
      
         
            
            
            THE
SERMONS
of M. Iohn Caluin,
vpon the Epistle of S.
Paule too the Ephesians.
            
               Translated out of French into
English by Arthur
Golding.
            
            ☞ Imprinted at London
for Lucas Harison, and
George Byshop.
1577.
         
         
            
            
            ¶To the most reuerend father in God
and his speciall good Lord, Edmund by
the grace of God Archbishop of Caun
                  ••
               burie.
&c. Arthur Golding wisheth abundance of
all heauenly wisdome, grace, and health
in Christ Iesu.
            
               
                  MY very good Lord,
forasmuch as it is the dewtie
of all them that publishe
things too the world, whether
as first authors, or as
translators, too deale in such
sort as most folke may reape
profite and commoditie by
their dooyngs, specially in
matters of Religion, the
knowledge or ignoraunce
whereof, concerne the benefite
and welfare, or the hinderance and perill, not of a fewe,
but of all men: I humbly beseeche your grace, that with your
clemencie, fauour, and well liking, which I haue alwayes hithertoo
through your goodnesse inioyed, I may indeuer too
benefyte others (specially the simple and ignorant sorte, for
whom my care is, & ought chiefly to be) by the things which
I haue gathered and conceyued to myne owne comfort, partly
out of these present Sermons of M. Caluins, and such other
readings, but specially out of the very woord of God it selfe:
that they may bee as a briefe abridgment of this whole work,
and as an enterance too the ryght concey
                  •
               ing of the doctrine
of Election and Predestination, which being the chief groundwoorke
of this Epistle to the Ephesians, minisrtr
                  ••
               h mee iust
occasion to say somewhat concerning the order and ryght vse
therof: not that I intend too take vppon mee too discusse the
particular poyntes therof, or too answer the seuerall obiections



and blasphemies which the heathenish Atheists or worldlywise
scorners are wont too cast foorth in derogation of that
heauenl
                  •
                
               
                  ••
               octrine, bycause their- fleshly reason cannot atteine
too it: (for I confesse that too bee a matter too hygh for mee
too meddle withall, and it were more than needeth, considering
how much is sayd therof in these Sermons:) But onely
too shewe the gentle reader what way he may safely take, too
deale therwith to his benefyte and comfort. Wherunto I am
the rather moued, bycause it commonly falleth out, that the
vnseasonable and vnaduyzed dealing therewith, (partly by
such as of a certeine vaynglory doo aduenture too speake the
things which they know not, and partly by such as beyng otherwise
godly and well mynded, doo notwithstanding enter
deeper sometimes intoo that profound doctrine, than common
capacitie (yea euen of good and sound Christians) can
well reache vnto, or ordinarie skill can well wade out of agein,
or the present state of the hearers well beare:) dooth oftentymes
shake, and sometimes also wellneere ouerthrowe the
faith of the weaklings, whom Gods woord willeth to be tendered
with all myldnesse and modestie, and for whose releefe
and edifying the things that are set downe there are cheefly
written. Wherfore keeping as euen a hand as I can, that nothing
may scape from mee vnawares, wherby the aduersaries
of the Gospell may take occasion too slaunder the doctrine,
or the simple sort, occasion to bee offended at it, or to shrinke
from it, or the perfect sort, occasion to find iust fault with me:
I will no longer trubble your grace with delayes, but (by Gods
leaue) proceedeforthwith too the matter.
            The substance and ground of this Epistle to the Ephesians
is this: That beyng once throughly instructed and rooted in
the fayth of Iesus Christ, wee must (for full confirmation and
stablishment of our consciences in the louing kyndnesse and
fauour of our God, ageinst all assaultes and temptations both
of body and soule,) stye vp in mynd aboue the world and all
worldly things, too the beginninglesse loue of God, wherthrough
he choze vs too saluation,
                  
                     •
                   Tim. 1. 9. or endlesse welfare in his



onely begotten sonne, before the foundations of the world
were layd, freely of his owne mercy, without respect of any
desert, worke, or worthinesse of our owne: In consideration
wherof,1. Cor. 6. 20. it is our dewtie on the other syde, too glo
                  •••
                God
both in our bodyes and in our soules,1. Tim. 1. 5. by leading a holy and
vertuous lyfe proceeding from a pure and sound hart:1. Pet. 1. 21. 22. 23. which
acceptable obedience, togither with the fayth from whence
the same springeth, is bred and brought foorth by the onely
woorking of Gods holy spirit in our myndes, for Iesus
Christes sake.
            This doctrine then belongeth not at all too the carelesse
worldlings,1. Cor. 6. 9. 10. which welter still in the dregges of the old Adam:
that is to say,2▪ Th
                     •••
                  
                  ▪ 
                  
                     •
                  . 8. which bee not yit come vntoo Christ, nor haue
heard of his Gospell:Titus. 1. 16. or which beyng come in name and profession,
doo fyght still ageinst him in lyfe and conuersation.
Of which two sortes, these latter (if they amend not vppon
dew admonition) are rather too bee left vp too the iust iudgment
of God, than too bee perswaded by reason, which they
themselues abuze, or too be confuted by Gods woord, which
they will not regard, vntill they feele it cutting sharper than a
two edged sword: and the other sort are too bee taught first
too knowe God and his sonne Iesus Christ, before they can
bee made parttakers of the riche treasures of Gods wisdome,
ryghtuousnesse, and redemption, layd vp in Iesus Christ for
none but such as beleeue in his name.H
                     •
                  br. 5. 12. 13▪
                Nother belongeth it
properly and immediatly to the weaklings and Nouice
                  •
                (if I
may so terme them) which are but newly trayned to the 
                  •••
               
               pell,
or are but of slender vnderstanding and feeble beleefe:
bycause their myndes beyng yit vnable too discerne so hygh
mysteries for want of experience in matters perteyning too
God,1. Cor. 3. 1. 
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                haue neede of milke still, rather than of strong and substanciall
meate. And surely there needeth no better nor further
proofe of the infinite and incomprehensible profoundnesse
of this doctrine, than that euen the Apostle himselfe being
after a sort astonished at the exceeding great hugenesse of
it, was fayne to knit vp his discourse therof with this exclamation,



O wonderfull depth of the riches of Gods wisdome and
knowledge.Rom. 11. 33. How vnsearchable are his iudgmentes, and his
wayes past finding out?H
                     •
                  b
                     •
                  . 5. 14. But this doctrine belongeth too such
as being growen vp too some rypenesse in Christ, and hauing
gathered strength in the knowledge of matters of saluation,
haue through the longer working or greater measure of Gods
holy spirit, obteyned light of vnderstanding aboue the common
and ordinarie rate, and by the same spirit subdewed their
owne wit and will, too the beleefe of God and his woord, that
is too say, roo a right and stedfast perswasion of mynd concerning
God and all his sayings and dooyngs, without any mistrust
or doubting of the same. I call that onely a right perswasion,
                  
                     •
                  . Pet. 1. 19.
which is grounded altogither vppon the Canonicall
writings of the old and new Testament, and throughly warranted
in all poyntes by the same. And lyke as that tree may
well and iustly bee sayd too stand fast, not which hath bin vtterly
vntasted or vntouched of any storme, but which hauing
borne out the brunt of all wyndes and weathers, continueth
vnblowen downe through the violence of tempests, haue shaken
off all the leaues, broken off some braunches, sliuered dyuers
bowghes, riuen the bark, yea and inforced the top of it
too stoope now and then too the ground: euen so that fayth
or beleefe, is too bee counted stedfast and well settled, which
continueth vnuanquished too the end, though in the meane
time it haue bin neuer so sore shaken and battered with the
assaultes of temptations, aduersities, and crosses both of body
and mynd. They therfore which haue atteyned to this grounded
growth in Iesus Christ, may safely and comfortably deale
with the doctrine of Election and Predestination without
guyde: & such may haue neede of exhortation, admonition,
warning and incoragement, by reason of the naturall fraytlie
which alwayes followeth, and oftentimes ouertaketh euē the
strongest, but not of instruction, otherwise than by the woord
it selfe:
                  
                     •
                  . Iohn. 2. 27 for (as sayeth S. Iohn) the inward anoynting (that is
to wit, the inlightening of the holy Ghost) teacheth them all
things. But as for the other sort, which are yit but as new



borne infantes in Christ, whether it bee in respect of 
                  •
               yme, or
in respect of knowledge, or in respect of both: forasmuch as
this doctrine is of such nature as it cannot bee learned by any
preceptes or perswasions of wisdome, vntill the kn
                  •
               wledge
and loue of God in Iesus Christ, be first well felt and throughly
digested by fayth in the bowels of mens hartes: they haue
neede too bee both cherished and trayned foorth by degrees,
and as it were by parcelmeale, too the right conceyuing and
vnderstanding of so great a mysterie. For although Gods free
Election and Predestination, according too the purpose of his
owne good will, euen before all time, bee in very deede the
first cause and onely originall welspring of our saluation or
endlesse welfare, and of all the things that further or accompanie
the same: yit is it not the first poynt in doctrine wherby
too bring men to saluation, nor the first Loadestarre that men
must looke at, as soone as they bee entered intoo the way of
saluation. Which thing appeereth sufficiently by the continuall
order of teaching vsed throughout the whole holy scripture,
where both the Prophets and Apostles and Christ himselfe,Hebr. 6. 1. 2.
doo alwayes begin the ministration of saluation at the
preaching of repentance, and so proceeding too fayth and free
forgiuenesse of sinnes, too newnesse of lyfe, and the right vse
of Sacramentes, too the rizing agein of the dead, and the euerlasting
iudgment: doo finally deliuer foorth the doctrine of
Election and Predestination as a sheeld ageinst all assaultes, to
make me
                  •
                perseuer and hold out to the end in the way of saluation,
through all aduersities, tormentes, and temptations,
as shall appeare more plainly hereafter. This doctrine then
is (as yee would say) the roofe of Christianirie, which beyng
orderly, substancially, and workemanly reered vppon the rest
of the building, is as a couering and safegard too the whole,
defending it frō all iniuries & anoyances of wynd & weather,
and giuing it continuance with perpetuitie: so that whatsoeuer
is added afterward, may well make too the adorning
and beautifying of it, but not to the safetie and strength of it▪
And therefore if it bee set vppon a false or ouerfeeble foundation,



or while the building is yit greene and vnperfected, b
                  •
               
               fore
the stones bee well clozed, settled and dry: the weyght of
it beareth downe the whole house to the ground, to the great
losse, and (but if the more grace of God bee) too the vtter and
vnrecouerable vndoyng, both of the buylder and of the building.
            What then, will some man say? Is it not too bee taught? Is
it not to bee learned? Yis verily: and that with all earnestnesse
and indeuer of mynd: howbeeit, not at al aduenture, not in
haste, not rashly, not presumptuously: but with singular circumspection,
reuerence, warenesse and humilitie, as al the godly
haue vsed to doo: least whyle wee take vppon vs too swim
without a bladder, before wee haue learned too beare our bodyes
vppon the water, wee bee caryed away with the violence
of the streame, or sink for fayntnesse ere wee can recouer too
land agein: or least (which worse is) whyle wee bee ouercurious
in medling with the secretes of Gods Maiestie, wee bee ouerwhelmed
of his glory. How then may wee wade safely in
it too our benefite? Euen by seeking of our selues in Iesus
Christ. Let vs see if wee can fynd our selues there. For the
scripture assureth vs,Actes. 4. 12 that there is no saluation but onely in
Christ Iesus, nor no damnation to them that are in him. Now
therefore,Rom. 8. 1. like as too knowe the originall cause of our death
and damnation, wee must not raundge beyond the fall of our
first father Adam,Rom. 5. 12. bycause that by him sinne entered into the
world, and by sinne, death: so to fynd our recouerie and saluation,
wee must not seeke elswhere than in Iesus Christ, bycause
he is ordeyned to bee the onely propitiation and attonement
for our sinnes,Iohn. 2. 2. &. 4. 10. and there is not any other name, (that is
to say, any other person or meane) giuen vs wherby to bee saued,Actes. 4. 12.
than the onely name of Iesus. For he is the way,Iohn. 14. 6. the
the truth,Iohn. 8. 12. &. 9. 5. and the lyfe: He is the lyght of the world:Iohn. 11. 25 He is
the resurrection and the lyfe: God is in him reconcyling the
world vnto himselfe:2. Cor. 5. 19. In him dwelleth the whole fulnesse of
the Godhead bodily:Colos
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  . 9. God hath made him our Wisedome,
Rightuousnesse,1. Cor. 1. 30 Holinesse,Hebr. 10. 14. and Redemption: And he through



his once offering vp of himselfe vppon the Crosse, hath perfected
them for euer which are to bee sanctifyed,Hebr. 5. 9. and is become
the author of euerlasting saluation too as many as obey him.
Inasmuch then as Iesus Christ is both God and man,Hebr. 1. 1. 2. 8. 9. and hath
all power both in heauen and earth,Math. 11. 27. 
                     •
                   Iohn. 3. 35. and all knees must
bow before him: whosoeuer seeketh saluation out of Iesus
Christ, dooth but wander away after his owne deceytfull imaginations,
neuer to fynd the thing that he seeketh, bycause that
(as sayeth Saint Iohn) he that hath not the sonne,1. Iohn. 2. 23. & 5. 12. hath not the
father,Ephe. 2. 12. and he that hath not the father, is a straunger too the
couenauntes and promises of saluation, without hope and
without God in the world, and so consequently in stead of the
substance he ketcheth but a shadowe or a dreame or rather
nothing at all. Nay rather he ketcheth euerlasting damnation,
according to this saying:Iohn. 3. 28. 3
                     •
                  
                He that beleeueth not in the
sonne, shall not see light, but the wrath of God abydeth vppon
him.Iohn. 3. 1
                     •
                  . And agein, this is damnation (that is to say, the cause of
damnation) that wheras light is come into the world, (which
lyght is Christ) men haue loued darknesse better than lyght:
that is to say, they haue loued the blynd imaginations and inuentions
of their owne ignorant mynds, better than the lightsome
truth of Christes Gospell.
            Wherefore putting away all flatterie and soothing of our
selues,Hebr. 4. 1
                     •
                  . and taking to vs the touchstone of Gods word, which
is quick and effectuall, and sharper than any two edged sword,
entering in to the diuiding asunder of the soule and the spirit,
and of the sinewes and marie, and sifting out the thoughts and
conceytes of the hart:2. Cor. 13. 
                     •
                  
                let vs examin our owne consciences,
whether wee bee in Christ, and Christ in vs, or no. Our owne
consciences (at leastwise if they bee not blynded with ignorance
or hypocrisie) will certifie vs of the truth in that behalf.
And if any man haue not the record thereof in himselfe, he
wander
                  •
               h yit still in errour, and knoweth not whyther he goeth,Gal
                     •
                  . 4. 6.
no
                  •
                i
                  •
                what cace he standeth. For they that are in Christ,
haue Christes spirit in them,Rom. 8. 16. and that spirit assureth their spirit,
that they bee the children of God. Now let vs see if wee



haue this warrant in our selues: wee shall discerne it by these
markes following,
                  
                     •
                  . Cor. 5. 17. and such other lyke. The scripture telleth
vs, that those which are in Christ Iesus, are become new creatures.Colos
                     •
                  . 2. 7.
That they bee rooted, buylded, and setled vpon Christ
by fayth:1. Iohn. 2. 6. That they walke as he walked, fashioned themselues
after his example:Eph
                     •
                  . 5. 22. 23. 24. & Gal. 5. 16. & Coloss. 3. 5 That they haue put off the old man, (that
is to say, their owne naturall disposition) which is corrupted
with deceitfull lustes: and beyng renewed in the spirit of their
mynd, (that is to say, in the inward working of their hartes,)
they haue put on the new man,Gal. 5. 22. & Col. 3. 12. & Ephe. 5. 9. (that is to wit, a new disposition
of mynd, which is shaped lyke vntoo God in true rightuousnesse
and holinesse:Rom. 8. 1. That they walke after the spirit, and
not after the fleshe, that is to say, that they liue not after the
lyking of their owne wit and will, but in obedience to the wisdome
and will of God:Colo. 3. 5. & Gala. 5. 24. That they haue mortifyed their earthly
members, that is to say, ouermaystred and subdewed their
sinfull lustes and lykinges: That they bee crucifyed too the
world,Cal. 6. 14. and the world to them, that is to say, that they bee no
more intangled with the fond loue and sinister affection of the
world and worldly things, than if they were already dead, and
had no more neede of them at all:1. Pet. 2. 24. And finally that they bee
dead vnto sinne, but alyue vnto rightuousnesse. Of all which
sayings, and of a number mo tending to the same purpose, the
pith and effect is this, consisting of two members: Namely,
that such as are rightly and vnfeynedly in Christ, haue vtterly
renounced their owne wit, will, wisdome, strength, reputation,
and rightuousnesse: yea and quyte and cleane forsaken
themselues, togither with the world and all worldly things,
and haue giuen ouer themselues (as it were in bondage) all
wholly vnto Christ, taking him for their onely God, Lord, Sauiour,
Father, Mayster, Teacher, Guyde, Defender, Stay, Light,
Rightuousnesse, Holinesse, Redemption, Wisdome, Strength,
Reconciliation, Sacrifize, Alter, Temple, high Priest, and all in
all: and therefore depending alonely vppon him in all things,
putting their whole hope, trust and confidence in him, wayting
vppon him as the seruant vppon his Mayster, or as the



handmayd vppon hir mistresse, or as the chyld vppon his father:
seeking his onely honour and glory in all caces, conten
               
                  •
               ed
to beare the crosse with him in suffering all manner of
harmes, wrongs, losses, despytes, reproches, myseries, and torments
for his sake, that is to wit, for the truth of his Gospell,
and for the rightuousnesse of his kingdome: and finally making
full account that as they on their part lyue not in themselues,
but in him, nor to themselues, but to God, so he on his
part will most plenteously and bountifully reward their labours
beyond all that they can hope or conceiue, and neuer
fayle them or withdraw himself from them euen in this world,
at their neede. Out of the which roote of trew and liuely faith,
springeth foorth this fruite (which is the second part or member
that I spake of) to the full confirmation of our consciences,
& to the open warranting of our beyng in Christ: namely
that for the loue of him, wee imploy our whole lyfe to glorify
God by indeuering continually to edefy, profit, and comfort
our neyghbours both in word and deede, earnestly, faythfully,
and cheerefully, without respect of our selues or of our owne
commodities, 
                  •
               ase, profit, pleasure, yea or lyfe, which is in dede
the perfect charitie. If wee fynd this disposition of mynd
throughly rooted in vs: then may wee boldly and certeinly
conclude,Gala. 2. 
                     •
                  . that wee bee in Christ, and Christ in vs: that the life
which we lyue as now in the fleshe (that is to say, in this world)
wee lyue by beleefe in the sonne of God, or rather that it is not
wee that lyue, but the sonne of God which lyueth in vs, that
wee bee led by Gods spirit, and consequently that wee bee his
children and heyres of his blessed and euerlasting kingdome
with Christ, as chozen and predestinated therto in him before
all worlds.
            Howbeit, forasmuch as wee carrie the old Adam continually
about vs, who cannot bee put quyte and cleane away but by
death.Gal
                     •
                  . 5. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . And the flesh not onely lusteth, but also wrestleth and
fyghteth so myghtily ageinst the spirit, that oftentymes it
weakeneth, woundeth, ouerthroweth, yea and (as sayeth Saint
Paule) leadeth vs captiue to the lawe or seruice of sinne:Rom. 7. 2
                     •
                  . Insomuch



that there is not so stout a souldyer in Christ, but he is
compelled to say with the same Paule,Rom. 7. 19. The good that I would
doo, I doo not, but the euill which I hate, that doo I: by reason
whereof the greefe and anguish of his mynd inforce him too
cry out (at leastwise in his hart,)Rom. 7. 24. 
               
                  〈◊〉
                that I am, who shall deliuer
mee from this body of sin
                  ••
               . The weake conscience of
the frayle sinner, fynding how farre he commeth short of the
trew effectes and fruites of perfect Christianitie heretoofore
described, is stryken in great heauinesse, and dwelleth in doubt
whether he bee yit in Christ or no. By meanes wherof, he not
only taketh no comfort in the doctrine of Gods eternall election
and predestination: but also is the more abashed and dismayed
at it. In this cace wee must not resort for remedie too
fleshe and blud, that is too say, too the perswasions of worldly
wisdome, or of mans owne natural reason and vnderstanding,
but too Gods holy woord, which beyng the very foode and
healthfull salue of our soules, alonely is able to pacify the vexed
conscience, and to cheere vp the drooping and dying hart.
This, besydes other comfortes, wherof mo shall bee reherced
hereafter in place more conuenient, telleth vs that there are
ages and degrees in Christ and Christianitie,1. Cor. 13. 11.
and that our lyfe
is a continuall warfare,Iob. 7. 
                     •
                  . wherin wee must mainteyne battell, not
onely ageinst the trubbles and aduersities of this world, but
also ageinst our selues, that is to say, ageinst the vices and affections
of our owne corrupt and sinfull nature,Gala. 5. 17. yea and (as
sayeth Saint Paule in this present Epistle too the Ephesians) ageinst
principalities and powers,Ephe. 6. 14. ageinst the Lordes of this
world, which are the rulers of the darknesse of this world, euen
the wicked spirites that are aboue. To bee s
                  •
               ort, wee must indure
continuall conflict ageinst the world, the flesh, and the diuell.
And this warfare is to be susteyned and borne out, not
by our owne strength and policie,Phil. 4. 
                     •
                  3. & Rom. 8. 37. but by the power and wisdome
of Christ in vs. Agein, the scripture telleth vs, that as
long as wee lyue in this world, (bee wee neuer so foreward,
willing, and circumspect in our doyngs) our knowledge is vnperfect,1. Cor. 13. 9. 20. 11. 12.
our loue vnperfect, our fayth vnperfect, and all our



ryghtuousnesse is as a defyled cloth:Esay. 64 7. so that euen the godlyest

                  〈◊〉
                holyest men that euer were, are, or shalbee, must bee faine

                  〈◊〉
                confesse with Dauid,Psal. 32. 1. & Rom. 4. 7. that onely those are blissed whose

                  〈◊〉
                are forgiuen, and whose iniquities are couered, and too

                  〈◊〉
                out with the Publicane,Luke. 18. 13. God bee mercifull too mee wret
               
                  ••
               ed
sinner:Psal. 103. 3. alwayes yeelding him this prayse, that it is on
               
                  ••
               
               
                  •
               he which forgiueth all our sinnes, and healeth all our infyr
               
                  •••
               ities.1. Iohn. 1. 8.
For if wee thinke wee haue no sinne, or that wee may

                  •
               ee quyte and cleane rid of sinne, so long as wee beare the

                  •
               arthly tabernacle of this frayle body of fleshe and blud about

                  〈◊〉
               : wee deceyue our selues, and the truth is not in vs. Therefore
wee must hold fast the foundation too the ende, which
foundation is the free forgiuenesse of sinnes through Iesus
Christ, beleeuing and hoping to bee iustifyed, (that is too say,
to bee accepted for innocent and ryghtuous, and to bee indewed
with power of the holy Ghost,) not by the deedes of
the Lawe, nor by our owne workes or inuentions, but by the
obedience and ryghtuousnesse of Christ. And therewithall,
vppon assured trust of his strength and assistance, wee must
fyght manfully ageinst our owne lustes, and ageinst all maner
of temptations and crosses, with the weapons of Gods word,
continuall and hartie repentance, feruent prayer, often fasting,
and earnest indeuer of amendment, so as wee suffer not sinne
to ouermayster vs,Rom. 6. 12. and too reigne in our mortall bodyes, by
our fulfylling of the lustes therof,Rom. 7. 22. but delyght in the lawe of
God with the inward man, that is too say, vnfeynedly with the
whole hart,Psal. 51. 6. for as
God requyreth truth in the inward partes,
so hateth he the deceytfull man.Psal. 5. 6. So then, wee must nother
finne wilfully and presumptuously, nor despayre and shrinke
away from God when wee haue sinned: nor play the hypocrites
in iustifying our selues towardes God or the world. But
lyke as wee must continually pray God to keepe vs from presumptuous
sinnes,Psal. 19. 13. and beware in any wise that they get not
the vpper hand of vs: so when wee haue offended, by what
meane so euer it be, or how often so euer it bee, (as who is he
that sinneth not?Psal. 19. 12. Or rather who can tell how oft he offendeth?)



Wee must ryse agein continually by repentance and
fayth: so as although our sinnes seeme neuer so greeuous and
heynous in our owne eyes, yit must we yeeld God the honour,
as well of faythfulnesse and mercy in pardoning our often manifold
and greeuous falles, as of ryghtuousnesse in sanctifying
vs with the fruites of true godlynesse, and of strength in vpholding
and mainteyning vs by the mighty power of his spirit, or
of Iustice in correcting and punishing vs for our misdeedes
and offences.
                  
                     •
                  . Iohn. 2. 1. 2. For wee bee sure that if any of vs doo sinne, wee
haue a faythfull aduocate with the father, euen Iesus Christ
the rightuous, who is the attonement maker for our sinnes,
and not for our sinnes onely, but also for the sinnes of the
whole world. Insomuch that if it were possible for one man
to haue in him the full gilt and greeuous burthen of all the
particular sinnes of all men: yit ought not the same man too
despayre, or to doubt of the cleere forgiuenesse and vtter release
therof, vpon his hartie repentance and vnfeyned amendment,
so long as Christ lyueth and sitteth at the right hand of
God, making intercession for vs. For lyke as God himselfe
is infinite, so is his mercy infinite also, towardes all such as take
hold of it by fayth in Iesus Christ. And too the intent wee
should take hold of it, he assureth vs of it with an othe, saying:
as truely as I lyue I desyre not the death of a sinner,Ezech. 18. 21. 22. 23. but rather
that he should turne from his wickednesse and liue: and in
what houre so euer he repenteth him of his sinnes from the
bottom of his hart, I will put all his wickednesse out of my rememberance,
sayeth the Lord. Moreouer, although we indeuer
to keepe a cleare conscience towardes God, and to leade a
blamelesse lyfe through charitie towardes men, according to
the prescript rule of Gods lawe: yit our so doyng must not
be with intent too purchace grace, fauour, or ryghtuousnesse
therby at Gods hand, (for that belongeth onely vnto Christ,
and no man liuing shall be iustifyed by the deedes of the lawe)
nor to glorify our selues to the worldward, (for whosoeuer seeketh
the glory of men, is destitute of the glory of God, and
hath receyued his reward already,)Math. 5. 16 & but onely to glorify God



               
                  〈◊〉
                shewing foorth the myghtie woorking of his spirit in vs,1. Pet. 2. 12. 
               
                  •
               o

                  〈◊〉
                benefite of our neyghbours, to th
                  •
                stablishing of our owne

                  •••
               sciences in the faith, and to the confuzion and shame of

                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               duersaries, which doo slaunderously misreport the doc
               
                  •••
               
of saluation which wee professe.
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                wee deale after this maner, then dooth Gods woord put

                  〈◊〉
                of all doubt,Rom. 6. 14. that sinne shall not get the vpper hand of

                  〈◊〉
                bycause wee bee not vnder the lawe, but vnder grace. And

                  〈◊〉
                continuall mainteyning & renewing of the battell ageinst

                  〈◊〉
               , the world, and our owne flesh, assureth vs, that although

                  〈◊〉
                bee neuer so full of infirmities, yit are wee graffed intoo

                  •
               hrist,Rom. 6. 4. 5. 6. and growen into him by resembling his death, in that

                  〈◊〉
                haue crucifyed, and dayly labour to crucifye the old man

                  〈◊〉
                him:Rom. 6. 5. by meanes wherof wee growe vp agein intoo the

                  •••
               enesse of his resurrection, through newnesse of lyfe to the

                  ••
               ory of God for euer. Finally, it warranteth vs that wee bee

                  〈◊〉
                grounded and setled in Gods Election, so as wee cannot

                  〈◊〉
                any wyse perish. For Satan is not diuided ageinst himselfe:

                  〈◊〉
                worldlinges hate not the world,Math. 12. 26. nor the things therin:

                  ••
               esh and blud mislyke no
                  •
                the corruption of the old Adam:
other can any man come vnto Christ, except the father draw

                  〈◊〉
               . Now then, seeying that to striue ageinst sinne, and too

                  〈◊〉
                continually by repentance after the maner afore mentio
               
                  •
               
ed, and to doo all things of mere loue, commeth not of our

                  〈◊〉
               , (for the naturall man is not obedient to Gods will,
no
               
                  ••
               er can bee:)Iames. 1. 17. but of God the father of all mercy, comfort, and

                  〈◊〉
               , from whom euery good and perfect gift commeth, who

                  〈◊〉
                of his owne free goodnesse worketh in vs both the wyll

                  〈◊〉
                the performance therof by the power of his spirit:Phil. 2. 13. And

                  ••
               eyng that the sheading of his spirit after that sort into our

                  ••
               rtes (beyng the earnest penny of saluation, and seale of our

                  〈◊〉
                option, to strengthen our weaknesse, and to warrant and

                  〈◊〉
                vs ageinst all temptations) is a sure and infallible proofe

                  〈◊〉
                Gods loue towardes vs,1. Iohn. 4. 1
                     •
                  .
according to 
                  •
               his saying of S. Iohn, 
                  〈◊〉
                doo wee know that wee dwell in him; and he in vs, that

                  〈◊〉
                hath giuen vs of his spirit: theruppon followeth an argument



grounded vppon the nature of God, which leadeth vs
directly and comfortably to the poynt of Predestination, and
is the very knot and conclusion of that matter.I
                     •
                  mes. 1. 17. For inasmuch
as God is vnchaungeable, so as there is no alteration of mind
or purpoze in him, too fancie one thing to day, and another
too morrowe, or too determine and repeale agein, and so consequently
too hate and loue by turnes and fittes:Rom. 11. 29. (for Gods
giftes and callings are such, ashe cannot repent him of them:)
it must needes follow, that he loued vs before all worldes, and
that the same loue of his caused him too chooze and predestinate
vs too saluation before wee had any beeing, yea euen euerlastingly
before all tyme: and also that the same loue shall
neuer leaue vs, vntyll it haue brought vs too the endlesse fruition
of his heauenly glory, bycause that whom he loueth, he
loueth to the end,Rom. 8. 11. and bycause that forasmuch as the spirit of
him that raysed vp Iesus dwelleth in vs, he that raysed vp Iesus
will also quicken our mortall bodyes, through his spirit which
dwelleth in vs▪ For when wee bee come so farre forward as
to fynd our selues in Christ, & by Christ to take hold of Gods
free loue, and by his loue to clymb vp to his eternall election:
then resting vppon the foresayd argument of the vn
                  •
               ariable
and vnchaungeable nature of God, (which not euen the heathen,
I meane the wyser sort of them, did euer deny, or in maner
doubt of:) wee knit the eternitie to come with the eternitie
past, and conclude determinately in our selues, that there is
now no damnation to vs that are in Christ Iesus.
            Yea and out of this conclusion springeth such inestimable
comfort and inward ioy of mynd, as inforceth vs to burst out
into this bold, but yit most godly boasting on Gods behalfe▪
which Saint Paule describeth in the eyght too the Romanes,
saying: I am fully perswaded, that nother lyfe, nor death, nor
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present,
nor things to come, nor heigth, nor depth, nor any other creature
can separate vs from Gods loue, which he beareth vs in
Iesus Christ our Lord. And seeyng that God is on our syde,



who shalbee ageinst vs? Seeing he hath not spared his onely
sonne, but hath giuen him for vs all: how should he not giue
vs all things with him? Who shall lay any thing to the charge
of vs whom God hath chozen? God hath acquitted vs, who

                  •
               hen can condemne vs? Christ hath dyed for vs, yea and is
rizen agein for vs, and also sitteth at Gods ryght hand and
maketh intercession for vs.2. Co
                     •
                  . 5. 15. Now if he dyed for vs, then are
wee sure that wee dyed all in him, and lykewyze that as he is
rizen,Rom. 6. 8. so wee are rizen agein with him, neuer to dye any more,
for death hath not any more power ouer him,Rom. 6. 9. but forasmuch
as wee bee his members, wee doo sit with him already in the
heauenly places by hope, only wayting for the day of his comming
to iudgment,Coloss. 3. 3. 4. at the which tyme, our lyfe which as yit lyeth
hidden with him in God, shalbee shewed openly, and wee
shall appeere with him in glory.
            And this assured perswasion or beleef of Gods loue, grounded
vppon his eternall predestination, kindleth in vs as it were
a counter loue towardes God, and a contempt of all worldly
thinges, bee they neuer so sweete or sower, pleazant
or peynfull: wherethrough wee doo cheerfully answere on
our owne behalfe accordingly as is set downe in the foresayd
eyghth Chapter to the Romans: Who shall plucke away
our loue from Christ? Shall oppression, or anguish, or persecution,
or hunger, or nakednesse, or daunger, or swoord,
according as it is written, for thy sake are we slayne all the day
long, and accounted as sheepe appoynted to the slaughter?
No surely: in all these things wee be more then conquerours
through him that loued vs, that is too wit, through God
woorking in vs.Hebr. 12. 
                     •
                  . And therefore hauing our eye fast set continually
vppon the foreleader and finisher of our fayth Iesus
Christ, who for the ioyes sake that was set before him, did
willingly abyde the Crosse, and the reprochefull misusages
which he was most spytfully put vntoo:2. Cor. 4. 1
                     •
                  . 17. 18. wee doo not faynt or
wexe cold, but although our outward man bee consumed, yit
our inward man is dayly remewed, insomuch that we reioyce

                  •
               uen in tribulations, knowing that tribulation br
                  ••
               deth pacience,



pacience breedeth experience, experience breedeth
hope, and hope maketh not ashamed. For wee bee sure that
our induring of affliction for a short tyme, will yeeld vs an incomporable
weyght of vnspeakable and euerlasting glory. In
respect whereof wee make no more account of all the aduersities
of this world, than of fleabytings, and therefore wee looke
not vppon the things that are seene, but vppon the things
that are not seene, bycause the things that are seene, are
transitorye, but the thinges that are seene, are euerlasting.
            Now then, the summe of the things aforesayd, is this. That
wheras there is no saluation, no election, no fauour, no blessing,
no benefyte to bee had, hoped, or sought for at Gods
hand, but onely in and by our Lord Iesus Christ: it is shewed
for the comfort of the weaker sort, that in this spirituall battell
ageinst the world, the fleshe, and the diuell, those are not
counted to be out of Christ, which beyng Baptized into him,
and professing themselues to bee Christians, doo notwithstanding
fall through simple ignorance and infirmitie of nature,
or are violently borne downe, wounded, or caryed away at
tymes by the force of ouermightie tēptations: but eyther such
as hauing their conscience seared or benommed, doo welter
in sinne without feeling of any remorse: or which feeling the
sting of sinne and hartbyting of the lawe, doo neuerthelesse
make such account of the filthie pleasures of the fleshe, the vanities
of the world, and the fulfilling of their owne wicked
willes, that they continew in sinne wilfully and wittingly, or
rather maliciously and presumptuously, euen ageinst the continuall
testimonie and exclamation of their owne consciences:
or else which through a cerrein feintnesse of hart, and cowardly
misbeleefe, by reason of ouermuch mynding of their owne
weaknesse, and of the horriblenesse of their sinnes without
the remedyes that God hath ordeyned for the same, doo vtterly
castaway their armour and weapon, and eyther out of
hand giue ouer, and as it were betray themselues too the enemie
of mankynd without any resistence: or soone after forsake



the feeld vppon despayre of victory, without returning any
more into the battell, or without crauing the helpe and

                  ••
               ccour of their Captein Christ, as who would say, they looked

                  〈◊〉
                get the vpper hand, and to stand by their owne strength at

                  ••
               eir owne appoyntment, and not at Gods appoyntment,

                  ••
               rough his power and mercie in Christ.
            Of which kynd of people the cowardlinesse is so much the
more shamefull and blamewoorthie, bycause God hath giuen
them such a Sauyour & Captein, as is both able & willing
too minister strength too them bee they neuer so weake and
feeble, health, bee they neuer so sicke or diseazed, soundnesse,
bee they neuer so sore wounded or maymed, corage, bee they
neuer so faynt and weery, victory, bee they neuer so much oppressed
and ouermatched, ryghtuousnesse, bee they neuer so
sinfull and wicked, yea and euen lyfe though they bee dead.
For Christ himselfe beeing the Phisition of our soules, our
health, our welfare, our lyght, our resurrection, our lyfe,
and the very truth it selfe, which cannot lye nor deceyue, (to
the intent wee should bee willing too resott vntoo him, and
haue assured warrant of hope and comfort,) calleth and allureth
vs in this wyse vntoo him:M
                     •
                  th. 1. 28. Come vntoo mee all yee that
are weery and ouerloden,Iohn. 16. 33. & and I will refreshe you: Bee of good
cheere, I haue ouercome the world, and so shall you also by
fayth in mee:1. Iohn. 5. 4. 5. Although your sinnes bee as read as scarlet, I
will make them as whyte as snowe:Iohn. 6. 37. 39. 40. I will refuze none that
commeth to mee, but though he bee dead, yit shall he lyue,
for I will rayze him vp at the last day:1. Tim. 2. 12. If yee suffer with mee,
yee shall also reigne with mee in glory:Iames. 4. 7. & Math. 16. 18. Resist the diuell, and
he shall flee from you, so that the verye gates of hell shall not
preuayle ageinst you:Math. 18. 19. & Iohn. 14. 13. 14. & 15. 16. Aske what you will of my father in my
name, and it shalbee done vntoo you: Aske and yee shal haue,
seeke and yee shall fynd,Math. 7. 7. 8. & Luk
                     •
                  . 11. 9. 10. knocke and it shalbee opened vntoo
you, possesse yee your soules through pacience. Besydes this,
he putteth vs not too the dooing of any thing which he himselfe
hath not first doone for our sakes, to giue vs the more
comfort and incoragement by his owne example. If wee bee



tempted,Math. 4. & Hebr. 4. 15. so was he. If wee bee smitten for our sinnes, so was
he: for he bare our infirmities,Esay. 53. 4. 5. and the penaltie of our transgressions
was layd vppon him. If wee be tryed and nurtured
with correction of the crosse, so was he: insomuch that although
he was the sonne of God,Hebr. 5. 8. yit learned he obedience
by the things that he suffered. If wee bee abaced, so was he:
insomuch that wheras it was no robberie in him to bee equall
with God,Phil. 2. 6. 7. bycause he was in the shape of God, yit abaced he
himselfe by taking vppon him the shape of a seruant, and that
so farre,Psal. 22. 6. as he cryeth out in the Psalme, I am a worme, and no
man, a very scorning stocke of men, and an outcast of the people.
If the terrour of Gods wrath for sin doo abash our harts,
so did it abash his: and that so sore, as he was fayne too crye
out,Psal. 22. 1. & M
                     •
                  th. 27. 46. O God my God, why hast thou forsaken mee? If wee
suffer want and penury, so did he: for he had not whereon
too rest his head. Finally he became lyke vnto vs in all things,
sauing onely in sinne,Heb. 5. 15. 16 to the intent that wee hauing a Hygh
priest which could bee touched with the feeling of our infirmities,
might boldly preace to the throne of grace, to obteyne
mercy and fauour,1. Pet. 4. 13. 14 to our releefe and helpe in dew time. Assuring
our selues that if wee fashion our selues lyke vntoo his
image in sufferance, in patience, in humilitie, in fayth, in hope,
in loue, and in resistence of sinne, wee shall also bee made lyke
vnto him in glory.
            Wherefore let vs take his yoke vppon vs,Ma
                     •
                  h. 11. 30. for it is sweete:
let vs sticke to him in weale and wo, 
                  〈◊〉
                he will not forsake vs:
and let vs fence our selues aforehand with the armour and
weapons that Saint Paule speaketh of in his present Epistle,
that wee may bee able to stand fast in these euill dayes, wherin
Satan the old serpent leaueth nothing vnattempted that may
destroy or impayre our fayth: and that wee may bee able to
beare out the brunt of afflictions which God iustly may, and
(I feare mee) shortly will cast vppon vs for our carelesse hearing,
and more carelesse, slowe, and negligent following of his
word so plentifully preached among vs, if wee conuert not by
speedie amendment. Let such as are yit weake, learne to grow



from fayth to fayth, from knowledge to knowledge in Iesus
Christ.2. Pet. 1. 5. 6. Let them (as sayth S. Peter) indeuer by all meanes to
adde too their fayth, strength, to their strength, knowledge, to
their knowledge, stayednesse, to their stayednesse, pacience, to
their pacience, godlynesse, to their godlynesse, kynd hartednesse,
and to their kynd hartednesse, Loue. And whyle they
bee proceeding too perfection by those degrees: I counsell
them in the meane season too reuerence the mysteries which
God hath not yit reuealed vnto them, nother despayring of
their owne saluation for want of deepe and exquisite knowledge,
(for to whom much is giuen, of him much shall bee requyred,
and to whom lesse is giuen, of him lesse shall bee required:)
nor refuzing too learne, least they fall intoo the sinne of
contempt: nor grudging at thoze too whom God hath giuen
a greater lyght of vnderstanding in such misteries: nor yit diffaming
the doctrine it selfe, which is vttered by the holy Ghost
for their comfort, if they could conceyue it aryght. Agein,
on the other syde, I coūsell the stronger sort (euen for Christes
sake, who beeing the Lord of al power, became weake for our
sakes) too trayne foreward the weakelings with all myldnesse
of spirit, not with disputing, but with gentle exhortation and
incoragement,Hebr. 12. 12. 13. and too cheere vp the faynt handes and feeble
knees, eche bearing so with others infirmities, and helping
too guyde their feete in the ryght pathes, as God may bee
gloryfyed on all handes through Iesus Christ. And as for the
vnreuerend and wicked wilfull scorners, wee may let them alone
vntoo God,Math. 7. 6. without casting of our pearles before swyne,
or wi
                  •
               hout giuing of our holy things vnto Dogges, least Gods
name bee blasphemed and rayled vppon by our occasion. But
yit ought wee (of christian charitie) too pray for them, if
peraduenture the goodnesse and long sufferance of God may
win them too repentance,2. Tim. 2. 10. 25. that they may acknowledge the
truth, and scaping out of the diuels snares wherein they bee
hild prizoners, come too their ryght myndes, and performe
the will of God. For wee our selues also bee compassed about
with innumerable infirmities, and haue neede of continuall



mercy at Gods hand, nother is there any of vs all that
standeth by his owne strength, or that can assure himselfe too
hold out one minute of an houre, but by the helpe of God
through Christ. Therefore let euery one that calleth vppon
the name of Christ, (that is too wit, which professeth himselfe
a Christian) depart from iniquitie. Let him that seemeth
to stand,2. Pet. 1. 10. 11. take heede that he fall not. And finally let
vs all indeuer to warrant our calling and election by good and
godly conuersation, and so shall the way bee layed open for
vs to enter into the euerlasting kingdome of our Lord and Sauiour
Iesus Christ, to whom bee all honour, glory, and dominion
for euer and euer. Amen.
            Thus much haue I (presuming vpon your graces good fauour
and sufferance) aduentured to wryte of this deepe, but
yit moste comfortable poynt of Christen doctrine, so farre
foorth as myght beseeme the breefnesse of an Epistle, and as
too my poore skill hath seemed necessarie too giue the simple
reader an enterance into the substance of this booke, that he
myght the eazlyer conceyue, and the better vnderstand and
digest the doctrine of this Epistle, and of the Sermons written
vppon the same. And therfore I haue had a speciall care to set
downe the matter as playnly and comfortably as I could, holding
my selfe alwayes to the present cace, without stepping asyde
into any bymatters, and without auouching anything
which is not warranted by Gods expresse woord. Agein, I
haue bin the sparer in woordes and sentences of myne owne,
bycause of the greate profoundnesse of the diuine doctrine,
which cannot bee handled with too greate reuerence: the rather
bycause I see that the more godly and skilfull men are in
matters of Religion, the warer and circumspecter they bee is
dealing with the foresayd doctrine, eyther in familiar talk &
conference, or in giuing it forth in their Sermons & writings.
And as for the author of these Sermons, I shal not neede to cō
               mend
him to your grace, bycause that you, whose study is imployed
in matters of diuinitie and good gouernment of the
Church, are better acquaynted with him thā I, & therfore cannot



be ignorant of the goodnes of his writings, wherof this is
not the first part, nor (I hope) the last that hath and shal be put
forth both by mee and others, (I trust) to the benefyte of our
common country. Wherefore omitting too trubble you any
further in that behalfe, I beseech your goodnesse to beare with
my boldnesse, and also with myne ouersyghtes where any haue
scaped mee in this translation, and to further this my trauell
with your fauour, as you doo the lyke proceedings that tend
to the aduauncement of Gods glory, by the edifying of his
Church. Surely my purpose and desyre was that it should haue
bin a first fruite, or at leastwise among the first fruites, of such
maner of presents as were offered your grace, at your returne
into the South, to welcome you to your See of Caunterbury, if
the time would haue serued to haue had it conueniently printed:
for it was fully translated and deliuered out of handes a
good while afore. Neuerthelesse, my trust is that a woorke so
beneficiall to the Church of God, shall not bee the lesse acceptable
to you, though it come not with such speede as I gladly
would it should haue doone: which thing I beseeche your
goodnesse with all reuerend humilitie too graunt, praying
God too power vppon you such abundance of his heauenly
grace and holy spirit, as the place of high preheminence wherin
he hath set your most reuerend fatherhood, requyreth: that
wee may long inioy your furtherance, to the continuall benefyte
of his Church. Written at Clare in Suffolke the .vii. of
Ianuary. 1576.
            
               Your good graces most humble Oratour
alwayes at your commaundement, Arthur
Golding.
               
            
         
         
            
            To all Christians baptized in the name
of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the
holy Ghost, dwelling or abyding in
Fraunce, greeting.
            
               IT is a wondrous matt
                  •
               r right deerly beleued
brethren, how all of vs glory in our
Baptim, and yit consider not all with one
accord what that marke importeth of i
                  •
               
owne nature, namely by following the intent
of him that is the author of it. For
no doubt but if wee did so, wee should all
ioyne toogither in one holy consent too
woorship the onely one God in spirit and
truth, and to acknowledge Iesus Christ
for our onely Sauyour, Aduocate, Mayster, yea and Lord, as touching
the gouernment of our soules and consciences: and wee would take his

                  •
               nely woord for our wisdome, guyde, and rule of our whole lyfe, and
specially of his seruice, without mingling of the inuentions of mans
brayne with it, how great antiquitie or countenance so euer they
seeme too haue. Yea, and for the outward gouernment and visible
order of the Church, wee would hold vs to that which our Lord Iesus
Christ in whose name wee were Baptyzed, hath shewed thereof too
his Apostles, and by them inioyneth the whole world too followe euen
vntoo the last day. And certeynly then should the straunge confuzion
and diuisions ceasse which are too bee seene in Christendome, wherof
those are the cause, which will not harken vntoo God, and yeeld full
authoritie too his woord, which fault shalbee layd too their charge at
the iudgment of God, vnlesse they turne a new leafe. The Lord and
Father of mercie graunt them grace so too doo, according as supplication
is made too him for them, in all holy assemblies where he is
called vppon according too his will, in the onely name of Iesus Christ.
That is the thing which wee desire: For heere the cace concerneth
not the bringing in of some newe deuyce, after the fancie of men, nother
stryue wee too make the victorie fall vppon mens sides, whatsoeuer
they bee, as some surmyze: but that God and his woord may haue
the vpper hand ageinst all abuses, superstitions, and lyes of Satan, and



               
                  〈◊〉
                we may all toogither giue glory too our God, confessing that both

                  〈◊〉
                and our fathers haue ouershamefully forgotten him, insomuch

                  〈◊〉
                haue not folowed his holy Lawe, but haue bowed asyde both

                  〈…〉
                the ryght hand and too the left. And truly whensoeuer we reade

                  〈◊〉
                woord in a tung that wee vnderstand, or heare it preached and

                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
               clared purely: he allureth vs too him, too make the lyke acknow
               
                  •••
               gedment.
And he hath doone so much in these late yeeres by stri
               
                  ••
               ng
with his mercie ageinst the malice of the world, that dyuerse

                  •
               aue returned intoo the ryghtway, whom others yea euen of all de
               
                  •
               rees
doo followe styll anew. But yit is not that ynough, vnlesse th
                  •
               
residew which haue hithertoo bin deaf or asleepe, doo bethinke themselues
too awake in good earnest, and too haue eares too heare, a
                  •
               
sayeth Iesus Christ. Therefore wee intreate and exhort them too it

                  〈◊〉
                Gods name, that they may discharge themselues of the promis
whereuntoo their Baptim dooth secretly bynd them, as hath bin sayd.
And too further them therein, besydes the lyuely voyces of the trew

                  •
               inisters, and other bookes conteyning faythfull expositions of the
Scripture: wee offer them heere the Sermons of M. Iohn Caluin vppon
the Epistle of the Apostle Saint Paule too the Ephesians, where
(as wee hope) they shall haue matter too fare the better by, for the
playner vnderstanding of the things, which they shall eyther heare
preached, or reade alone by themselues afterward. Too mak long
rehersall of things that myght bee alledged in commendation of the
doctrine herein conteyned, or of the manner of teaching vsed by the
Author, which is both simple and familiar, and yit neuerthelesse full
of authoritie and force: it is not now needfull. For wee bee sure that
such as seeke Gods honour and their owne saluation, shall in reading
them, perceyue that the Author had none other meaning with him:
and that shall euen the malicious sorte themselues bee driuen to
                  •
               
confesse, spyte of their hartes. Wherefore too conclude, ryght deare
brethren which shall meete with this book
                  •
               , wee pray you new agein,
too giue eare too our God and too his sonne our Mayster, who by his
seruant and excellent minister of his Church, declareth the things
which his holy Apostle had long ago preached with lyuely voyce, and
afterward compyled breefly in wryting for vs, and all that shall com
                  •
               
after vs too the worldes end. And of what degree soeuer you bee or



haue bin, shrinke not backe, forasmuch as it is God that speaketh, who
hath loued vs so d
                  •
               arely, that he hath not spared his owne sonne, but
hath giuen him too death too redeeme vs from death, and from the
vayne traditions of our fathers: Come on therefore, and let vs all
serue our God with one accord, walking in the wayes which he teacheth
vs, and forsaking our owne, (that is too say, all that disagreeth
with the rule of his woord,) and making all his giftes too
serue too his glory. And in so dooyng wee shall bee Christians
both in name and deede: wee shall discharge our selues
of our promise made in Baptim: wee shall see good
agreement in Christianitie: and wee shall serue
for a good example too the Iewes and
Turkes, which are yit enemyes too
Christendome. So bee it, So
bee it, Amen.
            
               Your brethren in our Lord, The
causers of these Sermons too
bee brought to lyght.
            
         
         
            
            ¶The Argument of Saint Paules Epistle
too the Ephesians.
            
               IT is well ynough knowen,
that Ephesus was a Citie of
the lesser Asia, renowmed for
many causes. And S. Luke
reporteth in the Actes, how
our Lord got himselfe a people
there by the seruice of S.
Paule, how the Church be
               
                  •
               an
there, and what furtherance it had. As for

                  •
               ee, I will touch nothing heere, but onely that

                  •
               hich belongeth properly too the argument of the
Epistle. Saint Paule had taught the Ephesians

                  •
               he pure doctrine of the Gospell. And when he
was prisoner at Rome, perceyuing that they had

                  •
               eede too bee confirmed, he wrate this Epistle too

                  •
               hem. In the three first Chapters he standeth

                  •
               heefly vppon the prayzyng and magnyfying of
Gods grace. For in the beginning of the first Chap
               
                  ••
               r,
after his greetings, he speaketh of Gods free
election, too the end they should knowe that they
were now called too the kingdome of heauen, bycause
they had bin predestinated vntoo lyfe before
they were borne. And heerin shineth foorth Gods
wonderfull mercy, that the sauing of our soules
commeth of Gods free adoption, as of the trew

                  •
               nd naturall welspring thereof. And forasmuch
as mens wittes are too weake to conceyue so hygh



a secret: he prayeth God to inlighten the Ephes
                  •
               
               ans
with the full knowledge of Christ.
            In the second Chapter, the better too set foorth
the grea
                  •
               nesse of Gods grace, he putteth them in
rememberance how wretched they were till they
were called too Iesus Christ, by comparing their
present state, and their former state toogither. For
wee can neuer perceyue sufficiently how greatly
wee bee beholden too our Lord Iesus, nor consider
as becommeth vs how greate his benefyts are
towa
                  •
               ds vs, except it bee layd afore vs on the contrarie
part, how wretched our state is without
him. Also he amplifyeth the matter new agein,
saying, that they had bi
                  •
                Gentiles and straungers
too the promises of eternall lyfe, which God had
made alonly too the Iewes.
            In the th
                  •
               rd Chapter he sheweth, that his Apostleship
had bin apoynted peculiarly for the Gentyles,
too the intent that they who had bin straungers
a long tyme, myght now bee graffed intoo the
people of God. And for bycause it was an vnaccustomed
thing, and such a one as trubbled many
mens mynds with the newnesse therof: He calleth
it a secret, hidden from all tymes, saying neuerthelesse,
that the vttering of the same secret was committed
vntoo him. Towards the end he prayeth
God agein too giue the Ephesians the perfect and
lyuely knowledge of Iesus Christ, so as they may
not couet too knowe any other thing. By which
woords he not only goeth about too make the Ephesians
acknowledge the greate number of benefyts



and gracious gifts that God had bestowed uppon
them, and too shewe themselues thankfull for

                  〈◊〉
                same, by yeelding themselues wholy vnto him:

                  〈◊〉
                also intendeth rather too put them out of all

                  〈◊〉
                of their owne calling. For by all lykelyhood

                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               aint Paule was afrayd, least the false Apostles

                  •
               ould step in to trubble their fayth, by making th̄
               
                  •
               eleeue that they had bin but halfe instructed. For

                  •
               heras they had bin Gentyles, and had newly re
               
                  •
               eyued
the trew Christen doctrine: they had not

                  •
               ear
                  •
                the Ceremonies nor Circumcision spoken
of. But they that intended too bring the Lawe

                  〈◊〉
                vre among the Christians, sayd, that all such as
were not consecrated too God by Circumsion,

                  •
               ere vnholie. For it was their common song, that

                  •
               one ought too bee reckened among the people of
God, which were not circumcysed: and that al the
Ceremonies commaunnded by Moyses, ought to

                  •
               ee kept. And for that cause they spake euill of S.
Paule, for making Iesus Christ common too the
Gentyles, as well as too the Iewes, and affirmed

                  ••
               at his Apostleship was an vnhallowing of the

                  •
               eauenly doctrine, bycause he did after that sort offer
and set forth the couenant of grace to vncleane
people without any difference at all. Therfore too

                  •
               he end that the Ephesians bein assayled with such

                  •
               launders, should not chaunge their mynds: he in
               
                  •
               ended
too giue them a remedie. And so, wheras

                  •
               n the one syde he telleth them so aduyzedly, that

                  •
               heir being called to the Gospell, was for that they

                  •
               ad bin chozen before the making of the world: he



warneth them on the other syde, not too thinke
that the Gospell came too them by haphazard at
the apoyntment of men, or that it lyghted in their
lappes at aladuenture. For he telleth them, that
wheras Christ was preached too them: that preaching
was nothing else than the vttering or publishing
of Gods euerlasting determination. When
as he setteth the vnhapie plight of their former life
before their eyes, he therwithal putteth them in
mynd, that their getting out of so deepe a gulf, was
through the singular and woonderfull mercie of
God. And wheras he speaketh of the Apostleship
which was committed too him towards the Gentyles:
he dooth it too strengthen them in the fayth
which they had once receyued, bycause their call
                  •
               ng
intoo the communion of Christes Church,
was wrought by the will of God. Neuerthelesse,
looke how many sentences heere be, so many warnings
are there to chere vp the Ephesians to acknowledge
Gods bene
                  •
               yts.
            In the fourth Chapter he descrybeth the meane
wherby our Lord gouerneth and maynteyneth
his Church: namely by the Gospell which is preached
by men. Wheruppon it foloweth, that that
is the verie full poynt of perfection, and that the
Churche cannot otherwyse bee kept vp vnappayred.
And therfore the Apostles meaning is, to commend
vntoo the Ephesians the ministerie, wherby
God reigneth among vs. Afterward he commeth
too speake of the fruts of preaching, that is to wit,
of innocencie, holinesse, and of all dewties of a



Christen man. And he not onely teacheth what

                  •
               he lyues of Christians ought too bee in generall:
but also interlaceth particular instructions,
which concerne euery
mans peculiar calling
or vocation.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Sermons of Iohn Caluin vpon Saint
Paules Epistle too the Ephesians, gathered
by the ordinarie writer, to the benefite and edifying
of the Lordes Church.
            
               The first Sermon vpon the first
Chapter.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Paule an Apostle of Iesus Christ by the vvill of God, too all
you holie and faithfull ones in Iesus Christ vvhich are at
Ephesus.
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Grace bee too you and peace from God our father, and from
the Lord Iesus Christ.
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Blissed bee the God and father of our Lord Iesus Christ, vvhich
hath blessed vs vvith all spirituall blessings, in heauenly things
in Christ.
                  
               
               
                  WHen we reade the Epistles which
S. Paule wrate abrode to diuerse
places, we must alwayes consider
that God mēt they should serue not
only for some one time alone, or for
some certaine people: but for euer,
& generally for the whole Church.
And truly if a man cōsider wel the
doctrine that is conteined in thē, it
will be easie to discerne, that Gods
intent was to be herd in the things
that are spoken there, euen to the

                     ••
                  rldes ende: and also that he hath had such a care of vs, that he hath

                     ••
                  ot ouerslipped or forgotten any thing, that might further our welfare

                     •
                  nd saluation. The slainne of this Epistle which I haue now taken in

                     〈◊〉
                   and too expound, is that S. Paule confirmeth such as had bin trayned

                     〈◊〉
                   the Gospell before, too the ende they might knowe that that is the

                     ••
                  ing wheruppon they must rest, as vppon the trewe lawfull and perfect wis
                  
                     •
                  ome,
and that it is not 
                     〈◊〉
                   too adde anything theruntoo. And he

                     ••
                  lleth vs that the bene
                     ••
                  tes which are brought vs by 
                     〈◊〉
                  : Lord 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
                     •
                  hrist, and whereof wee bee 
                     〈…〉
                  ,



are so excellent, that wee must needes bee tootoo vnthankefull, if
wee 
                     •
                  iske too and fro as folke that are neuer at rest nor contented. And
theruppon he sheweth vs also what wee haue in Christ, too the end wee
should so sticke vntoo him, as not to presume too seeke helpe any where
else, but assure our selues that he hath bought vs all. Againe on the other
side he sheweth vs, that Christ hath so wel prouided for his church,
that if wee haue the wit to vse the giftes of grace which he offereth vs,
wee shall haue full and perfect happinesse. Therewithall he warneth
such as haue bin instructed in the truth of the Gospell, too leade a holy
lyfe, and too shewe that they haue profited as they ought too doo in
Gods schoole. Now, these thinges serue not onely for the Citie of Ephesus,
nor for any one Countrie, ne for any one age or time: but wee
had neede too bee furthered more and more, seyng that the diuell practizeth
without ende or ceassing, too thrust vs out of the way. And when
he cannot leade vs quite away from the doctrine of Iesus Christ, he
laboreth too bring it out of taste with vs by some way or other, and too
intangle vs in new curiosities, onely too bring too passe that wee may
not bee constant in the faith that wee haue receiued, but stand alwayes
in a mamering. Now, whensoeuer our fancies are so ticklish, it is certaine
that there is a gap opened too wype out the rememberance of all
that wee had learned afore, & too take in many folies, yea and erroneous
doctrines, which serue too corrupt and peruert all the purenesse of
our faith. We see then that the doctrine which is conteyned in this Epistle,
is directed and dedicated vntoo vs at this day, & that God hath
by his woonderfull prouidence so dispozed thinges aforehand, that wee
not onely haue had the foundations of the Gospell whereuppon too
ground our selues, but also whereby our faith may from day too day
growe and increase, and wee go still forward, till wee come too perfection.
And first and formest S. Paule claymeth the authoritie vntoo him
which had bin giuen him of God, too the intent that men should not
stop at his person, as though it had bin but a mortall mannes saying.
For in very deede our Lord Iesus Christ is the onely mayster at whole
hand wee must learne:Math. 17. 
                        •
                     . 5. for it is witnessed of him from heauen, that it is
onely he and none other whom wee must giue eare vntoo. And it hath
alwayes bin Gods will too haue the guyding of his owne Church himselfe,
and that his woord should bee receyued without geynsaying, and
he hath not giuen that priuiledge too any creature.1. Tim. 3. 
                        •
                     . 16. And whereas Iesus
Christ is ordeyned in the roome of God his father: it is bycause he is



God manifested in the fleshe, and the infallible truth itselfe, and his

                     ••
                  sdome which was before all time. Furthermore when men speake,

                     〈◊〉
                   must not doo it in their owne name, nor alledge aught of their

                     ••
                  ne fancie and brayne: but they must faithfully set foorth the thing

                     〈◊〉
                   at God hath inioyned them and giuen them in charge. Thus yee see

                     •
                  hy S. Paule dooth as it were euerywhere vse this preface, that he is

                     〈◊〉
                   Apostle of our Lord Iesus Christ. And so he holdeth it for a sure and

                     •
                  bsolute grounde, that if any man thrust foorth himselfe too speake in

                     •
                  is owne name, there is nothing but rashnesse in him. Why so? For
he taketh that thing vppon him, which belongeth alonely vntoo God.
Ageine, forasmuch as our Lord Iesus Christ was purposely sent, too
be our last teacher, that wee might haue such wisdome as were perfect
and vtterly without fault: therefore dooth S. Paule call himselfe an
Apostle sent of him. This presuppozeth twoo thinges: the one is, that
S. Paule had that charge committed vntoo him: and the other is, that
he acquited himselfe dewly of it, by imploying himselfe faithfully in

                     •
                  he office that he was called too. For were a man the best able & most

                     •
                  xcellent in the world: yet if he thrust foorth himselfe of his owne head,
he trubbleth all common order. And wee knowe that God will haue
order, and not disorder among vs, as S. Paule sayeth in the fowrteenth
chapter of the first Epistle too the Corinthians. He then that speaketh
(at leastwise too teache) must haue calling: that is too say, he must bee
admitted, & haue his charge (giuen him,) so as euery man may not put
foorth himselfe of an vnaduized zeale, as I sayd afore. Now too speake
any further of S. Paules calling,Act. 9. c. 15. it is not needefull at this present. For
wee knowe how God gaue record that he auowed him for his Apostle.
And in deede he disputeth not much of it heere, bycause it was knowen
well ynough in the Church of Ephesits. But forasmuch as the Galathiās
had bin trubbled by deceyuers, in so much that S. Paules authoritie,
yea and the name of God himselfe had bin disgraced there: wee
sawe howe he mainteyned his owne state, telling them that the reuerence
dew too an Apostle of Iesus Christ coulde not bee taken from
him,Gal. 1. c. 13. 14, 15. &c. without ouerthrowing the order of God. And therfore it is ynough
for him heere too haue sayd in one woord, that he is an Apostle of Iesus
Christ. Let vs come too the seconde poynt which I touched, namely
that it is not ynough for a man too bee called, except he discharge his
dewtie with a pure conscience and vpright dealing in his office▪ which
thing S. Paule tooke vppon him as a thing out of all Qutesion and he



had giuen sufficient proofe of it. The deceyuers may well boast themselues
with full mouth that they bee called, as wee see they doo. For all
they that fight ageinst God and his woord, and sowe trubble and darnell
in his Church, would fayne make a buckler of their calling, and also
of their zeale, for they will needes bee called Christians, yea & more
too. But S. Paule had sufficiently proued that he came not of himselfe,
ne sought any thing else than too spend himselfe in the building vp of
the Church. And forasmuch as the same was well knowen in Ephesus,Act. 19.
(as wee may gather by the storie of S. Luke) yea and that he had
borne out many a hard brunt: therefore he thinketh it ynough too say
in one woorde, that he is an Apostle of our Lorde Iesus Christ. And
heere wee bee warned, first too holde our selues too the pure doctrine
which wee knowe too haue proceeded from God: for wee cannot doo
amisse if wee followe that rule. And bycause that in our Lord Iesus
Christ wee haue the performance of all that is requisite and needefull
for our instruction, so as wee neede not too doubt whither wee may
hold vs too the Gospell, or adde somewhat too it: Let vs bee co
                     •
                  tented
too take the sonne of God for our mayster, specially such he vout
                     •
                  afeth
too stoope so lowe as too take that charge vppon him, and also protesteth
that if wee haue profited well in his doctrine, wee shall come too
the trew marke wheruntoo wee should go. Yee see then that the first
less
                     •
                  n which wee haue too gather vpon this text, is that our faith must
not wauer one way nor other, but haue a sure and vnmoueable foundation
too rest vppon, that is too wit, Gods truth, euen as it is conteyned
in the Gospell. And seyng that S. Paule is sufficiently auowed vntoo
vs: let vs not doubt but Gods spirit speaketh too vs at this day by his
mouth, nother let vs heere the doctrine as though it were subiec
                     •
                   too
our iudgement: but let vs imprizon our owne vnders
                     •••
                  ding & wittes,
and receyue it without scanning, except wee will wilfully make warre
ageinst God, and aduaunce our selues aboue him. And so, that is one of
the thinges which wee haue too marke vppon this text. Furthermore
too the ende that this doctrine may not onely bee reuerenced among
vs, but also bee amiable too vs: let vs marke that S. Paule speaketh
in the name of Christ, who was sent vntoo vs of God his father, too
bring vs glad tydinges of peace: and also let vs beare in mynd how he
sayeth in another text,
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 5. 
                        •
                     . 20. that he was ordeyned too bring the message of
attonement, and beseecheth men in Gods name too bee reconcyled too
God. Now I told you that this was done too make the doctrine of the



Gospell sweete, that wee myght bee desirous of it and giue our selues

                     〈◊〉
                   too it. For whensoeuer it is told vs that God speaketh too vs:

                     〈…〉
                   it is ynough too authorize all that he shall speake: but yet might

                     〈…〉
                   at his voyce, and therwithall bee weerie of it, according

                     〈…〉
                   see a great mu
                     •
                  ber confesse well ynough that God deserueth

                     〈…〉
                   obeyed, and too haue all men subiect to him: but in the meane

                     〈…〉
                   they start away, and shun him as farre as they can, bycause his

                     〈…〉
                   maketh them afrayd. But when Iesus Christ speaketh too vs

                     〈…〉
                   mediator betweene God and men: wee may go too him boldly.

                     〈…〉
                   (as it is sayd in the Epistle too the Hebrewes) wee bee no more

                     〈…〉
                   were at Mount Sinay,Heb. 12. d. 18. 19. 20. 
                        •
                     xod. 9. b. 12. where the lyghtenings flashed in the aire

                     〈◊〉
                   the Lawe was published, in so much that if a beast had come

                     〈◊〉
                   it, it must haue dyed. The voyce therefore which God vttered at

                     〈◊〉
                   time was terrible. But now a dayes seyng he incorageth vs by

                     〈◊〉
                   Gospell to receyue the grace that he offereth vs, and is mynded too

                     〈◊〉
                   away the rememberance of our sinnes: let vs suffer our selues

                     〈…〉
                   iustifyed by his free goodnesse, and let vs bee peasable and 
                     〈…〉
                  
vntoo him. For that ought well too moue vs too resort vntoo him

                     〈…〉
                   poore hungrie soules, to bee fed with the heauenly foode that he

                     〈…〉
                   giue vs. Thus yee see in effect what wee haue too remember when

                     〈…〉
                   Paule calleth himselfe the Apostle of Iesus Christ.
               Whereas he addeth, that it is by the vvill of God: it serueth too

                     〈◊〉
                   off all scanning, too the ende that men should not blame him of pre
                  
                     •••
                  ptuosnesse,
as though he thought himself of more reputation than

                     〈◊〉
                   men. For he protesseth that it was not for any woorthinesse of his

                     〈◊〉
                  , but bycause it had pleased God too chcoze him too that office.

                     〈…〉
                   surely it is no feyned humilitie, that he sayeth he was set in that

                     〈◊〉
                   by Gods mere grace & choozing.1. Cor. 15. 9. &c. For wee see how he protesteth

                     〈◊〉
                   other places, that he is not woorthy of such honour, but rather had

                     〈◊〉
                   serued vtter damnation,1. Tim. 11. 13. 18. and therefore was too bee taken as a 
                     〈…〉
                  
of Gods infinite goodnesse, in that he had exalted him so high,

                     〈…〉
                   him that had bin a murtherer of Christians, that had shed the blud

                     〈…〉
                   the Martirs, and that had rayled ageynst God and his woord, as he

                     〈◊〉
                   reporteth it. Wee see then that there was no feynednesse in

                     〈◊〉
                   is confession of his, where he sayeth, that he was set in that state and

                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  gree by the onely will of God. And this serueth vs too great purpose

                     〈◊〉
                  , too the intent wee esteeme not Gods woord after the qualitie of

                     〈◊〉
                   that bring it too vs. For one of the ordinarie polices which the



diuell vseth too diminish the reuerence of Gods woord withall, is too
outface vs with the persons that bring it. Now it is certaine that
wee bee frayle vessels, and of no valew, yea and euen as good as broken
pots. What is there in them whom God hath ordeyned too bee
the ministers of his word?2. Cor. 4. 7. But it is the treasure alwayes inestimable,
notwithstanding the dyspizednesse of the vessells. Then let vs marke,
that when men come too warrant vs the forgiuenesse of our sinnes, &
the saluation which wee ought too hope for: our fayth must mount vp
hygher, and not stand scanning whether such a man bee woorthie too
bee herd or no, or inquyring what maner of person he is. Let vs holde
or selues contented, that God by that meanes intendeth too drawe vs
too himselfe. That is the way which wee must walke: and if wee st
                     •
                  p
asyde from it, by and by wee 
                     •••
                  e astray, and are in the high way too
destruction. Then let vs marke well, that wee must submit our selues
too Gods will and ordinance, and receiue without let, the doctrine that
is preached too vs by the mouthes of mortall men. For wee must not
bee wyze after the maner that a great number are, which demaund
whether God could not send his Angells from heauen, and teache vs
by reuelations: nor also after the maner of some buzibodies, which
beare thēselues in hand that they haue the holy Ghost in their sleeues,
by meanes wherof they hold skorne too receiue the giftes as they bee
delt abrode by God. Too the end wee bee not bewitched by Satan after
that maner: let vs marke how it is sayd heere, that it is Gods will
that the Gospell is preached by the mouthes of men, and that they bee
as it were witnesses of it vntoo vs: and that whosoeuer exempteth
himselfe from that order, is in like cace as if he did thrust backe Gods
hand, when he offereth him sure and infallible recorde of his saluation.
Thus yee see still what wee haue too marke vppon this text.
               Ageine, they that are called too beare abrode Gods woord, ought
too take warning by Saint Paules example, too walke in lowelynesse.
For who are wee if wee compare our selues with him? He
sheweth vs that he was not chozen for any sufficientnesse or abilitie
that was in him: but bycause it was Gods will to haue it so. Therefore
let vs assure our selues, that wee holde all thinges of him and of
his mere grace, and that wee cannot chalendge aught too our selues,
vn
                     •
                  esse wee mynd too rob him of his ryght. And wee knowe that such
vnthankfulnesse were not too bee borne withall.
               Hereuppon he sayeth, Too all the holy ones that are at Ephe
                     
                        •••
                     ,



and too the faythfull in Iesus Christ. Trew it is, that the name

                     〈…〉
                   Citie is expressed heere, but yet (as I haue touched alredie) the

                     〈…〉
                   is common too vs all, and God hath ordeyned it too our vse

                     〈…〉
                   day, and wee must receiue it as if S. Paule were still alyue,

                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  mong vs: yea and wee must not onely haue an eye vntoo him,

                     〈◊〉
                   the partie by whom he is sent. For although he dyed when

                     〈…〉
                   finished his race: Yit notwithstanding Gods spirit dyeth not.

                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  soeuer the cace stand, wee must for our learning beare in mynd

                     〈…〉
                   S. Paule meaneth heere, when he speaketh too the holy & 
                     〈…〉
                  
ones in Iesus Christ. Albeit then that wee bee not of that tyme,

                     〈…〉
                   of the Countrie and people of Asia: yit notwithstanding, seying it

                     〈…〉
                   pleased God too match vs with those too whom S. Paule wrate

                     〈…〉
                   time: let vs assure our selues that it standeth vs in hand at this

                     〈…〉
                  , too bee strengthened in the fayth which wee haue receyued by the
Gorpell bycause it was the intent and purpose of the holy Ghost, too
incorage all those too holde out, which haue bin entered in the Gospel,

                     〈◊〉
                   yet weake and haue neede of larger confirmation. But let

                     〈…〉
                   well in mynd these woordes, where it is sayd, the holy and

                        〈◊〉
                      ones in Iesus Christ. For S. Paule sheweth, that all the 
                     〈…〉
                  
of men is nothing else but feynednesse, till God haue applyed

                     〈…〉
                   too his owne seruice, & dedicated and consecrated them therunto

                     〈…〉
                   faith. For wee are all vncleane by nature, and there can neuer any

                     〈…〉
                   come from vs but vnclenenesse. Trew it is, that if men can set a

                     〈…〉
                   glasse & countenance vpon things, they shalbe taken for as righ
                  
                     ••
                  us
as may bee, & their vertues shalbe commended euerywhere, ac
                  
                     ••••
                  ing
as wee see that a man shall purchace the fame of great perfec
                  
                     ••••
                  ,
if he haue but some gay things in him. But wee must remember

                     〈◊〉
                   it is sayd in the fifteenth of the Actes, that God clenzeth mennes

                     〈◊〉
                   by faith. And he had great neede too doo so: for (as the Pro
                  
                     ••
                  et
Ieremie sayeth) manmes hart is a dungeon of horrible confuzion.Ierem. 17. 9.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   our selues perceiue it not: but God hath cleerer eyes than wee.

                     •
                  owsoeuer the cace stand, let vs assure our selues of this, that all the ho
                  
                     ••
                  nesse
which men surmize themselues to haue, is but corruption & vt
                  
                     •••
                  ly
abhominable before God, till such time as they be made one with

                     〈◊〉
                   by belief of the Gospell. Therfore marke it for a schoole poynt,

                     〈…〉
                   none other holynesse is lyked and allowed at Gods bande, than

                     〈…〉
                   holynesse of the beleeuers. For except wee first become Christi
                  
                     ••
                  s,
wee bee blynde and can neuer yeelde God his dewtie.
               
                  Although there were none other leadwnesse than this, were it not ynough
too marre all the vertues that wee could haue besides? Againe
seyng that the spirit of perfection, the spirit of the feare of God, the spirit
of righteousnesse, and the spirit of purenesse abydeth and resteth in
Iesus Christ: it is certeine that all such as are separated from him,
haue nothing else in them but vyce, and all maner of vnclenenesse, how
much so euer the world fawne vppon them. And on the other side let vs
marke also, that all such as boast themselues of beleefe in the Gospell,
and are not sanctifyed of God, doo bewray their owne hipocrisie and
lying, and dote themselues by their owne lyfe, whatsoeuer their mouth
sing or say, according as wee see many now a dayes, which defyle and
vnhalowe the name of faith which ought too bee holie. For euerie man
will say he is faithfull, and they that haue least faith, are boldest too say
that there is no faith but in themselues. And would God it were so but
in the one halfe of vs. But wee see euen among all that beare the name
of Christians, their whole life is disordered and looce, in so much that
they mocke▪ God too the full, and despyze all religion, and yet notwithstanding
doo in the meane whyle thinke (as I haue sayd already,) that
they haue great wrong if they bee not taken for good Chrirtions and
Catholikes. Yet for all this wee see how S. Paule knitteth these 
                     〈◊〉
                  
things toogither in vnseparable bond: namely that if wee haue the
faith of the Gospell, wee must therwithall giue ouer our selues wholly
vntoo our God, and separate our selues from the corruptions of the
world, according as wee haue seene how that in the Epistle too the
Galathians,Gal. 1. 4. &. 4. 5. 6. &. 7. he sayeth that the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
too the end wee should bee sanctifyed by his blud, too yeeld obedience
hensfoorth in all purenesse vntoo God his father. And as he sayeth 
                     〈◊〉
                  
another place,1. Thess. 4. 7. wee bee not called too vnclenenesse, but vntoo right
                     •
                  
                  ousnesse,
too the intent that Gods name should bee honored and glorified
by vs. Thus yee see what wee haue too remember in this preface,
too the end wee may bee the better prepared too receiue the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
conteyned in this Epistle, & the same may haue such authoritie among
vs, as it deserueth, and moreouer bee made amyable too vs, so as wee
may vnderstād, how it is for our singular benefite too learne at Paules
hand, forsomuch as he witnesseth the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ
vntoo vs, and leadeth vs too God too bee reconcyled vntoo him, wheras
wee bee naturally the children of wrath, and furthermore that wee
may stand in his fauour, so as wee may bee hold too call vppon him as



                  
                     〈◊〉
                   father, & bee sure that he also taketh vs for his children. Theruppon

                     〈◊〉
                   a thanksgiuing, too lift vp a mennes hartes; too acknowledge

                     〈◊〉
                   much they bee bound and beholden vntoo God, specially conside
                  
                     ••••
                  
that he hath shewed himselfe so bountifull towardes them, in 
                     〈…〉
                  
foorth himselfe after all maner of sortes.
               
                  
                     
                        •••
                     essed (sayeth he) bee the God and father of our Lord Iesus

                        〈◊〉
                     , vvhich hath blissed vs vvith all spirituall blissings in hea
                     
                        •••
                     ly
things, or in heauenly places in Christ. Forasmuch as the chiefe

                     〈◊〉
                   which God requireth at mennes hands, is that they should ac
                  
                     ••
                  wledge
his benefites and be thankfull too him for them: S. Paule

                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  sidereth first of all, how the same maye prouoke them too doo their

                     〈…〉
                  : For wee bee so rechlesse, as it is▪ pitie too see. Wee can well

                     〈◊〉
                   confesse, that our chiefe studie and indeuer ought too bee too

                     〈…〉
                   a well ordered lyfe: that is too wit, to praise God. For if a man
aske vs wherefore wee bee in this world, wherefore God hath such a
care of vs, wherfore his goodnesse feedeth and cherisheth vs, & finally

                     〈◊〉
                   he dooth as it were put out our eyes with the great number

                     〈…〉
                   which he bestoweth vppon vs: it is too the end wee should

                     〈…〉
                   some acknowledgement of them vntoo him. For (as it is sayd in

                     〈◊〉
                   Psalme) wee 
                     〈◊〉
                   our side cannot profit him at all, nother requyreth

                     〈…〉
                   else of vs in exchaunge than thanksgiuing, according as it is

                     〈◊〉
                   in the hundred and sixteenth Psalme, What shall I render too the

                     〈◊〉
                   for all the benefites which I haue receyued of him, but onely too

                     〈◊〉
                   the cuppe of welfare at his hand, and too call vppon his name?

                     〈…〉
                   see then that all that euer wee can bring vntoo God, is but too ac
                  
                     ••
                  owledge
our selues bound too him for all things. And yet for all that

                     〈◊〉
                   dischargeth his dewtie, no nor the hundredth part of it in that
b
                     •
                  halfe, but rather all of vs from the greatest too the least doo defraud

                     〈◊〉
                   of it, in as much as wee ceasse not through our leawdnesse, to bury

                     〈◊〉
                   praise, which ought too ring 
                     〈…〉
                   in our mouthes. For this cause

                     〈◊〉
                   Lord rebuketh vs for our negligence, for wheras the holy scripture
exhorteth vs too praise God, and vseth so many woordes too that pur
                  
                     •
                  ose:
let vs not thinke that they bee super
                     •••
                  ous: but let vs acknow
                  
                     •
                  edge
them too bee as many vpbraydings of our churlishnesse and vn
                  
                     •
                  y
                     •
                  dnesse
for fayling in the thing that is so requisite, and (as yee would

                     〈◊〉
                  ) the principall poynt of our life. Trew it is that the holy Ghost

                     •
                  ooth oftentimes set foorth other reasons why wee shoud magnifye
Gods name, as the order of nature, the fruites which the earth yeeldeth



the ayde and help which God giueth vs & such other things: and those
are sufficient matter wherfore too prayse God. But S. Paule leadeth
vs hygher heere, and will haue vs too glorifye God aboue all things,
for bycause he thinkes it not ynough too haue set vs in the worlde, and
too cherish vs there, and too haue prouided all things needfull for the
passing of this transitorie lyfe: but also hath chozen vs too bee heires
of his kingdome, and of the heauenly lyfe. Then are wee dubble bound
vntoo God, and that much more streytly than the ignorant and vnbeleeuing
wretches are. For although they bee sufficiently bonnd alredye:
yit notwithstanding the good which he hath doone vs in Iesus
Christ, is without all comparison more excellent and noble, bycause
he hath adopted vs too bee his children. Truely inasmuch as wee bee
men, wee bee of the nomber of his creatures which he hath fashioned
after his owne image: but what for that: This image is defaced in
vs by sin, and by the corruption wherwith we bee atteinted by Adams
disobediēce. And now what other heritage haue wee, than of his wrath
and of endlesse death? Too bee shorte, wee bee not woorthy too bee
reckened in the number of brute beasts, if wee abide in the state which
wee haue of nature. Now then seyng that God maketh vs members
of his onely sonne, & setteth vs in the aray of the Angels, & prepareth
vs too become parttakers of his owne nature and glory (as sayeth S.
Peter in his first Epistle:)
                     
                        •
                      Pet. 1. 12. ought not wee too perceiue there so hygh
and noble a grace, as should rauish vs wholly in loue with it? Thus
yee see that of the thinges which S. Paule ment too say in this text,
the first is, that wee bee heere exhorted too apply our whole indeuer
too the praising of God, verily bycause wee bee too cold & slothfull in
that behalfe, if wee bee not driuen and inforced thereuntoo. Besydes
this, S. Paule had one other respect more: which was, too feede vs in
such wise with the grace that we haue by the Gospell, as wee may no
more couet this thing & that thing after our ordinary manor. We see
how fickle wee bee of nature, & when God is so good vntoo vs, as too
set his woord before vs: wee will needes haue some other thinges beside,
and nothing can content vs. And what is the cause of it: It is for
that wee bee dull, & neuer conceiued nor vnderstoode what God sheweth
vs by his word.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 3. 18. For we shal see heereafter, that such as know the
loue which God sheweth vs in our Lord Iesus Christ, haue all that
they can wish vpward and downward, farre & wyde. Also S. Paule
dooth now call vpon vs too blisse God, too the end too holde vs to the



doctrine wherin consisteth the fulnesse of all felicitie, at leastwise if we

                     〈…〉
                   skill too vse it too our profit.
               
                  
                     ••
                  thermore let vs marke also, how not without cause he sayeth,

                     
                        〈◊〉
                      is in spirituall blissings. For although wee cannot eate a bit of

                     〈◊〉
                   nor drinke a drop of water without theft too Godward, except

                     •
                  cknowledge & confesse that he therein sheweth himselfe a very

                     〈◊〉
                   towards vs: yit notwithstāding, the things that concerne this

                     〈◊〉
                   and transitory life of ours, are nothing in respect of the thinges

                     〈◊〉
                   serue for the euerlasting welfare of our soules. And in very deede

                     〈◊〉
                   Paules exhorting of vs heere too praise God for his heauenly blis
                  
                     ••
                  s,
is in such wise, that therwithall he giueth vs an incling that we

                     〈◊〉
                   bee pacient if we bee pinched in respect of the flesh, & haue not all

                     ••
                  ges at will, but that God cutteth vs short of our pittance, & hand
                  
                     •••
                  
vs not so tenderly as we would bee. Two things therfore are con
                  
                     ••
                  ed
heere. The one is, that we should learne too knowe wherin our

                     〈◊〉
                   and perfect happinesse consisteth: that is too wit, in the lyfe

                     〈◊〉
                   wee hope for, and which is hid from vs as yit, too the intent we

                     〈◊〉
                   not bee tyed too the world: (Marke that for one poynt.) And se
                  
                     ••
                  ly,
that if this world shake vs off and dispize vs, and men make a

                     〈◊〉
                   stocke of vs, wee must settle our selues in pacience, and while

                     〈◊〉
                   despizers of God vaunt themselues with pompe and brauerie, and

                     •
                  eemeth that wee bee vnhappie in respect of them, in so much that

                     〈◊〉
                   of vs suffer hunger and thirst, and othersome be trubbled & vexed

                     ••
                  ongfully: wee must looke further. And why? Euen bycause wee

                     〈◊〉
                   too content our selues with the heauenly blissings which God

                     〈◊〉
                   bestowed vpon vs. Then must this so great, so hygh, and so inesti
                  
                     ••••
                  le
prerogatiue, make vs too ouerpasse all incomberances that we
can conceiue, whensoeuer God exercizeth and tryeth vs in this worlde

                     〈◊〉
                   many afflictions, and will haue vs too indure scarcitie and pe
                     ••
                  rie

                     〈◊〉
                   many things. This is the effect of the things which wee haue too

                     •
                  arke in this streyne.
               Now before wee go foreward with the rest, let vs marke that this

                     •
                  oord Blissing, is taken in diuers sences, when S. Paule applyeth it

                     〈◊〉
                   ther too God or too our selues. It is said that wee blisse God, & how?

                     〈◊〉
                   he blisseth vs? After what maner dooth he blisse vs? Wee blisse

                     〈◊〉
                   him as he blisseth vs, wee come farre short of that. For (as I haue

                     •••
                  edged alreadie out of the sixteenth Psalme) all our seruices can doo

                     〈◊〉
                   no good: & agein we must needes conclude, that (as I haue also alledged



out of the hundred & xvi. Psalme) all that wee can bring vntoo
God is no more but this acknowledgement, that wee bee beholden too
him for all the good things which wee haue. Yee see then that all our
blissing is but too yeeld the sacrifice of praize vntoo God. Let that
serue for one poynt. But now when God blisseth vs, is it but onely in
woordes? No: but it is a filling of vs, and a bestowing of all things
vppon vs which wee want, so farre foorth as is needefull. And why is
this woord Blissing attributed vntoo him? Bycause he needeth not too
trauell and take much paine too helpe his seruantes, and too giue them
the things that he knoweth too bee expedient for them. If he doo but
say the woord, that is too say, if he doo but vtter his will, the thing is
doone. Forasmuch then as God hauing created the world by his onely
woord, hath power also too doo vs good by his alonely behyghting of
it: therefore it is sayd that wee become riche by his onely blissing, that
is too say, by his shewing of himself louing and fauorable too vs. Now
let vs see if wee bee too bee excuzed when we defraud God of his dew,
by disdeyning too open our lippes too confesse howe much wee bee
bound and beholden vntoo him, after wee haue receyued so many benefites
at his hand. Let all the blissinges that all the men in the world
can giue vntoo God, bee layd intoo the balance ageinst the onely blissing
wherwith he inricheth vs: and which shall outwey other? All that
they can alledge, is, but that they must bee fayne too confesse, that they
can nother doo, nor say any thing that is aught woorth: wheras on the
other side God sheweth vs that he hath all that is requisite for our welfare.
Therefore it is not without cause that S. Paule sayeth heere,
that the faithfull must giue and apply all their wittes and indeuers too
blisse God, seyng he giueth them so great cause: for else they bee vnthankfull
and starke churles. Therefore he speaketh twoo thinges:
The father of our Lord Iesus Christ, vvhich hath blissed vs in
Christ.
               
               Whereas he sayeth, the God and father of our Lord Iesus Christ,
it must bee layd foorth after this maner: namely, that the God whom
wee feele so fauorable vntoo vs, is the father of our Lord Iesus Christ.
This circumstance deserueth too bee well marked. For thereby S.
Paule dooth vs too vnderstand, that Gods benefites, & specially those
that belong too the heauenly lyfe, and too the euerlasting saluation of
our soules, cannot come at vs, except Iesus Christ bee as it were the
cundit pype of them, so as wee may bee made parttakers of them for



                  
                     〈…〉
                   Therefore let vs marke well that wee bee shet out from all

                     〈…〉
                  , and from all things that concerne the saluation of our

                     〈…〉
                   Iesus Christ become our mene. Trew it is that the 
                     〈…〉
                  
doo eate and drinke and glut themselues to the vttermost,

                     〈…〉
                   shyneth vpon them. But yet howsoeuer they fare, to speake

                     〈…〉
                   they inioy not any of all the thinges that God giueth them,

                     〈…〉
                   they vsurp them without any lawfull tytle too them. For the

                     〈…〉
                   was made for Gods children, yea and that in respect of their

                     〈…〉
                  , which is our Lord Iesus Christ. Too be short, it is not 
                     〈…〉
                  
that S. Paule shewing how God hath giuen himselfe 
                     〈…〉
                  ,
sayeth that it is bycause he is the father of our Lord Iesus

                     〈…〉
                  . But (as I told you euen now) heere the matter standeth not

                     〈…〉
                   eating and drinking, but vppon farre greater and preciouser

                     〈…〉
                  : namely that God hath adopted vs for his children. And so ye
                     •
                  
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   effect what wee haue too beare in mynd.
               
                  
                     ••
                  wbeit, for the better profiting of our selues by this streyne: Let

                     〈…〉
                   that we must brydle our selues, least wee wander intoo 
                     〈…〉
                  
when wee knowe God the father of our Lord 
                     〈…〉
                  .
And why? For the Papists haue this word God often 
                     〈…〉
                  
in their mouthes, and lykewyse the woorde Iesus Christ,
                  
                     〈…〉
                   the meane whyle they haue disfigured Iesus Christ, and 
                     〈…〉
                  
the doctrine of his Gospell wherin he should bee seene. So

                     〈…〉
                   they a God: howbeit but by confuzed imaginatiō: & in the meane

                     〈◊〉
                   they knowe him not. And truly, they wo
                     •
                  e no more what God

                     〈◊〉
                   worship, than the Turkes doo. Wee know that our Lord Iesus

                     〈…〉
                   (in the fourth of Iohn) sayth, that they which haue not the 
                     〈…〉
                  
too rule themselues well, wote not what they worship,

                     〈…〉
                   continually forge Idolls too themselues. Therfore there is

                     〈…〉
                   one way too haue good and infallible accesse vntoo God: and

                     〈…〉
                   by beholding him in his lyuely image, for his maiestie is too

                     〈…〉
                  , too farre of, and too deepe for vs. But Iesus Christ hath 
                     〈…〉
                  
himselfe too vs, and applyed himselfe too our weaknesse, and

                     〈◊〉
                   vs whatsoeuer was requysite too knowe, that wee myght

                     〈◊〉
                   too God his father. Yee see then that wee must haue our Lord

                     〈◊〉
                   Christ for our way, too the intent wee stray not. For seing that

                     〈◊〉
                   is the father of our head and of him that is made one with vs, yee

                     〈◊〉
                   wee may haue accesse too come familiarly vntoo him. And

                     〈◊〉
                   without that mediatour, wee are all shet out from him, and the



maiestie of God must needs make the heares of our head too stand vp
for feare. But when we consider that he calleth himselfe the father of
him that is our head: wee knowe that he also must needs auow vs for
his children, bycause he hath bought vs.
               Furthermore although S. Paule doo set downe heere but the one
woord of Spirituall blissinges: yit notwithstanding he sheweth that
God hath shewed himselfe bountifull towardes vs mo wayes than
one. And therof he will make a more large declaration hereafter, by
laying foorth the benefites particularly which wee obteyne by the
Gospell. For all this chapter is full of them. But howsoeuer the eace
standeth, yit dooth he giue vs too vnderstand in this streyne, that Gods
giuing of his gracious gyfts vnto vs, is not by patches and parcells,
and that his making of vs too taste them, is not with a wet finger and
away, as they say: but that he hath giuen vs them so diuersly and fully,
that wee haue cause too magnifie him in all respectes. Therfore let vs
vnderstand, that seyng that Iesus Christ is so giuen vntoo vs, in him
wee obteyne all that is auaylable too our saluation, and too make vs
happie, according also as Paule speaketh of it in the eyght to the Romanes.
For if the onely sonne bee giuen vntoo vs, how should not all
the benefites which he hath in him, bee communicated too vs with him
and by his meanes?
               But howsoeuer wee fare, let vs learne too fauour Gods spirituall
giftes in such wise, as all our wittes may bee gathered home to make
much of them. And for the bringing therof too passe: let vs beware
that wee haue not our myndes too much wedded too the world. For the
verie cause that draweth vs away, so as we perceyue not the hundredth
part of the good that God hath doone vs, nor can apply his benefites
too our profit: is our owne vanitie, bycause euery of vs begulleth himselfe
with his owne fond and wandering lustes. Therfore let vs learne
too shake off the things that stop vs from comming too our Lord Iesus
Christ. And although our naughtie nature prouoke vs too seeke
the transitorie things of this world: yit let vs doo our indeuer to withdrawe
from them, so as wee may yeeld our selues with a free hart vntoo
God, and bee earnestly mynded too obey him, and too giue our selves
wholly vntoo him, for so is it his will too haue vs ioyned vnto him.
This is the thing which wee haue too marke vppon S. Paule, when
hauing spoken of the spirituall blissings, he addeth immediatly, in heauenly
places or thinges: whereby he ment too shewe, that wee bee not



                  
                     〈…〉
                   receiue the gracious giftes which are communicated too vs in

                     〈…〉
                   Iesus Christ, and which God would haue vs too possesse: till

                     〈…〉
                   howe there is not any thing in this world, that ought too

                     〈…〉
                  . Wherefore when wee once knowe that wee bee not

                     〈…〉
                   and made too dwell alwayes in this world, but that wee must

                     〈…〉
                   as wayfarers in it, and that our euerlasting heritage and

                     〈…〉
                   in heauen: let vs thereuppon make thitherwarde, and

                     〈◊〉
                   our selues too it more and more. And although wee bee feeble:

                     〈◊〉
                   not faynt, but plucke vp a good hart, and pray God too giue

                     〈◊〉
                   Moreouer yee see that the cause why S. Paule setteth downe

                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Blissings, is too doo vs too wit, that wheras the diuell 
                     〈…〉
                  
any traynes too thrust out of the way, God will prouide (
                     〈…〉
                  
them all. And why? For he hath such store of blissings, that he

                     〈…〉
                   and destroy all that euer may bee ageinst our 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               But now let vs fall downe before the maiestie of our good God,

                     〈…〉
                   of our faultes, praying him to touche vs more

                     〈…〉
                   with them, that wee may bee brought to trew repentance, so

                     〈…〉
                   may condemne our selues, and seeke to our Lord Iesus Christ

                     〈…〉
                   that wee want, and that not for one day or at a brayd, but 
                     〈…〉
                  
and stedfastly too our lyues end: and that whatsoeuer befall vs,

                     〈…〉
                   alwayes assure our selues that we haue cause too praise our

                     〈…〉
                  , and that if wee be poore and miserable in this world, the 
                     〈…〉
                  
is ynough too quiet vs, & to sweeten all our afflictions and

                     〈◊〉
                  , and too giue vs such contentation, as wee may neuerthelesse

                     〈◊〉
                   mouthes open too blisse God for shewing himselfe so kynd

                     〈◊〉
                   and liberall towards vs, as euen too adopt vs too his children,

                     〈…〉
                   shewe vs that the heritage which hath bin purchaced for vs by

                     〈…〉
                   of his only sonne, is redie for vs, and wee can not misse of it,

                     〈…〉
                   go too it with trew and inuincible constancie of fayth. That it

                     〈…〉
                   please him too graunt this grace not only too vs, but also too all

                     〈…〉
                  . &c.
            
            
               
               ¶The second Sermon vppon the
first Chapter.
               
                  
                     3. Blissed bee the God and father of our Lord Iesus Christ, which
hath blissed vs with all spirituall blissing in heauenly things
in Christ:
                     4. According too his choozing of vs in him before the foundation
of the world, too the end wee should bee holy and vnblamable
before him in charitie.
                  
               
               
                  WEe haue seene heeretofore how S. Paule
exhorted vs too praise and blisse God, bycause
he hath blissed vs, and that not after
an earthly maner, but after a spirituall maner,
too the end wee should learne too holde
our selues contented with Gods shewing
of his fatherly goodnesse and loue towards
vs, in opening the gate of the kingdome of
heauen vnto vs by hope, in so much that although
wee bee subiect too much miserie in this world, yit it is good
reason that wee should content our selues with Gods choozing of vs
after that fashion, and with his calling of vs too him, according as it is
witnessed too vs by the Gospell,Math. 6. b. 9. &. Luk. 11. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . that he is our father, namely in as
much as he hath knit vs too our Lord Iesus Christ as members too
their head. And now S. Paule bringeth vs too the originall & welspring,
or rather too the principall cause tha
                     •
                   caused God too take vs
into his fauour. For it is not ynough that God hath vttered the 
                     •
                  reasures
of his goodnesse and mercy vppon vs, too drawe vs too the hope
of the heauenly lyfe by the Gospell: and yit is that very much. For had
not S. Paule added that which wee see presently: it myght haue bin

                     〈◊〉
                   that Gods grace is common too al men, and that he offereth
it too all without exception, and consequen
                     •
                  ly that it is in euery mans

                     〈…〉
                   too receyue it through his owne freewill, by meanes
whereof the
                     •
                  e should bee some deseruing in vs. For if there were no

                     〈…〉
                   men, but that some receyue Gods grace and

                     〈…〉
                   what myght bee sayd, but that God hath shewed

                     〈…〉
                   to all mankynd? But they that are parttakers of the

                     〈…〉
                   Lord Iesus Christ, atteyne too it by fayth. And so yee see



what might bee deemed of it. But S. Paule, too exclude all deseruing

                     〈◊〉
                   behalfe, and too shew that all commeth of Gods onely free

                     〈◊〉
                   goodnesse: sayth that he hath blissed vs according too his

                        〈◊〉
                      of vs aforehand. As if he should say, that too exalt Gods

                     〈…〉
                   as becommeth vs, wee must looke vppon the difference that is

                     〈◊〉
                   betweene man and man. For the Gospell is preached to some, and

                     〈◊〉
                   wote not what it is, but are vtterly shet out from it, as if

                     〈◊〉
                   should make it too rayne in one coast, and suffer another coast to

                     〈◊〉
                   dry. Now if it bee demaunded why God pitieth the one part,

                     〈◊〉
                   forsaketh and giueth ouer the other: there is none other answere

                     〈◊〉
                   that it so pleaseth him. Uppon the preaching of the Gospell in a

                     〈◊〉
                  , some shalbee touched with lyuely faith in their hartes, and 
                     〈…〉
                  
go away ageine as they came without faring any whit the

                     〈◊〉
                  , or else they harden themselues ageinst God, and bewray the

                     〈◊〉
                   that was hidden in them before, whereof commeth such

                     〈◊〉
                  ? Euen of this, that God amendeth the one sort by his holy

                     〈◊〉
                  , and leaueth the other sort in their naturall corruption. Yee see

                     〈◊〉
                   that the thing wherein Gods goodnesse shyneth foorth most vntoo

                     〈◊〉
                   that by the preaching of the Gospell too vs, wee haue as it were

                     〈◊〉
                   that he pitieth vs, loueth vs, calleth vs, and allureth vs too him.

                     〈…〉
                   when the doctrine that is preached too vs, is receyued of vs 
                     〈…〉
                  
effectually: that is yit a further and more speciall token 
                     〈…〉
                  
wee perceyue that God intendeth too bee our father, and hath 
                     〈…〉
                  
vs too bee his children. Not without cause then doth S. Paule say

                     〈◊〉
                   this streyne, that wee bee blissed of God, euen according too his

                     〈◊〉
                   of vs aforehand. For wee of our selues come not too him, wee

                     〈◊〉
                   selues seeke him not:Esai. 6
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . but the saying of the Prophet Esay must

                     〈◊〉
                   bee fulfilled in all: namely that God sheweth himselfe too such

                     〈◊〉
                   sought him not: and that such as were farre of doo see him neere at

                     〈◊〉
                  , and he sayeth too them, heere I am, heere I am; although you

                     〈◊〉
                   despyzed mee, yit doo I voutsafe too come too you, bycause I haue

                     〈◊〉
                   care of your welfare. Thus wee see what S. Paule amed at in this

                     〈◊〉
                  .
               Too bee short wee haue to marke heere, that wee shall neuer know

                     〈◊〉
                   our saluation commeth, till we haue lifted vp our myndes too

                     〈◊〉
                   Gods euerlasting purpose, wherby he hath chozen whom he thought

                     〈◊〉
                  ; and left the residew in their owne confuzion and fall. Now then

                     〈◊〉
                   is no maruell though some men thinke this doctrine too be straunge



and hard: for it agreeth no whit at all too mans naturall wit. If a man
aske of the Philosophers: They wil alwayes tell him that God loueth
such as are worthy of it, and that forasmuch as vertue pleaseth him, he
dooth also marke out such as are giuen theretoo, too hold them for
his people. Yee see then, that after our owne imagination, wee will
deeme that God putteth none other difference between man and man,
in louing some, and in hating other some, than eche mans owne worthinesse
and deseruing. But by the waye, let vs remember also, that in
our owne vnderstanding there is nothing but vanitie, and that wee
must not measure God by our meetyard, and that it is too excessyue
an ouerweening too bynd God too the stake, so as he should not do any
thing but that which wee could conceyue, and which myght seeme
ryghtfull in our eyes. The matter therfore concerneth heere the reuerencing
of Gods secrets which are incomprehensible too vs, & without
wee doo so, wee shall neuer taste the principles of fayth. For wee
knowe that our wisdome ought alwayes too begin at humilitie: and
this humilitie is as much too say, as that we must not fall too weying
of Gods iudgments in our owne balance, nor take vpō vs to be iudges
and determiners of them, but that wee must bee sober, bycause of the
weaknesse of our wit, and that forasmuch as wee bee grosse and dull,
wee must magnifie God,Psal. 36. b. 6. and say as wee bee taught by the holy scripture,
Lord thy determinations are as a great deepe, and no man is able
too recken them vp vntoo thee. Yee see then, that the cause why
some men fynd this doctrine hard and irksome, is for that they bee too
much wedded too their owne opinion, and cannot submit themselues
to Gods wisdome, to receiue his sayings soberly & modestly. And truly
we ought too take warning by that which S. Paule sayeth:1. Cor. 2. d. 15. namely
that man of his owne mother wit vnderstādeth not Gods secretes, but
taketh them too bee starke foolishnesse. And why? For wee bee not of
his c
                     •
                  unsell, but must haue things reueled too vs by his holy spirit, or
else we should neuer know them: & we must haue thē in such measure as
he giueth thē vnto vs. S. Paule speaketh there of the things that wee
know by experiēce: that is to wit, that we be Gods childrē, that he gouerneth
vs by his holy spirit, that he comforteth vs in our aduersities,
& that he strengtheneth vs through pacience. We should not conceyue
any of all these things, vnlesse we were inlyghtened by his holy Ghost.
How then shall wee vnderstand the thing that is much hygher, namly
that God choze vs before the making of the world? Sith the cace standeth



so: let vs learne too put away all that wee conceyue of our owne

                     〈◊〉
                  , & too lay it vnder foot, and let vs receyue whatsoeuer God 
                     〈…〉
                  
vs, discharging our selues vtterly of all selfweening, and 
                     〈…〉
                  
our selues that wee cannot bring any thing of our owne syde but

                     〈…〉
                   beastlynesse. Thus yee see what wee haue too beare in mynd.

                     〈…〉
                   in good sooth wee see how S. Paule exhorteth vs to come too the

                     〈…〉
                   poynt.Rom. 9. d. 20. Who art thou o man (sayeth he) which standest in

                     〈…〉
                   with thy God? After he had set downe many replyes which we

                     〈…〉
                   to make, he sayeth, who art thou o man? By the word man he

                     〈…〉
                   to make vs perceyue our owne fraylty:Psal. 
                        •
                     03. c. 14. for we be but wormes of

                     〈…〉
                   earth and rottēnesse. Now then, what a malipertnesse is it too open

                     〈…〉
                   mouthes to dispute with God? Is it not a pe
                     •
                  uerting of the whole

                     〈…〉
                   of nature: Is it in our power too plucke the Sunne out of the

                     〈…〉
                  , or too latch the moone betwixte our teeth, as they say? much lesse

                     〈◊〉
                   it lawful for vs too contend with God, and too alledge reasons too

                     〈◊〉
                   his iudgments, which wee cannot comprehend.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   are that will graunt this doctrine of Predestination too bee

                     〈…〉
                  , wherof S. Paule treateth heere: but yit they would it were so 
                     〈…〉
                  ,
as it myght neuer bee spoken of. Yea, but they shew themselues

                     〈…〉
                   bee but fooles in controllyng the holie Ghoste, which spake it by

                     〈…〉
                   Prophets and Apostles, yea and euen by the mouth of Gods only

                     〈…〉
                  .Iohn. 6. g. 70. For when our Lord Iesus intendeth too assure vs of our 
                     〈…〉
                  :
he sendeth vs too this euerlasting election, and lykewise when he

                     〈…〉
                   too magnifie the gift of fayth,Iohn. 10. c. 
                        •
                     4. the one in the tenth of Ihon,

                     〈…〉
                   the other in the sixth. And therefore those kynd of folke come too

                     〈…〉
                   too put God too silence, and too wype the things out of the holye

                     〈…〉
                   which are shewed there. For all the whole scripture is 
                     〈…〉
                  .2. Tim. 3. d. 16.
S. Paule spake that of the Lawe and the Prophets. Therfore
mee also may conclude, that there is no superfluitie in the Gospell, nor
any thing which serueth not too good purpose, and whereby wee may

                     〈◊〉
                   bee edifyed both in faith and in the feare of God. But this doctrine

                     〈…〉
                   conteyned there, and the holy Ghost speaketh it lowd and shirle.

                     〈◊〉
                   Therefore they must needes bee Manichies which intend too nip and

                     〈…〉
                   the Gospell. For looke what lyketh not them, they did set it aside,

                     〈…〉
                   forged a Gospell of diuerse peeces, allowing nothing but that

                     〈◊〉
                   they themselues thought good of. Now if such maner of 
                     〈…〉
                  
haue shewed a diuelish stubbornnesse ageinst God, in separating

                     〈…〉
                   things which ought too go toogither in vnseparable bond, then are



they malicious and froward also, which would now a dayes haue the
doctrine of election kept in silence. For they woulde ouerrule God if
it were possible, & stop his mouth as oft as he vttereth any thing that
lyketh not them. Agein, a man may euidently see their beastlynesse, in
that S. Paule had not a better proofe whereby too magnifie Gods
goodnesse, than this. Then if there were none other reason, yit were it
better that the whole world should go too confuzion, than that this doctrine
should bee suppressed with silence. For is it reason that God
should set the infinite treasures of his mercies before our eyes, and yit
that they should not be spoken of, but bee thrust vnder foote? But there
are yit twoo reasons mo, which shewe that this doctrine is most needefull
too bee preached, and that wee reape so great profit by it, as it had
bin much better that wee had neuer bin borne, than too bee ignorant of
the thing that S. Paule sheweth heere. For there are twoo thinges
wherat wee must chiefly ame, and whereuntoo it behoueth vs too apply
all our wittes and indeuers, and they bee the very summe of all the
thinges which God teacheth vs by the holy scripture. The one is
the magnifying of God as he deserueth, and the other is the assurednesse
of our saluation,
                     
                        •
                     om. 8. c. 15. that wee may call vppon him as our father
with full libertie. If wee haue not these twoo thinges, wo woorth
vs, for there is nother fayth nor religion in vs. Well may wee talke of
God, but it shalbee but a leazing. As touching the first poynt, I haue
tolde you alreadie that Gods grace is not sufficiently knowen but by
se
                     •
                  ting Gods election as it were before our eyes. For put the cace that
God drawe all men alyke, and that such as intend too obteyne saluation,
must come of their owne free will and selfmouing: if it be so, then is
it certeine that wee deserue too bee receyued at Gods hand, and that
he should handle euery man according too his worthinesse. But wherin
shall Gods goodnesse bee magnifyed? Euen in this, that he preuenteth
vs of his owne mere free good wil, and loueth vs neuerthelesse
without fynding any thing eyther in vs or in our woorkes why he
should loue vs. If this bee trew, then must there needes bee election, so
as God must take the one sort bycause he thinketh it good so to doo, &
leaue the other. Thus ye see it is a most assured point, that Gods glory
doth not appeere & shyne foorth as were requisite, except it be knowen
that he sheddeth foorth his goodnesse and loue where it pleaseth him.
               I sayd euen now that the preaching of his word is a singuler benefyte
too vs. And that is the cause why it is sayd so often in the Lawe &



                  
                     〈…〉
                  , that God hath not delt so with any other nation, as he

                     〈…〉
                   the linage of Abrahā,Deut. 4. a. 7. in that he voutsaf
                     •
                  d too chooze & adopt

                     〈…〉
                   the lawe was a sure record. So then the children of 
                     〈…〉
                  
exhorted too prayse God, bycause he had vo
                     •
                  safed to gyue

                     〈…〉
                   law, and in the meane whyle had let the poore 
                     •
                  entyles 
                     〈…〉
                  
folk that perteyned not too him at all. But it is yit a farre 
                     〈…〉
                  
specialler priuiledge, when he maketh vs too fare the better

                     〈…〉
                   woord. For it is certeyne that our eares myght bee beaten

                     〈…〉
                   with the things that should bee told vs, and wee bee neuer the

                     〈…〉
                   for it, vntill God speake to vs by his holy spirit within vs. Then

                     〈…〉
                   matter God sheweth a dubble grace.2. Cor. 2. d. 16. The one is when he 
                     〈…〉
                  
vp men to preache the Gospell too vs: for no man is meete & 
                     〈…〉
                  
too doo it of himselfe. Needes therefore must they bee of Gods

                     〈…〉
                  , which doo call vs too him, and offer vs the hope of saluation.
But yit for all that, let vs marke well that wee cannot beleeue, except

                     〈◊〉
                   himself too vs by his holy spirit, and speake too our hartes

                     〈…〉
                   holy Ghost, as well as he hath spoken too our eares by the

                     〈…〉
                   of man.Esai. 53. a. 1. And that is the cause why the Prophet Esay sayeth,

                     〈…〉
                   beleeued our doctrine? or too whom is the arme of the Lord

                     〈…〉
                  ? He sheweth that there is no fayth in the world, till God haue

                     〈…〉
                   in mennes myndes and hartes by the power of his holy 
                     〈…〉
                  
And for the very same cause also dooth our Lord Iesus say,Iohn. 6. c. 44. that

                     〈…〉
                   commeth too him except he bee drawen by the father: but 
                     〈…〉
                  
hath learned of my father (sayeth he) the same submitteth 
                     〈…〉
                  
mee. Too be short, wee see manifestly that God sheweth 
                     〈…〉
                  
too vs, when he voutsafeth too inlyghten vs by his holy

                     〈◊〉
                   too the end wee should bee drawen too the fayth of his Gospell.
If the same were doone commonly and indifferently too all men: yit

                     〈◊〉
                   wee haue cause too magnify God. But now when wee see that

                     〈◊〉
                   are hardened, and othersome vnconstant: and that some go their

                     〈…〉
                   without taking any profit by the things that they haue heard,

                     〈◊〉
                   othersome bee altoogither blockishe: it is certaine that the same

                     〈…〉
                   Gods grace more apparant too vs,Act. 13. g. 48. according as S. Luke

                     〈…〉
                  , that at S. Paules preaching, as many beleeued as were 
                     〈…〉
                  
too saluation. Uerily the number of people was great that

                     〈◊〉
                   S. Paules Sermon: and out of all doubt he on his side had so

                     〈◊〉
                   grace, as ought to haue moued euen the very stones. And yit 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
a great sort continued in their vnbeleefe and stubbornnesse,



and othersome beleeued. Now S. Luke sayeth playnly that the
cause therof was not for that the one sort were more forewarde folke
than the other, or for that there was any towardnesse of vertue more
in the one than in the other: but for that God had foreordeyned them
too saluation. Therefore at one woord, wee see that all mannes deseruing
must ceasse and be layd vnder foote, or else God shall not haue
his deserued praise. Yea and wee must vnderstand, that fayth commeth
not of our selues: for if it did, then should there be some woorthinesse
in our woorkes. Trew it is, that by fayth wee confesse that there
is nothing but wretchednesse in vs, that wee bee damned and accursed,
and that wee bring not aught with vs but onely an acknowledgement
of our sinnes. But yit should our fayth serue for some desert, if we had
it of our owne breeding. Wee must therefore conclude, that it is impossible
for men too beleeue, vnlesse it bee giuen them from aboue.
And surely S. Paule declareth heere a thing well woorthie too bee
marked, when he sayeth, blissed bee God. And for what cause? Euen
for inriching vs in such wise in Iesus Christ, that our lyfe is happie
and blissed. And afterward he addeth, according too his choozing of
vs. Is not fayth comprehended among the spirituall riches whereof
S. Paule maketh mention? Yis, and (which is more) it is the chiefe
of them. For it is by fayth that wee receyue the holy Ghost, it is by
fayth that wee become patient in our aduersities,H
                        •
                     b. 11 it is by fayth that we
become obedient too God, it is by fayth that wee bee sanctifyed to his
seruice. Too bee short, fayth continueth alwayes chiefe of the spirituall
benefites that God bestoweth vppon vs. Now let vs remember
well S. Paules order. He sayth that God hath giuen vs fayth as well
as any of all the rest, according too his choozing of vs. Wee see then
that fayth dependeth vppon Gods election, or else wee must make S.
Paule a lyer. And so as touching the first poynt, yee see that all such
as cannot abyde to haue predestination plainly and openly spoken of,
are deadly enemies of Gods grace, and would deface it too the vttermost
of their power. For (as I sayd afore) the hyding therof were the
ouerthrowing of all religion.
               The second poynt is the assurednesse of our Saluation. The Papists
say wee must dout of it, and that wee cannot come vntoo God otherwyze
than with an opinion that he wyll receyue vs: but too assure
our selues of it, that ought wee not too doo, for that were too great a
presumtuousnesse. But when wee pray vntoo God, wee must call



                  
                     〈…〉
                  , at leastwize if we be the scholers of our Lord Iesus Christ,

                     〈…〉
                   taught vs so too doo. Now, doo wee call him father at 
                     〈…〉
                  ?
or are we sure of it in our selues that he is our father? If

                     〈…〉
                   is there nothing but hipocrisie in our prayers, and the first

                     〈…〉
                   wee vtter shalbee a stark lye. The Papistes therfore neuer

                     〈…〉
                   it is too pray vntoo God, seing they say that they ought not

                     〈…〉
                   themselues of their saluation.Eph. 3. c. 12. But (as wee shall see in the

                     〈…〉
                   chapter specially) the scripture sheweth that if wee will pray too

                     〈◊〉
                   ryghtly, wee must haue beleef in Iesus Christ, which giueth vs

                     〈…〉
                   & vppon that trust wee by and by conceyue boldnesse. Then 
                     〈…〉
                  
the world go, wee must not bee in a mamering nor yet dout, but

                     〈…〉
                   be throughly resolued & perswaded in our selues, that God 
                     〈…〉
                  
vs as his children. And how may that bee but by imbracing

                     〈…〉
                   through fayth, as he offereth it vs in his Gospell, and by 
                     〈◊〉
                  
our selues also that wee bee grounded in his euerlasting 
                     〈…〉
                  
if our fayth should depend vppon our selues: surely it would

                     〈…〉
                   from vs, and it myght bee shaken of, if it were not 
                     〈…〉
                  
aboue. And although wee bee kept or preserued by fayth as

                     〈…〉
                   S. Peter:1. Pet. 
                        •
                      a. 5. yit is it God that keepeth or preserueth vs. Then if

                     〈…〉
                   were not grounded vppon Gods eternall election, it is 
                     〈…〉
                  
that Satan myght plucke it from vs euery minute of an houre.

                     〈…〉
                   wee were too day the constantest in the world,Luke. 2
                        •
                     . c. 31. yit myght wee

                     〈…〉
                   too morrowe. But our Lord Iesus sheweth vs the remedie too

                     〈…〉
                   vs ageinst all temptations, in that he sayeth, you come not

                     〈…〉
                   of your selues, but the heauenly father bringeth you too mee.

                     〈…〉
                   as I haue taken you intoo my keeping,Luke. 10. 
                        •
                     . 32. bee no more

                     〈…〉
                  , for I acknowledge you for the inheritance of God my father,

                     〈…〉
                   that hath giuen me the charge of you and put you into my hand,

                     〈…〉
                   than all. Wee see then, that besides the setting foorth of

                     〈…〉
                   glory, our saluatiō also is warranted by Gods eternall 
                     〈…〉
                  :
which ought too bee sufficient cause too moue vs too consider

                     〈◊〉
                   at S. Paule treateth of it in this place.
               Trew it is (as I haue touched alredie) that many men starkle at it

                     〈◊〉
                   they heere that God hath chozen whom he thought good, and 
                     〈…〉
                  
all the rest. For wee see that the number of them that come vnto

                     〈◊〉
                   is very small: and why then hath he refuzed the rest? Uerily as

                     〈◊〉
                   would say that Gods will ought not too stand for a rule towardes

                     〈…〉
                   It behoueth vs too marke,Psal. 16. a. 2. first that God is not bound at all vntoo



any person. For had wee once that foredeele at his hand, that he were
neuer so little beholden vntoo vs: then we might well go too lawe with
hun. But forasmuch as he on his side is nothing at all bounde vntoo
vs, but wee altoogither vntoo him: let vs see now what wee shall win
by our contending with him. For if wee will needes constreyne God
too deale alyke with all men, he should haue lesse libertie than mortall
creatures. If a man bee riche, he may doo what he listeth with his
owne goods: if he bee liberall too some one, is it reason he should bee
sewed at the Lawe for it, and that euery man should demaund the lyke
summe of him? Behold, a man of his good will aduanceth one whom
he loueth: now if all poore folke should come and require him too doo
as much for them, as it were of bound dewtie, were it not a fond thing?
Uerily a man may adopt the farthest straunger in the world too be his
chyld and heire,Math. 5. g. 45. and it is free for him so too doo. Behold, God is liberall
too all men: for he maketh his sunne too shyne both vppon good
and bad. Onely he reserueth a certeine part of men on whom too bestowe
the priuiledge of adopting them too his children. What shall
wee now gayne by murmuring ageinst him? If any man say, that
then he should seeme too bee an accepter of persons:Coloss. 3. d. 25. No, it is not so:
for he choozeth not the riche, and letteth the poore go: he choozeth not
noble men and gentlemen,1. Cor. 1. a. 26. rather than men of no estimation and bace
degree. And therefore it cannot bee sayd that there is any accepting of
persons before God. For in choozing those that are vnwoorthy, he
hath no respect but only too his owne mere goodnesse: nother passeth
he whether one bee more woorth than another, but he taketh whom he
listeth. What would wee more? Then is it good reason that we should
hold our selues contented with Gods will, and brydle our selues, and
let him chooze whom he listeth, bycause his will is the souereine rule
of equitie and right.Rom. 3. 
                        •
                     . 19. And so yee see the mouthes of all the world stopped.
And although the wicked and he athenish sort doo grudge and repyne
at God, yea or blaspheme him for so dooing: yit is he myghtie ynough
too maynteyne his owne rightuousnesse and infinite wisdome:
and when they haue chattered their fill, yit must they bee confounded
in the end. For our part, wee see what S. Paule sayeth heere: for it is
no darke doctrine when he sayeth that God hath blissed vs. Uerily
inasmuch as he hath inlyghtened vs with the fayth of the Gospell by
his holy spirit, and made vs parteners of the grace of our Lord Iesus
Christ: euen therby (sayeth he) hath he shewed that he had choozen vs



                  
                     〈…〉
                   making of the world. And therefore let vs vnderstand, that

                     〈…〉
                   Gods grace aryght, wee must (as I sayd afore) come too

                     〈…〉
                   and originall cause, that is too wit, vntoo Election.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   have wee too passe further: for too the i
                     •
                  tent the better too 
                     〈…〉
                   respects and woorthynesse which men myght pretend, 
                     〈…〉
                  
wee bee inclyned too chalendge alwayes somwhat too our

                     〈◊〉
                   and cannot abyde too bee brought to nothing: he sayeth, before

                        〈…〉
                      of the world. So then forasmuchas through such 
                     〈…〉
                  
wee think our selues too haue that which wee haue not: it was

                     〈◊〉
                   that S. Paule should heere beate downe all such fantasticall

                     〈…〉
                  . And for that cause he sayeth wee could put our selues 
                     〈…〉
                  
when wee were not yet borne. Nay verily, God choze vs before

                     〈◊〉
                   taking of the world: and what could wee then bring vntoo him? In

                     〈◊〉
                   the Papists haue a suttle shift in this behalfe: for they say that
God chaze such vntoo saluation, as had not yet deserued it, but yit
he 
                     〈◊〉
                   such as he foresawe shoulde deserue it. Thus confesse they

                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  eseruing at all went before election, eyther in order or in

                     〈…〉
                   but that God (as too whom all thinges are open) knewe who

                     〈…〉
                   bee worthie of it. After that maner doo the Papists speake of it

                     〈◊〉
                   they deny not Gods election. And soothly, to shewe that these

                     〈…〉
                   which nowadayes cannot abyde too haue it spoken of,

                     〈…〉
                   diuells incarnate, and maynteyne a more outrageous and 
                     〈…〉
                  
wickednesse than the Papists do: wee must note that the 
                     〈…〉
                  
God to haue chozen and predestinated whom he thought

                     〈…〉
                   before the making of the world. They stand vntoo that:

                     〈…〉
                   thing these diuells deny, and would haue Gods maiestie vtterly

                     〈…〉
                  , by ouerthyowing his ordinaunce after that maner. The 
                     〈…〉
                  
leastwyze such of them as haue walked vprightest, & I speake

                     〈◊〉
                   of the very Monks and Freers which are called schoole diuines)

                     〈…〉
                   yit further, that this election of Gods is free, and that he choze

                     〈…〉
                   man for any other respect, than for that it pleased himselfe: but

                     〈…〉
                   and by after, they mingle and turmoyle al: for they say that whē 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
choze whom he listed, he did it too make them deserue it. And

                     〈…〉
                   doo they ground all their merites, insomuch as they 
                     〈…〉
                  
that men may win the kingdome of heauen by their owne 
                     〈…〉
                  
They graunt in deede that as touching election, it is a free gift:

                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  lwayes they returne too their fantasticall surmyze, that God 
                     〈…〉
                  
who should doo good. But how should he foresee that which could



not bee? For wee knowe that all Adams ofspring is corrupted, & that
wee haue not the skill too thinke one good thought of doyng well, and
much lesse therefore are able too doo well in deede. Although God
should tarie for vs a hundred thousand yeers, if wee could continew so
long in the world: yit is it certeine that wee should neuer come vntoo
him, nor doo any thing else than increase the mischiefe continually too
our owne condemnation. Too bee short, the longer that men 
                     •
                  yue in
the world, the deeper doo they plundge themselues in their damnation.
And therefore God could not foresee the thing, which was not in
vs, before he himselfe did put it intoo vs. How then come wee vntoo
God? How obey wee him? How haue we a quiet mynd that yeeldeth
it selfe according too his fayth? All these things come of him. And so
it followeth that he is fayne too doo all himselfe. Wherfore let vs consider,
that in saying that God choze vs before the creation of the world,
S. Paule presuppozeth the thing that is trew: namely that God could
not see any thing in vs, saue the euill that was there: for there was
not one droppe of goodnesse for him too fynd. So then, seying he hath
chozen vs, yee see it is a very manifest record of his free goodnesse.
And for the same cause,Rom. 9. 
                        •
                      11. in the nynth too the Romanes where he speaketh
of the twoo twinnes Iacob and Esawe, at such time as they were
yit in their moothers womb, before they had done eyther good or euill,
too the intent that all shoulde come onely of the caller, and not of the
worker: it is sayd, that the elder should serue the yonger. Wee see then
how S. Paule declareth there more at large, the thing that he toucheth
heere briefly: that is too wit, that whereas God choze vs before
the creation of the world, therein he sheweth sufficiently, that one
man is not more woorthie or excellent than another, that he had not respect
too any deseruing. Therefore seyng that the putting of difference
betweene Iacob and Esawe, was before they had doone eyther good
or euill: it came not of the woorkes, but of the caller. Then must all
praise bee yeelded vntoo God, and nothing at all bee reserued too man.
And so yee see yit once ageine what wee haue too marke heere, when
as S. Paule sayeth that wee were chozen before the makyng of the
world.
               He confirmeth the thing yit better in that he sayeth, that the same
vvas doone in Iesus Christ. If wee had bin chozen in our selues, it
myght be sayd, that God had found in vs some secret vertue vnknowen
too men. But seyng that he hath chozen vs (that is too saye, 
                     〈◊〉
                  


                  
                  
                     〈…〉
                   our selues: what shall wee reply too that? If I doo a man

                     〈…〉
                   bycause I loue him. And if the cause of my loue bee sought

                     〈…〉
                   bee for that wee bee lyke of conditions, or else for some 
                     〈…〉
                  .
But wee must not imagine any lykelinesse in God, and

                     〈…〉
                   vs expressly heere: for S. Paule sayeth that wee were 
                     〈…〉
                  
Christ. Had God then an eye vntoo vs when he voutsafed

                     〈…〉
                  ? No: for then should he haue vtterly abhorred vs. It is

                     〈…〉
                   in respect of our miseries he had pitie and compassion vppon

                     〈…〉
                   vs: but that was bycause he had loued vs already in our

                     〈…〉
                   Christ. Then must God needes haue had his patterne

                     〈…〉
                   glasse before him wherin too behold vs, that is too say, he

                     〈…〉
                   haue looked vppon our Lord Iesus Christ, before he could

                     〈…〉
                   vs and call vs. And so, too bee short, after S. Paule hath 
                     〈…〉
                  
wee could not bring any thing vntoo God, but that he 
                     〈…〉
                   of
his owne free goodnesse, in choozing vs before the creation of

                     〈…〉
                   he addeth yit a more certeiner proofe: namely that he did

                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  ord Iesus Christ, who is as it were the trew booke of 
                     〈…〉
                  
Gods voutsafyng to chooze vs, that is to wit, his voutsafyng

                     〈…〉
                   it before all euerlastingnesse, was as it were a registring of vs

                     〈…〉
                   of Record. And the holy scripture calleth Gods election

                     〈…〉
                   of Lyfe. As I sayd afore, Iesus Christ serueth for a register:

                     〈…〉
                   whom wee bee ingraued, and in whom God acknowledgeth

                     〈…〉
                   children. Seyng then that God had an eye vntoo vs in the

                     〈…〉
                   of Iesus Christ: it followeth that he fyndeth not any thing in

                     〈…〉
                   wee myght lay before him, too cause him too elect vs. This

                     〈…〉
                   is the thing that wee haue too remember further.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   afterward, that it is too the end we should be pure

                        〈…〉
                      before God, namely in Loue. This woord Loue

                        〈…〉
                     
                   referred vntoo God: as if it were sayd, that wee shall fynde

                     〈…〉
                   reason why God voutsafed too take vs for his children, but

                     〈…〉
                   owne free loue. Or else (as it is verye lyke) S. Paule

                     〈…〉
                   what the trew soundnesse and perfection of the faythfull is:

                     〈…〉
                   too walk in all rightuousnesse before God. Wee cannot laye

                     〈…〉
                   the whole as now, but it shall suffyze too tell breefly whertoo

                     〈…〉
                   had an eye. For he sheweth heere that although Gods 
                     〈…〉
                  
free, and doo beate downe and put away all the woorthinesse,

                     〈…〉
                  , and vertewes of men: yet notwithstanding it serueth not to

                     〈…〉
                   leaue too doo euill and too lead a disordered lyfe, or too runne



at rouers, but rather too withdraw vs from the euil wherin wee were
plundged. For naturally wee can doo nothing e
                     •
                  se but prouoke Gods
wrath, wickednesse will alwayes reigne in vs, & wee bee hild downe
vnder the bonds and tyranny of Satan. God therfore must bee fayne
too woorke, & too change vs: for all goodnesse cōmeth of his election,
sayeth S. Paule. Yee see then that the thing wheruntoo he ment too
bring the faythfull, was to make them knowe, that lyke as God choze
them of his owne free goodnesse: so he gyueth them not leaue too
yeeld themselues to naughtinesse, but intendeth too keepe and preserue
them vndest
                     •
                  ed too himselfe. For Gods chozing of vs and his calling
of vs therwithall vnto holynesse, are things matched ins
                     •
                  perably togither:
                     
                        •
                      Thess. 4. a. 7.
accordingly also as S. Paule sayeth in another text, that wee be
not called to vncle
                     •
                  enesse & f
                     ••
                  thinesse, but to be dedicated too God in
all godlynesse and holynesse. Now forasmuch as we cannot lay foorth
the whole at this tyme, let vs looke too make our profit of this Lesson.
And seing wee bee now about too prepare our selues to the receyuing
of our Lord Iesus Christs supper, which is a pawne vntoo vs as well
of our election as of the hope of our saluation, and of all the spiri
                     •
                  uall
benefyts that come foorth of this welspring and fountaine of Gods free
goodnesse: let vs consider that there he vttereth his riches vntoo vs,
not too the end that wee should abuse them, but rather of purpose too be
glorified for them at our hands, not only with our mouthes, but also
with our whole lyues. And forasmuchas wee hold all things of him:
let vs also learne too bee his, and too giue ouer our selues too the obeying
of him, that he may inioy vs quietly. And let vs alwayes shoote at
this mark, namely too get a sure warrant that he taketh and auoweth
vs for his children, by bearing his marks, & by shewing in bery deede
that wee bee rightly gouerned by his holy spirit, in calling vppon him
as our father. Thus yee see in effect what wee haue too marke in this
text till the residew may followe.
               Now let vs fall down before the maiestie of our good God with acknowledgme
                     •
                  t of our faults, praying him too make vs feele them in
such wise, as wee may continually profit in his feare, and be strengthened
more and more in the same: & in the meane whyle so to beare with
our weaknesse, as wee may alwayes inioy his grace, euen till he haue
set vs in possession of all things, at such time as he shall haue doone away
our sinnes, and blotted them quite out for our Lord Iesus Christs

                     •
                  ake. And salet vs all say, Almightie God heauenly father. &c.
            
            
               
               ¶The third Sermon vppon the
first Chapter.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         hath choozen vs in Christ, before the foundation of the

                           〈…〉
                        : too the end vvee should bee holy and vnblamable 
                           〈…〉
                        
him, in Loue.
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         hath predestinated vs too adopt vs too himself by 
                           〈…〉
                        
Christ, according too the good pleasure of his vvill.
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         the praise of the glory of his grace, vvherethrough he

                           〈…〉
                         accepted vs in his vvelbeloued.
                  
               
               
                  I Began too shewe you this morning that it
is not lawfull for vs too take libertie too
loocenesse, vnder colour that God hath
chozen vs before the making of the world:
as though it were meete for vs too giue ouer
our selues too all naughtinesse, bycause
wee cannot perishe, seyng that God hath
taken vs for his children.Math. 16. a. 6. For wee must
not put the thinges a sunder which he hath

                     〈…〉
                   toogither. Seyng then that he hath chozen vs too bee holy,

                     〈…〉
                   in purenesse of lyfe: our election must bee as a roote that

                     〈…〉
                   good fruites. For so long as God lettes vs alone in our owne

                     〈…〉
                   wee can doo nothing but all manner of naughtinesse, bycause

                     〈…〉
                   so great corruption and frowardnesse in ma
                     ••
                  es nature, that

                     〈…〉
                   they thinke or doo, is contrarie too Gods rightuousnesse.

                     〈…〉
                   there is none other shift but too bee chaunged by God. And

                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  ommeth this chaunge, but onely of the grace that wee spake

                     〈…〉
                   for that he did elect and chooze vs for his children, before

                     〈…〉
                   borne intoo the world? Herewithall wee haue too marke

                     〈…〉
                  , that God letteth his choozen ones go for a tyme, so as they

                     〈…〉
                   too bee strayd away & vtterly lost, & yit bringeth them home 
                     〈…〉
                  
too his flocke when it pleaseth him. And that serueth too 
                     〈…〉
                  
the more, and too make his goodnesse and mercy so much the

                     〈…〉
                   knowen too the whole world. If God should make all his 
                     〈…〉
                  
too walke in perfectnesse of conuersation euen from their 
                     〈…〉
                  :
it should not bee so well discerned, that the same 
                     〈…〉
                  
of the grace of his holy spirit. But when wretched folke that



lyued loo
                     •
                  ely, and were giuen too all naughtinesse for a time, are quite
chaunged: that cannot come too passe without Gods woorking & putting
too of his hand. Thus yee see that the cause why God delayeth
the calling of those whom he had chozen, is (say I) too touche them
too the quicke by his holy spirit, that he may make them too walke in
his obedience. For when wee see them refourmed vpon the suddayne,
and beyond the common expectation and opinion of men: therin we
perceyue that God hath vttered his power in them, as I sayde afore.
And agein on the other part, euery of vs is conuicted by experience,
that wee bee beholden too God for all the good that is in vs. For when
wee bee naturally inclyned too any vyce, and afterward the same is
corrected: wee perceyue well that God hath looked mercifully vppon
vs. Yee perceyue then that wee haue so much the more cause too humble
vs, seyng wee were in the way of perdition, till he had drawen vs
out of it. And it standeth vs in hand too mark that well: For there are
some fantasticall heades, which imagin that God dooth so guyde his
chozen ones by his holy spirit, that they bee sanctifyed aforehand, euē
from the tyme that they bee borne intoo the worlde, as soone as they
come out of their moothers womb: but the contrarie appeereth. And
in good sooth wee see how S. Paule in another text speaking too the
faythfull,Rom. 1. d. 29. sayeth, some of you were plundged in couetousnesse, some
were giuen too crueltie, some were scorners, some were whoremongers
and looee lyuers, and othersome were gluttons and drunkardes:
and too bee short, yee were full of all vnclenesse: but God hauyng
chaunged you, and made you cleane from such filthinesse and infection,
hath dedicated you too himselfe. Agein he sayeth too the Romanes,
you 
                     •
                  ught too bee ashamed of the lyfe which you led before he drewe
you too himselfe. So then, whereas it is sayd in this text, that God
choze his seruantes to make them walke in holinesse of life: it is not
ment that he is bound too gouerne them with his holy spirit euē from
their chyldhood forth. For (as I haue sayd alredy) experience sheweth
that he letteth them runne astray, till conuenient tyme bee come for too
call them. But yit must wee alwayes beare in mynd, that Gods choozing
of vs, was too the end too call vs too holinesse of lyfe. For if he
should let vs alone still as wretched castawayes: surely wee could doo
nothing but all manner of naughtinesse, according too the corruption
that is in vs. The good then proceedeth of his free bestowed mercy,
which he hath vsed alredy towardes vs before wee were borne, yea



                  
                     〈…〉
                   the world was made. Thus yee see in effect what wee haue

                     〈…〉
                   this streyne. And so the blasphemies of such as would

                     〈…〉
                   praise are repressed, which make a iarre, and as it were

                     〈…〉
                   Gods free election, and indeuer of dooyng well.

                     〈…〉
                  , Hath God chozen vs? Then let euery of vs doo what

                     〈…〉
                   wee cannot petishe. And what shoulde wee passe of 
                     〈…〉
                  
good or euill, seying that our saluation is grounded vppon

                     〈…〉
                   grace, and not vppon any vertew. The answere 
                     〈…〉
                  
easie: namely that if Gods election were not, looke

                     〈…〉
                   thoughtes and appetites there are in vs, so many 
                     〈…〉
                  
should there bee ageinst all ryg
                     ••
                  uousnesse: for wee tende all

                     〈…〉
                   euill, and wee bee not only inclyned too it, but wee bee as it

                     〈…〉
                   hot with it, and wee runne too it with frentik 
                     〈…〉
                  
cause the diuell possesseth all such as are not reformed by

                     〈…〉
                   spirit. And so we must needes conclude, that our giuing

                     〈…〉
                   too doo good, is for that God guydeth and leadeth vs

                     〈…〉
                   his holy spirit, and all bycause of his election. 
                     〈…〉
                  
erewhyle) wee must not separate the things that God

                     〈…〉
                   toogither. For wee bee not chozen too take leaue too doo

                     〈…〉
                   list, but too shewe by our deeds that God hath adopted vs

                     〈…〉
                   children, and taken vs intoo his keeping, too the intent too

                     〈…〉
                   by his holie spirit, and too knit vs too himselfe in all 
                     〈…〉
                  
ryghtuousnesse.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   let vs mark also, that although God haue reformed vs,

                     〈…〉
                   in the good waye, and made vs too feele that he hath

                     〈…〉
                   vs alredie, to subdew vs to his word and to make vs serue

                     〈…〉
                   in all things: yit doth it not therfore follow, that we be

                     〈…〉
                   at the first day, no nor yit in all our whole lyfetyme.

                     〈…〉
                   sayes not that God bringeth his chozen and faythfull ones

                     〈…〉
                   poynt of perfection, 
                     〈◊〉
                   he sayes that he draweth them 
                     〈…〉
                  
And so are wee but in the way thitherward euen vntill our

                     〈…〉
                   Therfore as long as wee liue in this world, let vs learne too

                     〈…〉
                   go foreward more and more, assuring ourselues that there is

                     〈…〉
                   somewhat amisse in vs. For they that imagin anie

                     〈…〉
                   are as good as bewitched with hippocrisie and pryde, or

                     〈…〉
                   no feeling nor feare of God in them, but mocke him 
                     〈…〉
                   face.
For he that examineth himselfe, shall alwayes fynd

                     〈…〉
                   of vyces, as he shalbee ashamed of them, if he consider them



well. They then which say that wee can come too anie perfection
whyle wee dwell in this mortall bodie, doo well shew that eyther
they bee vtterly blynded with diuelishe pryde, or else that they bee 
                     〈…〉
                  
folk voyd of all religion and godlinesse. As for our part, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
vs mark (as I touched afore) that God hath chozen vs too the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
wee▪ should bee blamelesse: Howbeeit, that wee bee not able too
bee so,Rom. 7. d. 24. till wee bee quyte r
                     •
                  d of all our infirmities, and departed 
                     〈◊〉
                  
of this prison of sin, wherin wee bee hild fast as now. And therfore
when wee feele anie vyces in vs, let vs fyght manfully ageinst them,
and not bee out of hart, as though wee were not Gods children, bycause
wee bee not yit faultlesse before him, but that our sinnes are alwayes
before our eyes, which make vs giltie. Although then that wee
fynd neuer so manie miseries in ourselues too thrust vs out of the way▪
Yit let vs go on still, assuring our selues that as long as wee liue heere
beneath vppon the earth, our waye is neuer at an ende, but wee 
                     〈◊〉
                  
alwayes go still forewarde, and wee can neuer come too our resting
place. Lo how the faythfull ought too harten and strengthen themselues,
although they bee not perfect. And let the same also cause 
                     〈◊〉
                  
too gro
                     •
                  e and sigh vnder the burthen which wee bee driuen too feele.
For the perfection of the faythfull and of Gods children, is too acknowledge
their owne weaknesse, and too pray God not onely too amend
all their misdooings, but also too beare with them of his infinite
goodnesse, and not too call them too account with extremitie and rigor.
Yee see then that the thing whereuntoo wee must resort for succour,
is Gods mercy, whereby he couereth and buryeth all our sinnes,
bycause wee haue not yit atteyned too the marke whereunto he calleth
vs, that is too wit, too a holy and faultlesse lyfe. But howsoeuer the
world go with vs, let vs go foreward still, and take good heede that 
                     〈◊〉
                  
step not out of the right way.
               If the woord Loue bee referred too men, then S. Paule ment too
betoken the trew right
                     ••••
                  ousnesse of Christians, that is too wit, to deale
faithfully and vprightly. For wee knowe that the hypocrites would
content God with ceremonies and Gewgawes, as men terme them:
and in the meane whyle some of them shalbee giuen too catching and
snatching: some shalbe full of enuie, malice, crueltie and treason: some

                     〈◊〉
                   drunkard
                     •
                  , and othersome shalbe whoremongers and looce 
                     〈…〉
                  
themselues the brydle too all naughtinesse. And yit for all 
                     〈…〉
                  
al is safe, if they may make a fewe moppes & mowes,



                  
                     〈…〉
                   some countenaunce of holinesse by vsing a fewe 
                     〈…〉
                  
Paule too cut of all such stuffe, sayeth that wee must walke in

                     〈…〉
                   is the bond of perfection and the fulfilling of the Lawe) if

                     〈…〉
                   too haue our lyfe allowed of God. And so yee see what wee

                     〈…〉
                   marke vppon that strey ne.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   let vs marke, that in this place S. Paule exhorteth

                     〈…〉
                   acknowledge our selues beholden to God for all the vertew and

                     〈…〉
                   that is in vs. As for example, if wee haue any good zeale, if

                     〈…〉
                   ageinst our owne vyces, or if wee walke in the obedience of

                     〈…〉
                   whence commeth it? Euen of this welspring, that he purposed

                     〈…〉
                   is to wit, that he choze vs aforehand. Then let vs consider,

                     〈…〉
                   prayse thereof is dew vnto him, and let vs not defraud him of

                     〈…〉
                  . For although wee lyued as perfectly as Angells: yit if we

                     〈…〉
                   fond as too thinke that the same commeth of our owne free

                     〈…〉
                   selfmouing: wee misse the chiefe poynt of all. For wheretoo

                     〈…〉
                   our good workes, but to glorify God withall? And if we take

                     〈…〉
                   spring of our selues, wee see they bee marred by so dooyng,

                     〈…〉
                   turned intoo vyces, so as they be nought else than stark 
                     〈…〉
                  
Yee see then that the thing wherat S. Paule amed in this 
                     〈…〉
                  
too bring vs alwayes backe too Gods free election, that wee

                     〈…〉
                   know how all goodnesse dependeth theruppon.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   addeth immediatly that wee be predestinated in adoption in

                        〈…〉
                      through Iesus Christ, according too the good pleasure of

                        〈…〉
                      will. Wheras he sayth that God hath predestinated vs in

                     〈…〉
                  : it is too shewe that if wee bee Gods children, it is not

                     〈…〉
                   nature, but through his onely grace. Now, this onely grace

                     〈…〉
                   respect of any thing that God foresawe in vs (as I touched

                     〈…〉
                  :) but bycause he had erst marked vs out and 
                     〈…〉
                  
too such adoption, yea euen in such wyse as the cause thereof is

                     〈…〉
                   bee sought elswhere than in himselfe. And that is the cause why

                     〈…〉
                   addeth immediatly, that he did it in himself, and according

                        〈…〉
                      the good pleasure of his ovvne vvill. Also he repeteth the same

                     〈…〉
                   that I declared this forenoone, namely that all was done in 
                     〈…〉
                  
Christ. Yee see therfore that the thing which wee haue too marke

                     〈…〉
                   sentence, is, that none other cause maketh vs Gods children,

                     〈…〉
                   onely his choozing of vs in himselfe. For wee haue no such 
                     〈…〉
                  
by birth or inheritance, nother commeth it of fleshe and blud,

                     〈…〉
                   sayd in the first chapter of S. Iohn: insomuch that al that euer



can bee sought in our our owne selues, is vtterly excluded and abolished.
And that is too shewe vs, that if men bee let alone in their former
plyght, they haue no intercommoning at all with God, but are vtterly
cut off from his kingdome.Gen. 1. c. 26. Trew it is that our first father Adam was
created after the image of God, and that he was excellent in his first
state: but after the comming in of sinne, wee were all vtterly forlorne.
Insomuch that euen Adam had not any stay of himselfe, and his free
will that was giuen him, serued him too none other purpose, but too
make him the more vnexcuzable: For he fell wilfully and through his
ow
                     •
                  e malice. But heereby we see what maner of constancie he had in
him, sith he was no sooner made, but he by & by fell & drew vs downe
intoo his fall with him.
                     
                        •
                     ph. 2. 
                        •
                     . 3. Then as nowe wee bee all of vs borne the
children of wrath, and are cursed of God.
               And so, as long as wee abyde in our former state and plyght, there
is nothing but endlesse death in vs. Therefore God must bee fayne
too call vs home to him. For are wee able too purchace such prerogatiue?
Where is the goold or siluer too buy it withall? W
                     •
                  ere are the
vertewes wherewith to recompence God for so great and excellent a
priuiledge?Iohn. 1. 
                        •
                     . 23. Too bee short (as is sayd alredie vppon this sentence) it
commeth nother of flesh nor of blud, that is too say, it commeth not of
anie thing that wee can fynd in this world: but alonly of Gods adoption.
For the word which S. Paule vseth, betokeneth an appoynting
of children: lyke as when a man adopteth a chyld, he choozeth him
too bee his heire, and all the goods that he hath afterward, doo passe
vnder that tytle. Euen so are wee heires of the heauenly lyfe, bycause
God hath adopted and chozen vs for his children. Yea, but S. Paule
is not contented too haue magnifyed Gods grace so farre foorth: but
he sayth moreouer, that God had also predestinated vs, and appoynted
the thing aforehand. Wee see the
                     •
                   that S. Paule g
                     •
                  t
                     •
                  ereth toogither
all the things that may beate downe the fond imaginations,
which wee myght conceyue of bringing aught vntoo God, or of auauncing
our selues towards him, too make our selues acceptable vntoo
him. Therefore all such thinges mu
                     •
                  t bee layd awater, so as
Gods only grace may bee acknowledged in that behalfe. And that
also is the cause why he repeteth, through Iesus Christ. Then if it
bee demaunded why and how wee bee predestinated of God too bee
his children: it is bycause he voutsafed too looke vppon vs in Christ:
for (as I haue sayd afore) he is as it were the register, wherein wee



                  
                     〈…〉
                   too atteine too the heritage of lyfe and saluation. For 
                     〈…〉
                  
pitie our miseries: yit should we alwayes be hateful in his

                     〈…〉
                   Iesus Christ came not before him, bycause that all of vs

                     〈…〉
                   descended of Adam, are all of one mould and making, and

                     〈…〉
                   none better than other among vs. Now then the one sorte

                     〈…〉
                  : and why is that, but bycause God looking vppon them

                     〈…〉
                   dooth mislyke them? But he choozeth vs in our Lorde

                     〈…〉
                   Christ, and looketh vppon vs there as in a glasse that he lyketh

                     〈…〉
                  . And so yee see whereof the difference proceedeth. 
                     〈…〉
                  
the thing yit better, he sayeth that Gods choozing of vs

                     〈…〉
                   
                  himself. Trew it is that God doeth all good of himself. But

                     〈…〉
                   S. Paule ment too set out the thing which is not seene in all the

                     〈…〉
                   workes of God: that is to wit, that none other cause moued

                     〈…〉
                   chooze vs, than his owne will. S. Paule therefore taketh 
                     〈…〉
                  
all respectes, when he sayeth that God choze vs in himselfe. If he

                     〈…〉
                   any desert or woorthinesse, if he had found any disposition

                     〈…〉
                   if he had found any goodnesse or vertew, or (too be

                     〈…〉
                   had found any one drop of aught that he myght like and 
                     〈…〉
                  
he had not chozen vs in himselfe, but wee our selues shoulde

                     〈…〉
                   some partnership with him. Seyng then that S. Paule 
                     〈…〉
                  
all thinges in Gods purpose which belong too our saluation,

                     〈…〉
                   that our election also is shet vp there: it is all one as if he

                     〈…〉
                   saye, that men doo fowly ouershoote themselues, when they take

                     〈…〉
                   them too bee any thing woorth, or too haue bin furtherers or

                     〈…〉
                   of themselues too the receyuing of such grace. Therefore

                     〈…〉
                   bee caryed vp aloft, if wee will knowe whereuppon our 
                     〈…〉
                  
grounded, and what is the very originall welspring and the

                     〈…〉
                   only cause of the same. And so yee see what is ment by this

                     〈◊〉
                  , that God did it in himselfe.
               
                  
                     •
                  ut S. Paul addeth yet further, according too the good pleasure

                        〈…〉
                      owne will. If he had set downe no more but onely the woorde

                     〈…〉
                  , it had bin ynough: accordingly as wee haue seene heertoofore, &

                     〈◊〉
                   declared vppon Sonday last, that S. Paule was chozen 
                     〈…〉
                  
too the will of God. And why so? Bycause he was nother fit

                     〈…〉
                   to haue such a prerogatiue, but that it pleased god to choze

                     〈…〉
                  . S. Paule therfore braggeth not that he had gotten the 
                     〈…〉
                  
but with all myldnesse acknowledgeth it too bee the free gift of

                     〈…〉
                  . Thus yee see what the woord Will betokeneth, and that not in



any one place only, but throughout all the whole holie scripture. Therfore
whensoeuer Gods wil is mencioned, it is to shew that men cannot
bring ought of their owne. Neuerthelesse S. Paule setteth downe
heere a woord of ouerplus, and sayeth, according too the good pleasure.
As if he had sayd, truly seing that Gods will is the cause of our
saluation, wee should not fleete too and froo, and seeke other reasons &
meanes therof: Howbeit forasmuch as men are so vnthankefull and
malitious, that they would alwayes darken Gods glory: & so puffed
vp with fond ouerweening, that they continually chalendge more too
thēselues, thā belongeth vntoo them: therfore if they be not sufficiently
perswaded of Gods wil, let them vnderstand that it cōmeth of the good
pleasure of his will: that is too say, of a free inclined wil which dependeth
not vpon any other thing (than it selfe,) nor hath any respect one
way or other, but vou
                     •
                  safeth too chooze vs freely, bycause it lyketh &
ly
                     ••
                  eth so too d
                     •
                  o. Now then wee see that such as serch out the cause
why God hath chozen vs, woold (if it lay in them) ouerthrowe his euerlastyng
ordinance: for the one is vnseparable from the other. If
God haue chozen vs as it is shewed vs heere: then can nothing hang
vppon our deserts, nor vppon aught that wee myght haue too comme,
but God wrought it according too his owne free inclyned will, and
found not any other reason (to moue him therto) than his owne good
pleasure. If any mē think this to be strange geere, it is bycause they
would be haylefellow with God. And heerin appeereth their diulish
malapertnesse, that they cannot suffer God to raine freely, as the thing
that he lyketh myght bee receyued as good, iust, & ryghtfull, without
geynsaying. But let such folke barke lyke doggs asmuch as they list,
yet is this sentence definiti
                     •
                  e vnable too bee repealed, which the holie
Ghost hathe vttered heere by the mouth of S. Paule: namely that it
is not for vs to searche any further cause of our election, than the good
pleasure of God: that is to say, than his owne free inclyned wil, wherby
he hath chozē vs, though we were not worthy in none other respect
than for that he listed too say, so it pleaseth me. And so yee see in effect
what wee haue too gather vppon those words of S. Paules.
               Now he sayeth immediatly, that it is too the prayse of the glorie
of his grace. Heere he sheweth the finall cause that God looked at in
c
                     ••
                  zing of vs: namly that his grace myght bee praysed by it, and that
not after a cōmon and ordinary manner, but with a certeyne glorie:
for he hath cuppled those twoo things togither, to the intent we should



                  
                     〈…〉
                   when wee see how God hath drawen vs out of the bottom

                     〈…〉
                   open vs the gate of his kingdome, and too call vs too the 
                     〈…〉
                  
saluation. Heere wee see yit ageyne the thing that I treated

                     〈…〉
                  : namely that all such as woold put awaye Gods 
                     〈…〉
                  ,
or are loth too heere it spoken of, doo therin shewe 
                     〈…〉
                  
bee mortall enemies of Gods prayse. Too their seeming

                     〈…〉
                   & vanisheth away. Yea, but who is the competent iudge 
                     〈…〉
                  
they themselues wyzer than God, who hath spoken the

                     〈…〉
                   too that which they alledge? O (say they) that were the

                     〈…〉
                   to open the mouthes of many mē to blaspheme God. 
                     〈…〉
                  
the wicked, it is certeyn that they wil alwayes find wherat to

                     〈…〉
                   they cannot be letted so too doo.Rom. 3. a. 4. But yit for all that God shal

                     〈…〉
                   wherwith to iustifie himself,Psal. 51. a. 6. and all they that doo so spyte

                     〈…〉
                   his rightuousnesse, shall bee confounded. Howsoeuer the cace

                     〈◊〉
                  , it is not without cause sayd heere, that God is then dewly glorified▪
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   his praise maynteyned, when wee acknowledg that he hath

                     〈…〉
                   whome he listed, & that there is none other cause of 
                     〈…〉
                  
betweene man and man (than only his wil:) so that they whō
                  
                     〈…〉
                   doo perishe, bycause they be woorthye of it, and they

                     〈…〉
                   calleth too saluation must not seeke the cause therof, elswhere

                     〈…〉
                   the sayd free bestowed adoption.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   by those twoo woords, S. Paule ment also too stirre

                     〈…〉
                   a greater and feruenter earnestnesse of praysing God. For it

                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  nough for vs too confesse coldly, that our saluation springeth of

                     〈…〉
                   good will: but wee must bee as it were inflamed too

                     〈…〉
                   selues wholly too his praise, as if wee were wholly wedded to

                     〈…〉
                   as S. Peter sheweth,1. Pet. 2. b. 7. that forasmuch as wee bee drawē
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   darknesse of death, it is good reason that wee should be 
                     〈…〉
                  
the vnvtterable prayses of God.Psal. 107. And hereby he dooeth vs too

                     〈…〉
                  , that when the faythfull haue streyned themselues too the

                     〈…〉
                  ,Luke. 17. b. 10. too discharge themselues in praysing Gods goodnesse: yit

                     〈…〉
                   neuer compasse it, bycause it is a thing incomprehensible.

                     〈…〉
                   well therefore what wee haue too beare in mynd. And so, vpon

                     〈…〉
                   or grace wherof he speaketh, it behoueth vs too gather

                     〈…〉
                  , shall neuer yeeld God his dew glory, till they bee vtterly 
                     〈…〉
                  ,
so as there remayneth not any thing at all in them for too glory

                     〈…〉
                   vs put the ca
                     •
                  e that Gods election were neuer thought of:

                     〈…〉
                   he therefore ceasse too bee praysed? No: but he shoulde haue



some peece of his prayse still. For if men should say no more but that
God causeth his daysunne too shyne vppon them,Math. 5. g. 45. that were a cause too
prayse him. And when we open our eyes too looke vpward and downwarsd
vppon the wonderfull woorkes that he sheweth vs, the same is a
large prouocation too exercise vs in his praise all our lyfe long. Moreouer,
when his Gospell is preached vntoo vs, there also wee haue
whereof too praise him, though no mention at all bee made of his election:
I say there is ynough as in respect of vs, but then should he bee
robbed of his chiefe pra
                     •
                  se, and wee should yeeld him but a peece of
that which is dew to him. And why so? For the faythfull should thinke
that they haue fayth of their owne selfmouing and free inclyned will.
I told you this morning, that fayth is a fruite of election. For there is
none other oddes betweene vs and the vnbeleeuers, but that God reached
vs his hand, and drewe vs too him by a secrete meane, at such
time as wee turned our backes vppon him, and were straungers too
him.Rom. 5. b. 10. Too bee short, it is not for naught that S. Paule sayeth heere,
that Gods praise shall neuer bee glorifyed as it ought too bee, till wee
acknowledge his election too bee the cause of all the benefites which
he bestoweth vppon vs, and that if he of his infinite mer
                     •
                  y adopted vs
not of set purpose from euerlasting, wee should haue a peece of the
prayse too our selues which is dew vntoo him. And so should God bee
diminished and abridged of so much of his ryght. Too bee short, wee
see well ynough how it is sayd heere, that men must bee vtterly abaced,
too the end that God may haue his right, and no man bee made
copartener with him, but all men confesse that he is both the beginner
and the accomplisher of our saluation.
               Also wee must marke well how S. Paule addeth, that of his owne
grace he hath accepted vs in his vvelbeloued. By this he vttereth
yit much better, why our saluation is grounded vppon Gods mere election
and free bestowed goodnesse. For men will neuer giue ouer
their foolishe ouerweening, if they bee not so vanguished as they haue
not one woorde more too reply. S. Paule therefore too bring vs too
such reason, telleth vs that wee bee damned & lost in our selues. Now
when such a thunder bolt lighteth vppon our heades, it is not for vs too
stand checking any more. Then if men will bee so foolishe as still too
hunt about with wyndlasses too haue somewhat alwayes belonging
and reserued too themselues besides the onely grace of God: there
needeth no more but this saying too turne them from it, namely that



                  
                     〈…〉
                   not in Gods fauour, till wee were in Iesus Christ, bycause

                     〈…〉
                   damned and accursed in our owne selues. This matter

                     〈…〉
                   declared already, if wee were not ouer
                     ••
                  owe in 
                     〈…〉
                  
thing that is so needefull, and which ought too be so cleere

                     〈…〉
                   And in good sooth, euen experience ought too teache vs in

                     〈…〉
                  . And surely if hipocrisie blynded vs not too much,

                     〈…〉
                   well perceyue that there is nothing but wickednesse

                     〈…〉
                   Gods wrath would strike vs in such feare, that wee shoulde

                     〈…〉
                   wittes end with it. But God must bee fayne too compell vs

                     〈…〉
                   by strong hand, or else wee cannot fynd in our hartes too

                     〈…〉
                   all praise vntoo him. Therefore let vs marke well what is

                     〈…〉
                   this speeche, where it is sayd that wee were taken too fauour

                     〈…〉
                   Christ,Math. 17. a. 5. bycause he is the welbeloued. And why is Iesus

                     〈…〉
                   Gods welbeloued, according as he is termed in the xvii. 
                     〈…〉
                  ,
and in other places, and also is shewed too bee so in the

                     〈…〉
                  ?Esai. 43. a. 4. Thereby it is shewed vs, that God dooth iustly hate

                     〈…〉
                   vs, so long as wee abyde in our owne naturall plyght. For

                     〈…〉
                   were not peculiar too Iesus Christ, then was it sayd in

                     〈…〉
                   is my welbeloued sonne in whom I am well pleased.Luke. 3. f. 22. But

                     〈…〉
                   too Iesus Christ, then can none other creature claime

                     〈…〉
                   that although. God loue his Angels, yit can they not bee

                     〈◊〉
                   beloued of him, but by the meanes of Iesus Christ. And as

                     〈…〉
                   is a farre other respect. For (as I haue sayd alredy) wee

                     〈◊〉
                  , and Iesus Christ is the mediator or spokesman too set

                     〈…〉
                   at one with God, insomuch that there should bee no

                     〈…〉
                   constancie in them,Coloss. 1. c. 20. if they were not vphild by him. And

                     〈…〉
                   their rightuousnesse should not bee perfect, but that they

                     〈…〉
                   and chozen in him. Let that serue for one poynt.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   for vs, seyng wee bee estraunged from God through sinne: he

                     〈…〉
                   take vs as his enemyes, and be an aduersarie too vs. 
                     〈…〉
                  
therefore is the onely welbeloued among men: and as for

                     〈…〉
                   of vs, God vtterly mis
                     •
                  yketh and disclaymeth vs, yea euen

                     〈…〉
                  ,G
                        •
                     n. 6. b. 7. that he sayeth he repenteth him that he made man. Which

                     〈…〉
                   of his importeth that wee bee not woorthie too bee of the 
                     〈…〉
                  
Asses, Dogges, and other beastes. For they continue still Gods

                     〈◊〉
                   in the same plyght that he made them: but we bee so leawd

                     〈…〉
                  , that wee deserue too bee razed out, and too haue our 
                     〈…〉
                  
cursed and hatefull before God. Nowe let vs go brag



and boast and seeke armes too innoble our selues: for wee see how the
holy Ghost disgradeth all such as thinke themselues too bee aught
woorth. Wherfore let vs consider that if wee bee enemies vntoo God,
wee bee in woorser taking than if wee had neuer bin created.
               Heeruppon S. Paule telleth vs, that God hath accepted vs in his
welbeloued. Seing then that our Lord Iesus Christ is receyued of
God his father too bee the beloued, not only in his owne person, but
also in respect of the loue that is extended too all the members of his
bodie: by that meanes wee bee called home agein, and God imbraceth
vs for his children, wheras erst wee were his enemyes and vtterly hated
of him. But howsoeuer the world go, wee must alwayes come
backe too the election that wee haue spoken of before. For the grace
that is communicated too vs by our Lord Iesus Christ, dothe issewe
lykewyse out of the same spring. Theruppon going foreward with
the matter that I haue touched alredie, he sheweth vs howe greate
neede wee haue too bee welbeloued in Iesus Christ. For if it were not
proued too our faces, wee woold neuer graunt (I meane vnfeynedly)
that wee bee beholden too God for all things. For wee bee alwayes
laboring too aduaunce our selues some way or other, and euery of vs
seeketh how he may reserue somewhat too himself, though it bee but
the mountenance of a pinnes poynt. But contrariwyze S. Paule telleth
vs, that God must be fayne too loue vs out of our selues, and that
if he lyke well of vs, it must not bee in respect of our owne selues. And
why? For wee be prisoners and bonds
                     •
                  aues of sin, wee bee hild downe
vnder the yoke and tyrannie of Satan, and finally wee bee shet vp in
the bondage of death, till wee bee raunsomed by our Lord Iesus
Christ. Now then wee see that the summe of this lesson is, that men
are admonished too depart out of themsel
                     •
                  es, and too seeke their saluation
in Gods only goodnesse, euen by holding the meane that is
shewed vs heere, which is too resort too our Lord Iesus Christ. For
there are two euill extremities wherof wee must beware.Math. 8. 
                        •
                     . 8. The one is,
that in comming too our Lord Iesus Christ, wee must not imagin
that there is anie woorthynesse in vs, why he should make vs partakers
of his benefytes. And how may that vyce bee corrected? Euen
by being led too Gods free election. For the verye cause why men
presume so much vppon their owne free will, and the very ground also
wheron they build the opinion which they haue conceyued of their
owne deserts and woorthinesse, is that they know not how they bee nothing



in any other respect, than for that God hath accepted them of
his owne mere free goodnesse, bycause he had chozen them alredie in
his owne euerlasting purpose. Therfore wee cannot by any meanes
father the beginning of our saluation vppon God, except wee confesse
that which is shewed vs heere, namely that wee were vtterly damned
and accursed at such tyme as he adopted vs, & that the verie originall
cause of his adopting of vs, is for that he had predestinated vs before
hand, yea, euen before the making of the world. Marke that for one
poynt. The other euill extremitie whereof wee must likewyze beware,
is speculation. Many fantasticall folke will say, As for mee I shall
neuer knowe whether God hath chozen mee or no, and therfore I must
bee fayne too abyde still in my destruction. Yea, but that is for want of
comming too Iesus Christ. How knowe wee that God hath chozen vs
before the making of the world? By beleeuing in Iesus Christ. I sayd
heeretofore that faith sprinketh of election, and is the fruite of it, which
sheweth that the roote is hidden within. He then that beleeueth, is
therby assured that God hath wrought in him: and fayth is as it were
the copie or counterpane which God deliuereth vs of the originall register
of our adoption. God hath his euerlasting purpose or determination,
and that he keepeth alwayes too himselfe as a chiefe president
or originall record, whereof he gyueth vs a copie by fayth. I speake
heere after the manner of men, for wee knowe that God vseth nother
paper nor parchment too ingroce vs in: and I haue told you alreadye,
that too speake properly, the register wherein wee bee inrolled, is our
Lord Iesus Christ. Neuerthelesse God reserueth too himselfe the
knowledge of our election, as a Prince would doo an originall President,
Register, or Record: but yit he giueth vs copies or counterpanes
of it, autenticall ynough, in that he imprinteth it in our hartes by his
holy spirit, that wee bee his children. Yee see then that the fayth which
we haue in our Lord Iesus Christ, is ynough too warrant vs our election:
and therefore what seeke wee more? I tolde you euen now that
Iesus Christ is the looking glasse wherein God beholdeth vs, when it
is his will to lyke well of vs. Likewyse also on our side he is the glasse
wheruppon wee must cast our eyes and lookes, when wee mynde too
come too the knowledge of our election.Iohn. 1. b. 12. For whosoeuer beleeueth in
Iesus Christ,1. Iohn. 5. c. 15. is Gods chylde, and consequently his heire, as I haue
declared before. Then dooth it followe, that if wee haue fayth, wee bee
also adopted. For wherfore doth God giue vs fayth? Euen bycause he



choze vs before the creation of the world. This therefore is an infastible
order, that inasmuch as the faythfull receyue Gods grace and imbrace
his mercy, holding Iesus Christ for their head, too the intent too
obteine saluation by his meanes: they knowe assuredly that God hath
adopted them. Trew it is that election is of it selfe secrete: it is so
deepe & hidden a determination, as it beh
                     •
                  ueth vs to honor it. Yit notwithstanding
God sheweth it too vs so farrefoorth as is requisite, and
as he knoweth it too bee for our benefite and welfare: and that dooeth
he when he inlyghteneth vs with the beleefe of his Gospell. Thus yee
see why that after S. Paule had spoken of Gods euerlasting election,
he setteth foorth Iesus Christ, as the partie too whom wee must resort,
too bee assured that God loueth vs and auoweth vs for his children,
and consequently that he had adopted vs before wee knewe him, yea
and before the world was made.
               Moreouer we haue to gather vppon this sentence that the doctrine
of predestination serueth not too carie vs away intoo wandering speculations:
but to beate downe al pryde in vs, & the fond opinion which
wee conceyue alwayes of our owne woorthinesse and deseruings: and
too shewe that God hath such free power, priuiledg, and souereyn dominion
ouer vs, that he may refuze whom he listeth, and chooze whom
he listeth: and that by that meanes wee bee led too gloryfye him, and
therwith too acknowledge that his choozing of vs is in Iesus Christ,
too the end wee should bee hild fast vnder the fayth of his Gospell. For
if wee bee his members and take him for our head, according too the
couenant and holie vnion that is betwixt him & vs, which can neuer
bee broken so long as wee beleeue his Gospell: wee must repayre too
him too be made sure of our saluation, bycause we see and feele by experience,
that God had adopted and chozen vs, and that he presently
calleth vs, & telleth vs that the assurance which he hath giuen vs and
dayly giueth vs by his Gospell, namely that he will bee our father, &
specially his ingrauing of it in our harts by his holy spirit, is no deceytfull
thing. For the Gospell may well bee preached too all men,
yea euen too the castawayes: but yit for all that God is not so graciouse
too them, as too touch them too the quicke. Therfore when wee
haue Gods adoption ingrauen in our harts, then (as shalbee declared
further herafter) wee haue a good and vndeceyuable gage, that God
will guyde vs vntoo the end, and that sith he hath begunne too lead vs
intoo the waye of saluation, he will bring vs too the perfection wheruntoo



he calleth vs, verely bycause that without him we could not continew
so much as one day.
               But now let vs fall downe before the maiestie of our good God,
with acknowledgment of our faults, praying him too make vs perceyue
them more and more, that being vtterly ashamed of them, wee
may hate our vyces, and al our whole lyfe, with the naughtinesse and
frowardnesse therof, & resort to him who alonly is able to remedie the
same, & not swarue one way or other from him, as he communicateth
hymselfe too vs in our Lorde Iesus Christe: but keepe on right foorth
too hym, acknowledging that as we be chosen in hym, so also wee bee
mainteyned and preserued for his sake, and that he wyll vtter his power
more and more in vs, vntyll wee haue finished our race, and bee
come to the heauenly heritage, wheruntoo wee bee going: beseechyng
him that although we be yit farre from it, yit he will voutsafe too giue
vs a stedie and inuincible strength to hold out continually, till we haue
fully renounced the world, & being quyte consumed in our selues, be so
renewed in the image of God, as the same may shyne perfectly in vs,
vntill wee bee made parttakers of the glorious immortalitie, which he
hath bought deerely for vs. That it may please him too graunt this
grace, not only too vs, but also too all people and nations. &c.
            
            
               ¶The fourth Sermon vppon the
first Chapter.
               
                  
                     God hath accepted vs in his welbeloued.
                     7. By vvhose blud vve haue redemption, that is too vvit, forgiuenesse
of sinnes, according too the richesse of his grace.
                     8. VVhereof he hath sheaded out abundance vppon vs in all
vvisedome and vnderstanding,
                     9. By making vs too knovv the secrete of his vvill, (according
too his good pleasure which he purpozed in himself.
                     
                        10. Too the intent too deale it foorth vvhen the tyme were full
come,) that is too vvit, too gather all thinges toogither by
Christ, as vvell the things in heauen, as the things on earth,
in the selfsame.
                  
               
               
                  I Haue declared alredie that wee cannot bee
beloued of God, but by the meanes of his
onely sonne. For if the Angells of heauen
bee not woorthy too bee taken for Gods
children, but by the meanes of a head and
mediator: what shall become of vs that
ceasse not too prouoke Gods wrath dayly
by our wicked dooynges, as folke that doo
in deede fyght ageinst him? God then must
bee fayne too looke vppon vs in the person of his onely sonne, or else he
must needes hate vs and abhorre vs.
                     
                        •
                     sai. 59. 
                        •
                     . 2. Too bee short, our sinnes doo set
God and vs so farre at oddes, that wee cannot so soone come towardes
him, but by and by wee feele his maiestie vtterly ageinst vs, and as it
were armed too put vs too vtter confuzion. But now remayneth too
see, how God receyueth vs intoo his fauour by meanes of our Lord
Iesus Christ. That is the thing which Saint Paule meaneth
in adding, that in him vvee haue redemption through his blud,
that is too vvit, forgiuenesse of our sinnes, according too the
riches of Gods grace Heere wee bee first of all doone too vnderstand,
that the enmitie which God beareth vs, is not in respect of our nature,
but in respect of our corruption. I say, it is not in respect of nature:
for as in respect that God hath creased vs, it is certeine that he
cannot hate vs. But inasmuch as mankynd is vtterly marred and gyuen
ouer too all naughtiness
                     •
                  , God must needes bee as a mortall enemie
too vs, and as an aduersarie ageinst vs, till the rememberance of
our sinnes bee buryed out of his sight. For wee bee subiect too euerlasting
death, till wee bee restored agein: by reason whereof, God being
the fountaine of all iustice and right
                     •
                  ousnesse, dooth vtte
                     •
                  ly hate and
abhorre the euill that he seeth in vs. Therefore vntill such tyme as
our sinnes bee blotted out, it is vnpossible for vs too hope that God
should eyther fauour or loue vs. But let vs marke heere how S. Paule
vseth twoo woordes, too expresse how wee bee reconcyled too God:
First, he setteth downe the Raunsom or Redemption, which is all



                  
                     〈◊〉
                  : and afterward the forgiuenesse of sinnes. Howe commeth it

                     ••
                  en too passe that Gods wrath is pacifyed, that wee bee made at one

                     •
                  ith him, yea and that he accepteth and au
                     •
                  weth vs for his children?

                     •
                  t is by the pardoning of our 
                     •
                  umes, sayeth S. Paule. And further
                  
                     •
                  ore,
bycause redemption is requisite thereuntoo: he matcheth that

                     •
                  ith it also. Trew it is, that as in respect of vs, God wypeth away our

                     ••
                  mes of his owne free goodnesse, and sheweth himse
                     •
                  fe altoogither

                     ••
                  untifull of himselfe, without respect of any recompence for it at our

                     ••
                  ndes. And in good soothe what man were able too make amendes

                     〈◊〉
                   the least fault he hath committed? Then if euery of vs should im
                  
                     •
                  loy
his whole lyfe in making satisfaction for any one fault alone, and

                     〈◊〉
                   that meanes seeke too winne fauour at Gods hande: it is certeine

                     ••
                  at the same dooth farre surmount all our abilities. And therfore God

                     •
                  ust bee fayne too receyue vs too mercy, without looking for any re
                  
                     •
                  ompence
or amendes at our handes. But yit for all this, the attone
                  
                     •
                  ent
which is freely bestowed as in respect of vs, did cost the sonne of
God very deere.1. Pet. 1. d. 19. For he found none other payment, than the sheading

                     •
                  f his owne blud, insomuch that he made himselfe our borrowe both in
ody and soule, and answered for vs before Gods iudgement, too get

                     〈◊〉
                   our discharge. Our Lord Iesus Christ (say I) imployed himselfe
holly both body and soule. For it had not bin ynough for him to haue

                     ••
                  ffered so cruell and slaunderous a death in the syght of men: but it

                     •
                  houed him also too abyde such horrible anguishe in himselfe, as i
                     •
                  
God had bin become a iudge too him: for he came too that poynt, that

                     〈◊〉
                   susteyned the person of all sinners too make full amendes for them

                     〈◊〉
                  . And so yee see why S. Paule hath matched those twoo woordes

                     •
                  ogither in this streyne.
               Therefore wee haue too marke first of all, that wee can obteyne no

                     〈◊〉
                   at Gods hand, nor be receyued of him, till our sinnes bee 
                     ••
                  yped

                     〈◊〉
                  , and the rememberance of them cleane put away. The reason

                     •
                  hereof is (as I sayd afore) that God must needes hate sinne wher
                  
                     ••
                  euer
he seeze it. So then, as long as he considereth vs as sinners, he

                     •
                  ust needes abhorre vs: for there is not any thing in our selues, nor in

                     〈◊〉
                   owne nature, but al maner of naughtinesse & confuzion. Then are

                     〈◊〉
                   enemies and aduersaryes vntoo him, till wee come too the reme
                  
                     •
                  ie
that S. Paule sheweth vs heere, which is, too haue our sinnes forgiuen.
Heereby wee see that no man can bee loued of God for any

                     •
                  oorthinesse that is in himselfe. For wherein lyeth the loue that God



beareth vs: I haue tolde you already, that he must bee fayne too cast
his eye vpon out Lord Iesus Christ, & not too looke a whit at vs. But
yit therewithall it is declared further, that God dooth neuer lyke well
of vs, till he haue released vs o
                     •
                  r dettes, and adopted vs too bee his
children, notwithstanding that wee bee woorthy of death before him.
Thus yee see that the assurance of our saluation (as is sayd in the song
of zacharie) is that God bee mercifull too vs and forgiue vs our sinnes
whereby wee were become his enemies.
                     
                        •
                     uke. 1. 77. Howbeit, let vs also beare
in mynd, that the cleere release of our sinnes through Gods free goodnesse,
is not doone without the raunsome that was payd by our Lord
Iesus Christ,1. Pet. 1. d. 18. not in golde nor siluer (as sayeth S. Peter in his first Epistle)
but in such wyse that he which was the vnspotted Lambe, was
fayne too serue that turne his owne selfe. Wherefore whensoeuer wee
intend too seeke Gods fauour and mercy, let vs fasten all our wittes
vpon the death & passion of our Lord Iesus Christ, that we may there
fynd wherwith too appease Gods wrath. And furthermore seyng that
our sinnes are done away by such payment and satisfaction: let vs vnderstand
that wee cannot bring aught of our owne, for the which wee
should bee reconcyled vntoo God. Wherin wee see how the diuell hath
by his s
                     •
                  yghtes cut of all hope of saluation from the world, by bearing
men in hand that they must euery man raunsome himself, and make
his owne attonement with God. And that is the very thing which men

                     •
                  all good woorkes, merites, and vertewes in Papistrie. For too what
ende tend all the inuentions which they haue forged? Why martir
they themselues after so many fashions, so as men neuer make an end
day nor night, but are euer still making of new wyndlasses and courses:
The marke that all these things ame at, is too pacifie God. And
so all the good woorkes which are so counted in Papistrie, are nothing
else but meanes whereby too make amendes for sinne. Howbeit that
is but a defacing of the raunsome whereof S. Paule speaketh heere.
For there is (as yee would say) an inseparable bond betweene these
twoo things, namely that God putteth our sinnes out of his rememberance,
and drowneth them in the bottom of the sea: and moreouer receiueth
the payment that was offered him in the person of his only sonne.
Therefore wee cannot atteyne the one without the other. Wherforeif
wee intend too haue Gods fauour, let vs consider that wee bee his enemyes
till he haue pardoned all our sinnes of his owne free goodnesse:
and yit notwithstanding, that our Lord Iesus Christ must bee fayne



too step in betweene him and vs. For the sacrifyze of his death serueth
too purchase vs an euerlasting attonement, so as wee must alwayes
flee thither for refuge. Trew it is that the whole lyfe but of Lord Iesus
Christ is become our raunsome▪ for the obedience which he yeelded
too God his father in this world, was too make amends for Adams
offence, and for all the iniquities wherthrough wee bee ronne in
arrerages. Howbeit S. Paule speaketh heere purposely of his blud,
bycause it behoueth vs too resort too his death and passion, as too the
sacrifyze which is of power too blot out all our sinnes. And for that
cause hath God represented in figures vnder the lawe, that men could
not bee reconcyled vntoo him but only by that meane. Now it is trew
that Iesus Christ did not only shed his blud, namely at his death: but
also feele the feare and terrour which ought too haue lyghted vpon vs.
But S. Paule dooth heere vnder one parrell comprehend the whole
after the ordinarie maner of the holy scripture. Too bee short, let vs
repose all our right
                     ••
                  usnesse in Gods shewing of himselfe mercifull
towardes vs of his owne free goodnesse: and let vs not presume too
face him with any vertew of our owne, thereby too bynd him vntoo vs:
but let it suffize vs that he receyueth vs intoo his fauour, freely without
any desert of ours, onely bycause the rememberance of our sinnes is
buryed out of his sight. And agein, let vs vnderstand, that the same canno
bee doone but by the death and passion of our Lord Iesus Christ,
and that that is the thing wheruppon wee must wholly rest.
               Heeruppon S. Paule addeth, that all is done according too the
richesse of Gods grace. No
                     •
                   without cause dooth he heere magnifye
Gods mercie which he vttereth in receyuing vs too fauour. For
wee see on the one syde how men doo wilfully ouershoote themselues
through their foolish ouerweening: For most men haue alwayes imagined,
that they myght make their attonement with God by their
owne satisfactions, and I wote not what shiftes besydes. Seeing
then that men are so farre ouerseene in their owne imaginations, S.
Paule too exclude all such dealing, sayth that wee must bee rauished
in loue with the richenesse of Gods goodnesse. He could haue sayd
simply that God dooth all according too his grace: but he setteh downe
heere his greate treasures, too the intent that men should not bee so
fond, as too bring as it were but a farthing, for the discharge of ten
hundred thousand crownes. And truly when the Papists prattle of
their satisfactions, they say not that they bee able too doo it throughly



in all poyntes: but they are of opinion that with the death and passion
of our Lord Iesus Christ, they also are able too bring somewhat of
their owne, and too doo so much by patches and peeces, that God shalbee
satisfied and contented. Thus yee see what a diuelish opinion
reigneth in papistrie, for they will needes found masses, they will
needs bable many prayers, they will needs gad on pilgrimage, they
will needs keepe this feast and that feast, they will needs performe I
wot not what deuotiōs, they wil needs weare sack cloth next their skin:
and all too help foorth the death and passion of our Lord Iesus Christ:
as who should say, it were not sufficiēt ynough of it self. But S. Paule
telleth vs that Gods goodnesse as it is shewed vs in Iesus Christ, is
so greate a treasure, that all other things must needs giue ouer and be
thrust vnder fo
                     •
                  te. And seing that God vseth so greate bountifulnesse
as wee ought too bee wholy rauished at it: is it not too outrageouse a
presumptuousnesse, when wee will needs bring our owne pelting
trash, as though our going on pilgrimage, & our dooing of some other
deuotions were of any valew or estimation? Is it not al one, as though
the blud of Iesus Christ were not a sufficient pryce, I say a sufficient
pryce and raunsome for our saluation? Yee see then on the one syde,
how S. Paule ment heere too cut of all occasions of the fond imaginations
that men conceyue in surmizing themselues able too pacifye
Gods wrath by their owne satisfactions and paymentes: and on the
other syde how he purpozed too succour our feeblenesse. For although
wee bee giuen too beleeue wonderous well of our owne vertuosusnesse,
and too beare ourselues in hand that God is greatly beholden vntoo
vs: yit notwithstanding, when it commeth too the calling vppon God
in good earnest, and too the putting of our trust in him: then if Satan
egge vs too despayre, and that wee bee tossed with trubbles and temptations:
we be so dismayed, that all the promises of the holy scripture,
and all that is said vntoo vs of the death and passion of our Lord Iesus
Christ, cannot make vs too haue any hope. S. Paule therfore too remedie
this vyce of vnbeleefe which is too deepely rooted in vs, doth
heere set before vs the greate treasures of Gods goodnesse, too the end
that all the distruste which wee can conceyue, may bee as it were swallowed
vp, seing that God voutsafeth too vse so greate bounteousnes
towards vs.
               And heeruppon he addeth, that he hath made the same grace too
abound towards vs in all wisdom and vnderstanding. By these



                  
                     •
                  ords he doth vs too wit by what meanes wee come by the thing that
he had specifyed afore. Behold, all our happinesse and all our souerein
velfare consisteth in being at one with God, so as he may take vs for
h
                     •
                  s children, and it may bee lawfull for vs too call vppon him as our
father with full libertie. But how shall wee obteyne that thing, from
which we be so farre wyde? It is sayde, that although wee bee naught
w
                     •
                  orth, ne naught can doo: yit wee shall finde all thinges in Iesus
Christ which are wanting in our selues, and that his death & passion
will bee a sufficient sacrifyze, too put away the rememberance of all
our misdeedes. Howbeit dooth it followe therefore, that all men are
parttakers of this benefite which is purchaced for vs by our Lord Iesus
Christ? No: for the vnbeleeuers haue nother part nor portion in
it. Then is it a speciall priuiledge for those whom God gathereth too
himselfe.Gal. 5. a. 4. Also S. Paule sheweth, that eyther wee must haue fayth, or
else Christ shall not boote vs at all. Although then that Christ bee generally
the redeemer of the whole world, yit dooth his death and passion
aduauntage none but such as receiue the thing that S. Paule sheweth
heere. And so wee see that when wee once know the benefites that
are brought vs by Christ, and which he offereth vs dayly by his Gospell:
we muste also bee knyt vntoo hym by faith. For the Turkes,
Iewes, and Papistes, and all other lyke are cut of and estranged from
Christ, & rot away in theyr owne filth, bycause they presume to worke
wonders of themselues. For it is a common principle among the papistes,
Iewes, Turkes, and all the Heathen men that euer were, that
they must appease Gods wrath. And how? By a great sort of meanes
of their owne deuising, and of euery mans imaginyng in his owne
brayne. Such men therfore haue no part in Christ. Wherfore if faith
be the key that openeth vs the doore to inioy the treasure whereof S.
Paule spake euen now: then is that the next way too make vs riche, so
farre forth as shalbe requisite for our saluation, so as we shal not want
any thyng, if wee bee knyt vnto Christ by fayth.
               Notwithstanding, it is not for nought that S. Paule hath heere
set downe this twoo wordes of wisdom and vnderstanding. For they
doo vs too wit, that the lerning of the Gospell is ynough too bring vs
to all perfection, and that whatsoeuer is added moreouer, is but dung,
filth, and rottēnesse. Too be short, S. Paules intytling of the Gospell
with those twoo honorable termes, is too the ende that euery man
should quietly giue eare to the things that God teacheth him by the



meanes of his only sonne, and that wee should yeeld our selues s
                     •
                  
teachable vntoo him, as not too take vpon vs to know aught, than tha
                     •
                  
which commeth out of his mouth, but simply receyue whatsoeuer he
speaketh, and continew in the same to the end, though the whole word
despyze vs, and all men set themselues ageynst vs, and not passe for 
                     〈◊〉
                  
the sieyghts of the world, as many men doo, who haue 
                     •
                  tching ear
                     •
                  s
and are alwayes desirous too heere somme new thing. Too the end
therfore that wee bee not so wauering, nor ouerled by foolish desyre of
knowing more than is lawfull for vs too knowe: let vs marke well
how S. Paule sayeth here, that if we haue once profited throughly in
the Gospel, we shall find there all wisdome to the full, so as we may
reiect all other things, not only as needlesse, but also as noysome, bycause
that by them wee shalbee turned from the pure doctrine, wherby
it is his will too haue vs knit vntoo him. Too bee short, S. Paule
ment to shew heere, that God dooeth vs an inestimable good turne,
when he voutsafeth to call vs too the knowledge of our Lord Iesus
Christ his only sonne, and that when we haue him, wee must dispyze
all other things, and not bee trubbled with a foolish desire of knowing
this or that, bycause that (as I haue sayd alredy) the full perfection
of all our knowledge is there, that is to wit, in our Lord Iesus Christ.
And here yee see also why it is sayd to the Colossians,Coloss. 1. d. 25. that he had bin
a faithfull teacher, yea euen too bring men too the perfection of wisdome.2. Cor. 11. b. 6.
Indeede he confesseth that he was rude and homely of speech,
and that he had nother the wisdom nor the eloquence that was hyghly
commended in the world: but yit he declareth, that if his doctrine
were receyued, there should bee found a full substance in it for the full

                     ••
                  rrishment of mens soules, and that there needeth not any more too
be added vntoo it. When we heere these things now adayes, we must
take warning to brydle our selues, & to represse the f
                     •
                  nd ouer curiousnesse
that is rooted too deeply in vs, that wee may hold vs too the pure
doctrine of the Gospell, & rest wholy therupon. Thus yee see in effect
what wee haue too gather vppon that streyne.
               Heerewithall let vs marke the thing that I haue touched alredye:
namely that as oft as the Gospell is preached, so oft is Gods grace
spred out vpon vs. If we acknowledge his goodnesse and liberalitie,
which he maketh vs too perceyue by his moystening of the earth, too
the end it should yeeld vs fruits too the sustenance of our bodies: much
more may wee vnderstand, that when God sendeth vs the woord of



saluation, he not only watereth vs too the welfare of our soules, but also
giueth vs so largely therof too drink, as wee may bee throughly satisfyed
therwith. For S. Paule thinkes it not ynough too say, that
wheras wee bee barren wee haue some refresshing by the Gospell:
but he sayeth, that it is as if God should poure downe al undance of
water vppon vs, and that wee myght bee so watered and refreshed
with it, as wee myght gather substance and lustinesse of it too hold out
to the end. And so yee see in what wyse we ought to esteeme of Gods
goodnesse, when he voutsafeth too drawe vs too him by meanes of his
Gospell, and that therwithall wee enter into possession of the benefites
that haue bin purchased for vs by our Lord Iesus Christ, according as
he offereth them too vs by his woord, and will haue vs also to receyue
them by fayth.
               Nowe for a larger openyng of the matter, he addeth immediately,
That his so dooyng is, bycause he hath vttered the secrete of his
vvyll vntoo vs, euen accordyng to his ovvne good pleasure vvhich
he had purposed afore in hym selfe. Loe heere an other thing which
ought to aduance the dignitie of the Gospell yit more: whiche is, that
there we haue the secretes which were hydden heretofore in God. And
it is not here onely that S. Paule speaketh after this maner: but wee
shall see yit a larger discourse of it in the second chapter.Rom. 16. d. 25. And not only
in this Epistle,
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 2. b. 7. &. 4. a. 1. but also euerywhere els, he sheweth howe wee ought to
bee as it were rauished at the preaching of the Gospell, bycause God
dooth there open the things that were incomprehensible to all men before,Eph. 6. d. 19.
and which no man would neuer haue beleeued, or once thought of.
For he seemed too haue chosen the onely lyne of Abraham,Coloss. 1. d. 29. in such wise
as if he had cast away all the world besides. Therefore it was a wonderful
thyng when he poured out his grace in commō vpon al nations.
Yit notwithstanding wee knowe, that at suche tyme as Iesus Christe
came intoo the worlde, the very selfe same people were growen out of
kynde, and Gods doctrine was so corrupted, that there was nothing
but superstition among the Iewes. It seemed then that all had
bin past hope of recouerie, when sodenly beyond the opinion of al men,
behold, saluation was offered too all nations. Beholde, Christe which
had erst byn hidden in deepe darknesse, yea, and in so deepe darkenesse,
as there was not any hope that euer he shoulde haue comme out of it,
rose vp as the Daysimne of rightuousnesse,Es
                        •
                     i. 4. a. 2. to giue light to the worlde.
For this cause therfore dooth S. Paul say, that in the Gospell wee bee



made priuie too the secrets of Gods wyll. Trewe it is, that at the first
sight there seemeth to bee nothyng but simple stuffe in the Gospel. And
that is a cause also why many scoffers thinke that the things which are
conteyned in the Gospell, doo serue but for idiots: and they beare themselues
in hande, that they are able too deuize many wyttier thynges in
theyr owne dreames and dotages, than all the doctrine is that concerneth
Iesus Christe. But such folke are vnworthy to taste of the thyng
that is shewed vs heere: for theyr pride dooth vtterly blynde them, and
make them starke doltes. Notwithstandyng, how s
                     •
                  euer they fare, yit
the faythfull perceyue f
                     •
                  ll wel, that there is a diuine maiestie in the doctrine
of 
                     •
                  he Gospell. And for that cause S. Paule doeth giue vs to
wyt in this same text, that our commyng thyther must not bee to learne
any common thyng, but too lyft vp our selues aboue the world. For we
shall neuer bee good scollers to Godward, nor neuer be in any towardnesse
to pro
                     •
                  it in his schoole, except we mount aboue the world, and reuerence
the things that God speaketh with his owne holy mouth. To
be short, the beginnyng and entrance of our fayth, is lowlynesse. But
how can men wel humble thēselues, vnlesse they know that the thinges
which God telleth them, doo farre surmount theyr owne wyt and capacitie?
Ye see then that the thyng whereat S. Paul amed, is, that wee
should reuerence the Gospell, assuring our selues, that it is not for vs to
iudge whether God haue spoken well, or yll. For it becommeth vs too
be fully resolued, that all that euer commeth from hym, is infinite wisedome,
yea and such wisedome as is vtterly faultlesse. To the end therfore
that all glorying may be beaten downe in our selues, & wee learne
to reuerence soberly and modestly the doctrine that is preached too vs
in Gods name: S. Paule hath purposely set downe this secret.
               And too the end wee should knowe how much wee be bounde vntoo
God, he repeteth this woord, According to his good pleasure, which
he had set downe before. And that is doone too put awaye, and too
shet out all opinion which men might conceiue of their owne woorthinesse.
For Gods good pleasure can haue no place, vnlesse men be barred
from al deseruyng, and repayre to hym vtterly empty. For so soone
as wee presume too bring any thyng at all vntoo God, surely it is an
aduauncyng of our selues too the defacing of Gods grace, so as it may
haue no more beautie nor preheminence among vs, as it ought too
haue. Too the end therfore that men should forbeare such presumptuousnesse,
S. Paule sendeth vs styll backe too Gods good pleasure: as



if he should say, that there was none other cause of the preaching of the
Gospell too the world, than the only franke and free goodnesse of God.
Yit notwithstanding, too represse all ouerboldnesse of men, he addeth,
that God had purposed the said ordinaunce, and the said high incomprehensible
determination of his wyll aforehand in hymselfe.
For what is the cause that men take so great libertie of questionyng,
disputing, and going to lawe with God, but for that (to their seemyng)
they treate of matters which ought to be open & manifest vntoo them?
So then, S. Paule perceiuyng vs too bee so foolishe and rashe, as to
presume ouer boldly to be inquisitiue of Gods purpose, saith it is a sealed
letter, and that God hath his purpose in hymselfe, and that it is not
lawfull for creatures too mount so high, and that if they doo so, it is the
next way too cast them downe, and too breake their neckes. Trewe it
is, that wee may well apply our whole indeuer too knowe Gods wyll:
howbeit, that must bee no further than he hath vttered in his woord: for
his woord is our light. But if God doo once holde his peace, he will
haue vs too brydle and as it were too imprison our selues, and not too
start out any further, for if wee woulde needes knowe more than is
graunted vs, that is too say, more than wee ought too know, & more
than is imparted too vs by his woord: it were but an entering further
and further intoo a maze, or rather intoo the bottome of hell. Therfore
let vs marke well, howe S. Paules meaning in this text, is that whē
                  soeuer
God keepeth his purpose to himself, it becommeth vs to stoope,
and too holde our selues contented too bee ignorant of it. For it is a
cursed wisdome, and such a wisdome as sendeth vs too the pit of hell,
when wee take leaue too knowe more than God hath taught vs. And
contrariwise wee bee wyzer in our ignorance than all the wyze men of
the world, when wee take not vppon vs too knowe any thing further
than Gods woord guydeth and gouerneth vs. Trew it is that there is
not any mo than onely one single will in God. Neuerthelesse he vttereth
the same vntoo vs according too our capacitie, and so farre foorth
as is expedient and profitable for vs. As for example, wee haue seene
that the forgiuenesse of sinnes is a poynt that wee cannot ouerpasse nor
forbeare: and therefore zacharie calles it the knowledge of saluation.
Agein, it standeth vs on hand too knowe where the forgiuenesse of our
sinnes is too bee sought for. For if wee haue not Iesus Christ,Luke. 1. g. 77. wee continue
still enemyes vntoo God, wee haue no agreement nor rest in our
selues, and Gods iustice must needes pursue vs: but Iesus Christ is



our peace. Furthermore, whē we know the things that are witnessed to
vs by Gods woord, wee must therwithall reuerence the misteries that
are hidden from vs, as hath bin sayd alredy, and must hereafter be said
agein, when wee come too Gods election. And S. Paule dooth yit agein
set downe heere the woord of foreordeyning or forepurpozing, to

                     •
                  hewe that God had predestinated vs before the making of the world,
and yit that the same was hidden. Yea verily: but nowe is the same
discouered vntoo vs, sayeth he. Thus yee see in effect, that the thing
which wee haue too beare in mynde, is that wee bee not called too the
knowledge of the Gospell by our owne towardnesse, nor for that any
of vs putteth foorth himself too it of his owne accord, nor for that wee
haue bound God vntoo vs by any vertue of ours: but for that God of
his owne infinite goodnesse listed too inlyghten vs. And he hath not
doone it bycause it came sodeinly in his mynde too doo it, as men are
woont too doo, who are caryed with sodeine braydes: but bycause he
had determined the same in his owne purpose, euen from before all
tyme. And if our wittes bee ticklish and prouoke vs too bee inquisitiue
and too say, How so? Had God chozen vs aforehand? And why then
did he not vtter it vntoo vs sooner? How happeneth it that it was not
perceyued ere this? too the ende wee should not so ouershoote our selues,
S. Paule sayeth that this purpose was after a sort locked vp in
God, till it was vttered vntoo vs. And so, too bee short, it is not lawfull
for vs too knowe any more than is vttered vntoo vs in the Gospell:
and looke what is shewed vs there, it behoueth vs too reuerence it. And
for the same cause it is added, that his so dooyng vvas too set foorth
the same in the fulnesse of tyme.
               
               Now heerin he sheweth, that men may wel vexe themselues, but yit
shall they come short of their purpose, and all their witts & imaginations
shall fayle them, if they go about too knowe more than God hath
giuen them leaue to know. For if any man demaund why God hasted
no rather too do it: therin he sheweth that he would be wiser thā God.
And is not that a diuelish pride? Is the creature woorthie to go vpon
the groūd, when it aduaūceth it self so hygh? For this cause S. Paule
sayeth, that the appoynting therof belongeth vnto God. For if a man
may set order after this maner, in his owne house & say: I will haue
my folke to fare thus, I will haue them to drinke such drinke, I will
haue them too eat that kynd of bread, I will haue them lodged after
this maner: how much more ought we too let God doo so? why should



he haue lesse priuiledge than woormes of the earth? Therfore let vs
giue God leaue to dispose of his church, & of the welfare of his chozen,
as lyketh best himself. And as for the tyme, let vs take that for the full
tyme which it shall please him too shewe vs. For it is not for vs too be
eyther iudges or vmpers in this cace, too measure the tymes, yeares,

                     •
                  oonethes, or dayes: but it ought too content vs, that God listeth too

                     •
                  aue it so. Some man will argew the cace and say: what, I pray you?
Behold, fower thousand yeeres passed betweene the fall of Adam and

                     •
                  he commyng of Christ: and could not God haue remedyed the matter

                     •
                  y sending the redeemer of the world sooner? See what a number of

                     •
                  retched folke wandered away in darknesse: behold the destruction

                     •
                  f mankynd as awaterflud that swalowed vp all thyngs: and yit in

                     〈◊〉
                   meane whyle Iesus Christ was hiddē. Bysids this, a small nūber

                     •
                  f men tasted of him, alonly by figures & shadowes. For none but the

                     ••
                  ewes wayted for the redeemer, to obteyne saluation by his meanes:

                     〈◊〉
                   yit euen they were faine to vse calues & sheepe & other brut beasts, to
asserteyne them selues of the forgiuenes of their sinnes, and that God
was mercifull to them. If a mā aske how this cōmeth to passe: let vs
repayre too that which is sayd here in one word: namely that the time
was not yit fully come. And why? Bycause God had so appoynted it.
And this is the very selfsame thing that we haue seene alredy in the
Epistle to the Galathians, wher S. Paule repressed all the foolish ga
                  
                     •
                  ings,Gal. 4. a. 4.
wherthrough men wander away in mounting vp hygher than
is lawfull for them to do. Therfore let vs conclude, that it is Gods peculiar
office too appoynt tymes and seasons, and that wee must not
think any other too be the dew, than that which he appoynteth. For
albeit that winter and sommer bee ordinarye with vs euery yeere: yit
if sommer come ouer late, wee must brydle our selues, and not grudge
ageinst God. Wee may well say, alas, if it pleased God too send vs
heate, it should bee well welcome. But yit in the meane while wee
must fully resolue our selues thus: It belongeth too God too gouerne,
and all souereintie and authoritie perteyne too him. If wee ought too
behaue our selues so modestly as in respect of the order of nature which
is common among vs, and wherein God shewes himselfe familiarly
vntoo vs: what ought wee too doo when wee come too the scanning of

                     •
                  he heauenly secretes, as of the euerlasting saluation of our soules, and
of this hygh misterie that the sonne of God is come too set the thinges

                     •
                  n their state agein which were lost and perished? Doth it not become



vs too stoope in that cace, and humbly too take in good woorth whatsoeuer
God telleth vs, and too lyke of that which he lyketh? Thus ye
                     •
                  
see why S. Paule spake heere expresly of the fulnesse of tyme, as if he
should say, that wee can neuer profit in the Gospell, till wee yeeld God
so much honour, as too hold our selues contented with his onely will, so
as wee step not foorth too reply ageinst him, nor face him with our
iangling, but glorify him by acknowledging his will too bee the rule
of all wisdome, of all ryght, and of all equitie.
               And for the better declaration hereof, he addeth immediatly, that
it vvas too gather all thinges toogither, as vvell in heauen as in
earth, by Iesus Christ, in himselfe. As touching this woord gather,
S. Paule ment too shewe vs thereby how wee bee all of vs horribly
scattered, till such time as our Lord Iesus Christ set vs in aray agein:
and this is verifyed not onely of vs, but also of all other creatures. Too
bee short, it is all one as if he had sayd, that the whole order of nature is
as good as defaced, and all thinges decayed and disordered in the sinne
of Adam, till wee bee repayred ageyne in the person of our Lord Iesus
Christ. For although wee beholde Gods woonderfull wisdome,
power, goodnesse, iustice, and rightuousnesse in all creatures: yit notwithstanding
there are markes of sinne both aboue and beneath, and
all creatures are subiect too corruption, and all is disordered by reason
that God hateth and reiecteth vs.Rom 
                        〈…〉
                     . Needes therefore must a restorement
bee made by Iesus Christ. And that is the thing that is ment by
the gathering toogither that S. Paule speaketh of heere, too the ende
wee would learne too mislyke of our selues, and too bee ashamed of the
disorder that is in our selues, and wherwith the whole world is fylled
through our sinfull lyfe: and moreouer learne also too magnify Gods
goodnesse so much the more. Then on the one side the holy Ghost warneth
vs in this text, that not onely wee our selues are out of order, but
also that wee haue brought the whole world too the same poynt, and
doo keepe it still at the same stay dayly by our sinnes, and that there is
none other remedy thereof, but that Iesus Christ must bee fayne too amend
all agein, and make such a gathering and vnion, as wee may bee
knit agein too our God. And so yee see the first poynt that wee haue
too marke vppon this text. Truly this thing is spoken in fewe words:
but it had neede too bee muzed vppon more at length. For it is the
thing wheraboutes wee ought too occupie our selues both earely and
late, that when wee looke intoo our selues, wee myght bethinke vs in



this wise: who art thou o wretched creature? for thou seest thou art separated
from thy God euen from thy birth: behold, thou art his enemy
and inheritour of his wrath: and on the other side there is nothing in
thy selfe which tendeth not too naughtinesse and frowardnesse: & thou
oughtest not onely too feele this disorder in thine owne person, but also
too perceyue that all thinges else are out of order through the whole
world by reason of thy frowardnesse. Therefore let vs sink downe and
bee ashamed of it, and therwithall confesse how much wee bee indetted
vntoo God, for his voutsafyng too gather vs toogether in the person
of his onely sonne, euen vs that haue so torne a sunder the thinges
that he had set in so goodly order.
               And for the same cause S. Paule speaketh heere, not only of men,
(which were estraunged from God afore by reason of sin): but also of
all things that are in heauen and earth:
                  Coloss. 
                        •
                      c. 20. wherin he comprehendeth
euen the verye Angells. For although Gods glorie shyne foorth in
them, and that they were neuer yit separated from him: yit neuerthelesse
it stoode them on hand too be
                     •
                   gathered toogither by our Lord
Iesus Christ, and that after twoo sorts. For albeeit that they neuer
swarued asyde, ne fell from that they were at the first, and that Gods
ryghtuousnesse doo alwayes shewe it self in them, insomuch that they
bee as it were mirrours and paternes of it: yit notwithstanding, if
God li
                     •
                  ted too looke vppon them with rigour, they should fynd themselues
farre short of the perfection of ryghtuousnesse that is in him, as
it is sayd in the booke of Iob.Iob. 4. d. 
                        •
                     8.
Furthermore, there is yit one other
reason too bee matched with this: which is, that the Aungells should
not hane such constancie and stedinesse as were requisyte, vnlesse Iesus
Christ had so stablished them as they myght neuer fall. Thus yee
see one way how they were gathered togither. But this gathering
wherof S. Paule speaketh heere, is in respect of their vniting agein
vntoo vs. For wee knowe that inasmuch as wee were banished out
of Gods kingdome, wee were cut of from all hope of saluation, so as
the Angells were by and by fayne too become our enemies, and should
bee so still, were it not for the attonement which wee haue with them agein,
by meanes of the head which is common too vs both. And heere
yee see also why that in the ladder that was shewed vntoo Iacob,Gen. 28. c. 12. it is
said that God stood vppon the toppe of it, and touched both heauen and
earth, and that the Angells went vp and downe on it. Now our Lord
Iesus Christ is the trew liuing and euerlasting God which touched



both heauen▪ and earth, bycause that in his persone God hath knit his
owne diuine being (or substance) and the nature of man toogither.
Thus therefore yee see that heauen is open, so as the Angells begin
too acquaynt themselues with vs,Hebr. 1. d. 14. yea and too become our seruants, as
is sayd in the Epistle too the Hebrewes, bycause the care of our soules
is committed vntoo them, and they (as is sayd in the thirtie and foure
Psalme) incamp about vs,Psal. 34. 
                        •
                     . 8. and watch vs, and are our keepers. Yee see
then how wee bee vnited agein too the Angells of heauen by our Lord
Iesus Christ.
                     
                        •
                     uke. 21. 
                        •
                     . 27. And that is the cause also why he sayd, from hensfoorth
yee shall see the heauens open, and the sonne of man comming downe
in his maiestie with his Angells. Whereby he doeth vs too wit, that
heauen was shet ageinst vs, and that wee also were vnwoorthie too
fynd any fauour at Gods hand, & that yit notwithstanding, now that he
is come too bee our head, and hath made the attonement betweene his
father and vs,Coloss. 2. 
                        •
                     . 10. and taken vppon him the office of mediator, & is become
the head, not only of the faythfull, but also of the Angells: he hath gathered
all toogither agein in such wyse, that wheras the diuells make
warre ageinst vs and practize our destruction without ceassing: the
Angells are armed with infinite power too maynteyne vs. And although
wee see them not with our eyes: yit must wee certeynly beleeue
that they watch for our welfare. Otherwyse what a thing were it? For
wee knowe that the diuell is as a roring Lion,1. Pet. 5. 
                        •
                     . 8. and seeketh nothing
else but too deuoure vs. Wee see what a number of 
                     ••
                  yghts he hath
too wynd about vs with. Needes then must the Angells haue an infinite
power too defend vs withall. Also it must needes bee, that wee bee
preserued vnder the protection of our Lorde Iesus Christ, who is both
their head and ours too. Thus yee see briefly that the thing which S.
Paule ment too tell vs in this Text, where he saith that we are gathered
togither agein, is, that wee were scattered asunder before, & that
wee bee not onely reconciled to God by the death and Passion of our
Lord Iesus Christ, but also now henceforth knyt ageyn vntoo the Angelles,
so as they are become our brethren and fellowes, and God hath
giuen them charge too guide and mainteyne vs in all our wayes, and
to watche ouer vs,Psal. 90. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . and to be in continuall battell for the withstandyng
of all the enemyes that make warre ageynst vs, tyll wee be gathered
all together intoo the rest of heauen.
               Now let vs cast our selues downe before the maiestie of our good
God with acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him too make vs



so too feele them, as it may drawe vs too trew repentance, and make
vs to continue the same all the tyme of our lyfe, and that yit notwithstanding
wee may not ceasse too trust in him, and too offer our selues
boldly in his sight, forasmuch as our sinnes are scoured out by the blud
that was shed for the washing of them: and that wee may so frame our
selues too this doctrine, as wee may all the tyme of our lyfe acknowledge,
that seyng he hath purchaced vs so deerely, wee ought too giue
our selues wholy too his seruice: and that seyng he hath shewed himselfe
so good a redeemer towardes vs, wee may not doubt but he wyll
continue his goodnesse from day too day, too the full finishing of the
thing that he hath begunne, and strengthen vs in all assaultes, tyll he
haue deliuered vs from the crueltie of Satan and of all his vpholders,
yea, and quyte and cleane taken vs out of the world, too make vs parttakers
of the happie blissednesse whereuntoo he calleth vs. That it
may please him too graunt this grace not onely too vs, but also too all
people and nacions. &c.
            
            
               The fifth Sermon vpon the first
Chapter.
               
                  
                     13. You also doo trust in Christ, vppon the hearing of the word
of truth, that is too say, of the glad tydings of your saluation,
by beleeuing vvhereof you also are sealed vvith the holy
spirit of the promise.
                     14. VVhich is the earnest penny of our inheritance, vntoo the
redeeming of the purchaced possession, too the prayse of
his glory.
                  
               
               
                  WEe haue seene heeretoofore how S. Paule
hath declared, that there is none other
grounde of our saluation than Gods free
goodnesse, and that wee must not seeke any
where else for the cause why he choozeth
the one and forsaketh the other. For it becommeth
vs too holde our selues contented
with his onely will, purpose, & vnchaungeable
determination. And whosoeuer goeth
any further, must needes stumble intoo such a dimgeon through his



owne rashnesse, as he shall feele that such as cannot honour Gods maiestie
and euerlasting ordinance with all lowlynesse and reuerence,
must euery one of them (say I) come too shame. Therefore whensoeuer
we come to the serching of the cause of our saluation, let vs learne
too father it altoogither vppon God. It is trew that too bee Gods
children and heires it behoueth vs too bee of the body of our Lord Iesus
Christ, which thing is doone by fayth: but yit can wee not beleeue
the Gospell except God drawe vs theretoo by his holy spirit. Nowe
wee see that he dealeth not alyke with all men. For he could very well
inlyghten all the world, and bring too passe that there should be no vnbeleeuers
at all: but wee see the contrary. Therefore let vs assure our
selues, that be choozeth whom he listeth. For if a man should aske the
reason why he dooth it: it were too loftie a presumptuousnesse, and
that is the very cause that maketh so many ouerweening folke too
breake their owne neckes, for that they cannot fynd in their hartes too
graunt, that God gouerneth men according too his owne will, as of
good ryght he may full well. Furthermore also S. Paule hath heretofore
set the Iewes and Gentyles both on one euen ground, and that is
a thing that requyreth yit longer discourse. For seyng that God had
chozen Abrahams ofspring, it myght haue bin thought that there had
bin some woorthinesse in them. Surely if wee haue an eye too the specia
                     •
                  l
fauour that God shewed too the Iewes, they bee well worthy too
bee preferred before all the rest of the world. But if a man take them
as they bee of themselues: he shall fynd them voyde of all ryghtuousnesse.
For wee must alwayes come backe too this poynt, that God is
not bound nor beholden too any man at all: and his receyuing of the
Iewes by free adoption, is not for that they were better woorth than
other men, or for that they myght make any maner of vaunt at all of
themselues. Therefore yee see why S. Paule sayeth expresly, that they
which beleeued in Iesus Christ in tymes past, are cōprehended vnder
Gods election, as well as the others, & that the others cānot boast thē
                  selues
too bee more worthy, or too haue deserued more than they, but
that all must come too this poynt, that as well of the Iewes as of the
Gentyles God choze whom he lyked and listed, too the ende that nothing
should bee considered in that behalfe but his onely mercy, and
that all mouthes myght bee stopped, and no man bee able too alledge
that be brought any thing of his owne. Howbeit, when S. Paule entereth
intoo this comparison betweene the Iewes and the Gentyles,



he sayeth that if a man haue an eye too Gods accepting of the Iewes
for his owne peculiar heritage, they were a holy linage, and he had
giuen them his Lawe and promises, by meanes whereof they were
in more excellent and hygh degree, than all the residew whom he had
forsaken and shaken of. But if wee haue an eye vnto God, all mannes
glory must needes bee layd awater. But S. Paule in that place speaketh
alonely of the forgiuing of our sinnes, and of our imbracing of
Gods grace by fayth: which things he sheweth cannot bee fathered
vppon any other cause, than onely Gods pitying of vs. Also wee haue

                     •
                  eene heretoofore in the Epistle too the Galathians,Gal. 
                        •
                     . c. 15. howe S. Paule

                     •
                  ayd vntoo Peter, wee bee Iewes by nature. For inasmuch as it was
a common opinion, that the Iewes were a holy lynage, bycause they
were descended of Abrahams race: very well (sayeth he), howsoeuer

                     •
                  he cace stande, wee haue none other refuge nor assurance of saluation,
but too beleeue in Iesus Christ: for he wist well that men are vtterly
fordoone and lost in themselues, bycause they bring nothing with them
but Gods wrath and curse. Therfore lyke as in those textes S. Paule
hath shewed that men beguyle themselues, if they imagin that they
haue any desert or woorthinesse in them: so now for the better confirmation
of the same doctrine, and too take away all disputing, and too
beate backe all replyings, he bringeth vs too this welspring, namely,
that God not onely giueth fayth too whom he listeth, but also hath
elected and chozen vs before the making of the world. Yee see then
that the thing which wee haue too marke in effect, is that all men from
the most too the least are indaungered vntoo God, and there is none so
holie or excellent, that can exempt himselfe from that generall state
of men.
               Nowe hereupon S. Paule magnifieth Gods goodnesse, in that the
Ephesians were gathered toogither, and made all one with those that
were hild and accounted afore for Gods people, and for the housholde
folke of his Church. Before the Ephesians beleued the Gospell, there
was great diuersitie betweene them, as shalbe declared yit more at
large in the second Chapter. But notwithstanding that the beleuyng
Iewes which had alredy bin cōuerted to our Lord Iesus Christ, were
as brethren too the Angels of heauen, for so muche as they were members
of the head that was common too them both, wheras in the meane
while the Ephesians were poore wretches, shet out from al hope of saluation,
enemyes of God, and plunged in all cursednesse: beholde, God



tooke away that diuersitie, and raundged them both in one aray. Gods
goodnesse therfore was so much the more manifest, in that he did so 
                     〈◊〉
                  
them backe which were drowned in the bottome of hel, to match them
with his owne children, and too make them fellowes and heyres of his
heauenly kingdome. That therfore is the cause why S. Paul hauing
spoken of such as had beleued in Iesus Christ afore, telleth vs expresly,
that God hath gathered and stablished his Churche in such wise, as it
wel appeareth that the greatest depend wholy vpon hym, and haue not
any other thing to rest vpon, than his only mercy: and that those which
were after a sort caste away, yea and abhorred, haue cause to glorifie
hym, seeing he hath deliuered them from the confuzion wherein they
were. And herewithal S. Paule sheweth, that the thing whiche hee
had said afore, is verified vntoo vs by the effectes of Gods grace. For
(as I haue said afore) our election is a secret thing, yea and incomprehensible.
When men haue inquired of it as much as is possible, surely
they must needes quaile in their owne imaginations, if they mynde
to enter intoo the sayd euerlasting ordinaunce of God. And therefore
it is not lawful for vs too seeke any further than the Scripture guideth
vs, and sheweth vs the way. Yee see then that Gods choozing of vs,
is hidden in hym selfe: but yit he yeeldeth vs recordes of it by the gifts
of grace which he bestoweth vpon vs, as by faith, which is a gyfte of
the holy Ghost. Marke that for one poynt.
               Nowe, were it but suche a gyft, as when he maketh his Sunne to
shyne both vpon good and bad, or as when he causeth the earth to bring
foorth fruit indifferently for all men: the same ought also too bee reckened
among the gyftes and benefites of God. But faith is a singular
gift, which is not bestowed commonly vppon all men, but is reserued
of God as a Iewell for those whom he liketh well of. And what is the
cause of it? Wee are all of vs the chyldren of Adam, and we are all of
one mould. Why then inlighteneth hee the one sort, and letteth the other
alone in their blyndnesse? There is none other cause but his
owne choyse. So then although we can not conceyue nother by wyt
nor by reason, howe God hath chozen vs before the making of the
world: yit wee know it by his shewing of it vntoo vs, and experience it
selfe auoucheth it sufficiently, in asmuch as we be inlightened by faith.
What is the cause that I receyue the Gospell, and sticke to it, and in
the meane whyle others abyde styl in their beastly blockishnesse, or rather
beare a spiteful rancour ageynst the doctrine of saluation? If I



imagine that it commeth of myne owne towardnesse, I am a traytour
too God. For wee must alwayes come backe to that which wee haue
seene alredy,2. Cor. 4. b. 7. and say, Who is hee that hath made thee to excel others?
S. Paule then dooth in that saying pull downe all loftinesse of man, to
the end that no man should aduance hymselfe, nor alledge that he hath

                     •
                  ught of his owne. Wee must not thinke (saith he) that wee haue any
woorthynesse of our selues, but that euery whit of it commeth of God.
Therfore in this Text S. Paule sheweth by experience, howe the E
                  
                     ••
                  esians
had byn chozen of God, & that it behoued them to haue their

                     ••
                  ole faith grounded thereupon, that is to wyt, vpon Gods free good
                  
                     ••
                  sse.
And for proofe thereof (saith he) ye haue heard the doctrine of

                     〈◊〉
                   Gospell, and beleeued it. But how commes that to passe? He she
                  
                     ••
                  th
that it must needes bee that they were confirmed by the holy
Ghost. Now, if they were confirmed, it was of necessitie that the holy
ghost must needes haue wrought beforehand. And so it is to no purpose,
to enter intoo so deepe a maze as Gods euerlasting ordinaunce.
For he sheweth vs as it were with his finger, how he hath chozen vs,
at least wise if we play not the churles with hym, but acknowledge the
good that he hath done vs, and bee fully perswaded and resolued in our
selues, that there is none other cause of it, than for that hee had giuen
vs his marke from before all euerlastingnesse: that is too say, for that
he had reserued vs too hym selfe, as his owne chyldren. Nowe then
wee see S. Paules meanyng: and therfore let vs learne too leaue making
of long raunges, when the cace concerneth our imputyng of all
things to Gods onely mere mercy. For the faith that we haue, dooth
shew it wel ynough▪ bycause that (as I ha
                     •
                  e sayd afore) the same commeth
not from our owne moother witte, but as a gifte that commeth
from aboue, & such a one as God communicateth not too all men without
exception, but onely so such as he lysteth.
               Furthermore heere are many woords well worth the weying. For
on the one syde S. Paule intendeth too magnifie the grace of the holy
Ghost, by shewing that wee can haue no part nor portion in our Lord
Iesus Christ, nor in any of all the benefites that he hath purchased for
vs, except God put vs in possession of our saluation by his holie spirit.
That therfore is one poynt. And yit notwithstanding S. Paule fayleth
not too shew therwithall; the ine
                     •
                  timable benyfite that wee haue
by the Gospell, in that he termeth it the woord of truth, and the glad

                        •
                     ydings of saluation. For first of all he ment too assure vs, too the in
                  
                     •
                  ent
wee myght haue an infallible warrant too call vppon God without



doubting or grudge of conscience. For so long as wee bee in doubt
whether God loue vs or hat vs, it is vnpossible for vs too praye truly
vntoo him. And so by that meanes yee see how our saluation is vtterly
defeated, according too that which is sayd by the Prophet Ioell.Ioel. 2. f. 32. And
it is a common doctrine in the holy scripture, that wee cannot obteyne
saluation, but by fleeing vntoo Gyd with prayer and supplication. But
wee should be shet out from that, if wee had not the sayd warrant, as
wee shall see more fully in the third chapter. Therfore it stands vs 
                     〈◊〉
                  
too be throughly assured, that God is our father, and that he accepteth
vs for his children. And how shall wee bee warranted that vnlesse the
doctrine of the Gospell bee so certeyne in all poynts, as it bee not lawfull
for vs to bring it in question? That therfore is the cause why S.
Paule sayeth that it is the word of truth. No doubt but there are other
truthes also: for euen when God threatneth vs, he dooth it not in 
                     •
                  est
nor yit in vayne: for as well his threatninges as his promises haue
their execution sure and certeyne. Howbeeit forasmuch as the present
cace concerned the correcting of al distrust in vs, as wherunto we be to
much inclined: S. Paule hath termed the Gospell the doctrine of
truth: as if he should say, my frendes, God is a faithfull witnesse vntoo
you of his owne wyll: for the Gospell is as much as if he laid forth
his hart vntoo you: and therefore settle your selues vppon it. Moreouer
also he saith, that our saluation lyeth inclosed in the Gospell: and
that it is too make vs too looue it, and esteeme it. For should we be so
wirlesse, or rather starke mad, as to holde scorne of our owne welfare?
But yit notwithstandyng he saith, that al this commeth of Gods mere
mercy, and of his euerlasting electiō, which as in respect of our selues
is farre of, and vnknowen too vs, but we haue knowledge of it by the
Gospell, which is the meanes and instrument therof. For too what
purpose were it that our Lorde Iesus Christ hath offered hym felfe in
sacrifice too reconcile the worlde to God his father, vnlesse wee were
made partakers of it by faith? Now, faith is not an opinion of mans
conceyuyng in his owne brayne: but a setled beleefe, that God cannot
lye nor deceyue vs, and that it is not to be feared, that our hope shall
not come too good end, if wee wayt vpon hym. So then, too be short,
S. Paules intent was to shewe, that if we haue the skyll to make our
profit of the doctrine of the gospell, wee shall no longer stand in a mamering
and perplexitie, but shalbe able to call vppon God with open
mouth, acknowledgyng our selues so bound and wholly indetted vntoo



hym in all things, as wee feare not but that he auoweth vs for his children,
and are accepted at his hande, and that hee heareth vs in all the
prayers that wee make vntoo hym. Thus much concernyng the first
poynt. Therfore according to S. Paules exhortation▪ let vs learne to
rest in suche wise vppon the doctrine of the gospell, that it may bee as
much too vs, as if God shewed hymselfe, visibly vntoo vs, and that the
heauens were opened vntoo vs:Math. 16. c. 19. and let vs alwayes beare in mynde,
howe it is anouched by the mouth of our Lord Iesus Christ hymselfe,Iohn. 20. c. 23.
that when soeuer sinnes are 
                     〈◊〉
                   by the preaching of the gospell,
the same is out of hand ratified in heauen. Thus ye see what certintie
we ought to haue, that wee bee no more doubtfull whether God
wyll heare vs, or no. But lyke as the gospell teacheth vs to beleeue,
so also S. Paule sheweth vs that we ought too esteeme it as an incomparable
treasure, for so much as it is the power of God, tendyng to the
saluation, of all that beleeue, as hee speaketh of it in the first Chapter
too the Romanes.Rom. 1. b. 16. Seeing then that wee bee forlorne and vndone of
our selues, and there is none other meanes too call, vs backe ageyn too
God, but by the gospell: let vs set store by that treasure, and bee well
aduized too make our profite of it. And in so doing let vs hardily despize
both the Diuell hymselfe, and all his temptations which he practizeth
ageinst vs, seeing that God calleth vs, and hath given vs a sufficient
record of hys fatherly loue and good wyll towardes vs.
               But let vs come too the second part which I glaunced at. For S.
Paule sheweth that besyds Gods voutsafing no haue the Gospell
preached vntoo vs, it behoueth him also too wooke by his holie spirit
and by a speciall grace. And in very deede wee shall find many that
will well ynough graunt that God was not moued to send vs his Gospell
vppon any other cause than his owne, mere free goodnesse. But
therwithall they surmyze, that the cause why some receyue it and
some receiue it not, is for that their owne free wils do
                     •
                   rule the roste
                     •
                  
and by that meanes Gods grace is diminished. For God offreth vs
not his grace, as a man shoulde offer an apple too litle 
                     〈◊〉
                   so as
hee that could ronne best, should come and haue it. If God should cast
it out so, it is certaine that the greatest parte of our saluation shoulde
proceede of our owne power and policie, and the commendation
therof should redound too our selues. Now then, after S. Paul hath
shewed that God hath called, and dayly dooth call vs too the inheritance
of his heauenly kingdome, and that his so dooing proceedeth



of his own mere free goodnesse. He addeth further, that it behoueth vs
of necessitie to be touched with his holy spirite. In deede he setteth
downe but the one part of the grace of the holy ghost: & that is bycause
he had set downe the other part before: for he hath not in this discourse
forgotten aught that belonged to his matter: but he began with Gods
free goodnesse wherewith wee bee all filled, and shewed that fayth
springeth out of the said fountaine of free election. And nowe for the
second part he addeth, that Gods inlightening of vs by his holy spirit,
so that wheras we were blynd, he hath printed his grace in our hartes,
and bowed and bent them to the obeying of hym, is not ynough for vs:
but that moreouer he muste bee fayne to confirme vs, and strengthen
our fayth, by geuyng vs an inuincible constancie too holde out too the
end. Yee see then that the thing wheretoo S. Paule bringeth vs, is,
that besides our receiuyng of fayth at the hand of the holy Ghost, and
besides his inlightenyng of vs by his grace, wherof I haue spoken alredy:
he dooth also stay vs in such wise, as wee fal not away. For the
better vnderstanding hereof, wee must first call to mynd the thing that
hath bin treated more at length alredy: that is too wit, that so long as
God letteth vs alone in our owne state and plight, wee bee blind wretches
wandring in darkenesse, and what soeuer is preached or spoken
vntoo vs, wee abide styll as blockes in our brutishnes. For the sensual
man shall neuer vnderstand any thing that belongs to God,1. Cor. 
                        •
                     . d. 14. or too hys
owne saluation. Yee see then howe wee bee vtterly barred and excluded
from the heauenly light, tyll God pitie vs, and giue vs the spirit of
light and insight. Marke that for the first poynt. Howbeit, for asmuch
as that poynt hath bin discussed heretofore: it suffizeth to doo no more
but too put you in mynd of it.
               Now there is yit another poynt, which is that when wee haue once
imbraced Gods grace by fayth, so as wee knowe that our Lord Iesus
Christ is he in whom wee fynd all that is requisite too make vs perfectly
happie: it standeth vs on hand too be stablished in the same. For
why? let vs marke how wauering men are. He that is best dispozed
too followe God, shall by and by fall, bycause wee be so frayle that the
diuell will ouerthrowe vs euery minute of an houre, if God hild vs n
                     •
                  t
vp by strong hand. And for that cause is it sayd that God vttereth his
power in mainteyning vs, when he hath chozen vs, and giuen vs too
our Lord Iesus Christ. For if he fought not for vs, alas what woulde
become of vs? wee should bee confounded out of hand, and we shou
                     •
                  d



not take one or twoo falles, but infinite falles, as I sayde afore. As
soone then as we were in the way of saluation, by & by should we surely
bee tu
                     •
                  ned out of it by our owne frayltie, lyghtnesse and vnconstancie,
vnlesse wee were hild backe, and that God wrought so in vs, as
wee might by his holy spirit ouercome all the assaultes of the diuell
and the world. Thus dooth Gods spirit woorke dubble in vs as in respect
of fayth. For he inlyghteneth vs to make vs vnderstād the things
that else should bee hidden from vs, and too receyue Gods promises
with all obedience. That is the first woorking. The second is, that the
same spirit is fayne too continue in vs, and too giue vs perseuerance,
that wee quayle not in the middes of our way. That then is the thing

                     •
                  hat S. Paule treateth of as now. As if he should say, my friendes, yee
haue knowen Gods grace, and yee haue had experience of it, and that
he hath drawen you too the obeying of his Gospell: For you had neuer
rome vntoo it, if he had not shewed himselfe pitifull towardes you. But
yit assure your selues, that he dubbleth his grace, in that he giueth you
power too hold out in the same. For had ye continued but two or three
dayes, or two or three yeeres, yea or more: needes must it bee that
God had helped you therein, for else yee should alwayes haue bin in a
mamering, yea, and as poore wretches at your wittes ende, without
any certeintie at all, but that God hath promised too haue a care of
you, and too guyde you continually till you bee come too your wayes
end, and haue accomplished your course. That therefore is the cause
why he sayeth heere, that they were sealed or signed by the holy Ghost.
Now it behoueth vs to marke well the similitude that S. Paule vseth.
For wee know that euidences are made authentik by s
                     •
                  ales: and that
hath bin in all tymes. Trew it is that men did not set them too in such
maner as they doo now adayes. But yit notwithstanding in stead of
signing them with their owne handes, they deliuered their seale or a
ring, and that was the maner of the publication of Testamentes, and
of other euidence, and of all bargaynes and couenants. In this respect
S. Paule sayeth that wee must bee sealed in our hartes. Trew it is,
that too speake properly, he should haue sayd that the Gospell was sealed.
Howbeit, too the end too doo vs too vnderstand that the fault commeth
and springeth from our selues, and that the Gospell is a doctrine
of sufficient authoritie of it selfe, he mynded too shewe vs, that Gods
sealing of his truth is in respect of our hard hartednesse, and vnconstancie,
for that we be shaken with euery wynd lyke wouering reedes,



vntill such time as he haue strengthened vs. But howsoeuer the cace
stand, let vs marke that the holy Ghost is as it were the scale wherewith
he ratifyeth and warranteth his truth vntoo vs. Nowe I haue
told you alredy how greatly wee stand in neede thereof. For although
wee graunt that Gods word deserueth to be admitted without geyns
                     •
                  ying
or reply: yit ceasse wee not too doubt of it, and that doo wee
fynd well ynough by experience. For whensoeuer any trubble or vexation
commeth, wee 
                     •
                  e as folke dismayd, wheras if wee were throughly
perswaded of Gods goodnesse in such wyse as he assureth vs of it, it
is certeyne that wee should not bee in any such feare. All the tempta
                  
                     ••
                  ons
then which shake vs, doo shewe well ynough that wee profit not
as wee ought too doo in the Gospell. And therefore God is fayne too
warran
                     •
                   it on his behalfe by his holy spirit, and too print it so surely in
our hartes, as wee may bee stedfast, and as the same stedfastnesse may
not bee beaten downe by all that euer the diuell can woorke or deuise
too ouerth
                     •
                  owe 
                     〈…〉
                  . But wee shall vnderstand this thing yit better,
by making continually such examination of our owne weakenesse,
as I haue spoken of before. For take wee all the reasons of the world,
and yit shall wee neuer bee certifyed so fully and perfectly as is requisite,
that God will bee mercifull too vs and defend vs in the middes of
all the perills of this world. For wee bee heere as it were in a sea, the
wyndes and stormes assayle vs euery minute, and wee be still in daunger
of swallowing vp. How then may wee despise Sathan, b
                     •
                  ing as
wretched shéepe vnprouided both of armour, weapon, and all other
meanes of helpe? How can wee be merye both in life and death, knowing
that Satan might doo any things ageinst vs: if wee were not wel
sealed, and after an authentical manner. So then, besides that in this
te
                     •
                  te wee bee warned too rid our selues of all presumption and ouerweening,
that onely God may bee prayzed and magnified: wee may
also gather therwith vppon S. Paules woords, that wee haue armor
and weapon wherwith too incounter and fight well, and that although
our enemy bee mighty and sturdie, yit he shal neuer ouercome vs, so
wee take the aduauntage of that which is sayd heere, namely that
Gods spirite seale
                     •
                  h the truthe, and the certeyntie of the promises of
the Gospell in vs.
               And S. Paule addeth yit one similitude more, saying that Gods
spirit is as an earnest pe
                     •
                  ny. And let vs not thinke it straunge that S.
Paule hath so myghtily confirmed this doctrine, forasmuch as the diuell



hath neuer ceassed frō the beginning of the world, to puffe vp men
continually with some fond opinion of their owne wisdome & vertew.
The cause of Adams fall, was that he would needes aduaunce himself
hygher than was lawfull for him, and be wyser than God: which thing
God gaue him not leaue to doo. Euen so standeth the cace with vs, &
the diuell pursueth his chalendge still. For behold he ouerthrew mankynd
by that sleyght, and all his indeuour yit still is to make vs beleue
that wee be able too doo this and that. Therfore it stoode S. Paule
on hand too rid men of that false and cursed opinion of their owne

                     •
                  reewill and selfuertew, and too shewe them that they are beholden too
the holy Ghost for all. Mark that for one poynt.
               Secondly, we be so grosse and earthly, that we had neede too haue
the doctrine chawed vntoo vs, and wee cannot conceyue any more of
Gods gratious giftes which are inuisible, than we see with our eyes,
and touche with our hands. Therfore it was requisite that S. Paule
should by similitudes declare how it is Gods holie spirit that putteth
vs in possession of the Gospell, and of all the benefits conteyned therin,
and which holdeth vs in them vntoo the end. Now wee knowe that
bargaynes are confirmed by giuing of an earnest penny, which men
doo cōmonly call a Gods penny. For asmuch then as in buying eyther
Lands, houses, inheritaunces, or wares, although a mans bare word
ought to suffyze, yit notwithstanding mē are so yll dispozed, that if they
perceyue any disaduauntage to themselues in the matter, they will not
bee ashamed too eate their woord: therfore was this ceremonie of giuing
an earnest penny, added: and it is all one as if the payment were
fully performed, so as the bargayne were vtterly past calling backe ageyne.
S. Paule then meaneth heere, that Gods spirit serueth to warrant
our saluation too the full. And too what end? For your inheritaunce
(sayeth he) too the day of your redemption. It is trew that
we be Gods heyres euen in that wee bee his children. But wee must
note how it is sayd in the eyght too the Romanes,Rom. 8. c. 24. that our saluation

                     •
                  s shet vp vnder hope. So then, wee cannot see it, nor inioy it as now,
according too the third of the Colossians,Coloss. 3. a. 2. where it is sayd, that wee be
lyke dead men that are departed out of this world, and that our lyfe is
hidden with God in Christ. Therfore although wee be Gods children,
yit haue wee not the full inioyment of it as yit. And it is all one
with that which S. Iohn sayeth in his cannonicall Epistle.1. Iohn. 3. a. 2. Wee

                     •
                  nowe (sayeth he:) wherby he sheweth that our fayth is not doubtfull:



but yit he addeth that it is not yit seene, (or it dooth not yit appeere,)
but wee must wayt for the day wherin wee shalbee lyke vntoo God, &
thē we shal haue lyght to see the thing perfectly, which we doo but beleeue
as now. Ageyne, wee haue seene how S. Paule sayd in the second
too the Corinthians,2. Cor. 5. b. 6. that as long as wee bee in this earthly pilgrimage,
wee bee (after a sort) absent from God. For why? wee walk
(sayeth he) but in hope, and wee see not the thing as if it were present,
but wee see it by fayth.Iohn. 5. 
                        •
                     . 24. Too bee short, although wee bee passed from
death too lyfe (as is sayde in the fift of Iohn:) yit do we fyght ageinst
an infinite number of deathes, bycause wee be beseeged by them. And
S. Paule dooth well match bothe toogither in this text. For on the
one syde he sayeth wee bee not yit come too our redemption and herytage:
and yit therwithal he sheweth, that we bee neuerthelesse sure of
it for all that, and that nothing but our owne vnthankfulnesse letteth vs
too glory fu
                     •
                  ly in God, and too say with full mouth, that wee doubt not
of our comming too the heauenly lyfe, forasmuch as wee haue an earnest
penny therof by the holy Ghoste, and are so knyt too our Lord Iesus
Christ, that all the goodes which he hath, doo belong vntoo vs, and
are made common to vs by fayth. Therfore let vs mark well what is
conteyned in these words of S. Paules. He sayeth that the holy ghost
is our earnest penny. Seing it is so: wee must needs be sure of our redemption,
wherof we shall haue the possession at the last day, yea euen
to the full: & that doth the thing of it s
                     •
                  lf shew sufficiently. For we be
but sillie wormes of the earth, wee bee compassed aboute with rottennesse
and corruption, wee bee beset with so many miseries as is pitie
to see, the world rayleth vpon vs, and mocketh vs and our simplicitie,
we bee fayne too indure hunger and thirst, it seemeth often tymes that
God hath forsaken vs, and after a sort cut vs of, yea, and that he vou
                     •
                  
                  safeth
not too pitie vs, as the most despyzed creatures of the worlde.
Lo at what poynt wee bee too outward appeerance. And therefore it
standeth vs on hand too haue a remedie, too warrant our selues withall
in the middes of so many perplexities and hartgriefes. That is the
cause why S. Paule sayeth purposely, that the holy Ghost is our earnest
penny. Although then that the world haue the brydle looce to trample
vs vnder his feete, as they say: although our Lord keepe vs occupyed
with many temptations: although he humble vs in such wyse, as
it may seeme that wee bee as sheepe appoynted too the slaughter, so as
death bee continually betweene our teeth: yit are wee not vnpurueyed



of good remedie. For why? Seyng that the holy Ghost reygneth in our
hartes, wee haue whereof too boast euen in the middes of all our temptations,
according as it is sayd in the viii.Rom. 8. c. 15. too the Romanes, that being
once assured that God taketh vs for his children, wee may not only
call vppon him, but also although wee bee afflicted and tormented,
yit wee ceasse not too bee alwayes fully and infallibly resolued that he
is our father, too leade vs too the glory of heauen: for euen that also is

                     〈◊〉
                   meane whereby our hope is tryed.
               Furthermore wee bee warned also too walk in pacience, and that
seing God hath giuen vs his holie spirit for an earnest pennye, wee
must not bee so hastie and impaciente as wee haue bin woont too bee.
For if God handle vs roughly, by and by wee fall too grudging, and
are very loth too suffer any thing: for wee see how tender and nyce we
bee of nature. But wee must indure paciently, bycause God will not
haue vs too come too his kingdome at one leape, as they say, but will
haue vs too passe by this world through the midds of thornes and breers,
so as wee shall haue much a doo to get through, and wee shalbee in
greate distresse. Seing that he will haue vs led such a way, and yit
notwitstanding giueth vs so good a remedie as ought to suffyze vs,
which is that he strengtheneth vs in inuincible constancie by his holie
spirit: let vs stand in a redinesse too fyght till the tyme of victorie bee
fully come. It is trew that our fayth doth euen now alredy get the vpper
hand: but wee receyue not yit the fruite
                     •
                   of it, nother doo wee fully
inioy it. Therfore wee must determine with our selues too sygh and
grone continually, and yit therwithall too reioyce also. For (why? too
reioyce in our hartes, and also) too cry with S. Paule, alas wretched
wyght that I am, who shal deliuer me from this prison of my bodie,
are things that may match verye well toogither. Therfore let euery
of vs moorne, yea and bee greeued at the hart, for that wee bee still so
much giuen too our wicked lusts, and too the number of vices that are
in vs. And yit notwithstanding let vs ceasse also 
                     •
                  oo say that wee thank
God, and too bee contented with his giuing of such portion v
                     •
                  to vs as
ought too suffyze vs, and too tary his leyzure till he accomplish and
performe the thing that he hath begunne, seing wee haue his holie spirit
so dwelling in vs, with a promis that wee shall, neuer bee destitute
of him vntoo the end. Thus yee see how wee bee heere incoraged too
take hart of grace, and too walk in such constancie, as all the miseries
of the world may not stop vs of 
                     〈◊〉
                  , till wee bee 
                     ••
                  me to our races



end. And that is the cause why S. Paule speaketh purposely of
redemption. It is trew that wee bee redeemed by our Lord Iesus
Christ,1. Cor. 1. d. 30. &c. and he is giuen vs for our redemption or raunsome, as is sayd
in another text: yit notwithstanding wee haue not the effect and full
fruition of it as yit.1. Tim. 2. b. 6. Then is there a dubble redemption: one which
was accomplished in the person of our Lorde Iesus Christ, and anoother
which wee wayte for, and which shalbee shewed vppon vs at his
comming ageine.Rom. 8. c. 23. According wheruntoo S. Paule sayth in the viii.
too the Romanes, that although wee grone and bee hild downe in anguish,
yit wee must not bee dismayed at it, nor think it straunge: bycause
all creatures (sayth he) doo beare vs companie, yea and bee as a
woman that trauelleth of child. For wee see that all the world is subiect
too corruption through the sin of Adam. Seing then it is so: let
vs not quayle in our gronings, but let vs so measure our affections as
too hold vs contented in that we haue our redemption purchaced in
the person of our Lord Iesus Christ, and thereuppon trust that he will
accomplishe the same thing in vs and in our persons, which he hath
brought vs in his owne. The thing therefore that S. Paule ment too
say, is that Gods spirit is our earnest penny duryng the tyme that wee
wayte too be taken out of this transitorie lyfe, and too bee set free from
all miseries, specially from the bondage of sinne, which is the heauyest
burthen that can bee. Untill such tyme then as wee bee deliuered from
all those thinges, wee must rest vppon this, that Gods spirit dwelleth
in vs.
               And as touching the redemption of purchace: it may well bee
taken for purchaced redemption: for it is a very ryfe maner of speech:
lyke as when it is sayd, the spirit of promis, it is ment, the spirit that
assureth or warranteth al the promises: The spirit of the feare of God,
bycause it is he that maketh vs obedient too his rightuousnesse. So
lykewise when he speaketh of the Redemption of purchace, it may
well bee sayd that it is the redemption which was purchaced for vs,
too shewe that if wee feele the effect of it in our selues, so as wee be out
of all doubt of the things that Iesus Christ hath doone for vs, we must
not mistrust that he hath suffered in vayne. For surely his suffering
were too no purpose at all towardes vs, vnlesse it came vntoo vs, so as
it myght redound too our profit, and wee inioy it. That therefore is the
thing that is purchaced in the person of our Lord Iesus Christ. And
yit in the meane season, as in respect of our selues he reyneth vs short,



                  
                     •
                  oo the ende wee should not through our owne vnthankfulnesse refuze
the benefite that God offereth vs, that is too wit, our reioycing in our
afflictions, bycause wee knowe that our saluation is sure, nor repyne ageinst
God and blaspheme him, but walke on quietly till wee bee deliuered
from this prison wherein wee bee, and till wee bee fully set free
by beyng gathered togither in our Lord Iesus Christ.
               Now let vs cast our selues downe before the maiestie of our good
God, with acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him too make vs
feele them more and more, yea euen so farre as too bring vs too vtter
mislyking of the wretchednesse that is in our selues, so as wee fynding
that there is nothing in vs but a dungeon of all naughtinesse, may
learne too resort too his righteousnesse, and to seeke it at the well head,
and too acknowledge that he hath shewed himselfe a mercifull father
towardes vs, not doubting but that thereby he ment too assure vs also
that he had adopted vs before the beginning of the worlde, too the intent
wee should continue in calling vppon him with trew stedfastnesse
and neuer giue ouer. And so let vs all say, Almightie God heauenly
father. &c.
            
            
               ¶The sixth Sermon vppon the first
Chapter.
               
                  
                     15. For this cause I also hauing herd of the fayth vvhich yee
haue in Iesus Christ, and of the loue vvhich you haue tovvardes
all the Saintes,
                     16. Ceasse not too giue thankes for you, making mention of
you in my prayers.
                     17. That the God of our Lord Iesus Christ, the father of glory
should giue you the spirit of vvisdome and reuelation, too
haue knovvledge of him.
                     18. That is too vvit (too haue) the eyes of your mynde inlyghtened,
that you might vnderstand vvhat the hope is vvhich yee
ought too haue of his calling, and vvhat are the riches of the
glory of his inheritance among the Saintes.
                  
               
               
                  
                  WEe haue seene already howe Saint Paule
brought the Epesians not onely to the chief
but also too the onely cause of their saluation,
and shewed that they must of necessitie
father all the whole vppon God, without
mingling of any foolish presumption therwithall,
as who should say that they themselues
had furthered Gods grace which
they had receyued, eyther by their free wil,
or by any good intent in them. Saint Paule therefore hath shewed in
effect, that not onely the Ephesians too whom he spake, but also they
that had bin Gods Church before, ought all without exception to confesse,
that all their welfare proceeded of Gods onely free goodnesse,
not onely bycause they were all redeemed by meane of our Lord Iesus
Christ, but also bycause he had called them too the beliefe of the Gospell,
according too his choozing of them before the creating of the
world.
               And nowe he warranteth all the sayd doctrine by the recorde which
it yeeldeth vnto God, in that it doth euen then magnifie his goodnesse,
when he is as it were separated from mannes eye, and from the sight
of all witnesses. Trewly the doctrine of the Gospel oughte not too bee
the lesse esteemed when it is preached and published in the open face
of the whole woorld: but yit it behoueth him that speaketh it too haue
it throughly printed in his hart, & to say the same thing in himselfe before
God and his Angels, which he speaketh before mē: for otherwise
it were but a iangling, or rather an vnhalowing of Gods word: if a mā
should step vp intoo the pulpet too talke lyke an Angell, and in the
meane while haue no such meaning in his hart, nor bee perswaded of
the thing that he speaketh. It were better that a man were drowned a
hundred times, than too beare abrode the most excellent record of saluation
& of Gods truthe: and in the meane season not too bee perswaded
in himselfe of the thing that he preacheth, so as God and his Angells
might knowe that he hath the same thing printed in his harte.
Therefore it is not without cause, that after S. Paule hath preached
Gods free goodnesse in choozing whom he lyked, and in calling them
too the knowledge of his Gospell when he had chozen them, & in confirming
them with his strong hand, and by giuing thē inuincible constancie
and stedfastnesse whē he had called them: nowe he addeth that



God knoweth his witnessing therof too bee in good earnest and vnfeynedly.
For he protesteth heere concerning the prayers which he maketh
alone by himselfe, when no man could know his thought nor what
he sayeth and vttereth with his mouth: that euen then he auoweth the
same doctrine before God, inasmuch as he prayeth him to voutsafe too
accomplishe the thing that he hath begunne. Heere therfore wee haue
too marke first of all, that such as mynde too haue their labour profitable
too the edifying of the Churche, and such as haue any trew zeale,
must not onely giue themselues too teaching, but also therwithall pray
God too woorke with them by his power and grace. For oftentymes

                     •
                  t befalleth, that wee doo but beate the water, (yea though wee haue

                     •
                  he tongues of Angells) bycause wee pray not God to further the doc
                  
                     •
                  rine
that wee preach. For of our selues wee bee but vnprofitable instruments:
and when he hath giuen vs vtterance, he must also make it
effectuall,1. Cor. 3. b. 7. according as it is sayd, that he which planteth is nothing,
and he that watereth is nothing, but it is God that giueth the increase.
Seing it is so: Let such as haue the charge of teaching Gods Church
walke fearfully & carefully, & not onely indeuer to win men vnto God,

                     〈◊〉
                   also humbly acknowledge that they can doo nothing of themselues,
and that they should but cast foorth a sounde intoo the aire, which
would vanishe away out of hand, if God wrought not with them by the
secrete power of his spirit. That therefore is the thing that wee haue
too remember vppon the woords that S. Paule speaketh heere.
               But euerye of vs also ought too apply it generally too his owne vse.
Therfore when wee come too bee taught Gods woord, or when any of
vs readeth it alone by himselfe: let vs not imagin our witts too bee suttle
ynough, and that wee bee able ynough too vnderstand whatsoeuer
the scripture telleth vs: but let vs acknoweledge our own beastlinesse,
and praye God too make his doctrine too preuaile in such wyse with
vs, as it may not slip frō vs. But this thing will be perceyued the better
by the processe that S. Paule holdeth on heere, if wee wey well all
the woords that he vseth. He sayeth that he yeeldeth thanks vnto
God without end or ceassing, for the fayth which he hearde to bee in
the Church of Ephesus, And for their loue towards the Saints: & yit
notwithstanding he continueth his praying vntoo God, that he
should inlighten them more and more, and bring them too the perfection
which all the faythfull ought too labour too attayne vntoo, till God
haue taken them out of this world. Now, in that he sayth that he ceaseth



not to giue thanks vnto God, wee see by his example wherabouts
the faythful ought too spende their time. For in very deede the cheife
sacrifyze that God requireth and alloweth, is that wee shoulde honour
him for all his benefits, and yeelde him his deserued prayse for the
same. And it is not too bee thought that that can bee doone (as yee
would say) by starts or by patches: but lyke as God on his side ceasseth
not too poure out his benefits infinitely, so also behoueth it euery of vs
too inforce ourselues, too blesse and prayse him without ceassing. For
S. Paule speakes heere vnfeynedly: and when he blessed God for the
Ephesians, he ment as much for all other Churches. What an vnkindnesse
then were it, if a mā should not thinke at all vpon the benefits that
he hath receyued at Gods hand? Wee are all of vs bound too prayse
God for our neighbours. If wee heare it reported that God hath prospered
his Churche, or shewed mercie too his people a hundred leages
of, and too bee short, if wee heare of any thing that ought too make vs
glad: it becometh our mouthes too be open to prayse God for it. Now
if wee bee bound too doo this for the good turnes that wee see not, but
which our neighbours feele, though they bee distant in far Countryes
from vs: what is too bee thought of vs when God filleth our mouthes
(as it is sayd in the Psalme),Psal. 145. 
                        •
                     . 16. and yit in the meane whyle wee haue no
mind at all too yeelde him thanks? And wee haue too note further,
that if wee bee bound too prayse God for our meate and drinke, and
for all the things that belong too this flightfull life: he bindeth vs to
hym much more without comparison, when he calleth vs too the heauenly
heritage, and when he blisseth and inritcheth vs with spirituall
gifts of grace, which serue too leade vs farre further than this worlde.
Seing then that God vseth such bountifulnesse towards vs: what excuse
can wee haue, if wee followe not the example that is shewed vs
heere in S. Paule? which is, that all our life long wee must occupy
our selues continually in praysing the name of God.
               Now heerewithall he sheweth that faith and charitie are the verye
giftes of God, & come not of our selues, as men doo alwayes imagine
through a diuelishe pryde. I told you afore, that S. Paule playd not
the Hypocrite in geuing thanks too God for the fayth and charitie of
the Ephesians. If euery man could beleeue, and had faith of his owne
inclination, or cold get it by some power of his owne: the prayse therof
ought not too bee giuen vntoo God: for it were but a mockerye too
acknowledge our selues beholden too him for that thing which wee



haue of others than of him. But heere S. Paule blisseth Gods name
for inlightning the Ephesians with fayth, and for framing their harts
vntoo charitie. Therefore it is too bee concluded, that all the whole
commeth of God. The heathen men bringing in their owne freewill,
th
                     ••
                  ght themselues beholden too God for nothing, but for their
good fortune, as they termed it: for they surmyzed that they had all
things by theyr owne power and pollicie. The Papi
                     •
                  ts also will well
graunt that Gods grace must bee fayne too help vs in par
                     •
                  e: 
                     •
                  ub yet

                     〈◊〉
                   all that they wyll haue man too bee still exalted, and too attayn too

                     ••
                  yth by his owne motion. 
                     •
                  eere S Paule shetteeh out all these di
                  
                     ••
                  lish
opinions, and sheweth (as wee haue seene heertofore) that whensoeuer
there is any Churche in the world, or any people too 
                     •
                  al vppon

                     〈◊〉
                  , which are setled and grounded vppon the beliefe of the Go
                     •
                  pell:
God deserueth to ha
                     •
                  e the whole glorie therof. And why? For his hand
must needs ha
                     •
                  e wrought in that cace, bycause men woold neuer inclyne
too any goodnesse, if they were not guyded and gouer
                     •
                  ed to it,
yea and euen drawen too it perforce by the holie Ghost. For there is so
grea
                     •
                  e 
                     〈◊〉
                   usnesse in vs, that wee not only bee weake and feble,
as the papists imagin, but also vtterly contrarie too God, vntill such
time as he haue clenzed vs. And this is the thing which he meaneth in
saying by his prophet Ezechiel, that the hartes which were stony before,
shall bee turned intoo fleshly hartes, namely that he will sof
                     •
                  en
them, and bow them to his obeysance.
               Furthermore vnder theis twoo woordes of Fayth and Loue, S.
Paule hath comprehended the whole perfection of Christians. For
the marke wherat the first table of the Lawe ameth, is that wee should
worship one only God, and hang vppon him for all thinges, acknowledging
our selues too bee so indetted vnto him, as wee ought to flee to
him alone for all refuge, and indeuer too spend our whole lyfe in his
s
                     •
                  ruis. That is the summe of the first table of the Lawe. The contentes
of the second are nothing else, but that wee should liue toogither
i
                     •
                   equi
                     •
                  ie and vpryghtnesse, and deale in such wyze with our neyghbours,
as wee should streyue our selues too helpe all men without hurting
of any man. And wee bee sure that God hath set foorth so good
and perfet a rule of good 
                     〈◊〉
                   in his lawe, that nothing can bee added
vntoo it. Seing it is so not without cause dooth S. Paule in this
place set downe fayth in Iesus Christ, and charitie (towards our ney
                  
                     ••
                  or
as the summe of whole christen comes 
                     〈◊〉
                  , shewing wherunto



wee ought too frame our selues, and which is our rule. But herewith
all wee haue also to marke, that vnder this worde Fayth, he comprehēdeth
the whole seruis of God. For it is imposible that wee should not
be wholy rauished in loue to our heauēly father, being once acquainted
with his goodnesse, as hee hath shewed it vs in the person of his only
sonne. Behold, God draweth vs out of the dungeon of confuzion and
death, and openeth vs the gate of the heauēly kingdome, and telleth vs
that he will take vs for his children. Now can we heare and beleue
this, but that wee shalbe wholly geuen ouer vnto him, forsaking the
world, and hating the euill that is in our selues, bycause it separateth
vs from him. Yee see then how the woorde fayth importeth a full yeelding
ouer of our selues wholly vnto God. Ageine, faith is not an ydle
thing: it importeth that wee should resort vnto God, and that whensoeuer
wee bee steyned with any blot, wee should pray him to redresse it:
for there is not any necessitie in the world, which is not as a dash with
a spurre, which God giueth vs to make vs comme vnto him. Fayth
therfore importeth prayer & supplication. It importeth moreouer that
it cannot be but we must halow the name of God by resting our selues
vppon him, and by yeelding him the whole glorie that belongeth too
him, when wee knowe that hee giueth vs all thinges of his owne free
goodnesse, looking for 
                     •
                  othing at our handes but only the sacrifyze of
thanksgiuing. Thus yee see howe fayth importeth all that is contayned
in the first table of the Lawe. Trew it is that the part is put for
the whole: howbeit it is too bee considered that the thinges which wee
haue spoken of, cannot bee put asunder. Now then it standeth vs on
hand too liue vprightly & indifferently with our neyghbors, as it is
said in the sixtenth Psalme,Psalm. 16. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . 3. that we bee beholden to God for al things,
and that wee cannot yeeld hym any recompence agein, and that when
wee haue streyned our selues too the vttermost, too bestow aught vpon

                     •
                  ym, all that wee can doo, is nother here nor there too hym. What requireth
he then? That wee should bee giuen too dooing of good to his
poore faithfull ones, according as S. Paule also nameth the Saintes
expresly in this Text. Trewe it is that wee ought too vse charitie towards
all men without exception: for wee cannot bee the children of
God, who maketh his Sunne to shine both vpon good and bad, except
wee loue our enemies, and streyne our selues too succour & helpe them.
That therfore is the marke that we must ame at. Yit notwithstanding
this hindereth vs not to loue all Gods children with a brotherly loue,



bycause they be knit vnto vs with a streyter bōd. That is the cause why
it is said aswel in my forealleged text of the sixtenth Psalme, as in this
present one of S. Paule, that wee muste haue loue towardes all the
faithfull. Yea and S. Paules hym selfe in an other place doth well discusse
the doubt that may bee cast in this behalfe. For he wylleth vs
too haue charitie too all men in generall,Galat. 6. c. 10. and chiefly too such as are of
the houshold of faith. God then wyll haue vs too becomme lyke hym

                     〈◊〉
                  , and to folowe his example in doing good too al men, yea euen too

                     〈◊〉
                   as are not woorthy of it, in so much that wee shoulde too the vtter
                  
                     •
                  ost
of our power, procure the welfare of those which seeke nothing
els but to picke out our eyes. Moreouer, for as much as he hath set his

                     ••
                  arke vppon all the faithfull, and commended them vntoo vs, he wyll

                     〈◊〉
                   vs too beare a certaine special brotherly loue towardes them. For

                     •
                  ods gyftes are too bee esteemed wheresoeuer they bee seene,Psal. 1. a. 
                        •
                     . accor
                  
                     •
                  ing
too the fifteenth Psalme, where it is said, that wee must loue such
as feare God, and abhorre such as are wicked. Then if wee see the tokens
that God hath put intoo his faithfull, whereby he commeth neere
them: is it not meete that wee also on our side shoulde be stirred vp
too loue them? Too bee short, wee see that S. Paule hath comprized
heere the whole rule of good and holy conuersation: that is tooo wyt,
that first of all we must giue ouer our selues wholy to our God, to stick
stedfastly vntoo him: And secondly lyue euenly and vprightly with our
neighbours, absteynyng from all euyll doyng, and indeuoring too doo
good too all men, accordyng too our power and abilitie. And howe
may that come too passe? Euen by knowing our heauenly father, and
by acknowledging the inf
                     •
                  nite good turnes which he hath done vs, and
wherof he voutsafeth too make vs partakers dayly, so as all our whole
lyfe depend vpon hym, & he onely be the party at whose hand we looke
for euerlasting saluation, by callyng vppon hym, and by yeelding hym
thankes all our life long. Let that serue for the first poynt.
               Ageyne, as touching the second, it is not possible for vs too loue our

                     •
                  eighbors, but wee must also lyue soberly without shewing any euyll

                     ••
                  ample, and looke in such wize too our behauiour, as no man maye
haue cause too complayne of vs. For what charitie is there in a whore
                  
                     •
                  onger
that goes about to dishonest another mans wyfe? or in a theefe
that seekes too steale another mans goodes? Ageyn, seeing that our
lyfe ought too be guided with all honestie: when soeuer any man bruste
                     •
                  h
out intoo drunkennesse, blasphemie, or such other things, it cannot



bee, but that in so doing there must be some trubbling of poore folk
                     ••
                  ,
some robbing them of their goodes, or some starting out intoo all maner
of extorsions and excesses. So then, if wee haue charitie, and lo
                     •
                  e
towardes our neighbor, wee shall lyue a sounde and vpright lyfe with
them, and wee shall rule it in suche wize, that wee shall not buzie o
                     •
                  r
selues about vayne fancies, as the Papistes doo: for they take 
                     〈◊〉
                  
paynes in their Ceremonies, and they call it Gods seruis too bab
                     ••
                  e
much, and too gad heere and there on pilgrimage, and to doo this 
                     〈◊〉
                  
that: and in the meane while they doo but plonder away in their ow
                     •
                  e
imaginations: and that is onely for want of knowing wherunto God
calleth them. Too the ende therefore that wee take not labour 
                     〈◊〉
                  
vayne, let vs marke what God alloweth, and let vs holde vs too that.
For wee cannot misse, if wee abide continually in the way, as he sheweth
it vs by his worde, specially sith he sheweth vs in so small room
                     •
                  ,
what is requisite too the leading of such a lyfe as becommeth vs. For
were the volumes long, and without end, wee would excuze our selues
that wee were no great Clerkes, and that wee could not beare away so
many things. But now seing that our lord vttreth his whole demaūds
in twoo or three words? we must needs grāt, that if we beare not away
so short and eazie a lesson, we be to
                     •
                   pee
                     •
                  ish and froward, and stop our
eares 
                     〈◊〉
                   wilfully, least wee might heare what he sayth vntoo vs.
               Finally it is too bee noted vppon this woord Fayth, that S. Paule
dooth not without cause say, the fayth in Iesus Christ: for that is the
thing which we must looke at. The fathers of old tyme had alwayes
the image of God before their eyes: for they myght not make sacrifize
but before his merciseate: they myght not hope that God herd
them,Colos
                        •
                     . 1. 
                        •
                     . 15. &c. or was mercifull too them by any other meane. They then had
the visible image of the Arke of couenant:H
                        •
                     br. 1. a. 3. but wee haue now Iesus
Christ the image of God, which was inuisible of himself: for not without
cause dooth S. Paule say, that God is incomprehensible till he
manifest himselfe in the person of his sonne. Therfore sith wee haue
Iesus Christ who is the expresse image of God, it behoueth vs to looke
thither. And heere yee see also why it is sayd, that he is the expresse image
of the power of God his father. For although the persones bee
distinct:Iohn. 5. d. 23. yit dooth he represent vntoo vs the thinges that are belonging
and requisite too ou
                     •
                   saluation, so that in knowing the sonne, wee
knowe the father also, as sayeth S. Iohn: and he that hathe not the
sonne, renounceth the father, what protestation soeuer he make of going



too him. So then, wheras it is sayd heere,Iohn. 14. a. 1. that wee must beleeue
in Iesus Christ: let vs bethinke vs of the warning which he giueth to
his disciples. Beleeue yee in God (sayeth he?) beleeue ye also in me.
There hee sheweth that the auncient fathers which liued vnder the
Lawe, had but a dark teaching, vntill the tyme that he was manifested
too the world. Trew it is that they woorshippid the liuing God, yea
and that they had none accesse vntoo him but by meanes of the media
                  
                     •
                  or.
Howbeit, that was but vnder shadowes and figures, nother had

                     •
                  hey any such lyght as wee haue nowadayes vnder the Gospell. And

                     〈◊〉
                   that cause also told I you that he is called the image of God, who is
of his owne nature inuisible, so as wee could not knowe him, vnlesse he

                     ••
                  tered himself by such meanes. Too bee short, let vs mark that wee

                     •
                  oo nothing else but wander, till wee haue our fayth settled in Iesus
Christ. And this wil bee the better perceyued by the errors wherwith

                     •
                  he world hath bin imbrewed vnto this day. For the Papists will pro
                  
                     •
                  est
well ynough that they beleeue in God: as much doo the Turkes
& the Iewes also. Trew it is that the Papistes and Iewes seeme too
come neerest the truthe: for the Iewes protest that they worship the
liuing God, euen the same God that gaue them his Lawe by Moyses.
But what for that? In the meane whyle they reiect Christ, who is the
end and substance of the Lawe. As for the Papistes, although they

                     •••
                  fesse Christianitie, & auowe Iesus Christ to be their sauiour: yit is

                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  pparant that they make warre ageynst him, for as much as they

                     〈◊〉
                   set vp seruing of God after their owne lyking, so as there is nothing
but disorder in all their doings. As touching the Turkes, they
can wel ynough say, Almyghtie God the maker of heauen and earth:
but shall wee thinke that God will renounce himselfe, or vnsaye that
which he hath sayd, which is, that no man can come vntoo him but by
his welbeloued sonne, whome he hath ordeyned too bee the mediator

                     ••
                  tweene him and men? Ageyn wee see how the papistes will well y
                  
                     ••
                  ugh
say, that they beleue in God: but yit therwithall they wil needs

                     〈◊〉
                   patrons and aduocates too bring them too his presenc
                     •
                  . Agein,

                     〈◊〉
                   not ynough for them that they bee bought with the blud of ou
                     •
                  
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Iesus Christ: they must also put too their owne merits, and

                     ••••
                  some themselues by their owne satisfactions: and when wee
haue offended God, we must haue such meanes and such. Then if a
man list too examin the papistes beleefe, surely he shall fynd that they

                     •
                  eleeue their owne dreames, and that all that euer they doo, is 
                     〈◊〉
                  


                  
confuzed maze. For with Iesus Christ they mingle whatsoeuer commeth
in their owne head, wheras wee know that he ought to continue
whole a
                     •
                  one by himse
                     •
                  fe. Wee see then how S. Paule leadeth vs
to the trew t
                     •
                  yal of our fayth: which is by resting vpon Iesus Christ,
so that wee feele our selues vtterly voyd of all goodnesse, and that wee
m
                     ••
                  t draw from out of his fulnesse, too be filled with all good thinges,
or else 
                     •
                  o wil bee vnto vs. For if wee had all the Angels in hea
                     •
                  en
on our syde (if it were possible:) yit is it certeyn that all should go too
w
                     •
                  ecke, if wee haue not the sayd head, as S. Paule sayeth in the first
and second chapters of the Epistle too the Colossians.Coloss. 
                        •
                     . c. 
                        •
                     8. &. 2 b. 10. And so yee see
what wee haue too gather vppon that sentence.
               Now after S. Paule hath sayd, that he thanketh God for the things
that he sawe alredie in the Church of Ephesus: he addeth that 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  pra
                        •
                     eth too him also. This is too shewe vs that when wee see God
bestowe his excellent giftes vppon his children, wee had neede too beseche
him still to cont
                     •
                  newe and go forewarde with the same, and that
for twoo causes. For he that standeth, may happen to fall, and againe,
God had neede too increace his grace more and more. For euen they
that are the perfectest shall haue cause too bee ashamed, if they looke
well intoo their owne wantes. Yee see then that the thing wheretoo
S. Paule bringeth vs, is that when wee prayse God for the gyftes
which he hath bestowed vppon his chozen children▪ wee ought too
match prayer also with our thanksgiuing. And why? For it is in hi
                     •
                  
onely too bring too passe the thing that he hath begunne: and it beh
                     •
                  
                  ueth
vs too lay alwayes this ground, Lord thou wilt not leaue the
woorke of thine owne handes halfe vndone.Psal. 138. b. 8. And the same thing whi
                     •
                  h
wee ought too doo for others, is also requisite for our selues. Too bee
short, wee bee heere warned too magnifie God in such wyse for his
goodnesse and gyftes which wee haue felt already, as wee must perceiue
that there is still much default in vs, and that it standeth vs on
hand that he should giue vs perseuerance too the ende: and moreouer
that he should correct our vyces, and augment his grace in vs, till wee
bee come too full perfection, which thing will neuer bee till wee bee
rid of this mortall body. Yit notwithstanding wee see howe Satan
dooth now adayes possesse such as surmyze a hellishe perfection, and
make but the three first petitions too their father, saying, that it is ynough
too pray God that his name bee hallowed, that his kingdome
come, and that his will bee done: and so they cut of all the rest of the



prayer which our Lord Iesus hath left vs. And for this matter I haue
the signing of their owne handes which theyr disciples know, wherby
those diuells shewe that they must needes bee vtterly without wit, seing
they bee caryed away so farre, as too refuze too yeelde God this
glory, that euen now wee bee yit still ouer loden with the burthen of
our infirmities, hild downe with store of corruptions, and hemmed in
with abundance of vyces, and that God must bee fayne too clenze vs
of them more and more, yea euen from day too day, vntill he haue
brought vs too the perfection wheruntoo he calleth vs. And it standeth
vs so much the more on hand too marke this doctrine well: bycause
the Papistes are not so farre ouershot in the errours of their supersti
                  
                     •
                  ions
and Idolatries, as these varlets are, which doo now adayes
sowe abrode their poysons in their priuie meetings and lurking holes.
But howsoeuer they fare, let vs marke well what is shewed vs heere
by the holy Ghost, when S. Paule sayeth that he prayeth God. And
why? I haue tolde you already, that the Ephesians had profited, and
that the giftes of God and of his holy spirit were augmented in them:
He hath shewed that. Now too knit vp the matter, he sayeth further,
that he prayeth God too giue them that which they haue not, & which
they want as yit. Sith it is so: let vs marke that the more wee haue
profited, the more cause haue wee too humble our selues, and with all
myldnesse too beseeche God too finishe the thing that he hath begunne,

                     〈◊〉
                   too increace his giftes in vs, till wee neede no more too go any
f
                     •
                  rther, which shalbee at the meeting, whereof wee shall speake more
in the fourth Chapter.
               But yit must wee mark well the woords that S. Paule vseth. For
he sayeth, the God of our Lord Iesus Christ, the father of glorie, or
the glorious father, (for the speeche father of glorie, is put in the Hebrew
tongue, for glorious father) giue you the spirituall reuelation
too haue knowledge of him. Now when as S. Paule sendeth vs
heere too Iesus Christ, saying, that the God whom he calleth vppon, is
the same which is the God of our Lord Iesus Christ, yea and his father
too: it is too shew the trust that he had too be heard, and that the Ephe
                  
                     •••
                  ns
should take hart too follow the same fashion and rule of praying,

                     ••
                  d that when they haue any occasion to resort vntoo God, they should
h
                     •
                  ld the same way that he did, and keepe by the streit lyne of comming

                     〈◊〉
                   our Lord Iesus Christ. But now if a man demaund how God is
aboue our Lord Iesus Christ: the question is easye too bee resolued, if



wee haue an eye too the person of the mediator,Iohn. 10. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     0. which is abased in our
stead and degree, too bee the meane betweene God and vs. Trew it is
that Iesus Christ is all one with his father, and when wee speake of
the liuing God, it behoueth vs too acknowledge that the whole fulnesse
of the Godhead dwelleth in him. Therefore wee must not separate
our Lord Iesus Christ,Coloss. 
                        •
                     . b. 
                        •
                     . as though he were a new God, and some othe
                     •
                  
than the same that was shewed too the fathers from the beginning (as
some diuels say now adayes, which haue stirred vp that stining villanie
and abhommination:) but it is the selfsame only one God which
hath shewed himselfe too vs in the person of the father, so wee seeke
him in Iesus Christ. For in Iesus Christ wee haue too consider the
office of the mediator, in that he so abased himfelse. Not that he forw
                     •
                  nt
any whit of his maiestie, nor that he was any whit abridged or
diminished of his eternall glory, there was no such thing at all. But as
in respect of vs he was abaced, yea and vtterly emptyed. And wee
must not bee ashamed too say, that Iesus Christ was abaced, seing it
is sayd that he was emptyed: for that is the very woord that S. Paule
vseth too the Philippians.Phil. 2. a. 7. Therfore when wee speake of Iesus Christ
as he is ioyned too vs, too the end too bring vs too his father: so is he
vnder God his father, namely in respect that he hath taken our nature
vppon him, and is become our fellow. And that also is the cause why
he sayd to his disciples (as S. Iohn reporteth in his twentith chapter)
Go yee too my brethren and tel them,Iohn. 20. d. 17. I go too my God and your God,
too my father and your father. Lo how Iesus Christ ioyneth himself
in such wyse with his faythfull ones, that he sayth he will haue one selfsame
God with them. Yea verily but in what sort? For is he not God
himself? Yis: howbeeit forasmuch as he is clothed with our flesh, and
inasmuch as he voutsaued too bee made fleshe, too the ende that wee
myght bee members of his bodie: that is the cause why he hath one
God with vs. And that is the cause also why the Apostle applyeth
this text of Esayes too his person:Esai. 8. d. 18. &c. Lo heere am I with the seruants
which thou hast giuen mee: so as Iesus Christ commeth there as a
captein that presenteth himself before his king and prynce,Heb. 2. d 13. saying, Lo
here I am with the companie of children which thou hast giuen mee.
Howsoeuer the cace stand, wee see that Iesus Christ draweth vs too
God his father, too the end wee should repayre too him with ful trust,
and he receyue vs. For otherwyse who is he that durst bee so bold as
too hight himself that his request should be heard? What grace could



wee obteyne,Iohn. 14. a. 6. if the gate were not opened vs by Iesus Christ, and that
he performed not the thing that he hath spoken, namely that he is the
way:
               Howbeeit too the intent wee myght the better knowe what neede
wee haue too bee guyded by our Lord Iesus Christ: S. Paule setteth
heere before vs the infinite glory of God. How dare wee then bee so
bold as too offer our selues intoo Gods sight, but for that we haue an
aduocate which maketh vs a way in thither? For if the sunne doo dazle
mennes eyes, and the heate of it sindge vs though wee bee very farre
of from it: what will become of vs when wee will preace vntoo God?
For what else is the sunne than a little power which he hath breathed
intoo it? And must wee not needes bee as it were swallowed vp, when
wee preace to the incomprehensible maiestie that is in God? Yit notwithstanding
if wee haue Iesus Christ, wee haue too vnderstand that
God is not onely the father of glory, but also the father of mercy, and
that he looketh with pitie vppon such as are most miserable, and are
had in reproche and disdeyne of the world. Lo whereuppon wee ought
too rest in praying vntoo God.
               S. Paule prayeth God heere expresly too giue the Ephesians the
spirit of wisedome and reuelation. It is certeine that God had alredy
reueled too them the truth of his Gospell, as it is seene. And verily
wee could not haue one sparke of fayth, or of lyght, except God had
wrought in vs alredy,Math. 16. c. 17. according as it is sayd to Peter in the sixteenth
chapter of S. Mathew, Flesh and blud hath not opened these thinges
vntoo thee, but my heauenly father which is in heauen. And yit for all
this, Peter sheweth afterward, that he knewe not any whit of Christes
spiritual kingdome. Then although he were but as a silly nouice sat
his A. B. C. yit is it witnessed of hym, that the smal taste of the Gospel
which he had, was a gift from heauen. Hereby wee see how God
must be faine too increase his giftes more and more in vs: and in that
respect is our life termed a way, bicause wee must alwayes go on forewardes,
tyl our race bee ended. And who soeuer imagineth any perfection
in this worlde, is possessed of Satan, and vtterly renounceth
God grace. Yit notwithstanding let vs not surmize that God changeth
his purpose, (for he is not variable) or suffereth his grace too bee
chopt out in gobbets and cantles, at mens pleasures: but he hath appoynted
this order, that wee shoulde growe from day too day, and yit
therwithal learn
                     •
                   to acknowledge soberly our wantes, and too grone



for them, and to mislike of them, & to hold our selues alwayes in awe.
Ye
                     •
                   see then that these two thinges agree very wel: namely that the
Ephesians had alredy receyued the spirite of Reuelation, and yit that
they needed to haue it giuen them of God. For although there be but
one spirit, yit are the gyftes diuers, and they be distributed to euery of
vs in measure, and as it pleaseth hym to giue them. There is none
but Iesus Christe whiche hath receyued them fully. He onely is the
fountaine that can neuer be drayned dry, it is he vpon whom Gods spirit
re
                     •
                  teth: to the end that we should al of vs bee made partakers of it.
And for our owne parts let vs acknowledge, that the wizest of vs haue
neede too bee alwayes scol
                     •
                  ers, and too learne styll euen to our dying
day. Howbeit, by the way let vs marke that this woorde Reuelation
condemneth vs of al blyndesse. For wee haue our eyes open too discerne
betweene white and blacke: wee see the Sunne and the Moone,
wee see these worldly things, and are able to iudge of them: wee neede
no newe Reuelation for that geere, for wee haue it of nature. True it
is that our eyes are instrumentes of Gods power and goodnesse, wherby
he maketh vs to inioye the light: but that is a common thing. But
heere S. Paule sheweth vs, that wee bee blynd, and that we conceyue
not any whyt of Gods spirituall grace, except he open our eyes, and
take away the kercheefe or veyle that is before them, yea and giue vs
a newe sight, which wee haue not. For wee haue our eyes woorse thā
stopped, vntyl he inlighten them by his holy spirit. Thus ye see what
wee haue too beare in mynde. And that is the thing which he proceedeth
styl withal. Namely (saith he) too haue the eyes of your vnderstanding
inlightened. But a man might reply, If wee haue the spirit
of Reuelation alredy, why haue wee neede of it? Uerily as who
should say, you sawe nothing at all. True it is that you see partly: but
you haue your eyes styll too much dymmed. And this may be said generally
of al men,1. Cor. 13. d. 12. according as it is saide, that in this worlde wee see
thinges but d
                     ••
                  ly, and as it were through a glasse, tyll wee bee able to
behold God in his heauenly glory, at which tyme we shalbe fashioned
lyke vntoo hym. Agey
                     •
                  e, too the intent that men shoulde not alledge
(and say) M
                     •
                  st God then reuele thinges in suche wise vntoo vs, as if
wee were in such taking that wee could see nothing at all? And shall
a man bee as a bru
                     •
                  e beast without discretion or iudgement? To answeare
heereunto, it is true that wee haue some wyt, but yit are wee
blynd for all that, bycause wee be corrupted by sin. God therfore must



bee fayne too giue vs new eyes, as I sayd afore. And he addeth the
woord wisdome, the better too beate downe the fond ouerweening that
men conceyue in themselues, when they will needes flye without
wings too come vntoo God. For there is not that man which woulde
not bee wyse. If wee desyred trew wisedome by seeking it at Gods
hand: it were a good and well ruled desyre. But there are twoo faults
in vs: for wee will needes bee wyze after our owne conceyt. Am I not
wyze ynough too gouerne my selfe, wyll a foole say? And in the meane
whyle wee despyze Gods word, and euery of vs will needes haue the

                     •
                  rydle layd looce in our necke, and haue leaue giuen him too doo what
he thinketh good. But that is too great an ouerweening. The other
vyce is, that in reading the holy scripture, wee still imagin too come
too the knowledge of the things that are conteyned there, by our owne
discretion. But heere both twayne of them are excluded by S. Paule.
For when as he desyreth God too giue his faythfull ones the spirit of
wisdome, he sheweth that they haue no discretion, no more than brute
beastes, except it bee by the guyding of our Lord Iesus Christ, of purpose
too come too the kingdome of heauen. For euen in ciuill matters
and worldly affayres, God giueth it not too any, but too such as he
thinketh good. Now if he keepe his speciall goodnesse alwayes too
himselfe, too giue discretion too whom he listeth, too guyde himselfe
withall in these bace things of the world: then dooth he make the vnbeleeuers
too bee well syghted: and therefore when the cace concerneth
the heauenly lyfe, there is no preparation in vs. And so S. Paule
presuppozeth the thing which I haue sayd already, namely, that wee
must bee taught at Gods hand, too know him by the doctrine of truth
through the record of the Gospell, for without that, wee shoulde bee
lyke these fantasticall fellowes, which roue vnder the pretence of hauing
the reuelation of Gods holy spirit: howbeeit, that is not after
the maner that S. Paule taketh the word Reuelation, when he prayeth
God too giue it too his children. As for example, when Iesus
Christ speaketh of his spirit, he doth not separate it from the doctrine
that he had preached. When the spirit commeth (sayeth he) he shall
tell you all truth.Iohn. 14. d. 26. & 15. d. 26. And how is that? Had not the Apostles receyued
it alredy? Yis: but he addeth, he shall shewe you the things that you
heare now of my mouth. Too bee short, it is the peculiar office of the
holy Ghost to teach vs in such wise, as the word which we heare, may
therwithall haue his course & place, and as we may profit in the same.
               
                  And theruppon S. Paule sheweth also wherin lyeth all our light
and knowledge: namely in knowing God in the person of his onely
sonne. That (say 
                     •
                  is the thing wherwith we must content our selues.
For if wee haue 
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  klishe wits too bee inquisitiue of the things that
passe our capacit
                     •
                  e: Let vs consider a little how weake and rawe our
vnderstanding is. And if our wits be so grosse & heauie: how shall wee
doo when wee would s
                     •
                  ye aboue heauen and earth? Are wee able too
comprehend all that in so small a roome? Yit neuerthelesse we see how
men take vnmeasurable leaue to bee inquisitiue of this and that, & to
put foorth questions in way of pleading and disputing ageinst God.
For this cause S. Paule sheweth vs here, that if wee mynde too bee
wize, it behoueth vs too bee sober: that is too wit, we must vnderstand
what manner a thing God and our Lord Iesus Christ is, as he himselfe
will shew anone after, that when wee be once come to that poynt,
wee haue so much as ought wel too suffize vs, and if wee presume too
go any further, it is but a wilfull ouerthrowing of our selues. S. Paule
then wil shew that more at length hereafter: but it ought to suffize vs,
that as wel in this text, as in all the whole holy scripture, we ought too
learne which is the God whom wee ought too serue, what is his will,
how we may haue our trust in him, what entrāce we may haue to pray
too him, and too flie too him for succour at all times. That is the thing
wherunto we must imploy our selues. But that cānot be doone, vnlesse
al that euer we haue neede of, and is auaylable to our welfare, be too
bee had in Iesus Christ, in whom God hath manifested himself. For
in it selfe the maiestie of God is too high a thing, and wee should bee
vndone a hundred times before wee could come nere him, if it were
not that he is come downe vnto vs. But if wee once haue Iesus Christ▪
there wee haue a lyuely image of him, wherein wee may behold whatsoeuer
is requisite for our saluation. For there we vnderstand that God
is our father, and that wee bee clenzed from all our sinnes too be transformed
intoo the glorye of God. There wee see how God accepteth
vs for rightuous, and that wee bee reconciled too God ageine. There
wee perceyue how he hath raunsomed vs, and that wee shall neuer bee
left destitute of the grace of his holy spirit, till he haue brought vs too
the ioying of our inheritaunce. Thus doo wee knowe all these things
in our Lord Iesus Christ.1. Cor. 2. 
                        •
                     . 2. And that is the cause also why S. Paul sayeth
in another place, that he desired not too knowe any other thing than
Iesus Christ, and that it is he onley of whom he intended too boast.



According whereuntoo wee haue seene heretofore, how he forsooke all
things to abyde vnder the Crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ, and that
althoughe the same hath too the worldward nothing but shame and reproch:
yit he protesteth that he had giuen ouer al that he had esteemed
afore, and that he estemed them but as hinderaunce and losse, yea and
as filth and dung, too the intent too cleaue too our Lord Iesus Christ,
and too shewe that such as are possessed with the fond opinion of their
owne deseruings, do separate themselues from our Lord Iesus Christ,
and that if wee will bee knit vntoo him, wee must giue ouer all that we
imagine our selues too haue of our owne, and offer our selues vnto him

                     •
                  oyde of all goodnesse, too bee filled at his hand: And here ye se
                     •
                   also
why S. Paule sayth, that he had leuer come too the hauen of saluation
poore and starke naked, then too liue in the mids of the Sea, and too
bee there swallowed vp. For although he were taken for an holy man,
and as halfe an Angell: yit made he no reckening of all that, so he
might bee partaker of the remission (of sinnes) that was giuen him in
Iesus Christ, and of the grace which he hath communicated too all his
members. Therefore let vs learne too magnifie Gods grace in such
wyze, as wee may vtterly forget all the toyes wherwith the diuell de
                  
                     ••
                  iueth
the vnbeleeuers, by puffing them vp with I wote not what
manner of pryde, and come vtterly emptie too our Lord Iesus Christ

                     •
                  oo beg his grace. For wee cannot receiue one drop of it, but by confessing
our selues too bee vtterly vnworthie of it.
               And now let vs fall downe before the maiestie of our good God,
with acknoweledgment of our faults, praying him too make vs perc
                     •
                  yue
them more and more, and that the same may so humble vs, as
wee may bee stablished in his grace, and labour too come nerer and
nerer vntoo him, that being beaten downe in our selues, wee may bee
rayzed vp by him through his mere mercie, and depending altogither
vppon him, resort vntoo him as too 
                     〈◊〉
                   father, and continewe in so doing
till he haue taken vs out of the prizon of sinne, and ioyned vs perfectly
too himselfe. That it may please him too graunt this grace, not
onely too vs, but also too all people. &c.
            
            
               
               The seuenth Sermon vpon the
first Chapter.
               
                  
                     17. I pray for you, that the God of our Lord Iesus Christ, the father
of glorie, giue you the spirit of wisedome and reuelation,
too haue the knoweledge of him:
                     18 That is too wit, too haue the eyes of your vnderstanding inlightened,
too the end ye may know what the hope is which
you ought too haue of his calling, and what the riches are of
the glory of his heritage among the Saintes.
                  
               
               
                  ALl men haue naturallye some vnderstanding.
Not that it sheweth itself as soone
as they bee borne: but in processe of tyme
all haue some discretion of good and euill.
And for that cause are thei reasonable creatures.
But the vnderstanding which wee
haue of nature, is not ynough too bring vs
too the kingdome of heauen. For wee stop
farre short when matte
                     •
                  s that concerne the
heauenly life doo come in question: Wee see that euery man hath wit
in matters and affayres of the world: and euery man will looke about
him. Agein although dyuers could fynd in their harts that their owne
consciences were dead: yit notwithstanding God hath so graued a
kynd of feeling in their harts, as our liues must needs bee brydled, and
euen the wickeddest and woorst natured of vs all, shall of force haue
some remorse or hartbyting, and bee constreyned whether they will
or no, too allow the good, and condemne the euill. Trew it is that when
they haue committed any fault, they will labour too hyde it with vayne
excuces. But if a man aske them whether murther, extortion, robberie,
whoredome, deceyt, and forswearing bee vertewes or no: thy will
say, they bee vyces woorthy too bee condemned. Euerie man will
talke so. For it is Gods will that there should bee such a knowledge
printed in mans harte, too the end that all should bee condemned without
excuce, and bee inforced too bee thir owne iudges. But (as I said
afore) this is not ynough too leade vs vntoo God, and too open vs the
kingdome of heauen in such wise, as wee may knowe how too bee saued,



or howe too call vppon God. Then are wee starke blynd in that
behalf: for our insyght reacheth not beyond the world. Therfore God
must bee fayne too woorke in vs, and too giue vs new eyes too spye out
the things that are requisite too our saluation. And that is the cause
why S. Paule prayeth vntoo God heere too giue them inlyghtened
eyes. Wherin he presuppozeth that men haue alredie some enterance,
not too atteyne so hygh as is requisyte: but too haue some seede of Religion
in them, and too perceyue that there is a God: Furthermore
God must bee fayne too giue a greater lyght, and such a one as wee be
quyte voyd of, by reason of Adams sin: for wee bee plundged in such
darknesse, that we go cleane awk frō the ryght way, till God haue reached
vs his hand. Yee see then that the thing which is conteyned
heere, is that God hath doone more for vs in giuing vs the eyes of vnderstanding,
than in making vs men, and putting vs intoo the world?
bycause that therby he reformeth vs, and giueth vs a cleere and sure
insyght, as to those whom he hath chozen. For it is a priuiledge which
is peculiar too his owne children, and not common too all men. And
truely wee see that when God vttereth his power, it is not knowen but
onely too such as haue inlyghtened eyes, according too this saying of
Moyses,Deut. 2
                        •
                     . a. 4. Thy God hath not giuen thee a hart too vnderstand, nor
eyes too see, euen vntoo this day. Wee knowe that miracles were
wrought in the sight of the people: yit notwithstanding the passing
of the red sea, the issuing of the water out of the rocke, the falling of the
Manna downe from heauen, the thicke cloud by day, and the fiery pillar
by night, the abundaunt comming of the fleshe vntoo them, and
the horrible punishments that God layd vppon the rebells, and vppon
such as had giuen full scope too their owne lustes, all this geere the
people vnderstoode not. Moyses telling them that they had neede too
referre themselues too God, that they might bee inlightened by his
spirit, sayeth, I see that euen vnto this houre Gods gracious dooings
haue bin buryed among you through your vnthankfulnesse:
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   but that
is bycause men are blockish, and doo neuer vnderstand aught that belongeth
too their welfare, till God haue wrought in them. Therefore
it standeth you on hand too rid your selues of all ouerweenyng, and too
craue vnderstanding at Gods hand, acknowledging your selues too
bee vnable too reache so hygh as too iudge ryghtly of Gods woorkes,
and too profite your selues by them, vntill he haue gyuen you a heauenly
syght in your myndes. This is the summe of the thinges that



wee haue too marke in this streyne.
               Now hereupon it is easye too gather, how the wretched world hath
bin beguyled by the opinion of freewill, which hath bin put into their
heades. For the Papistes will wel ynough graunt, that without Gods
grace we cannot walk as we ought to doo: but yit they say therwithal,
that we may well further Gods grace by our owne freewill: & so they
make a medly of thē togither. Whē they mynd to defyne freewill, they
say it is a mingled thing, so as wee haue reason and wit too chooze the
good, and too refuze the euill, and that therwithall we haue also power
and abilitie, to performe and put in execution the thing that wee haue
purposed. But wee see after what manner S. Paule speaketh heere
of mamies reason, which they terme the Queene that ouerruleth and
brydleth all our thoughtes and deedes. He sheweth that shee is starke
blynd, vntill God haue renewed hir, and not that he dooth but supply
our wantes where any bee, as though there were some peece of power
in vs. Had it bin so, S. Paule would haue sayd, that God furthereth
our light, or that he increaseth it, or that he addeth too it whatsoeuer it
hath neede of. Howbeit he speaketh not so: but he sayeth, God giue
you inlyghtened eyes: shewing therby that it is a free gift, & not only
that our Lord must bee fayne too beare with our infirmities, and too
put some further portion theruntooo: but also that we being blynd can
see nothing at all, till he haue opened our eyes, and that wee bee guyded
and gouerned by the sayd manifestation of his holy spirit, which
wee haue touched heertoofore. And now forasmuch as men runne alwayes
flinging ouer the feeldes, & buzie their heades about many vnprofitable
things: S. Paule sheweth vs wherto we ought too apply
all wholy both our vnderstāding & wit, namely about the seeking how
too knowe what the hope of our calling is. I haue told you alreadye,
that men are as yee would say, borne to curiositie, and that they roue
& raunge, and frame many wicked gazes (in their heades:) & that is
the cause why many men doo martir themselues out of measure,2. Tim. 3. b. 7. euer
lerning, a
                     •
                  d neuer atteyning too the knowledg of the truth, as sayeth
S. Paule. Therfore let vs mark well, that all the trew knowledge
which wee must seeke, is too atteyne to the hope wheruntoo God hath
called vs. For the scripture serueth not too feede vs with vayne and
superfluous thinges: but too edifie vs too our welfare: that is too
wit, to make vs perceyue Gods goodnesse, that wee myght be ioyned
vntoo him, and he bee our trew happinesse. And hereuppon wee may



gather also, that vntill such tyme as our Lord haue inlightened vs by
his holy Spirit, wee can find nother waye nor path too come neere
the heauenly lyfe, no nor so much as gesse what it meaneth. Wherfore
it is for our behoofe, that our Lord should put vs in possession of our
saluation, by the power of his holy spirit. I told you heertoofore how
that fayth serueth too giue vs an enterance intoo the kingdome of heauen,
and intoo the heritage that is purchased for vs by our Lord Iesus
Christ, and that God must bee fayne too giue it vs by his holy spirit.
Then sith it is so, let vs marke that wee haue neede, not only too haue

                     •
                  he Gospell preached vntoo vs, but also that God bore our eares, so as
wee may hearken too the things that are conteyned in the same, and he
open our eyes too see the thinges that he sheweth vs: and too be short,
that he may both begyn all, and bring all too passe. Howbeit for as
much as men (as I saide afore) doo by their fond imaginations take
more vpon them than they ought too doo, and on the other syde despize
Gods giftes: S. Paule magnifyeth heere the hope whereof he had
made mention before, saying: VVhat the richesse of the glorye of
his heritage are among the Saintes. No doubt but that when there

                     〈◊〉
                   any speaking of God, and of our Lorde Iesus Christ, wee will say,

                     ••
                  ey be high thinges: howbeit that is but too exempt our selues from

                     ••
                  em, if wee coulde scape: soo as wee coulde bee contented to knowe

                     •
                  ightnought of the things that concerne our saluation. Wee bee vn
                  
                     •
                  aciable
when any body feedes vs with vanities and leazings: but if
God call vs too his schoole, wee shrinke backe as muche as wee can

                     •
                  ossibly, yea and wee set this afore vs as a shielde, that wee bee rude,

                     •
                  nd that wee haue but a smal and ouer grosse vnderstanding, & that the
secretes of Gods word are too deepe and incomprehensible for vs. We
haue skyl inough too say so: and yit is al but hypocrisie and feynednesse.
And for proofe therof men wyl alwayes iudge after their owne
liking, so as if any thing be propounded to them frō out of Gods word:
Is it so, say they? And howe is that possible? They reason, they scan
of it. Beholde, it is God that speaketh, and yit wyll not they without
gainsaying, receiue the thinges that are shewed them in the name of
God. Wee see then that they doo but lye, in saying that they bee dull
and grosse witted: for they thinke the cleane contrarye. The starkest
idiots (say I) and the veryest doltes of them al will styl bee wizer than
God. Ageine, on the other syde, what causeth the Gospel too bee despized,
but that a number of per
                     •
                   and fantastical felowes, thinke it too



bee but a simple doctrine, and that it hath not finenesse and suttletie
ynough for them? So much the more neede therefore haue wee too
bethinke vs of the thing that is shewed vs heere by S. Paule: which
is, that the glorious heritage wheruntoo God hath called vs, is an infi
                     •
                  ite
riches. For besydes that wee bee nothing else but myre and
rottennesse, s
                     •••
                   shetteth vs out from all hope of saluation. And so long
as wee bee Gods enemyes, what can wee looke for at his hand but
vtter confuzion? Yit notwithstanding it pleaseth him too make vs
fellowes with the Angells of heauen, yea and more than that too: for
we be made members of our Lord Iesus Christ, to the end we should
bee parttakers of his lyfe and glory. How excellent riches are these?
When wee shall haue imployed all our wittes about them, ought wee
not too bee tootoo much ashamed, seyng that God hath vttered so inestimable
goodnesse towardes vs? So then, S. Paule too waken vp
mennes drowzinesse, and to rebuke and correct their vnthankfulnesse,
for that they commend not the hundreth part of Gods grace, as they
ought too doo: telleth vs that if wee thinke better vppon it, wee shall
fynde that his speaking after that maner, is too stirre vs vp too pray
God too inlyghten vs, bycause that without him, wee should not bee
able too come any thing neere fayth, nor neere any knowledge at all.
               Thus wee see now S. Paules meaning, which hee pursueth and
continueth much more in adding, what the excellencie of his power
is in vs that haue beleeued. And ageyn, according too the effectual
voorking of the strength of his power. He gathereth and heapeth
vp many woordes heere toogither, which import all one thing. Neuerthelesse
it is as it were a correcting of mans leawdnesse, which labour
too deface Gods goodnesse as much as they can, insomuch that
wheras they bee not able too deface it altogither, they diminish it in
such wyse as it appeereth not, as if it had but a sparke wheras it ought
to haue full light. But by the way let vs mark, that wheras S. Paule
setteth downe here the Saintes and beleeuers: he meaneth the faithfull
whom God hath already called too him. And therein he sheweth
that euen when wee haue fayth, all our holynesse proceedeth of Gods
mercy, and men bring nothing of their owne growing. Truely this title
of Saintes is very honorable: but yit it behoueth vs to go to the welspring
of holynesse: for in our selues we haue nothing but vnclennesse.
Gods children must nedes be holy: yit must they consider from whēce
they haue it, whether they haue of their owne purchace and polli
                     •
                  ie, or



of Gods gift. S. Paule sheweth here, that the prayse thereof ought too
bee yeelded simply vntoo God.Leuit. 11. g. 44. & 19. a. 2. &. 1. et. 1. c. 15. For it is not for nought that he sayeth
so oft, I am holy. And agein, wee know that Iesus Christ was sanctified
for vs, too the inten
                     •
                  e that wee might bee washed and scoured from
all our vnclenenesse. Thus much concerning the first poynt.
               Afterward followeth the cause of our fayth: namely that men atteyne
it not otherwise, thā by the drawing of a secret motion,Math. 11. d. 29. according as it
is sayd, 
                     •
                  hat we must learne of God, not only bicause his woord conteineth
all wisedome, and God doth thereby teach vs faithfully the things
that are for our behoofe: but also bicause our Lord expoundeth it moreouer,
saying, he that heareth it of my father. He himself spake it,Iohn. 6. e. 45. which
was the wisedome of God: and yit he sheweth that the things which

                     •
                  e vttered with his mouth, could not preuaile, except God spake with
                  
                     ••
                  
a man by his holy spirit. Now if Iesus Christ could not profot men
by his teaching, further foorth than Gods spirit wrought within their
harts▪ what shall the preaching doo which wee heare at the mouthe of
mortall men, who are nothing? men then must plant and water, and
God must giue increace,1. Cor. 3. b. 6. as S. Paule sayeth in the third Chapter of
the first Epistle too the Corinthians.
               Furthermore, as I haue told you, that wee must drawe all our holynesse
frō out of Iesus Christ, in whom we shall finde al the fulnesse and
plentie of it: so also let vs vnderstand, that by that saying we bee warned,
that wee bee not called too filthinesse, too take leaue too doo euill:
but too bee as it were sholed out too the seruice of God. Most men can
well ynough brag that they bee faythfull, and that word runnes roundly
vppon euery mans tongue: but fayth is a preciouser thing than wee
thinke: for it 
                     〈◊〉
                   our harts (as it is sayd in the foftenth of the Acts)
too the intent wee should bee as it were sholed out and set a side,Act. 15. b. 
                        •
                     . too
giue our selues wholly too Gods seruice. But her
                     •
                  by it is ment, that
men are as it were of a corrupt and infected lump, till God haue drawen
out the one so
                     •
                  t from the other. Then differ wee nothing at all from

                     •
                  hem that are as deepely plundged as is possible, in all manner of euil
and wickednesse. Wee bee all alike (say I) as touching our nature.
But they that beleeue in our Lord Iesus Christ, must bee as it were

                     •
                  orted out from the rest of the worlde, as S. Peter also sayeth in his
first Epi
                     ••
                  le. Agein, wee haue seene heeretofore, that wee bee clenzed
by the b
                     •
                  ud of Iesus Christ, too the intent too bee drawen out of this
worlde,Iohn. 17. c. 15. according also as he sayeth in S. Iohn, where he prayeth too



his father, not too take vs out of this world, and out of this transitorie
lyfe, but too keepe the naughtinesse of the world from bearing rule in
vs, and too exempt vs from it. Yee see then that the thing which wee
haue too beare in mynde, is that holynesse is the trew recorde of ou
                     •
                  
fayth. And therefore whosoeuer is called a Christian, ought too fee
consecrated vntoo God, and not too intermeddle or defyle himself with
the vnclenenesse and f
                     ••
                  thinesse of the world. Trew it is that our holynesse
shall neuer bee perfect, so long as wee bee in this world: for wee
doo alwayes drawe the lynes too vs, and although sinne ouer mayster
vs not, yit dooth it dwell in vs, and wee keepe continuall battell ageinst
it, to get the vpper hand. But howsoeuer the world go, yit when
God once hath sanctified vs, we must apply our selues to his seruice, we
must indeuer too clenze our selues more and more from all vyces, and
wee must giue our selues wholly vntoo him, so as wee bee no more as
worldlings, which take leaue too doo what they list. This in effect is
the thing that S. Paule ment too say.
               Moreouer, no do
                     •••
                   but that in this place he maketh comparison betweene
such as are drowned in all ignorance, or rather are so hardened,
that they haue no mynd at all too submit themselues too the obedience
of the Gospell, but doo fyght furiously ageinst it: and the faythfull
which are as sillie sheepe, herkening to the voyce of the good shepherd.
S. Paule then condemneth heere all scoffers and scorners which despyze
God, and are as Doggs or brute beasts, without any feeling of
religion. When wee see these things, they are all of them mirrours
vntoo vs, too make the heares stand vp vppon our heades, by making
vs too knowe what wee should be, if God pityed vs not. And therfore
when we see folkes scorne God so openly, and rush forth at randon into
al leaudnesse, let vs acknowledge the infinite goodnesse of our God,
in that he hath separated vs from the companye. Wherefore when
wee see one sort sotted in their vnbeleefe, and an other sort full of pryde,
bitternesse, and stubbornnesse ageinst the Gospell: let vs vnderstand
that wee our selues should bee lyke them, but that God hath reached
foorth his arme vppon vs.
               But now let vs marke well the woordes that S. Paule vseth heerein,
saying, the excellent greatnesse of his m
                        •
                     ghtinesse, according to
the effectuall vvoorking of the povver of his strength. It should
seeme that the holie Ghost ment too thunder downe vppon this diuelish
opinion wherwith the world hath at all tymes bin besotted▪ that is too



wit, of freewill. For the heathen men presumed so farre, as too say
that God had in deede created them too bee in the world, and that it
was in his power too giue thē good or bad fortune, as they termed it:
but that it was in euerye mans owne power and freechoyce too follow
vertew, and too behaue himself in such wyse, as no fault myght bee
founde in him. Loe how the heathen men parted the stake betweene
God and themselues. The lesser matter, which is the setting of vs
heere beneath too crawle heere lyke frogges, they left vntoo God: but
the greater matter, namely our atteyning vntoo heauen, and the ruling
of our selues in all vertew, that sayd they, was in mans owne abilltie,
and belonged only too himself. The Iewes and Papists haue not bin
altoogither of this mynd: for (as I haue touched alredye) they confesse
that we haue neede of Gods helpe: But yit for all that, they will haue
vs too mingle some peece of our owne holinesse with Gods grace, and
too bee able too woorke ioyntly with it, as they say, insomuch that
when it commeth too the reckening, the cheef part shall alwayes bee
found in our selues.
               But let vs see how the holy Ghost speaketh of it. Too what end vseth
he all these terme of hyghnesse, power, strengh, effectual vvorking,
and myghtinesse? wherfore heapeth he vp all these toogither,
but too shewe that men bee mad when they will take more vpon them
than becōmeth them? Ther is not that woord heere, which serueth not
to abate our cackling, if wee boast of neuer so little a drop of goodnesse.
For if men say, I haue yit some good mouing in mee, I haue some
peece of vertew: behold, S. Paule speaketh of Hyghnesse: as if he
ment to shew that all the goodnesse which we haue, is aboue the world,
and hath not his roote nor spring in our selues, but cōmeth from aboue,
as S. Iames sayeth.Iam. 1. c. 17. Agein, if men say, wee haue some power too
withstand our owne vyces, and to fyght ageinst temptations: S. Paul
sayeth heere, that our strength, our power, and our myght commeth of
God, and that he must bee fayne to vestowe it vppon vs, and we to receyue
it of him. If men say still, yit by streyning our selues we may be
able too doo somewhat: S. Paule telleth vs, ther is no effectuall working,
ther is no bringing of the thing to passe, vnlesse God giue it vs,
according too his speaking of it in the second to the Philipians, where
he sayeth,Phil. 2. b. 12. 13. that it standeth vs on hand too walke in feare and warinesse,
bycause it is God which giueth both the will & the abilitie to performe
the will, according too his owne good pleasure: that is too say, he beginneth



the woorke, and bringeth it too the end and knitting vp. Too
bee short, let vs marke, that looke how many woordes there are heere,
so many great thunderclappes and lyghteninges are there too beate
downe and too sinke all the pryde of man, too the intent that being confounded
in our selues, wee myght giue God the glory which he deserueth,
and with all lowlinesse frankly and freely yeeld our selues giltie,
acknowledging that al goodnesse commeth of him, & that we be beholden
to him only for it. Thus yee see how the effect of the matter which
wee haue too marke vppon this streyne, is too imbace our selues in
such wyze, as wee myght haue no desyre too part halues with God, too
saye that he dooth but helpe vs, and that there is some portion of his
grace and holy spirit in our owne freewill: but too yeeld him purely
and simply the whole prayse of our saluation.
               Furthermore, let it also make vs too despyze the world, that wee
may content our selues with the hope of the euerlasting lyfe which is
purchased for vs by our Lord Iesus Christ. For wee knowe that although
men bee generally subiect too many afflictions, and that this
lyfe of ours bee notwithout cause termed a vale of wretchednesse: yit
god exercizeth his owne childrē with greater abundāce of aduersities,
than he dooth the other sorte: for they also haue neede too bee alwayes
put in mind to renounce the world. If wee should liue heere to much at
our 
                     •
                  ase and pleasure, what woold become of vs, seeing wee misse not
too fall a sleepe heere, notwithstanding that God doo pricke vs and
quicken vs vp so many wayes, to passe hence in poste without 
                     •
                  esting
heere bylowe? yee see then in fewe woordes, howe God will exercyze
vs many wayes after he hath called vs too the fayth of the Gospell,
for else wee would bee weery of seruing him, and it would seeme too vs
that his loue were but a very slender thing, if wee should not learne to
giue ouer all other things as little or nothing woorth, and too imbrace
Iesus Christ. Therefore let vs learne that S. Paules intent heere,
is too drawe vs in such wyse vntoo God, as nothing may let vs too
walke in our calling: and that if wee haue not all thinges to our lyking
in this world, wee may lerne too esteeme the inestimable benyfites of
our God better than wee haue doone, that wee may say with Dauid
(as he speaketh in his sixtenth Psalme) I haue myne heritage, which
suffizeth me: seeing that God hath giuen himself too mee, I haue so excellent
a portion,Psal. 16. 
                        •
                     . 5. that I passe not for going through all the afflictions
of the world, Pouertie, sickenesse, reproche, feare, & threatinings, all



these thinges shalbee sweete too mee, so I possesse my God, and he
make mee to feele that he hath chozen mee, and reserued mee too himselfe,
and is mynded too haue mee partaker of all his goodes. Thus
you see in effect, that by this text wee may bee hartened and strengthened
vntoo pacience, too beare myldly all the afflictions and aduersities
of the worlde, and not too bee greeued or out of conceyt: and that although
God make vs now and then too drinke of a bitter cup, and giue
vs cause too sigh and lament, yit wee must not fall too repyning and
grudging, but assure our selues that God hath giuen vs a good comfort,
in that he hath called vs too bee parttakers of his kingdome, and
so vttered his power already in vs, as wee ought as it were too aduaunce
our selues aboue all earthly thinges, and too looke downe at
them as at our feete.
               And for as much as wee doo not yit perceyue such fulnesse of Gods
grace, as were to be wished, therfore S. Paule sendeth vs to the person
of our Lord Iesus Christ. And surely if he had not added, that God
hath vttered his power in his only sonne, after such maner as we haue
herd it: what a thing were it? For we myght alledge in way of reply,
howso? where are these riches of God? For we be not only bereft of the
goods of this world, but also we be as a dry & barrein grōud in respect
of the grace of Gods holy spirit. If there bee any portion of it in vs, it
is so smal, as wee ought too bee ashamed of it: and yit for all this, wee
bee moreouer plundged in our infirmities. If yee speake of Gods
power, it ought too get the vpper hand of all sinne in vs. But wee bee
so weake, that wee bee as good as beaten downe. Agein, it were meete
that Gods image should shyne foorth in vs, and wee beare such store of
fylthinesse and such blemishes about vs as is pitie too see. Wee should
bee wholly consecrated too God, but the worlde holdes vs backe, and
wee bee as it were snarled in it. Loe how the faythfull myght bee abasshed
when any talke were ministered concerning Gods grace, if
they stayed there, and were not led foorth too Iesus Christ. Not without
cause therfore doth S. Paule adde here, that God did then vtter the
excellencie of his power, when he rayzed our Lord Iesus Christ from
death. And he speaketh purposely of his resurrection, bycause that in
his death wee see nothing but astonishment. For there appeered nothing
but weaknesse: but by his vanquishing of death he shewed himself
too bee the sonne of God, yea and the Lord of glorie and lyfe, who

                     •
                  ad all power in himself. And that also is the cause why S. Paule



sayth, that God did set him at his ryght hand. For it had not bin ynough
for Iesus Christ to haue bin rayzed agein, except he had a continuall
and abyding dominion. Trew it is that euen in his (only) resurrection,
wee haue a record that he is the sonne of God: but yit for all
that, wee must passe one step further, namely that he had not a blast of
power and away, but that by his ryzing agein, he atteined such superioritie,
that all the world is gouerned by him, and he is now set downe
at the right hand of God his father, to maynteyne and preserue his seruantes
that call vppon him, and put them selues intoo his keeping,
and hath sufficient power to ouercome Satan and al the world, and all
our enemyes. Now then wee see S. Paules meaning: that forasmuch
as wee myght bee cast downe, and our fayth at least wyse sore
shaken, if wee should looke no further than too our selues: therefore he
setteth Iesus Christ before vs, as the trew patterne, wherin wee may
see the thing that as yit is vnseene in our selues: that is too wit, Gods
inestimable power which surmounteth the whole world. For first he
is rayzed from death: and secondly he is set at the ryght hand of his
father. Now the speaking of Gods ryght hand is a resemblance taken
of men. It is certeyne that God hath nother ryght hande nor
lefte, for he is infinite, and fylleth both heauen and earth, and agein,
he hath no body, but is a spirituall beyng. Therefore wee must not
imagin any place certeine, when Gods ryght hande is spoken of.
And wehn as it is sayd, that Iesus Christ sitteth there, it is too shewe
that he filleth all the world with his power. Trew it is, that as in respect
of his manhood, he is in heauen: and it is one of the Articles
of our fayth, that he is ascended into heauen. But yit notwithstanding,
although he bee absent from vs in his body: and that there is a great
distaunce betwixt vs: it is no let but that he filleth all things with his
holy spirit, and dwelleth in vs himselfe, and that wee bee nourished
by his owne substaunce,Iohn. 6. f. 55. according to this saying, that his flesh is our
meate, & his blud our drinke. Yee see then how that Gods right hand
is not some certeyn place for Christ to sit in, but the souereinty which
he hath obteyned too gouerne the whole world. And (as I sayd afore)
it is a similitude borowed of men, as when a prince maketh his vicegerent,
he setteth him at his right side, as who should say, Loe here the
second person (of my Realme) whom I will haue men too obey. God
then in the person of our Lord Iesus Christ,Colo
                        ••
                     . 2. b. 
                        •
                     . ment too shewe that he is
our father. Trew it is that the whole fulnesse of the Godhead is in Iesus



Christ. Howbeit forasmuch as wee bee heauie and sothfull, and
vnable too atteyne too the maiestie of God, therefore it is sayde, that
Iesus Christ hath obteyned all souereintie, so as wee bee sure that he
hath vs in his protection, & that being vnder his hand, wee be safe, and
all the diuels of hell (doo what they can) cannot preuayle at al ageinst
vs. For who is it that hath al power? It is euē our head. Although thē
that we which are his members be weak: yit is there strength ynough
in the head, which is the chiefe part of the body. And so ye see for what
cause it is sayd, that Iesus Christ is set at the right hand of God his
father: namely too shewe vs that wee neede not too seeke farre for his
help, seeing he gouerneth all things both aboue and beneath, and wee

                     •
                  ee committed too his charge here. He sayeth that God hath vttered
his high and infinite power in vs. Howebeeit forasmuch as that suffizeth
not, by reason of the infirmities which wee feele, & for that there
is so much amisse in vs still, and wee bee not yit come too the full measure,
no nor too the hundreth part of it: therefore too the intent we may
bee the better assured of all the things that wee want, wee must consider
them in Iesus Christ: Are wee then subiect yit still vntoo death?
Behold Iesus Christ is receyued vp intoo euerlasting life: for the very
cause why he became a mortall man as wee bee, was that the life
which he hath, might belong vnto vs. Doth sinne dwell still in vs? Behold,
Iesus Christ hath no spot nor blemish in him. Are wee weake?
He is the power of God his father, and looke whatsoeuer he receyued
in his manhod, which he tooke of vs, was for our sakes and too our behoofe.
Too bee short, looke whatsoeuer wee want, and whatsoeuer
may comfort or quicken vs, we shall fynd it in our Lord Iesus Christ,
bycause wee should not bee in care and perplexitie, as though we were
excluded from the benefites that S. Paule hath made mention of heretoofore.
Finally wee should neuer haue any settled trust, except wee
knew that the things which are wanting in our selues, are in our head.
For the measure of Gods gracious giftes is very fimall, yea euen in
the perfectest folke, and in such as are forewardest▪ and haue profited
most of all. Sith it is so then, wee should alwayes hang in a mamering
and doubt. But when wee know that all is accomplished in our
Lord Iesus Christ, and that he is as it were the first fruites, and that
wee were sanctifyed in him, and that in his person wee haue receyued
the things aforehand, which shall bee 
                     〈◊〉
                   vs in all plentifulnesse
hereafter when he hath taken vs out of this world: there verily lyeth



our certeintie, wheruppon wee ought too rest, that wee bee not shaken
downe with any temptation. Too bee short, wee bee taught by this
text, that although Gods grace bee weake in vs, that is too say, although
he haue put but a small beginning of it in vs, and not so large
an abundance as were requisite or too bee wished for: yit notwithstanding
the same giueth vs a taste and sauer too trust in him. For there
cannot bee so little grace of his holy spirit in vs, but that (as sayeth S.
Paule in the eyght too the Romanes) we know the same is as a gage
or earnest penny aforehand, of the lyfe that he hath promised. Trew it
is that this lump of sinne dwelleth still in vs: but it ought too content
vs that God voutsafeth too bestowe neuer so little of his holy spirite
vppon vs.
               Furthermore, for asmuch as wee can not be sure of all these things,
consydering the slendernesse that is in our selues, and the infirmities
and wantes which wee haue: therfore wee must lift vp our eyes to Iesus
Christ. Yea, what auaileth it vs, that wee may fynd all perfection
in hym? for wee bee tootoo farre of from hym. Wee bee farre from
hym as in respect of distance of places, & in that respect doth S. Paul
say, that wee bee absent from hym, bicause we walke but by faith, and
not by open eye syght and beholding. But yit for al that, wee he members
of his body. Then seeing it is so: like as a roote cannot bee separated
from the tree, but sendeth foorth his sap intoo all the boughes
and braunches of it: Euen so let vs vnderstand, that the end wherunto
our Lord Iesus Christ hath in such fulnesse receiued the spiritual gifts
that belong too the heauenly life, is too communicate them too vs so
farre foorth as needeth, euen from degree too degree, according as w
                     •
                  
shall haue profited in the faith. And heerewithall let vs continually
beare in mynd, that wee must stoope and humble our selues, and (bee
contented too) bee still farre of from the perfection whereuntoo it becommeth
vs too aspyre, and too bee as hungrie folkes, so as wee feeling
our owne necessitie and lacke, must runne too our God too beg at
his hand, knowing that he is able too increace it from day too day, and
that if it were not so, wee should bee vndoone out of hand, and al should
go too wrecke and vanishe away, but that he continueth the thing that
he hath begunne. Yee see then how it standeth vs on hand too bee ioyned
too our Lord Iesus Christ, and too knowe that there is an inseparable
bond betweene him and vs. And inasmuch as he once became
poore too make vs ryche, as it is sayde in another place: that is the



very meane wherby all the riches that are in him, are at this day communicated
vntoo vs. Not that wee haue the full fruition of them, as
I sayd afore: but bycause it is ynough for vs that wee haue some small
portion of them, too make vs taste the loue of God, and too knowe that
he will not fayle vs in any thing, but that sith he hath giuen vs a warrant
that he is come neere vntoo vs, and dwelleth in vs by his holy spirit,
as wee haue seene in the second too the Corinthians: he will also

                     •
                  ll vs euen vntoo the end. His vsing of the woord Inriche, is too shew
that there shall alwayes be want & needinesse in vs.Phil. 1. a. 6. Neuerthelesse let
vs trust boldly to this promis, that he which hath begun the good work
in vs, will go through with the same, yea euen vntoo the day of our
Lord Iesus Christ. And that is sayd too giue vs some refreshing when
our lyfe is (too our seeming) ouerlong, and wee would fayne that the
sayde perfection were alreadie shewed openly in vs, and that Iesus
Christ were come agein. But it is sayd that vntoo that day wee must
alwayes bee iourneying, and go on still foreward further and further,
and beseeche God that he suffer vs not too quayle. Sure wee bee that
wee shall neuer fayle too susteyne want and necessitie: but yit will he
succour vs in such wise, as wee shall perceyue that if he haue once voutsafed
too behold vs with the eye of his mercie, it is too accomplish the

                     •
                  oorke of our saluation throughout, and (too doo vs too wit,) that he
hath not knit vs too our Lord Iesus Christ for nought, but that his so
dooyng hath bin, too the ende that euery of vs myght euen now, according
too the measure of his fayth, possesse the goods that are peculiar
too him, till he haue fylled vs too the full: which shall bee when he hath
knit vs fully too him.
               But now let vs cast our selues downe before the maiestie of our good
God, with acknowledgment of our sinnes, praying him too make vs
so too feele them, as it may drawe vs from them, and cause vs to direct
our lyfe obediently according too his commaundements, so as we may
shewe by our deedes, that he hath not bought vs so deerely in vayne,
but that wee giue ouer all our owne fleshly lustes, and yeeld our selues
wholly too the seruice of him that hath once adopted vs for his heritage.
And therefore let vs all say, Almyghtie God our heauenly father.
&c.
            
            
               
               The eight Sermon vpon the first
Chapter.
               
                  
                     19. And that you may knovv vvhat the excellent greatnesse of
his povver is tovvardes vs beleeuers, according too the vvorking
of the myghtinesse of his strength,
                     20. VVhich he vttered in Iesus Christ vvhen he raised him from
the dead, and made him too sit at his ryght hand in the heauenly
places.
                     21. Aboue all principalitie, and myghtinesse, and povver, and
Lordship, and aboue all names that are named, not onely in
this vvorld, but also in that vvhich is too come.
                     22. And hath put all things vnder the feete of him, and set him
ouer all things, too bee the head of the Church,
                     23. VVhich is the body of him vvhich filleth all in all.
                  
               
               
                  I Began too tell you this morning, howe
God hath sufficiently declared vntoo vs,
that if we haue and possesse his only sonne
Iesus Christ, wee haue the full perfection
of all good things, so as if wee cast our eye
vppon him, wee may see all that is too bee
wished. And therefore that although there
bee many thinges blame woorthy in vs,
yea and that we fynd nothing but frayltie
in our selues: yit wee shall haue a sure and substantiall stud too leane
vntoo, in that our Lord Iesus Christ calleth vs too him, and telleth vs
that the things which he hath receyued of God his father, are common
too vs, and that although wee inioy them not as yit too the full, yit wee
cannot bee disappoynted of them. Too bee short, I told you also that
our Lord Iesus Christ is set at the ryght hand of God his father, too
the ende that wee myght bee sure that all things are vnder his hand, &
that he rules the whole world, and that all good things are of him, and
he is able too disappoynt all anoyances, insomuch that if we be vnder
his protection, wee may defye the diuell and all our enemyes.
               And now too the intent wee should lerne too content our selues the
better with Iesus Christ alone, and not wander heere and there as we



be woont too doo: S. Paule addeth expresly, that he vvas set aboue all
myghtinesse, souereintie, principalitie, and povver. No dout but
that he meaneth the Angells: howbeit he hath vsed this maner of
speeche, to hold vs the better too our Lord Iesus Christ, that no fancy
myght turne vs from him: as if he should say, although God haue imparted
some portion of his glorie, dignitie, and power among the Angells:
yit dooth it no whit diminish, that which he hath giuen too Iesus
Christ: and therefore, wee shall fynd in him all things that are
needfull, so as wee neede not too gad heere and there for them, nother
is it lawfull too ioyne any companion with him, bycause all preeminence,
and whatsoeuer else may bee thought or deuyzed too bee moste
noble and excellent, is there, that is too say, in our Lord Iesus Christ,
and he (only) is too bee sought vntoo, as Paule himselfe sayeth also
in the first too the Colossians. For it is not now alate that the world
hath sought occasion too turne away from our Lord Iesus Christ, vnder
colour of seeking too the Angells of heauen. Wee see how Gods
creatures are alwayes drawen too some superstition, and men make
Idolls of them, bycause God executeth his souereintie by the Angells,Psal. 1
                        •
                     4. a. 4. &c.
and they be as it were his handes, his officers, and his instrumentes.
That is the cause why men think them selues too haue doone much in
betaking themselues too S. Michaell,Heb. 11. b. 7. or too S. Gabriell, or too I
wote not whom else. For (as I sayd) it is not a vyce newly deuyzed:
the diuell who is the father and author of lying, hath intangled men
at all tymes with such fancies, yea and euen the Christians haue folowed
the example of the heathen mens doings in that behalfe. For
the heathen men haue alwayes surmized the Angells too bee as halfe
goddes, and thought too haue them as their mediators, wherby too
come vntoo God, bycause they were not woorthie of themselues. And
euen after the same maner, talk the Papistes at this day. Now, the
selfsame abhominations began too be buylded vppon the earth euen in
S. Paules tyme. And for that cause he sheweth that it is not lawfull
too match any thing with Iesus Christ, but that although the Angells

                     •
                  ee magnifyed, and bee called vertewes, powers, Lordshippes, and
dominations, and men giue them what other tytles they li
                     •
                  t: yit must
they stoope and bee inferiour too the head, and the cheefe dignitie must
bee reserued too Gods sonne,Esai. 45. d. 23. bycause that all knees must bow before
him,Rom. 14. b. 11. not only of worldly creatures, but also of heauenly. Wee see then
that the cause of S.Phil. 2. b. 10. Paules packing toogither of so manie woordes in



this place too expresse the Angells withall, is that wee should the better
bee hilde too our Lord Iesus Christ, and rest wholly vppon him,
without wandering one way or other, vnder pretence that the Angells
haue excellent and noble giftes. And so wee see and may gather vpon
this streyne, that all the dotage of the popedomme in imagining of
Patrons, Aduocates, and mediators vntoo God, sprang vp euery whit
of it of none other cause, than for want of knowing of our Lord Iesus
Christ, and of the things giuen vntoo him by God his father: For wee
haue no mynd too repoze our selues vppon him, except wee know too
what ende he is come. But the Papistes haue on the one syde imagined
themselues too bee separated from our Lord Iesus Christ, not
knowing that he is become our brother, too the end wee should repayre
familiarly vntoo him: and on the other syde they haue robbed him of
his office which is allotted him in the holy scripture, and made but a
dead thing of it. So much the more therefore behoueth it vs too marke
wel these sayings, that we be made al one, & gathered togither into one
body with the Angells of heauen, and with the holy fathers that lyued
vnder the Lawe, and that wee and all the Prophetes, Apostles, and
Martirs, must with one common accord glorify our commō head Iesus
Christ, and resort vntoo him, and that he must bee set vp on hye for
euery man too looke at, and that wee must not wilfully put blyndfoldings
before our eyes, but take away all impediment, that his glorye
be not in any wyse dimmed. The very meane then to ouercome all lets
that Satan shall cast in our way too stop vs from comming too Iesus
Christ, is too consider that there is no dignitie or worthinesse in the
whole world, neyther aboue nor beneath, which is not made too stope,
too the end wee should all of vs bee ioyned vntoo him, with one accord.
Thus you see in effect what wee haue too gather vpon this text.
               Trew it is that by those wordes, wee be doone too vndestrand also,
that God distributeth offices among his Angels as pleaseth him, so
as one hath a greater charge than another. Yit notwithstanding it is
not in our power too knowe how the case standeth with them. Let vs
bee contented too knowe it according too the measure of our fayth,
and onely giue eare too Gods woord, and in all sobernesse learne of
him, without giuing brydle too our owne fond curiositie, as a number
doo, whom wee see disputing finely of the Angels, as though euery of
them would bee marshal of Gods house, too place euery of the Angels
according too his degree. For there is not a more diuilish malapertnesse,



than too babble in that sort of Gods secrets, further than God
hath made vs priuie too them by his woord. Therefore let vs hold our
selues contented, that the Angels (how noble so euer they bee) are ordeyned
too be the ministers of our welfare, by meanes of Iesus Christ.
And whensoeuer wee intend too haue the familiaritie (or acquintance
and helpe) of them: Let vs not doo as the Papists doo, which haue
their peculiar prayers too make vnto them: but let vs repayre too Iesus
Christ: for by that meanes shal all things become common betweene
them and vs. When hauing spoken of the Churche, wee say,
I beleeue the communion of Saincts: it is certeyne that the Angels
are comprehended therin, seeing that God imployeth them too doo vs
seruice. And why doth he so? It is not for that wee bee worthye of it:
but bycause he hath gathered vs all toogither vnder Iesus Christ.
That therefore is the verye bond of concorde and brotherhood betweene
vs and the Angels.
               Now hereupon S. Paule addeth, that Iesus Christ hath obteyned
a name, (that is too say, a maiestie) which is aboue al names, as vvell
in heauen as in earth. Here S. Paule sheweth vs briefly, that all our
wisdome is to know the benefits that are brought vnto vs by the sonne
of God, and which wee possesse in him alone, so our fayth bee settled
wholy vppon him, according as it is sayd in the Acts of the Apostles,Act. 4. b. 12.
that there is none other name giuen vnder heauen, whereby wee must
bee saued. For (as I told you this morning) inasmuch as God is
incomprehensible, and dwelleth in light which wee cannot approche
vntoo,1. Tim. 6. c. 16. (as S. Paule termeth it:) Iesus Christ must as it were step
in betwixte him and vs, too the end wee may preace boldly vntoo him,
and know that he is not far distant, nor farre separated from vs, wherfore
let vs marke that whereas here is mention made of Name: it is
bycause God wilbee knowen in the person of his onely sonne.Deut. 4. f. 35. 39. It is
sayd herewithall,1. Cor. 8. b. 4. 6. that there are not manie Godheads. As touching
the essence or being, wee haue but onely one God: and yit in Iesus
Christ wee haue the liuely and expresse image of the father,Coloss. 1. b. 15. &c. so as ther
wee finde whatsoeuer is expedient and requisite for our saluation.Ie
                        •
                     e. 9. g. 24. It is
said that wee ought too glorye in our knowing of the onely one God:
but yit that is accomplished in the person of our Lord Iesus Christ,
bycause that when men go about too seeke God, they enter intoo a
terrible maze, vnlesse Iesus Christ bee their way and leader. Thus
wee see now whereat S. Paule amed.
               
                  And it is added also, that the same is not onely for this worlde,
but also for the other: wherby is ment, that the knoweledge which
wee haue of Iesus Christ, will suffize vs for the heauenly lyfe. Nowe
it should seeme at the first blush, that there is some contrarietie beetweene
this Text, and that which is sayd in the fifteenth Chapter of
the first Epistle too the Corinthians. For there he sayeth, that at the
latter day when the worlde shalbee iudged, our Lord Iesus Christ
shall yeeld vp the kingdome too God his father, of whom he holdeth
it: and here he sayeth, that Christ is stab
                     •
                  ished in all aucthoritie, yea euen
for the worlde too come. But these twoo agree very well. For
wheras he sayeth, that Iesus Christ hath a name aboue al names, and
that he is the image of God his father: that is bycause of our rudenesse
and infirmitie, according also as when he is called Gods liuetenant,
that is, bycause we could not bee in rest, except wee knewe that
God hath his hand stretched out too succour vs at our neede: and wee
perceiue that the better in Iesus Christ, inasmuch as he is come neere
vntoo vs, and is become our brother. God than dooth not so reigne by
the meane of Iesus Christ, that he shoulde giue ouer his owne offyce,
and sit ydle in heauen himselfe: it were a leawd dotage too thinke so.
And truly wee see how our Lord Iesus Christ speaketh therof in the
fifteenth of S. Iohn: my father and I (sayeth he) haue alwayes our
hand at woorke. There he sheweth that the ordeyning of him too bee
ruler of the worlde, was not too the ende that the father should in the
meane whyle sit vnoccupied in heauen: but it is saide so in respecte of
vs, too the intent that we should not doubt but that God is continually
neare at hand too vs, when wee seeke hym in faith. At the latter day,
and after the iudgement, wee shall haue new eyes, as saith S. Iohn.
And for as much as wee shall bee like vntoo God,
                     
                        •
                     . Iohn. 3. 
                        •
                     . 2. and be transfigured
intoo his glory, wee shall see hym as he is: whiche thing wee can not
doo now, bicause wee haue too dull wits. Wherefore it is ynough for
vs nowe,1. Cor. 13. 
                        •
                     . 12. that wee behold hym as in a glasse, and darkely (as saith S.
Paule) and that wee knowe hym in part. You see then, that the yeelding
vp of the kingdome by our Lord Iesus Christ vntoo God his father,
is that wee shal behold Gods maiestie and substance which is incomprehensible
too vs as nowe. For wee shal haue our nature changed,
and wee shalbe newe fashioned in the heauenly glory, and we shal
be quite and cleane rid of al the corruption wherewith wee be compassed
about as now. And yit for al this, it is not ment that Iesus Christ



shalbe abaced: for hee shalbe then muche better in his perfection, according
as it is said in the third too the Colossians, that our life is hyd
in God with Iesus Christ, and that when Iesus Christ appeareth, thē
shal our life bee discouered likewise. Too be short, when wee be come
too the souerein blisse, that is purchaced for vs, then shal wee haue the
thing that lieth as yit but in hope, & Iesus Christ shal gather al things
too hym selfe, so as wee shal be then partakers of his glory, euery man
according too his owne degree and measure. Thus yee see how these
two Textes agree very wel: namely (that God hath giuen Christe a
name aboue all names, and also) that he shal yeeld vp the kingdome to
God the Father. And why? for wee shal then see his heauenly maiestie,
which we bee not able too conceiue as now, bicause wee be fleshly.
Also wee shal perceiue, that wheras Iesus Christ is appeared vntoo
vs a mortal man, he hath bin so glorifyed in his humane nature,
that in very deede he is God, of one selfe same substance with his father.
This (say I) shalbe fully knowen then, wheras nowe wee haue
but a litle shadow of it. Furthermore, let vs learne, that when Iesus
Christ was exalted by God his father, it was too the ende that his aduancement
should serue too our euerlasting saluation. And therefore
in the .ix. of Esay he is called the father of the worlde too come, too the
end wee might knowe, not only that he is giuen vntoo vs for this transitory
life, but also that the substance of the faith which is grounded in
hym, is in heauen, and that there wee shall feele the fruite of the thing
that is now hidden, and which wee taste as yit but in part, and that wee
shal enter intoo full possession of all the goodes that are giuen too hym
already. Thus yee see why S. Paule hath purposely made expresse
mention of the world too come.
               He addeth immediately, that God hath put all thinges vnder his
feete, and made hym head of the Church aboue all thinges. His
speaking here of the subiection of the whole worlde, is too shewe, that
what soeuer thing wee haue neede of, if wee can resort too our Lorde
Iesus Christ, he is able too succour vs, for he hath wherewith too doo
it. Yea and wee must marke well how it is sayd in the eyght Psalme,
that God hath care of all thinges, yea euen vntoo the sheepe, too the
byrdes of the ayre, and too the fishes of the sea. Too bee short, al creatures
are put vnder his feete. And too what end? For the holy Ghost
ment too drawe vs therby, as litle babes, and to shew that the spiritual
benefites (which wee ought too haue in greatest estimation) are communicated



too vs by our Lord Iesus Christ. His saying then is, that
wee might not eate one byt of bread, saue in respect that wee bee members
of Iesus Christ. For it is all one as if he intended too traine vs
vp higher by an Apcie, in as much as all thinges are giuen too our
Lord Iesus Christ, with condition, that if wee bee members of his body
in deede, al things that he hath, doo belong vntoo vs, and that if wee
separate not our selues from him, he wyl hereafter make vs partakers
of farre higher and excellenter goodes: that is too wit, that we shalbe
named Gods chyldren, and bee taken so too bee, and become the temples
of his holy Ghost. And what a thing is that? What a thing is
it, that wee may come freely vntoo hym, and cal vppon hym boldly, as
our father? What a thing is it too bee inriched ageine with the giftes
that wee were bereft of by the sinne of Adam? What a thing is it too
bee matched in felowship with the Angels, in stead of being vnder the
tyrannie of Satan, and vnder the thraldome of sinne? Howe can wee
haue these so high and noble thinges, sith wee can not clayme so much
as a morsel of bread as our owne, without theft, sauyng in that wee be
members of our Lord Iesus Christ. Now then wee see whereat S.
Paule amed, in saying that all things are made subiect too our Lorde
Iesus Christ. So then let vs learne now too giue God thankes in the
name of his onely sonne our lord Iesus Christ, whom he hath sent, not
onely too feede and nourishe our bodyes, but also too bee foode too our
soules, that they may lyue euerlastingly. And by that meane let vs
learne too inure our selues, to acknowledge that our Lorde Iesus
Christ hath wherwith too succour al our necessities. Then if the diuell
make so violent assault vpon vs, as we may be afrayde of vtter quayling:
let vs vnderstand that our lord Iesus Christ hath an inuincible
fortresse wherwith too defend vs ageinst hym, and armyes wherewith
too make vs inuincible in al battels. Therfore when wee bee weake,
let vs resort too his strength: when wee want any grace, let vs desyre
him too giue vs what he thinketh necessary: when our enemyes play
the mad beastes, and it seemeth that wee shoulde be quite and cleane
swallowed vp as it were in gulfes, let vs beseech our lord Iesus Christ
too hold vs vnder his protection, and too hold Satan as it were chayned
with al his vpholders, so as he suffer vs not too be ouercomme of
of them. Yee see then how all thinges were made subiect to our lord
Iesus Christ, not for his owne vse: (for what neede had he of them?)
but for our sakes, too the end he should giue vs what soeuer he knoweth



too bee for our behoofe, and that wee also shoulde learne too seeke all
thinges at his hand, and that when he seeth our enemyes haue the aduantage
of vs, he should represse them, as he wel can.
               Furthermore, wheras S. Paule sayeth heere, that he was ordeyned
head in the Church (or ouer the Church) in all thinges: it is a
continuing in his matter, too bring vs wholly too Iesus Christ. As
if he should say, It is trew that Gods gracious giftes are delt abrode,
yea and that the Angelles and mortall men also may bee ministers of
them vntoo vs: but yit howsoeuer the cace stand, we must alwayes resort
too the welhead. The veynes that are dispersed throughout the
whole bodie, may well giue strength too euery part, for they bee as it
were the Cunditpypes of the blud: but yit howsoeuer the world go, the
brayne must alwayes be the welspring of lyfe. It is wel to be seen, that
in a tree the sap is spred throughout: and yit notwithstading albeeit
that the roote ascende not vp too giue nurrishment too euery braunche
and leafe: all the nurrishment commeth of the roote. And if any man
woold say, that the whole tree is maynteyned alyue by any one braūch:
the cleane contrary is seene. It is trew that a great bough may well
giue nurrishment to the braunches and twigges that are about it: but
is it meete that that should preiudice the roote therfore? (No surely:)
no more than the members of a mans body ought too preiudice the
heade▪ though euery member doo his dewty. Here S. Paule sayeth
that our Lord Iesus Christ was giuen to the Churche to be hir heade
aboue all thinges, as if he should say, it behoueth vs all too resort vntoo
him. In this cace ther is nother S. Paule, nor S. Peter, nor the virgin
Mary, nor S. Michaell that haue ought of their owne. For they are
all needie & hungery, sauing so farforth as Iesus Christ filleth them: &
therfore al of thē, as well che great as the small, must be fayne to draw
out of his plentie. And that is the cause why that in the selfsame text
which I alledged out of the first to the Colossians,Colos. 1. c. 19. S. Paule sayeth, it
pleased God the father that all plentie or fulnesse should dwell in him.
For the tytle of Head is not alonely a style of fleeting honour: but it
serueth too expresse the power of our Lord Iesus Christ so much the
better. Therefore lyke as a (naturall) head not onely hath superioritie
and preeminence aboue the whole body, but also yeeldeth nurrishment
too the whole, and keepeth the man alyue: euen so is it betweene
our Lord Iesus Christ and vs, in so much that all should go to wrecke,
if wee depended not vppon him. Although (say I) it seeme that wee



haue receiued ryght excellent giftes at Gods hande already: yit notwithstanding
all is but wynde and smoke, vnlesse wee holde out in the
vnion of our Lord Iesus Christ. Herewithall it behoueth vs too note
also, that inasmuch as Christ is called a heade, it is meete that all others
should obey him, and that wee should yeelde vntoo his doctrine,
that he may rule all things as the head ruleth all the rest of a mannes
body. For the feete go, and the handes stirre, and too bee short, there is
no part which is not willing and forewarde too doo whatsoeuer the
head shall appoynt it. The lyke must bee doone in the Church: Iesus
Christ must rule, and all men must quietly obey him. And so we haue
too marke in this text, first that our saluation dooth so depend vppon
Iesus Christ, that there are nother Angells nor men, how holy soeuer
they bee, which haue not neede too receyue at his hand, the thinges
that they want in themselues. And therefore when wee stand in neede
of any thing that is requisite, eyther for the present lyfe, or for the heauenly
lyfe, eyther for our bodyes, or for our soules: there is no running
too S. Peter, nor too S. Paule, but wee must go streyght to our Lord
Iesus Christ. Marke that for one poynt.
               Secondly also let vs lerne too suffer our selues too bee ruled, and
too bee hild in awe by the hand of our Lord Iesus Christ, that therby
wee may shewe our selues too bee trew members of his bodie. And
he cannot bee our head, but he must needes therwithall bee our Shepherd
too, and haue all authoritie ouer vs. But lyke as I told you that
the diuell hath labored too deface the glorie of Gods only sonne, vnder
the pretence of Angells: so on the othersyde, he hath sent vs an ydole
intoo the world, too bee a barre in our way, that Iesus Christ myght
bee as it were separated from vs. For the Pope is not ashamed too
spew out this blasphemie, that the Chruch should bee but a headlesse
bodie, if he himselfe reygned not ouer it, ne had the vniuersall dominion
of it, so as euery man looked at him, and his seate were aboue the
whole world. And that is as much as if he should say, that Iesus
Christ hath no more too doo here, but ought too hold him contented
with heauen, and let his successor alone too rule in his stead. But herein
wee see how he 
                     •
                  uershoots himselfe, to abolishe the whole souereintie
of the sonne of God. So much the more therefore doth it stand vs
on hand too beare well this Text in mynd, wherein S. Paule sayeth,
that Iesus Christ is appoynted too bee head of the Churche aboue all
things. It is trew that the Pope will affirme himselfe too bee but as



an vnderhead, and therefore that Iesus Christ is not thrust out of his
place. But let vs looke backe too that which I haue touched alreadie:
which is, that Iesus Christ will haue no imaginatiue title, but
will haue his power reserued vntoo him, which belongeth vntoo him.
For a head requireth not onely too bee set hyghest: but also too haue
all men too receyue all things from him: and it behoueth vs all too
vnderstand, and that he is the very roote of our life, and the fountayne
from whence it behoueth vs too draw, notwithstanding that he send
foorth his spirituall benefits and goods among vs, by such chanels or

                     •
                  undits, as he thinks good. Thus yee see what wee haue yit further
briefly too beare in mynd.
               This matter is layd foorth more at large in the first Chapter too
the Colossians. For S. Paule sheweth there, that our Lord Iesus
Christ,Coloss. 1. b. 16. 17. 18. was appoynted too bee the head euen from the beginning of
the world, forsomuchas all things were created in him, and not alonly
forsomuchas he is our redeemer at this day. For put the cace that Adam
had not falne intoo the ruine wherintoo he hath drawen vs with
him: yit had Gods sonne bin alwayes still as the first borne of al creatures.
Not that he himselfe is a creature, but bycause he is the foundation,
according also as S. Paule addeth the reason thereof, which is,
that in him the Angels were created, and in him they haue their being
or abiding. Yee see then that the sonne of God should not haue
ceassed to haue had all preheminence both aboue and beneath, though
wee had not falne with our father Adam intoo such confuzion as wee
bee in. But now our Lord Iesus Christ must bee our head after another
manner: that is too wit, too make vs at one agein with God his
father, aud too gather vs toogither agein vntoo him, from whom wee
were estraunged by sinne, so as he was our deadly enemie, til we were
brought in fauour agein by meanes of Iesus Christ, by forgiuing vs
our sinnes. And besides this, S. Paule declareth in the same Text,
that Iesus Christ was ordeyned head of the Churche, too the end that
all fulnesse should bee in him. Thus wee see how wee ought too be
knit with the Angels, with the auncient fathers, and with the Prophets,
with condition that our Lord Iesus Christ must neuerthelesse
not onely continew the first and chiefe, but also haue all things referred
vntoo him, and wee communicate in such wise toogither, that euery
of vs keepe his place, and bee all members of one body, and that there
bee no mo heads thereof but onely one. For if we adde any fellowe



to Iesus Christ, it is a bereeuing him of the thing that God his father
hath giuen too him alone. Let vs bee contented that he maketh vs
partakers of all his benefits, vppon condicion that wee acknowledge
all things too come from him, and seeke all things in him. For in the
fiue and fortith Psalme it is well shewed,Psal. 45. b. 8. that we are al of vs fellowes
with Iesus Christ, and that we receyue some portion of all the good
things that were giuen vntoo him. But yit for all that, it is not too
bee sayd that he is fellowe and fellowelyke with vs, and that he cannot
bee discerned from his Apostles as the papists prate in their (peuish)
prouerbe, but it is too the end that wee should knowe, that none
of all the good thinges which wee can wishe, are farre from vs, but
that they bee offered vs by him, and that he is so liberall, that he desyreth
nothing else at our hands, but that we should receyue the things
that are for our owne welfare, according as he himselfe sayeth, Come
vntoo mee all yee that are a thirst,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 55. 1. come drinke water, yea euen without
money or moneyes woorth, drinke your fyll of water, wyne, and
mylke. There our Lord sheweth howe it is he that wee must resort
vntoo, and that if wee looke vppon him, his maiestie is too hygh and
too farre of from vs. Iesus Christ therefore must bee as our meane,
and forasmuch as he is come downe too vs: let vs also repayre vntoo
him,Iohn. 7. f. 38. according as is sayd in the seuenth of S. Iohn, come vntoo mee
all yee that are a thirst:Iohn. 4. b. 14. and whosoeuer drinketh of the water that I
wyll giue him, he shall haue his belly so full, that fountaines of water
shall flowe out of him. Condicionally that men seeke faythfully in
Iesus Christ for the things they haue neede of, he will giue vs not only
so much as shall serue the turne of euery one of vs for himselfe: but
also so much as wee shall bee able too bestowe vppon our neyghbours
too, and too succour their want.
               Now for a conclusion S. Paule addeth, that the Church is the bodie,
and accomplishment of him that accomplisheth (or performeth)
all things in all men. In terming the Church the body of Iesus
Christ, he sheweth the thing that I haue touched already: that is
too wit, that wee neede not too make long windlasses or harde iourneyes
too get the things that wee haue neede of. For sith wee bee vnited
and ioyned too the sonne of God: what require wee more? Wee
must needes graunt this principle, that we haue nother lyfe, nor gladnesse,
nor any good thing, but onely in God alone. That beeing confessed,
let vs see by what meane wee may atteyne too him: and that is



by the meanes of our Lord Iesus Christ. And so yee see the cause why
it is sayd heere, that all fulnesse dwelleth in him, & that it is his charge
too vnite vs vntoo God, and too drawe vs backe from the scattering,
wherein wee bee. Therfore wee cannot swarue aside one way nor other
too conuey any peece of that thing to S. Peter, or too S. Powle,
which is reserued too Iesus Christ alone, but that wee must rob God
of his dew. Trew it is, that wee will not bee acknowen of it: but yit
shall not our Hipocrisie serue too acquit vs before God. Wee may
well pretend many starting holes, but yit doo wee giue sentence of
condemnation vppon our selues, in confessing that wee ought to seeke
all our welfare at Gods hand. Well then, if wee alledge that wee be
not woorthye too preace intoo Gods presence: it is trew, and if wee
aske how wee may bee able too fly without winges: that is trew too.
And if wee say, then must wee repayre too S. Peter or too S. Paule,
that wee speake of our owne head. For God sayeth the cleane contrarie.
I send you too myne onely sonne (sayth he:) for in him shall
you fynde all that you want: and feare not that yee shall haue any
scarcitie, if yee bee once fylled with the grace that I haue put in him,
and which abydeth in him. And that is the cause why the Prophet
EsayEsay. 55. a. 1. speaketh purposely of Wyne, Water, & Milke: as if he should
say, wee haue all fulnesse of lyfe in Iesus Christ. As for those then
which gad too S. Peter and too S. Paule, and will needes haue Patrons
and Mediators: they not onely doo wrong too Iesus Christ, in
cantling out the thing by peeces and gobbets which is giuen wholly
vntoo him: but also rob God of his honour. For sith it is his will, that
all fulnesse should dwell in Iesus Christ, accordyng as I haue alledged
afore: it is certeine that wee go about to defye him openly, when
wee abyde not within the boundes which he hath set vs, in putting vs
in subiection too that person which he hath giuen vntoo vs, too the end
that he should giue vs all that wee haue neede of.
               But yit the thing which he addeth ought too be a greater and larger
comfort to vs, when he saith, that the Chruch is the accomplishment
of him that accomplisheth all. Now, by this woord Accomplishment,
he meeneth that our Lord Iesus Christ, yea and also God
his father account them selues as vnperfect, except wee bee ioyned vntoo
him. And that (as I sayd) is a record of Gods infinit goodnesse,
wherat a man can neuer maruell ynough. First and formost, God
needeth not too borrow at other mens handes: for he is perfect of himself:



nother wanted he aught euen before he made the worlde. And
when he made it, did he it for his owne profit, or too his owne aduauntage?
No: it was alonely too the intent that wee should knowe his
goodnesse, power, wisdome, and ryghtuousnesse, and bee witnesses of
it. For he hath set vs heere as on a stage, too the end wee should see
his glorie in all his creatures: and yit notwithstanding he could verye
well forbeare vs. But put the cace that God should borrowe of others
too perfect himself withall, and that he were lyke too mortall men, of
whō none is able to forbeare companie: put the cace that God were
such a one: What are wee? What can he fare the better by being ioyned
vntoo vs? It is all one as if the sonne were matched with a quamyre.
For what haue wee but infection and filthinesse? what are we
else than things so corrupted by Adams sin, as it is horrible too think?
How then can wee bring any such perfection vntoo God? Although
there bee nothing but frayltie in vs: although wee bee froward and
leawd: although there bee nothing in vs but all manner of filth: and
too bee shorte, although wee bee lothely in his syght: yit notwithstanding
it is his will to haue vs ioyned to him, yea euen vppon condition
that he should bee perfected in vs by his and our ioyning after that
sort toogither. As if a father should say, mee thinkes my house is emptie,
when I see not my child in it. A husband man will say, mee thinkes
I am but half an man, when my wyfe is not with mee.
               After the same manner speaketh God, that he thinkes not himselfe
full and perfect, but by gathering of vs too him, and by making vs all
one with himselfe. He taketh his whole pleasure in vs, and will
haue his glory too shine foorth in vs, so as his beames may sheade
out on all sides. And although the whole glory bee in himselfe: Yit
will he haue it seene, how it is his will that wee should haue our part
and portion of it. Thus you see in effect what S. Paule ment by calling
the Churche, the accomplishment of God and of Iesus Christ.
Now then, can wee bee excuzed before God, when wee say that wee
cannot come at him, seing wee bee his bodie in the person of our
Lord Iesus Christ? If one of our feete being diseased, would runne I
wote not whither, and raunge vp and downe, saying, I go too seeke remedie
so
                     ••
                  e where else: and for performance thereof, would bee cut
of from the bodie: if (say I) that the members of a bodie had any vnderstanding
and discretion, and could speake after that maner: were it
not a madnesse that the foote should say, he would bee rent from the bodie,



too seeke else where the thing that it wanteth? Euen so when the
Papistes and other Idolaters alledge that they must bee fayne too
serue their turne by the Saynctes, and too haue diuers mediators and
meanes too bring them too God: it is all one as if they should say, Iesus
Christ is nobodie, nother haue wee any successe or enterance vntoo
him. Yea, are the membes separated from the head? Of a truthe,
S. Paule hath heere accused and condemned all those of vnthankefulnesse
and vnkyndnesse, which vnder colour of vnwoorthinesse too come
vntoo God, doo deuyze themselues new meanes, and separate themselues
from Iesus Christ, and diminish his power, and rend it in peeces.
S. Paule condemneth them for that they cannot fynde in theyr
hartes too accept the benefyte and priuiledge that is offered them, in
that our Lord Iesus Christ hath voutsafed too become all one with
them, as with his owne body. Nowe then let vs lerane too haue such
familiaritie with our Lord Iesus Christ, as too resort vntoo him at all
times whensoeuer wee bee warned of our defaults and wantes.
               Furthermore too the intent his maiestie shoulde not bee defaced
thereby: S. Paule addeth, that he ceasseth not too accomplishe all
things in all men. For wee see on the one side, that when men are
once indewed with Gods giftes, they fall too thrusting of themselues
intoo his place, and would bee esteemed in his stead. After that maner
doo wee deale
                     •
                  , and wee beare our selues in hand that the gyftes
which God hath bestowed vppon vs freely, are as a pray or bootie too
boast of, and too aduaunce our selues more than is lawfull. Agein, on
the other syde, when wee heare Iesus Christ spoken of, how he was abaced
for our sakes, how he went downe intoo the dungeons of death,
how he voutsafed to bee subiect to all reproche: it seemeth too vs that
wee may well despyze him. S. Paule therefore too beate downe all
pryde, and too shew that Iesus Christ was not so abaced, that his glorie
was diminished: sayeth, that yit neuerthelesse hee dooth all in all
things. Wherefore let vs learne too receyue the blissing, grace, and
benefites which are giuen vs by our Lord Iesus Christ. And therewithall
let vs acknowledge, not only that we be made of nothing, and
that our lyfe is but a flyghtfull and vanishing shadowe: but also that
all the vertue and excellencie which wee weene our selues too haue, is
but lyke a greene flower, which withereth out of hand as soone as
God breatheth vppon it. And therefore let vs not imagin our selues
too bee riche, wheras wee bee poore: let vs not vaunt our selues of our



owne free will: let vs not presume vppon our owne desertes, nor vpon
any other of the flimflammes which the diuel hath deuyzed in poperie:
but let vs draw, let vs draw of the foūtaine that cannot be drained dry,
that wee may fynd wherwith too staunche our thirst whensoeuer we be
dry. Finally there are two meanes wherby God doth all in all things.
For like as he himselfe created the worlde: so also must all thinges
bee guided and gouerned by his hand. If it bee demaunded who
causeth the Sunne too ryse and set euery day, who guideth the whole
order of nature, who ordreth the dayes, moonethes and yeares, and
who maketh the intercourse of day and night: It is God, who dooth
all in all things. As much is too bee sayd of all other things which
we perceyue in the vniuersal gouernement of the whole world. Therefore
wee must not imagine that God was a Creator but for a minute
of an houre: but that he dooth also hold on in mainteyning the things
that he created. Howbeeit S. Paule speaketh here of the spirituall
goods which are, as yee would say, the peculiar heritage of Gods
children. God then doth all things in vs: Yea, but not alonly by the
common order of nature: but by inlightening vs with the beleefe of the
Gospel, in that he halloweth vs, and clenzeth vs from the vices and
wicked lusts of our fleshe, in that he draweth vs from the world, and to
bee short, in that he pr
                     •
                  uideth vs all things requisite too our welfare
and saluation. And so yee see how he doeth all in all things. As if S.
Paule had declared in one woord, that the faythfull are not any thing,
ne can doo any thing, ne haue any thing of themselues. Then speaketh
he not here, nother of the sunne, nor of the moone, nor of the trees
in the fieldes, nor of any other frute: nother speaketh he of beasts, no
nor yit of men, as in respect that they be the children of Adam: but of
those whom God hath begotten agein by his holy spirit: so that whatsoeuer
concerneth saluation, or belongeth too the heauenly lyfe, is not
to bee had but onely at his hand which hath all things in himselfe, and
dooth all in all things, as is sayd of him here. And therefore let vs
learne too emptie our selues, and too offer our selues in sacrifize too
God with trew and right humilitie, too yeeld him his deserued praise,
so as none of vs separate our selues from him through our owne vnkindenesse,
but all of vs doo him such honour, as too confesse that wee
hold all of him, and that wee bee ioyned too him by our Lord Iesus
Christ, who is our euerlasting God, acknowledging that it is he from
whom all good things come, and that it is he also too whom all 
                     〈◊〉
                  


                  
ought too bee yeelded and rendered.
               Now therefore let vs cast our selues downe before the Maiestie of
our good God, with acknowledgment of our sinnes, praying him
too make vs perceyue them more and more, and that the same may
cause vs too haue such a mislyking in our selues, as wee may earnestly
and hartily seeke too giue ouer our selues wholly too our Lord Iesus
Christ. And that forasmuch as he hath called vs already too him by
his Gospell: wee may so frame our selues thereafter, as too renounce
all superstitions, and too assure our selues that all that euer wee can
imagin too bring vs too the kingdome of heauen, are but deceytes of
Satan, and that it is ynough for vs too haue Iesus Christ alone too
make our recourse vntoo: that lyke as it was the fathers will too aduaunce
him on high, too the intent that all men should looke at him: so
also wee may haue our eyes fastened vppon him, and apply our whole
myndes in such wyse thitherwarde, as wee may haue none other way
nor preparation than by him alone, nor swarue one way nor other: but
when wee bee once brought intoo the ryght way, holde on continually
towardes our marke, till we be fully come thither. That it may please
him too graunt this grace, not onely to vs, but also too all people. &c.
            
            
               The nienth Sermon, which is the first
vppon the second Chapter.
               
                  
                     1. Euen then when you were dead through your offences and
sinnes.
                     2. VVherin yee walked for a tyme, according too the course of
the world, after the Prince of the power of the ayre, which is
the spirit that worketh now in the chyldren of vnbeleefe.
                     3. Among whom vvee also had al of vs sometyme our conuersation,
to vvit, in the lustes of our flesh, dooyng the vvyl of the
flesh, and of the thoughtes, and vvere by nature chyldren of
vvrath, as others vvere.
                     4. But God vvho is rich in mercy, through his great loue vvhervvith
he loued vs,
                     5. Euen vvhen vvee vvere dead in sinne, hath quickened vs toogither
vvith Christ, by vvhose grace you bee saued.
                  
               
               
                  
                  WEe haue seene already heretoofore, that too
knowe Gods infinite goodnesse throughly,
wee must alwayes consyder what wee bee
our selues, and what our state is tyll God
haue pitied vs too succour our wretchednesse.
For vntyll men haue so examined
them selues, howe wretched and miserable
they bee, surely they wyl neuer yeelde God
the hundreth part of the honour that he deserueth.
Wherefore let vs beare wel this lesson in remembrance, that
too yeeld God the prayze which is due too hym, euery of vs must consider
wh
                     ••
                   he were of hym selfe, if God had not reached out his hand vntoo
hym. And in good faith, what is our nature in generall? It is too
thinke nothing but al maner of euyll: and that is the matter which S.
Paule treateth of as now.
               In the first chapter the matter which he treated of continually, was
that wee cannot sufficiently exalt our God, considering the mercie that
he vseth towardes vs. And now too expresse the same yit the better,
and to touch vs the more to the quicke with it: he sheweth vs as in a
picture or in a glasse, what men are til God haue preuented them with
his grace, and called them backe too himselfe. Therfore he sheweth
that wee be plu
                     •
                  dged in so horrible a dungeon, that the very thinking
of it ought to abash vs, and make the heares stand vp vpon our heades:
for it cannot bee but that theruppon wee must needes bee moued and
inflamed too blisse Gods name, for that he hath sought vs so in in the
bottome of Hell,Iohn. 5. 
                        •
                     . 24. 25 too drawe vs vp too the kingdome of heauen. And
our Lord Iesus Christ, too shew in what cace he findeth vs, sayeth that
he is come to the end that the deade should ryze at his voyce. Yee see
th
                     •
                  n that the office which the sonne of God taketh vppon him, is too
draw vs from death too lyfe, by the doctrine of his Gospel. According
wherunto he addeth, that such as beleue in him, are passed from death
wherin they were hild downe, and are entred into the heauenly lyfe.
Not that the faythfull doo inioy it heere alredy, but bycause they possesse
it in such wyse by hope, as they be throughly assured of it. Now
wheras our Lord Iesus Christ sayeth, that his voyce hath power too
rayze the dead: he taketh it by a similitude. For what lyfe soeuer wee
su
                     •
                  myze o
                     •
                  r selues too haue: yit notwithstanding if we be separated
from God, weel bee in a spirituall death, howsoeuer the vnbeleeuers



imagin themselues too be more than alyue in their owne wisdome and
vertue. And therein doo they harden themselues and make their brags
of it too the vttermost. But let vs see where the welspring of lyfe is.
It is in God, and they bee alienated from him. Also let vs see what
is the trew lyfe of man. It is not that he should bee s
                     •
                  ttle and fine witted,
and bee able too compasse his matters well in this world by his
owne cunning and pollicie, or too purchace himselfe renoune, or too
bee wittie and well aduized too giue counsell too all other men: it is
not that he should excell in all humane sciences and in all arts: nother
is it that he should bee esteemed and renouned as a ma
                     •
                   of noble corage,
or as one that hath the other vertues that are commendable among
men: but it is a hygher thing that wee must begin at, namely to
knowe that God is our father, that wee bee defended and preserued
by the light of his word, & inlightened by fayth too knowe the way of
saluation, and too assure our selues that our whole welfare lyeth in
him, so as wee seeke it there with al lowelynesse: and also too knowe
the meane whereby too atteyne too it: that is too wit, by hauing our
Lord Iesus Christ in whom the whole fulnesse of grace is offered vs.
               Thus you see what the spirituall lyfe of man is, and where it lyeth:
that is too wit, in the lyght of Gods woord, and in the woorking of his
holie spirit, so as wee be new fashyoned agein according too the image
that was lost, and vtterly defaced in vs by Adams sin. And is that
too bee found among worldly men? Yea euen among those that are
most honored? No surely. Then is it not without cause that our Lord
Iesus vseth this similitude, saying, that wee bee raysed from death by
meanes of the Gospell. For florish wee neuer so much, beare wee neuer
so fayer a glosse before men, and seeme wee too haue neuer so much
wherfore too bee had in estimation: yit are wee but wretched carions,
there is nothing but rottennesse and filthinesse in vs, God lotheth vs,
wee bee damned and forlorne before him, the Angells abhorre vs, all
creatures curse and ban vs, and all things aske vengeance vppon vs,
bycause wee defyle them. For there is such corruption in man, that
heauen and earth must bee infected with it, vntill God haue chaunged
them.Rom. 8. b. 19. The thing then which our Lord Iesus Christs saying importeth,
is, that vntill wee bee renewed by the Gospell through the fayth
that proceedeth of it: wee bee but as dead men, there is not one drop
of lyfe in vs that deserueth the name of lyfe. And too bee short wee bee
as good as buryed in our graues, and must bee fayne to go out of them



agein, whereby wee bee doone too vnderstand, that wee bee cut of from
Gods kingdome, and consequently that there is nothing but filth in
vs: and yit notwithstanding that God voutsafeth too bee knit and vnited
vntoo such as put their trust in him and in his goodnesse. That
(say I) is our rysing agein. Too bee short, wee must alwayes consider,
that man bringeth death with him euen with his birth: not only
bycause he is mortall, but also bycause he is separated from God. We
bee mortall wyghtes, and it were but in respect that wee must needes
passe through this world, and depart thence whensoeuer it pleaseth
God: but wee bee also dead afore hand. And how is that? Bycause
our soules are altoogither sinfull.Rom. 8. a. 7. There is nother thought nor affection
in vs, which tendeth not too euil: all is repugnant or rebellious ageinst
God, and ageinst the rule of his ryghtuousnesse. When wee imagin
eyther one thing or other, wee can neuer deuyse any thing in
our myndes, but sin and vnryghtuousnesse, according as it is sayd in
Genesis, that God knew that all that euer man had in his thought and
imagination,Gen. 6. 
                        〈…〉
                     . was sin. Now sith it is so, let vs vnderstand that although
wee had knowledge of good and euill,Rom. 8. b. 6. and that wee had farre
greater skill and discretion than wee haue: yit are wee so marred, that
all our desires and lustes rebell ageinst God, as it were too make
warre ageinst him. Seyng then that we be so corrupted in our soules,
and that there is nother thought nor affection which is not vtterly
naught: let vs not thinke it straunge, that God with his owne mouth
auoweth vs too bee dead, notwithstanding that through our owne fond
ouerweening, wee imagin that there is some lyfe in vs. And that is
the very thing which S. Paule treateth of as now, in saying that the
Ephesians were parttakers of the aboue mentioned grace, though
they were deade through their owne sinnes and iniquities. As if he
should saye, Too the intent yee may the better esteeme the valew of
Gods grace, and what it bringeth with it: thinke not only vppon your
present state, but consider that if God had left you such as you were of
your selues, and had not succored you at all, but had let you followe
your owne swindge: you had bin vndoone. Consider what your nature
is, for yee were dead, and there was no hope that euer you should
bee quickened agein, bicause it is not in the power of mans owne free-will,
too giue himselfe lyfe agein when he is once dead. Knowe yee
therfore that God did draw you out of the dungeon of all destruction,
yea rather out of the bottom of hell, when he voutsafed too adopt you



too bee his children, and too call you too the knowledge of his Gospell.
Wee see that this saying of Saint Paules, is conformable too
the doctrine and recorde of our Lorde Iesus Christ.
               So then, let vs alwayes runne backe to the welles head, whensoeuer
we be tempted too glory in our owne vertewes, and imagin our selues
too haue I wote not what too aduaunce vs withall: let vs resort too
our naturall state, let vs consider that wee had bin vndoone, and that
wee were vndoone yit still at this day, if God of his infinite mercy had
not drawen vs out of the confuzion wherin wee were, and deliuered vs
from it by the meanes of our Lord Iesus Christ. And it is purposely
sayd in offences and sinnes: too stoppe all mennes mouthes, that no
man myght make profer too withdrawe himselfe from the common araye,
nor think that any thing is so greeuous as the corruption of our
nature, which cannot bee stayed but by death. It S. Paule had set
downe but one of the words, eyther offences or sinnes: by and by there
woold haue bin answearing and replying. For some woold haue
thought themselues too haue bin of the common aray. And other some
would haue said, Uery wel, though there bee some synne in vs, though
there bee some fault in vs, it doth not therfore folowe, that wee bee vtterly
condemned and cursed of God: for wyl he vse suche rigour and
extremitie ageinst vs? But S. Paule hath ioyned both the woordes
toogither, too shew that there is nothing in our nature, but all wickednes
and sinne: and at a woord, that there is not one drop of life too bee
found in it. Therfore it is al one, as though he ment too aggrauate or
make the thing heynous, which men on their part would make light.
For if wee haue neuer so smal a portion of vertue, yea, or but a shadow
of it: wee wyll needes exalt it aboue all the mountaines of the worlde.
But if there bee any vices in vs, though they bee neuer so grosse and
apparant, yit wee make but very light faultes of them. Therefore it
stood S. Paule on hand too beate downe this fond presumptuousnesse
of men, and too shew them that they bee wholly saped in sinne. For although
he speake heere too the Ephesians, yit speaketh he generally
too all men. And in good sooth, he expresseth it yit better, in saying,
that vvee vvalked according too the trade of the vvorld: for the
euyll lurketh vnespied, tyll it bewray it selfe by his fruites. And the
cause why men cannot humble themselues before God as were requisite,
is that they flatter themselues till they bee conuicted, and bee compelled

                     〈◊〉
                   stoope and too hold downe their heades spyt of their teethe.



For wee see what hipocrisie is in vs, insomuch that wee woold beare
our selues in hand that blacke were whyte, and neuer fynd our selues
faultie, so long as our misdeedes could not bee layd open too our faces,
nor any man stop our mouthes, by witnessing them too our heads. Too
haue many wicked thoughtes, or too bee tempted too doo this or that
euyll, wee thinke it no sinne at al. Too bee short, S. Paule hath iustly
set downe, that the Ephesians walked in their sinnes: too the intent too
shewe, that he speaketh not of a thing which ought too bee vnknowen
too them. For in beholding their owne lyues, and in beholding what
they had bin, and what trace they had followed: they should be driuen
too confesse that they were vtterly forlorne & cursed afore God. Therfore
when soeuer our hypocrisie hindereth vs from submitting our selues
vnto God, and from beating of our selues down
                     •
                   by acknowledging
of our synnes: let vs learne too looke intoo our life. Truely, although
wee perceyued a whole million of faultes which wee haue cō
                  mitted:
yit is it nothing in comparison of that whiche God knoweth.
Yit notwithstanding too waken vs the better, that wee may not be deceiued
by our owne selfe soothing, as wee haue bin woont too bee: let
vs alwayes iudge of the roote by the fruites of it. Seeing then that
wee bee gilty of offending God so many wayes, let vs conclude thereupon,
that there is nothing but frowardnesse in our nature. And too
shewe the better that he speaketh not here of any one sort of men, but of
al mankind: S. Paule addeth, that it vvas according too the trade
of the vvorld. The woorde that he vseth here, betokeneth the course of
tyme. As if he should say, Euen as wee see the Sunne dooth dayly
ryse and go downe, and as wee see Winter and Sommer followe
one another: so is it an ordinarie custome, yea and euen the nature of
man too bee vtterly froward, spytefull, and rebellious ageinst God, and
there is nothing in him but all maner of leawdnesse and corruption. It
is not for men too say, 
                     •
                  ush, euill custome hath gotten the vpper hande:
and agein, this serueth for some men, but all doo not so: there are some
nations more sinfull than othersome, and there are some mē more stubborne
and malicious than others, but yet there will alwayes some vertew
bee found in some other men. Nay, sayeth S. Paule: for it is the
common course of the worlde. As if he should saye, it is so naturall
(too all men,) as there is no disputing whether one man bee bad,
a
                     •
                  d another good.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   For like as fishe is made too suck vp water: so ar
                     •
                  
we suckled, or rather made starke drunken withall maner of iniquities



and sinnes. Wee be so filled and stuffed with them, that we burst agein.
Thus yee see how S. Paule ment heere, not too rebuke some one sort
of men, but too shewe all men without exception what their state is, till
God haue redressed it. Therefore let vs open our eyes, and looke intoo
the thing that S. Paule sayeth, and wee shall perceyue that all our
woorthinesse and noblenesse is decyphred vntoo vs heere, heere are
our armes blazed: that is too wit, that wee bee but dead men, till God
quicken vs by his mere grace. Agein, too the end wee should knowe
that this death proceedeth not from elswhere than of our owne sinnes:
it is sayd, that wee bee all corrupted, that there is nothing in vs but
faultes, sinnes, and offences, and that all our whole lyfe beareth record
thereof, so as the fruite sheweth what the roote is. And on the other
syde, that our starting aside is not for once and no more, but that wee
tend wholly thither, that is too say, too euill: wee bee inclyned thereuntoo,
nay rather wee bee caryed headlong thereuntoo, yea and wee
bee driuen with such a rage, that wee neuer ceasse stryuing ageinst
God, tyll he haue broughte vs in subiection too him by his holye
spirit.
               And S. Paule thinkes it not ynough to saye so: but addeth things
which ought to make vs too tremble yet more, saying, that it is according
to the prince of the aire, according as he hath all power in the
vvorlde, according too the spirit that ruleth all the vnbeleeuers.
His talking after that maner, is too shewe, that till God haue quickened
vs by meanes of our Lord Iesus Chryst, & vntill he haue gathered
vs vnto him: the diuell hath dominion ouer vs. See I pray you what
the dignitie of men is, vntill Iesus Christ haue raunsomed them. They
dye not once and away, (but euerlastingly:) and he must bee fayne by
his Gospell to make them parttakers of the saluatinn which he hath
purchased for them. Then vntyll God haue wrought in vs by his
grace, whose are wee? The diuels: he is our prince. Too bee short, he
hath all authoritie ouer vs, and ruleth vs with such tyranny, as there is
nothing but haling of vs too him by force. But S. Paule vseth this
word Spirit purposely, to shew that the diuell ruleth all our thoughts,
all our affections, and all our desyres, that he possesseth vs, and that
wee bee all wholly his bondslaues. At a woord, wee cannot stirre one
finger, wee cannot once moue, wee cannot thinke one thought, but the
diuell is at our elbowe, and haleth vs in such wyse, as wee vtterly become
deadly enemyes too God. When wee heare these things, it is



no time for vs too fall a sleepe and too flatter our selues, nor too bee so
lustie and presumptuous, as too go too lawe still with God, as though
there were some goodnesse in vs, & that he were boūd to acknowledge
our vertues. Must not men needes bee too farre out of their wittes,
when they continue still in their hipocrisie, and will needes stand too
their tackeling ageinst God, and win him by their replying, after that
the holy Ghost hath thundred so dreadfull and horrible a sentence vppon
our heades? Then if a man bee considered in himselfe and in his
owne nature, what shall he bee able too say? Behold, a creature cursed
of God, and woorthie too bee cast out of the common account of all
other creatures, yea euen of woormes, flyes, lyce, and vermine. For
there is more valour in any vermin in the world, than there is in man.
For man is a creature wherein Gods image is defaced, and the good
that he had put in it, corrupted: there is nothing in it but sinne, insomuch
that wee bee the diuells limbes, and he not onely ruleth vs, but
also possesseth vs and is our prince. Bee wee once throughly perswaded
of this in our hartes, shall wee not on the one side haue cause too
runne quaking too our Lord Iesus Christ, and too holde vs shrowded
vnder the shadowe of his winges? And on the other syde, must it not
needes bee a beastly blockishnesse, if wee bee so thanklesse as not too
magnifie Gods goodnesse, in that he hath drawen vs out of such a
dungeon vntoo himselfe, too make vs fellowes and brethren not onely
of the Angells of heauen, but also of our Lord Iesus Christ, who is the
Lord of glory, thereby too put away all reproche, and in stead of being
hatefull too all creatures, too make vs beare his marke, and too
bee honored, and too bee imbraced of the Angells, as their brethren,
and too bee auowed of our Lord Iesus Christ as members of his bodie?
So then, now wee see S. Paules meaning.
               And further, too the intent that all replying should ceasse: he sheweth
what the power of the diuell is. For he could haue sayd in one
woord, yee haue liued after the maner of the world, that is too say, diuelishly,

                     •
                  for so doeth the thing that he speaketh import: but in sted of naming
the diuell in one woord, he sayeth first, according too the prince
that hath his povver in the aire, and the spirit that vvoorketh euen
novv in the rebellious children. In saying, the prynce that hath his
power in the aire, he disappoynteth vs of all starting holes. For it is
not for n
                     •
                  ught, that the diuell is named the prince of the world: and
yit it is not for that he reygneth ouer the sonne, the moone, the starres,



the skyes, and the earth: but for that he holdeth vs captiue in his
bondes: bycause wee bee not woorthie too bee gouerned by God. For
had Adam continued in the soundnesse wherin God created him:
God woold haue hild vs as his children. But after the fall of our first
father, God left vs, and Satan tooke vs in possession. True it is that
Satan cannot doo any thing at all without Gods leaue: for wheras
he is named the prince of the woorld, it is not ment that he fyghteth in
such wyse ageinst God, as it cannot bee knowen who is the stronger:
that were a cursed blasphemie, and lyke these heretikes, which seeing
such phrases in the scripture, haue imagined that the diuell dooth now
and then resist God, and that he hath such force and power, that God
is fayne sometymes too giue him place. But such woordes are stark
madnesse. Neuerthelesse this souereintie of Satan is Gods iust vengeance,
according as it is sayd, that he deliuereth vs intoo the handes
of our enemyes, when wee cannot abyde that he should reigne ouer vs.
And so is that thing fulfilled and verefyed in vs all. Forasmuch as
God hath printed his mark in vs, wee ought too bee gouerned by his
spirit: but our father would needes exalt himselfe, he would needes set
vp his bristles ageinst God, and he was not contented with his owne
state and boundes. Forasmuch therfore as he rebelled in that wyse,
and could not fynd in his hart too abyde the souerein dominion of
God: he was giuen vp too the diuell, and made subiect too him: and
forasmuch as he could not abyde that God should reigne ouer him, he
was fayne too haue another mayster, and that subiection must reach
vntoo all men in generall. So then let vs marke that the souerenitie &
tyrannie of the diuell, is a iust vengeance of God vppon men for their
sinne. Let that serue for one poynt. And therfore let vs not imagine
that the diuell hath the reynes of the brydle layd looce in his necke, or
that he hath libertie too doo what he liste, though God withstand him:
but that wee bee left vp and giuen ouer vntoo him. And too the intent
wee may yit better knowe this subiection, S. Paule sayeth that
he is in the aire, as he will speake more at large ageyn in the ende of
the Epistle. He could haue sayd simply, according too the prince that
hath great power, according as our Lord Iesus sayeth,Luk. 3. d. 27. that he is the
strong man which possesseth the world in peace. Yee see then that the
diuell is called a prince, bycause he hath such power as wee bee not
able too withstand.
               And besides that: S. Paule giueth him his place in the ayre. Not



that the diuels are inclozed in a place certeine, for wee our selues see
that they enter intoo mens bodies, yea and into the bodyes of Swyne,
after as our Lord giueth them leaue and power.Luke. 8. d. 33. But he speaketh purposely
of the ayre, too make vs vnderstand that they bee aboue our
heads. If wee haue an enemy, wee will see if we can ouerthrowe him.
But if he haue his foote vppon our throte alreadye, if he treade vppon
our bellyes, if he bee already gotten vppon vs: what remedie is there
then? None at all on our part. That is the cause why S. Paule
speaketh here expresly of the ayre: as if he should say, that men may
well brag and lifte vp their nebbes, and bee brazenfaste in auauncing
themselues: but yit is the diuell aboue them with all that he can make.
Too bee short, he sheweth that wee bee vtterly giuen vp too that cursed
bondage. And to make the matter the playner, he addeth, according
too the spirit. For what is the cause that wee perceyue not the
state which he speaketh of, but bycause wee be fleshely▪ If there reygned
a tyran ouer vs that would lay a subsidie vppon vs too day, and a
tax to morrow, and sacke mens houses: & the next day cut this mans
and that mans throte, and rauish mens wyues, and commit other enormities
and outrages: wee would well ynough perceyue it. And why?
Bycause wee be quicke of feeling in the things that touche our fleshe,
and so earthly, as wee cannot perceyue any thing, except it concerne
this present lyfe. That is the cause why wee perceyue not our owne
miseries: for they bee inuisible. Wee thinke not that the diuell is such
a Tyran, nor so horrible as he is: bycause wee see him not. But S.
Paule telleth vs, that we must looke higher then this world, and that
wee must haue other eyes than those that beehold visible things: and
that it standeth vs on hand too looke vppon the diuell, though he bee
ghostly: & that although he haue nother armes too strike vs with, nor
legges too go with, nor any such other things: yit he fayleth not too be
the woorst tyran that can bee deuized in the whole woorld. And why
so? For he entreth vnseene. If there were a man that could enter into
other mens heads and harts, yea and intoo their thoughts and affections,
without swoord or staffe, without venim or poyson, without threatening,
or any thing else: or if he had an hundreth deathes in his hand,
and could make them enter without feeling how: I pray you were
not such an enemy much more too bee feared, than such as come furnished
with great force, and make a great noize? Yis surely. Now
S. Paule telleth vs, that the diuell is such a one: for he is a spirite,



sayeth he. So then, let vs not to be so fleshely as we haue bin wont too
bee, nother let vs iudge according too our owne rude and fond fancye,
when the sayd spirituall enemye is spoken of: But let vs assure our
selues, that he is able too doo vs much more mischiefe without al comparison,
then if wee could see how he came towards vs, and how he
entered intoo vs. So then forasmuch as he is a spirit, let vs bee so
much the more afrayd of him. And too the intent the faythfull should
bee the better dispozed too come too this foresayde poynt, that is too
say, too know their owne confuzion, till God haue prouided for it: S.
Paule addeth yit one confirmation more of his saying. For as soone
as wee haue receyued the fayth, and bee inlightened by Gods holy
spirit: if wee haue any desire too doo well, wee shall by and by indeuer
too serue our God. And it will seeme that that were inough. But
if a faythfull man looke intoo himselfe, he shall finde ynough to mislike
and too sighe and groone for: according as I haue tolde you before,
that euen S. Paule confesseth himselfe too haue bin vnhappy,Rom. 7. c. 24. and crieth
out, who shall set mee free from this prison of death? The faythfull
then shall alwayes fynd ynough in themselues wherfore too morne before
God. Yit notwithstāding forasmuch as God hath put some goodnesse,
some wel meaning, and some good intent intoo vs: the same doth
halfe couer the leawdnesse of our nature, so as wee knowe not a long
time after that it were requisite, howe wretched our state is, so long as
wee thinke but vppon our selues, I say, vppon our selues, such as wee
bee after that God hath partly reformed vs by his holy spirit. That
is the cause why S. Paule sendeth vs too behold what the vnbeleeuers
are. If wee looke vppon the worlde, wee shall see some giuen too couetousnesse,
and some too pilling and poulling, and not onely the little
theeues that are whipped and hanged: euen such as are robbers, I say,
not in woods and forests, but in houses, in markets, and in places of
Iustice. Wee shall see that there is nother fayth nor loyaltie among
most men, but that all men are giuen too pilling and pouling, without
any respect of equitie or vprightnesse. Wee shall see some rushe
out intoo whoredome and dishonestie, some intoo drunkennesse, and
some intoo other leawdnesse and looce behauiour. Wee shall see
men rap out othes, periuries, and other cursed things.
               Agein, wee shall see secret conueyances, impoysonings, spytings,
malicings, treasons, and wicked practizes. Too bee short, wee shall
see some so diuelish, that they fling them selues headlong altoogither,



as though they ment too make warre wilfully ageinst God. These are
things that may astonish vs: And although wee bee dull, yet ought
wee too haue some remors, when we see things so farre out of order in
the world. Neuerthelesse S. Paule sayeth that if we consider what is
doone, and how all thinges are turned topsiteruie, and what libertie
the world taketh too withstand God: it behoueth vs too apply the same
too our selues, and too conclude thus: the same should betyde mee, yea
and euen as much as I see in them that are moste wretched. For when
wee looke vppon the diseases that are abrode, how some are eaten with
cankers and other filthie diseases, and othersome haue as terrible sicknesses
as can be: we must prie vpon them and say, as ill, yea & worse to,
should lyght vpon me, if God pitied me not. For all of vs doo carye the
seede of them about vs: & that not only in our bodyes, (but also in our
soules) for there may be some diuersitie of cōplexions, so as some shalbe
stronger and lus
                     •
                  yer than other some: but the soule of man is vtterly
corrupted and marred. So then the sinnes that reigne in vs, are all of
them warnings to make vs cast downe our eyes, and too be ashamed
before God and his Angells, yea and too make vs hate and vtterly abhorre
our selues. Thus yee see why S. Paule hath added here, that the
diuell woorketh now still. He vseth the woord Now: as if he should say,
my frendes, if in looking vppon your present state, you fynd any thing
well, and that the same keepeth you from humbling of your selues
throughly, and from feeling how miserable yee shoulde haue bin, if
God had not shewed pitie and mercie towards you: see what is doone
about you, see how the vnbeleueres behaue themselues, and you shall
fynd them to be as wyld beastes, and enemyes of their owne saluation:
you shall fynd them stark mad ageinst God, and ageinst all ryght. Too
be short, yee shall see so great enormities, as shall abash men, & make
them too say, Alas, is it possible that it should bee thus? And so yee see
what yee bee. Say not: fy on thee naughtipacke. Yee may well fynd
fault with such a one, but ye must therwithal adde by & by for a sauce to
season it, how greate hath Gods mercie bin towards me? Then let vs
neuer condemne the sin that wee see euerywhere in other men, without
cōsidering therwithal, that if God had not brydled vs, we had falne as
deepely as wee see others too haue falne: and therfore let it stirre vs
vp immediatly too pray God that he leade vs not into temptation,Math. 6. b. 13. and
let vs acknowledge Gods infinite goodnesse, in that it pleaseth him
too reyne vs in such wyse, that wee fall not intoo the horrible falles



which wee see about vs. For when wee looke vpon the wickeddest in
the world, yea and euen vpon such as wee bee driuen too abhorre as
monsters: wee must (as I said afore) conclude thus with our selues:
Alas, as much should befal vs, if God remedied it not.
               And so yee see how wee ought to put that lesson in vre. And S. Paul
speaketh expresly of the rebellious children, too shewe that there wilbee
no obedience in vs, except God put it intoo vs, and reforme vs,
and both chaunge the naughtinesse whereuntoo wee were giuen afore,
and continue and increace the goodnesse that he hath begunne: for
else Sa
                     •
                  an hath so taken possession of vs, as he must needes drawe vs
lyke brute beastes. Trew it is that S. Paule addeth anon after, that
this serued not only for the heathen, (howbeit that Gods grace was
most apparant in them:) but that euen the excellentest men were comprehended
therin, and (which more is) that the Iewes, (who thought
themselues too haue a singuler priuilege of exemption from the common
cursednesse of men,) were also forlorne and damned, till they were
redeemed by our Lord Iesus Christ. Wherin wee see yit better the
thing that wee touched not long since: that is too wit, that heere is no
mention made of any one sort of men alone, but that the holy Ghost
thūdereth vpō al men, to the end that al of vs shold be beaten down frō
the least to the the most. But this cannot be discoursed as now. Therfore
we must for conclusion take that which S. Paule treateth: which
is that God hath quickened vs. Wherby he dooth vs too wit, that
we bring not lyfe with vs from our mothers womb, but that by reason
of sin we bee in death, when wee come intoo this world, which is worse
than if wee were not at all: yea and that there is no geynsaying too it,
bycause wee shall not find any thing in our selues but corruption and
wickednesse, and bycause that the more a man stirres it, the more it
stinketh, and wee shall bee the more loth too see the great and deepe
dungeon of all iniquitie which is in vs. Therfore it standeth vs on
hand too bee quickened, and too haue lyfe giuen vs, not of nature, bu
                     •
                  
of the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, bycause wee bee renewed by
him: yea and too knowe that God hath taken vs out of a wretched
and cursed state, and theruppon too forget all vayn glorie. And Let vs
not think that euer wee shall yeeld vntoo God the prayse that hee deserueth,
till wee abhorre all our owne wretchednesse, & bee come too the
poynt (to know) that the deuill reigneth ouer vs, till God pluck vs out
of his pawes, and set vs free from his cursed tyranny. For is there any



thing more irksome than too say, that wee bee subiect to the diuell, and
that he reygneth, not only ouer our bodyes, as somme worldly tyran
myght doo, but also ouer our soules, and ouer all our thoughts? For he
is a spirit, and there is not that thing in vs which is not corrupted by
him, & filled with his poyson. Sith we know this: let vs consider also
that God hauing found vs in that plyght, hath notwithstanding not
disdeined vs, 
                     〈◊〉
                   let
                     •
                  ed for all that too succor vs, according also as S.
Paule vseth the s
                     •
                  me reason,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   when he sayeth, that wee were Gods
deadly enemyes, at such tyme as Iesus Christ redeemed vs. And so
let vs conclude, that God respecteth nothing but our miseries, when he
calleth vs too him. Hee looketh not whether wee seeke him or no, for
how were that possible? wee drawe cleane arsward. He looketh not
whether wee bee able too doo him any seruis or no: for wee bee rank
rebells ageinst him. He looketh not whether there be any good towardnesse
in vs: for al our thoughtes & lustes are deadly enemyes fyghting
ageinst his ryghtuousnesse. Wherat looketh he then? What moueth
him too succour vs? Euen the infinite number of miseries that he fyndeth
in vs, and the horrible confuzion wherein wee bee: those are the
thinges which inclyne God too shewe vs mercie. So then, let all
mouthes bee stopped, and let vs not presume too bring any thing in
this behalfe, as th
                     •
                  ugh wee had bound God vntoo vs, or that he found
aught in vs wherefore he should shewe vs fauour: for he must take all
things of his owne, and doo all of his owne infinite goodnesse, bycause
he seeth vs miserable, damned, and vtterly forlorne, and let that stirre
vs vp too doo good, and too prouide remedie, not onely for our diseases,
but also for our death. For if wee were but corrupted with sinne and
vyce: the maladie were alreadie vncurable. But besides that, there
is a death, yea and a spirituall death, which cannot bee recouered by
all the meanes and remedies of the world: God must bee fayne too put
too his hand, yea and that so myghtily, as it may bee knowen that he

                     •
                  aueth vs by myracle.
               And nowe let vs cast our selues downe before the maiestie of our
good God, with acknowledgment of our sinnes, praying him to make
vs so too feele them, as we may forsake them, and bee rid of them dayly
more and more, and that in the meane season he of his goodnesse will
beare with vs, and not e
                     •
                  amine vs ouer streytly, but by little and little
aba
                     •
                  e and correct the naughtinesse that reigneth too much in vs, and
not suffer vs too bee s
                     •
                  aues vntoo Satan, but set vs free by our Lord



Iesus Christ, of whom wee holde all our spirituall freedome. And so
let vs all say, Almyghtie God heauenly father. &c.
            
            
               The tenth Sermon, which is the second
vppon the second Chapter.
               
                  
                     3. VVee also vvalked vvith the disobedient, dooyng the pleasures
of the fleshe and of the thoughtes, and vvere by nature
the children of vvrath as others are.
                     4. But God vvho is rich in mercy, through his great loue vvherby
he loued vs,
                     5. Euen at the tyme vvhen vvee vvere dead by sinne, quickened
vs toogither vvith Christ, by vvhose grace you bee saued,
                     6. And rayzed vs vvith him, and made vs sit vvith him in heauenly
places in Iesus Christ.
                  
               
               
                  I Began this morning too shewe you how
S. Paule ment too stretch out Gods goodnesse
vntoo all men, too the intent that none
should haue cause too boast of himselfe, as
though he had any woorthinesse alone by
himself. And truly if euer there were any
nation in the world aduaunced aboue others,Exod. 6. a. 6.
it was the Iewes: forsomuchas God
had accepted them for his owne houshold,Exod. 19. a. 5.
and called them a holie linage and his owne inheritaunce. In that respect
therfore the Iewes seemed well woorthie too haue preheminence
aboue others.1. Pet. 
                        •
                     . b. 9. Howbeit too the end that none should darken the grace
of our Lord Iesus Christ, he sayeth, that euer they also were the children
of wrath, so as it stoode thē on hand 
                     •
                  o lie drawen out of the dungeon
of confuzion, wherof I spake this morning. Too bee short, S.
Paule sheweth heere, that euen those whom men woold deeme too bee
the excellentest, can bring nothing wherof too brag, or too purchace
themselues estimation before God, but are all receyued too grace too
bee made heires of the heauenly lyfe, by meanes of our Lord Iesus
Christ.
               
                  Now heere myght a question be demaunded, why S. Paule setteth
the heathen men on euen ground with the Iewes, seing that God had
set such oddes betwixt them. For it myght seeme that all the promises
were disanulled: and that were a dooing of wrong vntoo God, rather
than vntoo men. If wee graunt (as of necessitie and reason wee needs
must) that Gods choozing of Abrahams ofspring, was not in vayne,
and that his telling of them, that he accepted them too bee of his houshold
& Church, was not too deceyue them: they must needes be neerer &
more familiar vntoo God, and they must needes haue some marke
wherby too bee gathered vntoo him. It seemeth then that S. Paule
should not haue abaced the Iewes after that sort. But in another
place he sheweth, that all this geere agrees full well, if wee consider
the Iewes (on the one syde) in the state of (Gods) chozen and peculiar
people: and (on the other syde) what they bee (of themselues) and
what they haue deserued before God. For in the Epistle too the Romans,Rom. 
                        •
                     . a. 
                        •
                     .
after that S. Paule hath giuen sentence vppon the whole
world, shewing that there is not any one which is not damned and forlorne:
he moueth this question: Seing then that God gathered Abrahams
linage, and dedicated it wholly too himself, what shall become of
them? Shall there bee no holinesse in them? For it seeemeth else that
God had but dalyed, and that his saying in the holie scriptures, that he
had not delt so with any other nation, was nothing woorth. But S.
Paule sayeth,De
                        •
                     t. 4. 
                        ••
                     4. that of a truth men ought too commend the grace that
God voutsafed too shewe foorth vppon his people: and so consequently
that they are too bee preferred before all the whole world, so farre
foorth as they be indewed with the benefytes which they had by Gods
promises. Hewbeit he addeth foorthwith, that in asmuch as they bee
descended of Adams race, and are sinners, as well as all other men,
and there is nothing in our whole nature, but corruption and frowardnesse:
all men must bee fayne too stoope, and all of vs must needes
acknowledg, that one of vs cannot bee sholed out f
                     •
                  om another, according
as wee haue seene hee
                     •
                  toofore in the second chapter too the Galathians,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
where S. Paule told S. Peter thus: Yea, wee bee Iewes by
nature, and it seemeth that wee ought too go alone by our selues, seing
that God is our King, and hath sanctifyed vs, and voutsafeth too dwel
among vs. Well then, it seemeth at the first blush, that wee should
shake of the Gentyles, as vncleane persons, and such as haue none
acquaintance with God. But let vs come too account (sayeth he) a
                     ••
                  


                  
there is none of vs all but he is indaungered vntoo God, & must needes
perceyue himselfe too bee a wretched sinner. Sith it is so, God must
bee the iudge of all men, and we must needes sinke before his maiestie,
till wee bee reconcyled vntoo him by our Lord Iesus Christ. Too bee
short, S. Paules meaning in this text, is not too deface Gods grace,
but too shewe that the Iewes had not any other meane in themselues
whereby too obteyne the saluation and heritage of heauen, than onely
by beyng members of our Lord Iesus Christ, and that they must alwayes
bee fayne too take themselues first for cursed and damned. For
the woorthinesse which they haue is but as a wyndfall, & they be borne
in sinne, and subiect too cursednesse, no lesse than all other men, and
Gods accepting and choozing of them too himself, was a speciall and
(as they saye) a supernaturall gift. Yee see then that by nature the
Iewes are forlorne as well as the rest of the whole world, and yit neuerthelesse
that God hath also receiued them too mercy.
               By the way wee must marke, that vnder the word Nature, Saynt
Paule sheweth, not only that wee bee sinners by custome, so as euery
of vs thrusteth his fellowe out of the way, and wee bee too much inclyned
too followe the euill, rather than the good: but also that there is a
further matter in it, which is, that euery of vs bringeth sinne with him
euen from his birth. Too eate and too drinke are things that accompany
vs: but yit is sinne more rooted in vs, than all the things that belong
too this lyfe. Truely the heathen men will thinke it straunge,
that the young babes which are not able too discerne betweene good
and euill, nor haue any discrecion or will, should alreadie bee sinners
and damned before God, according too S. Paules saying, who calleth
them the children of wrath: but yit must wee needes yeelde our selues
too condemnation whether we wil or no. As soone as babes bee able
too make any signe, it is certeyne that they will shewe inough and too
much, that they bee froward and naughtie, and that there is a secrete
poyson lurking in them▪ And that although they cast it not out at the
first, yit they bee as a broode of serpentes. Sith it is so, let vs vnderstand
that Saint Paule dooth not without cause call vs the children of
wrath, as well as the Iewes, not excepting the very infantes out of
the number, whom men terme innocents, and take them so to bee: For
wee must not regarde our owne opinion, nor the things that wee see
before our eyes, but wee must giue glory vntoo God, who is the competeent
iudge thereof, although wee finde it incomprehensible. How



soeuer the world go, wee must alwayes come backe too that which is
sayd in the one and fiftith Psalme,Psal. 51. b. 7. namely that wee not onely offend
God dayly in diuerse manners: but also are lothsome too hym beforehand,
yea euen before wee haue eyther done or thought any thing, bycause
wee were begotten in sinne and cursednesse. And by that word
Children of wrath, S. Paule meaneth that wee bee the heyres of
death, and that God must needes bee our enemie, yea euen as soone
as wee bee conceyued. Yit is not God cruell, nother hateth he the
things that are of his owne making. That is trew, if we had such purenesse
in vs as was in our forefather Adam, according too this saying,
that all things which God made were good, God then should hate
his owne workemanship in vs. But wee must conclude, that sith he
hateth vs, and is as it were armed to take vengeance on vs all, we haue
well deserued it. And that although sinne cannot be poynted out with
the 
                     •
                  inger, as yee would say: yit dooth God know it well ynough, and
wee must hold our mouthes shet at it. That is in effect the thing that
wee haue too gather vppon this Text, in applying it too S. Paules
meaning. For if the Iewes, which seemed too haue or ought too
haue some peculiar prerogatiue, are neuerthelesse included vnder the
generall state of men: what can wee alledge which are borne Gentyles,
if wee will presume too bring any brauerie before God? So
then wee haue well wherwith to be confounded dubble, seing that they,
in comparison of whom wee bee nothing, haue notwithstanding no
enterance intoo the kingdome of God, but by his only free mercie, an
                     •
                  
by being reconcyled by meane of our Lord Iesus Christ.
               But there is yit one question or doubt more. For how should the
Iewes be Gods enemies, seing he had auowed himself alredye to bee
their father? Some man will say, that the seeing of the things that
were figured, and the truthe 
                     •
                  nd substance of them remayned as yit too
bee accomplished. But wee haue too marke yit further, that although
God had adopted the Iewes in Abraham: yit they were receyued in
Iesus Christ, and that that grace was grounded vppon him, according
too this saying, In thy seede shall all nations of the earth bee blissed.Gen. 22. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     8.
And wee haue seene in the Epistle too the Galathians, that the
sayd seede must bee referred too our Lord Iesus Christ: for without
him there is no vnitie,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   but vtter s
                     •
                  attering asunder. Sith it is so, it is
not too bee marueiled, that the receiuing of the Iewes into the Church,
as well as the receyuing of the Gentyles, is fathered heere by Saint



Paule vppon the onely free bestowed goodnesse of God.
               Howbeeit, there is yit a second poynt, which is not too bee forgotten:
which is, that although the Iewes had obteyned such grace, yit
they abode in suspens till the comming of the Redeemer. And for that
cause wee shall see in another place, that those which were neere, and
those that were farre of, were reconcyled by him. For wee know that
there is no attonement too bee made with God, without sheading of
blud. Now the Sacrifizes of the Lawe could not put away sinne,Leuit. 17. c. 11. &. Heb. 11. f. 22. nor
pacifye Gods wrath and cursing. When men offered the blud of an
Oxe, or of a Calfe, or of a Lamb, it was not too make attonement with
God, there was no such power in the brute beastes: for the thing that
is corruptible, atteyneth not too the soule. Therfore it is too bee concluded,
that the Iewes were Gods children by hope, and yit that they
were vtterly separated from him, till the attonement was made in the
person of the Redeemer. And by that meanes did God shew himself
fauorable towards them, as he did towards the rest of the world. And
for that cause also dooth S. Paule adde, that God being rich in mercie,
hath quickened them, as he did the Gentyls, euen according too
his great loue vvhervvith he loued them.
               
               The cheef poynt (as I told you this morning) that S. Paule
handleth, is, that wee should lerne too bee ashamed, yea and too lothe
our owne wretchednesse, by resorting too our originall, and by considering
in what plyght God findeth vs, and out of what a dungeon wee
passe, when God reacheth vs his hand. And the second is, that wee
should magnifie his goodnesse so much the more, bycause it is an vncredible
thing, that he should voutsafe too cause the doctrine of lyfe too
come downe too the bottome of hell too quicken vs: for wee were sunk
downe thither. Thefore wee must marke well these wordes, where
it is sayd, that God being rich in mercie, quickened vs when wee
were dead, according too the great loue which he beareth vs. Trew
it is, that this tytle myght alwayes agree vnto God, bycause he nother
abateth nor increaseth: and so shall God bee euermore rich in goodnesse.
But we must therwithall marke the circumstance of the place,
and the matter that S. Paule treateth of heere: which is, that God
hath vttered the inestimable treasures of his mercie vpō vs according
too the greatnesse of our miseries. And For that cause also he addeth,
the great loue wherwith he loued vs. For needes must there haue
bin such a goodnesse in God, as is able to rauish vs, seeing it surmounteth



all our capacitie, and that wee bee not able too taste the hundredth
parte of it, though wee giue our selues neuer so much vntoo it. And
why? For when S. Paule sayeth that God loued vs, he speaketh expresly
of himself, and of such lyke, which had bin chozen from among
that people, when as the greater part of them was cut of. For although
the Iewes were the first borne, and had preheminence aboue
vs, as by ryght of inheritance, & that we be but as silly things borne
out of season,1. Cor. 15. a. 8. as S. Paule speaketh of himself: yit notwithstanding
wee see that they bee now banished from Gods kingdome, and are become
as a president that ought too make the heare stand vp vppon our
heades, when wee behold the wrath and vengeance of God that is vttered
vppon them. Therfore wheras S. Paule and some small number
mo were chozen from among the Iewes: it was through Gods
loue which had the greater apparance towardes them. Lykewyse
nowe adayes, if the Gospell were preached purely throughe the
whole world, & fayth giuen indifferently too all men, soo as there were
none but he should be touched immediatly with the holy Ghost, and all
of vs were alyke: it woold seeme to be as the course of nature. And
lyke as meat and drinke are common to all men, so it woold seeme that
wee had this of our owne naturall motion, and that it were not a speciall
grace of God. But when wee see so manie Countries hungerstarued,
so as there rayneth not one drop of good doctrine vppon them,
but rather the wretched people are fed with Lyes and trumperies of
Satan: and that on the other syde God inlyghteneth vs heere, and watereth
vs with his woord: whereof commeth that, but of the great loue
whereof S. Paule speaketh heere? Agein, many men haue their eares
beaten with the Gospell, and yit it is apparant too mennes eyes, that
they become hard harted by it, and waxe woorse and woorse. For it is
certeine that a man shall not see so horrible monsters in the papacie,
as where the Gospell is preached and professed, for they will say they
bee reformed, and yit they seeme too bee diuells incarnate: and wee
neede not too go farre to see such syghtes. So then, let vs marke heere,
that wee must not surmyze that any of vs hath aught wherwith too
please God, more than his felowes, nor presume too make any account
of our selues: but that we must alwayes repayre too the fountaine that

                     •
                  annot bee drayned dry, and not go too the pits that are full of holes
and can holde no water, or rather which haue nothing but s
                     •
                  id & filth
in them, (for all the gloriousnesse and brauerie of men is no better) but



drawe of the sayde loue of our God, & confesse that God must not bee
perswaded or moued by other folkes, but onely that it pleased him too
loue vs freely, by receiuing vs vntoo him, and by inlyghtening vs with
his holy spirit in the fayth of the Gospell. And so yee see what Saint
Paule ment too note heere.
               Now on the other side, to the end that men (who are alwayes suttle
witted, in seeking some shifts and starting holes or other: should not
excuze themselues by being vnder the Tyrannie of the diuell, nor
alledge that the same ought not too bee layde too their charge: Saint
Paule sheweth that the sayd bondage ceasseth not too bee wilfull. I
shewed you this morning, that notwithstanding all our free choyze,
and notwithstanding our reason and will, yit we be as it were fettered
too Satans seruice, so as wee can doo nothing but all naughtinesse,
nother should wee bee any better by nature, than the arrantest theues
in the world, if God had not pitied vs, accordingly as Saint Paule
setteth forth al other men vntoo vs as a looking glasse, yea & euen such
as despyze God and all order, and are driuen by Satan intoo all outrage:
saying, that wee should bee lyke them, if God had not bin mercifull
too vs. But now there are many which grudge ageinst God, and
which go too lawe with him, saying: If free will bee so defaced, what
shall become of vs? If men were able too giue themselues vnto goodnesse,
and yit notwithstanding made none account of it, but gaue themselues
too euill: surely it were good right and reason, that they should
bee hild for giltie. But if they cannot but doo euill: why should God
condemne them? At leastwise they ought too bee borne withall, seing
it is apparant that they bee hild vnder Satans dominion, euen from
their mothers wombe. Loe what many men alledge, in hope to washe
their handes. Yea, and they bee not contented too iustifie themselues
by vayne shifts, but they doo also rayle ageinst God, as though he were
the cause of their damnation. But S. Paul to preuent such s
                     •
                  aunders,
sayeth, that they which are vnder the bondage of Satan and of sinne,
ceasse not for all that too be condemned by good right. For they be not
constreyned theruntoo by force: they bee subiect in deede, but that is
with their owne good will. And that is the cause why he sayeth, that
euen such as are brought backe agein to our Lord Iesus Christ, haue
walked in the lustes of the fleshe: that is too say, that before God
had chaunged them, and brought them too his obedience by his holy
spirit, they walked in their owne wicked lusts. True it is that men will



graunt their nature too bee sinfull, but yit they say, it suffizeth that the
will bee otherwyse. All men will graunt that it is the will which putteth
the difference betweene vice and vertue: But when the philosophers
spake after that fashion, they were of opinion that wee haue a
francke and free will. And that is the thing that deceyued them, bycause
they knewe not that wee were marred by the fall of Adam, and
yit notwith
                     ••
                  anding ceasse not to be iustly accursed, forsomuch as our
offending of God is with our owne good will. And therfore also he
addeth agein, dooing the desires of our fleshe, and of our thoughts.
As if he should say, that they which are possessed of Satan, and hild
vnder the s
                     •
                  au
                     •
                  rie of sinne, cannot alledge any compulsion. For why?
it is their o
                     •
                  ne will that dryueth them thereuntoo. Thus yee see in
effect, how S. Paule ment too stop the mouthes of all misspeakers, too
the intent, that men should not picke any quarrells too God, by pretending
that they ought not too bee shent for their naughtinesse, seing they
bee subiect too it by nature. But let vs marke heerewithall how S.
Paule hath matched thoughtes with the fleshe, too the end wee myght
knowe that sinne reacheth throughout vs, and that wee haue no peece
of vs cleane and pure, wherintoo infection is not spred. For the Papistes
will well ynough confesse that wee bee corrupted in Adam: but
they say, that wee doo in deede tend alwayes vntoo euill, when wee bee
tempted vntoo it, and yit neuerthelesse, that if wee herken vnto reason,
and brydle our lustes by ruling them well, then wee shall see playnely
that wee bee not altoogither vnable too doo good. And so the opinion
of the Papistes is, that mans free will is not of such force as it was at
the beginning, but that it is wounded, yea and sore maymed, howbeeit,
that it hath yit still some lyfe, that is to say, some vertuousnesse, as they
imagin. But wee haue seene this morning, that the determinate sentence
of the holy Ghost is more generall: that is too wit, that wee bee
not onely sicke, but also dead, till wee be rayzed agein by Iesus Christ.
Nowe S. Paule confirmeth the same thing, saying, that our wicked
lustes, and the affect o
                     •
                  s that are termed the sensual appetytes, wherin
wee resemble the brute beastes, are not the onely things that harrie vs
heere and there: but that we must take the matter more strictly. What
are all our thoughtes, all our determinations, and all that euer is deemed
too bee best in man? They bee (sayeth S. Paule) starke wickednesse.
For if God should let vs go after our owne thoughtes: it is certeine,
that there is not a more horrible confuzion, than that would bee.



So then, wee see that men are not humbled heere by halues, too confesse
onely their frailtie, and that they haue partly neede too bee succored
and helped at God
                     •
                   hand: but wee see they bee vtterly damned
before him, sit
                     •
                   their thoughtes are heere called wicked and froward,
and that they haue nothing in them which prouoketh not Gods vengeance
ageinst them. So then, let vs on the one side yeelde our selues
giltie, assuring our selues that wee were iustly bereft of all Gods graces
in the person of Adam: And agein, on the other side let vs not take
the same for an excuse, in hope too scape by such shifte, as who should
say, we were not the bōdslaues of sinne, nor wee our selues any whit too
blame for it, bycause wee bee hild downe in Satans snares and nettes
euen from our birth. But it behoueth vs to consider alwayes, that euery
of vs shall fynde the welspring of his disease in his owne conscience.
Men may hold plea as much as they list: but if they enter intoo themselues,
and aske their owne consciences, yee shall see them condemned
and confounded without any nay. When a man hath babled what he
can, so as he thinkes he hath wonne the gole, by saying that he hath no
free will of his owne, nor abilitie too resist God: there needeth no
more but thys one woorde: what thinkest thou too bee the thing that
prouoketh thee too euill? Ho, it is the diuell. Thou sayest well. But
yit marke a little whether that dooth so fully excuze thee, as that thou
perceyuest not ryght well, that thou wart stirred vp and driuen too it
by thine owne selfmouing: knowest thou not that the welspring and
roote of the mischiefe is in thy selfe? When thou art so rebellious ageinst
God, that thy thoughtes are full of vntruth and vnbeleefe, and
that so much the more bycause thy lustes are out of square, and imbattelled
ageinst God and his rightuousnesse, euen too make warre with
him: when thou seest all this, must thou yit hold plea further with him?
So then, let vs not seeke any starting holes, seyng wee carie a sufficient
iudge with vs, euen within vs, namely seyng that euery of our owne
consciences rebuketh vs. That is the thing that S. Paule amed at in
this streyne. And thereby wee also are war
                     •
                  ed, not too presume aught
at all on our selues, but too brydle all our senses and imaginations, and
all the vnderstanding and reason which wee weene our selues too haue.
For vntill wee haue so renounced our selues, it is certeine that we shall
neuer bee meete too apply our selues too the seruing of God.
               And S. Paule sayeth expresly, that those whom God hath quickened,
are by that meanes made felowes with our Lord Iesus Chryst:



for it is euen he in whom they haue theyr lyfe. Trew it is that we
                     •
                  
ought too seeke it in Gods being: howbeeit forasmuch as that is too
hygh for vs, so as wee cannot come at it, no nor any thing nere it: therfore
our Lord Iesus is called the way.Iohn. 14. 
                        •
                     . 6. And he offereth himself, and
tary
                     •
                  th not till wee seeke him as though he weere farre from vs, but
reacheth out his armes too allure vs too him, insomuch that in his Gospel
he sayeth, if any man bee a
                     •
                  hirst, let him come vnto mee and drink.
And this is fulfilled in his person,Iere. 7. 
                        •
                     . 37. as hath bin said erewhiles. So then
let this speeche bee marked, where S. Paule sayeth, that those which
were dead afore, were quickened agein by Iesus Christ. And heere
wee see yit better the thing that I touched shortly this morning:
which is, that S. Paule speaketh not of a visible death, wherof men
may iudge by outward syght: but of the corruption that is in our souls:
for he fyndeth fault with vs all. How then may wee atteyne too the
heauenly lyfe. How shall we bee rayzed & quickened agein to possesse
the heri
                     •
                  age that is promised vs? Wee see on the contrarie part, how
wee bee subiect too as many miseries as can bee. This therfore must
needs bee ment of the newnesse of lyfe which he speaketh of in other
places. Now it is certein that this lyfe is not yit perfeet in vs: there is
but a little enterance of it, which serueth too leade vs further, and too
bring vs too the end, (which shalbee) when wee bee come too the full
glorie that he speaketh of heere. And wee see also how S. Paule setting
himself foorth for an example, alledgeth that he had giuen ouer
all things for our Lord Iesus Christes sake, yea and euen the fond opinion
which he had of his owne ryghtuousnesse: insomuch that although
men esteemed him as a little Angell, yit notwithstanding he knewe
that it behoued him too bee saued by Gods free grace in Iesus Christ.
And in sted of all his honour and riches: he had suffred so many reproches,
so many tortures, so many beatings, and so many imprisonings,
that a man would haue said,Phil. 3. 
                        •
                     . 12. he had bin lyfted vp aboue the world: and
yit notwithstanding he addeth, not that I am yit come too my marke,
but I streyne my self foreward, and forget the tyme that is past. For if
I stay vppon the things I haue done alredy, saying, I haue ouercome
so many incounters, I haue delt thus valeantly, I haue not ceassed too
preach the Gospell euery where, I haue wrought in such wyse, that the
frute of my doct
                     •
                  ine is come to the whole world, I haue passed the sea,
I haue bin among barbarus nations, where God and his Gospel were
neuer erst heard of, I haue had a number of lets, and haue ouercome
them all, I haue incountered with thus manie enemyes, and haue got



the vpper hand of them all: If S. Paule say, I had had all these considerations
with him, he had become cold: for it is an easye matter
with vs too shrink away when wee once think with our selues, 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
I haue doone ynough for my part, now let others marche on in their
aray. And so euery of vs woold take his leaue, when he had some thing
or other, I 
                     •
                  ot not what. But S. Paule sayth, that he forgets the tyme
past, too the intent too cut of occasion of slothfullnesse, which myght
come in his head, and sayeth, that he streyneth him self foreward, and
holdeth his armes opē too atteyne vnto it. And how long tyme did S.
Paule streyne himselfe foreward? Euen too the end. Then let vs
mark well, that our glorie shall neuer bee perfect, that is too say, wee
shall neuer throughly inioy the glorie that wee wayt for, vntill the end.
And therefore it behoueth vs alwayes too take warning of our owne
wretchednesse, too moorne for it before God, and too confesse that
wee be beholden too his only goodnesse for all things. Now then, howsoeuer
wee fare, wee see that we be reformed vnto newnesse of lyfe by
Gods spirit: and that although wee dwell among vnbeleeuers, & bee
subiect too manie miseries, yea and haue sin dwelling in vs: yit there
is none of vs but he feeleth that the handsells which God hath giuen vs
of his holie spirit, are not vayne nor vnprofitable. If any man alledge,
that before such tyme as Iesus Christ woork in vs, wee haue alredye
some lyfe, as is seene: answer was made shortly this morning: that
forasmuch as all that euer men haue by nature, is not able too bring
them vntoo God, but maketh them too rest vppon this world: none of
it ought too bee made account of, when the heauenly lyfe commeth in
question. Then let men calp their hands at vs on all syds: yit are wee
but dead men, when God layeth the brydle looce in our necks, and
suffereth vs too walk after our owne fancie and lyking. Man may
well haue some reason: but what can it doo so long as it is in the owne
nature? It will fyght ageinst God, and ageinst all truthe. Yit notwithstanding,
man, say they, hath a will: howbeeit, that the same will bee
wicked. Trew it is (as I haue sayd alredye) that it hathe no strength
in it. Yit notwithstanding forasmuche as man is wicked and froward,
and hath the cursed roote of rebellion in himself, so as he cannot but doo
euill, he offendeth God willingly. And seing it is so, let vs boldly conclude,
that wee bee in death, till wee bee made partners of the lyfe of
our Lord Iesus Christ,Esay. 6
                        •
                     . a. 1. and Luk. 4. c. 18. and that he deale vntoo euery of vs the spirit
which he hath receyued, in such measure as he listeth: according as it



is sayd that Gods spirit rested vppon him, and was giuen vntoo him
in all plentie, and that as nowe he must deale it too euery one of hys
faythfull ones. Therefore according as our Lord Iesus Christ maketh
vs too taste of his holy spirit, and according as he strengtheneth thereby:
so are wee quickened in him and with him.
               Now heeruppon he addeth, that he hath made vs too sit in the
heauenly places vvith our Lord Iesus Christ. This serueth too magnifye
the grace that we haue hithertoo spoken of, yit so much the more.
If he had sayd in one woord, that wee were q
                     •
                  ickened: it had bin
ynough, and it ought well too haue inflamed our hartes to sing Gods
prayses, and too occupye our selues therin, and too apply al our indeuers
theruntoo. But heere is a greater vehemencie, bycause of our
coldnesse and lazinesse. For S. Paule hath shewed on the one syde,
that wee were dead and hild in bondag vnder the tyrannye of Satan.
Alas, these are terrible things. And now he setteth downe on the other
syde, that God hath not only loued vs, but also glorifyed vs in himself,
and that wee bee lifted vp from the bottom of hell, aloft vntoo the
kingdome of heauen, where he hath lodged vs, and giuen vs seates among
his Angells. Seing then that wee heare this, needes must wee
bee to much doted, & our witts too much brutish, if we make not in good
earnest too glorifye the inestimable goodnesse of our God, and too conclude,
that wee bee so beholden and bound vntoo him, that although
wee should doo nothing else all our lyfe long, but preache the grace
that wee haue felt by experience at his hand, yit it were nothing at all.
And so yee see why S. Paule hath purposely set downe, that wee be
lifted vp too heauen wi
                     •
                  h Iesus Christ. And heeruppon wee haue a
very profitable exhortation too gather, which is, that although we bee
heere in the myre, and do but craule lyke poore frogges: yit ought we
to beare this state paciently, for somuch as on the other syde God hath
lyfted vs vp so hygh, euen vs that were nothing, yea and cursed creatures
too. And therfore whensoeuer wee be fayne too suffer hunger &
thirst in this world, or be mocked by vnbeleeuers, or put to the abiding
of manie outrages, let vs resort too that which is sayd heere: namely,
that yit neuer
                     •
                  helesse wee be set alredy in heauen with Iesus Christ,
howbeeit not in such wyse, that it is apparant vntoo our eyes. For in
this behalfe wee must giue place too hope, and vntoo that which is
sayd in another text,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   namely that our lyfe is hid, and that we must hold
our selues quiet, till it appeere at the comming of our Lord Iesus



Christ. Thus then you see in effect, how it beehoueth vs too vnderstand
the things that are spoken heere of the diuers state of Gods children,
after they bee called too the fayth of the Gospell. But by the
way, we must not imagin an earthly paradyse in this world, where we
shall haue nother trubble nor greef: wee must make our reckening,
that wee shall neuer liue heere at our 
                     •
                  ase, but wee must make
roome for fayth, as I sayd afore. And besydes this, wheras the holye
Ghoste auoucheth by the mouth of S. Paule, that wee shalbee lifted
vp on hygh: i
                     •
                   standeth vs on hand too cast downe our heades, and too
suffer our selues too bee oppressed by our enemyes, and too bee ouermaystered
by them with all pryde: we (I say) must suffer these things,
and yit in the meane whyle bee fully perswaded, and throughly resolued
of this doctrine, that wee for all that shal not fayle too inherit the
kingdome of heauen, for it is vnpossible that the head should bee separated
from the m
                     •
                  mbers, and our Lord Iesus Christ is not gone thither
for his owne sake alone. Wee must alwayes repayre too that
principle. Our confessing that Iesus Christ is rizen from the dead,
and gone vp intoo heauen, is not alonly too glorifye him in his owne
person. Trew it is, that first of all it must come to passe,
                     
                        •
                     hil. 1. b. 10. that all knees
must bow before him, and that all creatures both in heauen and earth,
yea and euen in hell, must doo him homage. But yit notwithstanding,
the vnion wherof wee haue treated heertoofore, is fulfilled in this, that
Iesus Christ hauing gathered vs intoo his bodie, hath begunne that
thing in himself, which he intendeth too performe in vs, namely when
conuenient tyme commeth. So then, Iesus Christ is gone vp intoo
heauen, too open vs the gate in these dayes, which was shet ageinst vs
by Adams sin: and that is the verye maner of our sitting with him alredye.
And therwithall S. Paule sheweth in one woord, what he intended.
In deede this saying shalbee declared more at lenth in his
dew place, where S. Paule himself will treat of it more at large in the
next Sermon. Yit notwithstanding wee may see wherat he amed, too
the end wee may haue a sure and ryght marke too shoote at: which is,
that wee bee saued by grace, and that noman is able too clayme any
thing of his owne. Neuerthelesse it is not ynough for vs too haue confessed
in one woord, that our saluation commeth of Gods free fauour,
and too haue felt it also within our selues: but wee must also therwithall
bee taken in loue with the infinite greatnesse of the same grace, by
considering what wee bee, how all euill commeth of our selues, and



that there is no saying nay, bycause our faultes doo too much conuic
                     •
                  
vs, in somuch that if God should execute a hundred tymes more rigour
ageinst vs than he dooth, wee could not contend with him, nor dispute
with him, but that wee should alwayes haue this record of our owne
consciences, that wee bee iustly woorthie of death, and that the same is
dew vntoo vs by our desert. Then seeing it is so, let vs hold fast this
doctrine, for wee shall haue profited greatly for our whole lyfe, if wee
once know, that there is not only some one naughtie touche, but an infinit
number of euils in vs. Therefore let vs lerne too mislyke of our
selues, and too hate and abhorre our selues, and afterward when wee
bee come too the grace that is shewed vs in our Lord Iesus Christ, let
vs vnderstand, that without that, the diuell should needes haue full and
whole possession of vs, and reigne ouer vs, as he had doone afore. Also
let vs beware that wee profit our selues by such grace, so as it may
serue too put away all our cursednesse. And then let vs assure our
selues, that not only all our miseries shall turne too our benefyte by
our Lord Iesus Christ, but also that he will giue vs such strength, as
wee may well glorie in our state: and although wee bee driuen too
fyght ageinst manie temptations, and that wee bee frayle on our owne
behalf: yit neuerthelesse wee shall ouercome them in such wyse, as wee
shall haue cause too yeeld God thankes by our Lord Iesus Christ,
insomuch as being ioyned vntoo him, wee cannot fayle too come too
the full perfection of all good things.
               Now let vs cast our selues downe before the Maiestie of our good
God, with acknoweledgement of our faults, praying him too make vs
so too feele them, as it make vs not onely too confesse three or foure of
them, but also too go vp euen too our birth, and too acknowledge that

                     •
                  here is nothing but sinne in vs, and that there is no way for vs too bee
reconciled to our God, but by the blood, death, and passion of our Lord
Iesus Christ. And therefore as oft as wee feele any hartbytings too

                     •
                  urne vs aside from the grace of God, too cite vs too his iudgement
s
                     •
                  ate, let vs haue none other refuge, than too the sacrifize wherby our
Lord Iesus Christ hath made attonement betweene God and vs. And
w
                     •
                  ensoeuer wee bee weake, let vs desire him too remedie it by his holy
spiri
                     •
                  , which is the meanes that he hath ordeyned too make vs par
                  
                     ••
                  kers
of all his gracious giftes by: and let vs so continue in the same,
as wee may bee an example vntoo others, and labour too drawe them

                     〈◊〉
                   vs too the fay
                     •
                  h and vnitie of the doctrine, and by our life and



good conuersation shewe that wee haue not gone too schoole in vayne,
in so good a schoole as the schoole of the Sonne of God. That it may
please him too graunt this grace, not onely too vs, but also too all people. &c.
            
            
               The eleuenth Sermon, which is the third
vppon the second Chapter.
               
                  
                     8. Surely you bee saued by grace through fayth, and that not of
your selues: it is the gift of God:
                     9. Not by woorkes, least any man myght boast.
                     10. For wee bee his vvoorkmanship, created in Iesus Christ, too
good workes which God hath prepared for vs too walke in.
                  
               
               
                  SSaint Paule hath shewed heeretoofore,
that our saluatiō is the true looking glasse,
wherein too behold the infinite glorye of
God: for it is his will, too be knowne by
his goodnesse aboue all things. And for
that cause also hath he shewed, that God
choze vs before the making of the world,
howbeeit not in respect of any thing that
could bee found in vs: but too content his
owne onely mercie. Here therefore he concludeth that matter, and
sheweth what he ment when he told vs, that our adoption hangeth and
proceedeth of Gods chozing of vs in his owne euerlasting purpose,
that is too wit, too the intent wee should be as it were cleane defaced,
and confesse that whatsoeuer wee bee, and whatsoeuer goodnesse wee
haue, wee hold it all wholly of God and of his onely free goodnesse.
That is the cause why he sayeth, that wee bee saued by grace, not of
our selues, but by Gods gift, and not by works. It had bin ynough

                     ••
                  o haue excluded all the goodnesse and vertue that man could imagin.
But for asmuch as it is hard to beate downe the pride wherto wee bee
too much giuen: S. Paule reherceth this matter agein, too the end it
might bee the better vnderstoode, and confirmed more at large. And
therwithall wee haue too mark, how he matcheth fayth ageinst it, as
well too shewe the meane wherby too come too saluation, as also too



                  
                     〈1 page〉
                  


                  
                  
                     〈1 page〉
                  


                  
more therfore doth it stand vs on hand, too marke well the thing that is
sayd in this streyne, which is, that wee bee saued by grace, and that wee
doo nothing at all too it, but that God giueth vs all that euer belongeth
too our saluation. And why? Bycause wee can doo nothing at all: we
haue nother good workes nor deser
                     •
                  es too alledge for our selues.
               Furthermore, this speech is well worth the weying, when he saith,
least any man myght boast. For theruppon wee haue too gather,
that it is not ynough for vs too father some part of our saluation vpon
God: but that we must come to that poynt, & yeeld so farre, as not too
make any countenance too it at all, but abyde too haue all our owne
glory so abaced, as only God may haue all preheminence, as wee haue
seene in other textes, and specially in the place of Ieremie, where it
was alledged,
                     
                        •
                     ere. 9. g. 24. that God is not glorified as he ought too bee, nother is
it possible for vs to glorie in him, till all that euer wee think our selues
too haue of our owne, bee cast downe and doone away. For nother the
vertue, nor the wisdome, nor the abilitie, nor the ryghtuousnesse of man
mu
                     •
                  t bee put foorth, if wee intende that God should keepe still that
which is his owne, and which he reserueth too himself. Now therfore
wee see that all the partnershippes which the world woold make with
God, are but fond dotages, yea and illusions of Satan, who laboreth
too make vs beleeue that wee are able too doo somewhat of our
selues, too the intent too plucke vs therby quyte and cleane from ou
                     •
                  
God. For so long as a man imagineth himselfe to haue any one drop
of goodnesse of his owne: he will neuer giue ouer himself vntoo God,
but bee puffed vp with vayne presumption, and rest vppon himself.
Satan therfore hath wonne much at our handes, when he hath once
perswaded vs, that wee bee able too doo any thing of our selues, or that
wee can make any meanes to atteyne too saluation: for his drift is, too
make vs leaue seeking of the thinges in God, which God offereth vs.
And by that meanes wee abyde emptie still, according too the virgin
Maries song,Luke. 
                        •
                     . g. 53. where it is sayd, that such as are so filled with ouerweening,
shall abyde still hungrie, and God will laugh their vayne presumption
too scorne. Then can wee not bee fed with Gods grace, except
wee long for it, and feele our owne lacke, according too this saying
of the Psalme,P
                        •
                     al. 81. b. 10. Open thy mouth, and I will fill it. So then, let vs
marke well, that men shall then bee dispozed to receyue at Gods hand
all that is requisite for their saluation, when they reserue nothing too
themselues, but acknowledge that all self boasting must bee put away.



And (as I sayd afore) by that meanes the partnershippes which the
world pretendeth too make with God, doo fall too the ground. For
the Papists are driuen too confesse, that without Gods helpe they can
doo nothing, and that they bee too weake too withstand Satan, if they
bee not strengthened by the holy Ghost. They can fynd in their hartes
too graunt, that they cannot deserue aught at all, except God supply
their wantes, and also that they haue neede of the forgiuenesse of their
sinnes. But yit for all that, they cannot abyde too giue ouer their freewill,
but imagin verily that they can partly further themselues. Theruppon
they are alwayes buylding of some desert, and although (they
graunt that) Gods grace preuent them at the first, yit they alwayes
mingle therwith some indeuer and good will of their owne, and when
they flee vntoo God for release of their sinnes, they bring him their
owne satisfactions for the same. And so yee see, that the Papistes will
not in any wise freely and wholly yeeld and gyue ouer vntoo God the
prayse of their saluation, but keepe backe some part of it, commonly
the one halfe or more, too themselues. But S. Paule passeth further
here, & sheweth that we doo wrongfully alwayes defraud & bereue God
of his glory, till wee haue forgotten all the false opinions wherwith the
world deceyueth it selfe. Therefore the onely way for vs too glorifye
God, is too acknowledge that wee bee nothing of our selues. And so,
humilitie or lowelynesse is not a feyning or false pretence, as many
suppoze, which thinke themselues too haue contented God by saying
in one woord, that they bee wretched sinners, and as weake as is possible:
but wee must bee fully resolued, that all that euer men imagin in
their owne braynes concerning desertes, freewill, preparation, helpe,
or satisfaction, is euery whit but leazing & trumperie of Satan. When
we once know this, then will we submit our selues as we ought to doo,
& then shall God keepe his estate, as he deserueth, & we also shall yeeld
him such honour as is dew to him. But this cannot be done (as I sayd)
vnlesse all that euer men conceiue & imagin concerning good workes,
wherewith too deserue well at Gods hand, bee vtterly razed out.
               Moreouer let vs mark therwithall, that if wee wil bee partakers
of the saluation that God offereth vs, wee must bring nothing with vs
but only fayth. For (as is sayd in another place) fayth taketh no help
of good woorks. Although it haue record of the Lawe,Rom. 4. a. 4. 5. yit dooth it not
bring aught vntoo God, wherby too bynd him 
                     〈◊〉
                   vs, but rather
witnesseth that wee bee vtterly emptyed, and that wee haue none other



hope than only in his free goodnesse. But lyke as a man that is pinched
with great distresse, so as he can scarsly stirre a fynger, and hath
nothing but his tongue too cry out, alas that some body woulde helpe
me, & pitie mee: euē so must fayth ryd away al the ouer weenyng which
wee haue in our selues, that wee may receiue what soeuer God offereth
vs, so as al the prayse thereof bee reserued vntoo hym. That therfore is
the thing that wee haue too beare away.
               And heerby wee bee warned, not too bee vnthankfull when God
calleth & al
                     •
                  ureth vs so gently: but too run vntoo him as poore hungry
soules, & to haue an earnest mynd too bee succored at his hand, bycause
it pleaseth him. For what is the cause that our Lord Iesus Christ profiteth
not a great number, but for that they haue deaf eares when God
incorageth them too come too him? And veryly some of them are so
beastlyke, that they passe not for the heauenly lyfe, so they haue heere
wherof too feede and too drink lyke Swyne, or wherewith too wallowe
in their owne delyghts and pleasures: as for the spirituall goods
(which wee ought too labor for) they bee nothing with them. Yee see
thē that the one sort shet God out of the doores, bycause they bee dulled
with the allurements of Satan, and drunken, or rather vtterly bewitched
with the delyghts of this world, eyther in pomp and honour,
or in riches, or else in whoredome and other loocenesse. And the other
sort think they haue wherwith too make God beholden too them, as
wee see manie hipocryts doo, which cannot giue ouer the vayne self-trust
wherwith they bee swolne lyke Toads. Wherfore too bee short,
let vs marke well this woord fayth, that the pleasures and ease of
this world hold vs not backe from lifting vp our harts vntoo God.
And that is the very way too fasten our anker in heauen. For wee can
neuer haue the sayd substancialnesse of fayth, which S. Paule speaks
of, except wee passe swiftly through the world, and know that our heritage
and resting place is elswhere than heere: and moreouer shake off
all vayne imaginations that may come in our heads: for they serue
but too turne vs away from Iesus Christ, so as wee may not come at
him, nor he haue any entrance at al vntoo vs. That is the thing which
wee haue too gather vppon that text.
               Now for further confirmation, S. Paule addeth hereuppon, that
vvee bee Gods vvorkmanship. He meanes not this of Gods creating
of vs, and of his setting of vs in this world: but his meaning is,

                     •
                  hat men, as they bee borne in Adam, are vnme
                     •
                  e for the heauenly



life, and that if they thinke too get any thing by that, they deceyue
th
                     •
                  mselues too much, bycause they bee but as dead creatures, and as
caryo
                     •
                  s wherein is nothi
                     •
                  g but rotten 
                     •
                  ilthynesse. For proofe hereof
wee neede too seeke no further matter than this present Text, where
he sayth, that wee bee created in Iesus Christ. Here therefore S.
Paule maketh a comparison of the dubble birth that is in al the faithfull.
For wee haue all of vs one generall creation, wherby wee liue
in this world: and God createth vs new agein, when he voutsafeth too
giue vs newenesse of life by his Gospell, I meane when he printeth it
in our harts and mynds by his owne secret working: for the word alone
were not ynough too doo it. So then, as in respect of our first
creatiō, there is no differēce betwene the Iewes, the Turks, the Heathen
men, & vs. Wee are al of vs taken out of one Lump, wee are al
the children of Adam, yea wee are all heyres of Gods wrath, and cursed
by nature, as wee haue seene alreadie heretoofore. Then if men
examine them selues, and searche what they bee by their first birth:
they shal finde how there is nothing in vs but sinne and wickednesse, &
that the wisedome which wee weene our selues too haue, is but beastlynesse:
and that the light whiche wee thinke wee haue too discerne
betweene good and bad, is but stubbernesse and starke spytefulnesse
ageinst God: and so yee see wee be corrupted in all parts of our soule.
               Now then what can wee doo too finde fauour at Gods hand, and too
make him beholden vntoo vs? for if wee can doo nothing but euil, it is
but a kindling of his wrath more and more ageinst vs. Wee bee
worthye of endlesse death alreadie before wee come out of our mothers
wombe: in somuch that although wee perceyue not the sinne that is
in a yong babe: yit hath he the seede of it within him, and God auoweth
that all of vs deserue too bee drowned in the bottom of hell: Then
if the little babe bee so rightfully condemned afore hand, euen ere he
haue seene the light of the world: what is too bee sayd of vs when we
bee come foorth, and doo shewe that wee bee naughtie (in deede) and
that our nature is altoogither sinfull: And when wee bee come to age,
what can we do (as I said afore) to fal to cōposition with God, so as we
might helpe foreward his grace, and that our so dooing might bee a
meanes too further our saluation? Loe what S. Paule meaneth by
this Text, where he sayth, that wee bee Gods woorkmanship. As if
he shoulde saye, poore creature, thou thinkest too play the d
                     •
                  utie fellowe
in this behalfe, by putting thy selfe foreward too alledge some deseruing,



and that thou art able too begin and too approche vntoo God,
so as he on his syde must bee fayne too bee beholden vntoo thee: When
begannest thou that? If thou say, thou begannest it before thou wart
borne: thou deseruest that men shoulde spit in thy face. If thou say, it
was afterward, betweene the age of seuen yeeres, and the age of twentie
or thirtie yeeres, at what tyme thou wart inlyghtened with the Gospell:
thou art on the contrarie part sufficiently disproued, that thou
couldest not haue one drop of willingnesse too doo good, but that all thy
thoughtes and desires were vtterly rebellious ageinst God, and as men
of warre fyghting ageinst his rightuousnesse. Therefore thou hast
doone nothing else but fyght ageinst God, euer since thou wart borne.
Agein, if thou take it too bee from the time that thou wart a little babe,
vnable too discerne betweene whyte and blacke: yit wart thou of the
cursed race of Adam. And so turne thee on which syde thou wilt: and
reason must needes driue thee too perceyue, that thou wart vnable too
doo any thing too Godward, and consequently that all that euer he hath
wrought for thy welfare, ought too be fathered vppon him alone, without
chalenging any drop thereof too thy selfe.
               Thus wee see now why Saint Paule dooth in this text call vs the
woorke or woorkmanship of God, according also as it is saide in the
Psalme,Psal. 79. 
                        •
                     . 13. that they which were the houshold folke of his Church, were
also his flocke. For there the Prophet sholeth out the children of Israell,
whom God had gathered toogither of his owne mere goodnesse,
too set them asyde from other heathen nations. For it is certeine, that
God found none other cause too keepe that linage too himself, or too
preferre them before others, saue only that he of his own mere mercy
had them theruntoo. As much is to be sayd of vs at this day. And
that which he addeth, namely that wee were created in Iesus Christ,
ought too touche vs yit the more too the quicke. For there he sheweth
that the creating of vs in Adam, is but a bringing of vs too destruction:
and therfore that it standeth vs in hand too bee fashyoned
and cre
                     •
                  ted new agein, namely euen in Iesus Christ, who is the second
Adam, as he him self termeth him in the first too the Romans,
and in the fif
                     •
                  eenth of the f
                     •
                  rst too the Corinthians. Yee see then that
this woord create, is ynough too stoppe the mouthes, and too put away
the cackeling of such as brag of the hauing of any woorthinesse.
For when they say so, it is a presupposing that they were the makers
of themselues. He that chalendgeth too himself any fredome of will,



and taketh vppon him too haue any meane or abilitie to doo good (of
himself:) it is certein, that his meaning is, too step intoo Gods place,
and too shew himself too bee a Creator. But there is noman which
abhorreth not such blasphemie. The blyndest betles and maddest
bedlems in the worlde, account the woorde Creation, as a holie and
sacred thing, & will say, that God is the verye Creator or maker of all
things, and thou Hipocrite confessest the same with thy mouth, and
yit thou doost but lye, forasmuch as thou thinkest that thou hast some
freewil too further thy self too welfare & saluation. And so thou denyest
the first article of our fayth: for thou makest God but half a creator,
So then they will well ynough confesse with their mouth, that God is
the Creator, yea and as farre as the lyfe of this world comes too, they
will say, they holde it of him. But now is there a much excellenter
lyfe, namely which wee hope for, and which wee possesse alredye by
fayth, howbeit that wee inioy it not alredye now presently. And how
much more precious and woorthie is that lyfe wherin wee shallbee
parttakers of Gods glorie, than this wayfaring which wee make in
this world, that is but a shadowe that vanisheth away out of hand?
Now if yee aske the Papistes of whom they haue the (heauenly) lyfe,
wee haue it partly of Gods grace (say they) and partly of our owne
feeewill. Forasmuch then as they father some peece therof vppon
themselues, and thinke too part stakes after that fashyon with God:
wee must conclude that they bee their owne creators. But heeruppon
they will reply, and protest that they neuer ment any such thing, and
that they had leuer dye, than too vtter any such blasphemie. Yea, but
in the meane whyle, which is the thing of greater valew? too create a
mans self too bee a mortall man in this world, or too purchace euerlasting
lyfe? S. Paule telleth vs, that if wee can doo any thing by our
owne freewill and power, God is not fully our creator. But he sayeth,
wee bee his woorkmanship and of his making, yea euen in respect of
the heauenly lyfe: it behoueth vs too beare that alwayes in mynd: for
S. Paule speaketh not of this transitorie lyfe, but of the inheriting of
the kingdome of heauen. Wee see then that the Papistes defye God
in their pryde, lyke villanous blasphemers as they bee. And therefore
for our part, if wee mynde too bee parttakers of the grace which is
purchaced for vs by our Lord Iesus Christ, wee must bee rid cleane of
all selfweening, and acknowledge that our beginning too doo well,
springeth of Gods voutsafing too call vs too him, and of his preuenting



of vs through his owne free goodnesse. Too bee short, S. Paules
meaning is, that all they which thinke themselues too haue deserued
aught at Gods hand, doo beare themselues on hand, that they bee men
of great abilitie, wheras in deede they bee already dead, & are nothing
at al. What can a dead man doo? And surely wee bee dead (as I haue
declared heretofore) till God 
                     •
                  uicken vs agein by the meanes of faith,
and by the woorking of his holy spirit. Now if wee bee dead, what
good can wee doo, or whereuntoo can wee dispoze cur selues? Agein,
wee bee nothing at all: for the woorde Create, importeth that all that

                     •
                  uer is in vs, is of Gods putting intoo vs. Lyke as when it is sayde
that he created the worlde of nothing, it is as much too saye, as that
where as there was not any thing at all before, he gaue beyng too that
which was not. Euen so as in respect of the spirituall lyfe, that wee
bee cre
                     •
                  ted, is as much too say, as that wee were nothing at all before.
Now, if wee bee nothing, shall wee bee able too bynd God too gyue
vs this or that? Are they not things vtterly ageinst nature? Then let
vs marke well, that too knowe how wee bee saued by mere grace, and
that wee haue all thinges of Gods gift, and of his free goodnesse, wee
must bee fayne too come too this poynt, namely that God gaue vs our
beyng, according as it is auouched by the example of Abraham in the
fourth too the Romanes.Rom. 4. a. 1. For in Abrahams body wee see what is in
our soules. When Iesus Christ was promised too Abraham in his
sonne Isaac,Gen. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . c. 19. yee knowe he was a man altoogither drooping and barrein:
and his wyfe also was farre striken in age. And therefore that
eyther he on his syde should beget, or his wyfe on hir side brede a child,
are things impossible. But he beleeued God, which calleth foorth the
things that are not,Rom. 4. c. 17. and giueth them beyng. Seyng then that Abraham
was as a withered blocke, and had no s
                     •
                  rength nor lustinesse in
him, and yit notwithstanding receyueth the promis that was made vntoo
him: therein it behoueth vs too behold that wee cannot bee parttakers
of Gods grace, except wee acknowledge our owne vnabilitie, and
bee first of all v
                     •
                  terly abaced in our selues, that our Lord may begin
our lyfe, & continue the same, till he haue brought it too ful perfection.
               Furthermore let vs marke well, that his saying in Iesus Christ,
is too sende vs backe too the corruption which wee haue by inheri
                  
                     ••
                  unce
in Adam. For wee can neuer fynde in our heartes too
yeeld our selues giltye, tyll wee feele it proceed in our selues. And
moreo
                     •
                  er it serueth too shewe, that this benefyte is not common indifferently



to all men, but only to those whom God hath chozen, accordingly
as wee haue seene alredie, that we were chozen before the making
of the world. Now then this extendeth not generally too all Adams
ofspring, but only too so many as are renewed in Iesus Christ.
And therfore it is all one as if S. Paule should shewe, that wee had
neede of a remedie, for somuch as wee bee alredye forlorne and damned,
at such tyme as God by the meanes of Iesus Christ plucketh vs
out of the dungeon wherin we were. And this serueth too confirme yit
better the thing that we haue seene heertoofore, which is, that wee can
not be faythfull, except God make vs new agein, so as wee hold of him
all things that belong to the heauenly lyfe, and all the spirituall goods
which wee haue. Now seing wee bee created in Iesus Christ, it is all
one as if it were sayd, that all the ryghtuousnesse, all the wisdome, all
the vertue, and al the goodnesse that is in vs, wee drawe it from out of
that fountaine, and that God scattereth them not abrode at aduenture,
but hath put the fulnesse of all things belonging too our saluation, into
Iesus Christ, in somuch that when wee bee once made members of his
bodie,Iohn. 1. b. 16. & Colos. 1. c. 19. &. 2. b. 9. wee be allso made parttakers of all his benefyts, and that without
him, wee bee cut of from all parts of our saluation, as though wee
were rotten and stinking wretched carkesses, and that there were nothing
in vs but filth, as I haue declared before. Thus yee see what wee
haue too mark further, when S. Paule sayeth, that wee bee not only
Gods woorkmanship, but also created in Iesus Christ.
               Now he addeth, too good vvoorkes vvhich he hath prepared
for vs to vvalke in. His setting down of good woorkes in this place,
is to shew, what a follie, or rather what a madnesse and frentiknesse it
is in men, too beare themselues in hand that they can bring good
workes on their behalf, as who should say, they had thē in their sleeues,
or as if they were of their owne growing. For needes must God
haue prepared them (sayth he) and that wee should haue them at his
hand. And it is all one as if he should say, go too, shew heere your
prowesse and vertewes: enter a litle into account with God: seeing
your pryde will not bee daunted, but yee haue all wayes some bristles
set vp still, bring foorth all that yee think may make for yee. Well, say
you, and wee will bring our good workes, as the Papistes are wont to
doo: who alledge in this wyse: what? how now? shall we not be saued
by our owne merites, and by our good workes? And whence draw ye
them, sayeth S. Paule? Haue yee coyned them in your owne shop? or



haue ye some gardin of your owne planting, whence too gather them?
or spring they, I wote not how, of your owne trauel and pollicie, so as
you may further your selues by them? No, but contrarywyse, knowe
yee that God hath prepared them. And is it meete that you should fall
too replying ageinst him, when he hath pityed you, and shewed himself
bountifull towardes you? Is it meete that yee should presume too step
foorth too pay him, as though yee had wherwith of your awne? When
a man hath bin well kept and tended, and his host hath lent him mony
at his neede, and he hath receyued it at his hand (too pay him withall:)
shall he afterward boast, that he hath payd his hoste? There is
an hoste, that not onely is contented too doo his charitie vpon a man,
but also after he hath found hym both at bed and at boord, wyll say too
hym, Hold here wherwith too pay: too the intent it may not seeme too
you, that my charitable dealing hath bin too make an vnderlyng of
you, I wyll receyue payment for it at your hand, yea, 
                     •
                  ut yit the same
shall come out of myne owne purse. Nowe, shall he too whom suche
franknesse hath bin vsed, go and say, he hath wel payd his host? Yea,
and with what money? Euen with the same money that was put intoo
his hand. So standeth the cace with those that put forth theyr good
woorkes, too say, that God hath not saued them freely, but that they
them selues were a helpe too it. Yea, but where come they by those
good workes? That was the thing that S. Paule amed at, when he
sayd that God prepared the good woorkes. Trew it is that God prepareth
mennes conuersations by the Lawe, wherein he gyueth vs a
certaine rule how too walke according too his will: and it is all one as
if he prepared the way for vs too go in as wee ought too doo. But that
would nothing boote vs, except wee receyued the good woorkes themselues
at Gods hand. When God commaundeth vs any thing, wee
may well haue our eares beaten with the sound of it, but it will neuer
enter intoo our hartes, for wee bee full of pryde and naughtinesse, and
too bee short, it is impossible for vs too obey God, till he haue softened
our hartes, and vtterly chaunged them.
               And that is the thing which is declared too vs by the Prophets, and
in all the holy scripture. God therefore must bee fayne too make another
preparation: that is too wit, when he hath taught vs, and told vs
what is good, and what he lykeeh of, afterward he must reforme vs,
and so guide and gouerne vs by his holy spirit, as there may bee one
accord betweene our life and his lawe. Then vntill such time as God



prepare good woorks after that fashion, that is too say, till he giue vs
them by shewng vs his will, and also make vs to do them by his power:
wee must needes bee vtterly vnprofitable Now sith it is so, let
vs learne too humble our selues before God, both for that is past, and
also for that that is too come. For that which is past, let vs acknowledge
that God hath plucked vs out of the gulf of hell, and that whereas
wee were by nature damned, he hath voutsafed too haue vs too bee
his children, and therfore let vs not bee so ouerweening, as too thinke
that wee haue this or that, but let him be gloryfied as he deserueth, and
let vs assure our selues that he hath pulled vs backe from death, to the
intent, that the beginning, welspring, roote, and onely cause of our
saluation, should proceede of his onely free bestowed goodnesse. Thus
ye see in effect, that it is a poynt of trew humilitie, to giue all the glory
of our saluation vntoo God. And for that which is too come, it behoueth
too knowe that wee could not stirre one of our little fingers too
doo any good, except wee were gouerned by God, and receyued the
good works them selues at the hand of him, and of his holy spirit. So
then, as oft as wee feele our owne weakenesse, let vs flee too him for
refuge: and when wee haue doone any good, let it not puffe vs vp
with any pryde, but let vs alwayes thinke our selues so much the more
straytely bound vntoo God, yea euen by dubble. He that is yit very
weake, must confesse him selfe exceedingly bound vntoo Gods mercy,
for bearing with him: but he that goeth afore others, and is as a mirrour
of all holinesse, must confesse himselfe much more bounde vntoo
him. For why? He hath nothing of his owne, he holdeth all things of
God, and of his onely free goodnesse. Wherefore let vs all our life
long walke in such sort, as wee may still from yeere too yeere, from
mooneth to mooneth, from day to day, from houre to houre, and frō minute
too minute, continually acknowledge our selues bound vnto God
for the goodnesse which he hath giuen vs of his owne mere mercy, and
let vs thinke our selues beholden too him for all things.
               And let vs marke by the way for a conclusion, that S. Paules intent
here, is not to decypher al the causes of our saluation one by one,
but too abate mens lustinesse, that they might not make any bragges,
or any countenance 
                     〈◊〉
                   God is in their debt. Therefore it is ynough
for S. Paule to haue stopped all mens mouthes in such wyze, as they
may not take vppon them too haue aught of their owne. For contrariwize
whensoeuer God giueth vs good works, although they bee the



fruites of his mere goodnesse: yit can they not purchace vs any thing
at his hand: for wee must alwayes ground and settle our selues vppon
the forgiuenesse of our sinnes. There lyeth all our rightuousnesse.
               Too bee short, there are twoo things requisite in yeelding God the
prayse that is dew for our saluation: first that wee acknowledge our
selues too haue all things of him: and secondly that wee acknowledge
that all the good workes, and all the good will which he hath giuen vs
already, serue not too purchace vs fauour at his hand, nor for vs too
trust vppon: but (too shewe vs) that he had neede too vpholde vs, and
too burye and forget all our sinnes, and that by that meanes wee bee
iustifyed before him, bycause he acquitteth vs, notwithstanding that
wee deserue too bee condemned a hundred tymes. So then, too be shor
                     •
                  ,
when it is tolde vs, that there is nother freewill, nor any thing else in
man: it is too the ende wee should learne too gyue all glory vnto God,
and not haue any cause too vaunt our selues any more. And that afterwarde
vppon the knowing thereof, wee should vnderstand that wee
should bee in continuall trubble and perplexitie, were it not that wee
bee sure that wee shall alwayes obteine grace and mercy, by comming
too God with teares and lamenting. And how so? Bycause he voutsafeth
too acquit vs, and although he could thunder downe vppon 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
and drowne vs: yit he buryeth our sinnes by meanes of 
                     •
                  ur Lord Iesus
Christ, and receyueth vs alwayes too mercy.
               Thus then yee see how men ought in all poyntes, and in all caces
too bee confounded in themselues, and too bee ashamed of their owne
leawdnesse, that they may glorifie God: and therwithall ackowledge
that they should alwayes bee in doubt and anguish, but that God dooth
euermore pitie them, and the death and passion of our Lord Iesus
Christ, is the sacrifize wherby wee be reconcyled too him. That therfore
is the trew way too vphold and auow God too bee the Sauiour
of the world: & that also is the way for vs to father all things vpon the
grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, as he deserueth: namely by rayzing
and putting quyte away all the glorying which we pretend to haue in
our selues, and theruppon too confesse, not only that all the goodnesse
which is in vs, is of Gods putting intoo vs, but also that he must bee
fayne too beare with our infirmities, bycause wee ceasse not too prouoke
his wrath, till he make that satisfaction auaylable, which was
made by the death and passion of our Lord Iesus Christ.
               But now let vs cast our selues downe before the maiestie of our



good God, with acknowledgment of our sinnes, praying him to make
vs too feele them more and more, till wee bee so pulled downe, as there
may bee no more showe of sin in vs: and that in the meane whyle, wee
may neuerthelesse seeke the ayde and helpe of our Lord Iesus Christ.
And that forasmuch as he hath partly inlyghtened vs alredy by his
holy spirit, it may please him too increace his grace in vs more and
more, till he haue communicated it wholy vntoo vs: and in the meane
tyme so vphold vs and gouerne vs by his holy spirit, as our whole indeuer
may bee nothing else but too frame our lyfe after his holy lawe:
and he not passe vppon the great number of our sinnes which we commit,
neuer ceassing too stray away too our owne vndooing, but hold vs
backe by his secret power, vntill he take vs away out of this world,
and ioyne vs with our Lord Iesus Christ, who is the fountayne of all
perfection, that wee also may bee perfect in him. And so let vs say, Almyghtie
God heauenly father. &c.
            
            
               The twelfth Sermon, which is the fourth
vppon the second Chapter.
               
                  
                     11. VVherfore remember that you vvhich vvere sometime Gentiles
in the fleshe, beyng called vncircumcision, in respect of
that vvhich is called circumcision, made by hand in the flesh:
                     12. VVere at that time vvithout Christ, straungers too the common
vveale of Israell, and straungers from the couenants that
conteyne the promise, vvithout hope, and vvithout God in
the vvorld.
                     13. But novv in Iesus Christ, you that vvere erevvhyle farre of,
are made neere by the blud of Christ.
                  
               
               
                  ALthough the things that are preached vnto
vs generally cōcerning Gods grace, ought
too mo
                     •
                  e vs too magnifie his name, and to
acknowledge the benefyts that wee haue
receyued of him: yit notwithstanding if a
thing bee doone priuately vnto vs, then
ought wee to bee touched yit the more therwith.
The same order keepeth S. Paule
here. For wee have seene this morning,



how he made cleane riddance of all that is in man, that there myght
bee but only one ground woork of saluation, that is too wit, the mere
goodnesse of God. Now hee applyeth the same particularly too the
Ephesians, willing them too bethink themselues of their plyght wherin
God found them: as if after his speaking of all mankynd, he should
send euery one of vs too his owne experience. And in verye deede, that
which is spoken heere too the Ephesians, concerneth vs also, lyke as
if a man hauing told vs of the forlornnesse wherintoo wee bee tumbled
by Adams fall, should say: Consider also what you were, and after
what sort you liued in all beastlinesse, before such tyme as God called
you too the knowledge of himself. The thing then which wee haue too
mark, is, that S. Paule hauing shewed how that all mē from the greatest
too the least, ought too confesse that they haue their saluation
through Gods only goodnesse, addeth another particular declaration,
wherin he sheweth the thing that euery one of the faythfull ought too
knowe in himself. Trew it is that the thing which he hath sayd for that
tyme, would not agree in all poynts too our dayes: but yit shall S.
Paules answer alwayes haue his course, and serue too good purpose.
For although wee haue bin baptized from our infancie, yit come wee
of such as erst were cut of from Gods Churche. For the Iewes were
sholed out from all other nacions of the world, as a people whom God
had ordeyned too himselfe, wee were then all Heathen, (I meane
as in respect of our forefathers,) before the Gospell was preached
too the world. But now agein wee see what confuzion is come vppon
vs, through the vnthankfulnesse of such as were called too the truthe
of the Gospell, and how wee haue strayed away after such a sort, that
wee haue bin as good as cut of from Gods Churche agein. For the
baptim that wee receiued in our chyldhod, stoode vs in none other sted,
but too make vs dubble giltie before God For they that were plundged
in the superstitions of poperie, and in all the Idolatries that are
committed there, had as good as renounced their baptim, and were
become renegats: and wee can not excuze our selues too haue bin forsworne
vntoo God, seing wee were start away from his obeysaunce.
Therfore it is not for vs too make any boasting, or too seeke any excuce
too couer our wretchednesse withall: but rather too confesse freely
that wee were as deadly enemies too God, and woorthie too haue
bin vtterly giuen ouer of him, bycause he had reached vs his hand too
bring vs backe agein too the way of saluation. So then, first wee take



this text as it lyeth, to apply it to the Ephesians, and afterward looke
too take profit of it our selues. Now then let vs see the contents and
substance of these woords, Bethink your selues, and remember how
yee were sometyme Gentyles.
               
               First he putteth a difference betweene the Iewes, and those whom
God had suffered too walke on still in their owne darkenesse. For it
was a speciall priuiledge that God gaue vntoo Abrahams ofspring,
when he adopted them, too say too them, you shalbee my people whom
I lyke of, as though yee were of myne owne houshold. Those then
which came not of Abrahams lyne, were as good as banished from
Gods kingdome and Church. And he addeth, in the fleshe. Not as
he speaketh in dyuers other places, where he vseth that woord in reproche:
but too shewe that God had shewed by a visible fashion, how
wretched their state was, and that they needed not any greate deepenesse
of wit too perceyue it. For circumcizion (sayeth he) serued as
it were too rid men of their vncleannesse. And furthermore that Sacrament
was ordeyned of God, too shewe that all the seede of man is
cursed, and that wee cannot bee ryghtly made holy and pure, but by
the cutting of, & putting away of the thinges that wee haue by nature.
Too bee shorte, lyke as nowe adayes wee bee taught by Baptime
too renounce whatsoeuer wee haue by birth: so also was circumcizion
a token to shew how all men were filthy and lothsome, till they had forsaken
their owne kynd. Now then, S. Paules meaning is, that the
sayd visible signe, shewed well too all the heathen, that they were (as
yee would say) vnwoorthie too preace vnto God, and that he voutsafed
not to receyue them into the companie of the faythfull. For the Iewes
had not inuented circumcizion of their owne brayne: but (as I haue
sayd afore) God had sholed them out from the rest of the world, & all
was by reason of the priuiledge of his owne mere grace & goodnesse.
               Theruppon S. Paule addeth further, that they were at that tyme
vvithout Christ. And this serueth too shewe yit better, that men are
horrible scattered, and can do nothing but runne astraye, till God haue
knit them toogither in the bodie of his sonne, and adopted them too bee
his children. For wee knowe that Iesus Christ is the lyght of the
worlde, and that all ryghtuousnesse dwelleth in him, and that he is our
redemption and lyfe. So long then as wee haue none acquayntance
with him, wee must needes bee as poore blynd men in the darke, wee
must needes bee as good as dead, wee must needes bee naked of all holynesse,



ryghtuousenesse, power, and all goodnesse. And forasmuch
as our freedome dependeth vppon him: wee must needes bee hild vnder
the tyrannie of the diuell and of sin, till he haue raunsomed vs from
them. For this cause therfore doth S. Paule send vs heere vnder the
person of the Ephesians, too Iesus Christ, too the end, that they which
are not parttakers of Gods sonne, should knowe that it were better for
them too bee drowned a hundred tymes, than too continew alwayes in
that state. And why? For sith wee can haue nother lyfe nor soule health
nor ryghtuousenesse, nor ought else that is allowable, but in Iesus
Christ: it is all one as if he sayed, that wee haue nothing but vtter
naughtinesse and destruction in our selues.
               He addeth thereunto, the common weale of Israel: shewing thereby
that all the promises which were made too the Iewes, were grounded
vppon Iesus Christ. And therefore they that belong not too his
body, are foorthwith depryued of all Gods promises, and cannot conceyue
any hope of lyfe, but onely by imagination, wherin they beguile
themselues. And verily he addeth, the instrumentes (or couenantes
and conueyaunces) of the promises: as if he should say, that God had
not called the Iewes as it were in hudder mudther, but had passed a
solemne conueyance or euidence, which serued too leaue all the world
in condemnation. Therfore forasmuch as God had aduaunced Abrahams
linage, it must needes bee that the rest of the world was so much
the more confounded, like as if some Princes or some Cities should
make a league, all others that are not comprehended in it, are as good
as depriued of the benefite that is conteyned in it. And when God declared
that he tooke the Iewes too bee his flocke, and that he would be
their father and sauiour: he declared also that no part thereof could
come to the Gentiles, whom he had after a sort forsaken, and to whom
he had not voutsafed too shew the like mercy. Finally he sayeth, that
they had bin vvithout God, which is the full measure of all mischief.
For what shall become of man, when his God hath so shaken him of,
as there is no accesse for him, nor no comming too him agein? And
that not onely he is forsaken of his God, but also cannot but plundge
himselfe deeper and deeper intoo the bottom of hell, and make warre
ageinst God, as though he were at defiāce with him, bicause he is stubburne
and rebellious ageinst all goodnesse? Thus yee see, that the
thing which S. Paule setteth forth here, too the intent that the Ephesians
should profit themselues, by the things that he had sayd this morning



concerning the onely cause of our saluation: is that there is none
other thing for vs too trust vntoo, but onely Gods meere grace.
               But now let vs come too o
                     •
                  r selues. I haue alreadie declared breifly,
that our fathers were in the same state that S. Paule setteth downe
here. And therefore wee haue no cause too brag of, as oft as we thinke
of what roote and originall wee spring. For if the very Iewes bee at
this day a record of Gods wrath and horrible vengeance, which he
layeth vppon them for their vnbeliefe: is there not much more cause
for too cast downe their eyes, which are but as things borne out of
tyme? For the Iewes are of the holy roote that God had chozen, and
wee bee but graffed intoo it in their steade. If God hath not spared
the naturall braunches,Rom. 11. b. 16. &. 17. c. 21. what will he doo too vs that haue bin brought
in as it were ageinst nature? Loe how S. Paule exhorteth vs too
lowelinesse, too the end wee should lerne to submit our selues alwayes
too Gods meere goodnesse, and frankly and freely confesse that our
welfare consisteth therin. Also I told you secondly, not onely that
our fathers were straungers to the hope of saluation, bicause they were
not adopted as well as the Iewes: but also that the horrible scattering
which came vppon the whole world, and which reigneth in it still at
this day, ought too beate downe al pryde and presumption, that Gods
grace may shine the brighter vppon vs. Now then (as I sayd) although
wee bee baptyzed, and haue the badge of Gods goodnesse and
free adoption: yit, notwithstanding we haue bin wretched idolaters,
and were gone away from our Lord Iesus Christ, and the things that
wee had in greatest estimation, turned too our greater damnation, in
steade of being for our welfare. Therefore wee haue good cause here
too bethinke our selues.
               Furthermore for asmuch as wee bee short witted in magnifying
Gods grace, let vs wey well this woord which S. Paule vseth heere
to bring vs to remembrance of the things which wee myght forget.
For when wee bee indewed with Gods grace, and it hath pleased him
too giue vs some good desyre too walk in his feare, & he hath wrought
so in vs by his holye spirit, as men may perceyue that there is some
goodnesse in vs: it maye make vs too forget by and by what wee
were afore, by meanes wherof Gods grace is as good as buryed. Too
the intent therfore that our present plyght hinder not our continuall
praysing of God, and our esteeming of his goodnesse and grace as it
deserueth: let no length of tyme darken the benefites that we haue receyued



of God, but let vs as it were enter intoo examination of them euery
day. And although God haue chaunged our state at this day,
so as wee bee no more the men that wee were afore: yit notwithstanding
let vs beare in mynd, that before God had pitie vppon vs, wee
were as seely sheepe that went astray, and as beastes that are vtterly
lost, and that without the same small beginning, wee had bin damned
ten hundered thousand tymes erst, had not God preuented vs, and giuen
vs remedie for the cursed state wherin wee were. Yee see then,
that the thing which we haue to consider vpō the sayd speech, wherby
S. Paule putteth the Ephesians in mynd, what they were afore, is,
that although God had put awaye the thing that shoulde haue made
them ashamed, and marked them afore hand with his holy spirit, so as
they were become as precious perles: yit notwithstanding he will
haue them too bethink themselues, (lyke as in very deede it is, the
frutes of repentance which the scripture setteth downe,) that when
God hath reached vs his hand, and brought vs home agein from our
straying, wee ceasse not too beethink vs of our (former) sinnes, euen
in such wyze as wee may bee sorye, abashed, and ashamed of them.
               Whereas he sayeth, that the Gentyles haue good cause too hold
downe their heades, bycause they were sometyme without assurance of
Gods goodnesse and loue: therby wee bee put in mynd, that wee receyue
a singular benefyte at Gods hand, when wee haue the vse of his
Sacramentes, which are as warran
                     •
                  es, that he taketh and auoweth
vs too bee of his household and Church. Trew it is, that if wee abuse
them, wee shall pay deerly for it: but yit whatsoeuer come of it,
when the Sacramentes are put too the end wheruntoo they were ordeyned,
it is certein, that they bee as it were inestimable treasures, as
I sayd afore. For although wee haue Gods promis that he taketh
vs for his children, euen from our comming out of our mothers womb:
yit is there nothing but vnclennesse in our flesh. Now then, haue wee
baptim? There it is shewed vs that God washeth and clenzeth vs
from all our vnclennesse, that he pulleth vs out of the confuzion wherin
wee were with our father Adam: and that he will haue vs clothed
with Iesus Christ, too bee parttakers of all his goods, as though they
were our owne.
               Wee see then what baptim importeth, and consequently how much
we ought too esteeme this grace of Gods comming vntoo vs in such
wyse, and of his shewing of himself too bee our father after so homely



maner. As much is too bee sayd of the supper. For there it is shewed
vs visibly, that Iesus Christ is the trew foode of our s
                     •
                  ules, that
like as our bodyes are susteined & nurrished with the bread and wyne,
so wee haue our spirituall lyfe of the verye substance of Gods sonne.
Seing then that our Lord Iesus dooth as it were from hand too hand
shewe vs, that he giueth vs his bodie and blud too bee our spirituall
meat and drink: is it not a thing much more worth than all things that
are too bee found in this world? And herin wee see how malicious and
frowarde most men are: for as touching the Lords Supper, manie
come to it, which rush thither lyke wretched beasts, not knowing why
it was ordeined. Some agein make but a custome & ordinarie vse of it:
& although thei haue bin taught to what purpose it auaileth vs: yit they
do but wring their mouth at it, & all is one to thē, when it is once past
with thē. And othersome defyle it euen wilfully. And as touching baptim,
we se how the world goeth with it. For wheras we ought to think
dayly, & not only once aday, but euery houre of the day, both vpō Babtim,
& also vpon the Lords supper, to confirme our selues the better
in Gods grace: so little dooth any man sett his mynd that way, that if
baptim bee minnistred in the Church, men make none account of it.
Scarsly can one bee found among a hundred, that can fitly tell and vtter
what that signe of our adoption betokeneth. And yit yee see what
disdeyne is matched with that ignorance. Must not God after his
long suffering of vs, and his pacient wayting for vs, be reuenged of
such dishonour, when his grace is so lyghtly esteeemed among vs? So
much the more therfore dooth it stand vs in hand, too marke well what
S. Paule telleth vs heere, when he sayeth, that the Gentyles being
depryued of the Sacramentes which God giueth too his children for
a warrant of his goodnesse and loue, are in miserable taking, too the
end wee may lerne too make much of the priuiledge which he hath giuen
vs, not too boast folishly of it, as hipocrytes doo, who abuse Gods
name continewally: but too make vs too fare the better by a thing of
so greate pryce and valew, and too make vs knowe that wee bee no
whit better than they which are as poore hungrestarued soules, ageinst
whom God shetteth the gate still, and too whom he voutsafeth
not tooo impart those pledges of his, wherein he sheweth and witnesseth
that he will bee our father. Yee see the Turkes haue circumcision
as well as the Iewes, and yit is it nothing woorth, bycause there is
no more any promis of God goyng with it: and yit notwithstanding



wee come of Adams race as well as they. Wherefore haue wee Baptim,
but bycause God intended too shewe himselfe the more pitifull towardes
vs, and too vtter the riches of his goodnesse? Agein, the Papistes
will needes bee called Christians, and haue Baptim as well as
wee. And yit in the meane whyle they bee bereft of the holy Supper,
yea and they haue the abhominable Masse, wherein they renounce the
death and passion of our Lord Iesus Christ. And what cause is there
why wee should bee so preferred before them, sauing that God would
haue vs too bee as myrrours of his infinite mercy? So much the more
therefore behoueth it vs too walke in awe and warenesse, and too set
store by the things which God sheweth vs too bee of such woorthinesse
and excellencie, that wee may fare the better by them. Wherefore
marke it for a speciall poynt, when S. Paule speaketh heere of Circumcision
and vncircumcision.1. Cor. 
                        •
                     . d. 19. & Gala. 5. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . & 6. d. 15. For although he say in other places,
that Circumcision is nothing, (howbeeit that was but bycause it was
abolished, and the vse therof ceassed, as of all other figures of the Law:)
yit notwithstanding, at such tyme as God ordeyned it, and so long as
the Iewes vsed it holily, it was a sure warrant to them of Gods adoption,
as if he had clenzed them from all the filthinesse that is in Adams
race, and appropryed them vntoo himselfe.
               After he hath sayd so, he addeth, that they vvere vvithout Christ,
and vvithout promises. Here he sheweth that the Sacraments take
and borrowe their force of Gods woord. For if there were nomore but
the bare signes, it were no matter of great importance. If Circumcizion
had bin giuen too the Iewes without any doctrine or instructiō: too
what purpose had it serued? Surely they had bin neuer the better for
it. But when as God sayeth, I am the God which sanctifyeth you, you
shalbee my children, I will receyue you, and therwith all take you for
myne heritage: and on the other syde also I giue my self too you, and
wilbee your lyfe: forasmuch as Circumcizion had such promises, it
was as an inestimable treasure too the Iewes, bicause the foundation
(that is to wit, our Lord Iesus Christ) was layd sure, wheron the promises
were setled, and as yee would say, confirmed. That then is
the cause why S. Paule ioyneth heere the common weale of Israell,
and the instruments of Gods promises, and our Lord Iesus Christ al
toogither. Howbeeit in speaking of the common weale of Israell, he
sheweth, that God had chozen one certeyne linage which he would
haue too bee holie: and so was it too bee concluded, that all the rest



were vnholie. In speaking of the instruments of the promises, he sheweth
(as I haue touched alredie) that wee must not looke vppon Circumcision
in it selfe, but wee must direct it too the ryght end of it. It
becommeth vs too knowe wherefore God would haue it vsed among
the Iewes: for otherwyse it is but an Apes toy, as the number of fond
deuotions which the Gentyles had, whereby they hoped too haue had
holynesse: but all of it was but abuse and trumperie, bycause they had
no promis of God. Lykewyse they say now adayes in the papacie,
that they haue many Sacramentes, and therewithall as many murlimewes
and gewgawes as can bee: but all that God disalloweth, is
but pelting trash. And why? for there is no woorde that sanctifyeth
them. So then let vs marke well, that too profit our selues by the
Sacramentes, wee must alwayes be taught them by Gods doctrine.
And thereby wee may iudge, that manie are cut of from the Church
of God, who notwithstanding are now adayes thought to bee hyghest
in it. For in the meane whyle where is the instructiō, which they should
haue too be partakers of the benefytes that God offereth them? They
will alledge their Baptim, and they will say, they receyue the Lordes
Supper. If a man ask them too what end: they vnderstand nothing
at all, and that is as an vtter abolishing of the power of the Sacramentes.
So much the more therfore dooth it stand vs on hand too
come backe too this poynt, namely too lerne of the Gospell, too what
end Baptim was ordeyned, what frute it yeeldeth vs, and which is the
ryght and lawfull vse of it: and also too consider whertoo the holie
Supper auayleth vs. For if wee haue not Gods woord: our Lord
himselfe telleth vs, that the Sacramentes which we recey
                     •
                  e, are as it
were imbaced, and there is nothing but falsehod in them. And lyke as
if a man should set a (Princes) seale to a letter that had nothing therin,
or which had but imaginations and dreames contryued in it, it were an
offence woorthy of death: so also forsomuch as the Sacramentes are
as Seales too warrant Gods promyses vntoo vs, and too make them
of authoritie among vs: if wee separate them from his woorde, it is
certeyne, that wee bee falsifyers before God and his Angells. That
therefore is one thing more which wee haue too marke vppon this
streyne.
               And wee must marke also, that Iesus Christ is set downe with the
common weale of Israell, and with the Sacramentes and promises,
too shewe that it is he on whom all of vs depend. For it is certeyne



that God neuer commeth at men without the mediator. For sith he
hateth vnrightuousnesse, & all men are cursed in Adam: it was requisite
that our Lord Iesus Christ should step in, that wee myght haue
some enterance and accesse vntoo God.2. Cor. 1. d. 20. And that is the cause why S.
Paule sayeth also, that he is the yea and the Amen of all Gods promises.
For there shall neuer be any certeintie of Gods promises without
Iesus Christ.Exod. 24. b. 8. And for the same cause also all things were dedicated
in the Lawe with blud, yea and euen the booke of the Lawe it selfe.
When the couenant was red openly,Hebr. 9. 
                        •
                     . 20. and published solemly too the
people, the booke was besprinckled with the blud of the sacrifize, too
shewe that all the doctrine conteyned in the Lawe, and all the promyses
wherby God adopteth those too bee his children, whom he hath admitted
intoo his Church, must bee confirmed by the blud of our Lord
Iesus Christ. So then, will wee haue the promyses too bee sure and
infallible? Will wee bee assured of them, that wee may freely call vppon
God, and fyght ageinst all temptations? Wee must resort alwayes
too Iesus Christ. It is much when God telleth vs with his
owne holy mouth, that he will reserue vs for his owne: but yit must we
needes tremble continually at his maiestie, till wee haue cast our eye
vppon our Lord Iesus Christ, and knowe that God lyketh well of vs
for his sake, so as our sinnes bee buryed, and shall neuer come too account.
Thus yee see how the promises, the Sacramentes, and all that
euer wee haue, must bee ratifyed by Iesus Christ. Too bee short, (if I
may make an humane comparison, and speake gr
                     •
                  ssely) he is the trew
sauce too make all things sauerie that belong too our saluation. For
without him, wee should continue euermore as men in a swound, and
(as I haue sayd alredye) wee could conceyue no hope at all, nor haue
our myndes so settled, as wee myght resort vntoo God for refuge. Not
without cause therefore d
                     •
                  oth Saint Paule say, that such as haue no
Circumcision, nor other Sacramentes whereby too bee consecrated
vntoo God, nor any pr
                     •
                  myses of saluation, are without Christ.
               And now he addeth a thing which may seeme hard & straunge at the
first sight, when he saith, that the Ephesians were vvithout God. For
it is certaine that although they were wretched Idolaters, yit they had
a certeyne opinion that the world was not made of it selfe: for wee
k
                     ••
                  we that all men haue continually hild so
                     •
                  e seede of Religi
                     •
                  n, and
euen they which ouersho
                     •
                  e them selues so farre, as too wype out all
knowledge of God, are first most vgly monsters, and secondly although



they striue too thrust all knowledge of God vnder foote, yit must they
needes haue harthitings, that sting them in spyte of their teeth, and
they bee driuen too feele that they cannot scape the hand of God. Howsoeuer
the cace stand, wee bee na
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  ally inclyned too knowe that there
is a God. And the heathen men haue alwayes had their deuotions
and deuine seruices (as 
                     •
                  hey termed them) to shew that they worshipped
some Godhead. How then doth S. Paul say here, that they were
without God? Wee haue to note, that it is not ynough for men to confesse
that there is some certeyne Godhead, and to indeuer to discharge
themselues of their duetie by seruing of a God: but they must also haue
a certeyne settled beleefe, that they wander not too and fro after the
manner that is spoken of in the first Chapter too the Romanes,Ro
                        •
                     . 1. c. 21. where
it is sayd, that such as deuyze straūge shapes of God, doo vanish away
in their owne foolishe imaginations. Now it is certeyn, that all such
as are not taught by Gods worde, by the lawe, by the Prophets, & by
the Gospell, are out of the right way, and after a sort, at their wittes
end, so as they bee tossed too and fro like wauering reeds that yeeld too
euery wynd, and theruppon make sundrye shapes of God. For euery
man buildeth and forgeth crooked conceytes in his owne brayne,
and wee knowe that mans wit is as a shop of Idolatrie & s
                     •
                  perstition,
in somuch that if a man beleeue his owne conceyt, it is certeyne, that
he shall forsake God, and forge some Idoll in his owne brayne. Lo
                     •
                  
what wee bee. And it may right wel be sayd, that we be without God,
when wee wander away after that fashion in our owne imaginations,
and in our false opinions. And that is the cause why S. Paule sayeth,
that such as haue had a mynd too worship some vnknowen Gods, haue
woorshipped nothing but Idoles and fantasticall imaginations, and
that God belongeth not at all vnto them, and so consequently, that they
were vtterly forsaken of him, lyke as they were become renegates, &
had renounced him before. Somuch the more then behoueth it vs too
trauell and take peyne too knowe which is the God whom wee ought
too worship. I haue told you alreadye, that it is not ynough for a man
too alledge that he hath a good intent, and that he ment too worship
God: that will go for no payment: for God lyketh not of the libertie
that men take too make themselues beleeue this or that. Sith it is so,
wee must present our selues before God with all warenesse, that be
may shewe vs the way too come vntoo him. For else wee shall but go
astray, and he that runneth swiftest, shalbe furthest of frō him, yea & in



the end breake his necke. Lo in what cace wee bee till God haue reached
vs his hand, and set vs in the ryght way, that wee may not bee as
poore wandering beasts all the tyme of our lyfe.
               Agein, for asmuch as he hath giuen vs a record of his maiestie in
the holy scripture: it becommeth vs too hold our selues short therunto,
and not too couet too knowe any thing which is not shewed vs there.
What must then bee our lodestarre too knowe God by? Too suffer our
selues too bee taught by his woord, and too bee so discret, as to receyue
whatsoeuer is conteyned there, without geynsaying, and not too presume
to adde any thing at all thertoo. And wee ought so much the more
to haue that care,1. Iohn. 2. d. 22. 23. sith we knowe how S. Iohn auoweth, that he which
hath not the sonne, hath not the father. Then lyke as I haue told you,
that bycause God reueleth himselfe in this woorde, it behoueth vs too
seeke him there: so also forasmuch as our Lord Iesus Christ is his liuely
image, let vs not enter intoo ouer hygh speculations, to knowe what
God is: but let vs repayre too Iesus Christ, acknowledging that it is
his office too bring vs too God his father, and that it is he by whome
wee must bee guyded, and so shall wee bee sure that wee shall not bee
without God in this world. Now if they that take so much peyne, and
trott vp and downe too serue God, bee condenmed heere too bee without
God, bycause they haue not hild the trew rule, but haue bin beguyled
in their superstitions: what shall become of the dogges and swyne
that haue no awe at all of God, specially sith they bereue themselues of
all knowledge, and degenerate intoo beastes, after they haue had some
vnderstanding of the truth, by hauing their eares beaten with the holy
Scripture: Of which sort wee see a great number nowe adayes,
who too take the aduauntage of the tyme, and too make good cheere at
their pleasure, could fynd in their hartes too quench, or too darken the
lyght that God had caused too shyne vppon them, yea euen too the vtter
defying of Gods maie
                     •
                  tie, as though there were no more instruction
at all. Wee see how this cursed 
                     •
                  eede is dispersed abrode at this
day through all the whole world. But (as I sayd afore) if the poore ignorant
sort, which neuer had any certeyne way, but haue bin as blynde
wretches wandering heere and there too seeke God, and yit he hath not
s
                     •
                  ewed himselfe vntoo them, haue none excuce at all, but are condemned
at Gods hand, bycause they had not a trew roote: what shall beco
                     •
                  e
of the vnhappie wretches that despyze God in that wyse, and

                     〈◊〉
                   ageinst him, saying, wee knowe no more what the trew doctrine



and Religion meane. So much the more then ought wee too humble
our selues, and too knowe that sith God hath reueled himselfe vnto vs,
now that he is ioyned too vs with an insepa
                     •
                  able bond, and hath shewed
himselfe a father too vs, and hath voutsafed too make vs members
of the bodie of our Lord Iesus Christ, and made vs one with him, with
condition that whatsoeuer he hath, belongeth now vnto vs: we ought
too lerne too magnifie that grace, and too acknowledge what we haue
bin, and what wee should bee still, if God had not shewed himself mercifull
towardes vs.
               Heruppon a man myght demaund what S. Paule ment by the
woord VVorld: for it should seeme that out of the world they were not
without God. Howbeeit, that was too aggrauate the matter so much
the more, by saying that the Ephesians had inioyed the lyght of
the Sunne, all the Elementes had serued them, & they had receyued so
manie commodities of Gods gift in all his creatures, and yit had not
knowen him. For what else is the world but an open stage wheron
God will haue his maiestie seene? Let vs lift vp our eyes: doo not the
Sunne, the Moone, and the Starres, leade vs too him that gaue them
the vertewes which wee perceyue in them? For behold, the sonne is
farre of from vs, and yit he giueth vs lyght. Agein, he causeth the earth
too bring foorth frutes, also wee see the dubble course that he keepeth:
and although he wander now on the one side, and now on the other, yit
notwithstanding he keepeth his compas continually, and neuer fogetteth
how farre he ought to go on the one side or on the other, as huge a
masse as he is. If a Ball or a Boule were too bee hild vp, it woold
neede some help: but behold, the Sunne hath nothing to hold it vp, but
the secret power of God: and yit notwithstanding he is so huge and
infinite a masse, as exceedeth all the whole earth. Mount he vp, or go
he lowe, turne he, or returne he, on the one side or on the other: yit keepeth
he his course stil euery day through the whole world, & euery yere
also on the contrary part, and yit for all this he misseth not in any of all
those thinges. Too bee short, when wee behold the skyes, wee ought
too bee rauished with desyre to go vnto God. Agein, when we behold
the thinges that are neerer vs, namely the varietie of the good things
that God bestoweth vppon vs: (wee haue cause too doo the lyke.)
Finally without going any further, let vs but enter intoo our selues.
If a man looke but vppon one of his fyngers, what workmanship and
what goodnesse of God is there? Wee then are in the worlde where



God vttereth such abundance of myracles, wherby it is his meaning,
too bee knowen and worshipped: and yit notwithstanding wee play
the beastes, and go on lyke blockeheades without any vnderstanding,
not knowing the God that made vs and fashyoned vs, euen him that
vttereth and sheweth himselfe in all his creatures both aboue and beneath.
Is not this ynough then too bereeue them of all excu
                     •
                  e, which
play the beastes in their ignorance, lyuing heere but only too deuoure
Gods benefytes, and in the meane whyle repayre not too him, too doo
him honour, or to offer him their seruice? Then is it not without cause,
that Saint Paule addeeth yit further this saying, that such as were
so destitute of the knowledge of the Gospell, were without God in
the world.
               Now thereuppon on the other side, he setteth downe the grace of
God, which they had receyued, too the ende, they should knowe that
it was not of their owne purchace, nor obteyned by their owne pollicy
and abilitie, but that they ought too consider well how greatly they
bee bound vntoo God, for rayzing them vp too heauen from the deepe
dungeons of hell. If God had but lent vs his hand to lift vs vp when
wee were falne but too the ground, and so let vs alone in our owne
state, wee should be beholden to him for it. For when we bee falne,
and some body helpes too lift vs vp agein, wee will cun him thanke, &
so ought we too doo. Behold now, God hath not only lift vs vp from
the ground, but also drawen vs out of the gulf of hell. And his so dooing,
is not too make vs crepe here beneath vpon the earth, or to make
vs too inioye the benefits that he offereth vs here presently: but too aduaunce
vs too the kingdome of heauen, as wee haue seene heretofore,
how wee bee put in possession of it alredy by fayth, and are set in the
person of Iesus Christ in the glory that he hath purchaced for vs, for
he is entred into it in our behalf. The seeing it is so, haue we not cause
too magnifie Gods grace so much the more? So haue yee Saint
Paules meaning, in that he sayth, that novv by Iesus Christ you be
come nere vntoo God, euen you (sayeth he) vvhich vvere farre of
before. Therefore at a word (forasmuch as the whole, cannot be layd
foorth at this tyme) let vs vnderstand, that whereas men seeme to haue
some worthinesse in thēselues, they cannot but stray away to their own
destruction, so long as they bee separated from God, bycause that by
nature they 
                     •
                  ee straungers vntoo bim, yea and quite cut of from him.
Moreouer let euery of vs knowe for his owne part, how wee had forgotten



God, and were quite turned away from him, till he called vs
agein vntoo him. When wee knowe this, let vs learne too magnifie
his grace for voutsafing too reconcyle vs too himselfe, and too put away
all the enmitie that was betwixt him and vs, and too make vs his
children of his deadly enemyes, assuring our selues, that all this is
done by meanes of our Lord Iesus Christ, too the intent wee should
out of that fountayne drawe all that belongeth too our saluation. And
furthermore let vs consider also, what furtherance wee haue by the
helpes that God hath giuen vs too come too Iesus Christ by, and too
confirme vs in him, too the end wee may haue a resolute and sure doctrine.
As for example, when the Gospell is dayly preached vntoo vs,
Iesus Christ is offered there vntoo vs, and he on his side calleth vs
vntoo him. Too he short, he hath his arm
                     •
                  s stretched out to i
                     •
                  brac
                     •
                  
vs. Let vs vnderstand that: and afterward let vs adde the Sacraments
theruntoo, and seeing that Iesus Christ hath not onely commaunded
the open preaching of the Goswell, 
                     〈◊〉
                   he sheweth himself
too bee our Shepherd, and that he will haue vs too bee his flocke,
but also confirmeth the same by Bapti
                     ••
                  , & by his last Supper: let vs
take good heede that we make not those signes vnauaylable through
our owne malice and vnthankfulnesse: but let vs (rather) consider
to what end God hath ordeyned them, and let vs so vse them, as wee
may growe more and more in fayth, and bee thereby in
                     ••
                  amed with
such zeale, as wee may indeuer too give our selues wholly vntoo God,
sith it hath pleazed him also too giue himselfe vntoo vs.
               And now let vs f
                     •
                  l downe before the maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faults, praying him, not only too make euery
of vs too knowe the vyces wherwith wee bee atteynted, but also those
which he hathe voutsafed too cle
                     •
                  ze vs of, and specially that wee may
come too our originall, and consider that euen from our moothers
wombes wee bring nothing but 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and that wee ceasse not too
increace the 
                     〈◊〉
                   and more, that when wee knowe it, wee
may blisse his holie name for the knowledge which he hath giuen vs,
and bee so prou
                     •
                  ked too repayre vntoo him, as wee may hold the ryght
way, without swaruing from our Lorde Iesus Christ, bycause that
without him wee must needs bee 
                     •
                  ani
                     •
                  ted the kingdome of 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
and shut qu
                     •
                  te and cleane out of it. So then, let vs hold that way, and
call vppon this good God of ours in
                     •
                  e
                     ••
                  antly, that he voutsafe to make
vs feele by experience, that his calling of vs vnto him, is not in vayne:



that wee fynding such frute of our prayers, may bee so much the more
incoraged too flee too him for our ref
                     •
                  ge, and also to giue him thanks
for all the benefyts which wee receyue at his hand. That it may please
him too graunt this grace, not only too vs, but also too all people. &c.
            
            
               The .xiii. Sermon, which is the fift
vppon the second Chapter.
               
                  
                     13 Novv in Iesus Christ, you that erst vvere farre of, are mad
                           •
                        
neere by the blood of Christ.
                     14 For he is our peace, vvhich hath of both 
                           •
                        vvayne made one,
and broken dovvne the vvall that vvas betvvixt them,
                     15 That is too vvit, the emnitie, through his flesh, aboolishing
the lavve of the comm
                           •
                        undements vvhich vvere in ordinances:
too the end he might set them both in himself, to make
one nevv man of them.
                  
               
               
                  WEe haue see
                     •
                  e heeretoofore howe wee bee
all enemies of God by na
                     •
                  ure, bycause we
bee gone away from all rightuou
                     ••••
                  sse,
through the sinne of Adam, so as there is
nothing in vs but leawdenesse and rebelliousnesse.
And although men soothe and
flatter themselues, it is certayne, that they
cannot bring any thing before God, which
shal not prouoke his 
                     〈…〉
                  
God then must needes disclayme vs for his 
                     〈…〉
                  
wee must bee fayne too bee guyded by our Lord Iesus Christ: for wee
cannot come vntoo God but by that meane. 
                     〈…〉
                  
had some familiaritie with God, bycause he had adopted them: in respect
whereof it is sayd, that Abrahams ofspring was holy: not that
they had more woorthinesse than the rest of the worlde: but bycause
of Gods goodnesse who had voutsafed too chooze them. And therefore
before suche tyme as our Lorde Iesus Christ came intoo the



world, the one were in comparison neerer, & the other were further of
from God. Not that the Iewes were better woorth than the Gentyles,
as I sayd afore: but bycause it had pleased God too accounte
the
                     •
                   as of his owne house. Yee see then that they were nygh, bycause
it was sayd vntoo them, that God 
                     •
                  ate among them, and that they
were a priestly kingdome, whereof they had also as it were a visible
signe by the recordes that were giuen them, as by the Sanctuarie
and by all the appurtenances therunto belonging. Now S. Paule framing
heere his matter too the Gentyles, sayeth, that they haue chaunged
their state, bycause that wheras they were farre of from God, they
were made neere him by the crosse of Iesus Christ: And that serueth
too the magnifying of Gods grace the more. For as I haue declared
heertoofore, if wee consider not in what plyght God fyndes vs before
he reach vs his hand too draw vs too him: wee shall neuer knowe
how much wee bee beholden and bound vntoo him, nor how great his
mercy is towardes vs. But when it is shewed vs, that euen from our
birth wee bee cursed, and the diuell holdeth vs vnder his tyranny, and
wee bee in thraldom vntoo sin, and God is as it were armed ageinst
vs, too bee our iudge with all extremitie: when this geere is set before
our eyes, and it is added further, that God hath drawen vs out of the
dungeon of hell, too aduaunce vs to the kingdome of heauen, assuring
vs that wee haue our inheritance there, which cannot fayle vs, and also
it is shewed vs, that wee haue the certeintie of all these things in
Iesus Christ: then must wee needes bee rauished too woonderment,
considering that Gods goodnesse surmo
                     ••
                  teth all our vnderstanding.
This is the thing that S. Paule goeth forward withall heere ane
                     •
                  .
And this matter is well woorthie too be often remembered: nother is
it too bee feared, that it is but needlesse talke too put vs in mynd too
yeeld God his dew honour, and too haue a stedfast setlednesse, so as
wee may call vppon him freely, being throughly perswaded and resolued,
that he will alwayes bee a father too vs, and accept vs as his children,
namely if wee bee members of his only sonne, as knitte vntoo
him by beleefe of the Gospell. Yee see then that the thing which wee
haue too marke in the first place, is, that by the meanes of our Lord
Iesus Christ, bycause he hath reconcyled vs too God his father by his
death, wee bee now come neere too the kingdome of heauen, from
whence wee were farre of, yea and without hope too haue any accesse
or enterance thither. And although S. Paule haue spoken but too



                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  


                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  


                  
one nation: yit is his matter generall. And so the holie Ghoste exhorteth
vs at this day by the same doctrine, too consider our owne miserie,
that wee may be abashed in our selues, and receyue the inestimable
benefyte that is offered vs by the Gospell in the person of Christ.
               Hereuppon he addeth, that hee is our peace, making both one,
yea euen those that were farre of, as well as them that were neere.
Lyke as in the forerehearced sentence S. Paule ment too humble
the Gentiles, and shewed howe muche they were indetted vntoo
God: so heere he addeth a warning for the Iewes, to pull downe their
pryde, that they myght not think themselues too bee better than other
men, bicause God had chozen them. For acording as men are alwayes
giuen to auaunce themselus beyond measure, that people abused Gods
grace, and bare thēselues in hand that the linage of Abraham was as
a linage of Angels. Too bee short, when it was told them, that the
Church should bee vnited togither both of Iewes and Gentyles without
exception: they thought that God did them great wrong and iniurie.
In somuch that it was oftentymes told them, that Gods choozing
of them, was nother for their vertue, nor for their nobilitie, nor for
any thing else that he found in their persons: but bicause he had loued
their fathers without any desert of theirs. Often tymes therfore were
they warned by Moyses and the Prophets, too chalenge nothing at al
too them selues, but too goe too Gods free goodnesse, too spye out
them selues there, too the ende they myght confesse, that if they had
any prerogatiue aboue others, that was not of themselues, nor for their
own sakes, but bicause it was Gods good pleasure too keepe them to
himself for his owne heritage. And yit for all that, S. Paule sheweth
heere, that the Iewes renounce their own saluation, if they match not
with the Gentiles in true brotherhood. For why: Although the Iewes
were neere God alredye, and had witnesse that he hild them for his
children: yit notwithstanding, the matter hung in suspence til the comming
of our Lord Iesus Christ. Then behoued it them too bee knit to
God by the mediator, or else they should haue had no peace in their
consciences. For when men examin themselues, they must needs conclude
by and by that God is iustly their enemye. And for proof therof,
what haue wee in our thoughts, in our lusts, in our soules, and in our
bodies, but vtter corruption? Therfore it ought to make vs to quake
as oft as wee thinke what wee bee. But the Iewes had the Ceremonies
and shadowes of the Law, which were assurances of Gods grace



vntoo them. Yea, but if they had stayed there, what a thing had that
bin? For the blud of brute beasts could not scoure away their spottes,
nor set them in Gods fauour. Therefore it stoode them on hand too
resort too Iesus Christ. And that is the cause why S. Paule sheweth,
that the Iewes ought not too too bee so puffed vp with pryde, as too
shet the heathen out of the doores, as though they were not woorthie
too bee of Gods Church. For Iesus Christ is the mediator as well
of the one as of the other, vntoo God his father. In so much, that without
him, all of vs are shet out from the hope of saluation. No man then
ought too despyze his neyghbour in this cace, nor too looke ouer the
shoulder at him, as the prouerb sayeth. But wee ought too imbrace
one another in 
                     •
                  rew vnitie of fayth and loue, knowyng that euerychone
of vs from the greatest too the least, should ryghtfully bee cutte of from
Gods Church, but that he of his owne mere goodnesse gathereth vs
too him. After the same maner dooth S. Iames exhort the great men
of this world too glory in their smalnesse,Iames 
                        •
                     . b. 8. 
                        •
                     
                   bycause God hath taken away
the blyndfolding that letted them too know their owne wretchednesse.
For wee knowe that men doo wilfully abuse their greatnesse,
and beleeue them selues too bee marueylous wyghtes, tyll they come
too knowe God. Therefore the great men of this worlde haue their
eyes blyndfolded, and that deceyueth them, and maketh them too take
leaue too doo what they liste. Now Saint Iames sayeth, that they
haue cause too glorye of their smalnesse, for that our Lorde discouereth
them too bee creatures out of all hope, as of themselues, and yit
neuerthelesse taketh them intoo his fauour of his owne mercy. And let
the little ones (sayeth he) reioyce in their nobilitie, bycause God hath
exalted them: in somuch that whereas they were but as wretched
woormes, and had nothing but reproche in them, God hath taken them
vp, and made them new creatures. Yee see then that the meanes too
vnite vs as wee ought too bee, is, that euerye of vs in his degree acknowledge
himselfe too bee in a wretched and miserable plyght: an
                     •
                  
that when he hath yeelded all too Gods mere mercy, he acknowledge
that the same is spred ouer all at this day, and that it is not for vs too
stint or too brydle him, but in asmuch as he hath chozen vs, it is our
dew
                     •
                  ie too receyue those intoo our fellowship, whom he hath set in the
same aray and company with vs. That (say I) is the thing that Saint
Paule amed at, in saying that our Lord Iesus Christ is the peace of
all men, yea euen as well of them that were mere afore, as of them that



were yit farre of. But yit (as I tolde yee afore) he had an eye too the
foolishe ouerweening of the Iewes, which woulde haue driuen away
the G
                     •
                  ntyles from the kingdome of God. And he telleth vs, that if
wee mynd too haue Iesus Christ too bee our mediator, too giue vs enterance
too God his father, and too guyde vs thither, and that all this
should bee grounded vppon Gods mere mercy: let vs not bee so folish
as too clayme aught too our selues, as who should say, wee were better
than other men, or ought too bee preferred before them: but let euery
of vs acknowledge that all of vs had neede of Gods infinite mercye,Rom. 2. 
                        •
                     6 b. 9. & Gala. 3. d. 22.
bycause all of vs were shet vp vnder sinne, as S. Paule sayeth in another
place.
               Now must we apply this well too our owne behoofe. For some
thinke that men are aduaunced the rather, bycause some of them haue
bin of an honest and vnblamable conuersation to the worldward: some
borne of honorable houses, and othersome indewed with ex
                     ••
                  llent vertewes,
or with some skill and cunning. Too be short, euery man sercheth
and seeketh as much as is possible, too alledge some thing
why God hath accepted him rather than his neyghbours. But let vs
lerne, that although wee were neere God in outward appeerance, yit
notwithstanding, the only way too bee in his fauour, and too bee able
too call vppn him, and too hope that he will hold vs in his fatherly
loue euen too the end, is, that Iesus Christ bee our head. And how
may that bee?Luke. 19. b. 10. 12. It is certeyne that he is come to saue that which was
lost. And agein, (as it is sayd in another place) it is a sure and infallible
saying,M
                        ••
                     k. 9. b. 13. that our Lord Iesus Christ came too call agein too saluation,
the sinners that were in damnation.Luke. 5. f. 
                        •
                     2. Sith it is so, let vs learne too
humble our selues with all modestie, and not only too shrinke in our
hornes,1. T
                        ••
                     . 1. c. 15. but also too bee vtterly abaced and brought vnder foote, that
God may bee glorified as he is worthie, and that one of vs perke not
aboue another, but make all one bodie, for that is the condicion wher
                  
                     •
                  ppon
wee bee called.
               Furthermore, the tytle that S. Paule giueth vntoo our Lord Iesus
Christ, namely that he is our peace, ought too bee well considered: for
without that wee should alwayes be as a straught, or as blocks, for they
that haue any feeling of theyr sinnes, cannot bee in rest without feeling
of sore 
                     •
                  orinentes, but are so out of quyet, as it were better for them too
bee sunken vnder the earth, than to see thēselues so cyted before Gods
iudgment seate euery minute of an houre, and too bee distressed in such



sorte. Then if wee haue not Iesus Christ for our peace, surely the 
                     ••
                  
                  kening
vp of our consciences must needes daunt vs, and hold vs as it
were vppon the Racke, by making vs too 
                     •
                  eele that God settes himself
ageinst vs as an enemy, or else it m
                     •
                  st needes vtterly 
                     〈◊〉
                  , vs, and
make vs brute beastes, so as we shal not only fal
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
but also bee so bewitched by the diuell, as wee shall feele no more gre
                     •
                  f
nor remorse for them. And so this lesson, where it is sayd, that Iesus
Christ is our peace, cannot bee 
                     〈…〉
                  . For first it warneth
vs to bee touched to the quicke with out 
                     〈◊〉
                  , so 
                     〈…〉
                  
sory for them, considering that Gods 
                     〈…〉
                   accordingly
as he calleth none vnto him, but such as are 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                   tyred.
Agein, when we once know that: wee may ouerleape all distrust
& doubting, bycause that wheras we haue prouoked Gods wrath: i
                     •
                   is
appeased ageyn by our Lord Iesus Christ: wheras we haue 
                     〈◊〉
                  
with God, and kept continuall warre ag
                     ••
                  yn
                     ••
                   him: Iesus Christ 
                     〈◊〉
                  
made agreement betwixt vs: and wher as God 
                     〈◊〉
                   vs for our
sinnes, and for our naughty and froward nature: Iesus Christ putteth
all that away, too the ende that God may take vs, not onely as his
creatures fashyoned after his owne image, but also as his deere children,
whom he hath adopted too bee heires of his kingdome. And so
yee see what wee haue too gather vppon that 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               And were this poynt throughly 
                     〈…〉
                  
worlde should not flote so continually, nor 
                     〈◊〉
                   so as it dooth. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
most men now adayes are caryed est one & est another, & doo nothing
else but wander. The Papistes on the one syde haue their pryde too
keepe them from contining ryghtfoorth vntoo God: they will 
                     〈◊〉
                  
haue their freewill, and their 
                     〈…〉
                  
what the grace of Iesus Christ 
                     〈…〉
                  
themselues frō it as much as they ran: And God in the meane season
payeth then as they bee woorthie. For as for thē that are so fore possessed
with that diuelish selfmeening, that they can dispose their lyfe
in such wyse, as too bee able and came vnto God, and too deserue somewhat
at his hand, and again, haue their 
                     〈…〉
                  
with him, when they haue done 
                     〈◊〉
                  : when they haue such things
too themselues, all slippeth away lyke wynd, & they 
                     〈◊〉
                   vnto the other
extremitie, saying show shall wee bee 
                     〈…〉
                  
if wee haue not 
                     〈…〉
                   And so are they

                     〈…〉
                  


                  
wherof Iesus Christ is all the whyle vnregarded: they make them bywayes,
and go not too Iesus Christ who is the trew way. For asmuch
then as they leaue the ryght way which cannot mislea
                     •
                  e them: they
must ne
                     •
                  des wander now 
                     〈…〉
                   one syde, and now on the other, and after
long tyring of themselues, breake both their armes and leggs, and
in the end fynd that the further they proceede, the further they go back
from God. So much the more therfore dooth it stand vs on hand too
wey these woordes of S. Paule, where wee bee warranted that wee
shalbee receyued louingly at the hand of our God, if wee haue Iesus
Christ for our peace, and rest wholly theruppon. And for the same
cause 
                     〈◊〉
                   ioyne thertoo the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the text, by mee alredie alledged,
namely,Math. 11. 
                        •
                     . 29. you shall fynde rest too your foules. Wherby our Lord
Iesus Christ dooth vs too vnderstand, that all such as separate themselues
from him, and are not contented too haue hi
                     •
                   for theyr mediator,
shall euer be
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  nquie
                     •
                  , and although they assure themse
                     ••
                  es, and
beare themselues in hand with this and that, yit neuerthelesse they are
afterward afrayd, and find no resting place too stay their foote on, nother
haue they any safe harborough wherin too eschew the storme.
Therfore it standeth vs vppon too go too our Lord Iesus Christ, and
too hee throughly resolued that he is our peace, if we intend too cal vppon
God freely and without anie doubting. Finally all men 
                     〈◊〉
                  
exception must come thither, as wel they that are neere God, as those
that are farre of. If there bee any that think there is any valour or
worthinesse in themselues, surely they will neuer repayre too our Lord
Iesus Christ, till they haue layde that imagination vnder, foote. Agein
on the other 
                     •
                  yde, though wee bee a thousand tymes past hope in
outward apperance, yit let vs assure our selues, that our Lord Iesus
Christ is of sufficient abil
                     •
                  tie too wype away the rememberance of all
our iniquities, so as God shal receyue vs into his fauour▪ accordingly
as S. Paule hauing sayd, that Iesus Christ came too saue wretched
sinners,1. Tim. 1. a. 15. addeth, that he himself is an example therof: in somuch that

                     •
                  e which had bin a persecuter of the Church, an enemy of the 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
yea and a sheader of giltlesse blud, was neuerthelesse receyued, not only
intoo the common aray, but for an Apostle, too beare abrode and too
publishe through the whole world, the message of saluation, from the
which he had erst bin out of. Seeyng then that God hath vttered foorth
the treasures of his goodnesse vppon him: wee may well assure our
selues that if wee trust in our Lord Iesus Christ, and seeke too bee at



one with God his father, by 
                     •
                  ea
                     •
                  es of his death and passion 
                     〈◊〉
                   wee were in teh bottom of hell, yit should wee bee or aswen from thence, and Jesus Christ would shew in deed 
                     〈◊〉
                   that that 
                     •
                  y
                     •
                  le was not 
                     〈◊〉
                   him by imagination. And so yee see what wee has too gather more vppon chose wordes of S. Paule.
               Now he 
                     •••
                  eth, that  Iesus Christ hath broken dovvne the vvall that vvas betvveene them.  And he vseth that 
                     〈◊〉
                  , too declare that the Ceremonyes and figures are abolished, so as there is now 
                     •
                  o let but that wee may bee knit together in concord and brotherly loue. And anon after he compareth the Ceremonies of the 
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  e too 
                     〈◊〉
                   emnitie. For lyke as we now 
                     〈◊〉
                   dayes haue Baptim, which separateth vs from the heathē: so when God choze the Iewes, he gaue them Circumcision. Now then, when we bee one 
                     〈◊〉
                   baptized, we beare the marke wherby God will haue vs knowen too bee of his Church, and of the flocke of his sonne Iesus Christ. The lyke be
                     〈…〉
                   and vse had Circumcision in the tyme of the lame. The Sacrifizes witnessed 
                     〈◊〉
                   them, that God forgaue them their sinnes. Forasmuch 
                     〈◊〉
                   vs 
                     〈◊〉
                   priuiledge was not giuen too any 
                     〈◊〉
                   to Abrahams linage 
                     〈◊〉
                   sayth, it was as a wall 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  ; lyke as if some ground were paled about too keepe sheepe in, or as if some stable were made to kepe cattell in. Euen so was it then. For God (as is shewed in the song of Noyses) had stretched out his lines too hold the linage of Abraham separated from the rest of the world. There 
                     ••
                  en was Gods pathe, and the Ceremonies were as walles or pa
                     〈…〉
                  s too hold in that people vnder the keping and the protection of God. And what were the 
                     •
                  e
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  yles? They went on at aduenture, yea and euen in destruction, according as it is sayd, that God had not voutsafed them the fa
                     〈…〉
                   too manifest his rightuousnesse vntoo them. And S. Paule also sheweth 
                     〈◊〉
                   pre
                     〈…〉
                  y, that God had suffered them too walke on in the 
                     〈◊〉
                   and that they had bin as wretched beasts in taht behalf. Now wee 
                     〈◊〉
                   S. Paules meāing when he speaketh of the Ceremonies, how they were as a wa
                     〈…〉
                   too deuyde the Iewes from the Gentiles. But now are they all broken downe, bycause that Iesus Christ 
                     〈◊〉
                   is the trueth & verie substance of them, is come too put away all those shaddowes. For the giuing of the ceremonial la
                     〈…〉
                   was not to the 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   the people shouuld 
                     〈◊〉
                   themselues wholly about that, and put their 
                     〈◊〉
                   in it, as hypocrits doo, which peruert Gods meaning, that 
                     •
                  oo the intent they should 
                     •
                  pply the absence of 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Iesus Christ, as S. Paul



speaketh of them in the second too the Colossians. The Iewes had
not yit the pledge that is giuen vs in our Lord Iesus Christ, and
therefore it was needefull that they should bee vphild in good hope,
till he were shewed to the world. Wherefore not without cause were
all those things cast downe by his comming: for he is now vntoo vs
as the day sonne of rightuousnesse. And therefore it is no reason that
wee should 
                     •
                  ee led any more as it were by darke shaddowes. For
by that meanes the emnitie is done away, bycause that at this day we
bee ioyned too that linage which God had dedicated too himself, and
there is no more diuersitie at all. Forasmuch then as wee bee made
the children of Abraham by fayth, there is but one spirituall ki
                     •
                  red
among vs.
               But let vs marke that Baptim, and the Lords Supper (which are
the Sacraments that Christ hath ordeyned) are not a diuision lyke
too the figures of the lawe. For although wee bee separated from the
vnbelee
                     •••
                  s, and from such as neuer came yit within in Gods Church:
yit is there not any one certeyne nation of the world, which 
                     〈◊〉
                   accepteth
peculiarly by it self, but he will haue his grace spred 
                     〈◊〉
                   ouer
all. There is not then any such distin
                     ••
                  ion as there was before,
that it can bee sayd, wee come of the linage of Abraham, wee bee they
whom God voutsafed too adopt. None can say so: for there is now
nother Iewe nor Gentill any more, as it is sayd in many places of
the scirpture. Therefore whosoeuer calleth vppon Gods name purely,
of what nation so euer he bee, the same is well lyked and accepted
of him, as sayeth S. Peter in the sixtenth of the Acts, and also in his
first Epistle. And Baptim and the Lords Supper serue now a dayes
too vnite the whole world. For let the barbarousest sort that can be,
come, and God will receyue them: Baptim shalbee ministred vntoo
them, bycause it belongeth to all such as are kni
                     •
                   togither intoo the body
of the onely sonne of God.
               Now herewithall let vs looke too applye this Text too our 
                     •
                  dif
                     •
                  
                  cation.
And first of all let vs vnderstand, that the abolishing of the Ceremonies,
namely as touching the vsing of them, was the very key to
open vs the kingdome of heauen. For the accomplishment of them
was fully shewed in our Lord Iesus Christ, so as it is knowen better
than euer it was, that they were no trifles nor vnprofitable 
                     〈◊〉
                  :
but yit for all that, it is not for vs to vse them, seeing wee haue the full
perfection of them all in Iesus Christ. And by that meanes wee see



how God hath powred out his goodnesse vppon those whom he had
shaken of afore. That is the meanes whereby we belong too him at
this day. In that respect is the Gospell published indifferently too
all the world, so as our foref
                     •
                  thers, which were heathen men, were receyued
intoo the Churche, and wee bee succeeded in their roomes. For
although it bee seene that the world hath bin vtterly forlorne, and that
there hath bin an horrible desolation in it: Yit hath God made the
thing effectuall which is spoken in his Lawe,Exod. 2
                        •
                     . b. 6. namely that he contineweth
his mercy too a thousand generations. Thus yee see what wee
haue too remember in the first place.
               Secondly although baptim serue not peculiarly for any one people,
Citie or Countrie: yit are wee as yee would say, marked out by God,
when he giueth vs the vse of his Sacraments, to assure vs of his adoption,
and too nurrish the hope that he hathe giuen vs by his Gospell.
It is trew that they which shrink away from our Lord Iesus
Christ, doo after a sort make theyr baptim vayne: but that shall cost
them ryght deere, because the pledge and earnestpenny which God gi
                  
                     •
                  eth
vs, too shewe that wee bee ioyned too our Lord Iesus Christ, and
are clothed with him (as it is sayd in the xii. Chapter of the first too the
Corinthians) is too precious a thing (too bee so misused.) And therfore
all they that inhonour themselues with the name of the Church,
and yit notwithstanding are disordered and dissolute persons, shall
one day feele what a trayter 
                     •••
                  nesse it is too haue so vnhallowed their
baptim, which God had ordeyned for their saluation. But let vs on our
syde 
                     •
                  ake heede, that wee walk as folks sholed out from the filth of the
world:
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   for (as sayeth S. Peter) the verye cause why our Lord Iesus
Christ hath gathered vs vntoo him, is, that wee should glorifye him
for deliuering of vs out of the darknesse of this world and of the diuell,
intoo his owne lyght. And wee haue seene heertoofore in the Epistle
too the Galathians, how Iesus Christ will haue his death serue, too
drawe vs from all the vnclennesse and filthinesse of the world. Lykewyse
in the first too the Thessalonians S.1. Thess. 
                        •
                     . b. 7. Paule sayeth, that wee bee
not called too vnclennesse, but that wee ought too bee pure, and too dedicate
our selues too our God in purenesse, so as wee may shewe in
deede, that wee intende too honour him with all that euer he hath giuen
vs. The thing then which wee haue to gather vppon those words
of S. Paule, is, that wee must not runne astray lyke wyld and mad
beasts, nor yit kicke ageinst him, but quietly beare the yoke of our



God, and approch vnto him with true obedience, and moreouer 
                     〈◊〉
                  
our owne wandering lusts, too the end wee may walk lyke holie people,
lyke people that are dedicated too God, & finally as his heritage.
Thus yee see how this text is too bee prac
                     ••
                  sed of vs at this day.
               Now he addeth purposely, that Iesus Christ hath doone it in the
flesh, meaning in our nature, too the end that wee myght bee sure that
in his personne wee bee a
                     •
                  owed too bee Gods children. For lyke as in
Adam wee bee all lost: so by our Lord Iesus Christ the second Adam,
wee bee restored too the hope of saluation. And in deede after the selfsame
maner dooth the Apostle shewe vs, that wee may boldly trust
that God will alwayes bee o
                     •
                  r father for his fake.Hebr. 2. d. 16. For he hath not
taken on him the nature of the Angells (sayeth he) but the seede of Abraham.
And although Mathew in the Genealogie of Iesus Christ,
beging at the person of Abraham, as at the welspring & roote: yit doth
S. Luke leade vs further, and telleth vs, that Iesus Christ appeared
not alonly for the Iewes. Truely S. Mathew dooth it vppon very
good reason, namely too shewe that Iesus Christ came specially too
performe the promises that had bin made of old tyme. But S. Luke
sheweth the same thing that S. Paule declareth heere: namely that
when wee haue gone vp as farre as to 
                     •
                  ur first father Adam, wee shall
fynd, that our Lord Iesus Christ was yit stil before him. Trew it is,
that he was conceyued by the secret and woonderfull power of the holye
Ghoste, in the womb of his mother: but yit for all that, he ceassed
not too bee the trew linage of Abraham, and of Dauid, and also of
Adam, and there is no doubt but that wee bee ioyned too God by 
                     〈◊〉
                  
meane, seing he is our trew brother, and wee neede not to seeke farre,
bycause wee bee bone of his bone, and flesh of his fleshe, as wee shall
see hereafter in the fift Chapter. Thus yee see in effect what S. Paule
ment by adding this saying, that the fulfilling or performing of all
these things was doone in the flesh of Iesus Christ. For if wee should
consider nothing else in Iesus Christ, but his heauen
                     •
                  ly glorie and diuine
maiestie, what would come of it? Wee would bee abasshed, and
wee myght say, he were too farre of for vs too come vntoo him. But
now seeing he hathe of the same flesh that wee haue,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   and is become
very man, lyke vntoo vs in all things, sauing only sin, so as he vndert
                     ••
                  ke
our passions or sufferings,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . and our wants and wretche
                     •
                  nesse, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
haue pitie of vs, as the Apostle sayth: wee may assure our selues, th
                     ••
                  
when wee offer our selues vntoo God, wee shalbee ioyned vntoo him in



the person of his only sonne. For lyke as he is verye God, so on the
other syde he is a kin too vs, bycause hee came downe hither, & refuzed
not too bee in this state of bondage, too the intent that wee myght bee
glorified by his meanes for lyke as he not only abaced him self 
                     〈◊〉
                   also
emptyed himself vtterly: so will he also lift vs vp intoo his heauenly
glorie. And for that cause also is he called our brother: This only one
saying ought too breake off all distrust, when wee bee in dout and perplexitie
whether God will accept vs or no. For seeing wee haue this
record, that Iesus Christ is our brother: what would wee haue more?
So then wee may wel conceyue out of what filth and defylements, yea
and out of what a gulf God hath drawen vs, seing he hathe assured vs
of his fatherly loue, wheruppon our saluation is grounded, yea and
that in the person of Iesus Christ. For wee see how the wretched
papists wote not too which Saint too vow themselues: yea and too
barre themselues of all excuce, so as there may neede none other processe
too condēmne them: they make a common proueth of it. For
euen in that one saying that they wote not too which Saint too bow
themselues, they shewe themselues too bee faythlesse and destitute of
all aduyce and stay of themselues, and too bee as stray beastes. For
they haue such a multitude of theyr Sainctes, that they haue made
whole warreines of them. It is trew, that all of them haue the Uirgin
Mary for their aduocate: they catch holde of Saint Michaell, or
of Saint Peter, for their patrone, or of some other Saint, after as
their superstitious mynd leades them heere and there. Howbeeit, all
that they doo is with vnquietnesse of mynd, and they shall neuer fynde
rest, bycause they haue no woord of God too stay vppon. And when
they fynde themselues hampered in any perplexitie, they bee lyke
wretched forlorne caytifes, that are vtterly at their wittes end, bycause
they see well ynough that they fynde no ease at all, when they haue

                     •
                  ossed and turmoyled neuer so much. But now, seeyng that wee bee
sure of the hope which wee ought too haue, bycause 
                     〈◊〉
                   Lord Iesus
Christ is our yeare, and is 
                     〈…〉
                   vs, too vnite vs too God his
father: let vs vnder stande that the same is an inestimable benefyte, for
the which wee ought not too bee afrayd too suffer ten hundred thousand
deathes, if neede were. And S. Paule saith consequently, that the Law
consisted in ordinaunces and Decrees, too shewe that God abolished
not the lawe of good and holy conuersation, when he mynded too call
the Gentyles 
                     •
                  oo saluation: but that he 
                     〈◊〉
                  : away only the ceremonies



that serued peculiarly for the present tyme, and were not giuen
but only too the linage of Abraham. Yee see then what was abolished.
And therefore let vs leaue the figures of the Lawe, as Circumcizion,
Sacrifizing, feastfull dayes, as they were kept then, the difference of
meates, Lyghtes, Perfumes, and all that is set downe in wryting by
Moyses: for all those thinges must bee vanished away at the comming
of Christ: and yit for all that, let vs hold still the Lawe that God hath
giuen vs, which is inuiolable: that is too wit, let vs woorship him
purely, let vs call vpō him, let vs put our trust in him, let vs do him homage
for all the benefites that he hath bestowed vppon vs, and let vs
hallowe his name. Agein, let vs aduyze our selues too walke in purenesse
of lyfe, and with such conscience towardes our neyghbours, as we
may doo no man wrong or harme: and finally let vs withdrawe our
selues from all the defilements of the world. Heere yee see that the
Lawe which God hath giuen vs too rule our lyfe by, must continew
still: for that is not abolished, but only that which consisted in traditions,
and in the figures that serued but for the tyme, and were too haue
an end by Iesus Christ. Now seing it behoueth vs too giue ouer the
shadowes that were vsed, and had their full scope in the tyme of Moyses
and the Prophetes: it is much more reason that the Christian
Church should not now adayes bee burdened with mens inuentions.
According wherunto S. Paule 
                     •
                  elleth vs, that we must content our
selues with Gods Lawe, which serueth too shewe vs how wee may
be vnblamable, that is too wit, by walking in ryghtuousenesse, Iustice,
faythfulnesse, and mercy, and specially by calling vppon God purely,
and after a spirituall manner. Marke that for one poynt.
               Agein, he sayth that the shadowes of the Law should in these dayes,
not only be superfluous, but also as a curtaine to keepe vs still in darknesse,
and too let vs from seeing our Lord Iesus Christ, as wee ought
too doo, in the mirror of his Gospell. Therfore let vs conclude, that the
ryghtuousenesse which God requyreth at our handes, is another maner
of one, than that which the papistes haue imagined: for all the
thinges which they terme Gods seruice, are but starke gewgawes.
Yea and wheretoo serue they all, but onely too deface the peculiar operation
of our Lord Iesus Christ? For the poore ignorant soules are
hilde fast too them, and stand poring altoogither vppon them. When
I speake of ignorant soules, I meane the ablest sort of them, euen thos
                     •
                  
that thinke themselues too 
                     •
                  ee of greatest capacitie: for they are all



intangled lyke wre
                     •
                  chd beastes. And therefore let vs learne too holde
vs too the singlenesse of the Gospell, and too looke vppon our Lord Iesus
Christ there, lyke as he also 
                     〈◊〉
                   familiarly vntoo vs, too the
intent wee myght bee aduaunced by him, and boldly call God our father,
and flee too him for refuge, not doubting but that he wil bee neere
vs, whensoeuer wee cal vppon him in truth.
               Now let vs cast our selues downe before the Maiestie of our good
God, with acknowledgement of our faults, praying him that his making
of vs too feele them more and more, may cause vs too forsake
them by true repentaunce, and too walke continually aright, and too
giue our selues too holy conuersation. And that forasmuch as wee
bee so weake, that there will alwayes 
                     •
                  ee manie vices in vs: it may
please him too hold vs vp till he haue taken vs out of he world, and
throughly fashioned vs lyke too his owne image, according too the
ground worke which he hath begun in vs. And so let vs all say, Almighty
God heauenly father. &c.
            
            
               The .xiiii. Sermon, which is the sixth
vppon the second Chapter.
               
                  
                     16 Iesus Christ hath reconcyled vs both in one body, too the
end, too knit both the one and the other vntoo God by his
crosse, killing the enmitie therby.
                     17 And being come, be preached peace too you that were farre
of, and too them that were nere hand.
                     18 For by him both twayne of vs haue accesse too the father in
one spirit.
                     19 Therfore yee be no more straungers and forreyners, but fellowe
citizens with the Saints, and household folke of God.
                  
               
               
                  
                  WEe haue seene this morning, how S. Paul
hath told vntoo such as were erst without
hope of saluation, that they were so much
the more bound vntoo God for his calling
of them too bee of the number of his children,
seeyng it was not a common and ordinarie
thing, nor a thing that was looked
for. On the other syde he did also beate
downe all pryde, too the intent that the
Iewes myght not thinke in themselues, that the priuiledge of adoption
was of their owne purchacing, nor vaunt themselues though God
had preferred them before all the rest of the world. And now goyng
foreward still with the same matter, he sayeth, that wee vvere reconcyled,
as vvel the one syde as the other, by the death of Iesus Christ,
and that in so dooyng he hath knit vs toogither intoo one body,
putting all enmitie too death by his crosse. This serueth too expresse
better the thing that wee haue seene already. He had sayd that
wee must come vntoo God by the meanes of our Lord Iesus Christ:
for without him wee bee all a farre of, as well Iewes as Gentyles, bycause
wee bee all sinners, and God in an enemye too vs, till his wrath
bee appeazed towardes vs. Now S. Paule sheweth, that that is done
by his bearing of our sinnes vppon his crosse. For it is by his obedience,
that all our iniquities are put awaye, and it is by his sacrifyzce,
that our sinnes are washt away.
               To bee short, were it not for the death and passion of our Lord I
                     •
                  
                  sus
Christ, wee should stand bound still in the hand wryting that is
spoken of in the second too the Colossians.Coloss. 2. 
                        •
                     . 14. For if wee should come too
reckening, who durst open his mouth too excuze himself before God,
or (looke too) scape the damnation that all of vs haue deserued? For if
wee should go about too alledge but one poynt, there would bee a thousand
too stop our mouthes, so as wee should bee driuen too stand still all
confounded, till wee came too the remedie, that is too wit, that Iesus
Christ hath by his death made so full satisfaction for all our dettes,
that wee bee quitted and released. That then is the thing which S.
Paule handleth as now, too the end wee myght knowe what maner
of accesse it is that he speaketh of. For, too preace intoo Gods presence,
in cace as wee bee of our selues, were too great a boldnesse. But
when it is told vs, that God wil not lay our sinnes and misdeeds to our



charge, bycause Iesus Christ hath put them all away by his death:
then is it no rashnesse at all for vs too go vntoo God with our heades
bolt vpryght, but we haue a good foundation, and a boldnesse that God
lyketh well of. Therfore as oft as wee haue occasion too pray, or too
fyght ageinst anie temptations, let vs learne too knowe that wee haue
neede too bee incoraged too patience, and too bee asserteyned of the euerlasting
lyfe, and too repayre all wholly for refuge too the death and
passion of the sonne of God, knowing that vntill such tyme as wee bee
dipped in his blud, and washed by the woorking of his holie spirit, wee
shall euermore bee lothely, and God will iustly shake vs of, and bee alwayes
a iudge too vs in sted of being our father. And it is not ynough
too knowe that Iesus Christ hath made amendes for vs, yea and that
all things requysyte too our saluation, were fully accomplished and
performed by his death and passion: but wee must also therwithall
receyue the benefyte thereof in such maner as it is ministred vntoo vs.
For what shall it auayle the Iewes, Turkes, and other lyke, that
Gods sonne vndertooke the condemnation that belonged too vs? They
shal rather bee hild dubble giltie, bycause that by their vnthankfulnesse
they bereeue themselues of the benefyte wherof they myght haue bin
parttakers, if they had receyued the promises of the Gospell by fayth.
But the Iewes on the one syde blaspheme our Lord Iesus Christ, the
Turks on the other syde laughe him too scorne, and count him but as
a night ghost. And the Papists labour with tooth and nayle to deface
his power, and too rob him of the greatest part of his graces. These
therfore shall fynde that the death which the sonne God hath suffered,
serueth too increace their cursednesse, and too kindle Gods wrath so
much the more ageinst them. Yea and euen they also which neuer
heard of the Gospell, are vtterly excluded from this treasure.
               And for that cause S. Paule addeth, that Iesus Christ hath preached
peace to them that vvere neere, and too them that vvere farre
of. Wherby he sheweth, that whē the Gospel is preached, we be dayly
put in possession of the saluation which was purchaced for vs by our
Lord Iesus Christ, at 
                     •
                  eastwyse if wee lay holde on him by trew fayth
that hath taken lyuely roote in our hartes, too bring foorth good fruite.
Therefore there are twoo things requyred. The one is, that wee know
how that the matter and substance of our saluation is in Iesus Christ:
and the other is, that the same bee declared too vs by the Gospell. And
too the intent wee may bee the surer of this doctrine: S. Paule sayeth,



not that Christ hath sent his Apostles, or set vp a great sort of 
                     〈◊〉
                  
too bring vs such message: but that Christ himselfe is come too bryng
tydings of peace too all men. Nowe it is certeyne that our Lord Iesus
Christ hath not executed the office of preaching since his Re
                     •
                  urrection,
sauing onely among his Disciples, that they myght bee furnished
aforehand too preache euery where the doctrine that was committed
vntoo them. But S. Paule sayeth, that he preached too such
as had erst bin farre of from God. He did not this in his owne person.
Then is it certeyne that S. Paule speaketh of that preaching of the
Gospell, which was doone by the Ministers that were appoynted by
God, and by our Lord Iesus Christ.
               And yit notwithstanding he sayeth, that it was Christ himself that
preached, namely too the end wee should yeeld the greater reuerence
too the Gospell, and hold it as the truthe authorized by God, and euerye
of vs submit himself too it without any geynsaying or replying.
For if wee haue any doubt of it, let vs not thinke that Iesus Christ
shall boote vs any thing at all. Therfore wee must assure our selues of
it, yea and (as wee haue seene in the first Chapter) Gods promises
must bee sealed in our harts by the holie Ghost, who for the same cause
is called the earnestpennye of the lyfe that wee hope for, and the verye
signe, manuell, or seale that God printeth in vs, too the end, that our
fayth should bee in full certeintie. Wee see then wherat S. Paule amed
in this text, in saying that Iesus Christ being rayzed from the
dead, and hauing performed the charge that was inioyned him by God
his father, was our Redeemer, and also the bringer of the same me
                     •
                  
                  sage
vntoo vs, not for once and away, but by continuall preaching of it,
insomuch that he will haue his mouth still open euen too the end, too
witnesse vnto vs, that in him wee shall assuredly fynd all that wee can
wish too bring vs too the heauenly lyfe. Now then must wee not bee
very blocks, if we be not touched too the quicke, at the hearing of these
woords? It is trew that the sonne of God fleeteth not from place too
place, nor is conuersant heere beneath among vs in visible fashion,
nother were that requisite. But yit for all that, the doctrine which
wee preache in his name, ought too haue lyke anthoritie, as if hee
spake to vs himselfe mouth to mouth. And for the same cause also dooth
hee say,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . d. 40. Hee that heareth you, heareth mee, and he that receyueth you,
receyueth mee:Luke. 10. c. 16. and likewyse, he that reiecteth you, reiecteth mee.
And agein,Iohn. 13. c. 
                        •
                     0. by this meanes is God my father honored, euen by your



beeleeuing of the Gospel. And contrariwise he hath great wrong and
reproch doone vnto him, when the things are douted of that are so wel
certifyed there. The Pope & al the rabble of his Clergie alledge this
for the mayntenance of their tyrannie. But our Lord Iesus Christes
meaning was, too warrant vs the message that concerneth the forgiuenesse
of our sinnes, wherwith our eares are beaten continually.
For wee shall alwayes hang in a mamering and doubt, if wee bee not
throughly perswaded and resolued, that all thinges conteyned in the
Gospell, are hild of Iesus Christ, who is the infallible truth it self. For
if wee haue an eye too men, wee shall bee euer wauering and doubtfull.
And for proofe thereof, what can they bring vs of their owne growing,
but vtter vanitie and leazing? So then, although our Lord Iesus
Christ abyde still in his heauenly glory, and wee bee absent from him
in body, yea and that it bee a straunge thing to vs, too say, that he dwelleth
in vs,Math. 18. d. 20. and that wheresoeuer twoo or three bee gathered toogither
in his name, he is in the middes of them: yit notwithstanding wee
must bee fully assured of this poynt, that when the pure doctrine of the
Gospell is preached, it is all one as if he himselfe spake vntoo vs, and
were familiarly conuersant heere among vs. Then too bee short, our
fayth must ame at him, as at the very marke or butte of it, and we must
rest vppon him. And seeyng that God his father hath sent him too bee
a faythfull witnesse, looke whatsoeuer is 
                     •
                  old vs truly in his name, wee
must receyue it without any geynsaying.
               Furthermore, as wee haue heere wherwith too strengthen vs in
trew constancie of fayth, and too arme vs ageinst all the assaultes and
alarumes that Satan can giue vs: so it is a great shame for vs when
wee bee deafe at the hearing of the Gospell, or let it alone as a thing
hanging in the aire, taking it too bee but as a fable or a thing of no
valew. And yit for all that, most men now adayes doo eyther despyze
the Gospell, or else are so besotted, that they discant of it, as of a tryfle,
or else make but a mocke of it. Some hauing heard Sermons, or hauing
bin taught at some Lecture, or by some other meanes, will perchaunce
say, it is possible that this may bee trew: and as for mee, I
wil not say nay to it: but forasmuch as I am no clerk nor diuine, it is al
one too mee, I will let it alone still in his ordinarie course. Some other
will say, Tush, I will hold mee too the fayth of my forefathers:
For it is too daungerous a matter to chaunge. Some agein say thus:
How so? It is a new doctrine, that wee neuer heard of before. And



othersome being not contented with such scornfulnesse, adde outragious
crueltie, and fight openly ageinst it, in so much that they could find
in their hartes too plucke God out of his seate, wheruppon they fall to
sheading of innocent blud, indeuoring to the vttermost of their power,
too wype away the remembrance of the Gospell. But in the meane
whyle, let vs vnderstand, that whensoeuer the message of our saluation
is set foorth vntoo vs, if wee despyze it, wee shalbee giltie not only reiecting
a benefite that was brought vs by a mortall creature, but also
of shetting the gate ageinst Gods sonne, when he came too seeke vs to
our saluation. And therfore too quicken vp our slothfulnesse, and too
correct the cursed stubbornnesse that myght hinder our full and obedient
yeelding too the Gospell: let vs mark that the preaching therof is
not a thing doone by haphazard, nother doo men come of their owne
selues, as sayeth S. Paule also too the Romanes:Rom. 10. c. 15. but Gad himself visiteth
vs, and commeth vntoo vs, and our Lord Iesus Christ performeth
still the dewtie of a shepeherd, and calleth vs too him with his
owne voyce, bycause he seeth vs too bee as sheepe that go astraye. And
although wee bee peaked asyde heere and there: yit his mynd is too
gather vs togither agein to be of his flocke. Were this well printed in
our hartes, surely wee should bee better disposed, not only to receyue
the doctrine of the Gospell with all humilitie, but also too bee inflamed
with such a zeale and earnestnesse, that the whole world should be nothing
in comparison with vs. Too bee short, Gods woord would bee
as sweete as honnie to vs, and more precious than all goold and siluer,
considering that the sonne of God being in the glory of God his father,
doth neuerthelesse make vs to heare his voyce, and that not as one that
speaketh a farre of, or with a sound that vanisheth away in the ayre, or
in such wyse as wee haue no certeine record of the thinges that he speaketh:
but as one that commeth and preacheth too vs himself. For
looke what is done by his authoritie, and according to the commission
that he gaue and commited too his Apostles: it becommeth vs too receyue
it for his sake, as I haue declared afore.
               Moreouer S. Paules intent here, is to prouoke vs too receyue the
Gospell with all obedience, not onely for the worthinesse of the person
of our Lord Iesus Christ: but also for the things that are conteyned
in the Gospell it self: for it is the message of peace, sayth he. Let
vs consider what it is to haue warre with him that made vs and fashioned
vs. If wee haue an enemy in this world, although he be but a



frayle man, and haue no very great credit: Yit will wee bee afrayd
least he shonld practize some pollicie or spight ageinst vs, or reuenge
himself by force. Too bee short, wee would euer bee vnquiet, so long as
we had any enemies in this world. Must we not then needes be tootoo
brutish, seeing wee fall a sleepe when God sheweth himself too bee ageinst
vs, and that he is armed too take vengeance vppon vs? If we
considered well what it is too haue warre with God, (as in deede our
sinnes ceasse not to prouoke him to displeasure) we should finde on the
contrary part, what a benefite it is too haue peace and attonement
with him. Now seeing that this is brought vs by the Gospell, wherby
wee enter possession of the attonement that was made by Iesus
Christ, whe
                     •
                   he offered himselfe in sacrifize by his death: it is a
thing that ought too inflame vs in such wise, as too make vs imbrace
the Gospell with earnest zeale, and too giue ouer our whole minde
thereuntoo. So then considering the coldenesse and lazinesse that is
in vs, let vs so much the more thinke vppon this saying, and applye
the same too our vse, namely, first too knowe that the sonne of God refuzeth
not too teache vs, and too be o
                     •
                  r scholemaster, so wee bee contented
too bee his schollers: and secondly that wee shall haue a doctrine
which is more too bee desired, than all the pleasures, honour, and
goods of the world: that is too wit, that wee bee at peace with God,
and that being sure of his fauour towards vs, wee may haue recourse
and accesse vntoo him, and bee receyued as his children at his hand.
Well ought wee too note that: for S. Paule ment too shewe which
is the trew peace, bycause many men thinke themselues well at ease,
which notwithstanding haue no peace with God. For some are puffed
vp with diuelish self weening, as the Monks and Fryers in the
popedome, who perswade themselues that they haue deserued so well
at Gods hand, as there can no fault bee found in them. They then
which ground themselues after that manner vppon their owne vertues
and good deedes, thinke that God is bound vntoo them, and they
may well bee luld asleepe, bycause Satan besotteth them with the
foolish self trust which they haue conceyued: and that is bycause they
ame not at God, but haue forged an Idoll in their owne head. And in
good fayth, what are the things that they would content God withal,
but gewgawes and baggagely trifles, as if they would still babes
with them? The Papists must take a sprinkling of holy water, they
must all too be crosse themselues, they must fast this wake, and that



wake, they must gad on pilgrimage, they must forbeare eating of
flesh vpon such a day, they must babble thus many Paternusters, they
must set vp a candle to such a saynt, they must here thus many masses,
they must say thus many meaculpaze. Too bee short, when a man
hath raked them all on a heape, it is certeyne that they be but the scrapings
and offals of all filthinesse. And yit to their seeming, God is wel
payd with them, as who should say, he were an Idol, or a little babe,
as I sayd afore. Wee see then that none of all those hipocrits that
are so puffed vp with presumption, can haue any peace with God. But
forasmuch as they fetch such windlasses and looke not at God, but askewe,
and though they make countenaunce of approching vnto God,
yit their offring themselues vntoo him is it not with si
                     •
                  glenesse and
substanciall soundenesse of hart: they do but beguile them selues with
their fond flatterings. Also there are a sort of these scoffers, which
doo but nod their heads when men speake too them of their saluation,
saying, it is ynough, if wee may giue but one good sigh, but let vs not
ceasse in the meane whyle too make frolicke chere, for what a thing
were it too passe all the tyme of our life in such dumpishnesse? That
would doo vs no good, & therfore let vs play the good fellowes. Hereupon
they fall to vnthriftinesse, some after one fashion, & some after another.
They haue a thousand wayes too destruction, and all confederate
themselues ageinst God as much as is possible. Therefore for
bycause there haue alwayes bin so many, yea and to many, that bring
their owne consciences a fleepe: S. Paule in this place (lyke as also
in the 
                     ••
                  ft too the RomanesRom. 5. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  ) setteth downe the tr
                     •
                  w peace: which is,
that when wee come vntoo God, and must present our selues before his
Maiestie, wee bee sure that he will pitie vs, and not lay our sinnes to
our chage, but receyue vs as his owne children. Then if we intend to
enoye this spirituall peace, which passeth all the goods of the world:
let vs 
                     •
                  earne too haue warre with our selues. And how is that? It
is, first too knowe that wee bee damned and forlorne, and that there
is no hope of remedie for vs, wherby too get out of the pit of destruction
agein, except wee bee recouered by meanes of our Lord Iesus
Christ. When wee bee so bereft of all vntoward selftrust in our own
deserts, and knowe that wee bee emptie and starke naked: let vs repayre
as poore beggers vntoo God: that is the thing that is requisite
for the atteynment of trew peace. And by the way also let vs not
thinke too gayne any thing by being blockishe▪ so wee should fall
                     •
                  


                  
sleepe in this world: bnt let vs vnderstand, that forasmuch as wee
haue no certeyne tyme (appoynted vs,) it is our duetye to summon our
selues euening and morning before God, and too examine our sinnes
throughly, and too bee both sorie and ashamed of them. When wee
haue once learned too make warre thus ageinst our owne vyces, and
too plye it throughly without Hipocrisie and counterfetting: then are
wee in the hygh way too the peace which our Lord Iesus Christ dooth
publish and preache vntoo vs euery day by the Gospell. And that is
the very cause why S. Paule sayeth expresly, that by him wee haue
enterance in vntoo the father. As if he should say, that no vnbeleeuers,
no heathenish worldlinges, no mockers of God, no dullardes which
thinke not of their euerlasting saluation, can by any meanes taste of
what valew the peace is, which wee obteyne by the Gospell, or (conceyue)
how precious and amyable it is. And why? For they put too
many scarfes before their faces, too keepe them from beyng abashed
at Gods Iustice, and from beyng striken with terrour of their sinnes.
Too bee shorte, they make themselues wilfully drunken, that they
myght haue a senslesse conscience, and they bere
                     •
                  ue themselues of all
vnderstanding, as though they were brute beastes. But when wee
consider that all our welfare consisteth in beyng able too haue all our
recourse vntoo God, and that our comming too him is certeine also,
yea and that the way is open for vs too go thither familiarly: surely
then will wee forget all other things, and long too bee made parttakers
of our Lord Iesus Christ, and too bee vnited intoo his body, too
the ende that God may receyue vs, and wee call vppon him with full
trust in our necessitie, and settle our selues vppon the loue that he beareth
vs, not doubting but that whatsoeuer is offered vs in the Gospell,
is all one as if God vttered his hart among vs.
               Now S. Paule hauing spoken of the preaching of the Gospell,
addeth purposely, In one Spirit. He had sayd afore, that wee bee all
knit toogither in the flesh of our Lord Iesus Christ, namely▪ for that
he tooke our nature vpon him, & by that meanes abolished and tooke
away the cursednesse that was in Adam. Neuerthelesse, the dooing
therof in the person of the sonne of God were not ynough, if the
Gospell wer not as a meane to him. Now therfore for a third poynt,
S. Paule addeth, that wee must communicate all of one spirit. For
although the Gospell bee preached, yit are there manie stubborne persons,
and others so be
                     •
                  narled in this world, that they thinke no more



of the heauenly lyfe, than doggs and Swyne doo. Othersome agein
are so saped in their hipocrisie, that although God doo call vs all and
allure vs sweetly too him in the person of his sonne, the number of
them that come vntoo God is verye small. For this cause S. Paule
sayth, that wee must haue Gods spirit. For it is certein, that by nature
wee bee variable, and not only euery one of vs will needs haue his
opinion by himselfe, but also wee change euery minute of an houre, by
meanes whereof, wee bee so farre of from beeing all of one accorde,
that none of vs abydeth setled in his opinion, from morning to
nyght, except he bee gouerned of God. It standeth vs then on hand,
when wee heare the Gospell preached, too haue Gods spirit to guyde
and gouerne vs, soo as wee may throughly imbrace our Lord Iesus
Christ, and by him haue accesse too the father. Now therfore wee
must beare in mynd, first that when our Lord Iesus Christ exhorteth
vs by his ministers (according also as S. Paule sayeth in the second
too the Corinthians:) wee ought too bee well dispozed too come vnto
him,2. Cor. 3. 
                        •
                     . 4. yea and to runne vntoo him, euen with inforcing our selues aboue
all power of man. For (when wee haue doone what wee can) yit
shall wee haue none accesse vntoo him, but all our indeuer shall rather
bee a retyring backe, than a going foreward, vnlesse his spirit guyde
vs. So much the more then doth it stand vs on hand too pray God too
touch vs with his holy spirit, & to cause him to make vs way vnto him,
as is sayd in the eyght to the Romans,Rom. 8. c. 15. and as we haue seene also lykewyse
too the Galathians. For there S. Paule putteth a difference
betwixt Gods children,Gala. 4. 
                        •
                     . 6. and the Reprobats. Wee (sayeth he) haue the
spirit of adoption, wherby wee crye, Abba father. Wee should not
knowe him of our selnes (sayeth he) bycause there is nothing in vs
but infirmitie: and it were too great a rashnesse in vs, too call God
our father. But when God hath once sealed the truth of his Gospell
in vs by his holie spirit, and inlyghtened vs inwardly, so as wee know
it is he that speaketh: and thertoo hath assured vs of his goodnesse
and mercie: then may wee freely and with open mouth crye out, that
he is our father. And soo yee see in effect what wee haue too beare in
mynd, too the intent that none of vs trust too his owne brayne, when
the Gospell is preached vnto him, but that in cosideration of the rudenesse
and weaknesse that is in vs, wee suffer our selues too bee gouerned
by Gods spirit, which is the chefe kye wherby the gate of paradise
is opened vnto vs. And for that cause also is it sayd, that wee must be
besprinckled with the blud of our Lord Iesus Christ,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   as S. Peter termeth



it in his first Epistle. For the same cause also the Apostle in the
Epistle to the Hebrewes sayth,Heb. 9. d. 14. that Iesus Christ was offred vp in spirit:
meaning that his sacrifyze wherby he purchaced vs ryghtuousnes,
should still be as a vayne thing to vs, if the holie Ghost wrought not in
it by his powre. And S. Paul going forward with the matter that hath
bin declared hertofore, addeth also, that as vvell they that vvere farre
of, as they that vvere neere hand, had heard the sayd message, & that
the same is set afore vs also at this day, to the end we myght bee confirmed
in it more and more. And (as I haue sayd alredy) by those that
were neere, he meaneth the Iewes who had had some familiaritie
with God theretoofore, bycause he had acquaynted himselfe with
them, by giuing them his Lawe, telling them that he receyued theyr
linage too be the protector thereof. Howbeeit, that was not too knit
them throughly vntoo him, till he had pardoned their sinnes, which
was doone by the meanes of Iesus Christ. For the Lawe could yeeld
them nothing but terrour and anguish of mynd, & curse them throughout,
and sink them downe too the bottom of hell, as S. Paule sayeth in
the third too the Romans,Rom. 3. 2. Cor. 3. b. 7. and specially in the third Chapter of the second
Epistle too the Corinthians. Therfore it was requisite that the
Gospell should bee added thereuntoo. Now it is certein that Dauid &
the other holy Prophetes, and lykewyse all the kings and the faythfull
that liued vnder the old Testament, had not the Gospel so manifestly as
we haue: but yit in very substance God declared vnto thē, that he of his
owne free goodnesse receyued them too mercie, for the redeemers sake
in whom they trusted. If the Lawe bee separated from the Gospell,
it not only profiteth them not at all which rest vppon it: but also serueth
too beate them downe, and too thunder vpon them, and too shewe
them how dreadfull Gods maiestie is. It is in the Gospell then that
wee haue peace: and therefore it stoode the Iewes in hand too bee
made partakers of that doctrine. And as for vs that come of the Gentyles,
wee ought (as I sayd this morning) too acknowledge so much
the better, the dubble recognisance wherin wee stand bound vnto God,
for that he hath voutsafed too make vs fellowes (with his peculiar
people,) vs (I say) that were as things borne out of tyme, and too put
vs in the companie of those whom he had chozen and adopted afore, in
such wyse as the recordes of the Prophets are now fulfilled, wherin it
is sayd,Esay. 24. c. 15. yee Gentyles and Nations, glorifye yee God with his owne
people: wherby the holie Ghost foreshewed that there should be such



a melodie, that all men should sing Gods prayses, euen as well the
Gentyles as the Iewes, when they were once knit toogither, and gathered
from out of the scattering wherin all of vs are, as is sayd alredie,
and as wee haue seene afore.
               Wee see then wherat S. Paule amed, in saying that the Gospell
was preached too all men, as well them that were farre of, as them
that were neere.Rom. 10. 
                        •
                     . 15. And that is it which he treateth of in the tenth too
the Romans. For there he sheweth that wee should euer bee scanning,
and neuer resolued of our fayth, if wee knew not that the preaching
of the Gospel proceeded of Gods authoritie, & of his vnchaungeable
ordinance. It is not for men (sayeth he) too put foorth them
                     •
                  elues,
except God send them. And God hath begunne too teache the worlde
at all tymes heeretofore,Rom. 1. c. 20. though not by preaching or wryting, yit by
the onely sight of the world it sel
                     •
                  e. No maruell therefore (sayeth he)
though God haue voutsafed at this time too extend his grace too all
Nations, by making them too knowe that he would bee their father.
Now then, lyke as on the one side, it stoode the Iewes on hand too
knowe howe great neede they had too bee reconcyled too God by Iesus
Christ, and not too bee deceyued by trusting too theyr birthryght,
or too their Circumcision, or too any of all these shadowes of the Law,
but that it behoued them too flee too the onely meanes that I haue treated
of, namely, that God receyued them too mercy, for the eternall sacrifyzes
sake which Iesus Christ offered: so let vs on our syde learne
too magnify Gods goodnesse, seeyng he hath voutsafed too cast vs too
bee of his houshold and Church, notwithstanding that wee were cut of
and banished from it before. And therefore let vs looke too our selues,
that wee let not this benefite vanish away, ne be depryued of it through
our owne vnthankfulnesse. For what excuce will there bee for vs, if
when God calleth vs too heauen in the person of his onely sonne, so as
Iesus Christ telleth vs, that it is he himselfe which commeth too seeke
vs, as oft as it is tolde vs, that God will be mercifull to vs for his sake:
wee runne not apace vntoo him, both hot in zeale, and earnest in carefulnesse,
too shewe howe wee knowe that all our welfare, ioye, happinesse,
and glory, consist in beyng ioyned too our God? which cannot
bee but through his free goodnesse. Agein, when wee refuze too receyue
this peace, let vs bee afrayde that Iesus Christ will chaunge his
voyce: for it is certeine that the Gospell dooth alwayes behyght dan
                     •
                  
                  nation
too such as frame not themselues too Gods will. And it is not



for nought that the scripture speaketh of binding, as wel as of loozing
                     •
                  
for our Lord Iesus Christ ment too shewe vs,Math. 16. c. 19. that it is the very nature
and dewtie of the Gospell, too plucke vs out of the bondage and prison
wherin wee bee hild, vntill he hath set vs free: and so is it his owne
office also,Iohn. 8. c. 36. as he himselfe sayeth in the eyght of S. Iohn, where he declareth
the same thing, howbeeit, he addeth, that there are bondes also
prepared for those that take him not for their redeemer, ne suffer themselues
too bee set free by him. And that is it which he meaneth in S.
Iohn,Iohn. 20. e. 23. when he sayeth, whose sinnes soeuer yee release, they bee released
vntoo them, and whose soeuer yee withhold, they be withhild. Then
dooth he shewe, that when wee preache the Gospell, wee must first of
all declare the message of Reconciliation, which thing is spoken of in
the first too the Corinthians, in the place by mee before alledged. Thus
yee see that the thing which wee haue too doo continually, is too shewe
that God hath bin so kynd vntoo vs, as too bee at one with vs in the
person of his sonne, yea and too receyue vs too bee himselfe, that we myght
washed and scoured from all our filthinesse, and bee accepted for
ryghtuous before him.Math. 
                        •
                     . c. 16. Lo how wretched soules are vnbound, lo how
poore captiues are let out of prison, Lo how they that erst were plundged
in darkenesse of death, are brought out ageyn too the lyght of lyfe.
But on the other syde, wee haue also commission too withhold sinnes,
by threatening the despyzers of Gods woorde with Gods horrible
wrath, (and by telling them) that when they haue shaken their eares,
and thinke themselues too be scaped, the doctrine that they haue heard,
must bee as ropes and fetters too bynd them withall. According wheruntoo
S.2. 
                        •
                     or. 10. b. 6. Paule sayeth expresly in another place, that wee haue vengeance
ready for all such as 
                     •
                  et themselues ageinst our doctrine. Yea
though they bee the hyghest in the world, yit if they set vp their bristles
ageinst God, and de
                     •
                  pyze him, they shall not scape the damnation that
is threatened them, at leastwyse when the faythfull haue once performed
their obedience. And in deede when an enemie summoneth a
people, there is trembling for feare, least they shall fynde no mercy, if
reasonable conditions should bee refuzed: and what then shalbe doone,
when God commeth, not onely too will vs too yeeld our selues vntoo
him, but also too offer himselfe too vs, and will haue vs too possesse him
and all his goods in the person of Iesus Christ? What shall become
of vs, if wee refuze such grace, when he vseth such kyndnesse towardes
vs? Must not horrible damnation lyght vppon so villanous pryde and



scornfulnesse, when men voutsafe not too receyue him, euen him which
not only procureth their saluation, but also created them, and by whom
they bee mainteyned? Then let vs learne too marke well this doctrine
wherein peace is spoken of, too the ende wee prouoke not God any
more, ne turne our bread intoo bane, and our meate intoo mortall poyson:
but that wee may bee quickened truely by the grace which God
offereth vs dayly.
               And for that cause Saint Paule concludeth, that they which are
so touched with Gods spirit, to obey the Gospell simply and substancially,
are no more straungers, but rather fellovvcit
                        •
                     zens vvith the
Sayncts, and Gods houshold folk. And this tendeth still too the end
that I haue noted afore: that is too wit, that Gods name should bee
glorified as it deserueth, and that wee should not step lyghtly too him
as wee bee woont too doo. For wee thinke too discharge our selues
with one woord, by saying that Iesus Christ is our redeemer. But
let vs alwayes call to remembrance what wee haue bin, and in what
taking we were, til Iesus Christ drew vs out of the dungeons of death.
For the worde straungers, importeth that which wee haue seene heertoofore:
namely that before the Gospell was preached, the Gentyles
were without hope of saluation, cut of from Gods fauour, without promises,
without God in the world: insomuch that although they liued
heere, although they were fed and susteyned by the good thinges that
God gaue them, although they inioyed the lyght of the sunne: yit neuerthelesse
they were without God. And at the same poynt are all vnbeleeuers.
So then, S. Paules rehercing what our redemption was
when Iesus Christ came too find vs, & reached vs his hand to guide vs
too God his father, is too the end that wee should learne to
                     •
                   yeeld hym
the whole prayse of our saluation. Heeruppon he sayeth, that wee bee
citizens of heauen, companions with the Angelles of Paradise, and
fellowes with the holy kings and Prophets. When there is any talke
of the Prophetes and Apostles, or of any of the Saynctes and Martyrs,
wee haue them in admiration, and good reason wee should so: but
in the meane whyle wee regard not wherfore the holy Ghoste setteth
them before vs. The Papistes make Idolles of them, and (too theyr
seeming) they haue honored S. Paule and S. Peter well, when they
haue decked them with Gods fethers. But contrarywyse it is sayd
h
                     •
                  ere, that when God setteth foorth the grace that he gaue vntoo them,
it is too the ende that wee shoulde bethinke vs of the benefite that he



bestoweth vppon vs, in that he mustereth vs in their band. According
wherunto the Apostle in theHebr. 12. a. 1. .xii. to the Hebrewes, sayth, that they might
to be vnto vs as a great & thicke cloud of witnesses, that we myght followe
their example the more cherefully, and walke on in the way that
they shewe vs. Agein, when God hath made vs too perceyue the inestimable
good which he doth vs, in matching vs with the Prophetes,
Apostles, Martyrs, and all the faythfull, let vs go yit further, (and consider)
that he hath made vs fellowcitizens with the Angelles of heauen.
A man would take great labour for a citizenship, Freedenizonship, or
Burgesship of this world, and yit notwithstanding they be but incoms
of this lyfe: And what is this lyfe of ours? A flyghtfull shadow which
fleeteth away out of hand. Behold, God calleth vs, not only to soiorne
in his Church as straungers, but also too assure vs that he admitteth
and accepteth vs for his children, so as wee may with trew trust, and
as it were with one mouth boldly call vppon him as our father, and
keepe one tune and melodie with all the Saints. That therfore is the
thing which we haue to remember vpon this streyne: which order the
Apostle vseth also in the end of the Epistle too the Hebrewes,Hebr. 12. c. 18. saying,
that we be no more vnder the law, which could do nothing but fray vs,
bycause there was nothing too bee heard there, but thunderings, and
lyghteninges, which were terrible signes of Gods anger. But wee
(sayeth he) are come too mount Syon, where wee heare the sweete
voyce of God our father, who matcheth vs with his holy spirites, with
his Angelles, and with the soules of his faythfull ones, so as wee bee
now of their crew, and may speake vntoo God as it were all with one
mouth, bycause wee haue one common head. This is in effect, the
thing that wee must beare in mynd. And although wee inioy it not as
yit: yit notwithstanding wee bee sure, that by the meanes of fayth wee
may walke through this present lyfe as straungers too the world, and
that God will not fayle too auow vs for his children and heyres: and
that although wee bee yit wrapped heere in many vyces and imperfections,
yit notwithstanding, all the Saincts of Paradyse doo acknowledge
vs for their brethren, and imbrace vs for our Lorde Iesus
Christes sake.
               Now let vs cast our selues downe before the Maiestie of our good
God, with acknowledgment of our faults, praying him too make vs so
to feele them, as we may mislike them more & more, & on the other side
set our whole mind too the considering of the infinite grace which he



extendeth toowards vs, in calling vs vntoo him, too the intent we may
not be so spitefull, nor yit so witlesse and blind, as not to hearken when
he speaketh, but rather that wee may obediently through fayth yeelde
vntoo the doctrine which he setteth foorth vntoo vs, wherein lyeth all
our welfare and saluation: and that the same may plucke vs backe
from all the leaud lusts of the world, and from all the froward affections
that thrust vs aside, & turne vs away from him, so as we may grow
more and more in his feare and loue, too be fashioned lyke his image,
vntill we bee come too his heauenly glory, wheruntoo he calleth vs.
That it may please him too graunt this grace, not only too vs, but also
too all people. &c.
            
            
               The .xv. Sermon, which is the seuenth
vppon the second Chapter.
               
                  
                     19 Then are you no more straungers and forreyners, but fellowe
citizens with the Saints, and the household folke of God▪
                     
                     20 Buylded vppon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets
wherof Iesus Christ himselfe is the head corner stone.
                     21 In vvhom the whole building being knit toogither, groweth
intoo a holy Temple too the Lord:
                     22 In vvhom you also are builded togither, for a dvvelling place
of God, in spirit.
                  
               
               
                  WEe haue seene here alreadie, how the holy
Ghost by the mouth of S. Paule, setteth
vs out a looking glasse wherin too behold
the infinite goodnesse of our God, in pulling
vs backe from the d
                     •••
                  eons of death,
to make vs his children and heires of the
heauenly lyfe. For this cause it is say
                     •
                  
                  ▪
that when we be receyued into the Ch
                     •
                  rch,
it is all one as if we were made Citizens,
not of some earthly Citie, but euen of heauen, too bee companions

                     〈◊〉
                   all the 
                     〈◊〉
                   and faythful seruaunts of God, yea and with



all the Angels of Paradise. And bycause the Churche is called not
onely Gods Citie, but also his house: therefore Paule addeth, that we
bee his houshold folke, therby too inhaunce the grace and fauour that
God hath vttered towards vs. For, 
                     〈◊〉
                   gathered intoo Gods
house, and too haue him neere vntoo vs, and too haue familiar acc
                     •
                  sse
continually vnto him, is much more for vs than if wee were but generally
of some Citie of his. Wee see then, that bicause men doo neuer
sufficiently esteeme the spirituall good that wee receyue by our Lord
Iesus Christ: S. Paul ment to shew here, how it is good reason that
we should make more account of the adoptiō wherby God hath so gathered
vs toogither by meanes of our Lord Iesus Christ, that we may
now be familiarly conuersant with him by hope: than by al the whole
world.
               And he addeth another similitude, which is, that we be builded to be
the temple of God. Sometymes the holy Scripture sayth, that euery
faithful man is the Tēple of God, bycause he dwelleth in vs by his holy
spirit. But when it is spoken vniuersally of the whole Churche,
then are wee as lyuely stones, and the building is so bound and clozed
toogither, that euery of vs serueth too the perfectting therof. Then is
not the one contrarie too the other. For euery faythfull bodye alone
is the Temple of God, bycause he ought too bee giuen too all holinesse,
by the woorking of the holie Ghost, and (as I sayd afore) God
abydeth in vs. Howbeeit for asmuch as wee ought not too bee separated
asunder, but rather to bee knit toogither in vnitie by the bond of
fayth▪ it agreeth very well also, that wee should be named stones, and
that lyke as a building is made of manye stones, wherof there is none
but it serueth too some purpose: so wee should suffer our selues too bee
ioyned too our Lord Iesus Christ by beleef of the Gospell, that God
may dwell in vs, and bee there purely woorshipped, and wee bee fully
assured, that whensoeuer wee call vppon him, wee shall alwayes fynd
him at hand too heare vs, and that when wee bee gathered toogither
in his name, wee shall euermore haue him among vs. That is the
thing which S. Paule treateth of heere, when he sayeth, that they
which had bin heathen men, and cut of from all hope of saluation, were
builded vp by the Gospell to bee made a Temple for God.
               Now we see better than afore, how God will take vs for his household:
that is too wit, if wee bee taught purely by the doctrine of the
Gospell, that God auoweth vs for his Temples, that he is contented



too bee worshipped of vs, and that he taketh our seruis in good worth.
Therfore vntill such tyme as wee haue the doctrine of the Gospell too
giue vs enterance too that excellent benefyte which is vtterly vnestimable,
wee cannot bee called nother Citizens of heauen, nor children
of God, nor belongers too his household. And it is added, as well too
make vs percey
                     •
                  e what reuerence the Gospell deserueth, as also too
shewe vs that wee neede not to make farre iourneis too seeke it. For
God offereth vs the prerogatiue of entring into his house, the doore is
set open for vs, at least wyse if wee receyue the promises that he maketh.
Wee neede not too go about heauen nor earth: God telleth vs
and assureth vs, that hee hathe adopted vs, too the intent wee should
leane all wholly vnto him. And so ye see how wee may bee familiar
with him, and he bee ioyned vnto vs.
               But therwithall hee sheweth also where wee should seeke for his
woord. For faythlesse men are so spytefull, that they seeke all maner
of krinks too shift themselues from God. And surely wee see, that manie
make as though they were willing too serue God, so it myght bee
apparant too them, that it is he which speaketh: but therwithall they
doubt whether the Lawe came of him or no, and whether the Gospell
bee his truth or no. Lo how men would shake of Gods yoke too the
vttermost of their power, by their shrinking aside, and by their starting
holes and shifting. They make protestation with full mouth, that their
intent is too humble themselues vnder him: and yit they knowe not,
nother can they discerne which is his woord. And why is that? Euen
bycause of their malice and vnthankfulnesse. S. Paule therefore too
barre all such tryfling excuces, telleth vs that inasmuch as God hath
spoken by Moyses and his Prophets, and finally by his Apostles, wee
ought too assure our selues, that al that euer is couteyued in the Lawe,
and in the Gospel, is the truthe it self, and that we ought not bee afrayd
too bee be guyled or deceyued. Wee shall heare manie Replyes, for
euery man imagineth whatsoeuer commeth in his fancie. But God
authorized his woord sufficiently, when he published his Law. Agein,
he gaue sufficient authoritie too his Prophets: and finally his Gospel
was ratified and sealed with miracles ynow. Therfore it is not for
vs too say, wee knowe not whether it bee Gods woord or no: For it is
in our mouth, it is neere at hand to vs, insomuch that God hathe voutsafed
to feed vs lyke littel babes with it, by sending vs mortall men to
speake it too vs face to face. So then let vs learne first of all, not to sor
                     •
                  


                  
in the ayre, when the receyuing of Gods woord commeth in question.
Let vs bee contented that he hath giuen vs sufficient record of his wil
by his Prophets and Apostles (and so shall wee yeeld him obedience)
though it hath pleased him too vse such instrumentes of his holy spirit:
for our fayth cannot bee without humilitie, and God taketh a tryall
thereof, in making mortall men too bee the meanes wherby he communicateth
himselfe vntoo vs. Take it therefore for a principale, that
it must not greeue vs though God appeere not in visible shape, or
though he send vs not his Angells from heauen. For it ought too suffyze
vs, that wee knowe that the Prophetes and Apostles are sufficient
witnesses, chozen and ordeyned too bring vs the message of saluation.
And by the waye Saint Paule sheweth, that there is very
good agreement betweene the Lawe, the Prophetes, and the Gospell.
In deede wee haue seene heretofore, that the vse of the ceremonies
is at an ende: but yit for all that, the substance of them continueth still.
And when God caused the Gospell too bee preached openly too the
woorld, it was not for that he was vnconstant, nor for that he intended
too teache men after a new and straunge fashion, wherwith the Lawe
was nothing acquaynted: for the Lawe and the Prophetes bare witnesse
continually too our Lord Iesus Christ. And therby also are wee
put in mynd, too further our selues by all the things that are conteyned
in Moyses and in the rest of the Prophetes. For now adayes there
are some fantasticall folk, which think that for all doctrine, wee ought
too haue no more but the new Testament, and that all the rest is superfluous.
It is trew indeede,Coloss. 2. a. 3. that al perfection of wisdome is throughly
conteyned in the Gospell: but yit dooth it not therfore followe, that
wee ought not too bee edifyed by the Lawe and the Prophetes: for
wee see that the Apostles themselues confirmed their doctrine by their
testimonies. And heere when S. Paule sayeth, that wee must bee
builded vppon their foundation, he sheweth sufficiently, that whatsoeuer
things our Lord betooke vntoo them in old tyme, is profitable for
vs at this day, and wee must practize it, and put it in vre. Lykewyse
S.1. Pet. 1. b. 12. Peter sayeth, that they serued not only for their owne tyme, but also
for ours. Trew it is, that they gaue some tast of our Lord Iesus
Christ, and of the good things that are imparted to vs by his meanes:
but yit it is wee that are come too the fulnesse of the tyme▪ as sayeth
S.Gala. 4. a. 4. Paule in another place. And the same is also a verifying of S.
Peters saying, that is too wit, that the doctrine of the Prophetes



poynteth at vs, and wee haue more ful fruition and greater fruite of it,
than they that heard it spoken. For wee haue so great a lyght in Iesus
Christ, that the things which were then darke, are now manifestly open
and knowen vntoo vs. So then, let vs studie the Lawe and the
Prophetes, knowing wel that they leade vs to our Lord Iesus Christ.
For he is the marke that is set before vs, and wherat wee leuell at this
day,Rom. 10. a. 4. accordingly as it is said, that Iesus Christ is the end of the Law,
and also the patterne that Moyses sawe on the mountain. It is sayd,
that the Lawe and the Prophetes beare witnesse of him,Iohn. 5. g. 45. and euen our
Lord Iesus Christ himselfe vpbraydeth the Iewes, (telling them)
that forasmuch as they boasted of the Lawe, they were so much the
more blame woorthie and lesse too bee excuzed afore God, and their offence
was so much the more heynous and vnreasonable, bycause they
reiected him, to whom the Lawe sendeth vs, and too whom the Lawe
would holde vs backe.
               So then, hereuppon wee haue too gather, that too profite well in
the holy scripture, wee must alwayes resort to our Lord Iesus Christ,
and cast our eyes vppon him, without turning away thence at any
time. Yee shall see a number of folk that Martir themselues exceedingly
in reading the holy scriptures, they doo nothing else but turne
ouer the leaues of it: and yit at the end of halfe a score yeares, they are
as wel seene in it, as if they had neuer read line of it. And why? Bycause
they doo but roue vp & downe, & a
                     •
                  e not at any certeyn end, yea
and euen in worldly learning, yee shall see a great sort that take paine
ynough, and yit all is to no purpose, bycause they kepe nother order
nor measure, nor doo aught else then make a raking toogither on all
sides. By meanes wherof they bee euer new too seeke, and can neuer
bring any thing too perfection, and although they haue gathered togither
a number of sentences of al sorts, yit is there no hold at all in thē.
Euen so is it with them that labour in reading the holy scripture, and
know not which is the poynt that they ought to rest vpon:Coloss. 2. a. 3. namely how
it is our Lord Iesus Christ. For lyke as it is sayd that all our perfection
is in the Gospell: so on the other side it is said, that our Lord
Iesus Christ is giuen vs too bee the wisedome of God his father,
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 1. 
                        •
                     . 24. as
sayth S. Paule in the first too the Corinthians. And lyke as it is
sayd of the Lawe,Iohn. 14. 
                        〈…〉
                     . This is the waye, walke yee therein: so also it is
sayd of our Lord Iesus Christ, that he is the trew way. Agein, as it is
sayd,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
Lord, thy word is a Lanterne too guide my steppes by: so our



Lord Iesus Christ sayeth,Iohn. 8. b. 12. I am the light of the world, he that walketh
in mee, cannot go amisse. We see then that all that euer is treated of
in the holy scripture, is now verified of our Lord Iesus Christ, to shew
vs how that he is the onely thing that wee haue too take hold of.2. Cor. 4. a. 4. And
in very deede, it is not for nought that he is called the lyuely image of
God his father.Coloss. 
                        •
                     . b. 15. For although there bee nothing but light in God:
yit shall wee neuer bee able too come too that light, till our Lord Iesus
Christ come downe too lift vs vp thither,1. Tim. 6. d. 16. and giue vs enteraunce
intoo the place that was shet fast ageinst vs afore. Yee see then that
the thing which wee haue too gather vppon those words of S. Paule,
is, that the Prophets & Apostles were chozen and ordeined to bring vs
to God, by meanes of our Lord Iesus Christ: who is his very image,
and therefore that the onely thing wheron we must settle all our senses
and myndes, is too bee edified in the holy scripture.
               And on the contrary part alos, let vs conclude, that all such as giue
themselues too vayne curiosities, and will needes bee wyser than God
gyues them leaue too bee, must abyde still in confuzion, and in steed of
goyng foreward, go more and more backeward, whereof wee see many
examples, as I sayd 
                     •
                  fore, and it standeth vs in hand too profit our
selues by them. For what is the cause of all the corruptions in the
world? what is the cause of the great number of errours, of the great
abundance of vngodlynesse, & of the great store of superstitions which
raygne euery where, but for that men are ticklish in their owne foolish
lu
                     •
                  tes and fleshly lykinges, and can neuer bee contented with the simplenesse
of Iesus Christ, as it is set downe in the Gospell? So much
the more therefore ought wee too beare well in mynd the thing that is
tolde vs heere: which is, that wee must alwayes set our Lord Iesus
Christ before our eyes, and in our sight, if wee purpose too haue an infallible
resting stocke in the holy scripture, and too further our selues
in it. And heerewithall wee see also, that we neede not too seeke heere
and there for Gods woord: for wee bee sent too the Prophetes and the
Apostles, as if it were told vs, that they bee our 
                     〈◊〉
                   within the which
wee must keepe vs, and that our fayth hath no leaue too start out on the
one side or on the other, but must bee hilde brydled vnder the obedience
of Gods woord, as it is conteyned in the holy scripture.
               Now had this text bin well vnderstoode, surely the wretched world
should not bee in such disorder, as wee see it is. For what is the cause
th
                     ••
                   men haue deuized so manie wayes of saluation, but for that they



haue not knowen the power of our Lord Iesus Christ, as it is shewed
vs heere? And in good sooth let a man looke vppon all the inuentions
of the Papistes, and he shall fynd that there is no end of their superstitiousnesse:
and yit in the meane whyle they haue as good as forgotten
Iesus Christ, or rather buried him in such sort, as they haue had no regard
of him. And was it not a corrupting and falsifying of Gods
truthe, when men knew not whertoo it tended, nor too what end it was
giuen, namely how it was giuen too keepe vs wholly too our Lord Iesus
Christ,Math. 11. d. 29. that wee myght cleaue to him, and fynd rest too our soules,
as he himselfe sayeth? Agein, on the other syde, whereuppon doo the
Papistes ground themselues at this day? Euen vppon their Councels,
vppon their decrees, vppon the things that men haue inuented
of their owne brayne: and yit they would needes beare vs on hand,
that all perfection is too bee had there. For as for the things that Iesus
Christ and his Apostles haue taught, they be but enterances, saye
they: yea and they bee not ashamed too say, that those things are but
as an Ap
                     •
                  ie, and that Iesus Christ forbare too speake of the things
that were more hygh and excellent, so as the holy scripture is but as
a Catechisme for little children, and that too atteyne too the age of
perfection, wee must haue holy Councels, wherin God reueleth the
mystiries that were vnknowen afore. Now seing that the diuell hath
so vtterly bewitched and blynded them, that they haue labored too
thrust Gods woord vnder foote, too the end wee should stray and wander
heere and there without any good direction: wee haue so much
the more cause too beare in mynde the thing that S. Paule telleth vs
heere, which is, that wee must mislyke whatsoeuer is added too the holy
scripture, assuring our selues that God hath giuen such charge too
his Prophetes and Apostles, as he forgat not any thing that was profitable
or expedient for our saluation: and that if wee desyre too profit
in his schoole, we must not puttoo any morsels or coluppes of our
owne, nor fall too borrowing of things heere and there, that are contrarie
too that pure doctrine, but must vtterly mislyke all such dealing,
yea and abhorre all maner of patching, as leuen that sowreth, and
marreth the whole batch of dowe, bycause God condemneth whatsoeuer
men take vppon them too adde vntoo the Lawe and the Gospell,
from the which wee must not in any wyse turne away: for it is not
without cause sayd:Iohn. 14. a. 5. &. 8. c. 12. This is the way, walke in it. And wheras Iesus
Christ sayeth, he is the way, and the lyght of the world: it is too



the end that wee should abyde in him, without swaruing asyde in any
wyse, eyther too the ryght hand or too the left. Another thing which
wee haue further too consider vppon this text, where Gods doctrine is
spoken of, and the Prophetes and Apostles are named the Messengers
of it, is this: that wee knowing what their office is, should not
consent too bee taught by such as God neuer made priuie of his wyll,
and whom he disauoweth, when they go about too adde any one 
                     •
                  illable
too the things which he will haue too bee noted and hild without geynsaying.
Trew it is, that the Church cannot indure without the dayly
preaching of the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles in it:1. Cor. 3. b. 10. and that
all they which are ordeyned too teache, are called Masons, Carpenters
(and builders) of Gods house. Therefore in that they bee buylders
of the Churche, they bee all one with the Prophets and Apostles.
Yit notwithstanding, it followeth not therefore that they may take
what they list of the Lawe, or take libertie too preache their owne inuentions:
but they must drawe (their matter) out of the pure fountaine
that is offered vs in the holy Scripture, that wee may bee hilde continually
too the simplicitie of the Lawe and the Gospell, and not bee atteynted
with any wandering opinions in sted of the obedience of fayth,
which contenteth it selfe with the meane that God hath set. Agein,
wheras S.1. Pet. 
                        •
                     . a. 6. Paule sayeth, that Iesus Christ is the foundation and the
head corner stone: it is not ment, that it is lawful too mingle any thing
with Iesus Christ, as though he shoulde but make some one peece of
the buylding, and the rest bee supplyed by others: but it serues too
shewe that wee must bee buylded vppon him, according as Saint
Paule exhorteth vs in the thirde Chapter of the first Epistle too the
Corinthians, where he sayeth, that no man can lay any other foundation,
than that which is layd already, that is too wit, than Iesus Christ.
Heereby S. Paule dooeth vs too vnderstand, that men cannot set forth
any thing wheron too ground and settle their saluation: there is (sayth
he) none other foundation but Iesus Christ. Agein, wee know his dominion
extendeth euery where: and therefore all of vs from the most
too the least must yeeld vntoo him, and not forsake the great number
of benefytes which he offereth vs, and which wee possesse by his
meanes.
               But yit shall wee neuer vnderstand how Iesus Christ is our only
foundation,1. Cor. 
                        •
                     . c. 24. except wee knowe too what end he was sent, according too
the forealleged text, where S. Paule sayeth, that he was giuen vs too



bee our wisdome. And not only that, but also he addeth further, that
he was giuen vs too be our rightuousenesse, redemption, and holinesse.
As if he should say, that Iesus Christ is our wisdome, wheruntoo wee
mu
                     •
                  t wholy hold our selues, bycause wee may there see, that he is the
welspring of all welfare, & hath in him whatsoeuer is requisite to our
saluation. Then if we once know to what end Iesus Christ was giuen,
and the infinite benefites wherof he will make vs partakers: wee will
forsake all other foode: that is to say, all that euer man setteth afore vs,
shalbee too vs but as vanitie, yea and euen as dung and filth, bycause
wee shalbee fully satisfied with our Lord Iesus Christ. Now then,
that wee may conceyue how he is the foundation of the Church, and
that wee ought too bee settled vppon him: let vs marke that it is bycause
God hath reueled himself fully vntoo vs by his only sonne, and
put all thinges intoo his hand which are requisite too our saluation, or
worthie to be desired, to the end that wee myght drawe of his fulnesse,
as is sayd of him in the first Chapter of S. Iohn. And this in effect is
the maner how wee ought too put this text in vre, where it is sayd, that
our Lord Iesus Christ is in such wyse the cheef stone, that he beareth
vp all the whole (building) in the corner: and we knowe that the greatest
weyght of a building lyeth vpon the corner.
               But by the way, let vs marke also, that S. Paule ment not too set
Christ alone in a rowe by himself, and to couch other stones with him,
that should haue maystership and authoritie as well as he: but simply
too shew, that there is no more diuersitie betweene the Lawe and the
Gospell, as touching the substance of them, but that our Lord Iesus
Christ is the end of all, and that wee bee so ioyned and knit togither by
his meanes, that all of vs are made the Temple of God, and belong
by vnitie of fayth too the spirituall building, wherin God intendeth
too dwell. Yit notwithstanding, if our fayth rest not wholy vppon our
Lord Iesus Christ, it is certeyne, that wee cannot bee builded vppon
this foundation. For whereas the Papistes inuent Patrones and
Aduocates too get them fauour at Gods hand, and heape vp a number
of meanes too merit withall: it is all one as if they made themselues
straungers too Iesus Christ. Now whosoeuer turneth away from
him, and it bee but a finger bredth, must needes fall intoo destruction.
for▪ it is the propertie of a foundation too beare vp the whole building.
Now if the buildig bee too wyde, and ouerhang it, it must needes fall
downe. Euen so goeth it with vs. If wee bee not builded vppon Iesus



Christ, so as our fayth bee lined and leueled vntoo him, and wee
sticke too him without adding of one thing or other: he must needes
disauow vs for any of his, and cast vs quyte away. And in good fayth,
the Papists & their lyke doo well be wray their greate vnthankfulnes,
by their wandring here and there, and by their adding of new meanes
at their owne pleasure. This wrong and outrage which they doo too
our Lord Iesus Christ, deserue wel that we should tumble them downe
and cut them quite off from Gods Church. Therfore if wee mynd too
inioy the benefite that S. Paule setteth foorth to vs heere, let vs beware
that our fayth bee so framed too the Lawe and the Gospell, as too
reiect whatsoeuer thinges man shall haue inuented, assuring our selues
that it is the next way too drawe vs too destruction, and that wee cannot
bee grounded vppon Iesus Christ too stand fast vpon him for euer,
vnlesse wee addmit all the thinges that are spoken and witnessed of him
in the Lawe and the Gospell, without making of it Lawfull for men
too adde any thing at all too it. Yee see then in effect, that the thing
which wee bee warned of in these woordes of S. Paule, is, that wee
belong not too our Lord Iesus Christ, ne can bee of Gods Church, except
it be by following the pure doctrine of the Lawe and the Gospell,
and by forsaking (as yee would say) all the filth and abhomination
that men haue deuyzed by their owne dreames and dotages, how
fayre colour of wisdome soeuer they beare. For they will fynd store
ynough of fyne pedlery, too make folke beleeue that their adding of so
many gewgawes, is not without cause. But howsoeuer they fare, if
wee couet too bee ioyned and vnited too Iesus Christ, we must so abyde
in him, as too make none account of any other thing.
               And therwithall wee see also, that too bee taken for Gods children,
wee must giue our wynds too trew concord. For S. Paule setteth
downe bothe twayne of them heere: and in verye deede, they be things
inseparable, that Christians being taught Gods word purely, should
with one hart and one mynd receiue the things that are so set forth vnto
them, and haue brotherly concord among them, too speake as it were
with one mouth, and too make one pure and simple confession. Then
lyke as hithertoo wee haue seene that we must be builded vppon Gods
pure woord alone: so it is shewed vs heere, that wee must not euery of
vs bee bent too his owne opinion, but frame our selues too the vnitie
of fayth, accordingly as S. Paule speaketh therof in the third too the
Philippians, saying▪ if ye intend too bee perfect, ame yee all at one



mark, and be yee knit truly toogither in one. For wee know how ambition
tickleth vs continually, and euery man would fayne haue somewhat
by himself, too set out his owne estimation withall. For the very
cause wherof came al the heresies that euer were, is this pryde so depely
rooted in mennes harts, that wheras all of vs ought too bee lerners,
euery of vs will needs bee teachers. And in verye deede he that is to
teach other folks, must not set foorth any thing of his owne, but purely
impart vntoo them the things that he hath learned of our Lord Iesus
Christ. And soo bycause men are so froward, that they couet alwayes
too knowe more than is lawfull for them: therefore they misbehaue
them selues, and euery man would keepe a schoole, too make a showe
of hym selfe. But it is said (heere) that in stead of this dealyng, wee
must bee knyt toogither, that wee may speake all as it were with one
mouth, and confesse that wee haue but one God, and one Father, by
shewing our selues too haue no mo maysters, but onely Iesus Christe.
Neuerthelesse, it is true that such a concord would not bee ynough: but
I haue told you already, at what ende wee must begynne: that is too
wit, at the pure instruction which wee receyue of the Prophetes and
Apostles. The Papistes brag too too much of theyr agreement: and
so may they do ful wel, for the diuel possesseth thē in such wise, that they
be wholly sotted in it. In deede there is ianglyng & iarryng ynough among
thē, & they snatch one at another lyke Curdogs, when they bee in
theyr own Synagogues: but yit they sticke toogither lyke Burres, in
the mayntenance of all vngodlynesse. We see their diuelish madnesse &
wilful stubbornnes when they reason for the mayntenance of their own
lies ageinst gods truth. But S. Paul sheweth vs after what maner we
ought to agree▪ namely not in dreames & dotages, nor in the things that
men haue put foorth of their own store: but in the doctrine of the Prophets
& Apostles. Now seing that the Papists haue banished the holy
scripture, & although they make coūtenance to receyue it, doo neuerthelesse
deface it, yea & vtterly falsifie & corrupt it by their own inuētions:
therby we see they be farre of frō their reckening, in that they vant thē
selues with open mouth to bee Gods Church: for seeing they haue not
the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, they haue no marke 
                     〈◊〉
                   the
church at al. Although men were redie to receyue al things that are in
the holy scripture, euē without geinsaying: yit if they fal to mingling of
their own fancies therwithall: Christianitie is therby alredy corrupted
& cōfo
                     ••
                  ded. Now, they not only intangle Gods truth with their own



inuentions: but also vtterly ouerthrow al: in somuch that Gods seruice
is vtterly corrupted by thē, poore soules are harried to & fro, & our Lord
Iesus Christ is robbed, so as they make but a fantastical cōceit of him,
& attribute his offices to this man & that mā, as it were the dealing of
some pray or bootie. Forasmuch thē as we see the papists so malapertly
& madly turne Gods word vpsyde downe after that fashion: we may
well conclude, that although they boast thēselues neuer so much to bee
the Church, yit God disauoweth them, yea & vtterly abhorreth them: &
that if a mā get him not out of that den of theeues, it is impossible for
him to be ioyned to our Lord Iesus Christ. Thus yee see that the thing
which we haue to beare in mynd, is, that to be ioyned to God by meanes
of his only sonne, & to be companions with the Angels of heauen,
& brethren of the Patriarks, holie kings, and Prophets, wee must be
banished out of the Hellish Sinagogs that are in the popedome, where
it is apparant that Antichrist reigneth, and that Iesus Christ is vtterly
dispossessed of his right and souereintie. And veryly we see their
cursed presumption, in that they haue bin so bolde as too say that the
See of Rome is the foundation of the Churche. For they abuse these
woordes of our Lord Iesus Christ in the sixteenth Chapter of S. Mathew:
Thou art Peter, and vpon this Stone will I buyld my Church.Math. 16. c. 18.
Now seeyng that Iesus Christ sayeth, that Peter shall bee buylded
vppon himselfe (that is too say, vppon Iesus Christ:) he meaneth not
too resigne his offyce eyther too him or too any other body: but therby
it appeereth, that among the Papists there hath not bin any reuerence
of the holy scripture, nor any desyre too bee taught, but that all was
one too them, so they myght set vp a tyrannye too oppresse the kingdome
of our Lord Iesus Christ, and too make cleane riddance of it, if
it were possible, and that they haue made no conscience of manifest
blasphemie, insomuch that euen little children ought too haue spit in
their faces, considering the grosse beastlinesse that is, and hath bin among
them. And herein also it is too bee seene, howe the diuell hath
raigned in full darkenesse, that Gods woord was buryed, yea and vtterly
defaced, and the wretched world quite and cleane be
                     •
                  eft of it for
a tyme, notwithstanding that it was their ordinary foode. So then,
let vs abhorre all those blasphemies, assuring our selues that wee cannot
bee grounded in but our Lord Iesus Christ, and that when wee bee
once faythfully instructed in him, wee neede not too borrow elsewhere,
bycause he hath brought vs whatso
                     •
                  uer is requisite for our saluation.



And it is not meete that wee should doo him so great dishonour, as too
seeke any supply one where or other: but that wee should hold our selues
all wholly vntoo him. That therfore is the meaning of the things
that S. Paule speaketh heere.
               Theruppon he addeth, that it behoueth vs all too bee buylded,
and too growe intoo a spirituall building, euen too God, and in the
spirit. First, whereas he sayeth, that wee must bee builded: it is to
stirre vs vp so much the better to growe dayly more and more in faith.
He vseth also the word Growe: and he meaneth in effect twoo things.
The one is, that wee must not thinke our selues too bee so perfect as
neede were that wee should bee, as some fantasticall heads d
                     •
                  o, whom
yee shall see so puffed vp with ouerweening, that they imagine themselues
too be wize ynough, and disdeyne too looke vppon Gods word,
or too giue eare vntoo it to be taught by it. But wo worth such pryde:
for wee cannot bee disciples of our Lord Iesus Christ, but by knowing
that it behoueth vs too bee grounded in him, and too profite in
him al the tyme of our life.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   For Gods word is of such height, bredth,
and length, that if a man should forbeare eating, drinking, and sleeping,
and buzie himselfe all wholly about that: yit should he neuer
knowe all. So then wee ought too trauell in it al our life long, knowing
that God intendeth as now but onely to set vs in the way, and that
wee must go foreward by little and little, and bee hi
                     •
                  d continually in
humblenesse and modestie.
               Agein, S. Paule sheweth vs, that too bee se
                     •
                  tled in our Lord Iesus
Christ, and too bee furthered in all the good things that are giuen
vs by him: wee must haue his word, that wee may bee builded vpp
                     ••
                  
it, and growe vppon it more and more: and that too bring the same
too passe, wee must bee teachable: and from day 
                     •
                  oo day labour too
seeke new helpe there too strenghthen our fayth withall, which shal
neuer be perfect in this world, as we fynde sufficiently by experience.
Thus yee see what S. Paule ment by that▪ which he sayeth here, concerning
our growing and going forward in the sayd building, howbeit
vntoo the Lord, sayeth he: shewing therby that too haue a goodly
show, is not all (that is re
                     •
                  uired at our hands) but that the cheife point
is, that God like well of vs, and that wee bee wholly giuen vntoo him,
so as he haue place and roome in vs, and dwel in vs as in his Temple.
For the Papists wil make a farre greater showe then wee on the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
side: they haue great multitudes, wherwith they bee p
                     •
                  ffed vp 
                     〈◊〉
                   the



vttermost. A
                     •
                  d theruppon they despyze vs, bycause wee bee but a
handfull of men (in comparison of them.) What, (say they) dooth
not Christendome extende through all Europe, Greece, and Affricke?
And yit see how these rascals that haue nother authoritie nor credit,
nor any thing else in them, will needes be counted the Chruch. Yee see
then that the Papists shake vs of with diuelish pride & malapertnesse,
bycause they haue on their syde great pomp, and all manner of riches,
insomuch that if a man go intoo their temples, he is rauished at them,
as if he were in an earthly paradice. But al is not gold that glistereth.
And although their pompe bee able too bleare the eyes of poore ignorant
soules, whom we see too bee caryed away in deede with such
things: Yit are they all no better but abhomination before God.
And so S. Paule sheweth vs that wee must not spite the Papistes,
though they be very many in number, and greatly multiplyed: for they
bee but a head without a body, or rather but a bumbasted and counterfet
body. Too bee short, that which the Papists terme their Church,
is a very monster. For it hath no head, bycause Iesus Christ hath
not preheminence ouer it, no nor any part or portion in it. Too the
end therefore that wee might knowe how wee should growe: it is sayd
vntoo vs, that wee must grow vntoo the Lord, and in Spirit, sayth S.
Paule. Heere he draweth vs backe from all worldly superstitions,
dooyng vs too vnderstand, that they bee but pelting trashe, yea and very
dung before God, who abhorreth them.
               Therfore wee must growe in spirit. And verily wee see that the
shadowes of the Lawe 
                     •••
                  assed immediatly as soone as wee had the
accomplishment and substance of the body, that is too wit, our Lord
Iesus Christ. And now that he is come, wee must not gaze any longer
vppon those figures. Sith it is so, wee ought much rather too giue
o
                     •
                  er the things that men bring in. How hygh and excellent so euer
they be, let vs cast them from vs, as filthinesse, & hold our selues cōtent
with this, that our Lord Iesus Christ wil haue vs to build in him after
a spirituall manner. And so yee see how his doctrine ought too bee
sweete and amiable too vs, yea and too rauish vs all wholly in loue
with it, so as wee may giue vp the world with a free harte, and giue
our selues too our Lord Iesus Christ. But on the other syde also let
vs beware, that the iudgment which he threatneth vnto such as cast asyde
this stone, lyght not vppon our heades, according too this saying,
Behold,1. Pet. 
                        •
                     . a. 6. I lay a precious stone in Sion. Seing then that Iesus Christ



is giuen vs too bee our foundation, wee haue there a precious stone,
whervppon if wee bee builded, wee may bee sure of our saluation. And
wee neede not bee afrayd that he is not strong ynough too vphold vs,
so as he will neuer fayle vs. But if wee fall to iustling ageinst that
stone, it is cer
                     •
                  ein that wee shall not bee able too stand ageinst it, but
wee shall sink downe vnderneath it, and in the end it shall brooze vs,
and beate vs all too peeces. Therfore let vs take heede that our Lord
Iesus Christ turne not intoo a stone too stumple at, after the manner
of the world which now adayes maliceth him, insomuch that euery
man settes vp his bristles proudly and rebelliously, too come russhing
ageinst him: but let vs bethink our selues well, and be meekely
dispozed too yeeld our seruice too him, that he may maynteyne vs vntoo
the end.
               And although wee see Iesus Christ too bee reiected of the world,
and it may seeme straunge vntoo vs that men should fyght so ageinst
him, and that he should bee as a whyte to shoote at: yit let vs not ceasse
too take him still for a precious stone, as Saint Peter counselleth vs
in the second Chapter of his first Epistle.Luke. 2. 
                        •
                     . 34. Yee see then that when wee
heare these promises which Saint Paule telleth vs of, wee ought on
the one syde too bee drawen too our Lord Iesus Christ, too giue our
selues wholly vntoo him, and too forge
                     •
                   all the things that seeme most
excellent in the world: and on the other syde too beware that our vnthankfulnesse
bee not punished for disdeyning too receyue him as a
precious stone, sith that God telleth vs that all our welfare lyeth in
this, that is too wit, that wee bee his Temple, and that he bee called
vppon at our handes. Therefore let vs profit our selues by so great
and inestimable a benefite, and let vs still growe and increase therin
more and more, vntill wee come too the heauenly heritage, where wee
shall haue full frui
                     •
                  ion of all the good things which he maketh vs 
                     •
                  oo
feele as yit but by fayth.
               And now let vs fall downe before the Maiestie of our good God,
with acknowledgement of our sinnes, praying him too voutsafe too
wy
                     •
                  e out the rememberance of them, so as they may not come too account
before him: and that therwithall he so correct vs, as wee may
cleaue fully vntoo him, and he so beare with our infirmities, as wee
may not ceasse too resort vntoo him freely at al tymes, though wee bee
not woorthy of it. And so let vs all say, Almighty God heauenly fafather▪ &c.
            
            
               
               The .xvi. Sermon, which is the first
vppon the third Chapter.
               
                  
                     1. For this cause, I Paule beyng the prisoner of Iesus Christ, am
an Ambassadour for you Genty
                           •
                        es.
                     2. Surely you haue heard the dealing forth of Gods grace, which
vvas committed too mee on your behalfe.
                     3. How that by Reuelation he hath giuen mee knovvledge of
the mistery, (as I haue written vntoo you briefely heeretofore.
                     4. By the reading vvhereof you may vnderstand the knovvledge
vvhich I haue in the mystery of Christ,)
                     5. VVhich vvas not knovven too the children of men in times
past, as it is novv discouered too his holy Apostles and Prophetes
by the spirit.
                     6. That is too vvit, That the Gentyles are fellovvheires, and of
one selfsame body, and parttakers toogither of his promise in
Iesus Christ by the Gospell.
                  
               
               
                  ALthough euery of vs confesse that the doctrine
of the Gospell brings alwayes trubble
and persecution, bycause the world hateth
it, and yit for all that, that wee ought
not too bee dismayed nor shrinke away: yit
notwithstanding it is so hard too put the
thing in vre which wee confesse, that there
is almost none of vs all which is not vexed,
and in maner shaken downe, when Gods enemyes
offer any vnquyetnesse, or when wee see the silly faythfull sor
                     •
                  
cruelly vsed at their handes. Neuerthelesse it ought too serue for a
strengthening of our fayth, when wee see men which are frayle of their
owne nature, not afrayd too hazard their lyues in bearing record of
Gods truthe. Seeing then that the power of Gods spirit appeareth
most manifestly, if we were not to 
                     〈◊〉
                   blynded with vnthankfulnesse,
it ought too assure vs so much the more. But forasmuch as wee aduauntage
our selues very euill by it: we haue neede too bee incoraged,
as S. Paule also dooth in this text. When wee see the diuell stirre
vp his vnderlinges too execute all tyranny ageinst Gods children: let



it not shake our fayth. And specially if the faythfull indure paciently
al that can be, for the maynteynance of Gods truth which they knowe,
and that they doo also hold out too the end. Without swaruing: that
(as I sayd) ought not too bee lost. And for the same cause dooth S.
Paule in other places say,Colos. 1. d. 24. he suffereth for the welfare of the Church.
Not that he could purchace them forgiuenesse of sinnes, or any grace
by his death:Rom. 1. b. 16. but bycause the Gospell is Gods myghty power too the
welfare of all that beleeue, and the further that wee go forward in it,
the neerer it maketh vs too come vntoo God, and vntoo euerlasting
lyfe. S. Paule then suffred for the example of those whō he had taught
afore with his owne mouth. For (therby) they knew that his speaking
too them had bin in good earnest, seeing he spared not his owne blud
and his lyfe, too seale and confirme the doctrine that he had brought
them. As much is doone in this text.
               For he sayth, he was an Ambassadour for the Gentyles, yea euen
though he were the prisoner of Iesus Christ. Surely these twoo
things seeme too bee as contrarie as fyre and water. For could not
Iesus Christ honour them better whom he sendeth in his name, and
which represent him, than too put them too all the shame and reproche
of the world?
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 11. c. 23. But S. Paule as well heere as in other places, hathe
not sticked too glorie in his imprisonment and bands. In deede he was
kept in ward as an euill dooer: b
                     •
                  t in the meane while he had record
bothe before God and also before man, that he suffred wrongfully, for
executing his office, and finally for seruing God faythfully. Therfore
let vs not think it strange, that on the one syde he calleth himself prisoner,
and on the othersyde the Ambassadour or messenger of the Liuing
God, euen as representing his person and dignitie. And it is not for
nought that he addeth the name of Iesus Christ. For imprizonment
generally myght haue bred some euill opinion of him, bycause euill
dooers are punished with it by order of Iustis. But the cace putteth a
difference betewne euill dooers, and the witnesses of God and of our
Lord Iesus Christ. That is the rause why S. Paule calleth not himself
a prisoner simply and without exception, but also sheweth the cause
why: saying, that Iesus Christ auoweth him, as th
                     •
                  ugh he were an
hostage (or pledge) for him. So then, by this saying wee bee warned
too re
                     •
                  eyue S. Paules doctrine with the greater authoritie, seing
hee hath rati
                     ••
                  ed it so well. If he had but onely executed his 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
                     •
                  n in preaching, wee ought too haue made acount of the obedience



that hee yeelded vntoo God. But he also wrought miracles, he in
                     •
                  ured
a number of trubbles and incomberances, and finally he suffered
imprisonment and death. Now when wee see that for all this he ceassed
not too go through stedfastly, and too ouercome all the assaults
that Satan and the wicked world were able too stir vp ageinst him:
surely wee haue the greater confirmation of the doctrine, which serueth
at this day too our vse.
               And therfore when wee bee told of Saint Paule, and of the great
number of incounters that he indured: let vs not think it is more than
needeth. For it is alwayes a more certayne ratifying of the doctrine,
too the end wee myght vnderstand how it is not of the doctrine of any
mortall wyght, but the doctrine of the liuing God, who also strengthened
him with inuincible constancie by his holie spirit. Now as this
is well spoken of the persons of Saint Paule: so must it also bee extended
further. For God wissed and ordeyned, that the rest of the Apostles
should suffer as well as hee. And it is sayd of Saint Peter,
                     
                        •
                     ohn. 1
                        •
                     . c. 18. that
when he was growen old, he should bee girded after another fashion
than he had bin woont too bee, so as he should bee tyed in streyt bonds,
and bee led whither he would not, at leastwyse as in respect of fleshly
infirmitie, though he had a spirituall disposition of mynd to obey God.
We see then in effect, how Gods seruants suffered, not a two or three
of them, but so as there myght bee as it were a great and thicke cloud
of them, as the Apostle sayeth in the twelfth too the Hebrewes. Sith
it is so: let vs make our hand of such helpes. For it is certeyne, that
God ment too susteyne our feeblenesse, by adding such helpes too his
woord (which ought too bee of sufficient authoritie of it self,) too the
intent it should no more bee doubted of, nor called in question. Thus
yee see how the thing that wee haue too beare in mynd, is that the blud
of the Apostles and Martyrs that hath bin shed too confirme the doctrine
of the Gospell, is as good as a hūdred seales, yea as a whole milion
of seales, too warrant vs all the thinges fully, which are conteyned
in the Gospell. Trew it is, that our fayth ought too bee grounded vppon
the authoritie of the holy Ghost: and that although God had neuer
a Martyr, too shewe that the truth of the Gospell is firme and certeine:
yit it ought too suffyze vs, that it is he which speaketh it. Agein,
wee haue seene heeretoofore, that the truth shall euer bee doubted of,

                     •
                  ill the holy Ghost haue sealed it in our hartes. And for that cause is
he called our earnestpennye,2. Cor. 1▪ d. 22. bycause he insureth vs of the heritage



which wee hope for, according too the promise which hath bin purchaced
so deerely for vs with the blud of our Lord Iesus Christ.
               Now for the last step, wee must come too the experience that wee
haue in these dayes. For the blud of Martirs is shed still at this day, &
God could well let that the wicked should not runne so vpon the brydle
ageinst the faythfull: he could well chaunge all their mischeeuousnesse
and rebellion: and wheras they bee rauening wolues, he could make
them as sheepe and Lambes: surely he could doo so. But on the one
syde he ordeyneth Satan too driue them and stirre them vp too such
rage, and agein he giueth them licence and leaue too trubble the faythfull.
And why? Too the end that wee should knowe what the power of
his holy spirit is, when it pleaseth him too guyde and gouerne vs. For
(as I haue declared alredy) the weaknesse of men is such, that there
needeth but the falling of a leafe from a tree too make them quake, & ageyne
wee knowe that death is horrible of it self. Therfore wee must
conclude, that God vttereth a wonderfull grace, when he strengtheneth
his seruantes in such wyse, as they bee not dismayed with any
threateninges, nor at the syght of fyre, when the enemyes and tirantes
are not contented with single death, but adde thertoo the most tyrannicall
tormentes that can bee deuyzed. Now then when the Martyres
perseuer in such constancie, therin men perceyue that God hath put to
his hand. Wherfore when wee heare that they bee handled so cruelly
for Gods word, and that some, if they scape, are notwithstanding redye
too dye, and othersome knowing their death shall bee precious in the
eyes of the Lord, offer them selues in sacrifize with a cheerful corage:
let vs not suffer their blud too fall too the ground. (I say,) when wee
heare of all these things, let vs beware wee suffer not that thing too perish,
which God hath ordeyned for our edifying, and for the better confirming
of vs in our fayth. For although wee ought too bee (sufficiently)
instructed by the preaching (alone) yit must it needes be a great
strengthening too vs, when Gods word is not onely preached, but also
sealed after that fashion. Then is it not too bee called in question,
or too be disputed of, as an vncertayne matter: but they to whom God
hath graunted the grace, and are led so farre by his holy spirit, as too
suffer for his truth: are faythfull wittnesses that their blud serueth too
giue a full sealing vp too his word, too the intent that wee should bee
the better resolued of it. Thus yee see what wee haue to gather vppo
                     •
                  
this streyne. And although the enemies of the Gospell make a triumphing,



and spit fire, and keepe a great coyle too deface all that
belongs too God: yit let not vs ceasse too gloryfie God alwayes, seeing
that all the battels which are prepared by Satans pollicie ageinst
the faythful, are turned of God into Crownes and Garlands, & he maketh
them to ouercome all things that seeme to make to their vndoing
and destruction. The thing then whiche wee haue yet further too
mark, is this in effect, that we must not bee thrust out of the way when
we see the wycked sorte, and the despyzers of God, and al worldlynges
scorne our simplicitie, at suche tyme as our brethren suffer persecution:
but must consyder that the pryzons where they be kept, & the reprochefull
fires are of much more worthinesse and excellencie, than all the
seates where those Iudges sit, that are as Satans vnderlings or vpholders,
and as ranke murtherers: yea & more excellent than al seats
of Kings and Princes, though they make neuer so much adoo of their
greatnesse.
               Now hereuppon S. Paule addeth, you also haue heard the dealing
foorth of Gods grace which was committed too mee, as I haue
written briefly vnto you, according as he declared the mistery therof
vntoo me▪ and you may better vnderstand the knowledge which
I haue of the mistery of Iesus Christ. Here S. Paule intendeth
too proue, that he was ordeyned an Apostle, not as one that had thrust
in himselfe through rashenesse or folly, nor as one that had bin aduaunced
by fauour of men, nor as one that had light intoo it by haphazard▪
but as put in by Gods free goodnesse. And it is not here only that he
stryueth for the maintenaunce of his calling, that is too wit, to shewe
that he was an Apostle sent and allowed of God: but he standeth vpon
that poynt in many other places.Gala 1. a. 1. &. Titus. 1. a. 3. It is trew, that he passed not for
his owne person: but the certeynty of the faythfull depended therupon.
When wee come too heare the Gospell, if wee bee not throughly
perswaded that he is sent of God: surely wee may well conceyue
some wandring opinion, but we shall neuer bee sure, nor haue any rest.
This then must go first: Namely, that such as teach vs bee allowed,
and that wee knowe them too bee imployed of God to our saluation,
and that they bee instruments of his holy Ghost. For otherwise a man
may say, what is he? for there is nothing in vs by nature, but vanitie
and leazing. And on the other side, were a man neuer so well learned
and sound, so as there were nothing in him but substantia
                     •
                  nesse and
soundnesse, yit should he not bee able too assure vs of the forgiuenesse



of our sinnes: it is too great and high a thing too warrant vs attonement
with God, and that he taketh vs intoo his fauour, wheras there
had bin nothing but deadly emnitie before. If the Angels of heauen
should say it with one mouth, they could not warrant it vs, except they
were authorized of God.
               So then let vs marke well, that S. Paules labouring so much too
shewe that he thrust not in hym selfe too bee an Apostle, but that he
was sent of God, and had that office at Gods hand, and that in all hys
dooyngs he attempted not any thing vppon presumption, or through
rashnesse, but according too our Lorde Iesus Christes choozyng of
hym, bycause it was his wyll too bee serued of hym after that maner:
is not causelesse. That therefore is the grounde that he goeth vppon
in this Text.
               Now he sayeth also, that the Ephesians ought too haue knowen
well the misterie or secret that had bin reueled vntoo him, namely too
the end they myght haue bin sure that he was ordeyned and appoynted
too deale foorth Gods grace, and too preach euerlasting saluation
of their soules, too such as had erst bin cut of and banished out of the
kingdome of heauen. And heere wee haue too marke first of all, that
too heare and too vnderstand the things that are preached too vs concerning
the Gospell, is not all that wee haue to doo: but that wee must
mount vp yit a little hygher: that is too wit, that God would haue vs
too bee certifyed of his good will by the record of men. For were it a
thing deuyzed heere beneath, it w
                     •
                  re too weake stuffe. And therefore
let vs marke, that the preaching of the Gospell and our common meeting
toogither too bee taught, is not a policie or order of mans deuyzing,
nor a fancie, or inuention of man, but an ordinance of God, and
an abyding Lawe, where ageinst it is not lawfull for vs too atte
                     •
                  p
                     •
                  
any thing at all. Sith i
                     •
                   is so, wee ought too come so much the more
soberly and aduyzedly thither as too Gods schoole, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   as too a
mans schoole, too heare the preaching. Trew it is, that wee 
                     •
                  ught too
examin the doctrine, and that wee must not receyue all things indifferently
that are preached, nor at least wyse bee as bruce 
                     •
                  eastes in
that behalf, after the maner of the Papists, who terme it simplicit
                     •
                  e, to
be without, any vnderstāding at all: but yit must wee beare such honor
too Gods name, that when the doctrine of the holy Scripture is set
foorth vntoo vs▪ wee 
                     〈…〉
                   our selue & from the world, and
forsake our owne reason, too submit our selues with trew obedience



and 
                     〈◊〉
                  , too the things which wee knowe too haue proceeded of
God. When wee come thither with such mynd so prepared, surely
God will neuer suffer vs too bee receyued, but he will so guyde vs by
his holy Ghost, as wee shalbee certifyed that our fayth con
                     •
                  neth of
him, and is grounded vppon his power, a
                     •
                  d tha
                     •
                   it commeth not of
men. Let that serue for one poynt.
               Agein, wheras Saint Pau
                     •
                  e sayth, that the calling of the Gentyles
too the knowledge of the Gospell, that they myght be ioyned to them
that were neere alredye, was a misterie or secret: wee haue too note,
that God purpozed to humble the world, and too hold it (as yee would
say) brydled, too the end that wee should lerne too honour his prouidence,
notwithstanding that the reasons thereof bee vnknowen too vs,
and the meanes therof hid from vs. God could haue published the
Gospell immediatly vppon the creating of the world, or streight after
Adams fall: but he did put it off by the space almost of twoo thousand
yeeres: and afterwardes agein after the flud, although the world were
renewed agein, yit draue he it of agein. So then there passed a sixteene
hundred yeeres or theraboutes before Abraham was called.
And when God choze him and all his linage, it was not yit the Gospell.
Neuerthelesse God tooke one man in his old age, that was alredie
passing and halfdead, yea and euen as good as buried, and in the
meane whyle letteth the whole world go too destruction. Now after
that foure hundred yeeres more were spent, the Law was published,
howbeit, that was but too Abrahams linage only. The Gentyles being
the farre greater number, were neuerthelesse excluded. This
matter seemeth strange at the first syght, and they that would hold
God brydled to their lust, wil fynd matter ynough heere to iangle at, &
so doo they in deede. For they would needes haue God bound to call all
the world alyke without exception. But that will he not doo. Ag
                     •
                  in,
is the Lawe giuen? Then passeth there a long tyme before Iesus
Christ come intoo the world. Too bee short, for the space of almost
foure thousand yeeres, there passed an infinite number of people,
wandering heere and there lyke blynd wretches, and walking in the
shadowe of death, and God did let them still alone, as it is sayd i
                     •
                   the
seuenteenth of the Actes.Actes. 17. g. 30. Sodeinly the Trumpet 
                     〈◊〉
                   and the
wall was broken down
                     •
                  , and God gathered toogither 
                     〈…〉
                  
e
                     •
                  st strayed from him, and had despyzed his name. He recey
                     •••
                   them
too fauour by meanes of our Lord Iesus Christ,Psal. 2. b. 
                        •
                     . in whose person the



souerein dominiō of God is extended ouer al the world. These then are
things that could not enter into our conceyt, as I said afore. Therefore
it is not without cause that S. Paule nameth that order of dealing, a
mysterie that had bin vnknowen to al ages, & was reueled in his time.
               But first and formest wee must resolue a question that myght bee
put heere, bycause the Patriarkes were not vtterly ignorant what
should insew, and the prophets bare record of it. For when there is
any speaking, that the Gentyles should bee matched with the people
whom God had chozen and adopted before: it is said, that Moyses foretold
and vttered,Rom. 10. c. 19. 20. and that all the Prophets sayd, that the straungers
should come too woorship God, and too honour his maiestie. Then
was it not a thing vtterly vnknowen at that tyme, as Saint Paule
speaketh of it: but yit let vs marke that all those prophesies ceassed
not too bee darke, bycause the meanes were hidden. It is true
that the hope of the faythfull was, that God woulde one day gather
toogither the world that was scattered after so horrible manner as we
haue seene: but as touching the knowledge of the tyme, that Circumcision,
and the figures of the Lawe should bee abolished, that God
should bee serued after another better knowen fashyon, that Iesus
Christ should bee as the daysimne of ryghtuousenesse, that men should
content themselues with him, that there should be no mo visible signes
but Baptim and the Lords Supper, too confirme vs withall in all the
ghostly gifts which wee obteyne at this day:Actes. 11. a. 
                        •
                     . all this (say I) was vnknowen.
Yea & euen the very Apostles thēselues continued still in that
grosse ignorance, notwithstāding that our Lord Iesus Christ warned
thē of the things that were at hand.Math. 10. a. 5. In deede whē he sent them abrode
into the Country of Iewrye, he sayd vnto them, Speake not yit too the
Gentiles. But that was bycause the cōuenient tyme was not yit come.
               When he drew towards his death,Iohn. 10. c. 16. I haue other sheepe (sayd he)
that are not of this fold, which must bee gathered toogither. Ther
                     •
                  
he sheweth that manie were chozen of God his father, who neuerthelesse
were not compryzed in the nation of the Iewes. And when he
was rizen agein from the dead,Mark. 16. c. 15. he sayd, Go preache the Gospell too
all creatu
                     •
                  es. Heere then is commaundement first gyuen them too
preache the hope of saluation too such as were vtter straungers too it
before. Now when S. Peter was aduertized that God would send
him too a heathen man,Actes. 10 he was so amazed at it, that the heares stoode
vp vppon his head. And how is that possible? God was fayne t
                     •
                  o



send him a vision from heauen, too make him go too a man whom he
tooke too bee vncleane.
               So then it is not without cause, that S. Paule speakyng heere of
so high and great a secret, saith, it was vnknowen too the Patriarkes
and Prophetes. They had in deede some incklyng of it: howebeit,
that was but accordyng too theyr measure, and vnder shadowes and
figures. There was not then any certayne knowledge, tyll God had
vttered the thing in effect, which he had kept in his owne determination.
And soothly S. Paule thought it good too repeate the woord Mysterie,
or Secrete, too the intent that one of vs should not prouoke another
too bee wylful in opinion, as we bee woont too bee. For if a thing
bee hard, one wyll say, this passes myne vnderstandyng, and another
makes none account at all of it. And by that meanes men turne away
from obeying God, and cast as it were a stumbling blocke in folkes
wayes, so as their way and passage is stopped vp, and none comes
neere Gods truth, which would be euident ynough, so men woulde
giue eare vntoo it. But wee bee forepossessed with this opinion, that
it is too hygh and profound a matter, and theruppon it seemes too vs
that God speakes it not for vs. And that is a cause which maketh
vs too hold scorne of his woord, & to let it alone as a thing that belongs
not at all vntoo vs: yea and the boldnesse and lewdnesse of men is such,
that they condemne all things that mislike them. Here S. Paule
too amend that fault, sayth, that the thing which is vnknowen to vs, is
neuerthelesse full of Maiestie before God. For shall wee take vppon
vs to measure Gods secrets by our imagination? What a presumptuousnesse
were that?Psal. 3
                        •
                     . b. 6. It is sayd, that his iudgements and dooings
are so deepe a gulf, as is able too swallowe vs vp a hundred thousand
times. Therfore let vs learne so to magnifie Gods wisdome, as though
his meaning bee darksome vntoo vs, yi
                     •
                   wee may not therfore shake
it of, but honour it with all humilitie. Trewly euen the things tha
                     •
                  
seeme most common, ought too bee 
                     •
                  eceyued in such wise of vs, as too
vnderstand that God giueth vs but a taste of them, and that wee haue
not the perfect knowledge of them: I meane the whole doc
                     •
                  rine of the
Gospell. There is not any poynt there which seemeth to bee of so small
importaunce, which passeth not all our vnderstanding. And there
are some other matters, wherein God reserueth the reason to himself,
meaning therby too hold vs short, too make vs confesse that all his
dooings are rightfull, although wee cannot agree too it of our owne



naturall wit, nor conceyue in our minde the reason why it should bee
so. Now if euer this doctrine were too bee put in vre, it hath neede
too bee put in vre nowe a dayes. For wee see how the wretched vnbeleeuers
doo generally shet them selues out of doores from comming
vntoo God. What is the cause that the wretched scules in the popedome
doo welter in their owne ignoraunce, and for any thing that is
told them, do shewe still that they be as it were bewitched by Satan?
They say, that Gods word is too high a thing. Yea, but dooth it followe
therefore that wee haue iust cause too reiect it? Wee should rather
consider how it is sayd,Psal. 18. b. 8. &. 1
                        •
                     9. 30. that Gods wisdome is comprehended alonly
by humilitie. And seeyng that God voutsafeth too teache the
lowely and little ones, all pryde ought too bee beaten downe in vs, and
then should wee fynd that our Lord gaue not his woord in vayne. Now
then, seeyng that in these dayes wee see a number that fynde no taste in
the Gospell, bycause it is as a straunge language vntoo them: Let S.
Paules saying and declaration moue vs too receyue modestly whatsoeuer
God 
                     ••
                  lleth vs, yea though the same bee too hygh for vs: and let
vs pray him who hath all lyght in him, too giue vs therof as he knoweth
too bee for our behoofe. For lyke as God speaketh too vs, and
maketh his doctrine too ring in our eares: so also dooth he woorke inwardly
in our hartes by his holy Ghost. Wherfore let vs submit our
selues too him, and bee ready too receyue whatsoeuer is taught vs truly
in his name. Thus yee see what wee haue too remember vnder the
woord Mysterie, or secrete.
               Now therfore when wee fynd any thing in the Gospell that shall
seeme hard and vneasie too brucke, let vs not doo as a number of madfolks
doo, which reiect whatsoeuer is not too their owne lyking: but
(as I sayd) let vs reuerence the thing that is hid from vs as yit, wayting
till God further vs, and come familiarly too vs, and increa
                     •
                  e the
measure of our fayth. And so ye se how that in reading of the holie scrip
                  
                     •
                  ure,
wee must haue the modestie too hold our selues in awe, (and
too say thus:) I vnderstand not such a text: but yit is it not for mee too
giue it ouer so, as though it were too no purpose: and therfore I will
pray God too beare with myne ignorance, and too open mee the gate
when he sees 
                     •
                  it tyme, and that he which hath the kye of all knowledge
and vnderstanding, will shew mee so much as he thinkes meete, and as
may bee for my benefite. Agein, lykewise when wee come too a Sermon,
if wee vnderst
                     •
                  nde not all th
                     ••
                   is spoken too vs, let vs stay our



selues, and in the meane whyle honour our God, and reuerence him in
the things that are too hygh for our wit too reache vntoo. And heerein
wee see, that such as would stoppe the mouthes of all Gods trew seruantes,
that they should not speake of the thinges that seeme too hygh
for them, are very diuells incarnate. For what a madnesse is it, that
bycause wee vnderstand not why God hath chozen some, and forsaken
othersome, how God gouerneth the world, that the diuell himself cannot
doo any thing without leaue, that the wicked are the instrumentes
of Gods Iustice: wee woormes of the earth, and stinking caryons
should take such authoritie vppon vs, as too say, that the thing ought
too bee rased out of the holy Scripture, which not onely was reuealed
too vs by the holy Ghost, but also sealed with the blud of Gods sonne?
Must it not needes bee that they are wholly possessed of the diuel, when
they presume so farre? Therfore let vs abhorre such monsters, & pray
God too lay his hand vppon them, and too shewe that they bee no better
than lyce, fleas, punices, and other the most vyle and despyzed
things of the worlde, when they fall too iustling so ageinst God, euen
with tyrannicall and passing barbarous furie. But as for our part, let
vs vnderstand that the honour which wee owe too our God, is this: that
whensoeuer wee heare any of the secretes of Gods woord, which cannot
bee knowen or vnderstoode of man, except it bee by the reuelation
of Gods spirit: wee must wayt paciently till God increace the knowledge
that he hath giuen vs. Agein, when one man hath a greater measure
of fayth, and more vnderstanding than other men, let him frame
himselfe too the lesser sort, and beare with them, and labour too further
them more and more: and let the lesser sort on their side haue the modestie
too hold themselues within their compasse, and not passe theyr
boundes,Phil. 3. 
                        •
                     . 15. but put in vre this saying of S. Paule in another place: If
yee thinke otherwise, tary till God shewe it you, & in the meane while
liue in concord, and let there bee no trubble among yee. And so yee see
what wee haue too gather vppon that streyne.
               Herewithall let vs mark, that God by that meanes intended too set
the greater glory vppon his mercie: for when in the end he publyshed
the doctrine of his Gospell, then did he vtter the infinite riches of his
goodnesse towardes vs. And although wee knowe not all the reasons
that God had in his mynd, when he deferred and put off the publishing
of his Gospell so long tyme: yit notwithsta
                     ••
                  ing it is very eazie for
vs too iudge, that he intended too open our eyes, and too waken vs, and



too quicken vp all our wits, too the end that euery of vs should apply
himself the better, too knowe how much wee bee beholden and bound
vntoo him. For are wee better than our fathers? Or when the Gospell
was published through the worlde, were the Gentyles more
teachable than before? No: but it seemed that wickednesse was then
come too his full measure, so as there was nothing but contempt of
God. Now when the world was so diuelish throughout, then came
Iesus Christ, then was the message of saluation brought too all men.
Yea and when S. Paule (speaking to the Corinthians) had told them
that Murtherers,1. Cor. 6. b. 9. 10. whormoongers, drunkardes, Theeues, forswearers,
and such like folke, yea which had committed yit more heinous crimes,
should not inherit the kingdome of heauen: he sayth vntoo them, you
also haue bin lyke them: too shewe that the Gospell was not preached
at Corinth, for any vertues that were there, nor for that the inhabiters
had bin more giuen vntoo God, or deserued aught at all: but all proceeded
of Gods only free goodnesse. Thus yee see that the secret
which S. Paule speaketh of, is too bee applyed after this maner:
namely that it was Gods will that there should be sin in al men without
exception, the remedie wherof he hath sent by his grace. Lykewyse
also wee in our tyme cannot say, that wee bee better then our forefathers,
as I tolde you before. For if yee haue an eye too the common
state, there was more faythfulnesse among men a fiftie yeeres ago,
than is now: there was more modest conuersation: there was lesse excesse
and superfluitie of pomp: and too bee short, men were not lyke
Dogges and Cattes, as they bee now adayes. It is trew, that they had
alwayes a smatch of their owne nature, which is nothing woorth: but
yit Satan seemed too bee then cheyned vp. But within these thirtie
yeeres, things haue gone from wooorse too woorse, and so farre out of
square, as is horrible too see. And theruppon, behold, Gods grace is
preached, forguienesse of sinnes is vttered, God calleth those that were
a hundred thousand tymes forlorne. Now what can bee sayd too it,
but that Gods will was too giue the greater beautie too his grace and
mercye by such an after deele? Wherfore let vs consider, that the way
too aduauntage our selues by Gods woonderfull secretes, is too reuerence
the thing that wee know not, and too receyue the things that
God vou
                     •
                  safeth too shew vs, and too admit the things without geynsaying,
which wee knowe too come of him: and specially too haue
regard that our fayth bee edifyed, and too consider whether wee ought



not too bee the more inflamed with the loue of God, for that he hath
voutsafed too sende the Gospell abrode now adayes as it were out of
a deepe dungeon: and for that after wee had strayed heere and there
lyke wretched wandering beastes, and had bin plunged in superstition
& idolatrie, so as wee scarse had any more vnderstanding of religion: he
hath appeered vntoo vs agein, not in person, but by his doctrine which
is preached too vs at this day, which had bin vtterly buried.
               Let vs then haue regard of that: And although the world perceyue
not at the first dashe why God woorketh after so straunge a fashion: let
not vs ceasse therefore too profit our selues by it, nother let vs passe for
our owne state too bee assured of the will of our God: but let vs resort
too the head, that is to wit, to our Lord Iesus Christ, and vnderstand,
that sith wee bee knit vntoo him agein by the Gospell, God dooth alwayes
auow vs for his children: and although wee haue bin the wretcheddest
in the world, and bee yit still at this day woorthie too bee banished
from his house, and cut of from his Church, yit notwithstanding
let vs not ceasse to hope still that he will call vs too the heritage which
he hath promised vs from tyme to tyme. Therefore it ought too suffyze
vs, that God will gather vs intoo his bodye, yit notwithstanding that
wee haue bin scattered heertoofore, and that he will performe his purpose
towardes vs, if wee suffer our selues too bee gouerned by our
Lord Iesus Christ. And forasmuch as he is ordeyned too bee our
King: let vs doo him homage willingly, submitting our selues to him
with trew obedience of fayth, not doubting but that he will reueale vntoo
vs the things that were hid afore, so as wee may perceyue how it is
not causelesse that Saint Paule sayeth in the second too the Corinthians,
that although God haue his secret purpose, wheruntoo wee cannot
atteyne: yit notwithstanding he declareth such things in his Gospell,
as are incomprehensible too all men, vttering there his harte vntoo
vs, and reueling his will fully vntoo vs, till wee may come too the
full inioying of the things which wee doo now hope for.
               And now let vs fall downe before the maiestie of our good God,
with acknowledgment of our sinnes, praying him too make vs profit
more & more in his holy word, & that the same may serue, not too puffe
vs vp with presumption and ouerweenig, but to drawe vs stil more and
more to him in trew humilitie, that we forsaking all that is of our own
brayne, and which wee bee able too bringfoorth of our owne deuyzing,
may desyre nothing but too lerne the things that are shewed vs by his



woord, and to
                     •
                   admit the same without geynsaying, and too stoope and
s
                     •
                  bmit our selues obediently and simply too the Gospell, that Iesus
Christ may bee honored, and so throughly heard among vs, as we may
neuer start from him: and that wee may bee so beaten downe in our
selues, as wee may neuer seeke too bee exalted but by his hand. That
it may please him too graunt this grace, not only too vs, but also too al
people. &c.
            
            
               The .xvii. Sermon, which is the second
vppon the third Chapter.
               
                  
                     7. I am made a minister of the Gospel, according to Gods grace,
vvhich is giuen mee through the woorking of his povver.
                     8. This grace is giuen too mee, which am the least of all the
Sainctes, too preach among the Gentyles the incomprehensible
riches of Christ.
                     9. Too open vntoo all men vvhat the communicating of the
mysterie is, vvhich vvas hid from the beginning of all times
in God, vvho created all things by Iesus Christ.
                  
               
               
                  I Haue tolde you heeretoofore how S. Paul
had an eye too twoo thinges, shewing that
he was certeinly appoynted too publishe
the Gospell through the whole world, and
specially among the Gentyles. For no
man ought too go about too vsurp any office
in the Church, but God ought too haue
that authoritie: and according to the euerlasting
order which he hath set downe, let
vs looke too followe the same, so as they
that go about too aduaunce themselues,Hebr. 5. 
                        •
                     . 4. may bee put downe, and no
man take any degree vppon him, but he that is called. Therfore marke
it for a speciall poynt, that S. Paule ment too excuze himselfe of rashnesse,
by shewing that he did not thrust himselfe in too bee an Apostle,
but had good and sure warrant that God had appoynted him thertoo.



And therewithall also he ment too assure the Gentyles, too the intent
they shoulde receiue the message of their saluation, as proceeding of
God, and not of man. For wee must alwayes bee at this poynt, that
the forgiuenesse of sinnes is too precious a thing for vs too bee assured
of by the authoritie of man. Then must wee bee fully resolued, that it
is God which speaketh,Math. 18. c. 18. too the end we may conclude, that whatsoeuer
is vnbounde on earth,1. Cor. 15. b. 9. is vnbounde also in heauen. And forasmuch as
S. Paule had erst bin an enemie too the Gospell, and had persecuted
the Christians,1. Tim. 1. b. 13. and blasphemed God: it seemed that that should haue
impeached the receyuing of him for an Apostle, and the yeelding of
such reputation too him as was requisite that he should haue. Therefore
he preuenteth the things that might bee alledged too bereeue him
of all reuerence, and sayth, that they must not haue an eye too his owne
person, nor too his deseruing, but too Gods aduauncing of him by his
grace, and by a power that is not ordinarye among men. It is trew
that S. Paule dooth alwayes humble himselfe as much as may bee,
that men may the better knowe Gods free be
                     •
                  towed goodnesse. And
that also is the rule that wee must holde, bycause God will haue all
mouthes st
                     •
                  pped, and none of vs all too haue aught whereof too boast.
For it is certeyne, that wee shall euermore but rob God of his honour,
if wee confesse not that wee bee beholden too him for all thinges, and
that wee haue not any thing at all of our owne. But (as I haue touched
already) he ment heere too put away all lettes, too the end that no
man myght vpbrayd him, that he was vnwoorthie of so excellent and
great dignitie, as too bee of the number of the Apostles. His intent
then was, to shewe that Gods grace surmounted all the impediments
that could bee in him before. First he setteth downe Gods grace. It
had bin ynough for him too haue graunted God so great prerogatiue,
as too holde all things of him: but he setteth downe twoo wordes m
                     •
                  ,
too exclude all that myght bee dema
                     •
                  ded of him. How now? (might
some man haue sayd:) such condition, and such ought too be in an Apostle:
hast thou such vertew? And so yee see why he was not contented
too set downe simply the gift, but also would needes adde, free bestowed.
And afterward he magnifyeth the same gift yit more, saying, that
God vvrought therein according too the woorking of his povver.
Too bee short, hee giueth men too vnderstand, that they ought to espye
a singular and woonderfull goodnesse of God in him, and therwithall
a power not ordinarie among men. Those are the twoo poynts which



wee haue too marke.
                     
                        •
                     . Tim. 1. 
                        •
                     . 12. Now forasmuch as in the first too Timothie he
sayeth also, that he himself both is, and ought too scrue vs all for a looking
glasse, let vs learne too apply the same vntoo vs.
               And first of al, whatsoeuer wee aske of God, let vs vnderstand that
the same must issew vntoo vs from the welspring of his only mercie and
free bountie, too the end wee should forget all selfdeseruing. For it is
the next way too shet vs out of the doore, when wee come vntoo God,
if wee imagin too bring aught of our selues. Mark that for one poynt.
And secondly to amend all distrust, let vs hope that God will doo more
than all our wits can conceiue. For it is not in vs too measure his
infinite power: and therfore whatsoeuer he hath giuen vs alreadye, let
vs think 
                     •
                  ur selues beholden too his goodnesse for it, let vs doo him
homage for it, and let vs yeeld him the prayse of it, as meete is wee
should. And so yee see, that the thing which wee haue too gather vppon
Saint Paules example, is, that we must with al humilitie besech God
too worke so in vs by his owne mere grace, as his name may bee glorified
therby, bicause there is no deseruing to be foūd in vs. Also let vs be
out of dout, that his power passeth all our capacitie, so as wee may
euery way giue him place and enterance, and not shet him out from vs
through our vnbeleef. 
                     •
                  nowe wee once that? Hath God shewed vs
his mercie and power, and made vs too feele them by experience? Let
vs put them in vre to the vttermost of our power, and let vs not seeke to
deface his glorie, vnder colour that he hath made vs more excellent
than others, as though wee had deserued aught of our selues, but let
vs yeeld him his dew, and that which ought too bee his peculiar
owne.
               And herewithall, too continue his matter, he addeth, that this
grace was giuen too him, (euen) too him the least of all the Saincts.
This serueth too expound that which hee had sayd concerning the gift
of grace. Now heruppon wee haue too mark, that if wee intend too
yeeld God that which wee owe him, wee must be vtterly abaced in our
selues. For so long as men fall too parting of staks with God, and
will needs bee somwhat of themselues: it is all one as if they would
set themselues ageinst God, and bee their owne keruers. Too bee
short, God neuer hath his full right, except wee be rid quyte and cleane
of all. Thefore a man cannot discerne how Saint Paule hild al things
of Gods mere grace and free gift, but by considering his (former)
slendernesse, that is too say, by considering what manner a one he had



bin, and what his estate had bin before. And this is a poynt of greate
importance: for wee see how men couet alwayes too reserue somwhat
too themselues. And although they graunt, that God deserueth too be
exalted without end: yit can they not finde in their harts too forgo the
the whole prayse of the thinges that he hath giuen them, but would
                     •
                  
fayne be esteemed and had in some reputation for them. Seeing that
wee bee so much giuen to vaynglorie, and that there is not a harder
thing for vs too doo, than too humble our selues with such lowelinesse
as God requireth: it standeth vs on hand too mark this doctrine so
much the more, wherin we see, that God shall neuer bee honored as
he deserueth, till wee be thrust downe vnder his feete, and haue not
any thing wherfore to bee estemed, but bee become lyke wrethed creatures
that haue nothing in vs but miserie, wherby God may haue occasion
too shewe forth his mercie vppon vs. Lo how Saint Paul
                     •
                  
yeelded the prayse of all things vntoo Gods freegift without hipocrisie,
by acknowledging himself too bee the least of all others.
               And let vs marke also, that S. Paules so dooing, was not a feyned
modestie, after the maner of most men, which wil commonly say,
and make as it were a prouerbe of it, O sir, I am the meanest and
least able of all men: and yit in so saying with their mouth, they ceasse
not too haue theyr hartes puffed vp with pryde. In so much that in
very deede, if a man should answere them, I beleeue it wel: they would
bee as hot as a toste, and had leeuer too bee found lyers, than too gyue
ouer theyr selfeweenyng, wherwith they bee so ful fraughted. S. Paul
vsed no such Ceremonie full of vntruth, but protested truely the thing
as he thought it, accordingly as in another place to the Corinthians,1. Cor. 1
                        •
                     . b. 
                        •
                     .
he sayth, he is not worthie too bee named an Apostle, bycause he had
persecuted Gods Church, and withstood his truth. And agein, when
he setteth foorth himselfe for an example in the first too Timothie,1. Tim. 1. b. 13. too
the end wee should not doubt but that God sheweth himself mercifull
towards vs: he sayth,Actes. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . 1. he had blasphemed the Gospell, and bin full of
crueltie, seeking to shed innocent blud. There then S. Paule sheweth
well ynough, that there was no counterfetnesse in his confession, and
that his lowelinesse proceeded from his hart. For he would haue chozen
too haue bin out of estimation too the worldward, and too haue
receyued all manner of reproche too himselfe, yea and too haue bin taken
for a cursed caytife: than to haue disgraced Gods goodnesse. And
like as his doctrine was too indure for euer: so ment he too haue his



wants knowen in all ages and all tymes vntoo the worlds end, referring
al things to this poi
                     •
                  t, namely, that men might knowe how God
had set him as it were vpon a scaffold, to warrant vs that he will shew
himselfe as free harted towards vs also at this day: and that on the other
side wee should not bee ashamed too bee acknowne of our owne
wretchednesse, too the intent that Gods grace may haue the greater
glosse in vs. Wherfore let vs remember vppon this Text, that wee
doo then offer God such sacrifize of prayse,P
                        ••
                     l. 13. b. 6. as he deserueth, when wee
protest truly and vnfeynedly, that al the good which is in vs, commeth
of his grace, who hath bestowed it vppon vs, and that wee cannot chalendge
any thing at all too our selues: but that when wee haue examined
all that is our owne, wee shall finde none other things at all,
than such as may cause vs too cast downe our eyes, and make vs ashamed.
After this manner (say I) must wee followe the thing that S.
Paule sheweth vs heere. Yea and let nother spyte nor vayneglory,
hinder vs too humble our selues among our neighbours. For here S.
Paule hath not only shewed that he was indetted to God for al things,
& that he was bound to him for al the good things that he had, bycause
they 
                     •
                  ame of his o
                     •
                  ly mere goodnesse and free gift: but also therwithall
abaceth himself, in comparison of the rest of the Apostles. Now
then, let vs rid away this cursed affectiō which is ouer deeply rooted in
our nature, namely, of desiring to perk vp in such wyze, as men should
looke at vs aboue othe
                     •
                   men, and commend vs more than others. For
we see how S. Paule, who was so excellent, did notwithstāding stoop
                     •
                  
too that lownesse: wherfore let vs indeuer too fashion our selues like
too him. And let vs thinke well vppon this saying of our Lorde Ies
                     ••
                  
Christ,
                     
                        •
                     uke 
                        •
                     8. c. 14. that he which wil be exalted of God, must bee brought lowe
in him
                     •
                  elfe. So then, let vs bee little ones of our owne accord, and
then it is certein that God will reache vs his hand. And although he
send vs nother statelinesse nor dignitie: yit will he giue vs so much
thereof as shalbee needefull, at least wise if wee haue the trew meekenesse
of seeking nothing else but too be gouerned by his hand.
               But heere it myght bee demaunded, how Saint Paule acknowledgeth
himself a little one, seing he hath done more than al the rest, as
he him
                     •
                  elf sayeth in the forealledged place of the first too the Corinthians.
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 1
                        •
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
Saint Paule was not ignorant of the gracious giftes that he
had receiued at Gods hand, nother ment he too imbace them in his
mouth as Hipocrytes doo, which say, I am n
                     •
                  thing at all: for he wist



well that God had indewed him with great 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and it is not a poynt
of humilitie too say, I haue nother skill nor wit, nor any thing woorthie
of prayse: for if wee speaks 
                     〈◊〉
                  , wee bee vnthankfull too God, as
they that burye his benefites wherin his glory ought 
                     •
                  oo shyne foorth.
Saint Paule then ment not heere too shew, that he was a man without
knowledge, and without the giftes of the holy Ghost, or that he had
receyued lesse portion of them than other men had: but his calling of
himself the least, was in respect of that which he had bin before he was
a member of the Churche.Math. 1
                        •
                     . a. 1. & Mark. 16. c. 15. For our Lord Iesus Christ had in his
lyfe tyme chozen and sholed out the twelue, too whom he gaue Commission
too publish the Gospell through the whole woorld. And now
in the meane whyle what was Saint Paule? He was not only a pri
                  
                     •
                  ate
person, but also banished, and cut of as a rotten member 
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  m the
companie of the faythfull. And besydes that, Satan draue him foreward
too all crueltie, so long as Gods spirrite was not in him. He
had in deede a kynd of zeale, but that was starke madnesse, for he ceassed
not for all that too fyght ageinst God in his owne misbeel
                     •
                  efe: he
did it ignorantly, but yit could not that excuze him. So then wee see
that his terming of himself the least, was not without cause, according
wheruntoo he sayeth in another place,1. Cor. 15. b. 8. that he was as an vntymely
birth, and that it i
                     •
                   was not too bee thought that euer he should haue
come too the spirituall lyfe, wherof he was a minister. For he was as
a rootten carkesse, and there was no lykelyh
                     ••
                   that euer he should
haue come too the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, seing he was runne
so farre 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and had bin as a tempest in thundering vppon the
Church, and as a 
                     •
                  allening Woolfe, that 
                     •
                  ought nothing else but too

                     〈◊〉
                   his pray. And so wee see how his confessing of himself to bee
the least of the Saintes, was vnfeyned, namely as in respect of his former
state. But God, who not only exalteth the thing that is small
and low, but also maketh what he listeth of nothing, vou
                     •
                  asafed too
change him after that fashyon, too the end that that miracle sho
                     ••
                  d amaze
vs as oft as we thinke vpon it, & wee not only lerne too magnifye
Gods goodnesse in that deede, but also apply the same too our
owne vse: and therwithall euerye of vs bethinke himsel
                     •
                   aduyzedlye,
and returne too our former state, (I meane not too bee such as we
                     •
                  
were in old tyme,) but consider welll of it, 
                     〈◊〉
                   too examin our
selues throughly, that Gods infinite grac
                     •
                   and goodnesse may app
                     ••••
                  
the more in vs. That then is in 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     ••
                  ing that wee hau
                     •
                   too remember



concerning Saint Paule. And therfore as oft and when
                     •
                  ieuer
the great treasures of Gods mercie which are imparted too vs
in our Lord Iesus Christ, are preached vntoo vs: let vs bee s
                     ••
                  e that
euerye whit therof was warranted too vs in Saint Paules person,
and that he spake not as of things vnknowen, but that he had sure experience
of them, and that in his person we may see still with our eyes,
the thing that he vttered with his mouth.
               Now let vs come too the gracious gift that he speaketh of, which
is the publishing of the incomprehensible riches of our Lord Iesus
Christ, by the Gospell. It was a great matter that Saint Paule had
bin receyued too bee a sheepe:Actes. 13. 
                        •
                     . 2. but God thinking not that too bee ynough,
did put him in office of a Shepherd. The thing then which
he meaneth heere, is, that wheras he had bin a Woolf full of crueltie,
he was not only chaunged too become a Lamb, too obey the voyce of
our Lord Iesus Christ, and too bee quiet in his flocke: but also exalted
of God too a much greater and hygher diginitie, insomuch as
he was ordeyned a Messenger of mans saluation, and a dealer foorth
of all the riches of our Lord Iesus Christ,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   which neuerthelesse are incomprehensible:
not that wee ought not too seeke them, but bycause
the measure of them dooth vtterly exceede our capacitie. Now then
wee see the effect of that which Saint Paule teacheth heere: going
foreward still with the thing that he began with heeretoofore, namely
that wee must vnderstand that he thrust not himself foorth through
folish ouerboldnesse,G
                        •
                     l a. 1. 
                        •
                     . 1. too take vppon him the office of an Apostle, but
that he was called too it from on hye, and set in that degree by God.
And further let vs assure our selues, that this doctrine was not put
foorth intoo the aire at all aduenture, but leueled at vs by Gods holy
Ghost, and by his woonderfull forepurpose, as wee shall see anon af
                  
                     •
                  er.
Therfore let vs not thinke that Saint Paule hath spoken only
for those whom he presently taught, & that in the the meane season th
                     •
                  
same doctrine belongeth not too vs: but let vs rather vnderstand how
it was Gods will, that Saint Paules labour should bee too our behoof
at this day, and that wee should receyue profit by it. That
is it which wee haue too remember concerning the processe of th
                     •
                  
text.
               And therfore let vs vnderstand, that whensoeuer the Gospel is preached
vntoo vs, wee haue there inestimable riches, insomuch that when
wee haue throughly set al our wittes too the boulting out of the knowledge



of the things that are offered vs 
                     〈◊〉
                  , wee may well haue 
                     〈◊〉
                  
tast therof, but wee shall neuer p
                     •
                  rceyue 
                     〈◊〉
                   how free 
                     〈◊〉
                  
God is towardes vs, howbeit it i
                     •
                   ynough for vs 
                     •
                  hat w
                     •
                  e can after
some sort perceyue his goodnesse, and bee a
                     ••
                  ured 
                     〈◊〉
                  . It is
trew that wee ought too bee rauished in loue with it: but yit 
                     ••
                  wsoeuer
wee fare, wee shall neuer get past half our way, in somuch that euen
he that hath as good as quyte giuen ouer the world, and forgotten
al the intycementes and pleasures heere beneath, and is (as yee would
say) led by an Angelicall mynd too aspyre too the kingdome of heauen,
shall notwithstanding haue comprehended but a smal portion of the
riches of ou
                     •
                   Lord Iesus Christ. This is a thing which ought to
                     •
                  
make vs esteeme the Gospell otherwyse than wee haue doone. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
on the other side, it will bee a horrible condemnation too our 
                     •
                  nthankfulnesse,
if wee thinke the things that are set foorth in the Gospell, to
                     •
                  
bee but odinarie matters, seey
                     ••
                  g that our Lord Iesus Christ vttereth
there the infinite treasures of his goodnesse. And moreouer also wee
must vnderstande, that when wee once haue our Lord Iesus C
                     •
                  ri
                     •
                  t,
wee may w
                     •
                  ll gyue ouer all other thinges as needelesse and supe
                     •
                  fluous.
               For if wee bee a
                     •
                   the poynt that the Papistes are, who can well y
                  
                     •
                  ough
say, Iesus Christ our Redeemer, and therwithall thrust him intoo
the throng of their Hee saynctes and Shee saynctes, so as Christ is
as it were but a little fellowe shuffled in among the rest: I say, if wee
bee at that poynt: surely wee renounce Iesus Christ, in disguizing him
so through our leawdnesse. So much the more then dooth it stand vs on
hand too wey well this text, where it is sayd, that his riches are incomprehensible,
that wee may set our whole mindes theruppon, and inforce
our selues euen beyond our power, too knowe the good things tha
                     •
                  
are communicated too vs by Iesus Christ: for it is cer
                     •
                  eyne, that
the measure of our fayth shall neuer atteyne too the vttermost. Sith i
                     •
                  
is so, let vs assure our selues (as I sayd afore) that our Lord 
                     〈◊〉
                  
Christ ought too suffyze vs throughly once for all: for we
                     •
                   shall 
                     〈◊〉
                  
in him whatsoeuer we can wish. And as soone as we swar
                     •
                  e from him▪
wee may well surmyze wee haue wonne I wote n
                     •
                  re what, b
                     •
                  t it shalbee
but wynd, which shall 
                     •
                  ill vs too no purpose. So then, let 
                     〈◊〉
                  
Lord Iesus bee knowen as he is, that is too wit, with the whole 
                     〈◊〉
                  
of his benefytes. For it is certeyn▪ that by him wee obteine 
                     〈◊〉
                  
that euer wee can aske at Gods 
                     〈…〉
                  


                  
where else,Iohn. 14. 
                        •
                     . 6. it is a straying out of the way: for it is sayd, that he is the
way, and that by him wee haue accesse vnto God his father. In 
                     〈◊〉
                  
that it is his office too guyde vs too God his father, therby he sheweth
vs that wee shalbee satisfyed of all that euer wee neede, and that we
                     •
                  
shall 
                     〈◊〉
                   too our s
                     •
                  luation, so wee r
                     •
                  st wholy vppon him. And on the
contrary part, that when we wander out on the one syde or on the other,
it is a playne renouncing of all the benefytes that are offered vs in his
person: and therfore wee bee well w
                     •
                  rthie too starue when w
                     •
                  e 
                     〈◊〉
                  
needes adde any thing at all too our Lord Iesus Christ, seing that
God hath shewed himself so bountifull in him, that he hath not forgot
                  
                     ••
                  n
any of all the things that belong too the fulnesse of our felicitie, ioy,

                     •
                  nd glorie. Also wee bee warned by S. Paules example, that the
more that any of vs is exalted at Gods hand, the more he should humble
himself, acknowledging how much he is bound vntoo him. Tre
                     •
                  
it is, that euen they which are furthest of all behynd, haue ca
                     •
                  se ynough
too magnify Gods goodnesse, for his calling of them into his Church.
For what a thing is it for vs too bee reckened as Gods children,Luke. 24. 
                        •
                     . 26. as
heires of his kingdome, a
                     •
                  d as members of our Lord Iesus Christ,
to be partakers of the glory wherinto he is entered? Now the Christian
that is (as yee would say) an vnderling too all others, an 
                     〈◊〉
                   in
a little nooke, a raseall and an idiot which hath nothing but scorning in
this world: is neuerthelesse adopted of God intoo the number of his
children, too bee of the body of our Lord Iesus Christ. So then, euen
the least haue ynough wherfore too glorify Gods grace: but they th
                     ••
                  
are aduaunced too any degree of honour, haue so much the 
                     〈…〉
                  ,
if they h
                     •
                  nour not God for the thing which it hath pleased him 
                     〈◊〉
                   bestowe
vppon them aboue other men. As for example, if a 
                     〈…〉
                  
knowledge and grace too serue the Church withall, it is cert
                     •
                  in, th
                     ••
                  
he is dubbl
                     •
                   giltie, if he acknowledge not himselfe so much th
                     •
                   more

                     〈◊〉
                   vntoo God for it. Also they that by their strength or 
                     〈◊〉
                  
are able too doo more than other poore men, that haue no more than
wherwith too gouerne themselues, ought also of dewtie too 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
                     •
                  hemselues before God, and too stoope in such wyse as there may 
                     〈◊〉
                  
no presumptuousnesse nor ouerweening in them, too puffe them vp
withall. To be short, looke as euery man hath receyued grace thought
Gods goodnesse, so ought his marke alwayes too bee that God 
                     〈◊〉
                  
honored, and too confesse that wee bee the more beholden and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
vntoo him, for that he hath 
                     〈◊〉
                   so liberally with vs. That is 
                     〈◊〉
                  


                  
thi
                     •
                  g more which wee haue too gather vppon the example of Saint
Paule.
               But forasmuch as he had spoken of the riches of Iesus Christ, he
telleth vs, that those riches were then vttered, when Gods misteries
were published to such as had bin blynd wretches before. And I haue
alredye expounded vntoo you this woord Mistery, Secret, or pri
                        ••
                     tie,
according too Saint Paules applying of it in this text. I sayd in effect,
that all Gods woorks▪ being well considered, haue wherwith to
draw vs too wonderment. And why? Bycause they proceede of his
ryghtuousenesse, Iustice, goodnesse, and wisdome, which are all of
them things infinite. When wee speake of Gods wisdome, power, or
Iustice, they bee not things that wee can defyne▪ as though wee had
full knowledge of them, 
                     〈◊〉
                   as wee can doo of the things that wee see
heerebeneath. Yee see then how that all Gods woorkes, when wee
come too the co
                     •
                  sidering of them from whence they proceede, are wonderfull
too vs. Well then. And are not all the things that wee see in
the order of nature, Gods woorks too? Yis: but wee partly see what
they bee, and partly our wits come sh
                     •
                  rt of them. As for example, if
it bee demaunded by wha
                     •
                   m
                     •
                  an
                     •
                  s the earth bringeth foorth fruits, we
know it dooth so, bycause it is common among vs▪ But if the cause
therof bee demaunded, surely there all our wits vanish away. For is
the earth able of her self too yeeld foorth corne? Is it able to make the
things too liue agein, which were as good as dead? Whence come
the leaues and blossoms of trees▪ and all such lyke things, after that
Winter hath put all out of fashio
                     •
                  ? Agein, how can fruits, Corne, and
wyne nurrish men, seing they haue no lyfe of themselues? Then if wee
fall too seeking out the grou
                     •
                  d of Gods woorks, it is (as I sayd) a
bottomlesse pit, and wee 
                     〈…〉
                   fayne too confesse, that God hath
in himselfe an infinite wisdome, wheruntoo wee cannot atteyne. Howbeeit
Gods 
                     〈…〉
                   now and then 
                     〈◊〉
                   more wonderfull vntoo
vs, when we fynd the cause of them 
                     〈◊〉
                   to our naturall wit & vnderstanding.
As for example, wheras it is sayd, that it was Gods will
that the Gospell should bee preached vppon the soodein through the
whole world: it was (too see too) a verye mad kynd of dealing, if wee
iudge of it after our owne imagination. For some man will demaund
why God bethought him 
                     〈…〉
                   to the hope of saluation,
sith he had shet them out from 
                     〈…〉
                   Behold, the world which had
continewed so long tyme afore▪ was renewes agein at the flud. And



wee see how God suffereth the heathen folk too walk in destruction.
When all maner of wickednesse was come to his ful heigth, and ouerflowed
the world as a horrible flud, then suddeinly God showed him
self. And is not that a secret too astonish men withall? Now lyke as
the wicked, and al such as despyze God, and al worldlings are dazeled
at these things, and so farre out of conceyt with the straungenesse of
them, that they could fynd in theyr harts too go too Lawe with God:
so the faythfull are taught too kno
                     •
                  , that Gods wisdome is incomprehensible.
               Agein, S. Paule speaking hereof in the fourth Chapter of the second
too the Corinthians, sendeth vs backe too the Creation of the
world, saying, that if wee thinke it straunge that God should inlighten
blynde wretches, and that such as were but wandring beasts afore,
should bee brought intoo the way of saluation by the doctrine of the
Gospell: Wee should consider how the light was created at the beginning.
What was there in the confuzed lump, whereof it is sayd,
that God created the Heauen and the earth? There was nother beautie,
nor order,Gene. 1. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . nor aught else▪ darkenesse couered all, as it is sayd in
Moyses. But God commaunded that light should bee made, and so
he drewe light out of darkenesse. Therefore (sayeth S. Paule) although
the world was in i
                     •
                  ksome darkenesse, & that the Gentiles had
their eyes as good as stopt vp, so as there was not any knowledge of
saluation at all: Yit God at the comming of his onely sonne, shewed
how his promising by his Prophets that he would gather the world
too him,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 37. 
                        •
                     . 22. was not for naught. And so yee see, how he bringeth light
out of darkenesse new agein. Howsoeuer the cace stand, wee must alwayes
come backe too this poynt, that the drawing of the Gentiles
too the hope of saluation by the doctrine of the Gospell, was a secret of
God. And he speaketh of the communicating therof vntoo them, bycause
God had kept it secret too himself, and therefore he addeth, that
it had bin vnknowne in al tymes and all ages. And how so? For God
kept it secret too himself.
               Wee bee warned new agein in this Text, too reuerence Gods incomprehensible
ordinaunce, when we heare speaking of our saluation,
and too consider that it is a worke which passeth all our capacitie, and
that if wee mind too haue such knowledge of it, as is good and prof
                     •
                  table
too glorifie God withall: Wee must be as it were at our 
                     〈◊〉
                   end,
too say, it is a thing that I cannot vnderstand aright. Trew it is,



that wee ought too set our whole studie theruppon: and it behoueth vs
too exercise our selues in it all the tyme of our lyfe, as wee see in the
other Text. But howsoeuer wee deale, yit must the finall knitting
vp of it alwayes bee, that God hath not compassed the worke of our
saluation, according to our slender capacitie and weakenesse, but ment
too humble vs, too the end wee should bee abashed in our selues. And
when we haue reuerenced his euerlasting ordināce, which is hid from
vs, let vs imploye all the power and abilitie which wee haue, too the
praysing of his holy name. This is the thing that wee haue to beare
in mynd: and looke what is spoken too all men generally, that must
euery of vs apply
                     •
                   particularly too himselfe. For S. Paule treateth
here of the comming of the Gospell, vntoo vs which come of the race
of the Gentiles, and sayeth, that the same is a secret of God. Now
if euery of vs looke intoo himself, and demaunde this question of himself,
how comes it too passe, that I am made partaker of the Gospel?
how haue I bin brought intoo the Churche? I say, it wee consider
well these things, wee shall all of vs from the greatest to the least confesse,
that our Lord hath wrought after an vnaccustomed fashion. For
it is not of the order of nature, that God hath so reformed vs and created
vs the second time, too the end we should be his children, and beare
his image: but it is a very Miracle which ought too rauishe vs
and amaze vs, as I haue sayd alreadye. Let that serue for one
poynt.
               And besides that, forasmuch as I must bee fayne too reserue that
which followeth, till another time: let vs note for a conclusion, that whē
there is any speaking of Gods secrets, it is good reason that we should
bee sober, and suffer our selues too bee ignorant in the things that God
hath not reueled vntoo vs.Rom. 1
                        •
                     
                     ▪ a. 3. That is the thing which wee haue too consider
vpon the woord Communicate, For euen very experience sheweth,
what the end of them is, which giue head too their owne curiositie,
and will needes knowe all things, and serch out all Gods secretes by
percell meale. They that mount vp intoo such ouerweening, shall in
the end be confounded. And the hygher that they clymb, the more horrible
shall their fall bee, and God must needes cast them downe vtterly.
Therfore let vs learne too knowe no more than God disclozeth vntoo
vs: for it is meete for him for too shew vs so much of his power and
purpose, as he thinketh good. When it pleaseth him too open vntoo
vs the things that were straunge afore, then let vs learne them of him,



                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  


                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  


                  
and not say, this is too darke: but let vs pray him too giue vs such vnderstanding
by his holy Ghost, as wee may perceyue whatsoeuer he
sheweth vs by his woord. Yee see then how wee ought to bee diligent
and heedfull in receyuing the things that God hath voutsafed too teach
vs in his holy Scripture, and the things that are preached too vs in
his name. But therwithall let vs also tarry till he impart vntoo vs
what he thinkes good, and let vs not thrust in our selues at al aduenture
too knowe more than is lawfull for vs, but let vs bee contented with
that which God sheweth vs, assuring our selues that it is not for any
enuy that he suffereth vs to knowe no more, but for that he hath regard
what is expedient and behoofull for vs, and therfore giueth vs such
lyght as he thinkes meete, in measure and proportion. Thus yee
see in effect, how S. Paule ment that the Gospell was communicated
vntoo him: and also that the Gentyles receyued their part of it by his
meanes, insomuch that all men knew the things that were as good as
buryed from them before, till God brought them foorth to lyght. Likewyse
let vs at this day vnderstand, that whensoeuer it pleaseth God to
rayze vp men of skill which haue the gift too teache vs, it is a sure token
that he hath pitied vs aforehand, and is mynded too call vs too the
inheritaunce of saluation. And therfore let vs bee teachable, let vs
suffer our selues to be taught by the woord that is preached too vs, and
let vs coue
                     •
                   no further, but let vs rest vppon that which God shewethshe
vs. For the only meanes too satisfye vs, is too bee cotnented with the
free goodnesse which he hath vttered towardes vs, which (as I sayd afore)
is infinite, bycause the treasures of his mercie which he hath
powred out vpon vs, doo passe all mans capacitie, insomuch that our
vnthankefulnesse shalbee tootoo vnexecuzable, if our owne desires and
lykynges leade vs too knowe more than is reueled vntoo vs.
               Now let vs fall downe before the maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faules, praying him too forgiue them, and too
blot out the rememberance of them, & to giue vs the grace too frame
our lyues too his holy will and commaundementes, so as wee may
shewe by our deedes, that forasmuch as he hath adopted vs too bee his
children, wee also doo honour him as our father. And therfore let v
                     •
                  
all say, Almyghtie God heauenly father. &.c.
            
            
               
               The .xviii. Sermon, which is the third
vppon the third Chapter.
               
                  
                     9. The grace vvas giuen too mee, too manifest too all men what
the communicating of the mysterie is, vvhich vvas hid from
the beginning of all tymes in God, vvho created all things by
Iesus Christ.
                     10. Too the end that Gods vvisdome vvhich is diuers in all sorts,
myght bee manifested too principalities and powers in heauenly
places by the Church,
                     11. According to the determination of all tymes, which he made
in Iesus Christ our Lord.
                     12. By vvhom vvee haue assurance and accesse in trust, through
the fayth which wee haue in him.
                  
               
               
                  LIke as I sayd this morning, that all Gods
woorkes in generall, deserue well too bee
reuerenced at our handes, bycause God
hath printed in them some markes of his
infinite goodnesse, Iustice, power, and wisdome.
So also there are some woorkes
more woonderfull than the rest, and woorthie
too bee aduaunced aboue the common
rate, forsomuch as God oftentymes woorketh
after such a sort, that men (euen whether
they wil or no) are inforced to bee abashed and astonished at them.
Of this sort is the doctrine (of the Byble.) For all that euer is conteyned
in the Lawe and the Gospell, is a wisdome which it behoueth vs
too worship, bycause that without that, wee should neuer vnderstande
any thing, insomuch that it is sayde, that God will bee the teacher of
the little and humble ones.Psal. 1
                        •
                     . b. 8. Yit notwithstanding some part of the
thinges that are shewed vs in the scripture, may well bee vnderstoode
euen of the rudest and ignorantest sort. Agein, there are there hygher
or deeper matters. And those are they which S. Paule meaneth now,
by calling the preaching of the Gospell a Mysterie or secret, in comparison
of all the rest. For albeit that God had euermore determined
in himselfe too call the whole world too saluation: yit he kept the execution



of his purpose secret too himselfe, till the comming of ou
                     •
                   Lord
Iesus Christ: & when it was doo
                     •
                  e, the newnesse of i
                     •
                   seemed straunge.
That therefore is the thing that wee haue too consider, when S. Paule
sayth, that he was appoynted an Apostle, too co
                        •
                     municate the secret
that had bin hyd
                        ••
                     n before in God. And by those woordes hee
dooeth vs too vnderstand, that although too mans sight the publishing
of the Gospell was a new and vnwoonted thing: yit God did nothing
vppon the suddein nor in hast, but onely shewed then by effect, the thing
that he had a
                     •
                  re
                     •
                  dy determined and purpozed vppon afore, euen from
the c
                     •
                  eation of the world.
               Wherfore when wee looke vppon Gods workes, let vs learne not
too thinke he did the things at abrayd (as men say) which were erst 
                     •
                  id
from vs: but let vs reserue his secret purpose too himself, and when we
see the things come too passe, let vs vnderstand, that it must needes
haue bin so, bycause God had purpozed vppon it. And this serueth too
humble vs by all meanes: First too make vs knowe the smalnesse of
our capacitie, that we may reuerence the things which passe the reach
of ou
                     •
                   wit. And secondly, wee haue also wherwith too hold vs in suspence
as concerning the execution of Gods ordinance: for wee cannot
gi
                     •
                  e sentence of things too come, without fond rashnesse, and God
will laugh vs too scorne, according as wee see how all such as take
vppon them too prophesie (at lestwyse of theyr owne heade, and
without Gods calling of them to that office) bewray their owne shamelessenesse,
and are worthie too bee mocked of little children. Yee see
then that it becommeth vs too restreyne our iudgmentes, in the things
which our Lord hath not disclozed by effect, and that when wee see the
thinges come too passe, wee must vnderstand, that therin he dooeth
not any thing at aduenture, but had ordeyned it so before. And after
the same manner must wee iudge of the chaunge that was seene at the
tyme that our Lord Iesus was sent intoo the world. If it bee demaunded
why God delayed it so long tyme: men aduaunce themselues
too much in such curiositie. If it bee demaunded why the heathen
were then matched with the Iewes, and set in equall degree with
them, seing t
                     •
                  at God had cut them of from his Church afore: we must
also honour this secret ordinance, whereof Saint Paule speaketh
heere. And therwithall let vs vnderstand that God had so determined
it afore. Could wee haue that sobrietie with vs, wee should learne too
profite our selues much better by Gods woorkes, than doo these hea
                  
                     •
                  henish



folke, which barke at them, though they cannot byte them.
And now adayes we see that many are stirred vp with diuelish rage, to
murmur ageinst all Gods dooings, bycause they conceyue not the reason
of his purpose, insomuch that thervppon they spew out their horrible
blasphemies, as who should say, it were not free for God too reserue
any thing too himself, but must call men too counsell, and make
himself their vnderling. Seing then that a number doo so farre ouershoot
thē selues through that villanous pryde, to thrust God as it were
vnder their feete: it standeth vs the more on hand too put this doctrine
in vre, that wee may reuerence Gods secret ordinance, and therwithall
receyue the things that are vttered vnto vs, without geynsaying, as
good and ryghtfull, and doone with such wysdome, as is not too bee
founde fault with.
               And now Saint Paule thinkes it not ynough to say, that God had
his secret purpose hidden in himself: but also sayeth, that his vvill
vvas, that this vvisdome vvhich is diuers in many sortes, should be
knowen. This tytle deserueth too bee well marked, where he sayth,
that Gods wisdome is (as yee would say) of dyuers sortes. Not that
God is variable and chaungeable in himself, nor that there is any
snarling or intangling in his deuyces: there is no such thing at all in
God, nother can there bee: but Saint Paules speaking after that
manner, is in respect of our vndersauding. Therfore if wee would
comprehend Gods wisdome, wee should bee confounded and dazeled
at it, bycause it is infinite: and besydes that, it hath things in it which
are able too amaze all our senses, yea and too swallowe them quyte
vp, so as wee should neuer discerne anie thing certeynly, too say, Loe,
this is it. But this had neede too bee layd out more at length, that
wee may vnderstand it, and fare the better by it. Now and then wee
see some looking glasses, wherin wee thinke we behold a hundred, yea
or rather an infinite number of images before vs: and when wee see
them, wee bee at our wits end. After the same manner hath Saynt
Paule spoken heere of Gods wisdome, namely, as giuing vs warning
of the weakenesse and rudensse that is in our vnderstanding, too the intent
wee should not bee too inquisitiue in serching the things that passe
our capacitie, and the matters that God hath purposed in himselfe.
Then if wee will needes so stye vp hygher than is lawfull for vs, and
thrust our selues foreward with foolish presumption, too bee priuie of
Gods counsell, and too inquyre particularly what he hath determined:



our wittes must needes fayle vs ere wee come halfe way there, and we
shall fynde so many things there, that wee must of necessitie quayle of
our selues, and (bee driuen too) confesse that it is not for vs too reache
the bottome of so great and deepe a gulfe.
               Therfore if a man demaund here, how then can wee confesse God
too bee ryghtuous, wyse, and almyghtie, sith wee bee so daunted at his
woorks? for it is said, that it is the wisdome of men too serche out Gods
woorks, and too set theyr mynds wholly vppon them:Psal. 119. a. 2. and he hath also
ordeyned the world too bee as a stage, wheron too behold his goodnesse,
ryghtuousnesse, power and wisdome: and therfore there seemeth
too bee some contrarietie (betweene these twoo,) that wee should bee
diligent and heedfull in considering Gods woorks, and yit notwithstanding
that our wits are dazeled at the thinking vppon them: the
answer thertoo is verye easye: which is, that if wee desyre soberly,
too knowe but the things which God voutsafeth too reuele vntoo vs,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
and which are for our profite: wee shall haue vnderstanding ynough,
and wee shall well perceyue that he enuyeth not the teaching of vs by
his woorks, that wee myght come vntoo him, and put our whole trust
in him, too knowe how too call vppon him, to discerne betweene good
and bad, and too walke according too his will. Then if wee giue not
head to our foolish and vnordinate lusts, but herken lyke good scollers
to the things which our mayster voutsafeth too declare vntoo vs: wee
shall in Gods woorks vnderstand all things that are for the furtherance
of our welfare. And that is the cause why it is sayd in the booke
of Iob,Iob. 
                        •
                     6. that wee shall haue done very much, if wee can espye but the
vtmost borders of Gods woorks. Then may wee taste of Gods wisdome,
ryghtuousenesse, power, and goodnesse, by considering allonly
the 
                     ••
                  sts or vttermost bounds of Gods workes. But if we will needs
fall too gaging of them too the bottom, there wee shall fynd the foresayd
gulf which is able too swallow vp all our vnderstanding. Too bee
short, first it is too bee vnderstoode heere, that as well Gods woord,
as his woorks, are vntoo vs woonderfull secrets, and such as passe all
our wit and capacitie. Insomuch that if wee haue an eye to his works,
there are yit further miracles in them too daunt vs withall, than the
things that wee see euery day, & which are in common vse among vs.
Lykewise in the holy scripture, there are somwhat secreter poynts, &
which are not very easye to be vnderstoode. Konwe wee that once wee
haue first of all to humble our selues, and to pray God to inlyghten vs



by his holie spirit, that wee may profit our selues by all his woorks
and woords. And moreouer let vs lerne the things that he sheweth
vs, and bee contented with the measure that he appoynteth vs, without
coueting too knowe anie more than that which wee may lerne in
his schoole. Thus yee see what wee haue to beare in mynd.
               Furthermore when wee once haue such meeldnesse, surely our Lord
will giue vs a sure resting poynt: and although his priuities bee incomprehensible,
and the doctrine of the Lawe and the Gospell bee secrets
aboue the the reache of the world: yit shall wee bee taught by
them too our welfare and saluation. And so there is no mingling, no
confuzednesse, no intangling for vs, bycause God will guyde vs by
his holie Ghoste, and giue vs wisdome and discretion too knowe whatsoeuer
he seeth too bee for our behoof. Mark that for one poynt. But
if wee bee vnteachable or vnruly, and will needs play the looce colts
too serche further than wee haue leaue: surely Gods wisdome wil bee
alwayes variable vntoo vs: that is to say, there wil be such diuersitie
of things, and so manie stoppes in it, as wil make vs at our wits end,
and wee shall abyde as vtterly confounded. Yea and euen the faythfull
shall well perceiue the thing that Saint Paule sayeth heere, that
they may euer bee put in mynd too walke in awe and feare, and not
giue themselues the brydle too much, nor take too much leaue to know
more than our Lord will haue them too knowe. Now then, the dout
which myght haue bin cast, namely how God wil haue vs too bee abashed
at his works, is remoued. And yit will he not haue vs too bee
abasshed at them, so wee suffer our selues too bee taught by him.
               Theruppon wee may gather also, that it is a diuelish statelinesse
when these Ruffians take so highly vppon them,Not
                        •
                     . as too reiect whatsoeuer
they cannot conceyue the reason of. If a man tell them that God
dispozeth al things by his secret ordinance, and that the things which
wee terme fortune, chaunce, 
                     •
                  azard, casualtie, happe, aduenture, and
such lyke, are al determined before the making of the world, insomuch
that euen the heares of our heads are numbered,Math. 10. c. 30. and one litle bird shal
not light vppon the ground,Luke. 12. a. 7. without Gods prouidence: they step forth
and obiect, how can that bee? And whereas God telleth vs in his
Lawe, that he will haue this and that done, shall wee say, that he hath
mo wils than one? Then should he bee vnconstant, and that were too
make God chaungeable, and so should he seeme subiect too all manner
of lightnesse lyke a mortall creature. But (as I sayd afore) such men



do ill knowe their owne abilitie. For they imagine that if God bynd
not himself in all poynts too the things which he hath reueled to vs by
his word, he is contrarye too himself, and hath a dubble will, and that
moueth them too gabble after that fashion. But too bee short, Gods
will is alwayes one, and single, and agreable in it self: howbeit that to
our seeming it bee diuers, and haue many kinds of it, as if wee sawe a
hundred sundry shapes which dazeled our eye sight or vtterly dimmed
it. Whereas S. Paule sayth, that Gods wisdome is diuers in many
sorts: it is as if a picture had a thousand coloures in it, so as a man
could not distinctly discerne one from another. Neuerthelesse, S. Paul
in saying so, ment not that Gods wisdome is so wrythed in it self, that
there is any contrarietie or stryfe there. No: but he sheweth, that although
God haue alwayes one euen meaning, & keepe on still in one
trace and in one rate,Iames. 1. c. 17. although there bee no chaunge nor variablenesse
in him, and although there bee but one light wherein there is no dimnesse
at all: yit notwithstanding when men will needes preace vntoo
him, their wits are alwayes as it were astray and dazeled, and if they
go foreward, and step foorth still with too great boldenesse, they must
needes bee confounded in the end, and God must vtterly ouerwhelme

                     〈◊〉
                  . After that manner therefore must wee take the things that are
spoken in the holy scripture concerning Gods prouidence.
               Trewe it is, that wee haue our lesson, where God telleth vs,
that he will not haue any man too trouble his neighbour, nor too

                     •
                  ommit robbery, extortion, couetuousnesse, deceyt, or any manner of
naughtinesse: he telleth vs those things, and therewithall commaundeth
vs too liue chastly, and too absteyne from all violence. Now
when warres are moued in the world, when blud is shed, when infinite
ra
                     ••
                  shments and robberies are committed; shall wee say, that such
things are don, without Gods forcasting in his mind what was good?
Thinke wee that he suffereth fortune too rule the roste here beneath,
as though he himself were asleepe in heauen, or repozed himselfe there
in his pleasures? What a blasphemie were that? Wee would
make God as an Idoll. Agein, what would become of vs, if it were
so?
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   for Satan is as a roring Lion, seeking to deuoure vs as his pray,
and wee should bee continually as it were in his pawes and betweene
his teeth. Then if God ordered not all things in this world, nehild
Satan and all the wicked brydled: surely wee should bee a hundred

                     〈◊〉
                   forlorne, and perish euery minute of an houre. Agein, if we knew



not that warres, and such other lyke things are Gods iudgementes,
wherby he chastizeth our sinnes: it is certein, that we would neuer bee
drawen to repentaunce. Now then, let vs learne the thing that is told
vs here, I meane according too our small abilitie: that is to wit, that
God hath but one will, & that the same is certeyn & throughly agreeing
with it self, and hath no lightnesse nor inconstancie in it: and yit neuerthelesse,
that we must therwithall reuerence his secret determinations,
which are as now so high and profound, as wee cannot reache vntoo
them. And if wee cannot resolue our selues of al the doubts which
the diuell will cast in our wayes (making vs too thinke) How is it
possible that God should be cleare from sinne, and not be the author of
euill,1. Kings. 2
                        •
                     . d. 22. seeing he serueth his turne both by Satan and by all the wicked,
and imployeth them too aduaunce them selues one ageinst another?
how is it possible that he should bee blamelesse? When any of
these fancies come in our heads, or if any of those dogges which belke
out their blasphemies in that wyse ageinst God, assault vs: let vs bee
armed with sobernesse, knowing how it is sayd here, that Gods wisdome
is diuers in many sorts, and that although his will also be diuers
in many respects, yit notwithstanding it is alwayes one still.
That is in effect, the thing that wee haue too beare in mynd vppon
this streyne.
               Now therupon S. Paule applyeth the ground which he handleth,
vntoo the matter which he hath spoken here in generall: that is too
wit, that God created all things by our Lord Iesus Christ, too the
end, that this wisdome should bee knowne to the powers and principalities
in the heauenly places, by the Church. In sayng that God
created all things by Iesus Christ, he bringeth vs backe agein to the
beginning of the world, where he speaketh of the renewment that was
made, when God repayred the things that were decayed and scattered
by Adams sinne, according as wee haue seene heretofore, how it was
Christs office to gather toogither all things that were scattered afore.
For Adam had peruerted and marred all order by his fall, so as there
was nothing but confuzion both in heauen and earth,Rom. 
                        •
                     . d. 21. till al was mended
agein by Iesus Christ. Now then, the restitution that was made
by our Lord Iesus Christ, may well bee referred too this second creation,
as though that at his comming God had set the world in his former
state agein, which had bin as it were crazed afore. Howsoeuer
the cace stand, both 
                     •
                  wayne of them were doone by Iesus Christ, that



is too wit, as well the first creation as the second. And the conueyance
is not amisse, in that S. Paule leadeth vs from the one too the other,
by the similitude which he setteth downe heere. Let vs marke well
therefore that all thinges were created in Iesus Christ, when he was
ordeyned too bee head of Angels and men:Heb. 1. a. 2. yea and that although wee
had had no neede of a redeemer, yit had our Lord Iesus Christ neuerthelesse
bin stablished for our head.Colos. 2. b. 10. There remayned no more too doo,
but too clothe himselfe with our nature, and too offer himselfe in sacrifyce
for the redemption of sinners: but yit for all that, he fayled not too
beare the office already of reconcyling men vntoo God, and of ioyning
them with the Angels of heauen. After that manner then were all
things created in our Lord Iesus Christ. But heere S. Paule ment
purposely too leade vs too the restorement, which was made at such
tyme as Iesus Christ was giuen vs too bee our redeemer. For although
the world ceassed not too haue some shape still, so as the sunne
and Moone shone bryght, and the earth brought foorth hir fruites: yit
notwithstanding, wee knowe, that (as S. Paule sayeth in the eyght
too the Romanes) all creatures grone, and are as a woman traueyling
of child, bycause they see themselues subiect to corruption through
Adams offence,Gene. 3. 
                        •
                     
                     ▪ 17. for the which he was accursed.
               Too bee short, wheras God had shewed himself our enemye, he be
                  
                     •
                  ame
our father: and wheras the things that were created too our
vse, had vin turned away by Adams sinne: all was restored agein at
the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. So then, by that meanes he
gathered all things toogither agein,
                     
                        •
                     sai. 65. c. 17. & 2. Pet. 3. c. 13. & Apo. 21. a. 1. that had bin scattered asunder before,
and then was the world after a sort chaunged, as the Prophets
had spoken of it afore. For although they ment not too incloze the said
renewment within any certeyne tyme: yit notwithstanding when they
preached of the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ, and of the grace
that sh
                     •
                  uld bee giuen to the Church at that tyme, they vsed such speech
as this: Behold, I make the heauens new, and the earth new. After
that maner dooth God speake by the Prophet Esay: and it is not only
once, but it is, as yee would say, a common speech among al the prophets.
Nowe then, Saint Paule following the common phraze of
the Scripture, sayth, that all things were created new agein in Iesus
Christ: howbeeit that is in respect of the Church. The world it self
was not renewed: but as in respect of vs, wee bee parttakers alredye
of the re
                     •••
                  rement that is promised vs. For by our Lord Iesus Christ



wee inioy Gods creatures wherof wee were depryued afore. Wheras
the sunne and moone shyne vppon vs, and wee be nurrished by the
sustenance of the earth: wee knowe that those things belong vntoo vs,
bycause wee bee Gods children. And how is that? Euen bycause
he hath adopted vs in Iesus Christ. For the matter which wee haue
sung in the Psalme concerning man,Psal. 8. a. 5. must bee applyed to the person
of Gods sonne, as sayeth Saint Paule himself, who is a faythfull expounder.
Not that he restreyneth it too him alone:1. Cor. 1
                        •
                     
                     ▪ d. 27. but forasmuch as
the things which he speaketh concerning the vncorruptnesse of mankynd,
is not too bee found in it now, but all is marred and corrupted:
therfore wee must bee fayne too repayre too our head, by whom wee
bee set in good plyght agein. So then, wee could not bee blissed of
God, nother in our mea
                     •
                  e nor in our drinke, nor in the inioying of
any of all his creatures, were it not for the restorement that is made
by our Lord Iesus Christ, and that he hath caused the world too bee
giuen vs hensforth in heritage, too the end wee myght with a good
and cleere consclence, inioy all the gifts which hee hath bestowed vppon
vs. And so yee see, that the creating of al things in Iesus Christ,
is Gods reforming of his Churche, and our parttaking of the purchaced
heritage, for his sake and by his meanes.
               Now hauing sayde, that wee bee so created agein in the person of
Gods sonne, and that he is our head, inasmuch as wee bee knit vntoo
him by fayth: he addeth, that it is a vvisdome vvhich the very Angels
haue not knovven, insomuch that they fare the better by our saluation,
and haue cause too honour God for preferring them so too the
thing that was after a sort buryed from them before. Some thinking
this too bee straunge stuffe, haue bin of opinion, that S. Paule spake of
the diuels. But he speaketh expresly of the heauenly places, and meaneth
too put a difference betwixt the chozen Angels, & the castawayes.
And ageyn, too what purpose were it for the diuells, too knowe Gods
wisdome i
                     •
                   our saluation? It were too no purpose at all. There are
others, which beyng not able too rid themselues of this text of Saint
Paules: haue thought that the Angels are heere among vs, too bee as
schollers, and to heare the preaching of Gods woord. But that is too
fond and chyldish an imagination: for wee know, that as well the doctrine,
as the vse of the Sacramentes, are allotted peculiarly vntoo vs
of God, bycause of our rawnesse. The Angels of heauen haue nothing
too doo, nother with Baptim nor with the Lordes Supper. And why?



For the Angels bee altoogither spirituall. But forasmuch as wee
creepe heere beneath, therefore wee haue neede of such meanes as are
conuenient for our infirmitie, too make vs come by little and little vntoo
God. Therefore the doctrine that is preached among vs, serueth
not for the instruction of the Angels. How then shoulde it bee vnderstoode,
that the Angels were taught by the things which they see presently
in the Church? Let vs marke first of all, that although the Angels
behold the face of God:Math. 18. 
                        •
                     . 10. yit is it not ment that they bee come too
the perfection which is promised vs: for that is reserued too the latter
day, when all things shall bee fulfilled.
               The Angels then knowe not things yit but in part. Trew it is
that they must not bee mustered in our state and taking: for lyke as
they bee neerer God than wee, so bee they taught more familiarly.
But howsoeuer they fa
                     ••
                  , yit must they bee fayne too hyde their eyes,
as is shewed vs in the sixth Chapter of Esay, in the vision that is giuen
him there. Albeit then that the Angels be heauenly spirites, and be familiarly
conuersant with God, as houshold seruants of his kingdome:
yit haue they their eyes couered, too shewe that they vnderstand not all
things as yit, and that their knowing is but in part. For God must
shewe them that they bee but creatures, that they myght therby bee
hild in continuall awe, too humble themselues before him, and to keepe
themselues in their degree. According heeruntoo, it is sayed, that the
Angels of heauen knowe not when the last day shalbee:Math. 24. 
                        •
                     . 36. that is hid
from them. And why? Too the intent that men should humble themselues
the more, and not be ashamed to be ignorant of the things which
God hath not reueled vntoo vs. Too the end therfore that it may not
greeue vs that God concealeth many things from vs: the very Angels
are set afore vs, as not knowing all things as yit. Then is it not without
cause sayd, that they knewe not what should befall and come too
passe at the comming of the sonne of God, that is too wit, that all people
without exception should bee called too the truth of the Gospell,
and bee all adopted of God,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 3. 
                        •
                     . 7. too bee made the spirituall children of Abraham.
Trew it is, that the Angels knewe well that Iesus Christ
was the head of all mankind: but how that should bee doone, or at what
tyme, or by what meane, that was hidden from them. That is the
maner wherin S. Paule sayth, that they profited, namely by beholding
our Lord Iesus Christ too shed foorth his grace in that wyse. For it
was not ynough too say, that men should woonder at such a miracle as



                  
                     •
                  hat God should take those intoo his house, that were strayed away before,
and alye himself with those that were erst his mortall enemyes, &
allure them to him, whom he before abhorred. If it had bin sayd, that
men ought too bee astonished at it: that had not bin ynough. But when
as S. Paule sayeth, that euen the Angels fynde it straunge, and are
fayne too maruell at it, seeing how God vttereth so great treasures: it
serueth well too shewe vs, that whensoeuer there is any speache of our
calling, that is too say, of the mercie that God hath shewed vs in forgetting
what wee were, and in fashioning vs anew after his owne image,
insomuch, that wheras we were lost, and forlorne, yea and vtterly
drowned in the bottome of hell by Adam, he hath set vs vp ageyn,
and taken vs vp too the kingdome of heauen, and is not contented too
shewe vs his bounteousenesse in this world only, but also intendeth too
make vs partakers of his endlesse glory, and too giue vs the crowne of
lyfe in his kingdome: it is a thing for vs too lerne too woonder at, too
the end wee may receyue so great, so hygh, so excellent, and so worthie
benefites, with such reuerence as they deserue.
               And Saint Paule not onely heere,Colo
                        ••
                     . 
                        •
                     
                     ▪ b. 16. but also in other places calleth
the Angels, Principalities, too shewe vs, that wee cannot deuyze any
thing so hygh and noble, which is not inferiour too Iesus Christ, as is
declared more fully in the first too the Colossians. For in asmuch as
many men did euen at that tyme magnifye the Angels, too deface the
maiestie of our Lord Iesus Christ: S. Paule sheweth, that although
the Angels bee as it were Gods powers or vertewes,Psal. 10
                        •
                     . d. 21. and his armes
wherwith he executeth his woorkes: and although they bee dominions
and powers: yit notwithstanding Iesus Christ ceasseth not too
haue all preheminence and authoritie ouer them: but lyke as the
sunne darkeneth the lyght of the Starres, so must all the dignitie of
the Angels bee layd downe, that it hinder not Iesus Christ too bee
looked at of all men, and to bee the onely Loadestar, and too bee knowen
that it is only he in whom lyeth the fulnesse of all good things: and
so is he in deede, as is sayd in the same text. And it is a poynt well
woorthie too bee marked still. For wee see how it is ynough now
adayes among the Papistes, too alledge the vertewes of the Apostles,
or of the Uirgin Marie, or of the Sayntes, too make ydols of
them. And it seemeth too them on the contrarie part also, that if
men doo not woorship them, and pray vntoo them, and yeeld them the
seruis which belongeth alonly vntoo God: they bee vtterly vndoone.



For thus doo they alledge: How now? Why should not the Uirg
                     ••
                  
Marie bee our aduocate, seing shee liued so holy a lyfe, that shee was
as a mirrour of all perfection, and so hyghly in Gods fauour? Ue
                     •
                  ily
as who should say, that the excellencie which God hath put intoo his
creatures, should serue too bereeue Iesus Christ in such wyse, that he
should bee put backe therfore. So then let vs vnderstand, that whatsoeuer
can bee sayd or preached of the vertewes and woorthinesse of
the Uirgin Marie, of the Apostles, and of all othe men, yea and of
the Angells of heauen, serueth not too diminish the maiestie of our
Lord Iesus Christ, nor too turne vs away from him, nor too cause his
offices too bee delt away too this man and too that man. Wheretoo
then? Too doo vs too wit, that vertewes are so distributed to al Gods
children,Iohn. 7. f. 37. as there is none other fountayne of all goodnesse, but Iesus
Christ, who is the (only) party too whom wee must resort, and that
the creatures are neuer the more impayred, though Iesus Christ ouerpeere
them as their head. That then is in effect the thing which wee
haue too marke vppon Saint Paules woordes, where he taunteeh
such as would needs exalt the Angels without end or ceassing. For he
sayth: very wel, I graunt they be powers, vertues, & principalities: but
yit is our Lord Iesus Christ still their head, and they bee so grounded
vppon him, that they fare the better by our saluation. Now then,
what an vngraciousnesse were it, if wee should leaue Iesus Christ,
and go seeke too the Angels, seeing that euen they doo woonder at the
riches which God hath vttered in knitting vs intoo the bodie of his
sonne, and consequently in calling vs too him too bee his owne children
by that meanes? Thus yee see how the woondering of the Angells
at our saluation, ought too frame vs the better too our Lord Iesus
Christ, & make vs to sticke fast vnto him, without swar
                     •
                  ing from
him any manner of way. And for that cause is it added in the end,
that by him vvee haue boldnesse and enteraunce in hope, through
the beleefe vvhich is in him.
               
               Heere S. Paule ment shortly to blame the vnthankfulnesse of such
as are not contented with the hauing of Iesus Christ, but thinke that
he should haue some helpes added too him. Therefore he sayeth, what
desire wee more than too bee knit vntoo God? Is not our full happinesse
there?
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Now it is so, that by beeleeuing in Iesus Christ, we hau
                     •
                  
confidence that wee may 
                     •
                  reace vntoo God: the accesse is giuen 
                     〈◊〉
                  
And whereas trust or confidence is not ynough, wee haue also bol
                     ••
                  nesse



too come vntoo him with our heads vpright, not as pre
                     •
                  uming
any whit of our selues, nor yit too come thither rechlesly, but we must
alwayes practize this saying of the Psalme,Psal. 
                        •
                     . b. 8. that although we rest vppon
Gods goodnesse, yit must we euermore worship him with feare.
Notwithstanding, we may alwayes come boldly vntoo Gods throne,
assuring our selues that his Maiestie shall no more bee terrible to vs,
seeing he sheweth himself a father toowards vs in the person of his
onely sonne. Wee see then how S. Paules meaning is, too hold vs
fast too Iesus Christ. And therein wee see also what our frowardnes
is. For it is certeyn, that the care and zeale which S. Paule had too
make vs cleaue fast too the sonne of God, came of the wisdome of the
holy Ghost, who knew our frailtie and vnstedfastnesse. Had we (as
yee would say) but one drop of settled wit, it were ynough too doo vs
too vnderstand, that by the Gospell we may possesse Gods sonne, who
giueth himself vntoo vs, and that hauing him, we haue all that euer we
can wish.Rom. 
                        •
                     . f. 32. It were ynough too haue spoken this in one word, as S.
Paule hath shewed already: but wee see how he dubbleth and confirmeth
his saying, as though it were a hard thing too bee beleeued. And
of a truth, it is verye hard, bycause wee bee too much giuen too distrust
and vnbeleefe. Agein, too beleeue for one day, is not all that wee
haue too doo: it is required that wee should hold on still, which is a verye
rare thing too bee found in this world, bycause wee bee alwayes

                     •
                  isking. By meanes whereof, men doo as it were wylfully bereue
themselues of the thing that was giuen them. Furthe
                     •
                  more, forasmuch
as all the world is at the poynt, and wee cannot bee wonne or perswaded
but with great peyne, too come too our Lord Iesus Christ, and
too rest vppon him, let vs vse the remedie that Saint Paule setteth vs
downe heere.
               And first of all wee must marke well,Iohn. 10. b. 9. & Math. 27. f. 51. that Iesus Christ is the doore
too open heauen vntoo vs: for wee knowe that at his death the v
                     •
                  yle
of the Temple was rent asunder, and that in such wyse, that wee may
now enter familiarly intoo the Sanctuarie of God, not of such a materiall
Temple, as was then: but (euen of heauen,) so as wee may
preace intoo the presence of our God, and resort vntoo him for refuge,
as if a child should cast himself into the lap of his father or mother: for
it is certain, that God surmounteth all the fathers and mothers of the
world, in all kyndnesse and fauour. Seeyng then that wee know that:
what cou
                     •
                  t wee more? Woulde wee haue some better or excellenter



thing than God? Then must wee go seeke it in the bottom of hell. For
when wee haue made our vagaries as much as wee list, wee shall alwayes
fynde, that there is nothing in any of all the creatures eyther aboue
or beneath,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 44. 
                        •
                     . 7. that is woorth a strawe, in comparision of God, as
sayeth the Prophet Esay. So then, seeyng that God hath giuen himselfe
vnto vs in the person of our Lord Iesus Christ, and that the whole
fulnesse of the Godhead dwelleth in that great Sanctuary,Hebr. 9. c. 9. which was
figured by the visible Sanctuarie of the Lawe: ought wee not too bee
fully satisfyed when wee haue that, and too rest our selues wholy thereuppon?
And although our wittes & our affections bee fickle, yit ought
they too bee hild in awe as prisoners, so as we may say, Let vs cleaue,
let vs cleaue too our God,Psal. 73. 
                        •
                     . 28. according too this saying of Dauid, behold,
all my felicitie, and all my ioy is too be ioyned too my God. Likewise
he sayeth in another place,Psal. 36. c. 9. he is the welspring of lyfe and lyght. Agein,
wee haue s
                     •
                  ng this morning,Psal. 16. 
                        •
                     . 6. he is my portion, I cannot haue a better
lotte, I must needes take all my delight in him. Thus yee see what w
                     •
                  
haue too remember in the first place.
               Secondly, let vs mark well the degrees that Saint Paule setteth
downe here: wherof the first is, that we must haue fayth. For although
Iesus Christ haue opened the way and passage by his blud,Hebr. 10. c. 19. too make
vs enterance vntoo God his father: yit is not the gap opened for all
men:Apo
                        •
                     . 3. b. 7. for the vnbeleuers cannot inioy that benefite, whereof he is the
kye. Trew it is, that the doore is neere hand, and the opening therof
is easye, when we haue the kye: that is to say, if wee receyue the Gospell
in trew obedience of fayth. And soo yee se why Saint Paule telleth
vs, that it is not ynough for vs that Iesus Christ hath layd foorth
the tresures of the infinite goodnesse & mercie of God his father: but
that it standeth vs on hand on our syde, to receyue the same by fayth.
Not that wee dan doo it of our owne power, nor yit that wee can come
vntoo Iesus Christ, or bee partakers of the benefits which he offereth
vs by the Gospel, except wee haue fayth in him. And from beleef we
must procede too trust, that is too say, wee must bee fully perswaded,
that God will alwayes receyue vs, and that wee shall fynd fauour at
his hand, and that although wee bee wretched sinners, and vnwoorthie
too liue vppon the earth: yit neuerthelesse wee shall fynd him still
fauorable too vs when wee come too heauen. Lo how fayth is linked
with trust. And therof springeth this stoutnesse of mynd or boldnesse,
which is as it were the hyghest step, soo that although wee must needs.



bee as it were dis
                     ••
                  ayed, when wee consider what we bee of our selues:
yit we ceasse not to offer our selues vnto God with our heads vpryght.
And why so? Bycause he looketh vppon vs in the person of his only
sonne.Math. 17. a. 5. &. 2. Pet. 1. d. 17. And therfore it is sayd, that he is his welbeloued, howbeeit,
not for himselfe (onely), 
                     •
                  ut (also) for our sakes that are members of
his bodie. Ye see then how we haue too gather vppon this text, that by
receyuing the doctrine of the Gospell with trew obedience of faith,
wee possesse our Lord Iesus Christ, and by his meanes shalbee led vntoo
God his father, too come too the perfection of lyfe, lyght, and all
goodnesse. And by the way wee bee warned too go foreward in fayth,
till wee be throughly perswaded, that in fyghting ageinst all the temptations
that can assayle vs, we shall get the vpper hand by the meanes
of fayth,Rom. 8. g. 35. and finally that wee may brag (specially as S. Paule dooth
in the eyght too the Romanes) both ageinst lyfe, and ageinst death,
and ageinst all powers both aboue & beneath, & despyze all distresses,
knowing full well that nothing is able too disappoynt vs of the loue
that Iesus Christ hath shewed vs, and which God his father also hath
vttered towardes vs in his person. And theruppon also dooth it come,
that our prayers must bee grounded vppon full certeintie. For (as
sayeth S. Iames)Iames. 
                        〈◊〉
                      a. 6. he that th
                     •
                  nketh too obteyne any thing by doubting,
deceyueth himselfe. Therefore wee must assure our selues by the promises
of the Gospell, that God is readye too receiue vs too mercy,
whensoeuer wee come vntoo him. And thereby wee perceyue, that S.
Paule sayd not for naught, that if wee haue fayth, wee must not seeke
any thing more than Iesus Christ, but he must bee all our treasure, bycause
that in him wee haue all things that are requisite too our ioy and
contentation.
               Now let vs fall downe before the maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our sinnes, praying him to make vs so too feele
them, as wee may myslyke them more and more, and yit notwithstanding
not ceasse too bee glad, in that he hath shewed him self so pitifull
towardes vs in the person of his only sonne, that he hath voutsafed too
drawe vs out of the gulfe of hell, too giue vs enterance intoo his kingdome:
and also too graunt vs the grace too come theruntoo with trew
fayth, and too withdrawe our selues from all worldly intycementes,
which serue too turne vs away from him, so as wee may forsake all
vaynglory, & for as much as we be voyde of all goodnesse in our selues,
seeke all our wantes in him, which is the trew fountayne of all goodnesse,



that can neuer be drawen dry. That it may please him too graunt
this grace, not only too vs, but also too all people. &c.
            
            
               The .xix. Sermon, which is the fourth
vppon the third Chapter.
               
                  
                     13. VVherfore I beseech yee faynt not for my trubbles, vvhich I
endure for your sake, which is your glory.
                     14. For the vvhich thing I bovv my knees too the father of our
Lord Iesus Christ:
                     15. (Of vvhom all kinred is named in heauen and in earth.)
                     15. That according too the riches of his glory, he graunt you too
bee strengthened vvith povver by his spirit in the invvarde
man.
                  
               
               
                  IT is a woonderfull thing that men hauing
so many meanes too come vntoo God, labour
too go from him as much as is possible,
and euery strawe makes them too
turne head: and yit notwithstanding think
themselues too haue a very reasonable excuce,
if they can say, I was letted by this
and that (which shalbee nothing at all,)
but the least occasion that can bee, wyll
serue, bycause their seeking alreadye is too shrinke away from God.
And this is too common now adayes. For they that are desyrous too
iustifye themselues, bycause they reiect the doctrine of the Gospell,
will alwayes fynde fault with the causes of offences. O say thy, this
trubbleth mee, this maketh mee too mislyke the doctrine of the Gospell,
this maketh mee too forsake it vtterly. All that euer they can alledge
shalbee but tryfles, but yit had wee neede too labour so much the
more, too ouercome all the lettes and stoppes which the diuell indeuoreth
too cast in our way, so as wee may still keepe on our trade and
course. And that is the thing whereat S. Paule ameth heere, exhorting
the Ephesians not too bee thrust out of the way, but too holde on
still truely and constantly in the fayth of the Gospell, notwithstanding



that they might be offended too see him a prisoner, and as good as condemned
already. Now it is certein, that Saint Paules suffering in
mayntenance of the thinges that he had preached, was not too make
them swarue from Gods pure truth: but contrariwyse he protesteth,
that it was too their glory, so as they myght tryumph aforehand, considering
the inuincible constancie that was giuen him. But (as I
haue sayd already) besydes the thing that I haue touched alredy, there
is such a naughtinesse rooted in our nature, that wee bee well appayd,
if wee can haue any outward colour too shrinke away from God, and
we beare our selues on hand, that we bee quite and cleane discharged.
Howbeit S. Paule spake not this for that one people, but he giueth
heere an instruction that ought too serue vs at this day: which is, that
although the most part of the world bee mad at the Gospel, and fight
as much as they can, too quench the rememberaunce of our Lord Iesus
Christ, and although the faythfull bee persecuted, diffamed and
tormēted: Yit must we not swarue aside, nor be out of hart, considering
that it ought to confirme our fayth the more in our Lord Iesus Christ,
and that wee haue wherof to glory, seeing God holdeth vp his Church
by strong hand, so as it is not vtterly oppressed and ouercome. If the
Gospell were receyued without geinsaying, and with one common
accord, surely we should haue cause to blisse God for it, and there should
bee a melodie betweene heauen and earth, so as both men and Angels
might with full mouth magnifie Gods goodnesse so shi
                     •
                  ning foorth
vppon all men: But yit the fighting of men ageinst the Gospell, is a
sure recorde vntoo vs, that God is the author of it, inasmuch as they
that are imprisoned for it, and drawen euen vntoo death, ceasse not for
all that too stand stedfastly in it.2. Kings. 6. c. 16. God then vttereth there a wounderfull
power, and it appereth, that for all that euer Satan can doo, wee
neuerthelesse haue proofe that God is on our side, and fighteth for vs,
and vpholdeth vs by his power. Not that he exempteth vs from
affliction, but he will alwayes giue vs victory, and that ought to suffize
vs. Thus the thing which wee haue too remember vppon this Text
of S. Paules, is, that wee must bee readie too receyue all the alarums
that Satan shall make vppon vs, and that although wee see the doctrine
of the Gospell ill receyued of the world, so as it is not only despyzed
and disdeyned, but also hated, and the vnbeleeuers are inflamed
with a diuelish rage too destroy it: Yit notwithstanding we must
not beare it the lesse reuerence, for wee must not measure Gods maiestie



by the opinions of mē. Put the cace that God were euery where
despyzed, according as most men are in deede so churlish and vnthankfull,
that they bee as monsters shaped ageinst kind, yit must not God
loze the right that wee owe him. For notwithstanding the rebelliousnesse
of such as would wrap God with them in their iniquities, wee
ought too honour him with all humilitie. Euen so is it also with the
pure doctrine of the Gospell. Although then that the world set themselues
ageinst it, & many men trample it vnderfoote, so as some mocke
at it, some gnashe their teeth at it, and fires are kindled for it: Yit let
vs still quietly and obediently receyue the things which wee knowe to
come from our God. Thus then yee see how our fayth ought always
too keepe on his way, and that although many practizes and enterprizes
bee attempted ageinst the faythfull, and a man shal euery where
heare of nothing but confederacies, threatenings, outrages, and such
other things: yit wee must not ceasse too fight stoutly vnder Christs
banner,Luke. 21. d. 19. & to possesse our soules in pacience. And heereunto ought this
saying of S. Paules to serue, that it is our glory: for our fayth should
bee as good as dead, if God tryed it not. Neuerthelesse when wee see
the faythfull so examined, wee haue alwayes so much the better warrant
of the doctrine that is giuen vs of God. Trew it is, that it ought
too bee grounded in heauen, that is too say, vppon the aucthoritie of
God alone, without hauing respect too any creatures. For the very
Angels of heauen were not able too authorize the Gospell: Gods maiestie
must bee fayne too come foorth for vs too leane vntoo, and then
shall wee neuer bee shaken downe. Notwithstanding, when the Martirs
sticke not to giue their liues in the witnessing of Gods truth: then
(as I sayd afore) wee bee, or ought too bee the more stirred vp too receyue
the doctrine, and it is as it were sealed vp in our harts. Forasmuch
then as persecutions serue too confirme the doctrine the better:
therfore S. Paule sayeth, it is our glory, and that wee ought too triumph
at it, seeing that God dooth so mainteyne and strengthen them
whom he sendeth intoo that battell.
               For it is certeine, that in respect of the frayltie of the fleshe, they
shoulde quayle by and by. But that they get the vpper hand, let vs
mark, that it is Gods dooing, who woorketh after so manifest a fashion,
as wee haue cause too glorifie him for it. Now if when wee bee
trubbled, wee bee tempted too shrink, and too giue ouer at euery brunt
that is put too vs: it is a token that wee haue not the skill too profit our



selues by the meanes that God giueth vs, too drawe vs to him, and to
make vs sticke too him with trew stedfastnesse. Therfore let vs fyght
ageinst our own weaknesse, and ageinst the naughtinesse of our nature,
that when wee see how the diuell practyzeth too ouerthrowe the Gospell
in maner euery where, wee may consider, that God forgetteth not
those that are his, but strengtheneth them in such wyze with his power,
that their fayth getteth the vpper hand, to the end that we shold hope for
the lyke, and that when wee bee at ease and rest, wee should not ceasse
too prepare our selues after their example, that when it shall please
God too reach out his hand vppon vs, and too make vs take our turne
and course, wee may bee fenced a long whyle aforehand, and not bee
possessed with such imagination as some bee, which beare themselues
on hand, that they shal neuer feele any greefe or trubble: but that wee
may alwayes be redy armed to fyght. Herewithal S. Paule sheweth,
that it is not ynough for vs to be only taught: for we should not ceasse
for all that, to be alwayes fretting, and to be as men more than half out
of their wittes, vntill God made his doctrine too take such place, as
wee were touched too the quicke with it.
               Now then, hauing exhorted the Ephesians, he sayeth, I bowe my
knees before the father of our Lord Iesus Christ. If exhorting too
the end that euery man myght be of courage, had bin ynough: S. Paul
would not haue added that which he speaketh heere of prayer. But to
the intent too shewe what the Ephesians had too doo: he falleth intoo
the way before them too giue them an example. And therfore let vs
marke, that when wee shall haue had our eares beaten with Gods
woord, to shewe vs our dewtie, and thertoo not only bin instructed, but
also exhorted and spurred forward: yit will there alwayes bee some
sloth, coldnesse and rechlesnesse in vs, so as the doctrine shal stand vs in
smal stead, vntill God touch vs with his holy spirit. And this serueth
too beate downe al pryde in vs. For a number thinke themselues able
too woork woonders, who feele themselues beguyled, when they come
too the pinch. Wee see what happened too Peter. He promised, yea
euen vnfeynedly,Math. 26. g. 35. that he would not shrinke from his Mayster, though
he should dye for it. Yee see how Peter made a stout brag. Surely
he made it not but of a zeale, which a man would say, is good and holy,
and he ment too haue had the same intent so settled, as too haue shewed
it at the neede: and yit notwithstanding, the stout wordes of a sillye
wenche made him too deny Christ, and he was redy too haue denyed



him a hundred tymes, insomuch that he fell to cursing & banning. Seeing
wee haue such a looking glasse, let vs acknowledge our owne
weaknesse in Peters person, and (as S. Paule sheweth vs heere) let
vs resort too him that hath all power in him. For it is not ynough for
vs too knowe our disease, vnlesse wee seeke the remedie of it. First of
all then, let vs rid our selues of al foolish opinions, wherwith the world
is imbrewed, as that a man may bee able too ouercome all temptations
by his owne free will: and rather let vs learne too abace our selues
vtterly, knowing that when as God is so gracious to vs, as too teache
vs by his woord, the same is not too inable vs too doo it, but onely too
hold vs the more giltie and conuicted therof, too the end wee should not
make a sheeld of ignorance. Let that bee one poynt.
               Yit notwithstanding, let vs not stay there: but for asmuch as we be
weake of our selues, and Godhath all strength in him: let vs repayre
vntoo him. For it is certein, that he calleth and allureth vs vntoo
him. And therfore let vs not thinke that wee shalbe disapoynted, when
we cast our selues downe so as half dead, or rather as starke dead at his
feete, not doubting but that he will lift vs vp agein. And so Saint
Paule speaking of his praying too God heere, was not alonly too protest
that he discharged his dewtie: but too the intent that the same
should serue for an example too all the faythfull, that vppon the knowing
of their wantes: they myght resort only vntoo God, knowing that
he holdeth vs vp continually by strong hand, and that after he hath
once giuen vs fayth, he addeth also such inuincible constancie, that wee
stand out too the end. This is it in effect which wee haue too beare
in mynd. And therfore let vs take warning, not too trust too our owne
wit, nor too presume anie whit vppon our own power and strength,
when wee come too heare Gods woord: but too desyre our God, that
lyke as he hath voutsafed too haue his woord preached vntoo vs by
the mouth of a man, so he will also speake vntoo vs inwardly, and in
secret by his holy Ghost, that by that meanes the doctrine which wee
haue heard, may take roote, and bring forth profit and fruite. And
moreouer, sith wee see by experience, that God requyreth more of vs
than our power and abilitie can auoord: let vs desyre him too supply
our wantes, according too the example that I haue set downe alredye,
which is, that it is cleane contrarie too our fleshly reason, that wee
should go too death if neede bee, and forsake the world and our owne
lyfe. This is not too bee found in man, if he followe still his owne



reason and will. God therfore must bee fayne too woorke in this cace,
and too remedie our infirmitie. But although that too suffer for the
Gospell, and too go too death as it were with blyndfolded eyes, and
not too bee turned away, nor striken downe for anye thing, bee verye
hard things, and such as passe all abilitie of man: yit will God stand
by vs in such sort, as wee shall ouercome all distresses, if wee arme
our selues with the weapons that he giueth vs: that is too say, if vpon
the knowing of his will, wee being vnable too walke as he commaundeth
vs, doo pray him too giue vs legges, and too strengthen vs in such
wyse as wee may ouercome all. This doone, a man cannot say, that
this doctrine is vnprofitable. For why is it that our Lord giueth vs
those things by his holy spirit, which we haue not by nature? Euen too
make the doctrine auaylable, so as it may not disappoynt vs. They
then which doo slaunderously say, that if wee cannot followe God of
our owne freewill, it were better too forbeare preaching, bycause it is
but lost labour: they (say I) wote not what order God keepeth too assure
vs too himself. And experience sheweth well ynough, that the
preaching of the word is but an instrumēt wherby God worketh in secret.
If wee bee fully resolued of that, then shall wee verye well perceyue,
that God agreeth very wel with himself, in that he will haue
the Gospell preached too vs, and yit telleth vs, that it should stand vs
in no stead, except it pleazed him too woorke in our hartes by his holie
spirit. Now in saying that the Gospell is an instrument, it is all one
as if a man should say, that a plowman with his Plowgh 
                     〈…〉
                  
and all other things,1. Cor. 3. b. 7. were an instrument, and yit not therfore the cause
why the earth bringeth 
                     〈◊〉
                   fruites.Math. 6. b. 11. And why? For God keepes
that too himself: and in that respect doo wee aske him our dayly bread.
For wee must vnderst
                     ••
                  d, that as a father hath care of his children,
and as yee would say, puts the meate intoo their mouthes: so will
God haue vs too receyue our sustenance at his handes. And for that
cause he sayeth, that when the people should bee come intoo the land
of Canaan,Deut. 9. a. 4. although they should till and manure the ground, yit should
they not say, this haue I gotten with my owne hand, but all acknowledge
that they were may
                     •
                  teyned by the woord that proceedeth out of
Gods mouth,Deu. 
                        •
                     . a. 3. that is too say, by the inward grace which God giueth
too his creatures, so as wee bee fed therby. For all the labour of man
can nothing auayle, vnlesse God blisse it. And what then shall wee
saye of the thing that is much more excellent? For is not the foode



of our soules much preciouser than that which serueth but for our bodies?
therfore let vs not thinke, that it is ynough for vs to come to a sermon,
or too reade (Gods woord) euery man by himself: but wee must
also resort vnto God, that he may giue vs increace. And for the
same cause dooth Saint Paule set downe this similitude,1. Cor. 3. b. 6. that he
which planteth, is nothing, nor yit he that watereth, but that it is God
that giueth the increace from aboue. And he speaketh not there of
the laborers of the ground, but of the sowers of Gods woord, and of
such as manure his Church with continuall exhortations. Albeit then
that wee take neuer so great payne: yit shall wee doo no good at all
with our labour, except God woorke with it by his holy spirit. But
when he woorketh with vs, then is our labour auaylable, and then it is
sayd,Rom. 1. b. 16. that the Gospell is the power of God too the saluation of all that
beleeue. For God dooth so vtter the power of his holy spirit, that the
preaching of the Gospell, and the secret and inwarde woorking of the
holy Ghost, are things so ioyned toogither, as they cannot bee separated.
And so yee see in effect what wee haue too remember vppon that
saying of S. Paule.
               Now hauing spoken of praying, he sayeth, That yee may be strengthened
in the inward man, by the power of his holy spirit. Here
he sheweth vs the weaknesse that I spake of afore: for if we perceyue
not our owne neede, we will neuer voutsafe too resort vntoo God lyke
poore beggets. We know that man being left to himself, will neuer
acknowledge his owne pouertie, except it bee proued too his face. To
the end therfore that wee should come vntoo him vnfeynedly, and with
trew lowelinesse: it is for our behof too feele by experience, that we
can doo nothing at all, and that wee bee vnprofitable in respect of all
goodnesse, vntill our Lord haue renewed vs. That is the thing which
Saint Paule intended too make vs too vnderstand. For though all
the world generally doo seeke help at Gods hand, yit is there scarce
one too bee fonnd among a hundred, that dooth it truely and without
hipocrisie. For if a man could serch what is in some, he should fynd
them redye too burst lyke Toads, with pryde and filthinesse, and that
they presume woonderously vppon themselues. They will go seeke
succour at Gods hand, and yit thinke they haue their seeking in themselues.
Surely it is too excessiue a leaudnesse, but yit is it a vyce that
reygneth too much. Howsoeuer wee fare, if wee desir God too reache
out his hand too succour vs: let vs lerne first of all too abace our selues,



and let vs know, that wee haue not sufficient strength of our owne nature,
but that the same must bee fayne too come from aboue, and from
his holie spirit, as S. Paule hath expressed heere. That yee may bee
strengthened (sayth he) by the power of his holy spirit. No doubt but
he maketh comparison here of things cleane contrarie. For so long as
a man can doo ought of himself, Gods spirit needeth not to supply the
roome. But forasmuch as all power proceedeth of Gods free goodnesse:
therin it is shewed vs, that wee can doo nothing of our selues,
and that all the strength which wee surmyze our selues too haue, is but
smoke that vanisheth away, and a starke illuzion of Satan, who seeketh
too holde vs fast in some fond selfweening, too the intent wee
should not repayre too our God, and so be left vtterly destitute. And
besides this, Saint Paule sheweth further, that it is a free bestowed
benefyte, that is too saye, a benefyte that proceedeth of Gods onely
free gifte, too the intent wee should not imagin, that when God succoreth
vs, he hath an eye too any thing else than our wretchednesse, or
that he dooth it for any good disposition that he sawe should bee in vs.
And that is the cause why he succoreth vs in all our needes. And therfore
Saint Paule sayeth heere, that it standeth vs on hande too bee
strengthened by the power of his holy spirit, and that the same is a
free gifte.
               Now he sayeth, acording too the richenesse of his glory. Wherfore
is it, that he magnifieth the riches of Gods goodnesse so much,
but to beate downe all the fond opinions wherwith men besotte them
selues, in weening too bring, I wote not what, of their owne, and by
that meane too make themselues haylefellowe with God? Therfore
it behoueth vs to beare this thing wel in mind. For S. Paul speakes
too such as had shewed great strength already: but yit was it meete
that God should alwayes haue the prayse of it. They were in great
forwardnesse, and had fought already for the Gospell: and yit Saint
Paule wisheth, that they might bee strengthened. Heerein wee see
that wee bee so farre vnable too begin too doo good, that euen when
God hath set vs in the way, when he hath reached vs his hand, yea and
when he hath continu
                     •
                  d his grace in vs from day too day:Phil. 
                        •
                     . b. 13. Yit if he do
but turne away his hand one minute, wee bee quite quayled. And so
wee be warned (as wee haue seene afore) that as God is the beginner
of our saluation, so is he the worker of it throughout, and there is nostedfa
                     ••
                  nesse
in vs, furtherfoorth than wee bee vphild by him, and by



his holy spirit. And therfore wee ought too bee prouoked too pray
dayly all the tyme of our life. For they that forget themselues, and
fall as
                     •
                  eepe, shall soone f
                     •
                  ele themselues bereft of Gods grace. And
why? They bee not worthy of it, bycause they seeke it not with continuall
care. Therefore too waken vs throughly both from our slouthfulnesse
and from our rechelesnesse, wee must beare in mind, that seeing
God hath called vs into his Church, and touched vs to the quicke,
to receyue his Gospel with trew obedience: the same ought to strengthen
vs so much the more too the end. Let that serue for one poynt.
Agein, let vs vnderstand, that God must needs shewe the riches of his
glory, when he increaseth so his holy spirit in vs by degrees. For
must there not needes bee an infinite treasure of his goodnesse, when
he draweth vs so to him at the first sight? In what plight we are when
God chozeth vs and taketh vs too him? He draweth vs not onely out
of a stinking puddle, but out of the bottom of hell. For behold, the
thing that we bring with vs by inheritaunce from our mothers womb,
is cursednesse, and to be as enemies to God, and too haue nothing but
starke malice and rebelliousnesse in us, and too be blynd wretches, and
(at a word) too bee giuen too all euill, so as Satan reigneth ouer vs,
and wee bee his bond slaues, and are hild downe vnder the tyranny
of sinne. Now then seeing that God hath pitied vs, in respect that we
were so miserable creatures: Needes must it be, that he vttered the
great riches of his goodnesse in that behalfe, and meete it is that he
should bee glorified for the same. And (as I haue sayd already) wee
ought too be the better touched therwith, that like as he hath adopted
vs for his children, so wee may shewe our selues willing too take him
for our father. But howsoeuer wee fare, although he haue reformed
his image in vs, yit must he bee fayne too vtter the riches of his goodnesse,
and too increace his gifts in vs, and too make vs too go on still
with our course. And it standeth vs so much the more on hand to beare
this doctrine in mind, bycause wee see the worlde hath bin beguiled
with these toyes and opinions, that euery man myght well put foorth
himselfe through his owne freewill, or at leastwyse prepare himselfe
too come vntoo God. And agein, that Gods ad
                     •
                  ing of grace vppon
grace, is, bycause men haue vsed well the grace that he had giuen and
bestowed vppon them before. Now as touching the first poynt, how
is it possible that wee should bring aught of our selues too win Gods
fauour withall? seeyng wee bee lyke poore dead men, and as 
                     •
                  otten



carkesses, what preparation can wee make too purchase fauour at
Gods ha
                     ••
                  : Must not men need as bee woorse than be witched, when
they conceyue such 
                     •••
                  yes? Wherefore let vs learne too father the
beginning, continuance, and end of our saluation vppon God, and too
shim all those diuelish illusions, (which seeme to maynteyne) that God
in adding of grace vntoo grace, hath a regarde how euery of vs hath
deserued it. For contrariwyse S. Paule telleth vs, that in this care
we must haue nothing before our eyes, but Gods goodnesse in shewing
himself so liberall towardes vs, that he neuer ceasseth too doo vs good.
He is not lyke mortall men, which will say, I haue doone thee good
ynough already, content thy self: but lyke as he hath shed out the gifts
of his holy spirit intoo vs, so he is moued too increace the measure of
them, till wee bee come too the full heyght of them, that is too wit, too
full perfection.
               Now hereunto Saint Paule addeth expresly, the inward man: for
wee would fayne that God should alwayes strengthen and increace
vs in this world, but in the meane whyle the heaue
                     ••
                  y lyfe is as nothing
with vs. For some would shewe themselues valiant, and they
bee so rauished in their owne conceyt, that they weene themsel
                     •
                  es too
bee as Angels, so as men may speake of their deeds of prowesse, and
that they may bee taken for proper men, and purchace themselues reputation.
That is one kynd of strength that men desire. Others desyre
too increace their substance by merchandyse, or too get riches and
possessions by any meanes howsoeuer it bee. Othersome couet too bee
in credit and authoritie. Too be short, the meanes wherby wee would
haue God too shewe himselfe bountifull towards vs, is in pleasing
our sensualitie and earthly lusts. But on the contrarie part, Saint
Paule bringeth vs too the inward man, that is too say, too the spirituall
lyfe, which is vnseene of vs, sauing that wee haue record of it. For
after the same maner dooth he speake of the inward man lykewyse too
the Corinthians,2. Cor. 4. d. 16. saying, that the outward man corrupteth, but yit the
inward man is renewed. What is it then that Saint Paule meaneth
by the outward man? Riches, bodily health, honour, credit, authoritie,
and (at a woord) all that wee couet of our owne nature. Those are
the things that are ment by the outward man. Now (as I sayd afore)
wee would fayne bee strengthened in those things, but in the meane
whyle we despyze the inward man, that is too say, the things that belong
too the heauenly lyfe. And why? For wee see them not, bycause



wee bee grosse witted, and intangled in this world. Therfore Saint
Paule sheweth vs heere, that if God list too diminish vs too the worldward,
wee must be are it patiently, and he sayeth the lyke in the Text
which I am about to alledge. For when the faythlesse and heathenish
sort which haue their treasure in this world, doo see themselues go too
decay: they sygh and say, alas, where are the armes that I had in time
past? where bee the leggs? & therupon they fall too repyning ageinst
God. Agein, if a man that was riche bee diminished, and God cut
of the things that he possessed: he is in horrible vnquietnesse, and hee
had leuer too bee alredye buryed, than too see his wings clipped after
that fashyon. Agein, they that are led with ambition, and seeke nothing
but honour & estimation in the world, if they be once out of their
accustomed credit, they thinke all is lost: But on the contrarie part,
Gods children, which shet their eyes willingly at all the things which
haue a fayre glosse here beneath, and behold the heritage of heauen by
fayth, are not so vexed when they see themselues diminished euen in
eysyght, & that God maketh them to drop away by little & little: they
take al in good worth.2. Cor. 1. a. 5. And why? For they haue an eye to the chaunge:
which is, that by that meane God reneweth them, too giue them the
thing that is vnseene, and too make them take corage agein, as though
the kingdome of heauen were hard at hand. So then, the thing that
Saint Paul sheweth vs now, is, that looke as euery of vs is caryed
away with his owne foolish lusts, so would hee haue God too yeelo to
his fondnesse. And contrariwyse, by his praying bnto God to strengthen
vs, he sheweth vs, that it must not greeue vs, though wee decaye
as in respect of our bodyes, so wee haue the spirituall cheerelynesse
that maye make vs too drawe neerer and neerer vntoo our God,
and too looke still too the kingdome of heauen, which cannot fayle vs,
assuring our selues, that the bringing of vs lowe, is too the end wee
should bee exalted on hygh,2. Cor. 5. a. 1. and that although we must go downe into
the graue, yit it is not too perish there altoogither, but too bee renewed
agein. Wherfore let vs suffer our selues too bee so abaced, that wee
may bee set vp agein by the power of our God. And although wee be
poore despyred creature
                     •
                   in this world, let vs suffer it patiently, and
therwithall let vs not ceasse too warrant our selues that God will
woork in vs as he promiseth.
               And furthermore let vs mark wel, what S. Paule setteth downe
heere: for he vseth not the single name of God, but sayeth, The father



of our Lorde Iesus Christ, of whom all kinred is named in heauen
and in earth. Now hereby hee sheweth vs first of all, how familiarly
wee may go vntoo God, as hath bin touched alredye. And the last
sunday this text was declared sufficiently,Ephe. 3. c. 12. where he shewed vs, how we
may come vnto God. But there he did set fayth in the first place. Seeing
then that wee haue assurance that the gate is opened for vs, wee
may bee bolde too go in vntoo God. And this fayth ingendereth trust
in our hartes, and trust giueth boldnesse. These are the three steppes
that Saint Paule did set downe there. And heere he sheweth vs how
wee obteyne that priuiledge: that is too wit, bycause God hath not only
his heauenly Maiestie too bee worshipped of vs: (for although wee
ought too honour him in that respect, yit would it so astonishe vs, as too
make vs shun his presence as much as wee possibly could:) but also
addeth the tytle of father, and sayeth, that he taketh vs for his children,
by meanes whereof wee hee no more afrayde of him, but may come fa
                  
                     ••
                  l
                     •
                  arly
too him whensoeuer occasion serueth, forasmuch as he hath
his armes open too receyue vs. This is an article well woorthy too
bee mynded. For if wee cannot call vppon God, what will become of
vs? in what plyght shall wee bee? It is sayd, that all our welfare lyeth
in hauing our recourse vntoo God. Now if wee thinke that God
wil heare vs,Iames. 
                        •
                     . a. 6. when wee pray doubtingly and debatingly: wee beguile
our selues, as sayeth S. Iames. Therfore wee must n
                     •
                  t bee as reedes
that are shaken with euery wynde, or lyke the waues of the sea. But
wee must bee well and throughly assured, that God which calleth vs
too him will not disappoynt vs. Wherfore when wee pray vnto God,
it must be with trust, that wee shall not loze our labour. But how may
we come by that? For behold, God hath 
                     〈◊〉
                   incōprehensible 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
& what a distance is there betweene him & vs? Though we could 
                     〈◊〉
                  
aboue the cloudes, yit could wee not come nygh God, by reason of the
infinite hyghnesse that is in him, for the heauens comprehend it not.
               Then should wee bee as folke forlorne and vainshed away,1. Kings. 8. c. 27. if Iesus
Christ were not there as a meane to make vs way. And that is it which
S. Paule meaneth heere, when he sayeth, that he prayeth too the father
of our Lord Iesus Christ, too the end wee might 
                     〈◊〉
                  , that he
is not farre from vs, if wee hold the way that he sheweth vs, that
is too wit, if wee make Iesus Christ our aduocate, to beare word for
vs,Hebr. 9. d. 24. and speake as it were by his mouth. For he is entred intoo the
Sanctuary of the heauens, too present himselfe there on our behalf,



that it might he all one, as if he bare vs vppon his shoulders, and bo
                     •
                  h
wee and our prayers bee accepted and allowed of God, and wee bee
sure that they vanish not away intoo the ayre, but that God 
                     〈◊〉
                  
them as well as if he were hard by vs, according to his promise made
in the Psalme, which is, that he wilbe neere at hand to all such as call
vpon him in truth.Psal. 145. d. 18. Had this bin well considered, the wretched world
had not troubled it self so much, in seeking too Hee Saints and She
Saints, too bee their patrons and aduocats. As for example, when
the wretched Papists say, that they must haue the Uirgin Mary & S.
Michaell for their intercessors, and other Saints, whom they haue
deuyzed of their owne brayne: ho (say they) wee bee not woorthy too
come in Gods presence. It is very trew: but his vnworthinesse of ours
ought also to make vs too seeke the remedye which God hath appoynted
for vs, that is wit, too repayre too our Lord Iesus Christ, who is
the way that leadeth vs too his father, according too this saying of his,
I am the way,Iohn. 14. 
                        •
                     . 6. the truthe and the lyfe: and whatsouer yee ask of Go
                     •
                  
my father in my name, shalbe graunted you. There our Lord Iesus
promiseth, that whatsoeuer we ask of God his father in his name, shalbee
doone vnto vs: and therby he warranteth this doctrine. Therfore
let vs mark at a woord, that in asmuch as our Lord Iesus offereth and
putteth foorth himself too bee the way too lead vs vnto God his father,
wee must not go raunging vp and downe, but if wee will needs seeke
any other way, wee shall but stray, and neuer bee at any certeinetie to
come vntoo God. Furthermore, too the intent wee may bee contented
with Iesus Christ alone: let vs beare well in mynd how he sayeth, that
all our requests shalbe heard, if they bee grounded vppon his 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
Yee see then, that the thing which Saint Paule ment too shewe 
                     〈◊〉
                  
first place, is, that as oft as wee pray vntoo God, wee must assure 
                     〈◊〉
                  
selues, that although wee bee vnworthy too come vntoo him, yit notwithstanding
he ceasseth not too accept vs, and our prayers are a sacrifyze
of good and acceptable sent vntoo him, when we acknowledge
him too bee the father of our Lord Iesus Christ.Iohn. 17 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     1. But yit must 
                     〈◊〉
                  
also adde, that which the Gospell sheweth vs, that is too wit, that 
                     〈◊〉
                  
bee members of his only sonnes bodie. For had wee no allyance 
                     〈◊〉
                  
Iesus Christ, we should gayne nothing by knowing him too bee the
sonne of God. But forasmuch as wee bee made one with him, and he
boutsafeth too communicate all his goods vntoo vs: therfore wee may
well call God our father. And for that cause also did he saye 
                     〈…〉
                  


                  
disciples, I go my way too my God and your God, too my father and
your father.Iohn. 20. c. 17. Thus much concerning the first poynt.
               And heerewithall wee must marke well also, how S. Paule addeth
for a larger declaration, that all kinred both in heauen and earth is
named of him. In saying so, first he sheweth that the Iewes ought to
be ioyned vnto the Gentyles, and that for asmuch as the Trumpet of
the Gospell is blowen, Gods grace must bee preached abrode euery
where, that men of all Countries and Nations may call vppon God:
And therby also it is shewed vs, that although wee come of the heathen
which were erst cut of from the kingdome of God:Ephe. 2. d. 19. yit wee bee
now made his household folke, and registred among the Citizens of
heauen, and God auoweth vs too bee so. And so yee see that by the
father of our Lord Iesus Christ, an also bycause Iesus Christ is
made our head, and hath receyued vs for his body: yee see (I say)
that all kinred is named of him, bycause God voutsafeth too take vs
too him, yea euen vs poore wretched creatures, which are not woorthie
too bee of the number of the woormes of the earth, yit notwithstanding
he not only voutsafeth too admit vs intoo the companie of the
Iewes,Exod. 19. a. 6. which were a holy linage, the chozen people of God, and his
owne inheritaunce:1. Pet. 2. b. 9. but also hath taken vs intoo the fellowship of
the Angels of heauen.Apo
                        •
                     . 5. c. 10. For Saint Paule is not contented heere
with setting downe a kinred among men, too shew that he meane
                     •
                  t of
the faythfull is matched with Abraham, Dauid, Peter, and Paule:
but he sheweth, that he is matched euen with the Angels (of heauen
too.) And soothly we may well haue that digniti
                     ••
                   seeing that Iesus
Christ himselfe voutsafeth too bee our brother, and hath knit himself
to vs in the bond of brotherhood. Thus yee see how wee should bee
guyded in praying vntoo God, that wee may coine vntoo him in feare
and reuerence, considering his maiestie which is infinite, and more
                     •
                  
                  uer
not too bee abashed at it, ne too turne away, but vnderstand that inasmuch
as God hath voutsafed too take vs for his children, and our
Lord Iesus Christ is ordeyned our mediator, too the intent wee 
                     〈◊〉
                  
come vntoo him▪ wee may come with full trust before 
                     〈◊〉
                   of
grace, and not sticke too cal God our father with open mouth, 
                     ••
                  cause
he hath shewed,Hebr. 4. d. 16. that he taketh vs for his children, and wee haue Iesus
Christ for our brother by adoption,Rom. 8. c. 15. and wee neede not too doubt but
that all the Angels of heauen acknowledge and auow vs for their brethren,
when wee come too God so ioyned too our Lord Iesus Christ:



lyke as on the contrarie part also if we swerue from that marke, wee
must needes bee cast of, and the Angels must beecome our enemyes
and aduersaries, and set themselues ageinst all the prayers that wee
can make.
               Now let vs fall downe before the maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him too voutsafe too reforme
our lyfe in such wyse, as wee may shewe by our deedes, that wee
haue not lost our tyme in going too his schoole, and indeuer and inforce
our selues too please him in all things: and that forasmuch as
wee bee not able too serue him alwayes in perfection, he will voutsafe
too beare with our infirmities, & to beare them vp in the meane whyle,
so as wee may not ceasse too resort still vntoo him, seeing the neede
and necessitie wherwith wee bee pinched. And so let vs all say, Almyghtie
God heauenly father. &c.
            
            
               The .xx. Sermon, which is the fifth
vppon the third Chapter.
               
                  
                     14. For the vvhich thing I bovv my knees too the father of our
Lord Iesus Christ:
                     15. (Of vvhom all kinred is named in heauen and in earth.)
                     16. That according too the riches of his glory, he graunt you too
bee strengthened vvith povver by his spirit in the invvard
                           •
                        
man.
                     17. And that Christ may dvvell in your hartes by fayth.
                     18. And that yee may bee rooted and grounded in Loue, too the
intent yee may comprehend vvith all the Sainctes, vvhat the
wydenesse, and the length, and the deepth, and the heyght,
                     19. And knovve the louingnesse of Christ, vvhich passeth all
knovvledge, that yee may be filled vvith all fulnesse of God.
                  
               
               
                  
                  WEe haue seene this morning by what enterance
wee must offer our prayers vntoo
God, if we intend too be heard at his hand,
and too haue full assurance that our prayers
shalbee well lyked: namely that Iesus
Christ bee our guyde and aduocate, and
make intercessiō for vs, so as we speake not
but as it were by his mouth. Now he hath
set it downe for a rule in praying vnto God,Math. 
                        •
                     . b. 9.
that wee must call him father. And how
dare men bee so bolde or presumptuous, as to call God their father?
Surely wee can alledge no ryght wherby too clayme any such dignitie.
For not euen the Angels haue it, but by meanes of our Lord Iesus
Christ. Then is it vnpossible for vs too pray too God, as he commaundeth
vs, and after the manner which he teacheth vs in his woord
except Iesus Christ bee our aduocate. For on whether syde are the
Angels akyn too vs? shall the Uirgin Mary be found to bee our greate
Aunt or Graundmother? What are the Apostles? Too bee short, wee
must resort too our Lord Iesus Christ, too haue his spirituall kinred,
wherby God avoweth vs for his adopted children. And when wee
once haue that, wee must no more doubt whether God will heare our
prayers or no, seeing wee come not to him vppon a foolish rashnesse, by
presuming vppon our owne naturall reason or selflyking, but with obedience
too his commaundement. Agein, wee haue his promis,
which can neuer deceyue vs. Contrarywyse all they that thinke too
obteyne fauour at Gods hand by any other meane, doo but run astray,
and haue shet them selues out of the doore already. And therfore there
is now none excuce, but that wee must simply hold the way which the
Gospell sheweth vs, to come vnto God by, that is too wit, in the name
of our Lord Iesus Christ, without adding of any other creature, as we
see doone by the whole world. In deede they that pester vp a throng
of patrons and aduocates, (as they terme them,) hope too bee well
welcome vntoo God. But by what warrant? Who hath promised
them, that God will accept their deuotion, and all that they offer vntoo
him? For it is not in vs too appoynt officers in heauen. In a Court
of Iustice of the world, it myght well bee a matter of course (as they
terme it,) and it myght lie in the power of a Iudge, too giue leaue too
whom he listeth, too pleade mens caces, too the intent there myght be



no confuzion. But if wee will make aduocates at our owne pleasure,
and vppon our owne head (in heauen:) it is all one as if wee would
rob God of his authoritie and souereintie. Yea, and wee must bethink
vs how S. Paule sayeth, that all our prayers and supplications, shall
neuer be aught worth, but vtterly vnprofitable and vayne, if they be not
conformable to Gods word, so as we take our rule frō thence. For how
shall wee call vpon a God (saieth he) whom wee knowe not, at all aduenture?
And how shall we knowe after what maner we should pray,
and what style and speeche wee should vse?Rom. 10. c. 14. Wee must come too hearing,
not of the things that men shall bring vs of their owne brayne,
but of the things that God commaundeth vs. So then, wee must vse
this modestie and sobrietie, and not speake at randon when wee pray
vntoo God, but simply obey his word. Yea and we know that prayer is
the cheefe sacrifice that God requireth. For whereas it is sayd, that
wee must worship the only one God:Deut. 6. c. 13. &. 10. d. 20 & Math 4 b. 
                        •
                     0. it is not alonly with ceremonies,
as with kneeling downe before him. In deede that is requisite: for it
is meete that wee should honour our God both with our body and with
our mynd, bycause they bee both his. Howbeit in worshipping him,
wee must acknowledge truely that wee hold all good things of him:
and that doo wee in praying too him. For wee come thither as poore
soules vtterly destitute of all thinges that are meete for vs, knowing
that without him wee bee woorse than miserable. It is sayde in the
lawe, that in offering sacrifyze too God, men must not doo any thing
at all of their owne head, but follow his ordinaunce, insomuch that it
was forbidden them too take straunge fyre too vse vppon the aulter:
whereby it was ment in a figure,Leuit. 10. a. 2. that men should vtterly forbeare all
their owne deuotions, when they intend too offer any thing vntoo God.
Likewyse they were forbydden too offer sacrifyze without salt,Leuit. 2. d. 13. &. Mark. 9. g. 48. thereby
too shewe that wee ought too haue a sure instruction, so as all the
offerings which wee offer vp too God, bee sauced or poudered with his
woord: for without that, there will bee nother taste nor sauour in them.
But seeyng that wee now adayes haue the substance and truth of the
figures of the Lawe: whensoeuer wee offer our prayers and supplications
vntoo God, or yeeld him prayse and thankes, let vs doo all by
our Lord Iesus Christ,Heb. 13. c. 15. as the Apostle too the Hebrewes exhorteth
vs. This serueth too finish vp the matter that was begunne this morning.
               And wee must call to mynd what S. Paule told vs this morning:



namely, that in praying vntoo God, wee must not bee giuen too our
wordly affections, but seeke that God may bee glorified, and that the
residue may bee but as an appurtenaunce too it. That is the cause
why he spake purposely of the inward man. For if God should giue
vs the brydle too aske whatsoeuer came in our head, or if wee on our
side should take such libertie: what a thing were it? If he should giue
vs al our owne asking, it would turne to our ruine and confuzion. For
we haue our lusts further out of square, than litle children or sick folks.
And all of vs generally doo by experyence find in our selues, that wee
bee fast settled heere bylowe, and would fayne bee hild continually in
this world: wee hang our heads groueling downeward, and cannot
lift them vp. So much the more therefore doth it stand vs on hand, to
mark wel the thing that S. Paule sheweth vs in this sentence: namely
that wee ought too pray God to renew vs, and too strengthen vs by
his holy spirit, and too increace his giftes in vs more and more, that
in passing through this world, we may alwayes ame at that mark, and
bee heere but as wayfarers, too the end that our Lord may auowe vs
for his children, and the heritage be kept for vs, which he hath promised
vs, and bought so deerely for vs by the death and passion of our
Lord Iesus Christ.
               Now heereuppon S. Paule inferreth, that Iesus Christ may dwel
in our harts by fayth. Wherby he sheweth, that without Christ wee
shall neuer bee made partakers of any one drop of Gods grace. It
is trew, that God hath the whole fulnesse of life, light, rightuousnesse,
and all goodnesse in himself. But where is the head welspring? It
is vtterly hidden, & we shall neuer be able too come at it of our selues.
And if wee think too doo any good by our owne inuentions: it is but
a deceyuing of our selues: wee shall but dig pits continually, yea euen
such pits as are full of holes, and haue no springs of water in them.
Behold,Ierem. 3. c. 13. the thing that men gayne by following their own inuentions,
is, that they make much trotting vp and downe, and are neuer the neerer.
But our Lord Iesus Christ is a fountayne wherout we may well
drawe ou
                     •
                   fill: yea and wee neede too make no long windlasses too
come vnto him, bycause he offereth himself, saying: All you that are a
thirst come vnto me & drink, for whosoeuer drinketh of the liuing water
that I giue him,Iohn. 7. c. 37. shall haue ynough, both for himselfe, and also too
make it flowe 
                     〈…〉
                   his neighbours. Now then, for as much as our
Lorde Iesus Christ do
                     •
                  th so 
                     〈…〉
                   and bountifully offer vs



the benefits which wee receyue of God his father: therfore S. Paule
sayth, that he must bee fayne too dwell in our harts, that wee may bee
reformed by Gods spirit. And let vs mark, that Iesus Christ hath
the full perfection of all goodnesse in him, not onely in respect that he
is the euerlasting sonne of God, but also euen in his humane nature
which he tooke of vs, and wherein he became our brother, hath he also
receyued all fulnesse, according too this saying of the Prophet Esay,
that vppon him shall rest the spirit of wisedome,Esay. 11. a. 2. 3. 4. the spirit of vnderstanding,
the spirit of the feare of God, the spirit of rightuousnesse,
and the spirit of strength. And too what end? Is it for his own vse?
He had no neede of it: but (as it is sayd in another Text) it was to the
end that he should distribute it vntoo all his members, and wee all of
vs from the most too the least drawe of his fulnesse, not fearing that
fountayne can dry vp. Seeing then that our Lord Iesus Christ dooth
by the Gospell dayly communicate and offer vntoo vs the things that
wee want, and are needefull for our saluation: it is not for nought that
S. Paule hauing shewed that wee can do nothing furtherfoorth than
wee bee vphild by Gods grace: addeth, that God must bee fayne too
dwell in our harts.
               Now vppon these words, wee haue too gather first of all, that God
thinking it not ynough too remedie all our defaultes and misdooyngs,
and all our wantes, hath voutsafed too giue himselfe too vs in the person
of his onely sonne. If it were told vs that wee bee restored too the
former state from whence our father Adam fell, that were very much,
and therein wee should haue an excellent record of the goodnesse of our
God: but he hath not onely giuen vs both heauen and earth, that is too
say, all things that are fit for vs both in respect of this flyghtfull lyfe,
and of the euerlasting saluation of our foules: but also he hath giuen
himselfe vntoo vs. And how is that? Euen by giuing vs our Lord Iesus
Christ, as is sayd of him in the nyenth of the Prophet Esay. And
all the Scripture also leadeth vs thither, when it sheweth vs how God
giueth himselfe vntoo vs, and how wee possesse him, and haue full fruition
of him. And theruppon wee must conclude with that which S.
Paule sayeth, in the eyght too the Romanes, namely, that inasmuch
as Gods sonne who hath all excellence and dignitie in him, is giuen
vnto vs? shal any thing else be withhild frō vs: Seeing that God hath
graunted himselfe so f
                     •
                  rfoorth vntoo vs, as too haue his sonne to dwell
in vs: shloud we now doubt (of the obteyning) of the things which 
                     •
                  ee



knoweth to be for our profite and behoof? Thinke we that▪ they shalbe
denyed vs? Yee see then that the thing which we haue to remember
in the first place, is, that God hath shewed himself so bountifull toowards
vs,Psal. 119. 57. & Psal. 16. b. 5. that he hath not thought it ynough too put vs in possession
of all his goods, but hath voutsafed too become our portion and cup
himself, as the scripture sayeth, which vseth such similitudes, to shew,
that as a man seeketh his ordinary repast, and is well appayd when
he hath meate and drinke, bycause he is refreshed by it: so must we resort
vnto God, too haue the trew foode: and wee must hold our selues
contented with him, when he giueth himself so vntoo vs. And heerewithall
let vs euer beare in mynd what I haue sayd, namely, that wee
neede not too sore in the ayre, nor too make any farre fetches for the
possessing of God, bycause he hath knit himself too vs in the person of
of our Lord Iesus Christ, and in him we are made partakers both of
him and all his benefits. And S. Paul setteth downe the word fayth,
too shewe vs how deere the doctrine of the Gospell ought too be vntoo
vs. For it is not ynough too haue sayd, that Iesus Christ dwelleth in
vs, bycause wee will alwayes haue our replyes (and say) How may
that bee? For wee cannot stye vp so high. He is in the glory of heauen,
and wee bee crawling heere in the world, subiect to miseries without
number. Seeyng then that there is so long a distance betweene
him and vs: howe may he dwell in vs? Now S. Paule addeth purposely,
that the Gospel is of such power, as too vnite vs to Gods sonne,
at leastwyse so wee receyue it by fayth: for it behoueth vs too consider
the contentes and substance of the things that are preached vntoo vs,
concerning the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ. It is not onely sayd,
that it was Gods will too haue him offered in sacrifyzce, too the intent
wee myght bee reconcyled, and all our sunnes bee wyped out, so
as they myght neuer come too account, and (too bee short,) that full
amendes myght bee made for all our sinnes by his death and passion,
and that he was rayzed agein for our iustification, as S. Paule sayeth
in the fifth too the Romanes: not onely those things are sayd of Iesus
Christ, but it is also said, that he is our head, as we haue seene already,
& that we liue of his owne substance, as a tree draweth his sap from his
roote, and that as the head of a mā sheadeth foorth his power through
all the body, so haue wee a secret vnion, and such a one as is woonderfull
and farre aboue the order of nature, bycause that although Iesus
Christ bee in heauen, yit he fayleth not too dwell in vs. And soothly if



the Sunne can so cheere vs vp by his beames without fleeting out of
his place, insomuch as wee see that euery morning wee bee as it were
refreshed and comforted (by his ryzing,) yea and euē sicke folkes feele
some cheerlinesse by him though they lye a long in their beddes: seeing
that a creature which is not onely transitorie and corruptible, but
also senslesse and vnmoueable of it self, hath notwithstanding such force
and propertie giuen it of God, too reioyce and refreshe vs after that
fashion: what shall our Lord Iesus Christ doo, who is ordeyned too
haue the fulnesse of the Godhead dwelling in him,Coloss. 2. b. 9. and to shed foorth
all the gracious giftes of God his father vppon vs, too deale them vntoo
euery of vs according too his measure, as is sayd of him in the .xiiii.
Chapter of Saint Iohn? Then if wee come too Christ with beleefe in
him, that is too say, if wee receyue the promises of the Gospell: let vs
assure our selues that he will dwell in vs, euen by the meanes of fayth.
But hereof wee shall treate more fully in the fifth Chapter. Notwithstanding,
this text could not haue bin vnderstoode, vnlesse I had noted
the thing that I haue briefly touched euen now: that is too wit, that
Iesus Christ dwelleth in vs by fayth, and that our receyuing of him as
he offereth (himselfe with) all his grace by the Gospell, is not alonely
too looke vppon him aloofe, or too haue it tolde vs, that he hath offered
himselfe in sacrifyze for vs once for all: but too the end he should dwell
in vs by the power of his holy spirit, and wee bee knit vntoo him, and
feele that he dooth truely execute the office of a head towardes vs, so
as we bee members of his body, and liue of his proper substance. That
then is the cause why S. Paule added the woord Fayth, when he sayd,
that Iesus Christ ought too dwell in vs.
               Neuerthelesse wee must not go about too plucke Iesus Christ out
of his heauenly glorie, too the intent too bee the neerer vntoo him, as
the vnbeeleeuers doo, who will needs dwell euer still beneathe, and
transfigure God after theyr owne lyking. And wee see what is doone
in the popedome. For there is no God among them, but a sort of
puppets which they call Images and remēberances. And moreouer,
bycause they see well that those are but dead stocks and stones: they
haue made another God, whom they haue shet vp in a box, and too him
they resort as too a liuing God. In deede if they had the supper of our
Lord Iesus Christ according too his institution, in stead of the abhominable
Masse which they haue brought in on their owne head, Iesus
Christ woulde bee present among them: howbeeit not as they



imagine. For in the Supper wee doo truely receiue the bodie and
blud of our Lord Iesus Christ, too bee fed of him, and of his owne substance,
so as he performeth the thing which he speaketh by his woord,
namely,Iohn. 
                        •
                     . f. 35. that he is our spirituall bread and drink, and hath wherwith
too satisfie vs too the full. Yea, but yit are the bread and the wyne of
the Supper, as pledges that our Lord Iesus giueth himself too vs, to
the end wee should seeke him aboue after a spirit
                     •
                  all fashyon. So then,
Saint Paule sheweth vs, that if wee will haue Iesus Christ ioyned
vntoo vs, wee must not bee giuen too our owne beastlinesse, but our
harts and mynds must bee lift vp aloft too seeke him aboue, as hath
bin declared alredie.Coloss. 
                        •
                     . a. 1. It is trew, that he commeth downe too vs by his
woord, and by the power of his holie spirit: but that is too the end that
wee should mount vp thither too him.
               Howbeeit there is one thing more which wee ought too mark well
in Saint Paules saying, that Christ must dwell in our harts. For
manie men haue him in their mouth, yea and also in their brayne, as
they vnderstand him, and they think themselues well discharged, when
they can babble of him: but in the meane while there is no lyuely roote
in them. Then is it not ynough for vs to haue some rouing knowledge
of Christ, or too gaze at him in the aire, as they say, and too bee able
too talk of him with full mouth: but he must haue his seate in our harts
within, so as wee bee knit too him vnfeynedly, and with a trew affection.
That is the meanes for vs to be made parttakers of Gods spirit.
               And too bee short, wee may see here, that all such as weene too obteyne
aught at Gods hand but by the meane of our lord Iesus Christ,
doo but raūge and wander in vayne, and shal alwayes fynd themselues
emptie: insomuch that when they think themselues too bee full fed, it
shalbee but with wynd, that is too say, with vayne and tryfling imaginations,
as I told you this morning. They therefore which deuyze
patrones of their owne head, and surmyze that God will fauor them
for it, and in the meane whyle let Iesus Christ alone: must vnderstand,
that they bee so farre of from obteyning their requests, that God dooth
rather abhore them, insomuch that when they once swarue from the
ankerhold which is set foorth for vs in the scripture, (that is too wit,
from hauing our Lord Iesus Christ for their lodesman) the Angels
of heauen must needs forsake them, and the Saints also, to whom they
behighted themselues, must needs deny them, yea & al of them must set
themselues ageinst them as aduersarie parties. For there is no means



for vs too bee matched with the Angels, Prophets, Apostles, and
Martirs, till wee haue trew concord with them. And how shall wee
haue that? By fayth: that is too say, according too the pure doctrine
of the Gospell. Not that it is ynough for vs too haue our eares beaten
with it: but that wee must receyue the things that God promiseth vs
there, so as wee abhorre all that euer Satan can set afore vs, and haue
none other guyde than only our Lord Iesus Christ, who hath told vs,
that he is the lyght of the world,Iohn. 8. b. 12. and that whosoeuer walketh in him,
cannot stray. But by the way wee must serche and examin our selues
narrowly, that wee take not a vayne cloke vnder the name of Iesus
Christ, as we see manie doo now adayes, which protest themselues to
bee Gospellers. And euen among our selues, what a number are there
which will shew signes greate ynough, that they bee willing too followe
Gods woord? But they think too discharge themselues with
petie tryfles: and when they haue once giuen eare (too the doctrine)
and spoken a fewe good words: then, too their seeming, God is hyghly
bound vntoo them. But heere it is shewed vs, that wee haue none
acquayntance at all with him, vntill Iesus Christ dwell in our harts.
And that is the verye meane wherby too bee filled with his benefits,
and too haue his holie spirit dwelling and reigning in vs. For vnlesse
we feare God, and walk in his obedience, so as wee behaue our selues
according too his will, and all our wits and desyres ame thitherward:
it is a token that wee liue after the flesh,Gala. 5. c. 16. as Saint Paule sayeth too the
Galathians. Therefore wee must shewe by our outward fruites, that
wee bee truly ioyned too Iesus Christ,Rom. 8. a. 5. and that he hath made vs partakers
of his holie spirit.
               Now hereuppon Saint Paule addeth further, that vvee must
bee rooted and grounded in charitie. This woord Charitie or loue,
may bee taken as well for the loue that God beareth vs, as for the mutuall
loue which wee ought to beare one towardes another. But the
verie trew and natiue sense of Saint Paule heere, is, that he ment too
haue vs knit toogither. For as he spake heeretoofore of Gods free
loue towardes vs, so now he sheweth how fayth importeth that wee
should haue brotherly loue one towards another. And the holy Scripture
bringeth vs alwayes to that poynt: insomuch that when there is
any speaking of the full perfection of good lyfe: fayth goeth before, &
then comes Charitie next vntoo it. For the end that wee must begin
at, is the vtter abacing of our selues, too the end wee may seeke all our



welfare at Gods hand, and that our seeking of it there, may bee, first
too acknowledge that he giueth vs all things in the person of his onely
sonne: and secondly, too call vppon him too settle our fayth in him, too
flee wholly for refuge too his mercy, and after as euery man feeleth
himfelf bound vntoo him, (as all of vs are exceedingly,) so to acknowledge
by our thanksgiuing, that he is our rightuousnes, our holynes,
our victorye, our ioy, our glorie, and our happinesse, that wee may
performe the thi
                     •
                  g which is sayd in Ieremie, whosoeuer glorieth, let
him glorie in the Lord,Iere. 
                        •
                     . f. 24. bycause it is he that woorketh ryghtuousnesse,
Iustice, and mercy. Yee see then that wee must rest wholly vppon
our God, or else all the vertuousnesse which wee seeme too haue before
men, shalbee but filth and dung. Now then, haue wee fayth? Charitie
must be matched with it, and wee must liue euenly and vpryghtly
one with another, & euery of vs acknowledge thus, I was not created
for my self, nor to seeke myne own priuate benefyte & commoditie, but
for the benefite of my neighbours also. And therfore let vs absteyne frō
al guile, wrong, outrage, and malice, and indeuer to serue eche others
turne, according too our abilitie. That is the perfection of good lyfe.
               Saint Paule hauing spoken alredie of fayth, addeth now, that wee
must also bee grounded in Charitie: as if he should say, wee must not
haue alonly some fit (or pang of loue) as manie men haue: but there
must bee a stedfastnesse and euen holding on in it all our lyfe long. For
a thing may giue a greate blaze, and yit quayle anon after. Behold, a
huge building may be ouerthrowen with one blast of wynd, if it be not
set vppon a sure foundaton. Also a man may set vp a greate tree: but
if the roote bee cut asunder, what will come of it? It must needes fall
downe out of hand, or else if it haue some hold a the one ende for a
tyme, it must needes wither at the heate of the Sunne. Euen so is it
with vs, when we haue a greate zeale which is not well rooted in our
hartes: for it wilbee but as a maske or a gay showe before men. That
is the cause why Saint Paule exhorteth vs purposely too bee grounded
in charitie, too the intent too correct the vyce of louing, by startes
or fits (as they say) which is too common a thing. Neuerthelesse,
it were a fondnesse too conclu
                     ••
                   therefore, that our saluation were
grounded vppon our good woorkes. For heere he treateth not of the
cause of our saluation, but 
                     •
                  nly how wee ought too rule our lyfe. Agein,
wee knowe there is but one onely foundation of the Church, as
S. Paule sayeth in the third chapter of the second Epistle too Cori
                     •
                  
                  thians,



and as wee haue seene alredie in this selfsame Epistle, and specially
as Iesus Christ himself declareth in the sixteenth chapter of
Saint Matthew. And which is that foundation? It is Iesus Christ,
and no man can lay any other than that which the Prophetes and Apostles
haue layd, and wee must hold our selues too it at this day, and
euen vntoo the worldes end. And yit may wee not ceasse too bee rooted
in loue by meanes of our Lord Iesus Christ. When men demaund
what is the cause of our saluation, by what meane wee be brought into
his fauour, and how wee may come vntoo hym, and cal vpon hym with
full trust:Coloss. 2. b. 9. (wee must answeare) it is, bycause our Lord Iesus Christe
is giuen vs, and it is he in whom the fulnesse of the Godhead dwelleth.
Now wee bee yit farre of from such perfection: Howbeit, forasmuch
as wee bee grounded vpon our Lord Iesus Christ, wee haue a steadynesse
that continueth all our life. So then let vs marke, that Saint
Paule exhorteth vs here too true stedfastnesse, too the intent we should
neuer bee weery of wel doing, though wee haue neuer so many occasions
too thrust vs aside. For euen such as are best mynded (too see too)
doo neuerthelesse take pritch at it, when men shewe themselues vnkind
towardes them: and when they consider, that for their well dooing men
wyll requite them with all euyll, they bee sore greeued at it, and become
quite out of hart. And that is a cause why so fewe continue in
the feare of God, and walke as they ought too doo: for it seemeth too
them, that they haue lost their labour in doing well. Agein, there foloweth
this inconuenience also, that the wicked take occasion too rush
out so much more intoo all maner of harmfulnesse: so that if a man liue
in simplicitie, and beare the wrongs paciently that are doone vntoo
hym: all men wyll bee dooing with him, and euery man would eate
hym vp, as if he were a sheepe among an hundred Woolues. Such
as are easily intreated too giue of their goodes too their neighbours,
seeme too bee set out too the spoyle, and euery man wyll bee catching
al that euer he can from them. When men see so lea
                     •
                  de dealings in
th
                     •
                   world, it maketh euery man too take out his owne share, as men
say. But contrariwise it is told vs heere, that if wee bee rooted and
grounded in charitie, although men thrust vs aside, and discorage vs
by their vnthankfulnesse: yit wyll wee not ceasse too hold out in well
dooing, bicause wee haue a good and deepe roote.
               And S. Paule hauing spoken so of the good will that wee ought 
                     〈◊〉
                  
beare towardes our neyghbours, returneth too his matter of fayth.



And surely the cheef poynt for vs, is too knowe that God auoweth vs
for his children, and that our sinnes are forgiuen vs, so as he taketh vs
for ryghtuous. If wee haue not that, how can we fynd any sweetnesse
in seruing and honoring of him? And how or with what corage can
we pray to him? What prayse can wee offer to him? Too bee short,
it standeth vs on hand too bee certified of the infinite good that is doone
vs by our Lord Iesus Christ, too the end wee may bee rauished in loue
with our God, and inflamed with a ryght zeale to obey him, and holde
our selues short vnder his awe, too honor him with all our thoughtes,
with all our affections, and with all our hartes. The cause then why
S. Paule contineweth this matter, is to prynt it in the myndes of the
faythfull, where their saluation lyeth, and how they may bee sure of it.
And so much the more doo wee see what the wretchednesse of the world
is. For there is none other assurance, than the calling vppon God on
this groundworke, so as a man bee lifted vp by fayth too offer himself
into his presence. But on the contrary part, we see how men haue gone
too worke. And in deede they haue not bin ashamed in the popedome,
too say, that wee ought too bee alwayes doubtfull of our saluation, and
that wee cannot haue a sure beleefe of it. And it is not the ignorant
sort which say so: but all the doctors of their Sinagoges hold it for an
article of their fayth, that wee ought too bee alwayes in a mamering
and doubtfull. And that is euen as much as too cast men vp at aduenture
vntoo Satan. So much the more therfore behoueth it vs too
beare well in mynd the doctrine that is conteyned heere, that is to wit,
that when wee once knowe the loue that God beareth vs in our Lord
Iesus Christ, and in such wyse as he hath witnessed it too vs by his
death and passion, and dooth still dayly warrant it by his Gospell: wee
haue the perfect knowledge, and such as shall giue vs full happinesse.
And that is the cause why he sayeth, too the end yee may learne with
all the Sayncts, what his heyght, & depth, and wydnesse, and thicknesse
is: that yee may knowe all this, sayeth he. How now? Ment
S. Paule too make vs Carpenters or Masons, that he speaketh heere
as of the heygth of a buylding? Intendes he to teach vs th
                     •
                   science of
Masourie, that he speaketh thus of wydenesse? No: but he openeth his
owne meaning by & by, saying: It is the Loue that hath bin shevved
vs in Iesus Christ. Therfore when wee once knowe how well God
loueth vs, and how inestimable the mercie is, wherof he hath giuen vs
so good a pledge, in the person of his only sonne: wee haue all that can



bee, sayeth he. Let vs inforce all our wittes both vpward and downeward,
let vs stye aboue the cloudes, let vs pierce too the Centre of the
earth, let vs go downe too the bottoms of the deepes, and let vs rake
ouer sea and land, yit shall there bee nothing but vanitie and leazing.
When wee haue ended all our wyndlasses, surely weee may peraduenture
discourse lyke folk that are verie suttle, & haue learned the vnderstanding
of manie things: but yit shall there bee no substance in vs.
But when wee once knowe that God is our father in Iesus Christ,
and how that commeth too passe, and by what meanes wee obteyne
so greate a benefyte: that is the thing (sayeth he) whertoo wee must
hold vs. For it is the trew measure of our fayth, they bee the bondes
of it, and whosoeuer couers too knowe more, dooth but go astray, as
though he would wilfully enter intoo a maze, wheroutof he could neuer
wynd himself agein. Wherfore let vs hold our selues contented
with Iesus Christ as he is, and as he vttereth himself by his Gospell,
and then shall wee bee filled full, sayeth S. Paule. With what filling?
Euen with the fulnesse of God, sayeth he. As if he should say, Wretched
folke as wee bee, there is none of vs but he coueteth knowledge,
and it is a naturall desyre which burneth all men. Insomuch that wee
shall see many which consume all their goods, and spare nother their
bodyes nor their lyues. And what too doo? Too get knowledge. Wee
shall see othersome trot from place too place. And what too doo? Too
get knowledge. All men then haue that desyre, some more, and some
lesse, and there is not so ignorant a person, which would not faine come
too knowledge. Now then, seeyng wee bee all inclyned thertoo of
nature: let vs learne which is the trew knowledge. In deede there are
sciences which are behoofefull too passe this world withall, and requisite
it is that men should haue artes and trades, and also the liberall
sciences, as they be termed. All these are good, if they bee referred too
their dew endes. But yit notwithstanding wee must come too the
Science of Sciences: for that is it which will neuer fayle. For when
a man shall haue trotted all the earth ouer, (about other Sciences,)
what profyt
                     •
                   wyll come of it? It will bee but vanitie, as I sayde
afore. Wherefore let vs not seeke any thing out of Iesus Christ,
but let vs rest wholly there, and not swarue any whit at all from
him.
               And heere wee see first of all, the thing that I haue touched already
heeretoofore: namely, that if wee knewe wel what our Lord Iesus



Christ is, wee would easly giue ouer all other things, according as it
is sayd in the third too the Philippians,Phil. 3. b. 8. that S. Paule counted all
his former high esteemed things as losse and dung, to the end he might
hold himself too Iesus Christ, and that he went forewarde therein all
the tyme of his life, yea and did as it were hold his armes stretched
out too catch it, as he himself protesteth. Yee see then, that the thing
which wee haue too marke heere, is, that when wee once knowe that
Iesus Christ, and the benefits that he bringeth vs, namely that wee
may resort too God in his name with full trust: we shall no more haue
our mynds so vexed with vnquietnesse, but wee shal stand fast and stedy
in pure simplicitie of the Gospell. Howbeit, for the better vnderstanding
hereof, let vs see how men speake of our Lord Iesus Christ. In
deede they wyll call hym the sonne of God, and they wyll take hym for
theyr Redeemer: but in the meane whyle they wyl make a doale of his
offices, and part them here and there as a pray. The holy Scripture
calleth him the onely Priest, bycause it belongeth alonly vntoo him too
reconcyle vs vntoo God. And how many doo now adayes take that
vppon them? Euen as many Moonks, Freers, Masse Priests, and
Hipocrites as bee in the world: for they sell their prayers, as though
Iesus Christ had resigned his place vnto them. And vnder pretence
therof, they deuoure all the wealth of the world, and in the meane whyle
Iesus Christ is thrust a great way of. Agein, it is sayd, that by the
one sacrifize which he offered once for all, he hath gotten vs grace and
saluation, yea euen for euer, so that his death and passion appeaseth
Gods wrath, bycause that therby we haue full rightuousnesse. But yit
for all this, the Masse is brought in, as though the sacrifize that Iesus
Christ offered in his owne person, were but a bare figure, and that the
thing which the Papists haue inuented, were the only meane (as they
say) too purchace fauour at Gods hand. For the whoremaster goes
thither too pay his raunsome: so does the drunkard, the wicked swearer,
the looce liuer, the piller and poller, the quareller, the glutton, the
eater vp of his neighbour: all these resort too the Masse for their
raunsome, and beare them selues on hand, that God is well appayd.
               And in the meane whyle what becommeth of the sacrifize of Iesus
Christ? Tush, that must be thrust vnder foote. Agein, it is sayd, that
Iesus Christ is our onely Aduocate, which maketh intercession for vs
vntoo God his father. Yit notwithstanding, in the Popedome there
are whole warreins and Swarmes of Patrons, which euery man



hath forged of his owne brayne. And they bee not contented alonly
with the Apostles and Martirs: but they must also haue their S. Christopher,
& their S. Catherin, which are night Ghosts that were neuer
borne in the world: but looke whatsoeuer the diuell did put in their
heads,
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 1. d. 30. it was receyued. Agein, it is sayd, that Iesus Christ is our
rightuousnesse. But what for that? Yit neuerthelesse euery man
takes vpon him too make attonement with God by his owne woorks.
And therevppon sprang the ground worke of merits and of all the rest.
Agein,Iohn. 14. a. 6. it is sayd that Iesus Christ is our loadestarre, and the way
wherby wee must come too God his father, and finally too euerlasting
saluation: and yit will they needes haue whatsoeuer commeth in their
owne imagination. O (say they) mee thinks this is good, and seeing
I doo it of a good intent, why should not God take it in good worth?
Thus they make God a pretie fellow to stoope at their appoyntment,
and as a Iacke to creepe vnder their sleeue (at their pleasure.) See
how proud men are, whē they once turne away from Gods pure truth
vnto their own foolish inuentions, so as there is not so pure and sound a
thing, which they corrupt not. What is then the cause that all things
haue bin turned vpside down in Poperie? It is for that they knew not
Iesus Christ for such a one as he is set forth in the Gospell, but onely
haue made, I wote not what, a dead and vnauaylable thing of him, and
kept no more but the bare name and titles of him.
               Then is it not ynough for vs to say, we beleeue in Iesus Christ, and
that wee take him for our redeemer: but wee must also knowe to wha
                     •
                  
purpose hee is sent vs of God his father, and what benef
                     •
                  ts hee hath
brought vs. When wee once knowe all this: then shall wee bee filled
with him. We shal not neede to go bibbling heere and there, nor to
lap or licke vp mudde and stinking water one where or other, for want
of meate ad drink that is fit for vs. Our Lord Iesus Christ hath told
vs, that wee shall fynd both meate and drinke in him, so as wee may
throughly satisfye our selues both with meate and drink that is good &
wholsome for the nurrishmēt of our soules. So much the more therfore
behoueth it vs to go thither: & when we reade the holy scripture, let the
mark that we looke at, be alwayes too know what the grace of God
is which he hath shewed vs in the person of his onely sonne: and when
wee once know it, wee shall haue profited very well in Gods 
                     〈◊〉
                  , &
may well cast away all other things as filth & poyson. In deede 
                     〈◊〉
                  
doctrines will haue some sauor at the first syght, for wee see 
                     〈…〉
                  


                  
doo alwayes follow that which Saint Paul speakes in the second too
the Colossians, that is to wit, that bycause theyr dreames and dotages
haue some showe of wisdome,Coloss. 2. d. 23. therfore they giue themselues vntoo
them. But we must vnderstand that there is no trew foode, but that
which God giueth vs, and that it is his will to prouide vs of all things
which he knoweth too bee needfull for vs. Will wee then bee filled
without him? Thinke we, that if wee seeke too the Uirgin marie, and
call hir the moother of grace (after the maner of the papists, which doo
commonly giue hir that title): wee shall there fynd the things that we
want: Surely it is all one as if we would go seeke foode, & snatch here
a bit & there a bit by morsels & gobbets. But Iesus Christ sayth, Come
vnto me, & ye shal fynd all that you haue neede of: according wherunto,
it is sayd, that al the treasures of wisdome & knowledge are inclozed in
him.Coloss. 
                        •
                     . a. 3. Thē if we once know the loue that God his father hath shewed vs
in his person: we shal haue the fulnesse of all wisdome, we shal no more
neede too trot heere and there, wee shall no more neede too go vp nor
downe, nor farre, nor wyde: for wee shall haue wholly whatsoeuer is
good and requisite for our welfare. When wee heare this, must it not
needes be, that wee be as good as bewitched, if wee beleeue not God,
too rest wholly vppon his sayings, without flinging abrode after that
fashyon, and without making of so manie wyndlasss to trubble and tyre
our selues too no purpose? And that it is which is ment in the Prophet
Esay, where he sayeth, Go tread in your owne wayes: and when yee
haue compassed and gone about both heauen and earth,Esai. 66. a. 3. what shall it
boote yee? Then if wee bee so blynd as too stray out heere and there,
and cannot keepe the way that is shewed vs, but will needs go dig pits
at our own pleasure,Ierem. 8. c. 13. and forsake the spring of liuing water, which God
hath set before our eyes: it is good reason that wee should bee both ahungered
and athirst, & ly broyling in our owne foolish lusts, to trot to
and fro like women with chyld, which long too eate char Coales, and
had leuer drink the water of some puddle, thā the water of a fayre clere
spring. If wee fall too gadding in that maner after Satan, and bee 
                     •
                  
                  gre
of his illuzions and trumperie, and cannot content our selues with
the good that our Lord setteth afore vs: must it not needes be, that we
be worse than bewitched, and that the diuel hath made vs stark beasts?
So then, let vs vndestand first of all, that all things which men can
bring vs of their owne behalf, are but tryfles or rather illuzions of Satan.
And secondly, that when the 
                     •
                  ori
                     •
                  ture 
                     •
                  etteth Iesus Christ afore



vs, it is not for nought told vs, that wee must rest wholly vppon him,
and hold vs too him, when wee be come thither, bycause he hath the
fulnesse of all goodnesse in him, and therfore wee neede not too bee haled
too and fro, or too take too greate peyne in seeking the things that
are needfull for vs, nor finally too wander any more abrode, but to stick
wholly vntoo him, as too our perfect and souere in blisfulnesse.
               Thirdly, we must consider in Iesus Christ, the infinit grace that is
brought vs, and imparted too vs by his meanes. And Saint Paule in
saying heere the Loue, sendeth vs too the wellspring. For though
wee knew all Gods secretes, and were priuie too the rest of his will:
what were it, till we were perswaded of the loue that he beareth vs?
For wee see that when any man speakes of God too the vnbeleeuers,
it dooth so greeue them, that they wote not where too become, and it is
but a matter of heauinesse too them, bycause they conceyue nothing
but rigour in him. But when his grace and fatherly goodnesse is vttered
vntoo vs, as he hath shewed it in our Lord Iesus Christ: then
come we boldly vntoo him, and wee bee no more afrayd of his seate,
but haue familiar accesse to it: and therin he dooth vs an inestimable
good turne, such a one as surmounteth all that euer wee can wish in
this world, according as S. Paule setteth vs it downe heere. And so
yee see what this saying, the Loue of God, importeth. And he sayeth
purposely, in Iesus Christ, bycause that without him wee could not bee
beloued of God. For let Iesus Christ bee (as yee would say) let alone,
and let vs put the cace that wee thought vppon God, and that wee did
apply all our wits theraboutes, and therwithall that wee bethought
vs of our selues also: what were all this? Wee shall fynd such an incomprehensible
maiestie in God, as shall swallowe vs vp lyke a deepe
gulf. Agein, his Iustice is so perfect, as it wilbee much lesse possible
for vs to stand before it, than for Snowe to abyde ageinst the Sunne.
Now when wee come too our selues, wee must needes see a sea of all
miserie before vs, that is to wit, that our senses are blynd, that wee
bee vtterly vnfurnished of all vertew, that wee bee giuen too all euill,
that wee bee hild downe vnder the thraldome of sin, and that nothing
in vs (no not euen of the excellentest thinges that wee thinke our
selues too haue) which is not lothsome before God. Therfore when
we once know these twoo things, that is too wit, when we haue once
conceyued a terrour of Gods maiestie, and bee drowned in despayre
at the syght of our selues, then let vs afterward go seeke al the meanes



that can bee, and let vs call the Angels too help, and they will come
neuer the neerer vs for all that. Let vs take the Hee sayntes and
Shee sayntes, aud by what tytle can they belong too vs? Nay rather
wee bee separated from them. And agein, will God who is the fountayne
of all purenesse receyue vs, vs (I say) which are so wretched creatures?
Thinke we that he will intermeddle himself with our filth and
vnclennesse? No: but contrariwyse he must needes abhorre vs. So
then, it is not without cause that Saint Paule hauing spoken heere expresly
of Gods Loue, to the intent wee myght know that he dooth iustly
hate vs, so long as he beholdeth vs in our owne naturall state: addeth
immediatly, that the same loue is grounded vpon the bludshed of
our Lord Iesus Christ, too the end that all our spottes should bee
scoured away thereby, and wee bee so clenzed, as wee myght
not bring anye thing hensfoorth before God, which myght displease
him
               And by that meanes are wee discharged and quit of all our dettes,
bycause he hath yeelded perfect obedience. Lo how our stubbornnesse
is doone away, and shall neuer come too account, bycause he offered
himself in sacrifice for vs. Lo how wee be set free from all thraldome,
bycause he hath ouercome both the diuell and death, and sinne, too our
benefite. Lo how wee at this day inioy his victory, and make our tryumphe
of it. And so wee see briefly, how God hath loued vs in Iesus
Christ. Agein, when we know this, we must vnderstand also, that we
must not make long fetches any more, ne trubble our selues in vayne,
in stying vpward by our fond speculations, or in going downeward
by our fantasticall imaginations, and in the meane whyle let Iesus
Christ alone, as though he were too farre of from vs. For he commeth
neere vs, yea he dwelleth in vs, he will haue vs knit 
                     •
                  ntoo him, so as
wee should bee his body, and lyuely members of his owne substance.
Sith it is so, let vs learne to hold our selues in such wise vntoo him, as
nothing may turne vs from him. And although we may be tempted
by our owne fancies, too shrinke away from him: yit let vs cut of all
such occasion, and get the vpper hand by fayth. And when wee haue
so doone, let vs vnderstand, that God will still shewe himselfe a louing,
and kindharted father towardes vs, and that Iesus Christ also will doo
the dewtie of a shepherd towardes vs, if wee herken too his voyce, and
rest wholly vppon him, not doubting but that he will preserue vs, so as
wee shallbee safe vnder his protection, as he himself protesteth, saying,



that he will receyue all that are giuen him of God his father,Iohn. 7. d. 37. and so
keepe them when he hath receyued them, as none of them shall perish,
but he will rayze him vp agein, at the last day.
               Now let vs cast our selues downe before the maiestie of our good
God, with acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him too make vs
perceiue them more and more, that our miseries may driue vs to seeke
the good things that he offereth vs, euen with trew singlenesse of fayth,
and that we may not wander here & there, in our owne fond speculations
and gazes, but abyde so settled vppon his word, as it may bee our
only leaning stocke, and take such roote in our hartes, as it may not only
make vs too walke in all purenesse before him, and too 
                     •
                  eeke his
mercie in the person of his only sonne, but also make vs to liue vprightly,
and indifferently one with another, and that we may so profit therin,
as wee may abhorre al the abuses of the world, assuring our selues that
seeing wee haue Iesus Christ for our guyde, wee cannot fayle to come
thither, as he is ascended alredy in our behalf, that is too wit, too the euerlasting
heritage which he hath purchased for vs, according as it is
his will, that wee beeing made his fellowheires, should in the end come
too the same perfection wherintoo he is gone afore vs. That it may
please him too graunt this grace, not onely too vs, but also to all people. &c.
            
            
               The .xxi. Sermon, which is the sixth
vppon the third Chapter, and the first
vppon the fourth.
               
                  
                     20. Novv vntoo him that is able too doo most abundantly aboue
all things that wee aske or thinke, according too the power
that vvorketh in vs,
                     21. Bee prayse in the Church through Iesus Christ throughout all
generations for euer more. Amen.
                  
                  
                     The fourth Chapter.
                     1. I therefore vvhich am a prisoner in our Lord, vvarne you too



vvalkeas becommeth you in the calling vvhervvith yee be
called.
                  
               
               2. VVith all lovvelinesse and meekenesse, vvith pacience. &c.
               
                  WHen God hath doone vs neuer so much
good, although wee feele our selues beholden
vntoo him, and bound too yeelde him
his dew praise: yit can wee not discharge
our selues of our dewtie with a free hart,
except wee hope that he will holde on still
hereafter, and shewe himselfe the same too
the ende, which wee haue knowen him too
bee heretoofore. Now, without fayth we
cannot hope, and so is it vnpossible that
God should haue his dew praise at mens handes. Put the cace wee
had found Gods helpe at our neede, and whatsoeuer wee could wishe:
and in the meane whyle wee thinke it was but a sodein brayd which is
vanished away out of hand, and that hensfoorth wee may looke for no
more at his hand, and that it shalbee in vayne for vs too requyre it: it is
certeyne, that wee would come no more at him, bycause wee should bee
pinched and pressed with heauinesse and griefe. Therefore, that wee
may holde out in praysing Gods name, wee must cupple these twoo
things toogither: that is too wit, that on the one syde wee bethinke vs
of the good that wee haue receyued of him, and that on the other syde
wee hope still that he will alwayes bee stedfast and constant in his purpose
vntoo the end, and neuer ceasse to doo vs good. And that is the order
which S. Paule keepeth heere, saying, Prayse and glory be yeelded
vntoo God. And how? vntoo him (sayeth he) vvhich is able too
doo all things, beyond our asking, yea and beyond our thinking
too. Now it is certein, that heere Saint Paule had an eye backe too
that which wee haue seene before, which is, that God did then vtter the
infinite riches of his goodnesse, when he voutsafed too haue the Gospell
(which is the message of saluation) published throughout the
world. Neuerthelesse, he quickeneth vp the faythful, to discharge themselues
cheerefully, by telling them that they must not mistrust that
God will withdrawe his hand, as though his shewing of himselfe liberall
towardes them, had bin but for once and away. His meaning
then is, that God will go through with his woorke, and therefore that



wee may giue our selues too the praysing of his name without any stop,
as well in respect of the good that wee haue receyued already, as vppon
beleefe that he will holde on without euer fayling vs. That is the
effect of the matter which wee haue too gather vppon this streyne.
               Now his saying is, Let glory bee yeelded to God in the Church:
wherby he sheweth, that it is not ynough that euery of vs doo priuately
acknowledge the benefites that God hath bestowed vppon him: but
that wee must also ioyne toogither in that mynd. For if the body bee
well at ease, surely no member will bee so addicted too it selfe, but that
it will haue regard of all the rest. Now then, when as God hath made
his Church too prosper, so as the number thereof is multiplyed, and it
is also increaced in spirituall giftes: not onely they that haue receyued
those benefites, must inforce themselues too praise God: but also
all the rest of the body, for so much as it becommeth vs too bee knit togither
with the holy bond, whereof S. Paule will speake heereafter.
That then is the cause why he speaketh purposely of the Church: as if
he should say, that seeyng God dooth so vtter his goodnesse, euery man
ought too bee inflamed too glorify him, bycause that looke whatsoeuer
he dooeth too our neyghbours, wee ought too take it as doone too our
selues. And verily he had an eye heere too that which myght hinder
the praysing of God with one trew consent. For the Iewes had alwayes
a certeine disdeyne ageinst the Gentiles, bycause they thought
it was meete that themselues should keepe stil the birthryght, and that
they had wrong, if any of those were made equall with them, which
had bin vtterly shaken of afore. And likewyse the Gentyles perceyuing
the Iewes too bee giuen too foolish bragging of the lawe, which
had taken an end, myght haue despyzed them on the other syde. Saint
Paule therefore telleth them here, that inasmuch as God had called
them as brethren too the heritaunce of saluation, it became them too
agree in such wise in the praysing of him, as his prayse myght sound
euerywhere.
               And he sayeth, Let prayze bee yelded too God, yea euen for euermore,
from world too world, and by Iesus Christ. Forsomuch as
Saint Paule hath treated hertoofore of the grace that serued to guyde
the faythfull too the kingdome of heauen: therfore dooth he of good
ryght say, that men must not only prayse God for once and away, but
also that there is cause too continewe the same, not the lyfe of one man
but throughout all ages. Yea and moreouer S. Paule ment to doo



vs too vnderstand, that the Churche should bee preserued for
                     •
                   euer, and
that there should alwayes remayne some seede of it in the world, so as
the record of sauation should neuer bee frutelesse, but there should bee
some people still too bee gathered toogither, which should bee a looking
glasse, wherin too behold the inestimable mercie which our God
sheweth vs in our Lord Iesus Christ. So then, wee see Saynt Pauls
meaning, wherby wee ought too bee assured, that although Satan
practyze all that is possible, too wype away the remembering of God,
and too make hauocke in the Church, as the grace of our Lord Iesus
Christ may bee as good as defaced: yit will God ouercome all by his
power, so as the Church shall continew still, and the death and passion
of our Lord Iesus Christ shall bee auaylable, notwithstanding the crueltie
of Tyrantes, and the practyzes of houshold enemyes, and of such
as would ouerthrowe the whole buylding. And that also is the cause
why Saynt Paule setteth vs downe the name of Iesus Christ. It is
trew, that wee cannot yeeld God thankes but by that meane: for it is
certeyne that wee should not bee meete too receyue one drop of good,
but by the meane of our Lord Iesus Christ,Coloss. 
                        •
                     . c. 21. bycause wee bee enemyes
too God by nature. Insomuch that although he bee freeharted euen
too the vnbeleeuers: yit shall the same turne too their greater condemnation,
so that they bee dubble accursed, in beeing partakers of Gods
blissynges:Titus. 1. c. 15. for too hym that is vncleane, all thyngs are vncleane, as
sayth Saint Paule in an other place. And therefore wee can neuer
giue God thankes but in the name of Iesus Christ, by whom wee rereyue
all good things. Howbeit, Saint Paules meanyng was too
doo vs too vnderstand in this Text, that Gods once shewing of hym
selfe too bee a father too all men in the person of his onely sonne, by ordeinyng
hym too make the attonement, was too last for euer, and too
continue world without end, insomuch that wee must assure our selues
(as I sayd afore) that God will mainteyne his truth in this world, and
by that meanes haue alwayes some flocke gathered vnto him, among
whom his name shalbee called vppon.
               But let vs come now too the second part. He sheweth that it is not
ynough for vs too haue knowne Gods goodnesse by experience for the
tyme past: vnlesse we be strengthened in such hope by it, as we doubt
not but that God will shewe himself mercifull toowards vs euer after.
And that is the cause why he sayeth, Too him that is able too doo al
things exceeding abundantly, aboue our asking or thinking. Now



wee see heere how S. Paule warneth vs, that if God haue vsed great
mercifulnesse towards vs heeretoofore, wee must not doubt of his continuing
of the same, bycause he is not lyke mortal men, which be fickle
mynded: nother must wee bee afrayd that his fountayne will drye,
when he shal haue bestowed great benefits vppon vs already. Why
so? for he hath such store of them, that the more wee take to our contentation,
the greater abundaunce hath he still. Wee see then the meane
too dispoze our selues too acknowledge the good that God hath done
vs, at leastwyse too honour him for them, is too bee alwayes fully resolued
and perswaded that wee shall euer fynd him a father, bycause he
hath promised so too bee.
               And wheras he speaketh of Gods power or myght: wee must not
imagin it too bee an ydle power, as the worldlings doo. They will
graunt well ynough that God is almyghtie: but yit in the meane whyle
they trust neuer the more in him. Too their seeming he takes his rest
in heauen, or else he dispozeth not things in this world, but (at starts)
when he bethinks himself of them. But contrariwyse, when God
speaks vntoo vs of his power, it is, too the end wee should make it our
sheeld ageinst al the distresses, hinderances, and lets, which the diuell
casteth before our eyes, too make vs distrust Gods promises. Lyke
as when it is sayd, that Abraham beleued that God is almightie: it
was not generally and confuzedly, but with an applying of Gods infinite
power too the thing that had bin promised him: which was, that
in his seede all the nations of the earth should bee blissed. Abraham
looking vppon himself, sawe he was a man as fast decaying as myght
bee: He drooped, and (as yee would say) dragged his wings after him:
too bee short, he was hard at deathes doore: His wyfe had bin barrein
all hir lyfe long: she was past the age of teeming anie more, insomuch
that the thing which was told him by Gods own mouth, seemed vtterly
vnpossible. And why is it that Abraham dooth neuerthelesse beleeue
assuredly,Rom. 4. a. 3. that God will keepe promis with him? It is, bycause
he had an eye too his infinite power, which is able too ouercome all
lets and hinderances. Wee see then how Abraham applyed Gods
power too his owne behoof, assuring himself, that Gods truthe and his
power are things inseparable.
                     
                        •
                     . Tim. 1. c. 
                        •
                     2. After that maner also dooth S. Paule
say, that he whom he hath put in trust with his gage, is myghtie. For
he sawe himself too bee a poore and frayle creature, he sawe how hee
was hunted at all hands, (he sawe) that he was shaken of and despyzed,



(he sawe) how the doctrine that he bare abrode, was hated and abhorred,
he sawe how his lyfe hung as by a threede, and he had such a number
of trubbles, as were able too ouerwhelm him, yea and finally too
confound him and dispatch him quyte. And how ouercame he all this, &
abode inuincible, yea & euen tryumphed ouer them, being in prison, &
seing himself at deathes doore? How could he haue such victory ageinst
so manie temptations and incounters? It was by knowing that God
was the keper of his soule, whervpon he conceyued his infinite power,
which is able too performe all that he appoynteth. Yee see then, that
Saint Paule imagined not a power in the aire, but knew that God
wrought so in him, as he should neuer fall but vppon his feete (as men
say.) And why? For he had promis of it. Wherfore let vs learne to
put this lesson as well in vre, as it is common in the scripture. The
repeting therof so oft is not for nought. For wee see the frowardnesse
that is in our selues, insomuch that although God haue promised too
keepe vs, yit if neuer so little a blast of wynd come vppon vs, wee bee
dismayed by and by. And howso? Surely if wee yeelded God the honour
that hee deserueth, and acknowledge him too bee almightie (in
deede:) we should boldly defye all that seemeth too bee ageinst vs. And
why? For if God bee on our syde, who shalbee ageinst vs, sayeth
Saint Paule?Rom. 8. c. 30. And wee see also how Dauid defyeth, both all his
enemyes, and also death, saying: though I should walk in the shadowe
of death, & within the graue:Psal. 2
                        •
                     . a. 4. yit should I be safe, bycause God is my
shepherd, and hathe his sheephooke too guide mee withal. And in another
place he saith agein.Psal. 3. a. 7. Though I were beset round about with a million
of enemyes, yit should I not shrink. And why? for God is
with mee. Were wee then as well perswaded of Gods almyghtinesse,
as wee confesse it with our mouth: surely wee should not bee so
soone dismayd, nother should our fayth bee shaken at euery brunt. So
then let vs conclude, that inasmuch as wee bee so weake, and euery
thing of nothing, will scare vs out of our wits: there is nothing but
hipocrisie in vs, and our confessing that God is almightie, commeth
not from our hart. So much the more therfore behoueth it vs too put
this lesson in vre, and too exercyze it nyght and day, that wee may taste
it throughly. And that is the cause why it is so often mentioned vntoo
vs, for wee take it not too bee a matter of so greate importance.
But when our Lord dooth so often tell vs, that he hath al things in his
hand, that he disposeth of his creatures (as he listeth himself), and that



nothing is able too let his determination, nor the performance of the
things that hee hath promised: it is too the end that wee should yeeld
vntoo his promises, that which they behyght vs: that is too say, whensoeuer
wee shall seeme too bee at the poynt of vndooing, and the diuell
shall giue vs so whole skirmishes, as we shall see no way too escape,
nor any end of our distresses: let vs think thus with our selues, who is
he that hath spoken it? Who is he that hath promised too bee our defender?
Is it not he that is almyghtie? Could not he with one blast
blowe away all that the diuell practizeth? Though all the world were
ageinst vs, what could it doo, so our Lord voutsafed too maynteyne
our part? After that maner must wee aduaunce Gods power aboue
the whole world, that wee may rest vppon his promises. For (as I
haue sayd alredye) Gods woord, and the power of bringing too passe
the things conteyned therin, are things vnseparable. And wee blaspheme
God, as oft as wee bee in dout and perplexitie, whether he bee
able too performe his defending of vs or no. For sith he hath promised
it: out of all doubt he wyll perfourme it, or else should his power
bee shortened, which is impossible. And so yee see why Saint Paule
hath spoken heere of Gods power. And that also is the cause why the
prophets, in speaking of the succour which God hath alwayes in redinesse,
too reskew the faythfull withall from death, when they bee
plundged in it,E
                        •
                     ay. 45. 
                        •
                     . 18. haue commonly sayd, Is it not the God which hath
made both heauen and earth? This should seeme too bee farre fet. For
the cace is, that I am in some trubble, and haue none other refuge, but
onely Gods pitying of mee, whereof I seeke too bee assured: and he
telleth mee, I haue created heauen and earth. He seemeth too send
mee very farre, and too make mee leape out of Gods blissing intoo the
warme sunne. But Gods telling of vs that he created heauen and
earth, is too doo vs too vnderstand, that it belonges too him also too
rule his creatures, that he hath a care of vs as of his children, that
there is not any thing aboue or beneath, which is not subiect too him,
and that he turneth all things round about, & too and fro as he listeth.
Sayeth he so? Then must wee out of hand apply it too our benefyte,
so as wee doubt not but that his power hath such preheminence, as
he is well able too roote out whatsoeuer seemeth too bee ageinst vs.
And so yee see how yee must alwayes haue the sayde cheyne to tye
Gods promyses, & the truth of the brynging of them to passe togither.
               And S. Paule sayeth, that he can doo all things aboue our asking,



and our thinking. Not without cause hath he inclozed heere
all that belongeth too our saluation. For he that trusteth in God for
one thing, will not misse too enter into debating, whether he will adde
a second benefite, or a third. That therfore is the cause why S. Paule
will haue vs too looke for all things at the hand of our God. And he
sayeth, Aboue our asking. Trew it is that wee must not fall asleepe,
when wee would bee succored and gouerned at Gods hand, or be filled
with his benefites: but if wee beleeue in his woord, we must also bee
moued too pray: for it is a trew proof of our fayth, when wee resort so
vntoo our God.Psal. 55. d. 23. And for that cause is it sayd, that the faythfull must
discharge all their cares intoo his lappe. For it is the trew record of
it, when at all tymes of our neede, wee resort too him, who will haue vs
too seeke all our welfare in him alone. The faythfull therfore must be
diligent in praying,Coloss. 4. a. 2. according as S. Paule sayeth in another text,
wher he exhorteth vs too prayer and supplication, and setteth downe
this diligence also, too the intent wee should haue no slothfulnesse too
plucke vs backe. But albeeit wee giue ouer all our wittes too praying
vntoo God: yit notwithstanding, considering the necessities that
compell vs too resort vntoo him, God must bee fayne too outgo our requestes,
and too doo much more for vs than wee requyre. And for
proof therof, when any (of the faythfull) feeles his owne infirmities,
he will streyt wayes humble himself, and theruppon repayre vntoo
God, and that not for once only, but euery minute of an houre. And afterward
he will resort to him both for his body and his soule, and think
thus: Alas, yit want I such a thing, I must too him agein. Lo how
the faythfull doo throughly sift out the miseries and wantes wheruntoo
they bee subiect, therby too prouoke themselues too pray vntoo God.
But doo not wee think that the diuell hath a hundred thousand wyles
which wee perceyue not? And God must bee fayne too prouide for
them, or else what would become of vs? For although wee feele that
diuerse things doo pinch vs, yit are ther many other things that are vnknowen
and hidden from vs. So then it will alwayes bee found trew,
that God outgoeth all our prayers, and all our wishes. Mark that for
one poynt. Therfore let vs doo what wee can, and indeuer too resort
continewally vntoo God: and yit therwithall let vs bee fully perswaded,
that he must bee fayne too watch ouer vs, and too bee much more
sharp syghted than wee, in espying what wee haue neede of, and the
meanes also that are fit too compasse it to our behoof: all these things



must God bee fayne too looke too. And so must wee cast all our cares
vppon him,Psal. 55. d. 23. as I alledged afore out of the Psalme.
               And soothly his adding of aboue our abilitie too thinke, is too
shewe that although men bee inlyghtened by the Gospell, too distrust
themselues, too walke in feare, yea, and too bee abashed at the syght of
their owne wretchednesse: yit perceyue they not the hundreth part of
it, but must bee fayne too referre the residew vntoo God, and too looke
for more at his hand, than they can wishe. And herewithall S. Paul
sheweth vs, that wee cannot passe measure, in trusting vntoo God, and
in asking him the things that wee haue neede of. In deede wee must
not vse a foolish libertie, too pray too God too giue vs this, or that, as
our fleshly desyre prouoketh vs. For wee must referre our selues wholy
vntoo him: and specially we must in praying, fyght ageinst all our
owne lustes, that wee bee not too importunate in them. And in good
sooth, weee see what hath befalne too such as would needes haue God
too graunt all their demaundes too pleasure them withall. The children
of Israell were fed with flesh,Exod. 16. c. 13. & Num. 11. 
                        •
                     . 31. and were glutted with it, till they
were redye too burst: but whyle the meate was yit in their throtes,
Gods wrath and vengeance fell vppon them. It had bin much better
for them, that their request had bin denyed, than graunted. Therfore
when wee pray, wee must not take such libertie, as too say, that God
should bee subiect too our affections and desires, but wee must aske
him the things that he hath promised vs, assuring our selues that hee
will lyke well of our requestes. And (as I sayd afore) let vs not feare
that wee shall bee too excessiue, for wee see that he will doo yit more,
and so had he neede too doo. And let vs not bee afrayd too bee blamed
of any presumption or malapertnesse, in assuring our selues of his promises.
In deede if men warrant themselues more than Gods woord
will beare them out in, or beare themselues on hand that they shall obteyne
whatsoeuer they imagine in their owne brayne: all such hope
shall doubtlesse bee a s
                     •
                  ope. But if wee ground our selues vpon Gods
truth, which is sure and vndeceytfull: let vs hardily reache out the trust
farre and wyde which wee haue in him, and let vs not doubt but he will
performe it too the full, yea, and much more too, as S. Paule sheweth
vs heere. Yee see then, that the summe of the things which wee haue
too remember in this streyne, is, that wee must behold Gods benefites,
not onely those which wee haue had experience of, but also which are
seene through the whole world, that they may moue vs to praise Gods



name, and that there may bee such an agreeable melodie among all
the faythfull, as they may honour God for all the benefites which he
bestoweth generally vppon the whole body of his Church. And agein,
that wee must hope that he will go through with all that euer he hath
once begunne: and that inasmuch as wee haue already felt how mercifull
he is vntoo vs, so that he hath sought vs out when wee were strayed
away from him, and pulled vs out of the bottome of hell: wee must
not doubt but that he will hold on still, and increace the benefites more
and more which wee haue felt already in part: And furthermore that
in praying vntoo him, wee must haue an eye too the great number of
necessities, which moue and constreyne vs too come vntoo him, and
theruppon consider, that he will doo much more for vs, than wee can
wishe, and that wee bee so weake witted, and so vnskilfull, that we wote
not what is meete for vs: howbeeit that he remedyeth the same twoo
wayes, namely, by stirring vp vnutterable gronings in vs, as is sayde
more fully in the eyght too the Romanes:Rom. 
                        •
                     . c. 25. and on the other syde by supplying
such vnskilfulnesse, so as he taryeth not till wee craue his succour,
but preuenteth vs through his mercy, notwithstanding that wee
welter in our wretchednesse, and perceiue not the tenth part of the
things that wee want.
               Now heervppon Saint Paule exhorteth the faythfull, too vvalke
as becommeth their Calling, vvherin they bee called. This is not
only too the intent they should thanke God with their mouthes, as he
warned them too doo: but also too profit themselues by the spirituall
giftes which they receyue, and too put them too such vse as God may
bee glorifyed by them. For if wee should set foorth all Gods prayses,
and in the meane whyle men could perceyue no zeale of honoring
and seruing him in all our lyfe: it were but a feyning, and such a confession
were but an vnhalowing of Gods name, when our lyfe were
not answerable theruntoo. Not without cause therfore dooth Saint
Paule adde heere, that men should walke according too the calling
wheruntoo they bee called. And theruppon wee haue too marke, first
that forasmuch as wee bee slowe, and there is euer too much sloth and
coldnesse in vs: wee cannot deuyse a better way, nor which may touch
vs more too the quicke, too make vs go on forewarde in the obedience
of God, than too thinke vppon his infinite mercie which he hath shewed
towardes vs.Rom. 1
                        •
                     . a. 1. According wheruntoo, Saint Paule in the twelfth
too the Romanes, intending too win the faythfull too teachablenesse,



and too put their trust in God, setteth before them the mercie that they
had receyued at his hand. As if he should say, that whensoeuer wee
heare of the stone that ought too bee remoued, or thinke vppon the inestimable
goodnesse which God hath vsed towardes vs, in that he spared
not his only sonne, but gaue him for our saluation, voutsafing too
haue him offered vp in sacrifize, too put away the rememberance of
our offences and misdeedes: it ought too clyue our hartes asunder.
Therfore in this text he setteth Gods calling of vs before our eyes.
Truth it is that wee bee sufficiently bound aforehand by nature too
serue and honour God: for wee haue our lyfe of him, and we liue heere
at his cost: and wee see how all his creatures serue vs. That therefore
is bond great ynough whensoeuer the ruling of our lyfe according
too Gods will, commeth in question. But seeing he thinkes it
not ynough too haue set vs in the world, and too giue vs sustenance for
our bodyes, but also taketh vs too bee his owne children, too bring vs
vp in his Church, which is his house, and vpon his adopting of vs behyghteth
vs the inheritance of heauen, and too assure vs of it, hath giuen
vs the pledge that I spake of, that is too wit, our Lord Iesus
Christ: seeing wee knowe that God hath so manie wayes vttered the
infinite loue that he bare vs: ought it not too inflame bs too runne vntoo
him, too the end that by renouncing our selues more and more, wee
may▪ indeuer too giue our selues so vntoo him, as he may quietly haue
the vse of our whole lyfe, and wee mynd none other thing than the exalting
of his name? Yee see then wherat Saint Paul looked, when he
sayth, that he warneth the Ephesians too walke agreeable too the vocation
wherein God had set them. So then, wee haue too gather vppon
this text, that to correct the slothfulnesse that is in vs, and specially
to subdew the stubbornnesse that hindereth our pleasing of God in all
poyntes, (for it is certeyn, that all our thoughtes, and all the disposition
of our nature are inclyned vnto euill, & doo both draw vs back and
driue vs farre of from the obedience which wee ought too yeeld vntoo
our maker:) (I say) too correct all this throughly, and too come vntoo
God, we must learne to lift vp onr senses too the infinite grace that
God hath, shewed vs, in making vs parttakers of the spirituall goods
of our Lord Iesus Christ, by voutsafing too hane vs too bee members
of his bodie, and too adopt vs too bee his children and heires.
               Furthermore let vs consider the end whereat he amed, too the intent
God complayne not of vs, as he doth of the Israelites by his Prophet



Esay,Esay. 5. a. 4. bycause of the vnthankfulnesse which they had shewed towardes
him. He sayeth, that he had taken them as his Uyneyard,
or as a costly heritage. And he telleth them, that for all his manuring
of them, they had brought him foorth nothing but wyld Grapes
and bitter frute. Let vs beware (say I) that God haue not iust cause
too blame vs now adayes, as well as he did them. For if the people of
Israell receyued excellent giftes: much more are wee bound vntoo
God now adayes since the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. For
loke what he gaue too the Fathers of olde tyme in figures and shadowes:
that haue wee at these dayes in truth and substance, wee bee
in the ful tyme wherin it was Gods will too powre out al his benefites
vppon vs too the full. Sith it is so, wee shalbee the lesse excusable,
if wee bee vnthankefull, and acknowledge not the good that God
hath doone vs. That is the thyng which wee haue too beare in
mynde.
               And moreouer,1. Pet. 2. b. 
                        •
                     . let vs consider that (as sayeth Saint Peter) our
Lord hath drawen vs out, and reskewed vs from the tyrannye of death,
and called vs too his kingdome of lyght, too the intent that wee should
blaze abrode his vertewes, and bestowe our whole lyfe in magnifying
him too the vttermost: according too this present text, where it is
sayd, that wee must walke according too the vocation that God hath
called vs vntoo. Now this importeth a gathering and drawing of vs
out by our selues, as though God ment too make a new world of vs.
And in verye deede the thing whertoo the death and passion of our
Lord Iesus Christ tendeth, is, that we should bee sholed out from the
vnclenenesse of the world. Seeing then that wee bee as it were sorted
out by our selues, and God hath dedicated vs too himself, intending
too haue vs for his inheritance: let vs learne not too disappoynt him of
his purpose. And if wee bee the children of lyght, (as he sayth in another
place:Ephe. 5. b. 8.) let vs walke no more in darknesse, as the vnbeleeuers
doo, but let vs make the grace effectuall which wee haue receyued.
That is it in effect which we haue to remember concerning the woord
Uocation or Calling. Too bee short, we shalbee much more blame-woorthie
than the sis
                     •
                  ie ignorant and blynd soules, if we indeuer not too
hold our selues as it were locked vp vnder Gods hand, and vnder his
guyding. Truth it is, that at this day there is no corner of the world,
but it is so corrupted, as is horrible too see: insomuch that euen they
that haue had no tast at all of the Gospell, but haue bin nuzzeled and



imbrewed continually with superstition, shal not fayle to be iustly condemned
at Gods hand. And as for vs, it is certeyne, that wee shall
haue a much harder account too make, for that God inlyghtneth
vs with his woord, and wheras other folkes stray and wander in destruction,
he sheweth vs the way of saluation, calling and alluring vs
daylye vntoo him. Seeing then that wee haue such a priuiledge: wee
ought too bethinke our selues well, that wee quench not the lyght, by
thrusting it vnderfoote, and so put away the speciall grace that was
graunted vs, and which God voutsafed too direct vntoo vs, too the end
wee should bee the more prouoked too serue him.
               But by the way wee must marke well how S. Paule sayeth, that
this must bee doone with all submission and lowelinesse, with pacience
and meeknesse. Hereby he ment too expresse that it is not
ynough for euery man too imploye himself too the dooing of his dewtie:
but that we must also reach out our hands eche one too his neyghbour
and brother, so as God may bee serued with one common consent
among vs. Let vs marke well therfore (forasmuch as the residue
cannot bee dispatched at this tyme) that S. Paul speakes not
heere too euery man seuerally, but that he comprehendeth al the whole
bodie and companie of the Churche. As if he should say, my frends,
it is not ynough for euery of vs too withdrawe himself and too abstein
from all euill, and too shewe himself well mynded and zealous too liue
in the feare of God, and in all vprightnesse: but wee must also haue a
mutuall care one of another, and bee fully resolued that it is no seruing
of God, if we indeuer not by all the meanes wee can, that others
may doo the lyke. And so wee see heere how it is the rule of all the
faithful (first) that euery man looke too himself, and though all the
world bee mad in doing euill, yit notwithstanding that he which is
taught in Gods schoole, doo hold himself in awe and vnder subiection,
and consider whertoo he is called: and therwithall that if there bee
many of vs, and God haue shed out his grace so as he hath gotten himself
a Churche, wee must to the vttermost of our power, seeke to ioyne
with them whom God calleth, as well as vs, so that he which goeth
formest, reache his hand too him that is next him, and say, let vs goe
altogither, and one of vs incorage another, that he which goes faintly
and hath infirmities in him, bee taryed for by those that go swifter,
and bee borne vp also if neede be
                     •
                  , so as wee may all bee drawen vntoo
God. And this must not onely bee doone in euery towne and village,



but also wee must looke yit further of, and consider that they whom
we knowe not are neuerthelater of the body of our Lord Iesus Christ,
and therfore wee must serue them for looking glasses and examples,
and confirme them so much the more too leade a godly conuersation,
by shewing them the way that they may followe vs. And let vs also
profite our selues, so as if wee see any other men more vertuous, zealous,
and constant than wee bee, euery of vs may bee ashamed of it,
and saye thus too our selues: How now? Is it meete that thou
shouldest lag behynd, when other folkes marche on so fast afore, and
runne so cheerefully toowards God? Yee see then that the thing in
effect which wee haue too beare away heere, is that inasmuch as
God hath not called vs eft one man alone, and eft another, as though
he ment too sette vs a sunder, but directeth his voyce too all, and will
haue it serue for a holy bond vntoo all: wee also must aunswer him,
not onely with our mouth, but also with our whole lyfe, and there
must be trew vnitie among vs, and we must indeuer to bring to passe,
that God may bee purely worshipped euery where, and consider that
sith wee bee called all too one inheritaunce, there ought too be a ryght
brotherhood among vs, and that sith wee call vppon God as our father,
it becommeth vs as his children too bee ioyned too our head, that
is to wit, to our Lord Iesus Christ. And when wee bee so ioyned vntoo
him, it is certayn that wee shal not bee cut of from those whom he
will haue too bee of his body, nother shall the hand despyze the foote,
nor the foote holde scorne of the hand: but forasmuch as wee knowe
that our lyfe resteth onely in Iesus Christ, wee shal indeuer as much
as wee can too vphold one another, and pray too God too strengthen
vs ageinst all Satans assaults, & ageinst all that he can practize to set
vs at ods, that wee may mainteyne the battell, and with inuincible
constancie followe still the way which God hath shewed vs, vntill wee
attayne too the heritage which he hath promised vs, and purchaced so
deerly by our Lord Iesus Christ.
               Now let vs cast our selues downe before the Maiestie of our good
God, with acknoweledgement of our sinnes, praying him to drawe vs
too trew repentaunce, so as wee may bee vtterly cast downe in our
selues, too bee set vp agein too serue him, and that not for one day, but
so as wee may hold out too the end, that as his grace neuer fadeth, so
wee on our side may neuer ceasse too serue him, but according as he increaseth
his gifts in vs, so wee also may bee more and more inflamed to



come nerer too him, and too bee throughly knit vntoo him. And so let
vs all say, Almighty God heauenly father. &c.
            
            
               The .xxii. Sermon, which is the second
vppon the fourth Chapter.
               
                  
                     1. I therfore which am a prisoner in our Lord, vvarne you too
vvalke as becommeth you, in the calling vvhertoo you bee
called,
                     2. VVith all lovvelinesse and meekenesse, vvith pacience, bearing
one vvith another in charitie,
                     3. Being diligent too keepe the vnitie of the spirit through the
bond of peace.
                     4. Be yee one body and one spirit, euen as ye be called in hope of
your calling.
                     5. There is (but) one Lord, one Fayth, one Baptim.
                  
               
               
                  WEe haue seene this morning howe Gods
children ought too bee linked toogither, so
as euery man may helpe his fellowe, and
harten and strengthen him, and all of vs indeuer
with one accord too serue God. Now
for performance hereof, wee haue neede to
correct the vyces that are in vs. For on
the one side wee see how men are well neere
all inclyned too loftinesse, selfsoothing, and
selfweening, whereof by and by breedeth
scornefulnesse. For he that couets too aduaunce himself, must needes
abace his fellowes, too make himself their superiour. Then is it impossible
that there should bee agreement among vs, vntill wee haue
rid our selues of this pryde and ouerweening, wheruntoo wee bee too
much giuen. But if wee bee once knit toogither: then will wee also
bee meeke. For what is the cause that wee bee so sterne towardes
our neyghbours, and that there is nothing but rigor and roughnesse
with vs, but for that euery of vs coueteth too ouermayster other? That
then is the cause why there is no gentlenesse among vs. And therefore



S. Paule hath matched meekenesse with lowelinesse: for lowelinesse
is the moother of meekenesse. Last of all, he setteth downe pacience
or sufferance, in bearing long with mens infirmities and vyces. For
if wee will needes serche out by parcell meale whatsoeuer wee shall
see to be amisse in euery man: surely we shall haue occasion to reiect
both great and small: for there is not that man which is not blemished
with some euill. But haue wee once abated the pryde that I spake
of, and thereuppon conformed our selues too meekenesse, and gentlenesse,
so as wee can fynd in our hartes too bee warned and too beare
with others: and none of vs is so hindred by his infirmities, but that
he can abyde too make account of other men as of his brethren: then
shall the Church by that meane abyde alwayes in good plyght.
               Now hereuppon S. Paule addeth, that if wee intend too keepe the
vnitie of spirit, wee must liue toogither in peace. For wee know, that
when any fyre of strife is kindled, euery man would haue his enemyes
drowned in the bottom of hell. So soone then as wee giue the brydle
too our affections, so as wee fall too spyting of this man or that man,
and there groweth any hartburning or grudge ageinst vs: then followeth
parttaking in the Church, too the breache of all concord. Therfore
if wee desyre too bee at one (as wee 
                     •
                  eedes must, if wee will be
Gods children) let vs take good heede that Satan set no oddes or variance
among vs, and let vs bee quiet, and indeuer too preuent trubbles
where wee see any likelyhood of them. And so yee see, what we
ought too obserue, if wee mynde too helpe our neyghbours, and
too bryng too passe that God may bee honored among vs with one
accord.
               And heere wee haue too mark first of all, how Saint Paule in speaking
of Lowelinesse, meekenesse, and pacience, warneth vs, that if we
be not ware, and euery man brydle himself, the diuell shall alwayes
haue easie accesse and entrance intoo vs, too trubble vs. And why?
For as I sayd, euery of vs shall fynd the disease of ambition rooted in
him, so as there is none of vs but he would fayne beare some coūtenāce
of superioritie, at leastwyse till God haue layed his hand vppon him,
and by his holie spirit beaten downe al pryde in him, and made him

                     •
                  leane. But take mee all those that followe their owne naturall sway, &
surely they are euer so hygh mynded, as thy wil not be contēted, except
they bee exalted and much made of Saint Paule therfore thought
good too warne vs hereof, too the end we should learne too mis
                     ••
                  ke of



that vyce, and indeuer too rid our selues of it, which thing wil not bee
doone very easly, for it is a hard battell. But howsoeuer the world go,
wee must not giue ouer, till wee haue gotten so much aduauntage of
our selues, as too knowe that there is nothing in vs why we should be
esteemed, but rather that he which thinketh himself too bee excellentest
of all, ought (by that tyme that he hath sifted and examined himselfe
throughly,) too bee ashamed and abashed at his owne wretchednesse.
And for proof therof, when we haue throughly vewed al that wee
weene our selues too haue, wherwith too win vs any fauour, dignitie
or reputation among men: certaynly wee shall fynd that euery whit
of it is the free gift of God. Now then, so much the more neede haue
wee too humble our selues, seing that God byndeth vs so vntoo him.
What hast thou (sayth S. Paul) too boast of aboue other men,1. Cor. 4. b. 7. and to
chalendge as thine own? It is certain that God hath giuē it thee, therfore
honour him for it, which thing thou canst not doo, so long as thou
art puffed vp with pryde. So then, considering that al the vertues for
which wee myght bee praysed, are all records of Gods goodnesse, and
that he hath shewed himself a louing father towards vs, in that it hath
pleased him to haue vs come neere him after that fashion: it ought too
make vs cast downe our eyes, and too walk in all meeldnesse. And
if wee compare our vertues with our vyces, surely wee shall fynd
much more wherwith too beate downe our hornes, than wherfore too
set them vp. For when a man hath cast his cards throughly: he shall
perceyue that although he haue some good zele too serue God, yit dooth
he but llmp and halt still in that behalf, and that he hath no vertue in
him, which is not blemished with some spot, so as there is alwaies one
thing or other in him, too put him in mynd that he ought not too bee
proud. Agein, his vyces are euer mo in nūber a great way, thā his vertues.
What shall wee then doo, but be ashamed of our selues? For we
doo after a sort defyle the holie things, when wee mingle our owne
deformities in that wyse with the gifts of Gods spirit. And therfore
he that dooth moste excell, hath cause too bee the more lowely, for that
he is so much the more bound vnto God. Yee see then that they which
are esteemed as peerlesse perles, and exalted as little woorse than Angels,
ought alwayes too brydle themselues short, knowing that there
is not so little a blemish in them, which ought not too bee taken for
greeuouser in them, than in such as haue not receyued so great gifts,
ne be so excellent. Besy
                     •
                  s this, there are also vyces in vs euen of our



selues (as I sayd afore): and if there bee any good in vs, God hath
giuen it vs of his owne mere and freebestowed mercie. And therfore
it is not for vs too presume, but wee must impute all euill to our selues.
Hee then that maketh such comparison, will sone beate downe his ouerweening
wherwith he was puffed vp or deceyued.
               Now if the excellētest sort of al, haue not wherof to vaunt thēselues:
what shall the meaner sort doo, and such as are dispyzed too the worldward,
and haue nothing too set themselues out withall? They fyght ageinst
nature, if they will needes vaunt themselues. Too bee short, a
man shall alwayes fynd this auncient prouerb trew, that he which
knoweth himself best, will esteeme himself least. But wee must passe
yit further: which is, that we must vnderstand how we be not any thing
of our selues, nor can doo aught that is any thing woorth, and that the
good which God hath put intoo vs, ought too serue too teach vs meeknesse.
When wee once know that well, then shall wee bee throughly
humbled, say I. And the trew Lowlynesse or humilitie is not too
make a fayre face, or too pretend a myld countenance, as many doo,
who will speake gently and louingly, and looke rufully, and yit for all
that, ceasse not too bee as full of pryd, as toades within. Too be short,
humility importeth such a meekenesse, as pulleth vs downe in our selues,
and suffereth vs not too aduaunce our selues for any degree of honour,
nor too seeke estimation aboue our neyghbours. Now I haue
told you, that wee shall neuer bee meeke, nor neuer haue any gentlenesse
and myldnesse in vs, vntill wee bee brought lowe. For pryde doth
euer hold scorne of all the world. And wee see also, that such as are
ouerweening, and stand in their owne conceyt, beleeuing themselues
too bee well woorthy, and too deserue too bee exalted aboue the common
aray, doo therewithall become very straunge, insomuch that men
dare scarce looke vppon them: they thrust away one, and driue away
another a great way of. Therefore wee must haue learned too humble
our selues, too the end wee imbrace such as are our trew brothers,
specially sith wee knowe that wee haue neede too bee borne with at
their handes. For behold, it is sayd of our Lord Iesus Christ, that he
dooth easely let vs come vntoo him,Math. 4. a. 1. bycause he himself was tempted,
and made lyke vntoo vs, and that he beareth with our weakenesse and
infirmities, bycause he hath had experience of them in himself. Now
it is certeyn, that our Lord had not any vyce in him, for he is the welspring
of all goodnesse. Yit notwithstanding, too the intent that wee



on our syde should not sticke too resort too him familiarly, and too the
end wee should bee heard of God his father for his sake, it is sayd, that
he had compassion on vs,Hebr. 4. d. 15. bycause he had felt what man and mans infirmities
are, howbeit, without any spot of sinne, as I sayde afore.
Now then, how shall wee doo, if wee haue this foolishe beliefe, that
wee bee throughly perfit? Seeing that pryde is so rooted in our nature,
how shall wee pitie such as wee see in myserie, if wee consider not
first, that wee bee no better woorth than they? So then, let vs marke
well, that too bee kyndharted, gentle, and freendly, all pryde must first
bee beaten downe in vs.
               Furthermore let vs marke also, that kinde heartednesse is the mother
of pacience, and the continuall bringer foorth of that frute: and
that if wee bee too sterne, it is a signe that there is crueltie in vs, and
that wee be as wild beasts. And therby also we be conuicted of pryde
and ouerweening, & that we haue not well learned the Lesson that S.
Paule copyeth vs out heere. In deede wee ought too bee greeued at
the faults of our neighbours, & wee must not feede them by our flattery,
as the common fashion of the world is. But yit must our zeale
bee so measured, as we must beare with a great sort (for we our selues
also haue neede too bee borne withall) and not bee hastier with other
folkes, then we would that they should bee with vs, but alwayes kepe
this naturall vprightnesse, of not dooing that thing to our neighbour,
which wee would not haue doone too our selues, which is the summe
of the Lawe and the Prophets as our Lord Iesus Christ sayeth. Yee
see then how our zeale ought too bee mingled with kynd hartednesse:Math. 7. 
                        •
                     . 12.
for if it bee sauced altoogither with vineger, what will come of it?
There wilbee no taste or sauour in it. Therfore it must haue some
oyle put vntoo it. And so there must bee some temperature in all corrections
too sweeten them withal, that they bee not ouer rigorous.
Too bee short, S. Paule ment too shewe vs heere, that although we
ought not too bolster out any euill, but rather too be moued with Godly
zeale to condemne such as deserue it: yit notwithstanding we must
not reiect the weakelings, as though they were vtter reprobates or
castawayes, but labour too winne them too our God, according as
wee haue seene already, that that way ought too bee obserned. For
there are two euill extremities: but looke whatsoeuer God hath ordeyned
by his holy spirite, that will alwayes bee found too bee for euery
mans welfare.
               
                  The one of these euill customes, is, that a man cannot be wel taken
with the world, except he flatter. Who so intendeth to mainteyne
himself, must play the blinkard and shut his eyes, when he sees
a number of things in his freends woorthy of blame. And yit in the
meane while is not such silence a secret betraying? For we see,
that they whom wee pretend to loue, are in the high way to destruction,
and wholly hardened in their naughtinesse: and yit notwithstanding,
wheras we ought to waken them, or else too set a looking glasse
before them, that they might behold their leaudenesse, and be ashamed
of it, wee winke at it. In steade of so dooing, euery of vs dooth
cokes other, and cloketh the things that ought too bee sharpely rebuked:
insomuch that those flatteries are no better but playsters too
ease the sore, and in the meane whyle to feede the roote of it within.
               The other euill extremitie, is when wee bee so rigorous, that euery
little fault is ynough too make vs too storme. Sith it is so, wee
shall neuer haue the spirit of meekenesse aforesayd, if wee bee not guided
and gouerned by Gods spirit (as I sayd afore.) And heerby a
man may see and iudge, that there is a certeyne pryde lurking within
vs, wherethrough we take to much vpon our selues. To be short, there
is neuer any ouer great rigour without crueltie, nor crueltie without
pryde. Whosoeuer dispyzeth his neighbors, setteth to much by himself:
& he that cā beare with nothing, but is so terribly sterne, that al sinnes
are (in his opinion) vnpardonable: sheweth also that there is no manhood
or humanitie in him. So much the more therfore doth it stand
vs on hand, to beare in mynd that which S. Paule sheweth vs heere,
which is, too forgiue and forbeare. Not that we should allowe mens
vices (as I sayd afore) nor that they should haue leaue too doo euill
without rebuking, but that wee should paciently rebuke mens faults
and bee sory for them, and in so dooing of our dewtie, not forget also
to beare with the frayltie and weakenesse of our neighbours, so as we
shame them not, ne stryke them intoo such 
                     •
                  eauinesse, that they fall into
dispayre, when they see there is no forbearing, nor any forgiuing at
our hands. That then is the thing that wee ought to beare in mind.
And it is the very cause why S. Paule addeth, that men should beare
one with another in charitie or loue. As if he sh
                     •
                  uld say, that forasmuch
as we bee brothers toogither, there should neede none other rule
than that, too make vs as well kind hearted, as also pacient and lowely.
And for proof therof he sayeth in the thirteenth of the first Epistle



to the Corinthians,1. Cor. 13. b. 4. that Charitie hath these three things: First, that it
is gentle and kind hearted: Secondly, that it moueth vs too be lowely
and meeke, and thirdly, that it is pacient, and suffreth al things. Those
are three qualities which Paule attributeth vntoo louingnesse. For
if wee demaund what is the rule of holy life:Coloss. 3. c. 14. the Scripture telleth vs,
that loue is the full performaunce therof,1. Tim. 1. a. 5. bycause it is the bond of perfection,
and the end and fulfilling of the Lawe. Lo how these Texts
doo teach vs Charitie. Agein, our Lord also intending too conclude
the doctrine of the Law,Math. 22. d. 39. setteth downe these twoo poynts: Namely
that wee should loue him with all our hart, with all our mynd, and with
all our power and strength: and our neyghbours as our selues. Then
if wee thinke too bee allowed of God, and charitie reigne not in vs,
wee deceyue our selues. The world may like well of vs, but all our
whole lyfe shall bee vtterly lothsome before God, vntill Charitie bee
setled in our hartes, so as shee gouerne vs, and wee tend alwayes vntoo
hir, yea and woorke all our woorkes by hir. Now then, seeing that
loue is the trew perfection of the faithfull, and of all Gods children: let
vs see what it importeth. For if a man brag that he hath it, and in the
meane whyle haue nother lowlinesse, nor gentlenesse, nor pacience: he
maketh the holy Ghost a lyer, who not without cause sheweth, what is
betokened by Charitie or loue. For he hath not set downe the bare
woord, and only sayd, be yee charitable: but he hath also shewed vs
what is ment by it. Namely first of all, that wee must beate downe
this pride which beguyleth vs, and maketh vs dosse with our hornes
ageinst God, insomuch that it were right hard for vs too bee lowely
mynded towardes men, when wee cannot hold our selues meekely in
obedience vnder God. Now then, let vs fyght in such wyse, as all
pryde may bee corrected in vs: and therwithall inforce our selues alwayes
too humilitie, that wee may bee kynd harted and fellowlyke
with the faythfull: which cannot bee doone but by bearing one with
another. The very heathen men had the skill too say, that if wee had
the wit and discretion too see the vyces that are in our selues, we should
bee pacient toward others. For why? I haue neede too bee borne
withall my selfe, and if I doo not the lyke too other folkes, how partially
doo I deale? This consideration alone ought too tame vs sufficiently,
though there were nother Lawe nor Gospell. Wherefore in asmuch
as wee knowe that charitie importeth these three things: let vs
learne too bee pacient, not onely when any wrong is doone vs, but also



when wee see our neyghbours too bee weake and feeble, and not yit
come too such perfection as were requisite. And though they bee not
so well foreward and settled in Gods woord (as wee would wishe,) yit
let vs pitie them, and with all meekenesse indeuer too vse such correction
towards them, as nother their vyces may bee nurrished, nor the
parties themselues bee cast in despayre. Thus yee see what wee haue
to mark vppon that streyne.
               Now heervppon Saint Paule inferreth further, that (as I haue
touched heertoofore) wee must keepe the vnitie of the spirit, or the bond
of peace. For he setteth heere the vnitie of spirit, as a marke that is
requisyte in the Church and flocke of God: insomuch that if wee bee
at oddes among our selues, wee bee at oddes with God. And therewithall
he sheweth vs the thing that wee haue seene breefly before:
which is, that if wee bee not at one among our selues, God disclaymeth
vs, and telleth vs wee belong not vntoo him. This vnitie therfore
is a thing that ought too bee much set by now adayes, seeing it
is the meane in respect whereof wee bee acknowledged for Gods children.
Trew it is that the wicked and the vnbeleeuers haue their confederacies,
and are so linked one too another, as there is not a streyter
allyance too bee found in the world. For euen their euill dooings
doo bynd them one too another, as though they were fast sowed toogither,
bycause they perceyue themselues too bee hampered, insomuch
that he which hath conspyred in some mischeef with another naughtipacke,
will bee afrayd of him, and that feare is as a bond that cannot
bee broken. Howbeeit Saint Paule presupposeth heere, that the
faythfull are at one in God, as he will declare anon. For this cause
he sheweth them how the same vnitie may bee kept. It is (sayeth he)
the bond of peace. For when a fyre is once kindled, it is not so soone
quencht ageine. Wee imagin that when wee cast our selues intoo a
chafe, wee can come too our selues agein by and by, and all shall bee
whist and still out of hand agein. No: for the diuell dooth so set in his
foote, that the stryfe and contention turneth too a deadly sting, so as
men are inuenimed with it more and more, and although they shewe it
not outwardly, ne cast vp their rage and froth: yit notwithstanding
some hartbyting and hartburning will lurke still within, when there
hath bin anie debate. And therfore (as I sayd) let vs not thinke that
when anie trubble is stirred vp, it wilbee pacifyed so soone as wee
would haue it. In consideration wherof Saint Paule telleth vs,



that the Church shall perishe euery turning of a hand, through that
fyre, if wee continue not in quiet, and shun all stryfe and debate.
               And now he sheweth what maner of attonement or vnion it is that
he hath spoken of, saying, that there is (but) one God, and one fayth,
and one Baptime: that there is (but) one hope vvheruntoo vvee
bee called: and that there is (but) one God and father of our Lord
Iesus Christ, vvho is aboue vs all, and in vs all. It was very requisite
that this should bee added, too shewe that peace shall neuer bee
good nor allowed of God, but rather accursed, vnlesse it haue a good
groundwoorke. For what a peace were it, if wee would now adayes
linke in with the Papistes? Wee should bee fayne too forsake the
pure doctrine of the Gospell, and too bend our selues ageinst God, and
too defyle our selues with all manner of filthinesse and abhomination.
But it were better that the whole world were sunke; and we with it,
than too seeke such peace. As much should wee bee fayne too doo in
respect of the Turkes: for there is none of them both but he seeketh too
wrappe vs in destruction, and too plucke vs away from God. Now
if there bee such attonement among vs, as wee will needes inioy all
that our fleshly lust craueth: what confuzion will there bee? Uerely
oftentymes Gods seruantes are accuzed of conspiracie, and of spytefull
malice and stubbornnesse, bycause they cannot fynd in their hartes
too consent too anie wickednesse: insomuch that they which are in any
authoritie and credit, would vsurp any manner of tyrannie too hinder
the preaching of Gods woord, as it ought too bee, and deuyze
what they list of their owne brayne, so that albeeit there bee preaching
still, yit shall it not bee free according too Gods woord. If Gods
seruantes bee driuen too this: needes must we be trubbled by Satan
& his champions: and we shalbe both blamed and diffamed euerywhere.
For such folke will alwayes doo their office, in turning good
intoo euill by their false reportes and flaunders. Howsoeuer the world
go, no peace is commendable, but such as doo
                     •
                  h so ioyne vs toogither,
as God reigneth ouer vs, and wee become all one in him: for without
that, it shalbee but cursednesse. And so yee see why Saint Paule
calleth vs backe heere too God, and too our Lord Iesus Christ, and
vntoo fayth of the Gospell and to Baptim, too shewe how we ought to
agree among our selues.
               Now then, wee haue heere twoo poyntes too beare in mynd. The
one is, that in seeking attonement with men, wee must alwayes haue



our eye vppon God, and when wee bee come too it, wee must bee setled
in it more and more. That is a thing which wee must euer haue a
care of. Now in generall it is trew, that peace is too bee desyred,
and that the verye name of it is had in estimation among men. But
yit for all that, wee must not so shroud our selues vnder the shadow of
peace, as too separate our selues from God, that in the end wee make
warre ageinst him, and he proclayme vs too bee his enemyes. And
for that cause it is sayd, that wee must bee at continuall battell with
the wicked. For in asmuch as they serue Satan, they wil not ceasse to
fyght ageinst God and our saluation. And therfore wee must not bee
cold and negligent in that behalf, but zelous in setting our selues ageinst
them: insomuch that although they bee in honour and credit,
yit let vs abhorre them, as it is sayd in the Psalme: let them be vntoo
vs as stinking and lothsome thinges, and full of filth and vncleannesse.
Though they boast neuer somuch of their greatnesse, yit let vs assure
our selues, it were much better that they were drowned with all their
brauerie in the bottom of hell, than that they should so exalt themselues
ageinst God. Yee see then that we must esteeme the greatest men of
the world, no better than Woormes, when they dare so bend their
hornes ageinst God: and consequently that wee can haue no peace
with them, seeing wee should bee fayne too forsake God for their pleasure.
But (as I sayd afore) it were better that the world were turned
vpsyde downe, than it should bee so. Now then if wee knit toogither
in God, let vs followe the rule that is giuen vs heere: that is
too wit, too bee so abaced in our selues, as the world may perceyue
by our myldnesse, that there is no more loftinesse in vs too set vs at
oddes. And lyke as kyndhartednesse bringeth pacience, so also let
vs condemne mens vyces, and yit labour alwayes to drawe the parties
vntoo God, and too win them vntoo him, rather than too set them
of through sharpnesse.
               But now let vs come too the woords that are couched heere by S.
Paule. Hee sayeth, that we be one bodie and one spirit, as we bee
called too one hope of our calling. First and formest he sheweth
vs, vppon what condition we bee called of God: that is too wit, that
there should bee such a knot among vs, as myght shewe that wee bee
in very deede the bodie of our Lord Iesus Christ. For it is not ynough
for vs to be cast vp togither lyke a heape of stones: but wee must bee
knit toogither with a hartie good will. And lyke as it is sayd, that



there was but one hart and one mynd among the faythfull (in the primitiue
Church:Actes. 4. 
                        •
                     . 32.) so must the same appere among vs too at this day.
Saint Paule then in telling vs that wee be one spirit, and one bodie,
meaneth that wee bee made as it were all one man in Iesus Christ.
For Iesus Christ can well fynd in his hart too communicate his name
too all the companie of the faythfull, and that is too the ende too drawe
vs the more too the sayd affection of liuing toogither in concord and
brotherly loue, euen with such attonement as wee may bee brethren,
that is to say, so knit toogither, as the fingers of a hand: for without
that, wee can neuer shewe that wee bee desyrous too atteyne too the
kingdome of heauen. That therfore is the thing which he ment by the
twoo woords Bodie and Spirit.
               
               Trew it is, that when Gods spirit gouerneth vs, he reformeth our
affections in such wyse, that our mynds are knit toogither. But howsoeuer
the cace stand, Saint Paul ment too declare, that all the whole
bodie of the faythfull is but as one man. For it is not for any man to
put foorth himself there, but wee must bee linked all toogither, euery
man in his office or calling. Too be short, we must be but all as one,
as shalbe declared anone more at length. Forasmuch then as there
is none other too gouerne vs, but Iesus Christ: wee must needs bee
made all as one man in him. And soothly wee knowe that the thing
which was sayd of Adam and Eue, and of all maryed folks and their
wyues, must also bee accomplished in the Church: which is, that the
Churche is bone of our Lord Iesus Christs bone, and flesh of his flesh,
and soo there is a mariage betwixt them. Now if we bee so knit all togither
to the sonne of God: it is reason also that we should agree amōg
our selues, & that one vnion should extend through al the whole bodie:
for it is vnpossible that our Lord Iesus Christ should reigne ouer vs,
& yit notwithstanding that wee should bee diuyded among our selues,
seing that he is but one. Let that therfore serue for the first poynt.
               Now Saint Paule too stirre vs vp the better heruntoo, telleth vs,
that wee bee called vntoo an inheritance. In saying so, he sheweth
that there is a much holyer attonement betweene vs, than there is betweene
the (naturall) brothers of this world. For although they bee
borne of one father and one moother, so as they bee but one blud: Yit
notwithstanding, eueryman shifts for himself anon after, and the inheritance
is parted among them, so as the brethren seeme too be separated
asunder, and the naturall bond that was among them before, too be



half broken. But wee haue an inheritance that cannot be broken. A
man cannot say, I haue that which belongeth too mee, I will get mee
away, and I will dwell alone by my self. For what is our inheritance?
It is God himselfe. And moreouer the heauenly lyfe, which is purchaced
for vs by our Lord Iesus Christ, and wherintoo he himselfe
is gone afore vs, too gather vs thither too him. Seeing then that
wee bee all called too one selfsame inheritance, if any of vs shrink asyde
from his brethren, it is all one as if he gaue ouer his part in
the Kingdome of heauen. But wee woulde abhorre such a blasphemie.
If a man should demaund of anie of vs whether he woulde
renounce his part of paradyce, it would make the heares too stand vp
vppon his head, I meane euen of them that haue no feare of God at al.
No dout but there are some so wicked and monstrous beasts, that they
will flush out this blasphemie out of their mouth, that they renounce
theyr saluation. But if yee ask it of a man that is well aduyzed: hee
will alwayes abhorre and detest it. Yit notwithstanding, in verye
deede wee go about too shet our selues out of the gate, and too barre
our selues from comming in the kingdome of God, and wee wype
awaye the hope of it that is giuen vs by the Gospell, when wee bee not
knit toogither among our selues. Were this througly printed in our
harts: surely there would bee another maner of freendship and brotherlinesse
among vs, than there is: and men should see other maner
of meekenesse, meeldnesse, and pacientnesse. Now though wee haue
hithertoo bin misaduyzed, yit is it much better too take warning late
than neuer. Wherfore let vs lerne by this doctrine of Saint Paules,
that whensoeuer we bee prouoked too displeasure, so as wee seeme too
haue some cause too reiect one, too leaue another, and too separate our
selues from him or hir: we must vnderstand, that we haue all one hope
of the kingdome of heauen, and that Iesus Christ who is our head, calleth
vs all vntoo him, with this condition set afore vs, without which
wee cannot come at him, which is, that wee must shew truely, and by
our deeds, that wee make account of all such as are partakers of the
Gospell with vs, as of our brethren, and as though they were our owne
flesh and blud, and also that we bee so ioyned toogither, as the fingers
of one hand, as I sayd afore.
               And heeruppon, S. Paule going foreward with the same doctrine,
sayth, there is but one Lord. It is certeyne that heerby he
meaneth one God, who hath soueraigne dominion ouer vs, and is our



maister too keepe vs in vnitie,1. Cor. 12. 
                        •
                     . 6. bycause he cannot abyde that we shoul
                     •
                  
bee at ods. In the Twelfth Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians,
S. Paule sayth, that there is but one God, too shewe the seruice
which wee owe vnto God, specially for graunting vs of his gifts
wherwith too edifie his Churche. But his attributing of souereyntie
vntoo God in this Text, is too do vs too wit, that we cannot serue
God, vnlesse wee bee at vnitie among our selues. And why? For
although a mortall man be variable, and chaunge his mynd from morning
too night: yit will he not haue any discord in his house: if there
be any broyle, or if there ryse any strife, he cannot away with it. And
what shall God doo,Rom. 15. g. 33. who is the God of peace (as he nameth himself in
the Scripture) seeing he wil haue vs too gather toogither vnder him,
and telleth vs,1. Cor. 14. f. 33. that he sitteth among vs, and that wee bee his house?
Thinke wee that wee can wynd him intoo our troubles, contentions,
skirmishings,Phil. 4. b. 9. hurliburlies, and heats with vs? Then should he bee
fayne too transfigure himself, and to chaunge his nature. But let vs
not imagine that he will deny himself (as S. Paule sayeth) but he shal
bee fayne too cut vs of as rotten members, and too shewe that wee belong
not vntoo him, when he seeth that wee come nothing neere him.
And therfore let vs resort too the sayd souereintie and dominion which
God hath ouer vs, too the intent too alay all strifes and variances that
Satan shal indeuer too rayze vp among vs. For if Seruants, although
they be discontēted with another, & haue hartburning, grudge,
or such other things among them selues, doo neuerthelesse brydle them
selues for loue of their mayster, and agree agein among them selues:
what shal we do, when as the cace concerneth the pleasing of our God?
So then S. Paule declareth in effect, that when wee bee so wayward
and can beare with nothing, but will fall out for euery small and light
occasion: it is a token, not onely that wee dispyze men, but also that
we rebell ageinst God, and are lothe to yeeld hym any subiection.
Thus yee see in effect what we haue too consider vpon that saying.
               Now he addeth, that there is (but) one faith, and (but) one Baptim,
and (but) one God, the father of our Lord Iesus Christ. His
saying that there is but one fayth, is too shew, that wee haue one common
treasure, euen in this world. For he hath spoken already of the
heritage which wee hope for, and which is warranted vs in heauen,
though it bee not manifested too vs as yit. Now what is the pledge
of the endlesse lyfe, but the Gospell? And that haue wee in common



toogither. Seeyng it is so: then if the faythfull should forsake one anothers
company, surely the Gospell should bee as good as torne in
peeces. For wee must alwayes wey well this woord One, which S.
Paule hath couched heere, and so often repeted, in saying, that there is
but one hope of our calling. And how? Hereby he sheweth that wee go
about too breake and disperse the kingdome of heauen, (as much as in
vs is) when wee liue not in concord. It is sayd, that there is but one
God: it is then as it were a heawing of the hope of our saluation in
peeces, when wee cannot suffer God too gouerne vs, and too holde vs
vnder his protection. So now, when he sayeth, that there is but one
fayth: surely it is not long of vs that the Gospell is not torne in peeces
and gobbets, and rent all to fitters, as they say, when we cannot agree
with our brethren, nor beare with them gently and paciently, as was
commannded heeretoofore. That then is the thing whereuntto God
calleth vs.
               Now wee ought too profit our selues by it dubble. The one way
is, by abhorring all diuersities of opinions, and by looking well to our
selues, that wee haue but one fayth in our hart, and but one confession
in our mouth. For if the faythfull doo contrarie one another, it is certeine
that they shewe sufficiently, that they haue not the Gospell on
their side: at least the one part must needes erre from the truth of God.
It is trew, that erewhyles it may well happen, that all of vs shall not
conceyue one selfsame thing: and in that cace S. Paule shewes vs a
remedie, which is, that he which is not sure that God hath reuealed
the truth vntoo him, should hold himselfe in quiet, and pray God too
leade him further. But yit in the meane whyle, it behoueth vs too bee
fully resolued of the Articles of our fayth, and too agree so toogither in
them, that if euery of vs bee demaunded seuerally, he may shew, that he
holdeth none other thing, than that which is the generall beliefe of the
Church. That then is the first poynt which wee haue too marke, in
S. Paules telling of vs that there is but one fayth. Howbeit, this
fayth is not one, bycause men haue found meanes in their brayne too
vnite themselues toogither (by it:) for God must bee fayne too bryng
them too it, bycause they cannot come thither, nor abyde in it one minute,
except God strengthen them in his truth. Then must there needs
bee an interchaungeable bond betweene fayth and the Gospell: that
lyke as the Gospell (wherof God is the author) is but one, so our fayth
also must bee but one. Also as touching the doctrine, it is not ynough



for vs too confesse God altoogither with one mouth: but it must also
teache vs too holde our selues so linked toogither all in one vnitie, as
euery of vs doo trauell too his neyghbours benefite, and consider wherin
wee may serue his turne, and apply our selues faythfully thervnto,
bearing with them that are weake, honoring them that haue receyued
more largely of Gods giftes than wee, and making none account of
our selues, that wee may atteyne too the hyghnesse wheruntoo God
calleth vs, which is, that wee may bee parttakers of his glory, when
wee haue so humbled our selues, and walked in this world with all
lowlinesse and modestie. Thus much concerning that it is sayd in this
text, that there is but one fayth.
               Herevppon S. Paul telleth vs also,
                     
                        •
                     ala. 3. d. 23. that there is but one Baptim.
By Baptim wee put on Iesus Christe, (as he sayeth in another
place) and bee ioyned vnto him, to be parttakers of his lyfe, and of all
his benefytes. Now there is but one only Baptim, wherin the name
of Iesus Christ is alwayes called vpon, as he is our Redeemer. Wee
bee Baptized in the name of the father, as the author of our saluation:
in the name of the sonne, as of him that hath performed all that belonged
too our Redemption: and in the name of the holy Ghost, by
whom wee bee sanctifyed, too possesse and inioy the incomprehensible
benefytes that are purchaced for vs by our Lord Iesus Christ. Seeing
then that God dooth so call vs too him by a visible signe: must it
not needes bee that wee bee too froward, lyke wyld and mad beastes,
if wee continew not in such vnitie as he commaundeth? And not
without cause hath Saint Paule matched Baptim and beleef of the
Gospell heere toogither. For he had respect of our rudenesse. Wee
bee so dull, that wee conceyue not spirituall things, vnlesse they bee set
downe agreeably too our nature. Saint Paule spake heertoofore of
hope too Godward: and now bycause we perceyue not the things that
are aboue the world, or doo not easly vnderstand the doctrine: he spake
lykewyse of the vnion of fayth, and of the vnion of the bodie and the
soule. Well (will some man say still) all this is spirituall, & passeth
mans vnderstanding. Yee see then, that the things which he hath spoken
heertoofore myght seeme somwhat darke, so as wee myght not
fynd such sauour in them as were requisyte. But Saint Paule bringeth
vs backe too the visible signe, wherby God giueth vs an incling
of himself, according too the infirmitie of our flesh. For in Baptim
wee see the water, which sheweth vs that wee bee washed in the blud



of Iesus Christ. For in asmuch as by 
                     〈◊〉
                   wee bee all vncleane,
and vtterly reiected and cursed of God: in the death and passion of our
Lord Iesus Christ, wee bee reconeiled vntoo God his father, and by
that meane are called too the glory of heauen, and renued by the power
of his holy Ghost. Yee see then that wee must needes bee too dull
and brutish, if wee perceyue not the thing that is so visible and opens
For it is all one as if God had set vs forth an image in shape of the
thing that is too hygh for vs, by reason of our frayltie. Too bee short
Saint Paules intent here is not too separate Baptim and the Gospell
asunder: but he hath rather added it as a visible mark, to the intent
that if wee at the first brunt vnderstand not the vnitie of fayth, wheruntoo
wee bee led by Baptim, he may doo vs too wit, that it is all one as
if God had printed the marke of adoption in our harte, too shewe that
wee bee his: for being once Baptyzed with water, wee doo all heare
Iesus Christ, according as it shewed vs by that visible signe. And
now that Baptin is ordeyned, shall euery man haue a Baptim of his
owne by himselfe: No: but Baptim is alwayes but me. And therfore
wee must haue an eye too our selues, and dedicate our selues too
the one only God, and too the one only Sa
                     •
                  iour Iesus Christ, and for
performance therof we must also be well vnited togither. And by these
woordes of S. Paules, wee may see playnly, that the father, the sonne,
and the holy Ghost, are but one God. For if Baptim bee in such wyse
one, as it serueth too bring vs too an vnitie of body and soule, that is to
say, to a brotherhood that passeth all the allyances of the world: what
shall it bee when wee come vntoo God, of whom Baptim taketh all
the power that it hath▪ And what is God? He is not only the father,
but Iesus Christ is ioyned with him, and also the holy Ghost,
So thē let vs mark, that there is truly 
                     〈◊〉
                   in the essence of God,
and that although there bee distinction of persons, yit is not God separated
nor deuyded in himself. And although the father bee named
simply God, (as Saint Paul will speake therof heerafter:) that is in
respect of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   and order, and for that be is the head of him
which was sent too bee the mediator, bycause Iesus Christ abaced
himself,Phil. 2. a. 6. and although he had 
                     〈◊〉
                   shape vntoo God (as sayeth Saint
Paule) and that it had hi
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   for him too haue shewed himself
in such souerein maiestye: yit it was his will 
                     〈…〉
                   himself,
yea and too emptie himself vtterly. But howsoeuer it bee, yit wee see
that Baptim leadeth vs ryght vntoo God. And therby wee see that



which wee haue touched heertoofore▪ which is, that if our peace and
concord bee not grounded in God, and we gouerned by him according
to his woord, and by the power of his holy spirit: there is nothing but
lothlynesse in vs. But if wee bee touched too the quicke with that
which is sayd vnto vs heere, that is to wit, that Iesus Christ hath linked
vs too him, with condition that wee also should linke one with another:
wee shall bee hild in such concord, as the diuell shall not bee able
too win so much at our handes, as too separate vs from the flocke, but
wee shall ouercome all temptations, and where there bee any vyces
and infirmities, wee shall beare with them myldly and paciently, and
continue in the holy vnion, whertoo wee be dayly exhorted by the Gospell,
and by the common Baptim which wee haue receyued.
               Now let vs cast our selues downe before the maiestie of our good
God, with acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him too make vs
so too perceyue them, as wee may mislyke more and more of them, and
runne backe vntoo him with trew repentance, too obteyne such grace
of him, as wee may withdrawe our selues from all defylementes: and
by that meane learne too be vnabashed or vndismayed for any assaults
of Satan, and bee able too ouercome them all, with all the hardnesse
that he can trump in out way, too turne vs out of the pathe of saluation.
That it may please him too graunt this grace, not onely too vs,
but also to all people and nations of the earth. &c.
            
            
               The .xxiii. Sermon, which is the third
vppon the fourth Chapter.
               
                  
                     6. There is one God and father of all, vvhich is aboue all things▪
and through all things, and in you all:
                     7. But grace is giuen too euery one of vs, according too the measure
of Christes gift.
                     8. For the vvhich thing he sayeth, When he went vp on high,
he led a multitude of prisoners into captiuitie, and gaue gi
                           •
                        ts
vntoo men.
                  
               
               
                  
                  WEe haue seene heeretoofore, that God forgat
not any meane that myght knit vs togither
in trew concord and brotherhood.
For he hath dedicated vs all too himselfe
by Baptim,Galat. 3. d. 27. wherein wee put on Christ.
Forasmuch as wee hee come toogither intoo
the Church, lyke as wee bee called vntoo
one selfsame lyfe too bee heires all togither
of the kingdome of heauen: so ought
we too know who is the Maister that hath
authoritie ouer vs. Too bee short, God is in such wyse our father, and
wee his children, as he will not haue vs too bee at discord: for otherwyse
it were but a setting of trubble in his owne house and Churche.
Seeyng wee bee members of our Lord Iesus Christ, it is meete that
wee should link toogither in trew vnitie, or else wee shall (as much as
in vs lyeth) teare his body in peeces. Yit notwithstanding too the intent
that this vnitie myght touche vs the better: S. Paule addeth now,
that God beyng the father of all the faythfull, sheadeth out his power
and grace vppon them, and is aboue all things, as it were too gather
them intoo one. Too bee short, he so dwelleth in them by his holy spirit,
that they must needes bee one body, vnlesse they will needes turne
away from him. Yee see then that the reason why God is our father,
is not onely that he hath once created vs, or that he hath begotten vs
agein by his Gospell: but bycause he hath shed out his grace vppon
vs, as I sayd, and agein, for that he is aboue all. Yee see then, that the
meane wherby God linketh vs one with another, is his casting of his
beames (as it were sunne beames) from heauen, so as wee must needes
come toogither intoo one, sith wee know whence the things come that
belong too our spirituall lyfe, namely, of Gods gift towardes vs. And
this is not too scatter vs a sunder, but rather too gather vs toogither
intoo one body. But the last wordes doo yit better lay open the mynd
of S. Paule, namely, that God is in vs. Then if euery of v
                     •
                   know that
God dooth him so much grace and honour,Hebr. 3. 6. b. as to take him for his house
too dwell in: there is no excuce for vs, if wee bee at variance and hatred,
and euery man would bee separated from other, and liue too himselfe,
too the vtter ouerthrow of all order which God hath set, if it were
possible.
               Besyds this, Saint Paule speaketh not heere of the grace that is



common too all men: but he treateth of the Churh, and sheweth that
wee ought too link toogither, bycause God hath adopted vs and taken
vs too bee of his houshold. It is trew that God hath declared sufficiently
that wee haue nother strength nor liuelinesse but a
                     •
                   his hand:
and for that cause dooth Saint Paule saye,Actes. 17. f. 28. that it is hee in whom
wee haue our lyfe, mouing, and being. But this is generall to all
things.Iohn. 1. a. 4.
               
               And in that respe
                     ••
                   also is it sayd in the first of Saint Iohn, that our
Lord Iesus hath bin the lyfe of men from the Creation of the world.
Howbeeit forasmuch as men haue a more excellent priuilege than the
bruce beasts: it is sayd, that he is their lyfe and all their lyght. But
heere the cace concerneth the spirituall state of the Church. For wheras
all Adams race is corrupted and accursed by nature: God hath sholed
vs out from it by vou
                     •
                  safing too chooze vs, too the end too shewe
that we be ioyned vnto him with a much streyter and holyer bond, thā
the rest of mortall men are, which haue but their first birth. And this
ioyning is spoken of in theIohn. 17. d. 21. .xvii. of Saint Iohn, where it is sayd, Holie
father, sanctify thou them, as I haue sanctifyed my self for them,
that they may become one in vs, as thou and I are but one. Our Lord
Iesus protesteth there, that he speak
                     •
                  th not of the world, nor of them
that are not of his retinew and heritage. He letteth those go too destruction:
but he will haue the bodie of his Churhe too bee truly knit
toogither. And how may that bee doone? In deede it appeereth not:
wee be so set asunder here, that the nerest of vs thinks but euery man
on himself. But if wee considered how God hath reformed vs by his
holie spirit, and giuen vs a special lyfe: which is, that his grace should
shew it self in vs, & that this holie spirit should vtter his power in vs: if
we cō
                  
                     •
                  idered that: then should we thinke, that although we wander here
& there in this world, and euery of vs be put asunder from his neyghbours,
according too the necessitie of this present lyfe: yit must not
that let vs to be so ioyned vnder our Lord Iesus Christ, as none of vs
bee wedded too his owne profit, nor none of vs so loue him self, as that
hee should despyze his brethren, but suffer our selues too bee gathered
toogither vnder the maystership of our God. And that forasmuch as
he dwelleth in vs, we also must shew by our dooings, that wee bee desyrous
too bee all one in the power of that grace, which he hath so spred
out euerywhere. Therfore wee see here how Saint Paule exhorteth
vs too help one another, to the attey
                     •
                  e
                     ••
                  ent of the perfect vnitie which



God hath begunne in vs alredie. And too bring that too passe, he
sheweth vs, that wee bee sholed out of the world, too the intent wee
should bee wholly dedicated too our God. Now I haue told you alredie,
that forasmuch as God is the Creator, he must bee fayne to breath
strength intoo all things bothe aboue and beneathe, according as it is
sayd in the Psalme,Psal. 104. d. 29. that when he withdraweth his spirit, all things
are trubbled, and finally turne intoo nothing. There is not then anie
brute beaste, nor anie tree on the earth, nor anie bird in the aire, nor
anie fish in the water, which hath not his being and continuance by
the secret power of God, bycause he hath not only giuen them their
being for once (at the first:) but also maynteyneth and vpholdeth them
still. As for vs, wee haue much more (as I sayd euen now:) for wee
not onely liue in this world, and inioy the benefits that God hath giuen
vs heere, insomuch that wee haue eyes too receyue lyght, and eares to
heare, and the fruition of all our senses: but also Gods spirit dwelleth
in vs, too gather vs vntoo him, and too doo vs too vnderstand, that he
hath not onely made vs mortall men, and that wee hold this present
transitorie lyfe of him:Apoc. 
                        •
                     
                     ▪ a. 4. but also printed his marke in vs, too take vs
and auow vs for his children, and thertoo gouerneth vs him self, and
is so gracious vntoo vs, as too make his owne ryghtuousenesse dwell
in vs, bycause there is nothing but corruption in our selues. Thus ye
see, that the thing which we haue too remember in the first place, is,
that forasmuch as God is come so neere vnto vs, and not only allureth
vs familiarly too him,Iohn. 14. c. 23. but also voutsafeth too haue his dwelling in vs,
insomuch that wee bee his temples (as I haue shewed afore) bycause
he dwelleth in vs by his holie Ghoste:1. Cor. 3. c. 16. wee ought to seperate our selues
from all the defylements of the world. Yit notwithstanding it is not
ynough for euery of vs too acknowledge the grace that he hath receyued:
but wee must also indeuer too gouerne our selues alwayes in such
vnitie & brotherly loue, as euery of vs may help his neyghbour, too go
through in the Calling that wee bee entered intoo. For wo woorth
him (as I sayd) which separateth himself, bycause he renounceth God
by that meane. Wherfore let vs learne too offer our selues in such wise
vntoo God, euery man for himselfe too bee gouerned of him, as wee
may also doo the best wee can too linke our selues in one, and too gather
toogither, that wee may with one common accord shewe by our
dooyngs, that wee bee the trew body of our Lord Iesus Christ, and
that hauing him too our head, we 
                     ••
                  e all at God, and aspyre vnto him,



desyring nothing but too bee one with him,Iohn. 7. d. 21. as I alledged euen now
out of the text of S. Iohn.
               Now too confirme the matter yit better, he sayeth, that euery of vs
hath receyued grace according too the measure of Christes gift, or
giuing. Wherin S. Paule sheweth vs, that God vseth a wonderfull
maner too drawe vs too him: which is, by dealing foorth his giftes in
such wise vntoo vs, as euery of vs hath neede too bee helped and succored
of his neyghbours. For of our selues wee bee so wedded too our
selues, as there is none of vs but he would be as alone, were it not that
necessitie constreyneth and byndeth vs too those whom wee haue neede
of. God therfore too correct the pryde and presumption that are too
deepely rooted in mankynd, hath so delt foorth his giftes by certeyne
measure, as euery man perceyueth well, that he is bound and beholden
too him for the things he hath receyued,Math. 25. c. 27. and that there is no such perfection
in himselfe that he can forbeare other men, but that wee must
bee fayne too communicate toogither, and that with such mutuall good
will, as euery of vs indeuer too make the things that God hath giuen
him, auaylable too the profit and furtherance of his brethren: and therwithall
bee contented too borrowe of other men, and too suffer himselfe
too bee helped and succored at their handes, according as hee sees himselfe
too haue neede thereof. And this serueth too bring vs backe agein,
too the thing that wee haue seene afore, namely, that wee shall
neuer haue agreement among vs, without humilitie and meekenesse.
Wee see then wherat S. Paule amed. He handleth the same matter
in the .xii. Chapter of the first Epistle too the Corinthians. For there
he taketh the similitude of a mans body,2. Co
                        •
                     . 12. b. 12. too shewe that wee bee too
farre out of our wittes, when euery of vs despyzeth his neyghbours
and is wedded too himselfe. How now, sayeth he? Our members or
limmes haue no particular vnderstanding by themselues: the hande
hath no wit too conceyue by reason what his office is: no more haue
the fingers that are fastened too it, no nor yit the legges, nor the feete.
Then is there not any part of the bodye that hath any priuate vnderstanding
too it selfe. But yit notwithstanding, the hand dooth willingly
acknowledge it selfe bound too serue all the rest of the body, so as it
neuer refuzeth too doo it. If there bee any ache, if there be any disease,
or if there bee any other neede, alwayes the hand is walking from to
syde too thother. Now vp, now downe, and is continually occupyed.
The feete also, without hauing any other vnderstanding, that onely



a secret selfmouing of nature, can skill too beare vp the rest of the body,
and are neuer looth too doo it or greeued at it. Lykewise the hand disdeyneth
not too borrowe helpe of the other members, as knowing full
well, that it is not able too mainteine it selfe alone. Lo what an interchaungable
companionship there is among the members of a body.
And now hath God so called vs too him, that he will haue vs too bec
                     •
                  me
all one in Iesus Christ, as hath bin sayd afore. Dooth it then followe,
that euery of vs should bee a whole body by himselfe? No: for
wee see on the contrarie part, how God hath so dealt vntoo euery man
his portion, and vntoo all in generall: that it is as a bond too hold vs
toogither in concord, too the intent wee should not bee puffed vp with
so fond ouerweening, as too say, I haue ynough of myne owne, I passe
for no body else. Gods will then is not, that euery man should bee a
whole and perfect body of himself: but that one should bee as a hand,
another as a finger, another as an arme, another as a leg, another as a
shoulder, and another as a foote. Too bee short, God hath so dispozed
his giftes among vs, as wee must needes perceyue, that if euery of vs
will draw alone by himselfe, he shall by and by bee as a rotten member,
bycause he can haue no firme continuance in the whole body, if he
will needes bee separated from the rest of the members. And what
will followe of it? It must needes perishe. Euen so is it with vs. That
therefore is S. Paules meaning, when he sayth, that Gods grace is
giuen too euery of vs.
               Then sheweth he first of all, that if wee haue any excellencie, it serueth
not too make vs proud,1. Cor. 4. b. 7. for wee bee beholden too God for it: wee
haue nothing of our owne, as wee haue seene alredie by his vsing of the
same reason, to the intent that no man should presume too much of himselfe,
but walke meekely and soberly, giuing all the glory vntoo God.
So then, he sayth agein, that whosoeuer is most excellent, hath no cause
too exalt himselfe aboue his neyghbours, for he hath nothing of his
owne, but must accknowledge that he hath all of God. And after what
maner? Euen by confessing that it is his freebestowed gift. Yee see
then, that for the first poynt, Saint Paule ment too rid men of the vyce
which they bee too much inclyned too, that euery man myght beware
of exalting himself. Trew it is, that there is none of vs al, but he coulde
fynd in his hart too bee a maister ouer other men: but S. Paule sayth
vnto them, yee wretches, what are yee? What is it that you can claime,
too say, I haue this or that of mine owne? for yee hold all thinges of



the mere free gift of your God. And therfore cast downe your heades
euery one of you, and consider there is none but only God, which ought
too haue all preheminence. As for you, yee must learne too stoope too
him, and too hold your selues contented euery man with his degree, so
as yee labour and indeuer too serue your neyghbours, and al the whole
commonaltie or body of the Church.
               Howbeeit Saint Paule addeth moreouer, that it is according
too the meazure of Christ, according vntoo that which I haue declared:
that is too wit, that we shal not fynd perfection in any man aliue,
but euery man hath neede too bee succored, and that not only in respect
of this common lyfe. Trew it is, that our Lord sheweth vs aforehand,
how it is his will too hold vs linked toogither, bycause wee would bee
too fleeting too separate our selues asunder. For euery of vs cannot
bee a Baker, euery of vs cannot bee a Husbandman, euery of vs cannot
bee a Cutler: insomuch that there is not that man which needeth
not the help of one that seemeth his inferiour, yea and a rascall in comparison
of himself, nother could we liue one day in this world, without
communicating toogither. Our Lord brydleth vs in this aforehand,
bycause he sees wee bee as it were harebrayned, and would hardly bee
kept in vnitie. But heere he treateth of the spirituall giftes, wherby
God sheweth that he is a father too vs, and holdeth vs as the housholdfolke
of his Church. Let the perfectest man that is, examin himself
and he shall fynd, that his receyuing of more than other men haue, is
in such wyse, that it is by meazure. Howsoeuer the cace stand, let
none of vs presume too haue all: for it must needes bee, that a man is
too much blynded with pryde, if he bee of that mynd. But when wee
haue our meazure, let vs consider the twoo poyntes which I haue
touched afore:Luke. 7. g. 43. namely, that he which hath receyued the larger meazure,
is the more streytly bound too imploy euery whit of it too the
common benefyte of the Church. And moreouer that he must helpe
himself by his neyghbours, and consider that he cannot forbeare them,
and therfore conforme himself quietly vntoo them, and seeke no more
but to be as a member of the body, that all of vs may hold on toogither
too our head, desyrous that Iesus Christ may haue such preheminence
ouer vs, as euery of vs may obey him, and he leade vs too God
his father. And so yee see what Saint Paule ment in speaking of
the sayd meazure.
               Now it standeth vs on hand too marke well how he sayeth, that it



is in Iesus Christ, bycause it is he in whom wee be linked toogither.
For (as hath bin shewed heertoofore) what is our spirituall kinred?
Although it spring of God, as of the fountayne of all goodnesse: yit
could it not flowe downe vntoo vs, except Iesus Christ were among
vs,Ephe. 
                        •
                     . b. 10. and that wee were gathered toogither by his meane. Accordingly
also as wee haue seene in the first Chapter, how it is his office too
gather all things toogither (both in heauen and earth,) that were scattered
asunder before. Then let vs marke, that for asmuch as God
hath not giuen men such perfection, that euery one of vs can lyue of
himself alone, wee must cling toogither in peace and concord: For it
is certeine that God could well haue made vs perfect out of hand, so
as nothing should haue wanted in vs: and that he is no nigard in inriching
vs with his goods, so farre foorth as he knoweth too bee for
our behoof. Seeing then that there is infirmitie in vs, why dooth not
God knit vs too him out of hand? Why holdeth he vs still in such
weaknesse? Why giueth he vs not an Angelicall power and perfection?
As I sayd afore, he will haue vs to learne too liue warely and
awefully, knowing that it standeth vs on hand to haue him go through
with the thing that he hath begun. And therwithall we must also liue
meekly & gently one with another, and not be so proud as to despyze other
men, and too draw aloofe from them, but rather consider that they
may helpe vs, and that there is not so bace a person in Gods Church,
which hath not receyued some thing wherwith he may bee able to doo
seruis too his neyghbours. That then is the thing that wee haue
seene alredye. Agein, if wee thinke that a poore sillie soule hath no
learning too teach vs, and that wee can receyue nothing at his hand:
let vs beware that wee doo not preiudice the grace of God. For it is
certeyn, that looke how many haue anie tast and feeling of the Gospel,
wee haue record, that God dwelleth in them by his holy spirite. For
fayth is the singular gift of God:Rom. 10. a. 3. and it is a sure token that God dwelleth
in euery man, where wee see any feeling and knowledge of the
Gospell. Also it is certein that euerye little drop of Gods grace is
woorthie too bee esteemed, so as there is no cause in this beehalfe
why pryde should hinder our linking toogither, or that wee should not
consider that all of vs are members of one bodie. Let that serue for
one poynt.
               And therwithall on the other syde,Luke. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . a. 2. let euery of vs looke well to himself,
for wee shal yeeld account of the benefyts that God hath bestowed



vppon vs, and the more a man hath receyued, the more blamed shall
he bee, if he indeuer not too discharge himself of his duetie in seruing
of his neyghbours, as I sayd afore. For the end of all Gods giftes
is alwayes too edifye one another, that Gods Temple may gr
                     •
                  we among
vs, and bee still rered too his full perfection. And so yee see
how wee ought too bestowe the spirituall giftes that wee haue receyued
at Gods hand. For the same cause also it is sayd, that such as
know the Gospell,Luke. 16. b. 8. ought too shewe by the conuersation of their whole
lyfe, that they bee the children of lyght, and not as blynd wretches that
wander in darknesse. Wherfore let vs learne to make Gods giftes
auaylable in such wyse, as he may bee glorifyed by them. And in
that respect is mention made expresly of meazure, too the intent wee
should not alledge for our excuce, that this man or that man gaue vs no
good example. For when it standeth vppon commendation, then euery
of vs beares hymfelf on hand, and would perswade all the world too
beleeue, that he is very excellent. And yit in the meane whyle wee
consider not, that God hath bound vs dubble, in voutsafing too shewe
so large bountifulnesse toowardes vs, as too set vs in hygher degree
than our neyghbours. Therfore let vs bethinke vs better of it, both
generally and particularly, than wee haue doone. Generally, for that
wee haue the Gospell freely preached heere among vs, and for that
wee ought vniuersally too bee as a burning Cresset, too shew the way
of saluation.Iohn. 5. 
                        •
                     . 35. And particularly, by discharging euery man his owne
duetie, that wee giue no cause of stumbling too our neyghbours, but
rather indeuer too drawe them too vs, which are aloofe from God
and his truth, and also take peyne too confirme and put foreward them
whom God hath set alredie in a good trade, and in the ryght way.
But alas: Men discharge themselues ill of that. For according as
any man hath the excellenter giftes, so will he needes ouermayster
all others, and bee woorshipped as an Idoll: and so in the meane
whyle the vnion is broken, in manner of all handes. And yit for all
that, (as I sayd afore) it is impossible that we should linke toogither
in brotherly concord, but by conforming our selues too such as are of
the Church, as too our owne members. Without that, it is impossible
for vs too bee truely linked in one, and yit yee shall see that euery
man couets too bee had in estimation. Agein, when it commeth too
the edifying of others, we doo cleane contrarie too that which Saint
Paule telleth vs heere. For in the fourteenth and fifteenth too the



Romans,Rom. 14. a. 1. & 15. a. 
                        •
                     . he sheweth that wee must deale, as if a strong man should see
another man weake: so little ought he too vtter his strength too the
broozing of his neyghbour, that he ought rather too beare him vp. As
who should say, that if I had a little child to lead, I should breake both
his armes and his legges in running hastily with him. And if another
man that is much stronger than I, would needes tyre mee, vnder colour
that hee is lustyer than I, by trying his abilitie and force ageinst
mee: is it meete that I should bee cast downe by him? Therfore wee
must (as I sayd) haue a care too fashyon our selues in such wyse too
our brethren, as the stronger sort doo not shoulder their neyghbours
that are feeble and weake, nor vexe them by laboring too ouercrop
thē by force:Ezech. 34▪ c. 21. ne doo as the Prophet Ezechiell vpbraydeth, namely that
such as abuse their corage & strength after that sort, are as Goats that
dosse with their hornes ageinst the sillie Lambes, which haue none other
intent, but too bee meeke. That is the thing which wee ought
too doo, and wherfrom wee bee farre of.
               Also it is certein that the Citie of Geneua ought generally too bee
as a burning Cresset, too giue lyght too such as are yit farre of from
the Gospell. But it appereth how the world goeth with vs: I report
mee too yisterdayes dealing: I must needs speake of it. For if I concealed
it in the pulpet, and in the meane whyle the Countrifolke can
make report of it in the stretes, yea & giue iudgment of it: were I not
much to blame? Seing then that the little children can sing of it, (as
they say) should I not be too rank a traytour to God & his people,Esay. 3
                        •
                     
                     ▪ c. 10. if I,
if I (I say) and my fellowes should play the dumb doggs? If a goldsmith
should make a Crosse or a Chalice, he should bee punished, as he
deserueth. If some other man doo make a thing that serueth too popish
superstition, it shal not bee abidden. If a marchantman sell beads, he
shall haue his punishment as he is worthie. But if a man sell Chesibles,
Awbes, & all other trinkets of the masse, that shalbe suffered and
borne with. Neuerthelesse this hath bin doone. And in whose name?
Euen of them which ought too brydle others, and too punish them that
had offended. And in what place? In the place which is dedicated
and consecrated too God for the executing of Iustis. Yit notwithstanding,
it will perchaunce bee sayd, that it was done through ouersyght:
and I beeleeue it. For had the partie bin well aduyzed, surely he would
haue kept himself from dooing so vnlawfull and vtterly vnexcusable a
deede. And therfore let vs beware, let vs (I say) beware, that we suffer



not our selues too bee blynded after that fashyon by Satan, and so
rocked aslepe, as wee consider not what is told vs here, namely that if
wee haue receyued anie grace or gift at Gods hand, wee must set more
store by it, and put it too such vse, as God may bee glorifyed, and his
Church furthered by it: or else wee shall haue a dreafull account too
make, for giuing cause so of offence too the weake. And it had bin
better that that filthie trash had bin consumed a hundred tymes with
fyre, than too haue bin so brought foorth in open place, in the syght of
all such as lye in wayt for vs a farre of. For of a truthe wee knowe
well ynough that there are manie which watch vs, and seeke nothing
but too spye some cause too speake euill of vs, not only too mocke vs
for our labour, for wee bee woorthie of that: but too blaspheme Gods
name. Therfore if a man haue ouershot himself once, it is good that
he should bee warned of it, that he may take better heede hereafter: and
that wee knowing that God hath bound vs so deeply vntoo him, by exalting
vs, and by dooing vs more honour than we deserue, in voutsafing
too haue vs too bee his people, and too make vs glorie of the hauing
of the pure doctrine of his Gospell, we may profit our selues the
better by it, and bee afrayd least if wee chaunge after that sort, and become
so rechelesse as too fall too taking of leaue too doo what wee list:
God shewe vs that he is able too take away the things that hee hath
giuen vs, and too dispossesse vs of them when he listeth.
               Now Saint Paule addeth heere the maner how God is so liberall
vntoo vs in Iesus Christ, and yit notwithstanding dealeth the gifts of
his holie spirit too eche man by certayne meazure, & not to euery man
alyke, but as he him self thinketh good. He sayeth, that this was done
by our Lord lesus Christs ascending vp intoo Heauen. For then
did hee obteyne souerein dominion,Phil. 2. b. 9. and the father gaue him a name
which is aboue all names, that all knees should how before him, as it
is sayd in another place. In deede our Lord Iesus Christ receyued al
fulnesse of grace at his comming intoo the world, accordingly as S.
Iohn sayeth in his first Chapter,Iohn. 1. b. 14. that al of vs receiue of him, to the end
wee may haue our fill of the good things wherof wee were hungrie
and emptie before.Iohn. 1. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     6. That was the cause then why the spirit was giuen
him without measure, as it is sayd in the same text. And the faythfull,
bycause they be members of the Church, haue receyued therof, and
God hath giuen too euery man his portion, and according too the mesure
of his only sonne. But as for him, God hath not giuen him his



spirit by measure. And why? For hee is the head, and euerye man
must take his lyuelines from thence, and he therwithal haue all power
ouer vs. Wherfore let vs bee contented that euery of vs hath his
portion, that wee may walk in feare before God: and therwithall let
vs vnderstand that the perfectnesse is in Iesus Christ,Esay. 6▪. a. 1. & Luke. 4. c. 18. & Math. 3. d. 16. bycause Gods
spirit resteth in him, and bothe greate and smal must bee fayne too repayre
too him, with acknowledgment of their pouertie, too obteyne
there the things that they want, and not be ashamed to receyue Christs
Almesse, as they that are destitute of all good things. Furthermore,
although our Lord Iesus Christ shewed himself too bee the only sonne
of God whyle he was conuersant in this world, & proued the same by
his wonders, miracles, and gifts: Yit notwithstanding, whē he ascended
intoo heauen, he shewed himself too bee the verye partie in deede
which had commission of God his father,Ephe. 4. b. 8. too deale vntoo vs all
things that we haue neede of. And that is the cause why it is sayd in
the seuenth of Saint Iohn, that the holie Ghoste was not yit giuen,Iohn. 7. f. 39.
bycause Iesus Christ was not yit glorified. It is very certeyn that our
Lord wrought euen then by the power of his holie spirit.Math. 16. c. 16. For when
Saint Peter confessed him too bee the sonne of the liuing God: it was
answered him, Flesh and blud hath not reueled this thing vntoo thee,
but my heauenly father. Too bee short, wee knowe well that there is
nothing but euill in vs, and that the good which God giueth vs, is by
his holie spirit, and that all things are committed too our Lord Iesus
Christ, and that it belongeth too him too deale foorth his doctrine vnto
vs, according as it is told vs, that it is his office, and that the father
hath giuen him speciall commission too deale his gifts vntoo vs. And
in deede it is a cause also why the Prophet Esay sayth, that Gods spirit
rested vppon him, namely too shewe that if wee bee separated from
him, wee must needs perish as it were through drought and emptinesse.
But howsoeuer the cace stand, wee must alwayes come backe
too his poynt, that the holie Ghost was then powred out vppon all the
faythfull, when our Lord Iesus Christ was exalted, as it is sayd in the
other text. So then let vs mark, that when our Lord Iesus Christ left
the world, and was receyued vp intoo his heauenly glorie: it was too
the end that wee should thenfforth inioy his goods so much the better.
And that is also the cause why he sayd too his disciples,Iohn. 16. a. 7. it is erpedient
for you that I go away, for if I taried still with you, the holie Ghost
should not come. It is trew that our Lord Iesus Christ could well



haue giuen them his spirit whyle he was conuersant with them after
a visible fashyon, as well as he did when he was gone out of the world.
But we must not dispute of this matter after our own fancie:Phil. 2. a. 
                        •
                     . we must
vnderstand that our Lord Iesus was humbled for a time, yea and vtterly
emptyed, as wee shall see more at length agein hereafter: but yit
was he receyued intoo his heauenly glory, too the intent he should haue
souerein dominion, and bee so exalted, as all creatures myght stoope
too him. Thus yee see how our Lord Iesus Christes will was to absent
himselfe from vs in his body, too the intent wee myght the better
feele his presence through his dwelling in vs by his holy spirit. And
that is the thing which S. Paule treateth of as now, when he sayeth,
that for the same cause, it is sayd, that he vvent vp, and gaue his
gifts too men, after he had led away his enemies prisoners.
               
               Now this text (which is alledged out of the threescore and eyght
Psalme) sheweth, that God is verily exalted in the person of our Lord
Iesus Christ. In deede in that song Dauid preacheth aud singeth the
praise of God, bycause that beyng stablished King of Israell, and bearing
the figure of our Lord Iesus Christ, he had set vp Gods seruice in
his purenesse agein, redressed the great number of disorders that had
bin vnder the reigne of Saule, and finally prospered in a great sort of
victories, insomuch that God had vttered such grace vppon him, as it
appeared plainly, that his kingdome was not the kingdome of a mortall
and transitorie man, b
                     •
                  t rather that God mynded too haue his glorie
knowen there. That is Dauids proper meaning. Therfore wheras
he sayeth, first of all, that God is gone vp, he followeth the common
manner of the speaking of the Scripture: for inasmuch as all things
had gone tootoo much too hauocke in the tyme of Saule: God seemed
too haue bin asleepe. Agein, Religion was as good as beaten down:
and there was such excessiue libertie of dooing euill, that a man would
haue sayd, that God gouerned not that people any more. Dauid then
sheweth a woonderfull chaunge, in that he sayth, that God is gone vp:
that is to say, that he shewed by effect that he had a care of his Church,
that he intented too keepe it vnder his protection, and ment too haue
his maiestie knowen there. That is one poynt. Hereuntoo he addeth,
thou hast led captiuitie captiue: meaning therby, that God had subdewed
his enemyes round about him, of whom there had bin a great
number, which sought nothing else but the ruine and desolation of the
people. Therfore Dauid meaneth that as soone as God went vp, by



and by he brake and bruzed the heads of his enemyes, so as they came
no more too trubble his people, as who should say, they had found by
experience, that all their practizes, force, and assaultes had booted
them nothing at all. Theruppon he addeth, that immediatly also he
receyued giftes of men: too betoken that they which had bin so ouercome,
had offered tribute vntoo God, as to their souerein King. Trew
it is, that this was doone in Dauids person. Neuerthelesse it was
Gods mynd too haue his glory shyne foorth in that man, whom he had
so chozen and sholed out, and whom it was his pleasure to haue anoynted
of Samuell.1 Sam. 15. c. 12. Too bee short, wee see what Dauid ment to declare
in that verse. S. Paule therefore applyeth the same too our Lord Iesus
Christ, and not without cause. For looke what was figured in the
person of Dauid, must bee referred too Iesus Christ, bycause he is the
truth and substance of all those shadowes, and wee haue in him a much
more royall performance of the thinges that are mentioned in that
Psalme. S. Paule therefore abused not that text, when he appropryed
it too the onely sonne of God, in saying, that he was exalted vp on high.
For (as he will declare hereafter) Iesus Christ was first abaced, and
afterward exalted. Yee see then, that God tooke as it were a new possession
of his Souereintie, not ouer all the world, but ouer his owne
people, too the end too gouerne them with their owne good wils. And
afterward he tooke possession of it ouer his enemies too. For in the
Psalme it is sayd,Psal. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪ f. 39. not onely that he receyued tribute and giftes, to the
end that euery man should doo him homage: but also that he subdewed
the rebells. For there are nother diuels nor reprobates, but they bee
so beaten downe by the myghtie hand of God, as wee may well perceyue
that our Lord Iesus Christ is he of whom Dauid was the figure.
So then, S. Paule telleth vs heere in effect, that although our
Lord Iesus Christ dwell not among vs after the manner of men, nor
wee doo see him with our bodily eyes: yit must wee not therefore bee
separated from him in mynd. He is gone vp too fyll all things, not
with his body, but with his benefites and giftes. For how great distance
so euer there bee betweene our Lord Iesus Christ and vs, as in
respect of the places of heauen and earth: yit notwithstanding he ceass
                     •
                  th
not too dwell in vs, but will haue vs also too bee all one with him,
which thing he sheweth vs by the giftes which he bestoweth vpon vs,
so as wee ought of duetie too bee drawen to the vnion that he hath spoken
of. This then is the effect of the things which wee haue to gather



vppon this streyne, for as nowe the matter must bee broken of, but it
shall bee gone through with agein hereafter.
               But howsoeuer the cace stand, let vs marke for a conclusion, that
Iesus Christ is not so farre from vs now adayes, but that we may perceyue
by experience, that wee bee knit vntoo him, and that he vttereth
his riches too make vs parttakers of them, and that he fylleth vs with
them as much as neede requyres, at leastwyse according too the measure
and portion that hath bin spoken of. And therefore let vs labour
too serue our neyghbours, let vs foresee what may doo them good, and
let vs followe the order that God hath set among vs, assuring our selues
that although our Lord Iesus is gone vp, yit is he not therfore so
farre of from vs, that he hath forsaken and giuen ouer his Church, but
that he is exalted, too the end wee should honour him by acknowledging
him for our head. And seeyng we bee members of his body, wee
must serue one another, and not bee so v
                     •
                  happie as too barre our
selues from comming too him, but rather resort euery one of vs too
him, and indeuer too drawe others with vs, so as the stronger sort discorage
not the feeble and weake, but rather stre
                     •
                  gthen them, and the
lustie sort beare the faynter sort, and they that are already in good forwardnesse,
lend their hand too such as come lagging after, and haue
much adoo too drawe their legges after them: so as wee may al come
too the perfection wherunto wee bee called.
               Now let vs cast our selues downe before the Maiestie of our good
God, with acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him that we may
bee so touched with them, as wee may yeelde our selues too him with
trew repentance, too our further profyting and strengthening all our
lyfe long, by acknowledging the miseries that are in vs: and that it
may please him so too beare with vs, that in the end hauyng obteyned
releasement of our sinnes, wee may bee prouoked too come vntoo him,
not doubting but he wyll alwayes acknowledge vs for his children,
too make vs inioy the heritage which he hath bought so deerely for vs.
And so let vs all say, Almighty God heauenly father. &c.
            
            
               
               The .xxiiii. Sermon, which is the fourth
vppon the fourth Chapter.
               
                  
                     7. But grace is giuen too euery of vs, according too the measure
of Christes gift.
                     8. For the vvhich thing he sayeth, vvhen he vvent vp on hygh
he led a multitude of prisoners intoo captiuitie, and gaue
giftes too men.
                     9. Novv, that he went vp, what meaneth it, but that he first went
downe intoo the lovve partes of the earth?
                     10. He that vvent dovvne, is the same that vvent vp aboue all
the heauens, too the end to fulfill all things.
                  
               
               
                  I Began this morning too expound the text
of the Psalme alledged heere by S. Paul,Psal. 68. d. 19.
shewing that all the things which are spoken
there, agree too the person of the onely
sonne of God. For although he say oftentymes
by way of similitude, that God goeth
vp, when he sheweth himselfe iudge of
the world, and defender of his Church: yit
notwithstanding inasmuch as when our
Lord Iesus Christ was come downe, he
was abaced as one that was beneath all men, and afterward was exalted
by the power of God his father: therin we see most fully, how God
voutsafed too bee abaced, for a tyme in the person of his sonne, and too
bee in a state despyzed before men, and afterward would bee crowned
agein with glory and honour, as the Apostle sayeth of him in the Epistle
too the Hebrewes: and that is the cause why S. Paule sayth here,Hebr. 2. b. 7.
that it behoued him first too descend, too bee so exalted.Psal. 8. b. 6. But before wee
goo any further, wee must marke that heere S. Paule hath chaunged
the word. For wheras Dauid sayeth, that God Receyued giftes and
presentes, that is too say, tribute and homage of those whom he had
subdewed too his maiestie: S. Paule in stead thereof sayeth, that he
gaue. And so this is not rehearced as it lyeth in the Psalme: but the
Apostle ment too shew that the tryumph which our Lord Iesus Christ
made when he rose from death, surmounted all Dauids victories, and



all that euer had bin doone in shadowes and figures vnder the lawe.
For it is much more too giue than too take. Also wheras it is sayd in
the Psalme,Psal. 16. a. 2. that God receyued: that was not for himself, nor too his
owne vse: for wee knowe he hath no neede of any thing: but his receyuing
was too inriche his Churche. And that is the cause why it is
sayd,a. Mac. 8 f. 28. that the women which neuer stepped out of their doores, shall
haue their part of the pray or bootie.Psal. 68 d. 13. There therfore Dauid sheweth
that God was not glorifyed for any profit or aduauntage that he pretended
on his owne behalfe, accordingly as it is sayd that he is contented
with his owne perfection, for he can nother increace nor diminishe:
but all redounded too the welfare of his Church. For Gods shewing
of himselfe too bee riche, is not by keeping of his treasures vnder dubble
lockes (as men say:) but by setting them foorth for all commers,
at leastwyse if wee seeke them with trew fayth. And forasmuch as his
riches diminish not, nor yit his liberalitie which he vseth towardes vs:
thereby wee knowe that he passeth all the men in the world. Then if
wee will defyne in one woord how God is riche: it is in beyng liberall
vntoo vs, vsing bountifulnesse, and by alluring vs too him too succour
vs in all our needes and wantes, according too this saying of his by
his Prophet,Esay. 55 a. 1. Come all yee that are thirstie, and drinke your fyll: yee
shall haue your fyll, not onely of water, but also of wyne and mylk. Too
bee short, he sheweth that they can want nothing, which wayt vppon
him, and put their trust in him. Therfore it is sayd in the Psalme, that
all shall haue their part of the spoyle,Psal. 34 b. 10. not onely the men of warre, (for
they myght hap too boast that they had gotten the whole pray by their
owne manhood and pollicie) but that the women which neuer stird out
of the house,Psal. 68 d. 13. and which did nothing but spin vppon their distaues, shall
haue part of the bootie, as though they had gotten the victory. Hereby
(I say) he sheweth, that Gods receyuing of tributes and taxes of such
as he had subdewed too his dominion, was not too increace himselfe
withall, but too make vs parttakers of all the benefytes that belong
too our saluation. And herewithall let vs marke well, how it is alledged,
that when God giueth vs his giftes, it is not to the intent that wee
myght father any thing vppon our owne vertue or prowesse: but that
wee should thinke our selues beholden too his mere free goodnesse for
all things. And so must all things bee referred too his glory. For the
more that he bestoweth vppon vs, the more ought wee too bee forward
and ready too confesse how much wee bee bound vntoo him. But the



chiefe poynt is, that wee indeuer too make the giftes that wee haue receyued,
auaylable too the common edifying of the Church: that is too
say, that God may still bee more and more exalted, and the kingdome
of our Lord Iesus Christ increaced and augmented among men. And
so the condition (say I) wheruppon our Lord distributeth too euery of
vs the things that belong too him, and are his owne, and which he
could keepe styll too himselfe, is, that wee should doo him homage for
them both in woord and deede.
               But now let vs come to that whch Saint Paule addeth. He sayth,
that it behoued Iesus Christ to descend, according also as he descended
intoo the lovve partes of the earth, and that therupon he
vvas exalted. Manie haue made ouer violent glozes vpon this place,
saying that Iesus Christ went downe, not only, into the graue, but also
euen intoo Limbo,Phil. 2. a. 8. a place forged of their owne brayne. But Saint
Paule speakes simply, namely, (as it is sayd in the second too the Philippians) that bycause Iesus Christ was abaced, therfore God his father
exalted him too his ryght hand, and gaue him a souerein dominion,
too the end that all knees should thensfoorthe bowe before him.
Therfore wheras S. Paule saith, that Iesus Christ was abaced, he
meaneth it of his clothing of himself with our nature, wherein he became
despyzed, without any dignitie, and without any reputation too
the worldward.Psal. 22. b. 7. According wheruntoo it is sayd in the Psalme, that
he was counted as a woorme of the earth, and not as a man, insomuch
that men tooke scorne too looke vppon him (as sayeth the Prophet Esay,)
and there was nothing in him that men could lyke of.Esay. 53. a. 2. Yee see
then that Iesus Christ did so submit himself to all reproch, that he was
disfigured,Marc. 14 g. 65. and men did spit at him, and mocke him, and doo him all
the wrongs that they could, and afterward he was exalted. And no
dubt but Saint Paule hath touched the thing heere which he discourseth
more at the length in the forealledged place:Phil. 2. a. 8. which is, that the example
of the sonne of God ought too teache vs lowelinesse, and too
make vs walke playnly without taking any thing vppon vs aboue other
men. For who are wee? What is our state? When euery
of vs hath sifted himself throughly, what shall he fynd in him too boast
of? Wee haue many things too thanke God for: but too take vppon
vs that which is his, were a villanous trecherie. So is there nothing
for vs too doo but too cast downe our eyes. For behold, the sonne of
God could haue shewed himself in his heauenly glory and maiestie; so



as he could haue made all the world too quake: and yit wee see that
being borne in a stable,Luk. 2. a. 7. he walked all his lyfe tyme as one vnknowen
and vnesteemed, and in the end was put too death, and that not a common
death, but a death that was so reprochfull, yea and cursed of Gods
owne mouth,Deut. 21. d. 25. that he was hild for accursed before God and his Angelles,
too the intent that wee myght be blissed for his sake and by his
meanes.Gal. 3. b. 13. Seeing then that Gods sonne was so abaced, haue not wee
good cause too stoope lowe? For God requyreth not that wee should
forgo anie thing of our owne, when he exhorteth vs too lowlinesse. And
why? for if wee knew what wee bee, wee would stoope lowe ynough.
Our head was not in lyke plyght when he came downe hither. For
why?Iohn. 17 d. 24. As it is sayd in the .xvii. of Saint Iohn, he possessed his diuine
glorie and maiestie before the making of the world. And yit for all
that, he voutsafed too abace himself in such wyze (as in the syght and
opinion of men) that too outward apperance he seemed too haue vtterly
giuen ouer his maiestie. It is trew that he continued styll in his
perfect state, but that appeered not. And that is the cause why Saint
Paule vseth the woord Figure or Shape: he appeered (sayeth he) in
the shape of man. For he meaneth that our Lord Iesus Christes
clothing of himself with our flesh, and his being despyzed and reiected,
were no derogation at all too his diuine essence. And why? for it was
but an outward shape. Then did he continue alwayes vnappayred,
and yit neuerthelesse he was seene too bee vnder all men. Who wyll
then refuze the same state, that wee should not bee lowly after his example?
The fathers that liued vnder the Lawe perceyued alredye

                     •
                  hat it behoued them too bee fashyoned lyke vntoo the image and patterne
of our Lord Iesus Christ, who was their head, and yit they had
but verie darke figures. Now then, seeing that Iesus Christ sheweth
vs the way,Act. 14. d. 22. so as he is entered intoo the kingdome of heauen through
many tribulations, and intoo lyfe by death, and is exalted on hygh after
abacing lowe: what excuce shall wee haue, if wee seeing those
things, bee styll puffed vp with pryde, and cannot fynd in our hartes
too walke in meeknesse, considering that wee bee nothing? So then,
wheras Saint Paule speaketh of the lowe places of the earth: he
meaneth the humane nature which our Lord Iesus tooke vppon him
for our saluation, yea euen with addition of all the things that I haue
to
                     •
                  ched. For he shewed not himself as a great prince, nother vsed he
anie pompe or traynes of men too make himself dread in the world:



but (as it is sayd in the two and fortith of Esay) he brake not the broozed
reede,Esay. 42. a. 3. he quenched not the smoking flax, nother was his voyce or
crye hearde in the streetes.Math. 12. b. 20. Agein, besydes this wee see how he suffered
reproche, and how he abode it paciently: when he came too his
death, all men seemed too haue conspyred ageinst him. Therfore wee
must adde all these qualities too knowe how Iesus Christ descended
into the lowe partes of the earth. Howbeit, if we compare his diuine
maiestie with our nature, wee may well call all the earth the lowe places:
& although Iesus Christ had possessed the whole world: yit had it
bin nothing in comparison of his heauenly glorie. For what are they
which are in hyghest state of dignitie? They doo but craule heere lyke
Frogges,Esay. 4. d. 22. or (leape) lyke Gressehoppers, as sayth the Prophet Esay.
No maruell than though the whole earth bee termed a lowe and bace
place in respect of heauen. Howbeeit Saint Paules intent here was
too note breefly, that Iesus Christ voutsafed too stoope so lowe, as too
become a mocking stocke too the vnbeleeuers, yea and euen too bee
condemned and esteemed as a man accursed and forsaken of God, all
which things he indured for our saluation. It is good reason therfore
that wee should myldly and without geynsaying receyue Gods humbling
of vs,Gala. 6. d. 17. and beare in our selues the image of our Lord Iesus
Christ, by being shaken of, despyzed, and mocked for our simplicitie,
and that no man should 
                     ••
                  ke vppon him, or chalendge too himself
the things that are none of his. That, is the effecte of Saynt Paules
meaning.
               Now he sayeth,Iohn. 18. g. 36. 
                  that he is gone vp aboue all heauens. Wherin we
see that the sonne of God hath not as now the lordship of this world.
For Saint Paules declaring that he is aboue all the heauens, is too
shewe, that the dominion which he hath, is heauenly, and diuine, and euerlasting.
For the heauens themselues shall passe away,Math. 24. c. 35. and they
must needs vanish,Mark. 13. d. 22. as Iesus Christ auoweth with his owne mouth.
Now if the heaues bee snbiect too chaunging, and must bee doone away,
too be renewed agein:2. Pet. 3. b. 13. if Iesus Christ dwelt in heauen, he should
bee subiect too the same state, that is too say, he should bee frayle and
transitorie.Iames. 1. c. 13. Then is he aboue all the heauens in his infinite glorie,
wherin there is nother chaunge nor turning about.
               And theruppon he addeth, that it is too fyll all things. By this
woord Fyll, he meaneth that Iesus Christ is not so locked vp in anie one
place, but that wee may feele him present, and that he dwelleth in vs,



and that he filleth all things. But surely that is not with his bodie as
some haue grossely imagined: but it is with his power, and with his
spirituall benefyts and gifts. Yit neuerthelesse Saint Paules intent
heere is too betoken a presence of Christ, too the end that wee may
knowe that we haue not lost anie thing by his absenting of himself from
the earth, so as he dwelleth heere no more after a visible fashyon. And
why? For he ceasseth not for all that, too execute his power euery
where, and to fyll all things: insomuch that wee haue all things of him
which are requisite for our saluation. That is in effect the verye meaning
of S. Paule.
               Wherfore let vs heere put in practize the exhortation that hath bin
touched afore: which is, that wee cannot bee taken for Gods children,
except wee become lyke too him that hath the ryght of the first borne.
Sith it is so: let vs willingly suffer our selues too be abaced, that God
may exalt vs: for by that meane did our Lord Iesus come too his glorie.
Agein, let vs apply all our senses to tast throughly what the mercie
of God is, in that it hath pleased him that his sonne which was his
image, should bee so abaced. Let vs consider how greate the loue of
our Lord Iesus Christ is, in that he voutsafed to hide his diuine essence
for a tyme, and tooke not vppon him as belonged vntoo him, but did
as it were stoope downe too the syght of the world. Sith wee see this,
let vs consider first of all, how precious 
                     〈◊〉
                   soules were too the sonne of
God, seeing he voutsafed too stoope so lowe for our saks, and let vs esteeme
of the Gospell wherby so greate a benefyte is communicated
vntoo vs, assuring our selues, that if Gods sonne had not come downe
vntoo vs, there had bin no meane for vs too haue come vntoo God his
father. For besyds that wee bee plundged heere in myre, and haue nothings
in vs but vtter frayltie: it is certeyne, that we beare as good as
a hell about vs, bycause the diuell is not without cause called the prince
of this world.Iohn. 16. b. 11. So then, seeing wee bee vnder the tyrannie of Satan
and of sinne, how could wee mount vpward, if Iesus Christ drew vs
not? But first it behoued Christ too come downe hither. And therby
are wee taught to woorship our Lord Iesus Christ alwayes in the person
which he hath taken of the mediatour: and wheras the vnbeleuers
and vnholie folk take occasion too despyze him, bycause he was crucifyed:
let vs honour him still as he deserueth. For wheras his greatnesse
and maiestie were after a sort darkened for a tyme: that was too
giue the greater beautie too his mercy and louing kindnesse: which



selfsame woord S. Paule vseth when he purposeth too expresse well
what earnestnesse of mynd and care God had, too raunsome vs from
the dungeons of death. And so yee see in effect what we haue too consider
vppon the Apostles woords, where he sayth, that Iesus Christ
was so abaced.
               And wheras he addeth, that he went vp aboue all the heauens: I
haue told you alredye in one woord, that it is all one as if he ment too
exempt him from the aray of creatures, knowing that as now hee is
not subiect too any chaunge. And for the same cause is it sayd in the
sixt too the Romans,Rom. 6. b. 10. that he suffered once in dying for our sinnes: but
yit for all that, dyed not (for euer,) bycause he is entred into the lyfe of
God, that is to say, he is made parttaker of the immortall glorie, so as
wee haue iust cause to cast downe our eyes. And bycause wee conceyue
not this so hygh souereintie which was giuen him, let vs honour it, seing
that euen the Angels of heauen do beare vs companie therin.Psal. 96. b. 8. For
it is not for nought sayd in the Psalm, that all the Angels of God worshipped
him, when he shewed him self too the world: which text the Apostle
also applyeth to his person in the first chapter too the Hebrews.Hebr. 1. a. 6.
Herewithall let vs mark, that although Iesus Christ be not shet vp in
anie place certayne: yit he ceasseth not too keepe still the trew nature
of his bodie. For the Papists haue imagined, that although he bee in
heauen, yit he is euerywhere else as well as there: yea and therwithall
they haue their speculations, too shewe how it is no inconuenience
at all, that God should haue his beeing aboue, and therewithall also
bee beneathe 
                     •
                  eere with vs. And theruppon they imagin themselues
too haue the bodie of Iesus Christ in Almbrye: by reason whereof
they beare it abrode in the streates, and cause all men too woorship
it: and yit in the meane whyle men knowe it is but a morsell of
bread: Yis (say they), it is God. But, that is an vtter ad
                     •
                  ichilating
of the trwe nature of our Lord Iesus Christ. In defence therof they
alledge, that if it had the propertie of a bodie, it must needs bee in one
place certeine. But aboue the heaueus there is no place, (too speake
after the maner of the philo
                     •
                  ophers:) & it is sayd, that Iesus Christ is
there: (ergo (say they) his bodie hath not the properties of a bodie.)
Yis, and wee knowe that the Angels haue no bodies, and yit are they
not euerywhere, for they be faine to go whether soeuer God appointeth
them. Now seeing that the Angels are not tyed too any place, notwithstanding
that their essence is not infinite, but comprehended within



a certeine measure, though they haue no proportion of members:
why should not Iesus Christ bee aboue all the elements of this world,
yea and aboue all the heauens, and yit not ceasse too bee very man?
Not that he can dye anie more, or bee subiect too anie of our passions
and infirmities, as hee was heertoofore, when he listed too bee conuersant
in the world: for as now he is quyte rid of all those things: but
that howsoeuer the cace stand, he holdeth stil his trewe nature of man.
And although he bee aboue the heauens: yit let vs assure our selues,
that that distance hindereth not his prese
                     •
                  tnesse with vs and in vs.
As how: Wee must mark what hath bin touched afore. It is sayd,
that he filleth all things: yea, but that is with the power of his spirit.
Yee see then that the filling wherof Saint Paule speaketh,Ierem. 23. 
                        •
                     . 24. is that
wee should haue our fill of the benefyts of our Lord Iesus Christ, and
that when wee bee graffed intoo his bodie, and made one with him by
beleef of the Gospell, then may we assure our selues that he is the fountayne
which neuer dryeth, nor can neuer bee emptyed with drawing,
and that in him wee haue, all varietie of good thinges, and all perfection.
Now then, if Saint Paule had ment as the papists haue forged,
and as is maynteyned now adayes of manie ignorant and wilfull
persons, namely that Iesus Christ filleth all things with his humane
nature: surely hee would not haue forgotten it: but he letteth it alone
as an absurditie. Wherfore let vs mark well the the twoo sayings
that are set downe heere: that is too wit, on the one syde, that Iesus
Christ is gone vp aboue all the heauens, and yit notwithstanding that
he ceasseth not too fyll all things. It is sayd, that he is gone vp aboue
the heauens, euen to the end that we should not be tyed too this world
and too our fleshly fancies, when we intend too resort too Iesus Christ:
but that wee should lift vp our mynds on hygh,Math. 6. b. 9. and seeke him there by
fayth.Psal. 115. a. 3. Insomuch that when the holie scripture sayeth, that God is in
heauen, it intendeth not too assigne him some peculiar place. The respect
is farre differing, and altoogither vnlyke, betweene God in his
spirituall essence, and Iesus Christ in respect of the bodie and humane
nature which he tooke of vs. For when we speake of God, we must alwayes
lay this ground, that he hath an infinite essence which filleth al
things,Esay. 66. 
                        •
                     . 1. so that heauen is as his royal throne, & the earth is his footestoole.
Not that he hath any feete, nor any seate to sit on: but it serues to
shewe that there is no distance so farre or wyde, that can conteyne the
maiestie of God, which is infinite, as I sayd. That is a thing which



wee must beare in mynd, when God is spoken of vntoo vs. And why
then is it sayd, that God is aboue al the heauens, and why dooth Saint
Paul speake after the same maner here of Iesus Christ: It is bycause
that wee bee dull and earthly, that if God should not tell vs that he hath
his temple & palace in heauen, we would tye him too euery pyller, to euery
stone, too euery waterspring, too euery tree, & (too bee short) too euery
thing that wee see. Therfore too correct such vyce, our Lord sayeth
too vs, mount vp, mount vp aloft: as though he lifted vs by the
chi
                     ••
                  es, and sayd, wretched beasts, why seeke yee too see mee here beneathe.
What intend yee too lyken mee too? Assure your selues, yee
must bee conueyed vp aboue all the world, when yee think vppon me
and my maiestie. Therfore yee cannot woorship mee, except yee bee
rapt vp aloft, and consider that I am incomprehensible. Lo how the
scripture speaketh of him.Luke. 11. a. 9. And when wee say, Our father which art
in heauen: it is too the intent wee should lift vp our mynds vntoo him,
as he calleth vs at all houres. Not that wee must imagin as the papists
doo, who think too please God with their much babling, and with
their vsing of many Ceremonies, which may haue a gay glosse to the
worldward: I say, wee must not think too please God so: for let vs bee
sure, that that were a transfiguring of God, to make him lyke our selues:
but wee must rather bethink vs, that in sted of hauing our mynds
weyed downe to the world, wee must stryue to lift thē vp on hygh. And
as for Iesus Christ, it is sayd, that he is aboue al the Heauens, euen in
his humane nature. And how is that? Being God in respect of his
essence, he is equall too his father, so as he filleth all things: but in respect
that he hath put on a humane bodie, he is aboue the heauens, so
as he is not in the world. And it is too fond a grosnesse too say, Why
then, and are not the twoo natures so knit togither, as they cannot bee
put asunder? All this is trew: but yit dooth it not followe, that they
cannot bee distinguished. So long as wee remayne alyue, our soule
and bodye are ioyned toogither: and yit it doth not therfore folow, that
the soule is not of another nature than the bodie, or that they cannot be
distinguished. Euen so is it with Iesus Christ. If a man demaund,
why then? Is not our Lord Iesus Christ all whole with vs, according
as he is our head and mediatour, and hath gathered vs too him in such
wyse, as wee liue of his owne substance? Yis, he is with vs al whole,
if wee take him in the person of the mediator. But if a man demaund,
is euerye part of him among vs, which is in himself: No: nother is it



requisite that he should anie more bee so conuersant among vs, as too
bee subiect too the suffering of anie thing, but he must bee quyte and
cleane exempted from all that geere. And that is the cause why the
Apostle telleth vs,Hebr. 7. 
                        •
                     . 27. that he is appered once, and that hensforth we wayt
for him. And so yee see what wee haue to consider vppon this saying,
that Iesus Christ is exalted aboue all the heauens.
               Now let vs go backe agein to the woord fyll: for therein Saint
Paul sheweth vs, that the souereintie of our Lord Iesus Christ hath
no boundes too bee locked vp in: but that it reacheth euen vntoo vs.
Therfore (as I haue said twyce alredy) our Lord Iesus Christs filling
of all things, is by his power. For he is not a King after the manner
of those whom wee see in this world. They be subiect to hunger &
thirst, they bee subiect too diseases and other things: so as they must
haue officers at euery stones cast, or else they shal not be obeyed. They
then are fayne to doo their affayres by other men, which they cannot
doo by themselues, and too borrowe helpe at other folkes handes. But
it is not so with Iesus Christ: for he reigneth not by force of armes,
nor after the manner of worldly prynces. Now then? He reygneth
by his spirit, and by the meane of his woord. And by that meanes
are al things fylled with him,1. Cor. 2. a. 9. euen by the Gospell. Saint Paule sayth
in the first too the Corinthians, that wee communicate with him. And
too that end also dooth God call vs day by day, namely too make vs
parttakers of his only sonne. And how may that bee, vnlesse he extende
his power vntoo vs? Now truly, in this cace it standeth vs on
hand to haue more than our senses can receyue. For the power of our
Lord Iesus Christ caryeth with it a woonderfulnesse aboue all our
vnderstandyng, as Saint Paul wyll shewe yit agein hereafter. For
when he hath sayd, that Christ is the head of the Church, and as it
were a husband (which is all one personne with his wyfe:Ephe. 5. g. 35.) he cryeth
out, It is a great misterye or secret, betweene Iesus Christ and his
Church. If it bee a secret, surely than can we neuer atteyne too it by
our own mother wit, nor by our owne conceytes. And therfore wheras
Saint Paule sayeth, that he filleth all things: let vs assure our selues,
that in sted of common reason and common opinion, wee must haue
the experience of fayth, if wee intend to knowe how Iesus Christ dwelleth
in vs, and too bee perswaded of it, as hath bin sayd therof alredie.
Howsoeuer wee fare, let vs not thinke that anye distance can separate
vs from the sonne of God. And why? For his dominion extendeth



hygh and lowe, and therfore wee shall feele that he is in vs, and wee in
him, that wee shall be made all one toogither, yea euen too bee ioyned
vnto God his father, and too be brought too the perfection that is spoken
of in Saint Iohn,Iohn. 14. d. 28. where he sayeth, it is expedient for you, that I go
my way, for my father is greater than I. Our Lord Iesus Christes
meaning there, is not too make himself inferiour too his father as in
respect of his diuine essence: (for wee knowe there is but one God)
but he taketh vs there, too lift vs vp according too our rudenesse and
infirmitie, as if he should leade vs pace by pace, and step by step, lyke
litle chilldren. After that manner then dooth he ioyne vs too God his
father, tyll wee bee ryghtly transformed intoo his glorye, whereof
wee inioy part alredye by the Gospell.1. Cor. 13. d. 12. For wee see not yit but
as it were through a glasse, and darkelye, as Saynt Paule sayeth
in another place. That then is the thing which wee haue too beare
in mynde.
               Now it behoueth vs too honour well this King,Psal. 2. c. 12▪
                   which is set ouer
vs by God his father, and consider that wee ought too bee his people
in deede, yea and euen his owne bodie. Seeing he dooeth vs such
honour, let vs looke that wee bee so much the more inflamed with the
loue of him, and consider that Iesus Christ beeing exalted abo
                     •
                  e all
the heauens, is also iudge of the worlde, yea euen too call vs too account,
not only of our outward deedes, but also euen of all our
thoughtes. And therfore let vs walke in his feare and obedience,1. Cor. 15. g. 52. assuring
our selues, that when the Trumpet soundeth at the last day, we
must all appeere before him.
               And further let vs consider also, that he filleth all things in such
wyse, as it is to the ouerthrow of all our enemyes, and to the brydling,
or rather too the fettering of them, so as they cannot hurt vs, doo what
they can. Therfore according too that which is conteyned here from
out of the Psalme, it is very requisite, that he should be aboue, too obteyne
the vpper hand of our enemyes: for else what would become of
vs? And in deede let vs consider what they myght bee able too doo,
hauing infinite hostes too ouerthrow our saluation continually withall.
For the diuell is not as a mortall man: he hath such force, as is
terrible out of measure. What myght he doo, were it not that Iesus
Christ filleth all things? yea euen too shewe that he hath power both
ouer Satan, and ouer all his vpholders, insomuch that practyze they,
prepare they, and turmoyle they what they can ageinst the Churche,



yit shall they neuer bring their enterpryze too passe, bycause Iesus
Christ holdes them (at the staues end,) as it were with his foote vpon
their throte. Yee see then the kingdome of our Lord Iesus Christ
was giuen him, with full warrant, that wee shall euer bee defended by
his strong and inuincible hand, bycause he hath taken vs intoo his perfection,
euen he that is exalted aboue all the heauens. And that also is
the cause why Saint Paule sayeth expresly,Phil. 2. b. 12. that all knees shall bowe
before him, as well of creatures in heauen, as of creatures in earth,
yea and euen of creatures vnder the earth. Now when wee heare that
the Angelles stoope too our Lord Iesus Christ: let vs vnderstand,
that he applyeth them too our seruice, so as they bee our keepers, and
watch too defend vs ageinst Satan. And seeing that that charge is
committed too them by our Lord Iesus Christ who is their head: wee
ought too bee well assured of our saluation. And so yee see how wee
ought too put this text in vre. Moreouer, let vs walke so vnder the
obedience of our Lord Iesus Christ, as wee may feele that he fylleth
vs in deede, (as I sayd afore) bycause he is aboue all things, through
all things, and in all things. This was spoken of God his father,
howbeeit wee knowe that Iesus Christ is the meane whereby God
dwelleth in vs. Wherefore let vs bee his trew Temples, and sith
that he beeing the welspring of all purenesse, voutsafeth vs the grace
and priuiledge too dwell in vs: let vs indeuer too keepe our selues holy
vntoo him both in bodie and soule. For if wee giue our selues too
our owne vncleannesse, it is all one as if wee went about too driue away
the sonne of God, who cannot bee intermedled with our corruptions
and filthinesse. Not that wee can bee cleere from all spot and
blemish: but that wee must not delyght in them, but rather fyght ageinst
them, and labour more and more too fashyon our selues after the
purenesse that is in our Lord Iesus Christ. And lyke as he sanctified
himself in our behalf: so also let vs bee holy, namely by the grace
and power of his holy spirit, & let the same holynesse be consecrated by
the doctrine of the gospel,Iohn. 17. c. 17. as is sayd of it in another place. Now then,
as touching this fylling, yee see that in somuch as wee knowe that our
Lord Iesus Christ holdeth the diuelles, and all the despyzers of his
maiestie fettered in subiection: wee may assure our selues, that he
dwelleth verily in vs, and that the same is peculiar too vs, bycause he
hath chozen vs for his Temples, and intendeth too shew that the coniunction
which he hath taken vppon him with mankynd, is proper to



vs in respect of the humane nature, and also in respect of his spirit, bycause
he maketh it too take place in vs: and not only that he is man
(styll) as he was: but that there is yit more, that is too wit, that wee
be bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh: not that we bee created of his
substance, but that by the power of his holy spirit he maketh the substance
of his body and blud too flowe downe vntoo vs, wherwith we be
fylled: insomuch that wee haue there not onely meate too eate, but also
drinke too drinke, so as there is sufficient too content vs withall, condicionally
that wee consider the benefites wheruntoo he allureth vs,
and which he offereth vs, and will haue vs too inioy, so wee bee not letted
by our owne vnbeleefe.
               Now let vs fall downe before the Maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him too touche vs more too
the quicke with a trew knowledge of our selues and of our wretchednesse,
that wee may bee so cast downe in our selues, as wee may resort
too him with all lowelinesse, and confesse our selues too bee beholden
too him for all good things, and haue none other shooteanker than our
Lord Iesus Christ, sith it is he that wee bee called vntoo, but that wee
may bee so clothed with him, as it may put away all our fleshly lustes
and affections, which hinder our vniting vntoo God, and wee continue
in the hope that is giuen vs, vntill that beyng taken our of this world,
wee inioy the euerlasting rest that he hath purchaced for vs. That it
may please him too graunt this grace, not onely too vs, but also too all
people and Nations of the earth. &c.
            
            
               The .xxv. Sermon, which is the fifth
vppon the fourth Chapter.
               
                  
                     11. And the very same hath giuen, some Apostles, and some Prophets,
and some Euangelistes, and some Shepherdes and Teachers.
                     12. For the reparation of the Sainctes, too the vvoorke of administration,
and for the edifying of the body of Christ.
                  
               
               
                  
                  WEe haue seene heertoofore how our Lord
Iesus Christ hath not withdrawen his power
farre from vs, though he bee exalted aboue
the heauens. There is a greate distance
betwixt him and vs, as in respect of
the absence of his body out of the world: but
yit doo wee finde him alwayes present by
the power of his holy spirit, and by that
meanes dooth he fill all things. And now
S. Paule sheweth, that this maner of filling,
is too the intent that euery faythful man, should with al lowlinesse
serue his owne turne, with the giftes and grace which it hath pleased
our Lord too bestowe vppon those whom he hath set in his Church too
gouerne it: and that on the other syde, they that haue receyued the larger
measure, should not aduaunce themselues for all that, nor drawe
alone by themselues, but indeuer too doo seruice too the common benefyte,
saluation, and welfare of all Gods children. The summe therfore
of that which S. Paule was mynded too say, is, that Iesus Christ hauing
all riches in him, hath not delt therof vntoo euery of vs part and
partlyke, at leastwyse so as wee should all bee throughly perfect: (for
he ment it not) but that he hath distributed them by measure.1. Cor. 12 b. 11. And in
very deede, the order which he hath set in his Church sheweth it. For
all are not Prophetes,1. Cor. 12 d. 17. all are not Teachers, all are not Euangelistes.
Then dooth it follow, that Christ intendeth too distribute his giftes
by certeine measure. And theruppon wee haue too conclude, that he
which presumeth of himself, and surmizeth that he hath all that is requisite:
dooth foully deceyue himself twoo wayes. For there is not
that man which hath receyued such perfection, but that he hath neede
too profit still with his brethren. That is one poynt. Agein, he that
is the excellentest of all others, is most bound too doo good with the
things that God hath cōmitted to his charge, or to his trust as a pa
                     ••
                  n.
On the contrary part, the meaner and the ignorant sort, must not enuye
them that go before them in lerning and wisdome, bycause it is Iesus
Christes will, too haue it so, and so must it bee, seeing he will haue his
Church gouerned by the meanes of men. Now then wee see wherat
the Prophet amed: namely that wee should so suffer our selues too bee
filled with the spirituall giftes that belong too our saluation, as none of
vs refuze too bee taught by the meanes of men. Let vs not belyke these



fantasticall persons, who would haue God too send them some reuelation
from heauen, and that they myght haue no neede of preaching or
reading. Let vs not bee caryed away with such foolish ouerweening:
but let all of vs both great and small, submit our selues soberly too the
order that our Lord Iesus Christ hath set: which is, that such as haue
greate skill, and are well seene in thee holy scriptures, and haue the
gift of teaching, should streyne themselues too serue the whole Church
as they bee bound too doo:Iohn. 1
                        •
                      b. 8. for too that end hath God aduaunced them
aboue others. And that the meaner sort and the ignorant, bee not enuious
for that they see not them selues too haue lyke portion: but consider
that it is ynough for them that God forgat them not, but that the
dealing of his gracious giftes (after that maner,) was too their profit
and saluation. It was Gods will that all things should bee made common,
and that euery member of the bodie should haue his part of them,
at leastwyse so the order bee alwayes kept.
               Now S. Paule in saying, that our Lord Iesus Christ gaue Apostles,
and Prophets, and Euangelistes, and Shepherds, and Teachers,
dooth vs to vnderstand, that the preaching of the Gospell, and the meeting
of men toogither too heare the holy Scripture expounded, is not
a thing inuented by men: but that God hath so ordeyned it, and our
Lord Iesus hath set it downe for a lawe, and wee must keepe it without
breaking of it. For in good sooth, were it not set downe by the souereine
authoritie of the sonne of God, men are so hygh mynded, that
many of them would shake of that yoke. What haue I too doo (would
euery man say) too bee taught by my fellowe? Seeyng wee haue the
holy Scripture among vs, ought wee not too fetch thence whatsoeuer
is meete for vs too know? Why then should any one man bee preferred
before the rest of the company? Thus would there bee an horrible
disorder in the Churche, so as no man would submit himselfe too bee
taught. No man would bee a learner, too haue a mayster or teacher
ouer him, vnlesse wee were fully perswaded and resolued, that that order
was not of mans deuyce, but that it is a gouernment set downe for
all the faythfull by the sonne of God,Math. 1
                        •
                      d. 40. who will haue them heard, which
haue the charge of teaching,Luk. 10. c. 16. as men sent by him, telling men that
they despyze him, and do him wrong, and rebel ageinst him and his father,
if they receyue not his doctrine with all humblenesse, and that
whosoeuer will bee taken for a Christian, must also bee a chyld of the
Church. And so yee see in effect what wee haue too remember, when



S. Paul imputeth the hauing of Prophets, Teachers, & 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
vntoo the person of Iesus Christ.
               Furthermore, too the intent wee should bee the more gentle and
tractable, and make no sticking too receyue the doctrine that hath bin
preched vntoo vs, and to bee alwayes lerners in the scoole of our Lord
Iesus Christ: Saint Paule telleth vs also, that when wee haue good
and faythfullteachers, and others that labour too shewe vs the way
of saluation: it is a signe that our Lord Ie
                     ••
                  s Christ hath not left vs,
nor forgotten vs, but that he is present with vs▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   watcheth for our
saluation and welfare. Therfore let vs not 
                     〈…〉
                   men can put
them selues foorth of their owne head: for 
                     〈…〉
                   too speake
one woorde too the glorie of Iesus Christe,1. Cor. 12 a. 3. except it 
                     〈◊〉
                   gyuen hym
(from aboue) and that the holie Ghoste gouerne his tung▪ And in very
deede it is for the same cause that it is sayd,Psal. 119. 99. that the holie 
                     〈◊〉
                   is a
wisdome which passeth all wit of man,1. Cor. 2. d. 14. and that the 
                     〈◊〉
                   man vnderstandeth
no whit of it, but that God must bee fayne too reuele the
things too vs which else are too hygh and hidden from vs. Now then,
when wee see the holie scripture truely expounded, and applyed ryghtly
too our vse: let vs assure our selues that Gods spirit giueth vs record
that he abydeth among vs. Wherfore let vs lerne to receyue so excellent
a gift, assuring our selues that it is the homage which our Lord
Iesus demaundeth at our hands. And that is a cause also why the
Gospell is called the kingdome of heauen.Math. 3 
                        •
                     . 2. For wee beewray ryght
well, that wee take not God for our king, nor are willing too honour
our Lord Iesus Christ whē he is sent vnto vs, if we suffer not our selues
too bee gouerned by the meanes that he commaundeth and alloweth,
which is, the preaching of the Gospell, wheruntoo wee must yeeld such
obedience, as too receyue the doctrine of it without geynsaying, so that
he which hath the charge of teaching acquit him self faythfully, and the
residew bee not so hygh mynded, as to say, tush, I may forbeare it well
ynongh, but receyue the things willingly which are spoken too them,
and suffer themselues too bee taught, for feare least they should resist
the sonne of God, that wee may continew in them all the tyme of our
lyfe, as shall bee declared more at length agein anon.
               Now besydes this, Saint Paule by the diuersitie of the offices
which he setteth downe, expresseth yit better how greatly forecasting
our Lord Iesus Christ hath shewed himself for the saluation of those
that are his, in that he hath left nothing behynd, which was requisite &



conuenient too bring them too the heritage of saluation▪ Wee must
note here concerning these offices which S. Paul reherceth, that some
of thē serued but for a tyme, as the office of Apostleship. For they were
not chozen of purpose too continew too the worlds end, 
                     •
                  ut only too
publish abrode the doctrine of the Gospell, vntill it was receyued
through the whole world (I meane in all kingdomes and Countries)
though euery man shewed not himself obedient vntoo it.Math. 10. a 1. Then was
there that speciall reason why our Lord Iesus Christ ordeyned the
twelue Apostles,Gala. 2. b. 7. vntoo whom Saint Paule was ioyned afterward to
preach among the Gentyles: and it was as an entering intoo the possession
of his kingdome. But after that the Gospell was once authorized
after that maner, the office of Apostleship ceassed. Yit notwithstanding,
they had companions and helpfellowes, who were not of equall
degree 
                     〈…〉
                   in commission with them, too sowe abroad the seede of

                     〈…〉
                   them dooth Saint Paule name Euangelists or Gospellers.
According wheruntoo,2. Tim. 4. b. 5. wryting vntoo Timothie he sayeth▪
Go through diligently with the woork of an Euangelist, Those twoo
Offices then serued but for that tyme.
               Now as touching the Office of Prophetes: wee haue it not so excellent
now adayes (as it was then,) as men see. For God hath abated
his giftes, bycause of the vnthankefulnes of the world. Not that
he sheweth not him self as liberall as is requisite for our saluation: but
bycause that howsoeuer the world go, wee bee vnworthie too haue his
treasures so largely powred out, as they had them at the first vpspring
of the Gospell: therfore dooth he giue vs but a small portion of them▪
Howsoeuer wee fare, the Prophetes serued too bee as it were expounders
of Gods will, and had a much hygher vnderstanding in the scriptures,
than the common Teachers had, whose office was too instruct.
               As for the Shepeherdes which S. Paule speaketh of, they bee the
Ministers of the word, which haue ordinary charge to teach in some
place. As much is too bee sayed of the Teachers, as wee see by example
of the Church of Antioche, in the thirteenth of the Actes.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Trew it
is, that none can bee a Shepeherd except he teache: but yit for al that,
the Teachers haue a seueral charge by th
                     •
                   selues: which is to expound
the scripture, that there may be alwayes a good & sound vnderstanding
of them, & that the same may haue his 
                     〈…〉
                   in the Church,
so as 
                     •
                  erisies & false opinions 
                     〈…〉
                   that the fayth may abyde

                     〈◊〉
                   and sure aboue all things. 
                     〈…〉
                   the Teachers▪
               
               
                  Therfore wee see by the report of S. Luke, that the Apostles were
not tyed to any one certein place, nother did Iesus Christ ordeyn thē to
that end.Marke. 16. c. 15. Preach yee the Gospell (sayeth he) too all creatures. And
for that cause, according as occasion was giuen them, and as gappes
were opened vntoo them for the preaching of the Gospell, they imployed
them selues about it, and were not tyed any certein place. And
why? For their commission reached further. Yee see then that the
Apostles had charge too go too and fro, and had no resting place: that
is too say, they had not the charge of any seuerall Church commited
vntoo them, so as they myght say, heere will I abyde. As much is too
bee sayd of the Euangelistes: for they went about the world too, except
it were when they were called particularly too some place. After that
maner had Timothie bin chozen for a tyme: howbeeit for as much as
he could yll bee forborne in the office of an Euangelist, he was fayne
too shift his place,Ti
                        •
                      1. b. 5. now one where, and now another where. Titus
was alloted too the Ile of Candie. Trew it is that he was not yit altoogither
settled there: but yit was he fayne to hold him to that church,
howbeeit that he was remoued too and fro, according as the present oportunitie
and neede requyred. And heerin wee see how these leaud
folk which would peruert all order of gounerment, and seeke nothing
but confuzion, doo spyte God, in saying that a man must not tary alwayes
in one place, but followe the example of the Apostles. But
that is a flat mocking of Iesus Christ, as wee see by this text. Yee see
then how wee haue too marke, that the Apostles were as Trumpets
too proclayme the Gospell euery where, and that they had Euangelistes
in lyke charge with them, too beare them company. But yit in
the meane whyle there were Prophetes also, which were conuersant
more in one place than in another, after as it pleased God to distribute
his grace. Yit neuerthelesse there were of them in euery Church,
according as wee see that in the Epistle too the Corinthians,1. Cor. 13. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . that S.
Paule standeth myghtyly vppon that poynt, shewing that the gift of
prophesying ought too bee preferred before all other giftes, bycause it
is more profitable,Act. 14. d. 23. and serueth more too the edifying of the Church.
As touching Shepherdes,Tit. 1. b. 5. & 
                        •
                     . Tim. 
                        •
                     . d. 2
                        •
                     . wee see how S. Paule and his companion
Barnabas ordeyned of them euery where, and also how he commaundeth
Titus & Timothy to cause the churches to be so prouided, as they
myght alwayes haue some Shepherd too guyde them: for otherwyse
there would bee nothing but disorder. Now then sith wee see that the



choyce of Ministers and Shepherdes was made by the authoritie of
Iesus Christ, and they had as it were their place appoynted them, too
say, Thou must looke about thee heere, as if a man were set in a bulwarke
or in some Tower to keepe it, when it were in any daūger: it becommeth
euery man to keepe his place, and not to couet too gad heere
and there, but too hold him self bound too the place where he is. This
(say I) is the thing which wee haue too marke, when S. Paule speaketh
of such a varietie.
               Too bee short, let vs learne that our Lord Iesus knewe whatsoeuer
was profitable for the welfare of his church, and that he shewed
it in hauing a care that the faythfull myght not want anie thing, but
that they myght haue sufficient and conuenient meanes too draw them
too the kingdome of heauen. Now a dayes wee haue no more the
office of Apostleship (as I told you before:) nother haue wee anie ordinarie
Euangelistes: but yit for all that, God dooth neuerthelesse
drawe vs vnto him, and giue vs all helpes that are meete for vs. In
deede he chastyzeth our vnthankefulness, and bycause he sees his word
despyzed, he giues vs the things with a wet finger (as they say,)
which wee should haue more fully, if wee had such zele to them as were
requisyte. Yit notwithstanding let vs not thinke our state too bee the
worse, bycause wee haue none Apostles now adayes: for it were more
than needeth. It was ryght necessarye, considering the confuzion
and disorder of the popedome, that God should stirre vp men which
were not chozen according to the order of the Church: but yit he gaue
them grace, and they serued his turne. But now that there is order
set both heere and elswhere where the Gospell is preached: wee must
come backe too the thing before alledged, namely that when God giueth
vs such Shepherdes as labour too guyde vs faythfully, and thervntoo
wee haue Teachers also, which are able too mayntaine the purenesse
of the doctrine among vs, and too strengthen vs in the pure truth
of the Gospell, and too withstand all sectes and errours: wee must
vnderstande that that grace ought too bee so esteemed, wee must not
grudge ageinst God. Moreouer it is very certeyne, that if the Gospell
were receyued with such reuerence and earnestnesse, as it deserueth:
God also would bee more bountifull on his syde. Wheras wee
see now so fewe good Preachers, yea & that there step vp a sort of dirtdaubers
woorse than naught, and farre leauder than the Moonkes in
the poppedome, which are as redie to preache Mahomets Alcoran, as



Christes Gospell, so they may keepe their liuings styll: and when besydes
those, wee see also a sort of drunkardes that haue no more zeale
than Swyne, but are as mastiues that barke not, ne neuer open their
lipes but too confound lyght and darknesse toogither, that all things
myght be put out of order: Let vs vnderstand that God executeth
iust vengeance vppon the despyzing of his Gospell. For let vs see a
little what the humilitie and submission is which men yeeld vntoo
God for all their hearing of the sound of this doctrine, and for all his
setting vp of the scepter of his Gospell, to shew that he is mynded too
reigne ouer vs. Wee see that most men could fynd in their hartes
to haue no religion at al. Agein, they that make fayrest countenance,
would yit full fayne that the Gospell were styll but a shadowing place
of Ceremonies. And howsoeuer the world go, they bee loth too beare
anie yoke, they cannot abyde too bee rebuked for their vyces, but they
would haue a beastly licenciousnesse: condicionally that they myght
doo what they list, they would bee contented that the Gospell should
bee preached, as who should say, they would graunt it vntoo Iesus
Christ by composition and couenant. But in the meane whyle, all is
but hipocrisie, and they cannot so conceale their counterfetting, but
that the world dooth well see that they bee as shamelesse as harlots.
For doubtlesse, a man shall find more religion and feare of God in the
popedome, than among those that are in the places where the Gospell
is preached. But the mischeef of all mischeeues is, that a sort of these
naughtipackes step vp intoo the chayre of truth, of whom some are
drunkardes, some whoremongers, and some blasphemers: and too bee
short, there is such wickednesse among them, as is horrible to see▪ Sith
wee knowe this, let vs cast downe our eyes, and condemne the vnthankfulnesse
and rebelliousnesse that is in vs, as the cause of all the
disorder that wee see. But howsoeuer the world go with vs, yit if our
Lord bee so benificiall too vs still, as too haue his doctrine preached
too vs: therin wee haue a sure and infallible token, that he is neere at
hand with vs, and that he seeketh our saluation, by calling vs vnto him,
as though he spake with open mouth, and that wee sawe him personally
before vs. Then can we not fayle nor bee deceyued, in assuring our
selues that Iesus Christ calleth vs too him, and that he holdeth out his
armes open too receyue vs, as oft as the Gospell is preached vntoo vs.
And wee neede not too seeke reuelations from heauen,Deut. 32. c. 
                        •
                     4. nor too wander
abroade: for seeing that the woord is in our harte and mouth, what



would wee more? Who shall flye vp aboue the cloudes?Rom. 10. b. 8. Who shall go
down into the deepes? let vs assure our selues that God offereth himself
vntoo vs in the person of his only sonne, when he sendeth vs preachers
and teachers.
               And herwithall let vs still haue an eye too that which I sayd afore:
which is, that they too whom God giueth most of his grace, must consider
that by that meanes they be the more bound to imploy them selues
in the place that our Lord hath assigned them too, and wheruntoo it is
his pleasure too appropriate them. He then that hath knowledge, must
not exalt himself for it, but consider that he is a better too the whole
bodie,Rom. 2. b. 14. and (theruppon) examin well how he may serue too the glory of
God, with the things that he hath put him in trust withall, and make
the gift which he hath receyued profitable,Math. 25. b. 20. assuring him self that the vse
therof is common too all men, and that although God haue committed
it too his custody, and will haue him too bee the keeper of it: yit must
he not hold it as a treasure, locked vp in a hutch: but impart it abroade
to such as want it, and haue neede of it. Herwithal also let vs keepe vs
frō enuying of those whom it is Gods will to honour after that fashion,
that there bee no spytefulnesse in vs too say, Why, and is it meete that
such a one should bee preferred before mee? For in so dooing wee spyte
God. And therfore let euery of vs knowe his owne state and degree,
and not stand in contention with our God, assuring our selues that the
thyngs which he hath ordeyned in his Churhe, are doone by vnreuocable
iudgment. Wherfore let vs abhorre these madbraynes, that
would take away the order which wee see too bee grounded vppon the
authoritie of the sonne of God. There are, that thinke the preaching
of the Gospell too bee a needelesse thing, and that it serueth as it were
but for little children, and that they them selues haue the holy Ghoste
(at commaundement,) too reuele things too them from heauen euery
minute of an houre. But it is certeyne that the Diuell blyndeth
them in that ouerweening, and men knowe that he had wonne the
goale, if the meane of our saluation were abolished and taken away.
For lyke as S. Paule sayeth, that the preaching of the Gospell must
serue too make the Church perfect,1. Cor. 1. c. 21. that wee may bee brought too the
kingdome of heauen: so on the contrary part, when there is no more any
doctrine or Shepherd, the diuell must needes so ouermayster vs, as
wee shalbee scattered asunder, and nothing shall remayne but ruine and
destruction. Seeing then that this order is not of men, let vs learne



too submit our selues vntoo it, and let all of vs both great and small
without geynsaying, suffer God too guyde vs 
                     〈◊〉
                   that meane, seeing it
hath pleased him too appoynt it. Also wee see how Gods children are
called the children of the Church. And S. Paule sheweth that our
Lord Iesus will reigne ouer vs,Rom. 10. b. 8. with condition that his woord bee alwayes
in mens mouthes. He sayeth not, that the Angels shall come to
reuele vntoo vs the things that God will haue vs too knowe: but he
sayth, that wee must vnderstand Gods will by their meanes which
haue the charge and office too tell it vs. For lyke as in the tyme of
the Lawe, it was sayd,Mal. 2. b. 7. that the Priestes were Gods Angels, and that
men ought too inquyre at their mouth: so now also God will not haue
vs too flitter in the ayre after our owne fancies, but too go too the fountayne
which is open for vs when wee list too drinke. If a man would
go seeke the head and welspring of a fountayne (I meane as it is hidden
in the earth) and would hold scorne too drinke vntill he had found it:
would not men take him for stark mad and besyde him self? Yis that
would they. But behold, God hath prouyded for our infirmytie, in
that he will not haue vs too make to long wyndlasses too be taught
his woord faythfully. For he maketh the welspring too come home
too vs, which was hidden and farre of from vs, I say, he maketh it to
come home too vs as it were by Cundites, so as we neede doo no more
but open our mouthes too receyue it. Lyke as when there are fayre
Cundites that runne with continewall water abundantly, men will
come too drawe at them for their needes: so was it our Lordes will
that his woord should bee set foorth vntoo vs, by his ordeyning of men
too bee the instrumentes of his holy spirit. Then seeing it is so, let vs
learne too hold vs too it: and if wee will bee taught of God, let vs receyue
the doctrine that is preached to vs by the mouthes of men. This
say I, is the thing that we haue too remember vppon this text, too the
intent wee bee not so foolish as too say, Why hath not God giuen mee
such grace or gift? Why is it his will too vse such meane? Let vs content
our selues with this, namely, that his ordinance ought too suffize
vs, and that if wee will needes fall too reasoning of the matter, wee
shall euer bee put too shame, bycause there is is no wisdome but only
his good will. Also let vs mark that which is sayd immediatly in this
text: namely that it is Gods will that there should be order of ministery
or Seruice. As if it were sayd, God could well bring vs too perfection
by him self, without any other meane or helpe: Howbeeit for as



much as he will bee serued by men, and he applyeth them too such vse,
as he maketh them ministers, so as mē perceyue that the prayse of our
saluation is alwayes dew to him, & that all goodnesse cōmeth of him: it
behoueth men to submit thēselues therto. But here it might be thought
straunge why Saint Paule in sted of speaking of the giftes of the
holy Ghost, bringeth vs vntoo Offices. For he began with this matter,
namely that our Lord Iesus Christ gaue giftes according too the
measure which he knoweth to be fit for vs, and that in dyuers maners,
by meanes wherof he filleth all things. Now to confirme this he sayeth,
that there are Apostles, Shepherdes, Teachers and Euangelists.
It should seeme that S. Paule dooth not well continew 
                     •
                  he processe of
the matter that he treated of. But heere wee haue too note, (as wee
see also more largely in the first too the Corinthians,1. Cor. 12. a. 4. &. 13. a. 2. that for as much
as our Lord Iesus hath stablished the order that wee haue spoken of
alredye, and contineweth the same still in his Church, so as it is his
will that there should bee Shepherdes, Prophetes, and Thechers: he
dooth also furnish them out of hand with the things that are requisite
for the executing of their office. For he dealeth not after the maner of
men. Wee for our part may chooze one man to bee in office of Magistrate,
and another too bee a Preacher: but in the meane whyle wee
cannot giue them that which is requysite for them. For wee cannot
make a new man of him that is aduaunced too honour: but he must abyde
still the same that he was for all vs. Also when it commeth too
the election, euery man giues his voyce. Uery well, he that is chozen
shalbee officer: but yit in the meane while, he shall continew still the
same he was before. In lyke cace is it with Shepherdes. Wee may
well chooze a man, and he shall perchaunce proue a beast. For wee
cannot cause him too bee qualified as he ought too be. But when men
are of Gods owne choozing, so as he beareth the whole sway: then are
the giftes ioyned inseperably with their charge.Math. 4. c. 18. Whē our Lord Iesus
choze his Apostles, he choze sillie fishermē, & such as were vnlearned,
& yit did he serue his turne with them for the publishing his of Gospel:
howbeeit not too teach as yit, but too go abroade as his herawltes, too
giue warning that the King was come. But when he intended too
send them foorth too their office for adoo, he sent them the holy Ghost,Actes. 
                        •
                     . a. 4.
shewing therby (as is sayd in many other textes,) that all things requisite
for the welfare of the Church, must needs come of his free gift,
bycause it is well kn
                     •
                  wen that all things proceed of him, too the end



that all prayse should be giuen vntoo him. Then is it no maruell that
S. Paule speaking heere of the diuersitie of giftes, and of the measure
that it hath pleased God too deale too euery man, dooth send vs purposely
too the offices. As if he should say, It is not without cause that
God distributeth not his giftes in alyke too all. For he will not haue
all men Shepherdes, or Prophetes, or Teachers, or Apostles, or Euangelistes:
but he calleth whom he thinkes good, and therin tryeth
our humilitie, and therfore if wee bee willing too bee subiect too him,
let vs not sticke to take al authority in good woorth, which is grounded
in him, and vppon his ordinance. Now it is so, God letteth many men
alone in priute state, and in the meane whyle choozeth whome hee
thinkes good too preache his woord. Therfore men must hold them
there.
               Furthermore let vs mark, that if men proceede too their elections
with the feare of God, and seeke too obey him: surely he also will
shewe by effect, that they whom he hath called too teache, and to whom
the charge of ruling the flocke is committed, shall not bee destitute of
his power, but that he will furnish them with all things requisite, as
experie
                     •
                  nce sheweth wel ynough, and it is witnessed vntoo vs, that if
wee meete toogither in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ,Math. 18. c. 20. (so it bee
truely and vnfeynedly) he will be in the mids of vs. Thus yee se
                     •
                  
what wee haue too beare in mynd. Yit notwithstanding wee see that
the papacie hath so contryued men and framed them too their owne
Lure, as they bee vtterly gone away from the order of our Lord Iesus
Christ, and from the maner of gouerning the Churche, which was
knowen of the Apostles.
               Let vs looke backe agein to the thing that Saint Paule treateth of
heere. His meaning is too bring vs too the vnitie afore mentioned.
Therfore he will haue vs too bee of one accord, too link toogither like
brethren, and too shoote all at one mark, as hauing but one head which
knitteth vs all toogither, so as there bee nother enuy, nor ill will, nor
sects, nor aught else that may deuyde vs. Now too bring vs heruntoo,
he sayeth, that there is (but) one God, and one Lord, too whom all
Souereintie is giuen,
                  1. Tim. 2. b. 5. 
                  and that there is but one Baptime, and one
Fayth, and that vvee bee called al too one inheritance. After the saying
of this, hee addeth that Iesus Christ (for the better ratifying of that
vnitie) would that one man alone shold teach the rest, & that the companie
should giue eare too him, and therwithall that all of vs as well he



that speaketh, as they that heare him, should haue one selfsame fayth.
For asmuch then as all of vs cannot bee Apostles, Teachers, and
Prophets: he hath chozen some of vs too bee in that state and office, to
the end wee myght bee brought too the sayd vnitie, and Iesus Christ
bee aknowledged for our head, and all of vs bee gathered toogither vnder
him. Lo how S. Paule speaketh of it.
               But now if there had bin anie cheeftie or supremacie, so as it had
bin Gods mynd too haue assigned a seate in this world, the Bishop
wherof shoulde haue had superioritie ouer all the Churche, and
his Commission haue reached so farre, that his souereintie must haue
taken place euery where: surely Saint Paule would not haue forgottē
it, or else if he had, it had bin a very fowle fault. Spake he by the holy
Ghoste, and yit left he out the principall and most conuenient poynt of
his matter? (No:) and therfore if there were no more but this only
text, surely it were ynough too confound the shamelesnesse of the Papists,
when they say, there must needs bee an vnderhead in this wrold,
and that bycause Iesus Christ is gone out of this world, therfore hee
must needs haue a Uicar. But it is certeine that Saint Paule ment
too shewe the thing which wee haue seene in other texts: which is, that
Saint Peters Apostleship extended not vntoo vs. For he was appoynted
peculyarly too the Iewes,Gala. 
                        •
                     . b. 8. as is declared in the second too the
Galathians. But howsoeuer the cace stand, wee see heere the continewall
order, which wee must keepe, and wheruntoo wee must hold vs,
if wee mynd too be subiect too our Lord Iesus Christ. And that is
not to haue a Pope: but that euerye Churche haue his Shepherds and
Teathers, according too their neede, acording too the number of the
people, and according as the place requyreth: that when wee bee so
knit intoo one bodie of a Churche, wee may haue a lawfull gouernment,
which it is vnpossible for vs too forbeare, by reason of our rawenesse
and the weaknesse of our fayth, in respect wherof it standeth vs on
hand too haue the remedye which our Lord Iesus Christ hath giuen
vs, that men may hold themselues too his saying and authoritie. That
is it in effect which wee haue too mark vppon this streyne.
               Agein, Saint Paule procedeth afterward too shewe vs the inestimable
benefyte which wee haue by such order, and the fruite that wee
reape of it. For (as I haue touched afore) men are so hygh mynded,
that euery one would bee a Lord. Therfore there is nothing better
than too knowe that God woorketh our welfare by ordeyning this order



of gouernment, namely that there should bee Shepherds to teache
vs. For it is as a fyghting ageinst our owne saluation, whē wee play
the stubborne fooles, and will not lyke of the thing that God hath ordeyned
for our souerein welfare. Truely if there were no more but
this, namely that God hath so willed. Wo woorth him that dares
checke ageinst the maiestite of his maker. Yit notwithstanding the
worlde seeth our naugtinesse: and although wee graunt it too bee
good reason that wee should obey God, yit can wee not fynd in our
harts too do
                     •
                   it willingly and with a free hart, except wee see immediatly
before our eyes, that it is for our profit too doo so, and that Gods
intent was not alonly too humble vs vnder him, but also too aduaunce
vs therwithall, by willing this order too bee kept. And so yee see
wherat Saint Paule amed heere. For it is not ynough for vs too reuerence
the thing that God commaundeth, or too tremble at it, too the
end too doo it half perforce, and half of good will: but wee must go too
it with an earnest desyre. And how may that bee doone? By knowing
that it is for our profit. Now sith wee knowe it is so, and specially
that it standeth vppon our saluation▪ Wee ought well too apply all
our wits vntoo it: Or else our vnthankfulnesse wil bee the lesse tolerable,
when wee fall too thrusting away of the thing that God affereth
vs, not so much for any respect of himself, as for our profit. That then
is the thing which Saint Paul intended, in saying, that the preaching
of the Gospell and the appoynting of men expresly too that purpose,Phil. 2. b. 14. is
too linke vs toogither, that there myght bee no dissension among vs.
               And on the contrarie part Saint Paule declareth also, that all fantasticall
persons which reiect common order, and would bee so spirituall,
as if they were rauished aboue the Clouds: are separated from
the bodie of the Churche, a
                     •
                  d therwithall renounce God, by reason
wherof they ought to be euen abhorred, and shumed as deadly plages,
bycause they set dissension in the Churche. For bee wee neuer so desyrous
of vnitie, yit shall all that wee can doo bee in vayne, if wee hold
vs not too the thing that Saint Paule speaketh heere, that is too say,
that our Lord Iesus intended to knit the knot fast and sure in his owne
bodie. And therfore if any man say, he wil withdrawe himself from
the obedience of the Churche: it is all one as if he would cut asunder
the senewes of a bodie. I pretend peraduenture too loue some bodie,
& yit notwithstanding cut asunder the senewes of it euerywhere, so as
the whole bodie being disioynted and dismembered, falleth in a swond,



and finally rotteth quite away. Euen so standeth the cace with vs. For
wee should link toogither, and God hath prouyded verye well for it.
As how? By giuing vs Prophets, Teachers, Shepherds, and Euangelists.
Now if wee reiect them, what else is too bee sayd, but that
wee bee mynded too breake asunder al the vnitie which our Lord had
appoynted too bee among vs? To bee short, Saint Paule sheweth
heere, that all such as doo not submit themselues too the doctrine of the
Gospell, and yeeld reuerence too the minister therof, are deadly enemyes
of Gods people, and seekers of their owne confusion, & therfore
that men ought too shun them as woolues, bycause they bee vtterly intolerable,
inasmuch as they procure the ouerthrowe of the Churche, despyze
God in the things that were well ruled, and forsake the perfection
of all good things.
               Too bee shorte, Saint Paule addeth immediatly after, that it
is the edifying (or building vp of the bodie of Christ. And this
serues also to make those yit more abhorred, which wil not yeeld themselues
to this spirituall gouernment that our Lord Iesus hath allowed
of. For the bodie of our Lord Iesus ought too bee precious vntoo vs.
In deede it had bin ynough if he had sayd, the Church. But by vsing
this honorable tytle, Saint Paule sheweth vs, that it is too beynous
treason, for vs too seeke too rend the bodie of our Lord Iesus Christ in
peeces. Now it is so, that it cannot be builded vp, that is too say, it
cannot bee brought to perfection, nor continew in good plyght, but by
meane of the preaching of Gods woord. So then if wee bee willing
that God should be honored and serued, & that our Lord should quietly
haue his royal seat among vs, to reigne in the mids of vs: if we be willing
to be his people, & to liue vnder his protection: if we couet too bee
builded vp in the him, & to be ioyned vnto him, & to continue in him vnto
the end: to be short, if we desyre our saluation: we must learne to be
humble schoollers in receyuing the doctrine of the Gospel, & in herkening
to the shepherds that are sent vs, as if Iesus Christ spake too vs
himself in his own person, assuring our selues that he wil allow of the
obedience & submission of our fayth, whē we herken to the mortal men
vnto whō he giueth that charge. Therfore let vs shew the desyre which
wee haue that God should be honored, & also the desire and care which
we haue of our owne saluation, & of the common welfare and edefying
of the Churche: which thing will then come too passe, when all of vs
both great and small doo giue our consentes, that Iesus Christ shall



haue his instruments wherby too speake vntoo vs, and drawe vs vntoo
him. Which order if wee obserue, he will so blisse vs therby, as wee
shall haue cause too glorifie him, for that wee shall see how it hath alwayes
bin his will too procure the saluation of our soules, and that he
is euer at hand with vs, and will so woork, as wee shal not want any
thing that is for our behoofe or profit.
               Now let vs fal downe before the maiesty of our good God, with acknowledgment
of our faults, praying him to make vs so to feele them,
as we may be cast down in our selues, & seeke nothing else but to be set
vp agein by him, & that our Lord Iesus may haue such preheminence
ouer vs, as we may honour him as he deserueth, that wee beeing vnder
him in his keeping, may bee so guyded by his holie spi
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  , as his
woord may profit more and more in vs, and shewe foorth his strength,
and he so beare with our infirmities, as he may neuer ceasse too take
vs for his owne, so long as wee liue in his world, vntill wee bee all gathered
vp toogither intoo his kingdome. That it may please him too
graunt his grace, not only too vs, but also too all. &c.
            
            
               The .xxvi. Sermon which is the sixt
vppon the fourth Chapter.
               
                  
                     11. And the same hath giuen, some Apostles, and some Prophets,
and some Euangelists, and some Shehperds and Teachers.
                     12. For the reparation of the Saynts, too the woork of administration,
and for the building vp of Christes bodie,
                     13. Vntill wee come all into the vnitie of fayth, and of the knowledge
of the sonne of God, in the perfect man, vntoo the
measure of the full age of Christ.
                     14. That wee may no more bee babes, vvauering and caryed too
and fro vvith euerye vvynd of doctrine, by the vvylinesse
of men, and through their craftie conueyances too deceyue
vs.
                  
               
               
                  
                  WEe haue seene this morning, how God hauing
respect of our frayltie, hath voutsafed
too vse this meane too drawe vs too him:
that is, that wee should be taught familiarly
by mortal men lyke our selues, and therin
he sheweth also that he had an eye too
the thing that myght bee fittest for his seruants.
For in saying that he will alwayes
send a Prophet in Israell from among
the people,Deut. 18. d. 18. & Iohn. 1. g. 45. he ment too shewe that wee needed
not too seeke farre for him, but that he would fynd a meane too bee
familiarly conuersant among vs Therfore when the Gospell is preached
among vs, Gods applying of himself after that maner too our
slendernesse, is as much as if he came downe too vs himself. So little
then ought wee too disdeyne the order that he hath set among vs,
that our vnthankfulnesse shalbe the more heynous, if wee consider not
how greatly he loueth vs, in that he dealeth with vs after our owne
small capacitie. For inasmuch as wee haue not so excellent abilitie
as the Angels: therfore dooth he giue vs such meanes as he knoweth
too bee necessarie for vs. Moreouer Saint Paule addeth now, that
this must not serue vs for a little tyme only, but that wee must continew
in it all the tyme of our lyfe. For had he not added yit further, the
thing that we see: a man myght say, that we ought in deede to cōforme
our selues to the rule that God giueth vs, howbeit that must bee but for
a whyle, as if a man shold send litle children to schole, but that is not to
spend their whole lyfe there. And so it would haue seemed, that the
thing which hath bin spoken heertofore, serued but for a tyme, and that
when wee haue bin trayned in them a yeere or twayne, that ought too
suffyze vs, and euery man should be a Clerk wel ynough learned, so as
he myght forbeare all instruction afterward. But Saint Paule telleth
vs, that so long as wee bee in this world, wee must still profit in
Gods schoole, and haue our eares beaten dayly with his woord, that
wee may on the one syde bee brydled, and on the other syde bee strengthened
and set foreward more and more. For put the cace wee were of
so good abilitie and capacitie, as too learne all that is for our behoofe,
within twoo or three yeeres space: yit are wee so fickle headed, that
euery of vs would by and by bee starting out of the way, if wee were
not hild backe. Therfore Gods voutsafyng too haue his woord preached



vntoo vs euen too our dying day, serueth too make our fayth 
                     〈◊〉
                  
and stedfast.
               But there is yit a greater necessitie. Which is, that such as thinke
themselues forewardest, if they sift themselues throughly, shall fynd
themselues yit farre of from the marke that they runne at.Phil. 3. c. 12. And therfore
it standeth vs vppon, too bee strengthened dayly more and more,
and to haue the lyght of our fayth increaced, after the maner of the day,
which we see to grow still bryghter & bryghter vntoo hygh noone. So
must we profit still more and more, till the daysonne of ryghtuousenesse
appeere vntoo vs. Trew it is that men are so stout harted as a number
of them will not beleeue it: but that is bycause they bee contented
with their assishnesse. For yee shall see a great sort so proud and presumptuous,
bycause they haue studyed three or fower latin words, that
to their owne seeming they passe all the greatest doctors in the world,
A
                     •
                  d surely they also which doo but begin too study some science, beare
themselues in hand that they bee alredy come too the perfection of it,
and yit haue they scarsely entered into it. In lyke cace is it with handy
craftes, in so much that there is none so bold as blynd bayard: he sticketh
lesse to do al things, than the man that hath greatly profited. So
is it also with these lyghtheaded Christiās: get they once some saying
of the scripture at theyr tunges end, and behold, they bee (too their ow
                     •
                  
seeming) as half Angels, and they neuer passe of profiting any more.
But they that apply their whole indeuer to learne stil in Gods schoole,
doo fynd themselues behynd hand at a ten or twenty yeeres end. Howsoeuer
the world go, let vs marke well how the Apostle sayeth heere,
that God will not haue vs trayned in the Gospell for a twoo or three
yeeres only, but he will haue vs go through with it, so that if wee liued
a hundred yeeres and vpward in this world, yit must wee bee schollers
still, and all our wisdome is too knowe that we be not yit come so neere
too our perfection, but that wee had neede too go foreward still. And
heeruppon wee must euery of vs for his own part stirre vp and spurre
foorth our selues: and therwithall God must bee so gracious too vs,
as to be alwayes redy to continew his teaching of vs styll withou
                     •
                  
                  
                     •
                  eassing, so as wee maye neuer bee weerye. And when wee haue one
day learned some lesson that may d
                     •
                  o vs good, let vs assure our selues
that the same is not so wel printed in our harts as nedeth, nor yit so wel
knowen of vs as were reuqisite. And Agein, that when wee haue learned
one poynt, yea twoo or three, wee want yit much more, and ther
                     •
                  


                  
is not a man so well qualified, which hath not neede too bee exhorted
still. Too bee short, let vs assure our selues in any wyse, that Gods
ordeyning of this gouernment in his Church, that the Gospell should
bee preached, is too the intent, that as long as wee bee in this earthly
pilgrimage, wee should resort continually too the schoole where God
teacheth vs:1. Cor. 1
                        •
                     . d. 12. for wee walke by beleefe (sayeth Saint Paule) and not
by eysyght. Wherin he sheweth that we bee not yit of capacitie to behold
Gods glory,1. Iohn. 
                        •
                     . a. 
                        •
                     . (according also as S. Iohn sayeth in his first Epistle,)
nother shalbee vntill wee bee all wholly transfigured and made
lyke vntoo God: and then shall wee see him (sayeth he) as he is. As
now as (S. Paule sayeth in another place) wee see but in part,1. Cor. 1
                        •
                     . c. 9. and we
knowe but in part, verily bycause wee walke but in beleefe. Nowe
whence springeth fayth?Rom. 1
                        •
                     . b. 17. How is it nurrished and increaced. By the
woord of God. When wee haue preaching, and are diligent too bee
edifyed by it: that is the first poynt wherby, and wherat our fayth beginneth:
and that is the meane wherby it continueth and increaceth
till it bee throughly perfected, as wee shall see. And for the same cause
dooth S. Iohn call both old men and young men, and such as are in
the flower of their age, too the intent they should all submit themselues
too the obedience of the Gospell. Yee old men,1. Iohn. 2. b. 12. 13. 14. come heare him
that was before all tyme, sayth he (speaking of our Lord Iesus Christ)
he is appeered. And you young man and little children, learne too
knowe that yee haue a father in heauen. And you stronger sort, know
yee wherin your strength lyeth. Too bee short, S. Paule sheweth vs
heere, that Gods children must be so humble, as to submit themselues
too instruction and teaching from day too day and from yeere to yeere,
and consider that they bee not yit come whyther they woulde and
should.
               And too the same purpose dooth he adde, Vntill wee bee knit all
toogither in the vnitie of fayth. Forasmuch as wee myght quyte
start away, and no brydle could holde vs backe, if necessitie once constreyned
vs, (as I haue shewed you already this morning: therfore S.
Paule telleth vs, that wee bee not yit come too the poynt, which these
fantasticall persons that are puffed vp with their vayne ouerweening,
(doo thinke themselues too bee come vntoo,) as though they wanted
nothing more: S. Paule sayth, wee be not there yit. Trew it is, that
wee ought too indeuer too bee all one (as I haue shewed already:) for
without concord there can bee nother Church nor religion among vs,



nother is God honored and serued: neuerthelesse wee doo but go 
                     •••
                  ward
still vntoo this concord asMath. 5. d. 25. wee doo too all other vertues. And so
long as wee liue in this world, wee alwayes go still further and further,
according whervntoo this lyfe is not in vayne named a race or
way,1. Tim. 4. b. 7. appoynted vs of God. After that maner then dooth he speake
vntoo vs of the vnitie of fayth: not that the Christians ought too varye
one from another, and to maynteyne contrary opinions whyle they be
in the trade of profiting: but S. Paule sheweth, that their fayth cannot
bee all one, vntill it bee well settled. Now there will alwayes bee
imperfections and infirmities, there will alwayes bee cloudes of ignorance.
And therefore wee must keepe on too the marke that is set
vs downe heere.
               Furthermore, wee must marke well what S. Paule addeth, concerning
the knowing of the sonne of God. For therein he sheweth vs
the summe of our fayth: which is, not too wander too and fro, but too
knowe what Iesus Christ is, what at his power is, and what benefites he
bringeth vs. That is the trew perfectnesse of fayth. Therfore I said,
that it is a notable poynt. For wee see how the wretched world hath
bin misseledde and beguyled heretoofore, and still is in the popedome,
where they which haue some deuoutnesse, torment themselues greatly,
and take paynes too inquyre of this and that, alwayes full of hartbytings,
alwayes full of questionings, and yit are still of that sort, whom
S. Paule reporteth too bee euer learning,
                     
                        •
                     . Tim. 3. b. 7. and neuer a whit the wyzer.
S. Paule speaketh there of these Hypocrites which despyze the simplicitie
of the Gospell, and turne away from Iesus Christ, too follow
                     •
                  
theyr owne foolishe inuentions. They will haue their speculations on
eyther syde, and they will take payne ynough: but yit shall they neuer
bee the wyzer.Coloss. 2. a. 3. For inasmuch as all the treasures of wisedome and
vnderstanding are layd vp in Iesus Christ, wee must ame at him:
in him onely shall wee fynde the whole substaunce of our saluation.
When wee once knowe that Iesus Christ is giuen vs of God his father,1. Cor. 6. b. 11.
too reconcyle vs by his death and passion: when wee once know
                     •
                  
that it is he onely in whom wee must seeke our ryghtuousnesse, when
wee once knowe that wee bee washed from all spots and vnclenenesse
by his blud, that he hath made satisfaction for all our dettes wherin
wee were indetted, that he by his holy spirit hath sanctifyed vs and dedicated
vs too the 
                     •
                  eruice of God,1. Iohn. 2. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . and that he is our aduocate too make
vs fynde fauour in all our prayers and supplications: I say, when w
                     •
                  e



once knowe this: wee may despyze all the things which the other sort
thinke themselues too know, & which they haue imagined without any
certeintie. For that cause therfore dooth S. Paule adde heere expresly
the knowing of the sonne of God, too the end to defyne the better what
the woord Fayth importeth. For it runneth roundly ynough in mens
mouthes: and euery man will say he beleeueth: but in the meane while,
if these men which vaunt themselues with full mouth too bee as pillers
of the Church, and as good catholikes as may bee, (as the world sees
well ynough,) bee demaunded what faith is: they stop short of it. They
will say perchaunce, it is too beleeue in God: (yea:) but the Turkes
and Papistes will say so too: and yit for all that 
                     〈◊〉
                   will condemne
the Turkes, bycause they know not what beleefe is. As much is too
bee sayd of Papists. And wherin differ wee from them, wee (I say)
that call our selues Christians? In knowing that God hath sent vs
Iesus Christ too leade vs vp hygher, so as wee bee sure that bycause
he is our father, he will not lay our sinnes too our charge, but receyueth
vs intoo his fauour through his owne free goodnesse, accepting
vs for ryghtuous, when wee condemne our selues by trew repentance,
and seeke all our welfare in Iesus Christ, acknowledging that
there is nothing in vs but vtter cursednesse. Yee see then that our Lord
Iesus Christ is the very marke or whyte wherat wee ame. If a man
should shoote in a long bowe, or in a Crosse bowe, or in a Gunne, and
haue no mark or white before him, but should discharge at aduenture,
now this way, now that way: what a shooting were that? Euen so
standes the cace with al them that ame not at our Lord Iesus Christ.
For they doo but roue, and intangle them selues in many a pecke of
trubbles: and wee should bee euer in daunger to bee misledde and de
                  
                     •
                  eiued
by men, if wee did not knowe Iesus Christ, and settle our whole
contentation in hym, assuring our selues that he is the whole summe of
our fayth.
               Now Saint Paule addeth yit further, that the same is for the age
of perfection, and for our true accomplishment. Wherby he doth
vs too wit (as I haue touched alredy) that so long as wee liue in this
world, wee must still growe and go foreward, knowing that there are
still manie infirmities in vs, and that wee bee not yit come too our
full greatnesse. Yit is it not therfore too bee sayd, that wee bee litle
children still, as he will adde anon after: but here he setteth downe
as it were three degrees of age. First infanc
                     •
                  e and chyldhod, secondly



the yeeres aboue twelue, before there bee yit discretion and skill
to gouerne our selues, in which tyme wee must still profit more and
more. And when a man is come too the age of fortie yeeres, then is
he is his cheefe state. For by that tyme he ought too haue some trade
both of bodie and mynd, wheron too stay and rest. Not that wee must
not profit still euen at threescore yeeres: but I speake of the similitude
that Saint Paule setteth downe heere. First therfore he sayth, that
wee must herken too the Gospell, till wee bee come too full age. And
when is that? At our death, sayeth he. For heere wee must not
count our yeeres after the manner of men. After a man is once past
fiftie, too all seeming he decayeth both in his senses and in his wit,
But Saint Paule sayth, that wee shall neuer bee at our full growth,
till wee bee rid of this bodie. So then, the spirituall age of Christians
is when they bee gone out of this world. But now let vs see what
manner of ones wee bee, since wee beganne too profit in the Gospell.
Wee bee lyke a chylde that is halfe a man. He is past fifteene yeere
old, or perhappes past twentie: & yit he ceasseth not to learne styl dayly,
for he hath needde of it, and he is sure, that although he haue studied
(a good whyle,) yit is he not come too the last step, he hath not gotten
so settled and stayed a iudgment as were requisite. Howbeeit, it may
well come too passe, that a child of twentie yeeres shall haue all the
sciences at his fingers endes, wherein he hath bin trayned and instructed:
but yit shall he bee neuerthelesse lyght headed for all that, nother
shall he haue the skyll too apply them too his vse, bycause he is
not yit rype: for he is but lyke greene Corne, or lyke as when a vyneyard
makes a fayre show of a good vintage, but the grapes are not yit
rype. Euen so is it with that age. And for that cause Saint Paule
sayth by a similitude, that as long as Christians are alyue, although
they were threescore, yea foure score, or fyue score yeeres old, yit must
they bee still lyke children, not too chyldren of wit, but too young striplings
which are of age to profite,1. Cor. 3. a. 1. and doo willingly submit and suffer
themselues too bee gouerned, bycause they knowe well they bee
not yit of rype discretion. Neuerthelesse Saynt Paule telleth vs,
wee must not bee lyke lyttle babes that haue yit nother wit nor discretion,1. Cor. 14. b. 20.
nor can scarsely yit discerne betweene good and bad.
               First and formest therfore wee must beare this lesson well in mynd,
that when wee haue seene and tryed neuer so much in the world, and
traueled from place too place, and bin exercyzed in manye affayres:



though we thinke our selues to be the politikest in the world, yit are
wee not so wyse, that wee neede to learne no more. And why? For
heere the cace concerneth Gods wisdome, which passeth all the wit
of man, and wee may bee commended ynough and too much of the
world, and yit wee shall know things but in part,1. Cor. 13. c. 19. and therfore let vs
not deceyue our selues. Therfore away with this fond ouerweening,
too thinke our selues wyse ynough, (I spake euen of them that are able
too teathe others) and let vs continew scollers still. For although
Iesus Christ haue appoynted certein too bee as leaders and guydes
too shewe other men the way: yit dooth it not follow, that they bee so
wyse, that they must not bee learners as well as the rest. For he that
speaketh, must take instruction by it himself, and a man shall neuer be
meete too declare Gods will vntoo other men, except he himself learne
dayly.
               The thing then whiche wee haue too beare in mynde, is, that
wee must bee throughly perswaded, that if wee profit not our selues,
wee go lyke Seacrabbes. For they that go not foreward in the doctrine
of saluation, vaunt they neuer so much of their being taught in
Gods schoole, doo vndoubtedly go backe. And therfore let vs beware
in any wyse that wee fall not asleepe, or stand still at a stay, as though
there were no more too bee learned. And let vs consider that our lyfe
is lykened too a way, and thervppon learne too go foreward still, and
too gayne alwayes some ground, and too spurre and etch foorth our
slouthfulnesse and slowenesse, so as it may from day too day appeere,
that wee haue gotten some knowledge more than afore: eyther by vnderstanding
better the things which we thought too haue bin throughly
printed in our myndes, or by conceyuing some other poynt by other
folkes instruction, which was vnknowen too vs afore. So then, let
vs increace the hoord of that treasure from day too day. And if olde
folk bee so much the carefuller too gather goods, as they drawe neerer
too their graue, bycause they see themselues too bee weake, and too
haue neede of succour, and are alwayes afrayd to bee destitute of mans
ayde, insomuch that that forecast of theirs, driueth them to burning couet
                     •
                  usnesse:
ought not wee on our syde too bee greatly ashamed, if
wee make not prouision of Gods woord in our old age, seeing wee perceyue
how there is much feeblenesse and sin still in vs? or if wee labour
not too bee continually still inlyghtened euen tyll the daysonne of
ryghtuousnesse (which is our Lord Iesus Christ) shyne vppon vs,Mala
                        •
                     h. 4. a. 2.


                  
as at hygh noone, seeing wee fynde our owne ignorance by experience.
               Yee see then that the meane too put this doctrine of Saint Paules
in vre, is first too humble our selues in such wyse, as no man take more
vppon him through vayne selfweening, than belongs vntoo him, but
that wee will keepe on our way aduyzedly, assuring our selues that we
bee not yit come too our wayes end. And that is the cause also why
Saint Paul sayd,Phil. 3. c. 12. that he looked not backe to the things he had doone
alredye, but foreward vntoo the things that remayned. Saint Paule
had made a greate iorney, and taken much peyne for the Gospels sake:
he had bin taken vp afore into the third heauen:2. Cor. 12. b. 4. and there he had heard
and seene secret things, which it was not lawfull for him to speake of
among men. Yee see then, that he was as a man that had bin
taught in the schoole of Angels: and as in respect of men, he had passed
all the other Apostles: and yit for all this, he sayeth he streyneth
himselfe forewarde, and laboureth too atteyne too the marke
wherat he amed. Now if Saint Paule spake so: what ought wee too
doo, which are yit as it were but at our Apcie? Then as concerning
this full rypenesse of age, let vs assure our selues that wee cannot forbeare
new and dayly instruction, vntill wee bee quyte rid of all the infirmities
of our flesh. Untill wee bee departed out of this world, wee
must suffer our selues too bee guyded and gouerned lyke teachable and
meeke young folk, and wee must beeleeue good counsell, assuring our
selues that wee haue neede of it. Therfore Saint Paule attributeth
that (full rypenesse of age) too our Lord Iesus Christ, as if he should
say, that men beguyle themselues through their owne fond rashnesse,
by beholding themselues in them selues.1. Cor. 1. d. 21. For know we once what Iesus
Christ is, wee shal perceyue full well, that there are yit manie imperfections
in vs. He is called the wisdome of God his father, he is
called his euerlasting woord,Iohn. 1. a. 1. he is called his image. And all this is
too the end that wee should learne of him, and behold Gods glorie in
his person, which otherwyse were inuisible vntoo vs. But now, can
wee comprehend Gods infinite wisdome? Can wee atteyne too the
vnderstanding of Gods glorie,1. Cor. 11. b. 7. so as wee may haue the full syght of it?
Alas wee bee farre short of it.Coloss. 1. b. 15. Therfore whensoeuer wee be tempted
with foolish ouerweening, too think wee knowe more than wee doo:
let vs lift vp our eyes too our Lord Iesus Christ, and not presume in
our selues, as many fantasticall persons doo. For when wee 
                     〈◊〉
                  


                  
knowe that our wisdome is in our Lord Iesus Christ, then shall wee
well perceyue that wee bee yit farre from it.
               Herewithall Saint Paule warneth vs also, that it is not in our
owne power or cunning too beleeue faythfully,Iam. 1. c. 17. but th
                     •
                  t wee must be
fayne too haue it giuen vntoo vs. Trew it is that wee must doo our indeuer,
that our fayth may bee stablished: wee must bee diligent in hearing
Gods word, we must haunt Sermons, we must reade, we must
herken too good exhortations, and too all good doctrine, wherby wee
may fare the better: wee must giue good heede too those things. And
yit notwithstanding wee must not presume any whit vppon our
owne cunning, as though our wit were able of it self too receyue learning
and instructiō: but let vs learne that our Lord Iesus Christ must
bring vs too that by his holie spirit. So then let vs bee lowely, that
wee may bee the schollers of our God: and that lowelinesse importeth
a ridding of our selues from all selfweening, and an abcing of our
selues, knowing that wee haue no more than is giuen vs of God.
               Also on the contrarie part Saint Paule sayeth, that wee must not
bee as little children wauering with euerie blast of doctrine, or being
tossed and turmoyled too and fro, as chaffe vvith the vvynd:
and too bee short, that vvee must not bee beguyled by the vvylynesse
of men. Heere wee see yit better the thing tha
                     •
                   I touched heertoofoore:
which is, that Saint Paule setteth downe as it were three
ages. The first is, as a Chyldhood. And which is that? It is before
we haue anie instruction at all, when wee be yit as it were half beasts,
without discretion too discerne Gods truthe. And there bee many such
children in the world. At what age? Euen at three or fouer score
yeeres. For here Saint Paule speaks by a liknesse or resembla
                     •
                  nce,
& stands not vpon the accounting of dayes, moonethes, or yeeres. His
meaning then is, that such as are wauering and floting lyke a bote
that is tossed vppon the water, are little children. It it is trew that
the scripture dooth sundry tymes vse the woord (Chyld) in another
sense: as when Saint Peter exhorteth vs too bee as newborne babes,1. Pet. 2. a. 2.
and too desyre the milk of soundnesse, yea euen with putting away of
all malice. Also our Lord Iesus exhorteth vs too bee as babes,Mark. 9. 
                        •
                     . 36. & Luke. 
                        •
                     . f. 47. that is
too say, vnpuffed vp with presumption and pryde, so as wee mak
                     •
                   no
reckening of our selues, ne be trubbled with the lusts that vex
                     •
                   vs,
when wee begin too knowe what it is too liue among men. Then after
that maner it dooth vs good to be babes or little children. Agein



in another place Saint Paule sayth,
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 14. d. 20. that wee should bee babes i
                     •
                  
naughtinesse: but yit he sayth, that wee must not bee babes in vnderstanding:
and that is the thing which he rehearseth agein in this present
text. Then condemneth he such as are babes in vnderstanding,
that is too say, which are so doutfull and wauering, that they bee sure
of nothing: they knowe not what fayth too bee of, nor what God too
woorship. Now I told you that the world is too full of such babes,
which harden themselues in their brutishnesse and ignorance. And
in good sooth, how manie shall a man fynde which are so throughly
settled in Gods truth, as they cannot bee made too daunce after another
mannes pype, as Saint Paule speaketh of them heere? For if
it bee demaunded what the Gospell is, some will answere, it must
needes bee a good thing bycause God is the author of it: but in the
meane whyle, too bee able too yeelde a reason of theyr fayth, is no
poynt of their skill, but they harden themselues in their ignorance,
yea and couet too bee as lyttle babes styll. Othersome can well ynough
skill too yeeld an account, in such wyse as a man woulde deeme
there were some good roote of fayth in them: and yit for all that, if
there come but one blast of wynd, yee shall see them in such perplexitie,
that they wote not any more in what God they beleeue. For if
there ryse vp any heresyes or stumbling blockes, the most part of
those that spake woonders afore, are so wyndshaken as too saye,
How now? There were neuer such opinions heard of: and what
meaneth this? Which may a man holde for the best? But in so dooing
they shewe well ynough, (as I sayd afore) that they neuer streyned
themselues, ne tooke any great payne too go forwarde, that they
myght no more bee so wauering.
               Furthermore, besydes this lykening of men vntoo babes, Saint
Paule setteth downe yit other similitudes, saying, that such folkes
are as reedes that are shaken vvith euery vvynd, or as a boate that
floteth vppon the waues of the sea, or of some Lake. In deede this
belongeth not too little babes: but Saint Paules intent was also
too shewe howe wretched their state is, which are not throughly
grounded in the Gospell. For is there any greater wretchednesse
than too bee floting, and as it were wauering at euery wynde,
and too haue no steadinesse at all in the matters that concerne our
saluation? If wee were threatened euerye minute of an houre,
where through wee were so scared, that wee were in continuall fearfulnesse



and trembling: had wee not leauer too bee dead out of hand,
than too linger after that sorte, and too dye a hundred tymes aday?
But now, wee stand vppon the euerlasting saluation of our soules:
and wote not where too become in that cace? Shall there bee no stedinesse
in vs? S. Paule therefore ment too shew vs this thing, of purpose
too redresse the slothfulnesse or rechlesnesse whervntoo wee be too
much giuen.
               And too pricke vs foreward yit dubble: he sayeth, that vvee must
not bee subiect too mens Cousinage. He vseth heere a woord that
is taken of dyce playing. For wee knowe that they which make a
trade or occupacion of that craft, must haue store of siyghtes, for there
is no faythfulnesse nor trust in it. In deede it is sayd, that a man
shall see the tryall of ones wit and disposition by playe: but it is knowen
also that all Dycers are deceyuers, insomuch as there is not the
simplest of them, but he would haue the cunning too beguyle those
that playe with him. In deede all are not so cunnyng as too shred other
men of their goods by their s
                     •
                  eyghtie conueyance: but yit for
all that, wee see it is the generall and vniuersall propertie of that play,
too bee guylefull. And it is not so in that game onely, but welneere
in all other. Saint Paule hath set downe heere but one kynde, but
experience sheweth how the cace standeth, yea and euen lyttle children
ought too beare it well in mynde. And whereas I call them little
children, I meane not such as hang vppon the dug, but these lyttle
Cockchickens that are tyed too swordes, and are so pert fellowes, &
weene themselues to be men, when they ought to haue a rodde yit half
a doozen yeeres longer, and yit for al that doo take snuffe at it, if a man
kepe them from beyng deceyued. For if all games were set at lybertie:
surely there woulde be store of Cousiners euerywhere. And a
young heyre shoulde no sooner come too a dozen yeeres olde, but he
should haue a newe lyuerie on his backe (as they say:) for he should
fynde Cousiners ynow, which would take him by the hande, too picke
his purse, and keepe him good companie till he were quyte shred of
all that he hath. Now then although Saint Paule speake heere of the
stedfastnesse of the fayth of the Gospell: yit borroweth he the comparisons
of the common lyfe, and of the thinges that are seene day by
day. His saying then is, that vnlesse wee haue a well settled fayth, so
as wee bee fully purposed and determyned too walke in Gods truth
euen to the end, & to stand inuincibly in it: we be but little children that



are subiect too euery mans cousinage, & we shall alwayes fynd Cousiners
and deceiuers, that will robbe vs & spoyle vs, & we neuer perceiue
it, so as wee shall woonder how wee become poore. In the same taking
are wee▪ and all commeth too his poynt, too shewe vs that wee
haue great neede too bee well fenced. For when wee bee out of feare,
euery of vs falles too reueling, we take no care, wee keepe no watch.
But if there bee warre, so as wee bee threatened: then (wee think) it
behoues vs too keepe good watch, & wee stand vppon our gard. If wee
dout of any afterclappes, then we bethink our selues, least we be taken
napping. Saint Paule therfore telleth vs heere, that there will bee
nothing but cousining, and that we shal fall into Satans snares euery
minute of an houre, if wee watch not warely. And why? For among
whom are wee conuersant? What a sort of Cousiners are there in the
worlde? There will euer bee leaud companie which shall seeke the
ouerthrowe of our fayth: there will euer bee scoffers, heathenish folk,
and other makebates, which would fayne haue all things go too ha
                  
                     ••
                  cke,
yea and which will indeuer too shead their poysons and herestes
abrode, too corrupt and infect men withall. Too bee short, the
diuell hath a thousand wayes too deceyue vs, and men also are redy ynough
vntoo it, and there are maynteyners ynow which will offer
themselues, and desyre no better liuing, as they say. For this cause
Saint Paule sheweth vs, that if wee labour not stoutly too profyte in
Gods woord, wee shall surely bee caught and caryed away at euery
hand, and fleete too and fro, and bee led by the bill, and runne about
lyke little chilldren, so as wee shall haue no discretion at all. Then
if wee bee not well aduyzed, euen they that are the forewardest of vs,
shall stumble, and within a step or twoo breake our neckes, notwithstanding
that wee seeme too bee well entered on our way alr
                     ••
                  y
                     •
                  .
And it is not heere only that the scripture telleth vs, we must not bee
as little babes in vnderstanding. Wee see that the people of the
Iewes also were
                     •
                  vpbrayded with it, insomuch that Esay telleth them,
that they be but as little children alwayes at their Apcie,Esay. 28. 
                        •
                     . 10. and that they
must alwayes bee rapped vppon the pates, bycause they continue still
in their brutishnesse. When a man hath cryed out too them a hundr
                     ••
                  
and hundred tymes A.B.C. by and by they forget it, and are 
                     〈◊〉
                  
new too begin. Thus complayneth he of them. And agein, too 
                     〈◊〉
                  
them ashamed, How pro
                     ••
                  t you (sayeth he) specially in Gods doct
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  e?
There yee make as though yee were little children, & play the 
                     〈◊〉
                  .



In worldly affi
                     ••
                  es yee bee craftie yn
                     ••
                  gh: but in the doctrine of saluation
yee vnderstand nothing a
                     •
                   all. Now herein God sheweth, that
he will punishe such as take scorne too bee taught in his schoole. So
then, let vs labour too come too the myddle age,Ephe. 4. b. 13. whereof S. Paule
spake not long ago. And although wee cannot atteyne too perfection
so long as wee bee in this world: yit let vs not bee starke idiots and
altoogither vnlearned, nother let vs bee euer nouices: but let vs shewe
that God hath not lost his tyme, in beeyng so gracious too vs, as too
beate our eares with his woorde. That is the thing which wee haue
too beare away.
               Furthermore let vs vnderstand also, that it is long of none but our
selues that wee be not wel armed ageinst all the wyles of the diuell and
the world, namely by laboring too profit in the Gospell and in Gods
woord. For from thence must wee fetch armor and weapon too furnish
our selues withall, when wee bee weake. That is the way too
withstand at the cosinages and falshoods of Satan: that is the meane
for vs to beate backe all his assaultes: that is to wyt, by hauyng the
said worde, which wyll serue vs for Swoord, Target, and Headpeece▪
                  Ephe. 
                        •
                     . c. 14.
as wee shall see in the syrt Chapter. Too bee short, wee shalbe well
armed too withstand all bruntes.
               Therefore if wee bee fickle headed, and therupon it please 
                     〈◊〉
                   too
punish our vnthankfulnesse, accordyng too his threatnyng by Moyses
in the thirteene of Deuteronomie, where he saith,Deut. 13. a. 3. that if he styrre vp
false Prophetes, and the people gyue eare too them, it is a token that
they loued hym not, and that they which continue in his feare, wyll abide
firme and stedfast: I say, if wee bee so light and fickle mynded, let
vs arme our selues with these exhortations: and (as saith Saint Paul)
if heresies spring vp, let vs vnderstand,1. Cor. 11. d. 19. that it is for the tryall of suche
as bee rightly mynded. And therefore let vs marke well, that it is
long of nothing but of our own rechlesnesse, that wee bee not alwayes
stedfast in Gods woorde, and that our fayth dooth not alwayes get
the vpper hand of all temptations (as saith Saint Iohn in his first Epistle.
This ought too prouoke vs too take paynes,1. Iohn. 5. a. 4. not onely too get
ordinary foode to sustaine our soules withall: but also too withstande
Satan and all his champions, and too beate backe all assaultes that
shalbee made vpon vs.
               And forasmuch as our Lord matcheth his Sacramentes with his
woord: let vs make our profit of them altoogither. And wheras wee



are too receyue the holy Supper the next Sunday, let vs vnderstand,
that it is our spirituall armour, wherwith it beh
                     •
                  ueth vs too bee fenced
ageinst Satan, and is added for a further strengthning of vs after wee
haue bin instructed in Gods woord. Wherfore 
                     •
                  et vs not through our
vnkyndnesse and vanitie, suffer the meanes too serue for nothing, which
God hath giuen vs, and which he knoweth too bee fit for vs: but let vs
followe this counsell of Saynt Paules. And on the one syde let vs
consider that wee bee weake, a
                     •
                  d that wee haue neede too bee releeued,
and that Gods comming after that fashyon vntoo vs, is too drawe vs
vntoo him, that wee myght yeeld him thankes for the louing kyndnesse
which he vseth. And for our owne parte let vs indeuer too put foreward
our selues the more, by matching the woord with the Sacramentes,
and the Sacraments with the woord, so as wee may bee prouoked
thereby too resort too our God, that he maye so further vs in
the way of saluation, as it may appeere in the end, that wee haue not
walked in vayne, nor bin disappoynted of our expectation.
               Now let vs foll downe before the maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him too make vs so too feele
them, as we may vtterly mis
                     •
                  yke of them, and bee alwayes prouoked
too trew repentance, and not onlye bee sory that wee haue offended,
but also resist all the wicked lustes of our flesh, which hinder our trew
obedience in ruling our lyfe according too his holie woord, and that
forasmuch as the ryght way too atteyne thertoo, is too profit in his
woord, it may please him too graunt that wee may neuer bee destitute
of that benefyte, and that when wee haue it in our handes, wee may
vse it well, & labour too profit in it: and he woorke in such wyse in vs
by his holy spirit, as it may not be a sound that vanisheth away in the
aire, but a roote that groweth fast in vs, to yeeld frute in our lyfe, euen
too the end, that wee way bee so grounded in him, as his loue and fear
                     •
                  
may growe more and more in vs, vntill he haue gathered vs togither
intoo his heritage. That it maye please hym too graunt this grace,
not only too vs, but also too all people and Nations of the earth. &c.
            
            
               
               The .xxvii. Sermon, which is the seuenth
vppon the fourth Chapter.
               
                  
                     15. But too the end that follovving truth vvith Charitie, vvee
myght grovve in all things in him that is the head, too
vvit, Christ,
                     16. By vvhom the vvhole bodie being knit togither, and ioyned
by euery ioynt throughout, vvith furniture according too
the operation of eche part in measure, taketh the ful growth
of a bodie, too the buylding vp of it self in loue.
                  
               
               
                  WEe haue seene heeretoofore, that wee
must keepe the order which God hath set
among vs, that wee maye profite in Gods
schoole all the tyme of lyfe. For in asmuch
as God hath not ordeyued any superfluous
thing: we must conclude, that we
shall neuer atteyne too so perfect learning
whyle wee lyue in this world, but that
wee shall haue neede too go further styll,
and (which is more) wee shall neuer
bee at our wayes end, till wee bee come too the end of our lyfe. For
asmuch then as wee knowe that wee haue yit but a peere of the thing
which wee must haue, and that our fayth will alwayes bee weake:
let vs stryue so much the more too bee strengthened, and too drawe
neere vnto God. And then shall wee not bee lyke little children, and
such as wauer and flote too and fro with euery wynde, and haue no stedinesse
in their fayth. For if we be diligent to profite in Gods woord,
surely wee shalbee armed and fenced to withstand all the wyles of Satan,
and of the wicked men that would beguyle vs. For although God
bring vs not to perfection o
                     •
                  t of hand, but hold vs styll in some feeblenesse:
yit shall wee neuer bee destitute of good remedie, if wee receyue
the things that he offereth vs, & be not rechlesse in applying thē to our
behoofe. The meane to bring which thing to passe is shewed vs here:
namely that wee followe the truth, & loue one another. As if S.
Paule should say, that the knowledge of God, & 
                     •
                  he loue of our neyghbours
are twoo things that ought not too bee sep
                     •
                  rated asunder.
               
                  And he putteth truth foremest, purposely, bycause our linking toogither
would not boote vs at all, vnlesse Iesus Christ were the bond of
our concord, and that God alloweth it, bycause it is grounded vpon his
woord, Saynt Paule then ment heere too put a difference betwixt
vs, and the heathen and vnbeleeuers. For all men will graunt well
ynough, that there can be nothing but hauocke among men, when they
bee lyke too Dogges and Cattes: and it hath bin knowen for a grounded
principle in all ages, in all Countries, and among all people, insomuch
that euen the heathen folke, and such as knew not what trewe
religion meaneth, haue simply commended and esteemed the benefyte
of concord and agreement toogither.
               But yit they buylded without foundation. And therefore Saynt
Paule beginneth at Gods truth: As if he should saye, wee must not
only linke in one among our selues: but God must also go before vs,
and wee must obey him, so as wee must bee gathered toogither vnder
him, and he sit ouer vs, and wee must leuer chooze too bee at defyance
with the whole world, than too slip away from him. Thus yee see
that the thing which wee haue too marke vppon this text, is that God
will not haue vs too bee knit toogither without knowing how or why:
but he will haue vs too agree too woorship and serue him, and too put
our whole trust in his infinite goodnes, so as Iesus Christ be our head,
and we all members of his bodie through the power of fayth. And agein,
that when wee once knowe how wee haue a father in heauen
which hath adopted vs too bee his children, and that Iesus Christ
hath voutsafed too take our flesh and substance vppon him, too the
intent that wee should bee flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone: the
same should moue vs too loue one another, too bee carefull ech for others
saluation, and too helpe one another according too the abilitie
that God gyueth vs. According wheruntoo it is sayd in the Psalme,Psal. 133. 
                        •
                     . 1.
that the freendship of brothers is a leeuesome thing. And afterward
the Prophet bringeth vs too the oyntment that was powred vpon the
Priests: as if he should say, that men hauing no more but euen their
moother wit, may perceyue that there is not a more leeuesome thing
in the world, than too liue in peace and amitie. Howbeit therewithall
he declareth the order of it, after the same maner that it is shewed vs
heere by S. Paule, and 
                     •
                  ayth, that the sayd brotherhood must bee con
                  
                     •
                  crated
and dedicated to the name of God. For the annoynting of
Aaron and his successors, was in such sort, as the oyntment did sheade



downe vppon the whole body, and vppon the garment of them. Now
therefore let vs marke, that if wee intend too linke toogither well, wee
must drawe vntoo God, and our linking must bee allowed of him. Otherwyse,
wee may well haue fellowship toogither, but it shalbee but
a cursed felowship, and the end of it can neuer bee but vtter confuzion.
Wherefore, that wee may rule our lyfe well, let the end that wee begin
at, bee too cleaue vntoo the truth. Ryght necessarie is this warning
for vs now adayes. For the Papistes accuse vs, that wee haue
trubbled the world, & that the debates that are now adayes, doo spring
of our fault: inasmuch as heretoofore all was deade, euery man sayd,
Amen, too them, and there was no disputing. In deede there was no
great trauell spent in seeking God or the saluation of men. Now then,
too cast the Diuell out of the possession that he had gotten, it behoued
vs too vse great vehemencie, according as it is sayd, that he will neuer
giue ouer his place, except he bee inforced. Therefore it stoode vs on
hand (as yee would say) too thunder and lighten, too waken the world,
that was so falne asleepe, and after a sort bewitched. For inasmuch
as the vnbeleeuers are extremely stubborne in stryuing ageinst God,
and cannot abyde that the truth should take place, but vpholde theyr
lyes with diuelishe wilfulnesse: that is the very cause why there is so
much trubble and warre in the world now adayes, I meane for Religion.
Now the Papistes would laye the blame in our neckes: but let
vs see who is in the fault. For wee desyre that euery man should doo
homage vntoo God, and that both great and small should submit themselues
too his woorde, and that there should bee one trew vnitie of
fayth, so the simplicitie of the Gospell go before it and guyde it. These
are the things that wee seeke: and the Papists fynd fault with it.
               Yit notwithstanding, there is none other thing too bee found in
our doctrine, but that wee would fayne that there should bee a melodie
betweene men and Angels too woorship the trew God, and too
follow his w
                     •
                  ord, which is our trew rule, to the end there should be no
corruption in his seruis. On the contrarie part, the Papistes would
maynteyne all their abhominations and errours, and cannot indure
that Iesus Christ should haue his preheminence. For they haue bereft
him of all his offices, and made as it it were a bootie of them.
They haue an infinite warrein of Hee sayncts and Shee sayncts, too
whom they giue the tytle of their Aduocats: saying, that by their merits
they obtein fauour at Gods hand for such as pray vntoo them.



Moreouer in all the rest of their doctrine, there is nothing but it is
peruerted, yea and falsifyed. And besydes these errours and superstitions,
the Papists are also so spytefull, as too bend themselues euen
ageinst God, & to spit out their madnesse, yea and to indeue
                     •
                   too
wype away the rememberance of Iesus Christ by fyre and swoord.
What should wee doo in this cace? There is no compounding with
them, but by renouncing of Gods truth. But wee know what order is
taught vs heere by the holie Ghoste. For Saint Paule could well
haue sayd io one woord, Agree, my freends. But he sawe well hee
should haue spoken but one half, and that his doctrine also should haue
bin misconstrewed: and therfore he sayth, Let vs bee knit toogither
in the truthe, and let vs rather gyue ouer all the frendship of the
worlde, and procure the anger of all vnbeleeuers, and of all such
as rebell ageinst God, than swar
                     •
                  e one whit from it. But if wee
seeke too bee at good agreement in the truthe, and none of bs bee wedded
too himself, but rather euery of vs procure the welfare and saluation
of his neyghbours: that is the concord which ought to be among
vs.
               The thing then which wee haue in effect too remember vppon this
streyne, is, that on the one syde we must beware of confederating with
Gods enemyes,
                     
                        •
                     om. 12. d. 18. that wee stryke not sayle (as they say) too please
them. For although it behoue vs too seeke too haue peace and vnitie
with all men, as neere as wee can: yit is Gods truthe alwayes excepted,
and wee must make more account of that, than of all the world.
And in deede they that will needs gartify creatures, and in the meane
season turne away from Gods truth (as much as they can:) shall bee
alwayes vnhappie. Wherfore let vs euermore abyde stedfastly by
our God, and hold vs vnder his yoke, and not shrink away in any wyse,
but rather defye the whole world, yea though there were no man too
hold with vs. That is one poynt.
               Agein, if the world may bee wonne too obedience, and wee bee able
too doo so much as too drawe one or twoo too consent in one fayth
with vs: then must wee put our indeuer and labour theruntoo. For
wee must shun these twoo extremities, namely of offending God, and
of turning away from his pure woord, too purchace mens fauor: and
also of being so hygh mynded and full of statelinesse, as too trust euery
man to himselfe, and to let others alone, and too passe for no man but
himselfe: for these are two euill extremities which wee must beware



of. But let vs learne too ioyne these twoo things as inseperable:
namely that wee yeeld God trew obedience through fayth, by
holding our selues to the pure simplicitie of his word: and agein, that
therwithall we despyze not our neyghbours, but indeuer to win them,
that they may submit themselues quietly (vntoo God), and by that
meanes al
                     •
                   of vs both greate and small may speake as it were with
one mouth, through the holy Ghoste reigning in our harts, and all of
vs haue the knowledge that hath bin spoken of, namely that God is so
the authour of our saluation, that he hath also shewed himself a father
towards vs, in adopting vs, and in voutsafing to haue vs to be al of his
household: Which cannot bee, except wee liue all in good concord,
bycause he is the God of peace. And although wee should bee driuen
too fyght ageinst the whole world: yit let vs bee of good comfort, bycause
the Angels of heauen are our companions in cleauing vnto God.
Should wee then in these dayes separate our selues from an infinite
multitude of men, which presume vppon their riches, their greatnesse,
their pomp, their credit, yea & their wisdome? (Yea: and let vs
esteeme euery whit of it but as trashe, and for our owne parte, although
they call vs Schismatikes, count vs but as the ofscowrings
of the world: let vs hold vs contented, in that wee know that the
Angels of heauen, the holie Patriarks, the Hrophets, the Apostles,
and the Martirs agree with vs: and too be short, that all Gods chozen
people from Abell too his present day, doo beare vs sufficient
companie. And so may wee despyze all that shalbee layd too our reproche,
when wee haue Gods truthe and the mark wherby wee knowe
our selues too bee his children. For inasmuch as God cannot deny
himself, he will continew alwayes with his Church, wherof we bee a
parcell, if shee sticke vntoo his woord. Let that therfor bee one
poynt.
               But in the meane while also let vs not forget to seeke peace to the v
                     •
                  
                  termost
of our power, according to the text that I alledged out of the
Romanes. Therfore let vs not wilfully seperate our selues from the
world,Rom. 1
                        •
                     . d. 18. but let vs haue (as it were) our armes strected out too take home
all such as yeeld themselues willingly too the obedience of God, that
wee may haue one fayth toogither: and let vs indeuer too bring it too
passe. And the very same also is the cause why Saint Paule telleth
vs heere, that the fayth and obedience which w
                     •
                   yeeld vntoo God,
serues not too puffe vp our harts with pryde, so as wee should reiect



other men, and euery of vs loue himself, and shift for himself: 
                     •
                  ut too
make vs followe the example of our heauenly father, who allureth
them too him which were farre of, and is readye too be
                     •
                   reconcyled
too his enemyes: which thing seing he hath shewed vs 
                     〈◊〉
                   our
Lord Iesus Christ, and giuen vs so excellent a pledge of it: wee also
must haue the same doctrine of peace in our thoughts and in our
harts, and indeuer as much as is possible, too bring them too the vnion
of the Gospell, that are separated from it as yit: so that if they which
haue bin as it were stark mad ageinst God, doo yeeld themselues as
lambes and sheepe of the flocke: wee must bee redye to receyue them.
Let vs then bend our selues too that, and not bee giuen euery man too
his owne profite, but assure our selues that sith God hath knit vs
toogither and bound vs one too another: euery of vs ought too imploy
himself too the vttermoste of his abilitie, and according too his owne
measure, too drawe his neyghbours with him, so as we may be ryghtly
one bodie, and Iesus Christ reigne ouer vs.
               And for the same cause also dooth he adde, that wee should grovve
in all things in him that is our head, that is too vvit, in Iesus
Christ. Now by this woord Growe, Saynt Paule continueth the
matter that wee haue seene heeretoofore, which is, that wee must not
stand so much in our owne conceytes, as too thinke our selues too bee
come alredye to the marke wee go too. For (as I told you) our lyfe
is a iorney: and therfore wee must go on styll: for he that lingereth by
the way, dooth well shew that he neuer wist wherat he amed. Therefore
although wee must not bee as little children, yit are wee not yit
come to full age, nother haue wee gotten yit such strength as were requisyte.
Wherfore let vs growe, that is too say, let euery of vs looke
well too his owne infirmitie, and when he sees his owne weakenesse▪
let him theruppon take harte, and thrust foorth himself: let him preace
vntoo God, and let all our myndes bee continually bent that waye.
For it is not ynough for vs too haue begunne, nor yit too haue gone on

                     •
                   good way, vnlesse it bee printed in our hartes, that wee must profi
                     •
                  e
still, euen too our dying day. Otherwyse it is certeyne that wee shall
be but dazeled with our owne pryde, & that will make all Gods gif
                     •
                  es
too vanish away, which wee had receyued afore. Wherfore let vs not
imagin that wee haue such power, or such vnderstanding in all the
things that are requisyte for our saluation, as that wee should not consider
how it is not for nought that the holy Ghost exhorteth vs heere 
                     〈◊〉
                  


                  
growe. And heere yee see also, how lowelinesse ought alwayes too
ma
                     •
                  ch with fayth: according too this saying,Psal. 19. b. 8. that Gods woord serueth
too instruct the small and lowelye ones. The greater then that
a man would make himself too bee, surely the more dooth he shet the
doore ageinst himself, so as he can haue no enterance intoo the schoole
of God, and of our Lord Iesus Christ. Therfore let vs looke well 
                     〈◊〉
                  
our owne slendernesse, that wee may bee so meeke, as nothing may
                     •
                  
hinder vs from hoping continually more and more in our God. And
the same ought also too quicken vs, and prouoke vs to serue him, and to
confirme our selues continually the more in his woord. For what is
the cause of so greate sloth and coldnesse as is seene in manye men,
but that they thinke themselues too bee clerkes greate ynough alredy?
And therin they deceyue themselues, by reason that the diuell hath
dimmed their eyes through their owne fond ouerweening. Seeing
it is so: let vs continew little ones still, not in vnderstanding, but in
naughtinesse (as hath bin sayd afore:) and sith wee knowe that wee had
neede too profit, let vs indeuer so too doo. Howbeeit, let vs also haue
an eye to the meane that is shewed vs heere, which is, too resort to him
that is our head.
               Tr
                     ••
                  ly Saint Paule addeth theruntoo, all things: too shewe
than v
                     ••
                  en a Christen man hath examined throughly what is in him:
he shal
                     •
                   fynd that if he haue anie vertew, there shalbee vyces mingled
with it, and that in all his vertewes there is euer some blemish or
mayme. Wherfore let all of vs cast downe our heads, and let the excellentest
men in the world vnderstand, that God hath still reserued
some peece of grace too himself, which he hath not giuen too them, too
the intent wee should not bee puffed vp with fond ouerweening, too
think our selues too bee that which wee bee not.
               But let vs come too the heade that is spoken of heere. For Saint
Paule telleth vs, that our only shooteanker must bee too knowe Iesus
Christ (as hath bin declared afore) how that all the treasures of
wisdome and knowledge are layd vp in him.Coloss. 2. a. 3. For else many would
raundge farre in Gods woord: and that should bee but too bee alwayes
learning, and neuer to knowe any thing, as it is sayd in another
text. But S. Paule telleth vs,2. Tim. 3. b. 7. that in Iesus Christ wee shall fynd
all that is requisyte for out saluation, & that he also must haue the preheminence,
as the head appeereth aboue all the rest of the b
                     •
                  dy. For it
we grew in such wise, as the shoulders should get vp half a 
                     〈…〉
                  


                  
the h
                     •
                  ad: what a growing were that? Were such a growing too bee
well lyked? It were better that a member were starke dead, tha
                     •
                  
that it shoulde so disfigure the body. For so muche then as the head
ought too bee vppermost, Saint Paule telleth vs expresly, that it is
not ynough for vs too growe, but that wee must alwayes growe vnder
our Lord Iesus Christ, so as he may stand ouer vs, and all of vs both
great and small submyt our selues vnto hym.
               And wee see by experience, that this was not spoken for nothyng.
For what a number are there which carrye a great countenance and
shewe of knowledge, and yit doo nothing but set all thyngs in a broyle
and vprore, through theyr vayne glory? There are a great sort which
could fynd in theyr harts too haue our Lord Iesus Christ buryed, that
they them selues myght perke vp, and haue all the world gaze vppon
them, and bee had in estimation, and reioyst at. And many wretches
come so farre, that they passe not what come of it, so they may keepe
them selues in reputation. Ageyn, othersome myngle our Lord Iesus
Christ with so many superstitions, that he is vtterly ouershadowe
                     •
                  
with them. Wee see what is happened in Poperie. For they verifie
their owne prouerb throughly, that the sonne of God cannot be
                     •
                  
knowen from his Apostles. And why? Bycause they haue fleeced
him, and robbed him of the honour that belongeth too him, and made
as it were a bootie of it, dealing too euery man his share and portion of
it. Thus are the Papists well growen, howbeeit that is but in ignorance
and superstition, bycause Iesus Christ hath not his preheminence
among them, nother is hee their shooteanker. Yea and euen among
vs also yee shall see some so desyrous too get renoune among
men, that Iesus Christ shalbee as nothing with them. So much the
more therfore dooth it stand vs on hand too mynd well this lesson of
Saint Paules, that our growing must bee in our Lord Iesus Christ,Iohn. 3. d. 30.
according to this saying of Saint Iohn Baptist, I must diminish, and
he increace. Let vs followe that example, namly that the excellencie
which is in the Church should abyde v
                     •
                  appayred, and yit in the mean
                     •
                  
whyle Iesus Christ bee the shooteanker of all men. For although
the Starres haue their bryghtnesse: yit must the Sunne shyne aboue
them, and men must knowe that it is he by whome wee haue the trew
lyght in deede. And therfore let our Lord Iesus, who is the dayso
                     •
                  e
of rygh
                     ••
                  ousenesse, be so regarded, as nothing may impeach him, nor
bleare our eyes that wee should not look
                     •
                   at him, and our fayth 
                     〈◊〉
                  


                  
leuelled alonely at him. That then is the cause why Saint Paule
addeth expressely, that Iesus Christ must bee our head, and wee
growe in him, and resort vntoo him, and set ou
                     •
                   whole studye and
mynd vppon him.
               Too expresse this the better, he addeth, that it is he by vvhom the

                        •
                     hole body is knit and ioyned toogither by his ioyntes, and that it
is he which furnisheth it with substance and lyfe, according too the
measure and portion of euery member: & that when this is done, thē
the body is well proportioned: howbeit that loue must reigne among
vs, or else there shall be nothing but confuzion: insomuch that if there
bee greatnesse, it will bee ouer huge, so as it shall not bee a naturall
body, but rather a monster. Nowe in saying that wee receyue our
growing of Iesus Christ, that it is he of whom the knitting of the body
proceedeth, and that it is he also by whom wee bee maynteyned in
life: he sheweth vs our vnthankfulnesse, in that wee yeeld him not the
honor which he deserueth. For must it not needes be that we are tootoo
leaud, when the sonne of God giueth vs all things, and yit wee will bereeue
him the honor which he requireth, for shewing himself so bountifull
towards vs? He desyreth not that we should yeeld him any recompence,
nother can we, nother is it needfull: but yit he will be glorifyed.
Now then seeyng wee bee so inriched by him, and wee notwithstanding
doo fall too robbing him of his honor, so as he is defrauded and
bereft of it: must it not needes bee that wee bee woorse than diuelish?
Wherfore let vs mark well wherat S. Paule amed: for he intended
heere too reproue the worlde of too leaud an vnthankfulnesse, for not
yeelding our Lord Iesus Christ his dew honour, in somuch as he is
not exalted among vs, nother doo wee thinke vppon him, nother doo
wee place him in chiefe souereintie, that all men myght doo him homage.
And therwithall he sheweth also, that wee bee almost out of our
wittes when wee honor not Iesus Christ, ne exalt him as wee ought to
doo. For there is not that man which dooth not naturally 
                     •
                  ouet his
owne profit. Now then, in forsaking of Iesus Christ, we seeme to haue
conspyred & sworne our owne confuzion, that we might be bereft of all
his grace, & be as rotten members without strength. For he is as the
head of a mans body, & as the roote of a 
                     •
                  ree: it is he from whom all
our life & sustenance proceedeth. Now then if the hands, the feete, the
belly, the stomacke, the legs, & all the rest of the members should conspire
togither to say, let vs forsake the hea
                     •
                  : What should 
                     •
                  hey win by



it? Or if they should conspyre toogither too put the head downe, an
                     •
                  
to thrust it into the belly, that men myght not see it: what profit should
the whole body haue by it? Euen so standeth the cace with all such as
would diminish the glory and maiestie of Gods sonne, and lessen his
power, and not acknowledge to what end he was sent of God his father,
namely, that they should seeke all their welfare, and all the partes
of their saluation in him: for it is as much as if they would put downe
their head. But S. Paule telleth vs, that there must bee no knitting in
the body, but that which commeth of the head. For whence cōmeth all?
Beholde, the veynes conuey nourrishment euery where through the
whole body, and the senewes hold the bones togither, and giue thē mouing:
but yit must all these thinges haue their roote in the head. So
then, if we will needs despyze God in diminishing the glory of his only
sonne, surely all will turne to our confuzion. Iesus Christ can wel ynough
forbeare vs: but we must needs perish wretchedly like rottē carions,
if he giue vs not whatsoeuer belongeth to our life. Thus yee see
what S. Paule ment too shewe vs.
               Hereunto he addeth, that there is a certein measure in euery member,
& that the furnishment therof cōmeth of the head, so as it sheadeth
through the whole body, howbeit (sayth he) that is in measure. When
he sayth, it is in measure, he doth vs to wit, that al the excellencie which
we can see heere, is no derogation to the perfectnesse that is in Iesus
Christ. For there are twoo reasons too bee marked. The one is, that all
that is in man is vnperfect, & therfore that we must resort to our Lord
Iesus Christ, that he alonly may abyde vnimpeached, & not bee mingled
with other creatures. The other is, that the measure & portiō which
is in euery member, is not there as hauing his peculiar seat there. For
what could the hand doo, if it were not continually nurrished & maynteyned
by the head? The bond that holdeth altogither must needes bee
maynteyned from thence. Also the naturall heate & mouing must come
from thence, insomuch that the hand shoulde wither euery minute of an
houre, & rotte away, if the head wrought not continually. The like respect
is betweene Christ & his Church. For if wee consider well what
is in men: though we admitted one too bee like an Angell: yit hath he
but his measure still. And why? To the intent that Iesus Christ should
not be bereft of the honor that belongeth vnto him. Seeing then that
euery of vs hath his portiō (as hath bin shewed afore:) it is good reason
also that euery of vs should stoope, & not lift vp our hornes too take any



thing vpō vs, which God reserueth to his only sonne. That is one point.
               Agein, let vs vnderstand, that the same measure cōmeth of free gift,
as hath bin shewed alredy: & yit is it not without cause that S. Paule
repeteth it heere agein. For wee see the foolish presumptuousnes of
men, how euery man would be a lord: & we would faine rod God of his
right, to the end to be aduaunced & esteemed our selues. Therefore to abate
that loftinesse, and to clenze vs of such vyce, S. Paule putteth vs
in mynd once agein,1. Cor. 4. b. 7. that we haue nothing which is not giuen vs. And
therfore we must resort too this which he sayeth in the first too the Corinthians:
Who art thou? Haste thou made thy selfe so excellent by
thyne owne cunnyng? Hast thou any thing which thou canst chalendge
as thine owne? No: it is God that hath aduaunced thee so: and
therfore humble thy self. His meaning then is, that all the whole knitting
& all the whole furnishing cōmeth of the head. For it is not ynough
for vs that wee were once created & shaped, but it standeth vs on hand
to haue our members still mainteyned in their plyght. That therefore
is the cause why S. Paul addeth the word furniture, or sheading down,
as if God should shead downe his inworking vppon the head, and the
head shead fo
                     •
                  rth the same inwoorking throughout all the members.
And that is it which S. Paul ment, in saying that Iesus Christ is our
spirituall head, who hath receyued all fulnesse of grace, according too
the first chapter of S. Iohn, where it is sayd, that it was giuē him not
for himself alone: but for vs also which are his brethren. Seeyng it is
so, let vs vnderstand that al the grace which we haue receyued of God,
is creeped into vs by the meanes of our Lord Iesus Christ, and that
wee haue the full furnishing of it throughout also by him. Trew it is
that the sayd strength or inwoorking passeth through euery member,
and in comming from the head, it shal be in the shoulder, before it bee
in the arme, and afterward in the arme, before it be in the hand: but yit
for all that, shall the arme therfore glory in it selfe, and giue the hand
no part with it? No: but his receyuing is to impart it vntoo the residew
of the limbes, and all cōmeth of the head. Agein, shal not the hand
on the one syde, giue of his power backe agein too the arme (on the other
syde? Yis:) for euery member knowes his owne office, that is
too say, euery member hath naturally an inclination too serue all the
rest of the bodye, as though God had giuen them discretion and wisedome
too say, thus it must bee. They be bound vntoo it, and knowe
the neede that eche of them hath of others helpe.
               Trew it is, that my hand cannot iudge any thing, but yit hath God put



such an indowment & disposition into it, that it desireth nothing rather
than too imploy it self to the seruice of all the rest of the body. Also the
foote doth his dewtie without intreating or bydding, as though God
had imprinted such a discretion in them (as to consider) that all of them
receiue their power from heauen, and that the things which they haue
receyued, must be fitted thervntoo.
               Now if a man shoulde demaunde, Is euery man then alyke and
equall in the Church? Saint Paule, in speaking of portion and measure,
meaneth not that God hath distributed lyke portion too euerye
member. For the legge is not the eye: and yit 
                     •
                  euerthelesse, the leg,
according too his qualitie, hath that which it needeth. And for the same
cause also Saint Paule sayeth, that the members should bee so knit togither,
as they myght make vp one whole body through loue, and by
that meane haue euerye one wherewith too bee contented. There
are then twoo things which wee must marke: namely that Gods gifts
are diuers, and that some are much more excellent than other. For the
Eye is an excellenter member than the foote, and wee see also how it
is had in honour: and the mouth is more than the leg. Marke it then
for one poynt, that there is such diuersitie, that our Lord exalteth and
honoreth whom he listeth more than others. There are both great and
small in the Church, and all must not bee teachers and Prophets. But
yit this diuersitie letteth not, but that euery member hath his desyre,
and that which is meete for it, so as the foote enuyeth not the hand, nor
the hand the foote, no more than any of them both enuyeth the eyes.
Too what purpose should it serue the hand too haue syght? It were a
thing which not only could doo it no good, but also should doo it harme.
If euery member had al offices in it self, surely the bodie should be confounded
and come to nought. So then the hand hath his perfection in
that which belongeth vntoo him, I meane in his degree: and lykewyse
the foote. Howbeit S. Paules meaning is, that it ought too suffyze
vs, that the Church bee edifyed in common▪ For if our neyghboures
bee inriched with Gods giftes: the same redoundeth partly
vntoo vs. And on the other syde, if wee haue receyued a larger measure
of grace: wee bee the more bound too imparte the same too such
as haue neede of it. That therefore is the thing which Saynt Paule
meaneth too set downe in this text, saying, that if the knittyng bee
after that manner, the bodye shall bee well buylded and made vp.
               
                  And heere wee see how he contineweth his matter, which is, that
wee must be so linked toogither according too the doctri
                     •
                  e of the Gospell,
as Iesus Christ may reigne ouer vs, and wee knowe that the heauenly
father hath giuen vs him, with condition that wee should all
linke toogither vnder him, and maynteyne a brotherly vnitie among
vs. But yit afore all things, wee must bee subiect too him that hath
all souereine dominion, and consider that for asmuch as the heauenly
father hath set him in that degree, wee must all ame at him, and continew
in his obedience vntoo the end. And therwithall let vs vnderstand,
that that cannot bee doone, without loue, that is too say, vnlesse
euery of vs rid himself of the cursed affection of seeking too much our
owne profit. For in deede it is easye too perceyue, that that affection
dooth so blynd vs, that it makes vs too despyze our neyghboures. So
much the more therfore dooth it behoue euery of vs too indeuer too
giue ouer his owne ryght, and too knowe that God hath not so distributed
his giftes, that euery man may bee a world or a Church of himself,
but that for asmuch as euery man hath neede of his neyghboures, the
same is the very meane wherby he will hold vs toogither. And that
ought also too prouoke vs so much the more too doo what wee can one
for another. Although then that there bee but one fountayne from
whence wee drawe all spirituall giftes, namely euen our Lord Iesus
Christ: yit notwithstanding, God maketh the fulnesse of the grace
which he hath put in Iesus Christ, too flowe foorth as it were by chanelles,
that wee may receyue euerye man his portion, as is expedient
for vs. And so yee see in effect what wee haue too remember
heere.
               Now were this doctrine well put in vre: surely all the trubbles
that are now adayes in the world, would soone bee appeased, and there
would no more bee so many bickerings and disputings: but wee should
easly agree all toogither. For Ambition or Uaynglorye is the moother
of all heresyes, for whē men will needes exalt thēselues, they must
needes therby thrust downe Christ if they could. Agein, whence
spring Superstitions, but of this, that men knowe not the inestimable
benefytes that are brought vs by our Lord Iesus Christ, and are dayly
offered vntoo vs in him by the Gospell? This hath made the world
alwayes wanton and wandering after his owne lusts: this hath made
men too forge so many patrons and aduocates: this hath made men
too aduaunce their owne deseruings: this hath made folke too deuyze



so manye satisfactions, so many meanes wherwith too please God,
and so many new seruices: namely for that they were not contented
with Iesus Christ, and all for want of knowing what manner a one he
is, and that when wee once haue him, he ought too suffyze vs, and wee
too hold our selues too him, bycause the father hath so gloryfyed him,
as wee ought of duetie too doo him homage, and too honour him as our
souereyne King. For asmuch then as wee see the wretched vnbeleeuers
to be scattered here & there, by reason that they turne away from
Iesus Christ: we haue so much the more neede to be warned to hold vs
simply to his obedience, & to know that all our welfare commeth of
him, & (therfore) that we ought to returne to him to yeeld him his dew
honour, & therwithall put our whole trust in him, & that too the intent
we may so doo, we must consider that there is nothing but 
                     ••
                  lth in vs, &
that we hold our spi
                     •
                  itual lyfe of him, & that not for once & away, but in
such wyse as he woorketh continewally in vs, sttengthning & furthering
vs euen vntill he haue brought bs to his perfection, that is to say,
to the perfection which we hope for by him. And for this cause was
the holy Supper left vs, as a remēberance that our Lord Iesus Christ
is he in whom we must wholly seeke all things belonging to the lyfe
of our soules. For (there) we professe, that he is our nurrishment, euen
to satisfye vs to the full. And therfore the cause why wee come (thither)
to eate & drinke, is to put vs in mynd that we haue
                     ••
                   Iesus Christ, not
the halfe of our lyfe only, but the whole of it: & that when wee bee fed
with him, we must content our selues with him, & not seeke one droppe
nor myte (as they say) elsewhere. After this maner then must wee now
come to the holy table: that is to wit, after the examining of our owne
sinnes, when we once know that wee bee nothing: wee must seeke by
what meanes God calleth vs to him, and how we may keepe our way
thither, euen tyll we be perfectly knit vnto him: namely (by knowing)
that Iesus Christ is giuen vs, and that in him we haue all that is behooffull
and wanting in our selues. And therfore let vs so esteeme our
Lord Iesus Christ, as wee may take him for our very sustenance, and
as our fayth (as I haue touched afore) be not haled away to roue heere
and there, and finally to vanish quyte away, but may so rest vpon him,
as we may know that there is nother rightuousnesse, nor holinesse, nor
merit, nor power, nor aught else in our selues, but that wee shall fynde
all in him, & that we cannot be parttakers of him, but wee must also be
parttakers of all the goods that he hath receiued of God his father.



Seeing then that all the good thinges which God hath put intoo our
head, are communicated vnto vs by his meanes: let vs learne to humble
our selues, & not to clymb in such wise, as he should be defrauded of
his honor, but confesse simply and without feyning, that looke whatsoeuer
is giuen vs through his free goodnesse, he mainteyneth & preserueth
it, & moreouer increaceth and stablisheth it in vs more and more.
Furthermore let vs marke, that wee cannot possesse the goods of our
Lord Iesus Christ to take any profit by thē, except we first inioy him.
And that is the cause why he giueth himself vnto vs. And thinkes it
not ynough to giue vs some part and portion of his rightuousnesse, of
his desertes by the sacrifyce of his death and passion, of the obedience
that he yeelded vnto God his father, & of all the giftes which he receiued
fully of God his father, (I say, he thinkes it not ynough to giue vs
some part and portion of them) in his Sacraments: but he sayth, I am
yours, possesse yee mee. Then is it not ynough for vs too go seeke our
wants at his hand, that he may impart them to vs: but (wee must also
consider,) first of all, how he offereth himself vntoo vs, and sayeth, Lo
heere my body which is deliuered for you, lo heere my blud which shal
be shed for the remission of your sinnes. And this is doone, too the ende
that wee should know, that he dwelleth in vs truly by his holy spirit, &
that wee liue by his owne substance, & that it is not sayd heere without
cause, that the knitting of the bodye commeth of hym, and that he
is the furniture thereof, and that forasmuch as wee want the grace
and giftes that belong too our spirituall lyfe, wee must drawe them
out of that fountayne. And if we resort to him with perseuerance in the
fayth of the Gospell, wee shall feele our selues more and more strengthened
and stablished in all grace, euen till he haue rid vs of all our imperfections
& infirmities, too make vs inioy his heauenly glory with
him.
               Now let vs fall downe before the Maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him too make vs so too feele
them, as wee may be sory for them: and therwithall too worke so in vs
hereafter, as wee may from day too day bee clenzed of all our imperfections
and vyces, more and more, and that our Lord Iesus Christ,
who is the welspring of all purenesse, may so shed foorth the grace of
his holy spirit, as wee may bee made newe creatures therby, too doo
our souerein king the honour that belongeth too him. And so let vs all
say, Almighty God heauenly father▪ &c.
            
            
               
               The .xxviii. Sermon, which is the eyght
vppon the fourth Chapter.
               
                  
                     17. This I say therefore, and adiure (you) by the Lord, that hensfoorth
yee vvalke not as the (rest of the) Gentyles, (which)
walke in vanitie of their mynd,
                     18. Hauing their vnderstanding ouercast vvith darknesse, and being
straungers too the lyfe of God, by reason of the ignorance
that is in them, and through the blyndnesse of their
hart.
                     19. VVho vvithout remorse of conscience haue giuen themselues
ouer too leaudnesse, too commit all vnclenenesse, euen
with inordinate greedinesse.
                  
               
               
                  COnsidering howe corrupt wee bee by nature,
it is not ynough for vs too haue 
                     •
                  he
good shewed vntoo vs, vnlesse the vy
                     ••
                  s
that are rooted in vs, bee also corrected:
lyke as it woulde smally boote too sowe
(corne) in a ground that were ouergrowen
with nettles, shrewd weedes, rushes, and
thornes. And therefore notwithstanding
that Saint Paule haue heretofore shewed
the trew rule of godly lyfe: yit he addeth
(as neede is) that it standeth euery man on hand too bethinke himselfe,
too chaunge quyte and cleane, and too become a newe man, bycause
that vntill God haue clenzed vs both in mynde and ha
                     ••
                  , and in all
partes of our soule, there will neuer bee any thing but tilthinesse. So
then, the doctrine that wee haue herd heretoofore should not boote vs,
if that which wee heare now presently had not bin added. For we
                     •
                  
knowe that the Ephesians too whom Saint Paule speaketh, before
they were conuerted too the fayth of our Lord Iesus Christ, had liued
a certeine tyme in ignorance, and bin giuen too all naughtinesse and
leaud lyfe, euen too the vttermost. Yit notwithstanding, Saint Paul
setteth it downe heere in generall, that all they which haue not bin

                     •
                  aught in Gods schoole, are blynd wretches, vnable too discrene betweene
good and euill, yea and sta
                     •
                  ke beastes, insomuch that euen with



the very roote that commeth with them from their moothers womb,
euery man hardeneth more and more, tyll they fall intoo such excesse,
that they become as monsters, and appeare no more too bee creatures
fashyoned after the image of God. Yee see then that in effect Saint
Paules intent is, that after he hath declared Gods stablishing of his
gouernment ouer vs: Now too the end that our walking in this world
should bee too go vnto God, and too the heauenly lyfe, wheruntoo he
calleth vs: he sheweth that wee shall neuer obey him, nor bow our
necke too receyue his yoke, vntyll wee haue chaunged both our disposition
and mynd, and forsaken our selues, by cause wee be vtterly corrupted.
               And so there are twoo parts in the instruction that is giuen vs.
The one sheweth vs wheruntoo God calleth vs: and the other, that
wee must fyght ageinst our owne sinfulnesse, and vtterly imprison
our selues, that wee may become teachable too receyue the doctrine
that God setteth out for vs. Howbeeit for asmuch as that is hard too
doo: Saint Paule thinks it not ynough too giue vs single warning:
but also cyteth vs, and after a sort setteth him in seat of Iustice, before
whom wee must yeeld an account, too the intent too moue them and
quicken them the more too whom he speaketh. For it is no small
thing to make men to renounce thēselues, considering how euery man
sootheth himself, and beleeueth that he is able to woork wonders. Although
he bee saped in naughtinesse, yit thinks he that he hath some
vertues in him. Yea and although wee haue our faults proued too our
faces, yit will wee labour too cloke them through hipocrisie, and too
set some fayre colour and glosse vpon them, or else we will maynteyne
them wilfully, and neuer yeeld our selues giltie, though our shame lye
open to the whole world. To be short, it is a very hard incounter, when
a mā must as well lay down all the wisdome which he weened himself

                     •
                  oo haue in gouerning himself after his owne fancie, as also tame his
affections, that he may bee subiect vntoo God, and haue nothing in
him self that shall stryue ageinst him.Rom. 8. b. 7. For our flesh is too too stout in
that behalf: and wee heare how it is sayd in another text, that all a
mans thoughts, and all that euer he can conceyue, is emnitie ageinst
God. Lykewyse also it is sayd in Genesis,
                  Gene. 6. a. 5. & 8. c. 21. yea euen at the tyme that
the world had the greatest soundnesse that euer it had, that whatsoeuer
can come out of the warehouse of our owne brayne, is all of it stark
naughtinesse and rebellion ageinst God▪ So then, it was requisite



that greate vehemencie should bee vsed in this behalf: and therfore also
dooth Saint Paule vse it, saying that he not only teacheth, but also
cyteth them too whom he speaketh, too the end they may knowe that
they bee as it were in Gods presence, and that it is not for them too
fall asleepe in their vayne selfflatteries, but that as the diuell hath
manie allurements too beguyle vs, so on the contrarie part, Gods
woord must inlyghten vs: and that although wee forslowe too consider
our vyces, and had leuer too conceale them: yit wee must vnderstand,
that it is more for our profit to come too reason, and too examin
throughly what is in vs. That is the cause why Saint Paule mynding
too exhort the Ephesians too chaunge of lyfe, setteth downe this
adiuratiō & kind of witnesse bearing, as though he were present before
Gods iudgment seate. If there bee any couenanting betweene man
and man, this solemnitie and Ceremonie of swearing, will moue them,
and cause them to bethink themselues well what they promis, at leastwyse
if they bee not quyte out of their wits. Howbeeit, heere is not
some Notarie too take notyce of their othes, and such other customes
as are among men, to ratify the things that they agree vppon among
themselues: but heere is Saint Paule, who standeth in the behalf
and person of Iesus Christ, from whom hee hath authoritie, not only
too requyre vs, but also too summon vs too make our account,
if wee indeuer not too discharge our dewtie: yea and he telleth vs, tha
                     •
                  
it is not for vs too let slip the things that he sayeth, nor too heare them
with deaf eares, bycause God is present too punish our rechlenesse in
despyzing his woord. Sith it is so, let vs learne too leaue flattering
of our selues, as manie doo, whom wee see too pretend deafnesse: and
whatsoeuer coūtenances they make, they continew alwayes the same
they were afore. Wherfore let vs mark well, that God thinking it
not ynough too teache 
                     •
                  s, intendeth too take away all excuce, and 
                     •
                  elleth
vs, that he wil not suffer such contempt of his woord, when wee
voutsafe not too giue eare, seeing he was so gracious as too speake
vntoo vs, too giue vs a warrantyze of our saluation.
               Now let vs come too the effect of that which is conteyned heere.
Saint Paule sayeth, Bee not as the rest of the Gentyles are. I haue
told you alredye that they too whom he wryteth, were for a tyme quyte
giuen too all naughtinesse, and without the feare of God. For euen
from their cradle they had bin brought vp in all maner of Idolatrie, &
yit they thought themselues well discharged, when they had doone



some sacrifyze too their puppets. Like as at this day in the popedome,
they that play moste murlimewes, are counted most holie: and
they think themselues out of Gods dette, so they haue once doone a
sort of pelting tryfles. For that cause dooth Saint Paule send the
Ephesians too this similitude, saying, that if they looke vppon the rest
of the Gentyles, there they may see in what plyght and taking they
weere, before God had gathered them intoo his Church. Prye vppon
your selues there, (sayeth he): for there shall you see your owne images:
before such tyme as God reached you his hand, and drew you
out of the dungeon of vnbeleef wherin you were plunged, you differed
nothing at all from them. Now then at leastwyse yee ought too consider
the grace that hath bin graunted you, that it may bring foorth
fruite in you
               By the way let vs marke, that in vsing this speech, the rest of the
Gentyles, Saint Paule comprehendeth heere al mankynd. For he
speaketh not of twoo or three men only, nor of any one nation, nor of
some countrie: but he sayeth generally, that all they which had not bin
trayned in the Gospell, were blynd wretches, as wee see. Too bee
short, he sheweth what maner of ones wee be, vntill God haue preuented
vs with his grace, too the intent wee should not cast this exhortation
away, nor beare our selues on hand, that we be exempted from
all the things which we shall see hereafter. Therfore too the end wee
surmyze not a priuiledge too withdrawe our selues from the common
aray of men: Saint Paule hath heere knit all Adams children toogither
as it weere in one bundle. For in all mankynd there is nothing
too bee found but leawdnesse and corruption. Heere therfore are two
poynts which wee haue too mark. The one is, that heere as it were
in a looking glasse, wee should behold what our owne state is, so long
as God giueth vs the brydle, and letteth vs follow our owne swindge.
Mark that for one poynt: and I will lay it out more at large anon.
The other is, that when wee see the enormities which are committed
through the whole world, & that men bee so shamelesse in euil dooing,
or rather altoogither bewitched, and some so besotted, as a man can by
no meanes moue them to learne too feare God: when wee see (I say)
on the one syde such stubbornnesse in men, and on the other syde soo
grosse and beastly senslesnesse: let vs learne to spy our selues there, and
too consider that God did vs a singular good turne, when it pleased
him too touche vs too the quicke, that his woord myght preuayle in



vs. For wee differ nothing at al from the woorst and most disordere
                     •
                  
in the 
                     •
                  orld, nor from such as are in moste horrible confuzion. Yee
see then what wee should haue bin if God had not pityed vs. And this
ought too touche vs wel too the quicke, that the grace which God
hath graunted vs, bee not darkened and quyte quenched in the end, so
as wee bee quyte and cleane bereft of it. After this manner therefor
                     •
                  
ought wee too apply this text too our instruction, where Saint Paul
setteth other men before vs, which haue not yit bin inlyghtened by the
fayth of the Gospell, but are let alone: that by comparing our state
with theirs, wee may consider how mercifull God shewed him self vn
                  
                     •
                  oo
vs, in drawing vs out of such a dungeon, too the intent that wee
should bee the diligenter in giuing our selues vntoo him.
               Hereupon he sayth, VValk no more hensforth as they did in Vanitie
of mynd. By this woord Hensfoorth or Hereafter, he intendeth
too shame such as trayned in the Gospell, if their lyfe proue not
that they haue not mispent their labour. For too what purpose are wee
called too the fayth of our Lord Iesus Christ, but too separate our selues
from the stumbling blockes of the world? Therefore wee must not
excuze our selues by our bringing vp in euyll custome, nor by any examples
that myght allure vs too leaudnesse, nor yit by that there is
nothing but frowardnesse round about vs: for seeyng that God hath
adopted vs too bee his children, he wyll haue vs to lyue therafter. And
therefore let vs marke, that fayth importeth such a reforming of our
selues, as our lyfe bee cleane chaunged. And for the same cause is i
                     •
                  
sayd,
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 5. c. 17. that whosoeuer wyll bee counted too bee in Iesus Christ, must
become a new creature. For wee may prate of the Gospell ynough
and too much, and wee may be maruelously fyne headed: but that shal
bee nought woorth, vntill the sayd chaunge appeere in vs, that is too
say, vntill wee leade a newe lyfe.
               Besydes this, wee haue too marke heere, that after Saynt Paule
hath spoken of the vanitie of mynd, he addeth, Blyndnesse of mynde,
or Darkenesse of vnderstanding: and lastly he sayeth, Blyndnesse or
Stubbornesse of hart. This blazing of men after this sort, serues
well too put them quyte out of conceyt. For when the Philosophers
spake of the excellencie and woorthinesse that is in mans nature, they
did alwayes set downe Reason as an ouerruler: Next hir they did
s
                     •
                  t downe discretion, betweene good and euill, when men debate in
themselues, and make a serching and a turmoyling (for things). After



that manner did they make as it were a Courte barre, too the
end too make man iudge of good and euill. It should seeme then that
Saynt Paule heere abaceth men too much, when he sayth, that Reason
hath nothing in it but vanitie, vntruth, and deceytfulnesse: and agein,
that all that euer men can conceyue, is but a maze of vayne fancies,
and that they doo but ouerthrowe them selues more and more, as
if a blynd wretch should wander abroade in the darke. Yit notwithstanding,
the holy Ghost is the only competent iudge too giue sentence
of the things that are in vs, least wee myght thinke our selues too haue
wonne the goale by flattering of our selues, according as he told vs afore,
that men haue theyr eyes so blyndfolded with the fond opinion
which they haue conceyued of their owne woorthinesse, that they cannot
bee ashamed and confesse their owne leaudnesse. That was the
cause why the Philosophers did alwayes magnify the nature of man,
and yit notwithstanding experience sheweth the cleane contrarye: for
the vanitie that is in them is apparrant. But they wyted that vppon
mens negligence and rechlesnesse, so that if men would aply all the
senses of nature throughly, too knowe what is good, they should bee
as little Angels. They imagined so: but that was for want of boul
                  
                     •
                  yng
them too the bottom. For they neuer wist what God is: and
that made them too discharge themselues so lyghtly toowardes him:
insomuch that euen they which disputed most cunningly of Gods maiestie,
and had a hygher vnderstanding than the common sort, and
(too bee short) were esteemed the wyzest men in the world: could notwithstanding
neuer come neere the truth of God: and whensoeuer
his seruis came in question, they were so graueled, that they turned all
things vpsyde downe. And so the wisedome of the world will not

                     •
                  uffer vs too come too the heauenly lyght: for it is a speciall gifte of
God, and not too bee found in our selues. Yee see then that euen the
greatest men of skyll deceyued themselues: and that is the cause that
men fall asleepe in this fond opinion wherto they were to much inclyned
afore. Yea and we see that this foolish or rather diuelish ouerweening
hath gottē place euen among the Iewes, insomuch that they haue
alwayes bin of opinion, (as men are now adayes in the popedome)
that they haue freewill. Trew it is that the Papistes will graunt
more than the heathen folke, namely that wee be corrupted by original
sin, howbeeit their meaning is, that notwithstanding the infirmitye
which is in man, yit there abydeth some remnant of goodnesse in him,



insomuch that wee halfe an vnderstanding styll, and also 
                     〈◊〉
                   will
that is able to trayne vs vntoo good, though it bee but weake of it self.
Too bee short, such as will needes iudge according too their naturall
vnderstanding, say, that men are as sound & vncorrupted, as Angels.
The Papistes being conuicted by so manye recordes of the Scripture,
will graunt well ynough, that wee bee fal
                     •
                  e from our originall,
and that there are manye vyces in vs: but yit is that no let (say they)
but that we be still half cleane, and are able to do good of our owne power,
when wee bee once humbled before God. To be short, they make
such a partnership betwene God and men, that they say in deede, that
wee haue neede too bee inlyghtned from aboue, too atteyne too fayth:
but yit that wee haue some lyght in our selues, and God maketh vp
that which wanteth. Agein, they will say, that lust dooth so reigne in
vs, as it is ryght hard for vs too submit our selues too God, but yit that
wee must labour too doo it, and are able too doo it, so that God ayd vs
and reache vs his hand. This is the Concurrence (as they terme it)
(that is too say, the matching or marrowing toogither) of Gods
grace, and of the goodnesse that remayneth in man, though wee bee
corrupted. But (as I sayd) let vs rather herken too that which God
himself, euen he which only is the competent Iudge hath spoken of it
by vnrepealable sentence, which is, that all they which follow common
reason, and the things that man hath of him self, are blynd wret
                  
                     •
                  hes.
And what shall then become of Reason? For although men
think that it serueth too giue them lyght, and too shew them the way:
yit is it certeyne that it dooth but alwayes tumble them intoo the pit:
and wheras they weene themselues too bee well aduyzed, they shalbe
stark beasts. And the cause why this is told vs continewally, is too
doo vs too vnderstand, that God must bee fayne too reforme vs, not by
half, but all whole throughout.
               And heere a man myght ask a question: if men (I meene those
whom God hath let alone) were without vnderstanding and discretion
in that behalf, whether myght one see examples of it or no? It is verie
certeyne that they bee not lyke horses, nor yit lyke dogges: but yit
let vs mark, that all the vnderstanding and discretion which is in vs,
and all the iudgment which it is possible for vs too haue, serueth too
none other end, than too make vs vnexcusable. Therfore wee must vnderstand,
that although wee haue some discretion betweene good and
euill, before God haue taught vs by his woord, and inlyghtened vs 
                     〈◊〉
                  


                  
his holie spirit: yit the same 
                     •
                  erueth but too beree
                     •
                  e vs of excuce, that
wee myght not make a buckler of ignorance, as wee bee w
                     ••
                  nt too
doo. For although euery man haue not had the written Lawe, yit
must he beare the sentence of damnation about him in his hart, (as
sayeth S Paule in the second too the Romanes) and God must driue
him too perceyue it aforehand, by making him to feele har
                     ••
                  ytings
whether he will or no, so as he shall say, I am giltie in this thing and
in that. Thus remayneth there some vnderstanding in men: howbeit
not too leade them in the way of saluation, but only too make them so
much the more giltie before God. For as touching our affections,
it myght be sayd, that there are many which liue honestly and without
blame, though they neuer tasted of the Gospel. Yeamary, but in the
meane whyle their hartes are fraughted with malice & st
                     •
                  bbornnesse,
and no dout but that all such as haue not bin reformed by Gods spirit,
shall still feede a sea of wicked, froward, and malicious lusts within
them. And therfore let vs not stay vppon the outward showe,1. Sam. 16. b. 7. & Psal. 7. c. 10. &. 44. d. 22. & Iere. 17. b. 10. & 1. Iohn. 5. d. 20. but let
vs mark how it is not for nought that God chalengeth the searching
of mens hartes as his peculiar office: and therfore that must bee reserued
vntoo him. Also let vs call too mynd how Saint Iohn in his
Epistle sayth, that we see not all the sinnes that are in vs, but that God
who seeth farre more cleerly, is the Iudge therof. Howsoeuer the cace
stand, when men haue doone the best they can, yit can they not rid their
hands of condemnation, when they come before the heauenly Iudge,
(specially) seing that the starres are not cleere in his syght, no nor euen
the Angels, in somuch that if he listed to examin thē with rigour,
they should not bee able too come too the perfection that is in him. So
then let vs note, that vntill God haue visited vs, and is come vntoo vs,
and hath subdewed vs vntoo him: wee shall alwayes continue ignorant
and blynde wretches, there shalbe nothing but va
                     ••
                  tie in all our
vnderstandyng, in our hartes there shal be nothyng but pride and presumption,
and our lustes shall bee so farre out of square, that they shall
stryue ageinst God, and wee shall fyght ageynst his Iustice, and ageynst
all right. And surely wee see what hath folowed of it, when
men would needes gouerne them selues by t
                     •
                  eir owne wyt. For what
fashions of seruyng God haue byn brought 
                     •
                  ntoo the world, and howe
wicked? Wanted there any great cunnyng, or any great skyll? No:
for wee see that God hath 
                     〈◊〉
                   out this gracious gyftes in suche
wise, as mans wyt hath showed it selfe right excellent in all maner 
                     〈◊〉
                  


                  
sciences and knowledges, sauyng in the chiefe: that is too wyt, of
commyng vnto God. In this all haue fayled, they haue all wandered
away, and there was nothyng but fasehoode and deceyt in their
cace. And the further they indeuered too thrust themselues foreward,
so muche the deeper dyd they plundge them selues intoo the myre.
Wherefore let vs note, that although the light shyne (as it is sayd in
the first chapter of saint Iohn:) yit notwithstanding wee beyng darknesse,
conceyue it not. Saint Iohn sheweth, that euen from the beginnyng
God separated men from beastes, imprintyng his image in
them, and gyuyng them discretion too discerne betweene good and euyll.
The lyfe of man then serues not onely too eate and drinke, but
also too consider that wee haue a better lyfe, and that is, too haue some
order and common pollicie here beneath, and too vnderstand that there
is a God which ruleth all.
               Loe here the lyght that was before Adams fall. And this lyght abydeth
yit styll, but yit it shyneth in darknesse, and the darknesse comprehendeth
it not, but rather quencheth it quite and cleane out. So
then if wee haue any small insight or ame, let vs consider that it is but
as a little spark, which passeth and vanisheth away out of hand. But
in the meane whyle, as concerning our owne nature, that wee should
bee able too haue regard of goodnesse, or too seeke it, followe it, and
continew in it: it is vtterly vnpossible. And why? For our vnderstanding
is stark blynd.Psal. 94. b. 11. To be short, there is nothing but vanitie in vs, according
too this saying, that God perused the thoughts of men, and
sawe there was nothing but vanitie and leazing in them.
               Now too expresse this yit better, Saint Paule sayeth, that they
had their vnderstanding darkened, and vvere straungers too the
lyfe of God: wherin he cutteth of the occasion of all excuses that men
can make. For they will replye continually ageinst God, and though
they bee condemned, yit will they alwayes haue the last woord, (saying:)
what can I doo with it if there bee nothing but vanitie in mee,
seeing that God created mee so? why made he mee not otherwise?
But Saint Paule telleth vs heere, that wee haue our vnderstanding
ouercast with our owne darknesse. And why? Bycause the lyght is
quenched by the corruptiō that is come vpon vs in Adam. To be short,
S. Paul sheweth vs here, that we must keepe our mouthes shet, when
the scripture bewrayeth that we bee both ignorant, blynd, and brutish.
We must not think to further our cace by alledging that god ought to



haue made vs otherwyse: for the euill proceedeth of Adams fall, bycause
not only he was bereft of the good that he had receyu
                     •
                  d, but all
wee also were impouerished in him. And lyke as he that for feyteth
his goods, must beg and his children to, so must wee also also in our
penurie and pouertie consyder still at this day, the misfortune that is
come vppon vs through the fault and offence of our first father. Thus
yee see how Saint Paule hath heere disappoynted all starting holes,
that men are woont too set afore them, too shewe themselues too bee
ryghtuous and innocent before God. For whence commeth the vanitie
of our mynd in that wee bee both blynd and ignorant? Euen of
our beyng in darknesse, and by darkening of the lyght that God had
put intoo vs in our first creation. And forasmuch as this is a harde
matter too brucke, S. Paule bringeth vs too the lyfe of God: and that
is too laugh too scorne all the tryflyng imaginations that men haue
contryued too maynteyne their owne Freewill, Reason, and Discretion.
For (as I haue sayd already) the bookes of the Philosophers
are full of such stuffe. In the Popedome there is bickering still at
this day for Freewill, as though all were mard, if man had not some
good selfmouing and abilitie too prepare himselfe too receyre grace,
and were made fellowe with God, and could make the grace effectuall
which is offered him. By which reckening men shall not onely bee
hayle fellowe with God (if they may bee beleeued) but of better abilitie
than he, so as he shall but adde some little portion too them. But
S. Paule sayeth, that wee may well bee alyue in our opinion: but as
in respect of God, wee shall not fayle too bee as dead carkesses, or rather
euen as rotten and stinking carions. Then let not men take vpon
them through their foolish ouerweening to haue reason, wisedome,
and freewyll: but if they would fayne knowe their owne state, let them
lyft vp their eyes and consider that theyr liuing must bee the lyfe of
God, and not the lyfe which euery man fancyeth heere too himselfe. S
Paule in the seuenth too the Romanes, confesseth that he thought himselfe
alyue for a tyme, namely, before he had bin conuerted too the pure
doctrine, bycause he was full of hipocrisie, and possessed with such
pryde, that he thought himself too bee as a little Angell. And 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
Bycause Gods lawe had not yit sifted him throughly.Rom. 7. b. 9. But when I
once entered intoo my selfe (sayeth he) and knew what it was too lust:
then did Gods Lawe wound mee too death, and I perceyued that the
lyfe which I had lyued afore, was but death, and that I had made my



selfe too beleeue woonders, taking my selfe too bee that which I was
not, as fooles doo, which beleeue that they bee Kings and Princes,
when in the meane whyle lyce eate them vp, or else they starue for hunger
and cold. So then, Saint Paule confesseth that before he was
conuerted, he was alyue too his owne seemyng, and he tryumphed at
it: but when Christ had once humbled him, and made him feele what
Gods iudgment was, then he gaue ouer that lyfe, and sawe well that
it was but a death.
               Lykewyse he sayeth now, that although wee bee alyue in the opinion
of the world, so as men clap their hands at vs, and magnyfye our
vertewes, and that wee our selues also are besotted with the same opinion:
it is nothing at all, but wee must go vntoo God. Now wee
shall fynd that God hath a speciall lyfe which he reserueth and keepeth
as layd vp in secret for his children. For albeeit that he make his
daysonne too shyne both vppon good and bad, and shewe himselfe lyberall
towardes all without exception. Yit dooth he not scatter abrod
the things that serue for his chozen, according too this saying of this
Psalme,Psal. 3
                        •
                     . f. 20. 21 Lord how great is thy goodnesse which thou hast layd vp in
store for them that feare thee? It is as a treasure that thou hast
hoorded vp for them. So then whereas Saint Paule speaketh heere
of Gods lyfe: he sheweth that in lyuing according too our nature, wee
haue not our lyfe of him. Whence then? Is it not God that hath
created vs? Is it not he of whom wee haue our beeing and mouing:
as it is sayd in the seuenteenth of the Actes. Then is our common lyfe
of God, in asmuch as he is our maker: but in asmuch as he is the Sauiour
of the chozen, and in asmuch as he is the father of his children
whom he hath adopted: this lyfe which is common both too good and
bad, is not named Gods lyfe, but mans lyfe: God letteth it alone in
his plyght. And which then is Gods lyfe? It is, when vppon his
choozing of vs, he sheweth vs the way of lyfe and saluation, and reneweth
vs by his holye spirit, so as Iesus Christ dwelleth in vs by
fayth, (as wee haue seene afore) and vttereth his power in vs, causing
our old man to be crucifyed with him, yea & euen buried too, that wee
may bee rayzed agein, euen too bee separated from all vncleannesse of
the world, that wee may not resemble the vnbeleeuers, who are wholly
prisoners vnder the tyrannye of Satan, and are driuen and haled by
him, and giue ouer themselues too all euill. That is in effect the cause
why S. Paule hath spoken too vs here of Gods lyfe.
               
                  And now, that wee may the beteer bee wakened and receyue this
exhortation vnfeynedly: let vs not deceyue our selues any more with
the opinions that euery of vs may conceyue in our owne head, nor yit
with the iudgment of men, which oftymes doo prayse and commend
the thing that is nothing woorth. Uerilye wee knowe how our Lord
Iesus Christ sayeth in Saint Luke,Luke. 16. d. 15. that the thing which is hygh and
excellent afore men, is vtterly lothsome before God. Too the intent
therefore that wee may no more bee deceyued by them, let vs vnderstand,
that vntyll God haue made vs new creatures, and begotten vs
agein by his holye spirit, wee bee blynd in our vnderstanding, wee
haue nothing in vs but vanitie, and wee bee vtterly ignorant, yea and
starke beastes. That is in effect the thing that wee haue too beare in
mynd. Wherfore as oft as wee fall too our accustomed byase, and
followe our owne fancie, let vs learne too cyte our selues beefore
God, and too wey wel what is ment by the lyfe that he reserueth as peculiar
too himself. Not that it serueth for none other but himself, but
bycause he bestoweth it vppon none but his owne children. For therby
it is that he sheweth himself to haue chozen vs, as wee haue seene in
the first chapter.
               Now heerupon he setteth downe immediatly the hardnesse of their
hart: not a single hardnesse, after the maner as wee take hardnesse: for
the (greeke word betokeneth a thickenednesse (or muddinesse) as when
a peece of wyne that was very well fyned, is so trubbled, as it becommeth
all Lees, and groweth thicke (and muddie lyke a puddle,) so as
there is no more cleere licour in it. Euen so Saynt Paule sayeth
that the hart is thickened, when it is so blynded and hardened by that
meane, as it cannot yeeld too the obeying of God, and that then there
is no cleerenesse in it, but all is trubbled lyke a puddle. And this word
Hart, doth in the holy Scripture betoken now and then, all the lustes,
lykings, and will of man: and sometymes also his vnderstanding.
But for asmuch as heere Saint Paule hath put a difference betweene
a mans vnderstanding, and his mynd, and his Hart: we may wel think
that he ment too adde the will, togither with all the scannings and debatings
which wee make (in our selues) about the iudging of good
and euill: and finally the whole vnderstanding which wee haue, and
the reason that reigneth in vs. Saynt Paule therfore ment in effect
too shewe, that man is so corrupted in all partes of him through the
sinne of Adam, as there is nother wit nor wil, but it tendeth wholy vntoo



euill, and is vtterly saped in it. And therfore lyke as erst he condemned
the beastlinesse that is in vs: so now also he sheweth that we
                     •
                  
bee as blockes, and cannot bee quiet too follow our God whither soeuer
he calleth vs, but that wee be stubborne, and haue stiffe neckes
which cannot bowe, as Moyses also vpbraydeth those that rebelled
ageinst God, (telling them) that they had a necke of yron or brasse.
And euen such are wee too of nature. And for that cause is it sayd in
Ezechiell,Ezech. 36. f. 26. that God will chaunge the hartes of them whom he will
haue saued, so that wheras they were stonye before, he will make them
fleshye. This similitude sheweth well, what is in vs tyll God haue
wrought an alteration in vs. For wee haue nothing but hardnesse:
which is as much as if the holy Ghost should say, that wee bee Gods
enemyes, and refuzers of al truth, vntill God haue softened vs, and corrected
the crabbednesse and stubbornnesse, wherethrough w
                     •
                  e cast
vp our rage in such wyze ageinst God. Too bee short, all our lustes
are as men of warre marching in battell, to let God that he should not
reigne and execute his power and superioritie, which he ought to haue
ouer vs. Lo what our nature is. Now let vs go brag of our owne
freewill, and of our reason: as wee see these wretched Papistes doo,
who are euer harping styll vppon that stryng. But let vs learne too
humble our selues with a good will, and (as I sayd afore) let vs consider
that Saynt Paule blameth mens nature, shewing that all of vs
from the greatest too the least, are plundged euen too the bottom of
hel, vntyll God plucke vs backe agein. And therwithall let vs consider
all the enormities that are doone through the whole world, and
conclude, that we our selues should doo as much, if God shewed vs not
his mercie, and let the same stirre vs vp too brydle our selues, least
wee ouershoote our selues at some tyme: and seeing it hath pleased
God too drawe vs vntoo him, let vs not turne backe agein too meddle
with the leawdnesse of the vnbeleeuers. And no wonder though
they stumble, & tumble and reele too & fro, for they haue no lyght to direct
them by. But our Lord shyneth vppon vs
                     •
                   by his woord, and giueth
vs eyes by his holy spirt: and therfore let vs eschew too bee lyke
them, as S. Paule exhorteth vs heere.
               Heereuntoo he addeth the toppe of al mischeef: which is, that men
go astray after their owne kynd, continew in going outward from
woorse too woorse, and foade themselues with flatterie, wherby they
cast their consciences into such a sleepe, as they feele no more anye remorse



or griefe: and that is the hygh way too make them vtterly past
recouerie. Now first of all, let vs learne heere too preuent such vengeance
of God, which ought too make vs quake. And when wee heare
that such as abyde styll in their owne nature, and ouershoote themselues
so farre as too bee without scruple of conscience, and too become
as brute beastes, voyde of discretion, too be moued eyther with lyfe or
death, or with any maner of feeling of their owne soule health: let vs
a Gods name walke in feare and awe, and bewayle our sinnes euerye
houre early and late, that wee bee not hardened after that fashion. For
wee see how they that growe beastly after that sort, doo gather such a
hard hartednes, as a man cannot bow them, after they haue once gotten
such a boldnesse in giuing themselues vntoo euyll. Thus as touching
the first poynt, let vs bee ryght well assured, that God reuengeth
himselfe after a terrible manner, ageinst all such as foade themselues
in their vyces, and take inordinate leaue too doo what they list, so that
in the end they become brutish, euen as Asses and Dogges.
               And now for the second poynt, if God vse such rigor towards those
which were neuer yit trayned too the Gospell: what will he doo to vs,
when he shall haue shewed vs the way of saluation a long tyme, and yit
wee continew still lyke those that neuer tasted of good instruction? Do
wee not thinke that the punishment shal bee more horrible and dreadfull
vppon vs? Lyke as when S. Paule declareth in the first too the
Romanes, that God gaue men ouer intoo disordinate and shamefull
lustes, so as they were vtterly past all shame: he speaketh expresly of
the heathen and vnbeleeuers, who had none other knowledge of God
than by the skyes and the earth, and the creatures: they had none other
helpe than that great booke, wherby too glorify God, and yit forasmuch
as they did it not, therefore are they condemned after that maner.
But now can wee haue no such excuce as those sillie soules had:
wee cannot say wee be not able too discerne what is good, bycause we
were blynded by Adams sinne and there is nothing but vanitie in vs:
for God hath giuen vs his woorde,Psal. 119. v. 105. which is iustly called a lampe too
guyde vs by: wee haue the Gospell, where our Lord Iesus Christ declareth
that he is our guyde: and yit for all this, if we will needes prouoke
God wilfully, by disaulling the doctrine of saluation, whereas
wee should followe it, (of which sort there are many euen at this day,
who seeke too wallowe in all leaudnesse and disorder, and despyze God
openly) what shall become of vs? Wherefore let vs learne too walke



in the feare of God: and let vs marke well, that Saint Paule hath
not without cause set downe here the toppe of all mischief, of purpose to
shewe vs therby what wages God will pay too all such as yeeld not to
him in dewe tyme and place, but rather take libertie of all naughtinesse,
as though they were scaped out of his handes. Let vs then be
afrayde too ouershoote our selues so farre: and then although we haue
wandered farre afore, God can skill well ynough too drawe vs to him.
Let vs bee afrayde least God should execute the sayd vengeance vppon
vs,Prou. 29. b. 14. as wel as vppon them, according too this saying of Salomon, that
when the wicked man is come too extremitie, he despyzeth all: that is
too say, he regardeth nother lyfe nor death, but flingeth foorth lyke a
brute beast.
               Therefore let vs quake at such threatenings, for feare least God execute
them vppon vs, when wee cannot abyde too bee rebuked for our
vyces. And contrariwyze let vs practyze the doctrine of Salomon,
where he sayeth,Prou. 28. b. 14. happie is the man whose hart pricketh him & quickeneth
him vp nyght and day. Let vs learne then too bee our owne sollicitors,
and too touche our selues for our vyces: and when wee enter
intoo them, let vs bee abashed at them, and cast downe and condemne
our selues, vntill God haue releeued vs with his mercy. After that maner
must wee put this doctrine of S. Paules in vre, too the end, that
when God hath once knit vs too him by the meanes of our Lord Iesus
Christ, and giuen vs lyfe: wee may take good heede that that lyfe bee
not defaced and quenched in vs through our owne leaudnesse and vnthankfulnesse.
Agein, that beyng mynded too continew in this doctrine,
may learne first of all too humble our selues, (for it is certeyne
that humilitie will cause vs too resort vntoo God:) and secondly, that
our humilitie bee matched with warenesse, so as wee bee not rechlesse
too flatter our selues, but that through the same warenesse wee streyne
our selues too the vttermost too fyght ageynst all our vyces and lustes,
tarying our Lordes leyzure vntyll he rid vs quyte and cleane of them:
& in the meane whyle let vs alwayes win somwhat of our selues, bee it
neuer so lyttle, so as it may continually appeare, that our Lord Iesus
Christ woorketh in vs, and maketh his grace too preuayle, by causing
vs too goe foreward in goodnesse: that wee may (say I) bee so dispozed
as wee may growe more and more, vntyll God haue taken vs ou
                     •
                  
of this world.
               Now let vs fall downe before the Maiestie of our good God, with



acknowledgment of our sinnes, praying him too touche vs so too the
quicke, as it may drawe vs vntoo trewe repentance, too continew in it
all the tyme of our lyfe, that beyng vtterly beaten downe and made nothing
in our selues, wee maye learne too seeke all our welfare in him,
and he theruppon leade vs familiarly by the the hand of our Lord Iesus
Christ, so as wee may go too seeke it there, and go foreward more
and more in the professing of his Gospell, too the intent also too bee
filled with his gracious giftes, which are the trew fruites of that roote.
That it may please him too graunt this grace, not onely too vs, but also
too all people and Nations. &c.
            
            
               The .xxix. Sermon, which is the nynth
vppon the fourth Chapter.
               
                  
                     20. But you haue not learned Christ so:
                     21. At leastwise if yee haue heard him, and bin taught in him, euen
as the truth is in Iesus:
                     22. That is too wit, that yee put off the old man after the former
conuersation, which is corrupt after the lustes of errour:
                     23. And bee yee renewed in the spirit of your mynd,
                     24. And put on the newe man vvhich is created after God in
rightuousnesse and holynesse of truth.
                  
               
               
                  SAint Paule sheweth vs by the example
of the heathen men and vnbeleeuers, how
wretched mans lyfe is, when he suffereth
himself too bee led by his owne affections
and lusts. For wee bee so blynded by the
sinne of Adam, that we discerne not beetween
good and euill, Howbeeeit that is
not perceyued at the first blush: but if yee
looke into the whole course of mans lyfe,
yee shal find, that they hold not any certein
way, but that they wander too and fro, and in the end become stark
beasts, so as they haue no hart greef nor scruple of conscience at all.



Now he sheweth what diuersitie there ought too bee betwixt the lyf
                     •
                  
of Christians that haue bin 
                     •
                  ray
                     •
                  ed in the Gospell, and the lyfe of the
ignorant and blyud wretches, which neuer wist what God or his will
is. That is the cause why he addeth, that wee ought too keepe a farre
other trade, wee (I say) that are trayned vp in Iesus Christ. As if he
sayd, that such as haue not the lyght of God, straye heere and there,
and no maruell though they doo so, for they be blynd, and wander in
darknesse. But seing that God hath inlyghtened vs, and wee haue
Iesus Christ the daysonne of ryghtuousenesse shyning vppon vs: what
a shame is it if wee bee mingled with those that haue no direction at
all? Then is there no excuce for vs, if wee will alledge the heathen.
For so little can their exawple serue too lessen our sin, that it shall dubble
our condemnation. And why? God setteth them before our eyes
as looking glasses, wherin too behold what wee our selues and what
our nature is, of all the whyle that wee bee vngouerned of the holy
Ghoste. On the contrarie part we haue our Lord Iesus Christ too
shewe vs the way of lyfe. And it is not for nought that he hath sayd,
that he is the lyght of the worlde,Iohn. 8. b. 12. and that whosoeuer walketh in him,
cannot stray:Iohn. 14. a. 6. and agein, that he is also the way, wherin a man cannot
go amisse. That then is the cause in effect, why Saint Paule addeth,
that it is not so with vs, for wee haue lerned Iesus Christ. And how?
Yee haue herd him, layeth he. And his setting downe a those woords,
is of purpose too cut of all occasion of making of shrouding sheete of
ignorance. For men are loth too bee counted fooles, except it bee
when they should come too accounting with God. But then they
would fayne scape by saying, I am a silie idiot, I am not able too buzie
my self in so manie matters, it is vnpossible for me too set my mynd
vntoo that. Yee see then how wee can well ynough acknowledge our
ignorance, when wee bee called and cyted too make our reckening
before God. Agein, another sort will say, that the Gospell is too
hygh and deepe a thing for them. Saint Paule answereth vntoo all
this in one woord, saying, that we haue heard Iesus Christ. As if he
should say, it is long of none but of our selues, that wee haue not bin
well and dewly instucted, seing that the Gospell hath bin preached vntoo
vs. For why? There God sheweth him self, so farre foorth as
is expedient for vs. Then is there sufficient learning in the Gospell,
and it is not for vs too alledge our owne rawenesse, no more than our
darknesse: for God dooth the dewtie of a good and faythfull shcoolemayster.



Too bee short, if wee continew still in our beastlinesse, after
we haue heard the doctrine of the Gospell: we must blame our selues
for it: for surely it is not long of God, who knoweth what is meete
for vs. And that is the cause also why Saint Paule protesteth,2. Cor. 4. a. 3. that
there is no veyle in his preaching, but that men myght there see Iesus
Christ, if they were not blynded by Satan with vnbeleefe, too goo
away intoo destruction. Howsoeuer the cace stande, wee coulde not
fayle on Gods behalfe too bee guyded and gouerned as is meete for
vs, if wee gaue diligent eare too the things that he sheweth vs in the
Gospell.
               And he dooth yit so much the more aggrauate the leaudnesse of such
as profite not in Gods schoole, when he addeth, that they haue
bin taught, not as though it had bin sheweth them what Iesns Christ
is, for once and away, and that they had had but only some small tast of
it: for then myght it seeme that their ignorance were excusable. But
seeing that our eares are continewally beaten with it from day to day,
and wee haue bin confirmed and furthered in the fayth, and yit wee
abyde styll in our beastlinesse: that is vtterlye vnexcuzable. For he
hath shewed heertoofore, that if all this boote vs not, but that notwithstanding
mens stirring of vs vp early and late to come vnto God, and
theyr offering of the foode of lyfe vntoo vs too feede vs withall, so as
wee haue bin confirmed in it from day too day, too the intente wee
should not want any thing: wee bee styll at our Apcie lyke yong beginners,
and knowe not what the rule of good lyfe is: wee can blame
none but our selues, nother can wee say, that wee bee silie ignorant
soules, or that God speaketh vntoo vs in too darke a language, or
that wee haue not bin trayned vp in the knowledge of the truthe.
All this is dispatched by that which Saint Paule telleth vs heere,
which is, that God hath not ceassed with the preaching of his truth
vntoo vs once or twyce: but that he hath ordeyned the Gospell too bee
preached (continually,) that wee myght be confirmed in it all the time
of our lyfe: and that the thing which wee did not conceyue or vnderstand
at the first, should bee repeted vntoo vs, and layd foorth more familiarly
in a knowen tung, too the ende wee myght haue the larger
confirmation of it: and that if wee profit not for all his calling of vs
too him without ceassing, wee see our vnthankfulnesse too apparant,
in that wee knowe not Iesus Christ after wee haue had our eares beaten
so long tyme with the Gospell. And this is spoken vntoo vs: wherfore



let vs learne too recken the tyme well.
               When such as haue knowen Gods truth from their chyldhood, do
come too mans state, let them thinke thus with themselues: I ought
too bee a great teacher (as the Aposte also sheweth in the Epistle too
the Hebrewes:Hebre. 5. d. 12.) it is now a fifteene or twentie yeeres ago since I came
too age of discretion: so as a number of men are still behynd mee: and
it is God himself which calleth mee: for the preaching of the Gospell
vntoo mee is not by chaunce, but therby God sheweth the care that he
hath of my saluation, and the loue that he beareth towardes mee.
Seeing then that I haue heard the Gospell so long tyme without ceassing,
or myght haue done, if the fault were not in my self: must I not
needes looke for a terrible condemnation, when I continew still in my
beastlinesse? Agein, let such as haue bin sometyme in darknesse, and
afterward are inlyghtened, thinke thus: It is now a yeere, fyue, ten,
or more ago since God opened myne eyes by his woord, and drew mee
out of the dungeon wherin I was, in which if he had left mee styll, I
had bin a wretched forlorne creature: and now that he hath voutsafed
too inlyghten mee with the knowledge of his truth, which is so precious
a thing, should I bee rechlesse in the hearing and receyuing therof?
Agein, on the other syde, God pitying my rudenesse, applyeth himself
as much as can bee too my capacitie, insomuch that he dooth euen lisp
(as yee would say,) too shewe mee his secretes after a sweete and louing
fashyon, as if one should feede a little babe, and chawe his meate
too him, too the end he should haue no more too doo, but too swallow
it downe: and shall I notwithstanding continew a dullard still? Then
let vs marke well all these things, and beare well in mynd these words
of S. Paule, where he sayeth, not onely that wee haue heard of Iesus
Christ, but also that wee haue bin taught him, bycause that through
Gods goodnesse the Gospell was not preached vntoo vs, for one day
and no more: but hath ringed a long tyme already in our eares.
               And wee haue too marke, that S. Paule speaking of the doctrine of
the Gospell, matcheth Iesus Christ with it, according as it hath bin
tolde vs heretofore, that the thing which God sheweth vs in his word,
is the knowledge of Iesus Christ, as who is also the end and substance
thereof. Therefore let vs marke it,Rom. 10. a. 4. to the intent we wander not when
wee would faynest profyte in Gods woorde, but may haue alwayes a
certeine marke too ame at. For wee see a number that haue turned
ouer the Scripture leafe by leafe, and are able too make great report



of it. But in the meane whyle they wote not what the effect or pith of
it is: for their amyng is not at our Lord Iesus Christ. So much the
more behoueth it vs too marke well all the textes wherein it is shewed
vs, that when wee once knowe the benefytes that are brought vntoo
vs by the sonne of God, what power he hath, and what treasures
he vttereth towardes vs: then wee haue the trew vnderstanding of the
Gospell. But without Iesus Christ wee haue nothing. And verily
wee ought too be the more prouoked theruntoo, by the example of those
which name themselues Christians, and yit notwithstanding wote not
too what Sainct too vow themselues, as they say. As for example, see
how the Papistes gad vp and downe without any certeintie, and are
as Reedes that bend with euery wynd. And why? (Bycause) there is
no stedfastnesse but in our Lord Iesus Christ, and they bee iustly punished
for not seeking of him. For although they bee neuer so stout in
their owne imaginations: yit must they bee fayne too knowe in the
end, that the things which they haue buylded and forged in their owne
heades, are nothing. And therefore (as I haue touched already) let
vs vnderstand that Iesus Christ is the shooteanker wherunto God the
father calleth vs, and that wee must not bee drawen from him for any
thing, but apply all that wee haue vntoo him. And that is the cause
why S. Paule dooth in Gods name and authoritie, exhort and warne
those agein which haue heard Iesus Christ, and bin taught of him by
the doctrine of his Gospell.
               Furthermore he saith, If yee haue learned him well, according as
the truth is in our Lord Iesus Christ. And this is set downe of purpose,
bycause there are a number of fickle headed folke and fantasticall
fellowes, which make great protestation with full mouth, that they
bee Christians, as though they had deuoured the whole Gospell: and
yit haue nother wisedome nor discretion in them. And would God
that examples therof were not so ryfe now adayes in the world. But
if a man should demaund euery of them, whether they would not haue
the Gospell: yis, what else, say they? That runnes roundly with
them without any stop: for saying is good cheape. But let a man
examine the most part of them how they haue profited, and he shall
scarce fynd one among a hundred of them, that knowes in good earnest
what belongeth too Iesus Christ. Too say, that men may lawfully
eate flesh vppon frydayes, and too mocke at all the superstitions
of poperie, and to say, that they be but gewgawes and tryfling things.



that they can do with ease. But in the meane whyle if a man aske them
what it is to be regenerated, what pacience is, what newnes of lyfe is,
& what it is to be fashioned agein after the image of god: there the most
part of thē wil shew, that they neuer tasted of the truth of the Gospell,
but did but only guibble about the barke of it, & neuer came at the very
substance of it. And this is not now adayes only, for S. Paule sheweth
wel, that euē in his time many folks abused the name of Christ, & wold
needes be takē for great Christians, & yit neuer wist what the sonne of
God was. Wherfore let vs mark wel what is said here. For it is as if
S. Paul should find fault with himself: not that the things which he had
spokē needed any amendment, but too giue the sharper check or rebuke
to such as did so falsifie Christs name, & wickedly abuse his Gospel, by
making it a cloke for their wickednes. S. Paul thē making a countenance
as it were to bethinke himself better, sayth, yea for sooth, but I
pray God ye haue learned him. As if he shold say, I speak indifferētly
to al such as haue heard the pure doctrine of God. Howbeit forasmuch
as a great sort wil wrest & wring the things that are told thē, & take but
only some patch of matter, I wote not what: therfore haue they not any
good foundation to buyld vpō. To be short, they haue no roote of fayth.
And yit for al that, haue they once but fidled ouer, I wote not what: by
& by they be great clearkes, to their own seeming. And therfore looke
wel to it (sayth he,) that ye make not a vayne protestatiō, least ye be cō
                  uicted
of falshood before God & his Angels: & that the name of Iesus
Christ which ought to be holy too you, be not taken in vaine: and that
wheras enery of you boasteth himself to be a Christian, yit notwithstā
                  ding
ye know not to what end Iesus Christ was giuen of God his father,
nor how we be made parttakers of him, nor what our redemption
is, nor how wee may inioy all his benefytes. For if yee knowe not
these: it is certein that all this bragging of yours shall cost you ryght
deere, for that you haue with full mouth protested your selues too bee
Christians, and yit notwithstanding knowe not which bee the qualities
of your Christendome, nor to what ende to apply them. This in
effect is the thing that wee haue too remember vpon that streyne.
               Behold, Saint Paule telleth vs heere, that if wee haue bin trayned
in the Gospell, it beh
                     •
                  ueth vs too differ from the ignorant and
the vnbeleeuers. For Gods sholing of vs out, and his setting of vs in
aray alone by our selues after that fashion, and his inlyghtening of vs,
is to the e
                     •
                  d we should no more be as wanderers at randon, nor as silly



blynd wretches groping in the dark, but that wee should knowe the
ryght way of saluation. And in especially, seeing wee be dayly exhorted
too come vntoo him, and he giueth vs meanes to further vs more and
more in the fayth: let vs bee verye ware that we vnhallow not so holie
a thing, as is the truth of the Gospel, & the pure doctrine of God. But
wee vnhalowe it, if we know not too what end God hath giuen it vs,
and that wee must beare it in mynd. For I haue told you alredy,
that manie fantasticall persons will pretend christianitie wel ynough,
but yit for all that, there is no substance nor roote in them. Therfore
let vs looke well that wee knowe whertoo wee bee called, and that
God bee not disappoynted of his intent, when hee dooeth the office of
a schoolemayster towards vs, but that wee consider how he sheweth
vs the way of lyfe and saluation: and lyke as he is a good and faythfull
teacher, so let vs bee lyke schollers vntoo him.
               But let vs come now too the truthe whereof Saint Paule speaketh,
which is (sayth he) that yee put of the old man, which is corrupted
with earthly lusts, euen according too the conuersation that
yee haue led heretoofore. He expresseth yit better that all they which
vaunt themselues too bee the disciples of Iesus Christ, and yit notwithstanding
leade a lawelesse lyfe, and doo but giue occasion of offence
in the Churche, are falsaries, as if a man should bring forth
a counterfet deede. Wherfore let vs mark that it is a cursed trecherie
when wee say wee intend too bee Christians,Titu
                        •
                     . 1. d. 16. and professe it also with
our mouth, and yit notwithstanding go from the thing in our woorks
which wee protest in our woords, as sayeth Saint Paule in another
place. For he that taketh leaue too doo all euill, and yit wil bee taken
too bee of the number of Gods children: it is certeyn that he denyeth
Iesus Christ in his whole lyfe, how much soeuer he confesse him in
woords. Therfore let vs bethink our selues, and consider, that if wee
meane to bee allowed of God, wee must learne too rid away our old
man. And by that woord the scripture meaneth al that we haue of
nature. For wee knowe there are (as yee would say) twoo welsprings
of mankind, that is too wit, Adam, and our Lord Iesus Christ. Now
as in respect of our first birth, wee come all out of the welspring of Adam,
and are corrupted with sinfulnesse, so as there is nothing but
frowardnesse and cursednesse in our soules. It standeth vs then on
hand too bee renewed in Iesus Christ, and too bee made new creatures.
And for that cause dooth the old Man betoken all that wee haue



by birthryght from our fathers. Now then, if a man bee let alone in
his first state: surely he shalbee but a blynd wretch full of rebelliousnesse
and spyte ageinst God. Too bee short, he shall tend all wholly
vntoo euill, for wee bee altoogither saped in it. That is the thing that
is ment by the old man, least wee should think that Saint Paules intent
was too rebuke but only the vyces that are apparant before men:
lyke as when men will rebuke one that hath played the vnthrift for a
tyme, they will say he must cast his old skin. But heere Saint Paule
passeth yit further: which is, that our likings are vtterly vntoward, that
there is not one drop of goodnesse and vprightnesse in vs, that all our
thoughts are wicked, and that all our desyres and affections are rebellious
ageinst God, and ageinst his will and iustice.
               Furthermore, wheras he speaketh of vnclothing or putting of: it is a
similitude ryfe ynough, (wherby is ment) that wee must giue ouer all
that is of our owne, and cast it quyte away, that wee may bee clothed
agein with other ornaments, as he wil adde anon after. And here we
see, that there are twoo partes in ruling our lyfe, and in comming
vntoo God. The one is the forsaking of our selues, and the other is,
that wee bee gouerned by Gods spirit. For needs must all that is our
owne bee layd downe, before God take in hand the guyding of vs.
And why? For our thoughts and Gods doctrine, our affections and
the commaundements wherby God will haue vs too bee ruled, are as
fyre and water. Therfore all that is of our owne nature, must bee cut
of, before God doo gouerne vs. And that is the cause why wee must
begin at the forsaking of our selues: which also is the verye order that
Saint Paule hath followed in this text. Wee must (sayeth he) put of
the old man.
               And secondly wee haue too mark, that Iesus Christ was sent vs too
the end that we should be repayred after the image of God. It is trew
that he hath reconcyled vs to God his father by his death & passion, &
that the sheading of his blud washeth vs from all our filthynesse, and
setteth vs free from damnatiō, and endlesse death, and that his offring
of himself hath made full satisfaction for vs: insomuch that if we resort
to Iesus Christ for remission of our sinnes, God of his own free goodnesse
accepteth vs for ryghtuous, bycause he passeth not what we bee,
but buryeth all our faults, and ceasseth not to fauour vs as his childrē,
notwithstanding that wee bee wretched sinners. This benefyte receyue
wee by Iesus Christ. But yit must wee not separate the second



poynt from it: which is,Iohn. 1. b. 16. &. Coloss. c. 19. & 2. b. 9. that wee must bee sanctifyed by his holie spirit,
according too this saying, that he hath receyued the fulnesse of all
grace, too the end that all of vs should drawe out of him. And EsayEsay. 11. a. 2.
declareth that spirit of wisedome, the spirit of iudgment, the spirit of
vpryghtnesse, and the spirit of the feare of God rested vppon him. And
was that for any neede that he himselfe had? No: but too the intent
that wee should receyue that which wee want, according too the measure
that it pleaseth him too deale vntoo vs, as wee haue seene heretoofore.
And that is the cause why S. Paule in the second too the Corinthians
sayeth,2. Cor. 8. b. 9. that he became poore too the intent too fyll vs with his
riches. Then if wee desyre too be receyued too mercy at Gods hand,
by the death and passion of his onely sonne, and too haue our sinnes vnimputed
to vs, bycause he hath made discharge and payment for them:
let vs learne also that he is giuen vs too make vs holy, too the end we
should bee gouerned by his holy spirit. So then, if wee intend too begin
too rule our lyfe well: wee must forsake our selues and fyght ageinst
our owne nature. And agein, wee must note also that there is
no Christianitie in vs, nother can wee any skill of the sonne of God, or
of his power, or of his office, vntyll wee knowe that wee ought too bee
repayred by him accordyng too the image of God. Those are the two
things which wee ought too marke well. Trew it is that this deserueth
well too bee layd foorth more at large: Howbeeit too the intent
that the whole may be knit toogither in one linke, let vs note briefely,
that wee can neuer bee allowed of God, nor neuer doo him any seruice
that he may lyke of, vnlesse wee enter intoo the sayd battell of offering
force and violence vntoo all our thoughtes and affections, too subdew
them as prisoners too the obeying of god, and too kill them quyte and
cleane. So much concerning the first poynt.
               Now too the ende this doctrine myght not seeme more than needeth:
Saint Paul putteth the Ephesians in mynd what they had bin.
For wee knowe that men are not willing too bee rebuked, that is too
say, they bee loth too abyde it, and would rather bee spared: insomuch
that when any warning is giuen them, they coulde fynde in their hart
too put it farre from them. On the other syde wee bee so newfangled,
that if a man tickle vs not in the eare with some new thing, wee doo as
it were despyze and disdeyne it. As for an example, if a man speake
too vs of walking in the feare of God: who knowes not that, say wee?
Let him go preache that too little children, will many a man say. And



why? Bycause it seemes too them too bee but lost tyme too speake of
things that are so well knowen too them. But dooth it therfore follow
that they bee familiar and in vse with them? (No:) for as for them
that say, doo not wee knowe well ynough that God must bee loued, honored,
and serued, that we must absteyne from Theft, Extortion, Lying,
Deceyt, Blasphemie, Whoredome, and all other such things: are
they not the greatest despyzers of God and of all ryght dealing? Yis:
but let vs herken what Saint Paule telleth vs heere. Go too (sayeth
he) I exhort you too put of the olde man. If yee saye you haue it not:
aduyze your selues well, and consider what you were at the tyme that
God drew you too the knowledge of his Gospell: that is too wit, that
yee were as folke lost and vtterly forlorne. So then, assure your selues
it is not for naught that I exhort you too ridde away the olde man: for
yee bee not quyte stripped out of him as yit. It was as a dubble garment
about you before, and therefore yee must bee fayne too labour the
earnestlyer as nowe too laye away the residew that remayneth of it
styll.
               Agein, on the other syde, he telleth them also, that it must not greeue
them too bee exhorted, as though the thinges that are spoken of were
sufficiently knowen too them, (specially) seeyng that experience sheweth,
that they neuer knew how too order their lyfe. For too knowe
that it behoueth vs too doo this or that, is not all that wee haue to doo:
but wee must also shewe that our lyfe is well acquaynted with Gods
doctrine. Then if it bee perceyued by our fruites that wee haue such
roote in vs, so as wee can skill too frame our selues wholy too Gods
will: then may it bee sayd, that we bee well learned. But if our former
lyfe bewray vs too haue bin as stray sheepe, or rather as vtterly
peaked away after our owne lustes, and that there remayneth yit styll
a smatch of the same, that wee bee not so well clenzed as were requisite:
let vs bow downe our eares and herken willingly too the thing
which wee see too bee profitable, yea and needfull for vs. And so Saint
Paule spake not alonly for the Ephesians, but also for vs all in common.
Wherefore as oft as it seemeth vntoo vs that wee coulde well
forbeare the often putting of vs in mynd of one thing: let vs examine
our lyfe, and if wee fynde not our selues yit throughly rid of the diseases
that wee bee told of: let vs abyde too bee taught more and more,
assuring our selues that it is not ynough for vs too haue the doctrine of
God swimming in our brayne, but that it must bee well settled in our



hartes, so as our lyfe (as I sayd afore) may answer for vs, that wee bee
learned in good earnest.
               And Saint Paule hauing spoken of the old man, sayth, that he is
corrupted according too the lustes of errour and deceyt. In saying
that it is corrupted, he compareth the agednesse of our soules
with the agednesse as wee see it in our bodies. When a man commeth
too old age, he becommeth weake in respect of strength both of
bodie and mynd: he forgoeth all his lustinesse and hangeth his wings.
too bee short, he is as good as half dead: for his age dooth so abate
his corage, that he must looke styll towardes his graue, which wayteth
for him. And Saynt Paule taketh a resemblance hereof in the
old agednesse of the soule. Now I haue told you alredie, that (too
put away) the old agednesse of the soule (or the old man,) is too forsake
our owne nature, bycause it is altoogither cursed, and wee bring nothing
with vs from our moothers womb, that is good and cleane.
Therefore if wee bee geuen too our owne imaginations, and followe
our owne fleshly reason, and giue the brydle too our affections: then
is the soule in his old agednesse. And Saynt Paule sayeth, that by
that meanes it is corruppted, that is too say, there is no lyfe of God
in it, as wee haue seene heretoofore. Let vs vnderstand then that we
be corrupt, so long as wee continew in our old man, that is too say, so
long as wee continew styll in our owne state and nature. No doubt
but wee will thinke our selues too haue lyuelinesse ynough: but that
is but a madnesse, and all the maystries that wee trye shalbee but too
breake our neckes, vntyll wee haue forsaken and giuen ouer both our
thoughtes and our lustes. And that is the cause why Saynt Paule
speaketh purposely of the desyres and lustes of deceyt. For he sheweth
that men are so blynded, as they discerne not how the diuell deceyueth
them by the intycementes which he setteth afore them. For
whosoeuer is not touched with trew feare of God, will let himself
looce: and if a man say too him, vnhappye creature, wilt thou vndoo
thy self so? He will answer, No. For it seemeth not too him that he
serueth the diuell. And why? For they that are bewhitched with Satans
illuzions after that sort, doo so cleaue vntoo him, that they beecome
starke doltes and dullardes. Too the end then that wee learne
too flatter our selues no more in our owne conceytes, nor too fall
asleepe theruppon: Saynt Paule telleth vs that our lustes are full of
deceytes: as if he should say, when you take your se
                     •
                  ues too bee in



good cace, and yee haue all your owne wishing, and fortune (as yee
terme hir) smyleth vppon you, so as yee prosper in all things euery
where, and yee want nothing: behold, al your felicitie is but falshood.
Too bee short, Saynt Paule ment too warne vs heere, that wee
ought too suspect our selues in all our desyres. Therefore if a man
intend too rule his lyfe well: he must first and formest mislyke of himself,
and consider that all that euer he imagineth of his owne conceyt,
is but an illu
                     •
                  ion of Satan, wherwith he deceyueth and beguyleth
himself, and that as many as are of them, are but as snares too intangle
him on all sydes. When wee once knowe this, we shall haue profited
greatly, not only for one day, but for all our lyfe longe. And
for asmuch as wee see such a number of wretched soules cast awaye
themselues vppon hope of some profit, which they haue imagined of
their owne head: let vs beware that wee hold not the same trade, that
is too say, that wee follow not our owne good intentes, as men terme
them. For wee shall but throwe our selues headlong intoo destruction,
if wee followe the way that our owne nature dryues vs too. And
why? For all our owne lustes and lykings are deceytfull. Then is
there none other shift, but too laye asyde the reason which wee weene
our selues too haue, toogither with all the intycementes of Satan
and the world, so as euery whit of it bee cast away, and wee well appoynted,
knowing that the sweetenesse of them serueth but too beguyle
vs the sooner, that wee myght not perceyue the deadly poyson
which is hid vnderneath. Thus in effect wee haue too beare in mind,
how S. Paule telleth vs, that vntyll such 
                     •
                  yme as we haue learned too
denye our selues, and too holde our selues as prisoners vnder Gods
woorde, yea and too rid our selues quyte and cleane from the thinges
that wee haue of our selues and of our owne nature: we wote not what
Christi
                     •
                  nitie meaneth, wee knowe not whertoo the Gospell tendeth,
nor too what ende it is preached. For it is not ynough too haue put away
the old man for once: but wee must profit in it more and more, according
too the warning that is giuen vs heere. And in good scoth,
S. Paule had taught the Ephesians, and they had receyued his doctrine:
and yit neuerthelesse he exhorteth them along tyme after, as
wee see. Hereby he sheweth vs, that it is for vs too invre our selues to
pacience all our lyfe long. Although then that wee haue alredy struggled
greatly too thrust all our affections, all our lustes, and all our lykings
vnder foote: yit shall we neuer haue so ouermaystred our selues,



that wee shall bee throughly reformed. And therefore it standeth vs on
hand too giue all our indeuer theruntoo, and too labour for it all the
tyme of our lyfe. And so in fewe woordes yee see the stoutnesse which
wee must haue too forsake all our owne lustes, and all our wicked
thoughtes.
               And heereuppon wee must proceede too the second poynt, which is,
that wee must bee renewed. For it is not ynough that men mislyke of
themselues, and hate their vyces in shunning of them: but wee must
also frame our selues too Gods will, according too this saying: Hate
euyll,Psal. 34. c. 15. and doo good. So then, the things that S. Paule hath spoken
hithertoo, are as a preparatyue too set our lyfe in good order: lyke as
when a man intendeth too haue a good crop in his feelde, he must first
stubbe it, too rid away the brambles, bushes, and euyll weedes, and afterward
plow it and harrowe it, and then sowe it, and so will fruite
spring of his labour. Therefore if wee purpose too beare fruite vnto
God, and bee desyrous too order our lyfe in such wise as his name may
bee glorifyed by it: wee must first cause our selues too bee stubbed, for
wee bee full of naughtie affections, which are as thornes and thistles,
and therefore must bee cut away and plucked vp by the roote: and afterward
wee must bee tylled, so as the plow passe vppon vs: that is to
say, when our Lord maketh vs too feele his Iustice, wee must bee so
sorie that wee bee so giuen too naughtinesse, as it may bee as a good
tylth too vs at Gods hand. That is the thing which Saint Paule
dooth hithertoo.
               Now he soweth the good seede, too the ende that God may gather
the good fruite which he requireth of vs, that is too say, that he may be
honored at our handes, and that wee may shew that wee doo in verye
deede thinke our selues beholden too him for all thinges. That is the
cause why he speaketh next of beyng renewed in mynd and vnderstanding:
that is too say, that we must bee reformed in all things throughout,
and bee so chaunged, as men may perceyue that wee haue not onely
forsaken our selues, but also that God reygneth in vs without geynstryuing,
and possesseth vs both in our affections and in our thoughts,
according as he deserueth ryght well that wee should bee giuen all
wholly vntoo him.
               Now let vs fall downe before the Maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him too make vs so too feele
them, as it may make vs too bee sory for them, and too walke roundly



away in the path wherein he hath set vs: and that too bring the same
too passe, wee may consider too what end our Lord Iesus is sent vs, so
as the things which he hath doone for vs, may not bee lost and perishe
through our leaudnesse and carelesnesse, but that wee beyng renewed,
may learne so too serue our God in holynesse and ryghtuousnesse, as
wee may well shewe how great account wee make of the most noble
and excellent redemption which he performed, in that he spared not
his onely sonne for our sakes. And so let vs all saye, Almighty God
heauenly father. &c.
            
            
               The .xxx. Sermon, which is the tenth
vppon the fourth Chapter.
               
                  
                     23. Bee yee renewed in the spirit of your mynd,
                     24. And put yee on the newe man vvhich is created after God
in rightuousnesse and holynesse of truth.
                     25. VVherefore put avvay lying, and speake truth euery of you
too his neyghbour: for wee bee members one of another.
                     26. Bee yee angry, and sinne not.
                  
               
               
                  WEe haue now too lay foorth the second part
of the well ordering of our lyfe set downe
heere by Saint Paule: which is, that wee
must walk in newnesse of lyfe, bycause it
behoueth vs too bee reformed by Gods spirit.
And too the intent wee may knowe
that our chaunging must not bee in part
only, but in whole. Saint Paule taketh
heere the thing that seemeth most excellent
and most estemed in mannes nature: namely
knowledge, vnderstanding, wit, reason, and all maner of abilitie of
mynd. Then if there bee any wisdome in vs, Saint Paule sayeth, it
must bee corrected. And why? Trew it is that our reason of it self is
alwayes commendable: but wee bee so corrupted by Adams sin,
                     
                        •
                     . cor. 
                        •
                     . b. 
                        •
                     . that
we haue not the skil to think so much as one good thought, which is not



crooked, and full of malice and rebellion ageinst God. And although
this be not perceyued openly: yit will there euer be some secret hipocrisie
lurking, which is ynough & to much to condemne vs before God.
Yee see then that the thing wheruntoo wee must inforce our selues, if
wee purpose too please God, is that being rid of all our owne conceits
and affections, wee get vs a new guyde, that is too wit, Gods spirit:
according wh
                     ••
                  untoo he vseth a lyke maner of sentence in the twelfth
too the Romanes,Rom. 12. a. 2. in speaking of Christian lyfe. It behoueth vs too
bee transformed, not only in our affections which are sinfull, as euery
man may iudge: but euen in the thing which seemeth faultlesse, that
is too wit, in the Reason that wee haue spoken of. Too bee short, wee
must bee sacrifyzed, or else our lyfe will bee alwayes vnholy and vncleane.
And this sacrifyzing is expounded by Saint Paule in the text
before alledged, to be the laying away & mortifying of al that we haue
of our selues. Our trew perfection then is that fyghting ageinst al that
is of our owne nature, wee suffer our selues too bee gouerned by Gods
spirit, so as it may bee perceyued that wee bee vtterly chaunged. For
it is not ynough that our lyfe haue some honestie too the worldward,
so as it may bee commended and had in good reputation among men:
but also ambition and all other vyces that ly lurking within vs, must
bee clenzed away, and our Lord must haue the guyding of vs.
               And for that cause also doothe he adde that we must be reformed according
too God, namely in trew rightuousnesse and holinesse.
Lyke as heertoofore he had condemned the old man, which (as I
haue told you alredie) is all that euer wee bring from our moothers
womb: so now he sayeth, that wee must bee new creatures. And for
the same cause dooth he send vs too the example of our Lord Iesus
Christ in the sixth too the Romans, saying, that wee must bee crucifyed
and dye with him, namely in respect of the old man, and also bee
fashyoned lyke too his rysing agein, too walk in newnesse of lyfe. It
is trew that he vseth other woords there: howeeit all commeth too
one, which is, that lyke as our Lord Iesus is the second Adam, so
must he bee as a patterne too vs, and wee bee fashyoned after him and
his image, that wee may be lyke him. Now surely this wil not come
too passe of our owne nature: but yit is not this exhortation more than
needeth, bycause that when the holie scripture bringeth vs too our
Lord Iesus Christ, it meaneth not that wee should bee as blocks of
woode, but that wee should come and offer our selues too God that



he may woork in vs. And in very deede, these twoo things agree v
                     •
                  
                  ry
well: that the power which is in vs should come of God: for it is he
that moueth vs vnto good, it is he that bringeth vs to it, it is he that giueth
vs both the wil & the abilitie to performe the wil, as we haue seen
in another text.Phil. 2. b. 13. And yit God worketh so in vs, that of his gracious fauour
the good works that are done, are called ours. And in good sooth,
when we be so led by him, wee go. And it is not too bee woondered
at, that Gods goodnesse stretcheth so farre, as too make the things
ours which are his, and whereof he only deserueth the prayse. For
wee call the bread that wee eate our owne, though wee haue it but by
tytle of gift. For although men take payne for it: yit could it not stand
them in any stead, but through Gods free blissing. Then looke what
is giuen vs, wee call it our owne. Euen so S. Paule exhorteth vs too
put on the newe man, not that wee can doo it of our selues, for Iesus
Christ must bee fayne too clothe vs with his ryghtuousnesse, as well
as make vs parttakers of the giftes of his holy spirit. And I praye
you what is ment by putting on of the new man? I haue tolde you already,
that it is the vtter chaunging of vs both in our thoughts and in
our desyres, and (too bee short) in all the partes of our soule. Now is
not such an alteration the speciall woorke of God, and the gift of hys
holy spirit? Saint Paule therefore meaneth not that wee can doo any
thing as of our owne power: but yit that euery of vs ought too streyne
himselfe too followe whither soeuer he calleth vs. And therewithall
he warneth vs that all our lyfe is very daungerful vntill wee chaunge,
and that the newnesse appeere in vs.
               Now Saint Paule sayeth, that the nevve man is created after
God and his image. And therin he confirmeth the matter which I
go about too touch: that is too wit, that although wee streyne our
selues too the vttermost that wee can, yit can wee doo nothing, vnlesse
wee bee preuented by Gods grace. Which of vs can bee his
owne maker? Wee knowe that that honour must bee reserued vntoo
God alone. But heere the cace standeth vppon a new creating.
That therefore cannot bee in mans will, nor yit in his power. And
Saynt Paule also hath dispatched that doubt and scruple, in saying
that the newe man is created of God. As if he should say, my frendes,
In dede ye ought not to abuse the grace that is offered you by the Gospell:
but yit for all that, assure your selues that when yee haue streyned
your selues what yee can, too dedicate your selues too Gods seruice,



yee can doo nothing furtherfoorth than he woorketh in you by his
holy spirit. According whereuntoo he sayeth in another place, that
we doo woorke our owne saluation,Phil. 2. b. 12. 1
                        •
                     . euen as though we could doo somwhat
of our selues: but yit he addeth, that it must bee in feare and
trembling, that is too say, with putting away of all presumption,
knowing that it behoueth vs too depend vppon another: and he addeth
the reason, for it is God (sayeth he) which giueth both the will
and the abilitie too performe it, and all of his owne free goodnesse.
After that manner then must wee indeuer our selues. But yit must
wee not therfore conceyue a vayne ouerweening in the meane whyle,
as though we had some shift, and were able on our owne syde too doo
neuer so little without Gods grace: Saynt Paule exhorteth vs rather
too feare and warenesse. And why? For seeing wee bee as weake
as may bee, and not only that, but also starke dead, and as good as
rotten caryons in all caces of our saluation, & haue not so much as one
good thought of our owne: seeing (I say) that wee haue all at Gods
hand,2. Cor. 3. b. 5. and that he must bee fayne too woorke it by the power of his holy
spirite: let vs learne too walke in humilitie. And moreouer, let
vs not ceasse too make his grace auaylable, assuring our selues that
his woorking by his power shalbe alwayes in such wyse, as the prayse
must euer redound too him alone, and no drop of it remayne ouer too
our selues. Yee see then what wee haue too remember vppon this
speeche, where Saynt Paule sayeth, that the newe man is created.
Yea verily, and therin he sheweth how wee bee falne from our originall,
and from the state whertoo wee were aduaunced by Gods grace
in the person of our forefather Adam. As if he sayd, that Adams fall is
vntoo vs as a spirituall death, wherby wee bee cut of and cast awaye
from the number of Gods creatures. And not without cause dooth
God so oft vtter this dreadfull saying,Cene. 6. b. 6. that he repenteth him that euer
he made man. For therin he detesteth the corruption and sin that
are in vs. Not that God hath any humane passions in him: but too
shewe vs that he vtterly mislyketh vs, vntill his image bee renewed in
vs.Gene. 1. d. 31. It is sayd, that God looked vppon all that he had made, and all
was exceeding good and faultlesse. But when our father Adam was
once falne, and had made himselfe a straunger to the fountayne of life:
by & by he was stripped stark naked of all goodnesse. For beyng separated
from God, what could he be but vtterly forlorne, & past hope of
recouerie? Shall wee fynd eyther lyfe, or ryghtuousnesse, or holinesse,



or soundnesse, or vpryghtnesse out of God? No: Yee see then that Adam
was as it were cut of from the aray of creatures: he was not
woorthie too bee reckened euen among the Frogges and other vermine
of the earth. Brag wee as much as wee list, that is our nature:
wee beare a greater curse of God, than is in all the Lyce and
Fleas, and in all the woormes of the earth. That is the cause why S.
Paule sheweth vs, that God cannot acknowledge vs for his children,
vntyll his image bee repayred in vs: which thing is doone by this
newe creation.Iohn. 11. c. 25. For lyke as Adam drew vs all downe, and plundged
vs with himself in the gulfe of death: so are wee created new agein by
God in the person of our Lord Iesus Christ. And for that cause doth
he name himselfe the resurrection and lyfe. For wee must ryze agein
in him, if wee wyll liue in deede. Which thing cannot bee, except wee
haue first bin deade, as was declared more at large this morning.
Therefore wee ought too haue this reason alwayes with vs, that wee
weene not our selues too bee rightuous, or too make our lyfe allowable
before God, but bee euer fully resolued and perswaded, that God wyll
take nothing in good woorth at our handes, but that which he knoweth
too bee his owne. For as I sayd, without him, there is nothing but
euill. For by that meane was his image defaced in vs by Adams
sinne: and therefore it standeth vs on hand too bee made new ageyne
in Iesus Christ.
               Now he sheweth vs how that may bee doone, saying in Ryghtuousnesse
and holinesse. By the woorde Rightuousnesse, he meaneth
soundnesse and vprightnesse, so as we liue with our neyghbours without
deceyt, & without malice or harme dooing, yeelding too euery man
that which is his. Now when such a soundnesse reigneth in vs, thē shal
wee shew by our deedes that we be fashioned agein after Gods image
in ryghtuousnesse. But it is not ynough that men haue their ryght, except
God also haue his. For too what purpose is it for vs too bee no
theeues (towardes men,) and yit to be traytrous towardes God? or to
absteyne from stealing away our neighbours goods, and in the meane
whyle to rob God of his honor? Therfore must ryghtuousnesse be matched
with holynesse. For the twoo tables of the lawe are inseparable.
And vnder the woord Holynesse, S. Paule comprehendeth all things
that belong too the seruing of God. The newnesse of our lyfe therfore,
is this: namely too walke purely before God, too eschew all corruption
and vncleannesse, too separate our selues from all the defylementes



of the world, and too offer our selues in sacrifyzce vntoo God: and (on
the other syde) too walke soundly and vprightly with our neighbours.
The performance of these two things is all that is requisite to the perfection
of a Christian life. Now it is certein that Gods lawe hath not
taught vs by halues, what wee haue too do, but God hath there shewed
vs a right rule, wherunto there may bee nothing added, nor aught taken
from it. For in those two poynts is all our rightuousnesse conteyned:
namely that God bee honored in all feare and reuerence at our
handes, and that we serue one another without doyng any harme. Agein,
forasmuch as men are inclyned pitiously too feyning, and do euer
thinke it ynough to set some faire countenance vpon the matter: therfore
dooth S. Paule adde Truth. As if he sayd, that wee may be takē
for the holyest folk in the world, and yit neuerthelesse be condemued before
God, if we be not clenzed from all hypocrisie, so as God may bee
our witnesse and iudge, that wee bee not dubble mynded, nor haue any
bumbasting in vs, but that we go on in right meaning simplicitie before
him. So then, although our hands be cleere from theft, extortion, &
all other things that are ageinst charitie, if we haue lusts lurking within
vs, surely we shal bee still vncleane before God. Not without cause
therfore doth S. Paul adde the word Truth, notwithstanding that he
had comprehended the whole perfection of our lyfe, in the two former
poyntes. For it is bycause we would alwayes content God with some
gay outward showe, according too the vanitie and leazing wherwith
wee be fraught. Therefore it behoued this too bee added, that lyke as
God is a spirit, so must wee also bee faythfull and trew before him. For
he abhorreth all dubblenesse of hart, which the scripture termeth Har
                     •
                  
and Hart. If wee fall too making of partitions, and keepe some backshoppe
behynde: all that euer commeth from vs, must needes bee filthie
and corrupt, as springing from an euyll and infected fountayne.
Then if wee desire too haue our hartes allowed of God, the fountayne
must first bee scoured, and truth must reigne in vs. Nowe wee see in
effect wheretoo it behoueth vs too apply all our indeuer as long as
wee lyue heere beneath. For, too boast our selues too bee Christians,
and not too consider on what condition Iesus Christ is our head, and
hath knit vs vntoo hym: is a turnyng of all thinges vpsyde downe,
as hath bin sayde this morning. Then looke what manner a ones
wee couet too bee counted and esteemed among men: the same must
wee bee before God and his Angels.
               
                  Therefore wee must fyght ageinst our owne vyces, vntyll all that is
of our owne nature bee doone away. Not that that can bee doone in
one day: but that wee must go towardes it continewally more and
more. And further let vs assure our selues, that our Lord Iesus
Christ is giuen vs for a patterne and example: and moreouer, that it
is his office, too reforme vs so by the spitit of God his father, as wee
may walke in newnesse of lyfe, and become Gods creatures, and as
all that euer wee haue drawen from the corruption of Adams sin,
may bee quyte clenzed away. Therwithall let vs consider also what is
the pith of the things that God alloweth, & which is the rule of good
lyfe: namely first too honour and serue God, and afterward too walke
(neyghbourly) one with another, indeuering too doo good too such as
haue neede of vs, and absteyning from dooing all manner of euyll and
harme. This doctrine were easie ynough too conceyue, so wee were
not vtterly peruerted by our wicked affections. And soothly, there is
not that man which is not a great Doctor in preaching vntoo other
men: but yit as cleere and apparantly knowen as these things are, no
man can apply them too his owne vse. Yit shall there bee no excuce
for vs, when wee shall be fayne too come too account before the great
iudge. Wherefore let vs beare this doctrine well in mynd, yea and
let vs gyue good heede too it, seeyng it is so yll put in vre through the
whole world.
               Among the Papistes there is talking ynough of Gods seruice,
and of liuing holily: but yit the world seeth how those wretched soules
stand buzzing about a sort of pelting tryfles: and that for all their 
                     •
                  
                  uerlaboring
of themselues, they bee neuer the forewarder, but rather
the further of from God. And what is the cause of it? Euen this:
that euery man of his owne head deuizeth a rule too his owne liking:
and in the meane whyle God speaking familiarly and without any
darkenesse, is not heard at all, but men doo rather giue themselues to
the things that cannot auayle them. As for vs although wee haue the
lyght of the Gospell, and can say that the superstitions of Papistrie
are but trifles: yit are wee neuerthelesse farre of from this doctrine.
And if a mā should sift our lyues, where is this trew holinesse? Where
is this Ryghtuousnesse? For as for the Gospell, most men take what
they like of it, and tread Gods truth vnder their feete as oft as they
li
                     •
                  t. Too bee short, yee shall fynd that they which brag most of their
reformation now adayes, are vnholy and vncleane people, yea and



(for the most part) euen Dogges that barke ageinst God, despyze his
truth, and rayle at his woord, vnlesse it be when they let it s
                     •
                  ip, bycause
they thinke it nother heere nor there. That is the holynesse of a number
that would bee counted now adayes great Christians and pillers
of the Churche, insomuch that they would make themselues greater
than God, if they could: yea and although they bee but woormes and
woormes meate, yit ceasse they not too blaspheme so farre, and to cast
foorth their thunderboltes and madnesse, as too say, that men shall
speake as they will haue them, or else they wyll conquer God for it.
               And as touching the sayd Rightuousnesse, where shall a man fynde
it? Euery man sayes, there is nothing but deceyt, nothing but craft,
nothing but forswearing, extortion, outrage, and violence. Euery man
complaynes of his neyghbours, and his neyghbours of him. Howsoeuer
the cace stand, we see that Rightuousnesse is as good as banished
out of the world. And therefore inasmuch as the name of Iesus Christ
& of his Gospel is so shamefully vnhalowed by such as abuse it falsely:
wee haue so much the more neede too remember what S. Paule sayth
heere: namely that God will disclayme vs, vntyll we beare his mark,
and bee created new agein in Iesus Christ. As how? Too bee truthfull▪
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   or (as I haue sayd already) though wee were esteemed as Angels:
yit shall our hypocrisie bee alwayes lothely before God, if wee
bee not clenzed of it, and indeuer with a trew and ryght meaning affection,
too imploy our selues too the seruing of God, and too the helping
of our neyghbours.
               Now heeruppon he deuydeth this doctrine intoo seuerall poynts,
applying it too particular exhortations. For first he sayeth, that euery
man must leaue lying, and speake the truthe to his neyghbours,
bycause wee bee members all of one bodie. Not without cause doth
Saint Paule heere lay foorth things particularly, which he had erst
spoken generally. For wee would alwayes shift our hands of the doctrine,
that it myght vanish away in the aire, and not come at vs. Not
that Gods speaking too vs in generall myght not suffyze vs, if wee
were teachable as wee ought bee, too receyue instruction at his hand:
but bycause we bee so snarled in our vanities, that if God doo but say
generally that wee must bee reformed according too his image, and
vtterly renounce 
                     〈◊〉
                   selues: it toucheth vs not at all, but wee let it
passe. Therfore is he fayne too decyfer it by parce
                     ••
                  meale, as if hee
should make an anatomie of our thoughts and affections, and bring too



lyght the vyces which wee would fayne hoord vp in huthther muther.
That is the thing which Saint Paule goeth now about. He had sayd,
that it behoueth vs too bee reformed after the image of God by our
Lord Iesus Christ, who is the new man, and the head wheruntoo wee
must be lyke fashyoned. Now if he had gone no further than so: that
doctrine had bin receyued without geynsaying, but in the meane whyle
no man had fared the better by it as by a lyuely instruction. But now
will hee speake of whoredome, of Theft, of deceytfulnesse, of drunkennesse,
of hatred, of hartburning, and of the suttle flyghts that passe betweene
neyghbour and neyghbour. When things are thus layd
foorth by particulars, men are the more wakened: and although euery
man shrink back & inuent excuces, & deuyze shifts: yit, wil we, nyl we,
we must needs feele some hartbytings in vs. That is the order which
Saint Paule keepeth here. Wherfore let vs make well, that it is
not ynough for vs too haue bin taught our dewtie in one woord, and as
it were at a glaunce: but God had neede too warne vs, and too shewe
vs flatly as well the vyces wherto we be subiect and inclyned (of our
owne nature:) as also the vyces whertoo the diuel draweth vs by his
temptations and wyles. To be short, God must be fayne to guyde our
hands, our feete, our eyes, our eares, and our mouthes: he must bee
fayne too make vs see that wee may ouershoote our selues in this sort
and that sort, too the end wee may bee well armed on all syds, that the
diuell fynd not any gap open, nor bee able too make any breache intoo
vs. That is it which wee haue too beare in mynd, too the intent wee
take not our selues too be so able folks, as that the once hearing of a
matter is ynough for vs. For wee shall woonder too see how the diuell
will neuerthelesse ouerreache vs many wayes. And therfore let
vs bee well ware that wee giue good eare too all the warnings that are
giuen vs, bycause it is not any whit more than needeth.
               And forasmuch as Saint Paule had spoken of truthe: he sayeth,
Put away lying, and speake euery man the truthe. He setteth the
woord Truthe in another sense heere, than hee did afore. For in calling
holinesse and ryghtuousnesse truthefull, he ment that there ought
too bee no glozing nor disguyzing, but a ryght meaning simplicitie,
that when God looketh as a witnesse intoo our harts, he may fynde
no dubble dealing in vs. After that maner was the word Truth taken
afore. Now he speaketh of the truthe that ought too reigne among
vs▪ when wee traffik or bargaine one with another. Then must 
                     〈◊〉
                  


                  
bee faythfull and trustie in all our businesse and dooings, and we must
vse no wyles nor deceyt. And yit that is not ynough: but wee must
mark, that this truth wherof Saint Paule speaketh, is such a playn
dealyng, as wee lay open all that is in our hart, if neede requyre, and
in any wise go not about too get other mens goods too vs by suttletie
and craftinesse, nor too profit our selues by another mans losse. And on
the contrary part, vnder this word Lying, he comprehendeth not only
the lyes that are made in speache, as when a man sayeth, that whyte
is blacke, as for example, if one should aske a man the pryce of a thing,
he would sell that for a crowne, which is not woorth a shilling. Saint
Paule speaketh not of the Lyes that are so grosse & farre out of square,
that euen lyttle children are able too condemne them: but by the name
of Lying, he meaneth all manner of counterfetting and cousining, and
too be short, all the pollicies and shiftes that men haue, and wherein
they glory. Looke what the world termeth wisedome or policie: that
dooth Saint Paule call flat Lying. And why? For a man is not
counted too bee wittie now adayes, except the can filche and deceyue, I
meane by bywayes & couert cōueyances, which mē shal not perceyue.
But this ge
                     •
                  re is woorse than the picking of a chest, and the breaking
a sunder of the yron woorke, too get away the money, or than the murthering
of a man, when a theefe commes with a naked swoord too cut
a poore wayfarers throte. Therefore these politike murtherers, which
will needes be counted honest men, may disguyze themselues as much
as they list by their hypocrisie: but yit are they called (heere) both deceyuers,
and theeues and murtherers. Not that they appeere so before
men: but God who seeth deeper than wee doo, will iudge of their
dooings as they bee in deede. And what shall men gayne by excuzing
themselues? (Nothing.) Then is wee marke this geere well, we shall
see, that in speaking of Lyes, S. Paule condemneth the things that
men make most account of, as suttletie, and wittinesse, and skill to behaue
a mans selfe in all companie. For (the world sayes) a man must
hold with the hare, and hunt with the hound: he must beware that hee
bee not ouerraught: and he must alwayes preuent rather than be preuented.
The fashion of the world then is, that euery man stand so vppon
his gard, as he haue his nettes ready too intrap other men, and to
intangle them a hundred times ere they bee aware of it. But Saint
Paule sayth, wee must vse such a soundnesse and playne dealing, as
wee must speake truthe one too another. And he bringeth vs backe too



that which he had 
                     〈◊〉
                   after, too another purpose: namely, that
wee bee all but one body.
               
               Now then, let vs come too our owne members. If my one hand
should play legierdemayne, and conuey all things too it self, too the
hurt of the other: if my foote should conspyre ageinst my legge, or if
my bellye could woorke some pretie slyght ageinst my stomacke:
what a thing were it? Now then, if wee bee members of our Lord
Iesus Christ, is it not a separating of our selues from his bodie, when
wee vse such fyne shiftes and pretie slyghtes, notwithstanding that
they be not condemnable afore men? No doubt, but wee will protest
ynough with our mouthes that wee bee Christians: but whatsoeuer
wee pretend, Iesus Christ will not bee misfashyoned after our fancie.
Lyke as he is but one: so will he haue vs to be all one in his bodie, yea
euen with this conditiō, that euery of vs serue his neyghbours: which
cannot bee doone, except all counterfetting 
                     •
                  ee first put away, as wee
see that the hand dooth yeeld it self simply too the seruice of the rest of
the body: and lykewyse the foote and euery other member dooth his
dewtie. If anye one bee in daunger, the rest will not sinke asyde,
but all imploy themselues too succour it. (Among them▪) there is
no profer of deceyt, but all cling toogither, according too the order of
nature. Euen so ought wee too proue our selues too bee the members
of Iesus Christ by lyke playne dealing. Saint Paule then applyeth
too this particular exhortation, the thing that he had spoken in generall:
namely, that if wee bee clenzed from all hipocrisie and fayning
before God: wee will shew it in our whole lyfe. For when wee haue
too doo one with another, wee will vse no guyle, but walke playnly.
That is for one poynt. And therof springeth another: which is, that
wee must not prouoke or anger one another. For wee see that if a
man but moue vs a little, by and by wee bee in in a chafe, and our
passiōs are so excessiue, as there is nother reason nor measure with vs.
And when men are so caryed away, they doo so forget themselues, as
nothing can wey with them, vse what perswasion yee can. And therfore
Saint Paule sayeth, that if we be not quiet one with another, wee
cannot bee knit intoo the bodie of our Lord Iesus Christ, and (besydes
that,) as much as lyeth in vs, we deface Gods image in vs, by giuing
head so too our passions too chafe after that fashyon, and too bee so
hot one ageinst another. Now it should seeme by al lykelyhod that he
ment to take this common saying as drawen out of the fourth Psalme:



not that he alledgeth the Psalme too report the naturall sense of it:
but too apply it too his owne purpose. For wee may well take many
textes of Scripture, and apply them too dyuers things, howbeeit
without altering of any thing in them, and yit notwithstanding they
shall abyde in their naturall sense styll. Euen so, too the end that S.
Paules saying myght bee the better receyued: he sayeth, Bee angrie,
and sin not, as though it had bin a common saying, and so well knowen,
as it had bin taken almost for a prouerb. Now, Dauid vseth a
woord which signifyeth properly too chafe and storme: howbeeit that
was in rebuking such as persecuted him wrongfully, bycause they
were hardned in theyr malyce, and forepossessed with so great and venemous
rage ageinst him, that they made no conscience too oppresse
him. Forasmuch therfore as he sawe such wilful stubbornnesse in his
enemyes, he sayeth vntoo them, Bee yee angrie, and yee shal not sin.
Whereby he dooth vs too wit, that the cause why they were so caryed
away with rage ageinst him, was, that there was nother feare of God,
nor honestie, nor conscience that could hold them backe any more, but
that they were become as wyld beastes. And that is the cause why he
sayeth, Bee angrie: that is too say, Enter a little intoo questioning
and reasoning with your selues: examin what yee bee dooing: and
then will yeee not sin any more. If euery of you will go intoo his
chamber, and bethinke himself aduyzedly: yee shal perceyue, that hithertoo
yee haue bin driuen by diuelish rage. Now this doctrine is
ryght necessarie for all men, bycause wee see what headinesse there
is in vs, insomuch that wee haue no sooner conceyued any toy in our
head, but that by and by without inquyring of Gods will, or without
asking counsell at his mouth, as the Prophet Esay exhorteth vs
too doo: wee take the thing that wee haue conceyued,Esay. 30▪ a. 2. for good, and
will needes subdewe all men too our lyking. And therefore the cause
why wee ouershoote our selues so much, is, that wee enter not intoo
examination of the matter with our selues, that wee myght discerne
betweene the good and the euill, euen by yeelding God his due
authoritie, in giuing eare with all reuerence and modestie, too the
things that he sheweth vs by his woord. Then haue wee neede too
bee angrie, that is too say, too bee greeued with our selues, and too
complayne of our selues, that wee sooth not our selues as wee haue
bin woont too doo. If wee doo so, wee shall not sin: that is too say,
the great malapartnesse that is so deeply rooted in vs, will soone bee



abated: for wee shall abhorre too fyght ageinst God: and if our affections
get aforehande with vs, God will set in foote ageinst
them, and say, how nowe? will yee make warre ageinst mee vnawares?
               Now heeruppon Saint Paule sayeth, Bee yee angry, and sin
not. As if he should say, my frendes, what maketh you too storme so
one ageinst another? For if neuer so little a fault bee committed ageinst
you, yee bee streyte in a chafe, and would rend vp heauen
and earth too bee reuenged of the offence, and yit in the meane season
yee haue matter ynough too bee offended euery one with himself.
Neuer go from your owne persons too seeke cause of anger: for how
many wayes offend you God euery day? Yee ceasse not too prouoke
him early and late. And yit if one touche but the tip of your finger,
yee are by and by in a pelting chafe. And what is the cause therof, but
that (as it seemeth) yee haue conspyred with Satan too tormente
your selues so? You beare your selues on hand yee shall bee well in
quiet when yee haue reuenged the wrong that hath bin doone vntoo
you. But it is a cursed quietnesse, when men are so at rest, by being
reuenged vppon those that haue offended them. The way then too
asswage all these wicked heates, is for euery man too thinke with
himself, that he shall surely haue ynough wherfore too bee greeued
with himself, and too bee angrie with himself, and too bee reuenged
of himself.2. Cor. 7. c. 10. 11. According wheruntoo, Saint Paule in the second too
the Corinthians, declaring what trew repentance is, alledgeth the
sorinesse which wee conceyue vppon the knowing of our sinnes, saying
that the said sorines bringeth with it a greef, which suffereth vs not
to be in quiet and rest, but maketh vs to fall to stomaking ageinst our
selues, in consideration of the terriblenesse of Gods wrath which wee
haue prouoked ageinst vs, and yit notwithstanding suffereth vs not
too ceasse too bee still of good hope, by resting vppon Gods goodnesse
and mercie. Therfore if one bee once come too the poynt that they
can bee angrie with themselues, when they knowe they haue sinned,
and seeke not too bee reuenged of their enemyes, but rather are redie
too doo them good, and doo pray for them: that is a good exercyze,
and euery man ought too spend himself in that battell: for surelye
they bee good and holye passions, when a mans anger proceedeth of
a zeale too Godward, and of a loue that he beareth towards him.
And if wee doo so: that is too say, if euery of vs bee greeued at his



owne vyces: certeinly wee shall neuer fynd leysure too be at emnity
with other folkes, or too spyte our neyghbours: but if wee haue a
trew zeale too Gods honour: vndoubtedly wee will forget the
offences that are committed ageinst vs, and not bee so hastie as
too say, I will mayntayne myne honour or honestie. For wee shall
haue another greater and woorthyer let too hold vs backe: that is too
wit, the reuenging of the fault which wee our selues haue committed
ageinst God, and whereby he hath bin dishonored as much as in vs
lay, and the forgetting of the offence that hath bin committed ageinst
our selues. Thus yee see in effect what wee haue too consider vppon
this, where Saint Paule sheweth vs, that men must turne their eyes
away from the occasions which they may conceyue too bee reuenged
of others. For if a fly doo but come ouerthwart our eyes, wee bee by
and by in a spytefull choler, in so much as there needeth no more too
make vs fall out with euery body that doth any thing which mislyketh
vs. So then let vs learne to forsake our selues, and to thinke euery of
vs vppon our owne faultes, that wee may bee so displeased with them,
as it may rid away our cholericknesse, wherethrough wee fall too
fyghting ageinst God, and make vs too bee angry at the great number
of vyces whertoo wee bee too much giuen. That is the thyng
which wee haue too remember in the first place. And as touching the
second poynt, wee will delay it vntill next the Sunday, at which tyme
it shall by Gods leaue bee discoursed at length.
               Now let vs fall downe before the maiest
                     •
                  e of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our sinnes, praying him too make vs perceyue
them more and more, and therwithall too inlyghten vs so by the doctrine
of the Gospell, as wee may espye our owne sinnes and shamefulnesse,
and bee ashamed of our selues, and also behold the ryghtuousnesse
which hath bin shewed vs in our Lord Iesus Christ, and tend
thereuntoo with indeuer too bee fashyoned therafter, so as wee may
come dayly neerer and neerer theruntoo, vntill wee cleaue throughly
vntoo it: and that in the meane tyme he beare with our infirmities,
graunting vs the grace too amend them from day too day, in hope
that he will shewe himself mercifull toowardes vs, so wee play the
Iudges ageinst our owne selues in condemning all the vyces which
wee perceyue too be in vs. That it maye please him too graunt this
grace, not onely too vs, but also too all people and Nations of the
earth. &c.
            
            
               
               The .xxxi. Sermon, which is the eleuenth
vppon the fourth Chapter.
               
                  
                     26 Bee angrie, and sin not: Let not the sunne go dovvne vppon
your anger,
                     27 Nother giue yee place too the diuell.
                     28 Let him that stole, steale no more: but let him rather labour,
woorking vvith his handes in the thing that is good, that he
may haue too giue vntoo him that needeth.
                  
               
               
                  WEe saw the last Sōday, that if euery of vs
looked well too himself and too his owne
vyces, wee shoud haue ynough wherwith
to stay our chafing and choler, from wreaking
our wrath vppon such as offend vs.
For wee bee so wayward of our selues alredy,
that a small thing will put vs out of
pacience. And therfore the fault that another
man committes ageinst vs, be it neuer
so little, will alwayes set vs in a chafe.
And why? Bycause wee take too much leyzure too looke vppon other
mens faultes, and in the meane whyle forget our owne. The remedy
then which is set vs downe heere to keepe vs from being so soone
and so lyghly offended at other mens faultes, is, that euery of vs enter
intoo himself, and vexe and chafe himself there, when he sees himself so
wretched as all of vs are.
               Now after that Saint Paule hath shewed that it were much better
and more for our behoof too bee bee greeued at our owne vyces, than
at euery small occasion, when men behaue not themselues too our lyking:
he addeth theruntoo, Let not the Sunne go downe vppon
your anger. We must not vnderstand by this, that S. Paul ment to acquite
such as are soone angrie, & soone appeazed: for it is a vice worthy
of blame. And although it bee more excuzable than the feeding of a displeazure
which turneth too rancour or hatred: yit notwithstanding we
cannot bee so soone pacifyed, but that wee shall haue offended God alredye
with our choler. For wee heare what is sayd euen by the mouth
of our Lord Iesus Christ:Math. 5. d. 22. namely that if wee shewe any signe of displeazure



at all, and it be as it were but by grunting betweene the teeth
wee bee alreadye in daunger of hel fyre before God. Wee shal not
neede too haue giuen any blowe, nor too haue doone any open wrong
wherby wee myght bee brought before a Iustice: if wee haue but only
offended so farre as too haue conceyued any pritch, there is no excuce
for vs. And therfore when Saint Paule forbiddeth vs too feede
our anger, he dooth not vtterly iustifye them that are gentle and easye
too bee reconcyled, and will soone forgiue: for they bee blame woorthie
alredie, as I sayd afore. But he proceedeth here by degrees, as if
he should say, my freends, if euery of vs thought vppon his owne
sinnes, it is certeyne that wee should bee moued too mislyke of our
selues, bycause wee prouoke Gods wrath ageinst vs: and he that hath
a lyuely feeling of his owne faults, will arme himself therwith ageinst
himself. For wee ought too haue a zele too Godward, as though wee
were his attourneyes, and that zele ought too procure vs too condemne
euill whersoeuer wee fynd it. But Anger is alwayes at our elbowe,
yea and it dwelleth in vs, so as wee shall neuer bee so perfect as were
too bee wisshed, so long as wee bee in this world. (Yit notwithstanding)
howsoeuer the cace stand, let vs beware that wee suffer not our
selues too bee possessed with inordinate passions. For if wee conceyue
any hartburning, and go too bed vppon it: surely wee shalbee poysoned
by and by, and the mischeef wil not bee espyded so easly. It is all
one as if a man that felt him self alredye attached with infection of
some disease, should linger in his miserie, and by all meanes possible
eschewe the phisicion, and runne as farre backe from him as he possibly
coulde, if he woulde offer too come too him: and afterward
when he would haue remedie, it is too late, bycause the disease
is settled, & hath so ouergrowen him, that phisick cannot stand him in
any stead. Euen so is it with the man that is angrie, and contineweth
in it without purging of the malice from his stomacke: certeinly it is
as if a man had some inward and vnespyed disease, which groweth so
strong, as afterward it becommeth vncurable. That is the second degree
which Saint Paule hath set downe heere. First he sheweth vs
how wee may bee faultlesse before God, in respect of anger and choler:
that is too wit, by thinking euery of vs vppon our owne faults,
too condemne them, and too bee 
                     •
                  orie for them, and too feele such anguishe
of mynd for them, that wee bee as men half in a 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
That is a holy Anger, and such a one as God allow
                     •
                  th of. And yit



notwithstanding, forasmuch as wee bee ouerweake, if wee commit a
fault, at leastwyse let vs not dubble it: and though wee haue offended
God, let it not make vs too multiply choler ageinst him, least the diuell
get possession of vs, and wee cannot afterward abyde too bee
brought backe agein intoo the good way, but our passions doo so ouermayster
vs, as they make vs too followe them without end or measure.
In any wyse let vs beware of that.
               That also is the cause why he sayeth, that wee giue place too the
diuell, when the sunne goeth downe vppon our anger. It is
trew, that wee haue no sooner tripped, but that diuell hath alredy had
power ouer vs: howbeeit he is brydled in such wyse, that if wee
bethink vs of our faults, and amend them, God suffereth him not too
hold vs captiue as prisoners. But when we be so farre ouerseene as to
take pritch, and to lyke wel of our owne testinesse, and therupon to conceyue
a number of fancies too rancle inward more and more: (I say)
if wee bee at that poynt: wee haue giuen Satan entrance, he hath taken
possession of vs, and afterward it is out of tyme for vs too wish too
returne: for the mischeef is rooted so deepe, and growen so strong,
that medicines can not doo any more good, as I haue shewed alredy.
Now we see S. Paules meaning. And therfore let vs put this doctrin
in vre. The first poynt wherof is to examin well the euill that is in vs,
that we may be angry with our selues, and euery of vs be as a foe too
himself, as driuen by a zeale to Godward, to hate & abhorre our owne
vyces. Let that be the first thing that we bestowe our studie vppon and
then shall we haue wherupon too occupie well our chafing and choler,
& we shalbe no more so hasty to take pritch ageinst such as haue doone
vs some wrong, but wee will rather beare with them that haue fowly
offended vs, bycause wee shall haue buzinesse ynough too serche out
our owne imperfections. And (as I sayd afore) wee shall the easlyer
beare with other mennes misdealings, when wee perceyue our selues
blame woorthie so many wayes, not towards mortall creatures only,
but towards the liuing God. For what are wee that wee should keepe
such a stirre for euery wrong that is doone vs, seing wee craue forgiuenesse
at Gods hand euery day (as necessitie also constreyneth vs) of
the offences which wee haue committed ageinst his maiestie, and
wherthrough we haue brokē his ryghtuousnes? The very meane therfore
to appease al wicked & excessiue cholericknesse, is that euery of vs
be greeued & angry with him self, bycause he sees him self subiect too



so many infirmities, or rather so many sinnes and vyces.
               And for the seconde poynt, if wee chaunce too stumble and fall
through fraylty, that wee bee not so hild backe by the feare of God,
but that wee be faultie before him: let vs beware that wee doo not
harden and foade our selues in our euill dooing, but as soone as wee
feele anye vnmeasurable mouing in vs, let vs step before it, and indeuer
too represse it: let vs vse violence in that behalfe too subdew our
passions that carye vs so away, making vs too skirmish so ageinst
God and our neyghbours. Thus must wee fyght manfully too brydle
all our cholleriknesse. Or else if any excesse haue escaped vs, let vs
come back agein and bethink our selues better, and let vs rid it away
quickly, assuring our selues it is as a disease that requyreth speedie
remedie, or else it will ouergrowe in such wyze, as all succour shall
come out of season. Let vs think vppon it.
               Now if Saint Paule had sayd no more but thus: my freends, let
not the Sunne go downe vppon your anger, for if rancour doo once
settle, it will not bee easly put away: it had bin much, and that warning
ought too haue suffyzed vs. But the threate which he setteth
downe with it in that he sayeth, Giue not place too the Diuel, ought
too make the heares stand vp vpon our heads. Some in deede haue expounded
it too bee spoken of the enemies of the fayth, which seeke occasion
of slaundering it: but it is easie too bee seene by the woords
them selues, how hee intended too warne vs of a thing which wee
ought too bee more afrayd of, and which will scare vs woorse: that is
too wit, that the diuell getteth as it were the maystrie and dominion
ouer vs, when wee feede any grudge and hartburning ageinst our
brethren. Now then, which of vs wil not quake for feare, when he
heareth of his subiecton vntoo Satan, as if he were in his bonds lyke
a prisoner? And yit for all that we take no heede of the things that are
told vs heere. For S. Paul hath vttered Gods sentence, which is, that
if wee pursue our anger and hartburning ageinst such as haue offended
vs, it is all one as if wee wilfully passed an obligation too Satan,
too bee hild as thralles vnder his tyrannie. So much the more therfyre
dooth it stand vs on hand too bethink our selues aduyzedly, that if
that vyce cannot be througly amended at the first brunt, wee may at
lestwyze bee well ware that it doo not so settle in vs, as that we cannot
bee set at one agein, or that wee should pursue our quarells, or that
men should not bee able too wey with vs, vntill wee haue taken some



reuendgment. Let vs take heede (I say) that wee enter not intoo such
bondage of Satan. And euen for that cause is it sayd, that when men
doo fret and chafe after that fashion, of one diuell there are made

                     •
                  wayne. And why? For God is alredy offended at my neyghbour for
dooing mee wrong, and if I also fal to stomaking of the matter on my
part, & will needs requyte him with the lyke: the diuell hath won vs
bothe. I ought too pitie the soule that is after a sort stayed away alredye,
and in the hygh way too perdition: I ought too seeke too bee
at one with him agein, and too salue the sore as much as is possible:
now if I also do let the reynes looce, and cast my self intoo Satans

                     •
                  lauerie through the cursed libertie that I take: then getteth he the vpper
hand of both parties. So then, let vs beare this threatening well
in mynd, whereby the holy Ghost ment too waken vs throughly, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
euery of vs myght stand vppon his gard, too beware of taking pritch
or stomacke at thinges, least afterwarde wee conceyue such hatred,
as may so harden vs, that there shall bee no more meanes too appeaze
vs.
               Now hereuntoo S. Paule addeth another warning (as I haue declared
already,) wherein he rebuketh the common vyces that are contrarie
too the rule which our Lord giueth vs, too the intent wee should
lyue as Gods children, knowing wheretoo wee bee called. And nowe
he speaketh of the Deceytes, Robberies, and Extorsions that are committed,
when euery man is too much wedded too himselfe, and hath no
conscience of other mennes harmes. Let him then that stole (sayeth
he) steale no more: but rather let him labour vvith his handes too
doo the things that are good and profitable, and vvheriwth he may
succour such as haue neede. Now wheras S. Paule speaketh heere
of theft, he meaneth not such theeues as men punishe with whipping
or with hanging: but all manner of slyghtes and craftes that are vsed
too get other mennes goods by euill practyzes, as extorsions, bryberies,
and all other lyke things. Although then that such things bee faced
out, or else that they which are most giltie of them, bee not accuzed
before men, bycause they can skill how too cloke their misdooings: yit
dooth S. Paule call them all theftes and robberies. And why? For
the Prophets and Apostles spake not the ordinarie manner of speeche
that is vsed in Courtes of Iustice on earth: but had an eye to the iudgment
seate of God. For the thing that may bee excuzed, yea and peraduenture
well iustifyed before men, shall not fayle too bee condemned



there. For God seeth much cleerer than mortall creatures. Agein,
fauour or parcialitie may beare sway oftentymes in Lawe matters:
so as there shal be cloking, dissembling, and couering, and the Iudges
shall lyke well ynough too haue a napkin tyde afore their eyes, that a
man may haue some starting hole too scape out at. They may oftentymes
lyke well ynough of such thinges: but it is not so with God.
Wherefore let vs marke well, that the forbydding of vs too steale, is
not as the publishing of some statute lawe that belongeth too temperal
policie: but wee bee called before the heauenly iudge, who discouereth
the things that are hidden from men, and condemneth all wicked couetousnesse,
as theft, whereby we bee moued too seeke our owne profit
too much with the hinderance of our neyghbour. Too bee short,
vnder this woorde theft or stealing, S. Paule comprehendeth all the
wicked practizes, that are vsed too deceyue other men withall: and also
all extorsions whereby men are fleeced of their goods and bereft of
their substance. Now then wee see that there are Theeues too bee
found of all degrees. For there is not that man which is not buzie in
gryping too himselfe, I meane of them which are not reformed by
Gods spirit. Although a marchant man bee counted of good wealth,
yit will he haue store of fetches and policies still, and they shal bee as
nettes layde for the simple sort and such as haue no experience, which
perceyue them not. In lyke cace is it with Handicraftes men: for
they haue the skill too counterfet their woorkes in such wyse, as men
shall bee deceyued by them. Agein, as touching the pryce, there is no
trusting too them, al is one too them, so they may sell their wares, for
they thinke that all is lawfull for them. Lykewise doo laborers and
husbandmen. Too bee short, there is no state of men wherin there are
not infinite faultes, and extorsions too bee seene, so as euery man would
gayne and make himselfe strongest. If yee looke vppon the rich, and
vppon such as lyue of their Rentes, it is yit woorse. For they flea off
the skinnes of the inferiour people, and of such as are vnable too resist
them. And yit before men (as I sayd,) all of them doo iustifye themselues:
howbeeit, that is bycause they knowe not that God hath sounded
heere his trumpet, too summon them before him, ne consider what
manner of perfection and purenesse must bee brought vntoo him. So
much the more therfore dooth it stand vs on hand too try, not onely all
our outward deedes, but also all our our wicked affections, wherby wee be
tempted too inrich our selues b
                     •
                  yond reason and 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               
                  And Saint Paule sayeth purposely, that he which hath stolne,
should steale no more: too shewe that there ought too appeere such a
chaunge in our lyfe, when God hath once brought vs home too himself
by his Gospell, as wee may no more resemble the wretched vnbeleeuers
which walke in darknesse, but consider that our Lordes
inlyghtening of vs, is with condition, that wee should become newe
creatures. And herewithall wee see the thing that I haue touched
alredy: namely that S. Paule speaketh not of the common theftes
that are condemned and punished afore the world: for then should it
follow, that all had bin theeues which had bin conuerted too christianitie.
But (as I sayde afore) he vseth the woorde Steale, purposely
too make vs too abhorre all craftinesse, malice, suttlenesse, and
catching of other mens goods the more. For if it had bin sayd (but
thus:) vse no more craft too deceyue men, nother take yee leaue too
pull the things to you, that are none of your owne: he had not touched
them so much too the quicke, which flatter themselues, and seeke too
haue some couert to cloke their vyces withall. But when as he sayeth,
Steale no more: it is to the ende that wee should thinke thus with our
selues: Alas, albeeit that I would fayne excuze my self, and too my
seeming it were not doone amisse of mee, and men haue bleared eyes:
yit must I not rest vppon that. For in the meane whyle my faultes
shal not fayle too bee registred before God, and I must bee fayne too
yeelde an account of all things that haue not bin doone according
too vncorrupte equitie and ryght, and I must bee taken for a theef
before God, notwithstanding that all the world haue quit mee.
               But now let vs see howe well this doctrine is put in vre. A man
shall fynd that they which are conuerted too the Gospell, take most libertie
too doo euill. It should seeme that a number haue learned nothing
else by the Gospel, but to buzie themselues about pretie slyghtes
too intangle other mens goods. For there are too bee seene, which
vsed greater simplicitie in the tyme that they were blynd wretches,
and knew nothing of God, and of the pure doctrine of saluation, for
they had at least wyse some vpryghtnesse and playne dealing too the
worldward. But they haue so profited backeward in Gods schoole,
as they bee farre wylyer than they were before, in making theyr
owne aduauntage, and in taking more libertie, and in bearing themselues
on hand that all thinges are lawfull for them. And therwithall
they bee so shamelesse in facing and bolstring out their dooinges,



that they doo but make a pot at it, and beare themselues on hand that
they haue great wroong doone them, when they bee blamed for the
things that are apparantly knowen too all men, and whereof euen
little children may bee iudges. So much the more then are wee too
bee condemned, seeing that Paule telleth vs heere, that although
wee enriched our selues by Crafte and Extorsion, and made no conscience
too rake other mens goods too vs, before wee had good teaching:
yit at leastwyze wee should bee well aduyzed too walk more
vpryghtly with our neyghbors, now that we be inlyghtened by Gods
word. Yee see then that the thing we haue to beare in mynd vppon this
text, is, that our Lord Iesus Christes doctrine ought to rule vs in such
singlenesse, as euery of vs may forbeare his craftinesse and suttleties.
               Furthermore forasmuch as a number excuse themselues, saying,
How shall I doo then? For I haue no trade too liue by, vnlesse I
may follow still myne owne maner of dealing: Saint Paule sayeth,
Let them labour. Let him that would make it excuce, that he hath not
wherwith too fynd him self, except hee may deceyue and defraud: let
him (sayeth Paule) giue him self too laboring with his hands. As if
he sayd, that mens dispensing with them selues vnder colour that they
should then fast, and indure many miseries and penuries, is a tryfling
toy before God: All those allegations are nother heere nor there before
God, sayeth S. Paule. For if any bee afrayd that he shall want:
let him not forbeare too labour. Marke that for one poynt. And heere
let vs learne too leaue these self soothings, wherwithall a number of
folkes doo bring themselues asleepe, who when they haue sayd, what
shall I doo? Doo beare themselues on hand that Gods mouth is stopt,
and that he dares no more come nygh them: and they will needes bee
so priuiledged, that too their owne seeming they bee quyte and cleare,
if they can alledge for themselues, how then? Whereof shall I lyue?
What shall I doo, if I follow not my woonted trade? It seemeth too
vs that God is shet out of the gate, and that he hath no more authoritie
too condemne vs, when wee haue once alledged those thinges for our
selues. But that is but folly, sayeth S. Paule. Wee should rather
scratch vp the earth with our nayles, than offend God by dooyng
wrong too our neyghbours. The thing then wheruntoo he sendeth vs
backe, is, that when a man is growen riche, and hath lyued a long
tyme at his ease by fil
                     •
                  hing and stealing: that is too say, by prety fyne
slyghtes and conueyances, that are ageinst equitie and right: let him



not bee ashamed too abate his countenance, and too labour for the getting
of his liuing. Albeeit that he haue erst doone nothing but sit stil,
and gotten his liuing by deuyzing mischeefe: yit let him not bee ashamed
too labour and to take paine for his sustenance. Too bee short,
Saint Paule sheweth vs heere, that all vnlawfull gaynes must bee
left by such as call themselues Christians, and wil bee taken so too
bee. And this warning is as needfull for vs now adayes, as euer it
was for any. For besydes that, wee must absteyne from all suttletie
and deceyte, when God once calleth vs too bee his children, and
will haue vs too maynteyne a brotherhood among our selues: many of
vs also must giue ouer our trades of liuing. For what a number of
meanes too liue vppon, are there in the popedome? But when wee
come before God, let vs alwayes remember this definitiue sentence
which I haue set down: namely that we consider how the cace concerneth
our not answering before an earthly Iudge, but before him which
seeth all things, and before whom there is no cloking of any thing.
Therfore let vs thinke well vppon it, seeing there are so many meanes
excuzable in poperie, wherwith as good as a fourth part of the world
is maynteyned, and yit are all of them not only vnauaylable, but also
abhominable before God. For first of all there bee Priestes and
Moonkes, and all the rabble (of Cloysterers.) Secondly there
are there hangers on which liue of them, and are as it were their waged
men, which haue some geyne by them, and doo skum of some
part of their fatte by one meane or other: vnder which Couert there
lurketh a very long tayle that is turned in and out like a Maze. Agein,
there are a great sorte too bee seene, which giue themselues all
wholly too things that are nothing woorth. Trew it is that in this
darkenesse of theirs men see not very well: insomuch that black (as
yee would say) is turned intoo whyte. But yit howsoeuer the cace
stand, there is no placard for men in this behalf, but euery man must
haue an eye too this, that like as hithertoo I haue filched & polled to
get my liuing: and haue exercyced some wicked practize or other,
which God, condemneth by his woord: seeing I had defyled myself
in eating the bread which came not too mee lawfully from the hand
of God as it should doo, according too my asking of my dayly bread
of him, but by filching here and there: I must now hensfoorth chaunge
my copie, and learne too labour in such wyse, as I may truly say, that
the things which I haue, doo come too mee of Gods blissyng▪ That



is the thing which wee haue too remember vppon this lesson of Saint
Paules. And it behoueth vs to put it so much the better in vre, considering
that theeuerye is more ry
                     •
                  e now adayes in the world than euer
it was, and yit notwithstanding a number of men doo flatter themselues
still in that behalf, bycause the belly will needes haue the foredeele.
When a man hath whereon too liue (say they) and all things
necessary besydes: it is good reason that he should not exempt himself
from Gods woorde: but that wee should starue for hunger, what order
were in that? what rigour were it? Forasmuch then as wee bee so inclyned
too seeke too bee prouided for, by hooke or by crooke, without
regarding what is lawful or vnlawfull: let vs thinke the better vpon
the things that S. Paule telleth vs heere.
               And he proceedeth yit one degree further in this chaunge, which he
inioyneth vnto all the faythful: which is, that he telleth them they must
not only absteyne from defrauding of other men, and from polling
them of their goodes: but also indeuer too succour such as haue neede.
Although then that it seeme ouer rough vnto vs too absteyne from all
euill, and that in sted of liuing at our ease, as we haue bin woont to do,
and of hauing many commodities,) wee should bee fayne to scratch
our liuing out of the earth with our nayles (as they say) and too labour
with greate peyne and trauell, yea and too fare verye hardly: if although
(say I) that this seeme ryght hard: yit must wee go further,
that whē we haue wherwith to get our liuing without vsing of wicked
practizes, wee must now and then spare somewhat of that which God
giueth vs through his blissing, too releeue the needie withall. Therfore
let vs not looke whertoo wee bee inclyned, but let vs consider that
of our owne nature wee bee so froward and wedded too our owne profit,
that euery of vs will needs bee alwayes well stored, and that forasmuch
as wee haue so little regard of them that are mēbers of the bodie
of our Lord Iesus Christ aswel as our selues, we must take paines
to inforce our selues to do them good: for that is a labor that will bring
vs too another. Wee must (say I) inforce all our affections, and theruppon
imploy our selues earnestly and vnfeynedly, that wee may bee
able too protest that the bread which wee eate, commeth too vs from
Gods hand, and that wee bee susteyned by his goodnesse, as if it were
by a father that cantleth out euerye of his children their pittance. Then
let vs bee at that poynt. And moreouer, let vs not think it ynough too
absteyne from all craftinesse, and from wynding in of men by our



fetches, and from catching of other mens goods: but let vs labour
too doo good with the little which wee haue, and too succour such as
haue neede.
               Howbeeit Saint Paule addeth heere yit one circumstance more,
which deserueth to be wel noted: and that is, that he will haue vs to labour
in the thing that is good. And why addeth hee that? Let vs consider
what a number of trades, Crafts, or occupations there are in the
world, which serue for nothing but corruption, and to toll in pence, as
they say. Truly men are not aware of it. And why? Bycause all
men are contented, that such as haue wherwith, should bee prodigall,
too the intent that their money may flye abrode. Agein, such as (too
their owne seeming) cannot get their liuing otherwyse, are inuenting
of newe deuyces euery day, too angle the money out of fooles purses,
and of such as are so giuen too lyghtnesse. Agein, they that haue
wherwith, will needs set out themselues, and bee braue too the worldward.
And that is the cause why the occupatons and trades which
serue but for pompe and superfluitie, and for I wote not what nycenesse
and allurements, and alonly too prouoke folke too leaudnesse,
will needs make men beleue that there is nothing amisse in them. But
Saint Paule hath therfore set downe a distinction heere. For it is not
ynough when a man can say, Oh, I take peyne, I haue myne occupation,
or I haue such a trade: that is not ynough: but hee must see
whether the same bee good and profitable for the common welth, and
whether his neyghbours may fare the better by it. For ought not this
too be the end wherto all trades, occupations, and states doo tend, and
whertoo they ought too referre themselues: namely, that euery man
looke too imploy him self in some thing wherby he may doo good?
And for the same cause are wee lykened too the members of a bodie.
Now then,1. Cor. 12. b. 12. as who should say, that the hand should imploy it self too
the delyghting of some other member, which notwithstanding should
receyue harme by it. By that meanes all the bodie should go too destructiō.
So thē, in asmuch as we must alwayes haue before our eyes,
that in what calling soeuer wee liue, God must go before vs, as if hee
called vs too him, and wee followe the way that he sheweth vs by his
woord: surely he will neuer allow of any trade or occupation, which
is not beehooffull and seruisable too the whole common welth, and redownding
also too the profit of all men. Therfore if a man vse a trade
or occupation which is too no purpose but to breede offences, or too



bee sotte men in their delicate delyghts, and too marre them vtterly, or
else too set out pomp excessyuely, as though men purposed euen in despyte
of nature, too make hauocke of the good things that God hath
giuen vs: it is certeyne that all those thinges are without the compasse
of godly vocations or callings, and that God dooth vtterly disallow
them. Thou mayst well say, I haue trauelled in this or that: yea
but thou hast serued the diuell. For lyke as the diuell hath his Martyrs,
so hath he also his seruantes. Wee see how such as are gyuen
too superstition, doo martir themselues without end or ceassing, & are
(as yee would say) starke mad vpon them, and as good as out of their
wits. And oftentimes the scripture also vseth the same comparisons,
too shew how the diuell casteth men quite out of their boundes, when he
once possesseth them. Yee see then that many men torment themselues
without reason: yea, but yit are they the diuels martirs. Lykewise
there are a great number that shall haue taken much paine in some
trade or occupation, too get their liuing: & yit if a man looke too what
purpose it serueth, he shall fynd it to be nothing but infection & filthinesse,
& that it serueth but to nurrish pride and superfluitie. To be short,
it is an open prouoking of God, and a wasting and misspending of the
things that God hath giuē, with commaundement to vse them soberly
& stayedly. No maruell therfore though S. Paule haue set downe this
distinction. And therfore let euery mā looke diligently to himselfe, and
when fathers are mynded too set theyr children too any trade or occupation,
let them not looke (as the common custome is) which may
bee most gaynefull: but let them match these twoo thinges toogither,
namely, when they haue considered by what trade their sonne may best
get his liuing, and prouyde for himselfe and his household, when he
commeth too bee maryed: (therwith let him also looke) that he serue
his neyghbours turnes, and that the vse of his craft or mysterie may
redounde too the common profyte of all men. The thing then which
fathers must haue respect vntoo in setting their children too trades
and occupations, is not too bee forepossessed wyth regard how they
may most gayne, but howe they may alwayes bee hylde in order,
that they swarue not one way nor other. For when our lustes do
                     •
                  
so carry vs away, that wee can no sooner spye a little gayne, but wee
bee by and by snatching at it: it is all one as if wee shooke handes
with Satan, yea and these thinges become as hayted hookes that he
casteth for vs.
               
                  And lyke as a hungry fishe will soone bee taken, and the foode that she
raught at, costeth hir full deere: so fareth it with these intycementes of
Satan. When men haue no further forecast, but thus, ho, such a man
gayned well by such a trade, and great profit may bee made of it: he
steppeth too it at al aduenture, and neuer makes bones at it, too scan
or consider whether it bee ryght or wrong: but (as I sayde afore) is
choked or euer he come too that consideration. So much the more
therefore dooth it stand vs on hand too marke well what Saint Paule
sayeth heere: namely, that when men bee desyrous too get their lyuing,
they must bethinke themselues aduyzedly, and not beare with
themselues in dooyng of things, bycause they be customably doone of
others, and no fault found with them among men: but consider that
they haue too doo with God, and that it is he before whom wee must
make our account.
               Agein, let vs haue good eye too the thing that is told vs heere, that
is too say, too the succoring of the needie. For Saint Paule intended
too warne vs in one woord, that our Lord in setting poore
folkes before vs, intendeth too trye what wee bee, namely, whether
there bee kyndnesse in vs, or whether wee bee cruell lyke wyld beastes,
And it is a thing also that ought too moue vs too compassion. And
for the same cause, when the Scripture speaketh of dooing almesse,
besydes that it vseth the woord mercie, it sayeth also, that our bowels
ought to be moued when we see our brethren in neede. Yee see then
that the syght of our neyghbours necessities, ought too prouoke vs too
liberalitie, and too releeue them. Let vs not tary till they cry out for
hunger, nor tyll wee bee inforced, nor tyll shame compell vs: but let
euery of vs thinke, hath this man neede? Hath God se
                     •
                   him before
mee? Hath he made mee too knowe it? It is ynough. For it is euen
as much as if he summoned mee, and sent me his Receyuers or Rentgatherers,
too take vp his reuenewes. Lyke as they that haue Reuenewes
and Rentes, send their men to demaund them, and gather them
vp: so our Lord requyreth of vs, that wee should pay him his tributes,
that is too say, the homage money that wee owe him, in acknowledgment
that the things which wee possesse, come from him, and euen of
his meere free gift. He sendeth vs nother Shreefes nor Serieantes,
but the poore, and that ought too suffyze vs, for they bee his trew receyuers:
and that is, too the ende we should not be looth to giue them.
The cause why their necessitie is set before our eyes, is too the end wee



should bee touched with pitie and compassion, and theruppon bee inclyned
too doo good. So then, let vs marke that the summe of the
things heere spoken, is, first that wee should forsake all manner of
trades too lyue by, which are not agreeing too Gods woord: assuring
our selues that wee shall alwayes bee taken for theeues before him, if
wee vse any wicked trades, and that although wee haue good assurance
that our calling is good and lawfull: yit must wee vse it in such
wyse, as there bee not any rauening, craft, or deceyt in it. Marke that
for one poynt. Agein, let vs vnderstand, that there is no excuce for vs
before God, insomuch that although wee alledge famine, pouertie, or
necessitie: all that will not serue too acquit vs, but that wee must set
our hand too labour, that wee may earne our lyuing lawfully, and forbeare
too profit our selues by other mennes losse. Finally, besydes as
it were the bynding vp of our handes from dooyng any man wrong,
and from vsing any pretie shiftes & slyghtes too get other mens goods:
let vs haue a regard too doo good. Yea and let vs haue a speciall care
too succour such as want: howbeit so as it bee with the thinges that
God hath giuen vs of our owne. For those are the offerings and sacrifices
which wee must make vnto him, in acknowlegment of his benefytes.
And wee knowe that Almesdeedes are called Sacrifyces.
Therfore when wee doo them, wee must protest with an vnfeyned and
trew meaning hart, that wee come too doo homage too God for the
things that wee hold of him. And if there bee any theft in our hands,
it is certaine that our sacrifyzes shall bee vncleane, & our almesdeedes
shall bee turned intoo lothsomnesse. Then let euery man beware that
he doo not pill and poll with the one hand, too giue of it anone after
with the other: but let euery of vs haue both our handes cleane. Nother
let vs haue a dubble hart, but labour with all vprightnesse to earne
our lyuing in such wise, that if God send vs any profit by it, wee may
take it as his free gift. And in good sooth, Moyses also forbyddeth vs
too father any peece of our gayne vppon our owne running,Deut. 8. d. 17. or vppon
the labour of our handes: for God will haue vs to bee beholden to him
for all. Therefore when wee doo any almesse, let it bee with this protestation,
not onely with mouth, but also in hart and deede, namely, that
according as our Lord hath shewed himselfe liberall vntoo vs, and bestowed
vppon vs, and giuen vs ouer and aboue wherwith too serue our
owne neede, wee bee willing too doo him homage with it: and let vs
shewe in deede, that wee intend not too keepe too our selues the things



that he hath giuen vs, but doo put them too the vse whertoo he hath ordeyned
them, that is too say, too the releeuing of those that haue neede
of them.
               Now let vs fall downe before the Maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him too make vs feele them
better, so as wee may bee sory for them, and aske him forgiuenesse of
them, and profit more and more in his feare, that beyng withdrawen
from our fleshly affections, wee may continue in his feare and loue, too
the intent too profit more and more in the keeping of his holy commaundementes.
And so let vs all saye, Almighty God heauenly father. &c.
            
            
               The .xxxii. Sermon, which is the twelfth
vppon the fourth Chapter.
               
                  
                     29. Let no filthie speeche proceede out of your mouthes, but onely
such as is good too edifye, as neede shall require, that it may
giue grace too the hearers.
                     30. And greeue not the holy spirit of God, vvherby you bee sealed
for the day of redemption.
                  
               
               
                  SAint Paule correcteth a vyce heere which
is very daungerous, and yit notwithstanding
so common as can bee among men,
bycause they see not at the first what harme
it bringeth, and therfore doo take leaue the
easlyer too doo it. For it will bee sayd, that
too hold pleasant talke, and in the meane
whyle too think no man no harme, is a
thing that may bee abidden: as who should
say, it were possible too poyson our neyghbours
mynd, and yit for all that, it should bee no harme. And hardly
may men bee perswaded that it is so, notwithstanding that the holy
Ghoste haue sayd it. I say that when there is any lyght or leaud talk,
or tending too giue libertie vntoo euill: it is all one as if talk were



ministred too poyson mens soules. Nowe then it behoueth vs so much
the more too mark what is told vs heere: for Saint Paule termeth it
filthie and leaud talk, which cannot but infect. Men will deny it (as
I sayd afore:) but experience sheweth sufficiently,1. Cor. 1
                        •
                     . d. 33. how it is not without
cause sayd in another place, that euill woords corrupt good manners.
Though wee weere neuer so modest, chaste, cleane mynded,
and giuen too good: yit if wee admit wanton talk, it perceth euen too
the bottom of the hart, and wee bee atteynted with it before wee perceyue
it, insomuch as it marreth vs vtterly. And in very deede if a
woman giue eare too the messages that are brought hir, tending too
seduce hir: a man may well say shee is a harlot alredie, and the thing
it self is manifest ynough. Then is it certein that all vnchaste and
leaud speeches, are baudie tricks: and although the parties that are
so giuen too casting foorth of such leaud talk, doo it not alwayes of that
mynd: yit of what intent so euer they doo it, Satan is the author of it.
And (as I sayd afore) if such vnchaste and looce talk haue full scope,
needs must wee bee poysoned out of hand, and the mischeef haue his
course. And therfore not without cause dooth Saint Paul forewarne
vs, that no Vncleane speeche, or (as I sayd afore) no filthie speeche
proceede out of our mouth. And on the contrarie part he setteth
downe, that wee haue sufficient matter too talk of one with another:
that is too wit, too edifye, that men may fare somwhat the better by
our communication. Accordingly as euen the heathen men can say,
that it dooeth one good too bee in such a mans companie. And why?
For he shall euer heare some good sentence, and he neuer goes from
him without carying away of some good. And it is nature that moneth
them to say so. Therfore let vs learne too abhorre and shun such
plaginesse, when a man shall haue his tung so looce too speake woords
that smell of the pump (as men say), and one shall hold the one syde,
and another the other, and that in stead of receyuing good, a man shall
feele himself too bee stung by Satan. And in deede, of a very truthe
when such words enter into our harts ere we be aware of them, they be
stings that Satā giueth vs in secret & vnespyed. Seing then that they
be so, can it be sayd, that such a man is worthie too bee heard? Should
wee not hate him rather as a deadly plague?
               Yee see then that the thing which we haue to mark in the first place,
is that our Lord hath giuen vs tungs too make one another priuy of
our myndes, and that is too the intent we should make them serue too



the benefyte of our neyghbours, and therabouts ought wee to imploy
them wholy. And the tung which is the meane too vtter our harts and
mynds one too another, ought too guyde all the residew, as hauing the
superioritie ouer them.Psal. 16. c. 9. & 57. b. 9. On the other syde, not without cause is it termed
by the name of glorie, too shewe wherabouts wee ought too imploy
it, and too what vse, namely too the honoring of God. Therfore
if wee looked well vppon the order of nature, it ought to bee sufficiently
printed in our harts, that our woords should bee necessarie, and too
the furtherance of our neyghbours welfare and profit. The first poynt
therfore which wee haue too beare in mynd, is that our Lord will haue
all the partes of vs too serue too dooing good, and specially our tung,
so as the drift of all our talk bee too edify. As for example, one hath
neede of Counsell, another of warning; another of rebuking, and
another too be put in mynd of some thing, or else to be taught, bycause
he is vtterly ignorant: and agein, it extendeth too all things in this
present lyfe. Trew it is that the principall thing which wee haue too
looke vntoo, is too teache the ignorant, and too shewe them the way of
saluation. Besyds that, if any man misbehaue him selfe, so as he bee
negligent and slothfull, he must bee spurred foreward by good exhortations:
and if he bee vnruly, hee must bee shamed, (as much as lyeth
in vs,) that it may bring him backe tooo the seruis of God. Agein, a
man must comfort such as are in heauinesse, and giue counsell too such
as are in distresse, too the intent they fall not intoo despayre. Too bee
short, wee must indeuer too hold backe the poore s
                     •
                  ules that should else
go too destruction. And of all others that is the principall benefyte.
But yit if wee see a poore man that is lyke too bee deceyued, wee must
giue him some warning of it. And when we bee once come too that
poynt, it is certein that wee shall giue our selues continually to the benefyte
and behoof of our neyghbours, yea euen infinite wayes, as well
in respect of the bodie as of the soule.
               And let vs see nowe whether wee haue not sufficient ground and
matter too woorke these things vppon. Wee cannot go one step,
but wee see how one hath neede too bee spurred, another too bee rebuked,
the third too bee comforted, and another too bee taught. If wee
hold our toungs at all this, and care nother for the bodyes nor for the
soules of them that are linked too vs, and with whom wee ought too
be vnited as the fingers of a hand: is it not an open dispyzing of God,
when wee imbace the naturall vse of our toung in such wyse? And



therefore let vs keepe vs from marring of the thing that wee ought
too set so much store by, namely the meane which wee haue too glorify
God, by making confession of our fayth, and by calling vppon him,
and also by seruing our neyghbours turnes after so manye sortes,
as I haue shewed alredye. And so the first poynt which wee haue
too marke in this streyne, is the lawfull vse whereuntoo God
hath ordeyned our toungs, and how they ought too bee applyed wholly
thereuntoo.
               Now if wee ought too procure the furtherance of our neyghbo
                     •
                  rs
saluation, and also their temporall benefyte and welfare: what a
thing is it if wee seduce them by our disorder, and vtterly quenche
and put away all feare of God in them? When wee serue Satan by
our looce talk, when wee labour too deface all honestie, when wee
moue men too a beastly lyfe: is not such defyling of our toungs an vtter
peruerting of the order of nature? Then let vs learne so too occupy
our selues in good and necessarie talke, as wee eschew the defyling
of our selues with wicked communicatiō, which are as baudes
trickes of Satan, too corrupt such as were well dispozed too serue
God. And so wee see that looke how manye looce speeches passe in
the worlde, so many spirituall poysonings are there (as I sayde afore)
too corrupt good manners. And although wee cannot be made
to beleeue it: yit is it certein that it is proued sufficiently ynough, euē
by experience. Howbeeit let vs not bee as fooles that will not learne
but by great harme: but rather let vs yeeld too that which is told vs
by the holy Ghost.
               And heereuppon wee may gather, that it is not too bee thought
straunge, though the world bee now adayes giuen too all leaudnesse.
For it seemeth too bee no euill at all too vse iesting and scoffing talke,
insomuch that men would make a vertewe of it, and fynd no bones at
all in it. Lykewyse wee see a great number of iesters and scoffers,
whose drift is too put away all shame, that men myght let themselues
at raundon, and become vtterly shamelesse. Wee see this too much
in vse, and therefore no maruell though wee gather the frutes of that
wicked and cursed licentiousnesse, which is too much suffered. And
heereby wee see also, what is too bee thought of all wanton (and
baudie songs, and of louemakings. If a young mayd vse (as it is vsed
too commonly) too sing foolish songs of loue: shee will bee made a
whoore, euen before shee knowe what whooredome is. And so is shee



(imboldened and) inhardned too all vnshamefastnesse, and the diuell
getteth possession of hir before shee knowe what chastitie meaneth,
and how horrible a thing it is to put foorth hirself too such leaudnesse,
and too breake hir fayth and troth which shee shall haue plyghted,
when shee comes too mariage. Before a mayd can bee able too discerne
all this: shee shalbee vtterly mard aforehand, if shee acquaynt
hirself with leaude songs. And it is wonder that this mischeef can
not bee redressed. Whereby it appeereth, that Satan laboreth in
that behalf, and streyneth himself too the vttermust, knowing that he
hath vs at a great aduauntage, if he may so sowe his cursed cockle,
too corrupt our good manners. For surely if the diuell wrought not
in it, wee myght more easly deale too dispatch and rid away all those
ribawdries and filthinesse out of rememberance, which are as deadly
plagues, as I haue sayd afore. But it is impossible. For though
there were sorer punishment for it than there is: yit both wyues and
maydes had leuer go too prizon, and too bee taken for harlots, than
too correct that vyce, which is the corrupter of the whole world,
and too brydle their cursed toungs, which serue for nothing but too
infect all things with that filthinesse. Yit notwithstanding, wee shall
haue the lesse excuce after such warning, and as for them that stop
their eares, and wil needes harden their hartes ageinst the holy Ghost:
they shalbee driuen too yeeld an account, not only for offending God
so many wayes, but also for poysoning of folkes soules after a sort,
which is a thing much more heynous and horrible, than if they had
murthered their bodies. They that doo but poyson beastes, shalbee
driuen out of the world, and they deserue it well. And what shalbee
doone too them which not only slea the bodie with their poysons, but
also make assault vppon the soule, and ceasse not too corrupt all goodnesse
and all feare of God, yea and all honestie (as I sayd afore) by
their leaude talke.
               Yee see then that the thing which wee haue too remember in this
streyne, is that in asmuch as God hath appoynted our toungs too
such vse as wee haue heard, that is too wit, too the seruice of our
neyghbours, and too the benefyting of them both in bodie and soule:
wee must imploy them diligently thereuntoo. And therefore let vs aboue
all things keepe vs from infecting of those that were inclined too
serue God, and from thrusting them out of the way by casting foorth
such speeches before them as may coole their goodnesse, & prouoke 
                     〈◊〉
                  


                  
too euill, yea and make them more licentious and negligent. For euill
speech corrupteth good manners many wayes. There are some
naughtipackes too bee seene, that are 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  corners of God. And if
they bee warned too haue any remorse of their dooings: 
                     •
                  ush say they,
God passeth much for this. Agein, othersome come not too such extremitie,
but yit will they lessen their faultes, so as they shalbee but
veniall sinnes with them. Othersome doo cloke all things: and all others
generally will say, Tush, wee must not bee so carefull, God
will not haue vs too liue so sadly, for what a thing were that? It
should not bee lawfull for vs too laugh within a whyle. And their
speaking after that manner, is too burie all feare of God by little and
little. Yee see then that manie sortes of such folke, yea many mo
than needeth, doo shew themselues too much: and they bee as manie
recordes, that leaude woordes are poysons too murther mennes
soules withall. And therefore let vs stand vppon our garde in that
behalf. And first of all (as I sayd) let euery man beware that he
speake chastely, and vse none other than honest speeche. And therewithall
let vs shun all them as diuels, which iest out the matter after
that fashyon, notwithstanding that for their mirthes sake they bee
welcome too vs, and sometymes also fare well of free coste, (O, say
wee,) He is a good fellowe, he will make all the companie merrye.
Now whereas men are desyrous too haue such folke, too tickle their
eares by casting foorth their iestes and daliances, and such other lyke
things: let vs learne too shet them out of our doores. For wee would
not willingly hold vp our throte too a dagger, when wee sawe it drawen:
nother would go seeke one too murther our bodies. And why
then doo wee long sore too haue our soules murthered, which is much
woorse? Wherefore let vs eschew such folkes as can doo nothing but
quenche and put out the feare of God in vs, and make vs shamelesse
and hard harted▪ and bereeue vs of all honestie, and shamefastnesse,
for feare least God pay vs the wages that wee deserue, for hauing acquayntance
and familiaritie with such people: and therefore let vs doo
our indeuer that such plagues may not reigne among vs. Bee not deceyued,
(sayeth Saint Paule) speaking of such scoffers,1. Cor. 15. d. 33. which
serue but too prouoke our lustes, too bereeue vs of all remorse of conscience,
too abate the feare of God in vs, and too abuse vs in such
wyze, as sin may delyght vs. Beware (sayeth he) that none of you bee
deceyued by lying woordes, bycause it hath bin a common thing in



all ages. And therfore let vs put Saint Paules counsell in vre, and
not onely let euery of vs keepe good watch that he bee not surpryzed:
but also let vs haue a care too keepe other folkes from beeing corrupted
after that fashyon. That is the thing which wee haue too remember
heere.
               And wee see what he sayeth, namely that wee bee weake ynough,
yea and too weake: yea and so saped in euill, as is horrible too see:
and therefore when wee couet too record still some newe lesson (of
leaudnesse,) and are quickened and spurred vp by others, is it not as
if a drunkard hauing well stuffed and filled himself alredy, euen till
he bee redye too burst, should seeke still too prouoke his appetyte, that
he myght drinke and lade in wyne newe agein? So then, is not euery
man sufficiently giuen too euill of himself, though there were no
leaude songs nor vnthriftie talke at all? But when the diuell fyndeth
any gap open, and can drawe vs further too naughtinesse by his flatteries,
so as he can harden vs in it: I pray you doo wee not giue him
the vpper hand of vs, so as we be wholy at his pleasure, that he may
driue vs and drawe vs whither he listeth?
               Now hereuppon S. Paule addeth▪ 
                  that vvee must not greeue the
spirit of God, wherwith vvee bee marked and sealed ageinst the day
of our Redemption. Heere is yit one declaration more, which ought
too touche vs neere. Trew it is, that the things which haue bin spoken,
ought well of good desert too bee throughly mynded. For what
a thing is it for vs too peruert the order of nature, by applying our
tunges too the cleane contrarie, which God hath appoynted to his honour,
and too the benefyte of our neyghbours? And agein, too bee giltie
of infecting all men with our filthinesse, of peruerting those that
were giuen too the seruing of God, and of prouoking those persons
vntoo beastly vnshamefastnesse, that had some shame and honestie in
them? Should not this moue vs sufficiently, if wee were not tootoo
blockish? But S. Paule telleth vs of a thing that ought too scare vs
yit much more. Greeue not Gods Spirit (sayeth he.) And why? For
wee bee marked with it (sayeth he) and it dwelleth in vs, and sealeth
the hope of our saluation in our hartes, and it is also the seede of lyfe,
which wee haue too warrant vs our euerlasting saluation. Now it is
certeine that when wee take such libertie both too doo euill and too
speake euill: it is a fyghting ageinst Gods spirit as much as in vs lyeth,
and a choking of the lyght which he hath kindled in vs, & a taking



of the brydle in our teeth too doo all naughtinesse. And that cannot bee
doone but too his griefe. This is the thing which S. Paule intended
too say heere.
               Howbeeit let vs marke first of all, that he speaketh heere after the
common maner of the holy scripture. For wee knowe there are no
passions in God. It is the propertie of men too bee sorie and greeued:
God is vnchaungeable. Notwithstanding, bycause wee conceyue
not the hyghnesse which is in him, and that his maiestie is so infinite
as wee cannot come neere it: therfore vseth he that similitude, euen for
our rudenesse sake. Therfore when as it is sayd, that God is prouokod
too wrath, it is not for that there is any moodinesse in him: but too
make vs hate the euil, bycause we fyght agenist God in transgressing
his lawe, and that is all one as if wee would prouoke him too anger
through our spytefulnesse. The scripture then meaneth not too make
God subiect too any chaunge, when it sayth, that he is angrie or sorie:
but it leadeth vs too our owne dooings, too the intent that our vyces
should displease vs so much the more, and that we should euen abhorre
them. And heere Saint Paule speaketh not only of Gods anger, but
also sayth, that the holy Ghoste is sorie or greeued. And why? Wee
bee not Gods children (as he speaketh of it in the Epistle too the Romanes,)Rom. 8. b. 
                        •
                     .
except his holy Ghoste dwell in vs. For are wee woorthie
by nature, too bee mustered in such aray as too bee fellowes with the
Angells? wee (I say) which are but rottennesse, and moreouer cursed
in Adam, and chyldren of wrath? Howbeeit, God by his holy spirit
calleth vs too this inestimable honour and dignitie of beeing his children,
so as wee may call vpon him as our father, and haue familiar resort
vntoo him.Rom. 8. c. 15. & Gala. 4. a. 5. That therfore is doone by the holy Ghoste: and for
the same cause is he called the spirit of adoption: For the inheritance
of heauen belongeth not too vs, but in respect that wee bee Gods children.
Wee bee not so of our selues and by nature, as I told you: and
therfore it followeth that it commeth of Gods freebestowed goodnesse.
Now hee sealeth vp all this in our harts by his holy Ghoste: and that
is the cause why it is sayd, that wee haue a mortall bodie. The thing
that is ment heerby, is not only our feete, hands, skin, bone, and flesh:
but that there is a lump of corruption in vs by reason of the dwelling
of sin in vs, which bringeth nothing but death. For haue wee liued
any tyme? wee go away intoo dust and cindre, and there is not that
man which seeth not himself alredye beeseeged with a hundred deaths,



considering the diseases and infirmities wheruntoo wee bee subiect.
Agein, age makes vs to stoope, so as we perceyue a long whyle aforehand
how we be summoned too come too our graue. Seeing then that
wee perceyue such a number of deathes all at once toogither in our bodies,
and a much greate dungeon in our soules: how should wee hope
that God would take vs vp intoo his kingdome? But Saint Paule
sayth, that the spirit is lyfe. If there bee but one grayne or one spark
of the spirit of our Lord Iesus Christ in vs: let vs assure our selues
that wee shalbe parttakers of his glorie: for it is sayd, that he is raysed
agein from the dead, and hath gotten the vpper hand of it by his
holy spirit. After that maner are wee quickened with him, wayting
till wee bee deliuered from all the corruptible nature that compasseth
vs about. And now S. Paule sayeth, that wee bee sealed by the holy
Ghost,2. Cor. 1. d. 22. as is sayd of it, in the first chapter heertoofore, and in other places
besyde, as in the second to the Corinthians. And this similitude
is very fit. For although Gods promises ought to be of sufficient authority,
& to haue ful credit with vs of thēselues: yit notwithstanding,
such is our misbeeleef, that wee cannot giue credit too them, nor rest
vppon them, till they bee confirmed, and warranted vntoo vs, so as wee
may say, behold, it is euen God himself that speaketh. But what for
that? On the one syde we be forepossessed with distrust: & on the other
syde we be alwayes doubtfull and misgiuing, and cannot rest vpon the
things that are told vs in Gods name. By reason wherof his promises
are alwayes vnauaylable, vntill he print thē in our harts, which thing
he dooeth by his holie Ghost. For as a peece of euidence is made authentical
by setting too of the seale: so God warranteth his promises
of our saluation in our harts, by signing and sealing of them there with
his holy spirit. That then is the cause why it is so often sayd, that
Gods spirit sealeth vp the inheritance of our saluation in our harts.
And for the same cause also is he named the earnest penny, in another
place.2. Cor. 1. d. 22. For when a bargain is made, although there bee no present
payment seene, yit if an earnest penny bee giuen, the bargayne is concluded,
and the chapman cannot say afterward, tush, I repent mee of
my bargayne, and I will
                     •
                  forsake it: nother can the other say, I fynde
my selfe deceyued and ouerseene, and therfore I will rather keepe my
wares styll: but eche of them is bound, the one too make the money,
and the other too deliuer his wares. Euen so is it sayd, that Gods
spirit is the earnest penny of the lyfe of our soules. And why? For



(as I sayd) God byndeth himself vntoo vs in respect of our infirmitie,
whertoo wee bee too much inclyned. In deede it is not for that he oweth
vs any thing: but wee haue so much the more cause too magnifye
his goodnesse, in that he is so free harted as to bynd himselfe willingly
vntoo vs, wheras he oweth vs not any thing, and vou
                     •
                  safeth too assure
vs of it, bycause he seeth vs so feeble and weake. Lyke as when hee
sweareth: it is not for that he on his owne part needeth too adde any
thing too his single woord: for he himselfe is the truth, and the thing
that commeth of him must not bee doubted of. It myght seeme therefore
that the othe which he maketh is superfluous, and that he dooth
but abuse his owne name. (No:) but he dooeth it bycause he seeth vs
weake, and that wee haue neede too bee hild vp many wayes, and specially
bycause he seeth vs giuen too misbeliefe, and therefore that he
must bee fayne too remedie it. So then, whensoeuer God sweareth,
therin he stoopeth vntoo vs for pitie of our wretchednesse: and the sealing
and ratifying of his promyses in vs by his holy spirit, is euen bycause
it is impossible that wee of our selues should beleeue him, and
wee could not bee sure of the thinges that he promiseth vs, to call vppon
him, and too ouercome all the temptations of the world, vnlesse
he vsed that meane. And therefore wee haue so much the more neede
too beare this text in mynd, where S. Paule sayth, that the holy Ghost
sealeth in our hartes.
               And hereupon wee may gather a good lesson to humble vs withal:
namely, that wee shall neuer yeeld God the chiefe honour that he requyreth
at our handes, except he himself drawe vs too it, and giue vs
grace too discharge it whithall. The thing that he requyreth aboue
all other, is, that his woord haue all authoritie ouer vs, and that wee
yeeld it such reuerence, as he may no sooner speake, but wee shall
by and by answer, Amen: that is too say, as there may bee a ryght
(or full) accord betwixt them. That is the obedience of fayth, which
is the cheef sacrifyze that God requyreth. But contrariwyse, on
our part there is nothing but replying ageinst Gods woord, wee bee
full of lustes: and although wee seeme not too make vtter resistance ageinst
him, and too play the mad bedlems as many doo: yit are wee
giuen to a number of wicked imaginations, as we see, insomuch that
some are as it were frantike, specially when a man speakes too them
of God, for then will they haue their mouth open too spew out their
blasphemies, and too enter into disputation and debate, shewing themselues



vtterly vnwilling too receyue any good doctrine. And othersome
fall not intoo such furie and outrage, but yit they let slip whatsoeuer
is sayd too them, & looke what comes in at the one eare, goes out
agein at the other. Howsoeuer the cace stand, nother the one nor the
other doo giue glory vntoo God in receyuing his woord with such humilitie
as they ought too doo. Therefore let vs acknowledge our
owne naughtinesse, and bee sorie for it, seeyng wee prouoke Gods displeasure,
in not yeelding him the honour of thinking him too bee soothfast
and trew. In deede wee wil not say in open speeche, that his word
is vayne, wee will not accuze him of leasing and deceyt: but yit dooth
he protest that wee doo him as much wrong as that commes too, if
wee credit not his sayings? How long will this people slaunder mee
(sayeth he,) and rob mee of myne honour?Num. 14. b. 11. It is a complaynt which
he maketh there by Moyses, and in many other places of the scripture.
And surely if Saint Iohns saying bee trew,Iohn. 3. d. 33. namely, that when wee
beleeue God, we set to our seales that he is trew, that is too say, wee
vphold him to be faythfull: then contrariwyse, if we haue not that sure
groundwoorke in our fayth, & that Gods word win not so much at our
handes as too make vs too betake our selues wholly vntoo it without
any gaynsaying: it is all one as if wee counted God a lyer, insomuch
that although wee would hate and abhorre too vtter any such blasphemie,
yit dooth he complaine that wee haue doone him the like reproch,
and not without cause. And therfore wee see what frowardnesse there
is in our nature, vntill God remedie it.
               Furthermore wheras he sayeth, that the holy Ghoste sealeth his
promises after that fashyon in our harts: let vs vnderstand that that is
bycause he hath voutsafed too chooze vs. Wee haue seene alredy heertoofore
how he calleth vs too him, and inlyghteneth vs with the truthe
of his Gospell, according too his choozing of vs before wee were
borne, yea and before the making of the world. Therfore let vs vnderstand
that Gods spirit is a speciall gift, which is not bestowed vppon
all men indifferently, but is reserued as a treasure for his children
whom he hath chozen. And for that cause wee ought too beare well in
mynd the foretouched tytle, that he is the spirit of adoption. Also the
vnbeleef which is throughout the whole worlde,Rom. 8. c. 15. giueth an euident
proof of our Gods goodnesse, in that it hath pleazed him too ingraue
his woord in our harts. For it is certeyne that in all such as fyght ageinst
God, or which bee as brute beasts, and so carelesse that his



woord dooth no whit moue them: wee see what wee bee of nature, and
what wee should bee still, if our Lord for his mercies sake had not touched
vs with his holy spirit. And so yee see what wee haue too beare
in mynd. Wherfore whensoeuer the doctrine of our saluation is
talked of, let vs beeware that wee presume not any thing vppon our
owne wit and policie: but let vs bee small and lowely, that our Lord
may inlyghten vs by his his holie spirit. And when wee perceyue
that wee haue receyued such grace alredy: let vs not burye it, but let
vs giue the prayse of it too him that deserueth it. And on the contrarie
part, sith wee feele many perplexities, douts, and vnquietnesse, and
that sometymes we bee tossed lyke a ship that is redie too topple ouer,
and too be sunk in the bottom of the the sea: sith we perceyue our selues
too bee so trubbled: let vs consider our owne fraylty, that although
wee haue bin trayned vp in Gods woord, yit will there bee no stedfastnesse
in our harts, except God woork it there: and theruppon let vs
runne too the remedy, and pray God too keepe the seede that he hath
sowen in vs from choking, and the assurednesse of our heritage from euer
wearing out: that although Satan streyne him self too the vttermoste,
too destroy that which God hath put intoo vs, yit it may bee
strengthened in vs from day to day, as is needfull for vs. And so yee
see what wee haue to beare in mynd in this that Saint Paule sayeth,
that wee be sealed and marked by Gods spirit.
               And now he warneth vs, that it is too heynous a cryme too greeue
him, yea & to intollerable a trecherie. I haue told you alredy, that this
similitude intendeth not to impute any excessiue passiō to Gods spirit:
but too put vs too shame, and too make the heare too stand vp vpon our
heads. Behold (sayeth Saint Paule), Gods spirit hath chozen his
dwelling place in vs,1. Cor. 3. d. 17. & 6. d. 19. & 2. Cor. 6. d. 16. (according as it is sayd in another place, that not
only our soules, but also our bodyes are the temples of the holy Ghoste)
and he is glad too bee in vs, and too abyde there, and too make it his
continuall home: nowe then if wee fall too spyting of him, as though
wee mynded too chace him and banish him from vs, is it not too diuelish
a dealing? And yit notwithstanding, when wee seeke allurements
of vnthriftinesse, when wee take leaue too corrupt our selues by leaud
and loose talk, and when wee labour too haue other naughtie meanes
too turne vs awaye from the feare of God, and too bring our consciences
asleepe: it is all one as if wee indeuered of set purpose too chace
away and too banish Gods spirit from vs, and too say, wee will haue



no more acquayntance with him. Must wee not needs be moste miserable
and cursed creatures, when wee ouershoote our selues so farre?
That then is the thyng that S. Paule had an eye vnto.
               Therefore whensoeuer wee bee tempted vntoo euill, and the diuell
laboreth to make vs take pleasure in it, that all remorse of conscience
maye bee put away: let vs call too mynd the things that are spoken
heere, and say: How now? Thou reioycest: And wherin? In the
seruing of Satan: and on the other syde thou lettest him go that is thy
lyfe, the earnestpenny of thy saluation, and the foundation of the felicitie
which hath bin purchaced so deerly for thee by our Lord Iesus
Christ. Let vs thinke aduyzedly vpon this. And moreouer it is certein,
that euery faythfull man ought too feele the thing that is declared
heere. For if our Lord haue touched vs, and giuen vs the sealing
that is spoken of heere: it will bee a greef vntoo vs when wee bee
tempted vntoo 
                     •
                  uill. And so the thing that holdeth vs in awe, is the
spirit which watcheth and wardeth too withstand the enemie. And
if wee go aboue too kill this benefyte, that is too say, this inwoorking
that God giueth vs, it is al one as if wee greeued the holy Ghost.
This then is a most certein experience, and such a one as sheweth vs
that the thing which the holy Ghost hath put intoo vs, is vtterly ageinst
all euill, and that there must needes bee a battell and stryfe
betwixt them, insomnch that none of Gods children can sin, but he
shall by and by bee stirred vp too feare, and too say in himself, Alas,
where shall I become? In what plyght haue I brought my self? what
shall I doo?
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 7. c. 10. 11. And that is the sorrow that Saint Paule speaketh of,
which wee must not shun. But if wee neuerthelesse go on still in
euill: it is all one as if wee tooke pleasure in dryuing and chacing away
of Gods spirit. The Prophet Esay sayeth, wee prouoke Gods
spirit too bitternesse,Esay. 63 c. 10. when wee refuze the good doctrine that he setteth
afore vs. But S. Paule passeth yit further heere. For in deede
it is a kynd of prouoking God too wrath, when wee yeeld not too his
doctrine, which is a sure record of the care which he hath of our saluation,
and of the loue that he beareth vs. But wee must come too the
considering of euery of vs by himself. God hath voutsafed to ingraue
the beleefe of his Gospell in my hart, too the intent I should bee sure
of my saluation. And how dooth he that: By voutsafing to chooze mee
for his house, and too dwell in mee by his holy spirit. Now then if
I blot out this grace: it is asmuch as if I ment to estraunge my self



from God wilifully, And therefore let vs beware of such extemitie,
and let vs hold our selues in awe.
               And therewithall let vs marke also how Saint Paule addeth for
the last woord, that Gods sealing and marking of vs after that manner
by his holy Ghost, is ageinst the day of our redemption. Hereby
he sheweth vs, that if wee will well ouercome Satans allurementes,
and the lustes of our flesh, and all the temptations of the
world: wee must alwayes mynd the heauenly lyfe that is promysed
vs, and wheruntoo wee ought too trauell. Now then, Gods spirit (sayth
S. Paule) is not giuen vs too bee withdrawen from vs agein when
wee haue once felt his grace and power: but too the intent that the
seale and print of him should abyde with vs euen vntoo the day of our
redemption: that is too say, tyll wee bee delyuered from this transitorie
lyfe, and from all the miseries wherwith wee bee beseeged. Now
therfore seeyng that God hath giuen vs his holy spirit, too guyde and
gouerne vs both in lyfe and death, and with intent that wee should neuer
bee depryued and destitute of him: Let vs looke well too it, that he
may alwayes keepe the possession that he hath taken in vs, and wee
also inioy that inestimable benefite of his continuing with vs for euer,
that he may guide vs, and hold vs alwayes vp by strong hand, duryng
all the course of our life. The cause then why Saint Paule doth purposely
call vs backe too the last day, is too make vs lyue soberly, knowing
that like as wee haue neede too bee guided throughout by the
power of Gods spirit, so if wee bee depriued of it, and estraunged from
hym, and left destitute of his grace: it is too bee feared, that wee shall
fall intoo a reprobate mynd.
               As touching the day of our redemption, S. Paule by that woord
vnderstoode the happinesse which wee hope for, and which is hidden
from vs as yit. It is trew that wee were redeemed in the person of
our Lord Iesus Christ: but wee inioy not that benefyte as yit. Wee
may well say, Iesus Christ is our Redeemer, that is to say, he hath deliuered
vs, and set vs free from the bondage and subiection of death &
sinne wherin wee were, by paying our raunsome, and by makyng our
attonement. Ye see then,Iohn. 19. c. 30. that wee bee redeemed as in respect of the
sonne of God: for he hath performed all that was requisite for our deliuerance
and saluation, as he hym selfe auoweth with his own mouth.
But when wee come too our selues, wee fynde not thys redemption
there. And for that cause, as well in thys place, as in the eyght too the



Romanes, Saint Paule sayth, that the last day, wherin Iesus Christ
will appeere, is the day of our saluatio
                     •
                   and deliueraunce. And why?
Wee see what a number of miseries beset vs round about: yea wee
carye them with vs, and they bee inclozed in our bodyes and in our
soules. It behoueth vs therfore too seeke a better state, than that which
we see heere.Rom▪ 8. c. 24. And for the same cause is it sayd, that our saluation lyeth
in hope, and that wee hope not for the thing that wee see: but that
God intendeth too feede our hope. And wheras he sheweth not the
things too our eyes which he promiseth, and which it behoueth vs too
wayt for at his hand: it is too the end that although wee bee forlorne
wretches in this world, yit wee should not ceasse too reioyce in him,
knowing that wee shal not bee disappoynted in wayting for the heritage
which he hath purchaced for vs. And so yee see what is ment
by the woord Redemption which is set downe heere. Wherefore let
vs learne too bee so armed and fenced with Gods spirit, too fyght ageinst
all Satans temptations, as he may neuer fynde vs vnprouided,
nor out of order. And that that may bee doone, let vs pray God
so too ingraue his truth in vs by the same spirit, as wee may get victorie
by it, and ouercome all that is ageinst our saluation, and that we
continuing in our vocation that God calleth vs too, may take corage
and bee pacient vntyll our Lord Iesus Christ (who is our lyfe) doo appeare,
that our lyfe and our full happinesse may also bee manifested in
him at his comming.
               And now let vs fall downe before the maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faults, praying him too take vs too mercy,
and not too impute the great number of our sinnes vntoo vs, whereby
wee bee blame woorthy before him, but rather too beare with our infirmities,
and too clenze vs of them from day too day, that wee may
growe and increace in all his gracious gif
                     •
                  es, and put farre from vs
all euill that may seduce vs and thrust vs out of the way, and that by
that meane wee may draw neerer and neerer vntoo him, vntyll wee bee
fully knit vntoo him at the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. That
it may please him too graunt this grace, not onely too vs, but also
too all people and Nations of the earth. &c.
            
            
               
               The .xxxiii. Sermon, which is the thirteenth
vppon the fourth Chapter, and the first
vppon the fifth Chapter.
               
                  
                     31. Let all bitternesse, and hastinesse, and wrath, and roring, and
iniurie bee put from you, with all spytefulnesse.
                     32. And bee yee gentle one too another, and kynd harted, forgiuing
one another, euen as God though Christ forgaue you.
                  
                  
                     The fifth Chapter.
                     1. Bee yee therfore folowers of God, as deere children.
                     2. And vvalke in loue, euen as Christ loued vs, and gaue himselfe
for vs an offering and sacrifice vnto God, for a sent of good
sauour.
                  
               
               
                  WEe knowe that all Gods children not only
should bee peaceable themselues, but also
procure peace too the vttermost of their
power: and make attonement whereas
was disagreement and stryfe, forasmuch
as it is the marke that our Lorde Iesus
Christ hath giuen vs. Now if we ought
too reconcyle those betweene whom there
was any secret grudge: much more ought
wee too absteyne from all mouing of dedate.
For what authoritie or meanes shall wee haue too bring them
toogither which are greeued one at another, and too set them at brotherly
attonement, or too asswage their choler, when they bee moued
with some ouer vehement passion: if wee our selues bee full of stryfe
and trubble, and giuen to crying, roring and storming? So then, not
without cause dooth Saint Paule declare, that all bitternesse, vvith
testinesse, and anger, and cursed speaking, ought too bee put avvay
from the faythfull, euen vvith al Spytfulnesse. For he setteth
downe spytefulnesse heere, as the roote that yeeldeth the frutes which
he speaketh of. And by that woord he meaneth such a Churlishnesse



as maketh euery man too bee giuen too himself, and too drawe alone
without regard of others. For it cannot bee but that the man which
loueth himself ouer much, must needes disdeyne his neyghbours, and
so shake them of, as no gentlenesse can bee gotten at his hand. Then
if wee intend too auoyde stryfe and quarelling, wee must begin at
this poynt of putting away churlishnesse, and considering that God
hath linked vs toogither, indeuer euery man too maynteyne peace and
freendship, & regard those whom God hath so inhonored as too make
them his children, or in leastwyze created after his owne image. That
is for the first poynt.
               Now out of this Spytefulnesse springeth Bitternesse, which is,
when wee bee wayward and easye too bee moued, and there reigneth
such a scornfulnesse in vs, as we thinke all the world to be our vnderlings,
and that other folkes are nothing in respect of vs. When
wee bee puffed vp with such pryde, it cannot bee but that wee must
needes bee bitter, and by and by bee out of pacience at the stirring of
euery strawe, if it bee too our mislyking, and take all things in yll
part, and seeke occasions of vnquietnesse. According as wee see a
great number, which are not contented with chafing when any wrong
is doone too themselues: but although the matter touch them not, doo
seeme too bee set as spyes too marke if there bee any thing too checke
at. In deede if a man speake but one word that mislykes them, they wil
not in any wyse be quyeted, but are still fynding fault with euery thing.
And howsoeuer the world go, they must needes bee medling where
they haue nothing too doo: for they bee of so froward a nature, that
they will bee quarelling for the furthest straunger in the world. But
if the matter concerne themselues: though a man labour neuer so much
too please them, and too doo the thing that may content them: yit
will they euer mislyke of somewhat: and if a man aske them the reason
why, there is none other too bee found but their owne cankerde
stomacke, bycause they haue conceyued a rancour, and are puffed
vp with pryde too esteeme their owne selfwill with disdeyne of others.
Wee see then that Saint Pa
                     •
                  le hath shewed vs heere the trew remedies
too hold our selues in awe, that wee may liue peaceably, and
keepe our selues from entering intoo quarels and braules. A Phisition
will not only bid a man beware of the feuer or any other disease:
but he will also consider wheretoo he is inclined, and see what things
may bee ageinst him, and thereuppon say vntoo him, beware of such



a thing, for surely yee cannot but fall into such a sicknesse or such an
inconuenience, if you take not heed too your self. Now wee would
bee heedie ynough too keepe the orders that are prescribed vs for the
health of our bodies: but when it comes too the soule, euery of vs is
negligent: whereby wee shewe that wee make none account of our
saluation: and that is, bycause we consider not that on the one syde the
diuell laboreth too seduce vs, and wee on the other syde are so frayle,
as wee neuer cease too giue our selues too euill, except our Lord
haue armed and fenced vs with his woord. So much the more therefore
dooth it stand vs on hand, too marke the order that is set downe
heere: which is, that too liue quietly toogither, and too keepe our
selues from contention and stryfe: first, we must not bee blynded with
excessiue loue of our selues, but rather indeuer too rid away all pryde,
that wee may make account of our neyghbours, and liue meekely with
them: for that will restreyne vs from being so bitter and testie in taking
all things in ill part.
               And hereupon S. Paul telleth vs, that when we be so purged within,
both of spytefulnesse & of bitternesse: we must absteyne from Hastinesse,
& from wrath, and from roring. For here he setteth downe the
suddein heats of choler wherthrough men ouershoote themselues ere
they bee aware of it, and afterward fall intoo rages that cannot bee
stayed. For this cause it behoueth vs too bee mortifyed, for then will
it bee easie too alay the heate yea and euen too quenche it. But when
wee bee so inflamed with wrath, all must needs bee full of thundering,
and there wilbee no measure of our anger. Yee see then that the thing
in effect which wee haue too marke here, is that forasmuch as Gods
children ought too liue in peace and concord: they must, too the vttermoste
of their power brydle all their passions, yea and consider what
commeth of wrath and anger, namely that fyre is kindled, open warre
preclaymed, many woords escape which a man would wish in agein,
and finally therof springeth incurable mischeef. Now then if wee
looke well whertoo all our moodinesse leadeth vs, or rather earyeth vs
away: namely that the diuell taketh possession of vs, and holdeth vs
in the the stocks, and that wee haue nother reason nor stay of our selues
when we be so farre out of pacience: certesse we would stand vpon our
gard, & not giue place to the diuel, as hath bin declared afore. Howbeeit,
that we may auoyd stryfe & debate, let vs learne to clenze our hartes
of bitternesse and testinesse. And too bring that too passe, let vs



learne too esteeme well of those that are linked vntoo vs, and vntoo
whom also we be bound. Thus yee see in effect how wee ought too put
this text in vre.
               And forasmuch as it is a thing as hard to bee kept as any, & a thing
that dooth greatly hinder vs: therfore Saint Paule addeth, that it
behoueth vs too bee myld, gentle, and courteous one too another.
Heere he setteth downe the contraries too the bitternesse and spytefulnesse
that he spake of. And he bringeth vs backe too this principle,
that in asmuch as wee bee men, God hath created vs after his owne
image, and that inasmuch as he hath called vs too the beleef of his
Gospell, therby he hath marked vs new agein, and there wee behold
his image, which ought too moue vs too the Gentlenesse wherof he
speaketh. Therfore let vs mark well that we cannot despyze the least
that is, without dishonoring God. For (as I told you afore) all men
are made after his image. Now were it tollerable that an earthly
woorme should esteeme it self so much, and exalt it self so farre as too
set lyght by his maker? Let vs make no excuce in this behalf, for all
that wee can alledge will stand vs in no sted. And (as I sayd) seeing
that God hath inhonored men so hyghly as too giue them so excellent
a nature: it is good reason that wee should yeeld honour and reuerence
too his maiestie, and not tread them vnder foote by whom he representeth
him self vntoo vs. Agein, if a man consider him self well, shall he
not see his owne nature as it were in a glasse, in all his neyghbours?
(Yis:) For the greatest personages in the worlde, cannot say that
they bee made of any otheer stuffe, than the rest of Adams children
are. Seeing it is so then, what cause haue we too bee so proud as too
disdeyne those that are lyke vs, & are alyed too vs by such a kinred as
cannot be worne out? Howbeit, there is yit a more peculiar reason as
in respect of the faithfull. For in them God hath ingraued his image
new agein, which was as good as defaced by Adams sinne. Then sith
it is so, let vs learne too bee gentle and courteous one too another, and
not too bee so churlish, as no man may haue accesse too vs, nor yit so
straunge and scornefull, as too separate our selues from the common
aray and company of other men. This is the thing that S. Paule
ment by the gentlenesse or courtesie that he spake of.
               Now hereuppon he addeth, Mercifulnesse. Let vs (sayeth he) haue
compassion one of another. And this compassion stretcheth very farre,
and is as it were the welspring that moueth vs too gentlenesse. Wee



will alwayes graunt that a myld spirit is a singular vertue, and one
without the which wee cannot continew in the world. And how may
it bee mainteyned among vs? The onely meane is this compassion,
that is too say, (the disposition of mynd which causeth vs too thinke)
that when wee see any despyzed person, yit is he our neyghbour, that is
too say, our owne fleshe and bone. Yea, but yit is he dispyzed, nother
hath he any thing too bee esteemed for. Yit notwithstanding, the myseryes
that are in him, may also fal vppon mee. Then if wee consider
that: surely our hartes will yirne too see the man that is brought too so
great an afterdeale in respect of others: and whether he be weake of
body, or haue some infirmitie of mynd, it will greeue vs and touch vs
with pitie too rew his cace. And so there would bee no gentlenesse in
vs, if it were not for this compassion. Now then, put the cace there
bee a poore man that is sore diseased, or that droopeth and draggeth
his winges vppon the ground: should hee bee hild scorne of for that?
(No:) but contrariwyse, if wee were not vtterly mercilesse lyke wyld
beastes:Phil. 2. a. 1. & Coloss. 3. b. 12. surely the very same ought to moue our bowells (as the scripture
teacheth vs:) and too inclyne vs vntoo pitie, at leastwyse if wee
did our dewtie. Agein, if there bee any impediment of wit or mynd:
(as for example, some sillie soule hath much adoo too vnderstand one
saying among a hundred, yea he is not able too discerne whyte from
blacke:) if I haue not compassion of him, what letteth me to do it, but
myne owne crueltie, which maketh mee too forget common kyndnesse
wherby God knitteh vs all toogither? Yee see then, that if wee haue
any droppe of pitie, too keepe vs from reiecting them that are alyed
vntoo vs, and also from disdeyning them in whom there is any cause of
compassion and mercie: wee shall not fayle too bee gentle and courteous
towardes our neyghbours in all caces and at all tymes. To bee
short, lyke as the myseries which God knoweth too bee in vs, do moue
him too bee mercifull towardes vs: so the myseries that are in our
neyghbours, ought to be as spurres too prick vs and prouoke vs to be
pitifull vntoo them. Yea and there is yit more: that euen their vyces
which inflame vs too choler and anger, ought too minister occasion vntoo
vs too pitie our neyghbours. I see some▪ man that hath doone
mee wrong: not it is the diuell that hath dryuen him therunto, & the
wretched man dooth but vndoo himself, for he prouoketh God ageinst
him. Now then, if there were no more in mee but the common nature
wheruntoo God hath knit vs all: ought I not too bee sorie at the



hart, when I see a soule that is beguyled by Satans 
                     〈◊〉
                   go too
destruction? Yis verily. Therefore let none of the wrongs carie vs away
which are doone vntoo vs, nother let vs bee so farre prouoked, as
not too pitie those that doo amisse, namely, bycause they bee blynded
by Satan, and prouoke Gods wrath, and fight ageinst their owne saluation.
Behold then, the very remedy which wee haue too hold vs
vntoo and too keepe,Phil. 2. a. 1. & 
                        •
                      Colos. 3 b. 12. is, that too bee gentle, wee must bee pitifull and
haue compassion, as is shewed in the foresayd textes. For there is none
of vs but he would gladly be borne withall: and without that, we could
not tell how too lyue one day in the world. The perfectest man that
is hath yit some infirmitie, insomuch that if men should deale altoogither
rigorously with him, he should bee disdeyned, yea and as good as
vtterly disgraced and defaced. Nay further, where is that man too be
found which hath not many infirmities in him, and would not fayne
bee greatly borne withall, (as neede requireth) and that men should
not shake him of, though he haue some vyces that deserue their withdrawing
of themselues from him? Now if wee woulde so fayne bee
borne withall our selues: ought not wee also too pitie others? And
soothly when wee see a man hath some blemishe, ought wee not too
thinke, I am subiect too the same? verily when I haue sifted all things
throughly, I shall fynde other things in my selfe, that deserue more
iustly too bee condemned: and yit would I fayne bee borne withall,
though I were neuer so much conuicted. Therfore lyke as wee would
that other men should pardon vs: so let vs learne too pitie other men,
for they bee no more Angels than wee bee. That then is the thing
which S. Paule ment too bring vs too.
               And thereuppon he concludeth, that vvee should forgiue one another.
For if compassion go not alwayes afore, surely wee will
not let a pinnes poynt go without examination and rigorous sifting
of it, and without vnmeasurable displeasure, as experience sheweth
in very deede to much. Therfore a body should not stirre a strawe, but
wee would bee out of pacience at it. And why? Bycause there is no
pitie in vs. But if wee bee touched with mercy, surely wee will easly
forgiue, and let many things slip and passe (vnseene): and moreouer
wee wil not bee 
                     •
                  yghtly moued, but there will bee a brydle too
hold vs backe, and wee will not refuze too admit them alwayes too
freendship, which haue so offended. That therefore is the order which
Saint Paule keepeth too bring vs too charitie, and too maynteyne vs



in it: for it is the whole summe of this Lesson. Too bee Gods children
(say I), we must loue one another, & be knit toogither in good agreement,
that peace may bee maynteyned among vs. And how is
that possible too bee? For euery man is too much medded too himself.
Agein, their myndes are as farre differing as may bee. Their
manners and conditions also are differing. Too bee short, wee haue
infinite causes too put vs away, and too cut vs of from all company.
And surely if euery man let himselfe looce, Charitie shall neuer take
place, but bee banished farre from vs. What is too bee doone then?
Wee must first rid away all scornfulnesse and pryde (as is sayd afore)
and afterward bee clenzed from bitternesse and frowardnesse, so as
wee fall not too bee cholerike and testie, but euery man brydle himself
and subdew his owne affections. But this cannot bee doone, except
wee bee gentle and kynd harted, namely bycause wee bee creatures
fashyoned after the image of God, and knit togither with an vnseperable
bond. Yit would not all this suffize, vntyll wee haue learned
too knowe our owne infirmities, and that euery of vs bee angrie
with himself, bycause he seeth that he hath neede too bee quickned vp,
and that there bee many vyces in himself of the same sort that are in
his neyghbours: and that therefore wee haue neede of this bond too
hold vs fast togither: which will then bee doone, when wee bee mercifull
and pitifull. Now if common courtesie ought too moue vs too
succour such as are in necessitie: it ought also too bee of force too reconcyle
vs.Luke. 6. c. 36. For when our Lord Iesus exhorteth vs too bee merciful:
it is not only too the intent wee should releeue the hungry and thirsty
with meat and drinke, or help vp a man agein that is falne in decay,
or that wee should succour euery man according too our owne abilitie,
and the parties neede: our Lord Iesus intendeth not that alone.
Trew it is that all things are comprehended therein: but he
will haue vs specially too shewe mercie, in forgiuing the faultes that
are committed, and not too bee so extreme as too shake of those vtterly
which are not altoogither too bee commended, or in whom wee
spye many vyces. In deede wee ought not too flatter one another:
for trew freendship will not beare that, bycause it would bee but a
foading of vs too our owne destruction. If a man bee a freend too another,
and suffer him to ouer come himself with meate and drinke, so
as in the end he killeth himself: is it too be sayd, that his flattering of
him after that manner, and his foading of all his foolish appetytes,



is freendship? (No:) So then, if wee see a poore man at the poynt
too throw himself headlong intoo destruction, wee doo well shew our
selues too bee rather traytors than freendes too him, if wee indeuer
not too plucke him backe.
               The compassion therefore whereuntoo our Lord Iesus exhorteth
vs, is not a rocking of vs asleep in our infirmities through flatterie:
but a holding of our selues in measure, and a tempering of our rigour
in such wyse, as oyle may alwayes bee mingled with our vineger, as
they say. That is in effett the thing whertoo Saint Paule ment too
bring vs. For although euery man doo his best too bee pitiful, so as
he may shew no ouer greate rigour towards his neyghbours: yit is it
as contrarie too our nature as any thing can bee. For (as I haue
sayd alredye) this selfloue of ours dooth so blynd vs, that wee make the
least scapes in the world, too bee heynous sinnes and offences vnpardonable.
By meanes wherof if any man anger vs, too our seeming
his fault ought not in any wyse too bee forgiuen. So then, mercifulnesse
shall neuer bee found in men, vnlesse they fyght it out too the vttermost,
(ageinst their owne affections.) As for single teaching, it wil
not boote in that behalf. Wee haue this (Churlishnesse) so deeply
rooted in our harts, that if wee bee told of our dewtie, it dooth but half
moue vs. For this cause Saint Paule setteth Gods example afore vs
heere, who hath forgiuen vs in his only sonne. And immediatly therunto
he addeth our Lord Iesus Christe, who spared not him self for
our redemption and saluation. The thing then that can breake all
hardnesse in vs, the thing that can mortifye all our excessiue passions,
the thing that can reclayme all our crueltie, pull downe all our
pryde and loftinesse, and sweeten all our bitternesse, is to haue an eye
too Gods behauing of himselfe towardes vs.Iohn. 3. b. 16. Nowe he hath loued
the world so well, that he hath giuen his only sonne too death for
our sakes. If we compare our selues with God, what a distance is
there betwixt vs? So then, the greatest wrongs that wee can possibly
imagin (too bee doone vntoo vs:) are nothing in comparison of the
least fault that wee commit ageinst God. For a man cannot deuyze
to break Gods will neuer so little, but the same is an incountering of
his souerein dominion, a violating of his maiestie, and an ouerthrowing
of his ryghtuousnesse: which are thinges too precious (too bee abuzed.
What lyke thing is too bee found in man? can it bee sayd, that
if one haue misuzed vs, it ought too bee esteemed as if a man had infringed



Gods ryghtuousnesse? Now then wee haue iust cause too
condemne our selues, vntill wee serue God as wee ought too doo. And
who dooeth that? Wee bee enemyes too him aforehand, euen from
our moothers womb: and as wee growe in age, so growe wee continually
without ceassing in naughtinesse, in all sinfulnesse, and in all
vnryghtuousnesse. And yit for all that, God hath not forborne too
looke mercifully vppon vs: insomuch that the more wretched we were,
the more hath he vttered his infinite mercie, in sending vs his only
sonne. Now if wee consider this: ought not all pryde too bee layd
downe, all bitternesse asswaged, all rebelliousenesse tamed, all spytefulnesse
rid out of our harts, and all vntruthe put away? Yis verily.
What is the cause then that wee bee so wayward, and that when heate
hath once caryed vs away, wee ceasse not euen too spurre foreward our
selues, and that wee doo so easly enter intoo contention and stryfe, that
all the house where we bee, must ring of vs? What is the cause hereof?
Euen our owne vnthankfulnesse, for that wee think not vppon
Gods incomprehensible goodnesse towards vs, in that he hath not spared
his only sonne, notwithstanding that wee were his deadlie enemyes,
notwithstanding that wee were at warre with him, notwithstanding
that wee were cursed alredy of nature, bycause of the corruption
that is in vs. But yit notwithstanding all this (as I sayd afore)
it is vnpossible that wee should taste of Gods mercie, except wee bee
touched with compassion, and haue our harts rid cleane of that cursed
affection of reuendge. So then albeeit that Saint Paule haue exhorted
vs too things that are very hard, yea and vtterly repugnant too
mans nature, and which cannot bee brought too passe except God
woork in that behalf: yit notwithstanding the declaration that is shewed
vs heere, ought too preuayle so much with vs, as too make vs forget
all wrongs. For admit that another man haue offended mee:
what then? Can I try my self ryghtuo
                     •
                  s and giltlesse, when I shall
come before God? Alas, there are so many iniquities and transgressions
in mee, that I should bee confounded a hundred thousand tymes.
Should one fault then which is committed ageinst mee, bee vnpardonable:
and shall a hundred, yea a whole Million which I haue committed
ageinst God, bee nothing? What am I in comparison of that
souerein Maiestie: So then, following this warning of S. Paules,
whensoeuer wee bee moued too impaciencie for any displeasure or
wrong, so as we haue any desire of reuenge: let vs learne, let vs learne



I say, too gather our wittes aboute vs, and too consider what wee bee.
For first of all, if a man haue committed any fault ageinst vs, wee our
selues doo the lyke or farre woorse. On the other syde let vs consider
how God hath redeemed vs, yea and specially by that most precious
pledge of the blud shed of his onely sonne. And haue we deserued that?
Agein, what cause hath moued God too bee so mercifull towardes vs?
Nothing else but our wretchednesse. Now seeing that he which is so
good, and that he beyng not of our nature hath notwithstanding had
compassion of our wretchednesse wherin wee were plundged: what
shall wee doo? Ought not wee too haue much more compassion one of
another, bycause wee fynd the things in our selues which wee pardon
in our neyghbours? God can fynd no infirmities in himselfe: & howe
then shall he bee moued too forgiue vs? Truely euen bycause he is the
welspring of all goodnesse and mercy. But when I see the thing that
greeueth mee in my neyghbour, if I examin well my selfe, I shall fynd
the lyke there, or else much more. Should not all these things perswade
mee too some compassion, if I forgat not my selfe too much?
The way then too make vs easly forgiue many faultes, and too beare
with many vyces that may mislyke vs in our neyghbours, is, too cast
our eyes vppon the inestimable loue which God hath borne vs in the
person of his sonne.
               And heereuppon wee may conclude, (as I sayde afore) that
if wee were not too vnthankefull, there would bee another manner of
myldnesse among vs than there is, and wee would not so soone fall
out for euery wrong that is doone vs. For ought wee not too thinke
early and late, and day and nyght vppon the fauour that is graunted
vs in our Lord Iesus Christ, who is the daysunne too inlyghten vs?
Should wee be so brutish, as not too consider that he maketh his spirituall
lyght too shyne vppon vs, of purpose too guyde vs too saluation?
And how is that doone but by Gods mercy? Agein, when wee
behold the fauour that God sheweth vs in maynteyning vs in this present
lyfe: are wee woorthie too be be found at his cost? No: but all
commeth too vs through our Lord Iesus Christ. Therefore it would
become vs, both sleeping and waking, eating and drinking, in rest
and in labour, and in all things else, too consider alwayes the mercy
that God vseth towardes vs, and too beare it in mynd, and too make
it our continewall exercyze. And specially must this grace come alwayes
before our eyes, when wee pray vntoo God. For what accesse



may wee haue too talke familiarly with him, and too discharge
all our cares and greefes as it were intoo his lap, yea and too call
him our father: if wee bee not called too him through his free bestowed
goodnesse in our Lord Iesus Christ, and he forgiue vs our transgressions?
If wee bethinke vs not of all these things, wee bee too
dulheadded and brutish. And heereby it appeereth full well, that we
shall alwayes bee disallowed in bragging our selues too bee Gods
children, and his household folke, and faythfull children, (if wee bee
not willing and glad too forgiue:) wee may well boast of it afore men,
yea and wee may bee had in estimation through a fond opinion: but
yit will God disgrade vs. So then, if wee bee loth too forgiue, our
vnthankefulnesse bewrayeth it self therein, how that wee consider not
the infinite goodnesse of our God as he sheweth it in our Lord Iesus
Christ. That is the thing in effect, whertoo S. Paule intendeth too
bring vs.
               Now he addeth, that vvee must bee follovvers of God, as vvell
beloued children. For a man myght yit reply, it is trew that Gods
mercy ought too rauish vs all and too amaze vs, and it is so woonderfull
a thing, that all our affections ought too bee fastened vppon it.
But what for that? Are wee able too bee lyke vntoo God? No: for
he is the fountayne of all goodnesse, and wee bee leaud and vntoward:
yea, God hath the full perfection of all goodnesse in him, and there is
not so much as one drop of it in our nature. No maruell then though
we come nothing neere him, ne haue any resemblance or lykenes vnto
him. Such reply (say I) myght men haue made, if S. Paule had not
added this saying, Bee yee follovvers of God: that is too say, follow
yee him, let him bee your example or patterne. For although God be
the souerein goodnesse it selfe, and that wee haue not any peece of vs
which tendeth not too euill: yit is it no sufficient excuce for vs, that
wee should therefore bee vtterly ageinst him, for that is a token that
wee belong nothing at all too him. Truely as in respect that wee bee
but onely men, Adams sinne hath so alienated vs from God: that theroutof
spring malice, spytefulnesse, pryde, excessiue passions, and wicked
desyre of reuenging: and it separateth vs from God, in whom is
the fulnesse of all goodnesse. Such are wee from our moothers womb
through Adams sinne, as I sayd afore. But yit for all that, must wee
not needes chaunge our kynd, when it pleaseth God too reache vs his
hand, and too gather vs too him, and too knit the things agein in one,



which were scattered asunder? (Yis.) And that is the cause why S.
Paule sayeth, as Gods deere beloued children. Heerein he sheweth
that wee shall haue our mouthes shet, vnlesse we answer God in goodnesse,
by bearing one with another, according also as our Lord Iesus
telleth vs in S. Mathew.Math. 5. g. 45. Follow your heauenly father (sayeth he,)
which maketh his sonne too shyne both vppon good and bad. For too
say that wee bee Gods children, too call vppon him, too pretend the
name of Christians: and yit in the meane whyle too bee despyzers of
God, and too make as though wee would defye him, by shewing that
wee drawe aloofe from him: is it not vtterly ageinst kynd? (Yis:)
and therefore let no man deceyue himselfe, but let vs consider that wee
bee not onely full of hypocrisie, but also vtterly past shame, when wee
fashion not our selues lyke vntoo God, and yit will needes bee hild and
taken for his children. Trew it is, that too bee so fashyoned lyke vntoo
God, and too resemble him so fully, as one man commeth neere vntoo
another, is vnpossible: but yit must wee not bee out of hart for all
that. And soothly wee must call too mynd how the scripture sayeth,
that if wee go on too Godward, although wee bee farre of from the
marke that wee ame at, yit dooth he accept that willingnesse of ours,
when wee keepe our way and indeuer continually too go on forwarde
styll.
               Although wee bee slowe and weake, and although wee trip and
stumble, yit God imputeth none of those faultes vntoo vs, when wee
bee desyrous too fashyon our selues lyke too him. When wee shoote
at that marke, although wee bee farre short or wyde of it, yit dooth
God take it in good woorth, as I sayd. And that ought too giue vs
corage? For if wee should bee dryuen too fashyon our selues lyke vntoo
God poynt by poynt in all respectes: alas how could it bee doone?
For euen the very Angels, notwithstanding that there bee nothing
but holinesse in them, and that Gods glorie shyne foorth in them: are
yit farre short from the perfection that is in God. A
                     •
                  d what are wee
then, which bee so corrupted and marred, which haue such abundance
of naughtinesse, and which are so plucked back and turned away, by
so many vyces and temptations which Satan trumpeth in our way?
yit haue wee this too reioyce of, that our Lord beareth with vs, and
accepteth all our dooings in good part, so wee keepe on toowardes
him. That is the manner of following him, which is commaunded
vs heere. Trew it is that wee must not in the meane whyle fall asleepe,



and say, as many doo: I would fayne be lyke vntoo God, and
then doo but wring their mouth at it: but wee must consider euery
day and euery houre, that wee haue ill profited in the trew rule of fashyoning
our selues lyke vntoo God, and theruppon condemne our
selues for it, and thinke thus: I had some good will yisterday, how
is it increaced since? (nothing at all,) but rather to my seeming it is
become colder. After that maner must we quickē vp our selues, & fyght
ageinst the things that hinder vs, that wee may indeuer too go styll
foreward, and too come neerer and neerer too our marke from whence
wee bee yit so farre of. But howsoeuer wee fare, yit wil not our Lord
fayle too esteeme vs alwayes too bee lyke him, and too bee trew followers
of him, if wee willingly and without hipocrisy forgiue them
that haue offended ageinst vs, at leastwyse after his example, who
hath giuen vs a pardon that is farre greater than all the pardons that
can bee gotten at our handes, so as wee beare with the vyces and infirmities
of our neyghbours, as wee see that he hath borne with vs.
For he myght iustly sinke vs downe too the bottom of hell: and yit he
forbeareth not too adopt vs for his children. Seeing then that he
loueth vs after such a sort, notwithstanding all the vnworthinesse that
is in vs: It is good reason that wee should resemble him in so dooing.
And although wee had no better prerogatiue than our naturall birth:
yit ought wee too knowe that God hath not separated vs asunder. Euen
the wretched Paynims had some vnderstanding heereof. For
they sayd, that mans lyfe is too tend vnto God, and too bee fashyoned
lyke vntoo his image, and that the same is also the full perfection
of all happinesse. And agein, they added that wee cannot resemble
God better in any thing, than in vsing gentlenesse one towardes another,
and in dooing good, and in being pitifull. So then let vs consider,
that in asmuch as God hath made vs his welbeloued children,
vs (I say) which were his enemyes, and had nothing but filthinesse in
vs, and were clogged with so many vyces, that we were woorthie too
bee lothed of him, and yit he hath not letted too loue vs, it is good
reason that wee should winke at manie things that myght offende
vs, and hinder our louing of our neyghbours, and our holding with
them.
               And now Saint Paule hauing spoken of God, addeth also the example
of our Lord Iesus Christ.Iohn. 3. b. 16. The heauenly father loued the world
so well, that he spared not his only sonne, but deliuered him to the death



for vs. And what did Iesus Christ? He forgate himself, he regarded
not his owne person:1. Cor. 2. b. 7. he that was the Lord of all glorie, submitted
him self too all reproche: He that was the lyfe from the beginnig,
made him self mortall:Iohn. 1. a. 4. He that was the power of God the father, made
him self weake for loue of vs: He that had all things in his hand, became
poore,2. Cor. 8 b. 9. to inriche vs: He by whom all things are blissed, became
subiect too cursing. Seing then that o
                     •
                  r Lord Iesus Christ abaced
him self after that fashyon (as Saint Paule also sayeth (in another
place) where he setteth him foorth as an example for vs) and in sted of
his glorie,Phil. 2. a. 7. tooke vppon him al shame,2. Cor. 5 d. 21. and in sted of his ryghtuousnesse
became sin,Esay. 53 a. 5. & 12.(not that he offended or had any blemishe or spot in him,
but as bearing the punishment of our sumes, in which respect also the
scripture termeth him by the name of sin:1. Cor. 15 a. 3.) and agein, in sted of lyfe
tooke death, and voutsafed too bee cursed of God in this world, that
wee myght haue blissednesse by his meanes: when wee think vppon
al this, ought not all pryde, all presumption, al feercenesse, all scornfulnesse,
and all bitternesse, too be layd away, considering the meane
wherby our Lord Iesus Christ hath reconcyled vs too God his father?
So then, let vs thinke wel vppon all those things.
               And furthermore, too pull vs the more downe, and too breake the
hard hartednesse whertoo wee bee too much inclyned: Saint Paule
sayth, that he offered a sacrifyze of good sauour vntoo God his father.
As if he should say, my freends, had you once well weyed the
grace and fauour that is purchaced you by our Lord Iesus Christ, you
would soone beate backe all the wicked affections which make you to
stomack things, and yee would fyght ageinst them vntill yee had ouercome
them. And therfore bee kynd harted in bearing one with another:
and seeing it hath pleased God too gather vs as it were intoo
one flocke, and that our Lord Iesus Christ dooeth the dewtie of a
shepherd too leade vs toogither, shewe your selues too bee as a flocke
of sheepe, and not as rauening wooles. For somuch then as our Lord
Iesus disdeyneth vs not in any thing, insomuch that he hath made an
offering and sacrifyze of his owne person vntoo God his father, wherby
he hath wyped out all our sinnes: let it moue vs, and rauish all our
wyts to glorifie God, and too doo homage too our Lord Iesus Christ,
as oft as wee thinke vpon it. And whereas he sayth, that the sacrifize
which was offered by Iesus Christ, was of sweet sent or sauor: therby
he sheweth, that there is nothyng but stynche in vs. Too what ende



hath he sanctifyed vs? Too ryd away our infections and filthynesse,
which made vs stynkyng and lothly before God: as when Sacrifizes
were offered in the materiall Temple, God sayd, they were of good sauour
vntoo him: howbeeit, that was in respect of men, who could not
come vntoo God by reason of their sinnes, for that they bee infected
with them, and therfore God must needs haue shunned them. But all
was fulfilled in our Lord Iesus Christ, who is the truthe of the shadowes
of the Law. Seeing it is so: let vs vnderstand, that wheras it

                     〈◊〉
                   sayd, that the sacrifyze which Iesus Christ offered, was of sweete
sauour before God: it was too put away the rememberaunce of all our
infections, too the intent that when wee appeere before the face of our
God, (as wee must dayly in our prayers and supplications:) our
sinnes may not bee layd too our charge: so that although wee bee disfigured
like wretched lepers, so as there is nothing but infection in
vs: yit the same may bee no impediment, but that God may imbrace
vs as ryghtuous and innocent, too bee companions with the Angels,
and fashyoned fully according too his image. And how may that bee
doone? Euen bycause our Lord Iesus Christ will haue all our spots
wyped away, so as wee may come before him with our heads vpryght,
being well assured that he will alwayes make vs fynd the frute of his
mercie which he hath once told vs of.
               Now let vs kneele down before the maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faults, praying him to make vs so to feele thē
more & more, as it may draw vs vnto trew repentance, and yit notwithstanding
wee not dout but that he beareth with vs, too the end
that wee should ask him mercie and forgiuenesse, assuring our selues
that he will heare vs if wee keepe the way that he sheweth vs by his
word, and reforme vs more and more according too his image, so as
wee may giue a trew proof, that as wee call vppon him for our father:
so wee couet nothing else also but too bee his trew children. And so
let vs all say, Anmyghtie God heauenly father. &c.
            
            
               
               The .xxxiiii. Sermon, which is the second
vppon the fifth Chapter.
               
                  
                     3. And as for fornication, and all manner of vncleannesse, or couetousnesse,
let them not once bee named among you, as becommeth
Sainctes.
                     4. Nother ribaudrie, nor foolish talke, nor iesting, which are not▪
conuenient things: but rather thanksgiuing.
                     5. For, this yee know, that no vvhoremonger, or vncleane person,
or couetous body, vvhich is an Idolater, hath any inheritaunce
in the kingdome of Christ and of God.
                  
               
               
                  FOrasmuch as wee see our lyfe is subiect
too many myseries, and assone as we haue
scaped one daunger, another comes in the
necke of it: wee ought too take the better
heede too our selues. Then if a man haue
a care of his lyfe: hee wyll bethinke him
how too fence himselfe both ageinst colde
and ageinst heate, and ageinst all other inconueniences:
and agein, he wil take heede
that no mischaunce happen too his house
by making fyre in it, and as he goeth abrode, he is alwayes thinking
vppon the aduersities that are woont too befall men. But wee should
begin at the other ende: namely, that there are a hundred tymes mo
daungers within vs, than wee see without vs. For the diuell hath many
wyles too wynd vs in, and a number of vyces doo make warre ageinst
vs. Therfore it standeth vs on hand too watch, or else when we
haue ouercome one vyce, it will bee easye for another too steale vppon
vs, and too take vs vnwares. For he that shall haue absteyned from
open force, shall bee tempted too defraud his neyghbour by couert policie:
and he that despyzeth the goods of this world, shall haue some other
infirmitie in him. For some bee giuen too whoredome, some too
gluttony and superfluitie, and othersome too gamyng and play. Too
bee short, besydes that euery of vs is dispozed (naturally) too wickednesse
and sinne: there is not that man which hath not an infynite sort
of enemyes too fyght ageinst. For (as I sayd) wee bee not onely inclyned



too some one euill by nature: but too so great a number, that
euen they which are most vertuous, shall fynd themselues surpryzed at
all handes. And therefore it standeth vs so much the more on hand to
marke the exhortations that are conteyned heere. Saint Paule hath
told vs of many vyces already, and shewed vs the meane too incounter
them and too put them too flyght. Now he addeth whoredome on the
one syde, couetousnesse on the other, and foolishe talke that is full of
vayne bibblebable. Wee would thinke it were ynough for vs too haue
bin warned in one woord, too walke godlily. But (as I haue touched
already) let vs consider a little, on which syde the diuell is woont too
assault men. For when he hath once layd his battrie, if he cannot compasse
his purpose, he beginneth new agein: and when he hath gyuen
a skirmish on the ryght syde, he commes agein too the lefte, and one
whyle before, and another whyle behind, and alwayes he fyndeth some
gap open intoo vs. That is one thing which wee haue too marke vppon
the exhortations that are made heere.
               Now let vs come too S. Paules speaking of fornication and all
vncleannesse. Forasmuch as it is a vyce that all men doo ouer easly
beare withall in themselues: therefore he warneth vs, that it is not
ynough for euery one of vs too absteyne from actuall whoredome: but
wee m
                     •
                  st also consider, that God in commaunding vs too bee chaste
and vndefyled, meaneth that wee should bee well fenced ageynst all
the intycementes whereby Satan myght beguyle vs. There are then
some kyndes of whoredome or whorishnesse, which are not made account
of among men: but yit shall they not fayle too bee condemned afore
God. For this cause S. Paul thought it not ynough too tell vs,
that wee must bee chaste in respeet of our bodyes: but he addeth, that
all vncleannesse or filthinesse ought too bee farre from vs: and lykewyse
he matcheth couetousnesse with it. It is trew that they bee two
farre diuerse vices for a whooremonger wyll commonly bee prodigall:
and wheras he had bin well and thriftie before, he will forget
himselfe, so as he will wast away all. S. Paules intent was not too
make articles of difference betweene vyce & vyce, nother was it needefull.
Therefore it was ynough for him too shewe after how many sorts
the diuel might beguile vs, if we kepe not good watch, & shet the gate
ageinst him, & also preuent him, & descry the daungerswherin wee be,
to the end that practyze what he can, he may alwayes fynd vs so garded
vnder the feare of God, as he may haue no entrance vntoo vs.
               
                  Moreouer he addeth afterward, Filthinesse or vncomlinesse. For
when men take leaue too bee wanton, surely all rebaudrie will haue
full scope. (As for example,) if wantonnesse and other foolish things
bee permitted, as dauncing and such other things, men will say at the
first, that that may well be borne withal, so there be no worse. But let
men once beare and suffer dauncing, masking, mumries, & such other
lyke dung: and out of dout the diuell will haue a fling at them, & it cannot
by any means bee letted, but that all wil be marde. That is the
cause why Saint Paule in forbidding whoredome, addeth also all
manner of ribaudrie or vnhonestie: And by and by therewithall fond
talk. For a bodie would take it too bee no greate harme, if a man
should iest and dally with a mayd or a wyfe, and prattle of a number of
things. But (as I sayd) they bee all of them allurements of Satan:
and if it bee suffered, it cannot bee but the mayd must bee made a harlot,
though shee were the honestest woman in the world. That in efffect
is the thing which wee haue too beare in mynd.
               And he thinks it not ynough too say, that Gods children must absteyne
fron couetousnesse and whoredome, and from the things that
come neere vntoo them: but too the intent wee may abhorre them all
the more, he sayeth, Let them not bee once named among you. It
is not without cause that he sayeth so, for (as I haue sayd alredy, and
as shalbe declared more fully hereafter) as touching couetousnesse, it
wil bee thought too bee a vertew when a man woorketh and scrapeth
toogither on al sydes: O that is a good thriftie fellow: men clap their
handes at him, men soothe him: and although they count him but
as a theefe, and a robber, and a Cutthrote: yit notwithstanding so he
haue goods, euery body will think he dooeth well too maynteine him
self with such as bee in credit. Lo how men are flattered in their couetousnesse.
And agein, as concerning whoredome, wee see that if
Gods woord cryed not out vppon that vyce continually without ceassing,
it would bee set at libertie, and euery man would dispence with
him self, so as there would bee no more honestie among men. Saint
Paule therfore perceyuing it too bee so hard a thing too keepe men
from them, sayth, that not so much as the very names of them ought
to be suffred to haue their course, but that they ought to be driuen from
among vs. And in deede if there be any plague in a towne, euery man
will keepe him self cloce in his house, and bee afrayd too go abrode
where any perrill is. Too bee short, men wil bee ware ynough too



keepe them selues cloce, that the disease catch them not. Yea and
generall commaundement also shalbee giuen too keepe the streets
cleane, that the aire bee not infected by them, and too take away the
things that may feede or increace the mischeef. But in the meane
whyle, these deadly plagues assayle vs: and yit notwithstanding euery
man holds on his way still, and it should seeme that wee would fayne
bee poysoned with them. Howbeeit this warning ought not too bee
vnprofitable for vs, where Saint Paule forbiddeth vs too name whordome.
Trew it is that that word must needs be in vse still: for Saint
Paule standeth not vppon that Ceremonie.Exod. 20. b. 14. And in deede God sayeth
expresly in his Lawe,Deut. 5. b. 18. thou shalt not commit aduoutrie. He thinketh
it not ynough too forbid whoredome: but too the intent wee should abhorre
it the more, hee sheweth vs what an enormitie the breaking of
the fayth betweene man and wyfe is. God then nameth whoredome
in that text, and so dooth Saint Paule name it heere also: and that is
not to contrarie one another: but to do vs to vnderstand, that we should
not talk of it in iest or sport, as men are woont too doo: for that is but a
further inbrewing of men with that vyce, so as they myght not mislyke
it any more. Wee see that when there is talking of all vngodlinesse,
and leaue is giuen too vse looce speeche, euery man will giue
him self too it, so as custome will go for lawe, and men will take
whoredome too bee lawf
                     •
                  ll. Finally wee haue too mark that Saint
Paules intent was not too speake of the bare names of Whoredome
and Couetousesse: for if a man say too a whoremonger, What? Thou
playest the whoremaister: he will deny it, and say, I did but dally, and
play the wanton. As much will these naughtipacks doo which giue
ouer them selues vntoo it. But there is nother whoremonger nor harlot,
which abhorreth not the name of whoredome. And why? For
they see it is a filthie thing, and that it is as much as if a man should
set them vppon a scaffold too bee a shame too all the world. Saint
Paule therfore spake not of the bare name of Whoredome. As much
is too bee sayd of the name of Couetousnesse. What talke yee of Couetousnesse? It sounds ilfauoredly, and no man will be acknowen that
he is atteynted with couetousnesse.
               They will rather make such excuces as these: I haue a charge of
wyfe and children, and why is it not lawfull for mee too seeke sustenance
for them? Agein, should I not haue a care for heereafter, that
I may set them in some good stay? Couetousnesse hath such store of



excuces, that it is colored and vernished with them, and the terme
hath such visors put vppon it, that it is taken welneere for a vertew.
But Saint Paule ment not that men should onely forbeare the bare
names, which myght make the vyces themselues abhorred and hated:
but hee woulde rather that whoredome shoulde bee named as a villanous
thing, and that men should vnderstande that a whorehunter cutteth
himself of from the bodye of our Lord Iesus Christ, banisheth
himself from the kingdome of heauen, and is cursed before God and
his Angels. Those are things that must be knowen. And agein,
that a Couetous person is an Idolater and forsaketh God, that he is
as a damned soule and a confounder of all ryght and equitie, that he is
possessed of the diuell, and a tormentour too himself. Those are the
things which it standeth vs on hand too knowe, and wherof wee cannot
speake too much. But wee knowe what the manner of them is,
which are desyrous too take all libertie: for all their delyght is too
sharpen their wittes too tell merrie tales, (saying:) I remember mee
of such a thing and such a thing that was doone in my tyme. Yea and
they will not sticke to report what they haue heard of their graundfathers,
before they themselues were borne intoo the world. And if
there were any ribaudrie or vnthriftinesse in their dooings, that will
they lay open. And top what end? To the end that euery body should
bee desyrous too inquire of such filthinesse. Thus are snares layd too
chatch vs withall, whensoeuer the diuell shal haue wonne so much at
our handes. Yee see then that the things which Saint Paule ment,
are the pleasant tales that are told too make the men merry, too the
intent not only that euery man should delyght in whoredome, and bee
no more ashamed too giue themselues ouer too all leaudnesse: but also
take it as a lawfull thing, so as there may be common speeches of
it, and it may bee made a table talke at all feastes, and an ordinarie
communication in the streetes and euery where else. Yea and we see
that such as haue any iorney or trauell, I meane euen the poore people,
cannot solace themselues in their labour without offending God,
by intermingling alwayes of some fond tales. And too what end serue
they? Euen too harden mens hartes, that they may thinke with themselues,
Euery man is at the same poynt: no maruell though lecherye
bee made so heynous a matter: behold how such a man behaueth himself,
and such a one also. And when vyces can once bee made common,
then too their seeming the goale is wonne on their syde. Now



for that cause Saint Paule sayth, that they must not once bee named
among vs. And lykewyse dooth he say of Couetousnesse. For euery
man takes it for a vertewe, if he can pill aud poll all his lyfe long,
and neuer leaue raking of other mens goods too him by fraude and
extorsion. Yea and men haue a delyght too followe them, and too say,
O, such a man of myne acquayntance could well skyll too vse such a
practyze and such a tricke. Trew it is that couetous folkes will not
speake so of them whom they malice. For they will say, that villein?
he dooth nothing else but catch and scrape on all sydes, there is no
trust in him, he is cruel and churlish: and too bee short, euery of them
spyteth at his fellow. And so ye see how the couetous sort do rayle one
vppon another. But when a couetous person intendeth too confirme
himself in his naughtinesse, and too harden himself in it, and too couer
his faultes: he will say, It is meete that a man should bee forecasting:
I knewe such a one and such a one that came foreward by
that meane: he was a poore fellowe, and had nothing: but he hath
behaued himself in such wyse, that he hath hoorded vp well. And
how? Marrie he had good policie, and if any man fell intoo his hands,
he left his heare behind him, if he left not skin and all. Thus doo couetous
folkes shroud themselues in spoyling men, vnder pretence of
good thriftinesse, as they terme it, that is too say, vnder pilling and
polling, and such other lyke things. Therfore wee see how needfull
this exhortation of S. Paules is, where he sayth, that all vyces must
bee shet out of the doores, and that if any man speake of them we must
abhore him, & not make a iesting matter of them among vs, for feare
least wee bee atteynted with them.
               And wee must marke also that which he addeth of al vvantonnesse
and folish (or fond) talke. For (as I sayd afore) it is certein that
whoredome must needes growe lawfull among men, when they suffer
such prouocations and occasions of naughtinesse: for it is all one as
if a man would wilfully giue ouer himselfe too Satan. Therefore let
vs take heede too our selues, and driue the enemie farre from vs, and
let vs bee sure that where such lyghtnesse and leaudnesse haue full
scope, by and by there must needes bee a Brothelrie, or stewes set vp,
not in some one corner of a Citie or towne, but ouer all, so as no place
shall bee cleane, as experience sheweth too much. But yit would not
men bee willing too see it so. Euery man complaynes now adayes,
that there is no more chastitie in the world. And is it any wonder? For



the tyme hath bin that there was some honestie and sobernesse too bee
seene in maryed women: but now they count it a vertew too bee more
than mannish, and too be brazenfaste and vtterly shamelesse. And why?
will men say that a woman is chaste, if shee bee not well tryed? Ho,
no, no. Come who will (sayes shee:) if these roysters fall too dallying
with mee, tush, I can tell well ynough how too send them away, they
shall well fynd to whom they speake, for I wote how to answer them.
Thus will a harlot play the chaste wyfe, as though shee were a mirror
of all honestie: and yit in the meane whyle shee wyll stand at the barryers
lyke a man of armes, ageinst all commers that will holde talke
with hir of leaudnesse and ribauldrie. Now therfore let vs marke well
what S. Paule telleth vs heere. For women haue bin suffered a long
tyme too bee so vnmeasurable bold: and besydes wanton talke, there
are also very garish attyres, that it is very hard too discerne whether
they bee men or women: they must haue euery day new deckings and
trimmings, and euery day some new disguyzed fashyon or other. They
make thē great cart wheeles lyke Peacockes tayles, that a man cannot
passe within three foote of them, but hee shall feele as it were a
wynd myll sayle flasking by him. Agein, they haue their ribauldry
songes myngled with it. Now what chastitie can there bee where it
is so driuen away and banished by force, and on the contrary part, the
trumpets sound on all sydes, that euery body should giue ouer themselues
too superfluitie and garishnesse, and seeke nothing else but too
plundge themselues ouer head and eares in it? So then, let vs marke
well, that when there is such disorder both in iestures, and in countenances,
and in talke, and in dauncing, and in all lyke fondnesse, and in
all vanities and loocenesse: it is all one as if man should cut trenches
from a riuer too conuey the water too him. For wheras a riuer runneth
his ordinarie course, if a man cut the streame of, and drawe it on
the other syde, must it not needes haue his course that way? Then if
men fall too corrupting of the world after that fashyon, (as in deede it
is one of the cunning trickes that the diuell hath vsed a long tyme:)
must not all needes go too hauock, and bee vtterly past recouery? Yis:
and therfore let vs marke well what is sayd vntoo vs heere. For when
wee heare these iesters say, What a Gods name: men shall shortly
bee at the poynt that they may not laugh and bee-merrie: dauncyng
is forbydden: it shall not bee lawfull for folke too talke toogither: a
good fellowe may not bee so bold as to come in company with a mans



daughter, too talke vntoo hir of loue matters: if a man doo but speake
too a wyfe, though it bee but in sport, by and by it shall bee turned to a
cryme: and in the ende what will come of it, when there shall bee such
stowrenesse and sternnesse in the world? when men speake after that
maner, it is all one as if they proclaymed themselues too bee the Diuels
proctors and aduocates, too infect and poyson the whole worlde,
that there might be nothing but loocenesse, and that whoredome and ribaudrie
myght reigne in such libertie, as men myght no more thinke
it too be sin. That in effect is the thing that we haue to beare in mynd.
               Heerwithall Saint Paule sayeth, that it becommeth well the
Saincts: and that is too shewe, that there ought to be no disputing nor
replying: but that vyces should bee condemned sharply. For wheruntoo
dooth God call vs? Too that poynt must wee come. Truely if
any man say, men are frayle, and alas if they myght not bee so bold as
too cast their eye asyde too giue a pleasant looke, but they should bee
condemned for it: I say if mans frayltie myght bee construed so, truely
that vyce would eyther bee vtterly lessened, or else made half excuzable.
But let vs come to our owne state. God knoweth our infirmities:
but he wil not haue vs to welter in them: for he hath voutsafed to dedicate
vs too his seruis. Now let vs see if wee can make these looce behauyours
and all these folies, which are but Satans allurements (as
I sayd afore), too agree with the woord Holinesse. What is ment by
holinesse? It is as much too say, as wee must bee sholed out too offer
our selues vntoo God, that he may inioy vs and weeld vs, so as wee
may bee wholly his, and (too bee short) bee no more atteynted and sullyed
with the filthinesse of the worlde. If Holynesse import all this,
and that it must bee in vs or else wee shal not bee Gods children: it is
not for vs too pleade any more in defence of ribaudrie, that it myght
bee taken but for a lyght fault. Saint Paule therfore bringeth vs
backe too the honour that God dooeth vs: as if he should say, that if it
seeme ouer straunge and hard vntoo vs too refreyne from the vanities
wherin the worlde delyghteth so much, and wherin men think euen
their lyfe too consist, insomuch that the vnbeleeuers thinke not themselues
too bee alyue, vnlesse they may delyght themselues with foolish
and wanton dalliance, but that they doo but linger and pyne away:
when wee bee prouoked too the lyke things: wee must consider what
honour God hath done vs in voutsafing too dedicate vs too his obedience.
For what are wee by nature? what is there in vs? Euen from



our moothers womb wee bring nothing but disorder, wee bee cursed,
we bee saped in sin, and too bee short, from top too toe there is not any
peece in vs which is not giuen too euill: all our members are instruments
of sin: nother eyes nor eares, nother mouth, feete, nor hands
are exempted. Forasmuch then as wee bee full of all vncleannesse
through sin, and yit for all that, God hath now plucked vs backe from
it: is it not reason that wee should be dedicated vnto him, seing he calleth
vs too holinesse? And ought not this honorable tytle too restreyne
vs, from taking such vnbrydled libertie as euery of vs could fynd in
his hart too take in folowing his owne lusts? Too bee short, Saint
Paule ment too shewe vs heere, how wee may fyght ageinst our wicked
lusts. For if we follow our own nature, surely though some man be
not inclyned too lecherie, yit shall he haue other vyces: yea & we haue
all vyces in vs, but that we be restreyned by Gods brydle: and yit doth
euery man beguyle him self on his owne behalf. Now what is too bee
doone? Wee must not spare our selues, but rather fight ageinst our
selues. Let vs not bee dismayd though the Diuell bee so suttle, and
wee so tender and so easie too bee soone shaken downe: but let vs consider
how God calleth vs too the contrarie. And what is that? Too
be holy in him. The thing therfore that Saint Paule ment too say in
the first place, is that he armeth vs by setting before vs the state wheruntoo
God hath voutsafed too call vs through his goodnesse, too the intent
that euery man should gather strength, and not giue any way too
Satan: but that although wee bee sore layd at, yit wee should not yeeld
him the victorie, bycause God hath chozen vs vntoo all clennesse. And
after he hath drawen vs so by gentlenesse, he dooth also set downe an
horrible manace, and which ought too make the heares too stand vp
vppon our heads: and therby wee see how God indeuereth too win vs
too him by all meanes. When he sayeth, You bee Saynts or Holy
ones: therin God vseth sweetnes and gentlenesse, as if he should say,
my children, bethink your selues, for I haue not created you too liue
at alauenture in this worlde, but I haue therwithall adopted you, too
the intent too call you too the heauenly heritage. Now then, seeing
I haue redeemed you with the blud of my sonne, and giuen you my spirit
too dwell in you, too the end you should bee my temples, and I bee
woorshipped there: will you now go and giue your selues too all leaudnesse
agein▪ and in sted of being my temples, become styes for swyne,
and suffer your affections too bee as dirt and dung too defyle you withall,



and fall too wallowing agein in the myre, after yee haue bin wasshed
and made cleane? If yee will be my children, hold yee in the
plyght that I haue set you. After this maner dooth God proceede
with vs, too drawe vs too him, as though he did (as yee would say)
half flatter vs. And on the other syde, bycause he sees vs cold, and
that wee abuze his pacience, and are not touched too the quicke with
his grace when he vttereth it, but followe still our owne lusts: he threateneth
vs lyke a father who perceyuing his chyld too bee vnruly, and
not of so free disposition as too bee wonne at the first: (sayeth thus vntoo
him:) Wotest thou what? Though I haue cockered thee and suffered
much at thy hand, yit must thou behaue thy self otherwyse, and
play the good chyld towards mee, or else go too the diuell. If thou wilt
needs continew still in thy naughtinesse, get thee too the gallows: for
I am not a father that will suffer my self too bee so mocked without redressing
of it. After this maner will a father indeuer too keepe his
chyld in his good fauour if it bee possible: but if he see that it boote not,
he falleth too threatening and chyding of him, and all too breake that
stubborne hart of his, if he can. Euen so dealeth God with vs: and
therin wee see what care he hath of our welfare, as I sayd afore.
               Saint Paule therefore, after he hath told vs that wee bee Saintes:
addeth, that no couetous person, no lechour, nor no vncleane man
shall enter into the kingdome of God, nor haue any part of the heritage
that is purchaced for vs. This threatning (as I sayd) ought
too scare vs all, or else wee bee too blockishe. What a thing is it
that wee should bee berefte of Gods kingdome? And by the way wee
must marke well the woordes that he vseth: for he sayth, that vvee
shal not possesse the kingdome of God and of Christ. Not that
they be twoo dyuers kingdomes: but too expresse the better how that
inheritance belongeth vntoo vs, namely not by birthryght, nor yit
by our owne purchace, but by free gift. The kingdome of God then is
the heauenly lyfe, and al our whole happinesse. For out of God what
can wee haue but all vnhappynesse? Therefore if wee bee banished
out of Gods kingdome, we must needs be plundged in all miserie. But
it is expresly sayd, too bee the kingdome of Christ: and why? Bycause
it was purchaced vs by his blud, and also bycause wee bee now restored
agein too the state from whence wee were falne in our father Adam.
Agein, wee knowe that the inheritance is giuen vs in our
Lord Iesus Christ, to the intent that we being his members, and



adopted of God by his meanes, should also bee parttakers of that
which is peculiar too him. In the first too the Hebrewes he is called
the heire of all things: and is that too shell vs vtterly out? No: but
bycause wee cannot otherwyse bee taken for Gods children, but by
being incorporated intoo the bodie of our Lord Iesus Christ, to whom
all belongeth. Now then, if wee should bee reiected of God, if wee
should bee cut of from all the benefytes which haue bin purchaced for
vs by our Lord Iesus Christ, & that this should come to passe through
our owne vnthankfulnesse. Alas, should wee not bee too too blockish?
Yea, and for the better expressing thereof Saint Paule vseth the
woord Heritage or Inheritance. As if he should say, if yee were
heires of Gods kingdome from your moothers wombe, consider how
great a greef it ought too be vntoo you too bee set besyde it. But now
vnderstand you, that the kingdome of God is communicated vntoo
you by our Lord Iesus Christ, bycause he hath purchaced it for you,
and made you his brethren and fellowes. And vnderstand yee besides,
that it is bycause God hath adopted you freely: and yit you haue it not
by birthryght, nother can yee say that it is your owne, otherwyze than
by free gift. Now then, seeing it is a state of inheritance: will yee
bee so leaud as to looze such a benefite when it is offered you? Shall
God inuyte you so graciously too his glory, shall he offer you all the
ioy and happynes of the kingdome of heauen, shall he match you with
his owne sonne, and by that meane make you too possesse all the good
things that you can wishe: and shall all this be nothing woorth to you,
but that you will needes hold scorne of it and refuze it? How can Satan
so farre ouermayster you? Wee see then how Saint Paule ment
too waken vs heere earnestly by all meanes, too the intent that if wee
cannot bee drawen wholly vntoo God by loue, at leastwyze yit threatening
may doo vs some good, and moue vs too yeeld, that our desyres
may by that meane be brydled, and our lusts not ouerflow so outrageously,
but that sith God sheweth himself our Iudge, wee may at
leastwyze refrayne too resist him: for that is all one as if wee would
openly runne rushing ageinst him. Seeing that he with his owne holy
mouth hath auowed vs too bee banished from the kingdome of heauen:
if wee notwithstanding doo make none account of the thinges
that he telleth vs: what a dealing is that?
               Furthermore whereas Saint Paule sayeth, that nother whoremoongers,
nor cuetous men, nor vncleane persons shall enter intoo the



kingdome of God: he meaneth not that all such as haue offended and
doone amisse, are reiected of God. For who is he that can say, he is
cleere of all the vyces that are reherced heere? But he meaneth the
whoremoongers, couetous persons, and looce liuers that take pleasure
in their lustes, and are hardened in them, and are so settled in the
filthinesse of them, as there is not any more feare of God in them too
hold them backe. Wee heare what he sayeth too the Corinthians,1. Cor. 6. b. 8. 9. 10. 11.
where hauing made a greater beadroll of the same and other vyces,
and hauing first vttered the lyke sentence, telling them that all such as
are giuen too those vyces shall neuer come in the kingdome of God:
he sayeth, and such haue you bin. He sheweth that the faythfull also
had bin steyned with the lyke corruptions. But yee bee washed and
made cleane, (sayeth he) yee bee sanctifyed by Gods holy spirit, and
through the blud of our Lord Iesus Christ. As if he should say, by nature
yee were miserable, and folke giuen too all leaudnesse. The willingnesse
and desyre that you haue now too serue God, came not of
your selues, but of Gods drawing of you vntoo him, that wheras you
were erst as wyld beastes, he hath brought you vntoo his obedience:
wheras yee were foule and vncleane, he hath washed you with the blud
of our Lord Iesus Christ: and wheras you were vnholy, he hath made
you holy by his holy Ghost. And therfore fall not too wallowing and
plundging of your selues agein intoo vncleannesse. Thus the trew
meaning of those woordes is in effect, that the wicked and such as lead
an awlesse and lawlesse lyfe, that is too say, such as fyght not ageinst
their lustes, but delyght in naughtinesse, shall neuer come in the kingdome
of God. For first of all, if the faythfull bee not renewed at their
birth by the spirit of God: they bee steyned with the sinnes wheruntoo
mankynd is subiect, yea and wee see some that are wholy giuen vntoo
them. And albeit that our Lord haue wrought in vs by his holy
spirit: it dooth not therfore followe that wee bee so well reformed at
the first day, as there is no more euill in vs. For wee must bee fayne
too keepe continuall battell through repentance, all our lyfe long. And
repentance should take no place, if wee felt not sinne dwelling styll
within vs. Therfore it suffyzeth that it reigne not in vs, as S. Paule
exhorteth vs in the sixth too the Romanes. There S. Paule telleth
them too whom he speaketh, that if they looke vppon their former life,
they must needes be ashamed, bycause they were so strayed away, that
they had forgotten God and all vertew and honestie. Yee cannot (sayth



he) remember what yee were before yee were conuerted too the beleefe
of the Gospell, but yee must needes cast downe your eyes with
great shame. And yit notwithstanding he telleth them, that sinne must
not now reigne in our mortall bodyes, although it dwell there still. In
deede it were too bee wished that there were no sinne dwelling in vs,
and that wee were all lyke the Angels of heauen. But Saint Paule
knowing well that wee cannot atteyne too that so long as wee dwell
in this world, and vntyll wee haue put off our corruption, and bee dispatched
of this transitorie lyfe: wylleth vs yit at leastwize, that sinne
should not reigne in vs. So then, although wee bee steyned with many
vyces, yit let vs so fyght ageinst them, that they may not become
heynous crymes, as though wee rebelled ageinst God, but continew
onely as infirmities, so as wee beseeche God too forgiue vs them quite
and cleane, acknowledging that wee haue neede too obteyne mercy
dayly, accordingly as it is not without cause that he teacheth vs too
aske forgiuenesse of our sinnes. And so yee see how that saying is too
bee vnderstoode.
               Now furthermore S. Paul addeth (as wee haue seen alredy to the
Galathians) that couetous folkes are Idolaters.
                  Gala. 5. d. 20. Truely this matter
were well woorthy too bee discoursed more at length,Colos. 3 
                        •
                     . 5. and there is nothing
spoken of it which may not bee spoken agein. Howbeeit forasmuch
as in handling the Epistle too the Galathians, I declared there
why S. Paule calleth Couetous folkes Idolaters: it shall suffyze too
touche the pith of the matter in fewe woordes. For as touching other
vyces, they doo in deede make vs too forget God. What are the inordinate
lustes of our fleshe euerychone of them, but Idols? for euery
man is haryed away after the things that he desyreth, so as he setteth
all his hart and mynd vppon them, and forgetteth God. Therefore it
may well bee sayd, that all wicked lustes are Idols that impeache the
maiestie of God, and prouoke vs too stryue ageinst him, yea and too
shake of his yoke, and too betake our selues vntoo Satan. Neuerthelesse,
Couetousnesse is iustly called Idolatry, bycause it is certeyne
that when a man dooth once giue himselfe theruntoo, he 
                     •
                  etteth his
whole felicitie therin. He is not lyke a Glu
                     •
                  ton, who hath some remorse
and shame of his naughtinesse: nor lyke a drunkard, a whoremoonger,
or a blasphemer. For there is yit some shamefastenesse in
them. And why? Bycause they cannot so blynd men, but that they
wyll speake shame of them for it. And although the whole world clapped



their handes at them, and knew no whit of their leaudnesse: yit
shall they themselues bee inforced too haue some hartbyting. Yee see
then that all such as offend God any other way whatsoeuer it bee, shall
yit bee hild in awe by some feare, and haue some remnant of discretion
left in them too say, I doo amisse, and how much so euer they soothe
themselues, and fall a sleepe, yea and euen vtterly harden themselues:
yit shall they bee compelled too feele some pricking within. But the
couetous man dooth so reioyce in his doyngs, that he thinkes not himself
faultie, nother before God, nor before man: but (which more is)
gloryeth in his wickednesse. For when he hath fleeced one, and robbed
another of his goods, and deceyued one, and snared or intrapped
another: theruppon when he casteth vp his account, he will say, Blissed
bee God that hath prospered mee so well. Insomuch that yee shal
heare the greatest Cousiners in the world, say, thanked be God, I haue
made a good hand too day, I haue sped well this moneth, I haue gone
well foreward this yeere. And yit for all that, if they enter intoo their
owne hartes and sift them throughly: they shall fynd there that al was
but theeuerie, extortion, craft, and deceyt. Howbeeit the diuell hath
so stopped their eyes, that they haue no more discretion nor conscience
to say, this is euill done. Forsomuch then as couetous folke are at that
poynt, that they haue no more feare of God too stay them and holde
them backe: therefore are they termed Idolaters. But this is not all
the mischiefe, there is yit a woorse poynt: which is, that they set all
their felicitie in their riches, and doo so forget themselues, as they
thinke there can no harme happen too them, wherthrough they bee
puffed vp with such pryde, that they thrust God a hundred leagues of
from them, as the prouerb sayeth.
               And therfore it is not for nought that Saint Paule exhorteth the
riche men of this world,1. Tim. 6. d. 17. not too trust too their goods, nor too exalt
themselues for them. He sayeth that purposely, bycause they haue so
greate opinion of their riches, that they feare not God, but rather vtterly
forget him. Yee see then that the Couetous folk abuze their riches,
by setting their whole hart vppon them, (which notwithstanding
is forbidden them,Psal. 61. c. 11. by the prophet in the Psalme) and by weltring in
such wyse in them, that too their owne seeming they haue their Paradyse
heere alreadye. And therefore this cursed disposition and insaciable
luste of Couetousnesse,1. Tim. 6. b. 10. which maketh all men both drunken
and blynd, is iustly named Idalatrie, and lykewyse all the roote of



all euill, bycause the couetous man seekes alwayes his owne auayles,
and whether it bee by hooke or by crooke, by murther or by treason, by
periurie or by poysoning, or by whatsoeuer meane else, all is one too
him, so he may compasse his desyre. Thence spring so many trubbles
and contentions, and so much bludshed through the world: that some
are poysoned, and othersome haue their throts cut, there is none other
cause but this insatiable gripplenesse of couetousnesse. Trew it is that
Ambition, and whoredome, and such other lyke vyces drawe a sort of
foule inconueniences after them: but yit dooth not that discharge the
couetous sort from being atteynted with the same. So then let vs
mark well, that. S Paule speaking of Couetousnesse, doth iustly say,
that it doth so subdew vs too Satan, as it maketh vs too forget God,
and make vs so brutish, as wee stand no more in feare of God, ne haue
any remorse of conscience, and so puffe vs vp with pryde, as God seemeth
to be nothing with vs, but wee yeeld the honor of the liuing God
vnto our gold, siluer, & riches. And that is so rank treason, that there
is good cause why we bee made too abhorre it here, as wee see by that
which the holy Ghost speaketh of it by the mouth of the Apostle.
               Now let vs fall downe before the maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faults, praying him too make vs feele them
with trew repentance, that being greeued and hartily sorie for them,
wee may so sorrow for our offending of him, and for our straying from
the way of saluation, as wee may seeke nothing but too dedicate
our selues wholly vntoo him, that he may dayly cut of whatsoeuer corruption
is in vs, and make vs forsake the world, as the end whertoo
wee were redeemed and clenzed by the blud of our Lord Iesus Christ,
and in the meane whyle voutsafe too beare with our infirmities, and
too rid vs of them continually more and more, vntill hee haue taken vs
out of this world, to ioyne vs to himself in all ryghtuousnesse and holinesse.
That it may please him too graunt this grace, not only too vs,
but also too all people and nations of the earth. &c.
            
            
               The .xxxv. Sermon, which is the third
vppon the fifth Chapter.
               
                  
                     8. For yee vvere sometyme darknesse: but novv are yee lyght in
the Lord: walke yee as children of the lyght:
                     
                        9. (For the fruite of the spirit consisteth in all goodnesse, and
rightuousnesse, and truth.)
                     10. Trying what is acceptable too the Lord.
                     11. And haue not too doo with the fruitlesse woorks of darknesse,
but rather euen rebuke them.
                  
               
               
                  WEe knowe how hard a matter it is too reclayme
men from euill custome, when they
bee once inhardened vntoo it. For the mischeefe
dooth easly take roote in vs, bycause
wee bee inclyned and almost wholly
giuen too it of nature. But yit wee bee
not so soone chaunged, when wee haue
continewed along tyme in dooing euill.
For it happeneth vntoo vs as vnto sicke
folkes, whose diseases hauing once gathered
strength, doo so sticke too their bones, as they can by no meanes
bee purged away. Now a great number of folke 
                     〈◊〉
                   giuen to naughtinesse,
and beare with themselues in many vyces, before they bee called
of God, and touched too the quicke with repentance. Therefore
wee haue neede too practyze the doctrine that Saint Paule teacheth
vs heere: that is too wit, too knowe that when wee haue hild aloofe
from God, and strayed from the way of saluation, wee must not flatter
our selues in it, nor make a buckler and excuce of it, bycause it is
become an ordinarie thing with vs. For wee must not pardon our
selues a whit the more for all that, but rather consider that God hath
pityed vs, and that his drawing of vs from the euill wherein we were,
was too the end too chaunge vs, and too make his power and grace
the better knowen by our lyfe, in that it beareth witnesse that wee bee
no more the men that wee were before. That is the cause why Saint
Paul sayth in this text, Yee vvere once darkenesse, but novv hath
God inlyghtened you. As if he should say, that wee must not respect
eyther what others doo, or what hath befalne in our selues, too hope
too bee iustifyed, and acquit of our faultes by that meanes. For when
it hath once pleazed God too reache vs his hand, and too shewe vs
such mercie as too adopt vs for his children, and to make vs heires of
the heauenly lyfe, in sted that wee were forlorne, cursed, and damned
afore: that grace ought too preuayle greatly in vs, too make vs become



new creatures. And as for them among whom wee liue, if
God giue them the brydle and let them alone as men forsaken: let vs
vnderstand, that it was his will too shole vs out from so miserable taking.
And therefore let them bee as looking glasses vntoo vs, too
behold what a wretchednesse it is for men to followe their owne lustes.
So little then ought the offending and sinning of a multitude, too
couer our faultes: that wee ought rather too take warning by them to
withdrawe our selues, and too hold our selues as it were fettered vp vnder
the feare and obedience of our God, seeing he sheweth so speciall
fauour vntoo vs, wherof the residew which abyde still ignorant and vnbeleeuing,
are depryued.
               Howbeeit for the better vnderstanding of the whole, let vs marke
first, that Saint Paule hath shewed vs heere what the state of all
men in generall is, vntill God haue drawen them too him. And he
telleth vs there is not any cause at all why wee should 
                     •
                  ooth our selues
in our vertewes, insomuch that this only speeche of his, where he
sayeth, that wee be darknesse, (that is too say, that there is nother
lyght, reason, nor any gouernement in vs, but rather that wee bee become
stark beasts) 
                     •
                  ught well too make vs all too cast downe our eyes
and too submit our selues with humilitie. In deede many shall haue
some showe of wisdome, and bee commended of the world as well aduyzed
men, and as able not only too guyde themselues in their whole
lyfe, but also too counsell (and direct) others. Yit notwithstanding,
God auoweth that in stead of hauing ryght wisdome and reason, wee
bee but brute beastes as in respect of him. Now lyke as this saying
warneth vs to sygh and grone before God: so also doth it prouoke vs
too seeke the remedie that is necessarie for the well ruling of our lyfe,
that is, too suffer God too bee our maister and teacher by his woord,
(as shalbee declared more at length anon) and also too pray him that
his holy spirit may so woork in vs, and that wee may not bee led with
such ouerweening, as too count our selues wyse in our owne conceyt
and fancie. And so yee see in effect what wee haue too remember vppon
this streyne, where Saint Paul intytuleth men by a reprochefull
name, saying that they bee darknesse, and that there is nothing but vtter
brutishnesse in them. And hereof I haue treated alredy in the last
chapter, where Saint Paule shewed, that men discerne nothing, ne go
but too their destructions, vntill such tyme as they bee reformed.
               Now on the contrarie part he sayeth, Lyght in the Lord, too shewe



that all the wisedome which wee haue, commeth of a supernaturall
grace, as they terme it, that is too say, wee haue it not by inheritance,
nother can wee father it vppon our selues, but it is altogither of Gods
woorking, and wee must bee linked too our Lord Iesus Christ too bee
parttakers of such a benefyte. For it is not for naught that the scripture
sayth,Esay. 11. a. 2. that Gods spirit was giuen vntoo him too rest vppon him
with full perfection. Therefore let vs learne too distrust our selues,
& to know that all that euer wee can bring of our owne, will stand vs
in no stead, but to turne vs from the way of saluation, and that we haue
no wisedome, except it bee giuen vs of Gods free goodnesse, too the
intent too gather vs vntoo him, and too make vs members of our
Lord Iesus Christ his sonne, who is our trew lyght, as wee shall see
anone.
               Too bee short, it is all one as if S. Paule should saye, that by nature
wee bee but onely darknesse in Adam, and that wee bee inlyghtened
agein in our Lord Iesus Christ. Now (as I sayd afore) it is too the
intent wee should seeke none excuce, by alledging that wee cannot put
off our olde skin, nor vtterly forsake the thinges that are so printed in
vs: (for those shiftes are but tryfling, and they 
                     〈◊〉
                   passe in account
before God:) but contrariwyse too the intent wee should learne, too
examine well what wee bee, and what our state is, tyll God haue redressed
it, and too consider what wee haue of our owne, namely that
wee bring nothing but cursednesse with vs from our moothers womb:
and therwithall make the grace effectuall which God hath giuen vs,
that it bee not (as yee would say) choked through our vnthankfulnesse
and malice, but that wee consider well to what end our Lord▪ hath reached
vs his hand, and shewed himselfe so pitifull towardes vs: namely
that wheras wee were plundged in darknesse, it was his will to bring
vs agein too lyght.
               And wee bee called lyght in the Lord, not onely bycause wee haue
the woord of his Gospell, which is as a burning Cresset too guyde vs
by: but also bycause that he himselfe is as the spirituall Daysonne,
and dooth therewithall inlyghten vs inwardly by Gods spirit. For
wee see by experience, that men fare neuer a whit the better by hauing
their eares beaten with the doctrine of truth: for one may take payne
too teache them, and yit it shalbee but labour lost. Therfore our Lord
must bee fayne too make his sonne shyne, that is too saye, lyke as he
hath commaunded and ordeyned his woord too bee preached vntoo vs:



so also must he giue vs eyes too inioy the same lyght. For though the
sunne shyne neuer so bright in the skye, yit should wee fynd nother frute
nor profit by it, vnlesse wee haue eyes which are as instruments to receyue
the lyght that commes from aboue. So must God bee fayne
too giue vs spirituall eyesyght, to conceyue the things that are taught
vs by his woord. Yee see then that the meane how wee become lyght
in the Lord, is, that on the one syde God sheweth vs the way of saluation
by the preaching of his woord vntoo vs: and therwithall giueth
vs a new spirit, or mind, too the intent wee should not abyde in the ignorance
wherin all of vs are by nature.
               And Saint Paule vttereth his meaning yit better, when he addeth
that vvee should vvalke as children of lyght. Nowe wee see that
heere he not onely prayzeth and commendeth Gods grace, too stirre
vs vp too gloryfye him for it, as wee bee bound too doo: but also
therewithall sheweth the vse of it. As if he should say, beware in any
wyse that yee thrust not Gods grace vnder foote, ne make it vnauaylable
vntoo you. For his calling of you too the knowledge of our
Lord Iesus Christ, was too the intent yee should bee wholly chaunged,
tod bee brought vntoo this lyght. For if wee would haue the
sunne but onely too stande ydly gazing vppon it lyke folke out of
their wittes, what a thing were that? Wee were better too haue
continuall nyght. But the Sunne must serue vs to apply our selues
too the buzinesse which we haue too doo, and too labour in getting
of our liuing, euery man according too his charge, office, and calling.
Yee see then that wee should abuze the sunne, which bringeth
vs so great benefyte, if we should not euery of vs occupie our selues in
the things that wee knowe too bee our dewtie. Now Saint Paule
applyeth this similitude too the spirituall daysonne: that is too wit, too
the doctrine of the Gospell, saying that it shyneth, howbeeit not for vs
too giue our selues too ydle speculations, but too the end wee should
set our hand too the plough, and euery of vs looke wherwith he can
and ought too doo seruice, and theruppon make the lyght auaylable
that is offered him.
               Furthermore Saint Paule in one place calleth vs Lyght, and
by and by he addeth, Chyldren of light. Both of them come too one
end. But yit is it not for nought that he termeth vs Lyght. For
it serueth too expresse the better, that Gods grace is not only offered
vs, but also imprinted in vs, so as wee bee after a sort new shaped by it.



And it is not only heere that he dooth it,Phil. 2. b. 15. but also in the Epistle too the
Philippians. Now wee haue too marke first of all, that that tytle
belongeth properly too none but too our Lord Iesus Christ, according
as he himself sayeth, I am the lyght of the world, he that walketh
in mee,
                     
                        •
                     ohn. 
                        •
                     . b. 12. shall neuer stray. Yee see then that our Lorde Iesus
Christ is sufficient of himself alone too giue vs lyght, and that if wee
keepe our selues aloofe from him, we shall fynd nothing but darknesse
nother in heauen, nor in earth, nor in any creature else. For if wee
speake of Gods maiestie, it is aboue all the heauens: yea and the very
Angels haue no lyght but that which they borrowe of our Lord Iesus
Christ. And that is the cause why Saint Iohn Baptist is excluded
from that honour,Iohn. 1. a. 8. when he sayth, that he was not the lyght, but
that that dignitie belongeth peculiarly to the sonne of God, who inlyghteneth
all men that come intoo the world. Agein, the Apostles,
and all such as preache Gods truthe are also termed lyght in their
degree,Math. 5. b. 14. when as it is sayd, yee bee the lyght of the world. Not that
that belongeth properly vntoo them: but bycause God serueth his
own turne by them, when he deliuereth them his word to guyde others
by, and to shew them the way of saluation. Now if he that beareth the
Candle too lyght other men, doo reele and stumble, and stray heere
and there, what a thing is it? Therefore in asmuch as God hath giuen
vs the charge too preache his woord, wee bee warned too walke
in such wyse as euery man may bee edifyed by our lyfe. And yit in the
meane whyle, this is no derogation at all too the honour of our
Lord Iesus Christ: for they that are inlyghtened by him, must not
thrust forth themselues to be fellow and fellow lyke with him: but he
alone must continewe the ly
                     •
                  ht still, and wee inlyghten one another,
according too Saint Paules saying in the text that I alledged afore,Phil. 2. b. 15.
where he sayeth thus too all the faythfull: You bee as Lampes burning
in this world, euen by hauing the woord of God. The lyght
then which the Scripture allotteth, as well too the teachers, as too
them that are taught, is, that all of vs must haue Gods woord, which
must bee as a candle set vp aloft, and our lyues must so ruled thereby,
as the vnbeeleeuers may bee drawen too the fayth and reformed, or
else confounded and put too shame, when they see that our Lordes calling
of vs too profit in his scoole is not in vayne. And so yee see in
what sense S. Paule sayeth, that wee bee lyght in the Lord, namely
bycause Gods woord ought too bee as a burning Lampe vntoo vs, not



only too guyde our selues by, but also too shewe the way too all such as
otherwyse should go astray.
               Hereunto he addeth, that vvee bee children of lyght, to doo vs to
vnderstand, that our lyght commeth from elsewhere than of our selues,
and that wee borrowe it of him that is the lyght of the world,Iohn. 8. b. 12. as I
haue alledged before. According whereuntoo it is sayd, that God
is the father of lyght, and so also dooth the Scripture name him. Agein,
our Lord Iesus Christ is the trew lyght,Iames. 1 
                        •
                     . 17. wherby God appeered
vntoo vs, and whereby it is his wyll too inlyghten vs. Therefore are
wee the children of lyght: that is too say, wee bee so i
                     ••
                  yghtened, that
Gods lyght is in vs: namely bycause wee bee members of our Lord
Iesus Christ (as I sayde afore) and communicate with him, and he
guydeth vs by the lyght of his Gospell, and inlyghteneth vs also by
his holy spirit. And forasmuch as our Lord woorketh in vs by fayth,
he dreepeth it intoo vs by measure, as he himselfe thinketh good, as we
haue seene in the fourth Chapter. Howsoeuer the cace stand, let vs
esteeme Gods grace as it is woorthy, and as it deserueth, and theruppon
turne it too our owne benefyte, that it be not disappoynted through
our rechlesnesse, but that wee may walke, that is too saye, consider
whertoo God hath called vs, and euery of vs imploy and inforce himselfe
theruntoo.
               Now hereuppon Saint Paule giues a warning, that the frute of
this lyght is, Goodnesse, Ryghtuousnessr, and Truthe. As if he
should say, that he speakes not here after the common fashyon of men▪
but intendeth too bring vs vntoo God, and too shewe vs too what purpose
it serueth vs to be Christians, & which is the trew vse of the learning
that wee haue by the Gospell, and also how the power of the holy
Ghoste ought too shewe it self in vs, that is too wit, in the well ordering
of our lyfe. For by these three woords, Goodnesse, Ryghtuousnesse,
and Holinesse, he meaneth that wee should not doo any body
wrong, but indeuer too liue vpryghtly and faythfully with our
neyghbours, and also bee kynd harted in hauing compassion one of another,
too beare paciently one with another, and too succour one another
as neede shall requyre. Trew it is that there are other things requisyte
in a Christen mans lyfe: but heere Saint Paule comprehendeth
all vnder one kynd. As if he should say, my freends, God is singularly
gracious vntoo vs, in gathering vs vntoo him, wheras wee
were strayed away intoo destruction: and that wheras wee were hild



in thraldome vnder the tyrannie of the prince of the world,Iohn. 12. e. 31. & 14. d. 30. &▪ 16. b. 11. which is
the diuell: he hath set vs free, and made vs members of his only sonne
our Lord Iesus Christ. Lo heere an inestimable benefyte. And now
must wee shewe too what end our Lord hath vsed so greate mercie towards
vs. That (sayeth he) must bee knowen by our lyfe, euen by
walking one with another in all goodnesse: that is too say, that wee
be not cruell as dogges and Cattes, nor giuen too guyle, craft, and
malice, too deceyue and wynd one about another, but go on soundly
and roundly in all things, & deale so vpryghtly as euery of vs indeuer
to yeeld his neyghbour that which is his dew, so as no man be wedded
to his owne profit to greeue others. Whē our life is once ordered after
this maner, then shall men percey
                     •
                  e that we beare frute in the lyght, &
that the light also beareth fruit in vs, that is to say, that the light which
God hath giuen vs is not ydle, but that lyke as God hath inlyghtened
vs, so wee apply our selues too doo the things that he commaundeth
and appoynteth. That is the cause why Saint Paule speaketh of the
frute of Ryghtuousnesse, according too my former saying, where I
told you that the sunne giueth not lyght to the world, too the intent that
euery man should sit still with his armes folded one within another, or
too the intent wee should bee as the foules that flye in the ayre: but too
serue our turne, by guyding vs in all our dooings. That is the frute
and vse of the Sunne. Therfore the Gospell is not a frutelesse thing,
the woorking of it must shewe it self in our lyfe, that is too wit, by being
ryghtuous, kynd harted, and faythfull. Now vnder those woords
Saint Paule hath compryzed all things belonging too the twoo tables
of the Law. For (as I told you afore) Charitie serues not too
make vs forget what belongs too Gods seruis, as though that were a
thing of small weyght: but it is the maner of the scripture too send vs
backe too our neyghbours when it speaketh of the seruing of God. For
it is certein that if wee loue our neyghbours as wee ought too doo, and
liue with them according too Gods law, God shall alwayes haue his
cheef ryght. For vntill wee bee ruled vnder his awe, euery of vs will
loue himselfe too much, and desire too drawe too himselfe, and too glorie
in himselfe: and too bee short, there will bee nothing in vs but
Pryde, Uaynglory, Couetousnesse, Crueltie, and al maner of Deceyt,
vntyll our Lord hath brought vs vnder his yoke, and wee bowed our
selues vntoo his obeysance, too honour him and serue him, and to blisse
his holy name. And this shal bee doone when we yeeld men their dewtie:



for that is a trew tryall and record that wee feare God.
               And now too shewe vs how wee should liue in the world, S. Paule
setteth downe these three things: namely Goodnesse, that is too say,
kynd hartednesse in hauing pitie and compassion vppon such as are
in distresse, too releeue their neede, and too beare paciently with their
infirmities. Thus much concerning the woord Goodnesse: Next
that, is Ryghtuousnesse, which signifyeth vpright dealing, so as wee
take away no mans goods, nor go about too aduauntage our selues by
the hinderance of our neyghbours, nor bee giuen too pilling and polling,
but (too bee short) be contented with whatsoeuer God giueth vs,
without raking of other mens goods or possessions vntoo vs. Last of
all is added Truth, which is contrary too all craftie packing, and too
all leaud practyzes, whereby wee labour too draw other mens goods
too vs. Then haue wee once these three things, it is certein that Charitie
reigneth fully and perfectly in vs. These are the things that we
haue too remember vppon this streyne. Wyll wee then shewe that
our trayning vp in the Gospell hath not bin in vayne, and that wee
haue not forsaken the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ? Let vs liue vprightly
and euenly among men: and agein, let vs be kynd harted both
in bearing one with anothers infirmities, and also in succoring them
at their neede: and (finally) let vs bee faythfull, that is too say, let vs
vse no craft nor suttletie, but let vs bee soothfast, and wherin so euer we
haue too deale with others, let them not fynd vs dubble.
               The thing therfore in effect which wee haue too beare in mynd, is
that Gods inlightening of vs, is to the end we should no more plundge
our selues in darknesse, but that when wee haue once taken lyght of
him, wee also should indeuer too giue light too wretched vnbeleeuers;
which wander and reele, and stumble, and are lyke too breake their
neckes, bycause they bee as silly beasts: and no maruell at all, for they
haue no lyght too guyde themselues by. Trew it is that that shall not
excuze them, but that they shall alwayes bee giltie before God: for
their ignorance is matched with malice. But what shall wee on our
syde haue too lay for our selues when wee stray so away, seeyng that
God hath inlyghtened vs by his woord and holy spirit, and knit vs too
our Lord Iesus Christ, who is the daysunne of ryghtuousnesse, as I
haue declared alredie?
               Now hereupon S. Paule telleth vs, that we must trye and examin
what things please God. And this reacheth further than that which he



hath sayd: for it sheweth vs which is the trew rule, which if wee followe,
wee cannot doo amisse: namely too frame our selues according
too Gods will.Psal. 11
                        •
                     . b. 10. And truely we know that the feare of him is not without
cause called the trew wisedome. For wherof commeth it that men
ouershoote themselues intoo all euill,Prou. 1. a. 7. & 9. c. 10. but bycause they forget God, and
bury the rememberance of his name and maiestie? For they that haue
God in their myndes, shall euer bee restreyned as it were with a brydle.
Although their fleshe tempt them too euill: yit will they resist,
and consider that as long as they lyue in this worlde, they must spend
their lyfe in his seruice that gaue it them. Then if our myndes bee
vppon God, surely it will arme vs and giue vs strength ageinst all
temptations. And S. Paule sayeth heere, that we must examin well
what things please him: wherin he wakeneth vp our rechlesnesse. For
in the foresayde despyzing of God which I spake of, there are twoo
things. The one is that men fall as
                     •
                  eepe in soothing themselues, and
thinke not that euer they shall come too account, and theruppon doo
rest so soundly, as if it were in vs to make good or euill. And afterward
they fall outrageously too flinging themselues at aladuenture ageinst
God. Therefore it is not ynough for vs not too fyght wilfully ageinst
God, nor too play the wyld beastes, or the (mad) Bulles, which push
euery way with their hornes: that is not ynough: but wee must bee
watchfull in inquyring throughly what is lawfull for vs, that wee may
discerne betweene the things that God permitteth, and the thinges
that he disalloweth. Too bee short, the first thing that Saint Paule
sheweth vs heere, is, hat our lyfe shall neuer be well ordered, vntill it
bee wholly conformable too Gods will. Marke that for one poynt.
               Secondly (as I haue told you) wee must not thinke that God forgiueth
our carelesnesse, when wee doo (as it were) wilfully shet our
eyes, and are contented too go astray without taking any great heede:
but that it behoueth vs too stand vppon our gard, and too seeke diligently
what God alloweth. Those are the twoo poyntes which wee
haue too marke. As touching the first poynt, wee see how men haue
alwayes taken leaue in all ages too followe their owne inuentions,
as they terme them. And soothly it hath euer bin a common prouerb,
that the intent iudgeth men: and it is very trew in part, but men
haue misexpounded it and misconstrewed it. For vnder that presence,
euery man hath imagined that he should bee cleered before God, and
bee taken for ryghtuous, so he had no intent too offend. After that



maner do the Hipocrites weene themselues to do well: and when they
haue inuented a sort of follies & superstitions, they beare themselues on
hand, that God ought too take all in good woorth, bycause they weened
them to be good. But God deales not according to our imagination.
Wee see then, that men did foully beguyle themselues, in imagining
that it was ynough for them too haue a good intent or meaning,
as they terme it. And euen therefore is there nothing but hellish
confuzion in poperie, bycause they haue forsaken Gods woord,
and regarded not what he bade or forbade, but tooke leaue too doo
some this thing, and some that, as it came in euery mans fancie, and al
vnder colour that men are too bee iudged by their intent. Trew it is
(as I sayd afore) that the intent iudgeth men (in some respect.) For
although wee doo the most commendable woorke that can be deuyzed:
yit shall wee not fayle too bee condemned at Gods hand, if it bee not
doone too the ryght end. If our honest dealing bee but in outward
apparance, too get report that wee bee the henestest men in the world,
and in the meane whyle all our vertuousnesse is but dung and filth
within: it is but a showe of honestie. And why? Bycause our intent
is leaude and crooked. But yit for all this, (as I sayde afore)
wee must not take head too doo whatsoeuer our owne brayne teacheth
vs:Rom. 12. a. 1. 2. for our cheefe wisedome is to seeke what Gods will is, according
wheruntoo Saint Paule sayeth, it is our reasonable seruice which
God commaundeth vs, and wherin our obedience shalbee well allowed.
But if wee will needes doo all vppon our owne head, God will
reiect it all: for that is not reasonable, it is but trash and trumperie
of Satan. Wherefore let vs marke well what is told vs heere▪ that
is too wit, that wee must not seeke any other difference betweene
good and euill, than by weying it in Gods balance, and not in our
owne, too say, It seemeth too mee, and I thinke it too bee good, and I
will take some taste of it. Let vs beware (I saye) of bringing such
rashnesse with vs, and let vs bee as little children that are newlye
weaned from the teate. Let vs learne of God, and suffer our selues
too bee guyded and gouerned wholly by him. Yee see then that humilitie
is the beginning too serue God well, when as wee bee not
puffed vp and caryed away with ouerweening, nor so rash as too say,
I weene so, I thinke so: (but contrariwyse, too thinke thus:) is this of
God? hath he spoken it by this woord? Although it seemed too bee
the best and excellentest thing in the world: yit notwithstanding; I



would not fayle too refuze it, if it bee forbidden of God. And that is
the cause why it is expresly sayd,Deut. 12. a. 8. thou shalt not doo the thing that
seemeth good in thyne owne eyes. And for the same cause are wee
forbidden too bee wyse in our owne conceytes. Only let vs assure
our selues, that too be taught of God, is the infallible wisedome. But
as soone as wee step asyde from that which he sheweth vs, wee bee
but wanderers though wee were the wyzest too outward showe, and
the best esteemed in the world. Too bee short, wee see how all that euer
men can bring of their owne, will stand them in no sted, but onely
too condemne them. And why? There is nothing that can guyde vs
but only Gods will: it is the only rule whereby wee may say, this is
noughtwoorth, or this is good. Now seeing that the diuell hath
gone about too bereeue vs of such a benefyte: it behoueth vs so
much the more too stand vppon our gard, that is too say, too be heedfull,
and too apply all our wits throughly too the seeking out of Gods
will. Wee be carefull ynough for our temporall profit, for men neuer
(lyghtly) take thing in hand without forecasting wel what may insew.
O (say they) behold, I shall cast my selfe intoo such a daunger: agein,
this will serue my turne that way, or else this may hinder mee,
or hurt mee. Now then we be heedfull ynough in seeking the things
that belong too this flyghtfull lyfe: but in the meane whyle wee step
forth at aladuenture in seruing God. And although we pretend great
zele in seeking the heauenly lyfe: yit we shew therby that wee make
none account of it, and that all that euer wee doo is but for fashyons
sake, and as it were taskwoorke. Therefore let vs marke well that
men shall not bee so sore condemned, when their rebelling ageinst
God is not wilfully and of set purpose, as when they harden themselues
in their frowardnesse. Trew it is that men shall doo some
things without looking neerly too them: but yit must they looke whether
God lyke of them or no. The thing wherin wee must bee wyzest
and best aduyzed, is not too make our owne profit after the manner
of the world, which counteth the wylyest folke wyzest, but too get
vs spirituall discretion, too know what things God alloweth, and too
followe the same.
               Now heeruppon he addeth also, that wee must not haue too doo
with the fruitelesse woorks of darknesse, but rather rebuke them.
This is not added without greate reason. For although we bee well
dispozed too frame our lyfe according too Gods woord: yit shall wee



bee shouldered from it, if wee learne not too resist all temptations.
Truely although wee sawe no vyces about vs too withdrawe our obedience
from God: yit haue we such store of vyces alredie in vs, that we
must needs haue profited very well in Gods schoole, beefore wee can
bee disposed too submit our selues in true obedience, and to say, Lord
reigne thou ouer vs, and let thyne only will bee our rule. But yit let
vs put the cace, that wee were come so farre foorth, as too feele no resistence
nor geynsaying in our selues, but that wee could so subdew all
our affections, that they myght after a sort bee ruly: yit notwithstanding,
the diuell neuer ceasseth too assayle vs on all syds, one whyle by
lyght biekerings, another by vndermyning, and another whyle by giuing
alarums & open assaults, so as he wil soone ouerwhelm vs, except
we be well fortifyed, & God haue giuen vs inuincible power to withstand
all his pollicies. That is the cause why Saint Paule addeth,
that wee should not haue too doo with the vnfruteful woorks of
darknesse. As if he should say, my freends, I knowe well that the
vneazinesse of going vntoo God in this world, wil be as a blocke too
keepe you backe from dooing of your dewtie. And although yee knowe
that God ought too haue the maystrie, and that wee ought too
bee vnder his subiection: yit notwithstanding when yee bee conuersant
with the despyzers of God, and with vnholie persons, it is very
hard for you too walk vncorruptly. For looke how many vyces reigne,
so many infections are there too atteynt you, and it is very hard for
you too scape vnperuerted, lyke as it cannot bee but that wee must
feele some prickings whē we walk among thornes. Forasmuch thē as
there is such abundance of corruptions through the whole world, as a
man can scarsly remoue one foote but he shall stumble vppon some euill
or other: It standeth vs on hand too haue greate strength too maynteyne
vs vnimpeached in the seruing of God: or else we must be vtterly

                     •
                  urned away fron his obedience. But what for that? There is no
excuce for vs, sayeth Saint Paule. It wil not boote vs too alledge,
Alas, what shall I doo, I that am a poore frayle creature? If God had
set mee alone by my self, I could serue him the better: but I am heere
among so many vyces, that I must needs doo as other men doo: for
some pill, and some poll, some are whoremongers, some are drunkards,
and some swearers: and finally I see so much wickednesse, that
it maketh my hart too quake: and seeing I am hemmed in with all
these things, what can I doo in such extremitie? Wee will alledge



all this geere (say I): but it is in vayne. Wherfore let vs learne too
prepare our selues in such wyse too the seruing of God, as wee may
stand obediently in battell ray too resist all temptations. It is trew
that wee shall haue much adoo too bring it too passe▪ but yit will God
bee strongest, so wee pray him too gouerne vs with his holy spirit.
And that gouernment serueth not only to subdew vs too his dominion:
but also too giue vs victorie ageinst all the things that Satan practizeth
too ouerthrowe vs. Yee see then that if wee call vppon God and
put our selues to his guyding: it is certein that wee shall haue ynough
too make vs keepe on our way, notwithstanding that this world be ful
of wicked stoppes, too thrust vs out of the way. The thing then which
we haue too remēber vpon this streyne, is, that besyds the good mynd
which wee must haue too submit our selues vntoo God, and besyds the
lowlinesse too accept and receyue whatsoeuer God commaundeth vs,
& too frame our whole lyfe therafter: wee must also be armed to fyght
ageinst all the assaults that Satan maketh ageinst vs, and though we
see the whole world set vppon naughtinesse, wee must not think that
that may serue too diminish our fault before God, but consider that it
is his will too exercyze vs after that fashyon. Yit notwithstanding if
wee call vppon him, and put our whole trust in the working of his holy
spirit: surely wee shall obteyne victorie ageinst all that euer Satan
can trump in our wayes. And so yee see how wee may ouercome all
things that hinder our seruing of God.
               Finally, S. Paule following still the 
                     •
                  imilitude which he brought
in afore, telleth vs that wee must not haue too doo with the woorks of
darknesse. As if he should say, that wee must bee separted from the
vnbeleeuers, and that when wee liue at aladuenture, as though God
had not wrought in vs, & as though his word had done vs no good at al,
it is as much as if we trāpled Iesus Christ vnder our feete, abolished
the frute of his death & passiō, & defyled his blud, which is the fountaine
of all holinesse? Si
                     •
                  h it is so, let vs looke too retyre out of darkenesse,
and not too haue to doo with it in any wyse. And his calling of them
by the name of frutelesse woorks, is too shewe vs, that when wee bee so
mingled with the vnbeleeuers, worldlinges, and despyzers of God:
wee shall receyue but a poore reward, which shall yeeld vs no fruite at
all. What gayne wee then by taking leaue too doo euill, vnder colour
that the most part of the world is giuen too wickednesse (nothing)
for all of them must reape the reward of euerlasting death, for follow



one another after that fashyon. Now then let vs looke neerlyer too
our selues: for when men pardon them selues so lyghtly, that they seeke
nothing else but too keepe themselues fast fettered vnder the subiection
their father Satan, and too cast themselues as it were intoo the bottom
of hell: Alas is it not a wretched libertie? Saint Paule therfore
telleth vs expresly, that wee ought so little too intermeddle our selues
with the corruptions of the world, that wee should rather indeuer too
amend those which take such libertie too doo euill, that they vtterly
ouerthrowe themselues: and that both wee and they ought too bee so
hild in obedience to our God, as his woord and holy spirit may serue
vs as an inuincible power too fyght ageinst all assaults, and that wee
may bee so armed and furnished therwith, as it may bee vntoo vs bothe
a helmet,Ephe. 6. c. 14. and a brestplate, and a harnesse, and a swoord, as wee shall
see heerafter. And let vs beware too walk so in this world, as wee
may serue our God with trew constancie, and not bee turned from him
for any trubbles, impediments, lettes or stoppes that can bee layd in
our way.
               Now let vs fall downe before the Maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him too touche vs with such
repentance, as wee may bee sorie for them, and rid them away more
and more, too the strengthening of vs in his feare, and in the keeping
of his holy commaundementes: and the meane season he beare wyth
our infyrmities, vntill wee bee quyte and cleane rid of them: and
make vs too profit from day too day in the doctrine, that is too wit, in
the remission of our sinnes, vntyll wee come too the perfection of his
rightuousnesse and glory. And so let vs all say, Almightie God heauenly
father.
            
            
               The .xxxvi. Sermon, which is the fourth
vppon the fifth Chapter.
               
                  
                     11. Haue not too doo vvith the fruitlesse vvoorkes of darkenesse,
but rather rebuke them.
                     12. For (as for) the things vvhich they doo in secret, it is a shame
euen too name them.
                     
                        13. But all thinges are layd open vvhen they bee rebuked by the
lyght: for the lyght is it that layes all things open.
                     14. VVherfore he sayth, awake thou that sleepest, and arise from
the dead, and Christ vvillinlyghten thee.
                  
               
               
                  WEe haue seene this morning, that although
there bee many things in the world too
turne vs away from the seruing of God:
yit must we not therfore swarue as though
that myght serue vs for an excuce. For
there haue bin stumbling blockes in the
world at all tymes: but the remedie for
them is this doctrine, that is too wit, that
Gods children must stande vppon their
gard, that they corrupt not themselues by
companying with the v
                     •
                  beleeuers, bycause God hath sholed them asunder.
And it is not ynough for vs not too bee drunkardes, whoremongers,
theeues, or murtherers: but wee must also shun all manner
of euill wheresoeuer it bee. In deede wee ought too begin alwayes
at our selues:Luke. 6. f. 41. 42. for hipocrites will alwayes spye a mote in their neyghbours
eye, and yit beare a great stone in their owne, without feeling
it. But if wee will bee ryght and sound Iudges, let euery man examine
himself, and begin there in condemning vyces. Let vs consider
well whether wee our selues bee faultie or no, that wee may first and
formest make our owne indytement before God, by hating the euyll
that is in our selues. Howbeeit wee must also shewe therwithall, that
wee loue God better than the world, and not maynteyne our selues in
fauour and freendship of the wicked, by foading them in their faultes,
and by flattering them. And for that cause S. Paule addeth, that wee
must rather euen rebuke the woorkes which can bring nothing but vtter
cursednesse. And this serueth, not onely too shewe the zeale which
wee haue that God should bee honored: but also too withdrawe sillie
soules that are in the way too destruction, and too bring them backe
agein intoo the way of saluation. Lo heere twoo causes which ought
too moue vs too reproue euill. The one is, that it must irke vs too see
God offended, and men prouoke his wrath by ouerthrowing the order
that he hath set. Seeyng then that God is by that meane despyzed,
and his woord troden vnder foote: it ought too greeue vs, according



too the Psalme,Psal. 69. b. 8. where it is sayd, that wee ought too receyue too our
selues the reproches that are offered too God. Also we ought of dewtie
too haue a care of those that are redeemed with the blud of our Lord
Iesus Christ. If wee see the soules go too damnation which did cost
God so deere, and make no reckening of it: it is a scorning of the blud
of our Lord Iesus Christ. And euen for that cause also dooth S. Paule
tell vs, that inasmuch as wee bee separated from euill, too the intent
wee should not be companions of such as despyze God, nor in any wise
bee lyke them: wee must too the vttermost of our power shew, that we
hate them, to the end that they beyng by that meanes ashamed of their
leaudnesse, may bee touched with repentance. If wee haue once profited
so farre: it shall bee a great gayne too haue drawen backe a wretched
soule that was in the way too destruction. And after the same maner
speaketh Saint Iames of it, exhorting vs too doo it, saying: The
thing that you shall gayne by it,Iam. 5. d. 20. is, that you shall saue a soule from loozing.
And although men bee hardened in their sinnes: yit is it too
great purpose for vs too shew the zeale that we haue of honoring God,
and that his woord should not bee so impeached, nor the order broken
which he hath set, without declaring that the same displeazeth vs. For
if a man will bee knowen too bee a good and faythfull subiect, he will
not suffer any man too speake euill of his Prince, without setting of
himselfe ageinst him. (Lykewise,) that chylde shall bee taken for vnkynd
and vnhonest, which heareth his father wrougfully 
                     •
                  lamed and
defaced, and maynteyneth not his honour or honestie.
               Now, is not God our souerein prince? Yis: and although wee bee
but wretched woormes of the earth, and vyle caryons: yit dooeth he
the honour vntoo vs too adopt vs for his children. Now then, if wicked
and heathenish folk deface his maiestie, and darken his ryghtuousnesse,
yea and indeuer too plucke his dominion from him, and wee
dissemble at it: is it not too excessiue and intollerable a leaudnesse?
Therfore let vs mark well what is told vs heere. For it standeth vs
so much the more on hand too mark this text, bycause this vyce hath
reigned in the world in all ages: namely that according as euery man
is more or lesse desyrous too be flatttered, so dothe he the eas
                     •
                  yer beare
with other men, not after the maner which wee haue seene heertofore,
which is that wee ought too haue compassion of such as are weake,
and too vse pacience towards them: but cleane contrariwyse, that is
too wit, that wee bee contented too feede the euill, and too enter continually



into a willing confederacie toogither: and too the intent that
other men should not sift vs too narrowly in our vyces, but let vs alone
too doo what wee list, wee giue euery man leaue too take lyke libertie
too him self. And that is the cause why all things are out of order
now adayes in the world. Agein, wee bee loth too prouoke any
mans displeazure ageinst vs, insomuch that we had leuer betray God,
and too betray our neyghbours bothe bodie and soule, than too vse the
libertie that Gods spirit commaundeth vs. Wee see a wretched man
play the naughtipacke: let him follow his owne swindge, (say wee:)
it maks no matter too vs. And why? for wee wil not discontent him.
Agein, we see othersome peruert all order of Iustice, and infect the
whole people and countrie. And wee passe it ouer easly without speaking
ageinst it. And why? O I will not bring my self in displeasure
with a man of authoritie. Let some other bodie leade the daunce, and
I will willingly say, Amen too it. And if he were hanged on a Iebet
a whyle, he had but his desert. But no Godhamercie too mee in the
meane whyle. For why? I will not go put myself in any hazard (for
the matter.) Thus are vyces passed ouer nowadayes. But yit will
not God giue ouer his ryght for all that. For the sayd sentence shall
stand inuiolable on his behalf, and according too the same shall wee be
condemned as full of treason, that is too wit, wee shalbee hild for companions
of the wicked, if wee play the blynd and deaf (beasts) when
wee should restreyne naughtinesse by setting of our selues ageinst it,
and (as much as in vs lyeth) doo suffer Gods honour too bee so abaced,
as all honestie is ouerthrowen, and wee say nothing too it. Therfore
ought wee too bee the more attentyue too this warning too rebuke euill,
and (as I sayd afore) by shewing (too the vttermost of our power)
that wee mislyke of it, and also by being diligent too let it, if it lye in
our power too doo it. If euery man imployed him self after this sort,
surely wee should see another maner of soundnesse in the world. For
what is the cause that Gods name is so much blasphemed? It is for
that the blasphemies are cloked, and euery man had leuer too defyle
him self with other mens leaudnesse, than too purchace any disfauour
or mislyking, as they say. In lyke cace is it with drunkennesse, lecherie,
robberie, and all extorsions and wanton dooings that are committed.
But had wee the zele that is commaunded vs heere by Saint
Paule: surely wee should be much more corageous and stout in rebuking
such as doo amisse. On the other syde also wee shewe our selues



too haue no loue nor kyndnesse among vs, when wee suffer good men
too bee trampled vnder foote and misuzed, for wee ought too reache
them our hand. Agein, mens s
                     •
                  ules go too destruction, and wee remedie
it not, though God haue doone vs the grace, too place vs in his
sted, in that office of sauing the things, that were in the way too bee
lost and damned.
               Now S. Paule hauing spoken so, addeth to confirme the same doctrine,
and too quicken vp the slothfulnesse that is in vs, that the cause
vvhy the vn
                        •
                     eleeuers take libertie too doo such euill, euen as they
bee ashamed too speake of, is for that they can hyde themselues
(from men.) And why? For they haue no feare of God: and therefore
they take themselues too bee well hydden. When a theese perceyues
no body neere him, he rifleth cubboordes, he breakes open
doores, he filcheth, and he catcheth and caryeth away. Uery well, bycause
he cannot yit bee conuicted afore a iudge, he beares himselfe on
hand, that he is scaped quyte and cleane. If a Robber or a murtherer
get intoo some blynd nooke, he thinkes himselfe well hidden, and if he
finde a man astray, hee pulles him too hym, and strippes him, and
woundeth him, yea and cutes his throte too, if he cannot otherwise
mayster hym, and hee thinkes himselfe well escaped, bycause no
man sees him. In lyke cace is it with all other deeds: for wee bee
more ashamed of men, than afrayd of God. The scripture cryes out,
that all our thoughts must come to account, and that not only our wicked
deeds shalbe punished,Psal. 32. a. 
                        •
                     . but also euen the things that wee thought
too haue bin buryed. For at the last day the books shalbee layd open,
that is too say, nothing shall bee forgotten, except wee haue obteyned
this grace that is promised in the Psalme, namely that God forgyueth
our s
                     •
                  mes. And that is not doone without repentance. But they
that are inhardened too all euill, doo but make a mo
                     •
                  ke of it: so they be
not put too shame for it before men, let God doo what he will. For
they bee growne so brutishe, that they cannot wake, too consider what
it is too harden their hartes ageinst the souereine Maiestie of God.
Therefore when the vnbeleeuers and despyzers of God, get couert and
lurking holes after that sort, there is so vyle lycentiousnesse among
them, as a man would bee ashamed too thinke what they doo and
say.
               But Saint Paul addeth, that vvhen they bee rebuked, the mischeef
is discouered, and their libertie cut of, bycause it is a brydle



too them. Not only bycause they bee blamed afore men, but also
bycause they feele themselues too haue too doo with the heauenly
Iudge, and that it is a dreadfull thing too fall intoo his handes. Too
bee short, Saint Paule ment too shewe too what purpoze rebuking
may serue, when wee vse it ryghtly and with good zele of charitie.
Now I haue told you alredie, that wee must not vse any hipocrisie,
nor iustifye our selues by condemning other men. But when euery of
vs hath well examined his owne lyfe, and hateth the vyces wheretoo
wee bee subiect, and wherein wee bee wrapped: let vs indeuer too
bring our selues home vntoo God, praying him too strengthen vs so
by the power of his holy spirit, as wee may stryue too frame our selues
according too his will and ryghtuousnesse. And that doone, let vs
not flatter such as doo amisse, but let vs tell them freely the thing
that may doo them good. The profyt that will come thereof (sayeth
Saint Paule) is that God shall not bee so greeuously offended as
wee see he is: and moreouer whereas men were past shame afore, they
may by that meane bee brought too some honestie, and whereas it seemed
too them that they had leaue too doo all manner of euill: they shal
repent themselues, and drawe others too repentance with them. But
much more ought this (that followeth) too moue vs. For too say, that
wee should line in this world, and inioy the infinite benefytes that God
bestowed vppon vs, and in the meane whyle suffer his authoritie too
bee defaced, euen when it may seeme that men would plucke him out
of his seate by blaspheming his holy name: when men shall prouoke
him too anger, and wee let all slip: must wee not needes bee arrant
villeins and traytors? If wee were found at some mans cost, and one
should rayle vppon him in his owne house, or practize too murther
him, or robbe him of his goods, or defyle his wyfe, or intyce his chyld
too naughtinesse: and wee in the meane whyle should sit cramming of
our selues, and eate of his bread and drinke of his wyne, and (too bee
short) bee fed and maynteyned at his charges, (and yit let all alone,
and say nothing too it:) should wee not deserue too bee stoned, and
too haue all men too spit in our faces? Yis certeynly: for the vyce of
vnthankfulnesse shall alwayes bee condemned, euen among men.
Now if wee bee so much bound vntoo a mortall man, as too maynteyne
his honour and honestie, when wee bee found of his free cost:
what ought wee too doo for our God? Are wee not in his house as long
as wee liue in this world? Haue wee so much as one droppe of water



but only of his goodnesse and liberalitie? Behold, God hath a fatherly
care of vs: and yit notwithstanding wee suffer his name too bee
blasphemed, his maiestie to be bereft and spoyled of al reuerence, his
woord too bee torne in peeces, all order (that he hath commaunded)
too bee broken, the Church (which is his wyfe) too bee corrupted and
misuzed, and his children too bee intyced too naughtinesse: and in
the meane whyle wee play mum bowget. I would fayne knowe of
you, whether such silence doo not sufficiently shew, that wee bee not
woorthie too eate one bit of bread, nor too bee counted in the number
of earth woormes, Lyce, Cimies, and other of the vylest and filthyest
things of the world? Therefore let vs thinke well vppon it, that wee
shalbee found giltie of the despyzing of Gods maiestie, (as wee see)
bycause wee rebuke not mens vyces. That is a cause why the wicked
and heathenish sort waxe the bolder, and thinke the world to runne
on wheeles on their syde, and tryumph in their despyzing of God after
that fashyon: it commeth partly of our silence. And that is the
thing which S. Paule ment too shewe vs heere.
               It followeth moreouer, that the wretched soules whom our Lord
Iesus Christ hath bought so deerly, that he spared not himself to haue
saued them, doo perish, and are giuen intoo Satans possession through
our sufferance: and in the meane whyle wee make none account at all
of it. Now then, doo wee not therein bewray that wee haue not so
much as one drop of charitie in vs? Yis: and that is the cause why
I sayde, that (in so dooing) wee bee traytours too God and too our
neyghbours. For when wee haue no better zeale towards Gods name,
nor better care of our neyghbours welfare, doth not the world see euery
way that wee bee full of crueltie and vnkyndnesse? Of crueltie I
meane towardes men, in that wee suffer them too perish, euen knowing
it, and looking vppon it: and of vnkyndnesse towardes God, bycause
wee yeeld him not such honour as he deserueth, when wee haue
not the corage too shewe, that at leastwyse wee mislyke that men
should so derogate Gods authortie, and the reuerence which they owe
too him. Therefore whensoeuer wee bee afrayd too prouoke mens
displeazure, or too purchace their ill will, let vs thinke vppon the
thing that is told vs heere: namely that wee ought at leastwyse too
feare the Lord, whose wee bee, and that seeyng wee bee fed at his cost,
wee must not abyde too see such leaudnesse committed ageinst him,
without shewing (as much as is possible, and too the vttermost of our



power and abilitie) that wee doo vtterly abhorre such things: I say, as
farre as wee can: for some tymes our mouthes shall bee so shet, as wee
shall bee able too doo no more but sigh and lament at such vtter disorder,
when men become lyke diuels that are let looce, in flinging out intoo
furiousnesse ageinst God, and they that beare the swoord seeke nothing
but too make a confuzed medly, too the intent that all goodnesse
may be forgottē. For then (as I sayd) we haue none other remedie, but
too bee sorie for it, according as it is sayd of Loth, that it greeued his
hart too bee in Sodome.2. Pot. 1 b. 8. Therefore let vs not forbeare, but let euery
of vs prouoke himselfe too greefe and sorowe, when wee see things so
out of order, and let vs gyue recorde of it, as farre as it may doo
good.
               Agein, if there be any hope for vs to win those that are so vnruly: let
vs continually assay too draw them too repentance, yea, let vs streyne
our selues too it. For many men alledge this prouerbe too lyghtly,
that a man must not cast perles among swyne. And they beare them
selues on hand, that men are swyne, before they haue tryed what they
bee. Though they haue bin of lyght behauiour, yea, or euen looce and
lawlesse, so as the diuell hath after a sort caryed them away: yit must
wee labour too win them agein,1. Cor. 13. c. 7. and haue good hope of it, according
too Saint Paules saying, that Charitie hopeth well of all things. So
then, vntill such tyme as men shewe themselues vtterly wilfull in euil,
and that their diseases appeere too bee vtterly vncurable, let vs indeuer
too bee good Phisitions too them, by the aduyzements that God
shall put intoo our mouth. And so yee see what S. Paule intended, in
saying, that the vnbeleeuers thinke themselues too bee hidden, when
they bee not perceyued nor rebuked, and that when they bee let go at
rouers, they bee as it were in the darke, and theruppon conceyue the
more boldnesse too doo wickedly.
               But wee bee partly the cause of it, and we cannot wash our handes
of it: for God setteth vs in his roome in that behalfe, and giueth vs
his woord, which hath authoritie too condemne euyll, and yit notwithstanding
all is suppressed and thrust vnder foote. Marke that for one
poynt. But on the contrarie part, when the wickeddest men in the
world bee rebuked, then perceyue they their shame, whereas before,
they discerned not whyte from blacke. And why? For if a man bee
in the darke, he seeth nothing at all, but staggereth and stumbleth: and
though he bee neuer so much berayed, yit he perceyueth it not. Therfore



when Gods woord is set afore men, and we shewe offenders their
faultes with such libertie as is requisite: it is as much as if wee shewed
them a glasse, (and sayd too them.) See what thou art, thou art as
fowle and filthie as may bee: art thou not ashamed too see thy selfe?
go washe thy muzzle. So then, warnings will alwayes win thus
much, howbeeit not alyke with all men: for (as I sayde afore) many
are hardened, so as Satan possesseth them, and God hath giuen them
vp too such a wilfull stubborne mynd, that they bee past all shame. Neuerthelesse
whensoeuer any faythfull man dooth his dewtie, it wyll alwayes
doo good, and some profit will come of it, insomuch that they
which were erst as wood beastes, or as wyld bullockes, will returne,
and a man shall see some honestie in them. Therefore let vs win that
poynt, if it bee possible for vs, or at leastwyse let vs streyne our selues
too win it. And so yee see what we haue too gather vpon those wordes
of Saint Paule.
               Now as touching the woord Rebuke: it signifyeth properly too
discouer the thing that was hyd. And he allotteth this office vntoo
preaching, according wheruntoo he taunteth the vaynglorie that reigned
in the Churche of Corinth,
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 14. 
                        •
                     . 2. for their speaking with straunge tungs
too the intent too bee commended, and that men myght say of him,
This man is a greate Clerk, this man can speake all languages: and
yit in the meane whyle there was no edifying at all. Lykewyse in these
dayes, in the popedome the Organes are pyping at one syde, and there
is chaunting of fower parts on the other syde, and there is such store of
gewgawes, that the simyle people are rauished, but neuer a whit edifyed.
But Saint Paule sayeth, that when wee bee come togither in
the name of God, wee must indeuer too fare the better by it. And how
may that bee? It is (s
                     •
                  yeth he) when good men, and such as are alredy
inured too feare & serue God, are edifyed by his woord. And not only
that, but also if an vnbeleeuer comes in, which was erst a mocker,
and neuer had any remorse of conscience, and heare what is vttered in
the name of God, (that is too wit, that wee cannot scape (Gods hand,)
but must needs come before the iudgment seate of our Lord Iesus
Christ, and how deerly Iesus Christ hath payed for vs, and what a
trayterousnesse it is for vs too make the sacrifyze of his death and passion
vnauaylable:) I say, when an vnbeleeur heares all this, and
that wee bee exhorted too feare God, and stirred vp too loue him for
the infinite grace which he vttereth towards vs: Although he were



erst as a brute beast (sayth S. Paul) yit shal he enter into himself & bee
rebuked. For he vseth there the same woord which he vseth heere, the
meaning wherof is,1. Cor. 14. d. 24. that wheras his cōscience was as good as dead afore,
and he in maner brutish: he was inforced too enter into examination
of him self, and too bee ashamed, so as he could not but giue glorie
vntoo God. Not that this befalleth too all indifferently: but wee see
that a number of folk which were gone astray, and had forgotten God,
and had no regard at all of their owne soule helth, shalbee so touched at
one sermon, that they appeere too bee chaunged all their lyfe after.
Now looke what is doone in common assembly: the same ought euery
man too practyze by him self. For we bee not heere too the intent that
euery man should profit him self only: but too the intent wee should also
teache one another with mutuall instruction. After that maner must
wee rebuke offenders, too the end they may take no more libertie too
mocke God after that fashyon, nor to shake of his yoke, and to wander
into all naughtinesse. And that is in effect the thing that Saint Paule
intended too shewe vs heere.
               Now too confirme this doctrine the better, he addeth yit one other
reason: It is the lyght (sayeth he) that layeth all things open. Heretoofore
he tolde vs,Ephe. 5. c. 8. that when wee bee once inlyghtened by Gods
spirit and Gospell, wee must bee as lampes too giue lyght intoo the
world. For wee haue the woord of lyfe, which serueth, not only too
guyde vs, but also too drawe them intoo the ryght way, which haue
gone astray. Going forward herewithall, he sayth, that it is the nature
and propertie of lyght too discouer. And therfore when wee suffer
naughtinesse to nestle and to grow still deeper and deeper in huththermuthther;
we shew well that we be nother lyght, nor children of the
lyght, that is too say, that wee belong not awhit▪ nother too God, nor
too Iesus Christ. Too be short, Saint Paule meaneth that wee cannot
giue any proof of our christianitie nor of our fayth, but by hating
and abhorring of euill, as much as is possible, that it may not haue
his full course and sway. But now let vs think vppon our selues agein.
For (as I sayd) there is none of vs all which is not faultie in
fearing men more than God, and in winking at others, to the end that
they shoulde wink at vs, and not bee inquisityue of our dooings. Lo
how wee betray one another by our silence. But there is yit another
vyce that is woorse and further cut of dsquare: namely that besyos our
dissembling, wee doo also help too feede the euill. And so by that



meanes whoredome hath his ful scope, bycause euery man and woman
playes the baude. Wheras I say, euery one, I meane, that most men &
women now adayes doo wink at al maner of leaudnesse and misorder,
and stoppe their eares at the things which they myght well heare, and
euery man seeks too conceale his fellowes leaudnesse, men of mens,
and women of womens. They myght remedie a greate sort of enormities
that are committed: but they will rather go and 
                     •
                  eray their
Gownes and Cotes with other folkes dung and filthinesse, than discouer
their vyces. Too bee short, euery body playes the bawd in effect,
by concealing his neyghbours vyce, too the end that the other shoulde
doo as much for him. In lyke cace is it with all other sinnes. Yit
notwithstanding (as I sayd afore) God hath not spoken this in vaine,
but wee shall one day feele the execution of the sentence which he speaketh
heere by his Apostle, and then will it bee too late too forethinke
vs of that which wee will not knowe now. But let such as feare God
learne and remember how it is sayd heere, that Gods inlyghtening of
vs, is too the end that euery of vs should examine himselfe, and not bee
as blynd wretches, groping in the dark, which stūble on the one syde,
& runne ageinst things on the other, but that we should know the way
of saluation: and moreouer teache other men also, by discouering the
euyll that lay hidden, too the end that such as haue turned their backes
vppon God, and were well appayd too haue bin in darkenesse styll,
may vnderstand that they must bee fayne too come too the lyght, whatsoeuer
come of it. The very way therefore for vs too shewe in deede
and in good earnest, that wee belong too God, and are inlyghtened by
his holy spirit and by his woord, is too discouer thinges which should
else as it were lye lurking a long tyme, if wee drew them not forth intoo
the lyght. Trew it is that Charitie couereth a multitude of sinnes
(as sayeth Salomon) and that it behoueth vs too bee pacient,Prou. 10. b. 12. and too
beare with many infirmities. For it is not meete that wee should diffame
one another,1. Pet. 4. b. 8. as diuerse do, who in stead of warning those whom
they see too offend, fall too sowing abrode of newes, so as the streetes
and the market places are all full of them, yea, and they do so inhaunce
the matter, that of small scapes they make deadly crymes.
               Therefore when Saint Paule biddeth vs discouer men, it is not
ment that wee should defame one another after that manner: but that
the wretched man which had his eyes blyndfolded by Satan, should
bee made too perceyue his owne miserie and naughtinesse, that he



myght bee ashamed of it: and that the woman which had giuen ouer
hir self too all vnchastitie, myght bee made too recouer some honestie,
and too returne agein intoo the ryght way, by being put too shame
in hauing hir faultes and vyces layd afore hir. The manner then of
discouering, is not too backebyte one another, or too taunt and vpbrayd
one another by this and that, and too play the hipocrytes, who
will streyne at a gnat,Math. 2
                        •
                     . c. 24. and swallowe vp and Oxe or a Sheepe at a
morsell: that is too say, which will make conscience in very small and
lyght matters, and not see a number of great enormities, which
they suffer too passe hard by their nozes, without beeing any whit offended
at them. Wee must not doo so: but when wee see the mischeef
fed and increaced by our vnfaythfulnesse, let vs prouyde for it.
and let euery man bee compelled too thinke better vppon himself and
vppon his vyces, that he may amend them. This in effect is the
carefullnesse which Saint Paule inioyneth vs heere: and it is the very
meane to rid away the plagues that Satan would haue maynteyned
still by silence and dissimulation. Therefore whensoeuer wee perceiue
any impostume lying hid, let vs beware that the matter settle not
so long within, till the disease become vncurable: but let vs purge it
out of hand, and let admonitions serue as it were for launcers, and letting
of blud, and for such other meanes and helpes too take away
the rotten matter that myght marre and infect the whole bodye.
And so yee see in effect how wee ought too put this doctrine in
vre.
               Now heeruppon Saint Paule inferreth, that Therfore our Lord
Iesus Christ, in all the doctrine of the Gospell, speaketh too them
that are falne aslepe in their sinnes, & to such as are as good as dead,
too the intent they should vvake and ryze vp: and so shall wee
beee inlyghtened by him. Now wee haue heere too remember first
of all, that Iesus Christ dooth then rayse vs from the deade, when he
calleth vs too the fayth, and bringeth vs intoo the hope of saluation.
And that is too the intent wee should perceyue our state the better.
For wee see how men sooth and glorifye themselues. Although there
bee nothing in them but vtter confuzion: yit notwithstanding they
will needes put out their hor
                     •
                  es lyke Suayles too vaunt themselues,
as it were in despyte of God and nature. Now the Scripture sayeth
wee bee dead. Wee may well haue some resemblance of lyfe, before
wee bee conuerted too the fayth of Iesus Christ: Howbeit, that



lyfe is but death before God. And that is the cause why it is sayd in
Saint Iohn,Iohn. 5. c. 25. The houre is come that all they which heare the voyce
of the sonne of man, shall liue though they bee dead, and shall passe
from death too lyfe. Iesus Christ speakes not there of the visible
death, nor of the resurrection which we hope for at the latter day. But
he sheweth vs how wee haue alredy a preparatyue of the second rising
agein, when God reneweth vs, and giueth vs a spirituall lyfe. For
wee can doo nothing but euill, as hath bin declared heertoofore. And
Saint Paule also vseth the same phraze of speeche, namely that wee
bee dead too Godward. Following the same matter heere, he sheweth
vs that the whole drift of the Gospell is, that we should ryze from
the dead. For as long as wee bee straungers too God, who is the
welspring of lyfe: where are wee but in such a dungeon, as it had bin
better for vs neuer too haue bin borne? But wee must wake: for one
part of our death is this blockishnesse wherin wee bee, according as
I declared heeretoofore, that wee bee so corrupted afore hand euen
from our moothers womb, as wee can fynd no sauour in well dooing,
and that wee bee starke blynded in our wicked lustes, & the diuell dryueth
vs and thrusteth vs foreward in such wyze, that as long as God
giueth vs the brydle, wee can doo nothing but grub downe too the
bottom of hell, too sinke our selues the deeper in it. Now bee wee
once come too that poynt, there is no more sorinesse (as S. Paule sayd
afore,Ephe. 4. 
                        •
                     . 19.) there is nothing but such stubbornnesse, as God is nothing with
vs, nother haue wee any more feeling or perceyuerance of our sinnes.
That is the cause why he sayeth heere, that wee must wake, bycause
wee be in a deadly sleepe, vntyll God stirre vs vp, and make vs perceyue
what wee bee, that wee may abhorre our sinnes and returne vntoo
him. So then, the enterance of lyfe and saluation, is, that God visiteth
vs with his grace, wheras wee were as dead wretches, and had
nothing in vs but vtter corruption. Mark that for one poynt.
               Secondly let vs marke, that besydes the naughtinesse which is in
vs, there is also so great a hardnesse and wilfulnesse, as God must bee
fayne too wake vs as it were by force, that wee may haue some feeling
of our vyces too mislyke them. Trew it is that this is doone cheefely
when God calleth vs, and pulleth vs out of the confuzion wherin wee
were. But yit must euery Christian continew therin all the tyme of
his lyfe. For wee shall neuer bee so throughly awake, but that wee
shall haue neede of Gods stirring vp of vs still: according as yee shall



see some folke so heauie asleepe, that euen when their clothes are on,
and when they bee vp vppon their feete, they go reeling styll, and bee
as it were halfe in a slumber, v
                     •
                  tyll they stretch foorth themselues and
set their handes too some buzinesse, and they bee so heauie and dumpishe,
that they still slumber euen waking. Euen so is it with vs: for
although our Lord Iesus Christ haue doone vs the grace too draw vs
backe from death, and too quicken vs by his holy spirit and by his
woord: yit shall wee still feele our selues slothfull and sluggish, so as he
must bee fayne too waken vs styll. And therefore wee haue neede too
bee exhorted euery day, yea and too haue our eares beaten early and
late, as though Iesus Christ cryed out shrill and loud vntoo vs, what
doo yee yee wretched soules? Wherat looke yee? Though wee heard
such warnings without ceassing: yit should wee not bee so throughly
awake as were needefull. Now then wee see what S. Paule ment to
declare in this streyne: namely that looke what wee feele through
Gods goodnesse in our selues, wee should put the same in vre towards
our neyghbours. Now, our Lord Iesus Christ hath rayzed vs from
the dead, and he wakeneth vs dayly from the dead sleepe wherthrough
wee bee so drowzie: and that is too the end that wee should afterward
wake vp others that one asleepe, and indeuer too drawe those too lyfe,
which are as poore dead men.
               Furthermore wheras he sayeth, And Iesus Christ will inlyghten
thee: It is not ment that wee can ryze vp and awake of our owne
power, & that our Lord Iesus Christ dooth afterward adde his grace.
Hee meaneth nothing so. But the effect of his intent is, that wee shalbee
inlyghtened by Iesus Christ. And after what maner? Not only
as though we were but in some dark place (sayth S. Paul) & had neede
of a Candle as in the nyght time: For though a mā see not very cleere,
yit if he haue but some glimring of lyght, whether it bee of moone,
or of starres, or of any thing else: he will haue an ame too say, heere is
such a doore or gate, and heere is such a path or way: And a mans eyes
are not vtterly vnprofitable when he goes by nyght, how dark so euer
it bee:) But our Lorde Iesus Christe inlyghteneth vs after a muche
more woonderous maner. For wee bee not only in the dark, but also
stark blynd. The remedie therfore which the sonne of God bringeth
vs by teaching vs the doctrine of the Gospell, is that hee giueth vs our
syght agein. For our eyes are pikt out by the sin of our first father A
                  
                     •
                  am,
who would 
                     •
                  eeds see too cleere▪ Uaynglor iousnesse did so cary



him away, that he would needs discerne betweene good and euill, more
than was lawfull for him. But in sted of hauing greater lyght, he became
brutish, and wee with him, insomuch that all of vs continew
blynd. Now therfore wee had neede too haue our eyes restored vs agein,
and too haue Gods spirit too serue vs in sted of eyes. Mark that
for one poynt.
               Agein, in this world there is nothing but dull darknesse, yea and
that so thicke, as wee wote not how too step one pace without stumbling,
or without straying out of our way. Therfore it standeth vs on
hande too bee guyded, and that our Lord Iesus Christ shewe vs
the way. This is it that Saint Paule declareth too vs heere, and how
our Lord Iesus inlyghteneth vs: namely, not only that wee bee dimsyghted,
and that he helpeth vs, and supplyeth the want that is in vs:
but also that wee bee stark blynd, yea and dead, and finally euen in the
pit of hell, lyke as when a Coarse is layd in the graue, men may well
bring Candels and Torches too it, but it seeth neuer the more for all
that. So then our Lord Iesus imparteth his lyght vntoo vs, not too
make vs see more cleerly than wee did afore: but to giue vs our whole

                     •
                  ysyght new agein, bycause we bee stark blynd. Now then seeing
that Iesus Christ speaketh after this maner, and contineweth day by
day in wakening vs, and in making vs too see cleerer and cleeres:
ought wee not too followe his example, and too hold backe our neyghbours
as much as wee can, when wee see them straying too their destruction?
This is the pith of the things 
                     〈…〉
                   shewed vs heere.
               Now seeing that our Lord Iesus setteth, 
                     〈◊〉
                   forth for an example
and patterne: needs must we be too barbarous and sauage, if we be
not touched with it. And how? The sonne of God hath not only voutsafed
too doo his office in inlyghtening vs, and too shewe vs the way of
saluation, and to waken vs from the deadly sleepe wherwith wee were
ouerwhelmed: but also, when he hath inlyghtened vs, he will haue vs
too serue as Lampes for others too followe, that wee may shewe them
the way, so as he will haue vs (after a sort) too execute the one half of
his office. Seeing then that the sonne of God hath doone vs such honour:
if wee for all this, doo thrust this lyght vuder foote, and nother
doo good too our selues nor too other men with it: is it not too heynous
a treacherie? Agein, if wee imagin our selues too bee discharged of
our dewtie, when euery of vs dooth for his owne part refreynes 
                     〈◊〉
                  
dooyng euill, and in the meane tyme let others go too destruction, 
                     〈◊〉
                  


                  
as wee haue nother care nor willingnesse to remedie the matter, when
wee see the Diuell hale them after him too euerlasting death: must we
not needes perceyue therin that wee doo God great wrong and iniurie,
in holding his lyght choked after that fashion, and in betraying
our neyghbours, by suppressing so the benefyte which should serue too
the euerlasting saluation of their soules? Yee see then that wee shall
bee alwayes blame woorthie both before God and man, vnlesse wee
followe the thing that is shewed vs heere by our Lord Iesus Christ,
and beare this doctrine alwayes in our hartes too put it in vre: namely
that they which call themselues Christians, and will bee so taken,
must therwithall bee as trumpetters too waken such as are asleepe,
and as guydes too direct such as go astray, and too bring them intoo
the ryght way, which were wandered out afore. After that manner
(say I) must wee all deale, and continew in so dooyng, vntyll wee bee
come too the happie meeting, when our Lord Iesus Christ shall call
vs all too him, too put vs in possession of the heritance which he hath
purchaced for vs.
               Now let vs fall downe before the Maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him too make vs perceyue
them more and more, and in any wise not too suffer vs too fall asleepe
lyke wretched infidels, but that forasmuch as it is his will that our
lyfe should bee as one continuall day, wherein he gyueth vs not the
Sunne too inlyghten vs onely for a tyme, so as nyght shoulde afterward
come vppon vs, but guydeth and gouerneth vs himselfe 
                     〈◊〉
                  
nyght and day: wee may take such profit thereby, as he suffer vs not
too returne too darknesse agein, after he hath so inlyghtened vs, but
keepe vs styll waking, too go through in the holy calling wherto he
hath called vs, and too follow the way which he sheweth vs, so as wee
may call others too vs, too runne all toogither vntoo him, as he calleth
vs, vntill wee bee fully come thither. That it may please him too
graunt this grace, not onely too vs, but also to all people and Nations
of the earth. &c.
            
            
               
               The .xxxvii. Sermon, which is the fifth
vppon the fifth Chapter.
               
                  
                     15. Take heede therefore that yee vvalke circumspectly, not as fooles,
but as vvyle:
                     16. Recouering the tyme: for the dayes are euill.
                     17. VVherfore bee not vnvvyse, but vnderstanding what is the
vvill of the Lord.
                     18. And bee not drunken vvith vvyne, vvherin is loocenesse.
                  
               
               
                  THe care that wee haue of our tempor all
profit, will suffyze too condemne vs before
God, of the negligence that is seene in vs,
when wee come too the well ordering of
our lyfe. For wee thinke too escape by
this excuce, that wee thought not of it. But
is it a tollerable fault, that when God calleth
vs too him, and setteth the heauenly
lyfe 
                     〈◊〉
                   vs, specially telling vs how deerly
it was purchaced, and requireth nothing
but that wee should yeeld him his ryght, that is too say, that we should
glorify him in trew obedience: all this should bee nothing with vs?
Must it not needes bee that wee bee too too grosse headed, too stande
buzzing about a strawe, as yee would say, and about a sort of thinges
that vanish away, and in the meane whyle too despyze the kingdome
of heauen after such a sort, as too make no account of Gods seruice,
and too esteeme the saluation of 
                     •
                  ur soules as a thing of nothing? Yis:
And therfore S. Paule exhorteth vs now too bee more waker, than we
haue bin woont: and first he sayeth, that in this 
                     •
                  ace we must stand vppon
our ga
                     •
                  d, and not imagin that God must acquit vs for out blo
                     •
                  
                  kishnesse
sake, when wee bee intangled in this worlde, and by that
meanes thinke not vppon the kingdome of heauen. Take heede (sayth
he) that yee vvalke circumspectly. It is trew that although we looke
neuer so neerly too our selues, yit shall wee not misse too bee caryed away
by our infirmities, & wee commit many faultes, not only through
ignorance, but also euen wittingly, and oftentymes we bee not strong
ynough too withstand temptations so manfully as were requisite. Neuerthelesse



if yee search narrowly why men pardon themselues many
offences so easly, and why they beare themselues on hand that God
thinkes not on them: yee shall fynde that it proceedeth of negligence.
For if wee considered that wee walke in the presence of God and his
Angels: surely it would hold vs in another manner of awe than wee
bee. That therefore is the cause why he dooth expressely requyre
heere a great care and circumspectnesse in vs, too the intent that no
man should gyue himself ouer vntoo euyll for want of taking heede.
               And too prouoke vs the more theruntoo, he addeth, that vvee
haue neede too redeeme the tyme, bycause the dayes are euill.
Wherin he sheweth that wee cannot deuyze too abuze Gods grace
so little, but it is a willfull lozing of the tyme, which wee cannot recouer
afterward. Now then, let vs gather a breef summe of the things
that are conteyned heere, and let vs begin at this poynt, that the dayes
are euill, wherby Saint Paule dooth vs too wit, that wee shall fynd
many lettes too keepe vs from comming vntoo God. For wee
knowe wee bee hemmed in with so many corruptions, that euen they
which are best mynded, shall stumble on the one syde, bee pulled
backe on the other, and dyuers tymes stray quyte away. Now wee
had neede of a singular inwoorking, too fyght in such wyse as wee
may get the vpper hand of all the impedimentes that Satan castes afore
vs, to plucke vs from our God, and to thrust vs quyte and cleane
out of the way of saluation. And therefore this hath bin true in all
ages, that forasmuch as men are alwayes froward of nature, and
we be borne in sin: Satan holdeth vs as his prisoners. Agein, there
is not that man among vs, which draweth not other men too naughtinesse.
Moreouer, wee wote not scarsly how to open our eyes, but we
shall see some one thing or other, that may vtterly ouerthrowe vs, and
the diuell through his wylynesse applyeth all too his owne woorking,
that vnlesse wee take good heede too his dooings, he marreth vs out
of hand. But the more that the world rageth, and the more that iniquitie
ouerfloweth: the more ought wee too marke well this text, and
the counsell that is giuen vs heere by the holy Ghost. For surely
now adayes men are come too the full measure of all enormite, and
there is no part of the world where a man may fynd single and sound
dealing. In old tyme yit a man myght haue found some Nations,
where the folke were not so craftie and malicious, nor so excessiue in
pomp and all kyndes of pleazures, nor so farre ouer the shooes in robberie,



crueltie, and extorsion. But now adayes let a man go about
euerywhere, and he shall fynd that there is nothing but as a horrible
water flud and confuzed turmoyle of all wickednesse. And therefore
if Saint Paul haue sayd, that the dayes were eui
                     •
                  l, when there was
a hundred tymes more soundnesse than there is now adayes: we ought
too bee the more vigilant in keeping good watch, according too the
increacing of the euilnesse of the tyme. If there be any fear of warre,
euery of vs will abate his countenance, and consider that it is not for
him too hazard all at one chop, but that he must reserue some little
sprincling for a pinch, as well of vittelles as of other things. Also if
wee haue any other trubbles, euery of vs will bee forecasting ynough
in that behalf.
               Let vs bethinke our selues (will wee say) for necessitie will driue
vs too it. But now wee see well the euilnesse of the dayes, that is to
say, that all is ageinst vs, and although wee were the diligentest and
circumspectest in the world, yit shall wee not fayle too bee taken 
                     •
                  ardie
with many things, and too fynd our selues hindered when wee
should serue God: and yit notwithstanding, all this passeth and slippeth
away, and wee mynd it not at all. Therefore let vs bethinke
our selues, and learne too redeeme the tyme, that is too say, the mo occasions
there bee too prouoke vs too naughtinesse, and too pull vs away
from God, the more let euery of vs inforce and streyne himselfe
too doo good. For wee be woont too take the corruptnesse of the time
for a cloke too couer our sloth and vnlustinesse withal, and so wee beare
our selues alwayes on hand, that it is lawfull for vs too play the vnthriftes
among vuthriftes, as the prouerb sayeth. If a man tell vs
that wee must liue indifferently and vpryghtly: how shall I doo then,
will euery man say? A man cannot buy a pennywoorth of apples
without some deceyt: and how then may I deale in wares or marchaundyze?
Agein, if a man tell vs that wee must liue soberly and

                     •
                  tayedly,: yea, (say wee) but who dooth it? If a man speake too vs
of pacience and myldnesse, and such other things: Is it not apparant
(say wee) that euery man behaueth himselfe cleane contrariwyze?
Shall I bee al alone in the world? Lo how wee make vyce our buckler
ageinst God, & ageinst all the warnings that are giuen vs, as who
should say, that bycause it is common, therfore it ought too serue vs for
an acquittance or discharge. But contrariwyse it is sayd heere, that
wee must take so much the more peyne too redeeme the tyme, and the



more that the diuel laboreth to hinder vs, & the more meanes and wyles
that he hath too doo it withall, the more must euery of vs imploy himself
manfully, and waken vp all his wits and vnderstanding, praying
God too strengthen vs, and too giue power too risist him. Thus
yee see that our redeeming of the tyme must not bee by making of temporall
(and worldly) gayne, for in that behalf wee neede nother counsell
nor incoragement, euery man is too much inclyned that way of his
owne nature, and our lustes are so fyrye, as they will not suffer vs
too bee flothfull in that cace. But sith wee see the deuill goes about
to trubble vs, that we should not spend our lyues in the seruing of God:
let vs redeeme the tyme in that respect. And after what manner? In
that he speaketh of redeeming, (raunsoming, or buying agein) he presuppozeth
that we must forgo & looze the thing that we were desyrous
too haue kept. For when wee bee too redeeme a thing that was gone
out of our handes, or (too buy) a thing that wee neede, or too (compound
for) a thing that another man withholdeth from vs: in those
caces wee forgo some peece of our profit. If another man haue layd
hold of a thing that were for my commoditie: I must giue him a peece
of mony too get it out of his hand agein. Euen so is it sayd, that wee
must redeeme the tyme. And after what manner? Not alwayes with
gold and siluer: but by forsaking our owne lustes. It is true that
some tyme gold and siluer must bee spent about it. For if worldly
riches turne vs away, or plucke vs backe from following whithersoeuer
God calleth vs, wee must redeeme the tyme, that is too say, all
that euer wee perceyue too bee noysome and offensyue after that sort,
must be thrust vnder foote. Howbeeit there are many other meanes besydes.
For some are so snarled in their ambiciousnesse, as this world
hath altogither rauished them, and they take no tast of the euerlasting
lyfe, for any thing that can be preached vntoo them. Othersome bee
giuen too deceyuing, and others too extorsion. According then as euery
man sees the Diuell able too win of him, and too make him to looze
his tyme, by consuming it in wicked things: so let him redeeme it,
that is too say, let him reforme himselfe, and forsake both himselfe and
all the temptations wherwith he myght bee intangled. Yee see then,
that the thing which wee haue too marke vppon this streyue, is, that
considering the corruptnesse which is now adayes throughout the
world, and the great number of outrageous vyces, and how all things
are quite out of order, and (too bee short) that euen the perfectest men



are somwhat infected with the vyces, and disorders that are euerywhere:
in stead of seeking vayne excuce, by alledging that wee bee
weake, and vnable to ouercome the great number of impediments that
are offered vs, wee must redeeme the tyme.
               Now the only meane too doo it, is too vnderstand that Satans
thrusting of vs downe after that sort, is no sufficient discharge for vs
before God: for if wee resort vntoo him, he will giue vs armour and
weapon too hold out the battell withall, vntill wee haue gotten the victorie.
But howsoeuer the cace stand, let it not greeue vs too lay away
the things that wee lyked of, and too hold our wicked affections as it
were imprizoned, and then will it bee easy for vs too followe the thing
that Saint Paule sayeth heere, that is too wit, too bee watchfull and
heedfull that wee walk aduyzedly, euen as VVyzefolk, and not as
fooles. Wee haue seene alredy heretoofore, that if wee profit in Gods
schoole as wee ought too doo, wee shall haue a sure rule, and cannot bee
deceyued nor seduced. For God knew what wee haue neede of, and
he hath not forgotten too shewe vs any thing. And therfore Saint
Paul presuppozeth that although we be blynd wretches, although we
be ouerwhelmed with the darknesse of this world, although the diuell
haue manie suttleties & wyles to wynd about vs: yit if wee bee good
schollers too Godward, and suffer our selues too bee ruled by him and
his woord: wee shall haue sufficient wisdome, and wee shall not bee able
too say, that we offended vnwares: for God is forecasting ynough
too rule our whole lyfe, at leastwyse if wee herken too all that he sayth,
and yeeld our selues easy and willing too bee taught. If it bee so: then
may wee surely bee wyse, as Saint Paule requyreth.
               And in deede he expoundeth him self by and by after in saying, that
we must not be vnwyze, but wel aduyzed, & vnderstanding what is
the wil of God. He sheweth here what maner of wisdome he meaneth.
It is not as the world speaketh of it. For the world sayth, a mā is very
wyse whē he is suttleheaded to deceyue, & can skill to keepe him self frō
his enemyes, & maynteyn himself by his shifting & pollicie. Or else, the
wisdome of the world is also to lay wel aforehand for a mans own profit,
whether it be by hooke or by crooke. For there is no talk of the feare
of God, there is no talk of equitie, & much lesse of single & playne dealing:
bycause that he which wil bee wyze to the worldward, must beare
two faces in one hood, he must bee malicious, he must be ful of lying.
As for him that walketh in truth, he shalbe counted as a do
                     •
                  terell, for



he makes him self a 
                     •
                  ayt for euery man too pray vpon. He that will
not turne nother too the ryght hand nor too the left, shall lykewyse bee
called an idiot. Yee see then that the wisdome of the world cannot bee
without leaudnesse &Psal. 
                        〈◊〉
                      b. 10. euill conscience. But S. Paul following the sayings
of the scripture, namely that the beginning of wisdom is the feare
of God,Prou. 1. a. 7.& 9. c. 10. and that the feare of God is the perfection of it also: telleth vs
that when wee bee skilfull in Gods will, then are wee wyze. His intent
then is vnder these woords too condemne all the crafts, cautells,
and suttleties that men vse, and wherin they welter themselues, and
wherof they boast, and too shewe that all such stuffe is but lothsonmesse
before God. What manner of wisedome then shall there bee in vs?
(ynough) if wee knowe what the will of God is. Yea, but in the
meane whyle how shall wee behaue our selues towards the world?
God will so blisse our simplicitie, as wee shal not fall intoo the s
                     •
                  ares
of the wicked. For we heare our Lord Iesus willeth his disciples too
bee simple as doues,Math. 1
                        •
                     . b. 16. (which are sillie birds, and soone scared away)
and yit neuerthelesse too bee wyze as serpents. God therfore will not
suffer vs too bee fleeced and eaten vp by the the wicked, though wee
liue simply and playnly, aud haue none of all the worldly shifts too resist
them. Let vs but only 
                     •
                  etake our selues to the keeping of our God,
and hee will giue vs wisdome ynough. Howbeeit the cheef matter is
not too haue skill too maynteyne our selues in this world, and too disappoynt
men of dooing vs wrong and iniurie. Wee m
                     •
                  st begin hygher:
that is too wit, at the ruling of our lyfe in such wyse as God may
allow of it, and wee shewe our selues to knowe with what 
                     〈◊〉
                   he
hath set vs in this world, and too what end he hath created and rede
                     •
                  
                  med
vs, namely that wee should come too the inheritance of heauen.
That is the way for vs too bee ryghtly wyze.
               Agein, although this doctrine seeme straunge too such as are plundged
in the world, and vtterly heathenish without knowing whertoo
they bee called: yit notwithstanding if wee looke throughly intoo it,
wee shall see it is not vniustly sayd,Psal. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . b. 10. & Prou. 1. a. 7. & 9. c. 10. that there is no wisdome but the
feare of God. For what doo all they which will needs auaunce themselues
by their couetousnesse, ambition, and other trads of theirs? It
is certein that they do manifestly prouoke Gods wrath ageinst themselues:
and oftentymes they receyue the reward which they deserue,
for they spin ha
                     •
                  tars, both for themselues and for their children: insomuch
that wheras they h
                     ••
                  ed too inriche themselues, or to mayntayne



themselues in great 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and too leaue an euerlasting rememberance
of themselues in their houses heere: God dooth so curse all their
attempts, that the more they hoord vp, and the hygher that they clyme,
the more horrible is their fall and confuzion, so as the goods which
they had heaped vp, are turned too their vndooing, at leastwyse too
the worldward. But put the cace that their prosperitie hild alwayes
at one stay: yit doo wee knowe that our happinesse consisteth not in
this transitorie lyfe which is of no continuance, but is as a shadowe
that vanisheth out of hand. What shall we then thinke of the man,
which being created after Gods image, redeemed by the blud of our
Lord Iesus Christ, and adopted too bee companion with the Angels,
dooth notwithstanding play the beast wilfully, by forgetting what he
himself is, yea and euen the pryce of his saluation? If a man which
is created too inherit euerlasting lyfe, bee contented with the hauing
of a three or foure dayes pleasure heere beneath, and neuer passeth for
all the rest: must it not needs be that Satan hath bewitched him, and
bereft him of all vnderstanding and reason, and finally made him lyke
a brute beast? For if a mans sonne forsake his fathers house, and the
sustenance that is prepared for him there, and runnes
                     •
                  oging abrode
too haue a twoo or three dayes pleasure, whether it bee in whoredome
or in any other laudnesse, and within a whyle after becomes a begger,
and hath not a morsell of breade too eate: wil not the world say,
that such a chyld is starck blynd, & woorse than mad? Now let vs compare
this too the heritage that is prepared for vs in heauen, and was
purchaced so deerly for vs: Let vs see wherin it excelleth our wicked
and cursed lusts: Let vs see whither those men doo cast themselues
which shrink away from God, and what their end is lyke to bee, when
they bee so gone away from the welspring of lyfe, and of all welfare
and ioy. So then, had wee any setled vnderstanding, surely wee
would no more think it straunge, that the trew wisdome of men is too
liue in the feare of God. For that is the thing wherin all our welfare
consisteth, as it is sayd in the Psalme. So much the more therfore
dooth it stand vs on hand, too mark well this lesson, where S. Paule
telleth vs,Psal. 
                        〈…〉
                     . that wee shall euer bee as straungers from all welfare, so
long as wee seeke not too obey God.
               Besyds the things afore sayd, wee haue also too mark, that (as I
sayd afore) there is not any other rule, than the framing of our lyfe according
too Gods commaundement. Would we then that God should



allow of vs, and lyke well of vs? Letvs vs not rest vppon our owne
intents, nother let euery of vs bee giuen too much to stand in his o
                     •
                  ne
conceyt, and too say, this seemes good too mee, it must needes be so, for
I lyke well of it. Let vs beware of such ouer holdnesse, and let vs offer
our selues too our God, assuring our selues that wee cannot doo amisse
in obeying him, inasmuch as it is our whole wisdome too inquyre
of his will. Now▪ can wee say that our Lord hath hidden any
thing from vs that was for our behoof too knowe? No▪ for he protesteth
that hee will shew vs the way of lyfe,Iohn. 14. a. 6. so wee be not s
                     •
                  ubborne, but
bow downe our heads with one accord too bee subiect too his woord.
The same was protested long afore of the Lawe,Deut. 30. which notwithstanding
was but dark in comparison of the Gospel: for there wee haue
the full and perfect syght. Now therefore let vs not alledge that wee
bee rude and grosse, nother the veryest idots in the worlde thinke
too scape at that starting hole, by saying, I am no diuine, I neuer
went too schoole. For God hath stooped in such wyse, that all of vs
from the moste too the least may bee taught familiarly by his woord,
so there be no replying nor geynsaying in vs, but that we suffer our
selues to bee guyded and gouerned by his will.Es
                        •
                     i. 4. c. 19. And his will is manifest
vntoo vs, as he protesteth by his prophet Esay. I haue not spoken
vntoo you in secret (sayeth he), I haue not sayd in vayne, seeke
mee, whosoeuer seeketh mee, I will bee at hand with him, and shewe
him familiarly whatsoeuer is for his welfare. To be short, S. Paule
presuppozeth heere (as he sayeth too the Colossians,Coloss. 
                        •
                     . d. 28.) that when the
Gospell is preached vntoo vs, there wee shall fynde a faultlesse wisedome,
by meanes whereof wee shall haue a very certein way: and
therfore let vs beware that wee swarue not from it one way nor other.
               It is trew that all men shall not be so wel inlyghtened as were
requisite: but whereupon is that to be wyted, but vpon our owne fault
and negligence? And agein, although many simple soules atteyne not
too such knowledge, as myght leade them and direct them perfectly
too the seruing of God, according too their hartes desyre: yit notwithstanding,
all they that submit themselues humbly too Gods woorde,
and receyue it, and giue themselues too it, and beare such reuerence towardes
it as they ought too doo: shall surely haue a good loadstarre to
leade them too the heritage of heauen, although they drag their legges
after them, and bee not so well aduyzed as were too bee wi
                     ••
                  ed. For
this cause Saint Paule rebuketh al them of vnthankfulnesse and stubbornnesse,
too whom the Gospell is preached, if they bee not sure what



Gods will is, for that sheweth them as much as is for their 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
It is trew that God will not make vs too s
                     •
                  ye aboue the cloudes, nor
feede our curiositie, as a number desyre, who would haue speculations,
and are fond too heare some newe things, and would 
                     〈◊〉
                   euery day
chaunge of speeche too tickle their eares withall. But God will not
followe our fancies so farre. He will teache vs the things that are behooffull
for the bri
                     •
                  ging of vs vntoo him. And what would we more?
That therfore is the thing which wee haue too remember vppon this
saying of S. Paules.
               Now then let no man thinke it straūge that the wretched world is
so runne astray, that euery man peakes away alone by himself, and
there is nothing but confuzion euerywhere, as wee see (for example)
among the poore Papistes, who 
                     •••
                  tir themselues 
                     〈◊〉
                   of all measure,
and yit fayle so much of comming vntoo God, that they go from
him through their misaduyzed and brutish zele. And why? For they
passe not a whit for Gods will: but euery man followes his owne fancie,
and all of them excuce themselues vnder pretence of good intent.
By that meane hath the world bin peruerted, by that meane haue all
things bin put out of order, and by that meane hath all certeintie bin
taken away: euen bycause that in sted of Gods will, which ought too
bee so apparant as euery man myght 
                     •
                  ow downe his necke too it, too
receyue the yoke that is layed vppon him, men haue taken leaue and
libertie too doo what they thought good of themselues. Forasmuch
then as Gods will hath bin so despyzed, and men haue bin so di
                     •
                  elishly
bold and 
                     •
                  uer weening, as too behaue themselues after their 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
                     •
                  windge: it did put all things to confuzion, and the disorder of it is
so great yit stil, that it ought to make vs shudder too thinke vppon it.
So much the more therefore dooth it stand vs on hand, too hold our
selues very soberly in awe, by submitting our selues too God and his
pure woord, and not too wander one way nor other, 
                     •
                  eeing that all
our wisedeme con
                     •••
                  eth therin. That is the thing which w
                     •
                  e had too
remember further, in Saint Paules setting downe of Gods only will
for the full rule of all things. But wee cannot frame our selues therafter,
vnlesse wee take our leaue of all our ticklish lusts, and of al that
seemeth good in our owne eyes, & suffer God to reigne ouer vs, and to
haue such maystership among vs, that wee nother adde any thing too
his pure woord, nor take any thing from it.
               Saint Paule could well haue sayd singly, that wee must walke as



folke well aduyzed. But he addeth also on the contrary part, that
vvee should not bee fooles and vnvvyze, to the end to shew that
it is but a mockerie when men say, I am letted by other folkes▪ I
haue not the meanes too followe my booke, that I myght doo good at
it, or I am a poore simple soule, or a 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ or a handicrftes
man. Therfore too cut of this geere, S. Paule tell
                     •
                  th, vs that although
they which weene themselues too bee wyzest, are but fooles▪ yit notwithstanding
God will remedie such as suffer themselu
                     ••
                   too bee gouerned
by his woord. Howbeeit let vs marke (as I sayd afore) that
it is not for men too aduaunce themselues, or too bee so proud as too
thinke that they can gouerne themselues as they ought too doo: for
the beginning of our wisedome is too be fooles in our selues,1. Cor. 3. d. 18. as hath
bin shewed in the first too the Corinthians. But on the one syde there
is presumptuousnesse, so that very fewe can humble themselues in
such wyse, as not too be styll plucked backe and hindered by their
owne opinions: and (on the other syde) othersome are so rechlesse, that
although they haue their eares dayly beaten with Gods woord, yit
they continue dull styll for all that can bee doone. So much the more
behoueth it vs too marke well the warning that is giuen vs heere:
which is, that too bee well taught in Gods scoole, wee must not
bring any whit of our owne reason, nother must wee thinke our owne
deuyces good, but wee must bee fooles in our selues, that is too say,
boyde of our owne reason, and wee must giue place and open way too
Gods woord, so as wee accept without any geynsaying whatsoeuer
is vttered by his mouth.
               Heereuppon Saint Paule comes backe agein too certeine particular
and speciall exhortations, as he had begonne too doo before, and
first he sayth, that the faythfull ought too keepe themselues vvell
from beeing drunken vvith vvyne, vvherein there is disorder.
As if he should say, that wee must haue such stay of our selues in our
eating and drinking, and so vse the good thinges that God hath
ordeyned for our sustenance, as too take measurable repast of them,
and not make our selues lyke brute beastes. Now, that wee may
profit our selues well by this doctrine, wee haue too marke first of all,
too what end our Lord hath appoynted foode and all other things that
are for our sustenance. What then is the lawfull vse of wyne, of water,
of bread, and of all other vittelles? Uerily too feede our selues
with them, according too the neede of our infirmitie, and too susteyne



vs so in lyfe, as 
                     〈…〉
                  
doo homage too him of whom wee hold our lyfe, and by whom it is
maynteyned, yeelding him thankes for his fatherly liberalitie: and
secondly keepe our selues occup
                     ••
                  d euery man according too his degree,
and according too the abilitie that is giuen him. Thus yee see
that the lawfull vs
                     •
                   of mea
                     •
                  e and drinke, is too susteyne vs: not that
wee myght bee as blockes of timber, but that euery of vs myght occupye
himselfe in 
                     〈◊〉
                   the thinges that God hath ordeyned, too
the behoofe of his neyghbour, and too the earning of his owne liuing
honestly: and specially aboue all things, acknowledge the benefytes
that God of his infinite goodnesse best
                     •
                  weth vppon vs, that he may
bee glorifyed in all things, as it is sayd in another place. Now then
wee see that meate and drinke ought too serue too leade vs to God.Colos. 3. c. 17. For
is it reason that when God shall haue reached out his hand too powre
vppon vs the benefytes that wee receyue of him, he should notwithstanding
go vnknowen, and wee still cram our selues heere at his cost,
and yit forget him? Were not that too leaud and detestable a beastlinesse?
Therefore although meate and drinke bee helpes too our feeblenesse,
yit ought wee too referre all vntoo God. In deede it seemeth
at the first syght, that wee bee letted and hindered too doo good, as well
by eating and drinking, as also by sleeping. It is very trew: and therby
God sheweth what wee bee. But on the other syde wee must come
also too the recompence of it, that forasmuch as the tyme is after a
sort lost whyle wee take our repaste, bycause wee cannot apply our selues
too the seruing of our neyghbours (during that tyme:) our forslowing
in that behalfe may as it were spurre vs too resort vntoo God, by
considering what his goodnesse is towardes vs, according to the proof
that he setteth before our eyes. Thus yee see (as I sayd) that although
our eating and drinking doo hinder vs too the worldward: yit ought
they on the other syde too gyue vs occasion too bee more cheerefull in
seeking God.
               But now let vs see what excesse woorketh. If a man cram himself so
full, that he becommeth vnweeldie, there is a chaunge in his nature,
and it is all one as if he were at defyance with God and with nature,
and with all order. For (as I haue sayd already) meate and drinke
are ordeyned too strengthen vs, that wee may apply our selues to the
things which God commaundeth, and our vocation requyreth. Now
therfore, when a man is so pampered as he can no more, first he hath



defyled the sustenance that God gaue him▪ and secondly he chaungeth
himselfe intoo a beast, and (as much as he can) defaceth the image of
God. Moreouer God is forgotten. Is not this vnkyndnesse monstruous,
as though a man would mingle heauen and earth toogither? But
this is not yit all: Saint Paule addeth heere the vpshot of all enormitie
when he sayeth, that in drunkennesse and in all royot there is
loocenesse, that is too say, men oue
                     •
                  shoote themselues, putting away
all shame, forgetting all honestie, and becomming wyld beastes. Wee
see that one of the properties of drunkennesse is too driue men eyther
intoo whoredome, or intoo some other leaudnesse, and too cast them into
so sound a sleepe, that they perceyue nothing at all: let a man mocke
at them, let him spit in their faces, they feele nothing of it. Agein,
whatsoeuer commes at their toungs ende, out it goes, bee it ryght or
wrong, and they will as soone blaspheme God, as speake vnius
                     •
                  ly of
men: for there is no discretion at all in them. Now when men are
thus caryed away, and wheras God had printed his image in them,
too make them reasonable creatures, and giuen them an excellent state
aboue all other lyuing wyghtes: they fall too playing of the beastes
after that fashyon, & become lyke Asses and dogges: must it not needs
be vnderstoode, that drunkennesse is one of the detestablest things that
can bee? So then, Saint Paule ment too shewe vs heere in one word,
that although there were no trew feare of God in vs too restreyne vs,
nor wee so well aduyzed and discrete as too consider the trew and lawfull
vse of the venefytes that God hath graunted vs: yit wee should
refrayne for shame of the world, forasmuch as wee see that a drunken
man is as a confuzi
                     •
                  n too 
                     〈◊〉
                   all order, and there is nothing too
be seen in him but a lump of all lea
                     •
                  dnesse, insomuch that Gods image
is defaced, all reason que
                     •
                  ched, and all things put out of order in him.
Therfore sith wee see that drunkennesse is matched with such extremities:
ought we not too abhorre it? And although S. Paule haue giuen
heere but a short glaunce at the enormicies that happen through drunkennesse:
yit wee must consider, that in the same he hath also in generall
comprehended all the rest. The thing then which wee haue too
remember vppon this streyne, is, that wee must bee sober, and haue a
stay of our selues in our eating and drinking, and that although there
bee abundance before vs, yit wee must bee so discrete in taking of our
repaste, as our meates and drinkes doo not comber vs▪ The very heathen
men sawe that: and no 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ for it is a knowledge that cannot



bee wyped out, that wee must eate and drinke too li
                     •
                  e, and not liue
to eate and drinke: and agein, that we must take our 
                     ••
                  paste to strengthen
vs, and too make vs able too doo our 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ and no
                     •
                   too make
vs vnweldie. For it is certein, that bread and wy
                     •
                  e and meates are
not ordeyned too cast men downe: but forasmuch as men should else
decaye for famine,Psal. 104. b. 15. our Lord reneweth them, and giueth them their
strength, according too this saying of the Psalme, that wyne gladdeth
mans hart, and bread strengtheneth it. And so yee see, what wee haue
too remember in the first place.
               And seco
                     •
                  dly let vs consider, that when God suffereth men to ouershoote
thēselues into al leaudnesse, so as they be vtterly without stay of
thēselues, without honestie, without shame, & euery man sees them to
be as brute beasts, and they themselues perceyue nothing, but are as it
were cast vp at randon to al shamefulnesse: it is a ryghtfull punishment
layd vppon them by God for abuzing of his liberalitie, and for gl
                     •
                  tting
of themselues without any measure. Lo heere the payment
which this vnhallowing of Gods benefyts deserueth, when wee cannot
vse them according too his ordinance, and according too the rule
that he hath set by his woord, and imprinted in our harts. For though
wee had neuer heard one woord, nother of the Lawe nor of the Gospell:
yit are wee sufficiently 
                     〈◊〉
                   euen by beholding the order of
nature, which the very heathen men considered. And heere wee haue
too remember, that the mischeef is dubbled when men step asyde, and
giue ouer themselues (from euill too euill) by degrees: and therfore
much lesse ought it too serue too lessen their fault as wee see (a number
would haue it too doo), who when they cannot deny but that they
haue done amisse,, fall too this shift for their last refug
                     •
                  , saying, O,
yee may see, I was ouertaken with the wyne, my wits were intoxicate
after I had once drunk. Behold (I pray yee) howe they that
cannot start asyde one way nor other, would fayne haue their drunkennesse
too serue too acquit them before God. But so little can that stand
vs in any stead, that contrariwyse wee shalbee so much the more giltie.
And in very deede, if Lawes were well ordeyned, a drunken man
should haue dubble punishment, when he had commit
                     •
                  ed any offence
through his vnsobernesse. And why so? For he was woorthy of punishment
alredy for vnhalowing of the benfyts which God had dedicate
                     •
                  
to our vse, that they myght moue vs too resort vnto him. Wheras
he gaue them in witnesse of his fa
                     •
                  herly goodnesse, the partie 
                     •••
                  
                  zed



them after that fashion, and what a trayterousnesse is that? drunkards
then deserue one punishment for that. Agein, for asmuch as they
bee drawen too euill dooing 
                     •
                   farre of, as though they had confederated
themselues with Satan: they ought too bee punished agein, for
that they will needs excuze and cloke themselues. For although the
lawes of men haue not alwayes that consideration, or that men obserue
not that which ought too bee obserued: yit notwithstanding, they
that giue ouer themselues after that sort, and let themselues looce intoo
all leaudnesse through their vnsobernesse, shall bee driuen too answer
afore God, for defyling of the things which God had sanctifyed too
his seruis, and wherin he had put a mark of his goodnesse, too the intent
too drawe vs vntoo him by the same. Then if all bee peruerted
in our eating and drinking: must wee not yeeld an account before
God, for our abuzing o
                     •
                   the benefyts that he had bestowed vppon vs,
contrarie too his intent, as though wee were mynded too prouoke him
wilfully too anger? Seeing then that drunkennesse makes men so
beastly, as too forget themselues in such wyse, that Gods image is defaced
in them, and they become lyke doggs and Swyne, and Asses:
sith wee see our selues so disfigured (say I), yea and (woorthie) too bee
reiected of God as horrible monsters: and that wee doo also lay open
our owne shame aud dishonestie before men: ought not euery of vs atleastwyse
too bethink himself aduyzedly, and too brydle our lusts in
such sort when God giueth vs meate and drink, as wee fall not intoo
excesse? Yis: and so 
                     •
                  ee see in effect what wee haue too remember
vppon this streyne. And if wee cannot be so perfect as were 
                     •
                  equisyte,
let vs sygh for our faults, and in any wyse beware that wee play
not the beasts in eating and drinking, that God may bee so honored of
vs as he ought too bee, not only by our dooing of homage too him for
our lyfe, but also by taking continuall occasion by our meates too bee
prouoked too resort vntoo him. And let vs vnderstand, that he giueth
vs euen now some taste of his loue, too the end that in wayting for the
full inioyment therof, wee may learne too forsake the world, and serue
him with the willinger mynd, knowing that he is not only our mayster,
and hath al superioritie and dominion ouer vs, but also our father,
and is desyrous too win vs by his godnesse.
               Now let vs fall downe before the maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faults, praying him too make vs so too feele
them, as wee may truly repent vs of them, and alwayes resort vntoo



him too ask him forgiuenesse of them in the name of our Lord Iesus
Christ, and he beare with vs vntil he haue drawen vs quyte and cleane
away from all the corruptions of the world and of our flesh, and that
wee bee so reformed as wee may seeke nothing, but by all meanes too
come too the perfect ryghtuousnesse wheruntoo he exhorteth vs. And
let vs all say, Almyghtie God heauenly father.
            
            
               The .xxxviii. Sermon, which is the sixth
vppon the fifth Chapter.
               
                  
                     18▪ And bee not drunken vvith vvine, wherin is loocenesse: but
bee yee filled with the Spirit.
                     19. Talking among you in Psalmes, Praysinges, and spirituall
songs, singing and making melodie in your hart too the
Lord.
                     20. Giuing thankes alvvayes too our God and father▪ for all
things in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ▪
                     
                     21. Beyng subiect one too another in the feare of God.
                  
               
               
                  WEe ha
                     •
                  e seene this morning how God is
offended when men abuze the benefytes
which he would haue to be applyed 
                     •
                  o such
end as he sheweth by his word: & therfore
that all exce
                     ••
                  e and drunkennesse ought too
bee shunned of the faythfull, bycause they
knowe that God sheweth himself a father
toowardes them, by nurrishing them in
this world: howbeeit not as when they
shal bee come too the heauenly heritage,
but by hauing at leastwyse some tast of his goodnesse: for they be continualy
confirmed in the hope which is giuen them by our Lord Iesus
Christ. Now if in sted of beeing drawen vpward, men become so
brutish, as to looze all reason and māhood: it is an vtter peruerting of
the order of nature, it is as a defying of God for his owne ben
                     •
                  fytes.
But yit when drunkenesse draweth a long tayle after it, and men



flush foorth into all lea
                     •
                  dnesse, so as they bee past all shame, and yit
their shamefulnesse may make folke too loth and abhorre it: the mischefe
is increaced so much the more. And therefore too the intent
too kepe vs in sobrietie and orderly conuersation: Saint Paule sayth,
wee must keepe our selues from being so ouercome and vanquished
of wyne.
               And now on the contrarie part he addeth, that vvee must rather be
filled vvith the Spirit. For they that burst themselues so with eating
and drinking, and keepe no measure, tyll they can no more, doo well
shewe that they haue no feeling of the kingdome of God, ne neuer
tasted what the heauenly lyfe is. This remedie therefore is ryght
conuenient too correct all the excesses and superfluities that reigne among
heathenish men, and such as neuer conceyued any incling of
Gods grace and spirituall benefytes. Lyke as if a man that were
emptie, should deuoure & swallow vp al without chawing, it were rather
an ouerlaying of his stomack, than a taking of sustenance and repast:
and therefore if another man sawe that vyce in him, he would
restreyne him: euen so is it with all such as haue inordinate lustes: it
is a token that they bee too emptie. And wherof? Of fayth, of the
feare of God, and of the ioy which is in the holy Ghost: and that they
know not a whit of Gods goodnesse and fauour toowardes them, nor
of the grace which he sheweth vs in our Lord Iesus Christ. For had
we once our bellyes full of such vittelles, surely we would not play the
Wolues in rauening, but wee would keepe mea
                     •
                  ure. That then is
the cause why Saint Paule sayth, that wee must bee filled with the
holy Ghost. As if he should say, that the despyzers of God, and such
as haue none other religion but too lyue at ease heere, and too haue all
their delyghtes and pleasures, are excessiuely full, beyond all reason
and measure. And that is a defyling of Gods benefytes, and a despizing
of the order of nature, as I sayd afore. Now then if yee bee so
sharpe set too knowe what God is, and what it is too profit in his
woord: come your wayes to deuoure it, as they doo which haue eaten
no meate a twoo dayes afore: bee not afrayd of eating too much of
that foode, for it will neuer burst our soules. Therefore let vs hardily
cram our selues with the giftes of Gods spirit, and with his Ghostly
benefytes, wherby he feedeth vs in the hope of the heauenly lyfe:
for in so dooing wee cannot doo amisse: but wee cannot giue head too
our lustes, in taking foode for the bodie, but there will by and by followe



some euill and offence. The matter which wee haue in effect too
remember vppon this streyne, is, that all they which glut themselues
after that fashyon, and cannot satisfie themselues but by playing the
beastes: shewe well that they haue not so much as one drop of fayth,
nor of the feare of God, nor of religion in them▪ but that their bellye
ouerruleth them, and that they bee so subiect thereuntoo, as too their
peculiar & principall Idoll. Now seeing it is so, let vs learne to long
after the foode of our soules. And forasmuch as it is liberally offered
vs from day too day, insomuch that it is Gods whole desyre that wee
should haue all that suffyzeth for our saluation: let vs sharpen our appetytes
too take such repast, and then shall wee bee sure that (our other)
meates shall not allure vs too such gluttonie, that wee shall become
as vnsatiable gulfes, but wee shalbee contented with the hauing
of that which is meete for vs, and sufficient for our necessitie, at leastwyse
too our behoof.
               Furthermore this similitude which Saint Paule vseth, must not
bee thought straunge, when he sayth, that wee must drinke our fill
of Gods spirit.Esai. 55. 
                        •
                     . 1. For wee knowe that the Prophet Esay sayeth, that
Gods spirit is lykened too Water, and too Milke, and too Wyne,
wherby wee bee inuyted too come vntoo God, to take our repaste, and
too haue whatsoeuer is behooffull for vs. Come on (sayeth he) and
take at your pleasures both Milke, Wyne, and Water, without money,
or monyes woorth. Hereby therfore God declareth vntoo vs, that
wee shall haue abundance of all spirituall benefites, and sufficient too
content vs too the full, if so bee that wee will but open our mouthes
(as it is sayd in the Psalme) and not bee so forepossessed of our owne
inordinate lustes,Psal. 
                        •
                     1. b. 11. as wee cannot fynd in our hartes too seeke the principall.
That is the further meaning of the similitude that S. Paule
vseth heere.
               Now forasmuch as this doctrine is so yll put in vre euerywhere, we
ought to thinke the better of it. If a mā consider how great emptinesse
there is in them that professe Christianitie: (he shall fynde that) they
can scarsly say three woordes too yeeld confession of their fayth, for
had they any in their hartes, surely their mouthes would vtter it, according
too this saying,Rom. 10. b. 10. that wee beleeue with the hart vntoo ryghtuousnesse,
and confesse with the mouth vntoo saluation. Howbeeit, if
wee bee desyrous too bee filled: wee neede not too bee counselled too
go seeke the things that wee neede: wee neede but onely too receyue



the foode that is profered vs and set afore vs. Yea, and this serueth
well too vpbrayd vs with our leaudnesse, in that wee voutsafe not too
go vntoo God though he call vs, nor too make account of that which
he offereth vs. Wee will not forget too eate and too drinke for refresshing
of our bodyes: and yit that will not content vs nother: for wee
could fynd in our hartes too cobble vp (as yee would say) the whole
world. Yit notwithstanding euen the soberest are willing too haue
their ordinarie repaste. The other sort doo cram in meate and drinke
a foure or fyue tymes a day, and in the meane whyle the wretched
soules of them are hungrie still. Therefore wee must beare in mynd
that the warning which Saint Paule gyueth vs heere, telleth vs, that
too bee sober and well ruled, and too vse measurably the benefites that
God bestoweth vppon vs: the soule must not bee forgotten, but wee
must feede vppon the spirituall giftes, too leade vs too the heauenly
lyfe, and too maynteyne vs in the hope therof, vntyll the full possession
and fruition thereof bee gyuen vs at the comming of our Lord Iesus
Christ.
               And hereuppon Saint Paule addeth, that vvee should talke toogither
in songs and hymnes, and also that the same should be done
vvith the hart: bycause the toung would but vnhalowe Gods woord,
if the mynd match not with the speeche. Now wheras he sayeth, that
wee must talke toogither in hymnes, praysings, and songs: it is too
correct all fond talke, wheruntoo wee bee too much giuen. For wee
see that all of vs haue as it were itching eares: there is none of vs
which is not well apayd too heare tryflyng bibblebabble: he that hath
receyued in on the one syde, is ready too delyuer out on the other syde:
and so the day passeth away in things of nothing: or else our talk shall
bee wanton and looce, meete too infect good manners, and God shall
bee offended with it. Yee see then, that the thing whertoo men are too
much inclyned, is, that too please one another, they banish all talk that
may edifye, and common of pelting tryfles too moue laughter, as they
say. Now Saint Paule perceyuing this vyce to be ouer common in
the world, sheweth vs heere the remedie of it, that is too wit, that wee
should talke one too another in songs and hymnes, that is too say, that
men myght heare the prayses of God at our mouthes. And he pursueth
styll the similitude that he had vsed heretoofore. For drunkards
are not contented too become beastes themselues: but they doo also
drawe others. And ryot hath alwayes this inconuenience with it, that



men incorage one another too drinking,Esai. 2. d. 13. & 56. d. 12. & VVisd. 2. b. 6▪ & 1. Cor. 15. d. 32. saying: come on, let vs eate
and drinke, after the same maner that the Prophet Esay speaketh of.
Forasmuch then as Ryotters, after they haue well stuffed themselues,
would that the same vyce should raunge abrode euerywhere: Saint
Paule sayeth on the contrarie part, that when wee haue taken our repaste
of the giftes of Gods spirit, the same must not serue for our selues
onely, but also too giue refection and foode too others that haue
neede. The trew feasting therfore which wee ought too make one too
another too cheere our selues well, is that he which hath profited in
Gods woorde, indeuer too deale some part and portion of it too his
neyghbours, according too his owne measure. Nowe he vppeneth
heere Songs, Psalmes, and Hymnes, which differ nothing at all one
from another: and therefore I neede not too buzie my selfe in setting
foorth any curious distinction of them. For all commeth too this end,
that all our myrth should euer tend too the glorifying of God. And
surely we should take pleasure ynough in the mynding of Gods grace,
if wee were not withh
                     ••
                  d by our owne maliciousnesse.
               And it is a woonder too see how desyrous euery man is, that God
should shewe him self liberall and louing towards him. Wee would
fayne inioy his benefytes, and yit in the meane whyle we put the rememberaunce
of them vnder foote, and labour (as much as in vs is)
euen too burie them: and too our seeming, the tyme is lost that is spent
in acknowledging how many wayes wee bee bound vntoo God: and
yit notwithstanding it is the thing wherin wee ought too occupie 
                     •
                  ur
selues, it is the thing wherin our lyfe ought too bee cheef
                     •
                  yest imployed.
And soothly if men were well aduyzed, there is no mirth comparable
too this, nor meete too bee matched with it, namely with the acknowledging
of how many wayes God hath witnessed his goodnesse
and loue towards vs. For (as I sayd) it serueth too further vs in the
hope of the heauenly lyfe. And vndoutedly, none of the things that
wee receyue at Gods hand haue any trew sauerinesse, vnlesse we come
too put our trust in him, and can call vppon his name, and flee too him
for refuge, and yeeld him his dew and deserued prayze. And therfore
let vs marke well what is sayd heere, namely that when wee talk one
with another wee must alwayes magnify Gods name. Trew it is, that
wee cannot atteyne too such perfectnesse in this lyfe, but that wee must
bee fayne too haue much communication of the needs wheruntoo wee

                     •
                  ee subiect, and of the dooings and dealings which wee haue one with



another, and of dyuers things besyde. But yit for all that, the principall
poynt must not therfore bee let alone, and cast behynd our backs:
that is too wit, wee must not foreslowe too acknowledge the benefyts
wherby wee bee bound vntoo God, and therby bee prouoked too prayse
him, so as euery of vs not only doo his dewtie in secret, but also drawe
one another too it by mutuall example. That therfore is the pith of
the things which wee haue too remember in this strey
                     •
                  e.
               Now by the way Saint Paule dooeth vs too vnderstand, that wee
must sing vntoo God in spirit, too the intent wee imagin not too discharge
our selues as a number of hipocryts doo, which magnifye God
alonly with their tung, hauing their harts full of coldnesse still within.
Heere therfore he setteth downe twoo things which ought not too bee
put asunder. The one is, that wee should sing vntoo God, and the other
is, that wee should talk with our neyghbours. The whole ground
then of our matter is, that the benefyts which God hath bestowed vppon
vs, should bee commended, and that the rememberance of them
should prouoke vs too loue him and serue him, and too giue our selues
wholly too him, too seeke him, and too knowe that too cleaue vntoo
him, is our full happinesse. That is the ground of the matter that S.
Paule setteth vs downe heere. Now first of all wee must (sayeth hee)
sing vntoo God: and that cannot bee doone but with the hart. For we
knowe that God accepteth not any thing which is not agreable to his
owne nature. Then if wee will so sing as he may alow of it, and as
hee may accept our songs: wee must goo too it with a hartie affection.
For if there bee any counterfetting in our dooings, so as wee
make a greate shewe before men, and in the meane whyle bee nigardly
in our harts, and haue no zele at all, so as all is doone but for fashyons
sake: surely wee vnhallowe Gods name in so dooing. And euen
for the same did he say by his Prophet Esay,Esay. 29. d. 13. that such as came neere
him only with their lippes,Math. 15. a. 8. were farre of from him in their harts.
Therfore let vs markMa
                        •
                     k. 7. a. 6. well how it is sayd heere, that too sing Gods
prayses, the hart must go before, and (as yee would say) make a thundering
within. For it is the cheef melodie that can bee, and therin
wee agree with the Angels of heauen. For if the mouth speake alone,
surely it is but flat mockerie. And although men allow of vs for it: yit
dooth God refuze our paying of him with such coyne, that is too say,
with follies and things of nothing.
               Notwithstanding, when wee shall haue bin zelous in the praysing



of God, a
                     •
                  d he can well bee our iudge and witnesse, that wee lay open
our harts before him: then must wee also doo 
                     •
                  ur dewtie towards our
neyghbours, that euery man may be incoraged and tolled foreward by
our example. And heere wee see first of all, how little account is made
of God now adayes. For all the countenance that men make of singing
his prayses, is but a howling and yelling. It is one of the grossest
abuses in papistrie, that they think that God ought too hold him
self well apayd, when they haue barked at their parchment, as they
say. But in so dooing the holy scripture is vnhalowed, torne in peeces,
yea and vtterly falsifyed. Howsoeuer the cace stand, there is nother
aduyzednesse, wit, nor vnderstanding in their dooings: for it is ynough
with them that the throte hath yelled it out aloud. Yea and euen
among vs too, it is certein that such as pretend to set foorth Gods
prayses, doo commonly seeke nothing but too glorifye themselues by
it, and keepe backe the principall in making countenance too pay
God some peece of their arreerages. Agein, let vs consider how cold
and s
                     •
                  ender this exercyze of talking one too another in songs, hymnes,
and prayses of God, is among vs. For hardly can one woord bee
wroong out of vs that may edify. Leaud talk can by no meanes bee
banished frō vs: all the world shall heare vs sing vnchaste and ribauldly
songs: and such things cannot be plucked out of mens mynds.
But then ought this matter too bee rayzed out of the holy scripture.
Howsoeuer the cace stand, if men pardon themselues, they shall answer
for it before God, according too the sentence that Saint Paule
pronounceth heere by the authorie of God, and by the power of his holy
spirit.
               And by the way let vs marke, that his touching of three woordes
heere togither, which import all one thing, is not for nought. It is
too shewe that wee shal haue ynough wherwith too interteyne one another,
if wee acknowledge the s
                     •
                  ndrie benefytes that God hath bestowed
vppon vs, as becommeth vs. If varietie delyght men: let
vs consider how manie wayes God layeth foorth the tre
                     •
                  sures of his
goodnesse toowardes vs. Looke how many there bee of them, so
many 
                     〈◊〉
                   are there, and if wee had a hundreed melodyes too delyght
vs in all the things that wee occupye our selues about, it were
nothing in comparison of the inestimable diuersitie of benefites which
wee receyue at Gods hande. Saint Paule therefore hath heere cor
                  
                     •
                  ected
our vnthankfulnesse, by adding these dyuers woo
                     •
                  d
                     •
                  s, too



shew that it must needes bee that wee bee too dull, if wee bee not moued
when our Lord stirreth vs vp so many wayes, seeing wee cannot
set our mynd vntoo any thing, but his benefytes must needes come in
our syght.
               For the same cause also he addeth, Yeelding alvvayes thankes.
As if he sayd, that if wee were well aduyzed, the continuall repeting
of Gods prayses, and the harping vppon them should neuer greeue
vs nor weery vs. And why? Seeing that God continueth his benefyting
of vs, is it not reason that there should bee an answerablenesse
on our part, too hold out in dooing him honour for his good turnes?
Dooth any one day passe wherein wee receyue not at the least a hundred
good turnes at Gods hand? Now is it meete that wee should
thinke, that when wee haue thanked him a twyce or thryce for the
greate number of benefytes which we receyue of him al our lyfe long,
we haue leyzure to occupy our selues otherwyse euer after? When as
our Lord renueth and refresheth the rememberance of his goodnesse:
were it not meet that wee should bee moued by it? Therefore it behoueth
vs alwayes too marke well this saying, whereby Saint Paule
declareth, that wee bee tootoo vnmyndfull of God, if wee bee not prouoked
too acknowledge his benefytes from yeere too yeere, from
mooneth too mooneth, from day too day, and from houre too houre,
and too yeeld him the sacrifyze that he requyreth of vs, which is, that
wee shoulde protest our selues too bee wholy at his will, too bee beholden
too him for all good things, and that it is impossible for vs too
performe the hundreth part of our dewtie, according as wee heare
how Dauid sayeth, What recompence shall I yeeld vntoo the Lord
for all the goood that he hath doone mee?Psal. 
                        •
                      6. b. 12. 13.
                  Psal. 40. a. 6. I will receyue the cup of saluation,
and call vppon his name. And in the fortith Psalme he sayeth
expresly, that the order which God keepeth in gouerning vs, is so
woonderfull a thing, as it passeth the heares of our heades in number,
insomuch that wee must needes bee amazed at it. And therefore seeing
wee cannot come at the infinite goodnesse of God, though we indeuer
too apply all our wittes thereuntoo: al leastwyse let vs ame toowardes
it. And lyke as wee see that God is neuer werie of shewing
him
                     •
                  elfe liber all towardes vs, but floweth continually as a founteyne,
yea euen by so many streames as are able too sati
                     •
                  fie vs in all things:
let vs also shewe continually without ceassing, how much we be bound

                     〈◊〉
                   beholden to so good and kynd harted a father.
               
                  And he addeth yit further, that vvee must thanke God for all
things. Whereby he dooth vs too wit, that men are too blockish, in
that they consider not how many wayes God allureth and spurreth
them, notwithstanding the slothfulnesse that is in them. As if he
should say, my freendes, considering how much wee bee bound vntoo
God, both in respect of our bodyes, and in respect of our soules, can
wee comprehend it? No, it is not possible: for wee haue too small
and narrowe a wit. And when wee haue after a sort comprehended
Gods benefytes, yit haue wee not tung too expresse nothing neere
how much wee bee bound vntoo him. So then, of whom is it long
that wee bee so cold, that as soone as wee haue spoken but one woord,
wee thinke it is ynough, and that we bee discharged till another
tyme, and returne too it agein as slowely as may bee? whereof commeth
such slacknesse? Euen of our shetting of our eyes. Although
God shewe vs by all meanes, that it becommeth vs too bee occupyed
in blissing his holy name: yit will not wee see it one whit. Agein, as
touching the bodie, we beare our selues on hand, that our goods come
too vs eyther by our owne cunning, or by good fortune, or by fauour
of the world: as for God he is alwayes let alone: and as for his goodnesse
wee thinke not on it. Now then, when wee intend too doo our
de
                     •
                  tie in yeelding God his dew prayse, which is the cheef sacrifyze
that he requyreth (as I sayd afore:) let vs haue regard too cons
                     •
                  der
better what wee bee,Psal. 116. b. 12. c▪ 17. and what our state is, and how wee bee subiect
too so many necessities, as God must bee fayne too succour vs i
                     •
                  finite
wayes. And when wee haue considered our wretchednesse both in bodie
and soule, and on the contrarie part also considered how God prouydeth
for all, and suffereth vs not too haue any penurie without rel
                     •
                  ef
at his hand: surely wee shall haue wherwith too continue the praysing
of his holy name without ceassing. And Saint Paule will haue vs,
not onely too thanke God for the benefites which wee feele apparantly:
but also although he afflict vs, and handle vs diuerse tymes otherwyse
than wee would: yit will he haue vs too prayse him styll, after
the example of Iob,Iob. 5. a. 1. 
                        •
                     . 21. who (as wee see) not onely thanked God when he
had his children at his table, and they made merry in feasting one another:
but also when he was bereft of his issew, and left desolate in his
house: when all his goods were taken away, partly by robbers, and
partly by lyghtening that fell from heauen: and when he was so miserable,
as it seemed that Lyce should eate him vp, he ceassed not too



say, The Lord hath giuen, the Lord hath taken away, blissed bee the
name of the Lord. So then, Saint Paule sheweth vs, that euen in
our sorowes, and when wee receyue chastizements that are rough and
bitter too vs, yit let vs not grudge ageinst God, but rather perseuer in
praysing his name,Phil. 4. a. 6. as he exhorteth vs in another place, (where he
sayeth) that in praying too him wee must alwayes prayse him. Although
wee haue not the things that wee craue,1. The
                        ••
                     . 5. c. 18. and that in our peticions
wee shewe our selues too want this and that, and are pinched with
greefe and care: yit must thanksgiuing be mingled still with our prayers.
There are a great number that pray vntoo God: but yit they do
but prouoke Gods wrath, bycause they intermingle their grudgings
and repynings, g
                     •
                  ashing their teeth at him. They will in deede say,
My God, helpe mee. But which is that God? If they could plucke
him out of heauen, they would doo it with all their hart, too the end he
myght haue no more power ouer them. Ye see then that a number thinking
too pray vntoo God, doo but prouoke him to wrath, bycause their
requestes are full of pryde, spytefulnesse, and defyance. And therfore
Saint Paule telleth vs too the Philippians,Phil. 2. a. 6. that all our petitions and
requestes must bee matched with thanksgiuing, too shewe that wee
doo paciently abyde too bee gouerned by the hand of God. Likewise
in this text he sayeth, that wee must thanke God for all things, not only
when wee bee in prosperitie, and all things fall out as wee would
wish, so as God giueth vs our hartes desyre, and wee lyue in delyght
and pleasure: that is not the onely fit tyme and season too yeeld praise
vntoo God: but although he squoorge vs, yit must wee acknowledge
that he procureth our saluation (and welfare) by that meane. Let vs
see then, if wee haue not cause to blisse God in all our aduersities? Yis:
For first, whatsoeuer betyde vs, he beareth with vs: insomuch that if
he should touche vs but with one of his fingers in good earnest: wee
should bee ouerwhelmed at the first blowe. Seeyng then, that wee
hold out, it is a token that he spareth vs: and haue not wee cause too
thanke him for it? Agein, when he turneth his chastizings too our benefyte,
for that he purgeth vs by that meanes, too further vs continually
therby too the kingdome of heauen, and too lift vs vp bycause wee
bee too much tyed too the world, too the end wee should bee gathered
toogither, too come too the full perfection that is prepared for vs in
heauen: when wee see all this, haue wee not cause too prayse our God,
notwithstanding that wee bee full of greefe, care, feare, and doubtes?



Yis certeinly, but that our owne vnthankfulnesse hindereth it. So
much the more behoueth it vs too marke well the thing that S. Paule
telleth vs heere, namely that wee haue cause too praise God without
end or ceassing. And if our mouth bee stopped sometymes with grief,
so as wee seeme too bee barred from praysing God, and wee cannot
apply our selues freely theruntoo: let vs vnderstand that God neuer
sheweth himselfe so rough and rigorous towardes vs, but that he asswageth
the bitternesse which is in our afflictions, too the intent too
drawe vs vntoo him, and that wee myght thanke him, and glorify him
for it. Forasmuch as wee receyue no grace but by the meanes of
our Lord Iesus Christ, who dooth also turne the corrections too our
welfare, which wee should suffer as punishments for our sinnes: therfore
it is sayd, that vvee should yeeld thankes too our God and father,
namely by our Lord Iesus Christ. Now he setteth downe on
the one syde, God the father: and afterward sheweth how God is our
father in all respectes: that is too wit, by meanes of the mediator,
through whom we be reconcyled vnto him, and he hath so put away al
our sinnes, that whatsoeuer things we can indure in this world, are all
furtherances of our saluation,Rom. 8. c. 28. as is sayd of them in the Epistle too the
Romans. And heere wee haue to marke first of all, that without fayth
wee cannot prayse God as we ought to doo, insomuch that whatsoeuer
prayses wee sing with our mouth, all is but feyning and hipocrisie, except
wee bee throughly perswaded that God is our father. And
marke heere what is ment by fayth. It is not as the Papistes suppoze
it, namely too beleeue that there is a God in heauen, and in the
meane whyle too knowe no whit of his will: but Saint Paule telleth
vs, wee must bee throughly resolued, that God accepteth vs for his
children, or else wee shall neuer bee able to prayse him with a pure
and free affection. And how may that bee doone, but by being grounded
vppon the free adoption, wherethrough he taketh vs too him for
our Lord Iesus Christes sake? For is it by inheritance, or for
any woorthinesse of ours, that God is our father, and wee his children?
Alas no:
                     
                        •
                     phe. 1. a. 3. but cleane contrariwyse, wee bee called the children
of wrath: and God must needes disclayme vs, bycause there is nothing
but sin and wickednesse in vs. Then 
                     •
                  ntill wee come too our Lord
Iesus Christ, it is certein that wee cannot bee sure of Gods fauour,
nor that he will accept our 
                     •
                  eruice. And therefore Saint Paule hauing
sayd, that wee must y
                     •
                  eld thankes v
                     •
                  to God in and for al things,



bycause he is our father: dooth iustly adde, that that is doone by our
Lord Iesus Christ. Then let vs vnderstand, that all they which are
afrayd of Gods maiestie, and cannot trust him, nor rest vppon the
promises of his fauour, too call vppon him as their father: can neuer
prayse him. In deede they may well vse some Ceremonies, but all
shal bee but leazing. Therefore whensoeuer wee wil pray vnto God,
and yeeld him prayse and thankes, fayth must leade the way. Marke
that for one poynt.
               Howbeeit, (as I sayd afore) it is vnpossible for vs too bee grounded
in any certeintie of fayth too take God for our father, vntyll wee
knowe that wee bee made one in our Lord Iesus Christ, and that forasmuch
as wee bee members of his bodie, we bee also parttakers of
the benefytes that he hathe purchaced, so as his death and passion are
our ryghtuousnesse, his holinesse our clenzing from all our own defylementes,
and the sacrifyze which he hath offered dooth set vs cleere,
and drawe vs out of the damnation wherin wee were, and finally hath
set vs free from the bondage of sin, and purchaced vs full ryghtuousnesse.
Forasmuch as wee haue all these things in our Lord Iesus
Christ, therefore ought wee also too geue thankes vntoo God by his
meanes. And that is the cause why the Papistes cannot frame so
much as one request, that God alloweth. Yea and in very deede, they
bee as good as dumb. For though a man may heare Hymnes and
Canticles ynow (as they terme them) among them: yit cannot God
bee praysed at their handes. For although they wynd vp all things
with this saying, By our Lord Iesus Christ: yit doo they not beleeue
that God is mercifull too them, nother are they woorthie of it, bycause
they disclayme our Lord Iesus Christ, and doo so intangle him with
patrons and aduocates of their owne forging, as a man cannot discerne
him from others, insomuch that they coope him vp in a corner,
or else set him behynd in the reerward, whyle in the meane tyme there
is hunting after the merites and intercessions of Saintes, and that
is their trust, that is the moother of their diuelish presump
                     •
                  ion, namely
that they can make amendes (for their sinnes) and redeeme themselues.
But as for vs, when as it is told vs that wee must thanke God
in all things: it is too the end that wee should alwayes abace our
selues. And for that cause did I say, that fayth openeth vs the way
as wel too pray vntoo God, as also too giue him thankes for the benefites
that wee haue receyued at his hand.
               
                  Now heerupon Saint Paule addeth, that wee must bee subiect
one too another in the feare of Christ, or in the feare of God, for
any of bothe will fit the text wellynough. In saying that wee must bee
subiect, he sheweth, that lyke as God will haue his children too exercyze
themselues in his prayzes: so also he wil no
                     •
                   haue them too bee
vnprofitable heere beneathe, but too serue one anothers turne. For
inasmuch as wee bee not able too doo God eyther good or harme: therfore
is he contented that wee doo but prayse his name. For though
we imploy all our abilitie: what is there in vs wherwith too inriche
God, or too aduauntage him? For the giueth vs all things, and needeth
nothing him self. Therfore is it an inestimable goodnesse, in that
he quitteth vs of all that wee can owe him, so wee protest our selues too
bee so greatly beholden and bound vntoo him, as wee cannot discharge
our selues of it. Then if wee come with all humilitie, and confesse
the bond wherin wee stand bound vntoo God: it is the payment that he
requyreth of vs, and (for his owne part) hee seeks no more. But yit
he will haue vs seruisable one too another, and not too seeke our priuate
profit in such wyse, as too forget that wee bee knit toogither in
one mutuall bond of charitie. That is the thing wheruntoo he intendeth
to bring vs now in this text. Now a man myght think it straunge
at the first blush, that he should say, wee ought too bee subiect one too
another. For it seemeth not meete that the father should bee subiect
too his children, the husband too his wyfe, or the magistrate too the
people whom he gouerneth, yea, or that euen they also which bee equal
in degree, should bee subiect one too another. But if wee looke well
vppon all things, wee shall fynd that Saint Paule hath not without
cause put all Christians vnder this subiection. For why? The magistrats
which are aduaunced in authoritie and glorie aboue other
men, are bound neuerthelesse too those whom they gouerne, for they
bee not ordeyned rulers for theyr owne saks, but for the common welthes
sake. For Gods ordeyning of Principalities, kingdomes, and
States, was not to the end that some should haue preheminence aboue
others: but for that it is for our behoof too haue some brydle too hold
vs in obedien
                     •
                  e vnder lawes, and too haue some power and authoritie
ouer vs, and to stand in feare and awe of magistrats, bycause wee cannot
forbeare such a remedie. Seeing then that God hath set magistrates
in such state: it is certein that they be therfore subiect too those
whom they ought too serue in reigning ouer them. As much is too



bee sayd of fathers. It is trew that the father ought too bee honored
of his children. Yit notwithstanding, forasmuch as it is an honorable
tytle, it shal cost them ryght deere, if they gouerne not their housholds
discreetly. And in that gouernment there is also subiection. Lykewyse
is it betweene the husband and the wyfe. For is it not a subiection
that the husband beareth with the frayltie of his wyfe, and hath
the discretion too forbeare rigour towards hir, holding hir as his companion,
and taking vppon him a part of hir burthen both in sicknesse
and in helth? Is not that a subiection? yis. Not without cause then
dooth Saint Paule pronounce heere generally, that all they which
will proue themselues faythfull, must bee subiect one to another, namely
euery man in his state and degree. Let them that are hyghly aduaunced
consider well, that Gods aduauncing of them, is too the end
they should the willinglyer submit themselues too beare the paynes
and cares that belong too their office: and let such as are inferiours vnderstande,
that they ought much rather too humble themselues, and
too beare the yoke that is layd vppon their necke. And let such as are
equals and fellowes, (vnlesse they will needs bee as wood beasts, and
are loth too maynteyn any c
                     •
                  urtisie among them) consider neuerthelesse,
that euery mā ought to beare with his neyghbors. And is not this
a subiection? Wee cannot liue one with another without forbearing.
Now surely al forbearing importeth bo
                     •
                  dage,Rom. 13. b. 8. therfore must we be serued
for necessities sake. According wherunto it is said in another place
that wee must owe nothing but that which charitie byndeth vs vntoo.
And heerin wee see what a statelinesse it is, when any man shall say,
what owe I vntoo you? It is trew that men may well vpbrayd one another,
that they owe them no dewtie: but they must step yit further.
And that is the cause why Saint Paule setteth downe the feare of our
Lord Iesus Christ, or of God. As if he should say, If wee were here
without a God, and that euery man would get alone by him self: wee
myght well hold scorne one of another, and say, I passe not for thee.
Trewly, yit were it a greate and intollerable follie too say, I passe
not for thee. For the richest man that can bee deuyzed, dooth notwithstanding
stand in neede of a hundred folks helpes, yea of all mens
help. Then is it a greate ouer statelinesse too thrust away our neyghbours
after that fashyon, vnder colour that they can nother boote vs
nor hurt vs. And it is apparant that wee bee too blynd in so dooing.
But put the cace wee myght say, I passe not for thee, I owe thee nothing:



yit must wee come too God, who is our head. For when he did
put vs intoo this world, he linked vs togither, and would haue vs too
serue one another in charitie▪ and wee knowe there is none other bond
of perfection but charitie: and charitie bringeth a bondnesse with it.
So then, although I owe a man nothing as in respect of him self: yit
doo I owe him somwhat as in respect of God. And that is the thing
whertoo Saint Paule bringeth vs backe. As if he should say, Consider
with your selues that yee were not created and put intoo the world,
but with condition that yee should serue euery man his neyghbours.
Otherwyse, if yee shrinke asyde one from another: it is lyke as if yee
would cut asunder the sinewes of the body, too the intent it should fall
in peeces, yea and that our Lord Iesus Christ who is our head, might
haue no more too doo with vs. They then that will needes play the
wyld beastes, and cannot fynd in their hartes too stoope too any bondnesse
too their neyghbours, must go lyue abrode in the wyld woods,
for they bee not woorthy too lyue among men. For wee see how God
hath knit vs toogither, and therby separated vs from the brute beastes,
and yit notwithstanding bound vs one too another. Now if wee wyll
needs shake off this yoke, is it not a playne bewraying that we thinke
not our selues beholden for any thing too our Lord Iesus Christ, and
that wee bee loth too bee ruled by his hand, or too submit our selues too
the order wherunder he hat
                     •
                   put vs, and which he would haue too bee
kept without breaking? So then, forasmuch as euery of vs is so wedded
too himselfe, that wee cannot submit our selues one too another:
let vs beare in mynd that which Saint Paule hath set downe for vs
heere. For it is the very sauce that will make vs fynde taste in this
doctrine, that is too wit, that if wee feare God, and can fynde in our
hartes too submit our selues quietly too his wyll, it must not greeue
vs, nother must wee thinke it irksome and straunge, that euery of vs
should serue them whom he is bound too serue, and by that meane so
maynteyne his degree, as we may all linke toogither vnder our head
Iesus Christ, and atteyne too the heauenly glory which he hath purchaced
for vs.
               Now let vs fall downe before the Maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him too make vs so too feele
them, as it may drawe vs too trew repentance, and make vs too profit
in it from day too day, and too examin our myseries in such wyze, as
wee may bee moued too call vppon our God for remedie, that he may



clenze vs and defend vs from them, vntyll he haue brought vs too the
perfection of ryghtuousnesse, which we ought too labour for, and from
which wee bee yit farre of, and in the meane whyle he so beare with
vs, as wee may not ceasse too haue the priuiledge of calling vppon
him as his children, and also haue wherefore too thanke him through
our Lord Iesus Christ, bycause he hath by his holy spirit sealed the
adoption in our hartes, wherby he holdeth vs fast too him, and that
wee may so perseuer in fayth and hope, as wee may euer persist in acknowledging
the manifold benefytes which he addeth one vppon another,
and learne too receyue them so at his hand, as they may be made
holy vntoo vs, both by fayth and thanksgiuing. That it may please
him too graunt this grace, not onely too vs, but also too all people and
Nations of the earth. &c.
            
            
               The .xxxix. Sermon, which is the seuenth
vppon the fifth Chapter.
               
                  
                     22. VVyues, bee subiect too your husbandes, as too our Lord.
                     23. For the husband is the head of the vvyfe, as Christ is the head
of the Church, and lykewise is he the sauiour of the bodye.
                     24. Therefore as the Church is subiect vntoo Christ: so also let
vvyues bee subiect to their husbands in all things:
                     25. Yee husbandes loue your vvyues, as Christ loued the Church,
and gaue himselfe for it.
                     26. Too sanctify it, clenzing it in the vvashing of vvater through
the vvoord.
                  
               
               
                  
                  WEe haue seene heertoofore how euery of
vs is subiect too his neyghbours, and
that wee cannot otherwyse lyue one with
another, than by dooing some duetie as
of subiection. And forasmuch as that
mislyketh vs, bycause euery of vs coueteth
too bee aboue his fellowes, and wee set so
much store by that loftinesse, that it is
hard for vs too stoope: wee haue seene also
that if wee feare God, wee must not
thinke it straunge, that wee should submit our selues too our neyghbours,
for God created vs with that condition. Yee see then in generall,
that charitie doth so bynd vs one too another, that we ought not
too disedeyne this man, nor too loth that man, or too count the third
man vnworthie to haue any seruice done vnto him. For as in respect
of God, wee must eyther bow downe our necke, or else our stubbornnesse
wil turne too our decay. And now Saint Paule passeth further,
and sheweth that there are certein degrees among men. For although
the foresayd rule doo stand generally: that is too wit, that euery of vs
must indeuer too performe his duetie: yit notwithstanding, there is
also a greater subiection particularly of the sonne too the father, of
the wyfe too hir husband, and of vnderlings too their superiours, than
there is indifferently among al men. I haue told you ere this, that there
is a brotherood euen betweene the furthest straungers on the earth, bycause
they bee all of one common nature, and euery man must
needes acknowledge himself indetted too other. Howbeeit when
God hath knit folkes togither in a streyter and holyer band: euery
man must looke neerlyer to himself. For when a wyfe is matched too
hir husband, shee is giuen him for a help, and shee is a part of his bodie.
Also there is a speciall subiection, so that although the husband
bee superiour in authoritie: yit is that no let but that he also is bound
too his wyfe: for shee is his companion both too lyue and dye with
him. Lykewyse is it with children towardes their fathers, and with
fathers towardes their children, eche one in his behalfe and calling:
as subiects towardes theyr princes and superiors, and seruantes
towardes their maysters. Yee se then that the thing which we haue to
treate of as now, is, that we must generally liue in charitie one with another,
indeuering too discharge the duetie that God byndes vs too,



according too our abilitie: and therewithal, not de
                     •
                  pyze the order that
God hath set among vs, but rather bee prouoked so much the more too
doo our duetie, knowing that if wee refuze that condition, wee make
warre ageinst God.
               And now let vs come too mariage: which is not a thing ordeyned
by men. Wee knowe that God is the author of it, and that it is solemnized
in his name, and the Scripture sayeth, it is a holy couenant,
and therefore dooth it call it diuine. Now then, if a wyfe bee
stubborne and froward, and cannot fynd in hir hart too beare the yoke:
although shee doo wrong too hir husband, yit dooth shee more wrong
too God. And why? For it is his will that that bond should bee inuiolable:
and behold, a mortall creature will needes breake it, and
plucke it asunder. Wee see then that in so doing, shee bendeth hirselfe
ageinst God. On the other syde, when the man will needes rule after
his owne lyking and fancie, and despyze his wyfe, or vs
                     •
                   hir cruelly
and tyrantly: he sheweth himselfe too despyze God, and too defye
him openly. For he ought too knowe too what end he was created,
what the state of wedlocke is, and what lawe God hath set in it.
The thing therefore which Saint Paule calleth vs vntoo, is that
in all states wee should haue regard of God. For so long as our eyes
rest vppon them with whom wee bee conuersant, surely wee shall alwayes
fynd excuces ynow & too many, to exempt our selues from all
lawe. The husband may alledge, I haue a spytfull and stubborne
wyfe: or else shee is proud, and coy▪ or hath a wicked head of hir owne:
or else is talkatiue. Agein, another perhappes is a drunkard, another
an ydle huzwyfe, & another of some other leaud disposition. To be
short, there is not that man which may not haue some colour, if hee
keepe not the faythfulnesse and honestie of mariage, as becommeth
him. The wyfe also for hir part shal not bee vnprouyded. For now
and then hir husband may hap too bee testie and riottous, and too haue
small regard wheretoo God hath called them. Some are ill husbandes
and hunters of Tauernes (and ale houses:) or else playe the
vnthriftes in gaming and lyght behaueour. Some are whoremongers,
some gluttons, and some drunkardes. And so euery woman
myght pretende some excuce too exempt hirself from hir dewtie. But
when wee come too God, wee must bee fayne too cast our heades in
our bozom, for it will not boote vs too stand checking ageinst him.
Although the men misbehaue themselues on the one syde, and the women



on the other▪ yit wil not God haue the mariage to be brokē or dissolued
therby, sauing the diuorce (I meane) which our Lord Iesus declareth.
But the (other) vyces that are in a husband must not impeache
the wyues subiection & obedience vnto him. Agein, though
the wyfe bee not found to bee as shee ought too bee, yit may not the
husband shake hir of, and rid his handes of hir, what shift soeuer he alledge:
but Gods ordinance must alwayes stand firme, and the bond
which wee haue by his woord, must be inuiolable. This is the thing
that wee haue too remember vppon that sentence.
               The world seeth how ill this lesson is put in vre: but wee must consider,
that the roote of the mischeef is, that in mariage fewe or none
haue an eye vntoo God. In deede Gods name shall runne roundly ynough,
and euen the wickeddest could fynd in their harts that he should
blisse them & make them to prosper: but that in their marying they put
themselues intoo his hand and guyding, and call vppon him vnfeynedly:
that is no poynt of their meaning. Some seeke welth and gayne,
and othersome pleasure and voluptuousnesse. In lyke cace is it with
the women. And no maruell though the ende bee out of all order,
when the beginning was so out of square. For God must needs bee
reuenged on his part, when he is so lyghtly esteemed and despyzed.
Therfore let vs learne too mark well this lesson of Saint Paules, that
lyke as mariage was ordeyned of God: so they that are too enter intoo
it, must betake themselues wholy vntoo him, and make him their refuge,
knowing that it is he which byndeth the man and the wyfe the
one too the other, and which knitteth them toogither, and therfore that
eyther of them looke too their owne dewtie.
               Wheras he sayeth concerning wyues, that they owe subiection too
their husbands: wee haue too mark, that this subiection is dubble. For
man was alredie the head of the woman euen before the sin and fall of
Eue and Adam.3. Tim. 2. d. 13. And Saint Paule alledging the same reason, too
shew that it is not meete that the wyfe should reigne in equall degree
with hir husband, sayth, that the man came not of the woman, but the
woman of the man, and that shee is but a peece of his body. For God
could haue created Eue of the earth as well as he did Adam, but hee
would not. Nay rather he matched the man and the woman toogither
with such condition, that the man knowing his wyfe too bee as his
owne substance and flesh, should bee induced therby too loue hir, (as
wee shall see agein heereafter:) and that the wyfe knowing hir
                     •
                  elf too



haue none other being but of the man, should beare hir subiection paciently,
and with a willing mynd. For if the hand being a member of
the bodye, shoulde refuze too stande in his owne place, and woulde
needes settle itselfe vppon the crowne of the head: what a thing were
it: So then if wee looke backe too the creation of man and woman:
the husbande on his syde o
                     •
                  ght too bee induced too loue and cherishe
his wyfe as him selfe: and the wyfe seeing shee was taken out of the
substance of the man, ought too submit hir selfe quietly vntoo him, as
too hir head.
               But there is also another bond,Gene. 
                        •
                     . a. 6. & 1. Tim. 
                        •
                     
                     ▪ d. 14. which dubbleth still the subiection
of the wyfe: for wee knowe that shee was beguyled. Women therfore
must remember, that in being subiect too their husbands, they receyue
the hyre of Eues sin: and they must consider, that if mariage
had continued sound and vncorrupt, there had bin nothing but ioy both
for man and wyfe. For knowe that things were blissed of God, and
there was not any thing which shoulde not haue turned too gladnesse
and felicitie. But now although Gods blissings shyne foorth euery
where bothe aboue and beneathe: yit are there alwayes tokens of
cursing imprinted in them, so as wee cannot behold nother heauen nor
earth, nor any other creature, but wee may partly perceyue that God
is become a straunger too vs, bycause our father Adam fell from that
noble and excellent state, wheruntoo he was created afore. This is
too bee seene euery where in all things, and specially in mariage. For
women ought too feele the frute of their sinnes: and men feele ynough
of it for their parte. For surely if Eue and Adam had continued in
the ryghtuousnesse that God had giuen them, the whole state of this
earthly lyfe had bin as a Paradise, and mariage had bin so beautifyed,
that man and wyfe being matched toogither, should haue liued in such
accord, as wee see the Angels of heauen doo, among whom there is nothing
but peace & brotherly loue, and euē so had it bin (with vs.) Therfore
as now when a man hath a curst and shreud wyfe, whom he cannot
weeld by any meanes: he must consider with him self, Lo heere the
frutes of original sin, and of the corruption that is in my self. And the
wyfe also on hir side must think, good reason it is that I should receyue
the payment that commeth of my disobedience towards God, for that
I hild not my self in his awe. Thus much concerning the woord subiection,
which is set downe heere.
               Now Saint Paule in saying, As too the Lord, meaneth not too



make men equall with God, or with our Lord Iesus Christ: for that
were too greate an ouersyght: but he sheweth that the feare and reuerence
which a woman ought too beare vntoo God, and the subiection
which shee oweth too hir husband, are twoo things that cannot bee put
asunder: lyke as when he exhorted vs erst too link toogither in mutuall
subiection:Ephe. 5. d. 21. he added this saying, in the feare of God. And why?
For if wee pretend too honour God, and to obey him, and in the meane
whyle reiect and despyze our neyghbours, so as euery of vs is wedded
too him self, and will needs be exempted from all lawe and rule: it is
too grosse hipocrisie. Also if a wyfe pretend neuer so great deuotion,
and seeme too bee throughly seasoned with the feare of God, and in the
meane whyle bee a feend, so as there is nothing but scolding and brauling,
and wrangling, and such other thinges with hir at home in hir
owne house: therin shee shewes hir selfe not too haue one sparke of the
feare of God, forasmuch as shee dooth so holde scorne of hir husband
who is hir head, and as it were Gods lieftenant in that behalf. Therfore
let vs marke that Saint Paule hath not set downe this similitude
too match husbandes (who are mortall creatures, yea & very woormes
of the earth) in equall degree with Iesus Christ: but too shewe breefly,
that forasmuch as our Lord Iesus hath authoritie ouer mariage,
men must haue an eye vntoo him, and euery person submit himselfe paciently,
bycause no man can refuze his part, without despizing of him
which wyll haue wedlocke maynteyned with mutuall dewtie, so as
the man loue his wyfe, and the wyfe be subiect too hir husband. That
is the pith of the matter which wee haue too remember vppon this
streyne.
               Now then let wyues looke well too their dewties, and vnderstand
that when they contend with their husbandes, it is all one as if they
would reiect God▪ bycause he hath not created them otherwyse than
with condition, and too the end they should bee subiect too their husbandes.
Trew it is that they will bee soo proud and stately, as to say,
Should my husband haue my head vnder his girdle? Yea, but the
wyfe that dooth so, sheweth that shee is loth that God should haue any
authoritie ouer hir, and would fayne put Gods Lawe vnder hir foote.
Howbeeit, forasmuch as there is none other shift but women must
needes stoope, and vnderstand that the ruine and confuzion of all mankynd
came in on their syde, and that through them wee bee all forlorne,
and accu
                     •
                  sed, and banished the kingdome of heauen: when women



(say I) doo vnderstand that all this came of Eue and of the womankynd,
(as Saint Paul telleth vs in another place:) there is none
other way for them but too stoope,1. Tim. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪ d. 14. and too beare paciently the subiection
that God hath layd vppon them, which is nothing else but a warning
too them too keepe themselues lowely and myld. But if they
lyft vp themselues ageinst their husbandes, and cannot fynd in theyr
hartes too bee ruled by them: it is as it were a setting of their seales
too the sinne of Adam and Eue, and too the disobedience by them committed,
too declare that they be not willing that God should heale that
wound agein, notwithstanding that it bee deadly. Now, when they
doo so make warre ageinst the grace of God: what can come of it but
vtter confuzion? But the wyues that are leaud headed, will not think of
that: but yit is it registred before God, and they must bee fayne too
yeeld an account of it too their vtter confuzion. And therefore let vs
looke that wee keepe this warning better, too the end that euery man
may glorify God in his owne house.
               Also let the husbandes thinke vppon their duety. For although
(to speake properly) they be not subiect to their wyues, bycause their
wyues haue no authoritie ouer them: yit are they aduaunced too that
honor of superioritie with certeyne conditions: namely that they should
not bee cruell towardes their wyues, nor thinke all things graunted
and lawfull which they lift, but that their authority should rather bee a
companionship than a kingship. For doubtlesse the husband in not his
wyues head, too oppresse hir, or too make none account of hir: but let
him vnderstand, that the authority which he hath, dooth bynd him so
much the more too hir. For seeing he is the head, he ought too haue
discretion and skill how too guyde his wyfe and his houshold. And
what is the way too bring that too passe, but too vse gentlenesse and
myldnesse, and too beare discreetly with the frayltie which he knoweth
too bee in his wyfe,1. Pet. 3. b. 7. according as Saint Peter exhorteth vs. Yee
see then that husbandes must so requyre obedience at their wyues
handes, as they themselues must therwithall doo their owne duetie,
and consider that they shall not bee borne with before God, if they
giue their wyues cause too lifte vp themselues so ageinst them. For
it is certein that if the husband deale discretly and vpryghtly, the wyfe
shall stoope too him, and our Lord will so dispoze hir hart, as the
house shal bee quietly guyded. But the first and cheefe poynt is, that
God bee called vppon. For though a man vse all the meanes that



can bee, yit if he trust to his owne wit, he shall but loose his tyme. And
why? Bycause God will laugh his presumption too scorne. But if
husbandes consider that God holdeth folkes hartes in his hand, and
boweth them as he listeth, and thereuppon doo pray him too giue
them grace and power too win their wyues, that they may agree with
them, and humble themselues too them: them shall they perceyue that
God woorketh in that behalfe. But most commonly it is to be seene,
that men deale roughly with their wyues, and thinke too win them
by playing the termagauntes, so as they sticke not too brooze their
bodies, yea somtymes that the blud followes. These are hangmen
and tormentors that will so martir their wyues: asd yit notwithstanding
they will alledge the superioritie that God hath giuen them.
That superioritye is not diuelish, nother serueth it too make men
lyke brute beastes: but too maynteyne good order and gouernment.
               But the women on their syde doo for the most part inharden themselues:
and when rhey are too marrie, they neuer thinke vppon the
things that God sheweth and teacheth them by his woord: hardly shal
a man fynd one among a hundred, that prayeth vntoo God when shee
is vppon the poynt of mariage. No boubt but they heare it well ynough
sayd, that the husband must be the head: and (they themselues
will say,) very well: it is true, that if I haue a husband, he must bee aboue
mee, for so is the fashyon of the world, and I must abyde it.
But in the meane whyle there shalbee such ouerweening, or rather diuelish
stoutnesse in them, as they could fynd in their hartes too plucke
God out of his seate, and they would fayne that this matter which wee
reade now, were razed out (of the Scripture,) too the intent they
myght not bee subiect too it. Yea and they make a confederacie among
themselues in that cace, saying: tush, I warrant thee, I will
hold myne owne, and if my husband play the Churle with mee, he shall
well perceyue that I passe not for it, and I will hold him at a bay so
long, that when he sees he doth but looze his labour, he shalbe fayne to
giue ouer his game, and too let mee alone. After this manner (say I)
doo women begin too enter intoo huswyfrye, so as a man shal scar
                     •
                  ly
fynd one among a hundred, which is not of that mynd, and dooth not
fully determine vppon it.
               Also the husband on his syde thinks thus: Tush, let mee alone, I
will compasse hir well ynough. As who should say, he were God: who



hath told vs that there is another maner of discretion too bee vsed in
this behalf. For the way for men too win their wyues, is not too step
too them with stoutnesse, and too play the bedlems with them, or too
vse tyranny ouer them: none of that geere will boote: and yit men
thinke themselues so wyse in their owne conceyt, that they shall scare
their wyues with a grim looke. Too bee short, they dispute of the
matter, & in the meane whyle rob God, as though he had reserued nothing
to him self, wherby to teach vs to repayre vnto him, to pray him
to meeken their harts, and to bow them to obedience and myldnesse.
               Therfore it behoueth vs to remember the lesson so much the better,
which is shewed vs heere. And for the same cause dooth Saint Paule
apply the similitude of our Lord Iesus Christ, as well too the one side
as too the other. For he telleth the women that it is for their benefyte
too bee so subiect too their Husbands. And why? Let vs consider the
spirituall state of the Churche. How miserable were our state if wee
were separated from our Lord Iesus Christ? For we should be bereft
of all hope of lyfe, and of all Gods benefyts. And although wee inioyed
many gifts in this world: yit should they turne all too our displeasure,
if wee were not members of our Lord Iesus Christ. Too bee
short, without the sonne of God, there is nothing but scattering heere
beneathe. For he was sent too gather toogither all things that were
scattered afore, insomuch that all our happinesse, ioy, and rest, is too
haue Iesus Christ reigning ouer vs and ruling vs. Now then, there
must be an answerablenesse hereunto in mariage, and the women must
vnderstand, that forasmuch as wedlock is as an image of the spirituall
vniō, which is betwene vs & the sonne of God: it is for their benefyte to
be vnder their husbands, & to yeeld thē obedience, & that it shalbe much
more for their profit, than if they were at libertie too gouerne themselues,
and too doo what they li
                     •
                  t, without brydling or controlment.
Trew it is that they cannot conceiue it, but who shalbe found wyzer in
the end? God, or Women? If they will needs reply, that it were better
for them too bee in no subiection at all too their husbands, wheras
God for all that hath ordeyned otherwyse, yea euen for their welfare,
and hath declared and giuen sentence that it is so: weene they too get
the vpper hand in pleading so ageinst God? Yee see then that Iesus
Christ is set downe as the sauyour of the bodie, too the end that wyues
should knowe, that God hath preuyded better for their necessities,
than they bee aware of. When they haue well chawed their cud, and



debated what they can with themselues, and gathered all the reasons
that are possible too bee had: yit is it certein that they knowe not so
well what is for their owne profit, as God dooth, who hath put them in
subiection too their husbands, yea euen for their owne welfare, too the
intent they should bee maynteyned, which otherwyse could not bee.
               Agein on the other syde, Saint Paule alledgeth our Lord Iesus
Christ too the Husbands also, too the intent they should not abuse the
authority that is graunted them, nor breake the frendship which ought
too bee maynteyned in wedlocke, by being ouer churlish as they are
woont too bee. And the thing that he setteth them downe in our Lord
Iesus Christ, by demaunding how he hath loued his Churche: is first
and formest that he hath giuen him self for it, and that he spared not
himself when he tooke mans flesh vpon him. In deede al power and dominion
were giuen vnto him, so as all knees must needs bowe before
him,Phil. 2. b. 10. (as Saint Paule him self sayeth) and all of vs both greate and
small must doo him homage: but yit notwithstanding, what hath hee
doone for his Churche? Listed he too reigne in such sort as too exercyze
tyrannie ouer vs? No: but contrarily he humbled him self, and
wheras he had souerein dominion ouer the Angels of heauen, he became
subiect too the Law,Gala. 4. a. 4. and was called a Seruant, yea and he was
vtterly emptyed for our sakes. Now when wee see that God beareth
vs so inestimable loue in our Lord Iesus Christ,Phil. 2. a. 7. that he hath put himselfe
in the person of a husband, and voutsafed that wee should bee as
a wyfe vntoo him: I say, when wee see that, should we now which are
but woormes of the earth and a thing of nothing, refuze too follow the
example of the sonne of God, who had no regard of his heauenly glory
and maiestie, too the end too abace himselfe in such wyse for our sakes?
So then, it is ynough too meeken the hartes both of the one partie and
of the other, if there be not too beastly leaudnesse, or rather stark diuelishnesse
as wel in the husbands as in the wyues. For considering that
our Lord Iesus Christ dyd so abace himselfe, for the loue that he bare
vnto vs which are but carions and nothing woorth: and also hath told
vs that there is nothing better, than for the wyues too bee subiect too
their husbandes, and the husbandes too beare with their wyues: if that
moue them not, it is a signe that they bee too beastly hygh mynded, or
rather that there is nother wit nor reason in them. For were there but
one drop, surely the thing that Saint Paul telleth vs, ought too make
vs amend all things, that myght hinder the doing of our dewties, as



well on the one syde as on the other. And were this well regarded:
doubtlesse men shoulde see much more quietnesse in their houses then
they doo: and man and wyfe should not bee as Cattes and Dogges in
snatching and byting one at another. But the very mischeefe is, that
a man can see no feare of God among them. For ought not men too
call too mynd both euening and morning, the grace that is shewed vntoo
vs by the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ? And when all toogither
had well thought on it, and set their myndes too it, the maryed
men ought also too thinke (particularly) with themselues, to what end
hath God shewed himselfe so louing, so kynd, and so pitifull towardes
mee? Seeyng he hath aduaunced mee too such dignitie, it is good reason
that I should fashion my selfe lyke vntoo him. Now he will haue
mee too behaue my selfe towardes my wyfe, as Iesus Christ hath behaued
himselfe towardes mee. Is not this ynough too breake the
hartes that were as hard as stone, yea or as steele? Yis surely. Likewise
if the women on their syde were myndfull of their redemption
and saluation: then should their hard hartes needes bee softened, and
they would not harden themsel
                     •
                  es any more too such stubbornnesse, as
they doo, but they would submit themselues too the yoke of our Lord
Iesus Christ, that they myght bee parttakers of the benefyte which
he hath purchaced for them by his death and passion. Wee see then
that when the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ is preached too vs indifferently:
most men gayne nothing by it, for they forsake it in all their
lyfe.
               And by the way wee haue too marke further, that although husbandes
bee froward, and wyues vntoward too bee ruled, yea and vtterly
vncorrigible: yit is that no release too them, that eyther of them
both should not doo their duetie. As for example: It may bee, that if
a husband had a gentle and tractable wyfe (as I touched afore,) he
on his syde could beare with hir, and there should bee a maruelous
good lyking and lyfe betwixt them. But peraduenture one man will
say, he hath a drunkard or a glutton, another, that his wyfe is giuen too
garishnesse and ouer much brauery, so as all that shee can rap and
rend, is too little too trim hir and decke hir withall: and another, that
his wyfe is an ydle huzwyfe, and will doo nothing. Well, these
things may haue some colour before men: yea and (as I sayd afore)
if the matter concerned but the parties themselues: euery of them
myght haue their defence at hand, to cast of all yoke. But the husband



must thinke in that cace, I haue an ill dispozed woman, or a sot,
or one that hath nother manners nor good behaueour, nor any care at
all of hir houshold: but how doo I also behaue my selfe, not only in
these worldly affayres, but also towardes God? Now when the husband
shall haue bethought himselfe well, and examined his owne
faultes throughly: he will hold his peace, & paciently beare with his
wyfes faultes, vntyll God giue her the grace too amend them. And
in the meane whyle, howsoeuer the world go, let him not ceasse too
play the good husband in applying himselfe too his wyfe, too win hir
vntoo God. For he is not set in degree of superioritie, but for the benefyte
and welfare of his yoke fellowe. And forasmuch as it is an
inuiolable law, the same reason also must perswade the women. Insomuch
that if a woman haue a drunkard, or haunter of Tauernes and
Tippling houses, or a Gamester, or a Spendall, or an vnthrift and
a ryotter, or a Churle that is neuer in quyet with her, so that, do what
shee can too obey him and to please him, shee can neuer haue any peace
or good wyll at his hand: let hir consider, Alas, it is Gods squoorge
vppon mee, for I haue not bin as I ought too bee in obeying my God,
and in submitting my selfe to his wyll. For how haue I applyed my
selfe too serue and honour him? How haue I quitte my selfe of the
charge that he hath committed too mee? Let the wyfe thinke vppon
those things, and then let hir conclude, that howsoeuer shee fare, yit is
it not for mortall creatures too breake the bond wherin God will haue
vs bound: for that were a stryuing ageinst him. And therfore must I
submit my selfe too him that is my head: and although he bee terrible,
yit becommeth it mee too bee subiect too my God, who hath my husbandes
hart in his hand, and can alter it when he listeth. And I must
not prouoke him too win mee with strokes of the Cudgell: for in so
dooyng God would bee discontented both with him and mee. So then
the faultes of the wyfe cannot discharge the husband from keeping the
lawe vnbroken which God hath ordeyned, that is too wit, from lyuing
toogither both in one accord. Lykewise the vyces of the husband, shall
no
                     •
                   excuze the wyfe from yeelding subiection & obedience in all things
on Gods behalfe, as is sayd of it heere.
               Now Saint Paule too confirme this exhortation the better, declareth
how our Lord Iesus Christ is the Sauyour of the body: namely
bycause he gaue himselfe for the Church, too Sanctifie it, (or to make
it holy.) In deede the whole doctrine hereof cannot bee dispatched as



now. Yit notwi
                     •
                  hstanding wee haue too marke 
                     〈…〉
                  , that
heere S. Paule sheweth more at large the thing that he had 
                     〈◊〉
                   in
one woord afore: which is, that both the husband and wyfe may brydle
their wicked affections, and that when they bee tempted too go 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
or too fall out one with another, the very meane too 
                     〈◊〉
                   all
wicked passions, is too haue an eye too the pledge of the spirituall vnion
betweene our Lord Iesus Christ and vs, whereof wee will speake
more fully hereafter. For heere first of all it is sayd, that we must consider
that our Lord Iesus Christ gaue himselfe for vs, wherein he beginneth
at our redemption. And therefore wee must marke that word
for an end as yit, tarying tyll after dinner for the dispatch of the rest:
for vnder that woord it is shewed vs first, that our Lord Iesus Christ
was (after a sort) myndlesse of himselfe, and regarded not his owne
person, when he went about our saluation. Trew it is that he was giuen
vs of God,Iohn. 3. b. 16. who (as it is sayd in the third of Saint Iohn) dyd loue
the world so well, that he spared not his onely sonne, but gaue him too
the death for our sakes. Yit notwithstanding, our Lord Iesus Christ
also did gyue himself.Iohn. 1
                        •
                     . d. 18. No man taketh my lyfe from mee (sayth he) but
I lay it downe. For it was requisite that the sacrifyzce which he offered
for the remission of our sinnes, should bee willing. Yee see then,
that Iesus Christ gaue himselfe too the death: and if wee de
                     •
                  aund the
cause, surely it was first too fulfill the will and euerlasting dete
                     ••
                  ination
of God his father. Neuerthelesse lyke as God the father inte
                     •
                  
                  ded
the saluation of mankynd: so Iesus Christ shewed how deere wee
were too him, and how precious our soules are in his syght, sith he
voutsafed too giue himselfe after that fashyon. Now then, on the
one syde the husbandes must consider well heere what they owe too
their wyues: that is too wit, that they should bee as 
                     •
                  eere too them
as their owne lyues at the least. (And though they doo so,) yit shall
they not come too the perfection of our Lord Iesus Christ, but followe
him a great way behynde. And the wyues also on their syde,
must beare well in mynd, that forasmuch as it is Gods 
                     •
                  ill that 
                     〈◊〉
                  
wedlocke there should bee as it were a figure of the grace of our Lord
Iesus Christ: they bee too farre 
                     〈◊〉
                  , if they submit not themselues
where God calleth them too it. And by the way let vs knowe
also, that Saint Paule ment too magnify Gods goodnesse towardes
vs, and the loue that Iesus Christ beareth vs, in saying that h
                     •
                   gaue
himself for vs. And therefore let vs acknowledge that it came of the



free mercie of God his father, and also that our Lord Iesus Christ
respected nothing but our miseries, when he shewed himselfe so pitifull
too succour vs. If wee mynd these things, on the one syde wee
shal bee moued too our dewtie without geynsaying, and on the othersyde
inflamed too glorify our God, and acknowledge both with our
mouthes and also by our whole lyfe, how much wee bee beholden too
him, seeyng he hath powred out the treasures of his mercy vppon vs,
in so much that he hath not onely discharged vs of the condemnation
wherin we were, and drawen vs out of death: but also hath voutsafed
too giue vs his welbeeloued sonne for a pledge of his loue, and Iesus
Christ hath taken vppon him the office too bee the borrowe and raunsome
for vs, too the end too set vs cleere before God, that the diuel also
myght not haue any more ageinst vs, notwithstanding that he bee our
aduersary, & we bee subiect vnto him, tyll we be set free from that bondage
by meanes of the sayd Redeemer.
               Now let vs fall downe before the Maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him to make vs so to knowe
them, as wee may aske him forgiuenesse of them, and reforme our
selues more and more by amending them, and so profit in the doctrine
of saluation, as our lyfe may alwayes bee fashyoned after his
law, according to the meazure of the grace which wee haue receyued
of him. And so let vs all say, Almyghtye God heauenlye father
&c.
            
            
               The .xl. Sermon, which is the eyght
vppon the fifth Chapter.
               
                  
                     25. Yee husbandes loue your vvyues, as Christ loued the Church,
and gaue himselfe for it.
                     26. Too sanctify it, clenzing it in the vvashing of vvater through
the vvoord.
                     
                        27. Too make it too himselfe a glorious Church, vvithout spot
or vvrincle, or any thing el
                           •
                        e, but that it myght bee holy and
vnblamable.
                  
               
               
                  WEe haue seene this morning how large
matter of glorifying the infinite goodnesse
of our God wee haue, if wee consider by
what meanes he hathe drawen vs from
death, and taken vs for his children, notwithstanding
that wee were cursed afore
in Adam. And now Saint Paule setteth
foorth how wee bee made parttakers of
the grace that is purchaced for vs by our
Lord Iesus Christ: namely by being wafshed
and clenzed from our spottes, too the end too bee dedicated too
his seruice in all holynesse. Also he addeth the wasshing of water, bycause
Baptim is a visible figure and record vntoo vs, according too
our rudenesse and infirmitie, too make vs the better too perceyue the
grace of our God, which passeth all vnderstanding of man. Now
first of al there is the woord Sanctify, which importeth that we should
bee separated from the world, too bee knit vntoo the sonne of God.
And this doctrine is such, as wee can neuer knowe it ynough. For
(as I haue sayd afore) wee must alwayes compare the state wherein
God fyndeth vs, with the state wheretoo he calleth vs: For from our
moothers womb wee 
                     〈◊〉
                   nothing but vtter wretchednesse, wee bee
cursed and detestabl
                     •••
                  fore God. Therefore he draweth vs out
of the dungeon of death: from thence dooth he gather vs vp too himselfe.
And by the woord Sanctifie, S. Paule meaneth the chaunge
which ought as it were too rauish and too astonish vs, as oft as wee
consider what wee were, and what wee should bee styll if God pitied
vs not.
               But let vs come too the meane that I spake of. He sayeth, that
our Lord Iesus Christ hath washed vs. No dout but this is too bee
referred too his death and passion. For how could wee appeere before
God as it were with our countenances vpryght, but that our sinnes
are done away by the sacrifyze that was offered too set vs at one with
God. Then vntill wee bee wasshed and scoured cleane by the blud of
our Lord Iesus Christ, wee bee fowler before God than any leapar:



wee bee full of all maner of filth and infection: and too bee short, all
that wee can bring shall but prouoke Gods wrath, and the vertewes
that men esteeme greatest, shalbee but lothsomnesse. Therfore wee
must imbrace the sacrifyce wherby our Lord Iesus Christ hath reconcyled
vs too God his father, and his blud must flowe downe vppon our
soules, too clenze vs from our filthinesse and spots. Neuerthelesse it
is not without cause that Saint Paule sets vs downe baptim heere,
not that wee bee made cleane by that: nother was it his meaning too
turne vs asyde from the death and passion of our Lord Iesus Christ.
But forasmuch as wee bee dust and grosse, and vnderstand not the spirituall
benefyts so well as were requisyte: therfore Saint Paule conforming
him self too our rudenesse and infirmitie, hath shewed vs here
our wasshing by a visible signe. That wee may the better profit our
selues by this maner of speeche, let vs consider too what end baptim
was ordeyned, and whertoo it serueth. When our Lord Iesus Christ
commaunded vs too bee baptyzed in his name, ment he too turne away
our fayth from his bludshed? Ment he that baptim should take the
roome of his death and passion, to performe the office of our saluatiō:
No surely. For Baptim is but on Incum and an appendant too the
death and passion of our Lord Iesus Christ: and if it did not direct vs
thither, certeynely it were but a tryfling Ceremony. As much is too
bee fayd of the Lords Supper. When wee c
                     •
                  me too 
                     〈◊〉
                   the
bread and wyne, which are the pledges of the body and blu
                     •
                   of our
Lord Iesus Christ, although that in that supper wee bee truly fed with
the meate and drink, wherof mention is 
                     〈◊〉
                   in the sixth of Saint
Iohn (that is to wit, that our Lord Iesus Chri
                     ••
                   maketh vs partakers
of the truthe of his owne substance, too the end that his lyfe should bee
common vntoo vs): yit notwithstanding if the supper should bee separated
from the death and passion of our Lord Iesus Christ, it were a
thing of nothing. And in deede wee see also what the promis conteyneth.
This is my bodie (sayeth he) which is giuen for you. Trew it
is that is sheweth well what our ordinarie foode is: but therwithall he
sendeth vs also too his death and passion. For had he not made satisfaction
for our sinnes, and shed his blud to wash away our spots: what
should it boote vs now too haue baptim and his supper ministred and
giuen vntoo vs? Wee see then, that too vse baptim well, and according
too the institution of the sonne of God, we must not set our m
                     •
                  nds
vppon the corruptible and transitorie element. For what is the water?



If it stand but one day, it will corru
                     •
                  pt: and how then can it clenze our
soules for euer, and get vs a purenesse that shall continew after death,
though wee our selues doo turne too rottennesse? If this power cannot
bee in the water: wee must of necessitie repayre too the death and passion
of our Lord Iesus Christ. And in dede the water also is a figure
of his blud and of his holy spirit. Then let vs mark that our Lord Iesus
did then wash vs, when he shed his blud wherby he clenzed vs.
That is the meane wherby wee may resort vntoo God with full trust
that wee shalbee recey
                     •
                  ed as ryghtuous and perfect, bycause he layeth
not our sinnes too our charge. Mark that for one poynt.
               Now (as Saint Peter sayeth in his first Epistle) wee be was
                     •
                  hed
with the blud of our Lord Iesus Christ, by the holy Ghost. Wee see
then that wee haue the substance and truthe of our saluation in the person
of the sonne of God. And moreouer wee haue too note also, that
he communicateth him self vntoo vs, and therby putteth vs in possession
and fruition of all his goods through the power of the holy Ghost.
And how happeneth it then that Saint Paule hath made no mention
heere, of the blud that clenzeth vs, and of the woorking of the holy
Ghost? It seemeth that hee hath forgotten the cheef thing, and buzieth
him self about a thing that is very small. I haue told you alredye that
he ment not too abridge any thing that belonged too the sonne of God,
that wee should not seeke the whole fulnes of our saluation in him alone,
and settle our fayth alonly vppon him: nother ment he too dispossesse
the holy Ghost of his office, but he had respect of our infirmitie.
And that is the cause why he set downe the signe wherby the thing that
(of it self) is too hygh and too farre hidden from our vnderstanding,
is set before our eyes. That is the pi
                     •
                  h of the thing which we haue
too beare in mynd.
               Now of this declaration wee may receyue a very profitable lesson
in generall: that is too wit, that the trew and lawfull vse of Sacraments,
is too leade vs directly too our Lord Iesus Christ, and that otherwyse
wee make them but as Idols. And (therfore) in poperie
Baptim is but as a Charme, bycause they think there is no saluation
but by the water. I let passe the things that they haue pu
                     •
                   to it of their
owne deuyzing. For they haue corrupted and mard the very institution
of Iesus Christ, by mingling baptim with the superstitions that
are knowen of. But let vs put the cace they vsed nothing else but the
pure water: yit is it diuelish opinion that Baptim is able of it self to



saue vs. For by that meanes our Lord Iesus Christ is as good as
thrust away, so as they make none account of him. For they stand poring
vppon the visible signe, and are (as yee would say) vtterly doted
vppon it. In lyke cace are they with all the rest of their Ceremonies.
So much the more therefore dooth it stand vs on hand too beare this
lesson in mynd, That too apply the Sacraments too a ryght vse, and
too such vse as God alloweth and ordeyneth: they must guyde vs too
our Lord Iesus Christ: Lyke as in Baptim, wee see but the water:
but therby we must be lifted vp hygher to the blud of the sonne of God,
assuring our selues that it is not the water that maketh vs cleane, but
that it is only a warrant of the washing that was gotten for vs, when
our Lord Iesus Christ was crucifyed for vs. In the Supper wee
haue bread and wyne. Now to hold our selues to that which is set before
out eyes, were a withdrawing of our selues from Iesus Christ.
Our fayth therfore must bee lifted vp, and conueyed too him in whom
all the partes of our saluation are inclozed. Forasmuch then as wee
haue the whole perfection and fulnesse of all good things in the onely
Sonne of God: it is thither that wee must looke vp and labour too
atteyne, when the Sacramentes are set afore vs, for that is the very
office of them: or else wee pe
                     •
                  uert all, and it is (as yee would saye)
an vnhallowing of the thing that God hath halowed too our benefyte,
if our Lord Iesus Christ bee separated from the visible
signes.
               Wee haue also too note, that wee communicate not with Iesus
Christ, but by the grace of the holy Ghost. Yit notwithstanding let vs
not hold scorne of the helpes that our Lord hath ordeyned for vs, bycause
he knewe them too bee requisite for our infirmities sake. Why
be we not taught simply, that if wee runne too our Lord Iesus Christ,
in him wee shall fynde our washing and clenzing? It seemeth that that
ought too suffyze vs, and that the water of Baptim is but a vayle too
keepe vs from comming vntoo Iesus Christ. Yea, but let vs see a little
what our owne 
                     •
                  udenesse is. If wee had the myndes of Angels,
wee should no more neede this outward Baptim, than the Angels do.
But forasmuch as wee bee earthly, and it is hard for vs too atteyne
vntoo God, and the secretes of his heauenly kingdome: it is for our
behoofe too bee helped after that fashion. And it is a wonderfull gracious
goodnesse of God, that he stoopeth so too our infirmitie, and supplyeth
it with mee
                     •
                  e and conuenient remedyes. So little then dooth



Baptim hinder vs from comming too the sonne of God, (so wee bee able
too apply it too our behoofe,) or keepe our fayth from amyng at
him: that without it wee should bee hild downe still heere, and wauer
continually as floting in water. But when wee see how water is cast
vppon the chyldes head, there we ought too mynd the blud of our Lord
Iesus Christ, and too consider that lyke as water washeth away the
filth of the body, so the blud of our Lord Iesus Christ is the very clenzing
of our soules.
               Now as touching the inwoorking of the holy Ghost, wee knowe it
is lykened too water: and that is bycause he maketh vs parttakers of
the benefytes that were purchaced for vs by our Lord Iesus Christ:
and agein, bycause that by his grace and woorking, wee bee renewed,
and dye vntoo the world, and all our owne corruption is put away, to
the intent wee should come too the newnesse of lyfe which is gotten for
vs by the 
                     •
                  esurrection of our Lord Iesus Christ. All this must wee
behold in Baptim.
               And lykewyse the Supper must serue vs as a ladder too clymb vp
too our Lord Iesus Christ, and too bee throughly confirmed that he
dwelleth in vs, and that wee bee made one with him, so as he quickeneth
vs as the braunches of a tree, which take their strength from the
roote, and as the body of man, which draweth his strength from the
head. And so the thing that wee haue too marke vppon this streyne,
is that the Sacramentes doo not turne vs away from the trust which
wee ought too put wholly in our Lord Iesus Christ, nor make vs too
start asyde one way or other, but that being perswaded by them that
Iesus Christ suffizeth, wee fynd all our contentation and rest in him,
too the end also that all the honour which belongeth too him, bee
yeelded vntoo him. For it is not for vs too abridge him of that
which his heauenlye father hath giuen him. Let that serue for one
poynt.
               And that is also the cause why Saint Paule sayeth, hauing clenzed
it. Then yeeldeth he the dignitie of clenzing vs too our Lord Iesus
Christ. True it is, that if he had not bin appoynted too bee the
Mediator, he could not haue doone it: for it is a woorke altoogither
belonging too God: but forasmuch as he was sent too that end, and
had that office committed vntoo him, therfore are wee washed by
him. And in deede it is not only in his humane nature that wee bee
washed by his blud: but wee must also beare in mynd how the Apostle



in the Epistle too the Hebrewes,Heb. 9. 
                        •
                     . 14. sayth, that he suffered in spirit. How
in spirit? That is too say, his death must not bee considered of vs, as
if a man dyed: but wee must vnderstand that he is in such wyse the
sonne of God manifested in the flesh, as he hath vttered his euerlasting
power. And that when he was so abaced, and emptyed, although there
appeered nothing but cursednesse in his death: yit ought wee too vnderstand
that he wrought in that behalfe with a woonderfull power,
such as surmounteth all our vnderstanding, and all that wee can conceyue.
Yee see then that Saint Paule hath very well confirmed the
thing that I told you, that is too wit, that all our fayth is but a wauering
and vanishing opinion, vntyll it bee so grounded in our Lord Iesus
Christ, as it rest wholly there, and nother swarue nor stagger one
way nor other. For as soone as wee go about too adde one thing or
other too our Lord Iesus Christ: surely he shaketh vs of, as vnworthie
too haue any part or portion of his benefytes. Therefore wee must
leaue him that which is his owne: that is too wit, that he onely clenzeth
vs: according also as it is of his mere grace, that wee haue all
ryghtuousnesse before God.
               And Saint Paules speaking of Baptim (as I sayd afore) is too
the end that wee considering our owne abilitie, should bend our selues
too the confirming our fayth by these meanes which are behooffull for
vs. For he that reiecteth Baptim as superfluous, dooth well bewray
that he knoweth not him self. Insomuch that when wee haue well examined
what is in vs, it is certein that euen the perfecte
                     •
                  t shal fynd
themselues inclyned to vnbeleef, and to so many doutings, as ye would
maruell. They shall see themselues feeble and weake, and subiect too
infinite temptations. So then, it must needs bee that a man is too
much blinded in pryde, when he thinketh that baptim can 
                     〈◊〉
                   him in
no sted. Considering therfore what neede wee haue 
                     〈…〉
                   too
God by certein degrees: let vs make account of baptim, and of the holy
Supper, and let them alwayes bee meanes too guyde vs 
                     〈◊〉
                   Iesus
Christ.
               Agein, it is not without cause that Saint Paule matcheth the
woord and the washing of water toogither. For (as I haue touched afore,)
too bee so drawen away by visible things, that in sted of 
                     〈◊〉
                  
vp aloft, wee bee hild downe belowe: is too common a vyce, and so
deeply rooted in vs, as it is very hard too bee plucked vp. God pitying
mans weaknesse, hath at all tymes (as yee would say) 
                     〈…〉
                  


                  
too them: not by chaunging his place, (for his being is infinite, and
his maiestie filleth both heauen and earth) but by making him self familiar
vntoo them,Ierem. 7. b. 11. & Math. 21. b. 12. & Ma
                        •
                     k. 11. c. 17. & Luke. 19. g. 46. & 1. Chron. 6. g. 41. & Psal. 132. b. 8. c. 14, as if he were conuersant with them. And for that
cause did he terme his temple his house, his dwelling place, & his rest,
and (sayd) that he dwelt betweene the Cherubins: howeeit, that was
not to harden the people in their superstitions. Too what end then?
He ment too drawe them to him by little and little, which were vnable
to come to him at the first dashe. For where are the wings that wee
should stye aboue the clouds withall? But our fayth must stye vp aboue
the heauens. So then, God ment too releue mens infirmities,
by Ceremonies, Sacramentes, and such other things. But the vyce
on the contrary part hath shewed it selfe too much, that is too wit, that
men haue taken occasion too hold themselues downe, and too intangle
themselues in Ceremonies: and wheras they should haue lifted them
vp, they haue abuzed them, by turning them too the cleane contrarie.
And that is the cause also why the Prophets were continually occupyed
in rebuking the Iewes, for that they thought that God had dwelt in
the materiall temple. How now (sayeth Esay?) Hath not the Lord
made all these thinges?Esay. 6
                        •
                     . a. 1. Hath he not created both the stones and the
wood? And wyll you shet him vp within them? Dooth he not fill all
the Heauens? and the earth is not able too conteyne him. And yit notwithstanding
yee would locke him vp in some Cabane of your owne
buylding. Wherby he sheweth that it is too grosse a folly for men too
snarle themselues after that sort in visible figures, Ceremonies, and
Sacramentes, and too dwell vppon them, wheras they should bee led
vntoo God. Now forasmuch as this hath reigned in all ages, Saint
Paule too redresse it, sayth, that wee haue our washing warranted in
Baptim, vnder the figure of water. Yea, but yit must wee haue an eye
too the woord, sayeth he. For if there were no teaching, too shewe vs
that wee fynd the things in our Lord Iesus Christ, which are represented
too vs in Baptim, and that it is in his person that wee haue the
full performance and assurednesse of them: certeinly Baptim would
turne vs away from God, and it were better too haue none at all. For
it were an euill thing, if wee should bee withdrawen from the sonne of
God, too giue our selues too the corruptible world. Therefore let vs
bee well ware that wee separate not the Sacramentes from the word
at any tyme. And hereby wee see what Christianitie there is in a number
of folke. For all is well with them, if they bee Baptyzed, nother



consider they that the hauing of the signe without the promise added
too it, is but a deceyuable & vnprofitable thing. Wherto serueth a seale
when it is set but too a peece of Lether, or too bare parchment, paper,
or cloth? Surely it were too no purpose: for it ought too confirme and
ratifye some Euidence, whether it bee of gift or otherwyse. So is it
with the Sacramentes, when they bee not matched with the woord.
A man shall see a seale there, howbeeit too no purpose, for he shall see
no benefyte come of it. And surely they that continew still doted in
their ignorance, bycause they were Baptyzed as soone as they came
intoo the world: doo shewe therin too leaud an vnthankfulnesse: for
they falsifye Gods truth, as much as they can. If a man should counterfet
a Seale, it were felonie, though it were but in a cace of fyue shillings.
But they that are so drowned in their ignorance, as they cannot
abyde to bee drawen out of it: are falsifyers and forgers in a thing
that is more worth than al the world. For heere the cace concerneth the
ratifying of the things that haue bin purchaced vs by the death and
passion of the sonne of God, as hath bin declared alredy.
               Furthermore let vs marke also, that Saint Paule speaketh of the
woord that is full of instruction and edifyeth our fayth. For the pron
                     •
                  uncing
of some woordes is not ynough: as if a man should say, I
Baptize thee in the name of the father, and of the sonne, and of the holy
Ghost: and thinke that the vertue and power of Baptim were inclozed
in those woordes: it were an abuse, and truly it could not serue
vs but for a charme and inchauntment. But the woord is the promise
wherby our Lord Iesus Christ hath told vs, that he is verily giuen
vs too bee our ryghtuousnesse, too the end that all our sinnes should
bee couered and buried in his obedience, and all our spottes washt away
by his cleannesse. Therefore when wee once haue this promisse,
and knowe what things are brought vs by the only sonne of God, then
is the water matched with the woord. And wee ought so much the
more too note this,
                     
                        •
                     . Tim. 4. 
                        •
                     . 5. bycause wee see how Saint Paule sayeth in another
place too Timothie, that not euen our meate and drinke can bee
sanctified, but by the woord. Trew it is that bread, wyne, water,
and al other things are pure in respect of their creation by God: howbeeit
wee cannot vse them without turning them too vncleannesse, and
without committing of felonie ageinst God, but by his woord (sayth
he) whereby all things are made holy vntoo vs. And how is that?
By teaching vs that God sheweth himselfe too bee our father, in hauing



a care of vs too maynteyne vs and feede vs: and also by telling
vs that all these things are giuen vs, too the intent that by vsing his
liberalitie, first wee should bee prouoked too serue and honour him,
and too bee rauished in loue of him: and secondly bee confirmed in the
hope of the heritage that is promised vs. For seeing he makes vs
feele his gooddesse aforehand in this world: it is certein that when
wee come too the glorye whereuntoo he calleth vs, wee shall then
haue our fill of the good things, whereof there is but some little tast
shewed vs as yit. Yee see then that all the be
                     •
                  efytes which wee receyue
for the body, are made holy by the woord. And what shal bee
done then in things concerning the euerlasting saluation of our soules?
Is it not much more reason that they should bee sanctifyed by the same
woord?
               Now then, too bee short, wee see that the Papistes are destitute
of the power of the Sacramentes through their owne misbeleef, bycause
they haue robbed our Lord Iesus Christ of his power and vertew,
and conuayed ouer his prerogatiue vntoo corruption and dead
things. And therefore God hath so blynded them through his ryghtfull
vengeance, that they thinke themselues too haue the Sacraments
styll, but yit notwithstanding without the woord. As for example,
in deede in Baptyzing they mumble ynough, and they make theyr
coniurations and charmes, and all in an vnknowen language, but
yit is their speaking rather too the diuel, than too the Godfathers and
Godmoothers that are there, too answer for the teaching of the child,
and for the common instruction of the whole Church. Too bee short,
in Popish Baptim there is not the woord, and therefore (as much as
in them lye
                     •
                  h) they haue abolished Baptim. Yit notwithstanding,
God hath not suffered the rememberance of his goodnesse too bee vtterly
put away: lyke as in the tyme of the lawe, although the priestes
were Ioolaters, and had preached false doctrine, and had imbrewed
the simple people with many errours & fals
                     •
                   opiniōs: yit notwithstanding,
Circumcision was not chaunged in the tymes of Ezechias and
Ios
                     •
                  as, when things were redressed, and Gods seruice set in his ryght
state. And why? Bycause it had bin ordeyned of God, and it was
not lawfull too haue taken the signe of his couenant vtterly away. But
it behoued them too forsake all the incomes that had bin put too by
Sata
                     •
                  s policie. Euen so say I now, that in the Popedome there is
not the woord of God▪ as in respect of those that pretend too minister



the Sacramentes: and yit that wee sticke not too receyue the thing
that is witnessed vntoo vs in Baptim, though we
                     •
                   were infected with
much 
                     •••
                  thinesse. But wee must renounce the Creame that was ministred
vntoo vs, and all the other wicked trash, and reteyne the pure institution
of our Lord Iesus Christ. And furthermore let vs vnderstand,
that our Baptim as wee receyued it then had bin vnauaylable,
nay rather it had bin a cursed treacherie, if wee had gone no further
than so. And why? For wee had bin peruerted, and wee had falsifyed
the ordinance of our Lord Iesus Christ.
               In lyke cace is it with the Supper. Of a truth there is no supper
remayning now adayes in poperie. For that which they call Gods
Table, is a flat mockage and reproche too the death and passion of our
Lord Iesus Christ, bycause it is knit in vnseparable bond with the
masse, and wee knowe that the masse is an vtter renouncing of the sacrifyze
that was made by the sonne of God. But howseuer the cace
stand, although they vsed some conuenient resemblance too the institution
of our Lord Iesus Christ: yit for all that, they haue not the
woord. For they mumble betweene the teeth in their consecrating (as
they terme it) of the spiritual Sacrament, which they haue peruerted.
For how doo they vse it? They prattle vppon the bread, and blowe
vppon it, too chaunge it intoo the bodie of Iesus Christ, at least too
their seeming. Also they chatter ouer the Chalice, and beare themselues
on hand that all is chaunged there, and that they haue made
such an alteration, as though they were able too create a new world.
For it is much more too make a peece of bread too become the sonne of
God, than too haue created a whole world. But Satan hath so bewitched
the Papistes, that they beeleeue they doo all that. And by
what power? not of Gods woord. Howbeeit (as I sayd) the woord
that Saint Paule treateth of heere, is not a bare found, but a teaching
that edifyeth our fayth, so as wee receyue the promis that is made vs
there, and apply it too our 
                     •
                  se, too the end that in Baptim the water
may 
                     〈◊〉
                   as a warrant of our spirituall washyng. Also when wee
receyu
                     •
                   the bread and the wyne in the supper, it is an infallible pledge
vntoo vs, that wee bee nurrished with the very substance of the sonne
of God, so as his flesh is our meate, and his blud
                     •••
                   drink. Ye see then
that the woord is 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               As touching the huge and confuzed heape of thinges that the papists
haue in all their Ceremonies, and specially as touching their



fyue Sacaments which they haue forged and 
                     〈◊〉
                   of their owne
heads: there is no 
                     〈◊〉
                   (of God) at all in them. For what promis haue
they for their Anealing, as they terme it? No doubt but they 
                     〈◊〉
                  
deuise ynough of it: 
                     〈◊〉
                   where shall a man fynd any whit of it in the
scripture? In the same plyght are all the rest. As for mariage, it shall
be treated of at another tyme, bycause S. Paul maketh mention of it
anon after. Howsoeuer the world go, wee 
                     〈◊〉
                   that the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
haue falsifyed the Sacramentes, & they can as now receyue no profit
by them: bycause they haue put the things asunder which God had
knit togither. So much the more therefore dooth it stand 
                     〈◊〉
                   on hand
to remēber the thing that S. Paul telleth vs here: that is to wit, that
wee be wel washed in baptim, accordingly as 
                     〈◊〉
                   sayeth to S.
Paule,Actes. 9. c. 18. Wash away thy sinnes. And how? By Baptim. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
euen too shewe that the washing of vs with the water which wee see,
is not a vayne or deceyuable figure, but that Iesus Christ dooth in very
deede accomplish the thing that is shewed before our faces. Therfore
wee must beare that well in mynd: But yit is the woord req
                     •
                  isite
therwithall, without the which, all that men can set foorth concerning
Ceremonies, is but abuse and deceyt, though it be countenances with
the name of God an hundred thousand-tymes.
               Furthermore Saint Paule addeth, that our Lord Iesus Christes
washing and clenzing of vs, is too set vs as excellent and singularly
beautifull before his owne face. For the vnderstanding heereof,
let vs note that wee be washed, not only through the forgiuenesse of our
sinnes, when they come not too account before God: but also when we
bee renewed by the holy Ghost too fyght ageinst all the temptations
of the world, and too mortifye the vyces of our flesh, and all the froward
affections wheruntoo wee bee too much wedded. Yee see then
that it is a dubble grace which wee receyue of our Lord Iesus. That
is too wit, bycause he hath satisfyed for vs and discharged vs of our
dettes: wee come before God as ryghtuous. For our sinnes are not
layed too our charge, but wee bee reconcyled freely, at leastwyse as
in respect of our selues, howbeit that it is by the raunsome that Iesus
Christ hath offered. Yit notwithstanding, it is not ment that God
will haue vs let alone styll in our vncleannesse: but that he 
                     〈◊〉
                  
(also) too drawe vs too him by his holy spirit. Therefore it 
                     〈◊〉
                   of
necessitie that the foresayd washing s
                     •
                  ould bee matched with regeneration.
And that is the cause why Saint Paule 
                     〈…〉
                  , that



Iesus Christ hath washed vs, too the end wee should excell in beautie,
yea and bee vnblamable also b
                     •
                  fore him▪ Now wheras he se
                     •
                  teth vs
foorth too bee Honorable or glorious, (for so dooth the woord which
he vseth import:) he hath an eye backe too the thinges which he
treated of before, concerning men and their wyues. For now he
goeth foreward in treating of the spirituall wedlocke that is betweene
the sonne of God and vs, wherof he will speake yit more a
                     •
                   length
hereafter. Therfore lyke as a man will loue his wyfe when shee is
too his lyking: So Saint Paule telleth vs in this text, that the sonne
of God wyll lyke well of vs, if wee weare the badges that he giueth
vs: that is too say, first if vppon the knowledge of our owne wretchednesse,
wee humble our selues too seeke the pardon that he hath purchaced
vs, too the end that beyng quit at Gods hand, wee may call vppon
him with full trust. That is one poynt. Also that wee bee renewed
by his power, so as wee followe not our worldly lustes, nor giue libertie
too our wicked affections, but rather fyght ageinst our selues, and
labour too put away more and more the things that wee haue of our
selues, that God may reigne and lyue in vs, and wee bee gouerned by
his holy spirit, so as our lyfe may bee nothing else but a yeelding of obedience
too his holy wyll. Yee see then, what beautie wyll make vs
acceptable too the sonne of God: namely, not (the beautie that is adorned)
with corruptible deckings: but (the beautie which commeth) by
beyng clenzed of all our staynes through fayth, and by beyng so sanctifyed
by the holy Ghost, as wee may lyue continually as newe creatures.
That in effect is the thing that wee haue too beare in mynde.
For where it is sayd, that Iesus Christ is giuen vs to be our redemption:
Saint Paule declareth therwithall how it is doone, namely, bycause
(sayeth he) he is giuen vs too bee our wisedome,1. Cor. 1. d. 30. ryghtuousnesse,
and holynesse. And why too bee our wisedome? That all our wyttes
myght rest vppon him, and not wander from him one way nor other.
Agein, he is giuen vs too bee our ryghtuousnesse, too the intent there
should not bee any spot or wrinckle in vs, when wee should appeere before
the face of our God, but that the blud of Iesus Christ should bee
sufficient vncorruptnesse for vs. Also he is giuen vs for our Sanctification
or Holinesse, too the intent that wee should bee renewed by
his holy spirit. And whosoeuer separateth these things one from another,
intendeth too rend Iesus Christ in peeces, as much as lyeth in
him. Now then, would wee bee parttakers of the spirituall washing,



wherof Saint Paule treateth heere? Let vs looke that wee bee holy,
and that wee walke in pure conuersation before God. Not that it can
bee doone by our owne power or cunning: but all is attributed heere
to Iesus Christ, and Saint Paul  sheweth, that it is his office to make
vs so excellent. For it is certein, that when men will needes come too
it with presumptuousnesse, they may well inforce themselues, (
                     〈◊〉
                   yit
they shall bee neuer the neerer:) but as for vs, wee must only suffer our
Lord Iesus Christ too woorke in vs by his holy spirit. And by that
meanes shall wee bee passyng beautifull, that he may haue delyght
in vs.
               And for the same cause also doth he say, that he may present vnto
himself a beawtifull and glorious Church. In saying so, he declareth
that al the outward shewe and gay glistering which wee can haue
to the worldward, is but smoke: and that wee must haue a purenesse of
hart. He could haue sayd, Our Lord Iesus hath clensed his Churche,
too the intent it should be pure and ryghtuous: but he intended too expresse,
that our purenenesse or cleannesse, is not too please the syght of
the world, that wee may be prayzed and commended heere belowe, as
hipocrits are, whom men gape and gaze at a great way of, clapping
their hands at them, and esteeming them holyer than the Angels: but
that it is much better for a man not too bee so precyze, but too walk
playnly, and if there bee imperfections in him, too let them be knowen,
and yit too hold on his full pace still, hauing the feare of God vnfeynedly
in him all the whyle. Wherfore folowing this instruction of
Saint Paules, let vs learne too set our selues in the presence of the
sonne of God: and when it commeth too the ordering of our lyfe, let
vs looke at him, knowing that eyther wee must bee allowed there, or
else wee gayne nothing by being exalted and commended heere beneathe:
though men haue neuer so maruelous opinion of vs, all (say
I) shalbee but mere vanitie and leazing, till wee haue ruled and framed
our lyfe in such wyse, as if wee walked before the face of the sonne
of God, howbeeit that in very deede nothing can bee hidden from him.
This is it that wee haue too remember further.
               Now when as Saint Paule sayeth, too the end that the Church
should bee without spot or w
                        •
                     in
                        •
                     le, and vnrebukable in holinesse:
he meaneth not that this is accomplshed and performed in vs alredie,
nor that it can bee as long as wee bee compassed ab
                     •
                  ut with this bodie:

                     〈◊〉
                   it is as a prizon, and a bondage▪ and wee dragge our shackles after



vs continually whyle wee bee heere beneathe: and although wee haue
profited well in the feare of God, yit must wee bee fayne too say
alwayes with Saint Paule,Rom. 7. d. 23. that wee be hild in a miserable bondage,
and cannot serue God but by halues, as ye would say. Howbeeit, S.
Paule ment also too shewe simply whertoo wee bee called, too the intent
w
                     •
                  e should hye vs thitherward all the tyme of our lyfe. Now
then what is the end of our Redemption? wherfore are wee reconcyled
too God? Wherfore are we made cleane by the blud of our Lord
Iesus Christ? Wherfore also are wee sanctifyed and regenerated? It
is too the intent we myght in the end be vnblamable before God. And
what in this world? There will euer bee much too bee blamed and to
bee found fault with: but let vs bee contented that our sinnes shal not
bee layd too our charge. And this is well woorth the noting, bycause
there were a sort of malicious and leaud heads in old tyme, which
surmyzed an Angelicall perfection in their brayne, as though men
myght atteyne too a full and perfect ryghtuousnesse in this world, and
that was euen an abolishing of the couenant that God hath made with
vs, wherin consisteth our saluation. For therin are twoo inseperable
poynts: that is too wit, the forgiuenesse of sinnes, and the newbirth,
as it is sayd in the seuen and thirtith of Ezechiell, in the thirteenth
of Ieremie, and in effect euery where. These things then cannot bee
put asunder, namely that God dooth so receyue and adopt vs, as wee
neede still too haue our sinnes forgiuen vs, till wee bee ridde quyte and
cleane of al earthly corruption: and agein, that wee must go foreward
dayly in newnesse of lyfe. But there are yit still of those diuells incarnate,
which would abolish the remission of sinnes, insomuch that they
dare slaunder vs so farre, as to say, that wee hold men stil to their Apcie,
whē we make thē beleeue that they must needs be sinners still▪ Neuerthelesse,
it is certein, that whosoeuer wil bee a Christian, must needes
be a sinner. This is straunge at the first sight, but yit is it moued so as
by the holy Gost.1. Iohn. 1. c. 
                        •
                     . It is Saint Iohn that speaketh it, but the doctrine
is Gods. If wee say (sayeth he) that wee haue no sin, wee make God
a lyer, and his truth is not in vs. Then if wee imagin our selues too
bee so holy, that wee haue no more sin in vs: shall God bee a lyer for
our fancies sake? Also, if wee wil bee Christians, ought wee not too
bee Christes disciples? And if wee bee desyrous too learne in his
schoole, is not the maner of praying vntoo God his father, the principall
poynt which he teacheth vs?Math. 6. b. 1
                        •
                     . And what doth he shew vs there?



For giue vs our offences. Wee beseech God dayly too forgiue vs the
greate 
                     〈…〉
                  . Now
if any man intend too raze out this petition of crauing forgiuenesse of
our faultes: the same forsaketh the schoole of Iesus Christ. Then let
vs vnderstand, that in this world wee cannot bee without spot or wri
                     •
                  
                  kle,
but wee must bee clenzed by little and little, and the vyces whertoo
wee bee giuen, must bee corrected by peecemeale, vntyll wee come too
the perfection that is spoken of in the first Chapter. Too bee short,
as long as wee bee in this worlde, forasmuch as wee haue so many
sinnes and vyces in vs, let vs bee heedfull in praying vntoo God too
shewe himselfe alwayes mercifull towardes vs, and in bearing with
vs by forgiuing our misdeedes. And yit notwithstanding let vs therwithall
take hart too fight ageinst all our vyces, and too yeeld our selues
obedient too our God, and let vs vse force and violence too subdew
all our passions and lustes, vntyll wee haue gotten the vpper ha
                     •
                  d of
euill, though wee ceasse not too commit it. Although sinne dwell in vs,
yit let it not reigne in vs. Thus yee see how wee must day by day continew
this exercyze of presenting our selues before God with all humilitie,
in beseeching him too pardon our offences: and yit notwithstanding
profite more and more in the renewment that is spoken of
heere, tyll wee bee wholly fashyoned lyke too the ryghtuousnesse and
glory of our God.
               Now let vs fall downe before the Maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him too make vs feele them
more and more, that wee may bee sorie for them, and so streyne our selues
too followe his seruice, as wee may shewe by our deedes, all our
lyfe long, that he hath not redeemed vs in vayne from the tyrannye of
Satan, and set vs at libertie, euen too serue him with a free will, and
too giue our selues wholly too the glorifying of his holy name. And
therwithall (let vs beseeche him) also too graunt vs the grace, so too
taste the benefytes which he bestoweth vppon vs, as they may prouoke
vs more and more too glorify him, and that it may bee our continuall
exercyze and study too sing and preach his prayses alwayes, and
too acknowledge how greatly wee bee bound and i
                     •
                  detted vntoo him,
that by that meanes our Lord Iesus may so reigne ouer vs, as wee
may bee linked too him in vnseparable 
                     〈◊〉
                  , vntyll wee come too the
ringdome that he hath bought so deerly for vs. That it may please him
to graunt this grace not only to vs, but also to all people. &c.
            
            
               
               The .xli. Sermon, which is the nyenth
vppon the fifth Chapter.
               
                  
                     28. Men ought so too loue their vvyues as their ovvne bodyes.
He that loueth his vvyfe, loueth himselfe.
                     29. For no man euer yit hated his ovvne fleshe, but (rather) he
nurrisheth and cherisheth it, as the Lord also dooth the
Churche.
                     30. For vvee bee members of his body, of his fleshe, and of his
bones,
                  
               
               
                  SEeing that the holy scripture exhorteth vs
to be kynd harted, meeke, and patient one
too another, and setteth vs downe the example
of God, who is reconcyled too vs in
the person of his sonne our Lord Iesus
Christ, and sheweth vs therewithall that
Iesus Christ spared not himself, but shewed
the loue that he bare vs, and the care
that he had of our saluation, in that he gaue
himselfe too so hard and bitter a death: it
must needes bee that our hartes are harder than steele, if they bee not
meekened by it. And yit notwithstanding, all these exhortations cannot
suffyze vs, by reason of our wylfulnesse and corruption. God therfore,
too put vs too the greater shame, sendeth vs backe too the order of
nature: as if it were sayd, that although we had neuer heard any word
of Gods mouth, nor neuer had had any teaching by holy Scripture:
yit ought euery of vs too enter intoo himselfe, and too consider his own
state, for that wyll be ynough too hold vs conuicted, without any other
witnesse. And that could the heathen men tell vs full well: who hauing
nother beleefe in God, nor any Religion, could notwithstanding
well skill too saye, that the wyld beastes make not warre one ageinst
another. For one Woolfe eateth not another: the Beares and Lyons
that lyue abrode in the wyld woods, haue a certein thing that holdeth
them in order, so as they hurt not one another. And yit haue they
no discretion as is among men: but they haue as it were a naturall

                     •••
                  ouing which driueth them too loue one another, so as euery of them



lyueth (quietly) with his fellowe▪ Now then, must it not needes bee
that men are altoogither out of square, and doo despyze God and nature,
seeing they lyue like Dogges and Cattes (as they say,) and euery
man is as a Woolfe or a Foxe too his neyghbour, so as there is nothing
but craftinesse and malice, or else vtter crueltie? That is the
cause why God telleth vs that wee bee all of one fleshe, and of one
kynd. And Esay vseth the same reason, too perswade vs too succour
our neyghbours, and too haue pitie and compassion of them they
stand in any neede. Thou shalt not despyze thine owne fleshe (sayeth
he.) For the furthest straunger in the world is neuer the more separated
from vs for all that,Esay. 58, b▪ 7. but both he and wee spring both out of one
fountayne, and wee ought too acknowledge him too bee our image.
Therefore whosoeuer disdeyneth any man, surely he foregetteth himselfe
too much, and he knoweth not what he is, nother is woorthy of the
honorable degree wherin God hath set him. And why? Bycause he
peruerteth all order. Now if this reason ought too take place in generall:
much more ought men too bee touched too the quicke when it
is told them what they bee, specially seeing they bee linked toogither
in a much streyter bond. As if a man should saye too a father, How
now? If thou bee so farre out of loue with thy sonne, that thou art vnwylling
too see him, and disdeynest too talke with him, and he can fynd
no meanes too come too attonement with thee: what a crueltie is that?
For he is thy fleshe and thy blud. And how then canst thou bee so blynded
in thyne excessiue moode, as not too consider that God hath giuen
him thee as though he had come out of thyne owne person? And too a
sonne it will bee sayde lykewyse: How now? Is it meete that thou
shouldest bee borne intoo the world, and haue roome and place among
Gods children, and in the meane whyle forget thy father that begate
thee, and by whose meanes God sent thee intoo the world?
               Now the holyest band that God hath set among vs, is the bond
betweene man and wyfe. That is the cause why Saint Paule sayth,
that a man cannot loue his wyfe, but he must loue him self: and contrariwyse,
that if he despyze his wyfe or hate hir, it is all one as if he
fall at oddes with him self. And is that possible? Heretoofore he had
exhorted husbands too doo their duetyes, by hauing an eye too the example
of our Lord Iesus Christ. And he had alledged, that the sonne
of God had giuen him self too the death too wash his Churche: so that
although it was poore and miserable, and ful of filth and vncleannesse:



                  
                     〈…〉
                  
suffered that which was needefull for ou
                     •
                   saluation, he lefte vs moreouer
a record of the grace which he hath purchaced 
                     •
                  or vs. Insomuch
that in B
                     •
                  btim wee haue a visible token, that the blu
                     •
                   of our Lord Iesus
Christ is our washing and cle
                     •
                  zing. Can we think vppon all these
things, and not bee moued too some gentlnesse? Yea if wee consider
first of all that wee 
                     •
                  ee but wr
                     •
                  tched woormes of the earth, and (too be
short) that there is nothing in vs but vtter miserie, so as wee may well

                     •
                  ee called vermin, and caryons full of all corruption and lothsomnesse:
and afterward compare our selues with the sonne of God: ought there
too bee any such pryde in vs, as too esteeme and commend our selues,
and too 
                     •
                  read others vnder our feete? Now if this bee generall too all
men (as I sayd:) what shall it bee betweene man and wyfe? For the
knot that God hath knit betwixt them is such, that the husband is (as
yee would say (but half him self, & may no more separate him selfe frō
his wyfe, thā the wyfe may separate hir selfe frō hir husband, but eche
of them must haue regard too their owne state, as shalbee declared in
the end, and hath bin partly declared alredie. The husband is in deede
the head, but the woman is the bodie. And wheras the head hath preheminence
and souereintie ouer the bodie, it dooth not therefore follow,
that he should hold scorne of it, or bee glad too haue it shamed or reproched:
for dooth not the honour of the head extend too the whole body?
But now forasmuch as husbands are not sufficiently moued with the
reason that is taken of our Lord Iesus Christ: Saint Paule bringeth
them backe too their originall.
               And for asmuch as the heathen folk and vnbeleeuers were acquaynted
with mariage, and had giuen indgment of it: therfore wee neede
no holy scripture (sayeth he) too teache vs in this behalf, for the ignorant
soules which had but natural vnderstanding, and walked as their
moother wit directed them, knew that the wyfe is a peece of the husband,
and that there goeth an inseparable bond betwixt them, and that
the one ought not too forsake the other, vnlesse they will teare themselues
in peeces. Seeing that the blynd wretches perceyued this:
what a shame is it for such as are inlyghtened by Gods woord, and
haue bin taught familiarly as household folk, euen as a father hath his
eye vppon his children: (too bee ignoraut of it?) Seeing (say I) that
God speaketh so familiarly too vs, and as it weere month too mouth,
so as he sheweth vs his will, and telleth vs our deutie: must it not



needs bee that we are woorse than the I
                     •
                  fidels, and much more greeuously
too bee condemned than they, if wee continew hard har
                     ••
                  d, or
stop our eares least wee myght receyue the aduyce that he giueth vs?
Then let vs marke well, that seeing Saint Paule hath set vs foorth
our Lord Iesus Christ (for an example,) and told vs that he is so giuen
vs: it is good reason (considering how wee bee linked vntoo him) that
wee should shewe our selues willing too follow him, and fashyon our
selues lyke vnto him, by pitying such as are in distresse, by bearing
paciently with the vyces and infirmities of our neyghbours, and by releeuing
such as haue neede of vs, if wee may conueniently, and haue
wherwithall. Let vs think well vppon that.
               Agein, forasmuch as heere is mention made of man and wyfe, let
them that are maryed, consider what damnation is prepared for them,
if they bee not moued and touched too the quicke by the things that are
told them heere: namely that on the one syde the heathen folk shall
ryze vp to giue witnesse ageinst them at the latter day, and that (on the
other syde) the order of nature teacheth them what they haue to doo: so
that if they liue not in concord and freendship, as is shewed them here,
they doo (as it were) wilfully withstand God, yea and vtterly forget
themselues, and become woorse than brute beastes. And furthermore
let them knowe also, that forasmuch as mariage is a figure of the holy
vnion that is betweene the some of God and al the faythfull: the same
ought also too hold them in the greater reuerence: and although there
happen many contentions, yit ought they too subdew them, and too let
them lye as dead, and too consider that sith our Lord Iesus sitteth ouer
them, it is too shewe that wedlocke was blissed in such wyse by God
his father at the first, that he himselfe also hath ratifyed the same blissing
by his death and passion, yea and reconcyled vs too God, in such
wyse as the husband may perceyue as it were in a (lyuely) picture,
that he is all one with his wyfe, howbeeit in such wyse vnder the obedience
of God, as both twayne of them ought too serue him with one
accord, euen vntyll they bee so farre foorth as they bee come too hym,
too cleaue too him throughly in all perfection. Now although such
warnings ought too bee of great force among vs: yit are very fewe
touched with them according
                     •
                  y. And the world sees it. For let a man
looke intoo all housholdes one after another: and where shall he fynd
such freendship as may resemble Iesus Christ and his Church? (Nowhere.)
But the man and his wyfe are (rather) euer iarring and disagreeing.



And if there happen too bee some fond 
                     〈◊〉
                  , yit is there no
feare of God, and the least occasion in the world wyll bee ynough too
set them at oddes, so as they shall forget all that is conteyned heere: Or
(too say the truth) they neuer once thinke of it. The loue that is betwixt
them is led and prouoked by their lustes, and not grounded vpon
any knowledge that they haue of the discharging of their dewtie, that
the husband considereth how he ought too beare with his wyfe, how he
ought too guyde hir in the feare of God, and how he ought too loue hir
as a helper allotted vntoo him (for his ease) that he myght walke
as hee ought too doo: Nor that the wyfe humbleth hir selfe too hir
husband, or bendeth hir wittes too please him, bycause shee perceyueth
that shee is expressely giuen vntoo him, too bee a furtherance and
not a hinderance vntoo him. There is no talke nor inckling of al this:
but if all bee well considered, (I say) the common and most ordinarie
state is, that in euery house a man shall fynde diuelishnesse, cursyng,
banning, blasphemie, swearing, spytefulnesse, and harming. And although
some w
                     •
                  man bee a feend towardes hir neyghbours, as well as
shee is towardes hir husband: yit if hir husband had any wealth or
goods by hir, he must take hir part without discretion, and maynteyne
hir quarrell, be it good or bad. I say, a man may see, that this peruersenesse
reygneth welneere euerywhere.
               Agein, euery man complaynes of his wyfe, saying: I cannot liue
with hir, it is a mad beast, there is nothing in hir but pryde and peeuishnesse,
and there is nothing in hir but froward stubbornnesse. I
cannot speake a woord too hir, but shee payes mee agein with foure
for it. Now surely, such as men make their wyues, such haue they
of them. For were there no more but this that I spake of, namely
that men doo (as it were) in spyte of God maynteyne their wyues
wrongfull quarelles: ought not God too yeeld them their deserued
hyre, and too make it rebound backe vppon their owne pates? Whatsoeuer
I say, if a man marke well e
                     •
                  ery mans ordinarie trade of lyfe:
he shall fynde that there may bee a sorte of fond loues, and a forte of
excessiue affections, but as for well ordered frendship, such as dependeth
vppon God, and is grounded on his woord: hardly shal he among
a hundred houses fynd one, where the husband and the wyfe are so
well qualifyed. Yit notwithstanding wee bee vnexcuzable, if wee
profit not in this doctrine. So then, euery of vs must fyght ageinst his
vnruly affections: & if a man haue not such a wyfe as he could wish, let



him vnderstād, that God intendeth to try his pacience by that meanes
and let him consider wel, that he behaueth himselfe woorse towardes
our Lord Iesus Christ, who is the husband, too whom all of vs are
maryed. And therefore let him not bee rigorous towardes his wyfe,
seeing that he himselfe deserueth too bee so humbled. Too bee short,
let euery man so mynd this doctrine, that when the husband hath not
all things in his wife that he desyreth, he may thinke thus with himself:
yit am I bound vntoo hir, yea and I am not onely bound vntoo
my wyfe, but also vntoo God, who is the mayster of mariage, and too
our Lord Iesus Christ, who is as a mirrour and lyuely image of it vntoo
vs. Therefore am I bound too doo my duetie towardes hir, and
both too loue hir, and too beare with hir, although there bee vyces in
hir. Yit is it not ment, that the husband should foster and feede his
wyues vyces. For as wee must warne and counsell one another: so
must there not bee any such neerenesse or linking toogither, but that
if the husband see any thing amisse in his wife, he must at leastwyse tel
hir of it, yea and rebuke hir, and labour and indeuer too bring hir intoo
the right way, as much as he can possibly.
               But yit howsoeuer the world go, so long as wee bee maried, this
standes continually, that wee cannot chaunge the order which our
Lord hath set, yea euen too bee vnuiolable. Therfore wee must not
passe what the persons are: insomuch that although a woman haue too
rough & sharp a husband, & such a one as dealeth ouer hardly with hir,
yit must shee alwayes consider, that he is hir husband, and that when
God matched them toogither, he allotted hir that portion, bycause
shee was woorthie of it: and let hir also enter intoo examination of hir
sinnes, that shee may pray God too take away that rod, and too deale
more gently with hir. Then lyke as the wyfe must on hir syde continue
the bond of mariage, and submit hir selfe, euen without respecting
what hir husband is: so when the husband hath not a wyfe too his
lyking, let him thinke lykewyse, my wyfe dooth not hir duetie, I
cannot lyue with hir: but yit dooth wedlocke dure styll. Who ordeyned
it? God. Then if I forget my duetie, and reuenge mee of my
wife, or fall too stoutnesse without regarding what belongs too my
charge: it is not ageinst a mortall creature, that I shall bend my selfe.
When the husband ouershootes himselfe after that sorte, surely he
fyghteth ageinst God, and indeuereth too disanull the thing that is inuiolable
by nature. So then let euery of vs put this doctrine better



in vre on his owne behalfe, and let not onely maryed folkes, but
also all men in generall vnderstande, that wee cannot estraunge
our selues one from another, and become vnkynde, mercilesse, and vnpacient
one toward another, but wee must bee as witlesse creatures
that haue no reason nor regard from whence they come, or to what end
wee liue in this world. That is the effect of the things which we haue
too beare in mynd.
               And if wee rgarded well the Prophets reason,Esay. 58. b. 7. surely wee shoulde
bee more moued with this exhortation that is set heere: No man euer
hat
                        •
                     d his ovvne flesh, but nurrisheth and cherisheth it. If euery
of vs gaue himselfe too consider what care he hath of his owne person,
how tenderly he cherisheth all the partes of his bodie euen too the least
toe of his foote, how carefully he forecasteth that nothing may want
him, and how prouident he is in all respectes for it, so as if any member
bee ill at ease, he indeuereth too remedye it, that he may maynteyne
himself in health: I say, if euery of vs bethought himself throughly
after that fashyon: surely then would it bee a good teaching too vs
too doo the lyke too our neyghbours, that is too say, too al men: and
much more consequently, the fathers too their children, and the children
too their fathers, the husbandes too their wyues, and the wyues to
their husbandes, and so foorth mutually according as it hath pleased
our Lord too linke vs in neerer bond, as I haue sayde afore. And if
any body reply heereuntoo, 
                     •
                  ush, he, or he is not my selfe: (I answer,)
then must it needes followe that thou art no man. For (as I sayde afore)
Gods creating and maynteyning of vs, are with condition, that
wee should bee all as one masse. For though there bee many fingers
and many s
                     ••
                  ewes in a mans bodie: yit is that no let but that they bee
all one thing, nother is it any impeachment why one member should
not succour another as well as it selfe. For it is vnkyndly that the
bodie should fall too banding, and too deuiding of it selfe intoo factions:
nother is it possible that it should so. Then if euery of vs bee so
wedded to his owne profit, that in the meane whyle he disdeyne others
through pryde, or else bee cruell, so as if hee see all the miseries in the
world, he hath no compassion too releeue them, nor can fynd in his har
                     •
                  
to beare with any thing, or to forgiue it: is it not a signe that wee haue
forgotten our owne nature?
               Wherfore too the intent wee may fare the better by this doctrine,
let vs wey well these woordes of Saint Paule, that neuer any



man hated his owne fleshe, but that euery man nurrisheth and cherisheth
it. Neede wee a schoolemayster too teache vs this? Needeth
God too send vs his Angels from heauen, or neede wee too take much
payne too learne this art or cunning? (No:) wee bee but too much
giuen to it alredy by nature. Sith it is so, euery of vs beares his owne
euidence rolled in record ageinst himselfe, and his owne indytement
redie framed: there shall neede no long examination before God. For
the more carefull that men haue bin for their owne bodyes, the more
forecasting they haue bin for the mayntenance of it, and (to bee short)
the mo signes that they shewe of louing themselues: the greeuouslyer
shall they bee condemned before God, bycause they haue not doone
the lyke towardes them which are their owne flesh, yea though they
were most vnknowen and of the furthest countrie in the world, as I
sayd afore. And if this bee generall for all: what shall become of it,
when the sonne setteth himselfe with all outrage and stubbornnesse ageinst
his father, so as he hath no meeknesse too suffer himselfe too bee
gouerned by him, but euen vtterly shaketh him of, for whom he ought
to spend himselfe euen too the death? Also when the fathers on their
syde vse nothing but bitternesse toowardes their children, or gouerne
them in such wyse, as they do but prouoke them to impacience: When
the husbandes deale so roughly with their wyues, as it may vtterlye
discorage them, and cast them intoo sorrowe, so as they shall let themselues
looce, and fall disorderedly too all manner of leaudnesse: When
the women lykewyse bee stiffenecked, and cannot bee brought to good
order: I say, when these disorders are among vs: let vs assure our
selues there needeth none other record too condemne vs, than the care
that euery of vs hath had of himselfe, in that wee haue bin myndfull of
our owne welfare, and labored (earnestly) for it, and in the meane
whyle broken the bond that our Lord had set among vs, and euery of
vs drawen alone by himself, and forgotten all duetie of louing kyndnesse,
insomuch that wee would (if wee had could) haue made euery
of vs a new world. Truly there is no man of that abilitie, that he can
forbeare the helpe of his neyghbours: and yit are wee loth that our
neyghbours should dwel with vs, yea or that they should bee counted
in the number of men: there is not that man which would not reigne
alone lyke a Lord. But this vnkyndnesse and leaudnesse are sufficient
too shewe that wee bee not woorthie too inioy the benefytes
which God dealeth too vs in this transitory lyfe. For sith wee bee too



much wedded vntoo it, and mynd it more carefully than wee should do:
wee bee so giltie, as there is not that man which may open his mouth
too reply or too alledge any excuce for himselfe.
               And Saint Paule hauing told vs what wee ought too knowe, yea
and too iudge of our owne nature, returneth agein too that which hee
had touched afore, that is too wit, that such as professe themselues too
bee members of the bodie of our Lord Iesus Christ, ought to bee perswaded
by his example, too liue quietly, freendly, and agreeingly with
their wyues. No man (sayeth he) loueth him self, but he loueth his
wyfe (also.) Uerely God hath ordeyned wedlocke, in such wyse, as
the wyfe must bee as the bodie of hir husband. Therfore if a man loue
him self, his wyfe must bee matched with him, or else it shalbee a monstruous
loue. It is a thing that men ought most too abhorre, that the
thing which is most holy in mans lyfe, should bee vtterly abaced. Seeing
it is so, he that loueth him self, will loue his wyfe. For wee bee of
his flesh, wee bee of his bones. Heere he toucheth a thing that hee
spake not of before. For when he did set downe the example of our
Lord Iesus Christ, it was in alledging that he spared not him self,
but did shead his blud to wash vs from our filthinesse and vncleannesse.
We then were defyled & stayned before God, & our Lord Iesus Christ
found the meanes too bring vs in his fauour agein. And how? Euen
by his owne bludshed. But heere hee alledgeth another reason, too
confirme the matter yit better: which is, that wee bee bone of his
bones, and flesh of his flesh. In so saying, he dooth vs too vnderstand,
that when men doo theyr duetie, it is too theyr owne benefyte.
For therby they may taste the inestimable and infinite grace of God,
in that euery man accordyng too his degree, dooth in his mariage represent
the vnion that is betweene them selues and our Lorde Iesus
Christ.
               The thing therfore which Saint Paule intendeth, is yit agayne to
remoue the ha
                     •
                  dnesse of our hartes, by shewing vs that wee cannot inioy
the grace that is purchaced vs by our Lord Iesus Christ, vnlesse
wee lyue in freendshyp togither, accordyng to the image therof which
wee haue in the loue that he bare vs in his death and passion, whiche
surmo
                     •
                  nteth all the loue that wee can haue (one too another.)
               Howbeeit, before wee goe any further, let vs see why and in what
sense Saint Paule saith, that wee bee of the bones of our Lord Iesus
Christ, and of his flesh, and members of his body. For he is descended



of Adams linage,Rom. 1. a. 3. and is called the seede of Dauid. And although he
was conceyued after a woonderful maner in the wombe of the Uirgin,
yit tooke he mans fleshe vpon hym, and became very man. Howbeit
he saith, that he is the sonne of Man, too shewe that he hath taken a nature
that is common too vs, wherein he hath made hym selfe familiar
with vs.Hebr. 
                        •
                     . b. 14. And in deede (as saith the Apostle in the Epistle too the Hebrewes)
he is not ashamed too call vs brothers.
               But now let vs come too that which is sayd heere. It seemeth
that Saint Paule would make Iesus Christ as it were the roote of
mankynd, so as wee should descend of him: for he calleth vs his ofspring.
But wee haue too marke, that for asmuch as our Lord Iesus
Christ was shaped of the seede of Abraham, too performe the
thyngs that were promised, yea and that he could not bee the Mediator
betweene God and vs, except he had byn of our nature: (for he could
not haue amended our misdoinges wherthrough wee were bounde too
endlesse damnation, vnlesse he had clothed hym selfe with our body, and
had also a soule, too the end too present hym self in the person of al men:
and so it behoued our Lord Iesus Christ too bee our flesh in our body:)
wee may say that he is of our bones and of our flesh. And why? He is
descended of Adams race, as I sayd afore. But howsoeuer the cace
stand, he was conceyued maruelously by the holy Ghoste. Howbeeit
there is another respect. For yit for all this he ceasseth not too bee the
second Adam,1. Cor. 15. c. 21. 22. as Saint Paule termeth him, in making comparison
betweene the grace wherethrough wee were set agein, and the deadly
fall wherthrough wee were all forlorne. He sayeth, that the first Adam
did by his transgression make vs enemies too God, so as wee haue no
accesse to him, but should be thrust back, if we preaced to him, and that
iustly. For where sin reigneth, there must needes bee as it were vnrecoucylable
diuision. God being the fountayne of all ryghtuousnesse,
cannot match with our iniquities and corruptions. Then is there also
a second Adam, which cōmeth to remedie al, that is to wit, our Lord
Iesus Christ. And how is he the second Adam? For (as I told you
afore) it is not ment that wee should bee so bold as too think too preace
vntoo Iesus Christ, as though wee were linked too him of our owne
nature: but that is done in the power of his holy spirit, & not in the substance
of his body. Behold then, Iesus Christ is become very man, and
hath takē vpon him the selfsame humane nature that ours is: but yit is
it not of nature that wee bee his flesh and his bones: (for wee bee not



descended of him as touching our own substance) but it is of his diuine
power. Then must wee come too this poynt, that wee bee bone of the
bones of our Lord Iesus Christ, bycause wee bee restored in him, and
haue in him as it were a new and second creation.
               And Saint Paule (as wee shall see heerafter) hath an eye too the
originall of Eue: for shee was taken out of Adams substance, and shaped
of one of his ribbes. Now then, are wee restored by our Lord
Iesus Christ? If wee consider our first birth wherby wee bee brought
intoo this world too bee mortall men: wee cannot say, such is our flesh,
vnlesse wee bee of the seede of them that were afore vs: but whatsoeuer
wee bee, in that seede wee bee accursed. It is trew that Adam
was created after the image of God: but yit was that image defaced
by sin, so as wee bee not worthie too bee counted among Gods
woorkes. And the same horrible condemnation is pronounced wyth
his owne mouth,Gene. 6. b. 6. where he sayeth, that it repenteth him that hee had
made man, as though he disclaymed vs all, bycause wee doo but infect
the earth, and are not so woorthy too bee mustered in the aray of hys
creatures, as are the woormes, lyce, fleas, dogflyes, and all other vermin
of the world. That then is the benefyte which wee haue by Adam:
and as oft as it is sayd, that wee be of his seede and of his fleshe, it serueth
too shew vs, that there is nothing in vs but a gulf of cursednesse.
Now hereuppon, if wee come too our Lord Iesus Christ, wee bee restored
agein,
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 5. 
                        •
                     . 17. and (as the Scripture speaketh of it,) wee bee made
new creatures in him. Yee see then, that it is by power of the spirit,
and not by order of nature, nor by any common fashyon, that wee bee
of the bone and of the fleshe of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the cause
why wee bee members of his body, is that God his father hath ordeyned
and stablished him as our head. Howbeeit (as I sayd afore) that
is doone by a secret power, which wee comprehend not but by fayth.
Then do both these things agree very well: namely, that Iesus Christ
is of our bone and of our fleshe, in respect that he hath taken our humane
nature vpon him, and clothed himself with it, without the which
wee should haue no alyance with him. For if wee cannot atteyne too
the Angels: how shall wee atteyne too him that is the souerein head of
them? But wheras he is come in such wyze vntoo vs, that he hath
voutsafed to bee knit in the bond of brotherhood with vs: that is doone
specially when he woorketh so by the power of his holy spirit, that he
is our head, and wee are gathered toogither in him, and haue a heauenly



state, and wheras afore wee had nothing but of the earh, and consequently
had nothing in vs but corruption, now wee bee lifted vp on
hygh, and are made the children of God by the grace that is spoken
of heere, wheras erst wee were heires of his wrath, which wee hold
from our father Adam when wee followe his nature, bycause wee are
all lost and peruerted in him. Thus yee see in effect how the twoo
things are too bee agreed, wherin there seemed too bee some diuersitie.
And in deede if wee haue not that, what would become of vs?
How miserable would our state bee? I haue shewed alredye, that
if any man looke well what is in himselfe: he shall fynd nothing there
but matter too separate him from God. Now then, vntyll wee bee of
the substance of our Lord Iesus Christ, God must needes hate vs and
abhorre vs, and not knowe vs too bee of the number and company of
his creatures.
               Now remayneth too see how it commeth to passe that wee bee of
the bones of Iesus Christ, and of his flesh. For he is in heauen, and
wee are heere beneath on earth. Agein, when wee bee begotten, euery
of vs is begotten after the order of nature, he hath his father and
his mother too come of, and they bee of the same race that he is. How
then are wee of the bones of Iesus Christ? It is not in respect of substance:
for if wee looke vppon our owne flesh, nother the skin, nor
the bones, nor the gristles that wee haue, doo come of the body of our
Lord Iesus Christ: but it is in respect that the cursednesse which wee
bring from our moothers womb, and is spred ouer all Adams linage,
is taken away by the power of our Lord Iesus Christ, and that
therwithall he hath so sheaded foorth the grace of his holy spirit vppon
vs, that wee bee inlyghtened by it. Therfore it is as a qualitie (as
men terme it) & not a substance. Euery mā shal descend of such linage,
and God letteth the common order runne on styll which he appoynted
at the beginning, namely that men beget one another from issew too
issew: but in the meane whyle Iesus Christ renueth those whom God
his father hath chozen, and such as are the members of his owne body,
and riddeth them of the corruption which they had taken from Adam.
And afterward he giueth them such a power, as euery of them
feeleth by fayth that he is vnder the head that is set ouer vs, and that
wee bee gathered all toogither in him, and his lyfe is giuen vntoo vs,
too the intent wee should no more liue too our selues,2. Cor. 5. 
                        •
                     . 15. nor too the world,
but rather 
                     〈◊〉
                   he should liue in vs, as Saint Paule sayeth of him.



Yee see then that Iesus Christ needeth not too come downe from heauen,
too make vs members of his body, nor too diminish his owne
flesh too make vs too growe out of him, and too bee shaped of him.
For all is doone by the woonderfull power of his holy spirit. Wee
drawe no
                     •
                   any thing from the flesh, nor from the body wherwith he
once clothed himselfe: for that is in heauen, too the intent that
wee should bee fashyoned lyke vntoo the glory that is now in him.
But yit for all that he woorketh in such wyse, as wee haue all our
strength continually of him. And lyke as trees drawe both their flowers,
their leaues, and their fruites from their roote: and lyke as the
body of man feeleth his strength too flowe downe from the head, so do
wee feele the vertew and force of the coniunction that is betweene vs
and our Lord Iesus Christ, and yit he continueth still in his full state
al the whyle. Nother doth that hinder vs too inioy the inestimable
benefite that S. Paule magnifyeth so much in this text. And therwithal
let vs beare this poynt in mynd, that it is much when wee bee (inwardly)
stird vp to doo euery man his duetie: for thereby wee tast the
grace of God which concerneth the saluation of our soules.
               The matter that is in hand heere, is that men should liue freendly
and agreeingly with their wyues. And when a husband considereth
the things that are spoken heere, he ought too bee prouoked, not only
too discharge him selfe of the bond wherein he is bound too God and
his wyfe: but also too thinke thus with him selfe: This is such a state
that although it bee corruptible, and serue but for this transitorie lyfe,
yit hath God set it afore vs as a lyuely image wherein I see that Iesus
Christ is my head, and that I belong too him, and that not onely
I am his, but also he is myne, so as his lyfe belongs too mee, and
(too bee short) I am as if I were a member of his body. Seeing
then that men in dooing their duetie towards their wyues, and wyues
also in obeying their husbandes, may behold how they bee ioyned vntoo
Christ, and that they doo the things that belong too the heritage
of the kingdome of heauen: must it not needes bee that wee bee too vnthankfull,
if wee consider not how our Lord Iesus Christ laboreth by
all meanes too win vs, and too make vs walke vnder his yoke? And
moreouer he not onely allureth vs by gentle and louing meanes, too
the intent wee should take the better corage too serue him, and too doo
the things that our calling and state requyre: but also draweth vs too
him, and euen in this world, & in the transitorie and earthly things, setteth



vs foorth the euerlasting saluation that is prepared for vs in heauen,
& which was bought so deerly for vs by the blud of his only sonne,
to the intent that in the end wee should bee parttakers of the effect and
vertue that proceedeth therof.
               And now let vs fall downe before the Maiestie of our good God,
with acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him too voutsafe, so too
reforme our hartes vntoo goodnesse, as wee may seeke nothing but too
serue him, and too yeeld our selues wholly too the obeying of his holy
will, and that it may please him therwithall so too beare with vs in our
feeblenesse, as wee hauing receyued pitie and mercie at his hand, may
in the end bee able too stand vp before his face. And so let vs all say,
Almyghty God heauenly father &c.
            
            
               The .xlii. Sermon, which is the tenth
vppon the fifth Chapter.
               
                  
                     31 For this cause shall a man leaue father and moother, and bee
ioyned too his vvyfe, and they shalbee twoo in one flesh.
                     32 This is a great secret. Yea, say I, in Christ and in the
Church.
                     33 Therefore, doo yee so, as euery man may loue his wyfe as himselfe,
and let the wyfe feare hir husband.
                  
               
               
                  GOd dooth so dispoze his woorkes, as wee
haue occasion too behold a woonderfull
wisedome in all his dooings, and too receyue
such instruction by them, as may be
too our benefyte: as (for example) in
that which Saint Paule alledgeth here,
namely that the woman was drawen and
taken out of the substance of the man. For
God could well haue created Eue after
the same manner that he created Adam.
But he 
                     〈…〉
                  , and commaundeth woman too bee sha
                  
                     •
                  ed
therof. And whertoo tendeth this, but that there should bee such an



vnion betweene man and wyfe, as he myght thinke, this is my flesh,
this is my bone: and shee, whence hath God giuen mee lyfe? whence
hath he shaped mee? Euen of a rib that he tooke out of man. Wee
see then that God did not without cause vse such diuersitie in creating
man and woman. It was too the end it should bee continually
mynded in wedlocke, so as the husband myght knowe that he breaketh
the whole order of nature, if he bee not vnited in good agreement
too his wyfe: and the wyfe lykewyse, if shee submit not h
                     ••
                  selfe
quietly too hir husband, acknowledging him too bee hir head. But
Saint Paul applyeth this further, to the vnion which is betweene our
Lord Iesus Christ and his Church. For (as was declared vppon
Sunday) wedlocke is as a figure of the knitting toogither which is
betweene vs and the sonne of God. And therefore he cryeth out, saying,
It is a hygh misterie, that is too say, a secret which wee ought too
take very good heed of, Yea (sayeth he) in Iesus Christ and in his
Church. There are then twoo things too bee noted here.
               The one is, that wee see how God euen from the beginning, hath
knit man and wyfe togither in vnseparable bond. The other is, that he
intendeth too leade vs yit hygher: that is too say, that forasmuch as
there is nothing in our selues but all maner of wretchednesse, wee
should bee knit too the sonne of God, who is the fountayne of all goodnesse,
and from thence drawe our spirituall lyfe, and haue all our
strength and power of him.Gene. 2. d. 24. And forasmuch as S. Paule hauing alledged
the sayd text out of Moyses, addeth, that this misterie is great,
in that the sonne of God hath made vs bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh: some haue imagined it too bee as a prophesie of that which hath
bin sayd. But there is no reason nor colour of reason, why they should
think so, and it is euident that the text should bee mard, if it bee not
taken simply as it lyeth: that is too wit, that God intended too warne
man and wyfe what their dewtie and charge is. Let that then serue
for one poynt.
               The Papistes haue foully ouersho
                     •
                   themselues in this cace, and bewrayed
such ignorance, as little children myght well spit in their faces
for it. Bycause the woord Sacrament was an ordinarie woord (in
old tyme) too betoken Secrets, misteries, and all maner of hygh
things that are woorthie too bee had in admiration of vs: therfore the
sayd woord Sacrament was 
                     〈◊〉
                   in heere (
                     〈…〉
                  ) It is
a greate Sacrament, sayeth Saint Paule, that is to saye, a great misterie



or secret.1. Tim. 3. d. 16. And heerof there is no doubt, no more than when he
sayeth, it is a great Sacrament, that God was manifested in the flesh:
It is a greate Sacrament that the Gospell was published through
the whole world,Rom. 16. d. 25. and that the wretched Gentyles and vnbeeleuers
were matched with the ofspring of Abraham.Ephe. 3. a. 3. b. 9. So in this text, the
infinite goodnesse of our God is a (Sacrament,Colost. 1. d. 26. that is too say, a) hygh
thing, and well worthie to bee looked at of vs. Hereuppon some folks
haue bin so verie beasts as too saye, Then is Wedlocke or Matrimony
a Sacrament, as well as Baptim, or as the Lords supper. And
bycause they vnderstood not the word: to their seeming there was somwhat
to be found here, like as in Baptim, the water betokeneth that we
bee washed by the blud of our Lord Iesus Christ: and in the Supper,
the bread and wyne are warrants and pledges of his body and of his
blud. They were of opinion, that as much is doone in mariage. Now
when wee see that such doltishnesse hath crept in through the whole
world, and that these greate doctours had neede too bee set agein too
their Apcies, for so much as they knew not euen the things that they
ought too haue iudged by their naturall reason: therin we see that ther
                     •
                  
lyeth a greate vengeance of God vppon such as haue corrupted the
trew religion, and made minglemangles in the woord of God, after
their owne fancyes. And therwithall wee haue too thank our God so
much the more, for that he hath drawen vs out of such dungeons. And
seeing there was so horrible confuzion in such as are reported themselues
to be the Lampes and pillers of the Church, & were taken so to
bee: sith wee see that God did dull them so vtterly: wee ought not too
be afrayd too separate our selues from their company and si
                     •
                  agogue.
And seeing he hath graunted vs the grace too bee no more mingled
with them: let vs keepe on our course, and walk foorth soberly. For
there wee haue a warning too hold our selues in awe, that wee being
Gods trew schollers, wee may distrust our selues, and not go seeke
fyue feete in one sheepe (as they say), but handle the holy scriptures
with such reuerence, as God may guyde vs too the trew vnderstanding
of it by his holy spirit.
               But now let vs come too Saint Paules intent. It is certeine that
he alledgeth the record of Moyses,Gene. 2. d. 23. too shewe that the 
                     〈…〉
                  
beare with his wyfe, as with a portion of his owne bo
                     •
                  ie, and the one
half of his owne person: 
                     〈…〉
                  


                  
them. The cause then why Eue was shaped of one of Adams
ribbes, is, that God ment to stablish such a concord betweene man and
wyfe by that meane, as there should bee no bond in the world so streyt
as that. For the chyld ought in deede too honour his father: for he
is his seede, and he is his blud: but yit is the bond of wedlocke preferred
before it. And by whom? It commeth not of mens lyking: but
according as Adam had spoken, and as God had pronounced the sentence,
so is it an inuiolable order, that man should bee knit vntoo his
wyfe, yea and that in such wyse, that if he should needs forsake the one
or the other, his father should not bee so neere him as his wyfe.
               Yit is not this as much too say, as that God ment too breake that
yoke, and too giue children leaue too bee stubborne ageinst their fathers
and moothers, when they bee once maryed. God chaungeth
not any whit of the things that he hath ordeyned. Therfore he
that hath a father or moother alyue, ought too bee still subiect too them,
without ceassing of from dooing his dewtie, according as the scripture
sheweth, and as nature also teacheth euery man too doo. For wee
haue it ingrauen in vs, and wee cannot wype it out. Thus yee see that
maryed folks ceasse not too bee alwayes subiect too their fathers and
moothers. But heere the cace standeth vppon the comparing of the
one with the other: as if he should say, If a yong man should forsake his
father, & haue him in any contempt or dis
                     •
                  eine, or be stubborne ageinst
him, or yeeld him no reuerence: would not the world say, hee were a
monster? Now if God haue commaunded in his lawe, that stubborne
and disobedient children should bee stoned,Deut. 21. d. 21. and that men should roote
such villanie out of the world: what a thing is it, when a man shall forsake
his wyfe, or the wyfe hir husband? Surely it is an outrageous
cryme. Then if it be intollerable that the chyld should ryze vp ageinst
his father: (No doubt but) the bond of wedlocke is yi
                     •
                   much holyer, and
more expresly commended too vs of God. Seeing it is so: it standeth
euery man on hand, too looke that he discharge his dewtie. For if a
woman haue a froward head of hir owne, so as shee must bee brawling
euery minute of an houre, and wil not be subiect to hir husband: also if
the husband be churlish & cruell, so as he disdeyneth his wyfe: it is not
a doing of wrong to a humane creature, but to God, who is the author
of mariage, & hath ordeined it with such condition, as we heare of here.
And so ye see what we haue to remember vpō the first part of this text.
               But this extendeth yit further: that is too wit, that euery man



should loue those that are alyed too him by meanes of God. As for example,
a man hauing no more but his wyfe, is bound notwithstanding
too acknowledge that God hath vnited vs all toogither. And when
he created Eue the moother of all men out of Adams syde: it was too
the end that the same should extend euerywhere, and that wee should
knowe that he will haue vs to liue in such concord, as none of vs should
for all that separate our selues from other. No man then ought too bee
so cruell as too say, Tush, shee is not my wyfe. But wee must consider,
that forasmuch as it is our Lords will that there should bee a generall
concord among all men, and that euery man should think him
self bound too his neyghbours: it is as though mankynd were compounded
of twoo sortes, so as there were both malekynd and femalekynd.
Then are wee all bound one too another. Trew it is that
matrimony (as I sayd) is reserued by it self: but yit for all that, men
are bound towards women, too succour them, seeing that our Lord
hath shewed it by deede euen in the first creation. And women also
must behaue themselues soberly among men, although they bee not
their husbands.
               Also there is further, that they shalbee twoo in one flesh. Heerby
our Lord Iesus Christ sheweth vs, that the man which is maryed
ought too hold him self contented with his owne wyfe, and the woman
lykewyse rest wholly vppon hir husband, so as they let not their lusts
raundge abrode, nor giue themselues the brydle to chaunge any thing
in the order which our Lord hath set, and will haue too stand in force to
the worlds end. Men haue so passed their bounds in all ages, that
they haue forgotten both kynd and all kyndnesse. And they haue not
onely despyzed God and his woorde, but also forgotten with what
condition they were created, in the worlde: and they knewe not
euen that which naturall reason could haue shewed them. And they
had not come too that poynt, if they had not bin doted in their lusts
lyke woode beasts. And surely there is no such rage as the reigning
of inordinate lusts in our flesh, when they bee not repressed by the feare
of God. Thereof it came that in many countries it was lawfull for
men too haue three or foure wyues a peece, as it is permitted
still at this day among the Turks. The Iewes also, notwithstanding
that they had the Lawe of Moyses, did put away their wyues
for euery small occasio
                     •
                   that came in their heades. If a woman were
not fayre ynough, or if shee were not rich ynough, by and by shee was



diuorced. Trew it is that our Lord had prouyded for it, howbeeit
but halfe.Math. 19. a. 
                        •
                     . And in deede our Lord Iesus Christ declareth, that God
had a regard of the hard hartednesse of that people, which was past amendment
or taming. Therefore when any of them listed too put away
his wyfe, he was bound too giue hir a Testimoniall, that shee
was no harlot, but that shee lyked him not: and he choze rather too
susteyn that shame, than to keepe the fayth of mariage. For in putting
away his wyfe after he had plyghted hir his fayth too liue and dye
with hir, he shewed himselfe forsworne and vnfaythfull. Therefore
it was a reproch too them too put away theyr wyues after that sort.
But yit for all that, diuorces were common. And our Lord Iesus
sayth, that in so dooyng the Iewes were backestyders from the lawe
of God, and therfore he telleth them, it was not so from the beginning.
They tooke that libertie on that it was sayd, that he which found not
himselfe well at ease with his wyfe, should giue hir leaue too depart.
But our Lord Iesus telleth them, It is trew that God graunted it too
your fathers: howbeeit that was bycause he was fayne too deale with
them as with wyld beastes. So then, he graunted them more than
was lawfull: but yit knowe yee, that although he punished them not
with rigour, yit is it not ment that you should therefore take occasion
at it too doo yit woorse. Therefore haue yee an eye alwayes too the
beginning, when God created Adam, and shaped Eue out of his syde:
he sayde (at that tyme) that twoo should bee one fleshe. He then that
taketh twoo wyues, is woorthy too bee cut asunder, and he that takes
three, is woorthy too bee cut in three peeces: for it is all one as if he
would defye God and nature, seeyng God hath printed a marke in the
person of man and wyfe, too the intent that wedlocke should bee kept
as it ought too bee. Wherfore if a man disanull the ordinance of God,
deserueth he not to bee wyped out quyte and cleane? The thing then
which we haue yit still to beare in mynd, is, that a man must brydle all
his senses, and not cast his eyes wandering heere and there, least his
mynd bee caryed away when he sees a wooman that seemes fayrer too
him than his owne. And let the wyfe also not looke vppon any man
but hir husband, otherwyse than with simplicitie. And let them alwayes
thinke, wee bee but twoo, yea and yit one fleshe: I can not bee
a whole person, except I bee with my husband. And let the husband
also on his syde thinke, I am but halfe a creature, when I am asunder
from my wyfe, seeyng that God 
                     〈…〉
                  


                  
yee see what wee haue too remember vppon this saying, that 
                     〈◊〉
                   shall
bee one fleshe.
               Now theruppon Saint Paule concludeth, Therefore let the husband
loue his vvyfe, and let the wyfe honour or feare hir husband.
For the woord that he vseth, signifyeth too feare: but it is taken heere
for the reuerence and subiection which the wyfe oweth to hir husband.
And heere wee haue too marke the difference that is put betweene the
dewtie of the husband, and the dewtie of the wyfe. God commaundeth
not the husband too feare his wyfe, but he commaunde
                     ••
                   him to
                     •
                  
loue hir. There is yit more in the woman: that is wit, that shee
must bee subiect. If a man demaund, How then? Dooth the husband
owe none honour too his wyfe? It is not possible to loue ryghtly
and with a pure hart, where there is no reuerence: for a man will n
                     •
                  
                  uer
loue him whom he despyzeth. The world dooth in deede call it
loue, but (too speake properly) if I loue a wanton person or a iester,
bycause he makes mee some sport or pleaseth mee, that is no trew
loue: but there must bee a linking togither, and an agreement in good
manners, so as a man haue alwayes good estimation and opinion of
him whom he loueth. In lyke cace is it betweene a man and his wife.
For when I thinke with my selfe, Shee is a portion of my selfe, shee
is the one halfe of my person: is it possible that I should despyze hir?
The man then must honour his wyfe, howbeeit not by subiection that
hee shoulde not alwayes abyde in his state as heade, and haue the gouerning
of his wyfe. That is the cause why Saint Paule requyreth
nothing at the husbandes hande, but that he should loue his wyfe.
In another text too the Colossians he addeth,Colo
                        ••
                     . 
                        •
                     . d. 19. that they should not be
bitter too them. For if there bee loue, surely he that loueth, wil beare
with many faults and infirmities of his freend. And if wee doo it one
too another: much more ought the husband too doo it towards hir
whom he knoweth too bee giuen him of God, that he should loue hir
as his owne bodie:1. Pet. 
                        •
                     . b. 7. And therefore Saint Peter sayeth expresly, that
men must haue discretion and wisdome too helpe their wyues infirmities,
by bearing with their frayltie. If a man take a toy in his head,
that his wyfe is vnconstant and lyght: or too bee short, if he despyze
hir vnder pretence that shee is not a man: it is an ill regarding of hir.
For though shee bee frayle, he must consider that there is the lyke in
himselfe, and thereuppon beare with hir, as he would bee borne withall
himselfe. Thus yee see how this is too bee defyned that Saint



Paule speakes of here. He meaneth not that a man should bee doted
in fond loue, as it falleth out oftentymes. And the last Sunday I alledged
the examples of such as pretend too bee very hot in mayntenance
of their wyues quarelles (abrode,) and yit are diuelles to them
at home. So then, the loue that Saint Paule speaketh of, is a right
and good affection which the man beareth too his wyfe, bycause hee
knoweth that God hath knit them togither, as though he had put them
togither with his owne hand, and sayd, lyue you two togither in peace
and concord.
               Agein, as touching the wyues, bycause they bee loth too beare
the yoke that God hath layed vppon theyr shoulders: therefore in the
other text Saint Paule did put them in mynd, that God is the author
of wedlocke, and that it is he which hath set downe this condition,
that the wyfe should bee subiect too hir husband, and suffer hirselfe too
bee ruled by him as by hir head, and beare him reuerence. For a woman
will alwayes find matter ynough in hir husband too despyze him.
If he haue any goodnesse, shee will go about too deface it, that shee
may haue occasion too say, why should this man haue preheminence ouer
mee? For he is no more able too rule than I. And wee knowe
what ouerweening there is in men and women. For euery one thinkes
himselfe more able than his fellowe. The wyues therfore would feyne
gouerne and haue the maystrie. For that cause dooth Saint Paule
tell them, that they must abyde in the state that God hath put them in,
(that is too wit, in subiection,) and that they must not stand scannyng
what is in their husbandes, too examin whether they bee woorthy too
haue authoritie and superioritie or no: but that they must consider what
God hath ordeyned, and obey the same without geynsaying or replying.
They must not inquyre, why is this, and why is that? too the
intent too fynd some excuce too exempt themselues from the obeying of
God and of his commaundementes. Therfore wee must giue eare to
him, and euery of vs must without geynsaying receyue the things that
he commaundeth vs. Thus yee see how the things are too bee vnderstoode,
which are spoken here concerning the feare & subiection that
wyues owe too their husbands. This doctrine is cleere and familiar ynough
of it self: but yit for all that, how is it practyzed in the worlde?
Folke would fayne alledge excuce of ignorance, too shift off the performance
of their dewtie, by saying, this is to hygh & to hard to be vnderstoode,
when as it is sayd, that men ought to loue their wyues▪ needeth



there any gloze too expound what the holy Ghost ment? No: the thing
is euident ynough of it selfe, and euery man knowes in himself that he
vnderstandes it well ynough. But if yee looke vppon the loue that
men beare too their wyues, scarsely shall yee fynd one among a hundred,
which could not fynd in his hart too giue it ouer, and which hath
not some wandering fancies in his head. The women also are so lyght
mynded, that they could fynd in their hartes too bee vnmaryed twentie
tymes in a yeere. And wherof commeth that? Euen of that they
haue not an eye vntoo God, who is the author of Mariage? Truely
though wee had no scripture at all (as I sayd:) yit would the brutishest
man in the world reuerence mariage. And why is that, but 
                     •
                  ycause it
was our Lordes will too leaue that record ingrauen in mens hartes?
His meaning then is too shewe, that sith the most ignorant and grossest
sort vnderstand that man and wyfe should ioyne in good loue euery
one in their degree: men must bend that way. But now, wee haue
teaching, and wee haue exhortations added too spurre vs the further
foreward, too the intent wee should not 
                     •
                  latter our selues in our vyces:
and yit what are wee the better? It is too bee seene dayly, that men
storme at their wyues, and wyues checke at their husbandes: it is an
ordinarie matter in euery house, and euer among there flye and flyng
out cursings and bannings: too be short, there is nothing but frowardnesse
and dis
                     •
                  eyne. Now where these things are, it is vnpossible that
the man and wyfe should haue any accesse too come vntoo God. For
after what manner ought our repayring vntoo God bee, that wee
myght receyue mercy, and be vnder his protection, and he haue a care
of vs? It is by prayer.
               Now Saint Peter sayeth expresly,1. Pet. 
                        •
                     . b. 7. that when a man is ouersharp
and rigorous too his wyfe, and the wyfe also on hir syde is stubborne,
so as he is not able too weeld hir by any meanes, nor shee willing too
submit hir self as shee ought too doo: then are their prayers broken of.
As if he should say, wretched folk wheron think yee? Are yee not verie
miserable, seing the gate is shet ageinst you that yee cannot call
vppon God? Now then what will become of vs, when wee cannot betake
our selues intoo the hand of our God? It were better for vs too
bee drowned a hundred thousand tymes. Seeing then that God loueth
the quietnesse bothe of the men and of the women, in commaunding
vs too liue in peace and concorde, and moreouer 
                     •
                  iddeth
them come vntoo him, saying: when the husband gouerneth his wyfe



quietly, and the wyfe on hir syde dooth hir dewtie too: then if yee call
vppon mee, I will heare you as it were out of 
                     〈◊〉
                   mouth: seeing (say
I) that our Lord calleth vs to him for our owne benefyte and welfare,
when he commaundeth vs too call vppon him with a pure hart: must
it not needs be that we are possessed of the diuell, and haue forgone al
our wits, if wee accept not so good and profitable a conditon? Therfore
let vs mark wel, that if the husband intend too discharge his dewtie,
and the wyfe lykewyse: bothe of them must haue an eye vntoo God,
and hold their mariage of him, assuring themselues that they met not
at al aduenture, but that the Lord cuppled them toogither, too the end
that the husband should bee as a companion too his wyfe, and receyue
hir as a part of him self: and the wyfe yeeld the degree of honour
                     •
                  too
hir husband, as belongeth too him in respect of God, and submit hir
self too him as too hir head. Thus the best may too herken vnto God, and too obey him in this cace, is too take him for the authour of wedlocke,
too bee ruled by him in all things. And let not the husband
trubble him self too much in looking vppon the faults of his wyfe, too
say, what shall I doo with this caryon? For wee knowe that reproches
are lothsome and heynous. Also let not the wyfe looke at the
things that are in hir husband, to say, he is a very diuel, and cannot bee
wonne by any meanes: but let hir hold hir to the condition that shee is
bound vntoo, and let hir not ask why, nor wherfore God hath put hir so
in subiection, nother let hir make hir self glorious in setting vp hir
bri
                     •••
                  es ageinst God, for putting hir so in subiection too hir husb
                     •
                  nd.
               But now let vs come too the second poynt, and speake yit more of
the hygh misterie, which Saint Paule magnifyeth so much heere.
It is (sayeth he) a great misterie, yea betweene Christ and his Church.
By these woords it is easie too discerne, that Saint Paule ment not
too call mariage or wedlocke a Sacrament: for he expoundeth him

                     〈◊〉
                   afterward. And (as I told you) the only thing that is treated
heere, is the expressing of Gods inestimable goodnesse, insomuch that
in sted of executing the office of a teacher, too shewe and declare how
wee bee knit too our Lord Iesus Christ, Saint Paule him self 
                     〈◊〉
                   is
astonished, and as a man rauished intoo woonderment, confe
                     •
                  sing
that the wan
                     •
                  eth fit and sufficient wordes to expresse wel Gods grace,
in vou
                     •
                  saf
                     •
                  ng too knit and vnite vs too his only sonne. I haue told you

                     〈◊〉
                   alredy, how wee 
                     •
                  ee 
                     〈◊〉
                   of our Lord Iesus Christs 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and



how wee bee his flesh. It is not that wee bee taken out of his bodie,
for wee come of the linage of Adam: but bycause wee liue of his owne
substance,Iohn. 6. f. 55. according too this saying, that his flesh is our meate, and
his blud our drink, wherby he meaneth that wee liue in him, howbeit
spiritually. In deede wee haue a common lyfe both too talke and too
walk with all men, which proceedeth not of the speciall grace of our
Lord Iesus Christ. But yit the mouing which wee haue common
with the brute beasts proceedeth also of him, according as it is sayd,
that he was the lyfe of all things.Iohn. 1. b. 12. Yea and Saint Iohn passeth yit
further, saying, that the woord, (that is to say, our Lord Iesus Christ,)
was too quicken men, in that God hath giuen them this speciall priuiledge
of hauing some vnderstanding and discretion. But when the
spirituall lyfe which wee haue with the sonne of God is spoken of: that
is a thing aboue nature. For although wee haue not any woorthinesse
or excellencie when wee come out of our moothers womb: yit remayneth
there alwayes some print and image of God. And yit for all
that wee bee so cursed in our owne nature, and so miserable, that wee
bee called euen deceassed and dead. And that is the cause why our
Lord Iesus Christ sayeth,Iohn. 5. 
                        •
                     . 25. that the houre is come, that the dead which
are as rotten carkesses in the graue, shall heare the voyce of the sonne
of God. And Saint Paul hath sayd in the second Chapter, that when
wee bee reformed by our Lord Iesus Christ, then wee lyue, whereas
erst wee were dead in our sinnes and trangressions, bycause wee receyue
that from our father Adam as it were by inheritance. The maner
therfore that wee bee of Iesus Christes flesh, and bone of his bone,
is that wee bee graffed intoo his body, accordingly as Saint Paul also
vseth the same similitude of graffyng.Rom. 6. a. 6. Lyke as a sine that is set intoo
a stocke, taketh his sustenance from the same: so must wee by being
graffed intoo our Lord Iesus Christ. Trew it is, that we doo not
yit bring foorth good fruite of our selues: for his purpose heere is but
too shewe that as a braunche withereth which is broken of from the
roote and so let alone, but receyueth sap and nurrishment frō the roote,
if it bee graffed intoo another: euen so is it with vs, that is too wit, that
if wee continew such as wee bee by kynde, then are wee in death, bycause
wee bee separated from our Lord Iesus Christ? but if wee bee
incorporated intoo him, and it please him too communicate himselfe
vnto vs, then doo we feele in very deede, that bread doth not more nurrishe
vs whē wee eate it, nor wyne strengthen vs better when we drink



it, than wee verily receyue lyfe and strength by the body and blud
of our Lord Iesus Christ.
               Now then, that this is a hygh misterie, euery man is able to iudge
of himselfe. When wee haue debated neuer so much, and scanned
the matter in our hartes, is there any of vs that can comprehend how
wee bee knit too our Lord Iesus Christ, and how wee bee made all
one with him, so as wee can assure and warrant our selues, that wee
shall by that meane bee parttakers of Gods glorie, and that euen at
this day wee liue in our Lord Iesus Christ: According too this saying
of his,Iohn. 14. c. 19. bee of good cheere, for as I liue, so shall you also. Can
this (say I) enter intoo so small a roome as our sensuall reason is? No
surely. And that is the cause why a number of men cannot admit this
poynt, that wee bee the flesh of Iesus Christ, and bone of his bones,
but content themselues with their owne imaginations, which is an abacing
of Gods grace, which Saint Paule was not able too expresse,
but rather shewed vs that it ought too rauish our wittes too woonder
at it. Many then may happen too haue a rouing, and as it were a
heathenish imagination, that we bee knit vnto our Lord Iesus Christ,
that is too say, that wee bee saued by his grace. But the Scripture
goeth further: and though there were no more but this saying, That
it is a great misterie: yit let vs beware of limiting it after our owne
fancie, for it were al one as if wee would make Saint Paule a lyer.
All such as despyze this spirituall coniunction which wee haue with
our Lord Iesus Christ, would shewe that there is no such secret nor
wonderfull power of God, nor aught else, as wee heare spoken of
heere. And the holy Ghost vseth such speeche, too humble vs, and afterward

                     •
                  oo exalt vs agein. Therefore wee must on the one syde confesse
that all the wisedome and wit which wee haue, dooth fayle vs in
that behalfe: and afterward ryze vp agein, for that we heare our Lord
Iesus Christ call vs too him, and tell vs that wee bee so knit vntoo
him, that he hath not any thing of his owne, which he maketh not common
too vs, and wherof he will not haue vs too bee parttakers. Therfore
if wee haue any contrarye motions in our selues, and it come
intoo our heades too say, how is it possible that our Lord Iesus Christ
who is in heauen, should nurrish vs with his owne substance, so as his
body should bee our meate, and his blud our drinke? I say, if wee fall
intoo such fancies: we must repulse them all with that which is sayd
here, namely that it is a great Secret, and wee must rebuke our owne



folly and rashnesse, in intending too measure the thing that is infinite.
Our Lord sheweth vs, that when he hath knit vs too his only sonne, he
hath doone so high and profound a woorke, as surmounteth all our capacitie.
Seeing it is so, let vs alwayes conclude, that although
wee fynde it a straunge matter: yit must wee rest vppon the thing
which is spoken by God himselfe, specially when he sayth, that he will
woorke after so hygh a fashyon, that wee shalbee vtterly rauished at
it.
               Wherefore let vs learne generally vppon this text, that all the benefytes
which wee receyue by the meanes of our Lord Iesus Christ,
thereby too atteine too the heauenly lyfe, are and doo proceede of the
fayd fountaine of Gods incomprehensible wisedome, so as it is not
for vs too bee so foolish and presump
                     •
                  uous as too say, I will knowe
what it is, and agein, I will see what pleaseth mee. Let vs restreyne
our selues from such presumption, for it will make vs vnwoorthy
of the misterie of fayth, bycause it is a saying that importeth a
great secret. The end (say I) whereat wee must begin, if we mynd
too fare the better by Iesus Christ, and too bee parttakers of all his
grace: is too vnderstand, that Gods woorking in our saluation is a
great misterie or secret, according too the text that I alledged heertoofore
out of the Epistle too Timothie. It is a great misterie (sayth
Saint Paule) that God was manifested in the flesh.1. Tim. 
                        •
                     . d. 16. For what a
great distance is there betweene God and man? Wee be but wormes
and rottennesse, and Gods maiestie is so hygh, as no man can say what
it is, nor conceyue the hundredth part of it in thought, but wee must be
fayne too bee rauished too woonder at it. Seeyng then that God hath
so linked himselfe vntoo vs, that he is the trew Emanuell (as he is named
in Esay,Esay. 7. c. 14.) and that the things which seeme to be so farre asunder,
are knit togither in the person of our Lord Iesus Christ: Let vs conclude
theruppon, that there is nothing but mysteries and secretes in
all the grace which wee receyue of our God, and specially in our incorporating
or graffing intoo our Lord Iesus Christ, who hauing taken
our nature vppon him, and clothed himselfe with our fleshe,
will haue vs too bee graffed into him as into our roote, too bee quickened
by his spirit, and too bee parttakers of his lyfe, so as he hath nothing
peculiar too himself alone, but will haue all to be common vnto
vs. Will wee then receyue our Lord Iesus Christ with all the benefytes
which he bringeth vs, and will wee by his meanes ouercome all



the temptations that can crosse vs? Wee must tast throughly of the
thinges that the holy Scripture telleth vs and setteth afore vs, and
giue such reuerend credit vnto thē, by acknowledging that God woorketh
in vs by our Lord Iesus Christ, as the same may content vs, and
make vs too forsake all our owne naturall vnderstanding.
               Now let vs fall downe before the Maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our sinnes, praying him too voutsafe too pardon
vs in such wyse, as wee may bee rid of them, and he so gouerne vs by
his holy spirit, as we may indeuer to liue according to his holy wil,
and reforme our whole lyfe according to his holy commaundementes,
and he beare with all our infirmites, vntyll hee haue wholly reformed
vs, too bring vs too the perfection whertoo wee labour as now too atteyne.
And so let vs all say, Almyghtie God &c.
            
            
               The .xliii. Sermon, which is the first
vppon the sixth Chapter.
               
                  
                     1. Children, obey your fathers and moothers in the Lord, for
that is ryght.
                     2. Honour thy father and thy moother, (which is the first commaundement
in promis,)
                     3. That thou mayst fare vvell, and bee long lyued vppon earth.
                     4. Fathers prouoke not your children too wrath, but nurrishe
them vp in the nurture and vvarnings of the Lord.
                  
               
               
                  OUr resorting vntoo Sermons, must bee,
not onely too heare the things that wee
knewe not: but also too bee stirred vp too
doo our dewtie, and too bee wakened
when wee bee s
                     •
                  othfull and drowzie, by
good and holy warnings, and too bee r
                     •
                  
                  buked,
if there bee any stubbornnesse and
malice in vs. And that is the thing which
Saint Paule telleth vs heere, which euery
of vs ought too haue ingrauen in our
hartes. For it is a thing which all of vs vnderstand by our moother



wit, that children ought too bee obedient and subiect too their fathers
and moothers, and also that there ought too bee such gentlenesse in
those that haue children too gouerne, as too vse them myldly, and not
too giue them cause of frowardnesse, through their ouer great roughnesse.
This (say I) is knowen well ynough of all men: but yit is
not the warning that is giuen vs heere, more than needeth: For who
is he that dischargeth himselfe of the things that are told vs heere by
Saint Paule? Fathers and Moothers doo dyuers tymes marre their
children with cockering them, and make them such Cocknyes, as they
leade them too vtter vndooing. Agein, somtymes they bee in such
cholers and heates with them without measure or discretion, that they
haue no hold of themselues, nor no indifferent dealing with them as
there ought too bee. As for children, although it bee sufficiently proued
too them, that they ought too bee obedient and subiect too their
parentes, dooth not the world see how they despyze them, & as it were
hold vtter scorne of them? Nother are there almost any, which hold
themselues in awe, and yeeld a ryght reuerence too their fathers and
moothers, in respect that God hath bound them too it, and that they
ought too doo it. Therefore sith wee see heere, that Saint Paule
exhorteth the faythfull too things that are so common: therein wee
may perceyue the frowardnesse of our owne nature. For th
                     •
                  se are
such things as wee ought not too bee put in mynd of them, but euery
of vs ought too bee inclyned of himselfe too doo his dewtie without
warning. Gods spirit then rebuketh vs for being so fleshly, that although
wee knowe a thing too bee as ryghtfull as may bee, yit wee
cannot giue our selues too it. Wherfore let vs indeuer to fyght ageinst
our owne vyces. For it is not ynough for vs too haue learned what
wee ought too doo: but also, forasmuch as there is much fyghting
and stryuing in our selues ageinst it: after wee once knowe Gods
will, and what is ryghtuous and conuenient, euery of vs must enter intoo
himselfe, and beware that he drawe not cleane backe, but that he
imprison and bridle himselfe, and beare wel in mynd that it is not ynough
for him too haue bin instructed & taught, vnlesse he do also thrust
foorth himselfe by force, and subdue all his wicked affections, how hard
so euer it bee too bring it too passe.
               Now let vs come too that which is sayd heere. Yee Children
(sayth Saint Paule) obey your fathers and moothers. Trew it is
that (as Paule alledgeth afterward) God hath in his lawe set downe a



more generall terme: that is too wit, Honour. For God ment too
doo vs too vnderstand, that children ought too yeeld bothe subiection
and reuerence too their fathers and moothers. For such a one myght
yeeld obedience and subiection, as myght neuerthelesse haue a spytefull,
a proud, and a loftie hart, and despyze the partie whom he serueth.
But when as our Lord commaundeth vs too honour our fathers
and moothers: therunder he meaneth too comprehend reuerence, and
moreouer a performance of all dewtie: that is too wit, that children
should vnderstand, that they bee bound too serue their fathers and moothers,
& to be subiect too them in all things too the vttermoste of their
power. Yee see then that generally God will haue children, not only
too bee obedient and subiect too their parents, but also too yeeld them
reuerence, and moreouer too doo their dewtie towards them, in succoring
them, and in dooing them all the ease and comfort that they
can, assuring themselues that they be not their owne, nor at their owne
libertie, but that they owe all seruis vntoo them▪ by whose meanes
they came intoo the world.
               And Saint Paule sayeth expresly, in the Lord: meaning that
there is a dubble bond too hold vs in this subiection. For (first) there
is the order of nature, and agein, God telleth vs, that he hath set vs in
this earthly lyfe with condicion, that fathers and moothers should
haue superioritie ouer their children. The Heathen men shal not fayle
too bee found giltie, though they had not the lawe too direct them, nor
were taught the doctrine which wee heare now by the mouth of Saint
Paule. Insomuch that if a chyld were stubborne ageinst his father
and mother among the heathen, he was as it were abhorred, and there
was nother greate nor small which could not iudge of it: Nother
shall they scape Gods hand, sith they bee condemned alredy in this
world: for (as I sayd afore) it is a thing that is grauen in the harts of
vs all, and also as manifest as may bee. Howbeit, besyds that which
wee knowe naturally, God addeth his owne will for a further and
more ample confirmation, and telleth vs, that he hath so ordeyned and
appoynted it, and therfore that wee must passe that way. Then sith
wee perceyue that God holdeth vs vnder awe of our fathers and moothers:
it is certein that wee bee so much the more vnexcuzable, if euery
of vs submit not him self with meeknesse and humilitie. And they
that haue followed the order of nature among the heathen and poore
blynd soules, shalbee our iudges. For who hath stirrred them vp theruntoo?



They had not the helpes that wee haue: and yit they performed
their dewtie. That then is the thing which Saint Paule intended,
in saying, that children ought to obey theyr fathers and moothers
in the Lord.
               Now he addeth, that that is ryght. As if he should say, no man shal
gayne any thing by stryuing in this behalf. For wee knowe that
mans mynd is so full fraught with pryde, as there is no man but hee
would bee a lord. As for subiection, it irketh men to yeeld too it, vntill
our Lord haue framed vs too it by his holie spirit.VVis. 1. b. 6. And for that
cause also is the spirit of God called the spirit of meeknesse and gentlenesse.
And why?Gala. 5. d. 22. Bycause pryde maketh men lyke wyld beasts, and
puffeth them vp lyke Toades, so as they cannot humble themselues.
Saint Paule therfore perceyuing that this vyce is so rooted in our nature,
and mynding too redresse it, sheweth that it is ryght, and that it
becommeth euery man too imploy him self theruntoo, and that although
there bee any such sturdinesse in vs, as wil not suffer vs too bee
subiect too our superiours, yit this ryghtfulnesse 
                     〈◊〉
                   Gods (that is too
say, the rule that he hath set) must ouerwey it. For when he sayeth, it
is ryght (or ryghtfull) he bringeth vs backe too Gods authoritie: as
if he should say, seeyng God hath sayd the woorde, there is no further
scanning of the matter, but men must stop their mouthes, and seeyng
God hath commaunded it, men must obey it, assuring themselues that
his wyll is a sure and infallible rule, from the which it is not lawfull
too swarue nother too the ryght syde nor too the left. And it is a good
warning. For wee see that although men were willing too doo well,
and had some good zeale towardes it: yit will euery of vs bee wyze in
his owne conceyt, and when it commeth too the guyding and gouerning
of our selues, wee will needes beare sway aboue the woorde of
God. Forasmuch then as men are so fond and presumptuous, as too
attribute somewhat continually too their owne wit: it standeth vs the
more on hand too marke well what is sayd heere: that is too wit, that
wee must haue the discretion and skill, too perceyue what God commaundeth
and alloweth, and lykewyse what he disalloweth. Haue wee
then a warrant of Gods will? Wee must bee contented with it. And
if he once say, This pleaseth mee: then is it ryghtfull, though wee perceyue
not the reason of it. Agein, if there bee some hardnesse: yit let
vs not aske why, nother let vs reply ageinst God, whē he condemneth
the thing that seemeth not too bee vtterly euyll in our eyes. Let vs



(say I) beware of such malapertnesse and diuelishe rashnesse, and let
vs followe that which Saint Paule telleth vs heere, that is too wit,
that all that euer God hath vttered by his woord, is ryghtfull, and that
wee also must auow it too bee so without geynsaying. For the trew
proofe of our fayth and obedience, is that when wee thinke that this or
that ought not to haue bin commaunded or forbidden: yit we accept it
for good and auaylable, bycause God hath spoken it.
               Now hereuppon Saint Paule alledgeth the commaundement of
the Lawe, Honour thy father and thy moother. And agein he addeth
further, that it is the first commaundement of promis. As if he
should say, that God intended too bring vs by all meanes too the subiection
which wee should yeeld too our fathers and mothers. It ought
too suffyze vs that it is acceptable too God: but seeyng he allureth vs
moreouer by gentlenesse, and will not fray vs with authoritie & force,
but promyseth too prosper vs, in seruing our fathers and moothers:
that ought too make vs too lyke the better of our subiection. Therefore
Saint Paule hauing shewed vs that wee must bee subiect too our
fathers and mothers, except wee will bee rebels too God, and bend
our hornes ageinst him, and turne all ryght and order vpsyde downe:
addeth, that wee shall bee tootoo hard harted and wilfull stubborne, if
after Gods commaūding of vs, this promis of his moue vs not, wherby
he intendeth too induce vs so graciously, too doo the thing that he
willeth vs. And surely if wee bee not moued, yea and euen meekened
by it: it may well bee sayd, that the diuell reigneth wholly in vs, and
that he possesseth our hartes. His saying then is, that it is a commaundement
which hath a speciall promis, and so hath none other commaundement
of the lawe but that. The promis is, that wee shall liue
long vppon the earth, yea and in prosperitie, bycause God will blisse
vs, if wee honour those that were the meanes whereby wee came into
the world.
               And on the other syde he sheweth what the dewtie of fathers and
mothers is towardes their children: that is too wit, too intreate them
gently. Not too pardon them altoogither, or too lay the brydle in their
neckes,Coloss. 3. d. 2
                        •
                     . and too let them doo what they list: but too deale so myldly
with them, as they doo not in any wyse put them out of hart (as it is
sayd in another place,) but nurrish them in the feare of God. By this
woord Nurrish, Saint Paule meaneth that they should deale gently
with them, and shewe themselues louing towardes them. Howbeeit,



this woord is also sauced (as yee would say) with nurture and correction
of God. Then is there on the one syde Nurrishment, that is too
say, kyndnesse and gentlenesse: and on the other side, Chastyzement
and Discipline, that children may bee hild in awe, and not bee suffered
too bee wanton and vnruly, but so brought vp in the feare of God,
as they may knowe that God hath not left them awelesse and lawlesse,
but that he hath giuen them ouerseers too rule their lyfe. This is the
effect of the thing that S. Paule sheweth vs heere.
               Now too the intent wee may haue the fuller and certeiner vnderstanding
of this text, wee must marke first of all, that (too speake properly)
wee haue no father but only God. Trewe it is that now and
then he is called the father of our soules and of our spirites,Heb. 12. c. 9. according
as he is spoken of in the Epistle too the Hebrewes. Howbeeit,
euen as in respect of the flesh also, the honour and dignitie of bearing
the name of father,Iob. 13. b. 15. belongeth not too any mortall creature: for it is
God that fashyoneth vs, as it is sayd in the booke of Iob. Is the seede
of man (which is but corruption) able to
                     •
                   fashyon a body, wherein
appeereth so excellent woorkmanship of God? (No.) Then let vs
vnderstand, that forasmuch as our bodyes are all of them recordes of
Gods woonderfull power: he onely deserueth too bee hild and accounted
as our father. Yit for all that, they also that beget vs, and by
whom wee bee brought intoo this world, are our fathers. By what
tytle? Bycause God hath voutsafed too make them parttakers of the
honour that belongeth too himselfe alone. And heereby wee bee put
in mynd, that in stryuing ageinst our fathers and mothers, we make
warre ageinst God. For he hath imprinted his marke in them, & that
tytle of theirs dooth vs too wit, that God hath set them as it were in
his place. Therefore we must hold it for an vndoubted truth, that in
honoring our fathers and mothers, wee yeeld God the seruice that he
requyreth of vs, and which we owe him. And contrarywyse, if wee
despyze our fathers and moothers, and hold scorne too do
                     •
                   our dewties
towardes them: God is expresly offended in it, not only bycause
wee breake the commaundement of his lawe, but also bycause wee
despyze his maiestie, whereof our fathers and moothers doo beare
a certein marke, as I haue sayd afore. And that is the cause why
there is so rigorous punnishment in the Lawe, ageinst them that were
disobedient too their fathers and moothers,Leuit. 2
                        •
                     . b. 9. that whosoeuer had despyzed
his father or moother, or vttered any cursing ageinst them, or
doone them any harme, should bee stoned too death. Therefore when



children bee so farre out of square, as too set lyght by their fathers 
                     〈◊〉
                  
moothers: God will haue them dispatched out of the world: for they
bee monsters, and an infection too defyle the whole earth. Also he
will not haue any long examination, for such as lift vp themselues ageinst
their fathers and moothers:
                     
                        •
                     ent. 21. d. 18. 19. 
                        •
                     0. 21. but if the father and moother haue
once giuen this witnesse, Behold, this our sonne will not bee amended:
by and by thereuppon let him bee stoned (sayeth he,) and let the
world bee rid of such an infection. Gods saying so, is too shewe vs,
that it is tootoo outrageous & horrible a cryme, when children cannot
fynd in their hartes too yeeld submission too their fathers and moothers:
for it is al one as if they were full bent too abolish the whole order
of nature. That therfore is the end that wee must begin at, to profit
our selues well by this doctrine.
               And the same also is the cause why Saint Paule sayeth, that wee
ought too bee subiect too our fathers and moothers in God: meaning
thereby, that the thing which the Paynims and vnbeleeuers conceyue
darkely, ought to
                     •
                   bee much better knowen vntoo vs. For the
Paynims wi
                     •
                  t not well, how too yeeld a reason why children ought
too yeeld this subiection and obedience too their fathers and mothers,
sauing that it appeered that there is a certeine equitie and ryght that
required it, and that that was the reason. But as for too 
                     〈◊〉
                   too
this ground of the matter, that God is our father, and that he requyreth
this subiection at our handes: that could they not doo. And
why? For they knewe not whether there were a God that created and
fashyoned them, or no. But wee which knowe that God who is our
Creator, is also our father, and that too bee so, belongeth vntoo him,
and that he hath reserued that honour and dignitie too himselfe: and
agein, that he will haue fathers and moothers too be also parttakers
of that priuiledge: wee must of necessitie conclude, that wee ought
too obey our fathers and moothers, ye
                     •
                   euen in God, as though he
receyued at our handes the honour and seruice which wee doo to them
that represent his person and maiesty heere (as I sayd afore,) which is
despyzed in the stubbornnesse and disobedience of children too their fathers
and moothers.
               Here agein I must put you in mynd of a thing that I spake of afore:
that is to wit, that whē Gods wil is once knowē to vs, we must brydle
our selues short, & not take leaue to reply ageinst God, & to aske why
God lyketh this, or dislyketh that: but admit his will as the souerein



ryghtuousnesse & equitie. And where shall we fynd that will of his? In
his word. For when S. Paul intendeth to proue Gods will, he soreth
not in the aire aboue the clouds, but bringeth and alledgeth the things
that are conteyned in the Lawe. So then, too rule our lyfe aryght,
let vs apply our whole myndes too seeke out the things that are pleasant
and acceptable too God, as he sheweth them in his lawe, in the
Prophets, and in the Gospell. That is all our wisdome. And let vs
beware of the ouer boldnesse which I sayd was diuelish, which is, too
bee wyse in our owne conceyts, and too say, How should this bee?
Why should that bee? But let vs simply obey our God.
               Furthermore here is also a promis. In deede a question myght be
moued heere, why Saint Paule sayth, it is the first commaundement
of Promis: seeing there is a promis added lykewyse too the second
commaundement of the lawe.Exod. 2
                        •
                     . b. 6. For there it is sayd, I am the Lord
which doo shewe mercie in a thousand generations, too such as loue
mee, and keepe my commaundements. Heere is a much larger promis
than that wherof mention is made in this text. And how then
dooth Saint Paule say, that it is the first commaundement with promis?
The answer is easy: For Gods promising of mercie too a thousand
generations in the first table, is not a restreint of it too that only
cōmaundement, but an extending of it to the whole law: as if he should
say, there is nothing better for you thā to submit your selues to my wil,
for otherwyse you be in a cursed plyght. And for proof therof, doo not
all things that you can hope for, come too you of myne only free goodnesse?
Now, for my part, I will not fayle such as serue mee, and seeke
too honour mee: but they shall fynde continually that I am a mercifull
God. Heerin (as I sayd afore) our Lords intent is too drawe vs too
the obeying of his commaundements and ordinances with a willing
mynd. And so it is no speciall promis proper too any one commaundement
alone. But the promis that Saint Paule speaketh of heere,
(where it is sayd) Honour thy father and mother, that thou mayst liue
long vppon the earth, is peculiar (too that commaundment alone.) As
if he should say, God is so gracious, that he will cause them too prosper
through his blissing and fauour, which behaue themselues humbly
and meekly, and yeeld dew reuerence too theyr fathers and moothers.
Not without cause therfore dooth Saint Paule say, that it is the first
commaundment with promis, namely with such promis as is speciall,
and hath respect too none other commaundement than that.
               
                  Now let vs come too the promis. God sayth, that such as obey so,
shall liue long. Heeruppon wee may gather, that this present lyfe is
not too bee despyzed, bycause it is a record of Gods fatherly goodnesse
and loue towards vs. And in good sooth it is no small thing, that God
voutsafeth to create vs, and to set vs in this world, not only to liue here
as brute beasts, but also too reigne as his children, and too haue dominion
ouer all other creatures. It is sayd, that his goodnesse and mercie
extend euen too Asses,Psal. 104. b. 11. Oxen, and horses. And why? For when
he maketh the earth too beare hay for Cattell: dooth he not therin shewe
a wonderfull goodnesse towards the poore brute beasts, as I sayd afore?
But there is a farre other reason in respect of vs. For how inioy
wee all the goods and riches wherof the earth is full? God hath
powred out his bountifulnesse in that the earth bringeth vs foorth such
a sort of sundry fruts. Yea wee cannot looke vp too heauenward, hygh
nor lowe, but wee may perceyue a thousand (yea infinite) records of
Gods goodnesse.Psal. 104. c. 19. Too what ende shyneth the sunne, but too giue vs
lyght? And are not the Moone and the Starres ordeyned to doo vs
seruis? And yit are they as noble Creatures as may bee, insomuch
that the heathen folk woorshipped them, thinking that there was some
Godhead inclozed in them. Agein, when wee looke downward, wee
see what good things God hath appoynted for our vse. And although
he feede the beasts,1. Cor. 9. b. 9. 10. yit in the end all redoundeth too vs, according as
Saint Paule speaketh of them, saying: hath God a care of the beasts?
That is to say, when as God voutsafeth too succour the beasts in their
neede by his prouidence, he doth it for mens saks. Seing thē that God
hath harborowed vs after such a sort to make vs possesse so many good
things, besyds his creating of vs after his owne image and lykenesse:
is it not an inestimable benefyte? So then, this present life is not to be
hild scorne of. But there is yit more: God hath set vs heere as it were
in a iourney, too come too a further matter: that is too wit, too the euerlasting
rest, and too the heritage of heauen. Then if this present
lyfe guyde vs thither, that is too say, too the glory which God hath prepared
for vs, and which was purchaced for vs by the death and passion
of our Lord Iesus Christ: therbey wee see that it is a great benefyte,
and meete too bee esteemed at our handes. Trew it is, that there are
so many myseries in our lyfe, that it were much better for vs neuer too
haue bin borne, than too linger (continually) as wee doo. Therefore if
a man consider how wretched our lyfe is in it self, and too what a number



of greefes, anguishes, peynes, and vexations it is subiect: surely
he will say, it were better neuer too haue come out of our moothers
womb, than to enter into such a sea of confuzion as we see vppon earth.
Neuerthelesse when all commeth to al, we shal fynd that Gods goodnesse
exceedeth all the chastyzementes that he sendeth vs for our
sinnes. This lyfe should of it self bee nothing but happinesse and rest,
if God made vs vs not to reape the frute of our sinnes & transgressions.
Yit notwithstanding when as God dooth now and then afflict vs with
some barrennesse, or kill our vynes with frost, or drowne our Corne
with wet, or parche it vp with drought, and (too bee short) send vs famin
and derth: they bee as a rod of God, too shewe vs that in sted of
his former leberalitie, he is now become contrarie to vs. Likewyse are
the plague, warre, particular diseases and sicknesses, harmes, reproches,
and all other such thinges as woorke vs greefe or displeasure.
They are all chastyzements whereby God putteth vs in mynd of our
sinnes and faultes, of purpose too humble vs that wee myght knowe
what wee bee, and finally too make vs ready too forsake the world the
more willingly. Howbeeit, when wee haue gatherrd all the afflictions,
trubbles, and greefes that we see, intoo one heape: yit see we well
(as I sayd afore) that God maketh vs too feele the taste and sauour of
his goodnesse, in that he gyueth vs sustenance in this world. And this
present lyfe is euer as a record of his loue. For proof wherof, we should
quayle at euery temptatiō, & at euery vexation that myght befall vs in
this world, were it neuer so little, if God gaue vs not some cheering to
mitigate his rigour withall. For he dooth alwayes shew such euent, as
may cause vs to cōceiue that he myndeth not to handle vs according to
our desertes, but that in his chastizing of vs, he leaueth alwayes roome
for his mercie,Hab. 3. a. 1. as he himself sayeth in Habacucke. Not without cause
then doth God promis prosperitie in this lyfe, to such as obey their fathers
& mothers. Trew it is, that Moyses ment the land of Chanaan,
bycause he spake to the people of Israel which were to be settled there.
Therefore as in respect of that people it was a particular lesson.Exod. 6. a. 4. b. 8▪
                   Yit
notwithstanding, not euen wee at this day can set our foote in any
place, but that wee bee after a sort harbrowghed there by God. Therfore
wee must all of vs hope for the blissing that was promised in olde
tyme too the Iewes, of bringing them intoo the land that was behyghted
them for their inheritance.
               A man myght moue other questions heere. For wee see some that



are disobedient too their fathers and mothers, which notwithstanding
doo lyue still, and othersome which are of a good, gentle, and tractable
nature, doo dye: so as God should seeme too disanull the promis that
he made in his lawe. The answere heretoo is this. That God dooth
them no wrong whom he calleth out of this world too take vp to himselfe,
nother dooth he appayre their state. But too the intent wee may
haue an euidenter and easyer answer: let vs marke that things fall not
alwayes out alyke as in respect of temporall promyses.Psal. 34. b. 10. As for example:
God promyseth too prosper all them that serue and loue him in
singlenesse of hart. And how falles this out? Wee see a number of
poore beleeuers, which are wretched too the worldward, and reiected
and despyzed of all men. And where is this promis of God? As
I sayd, we must alwayes haue this condition added, that God giueth
vs whatsoeuer he knoweth too bee expedient for vs. There are twoo
sortes of Gods promises: and wee must marke well that. Some of
Gods promises belong too the saluation of our soules, as his receyuing
of vs too mercie, his pardoning of our sinnes, his shewing of vs
his will, his giuing of vs power too withstand Satan, and his strengthening
of vs ageinst al temptatiōs, by holding vs vp with strōg hand,
that wee may neuer quayle: in all these things wee must firmly and
sted
                     •
                  astly beleeue that God will performe whatsoeuer he sayeth, yea
and farre more than our vnderstanding can see or conceyue. God then
will surmount all our wit and capa
                     •
                  ity, in things concerning the euerlasting
saluation of our soules.
               But there are other promises to passe this world withall, for the easing
of vs in our miseries. In those God wil cantle vs out our morsels,
so as wee shall now and then haue hunger and thrist with them. Yea
and yit dooth not that impeach but that he is faythfull styll. For (as
I sayde) he knoweth what is meete for vs, and therefore wee
must not take his promises precyzely woord for woord in those caces:
that is too say, we must not take them according too the bare letter or
sound of them, too say, that God should doo all that is sayd there too
the vttermost sillable: No: but wee must alwayes beare in mynd, that
he knoweth what is for our behoofe and benefite. Now then, if he
take vs soone out of this world, it is bycause he knoweth it too bee for
our welfare and saluation. And so yee see that God dooth not falsifye
his promis, when he taketh those away in the flower of their age,
which haue obeyed their fathers and moothers. Surely none dooth



so discharge himselfe, but that he should alwayes bee found faultie, if
God listed too sift him with rigour: but yit shal some haue doone their
dewtie in such wyse, as God lyketh well of the obedience which they
haue yeelded, and yit notwithstanding he fayleth not too take them out
of the world: for he seeth that it should not bee for their profit too tarye
there any longer. As for (other) reasons that are hid in him, and in
his secret wisedome, it behoueth vs too cast downe our eyes at them,
bycause wee cannot atteyne vntoo them. Howbeit let vs vnderstand,
that if there were no hope of a better lyfe, those that are taken away so
soone out of the world, were too bee greatly lamented. But seeing
wee knowe that this world is but a pilgrimage, and this lyfe but a
iourneying to bring vs too the rest of heauen: wee must not complayne
when God deliuereth vs from the great number of miseries wherewith
wee bee beseeged heere beneath, too take vs vp too a perfect happinesse
which wayteth for vs (aboue.) But howsoeuer the cace stand,
let vs beare in mynd the thing that is sayd heere: that is too wit, that
when God holdeth vs long tyme in this world, it is as a pledge of his
fatherly loue towardes vs. And therefore wee ought too bee the wa
                  
                     •
                  er
in reckening the dayes that wee liue, whyle wee bee in this lyfe.
And for the same cause also dooth Moyses say in his Song,Psal. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . c. 12. that it is
great wisedome when men can skyll too count their dayes, and too
consider the shortnesse of their lyfe, that they may hye them apace too
heauen.
               But wee must also count our dayes too a dyuerse end, and for another
respect, which notwithstanding is not contrarye, but both agree
very well, and that is, that when wee bee come too the age of discretion,
so as we know that God hath created vs too be glorifyed by
vs in this world: wee must on the othersyde consider how wee haue dishonored
him, and thinke continually vppon the tyme past, remembering
how wee haue spent it: and this must wee doo from day to day,
and from mooneth too mooneth. And when wee come too the yeeres
end, let vs thinke thus with our selues: Behold, God hath bound mee
too him a great sort of wayes: and howe haue I counted his benefytes
that I haue receyued of him all my lyfe long? Can my mynd
atteyne vntoo them? Alas no, nor too the hindredth part of them.
Therefore we must make a rehersall of all our yeeres and dayes, that
wee may bee put in mynd too loue and honour God, when wee see
how greatly we bee bound vntoo him, for his maynteyning of vs so



long a tyme, and for his pacientnesse towardes vs in bearing with vs.
For if wee should make comparison of the faultes that wee shall haue
committed: there is not so little a fault which craueth not that wee
should bee confounded at his hand, and yit notwithstanding he continueth
styll his goodnesse towardes vs. Therefore let vs marke well
this doctrine, that is too wit, that this present lyfe byndeth vs too
God, bycause he maketh vs too tast his fatherly goodnesse in voutsafing
too maynteyne vs well, and in extending his bounteousnesse towardes
vs, and in being so gracious as too turne all his corrections
too our benefyte and behoofe, and moreouer sheweth vs that he will
haue vs too bee inured in this world too knowe him for our father, in
that he giueth vs his word and Sacraments, whereby he assureth vs
that his setting of vs heere beneath for a tyme, is too drawe and too
gather vs in the end too himselfe. Therefore if wee consider whertoo
wee bee called, and too what ende wee bee created, namely, too
passe through this worlde and too bee taken intoo the heritage of
heauen: wee shall perceyue that this present lyfe is well woorthie
too bee esteemed, if wee consider the benefytes that God imparteth
too vs heere.
               It is too bee noted heerwithall, that wee shall neuer haue any prosperitie
nor welfare in this world, except we be in Gods fauour. Therfore
in saying, that thou mayst liue long, and fare well: he sheweth
that the hauing of long lyfe is not all, but that it standeth vs on hand
too feele his blissing therwith. For the wretched vnbeleuers which
conceyue not the thing that I intend too declare, (that is too wit) that
God powreth out his riches vppon vs, too the intent we should knowe
him too bee our father, and bee confirmed more and more in trusting
too his goodnesse and loue:) may well come too greate yeeres:
but what doo they in this world? What is their lyfe? It is certeyne
that all that euer they haue, shal turne to their greater condemnation,
and their riches wherin they ioy, toogither with their delyghts and
pleasures, shall but prouoke Gods wrath, and all the goods that they
inioye, shall serue but too the further inchauncing of their wickednesse,
and too make them the more damnable. Then is it but a
wretched lyfe, if wee can perceyue no 
                     •
                  oken of Gods goodnesse in
it.
               And moreouer we must proceede further to the second poynt, which
is, that such as are so disobedient too God, and too their superiours,



haue no rest, but haue a woorme that gnaweth their consciences, and
are alwayes in vnquietnesse. Too bee short, experience sheweth, that
there is no welfare in this present lyfe, except wee bee blissed of God.
This diuersitie is not too bee seene alwayes as in respect of outward
apparance: but yit doo the faythfull know well ynough in themselues,
that God giueth them all things that they want. And so God promiseth
not long lyfe only, but also his blissing. As if hee should say,
you shal not liue, alonly too linger heere beneath, or too get your selues
greeuouser damnation, or too repyne and too gnash your teethe, and
too torment your selues with afflictions, miseries, and trubbles: but
too tast my goodnesse. Although I exempt you not from the trubbles,
comberances, and greefs of this world: yit shall you alwayes haue
some cheering, so as yee may feele that I haue not forgot you, but that
I take you for my children, yea and that all your sorrowes and greefs
shall turne too your benefyte and welfare. Wheras the di
                     •
                  ell laboreth
too keepe you from comming too mee, and too turne you away
from your perfect felicitie: I will drawe you too it by meanes of the
afflictions that you shall haue in this world. The thing therfore which
wee haue too beare in mynd, is, that too bee filled with the benefyts
which God bestoweth vppon vs in this world, and too liue at ease, is
not all that wee haue too desyre: but too knowe that it is God that maketh
vs too prosper, and that as he giueth vs lyfe, so will he maynteyne
vs in it, and prouyde vs of all things expedient and needfull for the
same. Wherfore let vs haue it well printed in our harts.
               Now then if wee bee desyrous too inioy this promis of God: let
euery of vs looke too the discharging of his owne dewtie. In deede
I cannot as now go through with the things that are inioyned heere to
children, & to fathers & mothers: & therfore I wil reserue thē to another
tyme. Yit notwithstanding for a short conclusion, let vs vnderstand
that God allureth vs too our dewtie, by shewing that he seeketh nothing
else but our welfare and benefyte, too the intent that wee should
with a frank and free hart receyue the yoke that he layeth vppon our
shoulders. And although it be an irksome thing too bee subiect too
those whom God hath appoynted too bee superiours ouer vs: yit when
wee haue first condemned our selues for it, let vs neuerthelesse yeeld to
that which he sayeth and vttereth, assuring our selues th
                     •
                  t he procureth
our welfare, & would fayne win vs by gentlenesse, and not by rigour:
and let that make vs the more obedient. And also generally, forasmuch



as wee see that all superiorities are of God: let vs vnderstand
that wee cannot geynsay them, but wee shall lift vp our selues ageinst
his maiestie, and bend our hornes ageinst him: and that contrariwyse
if wee beare subiection willingly, wee may assure our selues, that it is
an acceptable sacrifyze vnto him, and not doubt that our labour shalbe
lost in seruing him. Not that God will recompence vs by his promises,
as though we had deserued aught at his hand: but he wil doo it
of ouerplus. For as I haue declared alredie, wee bee bound too obey
him in all things that he commaundeth, nother must wee think him
beholden too vs for it, nor think too bynd him too vs by any meanes,
but that although wee bee bound too him, (as wee bee wholly his) yit
he of his ouerflowing goodnesse voutsafeth too blisse vs, and too make
vs feele his fauour, when wee haue awfully and reuerently followed
the things that he ordeyneth in his woord. That then is the recompence
which wee ought too hope for at Gods hand: howbeeit not as
the Papistes say, ho, God promiseth vs, and therfore we deserue. They
beare themselues on hand that God is beholden vntoo them, bycause
he hath bound himselfe willingly: yea, but that is of a free (and vndeserued)
goodnesse. Howbeeit, wee must not fall intoo such dotages,
but vnderstand that God beyng no whit at all bound vntoo vs, dooth
notwithstanding voutsafe too win vs by gentlenesse, too the intent wee
should serue him with the freer mynd and cheerfuller corage. Thus
dooth he call vs too him by all wayes. And therfore so much the leauder
are wee, if wee bow not our neckes willingly too giue our selues
wholly vntoo him, without seeking of any thing but onely too frame
our selues too his good pleasure and will, which is our cheefe rule, by
renounceall our owne affections.
               Now let vs fall downe before the Maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him too voutsafe too burye
them, and too washe vs from them, for our Lord Iesus Christes sake,
and too gouerne vs in such wyse by his holy spirit, as wee may bee reformed
too obey wholly his holy will, and too follow his commaundements,
which he hath giuen vs for a rule, and that therin we may shew
our selues too bee his trew children, lykewise as he hath voutsafed too
she
                     •
                   himselfe our gentle and louing father. And so let vs all say, Almyghtie
God heauenly father. &c.
            
            
               
               The .xliiii. Sermon, which is the second
vppon the sixth Chapter.
               
                  
                     5. Seruauntes, bee obedient too such as are your maysters as touching
the fleshe, vvith feare and trembling, in singlenesse of
your hartes, as vntoo Christ,
                     6. Not vvith eye seruice, as men pleazers, but as the seruantes of
Christ, dooing the vvill of God from the hart,
                     7. Seruing the Lord with good will, and not men:
                     8. Assuring your selues, that euery man, bee he bond or free, shall
receyue of the Lord the good that he shall haue doone.
                     9. And you maysters, do the like vnto them, forbearing threates,
assuring your selues that the Lord both of them and of you
is i
                           •
                         heauen, & that in him there is no respecting of the outward
appearance of persons.
                  
               
               
                  WEe haue seene already, that besydes the
generall rule which God hath giuen too
all men, heere are also seuerall warnings,
how euery man should behaue himselfe in
his degree and calling. And we haue seen
already what the husbandes ought too bee
towardes their wyues, and how the wyues
should behaue themselues towardes theyr
husbandes: what gentlenesse parentes
ought too vse towardes their children, and
what subiection children ought too vse towardes their parentes. Now
Saint Paule speaketh of Maysters and Seruantes, howbeeit, not of
such seruantes as we haue now adayes, for at that tyme there were no
seruantes that serued a yeere or two for wages, but they were hild in
bondage for lyfe and death, and were in the same taking that they bee
whom now adayes wee call bondslaues. But wee neede not too stand
any longer as now too haue further knowledge of them. Yit notwithstanding
wee haue great cause too prayse God for taking away of such
bondage from among men. For no doubt but it was too excessiue an
authoritie which maysters had in those dayes ouer their seruantes.
They hild them as brute beastes, and they had libertie too kill them



for euery fault. And in deede they had prisons in theyr houses to keepe
them locked in the stocks, they racked them, they rent them in peeces,
and (too bee short) they vsed them horribly, yea and euen beastly. Yit
notwithstanding, bycause of mans naughtinesse, it was our Lordes
wyll that this state should bee styll suffered. Moreouer, wee see that
euen they which are auowed too haue lyued in the feare of God, and to
haue excelled in his Church, left not too keepe bondmen or slaues in
their houses, howbeeit, they vsed another manner of gentlenesse towardes
them, than the Infidels did, according as wee shall see heere
in Saint Paules teaching.
               Also there was a reason that constreyned maysters sometymes too
vse the greater rigour towardes their slaues, bycause it was a common
prouerb among them, that looke how many slaues they had, so
many enemyes they had: and that was by reason of their holding of
them in awe by extreme force and violence, as those are now adayes
vppon the Sea, which are called Gallie slaues. And I haue alredy
touched what & how excessiue o
                     •
                  trages were done vnto them. There
was a great number of those bondfolke, and riche men had as it were
halfe armies of them, insomuch that some had fyue thousand slaues
in one house, and that was the way too haue ones throte cut fyue thousand
tymes, if there had not bin good heede taken too keepe them fettered.
And this came of sin, as one mischeef tolleth on another, vntyll
things bee come too vtter confuzion. But if wee consider what
the ryght or authority of maysters was, wee will alwayes say, it was
a thing vttterly ageinst all order of nature. For wee bee all fashyoned
after the image of God, and therefore that a reasonable creature in
whom God hath printed his marke, should bee put too such reproch, it
was tootoo farre out of all square. But such are the fruites of the disobedience
and sin of our father Adam, that all things were turned topsiteruie.
Also on the other part, inasmuch as seruantes were in such
subiection: it seemeth that if they could by any meanes plucke their
neckes out of the collar, it ought too bee lawfull for them, and it was
an honest excuce so too doo. But howsoeuer Seruantes fare, Saint
Paule commaundeth them to obey their maysters, & too be subiect too
them. In deede he dooth also exhort the maysters not too abuse the
power that was giuen them, nor too thinke that the thing which was
graunted them by the Lawe of man, was so ryghtfull and vnparciall
before God, as they could not bee blamed for it. Saint Paule then



counselleth maysters too asswage the excesse of their superioritie: but
yit will he haue their seruantes too submit themselues too it, and too
beare the yoke that was so hard and heauy. Now it myght seeme
that he did seruantes wrong therein, and that he should rather haue
cried out ageinst the common abuse, that such outrage myght haue bin
layd downe. But we haue two principles to remember to restreyne vs
from attempting of any chaunge.
               The one is, that forasmuch as it had bin Gods will too put maynkynd
intoo confuzion, and that all men both great and small should be
put in mynd that Adam had peruerted the order of nature. Therfore
S. Paul counselleth seruantes to beare such subiection, assuring themselues
that it commeth of God, and therefore that they must take it paciently.
The other is, that the Gospell serueth not too chaunge the
common policies of the world, and too make Lawes that belong too
the temporall state. It is trew that Kings, Princes, and Magistrates
ought alwayes too aske counsell at Gods mouth, and too frame themselues
vntoo his word: but yit for all that, our Lord hath giuen them
libertie, too make such Lawes as they shall perceyue too bee meete
and conuenient for the gouernment that is committed vntoo them,
howbeeit they must call vppon God too giue them the spirit of wisedome
and discretion, and bycause they bee not of abilitie too rule of
themselues, they must take aduice and counsell at Gods woord. Yit
notwithstanding, the doctrine of saluation, which is called the kingdome
of heauen,Math. 13. c. 24. d. 31. and the thinges that belong too the brydling of
vs in this world, that men may knowe how too behaue themselues
one toowardes another, are sundrye thinges. That therefore is the
cause why Saint Paule left slauerye, bondage, or seruiship as it
was.
               And he exhorteth Seruants to doo their dewtie, in feare and trembling,
that is too say, with all lowelinesse and reuerence: yea and hee
addeth further, with singlenesse of hart, which he matcheth ageinst
all the fyne slyghts and shifts wheruntoo the seruants and slaues of
that tyme were too much giuen, as is too bee seene in them that haue
written of them, & haue set forth the maners and trade of lif which was
in course and vse at those dayes. And let vs mark first of all, that S.
Paul thinks it not ynough for seruants too seeke the benefyte & profit
of their maisters, and to be willing to obey them, and too be foreward
in executing whatsoeuer is commaunded them: but he requyreth reuerence



aboue all things, as I sayde afore. Let Seruants vnderstand,
that although they should not bee inforced, nor chastized with whipping
when they doo amisse, but that they had gentle and meeke masters:
yit notwithstanding they ought too beare paciently the state
wherin they bee, assuring themselues that God alloweth of it, and that
the superioritie which their maysters haue ouer them, how hard and
greeuous so euer it be, is neuerthelesse ordeyned and stablished of God.
And that is the cause why he setteth downe the woord Singlenesse.
For wee bee ouer wittie in seeking our owne aduauntage, and there is
none of vs all which is not a great doctor in matters concerning his
owne profit. Why should such a one (say wee) haue this prerogatiue aboue
mee? What reason is there that I should bee bound too him in
that▪ Take mee the handicrafts men, that neuer knew word of learning,
and deale with them in dayly matters, and in things that may
make with them, and they bee so skilfull in debating their cace, that
yee would take them too bee all men of lawe. Forasmuch then as men
are so wyly in seeking their owne commoditie and profit, too the hinderance
of others: Saint Paule dooth purposely set downe singlenesse
of hart, which serueth too sift all affections, and too ouerthrowe all
things that men can deuyze too hinder themselues from dooing of their
dewties.
               Now he setteth downe purposely (these woords:) As seruing the
Lord: and it is the cheef foundation that wee haue too leane vntoo,
when the cace concerneth the dooing of any dewtie towards men. For
if wee sticke too creatures, wee wil say, Came wee not all out of the
Ark of Noe? Why should he bee better esteemed than I? Is it meete
that I should bee put vnder his feete? what reason is that: And all
the rest of the woords which wee heare euery day. For wee haue skill
ynough too alledge exemption, and so little doo wee think our selues
bound vnto others, that wee think all others bound vntoo vs. The
mark therfore that al mē shoote at, is, that euery man would be a Lord,
and no man admit any subiection. And so it would needs followe, that
wee should bee as wyld beasts, or rather as doggs and Catts (as men
say), vntill wee knew that God lyketh well of the seruis that wee doo
too creatures. If wee bee not throughly perswaded of that, wee may
well make some fayre countenances, and please men: but out mynd
shall neuer bee ryght and well dispozed, vntill wee bee come to the
poynt that wee know, that our Lord accepteth our seruis.
               
                  
But there is yit one other cause that myght hinder vs, or rather
coole vs in the discharge of our dewtie towards other men: and that is,
mens vnthankfulnesse. For they whom wee pleasure, doo commonly

                     〈◊〉
                   vs no thank, but rather think that wee bee made for none other
purpose but too serue them. When wee see them requyte our seruis
so euill, it spyteth vs: and it were ynough too make vs leaue of altoogither.
Now then it is needfull for vs too come backe too that which
Saint Paule telleth vs: namly that God is aboue all degrees, and
that he hauing superioritie ouer the world, will haue euery man imploy
him self with all humblenesse, and that all subiections which he
hath ordeyned in the world, too remayne firme and vnuiolable. This is
the effect of the thing that Saint Paule telleth vs heere.
               Now first of all wee haue too mark the generall article which I
come now to touch: which is, that whē we haue superiours ouer vs, we
must not obey them as inforced,Rom. 13. a. 1. but bycause God hath ordeyned them,
and there is no preheminence but of him, as Saint Paule declareth to
the Romanes. It is trew that there he speaketh expressely of Princes
and Magistrates: but yit for all that, it extendeth too all authoritie, as
too that which parentes haue ouer their children, husbandes ouer
wyues, and Maysters ouer their seruantes. Therefore wee must bee
fully perswaded of this, that Gods intent is not that all men should bee
shuffled toogither, (as it woulde come too passe, if there were no restreynt,)
but that some should rule and haue authoritie too commaund
others, and that they which are vnder them, should obey. Then is it an
vnreuocable sentence of God, wheruntoo wee must hold our selues and
bee contented. For if wee protest our selues too bee willing too obey
God, and in the meane whyle will needs remoue all order that he hath
set among vs: all that wee speake wyth our mouth is but hypocrisie.
Therefore wee must gyue a proofe of our humilitie too Godward,
by our willyng and easye bearing of mans yoke which he
hath layd vppon vs as it were his owne handes. Let that bee for one
poynt.
               Now (as I sayd) this comprehendeth all subiection, as well of people
towardes Princes and Magistrates, of children towardes theyr
parentes, and of wyues towardes their husbandes: as also of seruantes
towardes their maysters. And when wee once haue that, it wyll bee
easie for vs too withstand all the trubbles and incomberances that hinder
vs, and turne vs away from our dewties. For what is the cause



that wee cannot submit our selues too Gods wyll? As I sayd, all these
disputings are vnauaylable and fond, when a man shall say, Why am
I bound too such a one? Why shoulde he holde his foote vppon my
throte? Who hath giuen him more authoritie than mee? But seeyng
God hath told vs that he will haue it so: it behoueth vs too holde our
peace. Therfore if wee bee fully perswaded of it, wee shall be too froward
if wee shewe not by our deedes that wee bee willing too please
our God, and too fulfill his good wyll. For if a mayster haue a great
multitude of folke in his house, he shall bee of sufficient authoritie too
appoynt whom he listeth too haue the ouersyght of it, and they must be
obeyed. A Prince hath his officers, and they must commaund, and others
must herken too them, and simply obey them. And what is too
bee doone then, when our God who is the souerein Lord and father,
& hath the ryght of preheminence and dominion ouer vs, will haue vs
too obey such as he hath appoynted, without making any reply? For
what can it boote too say the contrarie? Therefore (as I sayde) let vs
print this counsell of Saint Paules throughly in our hartes, That
when wee doo our dewtie willingly and vnfeynedly towardes those
whom God hath set in authoritie ouer vs, wee serue God himself. And
soothly, without that mynd, all the vertewes that wee can haue in outward
shewe too the worldward, shalbee but smoke, as yee shall see a
number of men that pretend maruelously well, insomuch that they whō
they serue, shall bee contented tootoo well with them. But although
such dealing bee allowed among men: yit is it nothing woorth before
God. And why? For God will bee honored at our handes: He wyll
haue men too inioy theyr ryght in such wyse, as nother he bee forgotten,
nor they as it were defaced. Therefore if wee will but onely obey
men, and despyze the thing which God will haue too bee as an acceptable
sacrifyze too himselfe: what a dealing were that? Then let vs
tend alwayes too him, and dedicate our selues too him. And forasmuch
as it is hys will that wee should bee vnderlyngs, let vs beare
that yoke willyngly, and with a free and vnslauishe or vnconstreyned
mynd.
               And for the same cause Saint Paule sayeth expresly, Let not your
seruice bee eye seruice, as though yee sought too pleaze men. And
in very deede, they that play their pageantes so fayre (as they say)
seeke eyther recompence, or else too bee well interteyned and fed with
the fattest, or else too haue greater wages, and afterward too haue



some extraordinarye gift or reward when occasion serueth. That is
the thing that men hunt for, when they haue not an eye vntoo God.
But Saint Paule telleth vs, that although they whom we serue be so
froward, as wee cannot tell how too content them, and wee haue not
any hope that euer wee shall get the valew of a button at their hands:
yit wee must neuerthelesse performe our dewties towards God. And
heere wee haue too gather, that in all things which God commaundeth
vs, wee must not onely imploy our eyes, our feete, our handes,
and our armes (as they say:) but wee must begin with the inwar
                     •
                  
affection. Therefore when as Saint Paule sayeth, not vvith eye
seruice: he sheweth vs, that if wee desyre that our Lord should allowe
our serui
                     ••
                  s as good and lawfull▪ our hart must go foremost, and
guyde all our members, so as there bee no counterfetting: accordingly
as it is sayd, that he regardeth faythfulnesse, that is too say,
that wee should deale soundly,Psal. 101. b. 6. playnly, and substancially. Thus are
all gay showes quyte dasht. For (as I sayd) there is grea
                     •
                  e pre
                     •
                  ence
of vertew in many men, but God accounteth it euery whit as nothing,
and in deede it is but hipo
                     •
                  risie. Therfore if wee will begin too serue
God well, let vs learne too leaue dubblenesse: and that wee may
buyld substan
                     •
                  ially, let vs alwayes lay that foundation, accordingly
also as wee see how he had leuer too bee loued than feared. Trew it
is that wee owe him reuerence, and that wee ought too tre
                     •
                  ble at his
maiestie▪ but yit when he sheweth vs the cheef thing which he 
                     ••
                  quyreth,
and which pleaseth him best, he sayeth, What is it, O Israel,
that thou shalt fynd in my Lawe,Deut. 10. c. 12. but that thou lo
                     •
                  e mee, and sticke
too mee? Seeing that our Lord requyreth this willing affection, and
that wee should resort too him with a free and franke hart: thinke
wee that he accepteth aught at our handes, when wee come too him
grudgingly & repyningly, & yit pretend too maruelous earnes
                     •
                  nes towardes
men? Howsoeuer the world go, wee will alwayes haue this
backe nooke in vs, that wee would bee exempted from the obeying
of God. Therfore we must take pleasure in his seruice, and it must be
our ioy and delyght, so as our bondage must be more sweete and lee
                     •
                  
                  some
too vs than all liberty, yea and than all the Realmes and Kingdomes
of the world.
               And Saint Paule sayeth expresly, Maysters as touching the flesh,
bycause that among other 
                     •
                  lyghtes of Satan wherewith he 
                     〈◊〉
                  
too trubble the world in old tyme, and also too make the doctrine of



the Gospell hated: he did put this heresie intoo a number of mens
heades, that if wee bee once spirituall, wee must no more bee subiect
too any worldly and transitorie policie, nother is that the state of Gods
children. And wee also haue seene in our tyme a sort of seditious and
mad headed people, which haue indeuered too abolish all principalities
too take away taxes and impostes, and too make euery man
mayster of himselfe, lyke myce in the chaffe, as they say. And they
grounded themselues vppon this foundation, that in asmuch as God
hath adopted vs too bee his children, and the world is now renewed,
too the intent wee should bee graffed intoo the bodye of our Lord Iesus
Christ: it is a thing ageinst reason, and contrary too all equytie,
yea and euen ageinst the honour of God, that vnbeleeuers should
reigne ouer vs, or that they which name themselues faythfull, should

                     〈◊〉
                   souerintie ouer their brethren and neyghboures. Lo how the
d
                     •
                  uell laboreth too driue it intoo mens heades, that the Gospell 
                     •
                  onfoundeth
all order in the world, too the intent that men should hate it &
abhorre it. Agein, too say that there is no man better than other, is
a pleasant speech, and very fit too intyce a great number of folke. S.
Paule therefore sayeth purposely, that although maysters 
                     〈…〉
                  
temporall authoritie, and that their superioritie dooth 
                     〈…〉
                  
the fleshe, that is too say, this present world, and this transitorye lyfe:
yit must they not bee defrauded of their ryght, nother did our Lorde
Iesus Christ come too make a confuzed equalitie heere, so as it
should not bee knowen who is great, and who is little, but too make euery
man too hold himselfe quyietly in his calling,Psal. 131. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . without looking
lo
                     •
                  tyly, as it is sayd in the Psalme. The way too make vs humble and
meeke, is too haue an eye euery of vs too his owne calling, so as the
person that is aduaunced too authoritie and honour aboue others, bee
not puffed vp with pryde and presumption for it, but rather abace himselfe
before God, assuring himselfe that he is dubble bound vntoo him,
for exalting him after that sort
                     •
                   and the meaner sort maynteyne themselues
in their meannesse, without vsurping that which belongeth not
too them. Lykewise the way for fathers too haue such obedience of
their children as is requisite, is too treate them gently? that husbands
also rule their wyues with all concord and freendlinesse: that Princes
abuse not their subiectes as wretched beastes: and that 
                     〈◊〉
                   deuoure
not their 
                     〈◊〉
                   too much: and therwithall, that such as are
the meanest sort too the worldward, consider that God hath set them



in that state, as though he had appoynted them their place there
with his owne hand. Therfore let not the common sort aduaunce them
selues, but bee contented with their state.
               That (say I) is the cause why Saint Paule setteth downe this saying
expresly, as touching the flesh. It was not too bring maysters
in contempt for reygning ouer their slaues, but too preuent all obiections
that men myght alledge, when they would seeke priuiledge too
exempt themselues from obedience too God, and too all order that he
hath set. And therewith all hee dooeth vs too vnderstande also, that
the same subiection is no preiudice too the faythfull, but that they may
continew still in full libertie, as in respect of their soules. For the diuell
vseth that colour also. What (sayeth he)? Seeing that
our Lord Iesus Christ hath shed his blud too purchace vs freedome,
why should wee not continew in it? Yea, but Saint Paule answereth
theruntoo, (as he hath doone with more large circumstance in the fifth
Chapter of the first Epistle too the Corinthians:) that the bondage
which wee yeeld too our superiours, is alonly as touching the flesh,
and that our soules and consciences ceasse not too bee alwayes frank
and free before God. And therfore it is a chyldish ob
                     •
                  ection, too say,
that seeing our Lord Iesus Christ hath set vs free, why should men
make vs bond? He hath not set vs free as touching our bodyes, for it
is his will that there should bee principalities and Lordshippes still
in the world: which cannot bee, but that some must be subiect, and othersome
haue preheminence and authoritie. For asmuch then as our
Lord hath so distinguished the twoo gouernmentes of the bodie and of
the soule, and that the one is spirituall, and too bee gouerned by his
word, as in respect of our walking before him too atteyne to the kingdome
of heauen: but when it commeth too the behauing of ou
                     •
                   selues
towards men, which are of our owne bodie, then wee must learne too
frame our selues too all good policie: let vs assure our selues that yit
for all that, our state is no whit woorse 
                     •
                  efore God, than if wee were
Kings and Princes, and all 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  rembled before vs. Yea and the
things which wee doo hart
                     •
                  ly in seruing of creatures, doo turne so
much the more to the exalting & magnifying of God. For needs must
he bee a man of noble mynd, which can stoope so lowe as too obey
willingly, (not regarding) how great, how skilfull, nor how riche so 
                     〈…〉
                  


                  
chaunge their state: for wee see how Saint Paule hath cut of all occasion
of such dealing. And therfore let vs learne by that which is told
vs heere, that first and formest wee must haue God as it were fastened
before our eyes, and knowe that he hath set vs in this world too serue
one another in such sort, as wee must notwithstanding liue toogither
in all humilitie, and not disdeyne too doo our dewtie euen towards such
as are not so sufficient as wee could wish, & as wee take our selues too
bee. Bee wee once at that poynt, it is certein that wee will euery of
vs submit our selues willingly according too the state that God calleth
vs too, and hold our selues in the place where he hath put vs.
               Now if Saint Paule would that the Slaues of his tyme should be
so obedient too their maysters, there is lesse excuce in these dayes, for
Seruants that take wages. Let vs compare the one with the other.
Those poore soules (as I tolde you before) were handled so rigorously,
that their maysters myght imprizon them, put them in the
stocks, racke them, dismember them, mayme them, yea and kill them.
It was a greeuous cace, and yit were they bound too it for lyfe and
death.Exod. 21. 
                        •
                     . 1. There was no limitation of terme but only among the Iewes,
among whom God had appoynted a terme. But the common and
generall lawe of all nations was, that bond folks with their children
should continew bond for euer, so as the father had no more ryght too
his owne chyld, that a horse (as yee would say) or any other beast had
ouer the young ones that came of their seede. And was not such a
state as bad as a hundred deathes? Yis: for man dooth alwayes couet
libertie, and too take his ease, and too eate his bread with quietnesse:
and those wretched slaues had not a bit of bread at their owne
appoyntment. As touching their persons, they were woorse than
Captyues, as I sayd afore. And yit for all this, God willeth and
commaundeth streytly, that they should beare this state paciently, and
performe their dewties faythfully, and fall too it with a free and cheerly
hart. Now what is too bee sayd of hyred seruants, which may
warne themselues away, and haue their wages payd them when they
haue serued out their yeere, and are vsed and treated much more gently
and liberally than those poore slaues were? For they were fayne
too labour euery one in his trade and craft, they earned their bread,
they drunk water many a tyme scarce their fill, and they were shet vp
in Cabanes, where they were inforced too doo their taskes. Then if
Serua
                     •
                  tes now adaye
                     •
                   can not stoope so lowe as too beare the state



that God hath layd vppon their backes: it is certein that they be tootoo
vnexcuzable. As much is to be sayd of subiectes towardes their
Magistrates. Therfore inasmuch as we see that our Lord spareth vs:
wee bee so much the more bound too the subiection which S. Paule
speakes of heere.
               Furthermore wee haue too wey yit agein the woordes where he
speaketh of franke and free harted willingnesse. For it is impossible
for vs too fynd any tast or sauour in our state or calling, of what sorte
so euer it bee, except wee knowe it bee for our benefyte and welfare.
For we can reape no great profit of the seruing of Creatures. Wee
must therefore resort alwayes too our God, and ame at this marke,
namely that seeyng he hath bin so good and gracious too vs as too set
vs in this world, and too maynteyne vs heere, and too shewe himselfe
so good a father towardes vs, that all that euer wee haue, dooth come
of him: wee must shewe the reuerence which wee beare too his maiestie,
and labour too please him in such wyse, as wee sticke not too bee
subiect too men, nor take it in greefe or in scorne. So shall our state
bee greatly sweetened, when wee know that God accepteth it in good
woorth at our handes.
               And that also is the cause why he setteth these things as one ageinst
another: not too shewe any contrarietie, but rather too accord them
toogither. For he sayeth, that wee must serue God on the behalfe of
our maysters, with all willingnesse: and afterwarde setteth downe
Gods will on the other syde. Then is it a very good melodie which
answereth very well, that wee should know how it is Gods wyll, that
seruantes should obey their maysters. And this will of Gods must
dispatch all obiections that myght hinder vs or stop vs. When the
diuell tempteth vs too thinke any thing straunge that is commaunded
vs, he intyceth vs too our destruction. Now then, let vs take Gods
wyll as our souereine welfare and perfect happinesse, assuring our selues,
that howsoeuer wee bee handled at his hand, yit he loueth vs styll,
and hath an eye too that which is good for vs. Let that serue for one
poynt. And if wee haue such perswasion well rooted in our hartes, it
is certein that this willingnesse which S. Paule speaketh of will follow
with it, so as wee shall fynde no lothnesse in our selues, too grudge
ageinst it, as wee see they doo which are inforced to doo things ageinst
their wils: for they grunt at it, and although they dare not bee aknowen
of it, yit their hartes are fell, and there is nothing but rancor



in them. Therefore Saint Paule setteth downe willingnesse, that is
too say, that wee should doo all thinges with a good will and freely.
And so shall we make our state lee
                     •
                  some and pleasant. For as for them
that doo nothing but by force and constreynt: they cannot eschew the
necessitie of obeying, and yit in the meane whyle they bee tormenters
too themselues, and woorke themselues more spyte then they could receyue
by all the sorrowes that they can alledge. For when wee bee
handled roughly by our maysters, superiors, and Magistrates: yit if
wee bee sure that God accepteth our seruice, it asswageth all the greef
that wee can conceyue, so that when wee haue doone our dewtie, wee
take our repaste with praysing of God, wee take our rest as a releefe
that he giueth vs for our infirmities, and besydes this wee wyll euer
haue an eye too the heauenly lyfe, and take corage at it too walke on,
though wee haue neuer so many stoppes. Yee see then that Gods children
shall alwayes make a hundred tymes better market, when they
doo their dewtie in seruing God freely: than they that go too it as
though nyne men hild them, (as they say) and discharge it very coldly
with grudging and repyning.
               Furthermore let vs marke, that Saint Paule heere bringeth vs
three tymes backe vntoo God and too our Lord Iesus Christ: and
that is too rid vs of this imagination which wee myght conceyue, that
if other men misbehaue themselues towardes vs, the bond is broken
too vs, and therefore that wee may exempt our selues from subiection
if wee can. As for example, if a seruant haue a mayster that is too rigorous
and froward, he thinkes with himselfe, why? What doo I?
And so, seruantes thinke themselues halfe quit, if their maisters performe
not their dewties towardes them. But S. Paule declareth expressely,
that although maysters be so cruell as they doo by no meanes
spare such as are vnder their hand: yit is not their superioritie diminished
therby. Trew it is, that in respect of themselues such maisters
are vnwoorthie too haue authoritie, as wee shall see hereafter. But yit
for all that, he that is the inferiour must holde himselfe styll vnder the
yoke, bycause he sees that God hath so ordeyned it. That is the effect
of the thing which wee haue too beare in mynd.
               And on the other syde, Saint Paul forgetteth not seruants, that he
should not procure them their right, and that which belongeth too
them. For he commaundeth maysters too doo the lyke too them, not
as ma
                     •
                  e and matelyke (as they say) but so as maisters consider, that although



though the ciuill lawes lay the brydle looce in their necks, yit dooth
not God graunt them leaue too doo what they list, but speaketh as
well for the one as for the other: which thing wee must beare well in
mynd. Now for the maysters he giueth this rule, namely that they
must looke well about them how they rule, bycause they haue a common
mayster in heauen,Deut. 10. d. 17. &. Rom. 2. b. 11. who accepteth no persons. As touching
Seruants, he sayeth, my freends, though yee haue not such recompence
in this worlde as yee would desyre: let it suffyze you that God
accounteth you not as slaues. It is trewe that yee bee despyzed
too the worldwarde, but you haue your inheritaunce in heauen, and
our Lord accepteth your seruis, and yee shall haue your reward payd
you as well as if yee were Kinges and Princes. That is the
thing which wee haue too remember heere. In deede the tyme will
not serue for the whole discourse of it: but yit wee see, that first Saint
Paule ment not too currye fauor with the greate and riche sort, by
maynteyning their ryght ageinst their slaues: & also that he laboreth
on the other syde, too bring those too lowelinesse and meeknesse, which
otherwyse myght haue aduaunced themselues too much. And the same
order ought too bee obserued by such as haue charge in the Churche,
& are ministers of Gods word: namely that they spare nother great
nor small, but tell euery man his dewtie. For sith there is no accepting
of persons before God: his woord must bee handled roundly, and
wee must not bee dismayed at the hyghnesse and authoritie of such as
are in estimation among men. For seeing it is God that speaketh,
his woord must pull downe all loftinesse, according as Saint Paule
speaketh in the second too the Corinthians,2. Cor. 10. b. 5. where he sayth, that commission
is giuen too all Shepherds and ministers of the Gospell, too
pull downe the pryde of men, and too subdew their ouer loftinesse, when
they will needs exalt themselues ageinst our Lord Iesus Christ, and
step vp ageinst his doctrine, so as they wil not submit themselues too
his yoke. The way then for ministers of Gods woord too discharge
their office faythfully, is too exhort the meaner sort too doo their dewtie,
and the poore and oppressed too beare their state paciently without replying,
howsoeuer they fare, and without grudging ageinst men, bycause
that in so dooing they should rebell ageinst God.
               But on the other syde also he telleth the greate ones, that they must
not be as beasts that deuoure others, and eate them vp, but that they
must behaue themselues vpryghtly. And in deede euen the heathen



men themselues, when they listed too speake according too naturall
equitie, declared that euen at that tyme it became not the maysters
too abuze the authoritie which they had ouer their seruants: and these
were their woords, that bondmen and slaues ought to be hild as Hyrelinges
that were interteyned by the day. Sith the Paymins spake
so, without hauing any other vnderstanding than their moother wit
auorded them: what excuce is there now adayes for such as are trayned
vp in Gods schoole, where there is a brotherhood betweene both
greate and small, and where the maysters ought too become fellowlie
with their seruants, bycause they haue all one hope of the endlesse lyfe?
If they that haue power aboue others, will needs set their feete vppon
their throts by abu
                     •
                  ing the ryght of their authoritie: what a thing is
it? So then, so much the more ought both the one and the other sort of
vs, too think how too walk in our owne state and calling: so as the inferiour
sort grudge not that our Lord suffereth them too bee abandoned
too so many wrongs too this worldward, and too bee so mocked and
scorned: but that although they should indure a hundred tymes as
much, yit they repyne not ageinst God, bycause it were but a kicking
ageinst the spurre: And the greater sort also doo the lyke, that is too
say, that they consider, that the neerer God hath drawen them too himselfe
in giuing them preheminence, the more will he also haue them too
fashyon themselues too his image and lykenesse. And what shall wee
fynd in God but goodnesse? according as wee see that throughout all
the Scripture he is called the fountaine of all lowelinesse, gentlenesse,
and mercy. And therefore let such as are in degree of honour thinke
cheefely theruppon. For it is certein, that if they discharge not their
dewtie, they shall pay full deerely for that they haue bin so honorable
in the world, and yit abuzed the singular benefyte of God. And (as I
sayd afore) bycause both the one and the other are hard too bee brought
too conformitie: insomuch that they which are oppressed, cannot refreyne
grudging, but are prouoked too breake all bondes: Let them
be hild in awe by Gods woord, and by earnest exhortations. And let
the great ones also bee subdewed, that they forget not God as they are
woont too doo. For they ouershoote themselues so farre, as to thinke
they bee no more mortall men. And it is certein, that if men bethinke
themselues well of their owne state, and view themselues in the persons
of the meanest, it will leade them too humilitie. So then, Gods
woord must haue his course in this cace, too brydle as well the one as



the other, that wee may lyue in such sort euery man according too his
calling, as God may bee quietly obeyed, and wee in herkening too
his voyce, desyre nothing but too performe our dewtie towardes him,
and towardes all creatures, vntyll wee bee come too the euerlastyng
kingdome, where wee shall bee parttakers both of his glory, and of
his maiestie, and of all the good things that are in him.
               Now let vs fall downe before the Maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our sinnes, praying him to voutsafe to touch vs
with trew and lyuely repentance, that wee may bee so sorie for offending
of him, as it may make vs too hate our vyces, and too craue pardon
of them at his hand, too the intent he may gouerne vs by his holy
spirit, and make vs too liue according too his holy commaundements,
and beare with our weakenesse, vntyll hee haue rid vs quyte and
cleane of it. And so let vs all saye, Almyghtie God heauenly father. &c.
            
            
               The .xlv. Sermon, which is the third
vppon the sixth Chapter.
               
                  
                     10. Moreouer my brethren, bee strong in the Lord, and in the
mightinesse of his povver.
                     11. Put on the complet harnesse of God, that yee may stand out
ageinst the assaultes of the diuell.
                     12. For our vvrestling is not ageinst fleshe and blud, but ageinst
Principalities, ageinst Povvers, ageinst the Lordes of the
vvorld, (euen) the rulers of the darknesse of this world, (and)
ageinst the spirituall vvickednesses vvhich are in the heauenly
places.
                  
               
               
                  
                  WEe knowe that prospertie dooth so puffe
men vp, as they beare themselues on hand
that they ought too bee priuiledged, and
theyr state exempted from the common aray:
and too bee short, that they ought too
doo what they lyst. On the contrary part,
the poorer sorte which are despyzed and
shaken of, thinke that God hath as good
as forgotten them, and thereuppon they
cannot conceyue that he hath any care of
them. Therefore it is expedient that such as are so drunken with
presumptuousnesse, as they take ouermuch vppon them vnder colour
that they bee in credit and authority, should haue their corages abated,
and heare it told them, that they haue a mayster in heauen, too punish
them, though they scape the handes of men. On the other syde,
it is requisyte that they should be comforted which are redye to quayle,
and should bee tempted too fall intoo despayre. And Saint Paule
shewed them both heere. For he telleth the Seruants they neede not
bee afrayd but that God regardeth them, so they walke in his feare,
and that he hath a care of them, and accepteth their seruice, as well as
though they were in honorable state, and very great dignitie too the
worldward. And vntoo the maysters he sayeth, they haue a superiour
in heauen, before whom they must yeeld their account, and that there
their greatnesse and hyghnesse will not go for payment. For al those
things are nothing before God, bycause all things that beare a great
glosse and countenance too the world, doo vanish away when they
come before the souerein iudge. On the other syde also heere followeth
that which is sayd in another text,1. Thes
                        •
                     . 5. c. 14. namely that they which are
faynt harted, must bee comforted: for else they myght quayle, bycause
it would seeme too them, that God regardeth them not: I speake of
such as are despyzed too the worldward. Therefore it must bee told
them, that God hath not forgotten them, though it bee his will too
keepe them lowe for a
                     •
                  yme. It behoueth euery of vs too apply this
too his owne vse, according too the state that God shall haue set vs in.
For when wee bee trubbled wrongfully, when men make none account
of vs, when men shake vs of: if wee imagin that God hath giuen
vs ouer too, wee cannot call vppon him. And on the other syde
also, wee cannot serue him with a free hart, bycause wee thinke it is



but labour lost, & too no purpose. Therfore when we be assayled with
such temptation, let vs call this lesson too rememberance, which is,
that though wee bee now afflicted in this world, and men laugh vs too
scorne, and spit in our faces, and too bee short, though wee indure all
the reproche that can bee: yit wee fayle not for all that, too bee in the
safe keeping of our God, bycause he esteemeth vs & setteth store by vs,
and will in the end shewe that he dooth so, insomuch that although wee
linger and pyne away, and he withhold himselfe as it were hidden
from vs, and a man myght deeme (according too naturall vnderstanding)
that wee bee (as yee would say) razed out of his rememberance:
yit neuerthelesse, after he hath hild vs vnder for a whyle, and tryed
our humilitie & obedience: wee shall fynd, that our walking faythfully
and vncorruptly in his feare, shal bee admitted in our account in the
end, and that we haue not labored for mooneshyne of the water, as they
say. That is the thing in effect which we must beare in mynd, when
the great personages of the world exalt themselues in their pryde, and
are able to trample vs vnder their feete.
               Howbeeit, let all such as haue superioritie ouer others, aduyze
themselues well, and consider that God hath not giuen them the brydle
without reseruing his owne ryght too himselfe, but that both great
and small must bee fayne too appeere before his iudgment seate, and
there there wilbe no accepting of persons. Wherfore let such as are
riche, let such as are in authoritie, let such as haue any aduantage aboue
their neyghbours, remember wel this saying, that there is no accepting
of persons before God: but that although that in this world
one man goes before, & another followes after: yit when the Trumpet
soundeth, so as wee must all come before the great Iudge: then there
shalbee no more any such difference. And for the same cause are euen
Kings and Princes brought too that poynt, and too that consideration
in the Psalme,Psalr. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        •
                     . 6. where it is sayd, Yee bee Gods, and yee bee children
of the hyghest: which is, bycause God hath ordeyned thē to be as his
leeutenants, and set them in hygh degree. Trew it is that this
must stand in force for a tyme: but yit shall yee dye as men (sayeth he)
and as any one of the common people, and then shall yee bee driuen
too knowe that yee were but mortall men. For all these great and
gay shewes shall then bee layd awater. And of a truth, the setting
downe of the woord Person, ought too put vs well in mynd, that they
bee but temporall things, and that wee cannot bring any of them



with vs before God, as though they were our owne. Trew it is tha
                     •
                  
in our common speech we take the woord Person it another sense: for
we call a man or a woman a person. But when the Scripture speakes
of it, it meaneth all things that are without vs, as riches, states, offices,
nobilitie, great birth, and all things that men possesse in this
world, and whereof they may also bee bereft. Therefore when it is
sayd, that there is no accepting of persons before God: it is as much
too saye, as he will iudge vs simply as mortall men, and as brittle
and frayle creatures, and that wee cannot sheeld our selues with
one thing or other, insomuch that the richest cannot bring their treasures,
landes, and possessions with them, to aduaunce themselues with
them aboue others. They that haue bin in any great dignitie, shall
not say, how so? Euery man trembled vnder mee. Such geere shall
bee nothing woorth afore God. All the greatnesse and all the authoritie
of the world will serue too no purpose, but euery man shall be taken
as a chyld of Adam. So then, let such as haue any occasion too exalt
themselues, beare well in mynd, that all the thinges which haue any
gloriousnesse too the worldward, and are esteemed and had in reputation,
shall fade away lyke smoke, and bee consumed too nothing, when
wee come too bee iudged of our God. And therefore let all men both
great and small lyue in humblenesse and trust.Iames. 1. b. 9. And that is the c
                     ••
                  se
why Saint Iames sayth, let him that is small, glory in his hyghnesse.
Why so? Bycause God hath adopted vs too his children, and although
wee bee but poore earthwoormes, and euen men themselues
account vs as filth and dung: yit hath God voutsafed too print his
marke in vs, that wee myght bee knowen too be his children, and that
he hath giuen vs leaue to call vpon him as our father with full mouth.
Therefore wee haue iust cause too glory, notwithstanding that wee be
of lowe degree. For wee haue a hyghnesse whereby God exalteth vs
aboue all the world. And on the contrary part, Saint Iames sayeth,
that he which is great, must glory in his lowenesse. For wheras the
vnbeleeuers are so bewitched with pryde, that they despyze God,
and (as I sayd afore) doo beare themselues on hand, that they bee exempted
from all lawe, and that their state is set alone by it selfe from
all the rest of the world: the beleeuers must vnderstand, that all the dignitie
and excellencie in the world, serueth but for a tyme, and passeth
away, and that when wee come before God, wee shall haue nother one
thing nor other to clothe our selues withall. Too bee short, the things



which the scripture calleth Persons, are as apparels and clothings.
Let vs take this similitude: If he that is richly apparelled, thinke too
scape from God, vnder colour that he gazeth at his owne gay fethers,
and that the world woondereth too beholde him: he deceyueth himself
very much. For all those things must bee layd asyde when God calleth
vs too iudgement. Agein, the poore folke that scarsely haue wherwith
too couer halfe their body, yea and that but with a fewe ragges
and torne cloutes, must not thinke themselues the lesse esteemed (of
God) for all that. For there shall bee no more persons, that is too say,
there shall bee noth 
                     〈◊〉
                   riches nor pouertie, honour nor bacenesse: wee
must all appeere as wee bee, that is too say, mortall men, and children
of Adam. That is it in effect which wee haue too gather vppon that
lesson.
               After Saint Paule hath shewed euery mans dewtie particularly:
now he returneth agein too generall doctrine. For (as I sayd afore)
there is one rule common too all men without exception, which is the
same that is conteyned in Gods lawe, namely that wee should leade a
holy lyfe, giuing our selues ouer vnto his seruis: and also loue one another,
liuing chastely and soberly, in all myldnesse and honestie.
This is common. But it is sayd afterward, that euery man must haue
an eye too his owne calling, as, the husband hath a speciall dewtie
towards his wyfe, and the wyfe towards hir husband, as wee haue
seene hertoofore: for Saint Paule hath layd foorth all those things.
Now he attempereth his talk too all men, saying, Moreouer my brethren,
bee strong in the Lord. Wherin he sheweth that wee cannot
giue our selues too the seruing of God without hardnesse, but must take
peynes too prepare our selues thertoo. Trew it is that if wee were
whole and sound, and that our nature were vncorrupted, it would neuer
dare vs to liue according too Gods commaundement: nay rather
it would be our whole pleasure, accordingly as the faythfull doo feele
by experience, when God hath touched them too the quicke. And for
that cause also dooth our Lord Iesus Christ say,Math. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . d. 30. that his yoke is nother
hard nor rough, nor his burthen heauie: as if he should say, that he desyreth
nothing but too guyde vs by all gentle aud louing meanes. But
if wee consider what wee bee: that is too say, how vnable wee are too
bee firme and constat, and too hold out in the way which God sheweth
vs: surely wee shall well see how it is not without cause, that Saint
Paule exhorteth vs heere too bee strong. As if he should say, I haue



exhorted you hithertoo too doo your dewties: but I knowe well that
euery of you shall fynde such stubornnesse in him self, as he shal not be
able too ouercome his wicked lusts but by fyghting manfully. And
though you be weake, yit think not that that ought to serue for excuce.
When your passions on the one syde are stubborne and rebellious ageinst
God, and your selues on the other syde are frayle: think not that
that shall quit you before God: for yee shalbee condemned in your
sinnes neuerthelesse. What is too bee doone then? Bee yee strong in
the Lord (sayeth he:) that is too say, wheras most men doo welter in
their sinnes, and think themselues discharged by
                     ••
                  use their thoughts
and affections are so rebellious ageinst the ryghtuousnesse of God:
you knowing all the same miseries must mislyke of your selues for
them, and seeke the remedie of them. And what is that? Strengthen
your selues: that is too say, wee must inforce our selues: As if hee
should say, It is a hard thing too walk aryght: for wee shall haue as
many impediments as may be. The diuell wil not ceasse too seeke all
meanes possible too thrust vs out of the way, and wee shall haue store
of oppressions and vexations, for he hath slyghtes ynow and too many,
and besyds that, he assayleth vs now after one maner, and now after another,
and we haue not wherwith too resist him. Therfore it behoueth
vs too get strength too vs.
               Howbeit, he sayth, in the Lord, least men should imagin themselues
able too furnish out the matter with their owne freewill, and
with their owne cunning. Therefore, Bee yee strong in the Lord
(sayeth he) yea and in the myghtinesse of his power. When hee
dooeth vs too wit, that God will vtter such power, as wee shal not
neede to doubt of victorie ageinst all that the diuell can practyze, so we
bee not rechlesse, ne fall asleepe. Wherfore let vs call vppon God,
that he may help vs and succour vs at our neede. So then, let these
twoo things go toogither with vs: that is too wit, first wakefulnesse,
and such care as the faythfull should haue too strengthen themselues:
and on the other syde, hartie desyrousnesse too call vppon God. And
this is a text well woorthie too bee marked, as which conteyneth a
greate matter in fewe woords. For first wee see that wee must not
bee slothfull if wee couet too rule our lyfe according too Gods will,
but forasmuch as euery man beareth with him self, and we desyre nothing
but too shake of all care, and too cast the things at our backs (as
they say) which myght trubble vs: too the end wee bee not so nyce,



wee must mark first of all, that if wee will serue God, wee must inforce
our selues, and that is as much to say as we must fyght ageinst the diuell.
For (as I sayd afore) he is not ydle, nother will he suffer any of
vs to doo our dewtie with such ease, as though wee did but walk vp
and downe in some foyre place: but he will set thornes, and cast logs
in our wayes too stop vs. Agein, he will giue such girds at vs, as shalbee
ynough too ouerthrow vs a hundred tymes, before wee can step
one pace, vnlesse God ayd vs. Forasmuch therfore as wee cannot
walk in the feare of God without fyghting: wee ought too beare
Saint Paules warning in mynd. Furthermore he intendeth also too
make vs perceyue our owne weaknesse. For wee knowe that men doo
beare much with themselues, and seeke nothing but too welter in their
pleasures. Also there are which presume vppon their owne strength, &
beare thēselues on hand that they be able to worke wonders as though
they were as stout as could bee requyred. And this cursed perswasion
hath deceiued wretched mē in al ages, and by that meane hath freewill
trotted in euery mans mouth. But S. Paule telleth vs heere, that
wee haue neede too bee strenthened: which saying importeth that wee
bee weake by nature.
               And afterward he expresseth him self yit better, in saying, that it is
in the Lord that wee must bee strong, and that he hath all power in
him, too giue therof vntoo vs, as much as needeth. Then if wee enterpryze
any thing without calling vppon him, wee shalbee punished
for our rashnesse and pryde. Saint Paule therfore sheweth vs, that
men cast themselues into decay by their ouerweening, in imagining
themselues too haue that which they haue not, which conceyt turneth
them away from calling vppon God, Now it myght bee sayd heere,
that it is a superfluous exhortation too bid vs bee strong in the Lord:
for no man is able too vphold him self: that lyeth not in any bodies
power too doo. (No:) but yit for all that, wee feele by effect, that
God woorketh in such wyse in vs, that wee doo the same things that
he dooeth. But yit must that woorking needs bee amyable too vs. If
a mā haue liued holily, so as he may haue bin as a mirrour of holinesse
and of all vertew: it may well bee sayd, he hath doone this or that.
And in deede wee bee not as timber logs: and therfore wee doo good.
Yea, but yit must wee vnderstand that this (woorking) commeth from
elswhere than of our selues: and there lyeth the knot of the cace. Then
if it bee demaunded, whether men can doo good or no: yea, but not of



themselues, nor of their owne selfmouing, or of their owne kynd, but
(only) bycause they bee guyded by the holie Ghoste. If it bee demaunded
whethr men can doo euill: yea, they bee giuen wholy too it, it is
their common byasse. So then, men doo euill of themselues, and the
roote of it remayneth in them, and the blame of it is ryghtly imputed
vntoo them, and they must not fetch wyndlasses aboue nor beneath too
fynd tryflyng shiftes. Whosoeuer hath doone euill, shall abyde alwayes
in his condemnation: but let vs consider well that God woorketh
in vs when wee doo good, and the prayse thereof ought of ryght
too bee giuen too him. Howbeeit, although there bee nothing in vs
nor on our syde when wee serue God: yit notwithstanding S. Paule
exhorteth vs not in vayne, in saying that wee must bee strengthened
in God.Phil. 2. 
                        •
                     . 12. 13. For wee must not bee lazie, as he speaketh of it in another
place, where he sayth, woorke your saluation in feare and trembling,
for it is God that giueth both wyll and the abilitie too performe it, and
all according too his good pleasure freely and of his owne mercy.
This saying seemeth straunge at the first blush, when S. Paule wylleth
vs too woorke our saluation. For is that in vs? (No:) But he correcteth
that which myght bee conceyued through presumption and ouerweening,
by saying that it must bee done with trembling, and that
wee must walke in feare: that is too say, wee must distrust our selues,
yea and bee vtterly abashed, assuring our selues that wee cannot stirre
one of our little 
                     ••
                  ngers, no nor thinke one good thought (as he sayeth
in another place:2. Cor. 3. b▪ 5.) except God giue it vs from aboue. And afterward
(which confirmeth this matter yit better) he addeth for a conclusion,
that God giueth both the wyll and the performance of the wyll. Then
is it God that dooeth all, and yit ceasse not wee too doo also: yea, but
that is by him, and of him, as I haue declared already. Too bee short,
the holy Scripture sayeth, not that God doth renew vs, and that when
wee bee begotten agein by his holy spirit, wee begin too haue a good
mynd and too bee well inclyned: too the intent wee should bee slothfull
and ydle, but too the intent that God should bee glorifyed, and wee
not imagin our selues too bee the woorkers of our owne saluation, but
yeeld him the honour of all the good that he hath put intoo vs. Howsoeuer
the world go, yit must wee bee watchfull, that is too saye, wee
must keepe good watch ageinst the diuell, and indeuer too giue our
selues too goodnesse, so as euery of vs inforce our selues, for wee must
imprizon our owne wit, and wicked will too make them obedient too



God: but yit must all bee acknowledged too bee of him.
               His adding of these woordes, of the myghtye povver of God,
is too make vs ouercome all distrust, for wee see wee bee geuen too
bee out of hart, insomuch that if wee cannot compasse the thinges as
wee would, which he commaundeth vs, wee conclude, that in the end
wee must needes quayle. But contrarywyse Saint Paule sayeth,
that God will vtter a myghty and victorious power, according as it
is sayd, that he which is on our syde is stronger than all the world.
Seeing then that God taketh our part, and vpholdeth vs with his
power: let vs not feare too bee surpryzed by Satan and all that euer
hee can deuyze ageinst vs, but that whatsoeuer distresses betyde
vs,2. Cor. 12. c. 9. in the end wee shall ouercome all, euen by resting vppon Gods
inuincible power. And of a truth God perfecteth his power in our
weaknesse: that is too say, he woorketh not in such wyse, but that in
the meane 
                     〈◊〉
                   go limping, and are plukt backe, and stumble,
and step man
                     ••••
                   pace awry, and now and then start out of the way.
Yee see then that our Lordes assisting of vs with his holy spirit, is in
such wyse, as he holdeth vs styll in awe, too giue vs occasi
                     •
                  n too humble
our selues. Our weaknesse therfore is mingled with the strength
of Gods assistence, and that is too the end wee should knowe what
neede wee haue too call vppon him, and too flee too him for refuge.
For wee bee redye ynough of our selues too barken Gods glory. And
therefore God is fayne too waken vs, and too say vntoo vs, wretched
Creatures, should yee not bee forlorne a hundred thousand tymes, if
I hild yee not by the hand▪ Now then, our Lordes leani
                     •
                  g of infirmities
in vs, is too drawe vs too him, and too subdew vs too meeknesse,
that wee may haue matter too prayse him for, in that he suffereth
not our falles too bee deadly: and agein, that wee should seeke
him euery minute of an houre, knowing that if he helped vs not vp agein,
and hild vs on our feete, wee should perish without any mercye.
That then is the cause why that vntoo Paules former saying, wee
must also ioyne this sentence, that God doth in deede leaue some weaknesse
in vs as long as wee lyue in this world, but yit ceasseth not too
vtter his inuincible power in making vs too get the vpper hand: and
that wee must dwell vppon this concluzion, that when Satan hath
wrought the vttermost that he can, yit must wee marche on neuerthelesse,
and keepe our way too our iournyes end. And why▪ For it is
not onely sayd, that God will humble vs, and that he will haue pitye



vppon vs: but also that his power shal shewe it selfe in succoring vs,
and that not with a single and common operation, but with a myghtye
power, that is too say, with a power that shall ouercome all the lettes
of the world.
               Now then wee see what diuersitie there is betweene the doctrine
of the Papistes, and the doctrine that we follow, which is grounded
vppon the holy Scripture. For these blynd wretches say, they can
woorke woonders by their freewill. In deede they will giue some
little snippet vntoo God, saying, that he supplyeth their wantes, bycause
they bee inclined too euill and too vyce, but that they bee restreyned
by him. God therefore is as a pretie fellowe too help them at a
dead lift: but in the meane whyle it is their owne freewill, and their
naturall power that beares all the sway. But when they haue made
the vttermost of their owne strength: yit doo men dwell alwayes in
doubt, & if they happē to hold their own one houre, by and by they slumble,
and can neuer get vp agein. But contrariwyse wee hold opinion,
that man must bee vtterly beaten downe (as wee bee taught by the holy
Ghost,) so as wee may not haue one drop of power resident in our
selues, but bee vtterly emptied. Are wee once at that poynt? Our
Lord sheweth vs the remedye. If wee repayre too him, and acknowledge
our wantes, and bee redy too beg, so as wee haue our mouthes
open, and bee not pu
                     •
                  t vp with mynd, but (rather) vtterly emptye:
then dooth our Lord assure vs, that he will not fayle vs, and wee shall
haue whereof too presume, howbeeit not after the manner of the Papistes,
who make their brags
                     •
                   and aferwarde come short (of theyr
reckening,) and are put too vtter shame. On our part, when wee
haue acknowledged that nothing wee bee, nor nothing can doo, wee
resort vntoo God, too glory ageinst Satan, and ageinst all the
assaultes that he giueth vppon vs, and ageinst all the munitions of hel,
and ageinst all the impedimentes and temptations in the worlde.
Thus yee see how wee ought too put this lesson of Saint Paules
in vre.
               After he hath spoken so of the myghtye power of God: now he addeth,
that vvee must arme our selues vvith his complet Harnesse.
As if he should say, that it is long of none but our selues, that wee bee
not wel armed and weaponed too ouercome all Satans assaultes, and
that our owne negligence is the cause that wee bee so often vanquished
a
                     •
                  d foyled. And why? For God not only promiseth to succour



vs by his power, and that in such measure, as wee shall get the vpper
hand: but also putteth meanes intoo our handes, and armeth vs: and
yit notwithstanding wee hang vp our armour vppon the wall. And
is it any maruell if wee bee taken vnwares, or bee vnable too resist
at the pinch, when wee hold scorne too vse the meanes that God offereth
vs, and are so neere our hand? Now what is this armour?
Saint Paule will shewe it in dew place, as now let it suffize vs too
knowe his intent. Then whereas it is sayd, that wee must bee armed
with Gods complet harnesse: it is too rebuke and quicken vp our
rechlesnesse, in letting the things alone which he offereth vs. In deede
wee will lyke well if a man tell vs that God is redye and foreward too
succour vs, and that we neede not too doubt of victorie ageinst all our
enemies, so long as he is on our syde: we accept this geere willingly:
but in the meane whyle wee bee contented too sit styll, and it is not
for vs too incounter our enemie, for he is farre too strong for vs. But
yit must wee in this cace incounter hand too hand: and wee would that
Gods armours should lye styll, and bee prepared for vs without vsing
of them. For this cause are wee commaunded too put them on,
that is too say, too apylye them too our vse, sith our sta
                     •
                  e is such, as
wee must maynteyne battell, and it pleaseth God that wee should bee
so armed, and that the diuell should not come vppon vs vnprouded.
               And Saint Paule not onely vseth the woord Armor or Harnesse:
but also addeth, all the furniture, as if he should say, wee must bee
armed from top too toe. And that shalbe set foorth particularly yit
better heerafter. Howbeeit his meaning in this text, is that our vnthankfulnesse
is knowen so much the more, in that God armeth vs at
all poyntes, so as nothing is missing, except the fault bee in our selues.
In deede wee will not sticke too put on some part of the armour that
God giueth vs: howbeeit, it is but as if one man should clap on his
Morion for a countenance, & take nother Target, nor Corselet nor any
thing else: and another catch vp his swoord, and the third his halberd,
& in the meane whyle euery of them want many other things that they
should haue neede of. So wee perhaps apply some part of Gods armour
too our vse: that is too say, wee will not vtterly reiect or refuze
all the grace that he offereth vs. But there is none of vs all that armeth
himselfe as he should doo: that is too say, which is fenced with
all the vertues that God giueth him. For it is certein, that both from



the ryght hand and from the left, from aboue and from beneathe, God
ordeyneth meanes for vs too fyght withall, which are sufficient, so wee
despyze them not, but vpon knowledge of our want, receiue the things
which he giueth vs so liberally.
               And too the intent wee should bee the more prouoked too arme our
selues, and too receyue the helpes that God giueth vs: S. Paule addeth,
That yee may vvithstand all the assaultes of the D
                        •
                     uell. Heere
he confirmeth the matter that I spake of afore: that is too wit, that
wee cannot serue God at our owne ease, as though there were nothing
too let vs: as, a man may go too his woorke all day long, and it shall
go foreward quietly, bycause he is not distrubbled. But it is not so in
the obedience which the faythfull should yeeld too their God. And
why? The diuell ceasseth not too trubble them, and too woorke them
a thousand spytes and incomberances. Therefore if wee desyre too
walke in the feare of our God: wee must bee armed, that 
                     •
                  ee may bee
ready too battell, for our enemye wyll neuer let vs rest. And for that
cause Saint Paule setteth downe many assaultes of Satan. As if he
should say, Satans assayling of vs too bring vs too wickednesse, is not
for once or twyce and away: but he maynteyneth a continuall battell,
and when he hath giuen vs o
                     •
                  e alarum on the one syde, he commes about
agein on the other, insomuch that besydes our owne inforcing
and strengthening of our selues, wee haue neede of armour too repulse
our enemy, on which syde soeuer he assayle vs.
               And agein he amplyfyeth it yit better, saying, that our fyghting is
not only ageinst flesh and blud: but (also) ageinst the powers, and
principal
                        •
                     ties of the aire, ageinst the Lords of the world, and ageinst
wicked Spirits, which fyght from heauen ageinst vs: Commonly
when wee haue too doo with an enemy that is not greatly able
too anoy vs, so as wee feare not that he can doo vs any harme: wee
despyze him, and that is oftentymes a cause, that such as yee would
esteeme too bee the valeantest in the world doo come short home. And
why: Bycause they despyzed their enemye. But Saint Paule telleth
vs, we haue to do with other maner of wyghts than mortall men:
and yit wee feare them not. If a man hate vs, although he bee not of
any great abilitie: Yit haue wee a flea in our eare (as they say) and
wee think it wisdome too preuent the things that our enemie can practyze
ageinst vs. But specially if our enemyes be myghtie and strong,
and wee vnable too stand ageinst them, and too repulse them: then are



wee as much amazed as may be, & yit they be but mortall men as wee
be. Howbeit S. Paul tels vs, we haue not to fyght ageinst mortal mē,
but ageinst enemies that doo farre passe thē. And for that cause doth he
cal them powers and principalities, giuing them authoritie as though
they had the ouer hand of vs alredye. If wee were too fyght with an
enemye that were ouer our head, it would trubble vs curstly. Now
such are the diuells: they haue that aduauntage of vs: for they bee named
euen Kings of this world: and besyds that, they haue a thousand
wyles and policies. And therfore it is sayd, that they not only assayle
vs with force, but also lay so many stales and ambushes too intrappe
vs, as wee could not scape them, if wee stoode not vppon our gard.
Heere it standeth vs on hand too bee throughly waked, though wee
were not only asleepe, but also as it were in a swound. Yit notwithstanding,
this warning dooth little boote vs: for wee see how cold wee
bee in buskling our selues to the battell. Saint Peter telleth vs the
lyke,1. Pet. 5. b. 8. though he vse not the same woords. For in saying that the diuel
is as a roring Lyon, going about and seeking some pray to deuoure,
so as he will swallowe vs vp 
                     •
                  ut of hand, if wee bee not waking: hee
sheweth vs that it is not for vs too bee rechlesse and out of feare, but
rather too sticke well too our talking. Not that wee should bee afrayd
out of measure: for the intent of Saint Peter and Saint Paule in
setting foorth the diuells force, is not too discomfort vs and dismay vs,
that wee should conclude (with our selues:) how shall wee then doo?
wee bee quyte past hope of recouerie. No: but Saint Peter addeth,
withstande him beeing strong in fayth. And Saint Paule sayeth also
vntoo vs: the diuell is strong and myghtie, but yit God surmounteth
him: and if yee bee armed with his power, feare not but yee shall
farre ouercome Satan and all his assaultes, and in the ende get the
vpper hand of him. So then, the thing that wee haue too beare in
mynd, is that as oft as wee perceyue the lets that hinder our walking
where God calleth vs, and our holding out as were requisyte: we
must acknowledge our owne infirmitie, and condemne all the foolish
ouerweening of poperie, as their freewil, their works of preparation,
and all things which they imagin themselues too bring vntoo God.
Let all such stuffe vanish away. And when wee haue acknowledged
that wee can doo nothing at all of our selues: then let vs on the other
syde consider who is our enemie, and bee afrayd: not as men in a maze
too sinke in our owne wretchednesse: but that the same may the better



waken vs, and driue vs too seeke succour at Gods hand by prayer and
supplication, and too imbrace his promises with fayth, which shall get
the vpper hand of all the world. And therwithall let vs not doubt but
that God wyll alwayes haue the vpper hand of Satan and of all his
practizes. For he hath promised too vse an infinite power, whensoeuer
the cace concerneth the succoring of vs. Yee see then that wee
must walke in feare and warenesse. And why? Bycause wee bee beseeged
with many enemyes, and yit are destitute of all goodnesse, and
giuen too al euill. Then standeth it vs on hand to distrust our strength,
and too mourne, and too bee quickened vp with feare, bycause of our
enemyes, which might so deuoure vs at the first chop with one grayne
of salt (as men say) as wee should bee vtterly vndoone. For not onely
once, but a hundred thousand tymes should wee bee ouerwhelmed by
the power of the Diuell, if our Lord vphild vs not. But howsoeuer
wee fare, let vs marche on with our heades vpright, pr
                     •
                  suming vppon
the helpe that is promised vs from aboue: and wee shall feele it in such
wyse, as wee shall continue vnuanquishable. And although wee alwayes
hang our wings, and indure hote skirmishes, 
                     〈◊〉
                   as e
                     •
                  ewhyles
wee feele stinking hartgrypes,2. Cor. 12. c. 
                        •
                     . (as in deede God will performe hys
strength in our weaknesse:) yit howsoeuer wee fare, let vs not doubt
but all shall turne too our benefyte, and that euen our trubbles shall bee
a meanes too make vs modest, and serue vs for spurres too pricke vs
foreward too call vppon God, and moreouer moue vs too yeeld him
thankes and honour, when wee see he hath graunted vs the grace too
ouercome our enemy, so as wee shall euery minute acknowledge the
goodnesse that wee haue receyued at his hand. Thus the way for vs
too order our lyfe well, is, first too knowe God, and afterward too vnderstand
that wee bee beholden too him for all the goodnesse, and good
things that wee haue, and therefore not bee cold and lazie, but inforc
                     •
                  
our selues euery man too glorify him, in such wyse as wee walke continually
in his feare.
               Now let vs fall downe before the Maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him too make vs perceyue
them better than wee haue doone, and that our so dooyng may cause
vs too resort too him, that wee may not onely obteyne forgiuenesse of
our faultes past, but also bee so strengthened, as wee may order our
whole lyfe according too his holy commaundementes, euen according
too the measure of grace that he shall haue giuen vs, vntyll he haue



taken vs out of this world, and rid vs of al the vyces and spottes wherwith
wee bee steyned as now. And so let vs all saye, Almyghtie
God heauenly father. &c.
            
            
               The .xlvi. Sermon, which is the fourth
vppon the sixth Chapter.
               
                  
                     11. Put vpon you the vvhole armour of God, that ye may vvithstand
all the assaultes of the diuell.
                     12. For our vvrestling is not ageinst fleshe and blud, but ageinst
the Principalities, ageinst the Povvers, ageinst of Lordes
of this vvorld, the (gouernours) of the darkenesse of this
world, (and) ageinst the spirituall vvickednesses that are in
the heauenly places.
                     13. VVherefore take too you the vvhole armour of God, that yee
may bee able too vvithstand in the euill day, and stand fast
vvhen ye haue performed all things.
                     14. Stand fast therfore, hauing your loynes girt with truth, and
beyng clothed vvith the brestplate of Ryghtuousnesse:
                     15. Hauing your feete shod vvith the preparation of the Gospell
of peace:
                     16. Taking aboue all things the sheeld of fayth, wherby you may
quench all the fyrie dartes of wickednesse.
                     17. Also take too you the Helmet of saluation, and the swoord of
the spirit, vvhich is the vvoord of God.
                  
               
               
                  
                     I
                   Shewed you this morning, why Saint
Paule speaketh heere of the force and
craftes of Satan, that is too wit, to wake
vs, that wee bee not taken vnwares, as
it happeneth oftentymes. Therefore it
standeth vs on hand too knowe, with what
manner of enemye wee haue too doo, that
the same may stirre vs vp too resist him.
Trew it is that at the first wee myght bee
abashed, by comparing our owne weaknesse



with the practyzes and preparations of Satan, wherof mention
is made heere. But the remedy thereof is set downe therewithall, as
I haue touched alredy, and as Saint Paule proceedeth too shewe yit
more at length. Therefore he sayeth first, that the incounter which
wee haue too deale in, is much more harde and daungerfull, than if
all the men in the world did set themselues ageinst vs. For the force
of Satan is aboue them all. And that is the cause why he sayeth, that
our fyghting is not ageinst flesh and blud. By these woordes he
dooth vs too vnderstand, that wee haue not too stand ageinst mortall
men onely. It is trewe that men shall oftentymes bid vs battell,
yea and they shalbee Satans vnderlings too torment vs. But that
is not the thing that we must sticke at. For the diuel serues his turne
by them too driue vs too despayre, or too prouoke vs too reuengment,
and too make vs grudge ageinst God. Howsoeuer the cace stand, the
wicked doo neuer trubble vs, but they bee egged too it by another,
that is too say, by Satan, who ruleth them, and is their head, and setteth
them a woorke, too the endes aforesayd. Therefore if wee sticke
vppon men, wee forget the principall, after the manner of Dogges,
who if a man doo cast a stone at them, fall too byting of the stone too
wreake themselues, and regard not the hand that threw it. Euen so
are wee vnpurueyed of wit, when wee thinke our stryuing is but only
with men, and in the meane whyle thinke not vppon our inuisible enemye.
Wherfore let vs bethinke vs well of the thing that Saint
Paule telles vs heere, namely that Satan is the cheef enemye that
wee haue, yea and that it is he whom we must withstand: and although
he use diuerse meanes to vexe vs, and to turne vs away frō the feare of
God: yit must wee alwayes haue our eye vppon him, that we may beware
of him.
               Agein, a man myght thinke it straunge, that Saint Paule should
say, that the diuelles are the principalities of the aire, the lordshippes
and powers of heauen, and the princes of the world: for a man would
deeme that he matcheth them ageinst God. Now although some
Heretikes in olde tyme haue abuzed this place, intending too haue
made as it were twoo beginnings, so as God should bee letted too
maynteyne himselfe ageinst Satan, and too defend those whom be
hath taken intoo his protection: yit notwithstanding if wee haue an
eye too Saint Paules intent, this question wil bee easly resolued.
And why? For heere is no talke of any power that the diuell should



haue as it were in despyte of God too aduaunce himselfe ageinst him:
for wee must rather stand fully resolued of this poynt, that the diuell
is the executer of Gods iudgmentes, and cannot attempt any thing
more then is graunted and permitted him.Iob. 1. b. 6. If there were no more
but this text of the first chapter of Iob, where the diuell appeered with
the Angelles (who are named there the children of God) to get leaue
too doo mischeef: it ought too satisfie vs throughly. Trew it is that
he seeketh nothing else but too peruert and confound all things. But
yit for all that, God holdeth him brydled, and executeth what he thinks
good by his meanes, insomuch that when the diuelles haue deuyzed
what they cā, yit can they not attempt any thing without Gods leaue,
yea and except he haue ordeyned it, and giuen them expresse charge to
doo this or that. Yit notwithstanding, it is not for nought that S.
Paule nameth them the powers and principalities of the aire: for all
this dependeth vppon the things that he will speake anon concerning
the darkenesse of the world. But, that the diuelles should haue superioritie
ouer mankynd, which is shaped after the image of God, were
ageinst all reason: yea if wee had continued in our soundnesse. Had
wee hild out in the state wherein God created our father Adam, it is
certeyne that the diuell should not haue had any aduauntage ouer vs.
But forasmuch as wee bee now ouerwhelmed with darkenesse, and
become thralles of our owne nature: therefore the diuell is named the
Prince of the world. Wherfore let vs marke well that Saint Paule
hauing so aduaunced the power of the diuell, sheweth vs from whence
all of it proceedeth, and what is the welspring of it, too the intent
wee should not thinke that the diuell hath the reynes of the brydle looce
on his necke, so as hee should bee able too doo what he listeth, and
God vnable too let him. Too the intent then that wee should not imagin
that Gods souerein dominion is abated by any power of the diuelles:
Saint Paule sayth, that their power proceedeth of this, that
this world is in darkenesse. Trew it is that the Sunne shyneth vppon
vs, and the Moone also: but yit for all that, wee ceasse not too bee
plunged in the dungeon of death, and too bee blynd wretches, bycause
wee bee banished from the lyght of lyfe which is in God. Inasmuch
then as wee bee destitute of the knowledge of him that made and fashyoned
all things, and haue our wittes intangled in all naugh
                     •
                  inesse, and
our reason is vtterly peruerted: therefore dooth Satan reigne ouer vs.
And so the question is dissolued which myght haue bin demaunded,



namely how the diuelles are named the princes of the aire, and haue
such scope in this world which God hath created. That commeth
not of the originall order of nature, (as I haue declared alredye) but
of the corruption that is happened through the fall of man: Howsoeuer
the cace stand, the diuels haue such power ouer vs, as wee could not tel
how to withstand them, vnlesse God were both our sheeld and our wal,
and serued our turne at al assayes, yea and fought for vs at such tyme
as wee can doo nothing at all. I say, wee must mark well that, and
also beate downe the foolishe presumption which is so rooted in
our harts, as it is ryght hard for vs too weede it out. For wee see how
men doo alwayes vaunt themselues, and woulde make themselues
as Idols. But how speaks the scripture of them? It calleth them the
diuells slaues. So long then as wee haue not Iesus Christ for our
king, and his seate is vnset vp among vs by reason of Adams fall: the
diuell must needes bee our Prince, and haue all authoritie ouer vs,
and wee bee subiect vntoo him. Now let men make as greate brauerie
as they list, and chalendge this and that too themselues: and yit
notwithstanding, the thing that the holie Ghost hath spoken, must
continew soothfast. For vnrepealable is the definitiue sentence that
is giuen heere, that is too wit, that the diuel is our prince, and wee his
subiects, hild downe vnder his thraldome, vntill wee bee set free by our
Lord Iesus Christ,Iohn. 8. c. 36. according too this saying in the eyght of Saint
Iohn, that it is he which maketh vs free, too the ende wee shoulde
depart out of the cursed tyrannie and bondage of Satan. Now seeing
wee bee as wretched folk ouerthrowen, and the diuell is ouer our
heads, and hath gotten the vpper hand of vs alredye, if wee bee not
reskewed after a woonderfull maner: there is good cause why wee
should stoope, (as I declared alredye this morning) and distrust the
strength that wee surmyze our selues too haue of our owne, for it is nothing
else than deceytfulnesse. Also there is wherwith too quicken vp
our carefulnesse, too make vs resort vntoo God, and too pray him that
he forsake vs not, ne suffer vs too bee giuen vp as a pray too our enemies.
And finally, too make euery man too streyne himself, knowing
that although wee our selues doo nothing: yit dooth God woork in
such wyse by vs, as he wil not haue vs too bee as blocks, but he will
haue vs exercyze our fayth, and too bee as men of warre, too serue him
in battell, so as the stoppes that wee incounter, restreyne vs not from
keeping on our course still, but that wee outstand all the ambushes and



assaults that are put too vs. Thus yee see in effect how wee must put
this text in vre.
               And he concludeth agein, that wee must hold our owne too resist
the wicked dayes, vntill wee bee fast settled after the performance
of all. Heere he putteth vs in mynd agein, that it is not ynough for
vs too haue fought 
                     •
                  toutly for a mooneth or for a yeere, but that wee
must hold out too the end, yea euen all our lyfe long. For God hath
set vs in this world too maynteyne the battell vntill wee bee come too
the rest of heauen. The earth then is not only as a pilgrimage too the
faythfull, but also as a Camp where wee must alwayes haue enemies
too trubble vs nyght and day without ceassing. That is the cause
why Saint Paule sayeth expresly, that wee must resist till wee haue
finished and performed all things. And by the euill dayes, he meaneth
all our lyfe, but specially (the tymes) when our lord suffereth vs too be
pinched more than ordinarie. For although God trye vs too the end:
yit doth he forbeare vs now and then. For if he had not pitie of our
weaknesse, what would become of vs? It is trew that wee must no
                     •
                  
take truce with Satan: but yit dooth God sometymes giue vs respits,
so as we bee not greeued with extremitie. The euill dayes therfore
are, when there bee greate and in maner extreme temptations and
tryalls, howbeeit that all our whole lyfe is comprehended vnder the
same words. It is true that that impeacheth not our continuall happinesse,
but that God taketh vs still for his people and heritage: but yit
shall there alwayes bee that euilnesse wherof Saint Paule speaketh
heere. Then let vs not make our account of an earthly paradyse heere
beneath, or too reape heere the frute of our victorie, or too liue in rest:
but rather let vs assure our selues, that miseries are prepared for vs
without ceassing or number. Wherfore let vs bee armed too abyde
them, and too ouercome them. And it is no pleading ageinst Gods
will in this behalf. It is verye trewe that he could handle vs much
gentlyer, and that hee could so set vs alone by our selues, as our enemies
should not come at vs, nor wee suffer any vexation: but it lyketh
him not too doo so. Therfore wee must bow downe our necks, and euery
of vs buckle himself too the battell that God calleth vs vntoo.
For (as sayeth Saint Peter) it is good reason that our fayth which is
much preciouser than gold and siluer,1. Pet. 
                        •
                     . b. 7. should bee tryed. Seeing that a
corruptible mettall is fyned by fyre: should our fayth which is much
more excellent, bee kept from comming too his purenesse and perfection?



Therfore let vs think wel vpon that which is sayd here, namely
that wee must finish things (or go through with them.) And that is to
the end that no man should cocker himself, when he hath hild his owne
for a whyle, and taken greate peyne in imploying him self too Gods
seruis, but that he should walk on still to the end, & put the thing in vre
which S. Paul sheweth vs in another place,Phil. 3. c. 13. euen by his own example.
For although he had doone so notable things, as a man myght say,
that God should haue hild him quite, & giuen him some rest for his oftē
fyghting both by sea and by land dyuers wayes: yit notwithstanding
he sayeth, he forgetteth all that is past, and streyneth, and inforceth
him self still foreward, till he may atteyne too the fellowship of the resurrection
of our Lord Iesus Christ. For what causeth a number too
take so greate libertie, but that they think themselues too haue doone
ynough, and may giue others leaue too take their turne? why not, say
they? It is now a twentie or thirtie yeeres that I haue taken extreme
peynes without ceassing, and the world hath seene my faythfulnesse,
zeale, and care which I haue had too serue God, and my diligence in
dooyng the things that my charge requyred. And theruppon they
conclude, that now therefore they may well take rest. Wee must not
so indent with God. But whatsoeuer wee haue done, wee must forget
that which is behynd, (sayeth Saint Paule) and looke foreward to the
thing that is yit too come, that is too wit, that wee bee not yit come to
the glory of our Lord Iesus Christ, but that there are many infirmities
in vs styll, and our fayth is not yit so throughly well fyned, but
that it had neede too be brought ageien too the furnace and the fyre.
And therfore let vs hold out tyll wee haue finished all things. And what
is ment by this All? that hauing lyued in the obedience of our God,
wee dye lykewyse when it pleaseth him, and according too his wyll.
For it is not ynough for vs too lyue in awe of him: but wee must also
euen in our death, yeeld record that wee bee wholly his, and wee must
not couet too lyue heere vntyll wee bee wery of our lyfe, but wee must
alwayes haue one foote lifted vp too depart when it pleaseth God. So
then, all is then finished, when wee haue lingered in this world as long
as pleaseth God, and euery man indeuered too lyue according too
his calling, and bin pacient too the end. Finally, bee it that wee
lyu
                     •
                  , or bee it that wee dye, and let vs alwayes bee trewe sacrifyzes to
offer our selues vntoo God, and let vs seeke nothing but to yeeld vp our
soules and our bodyes intoo Gods hand. Therefore let vs stand fast



sayeth S. Paul: that is too say, that we may be able to shew our selues
before our God.
               Hereuppon he sheweth with what maner of Armour wee must bee
fenced and furnished: that is too wit, vvith Fayth, vvith Ryghtuousnesse,
vvith Truth, vvith Gods vvoord, and vvith the Gospell.
Now wee must not bee curious in seeking heere why Saint Paule
giueth the tytle of Helmet too one, the tytle of Brestplate too another,
and the tytle of Sheeld too another. For in the first Epistle too the
Thessalonians he toucheth the same doctrine briefely,1. Thess. 5. b. 8. howbeeit, without
following the similitude throughout, saying, that wee must bee armed
with the helmet of fayth and charitie. But he speaketh otherwise
in this place. If any man would say, there is some contradiction, the
doubt would soone bee dissolued, namely that Saint Paules intent
heere, was not too decyfer particularly all the peeces of a Christen
mans armour, but too shewe briefely that if wee receyue the meanes
that God offereth vs, and bee diligent too serue him, wee shall bee furnished
of all peeces, and wee neede not feare but wee shall haue wherwith
too withstand all our enemies, yea and too vanquish them. That
then was Saint Paules meaning.
               Now he setteth downe heere first of all, that wee must bee girt
vvith the Svvoord girdle of truth, and put on the headpeece of
Ryghtuousnesse. By those twoo woordes he meaneth soundnesse
and holynesse of lyfe. Therefore whensoeuer wee heare this woorde
Truth, let vs vnderstand, that Saint Paule condemneth all hypocrisie,
and will haue vs learne too giue our selues too the seruing of God
with a free hart, not with eye seruice, nor, as to the syght of the world,
but with a pure & right meaning mind. And to know why this Soothfastnes,
or vprightnes, & this soundnesse is put for a brestplate: it is not
now needefull too trubble our selues much, as I sayde afore. For the
poynt that wee must beare in mynd, is, how Saint Paul shemeth vs,
that if wee take the armour which God giueth vs, wee shall bee sure
without fayle too haue victorie ageinst all our enemyes. Ryghtuousnesse
is matched with it: which is a trew rule whereby too walke in
the feare of God, and too lyue with our neyghbours without dooyng
any harme, without fraud, without malice, and without extortion, and
rather too indeuer too doo one another good, according too the end too
which our Lord hath knit vs toogither, which is, that wee should so
communicate with our neyghbours, as no man bee wedded too hys



owne profit, but all of vs seeke the common welfare. And no maruell
now though the Diuell ouercome vs easly, and steale vppon vs al kynd
of wayes v
                     •
                  wares, both Euening and Morning and euery minute.
For where is this soundnesse that Saint Paule requyreth heere first
of all? Nay rather euery of vs flattereth himselfe, and wee thinke wee
haue doone much when wee haue vsed a fewe fayre countenances, and
not bin vtter rebels ageinst God, so as the world cannot vpbrayd vs
that wee haue bin despyzers of his maiestie. Then if wee play not the
starke bedlems, but pretend some fayre showe, & make some gay countenance
of religion: too our owne seeming wee haue discharged our
dewtie very well, when notwithstanding the diuell in the meane while
hath turned vs quyte away from the soundnesse and substancialnesse,
whereof Saint Paule speaketh heere. In lyke cace is it with Ryghtuousnesse.
For wee would fayne content God with a little. In deede
wee will confesse well ynough with the mouth, that it is reason that
God should bee serued and honoured, and that wee should lyue quietly
toogither, and indeuer too doo one another good. Wee will condemne
Robberie, Extortion, Whoredome, Deceyt, and wrong Dealing: but
yit when all is doone, wee would haue God too accept in good woorth,
the little that he fyndeth in vs, and too hold him contented with it. But
by that meane, behold, the diuell fyndeth vs still vnprouyded. Forasmuch
then as wee open him such a gap, wee must not maruell that he
getteth the better hand of vs. And therefore it were much better for
vs too go through with our race, and too sticke too our tackeling that
wee stand fast. For a man shall see dyuerse that haue a good zeale, as
farre as can bee iudged: and yit it shall bee but a blast, it will not continue.
And why? Bycause wee bee not fenced ageinst Satan. And
for proofe hereof, if wee followe the thing that is shewed vs heere: it is
certeyne that the promis wyll neuer deceyue vs. For although Saint
Paule exhort the faythfull too stand fast, and too hold out too the ende:
yit is there a certein warrantyze included therin, that God wyll alwayes
succour them at their neede, and that they shall not fynd themselues
disappoynted, so they fyght styll vnder his banner, calling continually
vppon his power, and vsing the meanes that are offered them
by his word. Therfore if there bee such cowardlynesse in vs as too be
so afrayd of the diuell, that he makes vs too tumble downe, and to start
asyde, and too stray quyte out of the good way: wee must impute all
too our owne rechlesnesse, bycause wee haue not put on the armour that



God giueth vs, but haue hanged them vp vppon a pin.
               Afterward heere followeth, that vvee should bee shod vvith preparation
too the Gospel of peace. No dout but Saint Paule had
an eye to the auncient fashion of men of warre. For they wore no
shooes at home, but only when they went a warfare: and that was
bothe too defend them from the cold, and too saue their feete when they
entred intoo battell with the enemie. It is sayd, that the Gospell serueth
vs for it. Howbeit there are twoo other woords too bee marked
also, in that he addeth, Preparation, and Peace. Notwithstanding,
that wee may lay foorth things in their order, let vs note that Saint
Paule allotteth too the Gospell this power and propertie of shooing of
vs, bycause that when wee bee trayned in the doctrine of the Gospell
as wee ought too bee, then wee may walk (safely) through the
world. For wee see how the vnbeleeuers are plundged euer head and
eares in it. Those whom God hath not prepared too walk and too atteyne
too the kingdome of heauen, are so snarled in this world, that
they bee altoogither vnprofitable, as though they had their legges
broken, and they sink themselues dayly deeper and deeper in it. Therfore
there is but one only way too make vs wade through this world,
and too atteyne too the kingdome of heauen: which is, too haue such
instruction as is in the Gospell, namely that God hauing adopted vs
too bee his children, will not haue vs too dwell heere beneathe for euer,
but that wee should come vntoo him, yea euen with all haste and
speede, and agein, that we intermeddle not our selues with the vncleannesse
of the vnbeleeuers, but separate our selues from them. Thus
much concerning the first poynt.
               There is also the woord Preparation, wherby Saint Paule dooeth
vs too vnderstand, that if wee haue the skill too aduauntage our selues
by the Gospell, wee shal bee rid of all thinges that let vs, and hinder
vs from comming vntoo God. What is it then that wee fynd there?
It is, that wheras erst wee were as it wee falen asleepe, or rather doted
in our pleasures and vanities: our Lord dispozeth vs too come vntoo
him. Wee haue seene already that all this world is in darknesse,
and that as long as wee abyde in it, wee bee as it were asleepe, so as
wee see no way before vs, and doo but reele and stumble, or rather lye
along in it as dead men,Esay. 59. b. 10. (as it is sayd in Esay): and if wee bee not
reskewed by our our Lord Iesus Christ, we must lye snorting in it still,
and wel
                     •
                  er euer in that darknesse. Wherfore let vs learne too put our



selues in such redinesse, as our loynes may bee girded vp (as sayeth
our Lord Iesus Christ,Luke. 12. 
                        •
                     . 35.) and our lampes bee burning in our hands,
that wee may see the way by the lyght that is giuen vs in our Lord Iesus
Christ, who not without cause is named the lyght of the world.
Agein,Iohn. 8. b. 12. let vs withdrawe our selues from this spirituall drunkennes,
which turneth the vnbeleeuers away from the kingdome of heauen,
and holdeth them downe heere beneath, vntill they bee come vntoo finall
destruction. Therfore let vs mark wel that wee cannot profit well
by the Gospell, vntill wee bee put in redinesse, that is too say, vntill
(as neede is) we be weeded out from all these things here belowe, and
our Lord haue so dispozed vs too him self, as our only trauell may bee
too come alwayes forewarder and neerer vntoo him, vntill wee bee
gone out of this world, and bee also quyte rid and set looce from all the
bonds of Satan, and from all the meanes that he hath too hinder vs.
If wee knowe this once, wee shall haue profited well for one day.
               But Saint Paule addeth one other tytle too the Gospell, which
serueth too make vs the more in loue with it, saying, that it is the Gospell
of peace. And therby he giueth vs corage to fyght, as if he should
say, my freends, it is trew that your enemies are myghtie, and will
giue you hard skirmishes, insomuch that yee should not bee able too
withstand them, but yee should bee ouerthrowen a hundred thousand
tymes in an houre, if God ayded you not. Neuerthelesse, if yee refuze
not the succour that God giueth you, but rather make it effectuall
by inforcing your selues to withstand all euill: yee shall haue peace in
the middes of warre. And why? For the Gospell bringeth alwayes
that benefyte with it. Now it is much when wee can fyght without
being afrayd. For wee see in what taking they bee from tyme to time,
which are out of quiet: there is nother counsell nor aduyce in them,
they bee quyte out of hart, and too bee short, the trubble dooth alwayes
dismay them. But yit is it trew, that we must haue a care with vs, as
hath bin sayd afore. For if wee bee rechelesse, we shalbee ouerraught
by and by. Howbeeit, this Care is no let or impediment, but that we
may enter intoo the battell freely with a stedie and well settled mynd,
forasmuch as God is on our syde, and will vtter his myghtie power
(in our defence.) This is the thing that ought too make vs quiet, so
as no such feare attache vs, as may make vs too turne head, or disfurnish
vs of aduyce, but that the more wee bee pinched, the more we may
flee vntoo God, praying him too succour vs, and too prouyde for all



our needs, which he knoweth much better than wee our selues doo.
Now then wee see what Saint Paules meaning is, when he wil haue
vs too bee shod with the Gospell. It is not too holde vs in this world,
but rather that wee should bee in a redinesse too trauell freely towards
the kingdome of heauen: and moreouer haue a quiet mynd too serue
God, trusting assuredly that notwithstāding all the trubbles which we
haue too indure, yit wee shal not perish. For he assureth vs not only
too succour vs in some one assault, but too continew with vs vntoo the
end, euen till he haue deliuered vs from al the greefs and trubbles
which wee susteyne at this day.
               There is further, that vvee must aboue all things take the Sheeld
or Buckler of fayth, and the spirituall Svvoord vvhich is Gods
vvoord. As touching this Sheeld, he setteth downe, that by meanes
thereof wee may beate backe the burning or fyrie dartes which the enemye
whoorleth at vs. It should seeme that Saint Paule vseth here
a needlesse speech, in putting Gods woord and fayth asunder, and that
he should not set downe twoo things which are but one. For fayth is
nothing of it selfe furtherfoorth than it is grounded vpon Gods woord:
and Gods woord also aduauntageth vs not, except wee receyue it by
fayth. But his distinguishing of these twoo things, which notwithstanding
go ioyntly toogither, was for the easyer declaring of them.
And he setteth fayth for the buckler, too the end (sayeth he) that wee
should therewith ward all the dartes of our enemye. Yit agein he
sheweth vs, that of our owne power wee bee not able too warde the
blowes that Satan can giue vs, but that they would be deadly. For he
thinkes it not ynough too say (simply,) too ward the blowes or assaultes:
but he sayth, the dartes. Now men see that one shall sooner

                     •
                  ee hit vnwares with dartes, than with speares or swoordes: lyke as
now adayes a man shall sooner bee hit with a Hargabusse, or with a
dubble Canon, than with a swoord that is swindged before ones face,
and which he may more easly shun. Saint Paule therefore setteth
downe the diuelles dartes, lyke as he had erst set downe his wyles.
Now then let vs marke, that Satan not onely vseth force, but also
myght wound vs too death by suttle meanes, if wee were not fenced
by fayth. For (as is sayd elsewhere) it behoueth vs too knowe his
whyles:2. Cor. 2
                        •
                      c. 11. and without wee doo so, wee can neuer withstand him. He
is the father of lying, and besydes that, hath such store of wyles, as
none can haue more, too beguyle vs and too intrappe vs. Therefore



let vs receyue these warnings, that wee may bee the more waking
too apply the promises too our behoof which are giuen vs in Gods
woord. And he setteth downe Fyrie Dartes, too shewe that his
woundes should be deadly (As I sayd afore) if God did not set his power
afore vs, and defend vs and preserue vs therby. Now wee see what
the force of fayth is.
               Now looke how much is attributed too fayth, so much is taken away
from men. For fayth borroweth all things of Gods mere grace
and liberalitie. Therfore let vs marke that in this text Saint Paule
ment too humble vs, and too shewe vs that God must bee fayne too
prouyde vs of all things belonging and requysyte too our victorye.
And therefore whosoeuer make themselues sheeldes of any of all the
(other bulwarkes that can be deuyzed, too repulse Satan withall:
they shall haue but a spyders web (as they say) and Satan will but
sport him at their presumption, insomuch that when they weene they
haue all the mountaynes of the world too fortifye them, it shall profit
them nothing at all at their neede. Wherfore let vs learne too make
fayth our bucklar: that is too say, when wee mynd too enter intoo the
battell, and too hold out in it: let vs consider, that God is our father,
bycause he hath elected and chozen vs for his children, of his owne infinite
goodnesse. Seeing he hath assured vs that he will alwayes be
on our syde, and that he is greater than all the world, and that he hath
put vs in good and safe keeping by ordeyning our Lord Iesus Christ
too bee our Shepherd: let vs gather all those promises toogither, and
make a sheeld of them too set before vs whensoeuer wee bee assayled,
and let vs defye the diuell, bycause wee bee in the protection of our
God, who is of inuincible power, and bycause our Lord Iesus Christ
hath taken vppon him the charge of our saluation,Iohn. 17. c. 1
                        •
                     . and promised too
bee a faythfull keeper of our soules too the end. When wee bee once
at that poynt, then shall wee beat backe the dartes of the diuell. For
on the one syde he wyll labour too make vs distrust Gods grace: and
on the other syde he will make vs beleeue that our Lord Iesus Christ
is farre of from vs: yea and he will tempt vs too murmur and grudge
ageinst him, or too make vs cast foorth tryflyng and vnprofitable
questions, or else blasphemyes, and such other things: and all these
are dartes. Agein, when wee bee tickled with any wicked lust or
longing in our hartes, it is the next way for vs too bee taken tardye.
Trew it is that at the first blush these allurementes will seeme nother



bitter, nor irkesome, nor hard, nor any thing else: but yit for al that,
they bee deadly dartes: and yit notwithstanding, fayth beateth them
all backe. As how? If wee bee tempted too coue
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  usnesse, bycause
wee bee afrayd least the earth should fayle vs: God hath taken
vppon him the charge too nurrish and susteyne vs. And so, let vs rest
vppon him, and aske our dayly bread at his hand. If the diuell labour
too win vs too whoredome: wee knowe that Iesus Christ hath
incorporated vs intoo himselfe, and made vs his owne members too
bee all one with him: and shall wee go spoyle our selues in dung and
filthinesse? What a dealing were that? He hath set vs free and clenzed
vs by his blud: and shall wee go wallowe agein in our vncleannesse?
Are wee prouoked too gluttony? and, why not? Hath
not God created vittelles too our vse? (Yis:) but shall wee defyle
and ouerthrowe the order that God hath set, which is, that wee should
bee susteyned by them, thereby too bee directed too the heauenly lyfe?
And shall wee turne the things too our hinderance, which 
                     •
                  ught too
bee our help? Agein, are wee tempted with ambition, too gloryfye
our selues? Yea: but what example hath our Lord Iesus Christ set
before vs?Iames. 4▪ b. 6.& 1. Pet. 5. b. 5. Moreouer if wee couet too be great in this world: wee shal
bee enemyes too God, for he resisteth the proud, so as their pryde and
presumption must needes bee pulled downe. Thus yee see how wee
may euery way beate backe the dartes of Satan.
               And agein, if any man appoze thee, (saying,) how canst thou tell
whether thou shalt bee euer the better or no for all thy trauell? Where
is the thing that the Gospell promiseth? Fayth must woorke in this
cace, for wee see not the reward that is promysed: but rather wee see
store of trubbles, incounters, and sorrowes. Too bee short, wee seeme
too bee the miserablest creatures in the world. And what shall wee
doo then? Wee should needes quayle euery minute of an houre, if God
reached vs not his hand. And how take wee holde of his hand? that
is too say,H
                        •
                     br. 11. a. 3. how doo wee aduauntage our selues by his power? Fayth
must bee fayne too woorke in this behalfe: that is too say, wee must
looke vp too the things that are not seene, as the Apostle sayeth in the
Epistle too the Hebrewes. After that maner shall wee beate backe
Satans dartes.
               Now finally he addeth the woord, which (as I sayd afore) ought not
too bee separated from fayth. But I haue told you already, that S.
Paule ment too adde that saying, for a further declaration of the matter.



As if he had sayde, My freendes, wheras I tolde you that you
myght withstand your enemyes, and beate backe all their dartes by,

                     •
                  he meanes of fayth: it is bycause Gods woord cannot fayle you. Forasmuch
then as yee haue the promyses of saluation, and God speaketh
too you, so as you knowe that he hath you in his keeping, and that you
cannot bee confounded, if you trust in him: therfore did I set fayth before
you as a bucklar. Howbeeit, if you haue fayth, yee haue mo bucklars
than one. For Gods woord is the trew spirituall swoord, wherby
wee may not onely beate backe our enemye, but also discomfit him,
and beate him downe vnder our feete. What remayneth now, but to
                     •
                  
learne too profit our selues better by Gods woord, than we haue doone
hithertoo? Seeyng then that our Lord Iesus Christ graunteth vs
this inestimable grace and benefyte of teaching vs in his schoole: let
vs consider therwithall too what end he dooeth it: that is too wit, too
arme vs ageinst Satan, bycause wee cannot lyue in his obedience, and
keepe the way that he sheweth vs, but by fyghting: and he also dooth
giue vs armour. So then, let vs assure our selues that wee haue a
good swoord, when wee can skill too apply Gods woord too our vse:
and moreouer, that fayth (which proceedeth thereof) will bee a good
sheeld for vs.
               Also wee shall haue the Helmet of the hope of saluation: and too
bee short, wee shall bee throughly fenced and furnished on all sydes.
For thereof commeth the soundnesse of conscience and holynesse of life,
which he hath spoken of. Finally wee shall want nothing, if wee can
skill too vse well the meanes that God setteth foorth for our welfare.
So then, albeeit that the state of the faythfull seeme too bee as irksome
as may bee, bycause God exercyzeth them ageinst all the Diuels in
hell, and that not for one day onely, but for all the tyme of their lyfe:
yit must wee thinke it ryght sweete and amiable, seeyng God prouydeth
for all our needes, at leastwise so wee awake, and consider the
daungers wherein wee bee, sauyng that wee resist them. Let vs consider
(I say,) on the one syde Satans violence and force: and on the other
syde his craftes and suttleties. And therwithall let vs call vppon
our God, (as Saint Paule will shewe vs agein hereafter,) and also
consider the commoditie that Gods woord bringeth vs. And hereby
wee see how the wretched Papistes haue stripped themselues starke
naked out of all the armour that should serue them for their saluation.
For what is the woord of God among them? A noze of waxe. They



haue not bin ashamed too belke out that blasphemie, both in all theyr
bookes and also in all their Sermons: namely, that there is no certeintie
in Gods woorde. Yea, but wee did wrong too call it the
spirituall swoord, if it armed vs not ageinst all the assaultes of Satan.
Therefore wee could not repulse the temptations wherwith wee
bee prouoked too euyll, vnlesse Gods woord serued vs thertoo. And
if wee found it not so by experience, surely Saint Paule would neuer
haue giuen it that name. Now then, let vs indeuer too profit more and
more by it, and let vs bee good schollers, and giue good eare too it
whyle God hath his mouth open too teache vs: and wee shall fynde
that Saint Paule hath not in vayne promysed vs heere, that wee shall
euer get the vpper hand, euen tyll wee bee come too the heauenly
Kingdome, where wee shall fully inioy the fruite of our victorie.
               Now let vs fall downe before the Maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him too make vs feele them
better, and that in the meane whyle wee may alwayes resort vnto him,
and not bee out of hart, although wee bee tootoo vnwoorthie too offer
our selues before his maiestie, nor quayle bycause of our vyces and
imperfections: but that seeyng it hath pleased him too bee on our side,
he make the remedies too serue at our neede which he hath giuen vs,
as wee desyre them at his hand: and that wee may indeuer too profit
so in his woord, as it may guyde vs foorth too the end, so as wee may
not quayle in any incounter, but that the Diuell may bee confounded,
and our Lord Iesus Christ exalted, bycause it is vnder him and by his
power that wee fyght, and it is he also of whom our victory proceedeth.
That it may please him too graunt this grace, not onely too vs,
but also too all people. &c.
            
            
               The .xlvii. Sermon, which is the fifth
vppon the sixth Chapter.
               
                  
                     18. Praying vvith all prayer and supplication, at all tymes in the
spirit, and vvatching theruntoo vvith all instance and supplication
for all the Saintes:
                     
                        19. And for mee, that in opening my mouth, vtterance may bee
gyuen mee vvith boldnesse, too vtter the secret of the Gospell.
                  
               
               
                  MAny supposing themselues too haue profited
well in fayth, are yit notwithstanding
ignorant what belongs too prayer. They
thinke it ynough if they can say, God help
mee, when they see any daunger at hand,
and yit in the meane whyle flee not too
him for refuge. But such folke wote not
too what purpose the promises serue that
are made vntoo vs. For God sayeth not
singly, that he will haue a care of vs, and
that he will help vs in all our needes: but also allureth vs too him, and
therewithall incorageth vs too praying. Then cannot the one bee separated
from the other, that is too wit, that wee should rest vppon
the hope of Gods promises, and haue them throughly rooted in our
hartes: and also bee stirred vp too resort vnto our God, so as our fayth
exercyze vs in prayer and supplication. Thus see wee that they bee
vnseparable things. And looke how much wee bee forewarder in
fayth, so much with the earnester zele should we call vpon our God, and
acknowledge and confesse that our saluation lyeth in his hand, and
that wee looke for all good things from him. And forasmuch as wee
bee so 
                     •
                  lothfull in that behalfe: he setteth downe twoo woordes, Prayer
and supplication, too expresse the better that wee must not go too
it coldly, nor slyghtly, and as it were for courtesie sake: but that wee
must bee touched too the quicke, too continue at it (as he will adde
anon after) and too hold on ryghtly without ceassing at anye tyme.
Trew it is that God telleth vs by his Prophet Esay, that he will
heare vs before wee cry,
                     
                        •
                     say. 65. d. 23. and his hand shalbee redye too succour vs before
wee haue opened our mouth. Howbeeit, that is not too make vs
slothfull, that wee should lye gaping at him with open throte (as they
say:) but too shewe that he will not suffer vs too linger, when wee
shall haue called vppon him, as though he were carelesse too help vs:
and that for proof thereof, he preuenteth vs, as wee fynd by experience.
Yit notwithstanding, he will haue vs too yeeld a trew proof of
our f
                     •
                  yth by praying vntoo him. For the very way for vs too shewe



truly that his promises haue taken effect in vs, and that wee trust too
them,Psal. 50. c. 15. is, that as soone as wee bee touched with any greef or affliction,
wee go streyt vntoo him,Psal. 62. b. 9. and vnburthen our hartes there, as is sayd
in another place. Now wee see how wee must make our aduauntage
of Gods woord, whereby wee bee certyfied that he wil neuer fayle vs:
that is too wit, by seeking the things in him which he protesteth that
wee shall fynd there. And so, prayers are as it were keyes whereby
too come too the treasures that God reserueth for vs, and which he
will not keepe from vs. Therefore wee must open the way too them
by praying.
               And yit Saint Paule thinketh it not ynough too say, that our fayth
must bee matched with prayers and supplications too our God: but
he sayeth also, Yea all prayer. As if he should say, that in all matters,
in al things both great and smal, in al our dooings, whatsoeuer
they bee: that must bee our shooteanker. For it myght happen that
wee would call vppon God, onely when wee thought on him, or else
when we had some matter of importance in hand. But Saint Paule
(as I sayd) will haue vs too doo God that homage euery where and
at all tymes, protesting that wee cannot haue any good but at his
hand, and of his mere free gift. So much importeth the woorde All.
And in good sooth wee see how our Lord taketh charge of our whole
lyfe, with condicion that wee should seeke too him euen for the bacest
things, and for such as wee durst not requyre of our freend that were
our equall and companion. Euen those things will he haue vs to ask
of him. For vnder this saying, that he giueth vs our dayly bread, it
is certeyne that he comprehendeth all that belongeth too our lyfe. Alas,
what a number of small things haue wee neede of, which wee
would bee ashamed too bee acknowen of, euen too our inferiours?
And God abaceth himselfe so farre, that he voutsafeth too haue a care
of our persons, which are but wretched and rotten carions, and yit
neuerthelesse he will not haue vs too stick too aske him the thinges
that are expedient and needefull for vs. Sith it is so, let vs remember
well this saying of Saint Paules, which willeth vs too
pray too our God for al things that wee deede, assuring our selues that
he wil yeeld so farre vntoo vs, as nothing shal (as yee would say) scape
his handes.
               And he sayeth expresly, that vvee must pray at all tymes, and
in Spirit. Whereas he sayth, in Spirit: it is surely too exclude all



Hipocrisye: for we knowe that the most part of the world babble ynough
when they should come vntoo God: howbeeit, it is but their
lippes or the tippes of their tungs that doo their dewtie. But that is
not the manner that God will bee prayd vntoo and called vppon: he
lyketh not of such supplications, but rather abhorreth them, bycause
that when wee pray so fondly vntoo him, wee make a false shrowding
sheete of him, and that is a kynd of trecherie. For if wee thinke too
be heard of God for our babling, when in the meane whyle our hart
is dead, and our prayers proceede not of a ryght dispozed and earnest
mynd, wee make God as an Idoll, or as a little babe, wherein wee doo
too great wrong to his maiestie, and to be short, we do but transfigure
him after our owne fancie. Therfore it behoueth our prayers, not only
to be made with our mouth, but also too come from the bottom of our
hart.
               And now forasmuch as we haue not that of our owne power: the holy
Ghost must be fayne to worke therin. And therfore by the word Spirit
may be vnderstood, that we should beseech God to gouern vs in such
wyse, as he touch vs throughly, to the end we may pray to him as we
ought too doo, and he also accept our prayers, acknowleding in them
the marks of his holie spirit. For wee must alwayes remember how
it is sayd in the Epistle too the Romans,Rom. 8. c. 26. that wee know not what too
pray: for as in respect of our selues, it is a thing that surmounteth all
our vnderstanding, and the ablest of vs all fayleth in that behalfe, notwithstanding
that there are a number which beare themselues on hand
that they knowe perfectly howe and what too pray vntoo God. Howbeeit
all such opinion dooth but shet vs out of the gate, vnlesse that vppon
the knowing of our defaults and infirmities, wee resort ryghtfoorth
too the remedie,Rom. 8. 
                        •
                     . 26. according too this saying of Saint Paules,
that the spirit of God driueth vs to vnutterable gronings which cannot
bee expressed, without the which wee could not vtter so much as this
woord Father:
                  Gala. 4. a. 6. according also as he sayeth too the Galathians, that
when the spirit cryeth in vs, wee can open our mouthes too call freely
vppon God,Rom. 8. c. 15. as is reherced in another place. Now then, it is certein
that wee shall neuer bee throughly dispozed too pray vntoo God, except
he gouerne vs by his holie spirit.
               Moreouer Saint Paules intent (as I haue declared alredie) is too
exclude all counterfetting, and that wee should not hope too iustify
our cace before God by ceremonies, or by popeholines (as they terme



it) in making of long prayers and many circumstances, but suffer the
spirit too beare sway. Wherfore first of all let vs bee so touched, as
the spirit may bee our mayster and teacher, and indyte the things too
vs which wee haue too vtter in calling vppon our God: and secondly
let our prayers proceede from the bottom of our hart, & let vs put this
saying of the Psalme in vre,Psal. 145. d. 18. that wee must sue vnto our God in truth:
for it is sayd that he is not neere too any, but too such as haue that qualitie.
And not without cause is such exposition set downe: for (as I
haue declared alredie) wee bee so much inclyned too shifting, that (too
our seeming) God ought too yeeld too vs and too our nature: but it is
cleane contrarie. Now then forasmuch as God perceyueth that men
abuse his name after that fashyon, and make prayers after their owne
maner, that is too say, prayers that are wrapped in hipocrisie and vntruthe,
and haue no substancialnesse nor soundnesse in them: he sayeth
expresly, that we must not hope too bee heard at his hand, nor too obteyne
any thing of him, except our prayers bee ruled by a ryght meaning,
that is too say, vnlesse wee pray with a hartie affection. Thus
yee see what wee haue to remember vpon that saying of Saint Paule.
And that wheras he sayth, Stedfastly, and with holding out throughout
too the ende: it is too expresse the better, that it is neuer out of season
too call vppon God. And euen therefore is this added, bycause
wee would fayne exempt our selues from our God. Wherein a man
may well perceyue howe vnperfect our myndes are, and howe destitute
of wit and reason wee be. For all our welfare consisteth in hauing
accesse too our God, that wee seeke help at his hand, and too bee
short, in being neere vntoo him, so as wee bee sure that he regardeth
vs, and hath a care of our welfare. And besyds that, who is he that
would not fayne bee heard? Yit notwithstanding, when wee should
pray vntoo God, it seemeth that wee bee haled to it as it were by force,
and wee should bee rauished in loue with it, as I haue shewed alredy.
Now then, this vyce of rechlesnesse and coldnesse in that wee neuer
pray vnto God, but when we be compelled or constreyned, had neede to
be corrected. Saint Paule therefore telleth vs, that wee must not tarie
till vtter necessitie inforce vs, but we must vnderstand, that al times
are seasonable and conuenient too resort vntoo God. Iu deede after as
wee bee picked foreward, so must wee runne the swiftlyer, according
as it is certeyne that wee bee as it were spurted by the afflictions and
manifold trubbles that God sendeth vs. And lyke as if an Asse



wil not go, he must haue a good cudgell layd vppon his backe: euen so
God perceyuig that wee come not too him with a good will, is fayne
too drawe vs too him as it were by violence. But yit must euery man
cheere vp him self, though no vrgent necessitie compell him. Too bee
short, we must pray vntoo our God bothe in tyme of prosperitie, and in
tyme of aduersitie. That is the thing which is ment by these woords,
at all tymes.
               
               And theruppon S. Paule sayeth, that wee must bee watchfull in
it, euen with all instance, too pray for all the Saints. In saying
that wee must bee watchfull, hee toucheth a vyce whertoo wee bee
too much inclyned, yea and wholly giuen ouer: that is too say, that
wee bee sleepie when wee should pray vntoo God, and had neede too
bee waked. Bycause of our heauinesse and sluggishnesse, wee bee
commaunded too wake and to keepe as it were a continuall wacth, to
the end wee should not let occasions slip, but alwayes resort vntoo
God with prayer. Now there is not so perfect a man, which fyndeth
not this maladie by experience in him self: namely that when wee
should pray vnto God, a number of things crosse vs, that set vs wandering
abrode: insomuch as wee shall woonder, that in sted of holding
out earnestly, our mynd shalbee rouing here and there. Seeing then
that wee bee so fickle, and our wits so skittish, and is hard too hold vs

                     •
                  ast any whyle: it standeth vs on hand to be the more watchfull, to the
intent to bring our selues back agein intoo the good way, when we be
started out of it. And let vs not tarie till the diuell haue woone so much
at our handes, as to plucke vs quyte from our prayers and supplications,
and to breake of the continuall course of them, and of the stedfastnes
that ought too bee in them: but when wee pray, let vs be as it
were locked vp and fast tyed too it, that is too say, let all our wittes
bee full bent and settled vppon the thing that wee haue too doo. For
euen the heathen men, when they were about too make sacrifyze too
their Idolls, vsed this proueth among them: whyle thou woorshippest
God, doo nothing else, but bee thou so wholly occupyed and fastened
theruntoo, as thou think vpon no other thing. If God wrested such a
confession from them, what ought wee to doo when wee offer him the
cheef sacrifyze which he alloweth aboue all other, that is, when wee
confesse our selues beholden too him for all good things? Should wee
mingle our owne vanities with it, and make our prayer too bee but for
custome and fashyons sake? Now then this watchfulnesse wherof



Saint Paul speaketh, is verie requisyte, by reason of the fraylnesse of
our wits, and specially bycause wee bee so wandering as is horrible.
Seeing it is so with vs: when wee goo about too pray vntoo God, let
vs bend our whole mynds vnto it, and let not our wittes bee intangled
about other cares and affections, but let our comming vntoo it bee as
though wee had broken all other bondes. That is the cause why mention
is made of lifting vp of our selues in our prayers and supplications.
Trew it is that in offering our selues vnto God, wee must come
with all lowlinesse: but yit must wee lift vp our hartes in such wyse,
as wee may bee after a sort in the prese
                     •
                  ce of our God. That (say I)
is the thing that is imported by the sayd diligentnesse.
               And he sayeth further, with all instance: which serueth still too
shewe vs, that if wee intend too bee wel disposed too praying, wee
must not go too it lazily, yea and that if wee followe that which our
owne nature sheweth vs, wee shal bee farre of from comming at God.
Therefore must euery man inforce him. For seeyng Saint Paule
speaketh so, it is as much as if he sayd, My freendes, yee shall fynde
such a coldnesse in your selues, as yee shall neuer pray vntoo God, nother
shall yee euer bee willing too pray, except ye prouoke and inforce
your selues. For the Diuell will alwayes bleare your eyes, too the
end yee should not see what neede yee haue too pray vntoo God. And
if yee lye sleeping still, it will cause your God too forsake you, seeyng
you bee so thanklesse as too despyze his benefites, and too yeeld him
no honour for them, no nor too acknowledge that all your welfare proceedeth
of him. For lyke leaud lozels, wee defyle the benefytes which
God bestoweth vppon vs, vnlesse wee acknowledge that wee haue all
things at his hand, yea euen by crauing all thinges that wee want, of
him, and also by yeelding him thankes for the things that wee receyued
already. So then, let vs learne too match our watchfulnesse with
all instantnesse.
               And herein wee comprehend holding out or continuance: so as it
is not ynough for vs too pray vntoo God by startes and braydes (as
they say:) but wee must continue in it, and that twoo wayes. For first
when wee haue prayed too day both euening and morning, and euery
houre: wee must holde on still, and neuer swarue from that trade, so
long as wee lyue. For our fayth (as I sayd) must exercyze it self: and
the meane too exercyze it withall is this, There is yit one other maner
of perseuerance or holding out: which is, that when wee haue desyred



God too helpe vs in this or that, wee must repete the same request,
not twyce or thryce onely,Esay. 65. 
                        •
                     . 23. but as oft as wee haue neede, a hundred,
yea a thousand tymes. As for example, Although God haue told
vs that he will succour vs before wee open our mouth too him: yit doth
he not shewe it (alwayes) openly too the eye. Therefore wee must neuer
bee weery in wayting for Gods helpe. Also it is not good that
wee should bee heard after our owne lyking, bycause God knoweth
what is meete and expedient for vs. So then, he must gouerne vs according
too his owne will. But (as I sayd) if wee pray too him after
his fashion and after his maner: he protesteth that wee shall obteyne
all our requestes at his hand, euen before wee haue vttered them with
our mouth. Yit notwithstanding he will sometymes hold vs as it were
at the staues end, in so much as it shall seeme that he is asleepe when
wee call vppon him, and that he hath turned his backe vppon vs. For
this cause is perseuerance requisite, so that if wee bee pinched with
any distresse, and would fayne seeke ease of it at Gods hand: we must
not doo it once and away, but wee must returne too it (oftentymes,)
and bee (as yee would say) importunate,Luke. 18. a. 1. according too the similitude
which our Lord Iesus telleth vs of the widdowe, which had too doo
with a Iudge that was without any feare of God, or shame of the
world, and yit neuerthelesse shee obteyned hir sute euen by importunatenesse.
So must wee doo: that is too say, wee must bee importunate
vppon our God: not that he is slowe in succouring vs (as I sayd
afore:) but bycause he will trye the constancie of our fayth. For they
that pray vnto God and fall to stomacking, chafing, and impaciencie,
if he releeue them not out of hand: doo not pray vntoo him, but (as yee
would say) summon him too bee at commaundement of their lustes.
But it behoueth vs too restreyne all our passions and desyres too
Gods good will, so as when wee pray him too make speede, wee may
neuerthelesse bee pacient, and bee contented too tary his leazure, in
delaying too day or too morrowe, or as long as it pleaseth him. Yee
see then that wee must continue in prayer and supplication, so as wee
must pray presently for the necessities that pinch vs too day, and lykewyse
too morrow, for those that may come then: and so wee must pray
ordinarily euery day. And besydes this, if God list not too deliuer vs
so soone as wee fayne would: let vs not ceasse to renew our petitions
still, euen vntill wee perceiue that wee haue profited by our praying,
and that he haue shewed vs the effect of his promis.
               
                  
Now forasmuch as it is hard for vs too bee brought too pray well
vntoo God: Saint Paule heere setteth vs foorth the thing out of our
owne persons, which ought too perswade vs: that is too say, that
wee bee bound too pray vntoo God, not onely for our selues, that is
too say, euery man for himselfe: but also too haue a care of our neyghbours,
and to respect them also. It is trew that if wee considered our
owne miseries well, and the great number of sinnes that are in vs, and
the great neede which we haue to be succored at Gods hād: we should
haue cause ynough without going out of our selues, too imploy our
selues in prayer and supplication, yea though wee did nothing else al
our lyfe long but sygh and lament before God for our offences, and
pray him to reach vs his hand, too the end that Satan might not ouercome
vs. As I sayd, wee should haue matter ynough in our selues.
But now that wee must extend our prayers further, that is too wit, too
the whole Church of God, and vnderstand that he will not haue mee
too thinke alonly vppon my selfe, but also too bee myndfull of all his
chozen, inasmuch as he hath knit mee too them, so as I must indeuer
too comprehend them in my prayers as much as is possible for mee:
seeing (say I) that wee bee resolued herof: it must needs bee that we be
too blockish, if we be not touched yit more to the quicke, and set on fyre
with this carefulnesse that is spoken of here, and therwithal continue
in the same.
               Howbeeit Saint Paule speaketh heere expresly of the Saintes or
faythfull, but yit is that no impediment that wee should not pray generally
for all men. For the wretched vnbeleeuers and the ignorant
sort haue greate neede too bee sewed for vntoo God: for behold, they
bee in the hygh way too destruction. If wee sawe a beast at the poynt
to perish, we would haue pitie of it: and what shal we do when we see
a soule in perill, which is so precious before God as he hath shewed,
in that he hath raunsomed them with the blud of his owne sonne?
Then if wee see a poore soule go so too destruction, ought wee not too
bee moued with compassion and kyndnesse, too desyre God too remedye
it? So then Saint Paules meaning in this text, is not that wee
should let the wretched vnbeleeuers alone without care of them: but
that wee should pray generally for all men: howbeeit he sheweth vs
therewithall, that wee must haue a speciall care of those whom God
hath knit vntoo vs by a streyter bond. Lykewyse when he speaketh
of Almesedeedes,Gal
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . c. 1
                        •
                     . his intent is that they should bee doone too all men



without exception which haue neede: but yit he addeth, that wee must
specially succour them that are of the houshold of fayth. Euen so is it
with our prayers and supplications. For the spirituall brotherhood
which God hath set among vs, ought too touch vs the more, and too
make the Church of God too come before our eyes, and intoo our remembrance
as oft as wee pray. And these words, Our Father, ought
too teache vs too make our prayers common. For none of vs can say
My father, alone of himselfe, but wee call him Ours, too shewe that
wee ought not to haue such care of our selues, as to forget them that belong
vnto vs, and are linked to vs with so neere a knot, as I haue declared
already. That then is the cause why S. Paule sayeth expresly, that
wee must pray for the Saintes.
               Now were this well printed in our hartes (as I sayd afore) wee
should bee well waked too pray too our God without end or ceassing.
For let vs consider the state and plyght of the Church in these dayes.
Although our Lord giue vs some rest: yit are our poore brethren tormented
by tyrantes, and by the enemyes of the fayth. Some are fayne
too flee, some haue their goods taken from them, many bee thrust intoo
prizon, and other some are burnt at the stake. All these poore
soules are in vnquietnesse, and put too some new terrour euery minute
of an houre. Wee see that there is as tirrible manacing and
threatening as may bee. Wee see how the diuell dryueth all those
foreward with outrageous fury, which would abolish the doctrine of
the Gospell. Wee see what scatterings are made by the stumbling
blockes that Satan thrusteth in by his champions. Wee see how a
great sort seeke nothing else but too put the Gospell too all shame.
And in the meane whyle, the poore seruantes of God which imploy
themselues in his seruice, are trubbled and vexed by all meanes.
Then if we gather toogither all the miseries and aduersities wheretoo
the Church is subiect, and consider well the distresse of euery of our
brethren: must it not needes bee that wee are duller than brut beasts,
if wee bee not moued too pray vntoo God, yea euen with a ryght perseuerance
in the same? For though I bee at myne ease too day, there
are many thousands in great perplexitie: and I shewe wel that I cut
of my selfe (as much as I can) from the bodye of our Lorde Iesus
Christ, if I pitye not the members too whom I am linked. Not
without cause therefore dooth Saint Paule set all the Saintes heere
afore vs, when be intendeth too inflame vs the better too a ryght



dispozed mynde in praying, and too continewe throughout in the
same.
               And therupon he requyreth also that men should pray for him. Yee
shall pray for mee also, (sayeth he) that God giue mee boldnesse
in opening my mouth, so as I may vtter the secret of the Gospell
accordingly. When Saint Paule commendeth him self too the
prayers of his neyghbours, therby he sheweth well in what humilitie
wee ought too walk. For he did not counterfet in exhorting the Ephesians
too such praying. He protesteth before God and his Angels, that
he had neede of it. But now let vs compare our selues with Saint
Paule. What man is of such abilttie, that he can forbeare too bee succored
by the prayers of his neyghbours, when Saint Paule exempteth
not him self from it? Now then, let euery man in his praying vntoo
God, desyre too bee made parttaker of all the prayers that are
made throughout the Churche,Psal. 145. d. 18. both generally and particularly. In
deede this promis shall alwayes stand trew, that God wil bee neere at
hand too all such as call vppon him. And Ionas fayled not too bee
succored of God,Ionas. 2. a. 2. though he were in the whales belly. Now therfore,
when we bee forsaken of men, when we be as good as dead, and the
remembrance of vs is as good as buryed: yit wil not God ceasse to regard
vs, and too cast his eye vppon vs too succour vs, according too
this saying, that the eyes of God are alwayes vppon them that feare
him,Psal. 33. d. 18. and his eares open too such as repayre vnto him. Notwithstanding,
too the intent too humble vs the better,Psal. 34. c. 16. our Lord telleth vs, that
wee haue neede one of anothers help, and that there should bee an intercommoning
among vs. And besyds this, there is also another reason,
which is, that he will keepe our charitie occupyed. Wherfore,
let vs learne too shewe both by our almesdeeds, and by our counsell, and
by all other helpes, that none of vs is giuen too him self, nor too his, too
owne priuate profit: but that after as God hath linked vs toogither,
euery of vs coueteth too succour our members, and too communicate
toogither in our prayers & supplications. For our commending one of
vs of another after that maner vntoo God, is the cheef dewtie of charitie:
And therfore it caused Saint Paule too desyre the Ephesians
expresly too pray for him.
               Now if any man alledge that that was a signe of vnbeleef, for if
this promis suffyze vs not, that euery man shall obteyne his owne requests,
is it not a poynt of distrust? the answer thertoo is easy. For



wheras God sayeth, that he will haue pitie vppon all such as seeke it at
his hand: he meaneth not too disanull the thing that he commaundeth
vs in so many other texts: which is, that wee should bee myndfull one
of another. Furthermore let vs mark, that in following Gods woord
wee can neuer bee blamed of misbeleef. For how comes it too passe
that men fall to misbeleefe, but by passing their bounds, that they wil
needs adde too that which God hath vttered? As for example: Wee
see that in the popedome men haue forged so many patrones and aduocats,
as they wote not which too beetake themselues vntoo. And
whence procedeth that? Euen of that their heads bee ticklish: and agein,
that they distrusted the things that are conteyned in Gods word.
Wee haue this generall lesson,Psal. 50. c. 15. Call vppon me in the day of thy neede,
and I will heare thee. God then will haue vs too resort vntoo him,
and too looke only at him, assuring our selues that he will neuer refuze
vs, when we pray vnto him in his sonnes name. And our Lord Iesus
Christ commeth afore vs, and offereth himself too vs, saying, that hee
will beare woord too and fro for vs, and that as long as we hold vs in
that path, wee neede not feare that wee shall not fynd accesse vntoo his
father, or that he wil not receyue vs familiarly. So dooth the holie
scripture report. But what haue the papists doone? O, (say they)
wee haue neede of aduocats too make intercession for vs. It is trew:
but our Lord Iesus Christ whō God his father hath assigned vnto vs,
ought to suffyze vs, forasmuch as he only is appoynted to that office.
Contrariwyse the papists make Aduocats in paradyse at their owne
pleasure,Psal. 110. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . and in the meane whyle spoyle Iesu
                     •
                   Christ of the priestly
dignitie which is giuen him of God his father, yea euen with a solēne
othe. The papists are not contented with that, but haue made such
a patching to it, that their cace is become a horrible confuzion. As for
vs, if wee followe that which is taught vs by Gods woord, then shall
wee walk in fayth, and wee neede not feare any straying, or that wee
shall bee blamed of vnbeleef: for God wil alwayes guyde vs aryght.
That then is the answere to this question and doubt which myght bee
cast, whether it bee not a poynt of distrust too desyre other men too
pray for vs, seeing that euery man may be heard him self, bycause that
what things God hath ioyned toogither, men must not presume too
put them asunder. For wee must alwayes beare in mynd howe it is
sayd, that euery man must occupie himselfe in praying, and moreouer
drawe his neyghbours too bee matched with him: and so shall wee



neuer bee turned from the fayth.
               Now if any man obiect further, that our Lord Iesus Christ cannot
bee the onely aduocate and patrone, if wee make supplication one
for another: the answer theruntoo is easie. For it is sayd, that Iesus
Christ is the onely mediator, and that all men both great and small
must resort too him too obteyne our sutes.1. Iohn. 2. a. 1. For vnlesse our prayers bee
dedicated by his holinesse, surely they shall euer bee foule and infected.
When Esay was commaunded too beare the message that God had
appoynted,Esay. 6. b. 5. he sayd, Alas my God, I am a man of vncleane lippes,
and dwell among a people that is vncleane also. How shall I doo then
when I must call vppon my God, and speake familiarly too him as it
were mouth too mouth, seeing wee bee full of vncleannesse and infection?
Now then, all our prayers must be sanctifyed by our Lord Iesus
Christ, or else wee shall neuer fynd fauour at Gods hand. Also it is
most certeyne that Christ is the only aduocate and Intercessour, and
that all the auncient Patriarks were fayne too hold that rule, and lykewyse
the Prophets and Apostles in their tymes, and so must wee also
continew in the same. And yit for all that, wee bee not letted therby
too pray one for another, inasmuch as wee haue albut one cōmon head,
which is our Lord Iesus Christ, in whom all our prayers must bee
ioyned toogither, too the intent wee may all with one accord, and with
one wel tuned melody protest, that wee haue none other welfare, than
that it pleaseth God too haue care of vs, insomuch that that is our full
felicitie, and vppon that trust wee come ryght foorth vntoo him. The
meane then for vs too continew euermore in the ryght way, and too see
that our Lord Iesus Christ bee not defaced, is too take him for our only
aduocate, and not too turne asyde one way nor other after our
owne fond fancies, as is come to passe in the popedome. And wee see
that the papists haue not bin ashamed too alledge this text, too perswade
vs too pray too Saint Peter and Saint Paule, yea too Saints
of the Popes owne forging, or rather to the Idols whom the diuell
hath blowen intoo his eare. But heere wee haue too consider that
wee bee commaunded too praye mutually one for another, bycause
God hath also commaunded vs too seeke helpe and comforte at
our neyghbours handes. And our Lord willeth it so, and promiseth
that wee shall fynd it. After the same maner also dooth Saint
Iames speake of it.Iames. 5. d. 16. Acknowledge your sinnes (sayeth he) one too
another, and pray one for another: that is too say, when yee bee pressed



with any temptation, and yee feele many infirmities and vyces in
you: let euery man vnburthen him self towards his neyghbours, and
say, Alas, I haue such a thing that greeueth mee, I haue offended
my God after such manner and such. And if yee doo so bewray the
infirmities that are in yee: it wel stiree yee vp to pray one for another.
But now is there any lyke thing betweene the Sayncts deceassed and
vs? Will Saint Peter and Saint Paule come tell vs their sunnes,
too the end wee myght pray for them? Or haue they eares long ynough
too heere our prayers? (No:) wee see then that God intended
too restreyne mennes mutuall praying one of another, to such as are
conuersant in this world, and are yit in the battell. They therfore that
haue neede of our prayers, shall also pray on their syde for vs, and
wee must doo the lyke for them on our syde. But as for them that are
departed out of the world, it is not in vs too make them our aduocats
before God. For if wee cannot make an Aduocate in a matter of law,
that shal not be past fyue shillings, but it is in the Iudges power too
appoynt such one for aduocate as he listeth, and too put him in that office:
what a presumptuousenesse is it, if wee will take vppon vs too
make aduocats in heauen? What a pryde and presumptuousnesse is
it? Is it not a plucking of Gods maiestie and authoritie from him?
Now then, let vs learne too pray so one for another, as wee passe not
our bounds, nor wander out one way nor other euery mā after his owne
conceyt, but bee contented too haue a care of all the members of the
Church, as wee bee bound too doo, and too take comfort and ioy our
selues, in that God hath voutsafed too bynd all his Churche vntoo vs,
and that by the same mutuall communicating, we (shewe our selues
too) bee members of the bodie of our Lord Iesus Christ. And therwithall
let vs all tend too our head, knowing that our prayers should
not bee woorthie too bee receyued, but rather bee foule, filthie, and
stinking, if our Lord Iesus Christ hallowed them not by his holinesse
and perfection. Knowing this, let vs neuer presume too open our
mouth too call vppon our God, but in the name of our mediatour, assuring
our selues that it is his office too bearewoord for vs, and too
make vs to bee heard, so as wee may fynd God fauorable and foreward
too help vs. That then is the meane for vs too pray vntoo God
boldly and with open mouth, as is sayd in the texts which I alledged
euen now both out of eyghth to the Ramans, and out of Saint Iames,
and also as wee haue seene in the third chapter of this Epistle. Wee



must call vppon God through the beleef which wee haue in Iesus
Christ, assuring our selues that he not only came downe intoo the
world too shead his blud once for the remission of our sinnes: but also
is incessantly before God too pray for vs, so as wee bee fully resolued,
that although wee bee but wretched earthwoormes, yit God accepteth
vs, and auoweth vs for his children by his meanes, & will alwayes be
mercifull in receyuing our prayers and supplications, bycause wee offer
them not too him in our owne name, nor by our selues, (for in good
sooth that were a foolish presumptiō of our owne imagination) but bycause
he hath commaunded it, and shewed vs the way which we should
hold vs too.
               Now let vs fall downe before the Maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faultes, praying him too pardon them, notwithstanding
that wee deserue too bee quyte cut of from the hope of
saluation. And forasmuch as it hath pleased him too call vs too him,
and too promis vs that wee shalbee receyued too mercie, if wee come
too him with fayth and humilitie: let vs pray him too prepare our
hartes in such wyse, as wee may make such requestes too him, as he
alloweth: and that therewithall he so beare with our infirmities, as
wee may not fayle to obteine fauour, though there be many imperfections
in our prayers. And so let vs al say, Almyghtye God heauenly
father. &c.
            
            
               The .xlviii. Sermon, which is the sixth
and last vppon the sixth Chapter.
               
                  
                     19 Praying also for mee, that in opening my mouth, vtterance
may bee giuen mee, with boldnesse too vtter the secret of
the Gospel.
                     20 For the which I am an Ambassadour in cheynes, too the
end (I say) that I may speake freely as it becommeth mee
too speake.
                     21 But that yee may also knowe of my state and what I do: Tychicus
our deere brother and faythful minister in the Lord,
shall shewe you all things:
                     
                        22 Whom I haue sent vntoo you for the same purpose, that you
myght knowe my state, and he comfort your hartes.
                     23 Peace be to the brethren, and charitie, with fayth from God,
and from our Lord Iesus Christ.
                     24 Grace bee with all them which loue our Lord Iesus Christ in
purenesse. Amen.
                  
               
               
                  WEe sawe this morning how wee ought too
bee carefull in praying one for anther, and
the frute that commeth thereof: namely
that euery man which is a member of the
Sonne of God, must assure him selfe,
that the whole Church laboreth for him,
and that generally both Iesus Christ and
all his must bee refuzed, if God pitie vs
not. But heerewithal wee haue to marke
also, that Saint Paule in commending
himselfe too the prayers of the Church, is not so myndfull of his bodye,
as of the thing that is much excellenter, that is too wit, of the due
executing of the charge and office committed vntoo him. If a man
bee sicke, or in necessitye in this world, or trubbled by his enemyes,
wee bee woont too crye out for helpe and succour, and wee would
haue euery man too occupye himselfe for vs. And why? For inasmuch
as wee bee fleshly: as soone as wee feele any disease in our bodye,
wee bee sorye at the harte: but in the meane whyle wee forget the
cheef poynt: that is too wit, the things that concerne the euerlasting
saluation of our soules. Agein, when it comes too the seruing of God,
euery man thinkes he is sufficient ynough of himselfe too doo it, without
helpe of his neyghbours. But Saint Paule sheweth heere, that
he thinkes not himselfe sufficient too execute the charge that is committed
too him of preaching the Gospell, without help from aboue:
and therefore he requyreth the prayers of the Church. And afterward
he sheweth therwithall, that he maketh more account therof, than of
his lyfe, notwithstanding that he were hild as then in prizon, yea and
euen cheyned. Ye see here that Saint Paule is hild in streyt ward, as
a sory offender, and looketh dayly for nothing but death: and yit for all
that, he careth not so much for his lyfe, as for the aduauncement
and preferment of Gods woorde: insomuch that he had leuer dye,



than too bee slothfull in dooing the thing that was inioyned him.
That is the effect of the thing which wee haue too remember vppon
this text.
               Trew it is that in the Epistle too the Thessalonians,2. Thess. 3. a. 2. he noteth
also the reason why he desyred too bee deliuered from the wicked and
faythlesse, which ceassed not too lay snares for him. And why? It
was lawfull for him too set store by his lyfe: but yit for all that, he
did not set the Cart before the horse (as they say:) for wee see by this
text,Coloss. 4. a. 3. 4. and also by that which is written too the Colossians, that he had
alwayes more regard too discharge his dewtie toowardes God, specially
in respect of the Church, by preaching the Gospell faythfully:
than too ease himselfe, or too eschew the daunger wherein he sawe he
was. Then first of all if our Lord call vs too any charge whatsoeuer
it bee, let vs learne too vnderstand our owne infirmitie, that wee may
bee succored of him as wee neede, and not presume any whit vppon
our owne strength or cunning, but consider that God must bee fayne
too hold vs vp by strong hand, and that wee haue neede too resort vntoo
him, yea and too desyre (after the example of Saint Paule) to bee
cōmended to the prayers of al the members of our Lord Iesus Christ,
as in deede it is good reason that wee should pray mutually also for
them. That is for the first poynt.
               Secondly, although it be lawfull for vs to desire men to pray for vs
when wee bee sicke, or when we bee pinched with any other affliction:
yit notwithstanding, lyke as wee must afore all thinges pray
for the comming of Gods kingdome, and seeke the aduauncing of
his glorie,Math. 6. d. 33. and make but an income of all other things else: So in
this cace, wee must learne not too bee so wedded too the world and too
this transitorie lyfe, as too cry out for helpe when wee bee pinched
with any aduersitie or neede, and in the meane whyle forget the thing
that ought too bee preferred before them. Wherefore let vs learne
too bee chare in such wyse of our lyfe, as wee may couet aboue all
thinges that God should be glorified in our persons, whether it bee by
life or by death, as S. Paule sheweth vs by his owne example in the
Epistle to the Phillippians.Phil. 1. c. 20. And so ye see what we haue to remember
in the first place.
               And he sayeth expresly, that Vtterance myght bee giuen him
in opening of his mouth. As if he should say, that God myght
giue him such corage and constancie, as he myght not speake fayntly,



but freely preach the Gospell, and not conceale any thing that myght
serue too let foorth the grace of our Iord Iesus Christ, and the infinite
benefytes that hee hath brought vs. That is the thing which Saint
Paule ment by the opening of his mouth. Now experience sheweth,
that he did not without cause desyre of God that his mouth myght
bee opened as a gate or doore: for he vseth the same terme in the forealledged
place of the fourth too the Colossians. For such as shun
death, (that is too wit, the most parte of them that professe the preaching
of the Gospell,) will not sticke too say somewhat too the matter:
but yit they doo oftentymes so disgyze the ryght, or else speake it so
fearfully: as the hearers wot not what they meane by it, their woords
shalbee so intangled. Too bee short, whereas they should shewe with
loud and shirle voyce, what our Lord Iesus Christ is, what Gods seruice
is, what the trew religion is, what fayth and repentance is:
they touch them as it were at glaunce: but as for too rip vp matters,
and too serch them too the bottom, they cannot away with that. And
why? For they see perill hanging ouer their heades, if they should
vse such freenesse. Howbeeit, Gods trew seruantes must practize
that which Saint Paule sayeth too Timothie:2. Tim. 1. b. 7. namely that they haue
not a slauish and cowardly hart, but march foorth freely in their vocation,
too ouerpasse all the furiousnesse of the world, and to haue a brazen
forehead,
                     
                        •
                     erem. 1. d. 18. as it is sayd in Ieremie. And although they see many
hard battelles, and that they cannot please the world in dooing their
dewtie, but that they shall haue the enmitie of many men for exalting
the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ as they ought too doo: yit let them
not ceasse too go foreward, and too ouercome all lettes. Howbeeit
forasmuch as wee bee fearfull and feeble, God must bee fayne too
woorke in vs, and too giue vs boldnesse too speake as wee ought too
doo.
               Then is it not ynough for vs too bee warned of our dewtie, but
wee must also adde this poynt of resorting vntoo God with acknowledgment
of our wantes and defaultes. And furthermore let vs all
take notice in generall, that the preaching of the Gospell is too hygh
and weyghtie a charge, vnlesse wee bee gouerned by Gods spirit: according
also as Saint Paule cryeth out in the second too the Corinthians:
Who is sufficent for it?
                     
                        •
                     . Co
                        •
                     . 3. b. 5. When he speaketh of the preaching
whereby men should bee reconcyled vntoo God, and certifyed of their
saluation, whereby the kingdome of heauen is opened, whereby wee



haue witnesse of the forgiuenesse of our sinnes, and whereby the blud
of our Lord Iesus Christ is giuen foorth too wash vs from all our
steynes: who is of abilitie meete for it (sayeth Saint Paule) except
God make vs able by woorking in vs? For wee cannot so much as
thinke too doo good. Yea wee bee so farre of from hauing power too
doo any thing in deede, that wee cannot so much as thinke one good
thought, vnlesse God giue vs it. Now then, let such as are called too
the office of teaching Gods Church, vnderstand their owne weakenesse,
and put themselues wholly intoo Gods hand, too bee made able
too discharge themselues, knowing that they shall neuer bring it too
passe, no nor the hundreth part of it, vnlesse it bee giuen them from aboue.
And therefore let all men pray for those that are so ordeyned too
bee teachers and ministers of the woord: for it is a singular gift of
God, when wee haue such Shepherdes of our soules, as are able too
guyde vs well. Wherfore bee it knowen both too great and small, that
too maynteyne the Church in hir perfect state and soundnesse, God
must bee fayne too giue power and strength too such as should teache,
and men must pray for them: for in so doing, euery man procureth his
owne welfare and saluation. And if we be negligent therin, it is a token
that wee make no reckening, nother of our spiritual life, nor of the
common welfare of the Church.
               And heerin wee see what wee ought too deeme of such as pretend
too preache Gods woord in these dayes, and in the meane whyle are so
fearefull, that they dare not open their mouth, vntill they haue well
bethought them, whether the things that they intend too speake, may
offend or delyght the eares of him and of hir. What a sort see wee in
the Popedome which rowe betweene two streames, and would fayne
haue it knowen, that they bee such as would fayne haue leaue too
preache purely? But yit for all that, they doo so beepeynt the doctrine
which they vtter: as they play the craftie merchantes, and
there is nothing but falshood in them, according also as Saint Paule
vseth the same similitude,2. Cor. 
                        •
                     . d. 17. & 4. a. 2. in speaking of such as abused Gods woord
too purchace the fauour of the world, and too maynteyne it. Now the
saying of such men is, that they must stryke sayle, hold with the hare,
and hunt with the hound, eschew occasiō of stumbling blocks, and that
it is not for a man too stryue ageinst the streame. As who should say,
they bee much wyzer than God, 
                     •
                  ho speaking by Saint Paule, telleth
vs, that Iesus Cerist must bee preached throughly, and men must



not go about too bury him any more: for seeing he is rizen vntoo glorie,
he will haue the voyce of his Gospell ring loud and shirle, without
any dissimulation, as I sayd afore. Moreouer, euen where there
is no persecutiō of sword nor fyre, the world sees that they which name
themselues ministers of the Gospell, would fayne currye fauell in such
wyse, as there should bee no shift but our Lord Iesus Christ must
stoope, and wrythe his truthe too and fro at mennes pleasures. Now
adayes when the preachers perceyue, that it is no pleasant thing for
them too put men vnder the yoke of our Lord Iesus Christ: what, say
they? Shall wee offend greate men, and such as are in authoritie ouer
vs? Should wee not rather win them by gentlenesse? Yis, but they
bee wyld beasts dossing with their hornes ageinst our Lord Iesus
Christ, and cannot abyde that there should bee any disciplyne in the
Church: and yit for all that, men must preache still too their lyking.
What a trayterousnesse and villanie were that? Yit notwithstanding,
a man neede not go farre too fynd such preachers of the Gospell, that
is too say, of leaud choppers and chaungers, which turne all topsiteruie,
knowing not what their dewtie is. The world sees such examples
too manifestly before their eyes. Therfore it standeth vs so much
the more on hand to mark well this text, where Saint Paule sheweth
that the Gospell is not preached as God hath commaunded it, except
men go too it fully and openly, and with full mouth (as they say.)
               Now he speaketh of the secret of the Gospell, too magnify this
doctrine, which else should be despized of many that wil needs play the
suttle & sharp witted fellowes, according as yee shall see a sort of presumptuous
fellowes which think thēselues so wyse, that the Gospell is
not for them: for there is such a simplicitie in it, as they cannot brucke.
They would stye vp and sore aboue the clouds, & haue such speculations
as myght amaze them, and (nother they themselues) nor any man
else vnderstand them. It is very trew that at the first syght, when men
reade the Gospell, they shall see that God dooth after a sort play the
nurce there (as he him self sayeth) and that bycause he knoweth our
rudenesse, how we bee as little children: he lispeth with vs. But yit
for all that, the doctrine therof passeth all the wit of man. For the verie
Angels doo woonder at it,Ephe. 3. b. 10. and are inforced too honour it, as it is
sayd in another place.
                     
                        •
                     . Pet. 1. 
                        •
                     . 12. Then let vs vnderstand, that in the simplicitie
which is seen in the Gospell, there is such wisdome of God as is incomprehensible,
vnlesse it please him too reuele it too vs by his holie



spirit. For were we the best learned doctors in the world, yit should
wee fasten vpō nothing (there) vnlesse God inlyghtned our vnderstanding,
as is sayd of it in the two first chapters of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians. That therfore is the cause why S. Paule telleth vs, that
there are great secrets in the Gospel which we vnderstād not, further
foorth than God woorketh in vs: and that no tung of man is able to vtter
them, except God guyde both them that heare them, and
are too bee taught them, and also those that speake them, so as all bee
gouerned, by his holy spirit.
               And he addeth, as it becommeth mee too speake. Wherin hee
sheweth yit agein, that it is not ynough too preache by rote whatsoeuer
comes at the tungs end: but all must bee ruled by Gods woord, so
as it may perce mens harts, and win them too his obenience: and that
(as is sayd in another place) there bee not only language or speache:1. Cor. 
                        •
                     . d. 20.
for the kingdome of heauen consisteth not in gay Rhetorik, but in the
power of God. Too the end then that there may be such a lyuelinesse,
as mē may know that such as teache vs, are stirred vp of God, to be as
his instruments, and too doo him seruis: Saint Paule desyreth men
too pay for him. Wherfore let vs learne, that too step vp into the pulpit,
and too expound some text of scripture, is not all that is too bee
doone, but there must be a special handsomnesse, which groweth not in
the gardens of men, but proceedeth of the extraordinarie goodnesse of
God.Rom. 10. c. 15. And herein he sheweth that which he speaketh in another place,
namely that noman can performe the dewtie of a good and faythfull
teacher, vnlesse he bee sent. Now this sending importeth, that God
giueth men that which is requisyte for the executing of their charge,
bycause they want it of themselues.
               There is yit further, that Saint Paule gloryeth of his bearing of
the Ambassage of the Gospell, notwithstanding that he bee a poore
prisoner, yea and in cheynes, as if a man should now set a man in the
stocks, or 
                     •
                  etter him. Therfore he vseth the woord Ambashadour, too
the intent that his imprizoning should not preiudice the doctrine of
God. No, no (sayeth he) God auoweth mee for his Ambassadour.
Albeeit that men hold scorne of mee, though I bee thus afflicted, and
although men myght lothe mee too looke vppon mee: yit is all this no
derogation too the office wherin God hath put mee, that is too say, too
my Ambassadourship of preaching the Gospell in his name. And
it is not only in this text that Saint Paule dooth so magn
                     •
                  fye the honorable



dignitie that was giuen vntoo him, in declaring that men
cannot any what diminish it: but (which more is) he glorieth greatly
in that he was hild so in yron cheynes and streyt prizon. For surely it
serued for a good record that he had preached earnestly, and that men
ought to receyue his doctrine quietly & without gey
                     •
                  saying. Trew it
is, that if we go through with our charge, & follow Gods calling with
a free hart, we shalbe his seruants. But yit for all that, there is not so
good proof of vs as when God sendeth some tryall, so as wee bee one
whyle in prizon, another whyle driuen from place too place, and trubbled
and vexed dyuers wayes. If wee see that, and agein, that wee bee
wrongfully blamed, and torne in peeces, and yit neuerthelesse doo hold
out still, without swaruing one way or other for any thing that may
befall: then dooth God ratifye and authentikly seale our Calling, and
shewe that he hath made vs his seruants. Now then seeing that Saint
Paule was in prizon, and moued too deny him self, and could haue
gone out if he had would, by forsaking the truthe of the Gospel, and yit
hild out stedfastly, so as his lyfe was nothing too him, but his continewall
seeking was too magnify the name of our Lord Iesus Christ:
when such Constancie was seene in Saint Paule, it myght well bee
concluded, that there had bin no counterfetting in him before. For whē
a man shall but only preache, and afterward when he commeth but to
the aking of the tippe of his finger, he starteth backe, and would plucke
his pennie from the stake (as they say:) dooth not the world see that
he was but a niggler, and a player of enterludes before? If a man be
a great wryter, and as excellent a teacher as can be deuyzed, and yit
notwithstanding wil not shed one drop of blud when God calleth him
too it? too shewe that the doctrine which hee caryed abrode was not
his owne: it appeereth that he was but a mocker, and that he is woorthie
too haue men spit in his face, and too haue more shame and reproche,
than if he had bin an ignorant beast. So then, Saint Paule
gloryeth of his bands, saying, that although the world made no reckening
of him, but disdeyned him, yit neuerthelesse God auoweth
him for his Ambassadour.
               And heerupon let vs learne not to bee so scornful as to despize Gods
seruantes, when we see them hild in prizon, but let vs vnderstand, that
God dooth then exalt them too much greater dignity and honour, than
those that are mounted aloft into pulpites. He then that is in prison,
and persīsteth in the pure confession of the Gospel, is in much more honorable



degree, than al they that preach at free liberty. Marke that
for one poynt.
               And agein, in the tyme that God spareth vs and giueth vs leyzure,
let vs learne too fence our selues so afore hand with corage and
constancie, as wee may bee his Ambassadours whensoeuer it shall
please him, both in prizon, and in the middes of the threatenings of
enemies, and in all the rages of death that can bee put ageinst vs.
That is the thing which wee haue too marke vppon this streyne. And
so let vs not bee dismayed as a number of vnconstant persons are, who
when they heare that a great sort are imprizoned in such a place, and
such a one was burnt in another place, are by and by out of hart, and
the Gospell is no more accounted with them. They that forge too
themselues such stumbling blockes, shewe well that they neuer had
any liuely roote in fayth. But contrariwyse, when wee see that our
Lord Iesus Christ dooth so serue himselfe by those whom he calleth
too tryall, by putting them intoo the handes of Tyrantes, and of the
enemies of his truth, and yit giueth them inuincible constancie: it is
a goodly strengthning of our fayth, and wee haue cause too bee the
more inflamed. For vnlesse God wrought in them, it is certeyne that
there should no such strenght bee seene in any man liuing. Therefore
wee must pray God too arme vs at our neede, and therwithal to shewe
vs that the doctrine of his Gospell which is of sufficient authoritie of
it selfe, must bee further authorized by a manner of prouision. But yit
must the blud of the Martirs, and of such as God hath sanctified to his
glory, serue too that purpose, bycause they bee as it were his Proctors
before men.
               Now heereuppon Paule addeth, that he hath sent Tychicus
too Ephesus, too the intent that the Ephesians myght knowe in
what state he was. This also is sayd too the common edifying of the
Church. For whereas Saint Paule speaketh of his state and dooings,
he meaneth not the things that concerne his bodie or his health,
nor any thing else that belongeth too this present lyfe: but he referreth
it specially too the confession of the fayth, and his free maynteyning
of the Gospell. Wee know that if a man bee in prison, specially a
man of renowme: folke will bee in some care of him, (saying) Alas,
will God giue him constancie? And agein▪ the diuell sleepeth not at
that tyme. There shall neuer any man of credit which hath edifyed
Gods Church, bee cast in prison, or impeached: but there shall some



thing or other bee sowed abrode, too disgrace him, and too bring him
as it were intoo a slaunder, and all is too deface the things that God
hath doone by his meane, and too ouerthrowe that which he hath
builded. That is one of Satans policies. And therefore Saint
Paule knowing that men myght sowe abrode many lyes, and say,
ho, see yee, I warrant yee he should not bee so long borne with at
Rome, specially hauing the Emperour and all the Court ageinst
him: except he did yeeld: it may well bee sayd, that his cace is not
cleere. And others, Tush, men make no account of him, they see he
is but a doting foole. And others: some one thing, and some another,
euery man after his owne fancie: Saint Paule (I say) perceyuing
that many poore we akelings myght be hindered by him, and
cast intoo perpleritie, and that othersome myght bee kept backe from
comming too the Gospell: will haue his state knowen, and the diuell
with all his slaunders put too the foyle, and the mouthes of all backebyters
stopped, and lykewyse of all Colcaryers which seeke nothing
but too set trubble in the Church. Also for feare least they that had
begun too profit in the Gospell, myght bee hindered, and the same an
occasion too shet the gate ageinst such as were not yit come in: Saint
Paule intending too preuent all those respectes, sayeth, that he hath
sent Tychicus.
               And wee see yit better in this text, what care he had alwayes too
make the Churches continewe in goodnesse. For he could haue alledged
that he was letted ynough for himselfe, and that he was ouermatched
with enemyes: & he could haue made thē beleeue, that he had
had no leyzure too thinke of other folkes, and that for his owne part, it
was ynough for him too doo his dewtie at Rome, without sending
here and there ouer the sea, too confirme the Churches: for there
were a great sort of others besydes him. Agein, forasmuch as God
had shet him vp: it had bin ynough (as a man would haue iudged in
common opinion) that he swarued not a syde euen too the death. But
he contenteth not him self with his only being of a faythfull witnesse
and martir of our Lord Iesus Christ: but he thinketh therwithall, that
it became him too preuent all stumbling blocks which the diuell stirred
vp one way or other, too defame the Gospell withall, and he imployeth
himself therto, as wee see heere by example. Now then let vs
learne to serue God in such wyze, euen too the laste gaspe of our lyfe,
as wee may haue a care of our neyghbours also, and procure their welare



as much as wee can, accordingly as God hath bound vs thertoo.
               And to the intent that Tychicus should be receyued, he calleth him
brother and faythfull minister in Christ: and that is too giue him
credit, that men myght receyue his record. And in very deede, wee
must iudeuer too the vttermost of our power, that such as can serue the
Church, may bee aduaunced, and men knowe what they bee, and that
they may haue as it were their mark, so as they may haue authoritie
as is requisite. That is the example which Saint Paule sheweth vs:
For it was not for any vaynglorie or fauor of men, that he commended
Tychicus after that maner: but his desyre was, that men should know
Christs faythfull minister too their owne benefyte, so as he myght
haue accesse too them, and not be reiected as one woorth nothing, but
that his woord myght be receyned as it deserued.
               Theruppon, too end and knit vp his Epistle withall, Saint Paule
prayeth, that the brethren myght haue peace, loue, and Fayth
from God, and from our Lord Iesus Christ. Now this woord
Peace is commonly taken in Saint Paule, for all welfare and prosperitie.
In deede it signifyeth properly concord: but the Apostles being
accustomed too the Hebrew tung, haue vsed the word that importeth
both. And when Saint Paule sayeth, Grace and peace bee giuen
vntoo you: by the first he wisheth Gods fauour and mercie, and by
the other, that he should prosper vs in all goodnesse and good things.
Therfore in this text he sheweth, that all the prosperitie of the godly
commeth of Gods mere goodnesse, and not from elswhere. Therunto
he addeth also, fayth and charitie. Wherin wee see that God reserueth
too him self the office, not only of sending vs these outward goods
which wee want, but also and specially of giuing vs the spiritual gifts,
wherof wee bee vtterly voyd and destitute. Howbeit, it is hard too
make men beleeue it, bicause they be alwayes drunkē with this pryde,
of imagining themselues too haue some abilitie of mynd too beleeue
the Gospell, and too discerne betweene good and euill, insomuch that
too their seeming, it is a needlesse thing to pray God too inlyghten
them. But yit must wee needs bee punished for our ouerweening, if
wee think wee haue eyther fayth or charitie of our selues. So then let
vs conclude, that bothe of them bee the singular gifts of God, and let
vs confesse, that both of them come of him, and that on the other side he
must bee fayme 
                     〈…〉
                  : for wee bee blynd

                     〈…〉
                   wee haue the woord pre
                     •
                  
                  ched



too vs, and as it were chawed too vs, so as there remayneth no
more for vs too doo, but too swallowe it downe. Yit shall wee continew
dull lyke blocks of timber, if God doo not inlyghten vs by hys
holie spirit, and bow our harts too his obedience. Then if God woork
not so, it is certein that when our eares shal haue bin beaten with good
doctrine all the tyme of our lyfe, it shalbee but lost labour. And it is
not only in this text that it is sayd so: but a man shall scarsly fynd any
leaf in the holie Scripture, wherin God reserueth not too him selfe
the giuing of fayth. And in good fayth wee our selues see well, that
the holie scripture inlyghteneth vs, and how vtterly wee bee destitute
of Gods spirit. If wee compare our selues with fayth, and with the
things that it bringeth vs: wee shall well see that there is iust cause
why God should will vs too doo him homage for so great and so excellent
a fift.Psal. 14. 
                        •
                     . 2. For it is sayd, that God looked downe vppon men, and that
he found them euery chone giuen ouer too all euill, and saped in their
filthinesse, so as there is not one that seeketh after goodnesse. Agein,
when there is any speaking of our reason and wisdome,1. Cor. 3. d. 16. it is sayd to be
stark ignorance, and that we bee vtterly brutish, and that wee must become
fooles in our selues, if wee will profit in Gods schoole. And 
                     〈◊〉
                  
for our harts: what are they? They bee full of naughtinesse and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
bornnesse euē from our chyldhood, as the holie scripture reporteth euery
where of them. Forasmuch then as wee be blynd in our vnderstanding,
and froward in wil: let vs come now and see what fayth is. It is
a cōprehending of Gods secrets, so as we know the fatherly loue that
he beareth vs, & assure our selues of it, & take hold of the heauenly lyfe,
which neuerthelesse is incomprehensible too mans vnderstanding: &
to be short,Ephe. 3. d. 13. are acquaynted with the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ,
which extendeth hygh & lowe, and deepe and wyde, as wee haue seene
herteoofore. Now then if on the one syde we consider what fayth is, &
on the other syde enter intoo our selues, and examin our selues in such
sort, as we fynd our selues vtterly destitute of all goodnesse: it is good
reason wee should confesse, that vntill God giue vs fayth, wee haue no
fayth at all. That is the thing which wee haue too mark vppon this
text.
               As much is too bee sayd of charitie. For is it not apparant that euery
man is wedded too the loue of him self▪ and that 
                     〈◊〉
                   affections 
                     •
                  arye
vs away, so as wee seeke 
                     〈◊〉
                   owne profit continually with the hinderance
of other men? And yit this lust and 
                     〈…〉
                  


                  
wee cannot loue our neyghbours, but would rather oppresse them.
So then, we must needs haue Charitie from elswhere, and God must
breake the cursed inclinatiō that is in vs, namely the ouer excessiue louing
of our selues. And moreo
                     •
                  er when wee haue so renounced our
selues, wee must vnderstand that wee bee so indetted too our neyghbours,
as wee must indeuer too doo our dewtie towards them. And so
yee see that fayth and charitie are iustly called the speciall gift of God,
and that Saint Paule dooth iustly in this text say: Charitie and
Fayth bee vntoo you frow God our father. It is certeyne that
his wish was not made feynedly, but that in saying so, he doth vs to vnderstand
that wee must haue it at Gods hand. Wherfore let vs lay
downe all foolish ouerweening, and let vs vnderstand that all the spirituall
benefyts which wee haue, are the free gifts of God, wherby hee
sheweth and declareth his liberalitie effectually towards vs. And it
is certeyne that all the perfection of Christians consisteth in faythe
and charitie. Wherfore let vs conclude, that whatsoeuer belongeth to
the saluation of our soules, or is woorthie too bee esteemed and commended,
wee haue none of it of our owne growing, but it commeth too
vs from aboue.Math. 16. c. 17. Accordingly as it is sayd of the confessing of our fayth,
that nother flesh nor blud doo shewe vs that Iesus Christ is the sonne
of God,Math. 11. d. 25. but the father reuealeth it too vs. And lykewyse also our
Lord Iesus Christ sayeth,Luke. 10. d. 21. Father, I thank thee that thou haste
hidden these things from the wyse, and reueled them too the little ones.
Therfore let vs learne to bee little ones, that we may bee Gods schollers,
and too bee fooles in our selues, that wee may bee filled with his
wisdome, and yeeld him honor, according too the measure of the gifts
which wee shall haue receyued of him, and not bee soo wicked as too
chalendge the prayse vntoo vs, which he dooth iustly and ryghtly reserue
too him self.
               Howbeeit, Saint Paule matcheth our Lord Iesus Christ with
God the father, too doo vs vnderstand, that wee can obteyne nothing
but by the meanes of him, which hath reconcyled vs vntoo God. For
what is the cause that wee bee so corrupted in our nature, as wee bee
voyd of all goodnesse, and full fraught with all vyces, and too be short,
that we be altogither abhominable: but for that we be vtterly estraunged
from our Lord Iesus Christ,Iohn. 1. b. 14. &. Coloss. 1. c. 19. &. 2. b. 9. who is the fountayne of al goodnesse?
And for the same cause was he indewed with all fulnesse of grace, according
as it is sayd, that the father hath not giuen hym (the spirit in)



some certein portion,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   but in such wyse as all of vs may so drawe out of
him, as wee can not want any thing, for he is the fountayne that can
neuer bee drawen drye. Then can wee not haue one drop of spirituall
gifts, but by flowing downe vppon vs through our Lord Iesus Christ,
who is the only cundi
                     •
                  pype of them. And our Lord Iesus Christ not
only hath the office of giuing vs at his owne pleasure whatsoeuer i
                     •
                  
requisyte and necessarie for our welfare, in respect that he is our mediator
(as wee haue seene in the .iiii. Chapter:) but also Saint Paule
yeeldeth him here moreouer, that he giueth vs faith and charitie by his
owne authoritie and power: for he setteth him in equall degree with
his father. Now then let vs vnderstand, that our Lord Iesus Christes
office of inlyghtening vs by fayth, and of reforming our harts, not only
belongeth too him as now in respect that he is our mediator & Gods
minister: but also that it is his owne: for this maner of speeche of S.
Paules would not otherwyse agree.
               But heere by the way a man myght aske a question. For Saint
Paule prayeth not God too giue fayth too the faythlesse, and charitie
too them that are fleshly: but vntoo the brethren, that is too say, too
the bodie of the Church. Now if they be of the Church, they bee Gods
children alredye, they bee begotten agein by the holie Ghoste, and by
that meane they haue both fayth and charitie. But herin Saint Paule
sheweth vs, that it is not ynough for that God begin fayth in vs, vnlesse
he continew in it too the end: and that lyke as wee call fayth the
gift of God, so must he also make it too growe and increace day by
day.Phil. 
                        •
                     . d. 29. And that is it which is ment by this saying, that it is giuen vntoo
vs not only too beleeue in Iesus Christ, but also too suffer for him.
Therfore Gods giuing of fayth vntoo vs, is not in such wyse, as that
he dooth but only prepare vs, that wee myght beleeue the Gospell, if
we listed, and that afterward we should bring a consent of our owne, &
go foreward of our selues by our own power: No: but when God hath
once dispozed vs too beleeue, he must also giue vs such an affection, as
may touche vs too the quicke, and afterward driue vs forewarde, and
giue vs abilitie too perseuer, so as we may profit, & go foreward, & be
confirmed euen to the end. That is the cause why S. Paule speaking
heere of the faythfull which were brought alredie intoo the good way,
and to whom the grace of God was manifested, sayeth neuerthelesse,
that God must bee fayne too further them & giue them the gift to hold
out, euen by growing more and more as wel in fayth as in loue.
               
                  
And therby we haue warning to pray God to increase & strengthen
our fayth, and to inflame vs with charitie, and therwithall to make vs
knowe our imperfections, so as although wee see a number that come
not neere vs, yit wee conceyue not any pryde too stand in our owne
conceits, as though wee were come too fayth already. Wherefore let
vs assure our selues, that we be but in our way as long as we bee in
this worlde, and therefore let vs inforce our selues foreward. For
what perfection of fayth so euer wee can fynd among men: it is certeyne
that God will fynd much amisse in it, and how farre foreward
soeuer wee bee, and how well so euer wee haue profited in charitie, a
man shall come farre short, of fynding that any of vs hath forgotten
him self, and thrust couetousnesse and ambition vnder foote, with all
other things that may 
                     〈◊〉
                   vs frō seeking the benefyte of our neyghbour,
and the imploying of our selues too doo them seruis. Sith it
is so, let vs learne (as I sayd) too knowe our owne imperfections in
such wyse, as wee may mislyke of our selues for them, and bee induced
therby too doo better than wee haue done hithertoo. And although
men prayse and commend vs, yit let vs learne too confesse with all
humblenesse and meeknesse, that wee bee yit farre short of atteyning
too our mark.
               Now hereuppon Saint Paule addeth agein, Grace bee too all
them that loue our Lord Iesus Christ vncorruptly. Wherin he
sheweth who bee the brethren that 
                     •
                  e 
                     〈◊〉
                   of euen now. Not all they
that professe themselues too liue after the Gospel, but such as loue our
Lord Iesus Christ, yea (sayth he) with such soundnesse, as it bee not
an affection that corrupteth and banisheth away out of hand. And not
without cause is this sayd. For wee see how fewe there are which
loue Iesus Christ ryghtly and soundly. The multitude of them that
pretend too holdwith the Godspell, is greate ynough: but what a
number are there which renounce God in their works, when they haue
confessed him so in their words? Agein, if a man examin them narrowly,
which haue yit some good tokens, and liue orderly ynough and
without blame, so as it myght bee sayd, that there is no hipocrisie in
them: he shall see them ouershoote themselues in the turning of a hand.
As for example, wee see how the persecutions now adayes discouer
such as haue not a lyuely roote, and so doo temptations lykewyse, insomuch
that they which haue liued in good reputation, doo afterward
tur
                     •
                  e asyde and go astray. And what is the cause therof? Some



new blocke that Satan casteth in their way, or some other stumbling
stocke too make them turne out of the good way. Therfore when all
is throughly reckened, a man shall fynd verye fewe, that loue Iesus
Christ vncorruptly, that is too say, which haue at rew stedfastnesse or
stoutnesse, so as if they bee tempted eyther with feare of death, or with
pouertie, yit notwithstanding they a
                     •
                  ter not, but continew stil in theyr
calling, & shew that the holie Ghost reigneth so in them, as he possesseth
the bottomes of their harts, euen vntill they bee quyte rid of all
the imperfections of their flesh. No dout but the perfectest haue store
of them. And lyke as it may well bee, that a tree shall seeme vtterly
withered, as farre as can be discerned outwardly by his braunches, &
yit if the roote continue still in his force, the tree shal be safe: so that although
some superfluous boughes be cut of, yit will he spring againe:
and it will appeere playnly, that it was still alyue within: euen so wee
from day to day cut of the corrputions of our flesh, which are yit in vs,
vntil wee bee come too the fulnesse of the incomprehensible perfection,
wheruntooo wee labour as now too atteyne.
               Now let vs fall downe before the maiestie of our good God, with
acknowledgment of our faults, praying him too voutsafe too open our
eyes more and more, that wee may consider the infirmities and vyces
that are in vs, yea and those also vntoo which wee should bee giuen, if
God had not deliuered vs from them, and should not drawe vs away
from them day by day. And theruppon let vs moorne before him, acknowledging
our selues too bee wretched offenders, that are well
woorthie too bee condemned, if he pitied vs not: And let vs so profit in
his woord, as it may bee too the amendment of the things that are yit
amisse in vs: and for the bringing therof too passe, let vs call vppon
the grace of his holie spirit, bycause wee knowe how needfull it is for
vs, in respect of the rechlesnesse, yea or rather rebelliousnesse that is in
vs. And yit for all that let vs not ceasse too go on still too the heauenly
perfection wheruntoo he calleth vs. That it may please him to graun
                     •
                  
this grace not only too vs, but also too all people and nations of the
earth. &c.
               FINIS.
               All glorie, honor, and prayse, bee alonly vntoo God, and too our Lord Iesus Christ. Amen.



               
            
         
      
   