
      
         
            
            
            SERMONS OF JOHN CALVIN, VPON THE SONGE that Ezechias made after he had bene ſicke, and afflicted by the hand of God, conteyned in the 38. Chapiter of Eſay.
            ¶Tranſlated out of Frenche into Engliſhe. 1560.
            ☞Newly ſet fourth and allowed, accordyng to the order appointed in the Quenes Maieſties Iniunctions.
            ¶Imprinted at London, ouer Alderſgate, by Iohn Day.
            And are there to be ſolde at his ſhoppe vnder the Gate.
            ¶Cum Gratia & priuilegio Regiae maieſtatis.
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND Chriſtian Princeſſe, the Lady Katharine, Ducheſſe of Suffolke.
            
               IT often falleth out in experience (my gracious & ſingular good Lady) that ſome men beynge oppreſſed with pouertie, toſſed with worldlye aduerſitye, tourmented with payne, ſorenes, & ſicknes of body, and other ſuche cōmon matters of griefe, as the world counteth miſeries & euils: Yet hauing theyr myndes armed & fourniſhed with prepared patience, and defence of inward vnderſtandyng, all theſe calamities can not ſo farre preuaile, as to make them fall, nor yet once ſtoupe into the ſtate of men to be accompted miſerable: but they beare them with ſuche conſtaunce, as if ſuche afflictions were not of ſuch nature as other commonly do fele them, or as if thoſe men were ſuche vpon whome thoſe troubles coulde not worke theyr naturall propertie. On th'other ſide we ſe ſome that flowyng in earthly wealth & ſuffiſance, free from

fortunes crueltie, healthy in bodye, and euery waye to the worldes ſeming bleſſed: yet with mynde not well inſtructed, or with conſcience not well quieted, euen vpon ſuch ſmall chaunces as other can lightly beare, are vexed aboue meaſure with reaſonleſſe extremitie. Wherby appeareth that the greues of body and calamities of fortune do ſo farre onely extende, to afflict, or make a man miſerable, as they approch to touch the mind, & aſſaile the ſoule. Which proueth that the peines and diſeaſes of minde & ſoule are not only the moſt greuous, & moſt daungerous, but alſo they onely are peinfull & perillous, and thoſe of the body & fortune are ſuch as the mynde vſeth, and maketh them. So as to a ſicke ſtomacke of mynde, all bodylie matters of delite and worldely pleaſures are lotheſome and diſpleaſant, as on th'other ſide the power of a healthy ſoule eaſely digeſteth and gathereth good nouriture of the hard peines, and bitter tormentes of the body and fortune. He then, that cureth the ſicke minde, or preſerueth it from diſeaſe, cureth or preſerueth not onely minde, but bodye alſo: and deſerueth ſo much more praiſe and thanke, than the bodies Phyſiciō, as the ſoule excelleth the bodie,

and as the curing, or preſeruation of them both is to be preferred before the cure of the bodye alone. But we ſe dayly, when ſkilfull men by arte, or honeſt neyghbours hauyng gathered vnderſtandyng of ſome ſpecyall dyſeaſe & the healing therof by theyr owne experiment, do applie their knowledge to the reſtoring of health of any mans body in any corporall ſickneſſe, howe thankfully it is taken, howe muche the releued patient accompteth him ſelfe boūd to him by meane of whoſe aide and miniſtration he findeth him ſelf holpen or eaſed. What then deſerueth he, that teacheth ſuch a receipt, wherby health both of body and mynde is preſerued, & wherby if health be appaired, it may be reſtored, yea whereby ſicknes and common miſeries continuyng ſhall not haue ſo muche power to trouble a man as to make him ſicke, or miſerable? This receipte God the heauenly Phyſitian hath taught, his moſt excellēt Apothecarie maſter Iohn Caluine hath compounded, & I your graces moſt bounden & humble haue put into an Engliſhe box, & do preſent vnto you. My thākes are takē away & drowned by the greate exceſſe of duetie that I owe you: Maſter Caluine thinketh his paynes recompenſed

if your grace or any Chriſtian take profit of it: bicauſe how much ſoeuer is ſpent, his ſtore is neuertheleſſe. And for God, recompenſed he can not be: but how he is continually to be thanked, your graces profeſsion of his worde, your abidyng in the ſame, the godly cō
               uerſation that I haue ſene in you, do proue that your ſelfe do better vnderſtand & practiſe than I can admoniſhe you.
            And that you maye be aſſured, that this kinde of medicine is not hurtfull: two moſte excellent kinges, Ezechias and Dauid, beſide an infinite numbre haue taſted the lyke before you, and haue founde health therin, ſuch healthe as hathe cured them for euer, and not as common or naturall reaſons of Philoſophie doe cure a ſicke or ſoore mynde, which with eaſie and weake not well drawynge or cleanſinge plaſters, ſo ouerheale the wounde that it feſtreth and breaketh oute afreſhe wyth renewed and doublye encreaſed danger.
            Suche remedye as here is conteined can no Philoſopher, no Infidele, no Papiſt miniſter. For what perfite helpe can they geue to a dyſeaſed mynde, that vnderſtande not, or beleue

not the onely thyng that muſte of nedefull neceſsitie be put into all medicines that maye ſerue for a tourmented ſoule, that is to ſay, the determined prouidence of almyghtie God, whiche ordreth and diſpoſeth all thynges to the beſt to them that truſte in him?
            This Phyſicke reſteth onely amonge trewe beleuyng Chriſtians, who are perſwaded that whatſoeuer betideth vnto vs, his hie wiſdom that ſent it, and that ſeeth all thynges, ſent it of hys good pleaſure and decreed purpoſe, and that for oure benefite if we loue and beleue hym, thoughe oure weake vnderſtandynge knoweth not howe it ſhoulde be profitable, but naturally iudgeth it hurtefull and vnpleaſaunt. And neceſſarye it was that he whiche by vnderſtandynge of Godes hatred of ſynne and felynge of hys iuſtice, is ſubiect to fall into the moſte perillous peine and tourment of conflicte with ſinne and desperation, ſhoulde by conceyuynge of Godes mercy, and beleuyng of his prouidence, haue helpe of the moſte and onely perfect and effectuallye working medicine.
            But in heauye caſe is he, that beynge

afflicted with that daūgerous diſeaſe of the felyng of Gods wrath kindled againſt him, hath not the cōſerue of belefe of Gods prouidēce remainyng with him, or beyng miniſtred to him either for febleneſſe of ſtomack can not receiue and brooke it, or his oppreſſed appetite beyng ouerwhelmed with groſſe faithleſſe and papiſticall humors can not abide the taſt of it. Wo is (I ſay) to them: for theyr diſeaſe is daungerous and hard to be cured. For when the wretched man findyng all helpe of man not able to vphold him from periſhing, being ſtriken with the mightie hande of God, feleth him ſelfe vnable to ſtande, no ſoundnes in his bodye, no ſtrēgth in his limmes, no helpe of nature to reſiſt the violence of that diſeaſe that Gods diſpleaſure hath laide vpon him, ſeeth no ſigne of Gods grace in his ſoule, but the depe woundes that Gods anger hath left in his cōſcience, perceiueth no token to argue him th'elect of God and partaker of the death of his Sauiour, hearyng pronounced that the ſoule which ſinneth ſhall die, knowyng him ſelfe to haue ſinned, & felyng him ſelfe dying: alas what helpe remaineth in this extremitie? If we thinke the helpe of papiſtes, to begge and borrowe others Virgins

oyle that haue none to spare, to bye the ſuperfluous workes of thoſe men that ſay they haue done more than ſuffiſeth to ſatisfie Gods lawe and to deſerue theyr owne ſaluation, to appeaſe God with ſuche extraordinarie deuiſed ſeruice as he neuer commaunded, and ſuch like vnholſome ſtuffe as papiſticall ſouleſleaers haue miniſtred to Chriſtian patientes: If (I ſay) we thinke theſe good & ſufficient medicines: alas, we do nothinge therby, but plant vntrew ſecuritie, promiſe health, & performe death: the pāges wherof whē the deceiued ſick man feleth, he to late eſpieth the falſhod of the murtherous Phyſiciā. The pore damned ſoule in Hell tourmented with the lamentable peines that turmoile him, from whome God the onely author of ioy and comfort is abſent, perceiueth to late howe wandring the wrong way from heauen, he is fallen into Hell. That ſelly wretche flamyng in the infernall fire feleth, alas, to late that thei which gaue him mans medicines to drincke, haue ſlayne his ſoule: they which taught him to truſt of ſaluation by mās deuiſes haue ſet his burnyng hert in that place of flames, where th'euerlaſting Chaos ſuffreth no droppe of Godes mercye to deſcende: they

which taught him to ſeeke health any other where thā in the determined purpoſe of God, that hath ſent his own ſonne for our redēptiō, haue spoiled him of all benefit of redemption. He feleth at length all to late howe by faulte of ill diet and throughe poiſonous potions which his ignoraunt corrupted and traiterous Phyſicion ſuffered him to vſe, and bad him to take, he lieth dead eternally.
            But on th'other ſide, when the beleuynge Chriſtian falleth (as God hathe made none to ſtande wherby they ſhould not nede his mercye to raiſe them when they are fallen) he knoweth whither to reache his hande to be raiſed vp againe: beyng ſtong with the ſtinge of the ſcorpion he knoweth howe with oyle of the ſame ſcorpion to be healed agayne: beyng wounded with the iuſtice of God that hateth ſinne, he knoweth howe with the mercy of the ſame God that pardoneth ſinne to haue hys peine aſſwaged and hurt amended. He knoweth that whome God hath from eternitie appointed to liue, ſhal neuer die, howſoeuer ſickneſſe threaten: no miſery, no tentation, no perill ſhall auaile to his euerlaſting ouerthrowe. He knoweth that his ſafetie is much more ſurely

repoſed in Gods moſte ſtedfaſt and vnchangeable purpoſe, and in the moſt ſtrong & almightye hande of the alknowynge and alworking God, than in the wauering will and feble weaknes of man. This healeth the Chriſtians ſicknes, this preſerueth him from death, this maketh him to liue for euer. This medicine is in this litle boke brought frō the plentifull ſhop & ſtorehouſe of Gods holye teſtamēt, where Gods euer abiding purpoſe frō beyond beginning is ſet fourth, to the euerlaſting ſaluatiō of ſome, & eternall cōfuſion of other. Beſide that, this boke hath not only the medicine, but alſo an example of the nature of the diſeaſe, & the meane how to vſe & apply the medicine to thē that be ſo diſeaſed. For when a man languiſhing in corporall ſicknes, heareth his neighboure reporte vnto him, or himſelfe hathe before time ſene in an other the ſame cauſe of ſicknes, the ſame maner of fits, paſsiōs, alteratiōs, & in euery point the ſame qualities of ſicknes, & the ſame dispoſitiō of body that he knoweth & feleth in him ſelf: it geueth him aſſurāce, & maketh him to know that he is ſick of the ſame diſeaſe that th'other was: wherby knowing howe th'other was healed, what diet

he kept, what Phyſicke he toke, he doeth with the greater boldnes, confidence of mynde, and deſire, call for, taſte, and gredely receyue that healthfull & lifefull medicine wherby he ſaw and knew his neighbour healed, and with the greater care kepeth the ſame diet wherewith he ſaw & knew th'other preſerued. So here this good ſoules Phyſiciā hath brought you where you maye ſe lyinge before youre face the good king Ezechias, ſomtime chillinge and chattering with colde, ſomtime languiſhing & meltyng away with heate, nowe freſing, now fryeng, nowe ſpecheleſſe, nowe crying out, with other ſuche piteous panges & paſsions wrought in his tender afflicted ſpirit, by giltie conſciēce of his owne fault, by terrible conſideration of Gods iuſtice, hy cruell aſſaultes of the tyrannous enemie of mans ſaluation, vexynge hym in muche more lamentable wiſe than any bodely feuer can worke, or bodyly fleſhe can ſuffer. On th'other ſide for his helpe, you ſe him ſometyme throwe vp his gaſtly eyen, ſtarynge wyth horrour, and ſcant diſcernynge for peine and for want of the lyuely moiſture to fede the brightnes of theyr ſight. You ſe him ſometyme yeldyngly ſtretch oute, ſometyme ſtruglinglye

throwe his weakned legges not able to ſuſtein his feble body: ſometime he caſteth abrode, or holdeth vp his white & blodles hand toward the place whether his ſoule longeth: ſometyme with fallyng chappes, he breatheth out vnperfect ſoūdes, gaſping rather thā calling for mercy & helpe. Theſe thinges being here laid open to ſight and remainyng in remembraunce, (as the horrour and piteous ſpectacle can not ſuffre it to fall out of a Chriſtian tender minde) if we feele oure ſelues in like anguiſhe, we finde that the diſeaſe is the ſame that Ezechias had, and ſo by conuenience of reaſon muſte by the ſame meane be healed. Thē behoueth vs to remember or to be infourmed by oure diligent Phyſitian or charitable neighbour, howe we ſawe Ezechias healed, whome we imagine in this Boke to ſee, both dying, reuiued, and walking after health recouered. There we ſe the heauēly Phyſician anoynt him with the merciful Samaritās oyle, purge the oppreſsing humors with true repentaūce, ſtrengthen his ſtomack with the holſome conſerue of Gods eternall decree, and expell his diſeaſe, and ſet hym on foote with aſſured faith of Gods mercy, and ſtaieng his yet vnſtedy pace & foltring legges

with the ſwete promyſes of Gods almyghtye goodnes. So learne we what Phyſicians helpe we ſhall vſe: and this medicine beyng offered vs, we are bolde to take it, bycauſe we knowe it wyll heale vs. And beyng healed, knowyng and hearyng it confeſſed, that ſinne was the cauſe and nouriſhement of Ezechias diſeaſe, we learne a newe diet, and to fede as Ezechias his Phyſician and oures apointeth, abſteinyng from thinges hurtfull taking things healthfull as he preſcribeth. So doth the Chriſtiā atteine his health, ſo beynge attemed he preſerueth it for euer. And as it is true that ſeconde & returned ſickneſſes by ſurfit or miſdemenour are moſt cruell and daungerous, ſo holdeth he yet this alſo for trueth, that to this Phyſiciā with this medicine, no diſeaſe neuer ſo long rooted, neuer ſo oft retourned, is vncurable. Beyng then thus muche beholden to this Phyſician we muſt nedes confeſſe that we owe vnto him our life and health, & all that we be or haue. And for his faithful miniſter maſter Caluine, I beſeche your grace wyth me, to wiſhe hym Gods benefit of eternall happie life for his rewarde, euen as I wiſhe your grace continuall health of life and ſoule for your preſeruation,

not onely for this newe yeare, but alſo for the tyme that ſhall excede all extent of yeares, beſechinge you to accepte bothe my worke and prayer.
            Concernyng my tranſlation of this boke, it may pleaſe you to vnderſtand that I haue rē
               dred it ſo nere as I poſsibly might, to the very wordes of his text, and that in ſo plaine Engliſhe as I could expreſſe: Suche as it is, I beſeche your grace to take it good parte.
            
               Your graces humble A. L.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               ☞The writinge of Ezechia kinge of Iuda, when he had bene ſicke, and was recouered of his ſicknes. I ſaid in the cuttyng ſhorte of my daies, I ſhall go downe to the gates of the graue. I haue ſought the reſidue of my yeares, I ſayd I ſhall not ſee the Lorde, the Lorde in the land of the liuing. I ſhall not beholde man any more, nor thoſe that dwell in the world. My life is withdrawen, and is chaunged like a ſhepeherdes lodge.
            
            
               AS the name of God is immortall, and we oughte to trauaill that they which come after vs, do cal vpon it, and that it be honored and glorified in all times: So is it not enoughe, that during oure lyfe, we endeuor oure ſelues to honor God: but as I haue ſaid before, our care ſhould extende it ſelfe to the time to come, to the end we may haue in ſtore ſome continuyng ſeede of religion, in ſuche ſort as the trueth of God may neuer be aboliſhed. But ſpeacilly they whom God hath ordeined in anye eſtate to guide other, ought therfore ſo much the more to applie themſelues vnto it. As alſo we ſe that S. Peter declaryng his ende to be nere,2. Pet. 5. and that he ſhould depart out of this worlde: addeth

that ſomuch as he poſſibly may, he woulde make the doctrine whiche he preached, to remayne alwayes in force and memory, that mē might take profit after his death. Behold now wherfore Ezechias was not cōtented to make this proteſtation whiche we reade here, with his mouth, but wold alſo wryte it, that to the ende of the worlde men might knowe how he had ben vexed in hys affliction, and that the ſame myght ſerue for doctrine to all the worlde: ſo as at this day we may take profyt thereof.
            He ſaythe expreſſely that this wrytinge was made after he was recouered. For oftentimes when we ar touched eyther with ſicknes or anye other 
                  •
               od of God, we make proteſtations enow, but we do nothing els but ſhake our cares (as the prouerbe is) when we ar eſcaped, & we by and by forget al thoſe thinges which we made a ſhew as if we knewe. But here it is ſhewed vs that the kinge Ezechias beinge recouered, forgat not the correction whiche he had receiued at the hand of god, nether the anguiſhes which he felt, but minded to make a memoriall of the whole, that thoſe which come after might be enſtructed therby.
            But it appereth at the firſt ſhew that this writing ſerueth not for any inſtruction of them that ſhold rede it, but ſhold rather be an offēſe. For we ſee the outragious paſſions of a man as it were rauiſhed in minde which ſo abhorreth death, that he thought all to be loſt when god ſhold take him out of the worlde, and in this we ſee nothing but the ſinne of infidelitie. He tormenteth and rageth with himſelf (as it ſemeth) with a rebelling, vncomely

for a ſeruāt of god: to be ſhort it appeareth that we can gather nothing of this ſong, but yt al the faithe whiche Ezechias had was only in hys proſperitie and quiet, & alſo that he gaue the bridle to much vnto him ſelfe in his heauineſſe, in ſo muche that he complayned of god, as we ſee that he compared him to a Lyon. But whē all ſhal be wel cōſidered, we ſhal ſee that there is no inſtruction better or more profitable for vs than this. For when we ſhal haue well examined al that is in vs, then we ſhall knowe that the ſame is alſo propre vnto our ſelues.
            But firſt let vs note how the good king Ezechias did not here ſet fourthe his owne vertues to be praiſed of the world, for he might haue kept in ſilēce that which he hath declared of his owne waywardneſſe, & in place therof he mought haue ſpoken of hys requeſt made to God, and the conſtance of his faythe: So then he ſayth not that he was of valiant courage, that he ouercame al tentations without any ſtoppe or ſtrife, he ſayth not that he had a faith ſo ſtedfaſte that it nothing trobled him to be corrected of ye hand of god: nothing of al thys▪ what then? we ſee a poore man tormē
               ted euen to the extremitye, and ſo ſtriken downe, that he wiſte not what myghte become of hym. We ſe a mā aſtoniſhed with reare of the wrath of God, lokyng on nothyng but his own affliction. Then ſeyng Ezechias doeth diſcouer him ſelfe, and ſticketh not to confeſſe his owne faultes, in this we perceiue that he was not led of ambitiō, nether of any vaine glory to be praiſed of mē, or to get reputatiō, but he rather was willing him ſelf to be cōfoūded wt ſhame, ye god might be glorified.

What is then his purpoſe? It is in one parte to make vs know howe he had bene afflicted then, when he thought that God was againſt him: and moreouer that therin men might know ſomuche the more howe great the goodnes of God was, when he receiued him to mercy, and woulde not forſake him in neceſſitie.
            We haue then to beholde here, as in a loking glaſſe, our owne wekenes, to the ende that euery man may prepare himſelfe againſt the time when his faith ſhalbe proued as the fayth of Ezechias was, and when God ſhall ſhew vs ſome tokens of his wrath, ſo as if then we ſeme in maner deſtroyed, yet we ceaſe not therfore to truſte that God will geue to vs an end of our troubles, as he did to this good king. Next to this, that we may learne to geue al praiſe of our ſafetie to the mercy of God, knowledging that ſo ſone as he forſaketh vs, we are vtterly vndone, and that then we become more then miſerable.
            And nowe we ſee howe, and wherfore the good king Ezechias was thus tourmented, that is, becauſe he ſawe death ſo nere at hande. It ſemeth at the firſt face, that ſuche paſſion beſemeth not a faithful mā. Trew it is that of nature death is dreadfull to vs al. For there is no man but (as they ſaye) deſireth to be, and in death we thinke that we periſhe, yt we be broughte to nought, and ceaſe to be. Thus of nature we flie frō & abhorre death▪
               2. Cor. 5 and therfore alſo S. Paule ſaith in the v. chapter of the ſeconde epiſtle to the Corinthians. that we do not deſire to be vnclothed of this body for it is impoſſible for man to deſire to change his

eſtate, I meane as concernynge thys lyfe. And thoſe that do kyll them ſelues haue no natural affection, but the Deuil ſo carrieth them away that they are altogether blinded. And ſuche are to be rekened as vnnaturall monſters, in whom al the order of nature is changed. To be ſhort it is moſt aſſured that death ſhalbe alwaye to vs terrible, and not onely becauſe we are enclined to deſire to to lyue, but alſo for ſo muche as God hath lefte a certeine marke, in ſuche ſorte that the Heathen thē ſelues & the vnfaithfull are conſtrained to fele that death is a curſe of God, which was pronūced vpon Adam, and al his linage. For aſmuch then, as death is come vpon the world by ſinne, & that it is a witnes of the wrath of God, that by it we are as it were caſt of from him, baniſhed from his kingdome (which is the kingdome of life) it muſt nedes be, although we haue no light of faith neyther euer had any one word of doctrine, that this be imprinted in our mindes, that it is naturallye vnpleaſant vnto vs. Behold then by what meanes we are brought to flie death, & to withdrawe our ſelues from it ſo muche as we poſſibly maye. Fyrſt bicauſe we are deſirous to be: ſecondly for that we conceyue death to be a certeine ſigne of Gods wrath: yea althoughe we harde thereof no certaine inſtruction, yet God hath printed a certaine naturall inſtinction and feling thereof within oure hertes. Yet notwithſtandynge it is alſo trew that the faithfull do ouercome thoſe feares, and do prepare them ſelues to die when it pleaſeth God, but not (as the place ſpeaketh whiche we haue alledged out of S. Paule) in ſuche ſort that

thei ſimply & without other cōſideratiō deſire to die, for yt wer ye doing of mē in deſperatiō, but thei prepare thē ſelues, for aſmuch as thei know, yt after they haue bene vnclothed they ſhalbe clothed againe, yt this body which is but a ruinous lodgyng, is nothing but rottēnes, & yt they ſhalbe reſtored to ye kingdō of god. For aſmuch as thē we behold this hope yt is geuē vs, thus we ouercome the feares of deth. Beſid this on ye other ſide, we know yt our lord Ieſus Chrſt hath repared this deſolatiō & ruine yt fel vpō vs by ye ſinne of our father Adā. So becauſe we take hold of life in the middeſt of deth, yt maketh vs yt we are not afraid to wtdraw our ſelues hēce whē god calleth vs to him, for we know yt death is but a paſſage to life. moreouer we know what is our true being: It is not to dwel in this world, for this is but a thorow fare, & we muſt alwai haue in remēbrāce, yt which is ſpokē yt god placeth men here onely to mānage thē, & to make thē to fetch their cōpaſſes (as thei ſay) & ſodenly to turne againe. Thē whē we are taught yt our life is nothing els but a courſe, & the the world is but a ſhadow, which paſſeth & vaniſheth awai: we know yt our true beyng, & our permanēt eſtate is in heuē, & not here by low. Thus ſe we how we ought not to flie deth: but (yt more is) we haue occaſiō to deſire it, bicauſe on the one ſide we ar fraile, & being holden vnder the bondage of ſin, we ſe ſo mani corruptiōs in our ſelues yt it is wofull, & when we deſire to ſerue God we draw vp our legs, & whē we lift vp one fote thinking to ſet forward one ſtep, we ſlip backward, & oft it cōmeth to paſſe yt we ſtūble or fall. Se now how iuſt a cauſe we haue to lamēt our life, not in way of deſpeir, but bicauſe we ought to hate & abhorre

ſin, We ought alſo to deſire god to draw vs out of this ſo miſerable captiuitie wherin we ar, as ſ. Paul ſheweth vs exāple.
                  Rom. 7. He cōfeſſeth him ſelf to be vnhappy, bicauſe he dwelleth in his bodi as a priſon. He aſketh howe he ſhalbe deliuered. On the other ſide, we know yt we ought to deſire death ye more yt we might come nere to our God.2. Cor. 5. For (as it is ſaide in this place yt we haue alledged) while we liue by faith we are as it were abſent frō God. Thē, where is our felicitie & perfect ioye? but in this yt we cleaue to oure God in perfectiō. Far aſmuch thē, as by death we come nere to him, it is a thing to vs happy, and whiche ought to make vs ioyfull. And therfore he ſaieth in the firſt chap. to the Philip.
                  Philip. 1. that as touchinge him ſelf, it ſhould be more auaūtage to him to die then to liue, & although his life was profitable to the church, yet in hauing no other regard, but to his own perſon, he was deſirous to be drawē away frō this place by low: mark thē what ought to be ye affectiō of ye faithful. Now let vs come to king Ezechias. It ſemeth yt he had loſt al maner taſt of ye goodnes of God, yt he knew nothing of ye reſurrectiō, yt he was ignorāt yt he ſhold be reſtored by meane of ye redemer, he conceiued nothing but the wrath & curſe of God: wher is his faith? where is his obeidiēce: wher is this cōſolatiō of the holy Goſt, & this ioy ineſtimable, whiche we ought to receiue whē God certifieth vs of ye loue which he beareth vs? In dede if he had had this perſwaſiō deply roted in hī, yt he was one of ye childrē of god: doth not ye adoptiō brīg ye īheritāce? to what end hath god choſē vs for his childrē, but yt we ſhold be partakers of ye heuēly life wherunto he guideth vs▪ but we ſe none of al this in Ezec.

It ſemeth thē that he was altogether diſtraught from ſenſe and reaſon, that he hath forgottē God: that all the good doctrine that euer he heard before is vtterly blotted oute, and that he thinketh no more of it. Theſe thinges at the firſte ſhew, ſeme very ſtraunge. Trew it is that at that time he had no ſuche reuelation of the heauenly life, as we haue at this day by the goſpel. But yet Ezechias and all the other holy kinges and Prophetes, and all the reſt of the faithfull dyd well conceiue that God had not choſen them in vaine. For though this ſētēce of our lord Ieſus Chriſt was not pronoūced,
                  Math. 22 yet was it engraued in the herts of all the faithfull that God is not the God of the dead. All they then that are cōpriſed in the number of his people haue bene aſſured to haue an abidyng life, and that ſhall endure for euer. And on the other ſide it is ſaid that God calleth him ſelfe the God of Abraham, of Iſaac and of Iacob long after their death. It muſt nedes be thē that they then lyued. So therefore the faithfull haue this aſſuraūce that God did not nouriſhe them in this world as brute beaſtes, but he gaue them a certeine taſte of hys goodnes, vntyll ſuche time as they myghte haue full enioyinge thereof after their death.
                  Num. 23 Euen Balaam himſelfe whiche neuer knew any thing of the lawe, yet he failed not to ſay: I wiſhe my ſoule to dye the death of the righteous, and my end to be ſuch as theirs ſhalbe. He deſireth to ioyne him ſelfe with the race of Abraham, and yet he was a wicked & refuſed man And who maketh him to ſpeake thus: euē this, that he is there as vpon the racke, & God wringeth

out of him this confeſſion. Now if Balaam which was poſſeſſed of the Deuill, and gaue oute his tonge to hyre, to curſe the people of God, hath bene conſtreined to ſay thus, what ſhall we think of them that had trewlye profyted in the lawe of God? But howſoeuer it be, trew it is that thold fathers had not ſo cleare and manifeſt knowledge of the heauenlye life as we haue at this daye in the Goſpell, and in dede the ſame was reſerued vntill the comming of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt. And with good reaſon: for we haue a good gage of our life in our ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt, in that he is riſen againe, and that it was not for him ſelfe alone but for all his body. This is the full aſſuraunce that God hath geuen in the parſon of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, that we paſſe through this world to come to the life that laſteth euer. The auncient fathers came not to ſuche degree, they were not ſo auaunſed. But howeſoeuer it were it is ſo that the taſt which they had of the heauē
               lye life ſo ſuffiſed them, that they rendred them ſelues peaſeably to God. And we reade not that they were greatly tourmented in theyr death, as whan Abraham departed, he made not lamentations, wayling and complaintes, as the king Ezechias did: but he was fylled and ſatiſfyed wyth lyfe, ſaieth the ſcripture.
                  Gene. 25.35.49. In like maner was it of Iſaac and Iacob, who rendring the laſte groane ſaith: I wyll put my truſte in thy ſaluation, my God. Thoughe Ieſus Chriſt had not yet appered vnto the world, yet Iacob had in him ſelfe a ſtedfaſt and vndoubted hope, and made him ſelfe as ſure of his ſaluation, as if he held it in his hād.

So then we ſee that the holy fathers were not in doubt or ſuche miſtruſt, that they did not alwaye aſpire vnto the heauēly life, but that it was their chiefe deſire to atteine thereunto.
            Now let vs retourne to the king Ezechias. We muſt conclude that he had ſome ſpeciall reaſon in him ſelfe, why he ſo complayned of death, which we ſhall better ſee in the perſon of Dauid. Dauid is ſometimes in ſuche anguyſhes that he crieth,
                  Pſalm. 6. Pſalm. 30. alas my God, who is he that ſhal acknowledge thee in death: And when I ſhalbe a poore rotten carion, what profite ſhalt thou haue? whē thou ſhalt haue brought me into aſhes, what is it that thou ſhalt haue gained?1. Reg. 2 1. Par. 29. He made there hys cōplaints, neuertheles in the end he dyed peaſeably. For no man ſaw that he was ſo paſſioned in his departyng, but that he rendred him ſelf mildly into the handes of God. Howe came it then to paſſe that he wrote thus? It is bicauſe he cōceiued the wrath of God, whether it were in ſickenes, or in any other affliction, and that is aſmuch as if the very hels were preſently ſet before him. The affliction then that he conceyued, was not of ſymple death, but yt God gaue him ſome ſigne that he puniſhed him bicauſe of his ſinnes. Now ſeyng yt we ſe, this ſame diſputatiō in the parſon of Dauid, it ſhalbe eaſy for vs to cōclud touching the king Ezechias yt he was alſo greuouſly vexed in his death, but that was not for that he was loth to depart out of this worlde, neither that he was tourmented as the poore Infidels whiche aſpire not to a better life, which are alſo as it wer drowned in theyr delites, and bringe them ſelues on ſlepe in ſuch ſort that they ſet nothynge by the

heauenly life. We ſee that Ezechias was not ſo ſtriken downe, and yet he thought that God was againſt him, as we ſhall ſe yet more largely. And in dede it was not without cauſe that the Prophet Eſay was ſente vnto him, for he was as a Heralde of armes, to make him defiaunce, and to declare vnto him: Beholde God is thine enemy: thou muſte ſuſteine his extreme rigour, for thou haſte offended him. When Ezechias heard that, he had no regard to ye ſimple death, by the which he muſte of neceſſitie paſſe, but he hathe an other ende of conſideration, yt he ſhould be cut of from the worlde as an accurſed creature, as one vnworthy, whō the earth ſhould beare. And when God ſtroke him, that gaue a tokē to him that the land ſhould be made deſolate, for he knewe what ſhould be the eſtate of the people: he ſawe that all ſhould be deſtroyed after his death, yf God dyd not remedi it by miracles. And he thought thus: My death ſhall not be onely to ſende me into the throte of hell, but it ſhall be to brynge a generall ouerflowyng ouer all, ſo that in all the land there ſhalbe nothing but deſolation. Shall the ſeruice of God then be throwen dowen, and ſhall al this be caſt vpon my neck bicauſe I haue offended my God? Alas, and what ſhall this be? Let vs not nowe thinke it ſtraunge if Ezechias ſpeake thus as we heare, but let vs hold this alway that it is not the ſimple death whiche dyd affraye him ſo. What then? the wrath of God, when he behelde his ſinnes, and that God toke away from him all ſauor of his goodnes, & turned his back vnto him as if he had ſene him armed againſt him, & lifted vp his arme, as if he would bring him to nought.
            
               When Ezechias ſawe that, he was ſo confoūded that his mouth was ſtopped, & not without cauſe.
            Nowe this is right worthy to be noted, for there are many blockiſh perſons (and the mooſte part) which feare death, but it is not becauſe they fele the curſe of God appeare to them. It is true as we haue ſaide before, that God leaueth alway this point in the conſcience of man, but they haue not all alike conſideration therof. Wherfore is it then that death is dreadfull vnto them? bycauſe euery one will ſay, I deſire to be. Truely when they ſpeake in this maner it is as much as if they ſaid I would be a calfe, or an aſſe, or a dogge, for the beyng of brute beaſtes is in this world, & the beynge of men where is it, but in this that they are ioyned to theyr God? But now we are as it were in priſon, for in ſteade that this world ſhold haue bene vnto vs as an earthlye paradiſe (if we had continued in the obeidience of God) now we are as in a ſtraunge countrey, wherein we be as lockt vp and baniſhed. It is trew that yet we ſe many times ſome, yea many trackes of the goodnes of God, but how ſo euer it be, yet we do but languiſh here. But there are but few that know this. So much yt more thē ought we to note wel this doctrine, which I haue here before touched, that is to wit, that both in death, and in all other afflictions we are more accombred and troubled with the wrath of God than with the euyll that we can fele. If one be afflicted with pouertie, ſo that he hath hunger and thirſt, an other be ſtricken with ſicknes and ſuffer great tourmentes,

another be perſecuted of men ſo as he hathe no time of reſt, and more if in the end death come before oure eyes, we oughte to knowe that there is nothing ſo muche to be feared as the wrathe and vengeaunce of God. But men do cleane contrary. And this marke, why I haue ſayde that we muſt note this doctrine the better: becauſe a man may ſe that the pore ſicke perſones, and they that are afflicted, in what ſort ſoeuer it be, wyll crye Alas, one wyll cry the armes, another wyll crye the legges, the one here, the other there: but yet they come neuer to the grounde of the euill. And that procedeth of the leproſie that is in vs. For we are ſo dull witted that we can not atteine to know the iudgemēt of God. So much the more ought we to lerne whē we ſhalbe beatē with ſuch roddes as I haue ſayd to make vs loke vpon the cauſe whence this euill procedeth: which is, that God will haue vs to fele our ſinnes, and that he ſommoneth vs to the ende that we ſhoulde there come as it were before our iudge, and that we ſhould not come there with ſleyghtes and meanes of excuſe, but with franke and free confeſſion, and that the ſame be not only made wyth mouth, or aſſent by writyng, but that we be woūded euē to the bottome of the herte, felynge what it is to haue done agaynſt the will of oure God, to haue ſtyrred him vp againſt vs, & to haue made warre againſt his iuſtice. This is it that we haue to holde in minde when we ſee that the kyng Ezechias was in ſuch extremitie of anguiſh, bycauſe God dyd puniſhe him for his ſinnes.
            Yea and this we ought to marke well, that

though before he haue proteſted that he had walked in puritie and vprightneſſe of lyfe, and that he had ſtudied all hys lyfe long to obey and pleaſe God, neuertheleſſe he reſteth not his mind vpon his vertues, nor hys owne merites, he entreth not into plea wyth God, for he ſeeth well that all that coulde nothynge profite him nor brynge hym and relefe. Therfore he ſetteth not fourthe what his lyfe hathe ben, but he knowlegeth that rightfullye he is afflicted.
            So then we learne, when it ſhall pleaſe God to correcte with his roddes, not to grudge at it, as if he did vs wronge, as if he had no regarde to oure merites, or as yf he vſed greater ſharpnes wyth vs than we had deſerued. Let al ſuch blaſphemies be beaten down, and let vs confeſſe that he hath iuſt cauſe to puniſhe vs, yea not only to expulſe vs out of the worlde, but alſo to throwe vs downe into the gulfe of hell. See then howe we deſerue to bee ordred yf wee looke vpon all our owne lyfe.
            Moreouer let vs not thynke it ſtraunge that god ſendeth vs afflictions whiche ſeme greuous and ſharpe vnto vs, ſeing wee ſee that Ezechias hathe walked before vs to ſhewe vs the waye. Men when they haue had any good affectiō and deſyre to ſerue god, do muche maruell yf god puniſhe them more then the wicked, and they ſuppoſe that they haue loſt theyr labour. This tentacion is to cōmō, as we ſee, that euē Dauid was alſo tormented with it when he ſaith: what meaneth this? for I ſee the deſpiſers of God proſper and be in iolitie,
                  Pſalm. 73. and make theyr triumphes, and in the meane time I do nothinge but ſup vp the

drynke of ſorrow, frō the euening to the morrow I haue no reſte. It ſemeth then that it is tyme loſt to ſerue God: Behold how at the extremitie he is beatē down, yf God by his wonderfull vertue had not vpholden him. And becauſe the lyke maye come vnto vs, let vs make vs a buckler of the example that is here ſet before vs of the kinge Ezechias: for wee haue ſeen here before howe he had framed all hys lyfe to the law of God: he had a zele which is not to be founde in manye people, to purge al hys land of all ſuperſtitions and ydolatries: many alarumes were ſtirred vp agaynſt hym, to make him ſomwhat to reuolte: but that nothyng ſtayed hym but that he ſet vp the trewe and pure religyon, & in his priuate lyfe he ſought nothing but that god might be gloryfyed in, and through all: and yet loke how God cōmeth to aſſayle him: yea, and that of a ſtraunge faſhion, for he is as a lyon that breaketh his bones: So whē we ſee that Ezechias, is thus handled, ought not we to learne to beare pacientlye the corrections that God ſhall ſende vs. Loe this is it that wee haue to conceiue of this place.
            Now to the reſt of the paſſions that Ezechias endureth, and although he ſlipt here of the henges yet ſtil in the middeſt therof he declareth the loue that he had to God, and that he deſyred not thys preſent life after the maner of them that ar therein become brutiſh, and whiche ſeke for nothynge but to eate and drynke, and know not for what ende they are created, but onlye to paſtime here for a whyle. But Ezechias ſheweth well that hee was guyded by an other ſpirite. He ſayethe

               I haue ſayd in the cutting ſhort of my dayes. I ſhall go down to the gates of the graue, I ſhall not ſe anye more the Lorde: euen the Lorde. He ſpeaketh here of his lyfe, that it ſhalbe cut of in the middes of his courſe: But yet he ſheweth that he deſireth not here to liue to be at his eaſe. He was a kinge, and might haue fared well, he moughte haue had greate ſtore of delicates, and pleaſures in this world, ſhortly he myghte haue made him ſelfe dronk with al ſortes of thinges of delite. He mourneth not for want of all theſe: but he ſaieth, that he ſhall no more ſee the Lorde, and he is not contented to haue pronounced this word once, but he repeteth it againe to expreſſe a greater vehemencie: The Lord, euen the Lord, ſaith he: By this he ſheweth that he deſireth not ſo much his life, as to exerciſe him ſelfe here beneth to knowe that God was his father, and to confirme him ſelfe more and more in that faith.
            Let vs then marke well wherunto oure lyfe is to be directed, that is, that we ſhould perceiue that God already in part ſheweth him ſelfe a father toward vs. I graunt it trewe (as I haue already ſaid) that we ar abſent from him, for our ſaluation lieth in faithe and hope, it is hydden and we ſee it not with naturall ſenſe. Yet in the meane while God faileth not to ſēd down certein beames hither by lowe to lighten vs ſo, as we be guided to the hope of the life euerlaſting and perceiue that God is not ſo farre eſtraunged frō vs, but that yet he ſtretcheth fourth his hand hether by lowe to haue care of vs, and to ſhewe vs by

experience that he hath vs in his ſafekeping. For when the ſunne riſeth in the mornynge, ſe we not what a fatherly care God hath for vs? After whē it goeth downe at euenyng, ſee we not that God hath an eye to our wekenes, that we maye haue reſt, and be ſomewhat releued? Doth not God then in ſo hydyng the ſunne in the nyghte tyme, ſhew him ſelfe our father? Further, when we ſe the earth bring forth her frutes for our nouriſhement: when we ſe the raynes and all the chaunges, and alterations that are in nature: in all this perceiue we not that God hath his hād ſtretched out to draw vs alway vnto him, and howe he already ſheweth him ſelf a liberall father vnto vs, and that we enioy the temporall benefites which he doth for vs, to the ende that by this meane we may be drawen vp hyer, that is to ſay, to knowe that he hath adopted and made vs his chyldren, that we may come to the fulnes of ioye and of all felicitie, when we ſhalbe fully ioyned with hym? Beholde nowe wherunto we ought to applie all our life, if we wyll not that the ſame be accurſed, and that as many yeares, monthes, dayes, houres, and minutes as we haue lyued here by low, all the ſame be put together in accompte, for euer to encreſe, and enflame the vengeance of God vpon vs. And therfore let vs know that we ought here to ſtudy vpon the workes of God. For euen therfore alſo are we ſet in this worlde, and therefore in the v. chapter,
                  Eſay. 5. when the Prophete mynded to rebuke the Iewes of a certeine vile brutiſhnes. They haue not (ſaieth he) beholden the workes of God. He ſpeaketh of theyr dronkenneſſe, of theyr gluttony, and of theyr diſſolute liues,

but the lump that maketh vp the heape of euell is this, that they haue not beholden the workes of God. So nowe the good kyng Ezechias ſheweth vs, that it were better for vs all to haue died before we had bene borne, and that the earth ſhould haue gaped whan we came out of our mothers wombe, to ſwallow vs, thā to liue here by lowe, if it were not for thys, that we do here alreadie ſee oure God: not that we haue a perfecte ſighte. But firſt he ſheweth himſelfe vnto vs by his worde, which is the trew lokyng glaſſe. And next, we haue aboue and beneath ſo manye ſignes of his preſence, and of the fatherly care whiche he hath for vs, that if we be not to much dulwitted, and altogether vnforniſſhed of vnderſtandynge and reaſon, we muſt nedes ſee hym. For all the world is as a liuely image, wherein God ſetteth fourth vnto vs his vertue and highnes.
            Moreouer, this that we are gouerned vnder his hand, is a more familiar witnes of his iuſtice, of his grace and of his mercy. Let vs then learne to lyue to this ende, to practiſe our ſelues to worſhip God as him that hath created and faſhioned vs. Next, that we beare to him honor and reuerence as to our father, and that in the taſtinge of good things (which he nowe dealeth among vs) We maye be confyrmed in the fayth of the Heauenly lyfe. And further, for aſmuch as he vouchſafeth to extende his prouidence euen hyther by low, for this entent to gouerne vs in this tranſitory and fraile life, that we doubt not, when we ſhal come vnto him, that then we ſhal beholde face to face that, whiche we nowe ſee darkely and in

a ſmall portion.
            And ſo the kynge Ezechias remitteth all to God, as if he ſhold ſay: Alas it is true that I am here, as to beholde clearly the graces of God. But nowe I ſee that all this is as it were plucked from me: For it ſemeth that God is mynded to ſpoile me of all that he hath geuen me before: and now there reſteth no more for me but to deſpayre, for as muche as he hathe geuen ouer and forſaken me. He hath ſent his prophete with this meſſage, that I am vndone. Alas, and when I perceiue no more ſigne of the goodnes of my god, neyther that he extendeth this ſtrength to comfort me in my afflictions: no not when I am in the anguiſhes of death: Lo is not this a wofull thing that our Lorde hath forſaken me there, and that I am cut of from him? Nowe of this we haue to gather, that be it in life, be it in death, this grace onely ſhoulde alwaye ſuffice vs: that is to ſay, that God geueth vs the felynge of his goodnes. And whē he ſheweth vs that he is fauourable vnto vs, let vs go on boldely, and if we lāguiſh in this life, let vs leaue it patiently. Trewe it is that we may well grone & ſigh that we are captiues, in this priſon of ſin: & beſid we yt may alſo bewaile ſeing theſe afflictions yt God doth ſend thē vpon vs. And yet oughte we not to ceaſe alwayes 
                  •
               s bleſſe the name of God, and to reioyſe in the myddeſt of all our ſorowes. When we ſhal fele that he wyll be oure father, and that he wyll knowe vs for his children, in death we ſhall beholde euerlaſtyng lyfe, whiche ſhall make vs forget all lamentations, ſo as we ſhall no more ſay: Alas what ſhall I do?
            
               Howe ſhall I behaue my ſelfe? Whither ſhal I go? We ſhal cut of all theſe thinges, and we ſhall ſaye no more: Shall I drinke no more? ſhall I eate no more? For ſuch is the maner of brut beaſtes. But now I ſe that my God draweth neare vnto me, I go nowe to throwe my ſelfe downe before him, I go to yeld my ſelf into his handes, and to ioyne my ſelf with him, as with mine own father. When (I ſay) we ſhall ſhalbe thus diſpoied,
                  Pſalm. 31. Luke. 23. we may ſay with Dauid. Lord I commende my ſpirite vnto thee. Dauid ſayd this during his life, but our Lord Ieſus Chriſt ſheweth vs that we muſt ſo ſay when God draweth vs out of this world. And laſt of all, when we thinke vpon all the benefites of god, let vs learne to glorifie him, as theſe be thynges inſeparable. Accordynge then as God maketh vs partakers of his graces & that already in part he ſheweth vs yt al our felicitie is to be of the cōpany of his children, ſo ought euery one of vs to endeuor to honor him as oure father.
                  Ionas. 2. This was the cauſe why Ionas beynge drawen out of the whales throte, ſaieth: I ſhall bleſſe my God. He ſaith not, I ſhall lyue to eate and drinke: But I ſhall come to the temple the ſanctuarie of my God, & there I wyll geue him prayſe for thys redemption, that is to wytte, for that he hath plucked me back from the deth. Beholde now what it is that we haue to do.
            Nowe concernynge that whiche Ezechias ſpeaketh of the cuttynge ſhorte of his dayes,
                  Pſalm. 90. he ſpeaketh as hauing reſpect to the naturall courſe of mans life wherof is made mention in the ſong of Moyſes, for he began to reigne at the age of xxv. yeares▪ In the xiiii. yere of his raigne, Hieruſalem

was beſeged, and then he fell into thys ſicknes, as we ſe. Thus was he xxxix. yeres old. Nowe he ſaieth that his life is cut ſhort, bicauſe he is not come to old age. Trew it is yt Moyſes ſpeaketh of the frailtie of men, and ſaith: What are men? After that God hathe let them walcke here their dayes, then they are gone againe. And in dede when man commeth to lx. yeares, he is al decaied, and if ye adde x. yeares more, there is nothing but lothſomnes and werines, he is nothing but a burden vnprofitable, and life it ſelfe is comberſom vnto him. He ſheweth thē that this lif beynge ſhort and fraile, ought not to holde vs. But howſoeuer it were, this kyng Ezechias was as in the flowre of hys age, he was not yet come to the age of xl. yeares. And in this reſpect he ſaith that God hath cut ſhorte his dayes, not that we haue any tyme determined. For do not children die ſometimes before they come into this world, and ſo ſone as they be come, doth not death already beſege thē? But he was not yet come to that old age, which is according to the ordinary courſe of mans life. Ezechias than beholdeth this: and aboue all thinges hath his eies faſtened vpō this meſſage of the Prophet Eſay, that is, that God hath puniſhed him bicauſe of his ſinnes. And it is aſmuch as if he ſhould ſay talking to him ſelfe. I ſee well that God wyll not leaue thee in thys world, for the aſſault is very violēt. And wherof commeth that, but of thy offences and ſinnes: as we ſhall ſee that he addeth afterwarde. It is true that he attributeth al vnto God as vnto his iudge, but he toke the faulte vpon his owne parſon, confeſſyng him ſelfe onely to be culpable. Loe

howe he vnderſtandeth that his dayes were cut ſhort.
            When he ſaith that he ſhall come to the gates of the graue, that he ſhall ſe no more the lyuing:
            
            That was bicauſe he ſhoulde be conuerſant no more amonge men, to exerciſe him ſelfe in the ſeruice of God. But nowe this is not without cauſe that in it alſo he conceyued the wrathe of God. Althoughe he were ſubiecte to dwell as it were confuſely myngled amonge manye raſcalles, as in dede there were many Hypocrits in Iuda, and many wicked and diſſolute perſons mockers of God, and of his law. And among the Heathen there was nothing els but vngodlines, and rebellion. Now when Ezechias ſaw that, I knowe nowe (ſayeth he) that I am vnworthye to dwell vpon the earth, becauſe theſe tarry ſtyll in the world, and God hath cut me of, yea with a ſtrong hand, as if he would come armed to make open warre againſt me as my enemye.
            Then when Ezechias had ſuche imaginations, it is not to be marueyled thoughe he made ſuche complaintes. But howſoeuer it were, all commeth to this end that God did perſecute him. This ſame was to him a burden ſo heauy that he as it were foltred vnder it. So muche the better oughte we to note thys doctrine, that if God at any tyme ſhall afflict vs, more hardelye than we woulde that he ſhould, we ſhoulde not ceaſe for all that heare to acknowledge that he loueth vs, and that this perſwaſion which we ſhall haue of

his goodnes ſhould make vs to ouercome al temtations which otherwyſe myght ouerthrow vs.
            Furthermore, if he reproue vs, and cauſe vs to feele our ſynnes: that we runne vnto hym, and take the condemnation vpon vs: For we ſhall gayne nothynge by all oure ſtartynge hoales: yf we wyll pleade, of neceſſitie the caſe muſte paſſe wyth hym. Then when we ſee that God is iuſte in puniſſhynge vs for oure ſynnes, let vs come wyth head bowed downe, that we maye be releued by hys mercye: and let vs haue no other confidence, nor truſte of ſaluation, but in thys that it pleaſeth him in the name of oure ſauioure Ieſus Chriſt, to receaue vs to mercye, for as muche as in vs there is nothyng but curſednes.
            Nowe let vs throwe oure ſelues downe before the maieſtie of our good God, in the acknowledgynge of oure ſynnes, beſechynge hym, that more and more, he wyll make vs to feele them, and that he wyll in ſuche ſorte cleanſe vs from all oure fylthyneſſe, that we beynge perfectly awaked from oure dull drowſineſſe, maye grone and ſobbe: not onelye for the miſeryes that we ſee in the world throughe our ſynnes: but alſo bycauſe we ceaſe not ſo muche as in vs lyeth, more and more to augement the ſame.
            And yet alwaye lette vs runne to oure God, and although it ſemeth that he perſecuteth vs, and that hys hande be verye roughe and dreadfull vnto vs, yet let vs not ceaſe to approche vnto hym, and magnifie hys goodneſſe: beynge aſſured that it ſhall very well ſurmount farre, and exccade all oure faultes and offences.
            
               And though we fele no rigour in him, yet neuertheles let vs acknowledge that it is much better for vs to draw home to his houſe, and vnder his ſafegarde, than to runne away from hym as wretched deſpering perſons, & let vs beſeche him to geue, not only vnto vs this grace, but alſo to all peoples. &c.
         
         
            
            THE SECONDE ſermon.
            
               ☞My lyfe is withdrawen, it is chaunged as a ſhepeherds lodge. I haue cut of my dayes as a weauer, he hathe oppreſsed me with ſicknes. From mornyng vntill night thou ſhalt conſume me. I made rekenyng to go vntill morning, but he hath bruſed my bones as a Lion. Thou ſhalt deſtroy me from morning to night, and ſhalt make an ende of me. I chattered like a Crane, and ſwalow, & mourned like a Doue, my eyes wer lift vp on high, and they failed me. Trouble oppreſseth me, Lord refreſch me. What ſhall I ſay, it is he that hath ſpoken it, and it is he alſo who hath done it.
            
            
               EZechias continuynge the matter whiche yeſterdaye was entreated of, ſayeth here that hys lyfe was chāged as a ſhepherdes lodge. By this ſimilitude he ſheweth that there is no reſte in the life of man, which he had proued in him ſelfe, for as much as he was as it were at reſt, & in one moment God toke him oute of this worlde. When we make a compariſon of our bodies with our houſes where we are lodged, it is likely that the bodye of man which is more than the houſe, ſhoulde haue ſome reſt: For what is ye houſe, but a place for the bodye

to reſort vnto? For they are builded for the vſe of men.
                  Math. 6. He then whiche dwelleth in any buildynge, ought to be preferred to the houſe, as the bodye to the gowne, and other garmentes. But Ezechias ſaith here, that he dwelt in thys world as a ſhepeherd: who hath his litle cottage which he draweth and carieth hyther, and thether. He ſpeaketh after the cuſtome of that countrey, bycauſe men there kepe theyr foldes, and a ſhepeharde wyll cary hys lodgyng as eaſely as a man would cary any lyght thyng: he ſheweth them in ſumme, that his life was none other thing then a wanderyng, and that God chaunged him by and by. He ſpeaketh after the opinion whiche he had conceaued: for he was as it wer vpon the brinke of the pit. And in dede it was neceſſarye, that he ſhould diſpoſe him ſelfe to die ſeyng God had ſent him ſuche a meſſage as is ſaide. To be ſhorte he ſpeaketh as if the thing wer already come. Now afterwarde he commeth to the cauſe of his ſicknes, and confeſſeth that he is culpable. He ſaieth that he him ſelfe had cut of his daies: euen as a weauer hauyng a pece of clothe vpon his Loome ſhould cut it all of. I may not then (ſayeth Ezechias) accuſe any parſon: for this euyll oughte to be imputed to me onely: for I haue prouoked the wrath of God, and haue depriued my ſelfe of hys bleſſyng, therfore muſte I nowe blame my ſelfe of all this.
            Nowe thoughe he do ſpeake here but of one man alone, yet we haue thereby a good admonition of the ſhortneſſe of oure owne lyfe alſo. Trueth it is, that it is a thynge well ynoughe

knowen vnto vs, and yet we do verye ſeldome thyncke of it. For althoughe we do confeſſe thys preſent lyfe to be nothyng els but a ſhadowe: yet are we ſo wrapped therein that no man thinketh vpon any other thinge, but to make prouiſion for a hundreth yeres. And to be ſhort, it ſemeth that we ſhould neuer depart from this world, we are ſo occupied on things of the world. So much the more then ought we to call that to mynde which the ſcripture ſheweth vs of the frailtie of our life, as ſ. Paule alſo ſaith that now we are lodged in a cabine:2. Corin. 5. the body of a mā is not a houſe worthy to be called a goodly dwellyng, or buyldyng: for in it is nothing but trāſitory, wherfore let vs mourne wayting tyll we may be fully reſtored, and let vs not be tyed ſo to this world but that alwaies we may be goyng forward. For the vnfaithful how ſo euer it be, they ſhall come to theyr ende: but by no meanes come they neare vnto God, but rather they are ſettled in this worlde, and in the ſteade of goynge forewarde, they do drowne them ſelues more depelye in it. Let vs then learne to goe forwarde, that is to ſaye, let vs learne to be ſo dyſpoſed to folowe God when he calleth vs, that death maye neuer come to vs before his time.
            Touchyng this that Ezechias ſaieth, that he was cauſe of his owne euil, let vs alſo practiſe well this doctrine. So ofte, and when ſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe God to afflicte vs, we ſe that we are gyuen to murmurynges: and although it be ſo that wee bee founde gyltye of oure

faultes, yet ceaſe we not to vexe our ſelues, as yf God paſſed meaſure. So then, that we may confeſſe with a true humilitie that God doth puniſh vs iuſtly in all thafflictions which he ſendeth vs, let vs ſaye after the maner of Ezechias: it is I that am cauſe of this euill.
            It is true that by and by he attributeth that to God: but they both agre very wel, to wyt, that man be authour of al the miſeries yt he endureth, and that God neuertheles worketh as a Iudge. For when an euil doer ſhalbe puniſhed, he ought not to complaine of his Iudge: but rather for as muche as he ſeeth him ſelfe to haue offended the lawes he ſhould condempne him ſelfe, and alſo he ſhould know that God by thauctoritie of iuſtice brought him to that iuſt puniſhment, euē ſo muſt we do: that is to ſay, that fyrſte we acknowledge that if God do afflicte vs, it is not bycauſe he taketh pleaſure in tourmēting vs: but that he muſt rewarde vs as we haue deſerued, thoughe yet he hath not altogether regarde to our offences: For what a thinge ſhoulde that be? we ſhoulde be an hūdred thouſand times ouerwhelmed if he wold vſe rigour towardes vs: but accordynge to that, which he knoweth to be good for vs, he chaſteneth vs, although we haue our mouth alwayes cloſed, and that no murmuryng eſcape thereout.
            And nowe to the reſt, whan we ſhall knowe that we haue prouoked his angre, let vs vnderſtande that we may not go fourther than our ſelues, to ſay who is ye cauſe of this? but let vs ſimplie accuſe our ſelues. Lo now in ſūme what we haue to learne of this matter. Now it foloweth, From the morninge to the nyghte, thou ſhalte

bringe me to naught.
            
            In which wordes Ezechias ſheweth howe horrible the diſpleaſure of God is, for he meaneth that god nede not deuiſe this policie, or that, whē he would be reuenged on mē: but if he ſpeake the worde, the thinge ſhall forthwith be done. To be ſhort he ſheweth here what the power of God is, on the one ſide, and what the frailtie of man is on the other ſide. And that is to pull out of vs al the foliſh imaginations that we conceiue, in making our ſelues beleue that we may eſcape his handes. And weſe howe men drawe backe alwaies: and although God handle them ſtreighly, they think they may finde ſome way howe to flee from hym. To be ſhorte, we thruſt out time with oure ſholders (as the prouerbe is) and promiſe our ſelues, leyſure enoughe, and thoughe the corde be ſtraite, yet we conceiue ſtill ſome vaine hope. And what is ye cauſe therof? that we haue not reſpect to our frailtie: for there is no minut of tyme, when deth threateneth vs not: And if we are now ſtanding vpright, at the turning of a hande, behold we are fallen. On the other ſide we are ignoraunt of the infinite power of God: For if he do but once laye his hande vpon vs, he nede not do it the ſeconde time, it ſhall ſuffice that he onely blow on vs, and loe, we ſhall be broughte to nothinge. It is not without a cauſe that Ezechias ſayeth here, that from morning tyll night, he ſhalbe brought to naught.
            
            For we heare alſo that we are not ſuſtained, but in this that God geueth vs ſtrength:
                  Pſal. 104. but if he withdraw his ſpirite, it muſt nedes come to paſſe that we beyng troubled, muſt immediatly fayle.

But if he ſhewe him ſelfe to be againſte vs, and that he perſecuteth vs, then muſt we be yet more ſtriken downe.
            Folowynge then the admonition of Ezechias, let vs after conſider howe feble we are, and let vs acknowledge what we be of oure ſelues: To witte, that euery minute God ſuſtaineth vs: but that death neuertheles beſegeth vs, and that it neede not make any great aſſaute to ouerthrow vs: for one blaſt onely were ynoughe. And loe ſtreight waies we ſhold be withered like graſſe:
                  Eſay. 40. as we ſhall ſe in the fourtie Chapter of Eſay.
            Moreouer let vs acknowledge what the wrathe of God is when it is armed agaynſt vs. For God is not lyke vnto creatures, ſo that he ſhoulde nede to arme him ſelfe, and to make great preparatiō, for ſo ſone as he ſpeketh the word, we ſhall fourthwyth be deſtroied by his only word. Seynge it is ſo then, let vs learne to walcke in carefulneſſe, commyttynge oure lyues into hys handes, and let vs knowe that we are nothynge at all, but in ſo muche as we haue oure beynge in in him: And ſo muche reſt as it pleaſed hym to geue vs, let vs attribute it whollye to his grace, and ſo when he prolongeth our life: for we ſhould be as men without ſtrength, yf he would ſhewe but one onely droppe of his power agaynſte vs.
            Note then what we haue to marke vpon thys place, where he ſayeth:
            
               From mornynge vntyll nyght.
            
            Now he addeth that he chattered as a Crane or as a ſwallowe, and that he mourned like a Doue.
            
            
               Wherin he meaneth that anguiſhe helde him in locked in ſuche ſorte, that he had not ſo muche as a word fre to expreſſe hys paſſyons. If a man crye and lament, and make hys complaintes, and declare hys euyll, it is then to be ſayde that he is ſore troubled: but when a man is ſo ſtriken down that he can not declare what he ayleth, when he ſtammereth ſo in him ſelfe, that he can not draw forth one onely worde to declare howe vehement hys paſſyon is: when he nowe ſygheth, nowe bryngeth forth halfe a worde, and the reſt kepte in, as if one had his throte locked vp: thys is a greate extremitie. Ezechias then ſayeth that he was ſo. Now there is no doubt, but that he had hys reſpecte vnto God cheifely: As if he ſhoulde ſaye, that menne perceaued well ynoughe the heauyneſſe that he was in: But whan that he woulde frame anye requeſt vnto God, he was as it were dombe, & that on the one ſyde the ſickneſſe troubled hym, and yet he coulde not plainelye expreſſe what he ayled: ſo that he was in two extremities. Thone, yt he was in ſuch ſort locked vp within, yt with great payne could he fetch out any cōplaint. The other yt he was oppreſſed wt ſo vehement paſſyons, that he wyſte no wheare to begynne to make his Prayer. But thys maye be thoughte very ſtraunge, that Ezechias who before had in him ſelfe ſo greate ſtrength, ſhoulde now be ſo faint harted yea, as it were brought to naught: but that was becauſe he had a ſpirituall conflict, felynge his ſinnes, and knowynge that God was his iudge: for (as we touched yeſterday) this trouble ſurmounteth all the other.

It is very likely that Ezechias had an extreme paine, wherwith he was throughly ſtrikē down: And alſo it may be coniectured that it was ſome burnyng peſtilence. Beholde then that his paine was great in it ſelfe: but that was nothing in cō
               pariſon of the conceiuing of Gods wrath, whē he behelde his ſinnes, and knewe God to be armed againſt him as his aduerſary, and that it was he that perſecuted him. This was it that in ſuche ſorte affraied him: And in dede, whan a man is brought to that point, all his courage and iolytie muſt of neceſſitie faile: for what is the conſtancie of a man to ſtande againſt the wrath of God? It muſt nedes be more then a frenſie and mad rage, when a man wyll thinke to do ſo. It is true that a man may be conſtant to indure afflictions when God ſhall ſende them: but how? ſo farre forth as he ſhall be ſtrengthened of God. Agayne if men trouble or moleſt one, he will cōſider that he hath to do wt creatures: if he ſuffer any trouble, well, he biteth on the bridle: but whē God ſummoneth vs to appeare, and maketh vs to fele that we are giltie before him, and that preſently we muſt render an accompt, that our ſinnes threaten vs, and that in the meane time we perceiue eternal death to abide vs: there (as I haue ſaide) can we not thinke that we haue any ſtrength to make oure partye good, except we were more then in a mad rage. Let vs not then think ſtraunge if Ezechias be ſo ſtricken downe, for he hathe not to do wyth reſiſtyng ſorowe, neyther with withſtandyng iniuries done vnto him on mens behalfe: neyther b
                  •
               yng down his ſholders to endure any afflictiō, but he hath to fight agaynſt God.

and howe could he perfourme that? than muſt he nedes be as a water that is powred out and ſpilt. See nowe what is the cauſe that he could frame no maner of complaint to expreſſe his griefe, and yet could he neuer kepe ſilence. Se alſo why Dauid ſayde that ſumtymes he helde his peace, and by and by after he ſet on crying and roring out,
                  Pſal. 23. & yet felt no releaſe. We ſe that the paſſiōs of Dauid were like to theſe of the good king Ezechias: as in deede he alſo addeth that his ſynnes troubled hym, and that he was affrayed of the wrath of God, he kept not then any certain rule or meaſure, but ſumtyme he caſte out ſighes, he lyfte vp him ſelfe, and anone after he was ſo caſte downe that he could not recouer his breath, and yet ſtyll the payne continewed.
                  Pſal. 39. And in an other place he ſaith yt he held his peace as if he had bene bridled, & had concluded in hym ſelf to vtter not one word more: no (ſaith he) I wyll be as a dome creature. I wyll not ſpeake, I wyll not brynge forthe one ſillable: yet notwithſtanding (ſaith he) I felt the griefe increaſe, and kindle more and more, euen as a fyre that is long kept very cloſe, if it be opened then the ſtrength encreaſeth & ſheweth greater force, and breaketh out in a flame, ſo Dauid proteſteth that in his anguiſhe, when he had determined to kepe ſilence and to ſay neuer a word, euen then was he deceaued, and ſhewed all that was hyden in his harte, although it were not by wordes well ordred and placed. And to be ſhort, they that knowe in deede what the wrathe of God is, wyll ſpeake and crye, and yet they know not on whiche ſide to begin: and again when they holde their peace they wote not why they doe it:

but they ar alway in anguiſh. And we ſe a notable exāple of al theſe things in ye good king Ezechias.
            It is trew that God doth not examine al mē a lyke with ſuche extremitie: for if he exerciſe vs it ſhalbe according to our weaknes: he ſeeth that we ſhall not be able to endure ſuche tormoiles and aſſualtes. He ſpareth vs thē: but whē it ſhall pleaſe him to proue vs in ſuch ſorte as we reade here in the example of kyng Ezechias: We muſte then be armed with this doctrine. This it is then that we haue to beare away. Now to the reſt: let vs lerne what is al the conſtantie of men. They may well ſhewe ſome token of valiantnes when God doth not ſhew forth his force againſt them, but ſo ſone as he ſhall call vs to accompt, thē nedes muſt all that luſtines whiche we thynke that we haue within vs, droupe and vaniſhe awaye. This is it that we muſt practiſe for our inſtruction to learne true humilitie, for we know that men do cōmonly reſt in theyr owne preſumption and truſt in them ſelues. And what is the cauſe of that? but for that euery man hath an eye to his felow, and therefore think we our ſelues to be ſtrōgly fourniſhed. But we ought to lift vp our wit to God, for there ſhold we finde, that ſo ſone as he ſetteth vpon vs we become as nothynge. Let vs then learne to knowe what it is to plonge our ſelues downe to the bottome in one minute, ſo ſone as God maketh vs to fele his wrath: Let vs alſo learne that vntil we be ſpoiled of all cōfidence in our ſelues, we can not be ſet in ye array of right humilitie. For ſo long as mē haue any opiniō of thēſelues, & think yt they cā do this or yt, it is certaine yt they robbe god of yt which belōgeth vnto him, & ſo whē they lift vp thēſelues without ſtay to reſt vpō, it is to breake theyr own neckes. This it is thē yt we haue to hold in memory,

that all the imagination of mē when they truſt in their own ſtrengthes is nothing but a dreame, bicauſe they loke not vpō God, & do not there ſtay themſelues, yt they mighte be ſpoiled of all vayne ouerwening of thē ſelues. Nowe when we heare ſpeake of ſuch a chattering, & that Ezechia cōfeſſeth yt he could not bring forth one word, but yt he ſtāmered, not wottyng what to ſay: let vs knowe that whē our Lord ſhal preſſe vs in ſuch ſort that we ar not able to frame one requeſt, or to haue one formall prayer, the gate yet ſhall not be locked againſt vs, but yt we maye haue acceſſe vnto him: Which I ſpeak bicauſe this tentation is very dā
               gerous. It is true that if we perceiue not in oure ſelues a zele to pray vnto God, & alſo a diſpoſition to way depely the promiſes whiche he geueth vs, to take boldnes to approche vnto him, yt ought to diſpleaſe vs, & we oughte to thinke yt we are farre frō him on our behalfe: but yet we muſt ouercome this tentatiō. Thē when a man ſhall fele himſelf in ſuche troble yt he can not bring forth one worde to pray to God, that he ſhalbe there throwē down & that he ſhal not know at what end to begin, yet muſt he pray how ſo euer it be, & in what ſort: at ye leaſt, let vs chatter, yt is to ſay, let vs caſt forth grones▪ & ſighes▪ which may ſhew̄ ſome exceſſiue paſſiō, as if we wer euē there vpō ye rack, & God heareth euē thoſe groninges: as alſo we ſe yt ſ. Paule ſaith, yt the holy goſt moueth vs to vnſpekable grones, ſuch as can not be expreſſed.
                  Roma. 8. Therefore if one would make an arte of Rethorick of ye praiers of ye faithful, it is a great abuſe: for our lord hūbleth vs to this end, yt we ſhold not imagine to obteine any thing at his hāds by any fair tale: he had rather yt we were ſo confuſed, yt we had not only one word

a right in oure praiers, but that nowe we ſhoulde caſt out puffynges, and blowinges, and anon that we ſhould abide ſtyll with ſilence: alas my God, alas what ſhal I do? and when we ſhall mourne ſo, that we ſhould be ſo wrapped in, and tangled, that there ſhould neither be begynnynge nor ending. Thē when we ſhalbe brought to that point, our lord knoweth this kind of lāguage, although we vnderſtande it not, and although our perplexities hinder vs, that we can not bringe forthe one perfect ſentence, ſo that men alſo vnderſtande not what we would ſay: yet God (as we haue ſaid before) wyll heare vs well ynoughe. Se then what we haue to learne at this time: that if troubles oppreſſe vs, ſo that Sathan by meanes therof go about to exclud vs that we ſhold not pray to God, but yt we ſhould be as it were afraied of hym, yet let vs not ceaſe to preſēt vnto god theſe gronings, although they be cōfuſe. Now Ezech. after ſaith: That he made rekening vntill euening, & that God brake all his bones, as yf he were in the throte, and betwene the clawes of a Lyon. In ſaying that he made reckening vntil night, he meaneth that he caſt his accōpt, well then I will ſe what will happen betwene this and nyght: but (ſaith he) the euill encreaſed: for I knew not yet ſufficiently the terrible & dredfull mighte of God, when he ſetteth him ſelfe agaynſt a pore creature. Now then we haue yet to lerne, that by the word of God, we haue bene taughte what is his force, and that we haue alſo fealte it by experience, althoughe we conceaue thereof but a portion onely. For God ſhall exalt him ſelfe in ſuche ſorte, as we ſhall perceiue that all that we thoughte of hym

before was but a ſmal ſhadow. So thē let vs lerne to cōſider what is ye power of God, & therunto to applie al our wit & ſtudies, & to be deſirouſly minded to walke in his feare, & to dread his maieſtye, knowing yt he doth let vs fele but a ſmal taſt of his ſtrength. For if he would lay hard to our charge, we ſhould finde yt whiche we before thought was as a farre of, & as it were in a dreame. This was it that the good kyng Ezechias ment to expreſſe, that we ſhould learne by his exāple not to recken without our hoſte, but yt we ſhould know ye marueilous are the iudgementes of God, & the corrections which he ſendeth to puniſh the ſins of men, and yt then we ſhould thinke that we haue not yet cōprehēded all, for our capacitie is to ſclēder. But that we are guided vnto it a farre of, yt is to ſaye, that if ſo be, yt when God doth chaſtiſe and correct vs, we be forthwith taken with feare, & thoughe we be dull witted, yet he maketh vs to fele what and how mighty is his maieſtie, we may imagine that it is a hundred thouſand times more thā our ſpirites can conceaue, and that therby we may be alway ſo muche the more ſtyrred vp to feare him.
            Now as to the ſimilitud of the Lyon, it ſemeth that Ezechias doth here a wrong to God, for this is not to ſpeake of him with ſuche reuerence as he deſerueth to compare hym to a cruell beaſt, yt deuoureth, bruſeth, deſtroieth, teareth & breaketh al.
                  Eſay. 103. And we know yt the ſcripture preacheth vnto vs of God, cleane cōtrary thereunto, yt is to ſay, that he is kind, pitiful, pacient, ful of mercy, ful of equitie & mildnes: briefly that he beareth ſuch loue to men, yt he deſireth nothing but to handle thē deintely as his owne children. Seyng thē it is ſo that

God declareth himſelf to be ſuche a one, it ſemeth that Ezechias ſpeaketh blaſphemy in comparing him to a lion: But the good kinge meant not here to proteſt againſt God: but onely he hath declared his paſſions, & he did it not to preache hys own praiſes, as we haue already ſene, but he had rather to receaue this ſhame, euē to ye ende of the world, yt men might know what his frailtie was, & that we ſhould haue ſuch inſtruction thereby as might profit vs. And thus Ezechias hath not ſpared himſelf, but hath ſet him ſelf out vnto vs for an exāple yt we might ſe how he was takē with feare & therby learne our ſelues to feare God, & alſo to arme vs wt his promiſes whē we ſhal come in ſuch troubles, to thend yt we may cōtinew to cal vpon him: & though we faile in al this, & become altogether cōfuſed, yet let vs ſtill hold this point to offer our ſelues to god, to ſēd forth vnto him our ſighes & groninges. And this is it yt we haue hereby to learne. Now is it not wtout cauſe yt Ezechias cō
               pareth God to a liō, for (as we haue ſene before) al the peines yt we ſhal fele in our bodies, & al ye greues yt we may cōceiue are nothing in cōpariſon of this cōceuing of the wrath of god, & this is ye cauſe yt we ſay yt the ſpirituall battailes are much more hard thā al other tētations yt we can haue. We cal ſpiritual battails, whē god cōpelleth vs to caſt an eye vnto our ſinnes, & on the other ſid ſo awaketh vs yt he maketh vs haue in mynd what his wrath is, & to cōceue yt he is our iudg, & yt we be ſūmoned to appere before him, to render accōpte. This is a battel which we cal ſpiritual, which is much more heauy, & much more terrible thē all the ſorrowes, anguiſhes, feares, tormēts, doubts & perplexities yt we may haue as in the world. Nowe when we ſhalbe come thus farre, we may not maruel if god

be vnto vs as a liō, as to yt we fele of him, for thys word is not here ſpoken as touchinge the nature of God. And when he hath thus turmented the king Ezechias, it is not for yt he hath forgottē his goodnes & mercy, which on thotherſid he ſheweth vnto him. But it was nedefull yt Ezechias ſhould firſt know himſelf to be in the hāds of God, as betwene the pawes, & in the throte of a liō, & ſo muſt it be that we come to the ſame point as I haue already ſaide, for otherwiſe God can not winne vs. There is ſuche an arrogancye in vs yt we alwaye think our ſelues to be ſtrong & mightie, & that we can neuer be beaten down but with a great thonder and lightening. And foraſmuch as we can not magnifie the power of God as it ought to be, we talk of it, & we think ſomwhat of it, but we do not geue vnto it an infinite greatnes ſo as we be rauiſhed when we think of it, & ſo as it occupie all our ſenſes in ſuch ſort as it ought. It behoueth therfore yt our lord do (as a man wold ſay) trāſfigure him ſelf, yt is to ſay, make himſelf terrible more thā all ye lions in the world, & that he declare himſelfe vnto vs wt ſuch a power yt we be vtterly afraid wt all, euē as if we eſpied a hūdred deathes. For the wrath of god is not only to make vs die: but we ſe the gulfes of hell opē whē god ſheweth himſelf as our iudge. It is therfore no maruel if we be thē ſo aſtoniſhed, as if a liō ſhoulde teare vs in peces betwene his pawes, & break our bones wt histeth, & if we cōceiue ſuch horror whē god is againſt vs: frō hēce thē procede al theſe cōplaints yt we ſee in the Pſalmes. They yt ar not exerciſed in theſe batails & perplexities, think yt Dauid meant to make his trouble greater thā it was, or they thinke it likely that he was very delycate? but when we come to the profe, we fele yt there is not one word to much

for the ſtormes that the faythfull fele when God ſearcheth them earneſtly and to the quicke, ſurmount al that may be expreſſed with mouth. Let vs not thinke then that this ſimilitude that is here put forth by the kyng Ezechias is ſuperfluous, for we ſhall finde the maieſtie of God a great deale more dreadefull then all the woordes here conteined can expreſſe, when it ſhall pleaſe hym to call vs to accompt, and make vs fele that he is a iudge: for if the mountayns tremble before him and melt away, howe may we that are nothynge ſtande before hym? So then let vs note wel whē ſomtime god taketh frū vs ye taſt of his goodnes, & we ſhall thynk our ſelues to be cut of from his kyngdome, and perceyue nothing but our ſinnes whiche are as great heapes of wood to kindle the fire of his wrath, and when we cōſider only that foraſmuche as he is aimyghty, it muſt nedes bee that he ſtryke vs with lyghtning & ouerwhelme vs. When we fele theſe thynges we muſt nedes be altogether oppreſſed vntyll he releue vs. And in dede in one minute of tyme we ſhall be plunged euen to the depth of hell, were it not that he helde vs faſt by the hand, and that we were after a ſecrete maner ſtayed by hym, although we ſee not howe. Loe this is a doctrine whiche ought to ſerue vs on the one ſide to humble vs that we may forget all the ſtrengthe whiche men thynke to haue in them ſelues, and reſte our ſelues vpon the maieſtie of God, and that we bee altogether throwen downe vnder that maieſtie, and yet neuertheleſſe that we may knowe the ende and neceſſitie that we haue of hym to vpholde vs, euen after an incomprehenſible maner. And when we

ſhall thinke that he hath altogether forſaken and forgotten vs, let vs be aſſured that yet he wyll holde vs by the hande, we ſhall not perceiue it, but yet he wyll doe it, and we can neuer get out of ſuche a maze vnleſſe by his infinite mercye he drawe vs out: as it is certaine that Ezechias had neuer bene releued, if God by his holy ſpirit had not ſuſteined hym within, and enlyghtened hym whyle he was in theſe great troubles. Now after he hath ſo ſayde, he added. Lorde, the payne vexeth me ſore, comfort thou me. But what ſhall I ſay? It is he that hath done it euē as he hath ſayde it. Here Ezechias confeſſeth in ſumme that (as touching him ſelf) he is vanquiſhed, and that there is no remedy without God helpe, and ſet hym ſelfe as pledge. The word that he vſeth ſignifieth ſome time to anſwer for, which mē terme to be ſuretie, it may then be thus expreſſed. Lord be thou my ſuretie in this extremitie, for I can no more. Thou ſeeſt that there is no more power in me, then muſt thou aunſwere as ſuertie for me in my place. And this worde alſo is often among the complaintes of Iob. But it ſignifieth alſo to refreſhe, and all come to one point, to wit, as we haue touched before, that Ezechias knew that he had no ſtrength and that he muſte nedes periſhe as touching him ſelfe: as if a man ſhould declare that he hath nothing to ſatiſfie his creditour that which he oweth, he commeth then to God for refuge. Nowe haue we here yet an other good admonition whiche is that we can not call vpon god as we ought except we be led to this reaſō to make our ſelues as nothing. For while mē kepe I wote not what remnant, it is ſure that they

ſhal neuer cal vpon God but by halfes. We muſt then be ſo brought in ſubiection that being altogether ſtripped naked of our ſelues, our folly may conſtrayne vs to ſeke in God that whiche wanteth in our ſelues. Loe this is one thing to be noted: Yet in the meane time we are aduertiſed not to be diſcouraged when God ſhal ſo haue ſpoyled vs that we ſhalbe voide of all ſtrength. For we may yet moue our matter vnto hym folowynge the ſteppes of Ezechias. Lord I can no more, ſo I beſeche thee that thou wylt eaſe me. Loe this it is that we haue to learne of this place. But it is true that we are not alway preſſed as Ezechias was, but howe ſoeuer it be, though the conſtraint be not ſo violent, yet ought we to be ſpoyled and voide of all falſe perſwaſion of our owne ſtrength that God may be glorified as he is worthy. And in the meane tyme as I haue ſayde, let vs followe with our prayers and requeſtes vnto God, though we be ſo vanquyſhed that we haue not one whit of ſtrengthe in vs, let vs neuertheles haue our recourſe to our God, & he ſhall geue vs that whiche we want, for aſmuche as in hym lieth all the fulneſſe of good thynges.
            Nowe he further addeth, and what ſhall I ſaye? for he that hath ſpoken hath alſo done it. Here ſome thynke that Ezechias woulde nowe reioyſe felyng the delyueraunce whiche God had ſent hym that he breaketh all his complayntes whiche he vſed, and that now he hath his mouth open to confeſſe the goodneſſe of God. But the naturall meanyng of the text beareth it not. Rather Ezechias breaketh his matter to ſhewe the anguiſhe whiche ſuffered hym not to continue as

he would gladly haue done. And we ſee manye ſuche examples in all the Pſalmes where there is ſome declaration of the chaſtiſementes whiche God ſent eyther to Dauid or to his other ſeruauntes. Then when God hath ſo ſharply afflicted his people, ther haue bene ſuch like requeſtes as nowe and then the faythefull enterlace alwayes, I wote not howe, as if they were vtterly caſt awaye. So doth Ezechias now.
                  Pſal. 39. And there is an example verye lyke in the nyne and thirtye Pſalme, whiche we haue already alledged. For there Dauid alſo acknowlegeth that he had to do with God. It was then muche to knowe that men perſecuted hym, but when he ſawe the hand of God to be againſt hym, I maye not (ſayd he) come to plede here, nor to purſue actions, there is nothyng better for me than vtterly to kepe ſilēce and take the condemnaciō vpon me. And in Iob we ſee many ſuche lyke complayntes. Nowe let vs come to the meaning of Ezechias. What ſhal I ſay? it is he whiche hath ſayd and he alſo hath done it. He lamented not as they whiche founde no hope, for ſuche people wyll crye alas, but all their ſighes vaniſhe awaye on the ayre. Contrariwyſe Ezechias ſheweth vs here that if we wyll haue God to heare vs, we muſt open all our paſſions and ſorowes before hym, that we may be vnburthened, as it is ſaid in the Pſalme. Ezechias hetherto hath folowed this order, yt is that he hath opened al his perplexities and cares whiche he endured as if he layde them abrode rounde about God. But now he reproueth hym ſelfe. Alas ſayeth he: what ſhold I doe? for it is God hymſelfe whiche hath ſayde it and done it.

He hath ſent me this meſſage by his Prophet, that there was no hope of life, it is then in vaine that I pray vnto hym. What ſhall I auayle thē in all my prayers?, what ſhal I do? And I wote not whether he wil haue pitie on me. We ſe now howe Ezechias outraged againſt him ſelfe. It is true that ſuche diſputacion proceded of infidelitie, but it is neceſſary that there ſhould be in fidelitie in vs to the ende that our fayth might the better be proued. Yet this is not ment to ſpeake properly that we ſhoulde be infideles, when we are ſo toſſed with vnquietnes, but that we haue a feble faith & that our Lorde exerciſe vs in ſuche maner that we in the meane tyme maye knowe what we are, and that without him we ſhould be a hūdred thouſand times vāquiſhed euery houre. Lo in effect what Ezechias ment to declare here. What ſhall I ſay? For I fele not that the prayer and entreating whiche I can make, doth profit me, and why? God afflicteth me and I fele no maner of eaſe. I am afrayd to preſent my ſelfe before him. Yet neuertheles I truſte that my requeſt ſhall not be reiected of hym, although that I knowe for a truthe that when he ſpeaketh by the mouthe of his Prophet, he hathe forthwith ſtretched out his hande, and I fele by profe that thys meſſage is not as a threateninge of lyttle chyldren, but that God hath publiſhed and proclaymed warre againſt me, whiche he hath done as it were with fyre and bloud, and it appeareth that there is no more remedy.
            Nowe haue we here a good place to ſhewe vs that we ought to deſpiſe Sathan and al vnfaithfulnes, when we haue to doe with prayinge to

God, ſo that when we ſhall haue a hūdreth thouſand diſputacions, yet we ſhall not let to cōclude, ſo it is that I ſhall ouercome all maner of lettes in the ſtrengthe of my God, and I will ſeke him although he repulſe me, & though it appeare that he hath an hundred armies to thruſte me far frō hym, yet wyll I come vnto hym. Thus haue I tolde you howe we ought to be armed when we are to praye vnto God. For as we haue nede in all extremities to runne vnto our God, ſo muſt we knowe that Sathan applieth all his power to ſtoppe vs that we haue no acceſſe vnto God. And there is none of the faythfull whiche doeth not fele this more than he would deſire. But in the meane tyme let vs lerne to know the ſicknes, that in nede we may take ſuch remedy as is here geuen vs of God. When then the deuill ſhall ſet before vs: What ſhouldeſt thou doe to praye to God? And what thinkeſt thou that in ſo greate wretchedneſſe as thou feleſt in thy ſelfe, he wyll ayde thee? And what thinkeſt thou myſerable creature? to whome prepareſt thou to go? Is it not God himſelfe that doth perſecute thee? But let vs paſſe forwarde, this notwithſtanding, and force our ſelues to breake through al ſtayes treadyng vnder foote ſuche wandryng diſcourſes.
            Moreouer it chaunceth that being yet in ſome reſt if we lift vp our wit to God, by and by this commeth in our fantaſie. Alas what are we? ſhal we dare to approche vnto God? Howe ofte haue we offended him? And hereupon we ſometyme conclude to holde vs there ſtill. But yet ſuch diſputacions are very ill, and they are euen ſo many blaſphemies, if God would lay thē to our charge,

as when we make queſtiō or doubte whether we be hearde or no, certayne it is that this is a deadly offence, and if God dyd not vpholde vs in our febleneſſe, we coulde not but bee drowned. But howeſoeuer it be, after we haue bene condempned, after we haue felte that our ſpirite is wrapped in many diſpayres, and that we are in a maze: Yet for all that let vs take good courage, and after we haue ſayde, alas what ſhall I doe? let vs breake that ſtroke and ſaye: I muſte yet pray and ſeke for my God. And why? for he hath ſayde that he wyll heare them that ſeeke vnto hym, euen from the depeſt bottomes. Now then loe, this is the fit tyme when I muſt goe to him. This it is that we haue to learne of this doctrine of Ezechias, when we ſee theſe broken vnprofit tales, and that he hath chattred, and we ſee hys paſſions ſo exceſſiue that they torment hym. Let vs knowe that it was Gods pleaſure to ſhewe here a mirrour wherein we myght beholde our owne febleneſſe and the temtations whereunto we are ſubiect, that we ſhold fight againſt them, and ſtyll to followe on tyll we fele the relefe that he doth promyſe vs, euen as we ſhall fele in dede, ſo that we haue a true continuaunce and faile not by our owne ſlackneſſe and ſlouthfulneſſe in the mydwaye.
            Nowe let vs throwe oure ſelues downe before the maieſtie of our good God, acknoweledging our faultes, praying hym, that more and more he wyll make vs to fele them, vntyll ſuche tyme as we be vtterly ſpoyled. And though he haue alway muche to reproue in vs: Yet let vs neuer ceſſe to hope in his mercy, and that he wyll

make vs ſo to taſte the ſame in the name of oure Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, that it may geue vs a true patience in all our afflictions, and that we maye be ſo holden in his obedience that we deſire nothyng but to offre our ſelues vnto hym and by hym to bee throughly ſanctified. And that not only he graunt this grace vnto vs, but alſo to all peoples and nations.
         
         
            
            
               ☞What ſhall I ſaye? he who hath ſayde it hath alſo done it. I wyll walke leaſurly all the dayes of my lyfe in the bitternes of my ſoule. Lorde, to all thoſe that ſhall lyue hereafter, the life of my ſpirite ſhall he notable among them, in that thou haſt caſt me in a ſlepe, and haſt reuiued me. Behold in my proſperitie the bitternes was bytter vnto me: And thou haſt loued my ſoule, to drawe it out of the graue, becauſe thou haſt caſt my ſinnes behynd thy back.
            
            
               WE haue already herebefore declared that the good kyng Ezechias complayning that it is God that perſecuteth him, is more confuſed for that, than if he had all the men in the worlde his ennemies, and if they all had conſpired to tormente him, as of truthe it is a caſe muche harder & that ought to amaſe vs more without compariſon if God lyft vp him ſelfe againſt vs, than if all creatures did make warre vpō vs. Behold then the cauſe why Ezechias ſtandeth cōfuſed and in trouble, becauſe he well feleth that the thinge whiche God declared vnto him by his Prophet Eſaye, is nowe fulfilled in hym, and this it is that moſte toucheth vs to the quicke when we make compariſon, betwene the worde of God and that

which we fele of his iudgements. If God did ſimply but ſtrike vs, we might wel be throwen down wythall: but when he addeth alſo his word to reproue vs, to make vs know that it is he that doth chaſtiſe vs, yea and that for our ſinnes, lo this is a cauſe of muche greater confuſion. Expreſly then Ezechias ſaieth: Accordyng as he hath ſpoken he hath alſo done it, and therfore he doeth thereupon conclude that he hath nothing to replie agaynſt it. For if we had to do wt men, we might well make our complaintes againſte them, but when we are to accuſe God, the caſe muſt paſſe on his ſide. We may pleade for a tyme, but he ſhall alway be iuſtified, when we ſhalbe condemned. Therfore it is loſt tyme to thinke to amend our harme when we ſhall not eſcape condēnation before God, but when we deſire to ſtande in oure owne defence, and vſe murmuryng and complaint, all this doth nothing but enforce our euyl, euen ſo farre as to drown vs altogether. And therfore let vs kepe oure mouthe cloſe as it is ſayd in Iob: for that is it whiche the good kyng Ezechias meant in this place.
            Nowe further he ſaieth: That all the tyme of his lyfe he wyll walke in feare, & go on eaſily or ſoftly as a man whoſe pride is abated, & draweth his legges after him. Yea in the bitternes of his ſoule.
            
            Here Ezechias declareth that God hathe ſo engraued in hym the felyng of this correction, and hath ſo printed it in his hert, that the remembrāce therof ſhall neuer be blotted out. It maye manye tymes come to paſſe (and we finde it in profe ofter

than we nede) that when God preſſeth vs, we be altogether aſtoniſhed, & then we grone, & if we be to cōfeſſe our faultes wt humilitie, it is maruell to here vs. Brifly we be not niggardly in wordes, ether to ſhew ye greatnes of our grief, or to declare our faults, or to bleſſe the name of god. But we do nothing but ſhake our eares by & by after▪ & by the next morow after god hath geuē vs releaſe or reſt, we think no more of it. Lo in what ſort men be, & howe they ſeke God (as it is ſayd vnto the Prophet) while he doth draw them vnto him by force, then they cal vpon him, and confeſſe the det as we haue ſaid, but ſo ſoone as God ſpareth them, they are as they were before, they lift vp theyr heades like ſtagges, they do nothinge but reioyſe, where before they were ſo ſtriken down as nothing cold be more, their face was all amazed with feare, ſhortlye, there was euen nowe nothinge but ſorrow, and fourthwith they make great chere, they retourne to theyr delites, and (that more is) they fare as if they meant to deſpiſe God openlye. We ſe then this inconſtancie, this chaunge, this lightnes in maner in all men. On the contrary ſide Ezechias ſaith here that it is not only for the tyme preſent that he knoweth that God hath chaſtiſed him, but for ſo long as he ſhal liue in this world he ſhall alwaye haue minde of the correction that he hathe receaued, and he ſhall goe as wyth a tremblynge pace, for the worde whiche he vſeth, doeth ſome tyme ſignifie to go ſoftely, and ſometyme to remoue. Nowe in effecte, he meaneth to ſaye that he ſhall neuer haue ſtedfaſt pace, but he ſhall be ſo muche enfebled, that he ſhall be as a man drawen out of the ditch, or as he that hath a long time ben ſicke▪ he doeth with great paine drawe his legges

after him, and though he ſhewe him ſelfe abroade in the ſtretes yet men ſee well that, that is all he can do, & when he ſtandeth vp he ſemeth ſtyll readie to rele and ſtagger. Nowe ſee we in a ſumme what Ezechias meant to ſay. Hereby we are put in remembraunce not to thinke ſtraunge if God ſomtime afflict vs more rigorouſly than we wold. For we haue not ſufficiently profited by his roddes vntyll we be truely humbled for all oure lyfe after. Who is he that ſhall find thys in hym ſelf▪ Let euery one nowe looke, if a moneth after that God hath ſhewed him mercy he hathe reknowleged his faultes and tremble therat. But contrariwiſe (as I haue already ſaide) we ſeeke nothinge but to blot out all remembraunce of them, for we thinke it to be matter that moueth melancholie. Sithe then we ſo eaſily forget the roddes of God, let vs not maruell if after we haue bene once chaſtiſed he returne againe the ſeconde time and ſhew him ſelfe ſo ſharpe that we ſhall not knowe where to become. Wherfore behold what we haue to do
                  •
                that is, that during the corrections, and when we be in trouble we beare patiently the rigour of god, knowynge that it is not without cauſe that he vſeth ſo excedyng great ſharpenes againſt vs, and that it is bicauſe he knoweth we haue nede of it: take this for one note. And alſo for another note, that we endeuour to awake, bycauſe of the great ſlouthfulneſſe that is in vs, for we are ſo ſluggiſhe and ſo coolde, that it is a pitie to ſee. Let vs then durynge the tyme of oure affliction thyncke vpon all oure offences, that we may haue a felynge and conceauynge thereof engraued euen in the bottome of our herts, & when God hath deliuered vs,

Let vs ſtyll thinke vpon it, and let not the feling of our euill be only for one day or for a ſmall ſpace, but as we praye God to ſupporte vs, and to geue vs leiſure to bleſſe his name and to reioyſe in him, let vs ſo do it that he be not compelled cōtinually to ſtryke vs lyke aſſes, ſeing our careleſneſſe and the ſlowneſſe that is in vs. Let vs preuente the roddes of God vnleſſe we wyl haue them always tyed at our backes. And nowe lette vs note that Ezechias trembled in ſuche ſorte, that he ceſſed not to be holden vp by the hande of God, and to ſeke for comforte in God, knowyng well that he was mercifull vnto hym. But theſe two thinges agree well, that on the one ſide the faithful are alwayes in care fearing to ſtomble the ſeconde and thirde tyme when they haue once paſte a deadlye fall. And yet neuertheleſſe they take courage and truſt in God to walke frely, for as muche as they knowe that he wyll neuer fayle them. Loe this it is yt we haue to practiſe, on the one ſide to thinke vpon our ſinnes and offences, and to be moued with horrour, ſeing that we haue deſerued yt God ſhould ſet him ſelfe againſt vs, and that this do ſo cut vs that it make vs to walke tremblyngly, & as ſcant able to goe. Loe howe we oughte to bee throwen downe and humbled vnder the hande of God. For there is no queſtion hereof beynge to wylde, but rather we muſt knowe that the chiefe vertue of the faithfull when God doth affliet and puniſh them is to be as brought to naught, & yet alwaye drawynge our legges after vs to goe on our pace ſithe it pleaſeth God to ſhewe vs mercy. And that we know, that though we haue offēded him, yet he will alway continue his goodnes towarde

vs, he wil geue vs courage, and that therfore on the other ſide we become freſh agayne. Lo this is the ſumme that we haue here to learne of Ezechias.
            After he addeth that the bitternes became to him bitter in his proſperitie. Here he enforceth ye euill that he hath 
                  •
               elt, becauſe he was ſodenly taken with it, whē he thought he was at reſt & free from affliction. As on the other ſide we ſee that ye thing whiche is forſeen farre of, may be more patiently ſuffred. For what is the cauſe that diſcourageth vs when we are in afflictiō, but that euery one during his proſperitie maketh him ſelfe beleue that all ſhal go wel. If a man did thinke of the death of his father, or of his wife, or of his childrē, if he did think that his own life were ſubiect to calamities, it is certain that he woulde be prepared with defenſe againſt all temtations, ſo as he wold not be found ſo amaſed when thei come vpon him. But becauſe euery mā deceiueth him ſelf in vaine hope, that is it that troubleth vs out of meaſure, when our Lorde ſendeth any aduerſitie. Nowe Ezechias confeſſeth that it is ſo chaunced vnto him, and for this cauſe he ſayeth that hys griefe hath bene ſo much the more bitter for that it happened vnto him in his proſperitie. For we haue ſeene here before, howe God afflicted hym euen to the extremitie, that is to wete, when he was ſpoyled of his Realme, and that al his lande was waſted by his ennemies. He was beſeged in the town of hieruſalem, there he was brought vnder, there they mocked hym, there they ſpake of hym all ſhame and reproche that was poſſible, yea, euen the name of God was vilanouſlye blaſphemed.

Lo thus was Ezechias all confuſed. Herevpon God deliuered him miraculouſly, euen as if he had come downe from heauen to ſuccour hym. He ſeing that diſconfiture ſo great whiche was done by the hande of the aungel, reioyſed, and not without good reaſon, for God gaue him cauſe hauing declared ſuche a ſigne of fauour toward him, as if he had reformed all the worlde at his deſyre. But there was a fault, wherſoeuer it was, that is that he thinketh no more of his affliction paſſed, & reſteth him to muche, that is to ſay, he becometh careles and negligēt. Lo herfore now he ſaith that his ſorowe is come vpon him in his peace and in his proſperitie. Nowe here we haue a very profitable warning, that is to ſay, when we know the graces of God, we muſt ſo reioyſe that yet we for get not the tyme paſſed, and that for the tyme to come we alwaye haue our eſtate before our eyes, that is to ſay, that with the turning of a hand our lyfe ſhalbe turned into death, our light into darkeneſſe, as we ſee the dyuerſe chaunges in thys frayle life. Briefly let vs ſo magnifie the goodnes of God, when he aſſureth vs that he wil maintein vs in peace and at reſt, that in the meane tyme we ſtill conſider what our frailtie is, and let vs not be daſeled when God ſhall bleſſe vs and ſende vs all after our deſire, let not that (I ſaye) make vs fal to muche on ſlepe, but let euery man make him ſelfe ready when it ſhal pleaſe him to ſende vs any chaunge to receiue alwayes in feare, in humilitie, and in all pacience that whiche he wyll ſende vs. If we doe ſo, we ſhall not finde the hand of God ſo greuous nor ſo heauy vpon vs as we are wont to do. But whē we ar to ſound on ſlepe, although

we knowe the grace of God, wherof we preſently reioyſe, he muſt awake vs, yea and pluck vs hard by the eare, yea and laye great ſtrypes vpon vs.
                  Pſalm. 30. And here we haue one example in the kyng Ezechias, as we haue alſo an other in Dauid. For in the .xxx. Pſalme he confeſſeth that he was ſo dronke that felicitie had made hym to forget hys eſtate. I haue ſayde in myne abundance, I ſhall no more be ſhaken. And how ſo? Dauid had had ſo many prickes to pricke hym forwarde, he had bene exerciſed ſo many wayes to haue alwaies in mynde what the life of man was, and he did profit right well therin, for he had bene a long tyme as in the ſhadow of death. He had bene perſecuted of the people, being pryſoner among his ennemies, and hauing no minute of reſt. Then when God had ſet hym on the roiall ſeate, he concluded that he ſhoulde neuer ſtomble, and that he ſhould therein remaine peaſable. If Dauid hauinge the ſpirit of God in ſuche excellence as we know, hauing had ſo many profes that he was altogether rauiſhed vnto God, yet neuertheleſſe hath ſo forgot him ſelf: what ſhal become of vs? After he addeth. It was of thy free goodneſſe that I was vpholden O Lorde, thou haſt eſtablyſhed me as on a mountaine, but thou turnedſt thy face, and lo I was troubled. Thus ſheweth he his vnthākfulnes in that. For although he had not altogether forgot the bleſſing which he had receiued of ye hād of God, yet is it ſo that he did not thinke vpō this, god hath deliuered me once yt I ſhold alway haue my recourſe vnto him: knowing yt my life hā
               geth as by a thred except y• ſtay of it be on his goodneſſe, & that frō minute to minute he worketh▪ cō
               feſſing

that by and by I ſhould peryſhe if he continued not ſtill to ayde me. Dauid thought not vpon this▪ and he knewe alſo that he had fayled, and ſo he addeth after. Lorde thou haſt hyd thy face and behold I was troubled. So is it of Ezechias, he was in peace, and loe ſodeinly God woū
               ded hym ſo that the ſtripe was deadly, & he coulde not cōceiue any thing but ſuch an aſtoniſhment as if God had ſtriken him with lightning from heauen. Therfore of neceſſitie muſt it be that he receiued a terrible bitterneſſe.
            Nowe let vs applie this doctrine to our profit, and let vs not ſtay till God make vs with force of ſtrypes to know our infirmitie. But whyle he doth yet ſpare vs and whyle he hathe pitie of our febleneſſe, let vs not ceſſe to thynke of hym, and let vs feare hym, keping our ſelues hid as it were vnder his wynges, knowynge that we can not ſtand one minute without his ayde. To the reſt, if ſometime we be ouertaken, let vs know it was becauſe we were to faſt a ſlepe.
            He addeth a lytle after that God hath deliuered his ſoule, but he vſeth a maner of ſpech which emporteth more. He ſayth thou haſt loued my ſoule, or thou haſt had thy good pleaſure in it to plucke it back from the graue. By this circumſtance he magnifieth the goodneſſe of God ſo much ye more for that he is come to ſeke hym euen to the graue. For if God doe holde vs ſtyll in our eſtate, I graunt we therby knowe that we are beholding to him, but therm we knowlege it but very coldly. But if he deliuer vs from death, then we better perceiue howe good he is, for that in ſuche extremitie he as it were cometh downe vnto vs.

For it ſemeth vnto vs that we are not much boūd vnto God, if he preſerue vs in this life, bicauſe we take that to be but as an order of nature. True it is that the more he ſpareth vs ſo muche the more we ought to fele his fatherlye goodnes, but we do it not, and ſo by reaſon of our dulnes it is become nedefull that God work of another faſhion. Now then as I haue already ſayde, if that God plucke vs out of the graue, and that we haue bene as forſaken for a time, that it ſemed we were cut of from al hope, that euen men diſdaigned to loke vpon vs as if we were pore rotten carrions, if in this caſe God haue pitie vpon vs, in this he ſheweth vs ſo much greater brightneſſe to ſe his mercye, and ſo much more we haue occaſiō to acknowledge what and howe infinite his bountye is, in this that god hath ſo plucked vs backe from the death. Lo, this it is that Ezechias meant to ſay.
            Lord (ſaith he) thou haſt loued my ſoule: And how ſo? was there any thing in it that might moue God to loue it. Alas, no: for it was nothinge but ſhadow, a dead thing. I was (ſaith he) at the graue, and then thou declaredſt thy loue towarde me. when then we ſhalbe altogether diſfigured, & that God neuertheles wyll vouchſafe to caſte eye vpon vs, and to haue care of vs, in this we ought much more to be enflamed to bleſſe his name, and to geue him ſuch praiſe as doth here the good king Ezechias. Behold thē in a ſumme what we haue to learne of this place: that is, for aſmuch as God ſeeth that we are not touched enoughe with the good thinges that he hathe done for vs, nor wyth his graces, and that it is nedefull that we be ſo ſtriken downe, and in ſuche extremitie that there

be in vs no more hope of life, that when we ſhalbe as forſaken of him and of men, he maye then take vs to mercy. Thus are we earneſtly touched and made to geue him thankes, knowyng that he ſaw nothing in vs but miſeries when he ſhewed hys mercy vpon vs.
            Now he ſaieth alſo on the other ſide: Lorde, they that ſhall lyue after, ſhall know that the lyfe of my ſpirite hath bene prolonged. This place bicauſe of the ſhortnes therof is darke, for it is not a ſentence layd out at length, but they are as it wer broken wordes. He ſaieth in ſumme: Lorde they ſhall liue amonges them, and in them all the lyfe of my ſpirite, thou haſt caſt me on ſlepe, and thou haſt reuiued me. Bicauſe he ſpeaketh not here of the yeres in the beginning of the verſe, that is the cauſe of the ſhortnes. But when we loke nearer, we ſhall finde that Ezechias meant to ſay that the miracle whiche had bene done vpon his perſone ſhuld be knowē not only for a dai, but alſo after his deceaſe. Some men do expound it, yt God ſhall alſo prolonge the life of other: but that expoſition is not to purpoſe. For Ezechias meant to ſaye, that this was not a cōmon or ordinary benefit, but rather he hath felt that God hath wrought wyth him after an extraordinary faſhiō. Hereunto tendeth his porpoſe, yt this miracle of God ſhal neuer be put vnder fote, but thoughe he be dead, yet we ſhall ſtill talk of it. Before he ſaid I ſhal remember all the time of my lyfe howe I haue bene chaſtiſed, & I ſhall fele the ſtrokes: for I yet go ſtaggering with all. Now he ſtretcheth forther & largelier yt which he ſaide before, that is to ſaye, that not onely he him ſelf ſhalbe humbled before God,

but alſo all the world ſhall haue occaſion to ſaye: Behold here an act worthy of perpetuall memory that god hath done for a mā. For we ought to deſire yt all the good thinges yt God beſtoweth vpon vs, be alſo knowen of other, that they maye take enſample therof, & that they maye ſerue for theyr edification. And we ſe whē Dauid wold be heard in his requeſtes, he addeth commonly this reaſon▪ that euery man ſhall thinke of it, yt the good ſhalbe edified, & the wicked confounded. Lord (ſaith he) whē men ſhal ſe that thou ſo aſſiſteſt thine, al they that call vpon thee ſhall reioyce, & ſhalbe ſo muche more cōfirmed in waitynge for the like: & alſo the wicked ſhalbe cōfoūded & though they now mock at the truſt yt I haue in thee, ſeyng yt thou haſt afflicted me, if they knowe yt I haue not bene diſapointed when I haue had my recourſe vnto thee, they ſhalbe abaſhed. Thus much then ſaith Ezechias, now yt this miracle of God ſhall profit not onely him but alſo other, as a thing knowen & notorious to all. And after he amplifieth it, ſaying yt it ſhall not be for a ſmal time, but alſo after his deceaſe. For aſmuch as his lif hath ben ſo prolōged, it ſhall be talked of for euer. For (ſaieth he) thou haſt caſt me on ſlepe. This worde to caſte on ſlepe emporteth yt he was as it were in the graue, & after was reuiued. As in dede this miracle is euen yet at this day celebrate in ye church of god, & ſhal be to thend of ye world. So thē we ſe yt it hath not only profited one perſon alone, but hath bene a cō
               firmation generally to all ye faithful, in this yt they waite for God, to haue pitie vpon them in theyr neceſſitie to ſuccor them, and though he do not prolong theyr life in ſuch ſort yet yt he ſhall kepe them

to the ende, and that if he ſe them ſtriken downe, he ſhall lift them vp againe, he ſhall geue thē ſome token of his pitie, ſo that in life and deth they ſhall fele him alway theyr ſauiour, and ſhall know that they haue not bene forſaken nor geuē ouer of him. Loe wherunto this ſong is profitable, & to what intent it was made.
            Nowe ought we to haue ſuche like affection, as Ezechias had, to endeuour ſo much as ſhall lye in vs that the graces of God may be knowen of al the world, although they ſpecially perteine to vs. For when God doeth good to euery one of vs, we ought not onely in ſecrete to thank him, feling our ſelues bound vnto him, but to endeuour to publiſh the ſame, that other may be confirmed and hope in God, ſeyng ſuch a profe of his goodnes to thē that call vpon him: and that praiſe may be geuen hym in common as S. Paule ſaith, when the faithful ſhall all together praiſe God, that he hath bene deliuered, and that this geuynge of thanckes ſhall geue ſuche a ſounde, that this ſhalbe a cauſe why God ſhall alwaye deliuer him ſo muche the more that praiſes may be giuē to him by many. I graūt we oft do publiſh ſuch graces of God as we haue felt, but many do it by ambition and hipocriſie, for makynge a ſhewe to magnifie the name of God, they draw a part of the praiſe to them ſelues. Let vs beware of that, and let vs haue an vpright and pure affection, ſo as euery one may learne to loke vnto God, and to haue his hope wholy ſtaied vpon him, and let vs haue this zele and this feruent deſire that all creatures beare vs company when we are to bleſſe the name of God.
            Moreouer when God ſhall as it were haue

ſtriken vs dead, and reuiued vs by his grace, let this ſo much ye more moue vs to praiſe him. Ther is not ſo ſmale a benefit that deſerueth not thankes, and when we ſhall applie all oure wittes to thanke God onely for this that he nouriſheth vs, yet can we not aquite our ſelues of the hundreth part of our det. But if God vſe a more excellent maner to declare his fauour toward vs, and that the good thinges which he doeth for vs, are as it were wonderfull and incomprehenſible of men, our bond encreſeth ſo much the more, and we haue ſo much the leſſe excuſe if we be not then enflamed to praiſe him with full mouth, and to preache euerye where the goodnes that he hathe made vs to feele.
            After this Ezechias addeth that God hathe caſt his ſinnes behynd his backe. Here he leadeth vs back to that we ſaw before, that is, that al yt he endured was but the payment that was due vnto him for his faultes. And that nowe this that god hath bene mercifull vnto him, is for that he hathe hidden and buried his offences which brought all the euyll vpon him. This ſentence is worthye to be well noted. For (as we haue before declared) although we knowe well that aduerſities happen not vnto vs by chaunce, but that it is the hande of God that ſtryketh vs, yet ſo it is that we can not come to the true cauſe as we ought. And that is partly bicauſe euery one doeth flatter him ſelfe in his owne faultes, and partly alſo bicauſe we entre not in iudgement or examination of our owne life to knowe whether it hathe bene well ordred: for wyllingly we are very lothe to be diſquieted. And yet muſt we come vnto it, for that is ye true ſigne

of repentance when men of them ſelues ſearch the depth of their ſinnes, and tarry not till God force them vnto it, but they preſent thē ſelues vnto him they ſommon them ſelues ſo as they nede neyther ſargeant nor officer, but they examine themſelues and ſay: Alas, how haue I lyued? how ſtande I with God? When men of their own mynde enter into this triall, in this thei declare that God hath touched thē by his holy ſpirite. But this is a rare thing as I haue ſayde, on the one ſyde hipocriſie ſtoppeth vs that we examine not our owne faultes, and that we diſcouer them not, ſeking always to flee from the ſhame and to hide our owne euyl: yea and we ſay that the euill is wel, and we make our ſelues beleue that we haue not offended God, or at leaſt we make our faultes leſſe as if thei wer nothynge, and as if we neded but only wype our mouthes. Loe howe we are caried away by pride and ambition that is roted in our nature whē we come not rightly to God in knowledging what we are. On the other part we are deſirous to flee from ſorowe, as naturally it is a thyng that greueth vs. Now there is no ſorow ſo great as whē we thinke that God is our iudge, and that we ar euill doers before hym, for there we fele yt whiche before hath bene ſayde, that he breaketh our bones as a Lyon: the wrathe of God is ſo terrible a thyng that it is no maruell though we flee from it. And yet is this a faulte, for we oughte not to make our ſelues lyke to them that are ſo blockiſh that they wyll in no caſe thynke vpon that which they haue deſerued of God, that is the puniſhmēt wherof they ar worthy. For this cauſe we ought ſo muche the more to note thys doctrine where

Ezechias leadeth vs by his example to knowe our ſynnes, ſo ofte as the Lorde doth rygorouſlye handle vs, that we may not only knowe that it is his hand which afflicted vs, but alſo that then he ſerueth his proceſſe vpon vs, and accuſeth vs of the ſynnes that we haue committed, and bicauſe we would not of our owne mynde come to haue our cauſe tryed before hym, and to aſke hym pardon that he is dryuen to drawe vs thereunto by force. This is the firſte thynge that we haue to learne of this place.
            The ſeconde point is that when God withdraweth his hande which he had heuyly layde vpon vs, that is a token that he is mercifull vnto vs, & that he wyll no more laye our ſynnes vnto our charge. True it is that ſomtime God after that he hath afflicted the wicked and reproued, leaueth them there and they waxe luſtier than they were before as I haue already ſayd. But here Ezechias ſheweth how we ought to fele the goodneſſe of God when he ſendeth vs any releaſe, whē he releueth vs of any ſickneſſe, whē he deliuereth vs from any daunger, when he comforteth vs in pouertie, when we haue bene in trouble and ſorrowe and he draweth vs out. If then we be ſad and ſorrowefull, it is not enough for vs to fele the euyll, but we oughte to looke vnto the principall cauſe & to come to the originall ſpring therof. So when a litle babe crieth, ſo ſone as the teate is geuen him he is appeaſed. And why? he ſucketh & is content, for he hath no vnderſtāding to go further than to his own hūger, he knoweth not whence ye meat cometh, he hath no ſkil to thanke her yt gaue him his ſubſtāce, for he hath neither wit nor reſon

But whan a man of the age of diſcretion ſhall ſee his father angry with him, and ſhall here him ſay to hym: away villein, get the out of my houſe: it is certaine that this ſorrowe more perceth hym to the quicke to be thus caſt of by his father than to endure hunger or thirſte, & all the pouerties that it is poſſible to thinke on. But if the father afterwarde doe pardon hym at the requeſt of his frendes, or for that he ſeeth his ſonne to be ſory that he hath offended hym, & ſayth vnto hym, come home againe and dyne with me, if that childe haue any reaſon he wyll not ſo muche eſteme his dyner as that he is returned into the fauour and loue of his father, ſo as he had rather to faſt and to abide hū
               ger and thirſt than euer to geue occaſion to his father ſo to caſte hym of agayne, & is a greate deale more glad that his father hath forgeuen hym than of eating and drinking his fill.
            Nowe let vs applie this to our vſe. The moſte part are as litle chyldren: if God be quickely appeaſed with them and plucke backe his hande, ſo as they haue no more outwarde occaſion to be ſorowefull, by and by they waxe ioyfull, and prayſed be God (ſay they) which hath holpē me out of this ſicknes: but in ſaying prayſed be God they thinke not vpon hym, they enter not into examination of their ſinnes, thei loke not vpō the cauſe why God afflicted them, and ſo ſone as they be cōforted they doe not acknowledge that it is becauſe God loueth them and is fauourable to them. And yet thereunto ought all their ioy to be applied and not to ſay behold my myrth is returned. He that hath bene in any daunger, if he ſee himſelf deliuered, he reioyſeth that he is no more in tormēt as he was,

but in the meane time doth he loke vpon the principall benefit and ſoueraigne felicitie of men, to be reconciled vnto God? No, that cometh not in his mynde. So muche the more ought we to take holde of this doctrine, where Ezechias ſayth not only, I am nowe vp on foote agayne, and it hathe pleaſed God to releue me, my life is prolonged, as he hath ſayde before: but he reſteth all vpon thys: God hath pardoned me my faultes, he hath taken me to mercie, he layeth not to my charge the offē
               ces that I haue committed, he hath ſo forgeuen me that nowe he is well pleaſed with me, he will no more call me to accōpt as my iudge, for he hath forgotten all my ſinnes and hath caſt them behind his back. Loe this it is wherunto Ezechias leadeth vs by his example.
            So, as oft as we ſhalbe afflicted by the hand of God, let vs learne to entre into examinatiō of our owne ſinnes: and when we praye God to delyuer vs, let vs not ſet the cart before the horſe, but let vs pray him to take vs to his mercy. And though we haue deſerued a thouſande moe afflictiōs thā he maketh vs to endure, let vs praye that yet he ceſſe not to be mercifull vnto vs: and whē he hath ſet vs vp againe, let vs geue hym prayſes not only for the good that he hath done vs touching our bodies, but for that whiche is muche more to bee eſtemed, that he hath forgotten all our offences & ſo is agreed agayne wt vs that he accepteth vs as his owne chyldren, becauſe he tourneth his face from our ſinnes, for whyle God loketh vpon our ſinnes he can not loke vpon vs but with indignation, and he doth but abhorre vs.
            Then that God may loke vpon vs with a mercifull

and fauourable face, it muſt firſte be that he forget our ſinnes, and thinke no more on them. True it is that when we ſo ſpeake, it is after the maner of men, for we know that all is preſent before God. But when we ſay that he muſte forget our ſinnes and loke no more on them, that is to expreſſe that he cal vs not to accompt, but loue vs as well as if we neuer had offended him.
            Moreouer by this faſhion of ſpech that Ezechias vſeth, we ſe what is the remiſſion of our ſinnes, that is, that God caſt them behind his back, and caſt them there in ſuche ſorte that he puniſhe them no more, nor aſke vengeaunce on them. And this is worthy to be noted: For the deuill alwaye trauaileth to darken this doctrine bicauſe it is the principall point of oure ſaluation, and as it is ſhewed vs in holy ſcripture, there is no other righteouſnes nor holynes, but this fre forgeuenes of ſinnes. Happie is the man (ſaith Dauid) whoſe ſinnes are pardoned. Saint Paule ſaieth that hereby we ſee what is our righteouſnes, and that Dauid hath made a briefe ſumme therof.
            For this cauſe the deuill hath alwaye trauailed by ſuttle meanes to tourne men from this that they may not knowe what nede they haue of thys forgeuenes of ſinnes, as in the Popes church we partly ſee they ſay it is not but with penance and confeſſion, and beſide that, that we muſte bringe ſome recompence, and if God pardon vs the fault yet that he reſerueth the puniſhment as a iudge. And that this ſhould be a derogation to his maieſtie, if we ſhould ſay that he wholly and fully pardoneth, and they ſaye that he muſte nedes ſhewe alwaye ſome rigor with his mercy, & that otherwyſe

it were to ſpoyle hym of his nature: Loe howe the Papiſtes haue treated of the remiſſion of ſinnes, ſo that if a man ſhould ſay vnto thē that God pardoneth oure ſinnes of his mere goodnes, this ſhold be to them as a blaſphemi, for (ſay they) we muſt make ſatiſfactiō. And what is yt? works aboue meaſure, which we do more thā god cōmā
               deth vs in his law. It is certain yt theſe are deteſtable ſayings. But howſoeuer it be ye pore world hath ben ſo made drōk wt ſuch ſorceries. So much ye more thē muſt we note this place wher it is ſaid that God in receiuyng vs to mercy, will entre no more into accōpt with vs, as Ezechias ſaith here. Thou haſte caſte my ſinnes behinde thy backe.
            
            It is true that God hath neither backe nor ſtomack. For we know that his offence is infinite & ſpirituall: but he vſeth thys ſimilitude to ſignifie that he pardoneth our ſinnes like as whē it is ſaid that he caſteth thē to the bottom of the ſea, yt is as much as if he would haue no more remembrance of them nor would haue them more ſpokē or made mention of. We ſee then in ſumme when God receiueth vs in ſuch ſort yt he is at one with vs, that it is not onely to pardon vs the fault as the Papiſtes haue imagined and iugle wtout reaſon, but it is to thende that we maye fele his fauor euerye way, and that he wyll perſecute vs no more. And in ſtede that we were afflicted of his hande, and in ſtede of yt he gaue vs by it a teſtimony of his wrath that contrariwiſe he maketh vs to know yt he taketh vs for his childrē, & that he wil vſe vs gētlye ſhewing the loue yt he beareth vs. Lo here in ſumwhat Ezechias meant to ſay, vſing this maner of ſpech yt god had caſt al his ſinnes behind his back.
            
               Now true it is that many tymes though God doth pardon vs our faultes yet he wyl not ceſſe to chaſtiſe vs, as it happened to Dauid: but that ſhal not be but for our commoditie and profit, to thend that we may walke ſo muche the more warely in tyme to come. I ſayde euen nowe that God ſendeth his puniſhement in ſuche ſorte that there remaineth alway ſome marke to put vs in mynde. Then God wyll ſurely punyſhe vs although he be mercifull vnto vs. But theſe two thynges are not contrariant, that is, to caſt our ſinnes behynd his back, and to receyue vs by and by to mercye & make vs proſper by his bleſſynge, and yet in the meane tyme not to nouriſhe vs in our idleneſſe, but to awake vs & make vs fele ſome ſigne of his wrath to preuēt vs. Yet neuertheles if he meane to declare vnto vs fully the remiſſion of our ſynnes, he will geue vs oftentymes outwarde ſignes, that is to ſaye he wyll geue vs ſuche a taſt of his goodneſſe that we may perceiue aſſuredly that he hathe ſhewed mercy vnto vs, and that it is impoſſible that he ſhoulde vſe vs with ſuche gentleneſſe and fauour, except he wold examine our ſinnes no more, and that he fully and perfectly acquiteth vs, and that he requireth nothing but that we ſhould walke with him as being made at one and truly reconciled vnto his maieſtie. Loe thus God declareth vnto vs the remiſſiō of our ſinnes not only by his worde or inwardlye by his holy ſpirit, but alſo by the frutes, that is to ſay, when by his bleſſing he maketh vs to proſper, and whē he handleth vs ſo fauourably that we are compelled to confeſſe in our own conſcience that he vſeth a fatherly bountie toward vs.
            
               Then when we ſhall haue theſe ſignes, let vs conclude boldly that God hath pardoned our ſinnes and that he hath caſt them behinde his back, neuer to examine or thinke of them any more. So then ſo ofte as we ſhalbe afflicted of the hande of God, let vs remembre that he hath ſhewed hym ſelfe good not only to thoſe whome he hath taken out of this world wher they ſomtime haue endured ſtrong & greuous afflictions, but that he hath alſo pardoned their ſinnes, and let vs knowe that he wyll vſe the ſame goodneſſe toward vs. And in doing this let vs learne to humble our ſelues hereafter. Moreouer the grace of God ſhall ſo muche the more brightlye ſhyne, as he ſhall not onlye handle vs with all ſauour touching our bodies, but alſo in this that he woulde not haue reſpect vnto oure ſinnes, and wyll ſhewe vs that although we did prouoke his wrath and gaue him occaſion alwaye to forſake vs in our myſeries, yet he wyl not handle vs with rigour but that he wil drawe vs vnto hym by his infinite mercye and goodneſſe.
            Now let vs throwe our ſelues downe before the maieſtie▪ of our good God, acknowledging our faultes, beſeching him that more and more he will make vs to fele them, and that it may be to humble vs in ſuche ſorte that comming vnto hym we may bryng only a pure and ſimple cōfeſſion of our ſinnes, and that in the meane tyme he geue vs ſuche taſt of his goodneſſe that we maye not ceſſe to runne vnto hym although our conſciences doe reproue and cōdempne vs, that we may embrace his grace whiche he hath promyſed in the name of our Lord Ieſus Chriſte, and as oft as he maketh

vs to fele it by experience that we may learn to turne it to our profite, and that we may be ſo armed againſte all tentations, that we maye neuer ſinke downe vnder the burden, how heauy or troubleſome ſoener it be. And that he wyll not only graunt vnto vs that grace, but alſo to all peoples. &c.
         
         
            
            THE FOVRTH SERmon.
            
               ☞For the graue ſhall not ſinge of the, and the dead ſhall not prayſe the, nether ſhall they that are brought down into the pitte waite for thy truthe. The lyuing, the lyuing ſhall ſing of the, as I do this day: the father ſhall make thy truthe knowen to his children. The Lorde it is that ſaueth me: we wyll ſing a ſong in the temple of the Lorde all the dayes of our lyfe. And Eſai, commaunded, that one ſhold take a cluſter of figges, and make a plaiſter of them to lay vpon the ſore, and he ſhoulde be whole. Then ſayd Ezechias, what ſigne ſhall I haue that I ſhall goe vp into the houſe of the Lorde?
            
            
               IT is certaine that if our lyfe were ordered as it ought to be, we ſhoulde alway ſhoote at this principall marke, to honour God ſo longe as we be in this worlde. And good reaſon it is yt we applie all our ſtudie therunto ſeing that without ende and ceſſing we proue the gracious good dedes that he doth vs. For this cauſe nowe Ezechias after that he hath knowledged that god prolonged his life, and hath geuen him a profe to witneſſe his ſingular loue toward him, ſayth yt with ſo muche more courage he wil magnifie the name of

God to cōfeſſe the receit of ſo great a benefit. And expreſly he ſayth that this ſhall not only be whyle he is in the worlde that he will trauayle to haue the name of God bleſſed, but he wil endeuour alſo for his ſucceſſours that it may for euer be knowē howe God hath wrought for him. Finally for cō
               cluſion he ſaith that there is no ſauiour but God: and if men reſt them ſelues vpon hym their ſaluation ſhalbe certain and infallible.
            But it may ſeme ſtraunge that he ſayeth that ye death nor yet the graue ſhall not be to prayſe god, for it ſemeth that he accompted vpō and knoweth no other goodneſſe of God but whē he preſerueth men in this frayle life. In dede if we loke not but here belowe, our faith ſhalbe but weake. And we knowe that we lyue to no other purpoſe but to taſt in part the goodneſſe of God, to the ende we may be drawen by hier and altogether rauiſhed to the heauenly lyfe. It ſemeth then that Ezechias is to muche geuen to the worlde, and that he hath no conceiuing of the ſpirituall kyngdome of God. For in ſaying that the graue can not praiſe God, nor they yt be dead, it ſemeth that he hathe no other regarde but to this preſent lyfe. And we knowe that it is ſayde in the firſt place, that God wil be glorified as wel in our death as in our life. And S. Paul for the ſame cauſe ſayeth, that he careth not whether he lyue or die, ſo the glorye of God might be alway auaunced. There appeareth to be great diuerſitie betwene S. Paul and Ezechias, for the one fleeth and abhorreth death, alleging that thoſe whiche are departed ſhall not prayſe God, the other ſaith it is to me al one whether I lyue or dye, for God ſhall alwaye be glorified

in me. If we beholde the eſtate of thoſe that are departed in that, that they are drawen oute of this world, and that God hath taken them nerer to him, it is likely that they ſhold be better diſpoſed, & more chearfull to bleſſe his name. Fourthly we be here heauely loden in this priſon of oure body, we can not half (as a man may ſay) opē our mouth to praiſe God, we goe not with a free courage nor with ſo vehement feruor of zele, as were requiſite: now the dead are not ſo encombred,2. Cor. 5. they are not abſent from God as we are (as S. Paule ſpeaketh in the ſeconde to the Corinthians) they may then ſo muche the better agree with the angeles of paradiſe in this melodie. And we knowe what is ſaid of the angels (as it is to be ſene in the vi. Cha. of Eſay) that without ceaſing they cry, bleſſed be the Lorde of hoſtes, the holy, the holy, the holy. Then as farre as we may iudge, thoſe whom God hathe drawen out of this tranſitorye life, ought to be more readye to prayſe hys name. But let vs firſte marke that Ezechias here had reſpect to the cauſe why God placed vs in thys world, and wherfore he kepeth vs therin. He aſketh not any reward of vs. He is not lyke vnto a man that ſetteth ſeruauntes in his houſe: for that wer to emprow his lands, & make profite therof, nether is he like vnto a great prince which requireth to haue manye ſubiectes, for that he is to be maintened and ſuccoured by them when he hathe nede. But God ſeketh no auauntage by vs, as he hathe no nede: Onely he will that we do homage to hym for all the benefites yt he geueth vs. For all our life ought to be applied to this marke, (as euen now we haue touched) yt we bleſſe god,

and render witnes that his benefits were not caſt away vpon vs as they ſhould be if we were lyke dōme men. Lo this it is that we haue to obſerue, that Ezechias (in ſayinge that the lyuynge ſhall praiſe God) meant to note, that men peruert the order of nature whē they awly not themſelues to praiſe God, and that theyr vnthankfulnes is by no meanes excuſable, when they bury the graces of God and put them in obliuion. Seyng it is ſo thē that our Lord requireth of vs nothyng but yt hys name be glorified in the world, it is not to be merueyled that Ezechias ſaieth: the liuing, the lyuing ſhall praiſe God.
            We muſt alſo note what difference is betwene the ſtate of the liuing and of the dead. Though the dead praiſe god, yet we can not iudge nor imagine that they aſſemble after our maner to ſhewe an agrement of theyr fayth. Eche one of them cā right well praiſe God by him ſelfe, & yet it meaneth not that they ar gathered together in one body, as we are nowe, for the ſcripture ſaieth nothing thereof. And we maye not forge fantaſies of oure owne braine as we thinke good. For we know that god reſerueth this perfection to the latter day that we ſhould be all vnited and in ſuche ſort ioyned vnto our God that his glory ſhould fullye ſhine in vs. For as muche then as they whiche are departed haue not ſuche a manner of exercyſinge them ſelues in the prayſynge of God as we, therefore it is ſaid that, that is a thynge properly perteynyng to vs that be lyuyng.
            But there is yet more. For Ezechias ſpeaketh not here ſimply of death as we haue touched alreadye, but he ſetteth oute hys death to be ſuche

as if he had bene cut of from the Churche of God, and from all hope of ſaluation, when this iudgement was come to be executed, or as if he had bene before hys Iudge: Then Ezechias prepared not him ſelfe to dye, as by nature we can not flee thys neceſſitie: but he had thys teſtymonye of Godes wrath, wherewith he was ſo feared as if all were loſt to hym. Nowe we knowe that no man can ſynge the prayſes of God excepte he haue occaſion and matter. For whan oure Lorde ſheweth vs a terrible countenaunce, oure mouthes are ſtopped, we are fylled wyth ſuche anguiſſhe, that it is impoſſible for vs to bleſſe hym. Rather contrariwiſe there ſhall be nothynge but gnaſhynge of teethe, when the wrath of God ſhall ſo aſtoniſhe vs. Loe thus ſtoode Ezechias. On the other ſyde, when God ſheweth hym ſelfe mercyfull towarde vs,
                  Pſal. 51. Pſal. 40. and vttereth ſome ſigne of hys fauor toward vs, he openeth oure mouthes, as it is ſayde in the li. Pſalme. Lorde thou haſte opened my mouth: therefore wyll I ſynge thy ſonges. And in other places. Lorde thou haſte put a newe ſonge in my mouthe, by thys the Prophete ſignyfieth when God maketh them ioyfull for theyr delyueraunce frome ſome euyll, that by thys meane, he ſtyreth them vp to ſynge hys ſonges, and to bleſſe hys name, and to be myndefull of hys benefytes. So then, when we conceaue nothynge but altogether terrour in God, we are in aſwounde, and then the gate is ſhutte ſo that we can not prayſe God. So Ezechias in this place, ſayinge that the dead ſhall not praiſe god, meaneth not generallye all thoſe that departe oute of this tranſitorye lyfe,

but thoſe whiche are as it were cut of from God, and are confounded with his wrath, who alſo taſt not his goodnes any maner of way, & are made naked and eſtranged from all hope of healthe. It is then impoſſible that ſuch ſhould praiſe God.
            There is yet another point to note. For when the faithfull are holden downe & oppreſſed wyth any diſtreſſe, they ſe nothing but theyr own grief, and euery man hath experience of this in him ſelfe to much. When any euyll hath caſt vs downe altogether, we can not applie oure ſelues to anye other thing, for we are there holdē faſt as in a ſtreight priſon. So was Ezechias, as alſo it is ſaid in the lxxxviii. Pſalme. That the ſtate of thoſe that are dead, is a land of forgetfulnes: men knowe not there what God is. This ſemeth to be a blaſphemie. But theſe maners of ſpech procede of the vnſkilfulnes and weakenes of men, that is bicauſe they can not withdraw them ſelues to iudge with a ſetled ſence, & to haue a well framed and ordered knowledge. But the trouble ſo vexeth & carieth them awaye that they ſpeake as at randon & confuſely. Behold, Iob ſaieth that men beyng taken out of this world haue no more carefulneſſe, but euery one is at reſt,
                  Iob. 3. as if there were a confuſe mixture, that the maſter & the verlet were all one, and that the tyrant ſhoulde cauſe no more terror. He ſpeaketh of the ſtate of thoſe that are departed, as if death ſhould deſtroy all thinges. Yet he had not ſuch opinion, but it was bicauſe that his ſorow ſuffred him not to ſpeak as a mā at reſt. For he was toſſed with ſuch vnquietnes that his words wā
               dred. So may we think of Ezechias. He ſpeaketh not of the eſtate & condition of thoſe that are departed

as the ſcripture teacheth vs, and why? his heauines, & the horrour whiche he had conceiued bare rule ouer him in ſuche ſorte that he wiſte not where he was: it is true yt this is not for excuſe.
            And thus therfore oure Lorde geueth vs mirours of our frailenes when we ſee that the moſte holy, & moſt perfect ſpeak ſo. Yet in ye meane time God ſupported Ezechias, becauſe the principall thing remained with him ſtyll, as we haue already ſene, that he tended to this mark to glorifie the name of God, for he had rather die a hundred tymes than to be one minute in this world prophaninge by vnthankfulnes the benefites that God hath done for him. Lo than Ezechias kepeth this rule that men ought not to deſire to liue one daye but to that end that God might be glorified in it. But in the meane time this yt he was toſſed with ſo great troubles that he could not orderly ſpeake as he ought, proceded of his weakenes, whiche God holdeth for excuſed and ſupporteth. For it is not a diſobediēce, though we haue many ranging wordes in our prayer. It is true that we oughte alway to frame our ſelfes to his rule, which is geuen vs, to thend that euery man pray to God, not at aduenture, and after his own fanſie. But how ſoeuer it be, we ſhall haue meaſurable ſorowes, & complaintes in vs, and it behoueth that god haue pitie of vs in this behalfe. Loe in a ſumme what we haue to learne, that aboue all, while we lyue, we alway tend to this ende that God be honored. For therfore it is he yt hath ſet vs in this worlde, to that end it is that he hath choſen vs to be of his flok, to wete, that we might be aſſembled to ſinge his prayſes with one accorde.
            
               And we ſee this yet better in the 115. Pſalme, where is a lyke ſentence. And it is not one man that ſpeaketh, but the whole body of the Churche of the faithfull, which ſay that one can not prayſe God in death, but we that lyue (ſay they) vnto the ende ſhall confeſſe that god hathe preſerued vs. There it is ſignified vnto vs that God wil alway kepe his church, and that he will haue ſome people remaining vnto the ende of the worlde. Why? bicauſe he wyll be knowen the father and ſauiour among men. And although it be not of the greater multitud, yet wil he haue ſome company that ſhal praiſe him. So then let vs learn to exerciſe our ſelues in bleſſynge the name of God while he kepeth vs here below, and while we be nouriſhed by his liberalytie, and while (whiche more is) he calleth vs vnto him to tend alway to the hope of the eternall heritage. Sithe then it is ſo, let vs applie all our ſtudy therunto, yea all the daies of oure lyfe. If we do otherwiſe, it wer better for vs that our mothers had bene deliuered of vs before our time, or that the earth had gaped to ſwallow vs vp, thā to be here gluttons, as brute beaſtes, and to continue vnthankfull for ſo manye benefites as God hath geuen vs, and that his praiſe ſhoulde be buried by vs. Take this for a note.
            The reſidue: Let vs alwaye be ready folowyng the example of S. Paule, to glorifie God, be it by life, be it by death. If at any tyme we be in trouble as the good kynge Ezechias was, let vs know that all our ſorowes, complaintes and groninges, oughte to be ſuſpicious vnto vs, bycauſe we can not kepe meaſure by reaſon of the frailtie

that is in vs.
            So that this which is ſayd here. The dead ſhall not prayſe God, may not be drawen of vs 
                  •
               or a cō
               ſequent profe, to pleade wyth God when it ſhall pleaſe him to call vs vnto him. Let vs not make this excuſe vnder pretext of Ezechias, or Dauid who ſpake ſo in the vi. Pſalme, or of all the people as we ſhall aledge. For there was exceſſe, bycauſe as well Dauid as Ezechias, and generally al the Churche then when a horrible diſſipation was neare tempted as if god wold reiect them, and vtterly diſclaime in them, and woulde haue no more to do with them. As they then were pulled backe from God, ſo were they abaſſhed. And no maruell. Let vs not therfore make therof a rule, as if we might do the like: but let it ſerue to make vs knowe our own weakenes. Moreouer although God do ſupport vs, yet let vs not pleaſe our ſelues in ſuche a vyce. Loe this it is that we haue to learne.
            Nowe we are taughte for as muche as God hath made vs to fele his graces, to haue our herts ſet at large, and our mouthes opened to bleſſe hys name. And on the other ſide that we can not pronounce one worde to his prayſe, whiche procedeth from a good hartie affectiō, except we be throughly perſwaded in this, that God is mercyfull vnto vs, & that we vſe to our profit the benefits which we receaue of his hande.
            As touchinge the firſte pointe, let euerye one learne to ſtyrre vp him ſelfe accordynge to that whiche he receyueth of the graces of God, for the number is infinite.
            
               There is none of vs when he ſhall duely conſider him ſelfe, but ought to be rauiſhed as it is ſaide in the xl. Pſalme, that if we wyll number the teſtimonies that God hathe geuen vs of the fatherlye care which he hath for vs, and of his mercye, they are mo than the heares of our head, and we ſhalbe therat as it were aſtonyſhed. But accordynge as God ſetteth fourth the richeſſe of his goodnes toward euery one of vs, let vs be ſo muche the more moued to bleſſe his name, & let euery one experuſe and pricke him ſelfe forward vnto that. Lo this is in ſumme that whiche we haue to marke vpon this place.
            Now on the other ſide, let vs confeſſe that our lyfe is curſed if we gluttonouſly deuoure the good thinges that God geueth vs and do not therin behold his goodnes. For we vnchriſtianly abuſe all that which was apointed for our vſe and ſaluation vnleſſe we be brought to this point that God ſheweth him ſelfe a very father vnto vs, and that by all meanes of gentleneſſe he draweth vs vnto him, that we ſhould not doubt that he taketh vs for his children. And in this alſo we ſee how miſerable is the ſtate of Papiſtes, for they will not aſſure them ſelues of the goodnes of God, but ſaye that alwaies we muſt be in doubt of it. And ſo all theyr prayeng and thankeſgeuyng to God, is nothing but Hipocriſie and faining. For we can not call vpon the name of God but with affiaunce, we can not praiſe his name except we know that he is fauourable vnto vs. Then they are altogether excluded. Let vs learn then that we can neuer offer to God a ſacrifice of thākeſgeuing which he eſtemeth and ſetteth by, and that we can neuer attein

to the right ſcope of oure life, vnleſſe we be fullye perſwaded of his goodnes. And ſo as ofte as we thinke vpon all the graces and benefites of God: let this come into our minde, that God doth confirme and ratifie vnto vs his adopſion to the ende that we maye not doubte that he compteth vs as his children, and that we freely call vpon him as our father: Lo in a ſumme what we haue to learn of this place.
            Nowe we muſt alſo note this which Ezechias ſaieth. The lyuing, the lyuing ſhal prayſe the? Yea the father ſhall declare to his childrē thy vertue. He had ſaid before that the dead ſhal not wait any more for the truth of God, that is to ſay, they ſhall haue no hope. And in this we ſee that which I haue touched, that Ezechias ſpeaketh not indifferently of all theſe whom God hath taken out of this world. For it is certeine that the faithfull do waite vpon the truth of God. When Iacob yeldyng vp his ſpirite, ſaide: I wyll waite for the ſaluation of the Lorde. He ſaide not that for one minute, but he declared and proteſted that he had this aſſurance imprinted in his hert, which ſhold neuer be pulled out, ſo yt though he paſſed through a hundred deathes yet alway this treaſure ſhould remayne with him. Nowe then the ſaintes and faythful although God called thē out of the world ceaſed not alway to nouriſhe the hope of the reſurrection▪ and of this felicitie which is promiſed thē. But Ezechias ſpeaketh of the departed, whiche are as it were baniſhed and eſtraūged altogether from the kyngdome of God whome alſo he forſaketh. Now, he was euen in the ſame eſtate in his own cōceit vntil god cōforted him by his prophet.

For ye meſſag which was ſēt to him, was to ſhew that God was his enemy, and that he came as his aduerſary with armed hande againſt him. Than was Ezechias driuen to remayne confounded. Then it is not without a cauſe that he ſaide, that thoſe which are departed, waite not for the truth of God, that is to ſay, that they ar altogether ſhut out frō the promiſſes, ſo as they are no more of the number of his children.
            But nowe he ſaieth that the lyuinge whiche taſt the goodnes of God, ſhall cauſe theyr children to knowledge hys truth. Nowe here we ſe again how God ſhalbe duely praiſed and honored amōg vs, that is, when a man ſhall knowe that he is faithfull to all his owne, that he neuer forſaketh them, but that his helpe is ready for them in their neceſſitie, and that they ſhall neuer be diſapointed which leane vnto him. Lo this is the true ſubſtaunce of Gods praiſe. So in a ſumme we ſe that it is nothing but falſhede and lies when men ſhal pray vnto God, and ſhall make as thoughe they gaue thankes vnto him, & in the meane time they are not inſtructed of the loue yt God beareth them nor certified of theyr ſaluation, and ſhall knowe of no promiſe. Then when that wanteth, it is certaine that all theyr prayſes of God, whiche maye be ſounded in the mouthes of men, are but wind
                  •
               
               ▪ and ſmoke. Wyll we then prayſe God as it apperteyneth, in ſuche maner as he alloweth the ſacrifices whiche we ſhall offer vnto hym of praiſe, and thankes geuinge? Let vs profit in his word, lette vs knowe what it is, to truſte in hym, which we canne not doe tyll he declared hys good wyll

towarde vs, and haue certyfyed vs that he hathe receaued vs, yt we may frely come vnto hym, and that we ſhal neuer be forſakē, ſo we fle vnto him. If we haue not ſuche an inſtruction, we can neuer pronounce one worde of Goddes prayſes as we oughte. Loe hereunto it is to be applyed▪ that Ezechias ſayeth here, that the father ſhall make knowen vnto hys chyldren the treweth of God.
            Moreouer, where as he ſayeth, that the dead can not wayte for it, nor leane vnto it. Lette vs knowe, that for as muche as God declareth hymſelfe mercyfull and lyberall vnto vs, that is alwaye the more to confyrme oure hoope: That we ſhoulde take ſo muche the more courage to runne vnto hym, and not to doubte that he hathe hys hande alwaye readye to helpe vs at neade.
            Howe then ſhall we vſe the graces of God as we oughte? When we ſhall be alwaye confyrmed more and more in the ſaythe, when we canne dyſpyſe all temptations, when we canne reſolue oure ſelues, that in callynge vpon God, we oughte in no wyſe to feare the loſſe of oure laboure, for as muche as oure hope ſhall neuer be confounded.
            When then we ſhall be well ſatiſfyed in thys 
                  •
               o as we maye fyghte agaynſte Sathan, to beate backe all temptations, beholde howe we maye wyſelye applye the benefytes of God to oure own vſe, and howe wee maye take profyte of theym: Loe in a ſumme what wee haue beare to learne.
            
               Moreouer, when he ſpeaketh howe fathers ought to behaue them ſelues towarde theyr chyldren we haue to gather in generall (as hath bene ſaid here before) yt it is not ynough yt we procure that god be glorified during our life, but we ought to deſire as his name is immortall ſo that frō age to age it may be honored, & that thoſe which ſhall come after vs, may kepe ye pure religiō, & that the ſeruice of God may neuer fall in decaye. That it maye be folowed and aduaunced alwaye and that the goodnes of God maye be euery where magnified. They that haue childrē, let them knowe that God hath committed them incharge to thē, & that they muſt rendre an accompt if they beſtow not al trauaill to teache them to ſerue God. For when it is ſayd that the father ſhall ſhewe to his childrē the truth of god, we muſt alwai come to this end. Why? to this ende that the children may truſt in him, that they may call vpon him, that they maye geue to him the prayſe of all good thynges, yt they may dedicate & cōſecrate thē ſelues wholy to him, & to his obediēce. Thē if fathers wil diſcharg, thē ſelues of theyr duties, let them knowe that this is the principall heritage that they ought to leaue to theyr children. But if they heape vp goods & yet geue them the bridle when they ſhall ſee them diſſolute, miſchieuous, wicked deſpiſers of God. Wo be to them in that they ſhall take peine to aduance them in this world: for they lift them vp very hye to make them break theyr neckes, & theyr fal ſhall be more deadly when they ſhal haue ſtore of gooddes: and yet in the meane tyme they ſhall deſpyſe God in his doctrine, there confuſion ſhalbe more

horrible, bicauſe theyr vnthankfulnes ſhalbe leſſe excuſable. Let the fathers then thinke better of this thē they haue bene accuſtomed, that is to ſay, when God geueth them children, he bindeth them to this charge, that they endeuor ſo much ye more, that they may be inſtructed in his truth, ſo long as as they lyue, as alſo we ſe thexample geuen vs in Abraham, which is the father of the faithful. For when God meant to ſhewe that Abraham would gouerne his houſe, as appertened: Shall I hyde from my ſeruaunt Abraham (ſaith he) that which I haue to do? No. Lo howe God maketh hym ſelfe familiar with him. For (ſaieth he) he ſhal inſtructe his children in my ſtatutes, in my lawes, & in my ordinances: Lo, this is the marke whereby the faithfull are knowen frō the deſpiſers of God. If then we will be numbred in the church, let vs folow this zele, and this affection of Abrahā, that euery one accordynge to the familie that he hath, trauaile that God be honoured in it, and that hys truth be alway knowen euen to the ende.
            Nowe for concluſion Ezechias ſaieth: The Lorde it is that ſhall ſaue me. This worde doeth emport that he deſpiſeth and throweth awaye all other ſafegarde, as if he ſhould ſaye, there is none but God. He might haue ſaid: The Lord hath ſaued me. He might haue ſaid: I hold my life of him and of his mere grace. But he goeth further, as if he meant here to mainteine the honor of God, and to beate down all the affiances that men conceiue in theyr fantaſie. For we are wonte to make our diſcourſes when we mynde to mainteine oure ſelues, and when we ſeke to be aſſured, we take this meane, and that meane.
            
               Nowe Ezechias forſaketh all and declareth that there is none but God, and that he it is whom we ought to go vnto.
            True it is that God ſuffreth vs to vſe all the meanes that he offreth vs, and he hathe ordeyned them for that vſe, but yet he wyll not that his glorye be darkened, as it is no reaſon it ſhoulde be. Neuertheles men be ſo wicked and froward, that alway they take occaſion to miniſhe the glorye of God vnder this coloure that he helpeth them by his creatures. If God hath not bene content only to make vs fele his owne vertue, but alſo applieth al his creatures to our vſe we ought to be ſo much the more ſtyrred to prayſe him. But cleane contrary, we robbe him of his right, we forſake him, and faſten our affiaunce here, and there, and we thinke that oure ſaluation procedeth from thys thing and from that. Lo how God is defrauded of his ryght. So much the more ought we to marke this that is here ſayd by Ezechias. The Lorde it is that ſaueth vs. That is, thoughe the Lorde do ſtretch his hande vnto vs, and geueth vs wherewith to be mainteined, yet let vs confeſſe that he is the fountain, and let the riuer that floweth frō him vnto vs, not hinder vs to knowe whence the riuer commeth. Let vs then tende alway to thys welſpring that God be glorified, and that he kept his owne wholy: and after, when we are made naked of all other meanes, let vs ſay: the Lord alone ſhall ſuffiſe. And for this cauſe ſaith Dauid. The mercye of God is more worth than all lyues, not meanyng that the lyfe of men is not of the mercye of God, but he ſheweth ye men ought not to be faſt bound here beneth, & that they are become brutiſh

when they thinke to preſerue, mainteine, or warrant them ſelfes by this, or that mercy, & that they ought aboue all thinges to preferre the only goodnes of God and to reſt in the ſame. So then beholde here a ſaying of great doctrine, if we cā haue ſkil to take profite therof. Let vs then folowe the example of Ezechias, and when God hath ſuccored vs at our nede: let vs geue him the prayſe for our life confeſſinge yt there is none but he alone to ſaue vs. Herunto he addeth againe. And we wyll ſinge our ſonges all the dayes of our life in ye houſe of the Lord. Here he repeteth agayne the ſaying that he ſpake before, that is, that he will employe all the reſidue of the life that god hath geuē him to make to God acknowledgement therof, that he might not be foūd vnthākful. For as I haue ſaid it were better that we had neuer bene borne, than to enioy ye good things that God hath done for vs, and yet to haue oure mouth cloſe and to thinke no more vpon him. Let vs then note well that thys repetion is not ſuperfluous when Ezechias ſaieth ſo manye times that ſith his lyfe is prolonged, he wyll be ſo muche the more ſtyred to prayſe God. Take this for one note.
            Now, he furder ſheweth that this ſhal not be for a ſodein braide, as many can wel praiſe God wt a merely vehement affection, when they haue had profe of his goodnes, but that droupeth awaye by and by, and the memory is loſt of it, & they thynke that it is enough yt at one time they haue teſtified yt thei thāk God for the good yt thei haue receiued. But Ezechias ſheweth vs yt we ought to cōtinue therin wt a true perſeuerāce, for we are beholdē to god no more for one day of our life thā for another

It muſt therfore be fully dedicate & auowed vnto him. So ſeyng the ſlouthfulnes and coldnes that is in vs, let vs learn to ſtyre vp our ſelues when we ſhall fele that oure zele waxeth colde for feare leſt it be wholy quenched. Let vs awake. How? If I haue once or twiſe reknowledged the grace of God. What is that? muſt it be now forgotten? And if I bleſſe the name of God duringe one moneth, a yere, or two, or thre: And now I think no more of it. To what purpoſe ſhal yt ſerue me? but to make me ſo much ye more gi
                  •
               tie of hipocriſie, & to ſhew yt ther was nothing but a fire of ſtubble, that there is no conſtancie nor ſtedfaſtnes. If then we beholde well the example of this good kynge, we ſhall euerye one be the more pricked forwarde, to fede our ſelues no more in this idlenes whiche is naturall vnto vs, and whereunto we be to muche enclined.
            When he ſayeth, In the houſe of the Lorde. He meaneth not that the prayſes of God ſhoulde be encloſed within the tēple, for euery man in hys owne houſe maye and ought to praiſe God. But Ezechias ſheweth that it is not ynoughe that he prayſeth God in ſecrete, but that he wyll ſtyre vp other, to haue more companye. He ſpeaketh here of a ſolemne ſacrifice of praiſe which he wil make to God in a great aſſemblie. And for this ſame cauſe our Lorde hathe wylled his to gather together. For he was able ynough to haue taught thē perticulerly if he would, & to ſaye: Let euery man prayſe me in his chāber. But his pleaſure is that there be this policie, that we be knit together in one body, that we call vpon him with one mouth, and that we make confeſſion of our fayth with one

accord. And why ſo? True it is, that firſte we ſee that it behoueth that all oure ſenſes be applied to glorifie him, but there is alſo a ſeconde point, that euery one ſtyrre vp other as we haue nede, for ther is none of vs that feleth him ſelf diſpoſed to praiſe God, but he hathe yet a pricke forwarde when he ſhall ſee the company of the faithfull, and example ſhewed him. For aſmuche therfore as this doeth ſtyrre vs vp, God willeth that openly and in common we ſing his praiſes. And for this cauſe Ezechias ſaieth expreſly that he will go to the temple of the Lorde to prayſe and bleſſe his name, as we ſe alſo that Ionas dyd the lyke.
                  Ionas. 2. He ſpeaketh of houſe of the Lorde, and why? not (as I ſaid) that the praiſes of the Lorde are there ſhut vp & hiddē but for that the people there aſſemble together, & for that he knew that this ſhould bring more profite becauſe there ſhoulde be ſome that ſhoulde be ſtyred vp by his example. Lo in a ſum the ſonge of Ezechias.
            Now in the end it is here recited that ye Prophet Eſay commaunded to make him a plaſter of figges vpon his wounde, wherby it is likely that it was a peſtilence which he had. And after he by and by addeth yt Ezechias alſo demaūdeth a token which is graunted him, as we ſe when the ſonne was drawē back of his courſe vpon the diall of Achas. A man mighte here moue a queſtion, whether thys playſter were for medicine, or a token that the Prophet gaue him. And it ſemeth that if it had ben for medicine, it ſhould haue diminiſhed the glory of God, for it behoued that Ezechias life ſhould be miraculous. Why did he not then heale him without any meane? But when all ſhalbe

wel conſidered, the ſigne or miracle that was geuen to Ezechias whē the ſonne ſtayed his courſe, and when the ſhadowe of the dyall was drawen back ſo many degrees, was ſufficient, and toke awaye all doubt. Moreouer although Ezechias vſed this plaiſter it is not therfore to be ſaide that his healyng was naturally wrought, for ſith God had chaunged the order of the heauen, and ſhewed a witneſſe ſo euident that this proceded from his hande, and that it was an extraordinary benefite, we ought to content our ſelues with that, and we ſee many times that God is ſerued with his creatures and yet he hath ſufficientlye declared that it was his owne power only.
            They whiche thinke that Ezechias rather had this plaiſter as a ſacrament to confirme hym, doe thinke that the figges would more haue hurt his wounde than helped it. But a man maye make a compound of them to ripe a ſore, and that is commonly knowen. True it is that God ſomtime geueth ſignes that ſeme cleane contrary, and that is to drawe vs the more to him, to make vs forſake our owne fantaſies and hold vs content with that whiche he hath ſpoken. As how? God promiſeth that the worlde ſhall neuer be deſtroyed with water, and what ſigne geueth he therof? a ſigne that naturally threateneth vs raine. When we ſee the rainbowe, what token is it? it is ſuch a drawyng together of waters, that maketh ſeme we ſhall all be ouerwhelmed and the earth ſhal peryſhe. And how ſo? This ſigne is geuen vs of God to make vs know that therth ſhal neuer be deſtroied with ouerflowynge of water. Yea but it is to make vs learne to ſtay vpon his truthe and to ſtoppe our

eyes againſt all the reſt, and againſt al that we cō
               ceiue in our ſelues, and that the truthe of God be of ſo ſufficient credit with vs, that we receiue it without gainſaying. So thē God worketh wel in ſuche ſorte: but as to this place, we maye rather iudge that the Prophet to aſſwage the griefe of Ezechias gaue hym thys remedye, lyke to a fyre that burneth a man. And ſo when GOD hadde prolonged the lyfe to this good kynge▪ he would yet of abundant grace adde this goodneſſe alſo, that the paine ſhould be mitigate. Then the prophet gaue him this as it wer an ouerplus that God had not only prolonged his life, but alſo wold not haue him endure ſo muche or ſuffer the tormentes whiche he felt before.
            Thus behold howe in all and euery waye God hath declareth him ſelfe pitiful towarde this good king, how he would ſhewe him ſelfe pacified altogether after that he had vſed ſuche roughnes toward him and had ſtretched out his arme as if he wold haue altogether ouerwhelmed him, but this meaneth not yt God doth ye very ſame to euery one of his children, to the ende yt we ſhold not aſke that in one minut of time God make vs glad after he hath drawen vs out of the graue and hath geuen vs throughlye to content vs, but that it maye be his pleaſure by litle and lytle to geue vs eaſe of all our greues, in the meane time lette vs be content with this.
            And in dede we may gather that God hetherto hath wrought by degrees in Ezechias: for this miracle was done ſince the ſhadow of the ſonne was drawen back, and the meſſage of prolonging his lyfe was geuen him by the prophet.
            
               It ſemeth thē that Ezechias was altogether deliuered, and yet this plaiſter was alſo requiſite. So then whē our lord after he hath geuē vs anye 
                  •
               aſe in oure trouble ſhall leaue ſome remnaunt of peine: let not that trouble vs, nether let vs be wery of bearyng his correction, vntill he haue healed vs altogether.
            Nowe we haue to declare why Ezechias demaunded a ſigne, for although it wer of wekenes yet God heard him in ſuche a requeſt, and herein we ſe howe louynge God is towarde vs, when he doeth not onely graunt the requeſtes whiche we make of a pure and right affection: but alſo though there be ſome infirmitie mingled withall, and that we bear paſſions ſomwhat exceſſiue, yet God hath pitie on vs in this point. Certaine it is that Ezechias when he had perfect faith he was content to haue heard the word from the mouth of the Prophet. Then when he ſaieth alas ſhall I not haue ſome ſigne: herin he ſheweth that he geueth not ful and perfect faith to the word of God. But yet he confeſſeth his fault, and in confeſſyng it, he aſketh remedy: & of whō? of God himſelf. Then whē we ſhalbe ſo encombred, fyrſt let vs acknowledge our owne pouertie, and let vs not go aboute to excuſe the euell, but let vs take vpon vs the ſentence of condemnation willyngly. If then we aſke of God to helpe it by his goodnes, he wyll ſuccor vs, and heare our requeſtes.
            It is true that it becōmeth not vs to require a ſigne or miracle when we thinke good, for as it hath bene declared in that place wher the prophet euen nowe made mention of the ſigne. Ezechias had a ſpeciall motion vnto it,
                  Iudi. 6. as Gedeon alſo had:

Let vs leaue that to ye good pleaſure of God, whē we know our infirmitie, & pray him to helpe, and to confirme vs to the ende we may be fullye ſatiſfied in his worde. Lo then how we muſte go forward, and in this doyng we ſhall fele that this is not written onely for the parſon of the kyng Ezechias, but that God would geue it for a common inſtruction to all his church, that in oure troubles when we ſhalbe come to the extremitie: yea, to the bottome of hell, we may yet know that we ought to haue our refuge to him that hath called vs, and handled vs ſo gently, hopinge that he wyll ſhewe fourthe his ſtrength towarde vs, althoughe for a time it be farre from vs, and that we ſe no ſigne of it, & ſo that he will geue vs mater to glorifie him, and alſo we are taughte to applye all oure lyfe to to bleſſe the name of God, and to ſing his prayſes accordyng as we haue experience of his goodneſſe towarde vs.
            Now let vs throwe downe our ſelues before the maieſtie of our good God, in acknowledgyng of our faultes, praying him, that more and more, he wyll make vs to feale them, and that this may be to beate vs altogether downe, and humble vs before him yt we may fight with the vyces which make warre againſt vs, knowyng that our Lord hath ordeyned vs to this conflict, till we be fullye renewed and clothed with his iuſtice, & that there may be no ſtoppe to let vs frō the obedience of his good will, and that he graunt this grace not onely vnto vs, but to all peopes and nations. &c.
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧A MEDITATION OF A PENITENT SINNER: VVRITTEN IN MANER OF A Paraphraſe vpon the 51. Pſalme of Dauid.
            ¶I haue added this meditation folowyng vnto the ende of this boke, not as parcell of maiſter Caluines worke, but for that it well agreeth with the ſame argument, and was deliuered me by my frend with whom I knew I might be ſo bolde to vſe & publiſhe it as pleaſed me.
            
               
               
               ¶The preface, expreſſing the paſſioned minde of the penitent ſinner.
               
                  THe hainous gylt of my forſaken ghoſt
                  So threates, alas, vnto my febled ſprite
                  Deſerued death, and (that me greueth moſt)
                  Still ſtand ſo fixt before my daſeld ſight
                  The lotheſome filthe of my diſteined life,
                  The mighty wrath of myne offended Lorde,
                  My Lord whos wrath is ſharper than the knife,
                  And deper woundes than doble edged ſworde,
                  That▪ as the dimmed and fordulled eyen
                  Full fraught with teares & more & more oppreſt
                  With growing ſtreames of the diſtilled bryne
                  Sent from the fornace of a grefefull breſt,
                  Can not enioy the comfort of the light,
                  Nor finde the waye wherin to walke aright:
               
               
                  So I blinde wretch, whome Gods enflamed tre
                  with pearcing ſtroke hath throwne vnto ye groūd,
                  Amidde my ſinnes ſtill groueling in the myre,
                  Finde not the way that other oft haue found,
                  Whome cherefull glimſe of gods abounding grace
                  Hath oft releued and oft with ſhyning light
                  Hath brought to ioy out of the vgglye place,
                  Where I in darke of euerlaſting night
                  Bewayle my woefull and vnhappy caſe,
                  And fret my dyeng ſoule with gnawing paine.
                  Yet blinde, alas, I groape about for grace.
                  While blinde for grace I groape about in vaine,
                  My fainting breath I gather vp and ſtraine,
                  Mercie, mercie to crye and crye againe.
               
               
                  
                  But mercy while I ſound with ſhreking crye▪
                  
                  For graūt of grace and pardon while I pray,
                  Euen then deſpeir before my ruthefull eye
                  Spredes forth my ſinne & ſhame, & ſemes to ſaye
                  In vaine thou brayeſt forth thy bootleſſe noyſe
                  To him for mercy, O refuſed wight,
                  That heares not the forſaken ſinners voice.
                  Thy reprobate and foreordeined ſprite,
                  For damned veſſell of his heauie wrath,
                  (As ſelfe witnes of thy beknowyng hart.
                  And ſecrete gilt of thine owne conſcience ſaith)
                  Of his ſwete promiſes can claime no part:
                  But thee, caytif, deſerued curſe doeth draw
                  To hell, by iuſtice, for offended law.
               
               
                  This horror whē my trēbling ſoule doth heare,
                  When markes and tokens of the reprobate,
                  My growing ſinnes, of grace my ſenſleſſe cheare▪
                  
                  Enforce the profe of euerlaſtyng hate,
                  That I conceiue the heauens king to beare
                  Againſt my ſinfull and forſaken ghoſt:
                  As in the throte of hell, I quake for feare,
                  And then in preſent perill to be loſt
                  (Although by conſcience wanteth to replye,
                  But with remorſe enforcing myne offence,
                  Doth argue vaine my not auailyng crye)
                  With woefull ſighes and bitter penitence
                  To him from whom the endleſſe mercy flowes
                  I cry for mercy to releue my woes.
               
               
                  And then not daring with preſuming eye
                  Once to beholde the angry heauens face,
                  From troubled ſprite. I ſend confuſed crye,
                  T
                        •
                      craue the crummes of all ſufficing grace.
                  
                     With foltring knee I fallyng to the ground,
                  Bendyng my yelding handes to heauens throne,
                  Poure forth my piteous plaint wt woefull ſound,
                  With ſmoking ſighes, & oft repeted grone,
                  Before the Lord, the Lord, whom ſynner I,
                  I curſed wretch, I haue offended ſo,
                  That dredyng, in his wrekefull wrath to dye,
                  And damned downe to depth of hell to go,
                  Thus toſt with panges and paſſions of deſpeir,
                  Thus craue I mercy with repentant chere.
               
            
            
               
               
                  ❧A Meditation of à penitent ſinner, vpon the 51. Pſalme.
               
                  
                     Haue mercie vpon me (o God) after thy great merciHAue mercy, God, for thy great mercies ſake.
                  O God: my God, vnto my ſhame I ſay,
                  Beynge fled from thee, ſo as I dred to take
                  Thy name in wretched mouth, and feare to pray
                  Or aſke the mercy that I haue abuſde.
                  But, God of mercy, let me come to thee:
                  Not for iuſtice, that iuſtly am accuſde:
                  Which ſelfe word Iuſtice ſo amaſeth me,
                  That ſcarce I dare thy mercy ſound againe.
                  But mercie, Lord, yet ſuffer me to craue.
                  Mercie is thine: Let me not crye in vaine,
                  Thy great mercie for my great fault to haue.
                  Haue mercie, God, pitie my penitence
                  With greater mercie than my great offence.
               
               
                  
                     And according vnto the multitude of thy mercies do away myne offences.My many ſinnes in nomber are encreaſt,
                  With weight wherof in ſea of depe deſpeire
                  My ſinking ſoule is now ſo ſore oppreſt,
                  That now in peril and in preſent fere,
                  I crye: ſuſteine me, Lord, and Lord I pray▪
                  
                  With endleſſe nomber of thy mercies take
                  The endleſſe nomber of my ſinnes away.
               
               
                  
                  So by thy mercie, for thy mercies ſake,
                  Rue on me, Lord, releue me with thy grace.
                  My ſinne is cauſe that I ſo nede to haue
                  Thy mercies ayde in my ſo woefull caſe:
                  My ſynne is cauſe that ſcarce I dare to craue
                  Thy mercie manyfolde, whiche onely may
                  Releue my ſoule, and take my ſinnes away.
               
               
                  So ſoule is ſinne and lotheſome in thy ſighte,Waſh me yet more from my wickednes, and clenſe me from my ſinne.
                  
                  So foule with ſinne I ſee my ſelfe to be,
                  That till from ſinne I may be waſhed white,
                  So foule I dare not, Lord, approche to thee.
                  Ofte hath thy mercie waſhed me before,
                  Thou madeſt me cleane: but I am foule againe.
                  Yet waſhe me Lord againe, and waſhe me more.
                  Waſhe me, O Lord, and do away the ſtaine
                  Of vggly ſinnes that in my ſoule appere.
                  Let flow thy plētuous ſtreames of clenſing grace.
                  Waſhe me againe, yea waſhe me euery where,
                  Bothe leprous bodie and defiled face.
                  Yea waſhe me all, for I am all vncleane.
                  And from my ſin, Lord, cleanſe me ones againe.
               
               
                  Haue mercie, Lord, haue mercie:For I knowledge my wickednes, and my ſinne is euer before me. for I know
                  How muche I nede thy mercie in this caſe.
                  The horror of my gilt doth dayly growe,
                  And growing weares my feble hope of grace.
                  I fele and ſuffer in my thralled breſt
                  Secret remorſe and gnawing of my hart.
                  I fele my ſinne, my ſinne that hath oppreſt
                  My ſoule with ſorrow and ſurmounting ſmart.
                  Drawe me to mercie: for ſo oft as I
                  
                     Preſume to mercy to direct my ſight,
                  My Chaos and my heape of ſinne doth lie,
                  Betwene me and thy mercies ſhining light.
                  What euer way I gaze about for grace,
                  My filth and fault are euer in my face.
               
               
                  
                     Againſte thee onelye haue I ſinned, & don euill in thy ſight.Graunt thou me mercy, Lord: thee thee alone
                  I haue offended, and offendyng thee,
                  For mercy loe, how I do lye and grone.
                  Thou with allpearcing eye beheldeſt me,
                  Without regard that ſinned in thy ſight.
                  Beholde againe, how now my ſpirite it rues,
                  And wailes the tyme, when I with foule delight
                  Thy ſwete forbearing mercy did abuſe.
                  My cruell conſcience with ſharpned knife
                  Doth ſplat my ripped hert, and layes abrode
                  The loth
                        •
                     ſome ſecretes of my filthy life,
                  And ſpredes them forth before the face of God.
                  Whō ſhame frō dede ſhameleſſe cold not reſtrain,
                  Shame for my dede is added to my paine.
               
               
                  But therey Lord, O Lord ſome pitie take,
                  
                     That thou mighteſt be founde iuſt in thy ſayinges, and maieſt ouer come when thou art iudged.Withdraw my ſoule from the deſerued hell▪
                  
                  O Lord of glory, for thy glories ſake:
                  That I may ſaued of thy mercy tell,
                  And ſhew how thou, which mercy haſt behight
                  To ſighyng ſinners, that haue broke thy lawes,
                  Performeſt mercy: ſo as in the ſight
                  Of them that iudge the iuſtice of thy cauſe
                  Thou onely iuſt be demed, and no moe,
                  The worldes vniuſtice wholy to confound:
                  That damning me to depth of during woe
                  Iuſt in thy iudgement ſhouldeſt thou be found:
                  And from deſerued 
                        •
                     la
                        •
                     es releuyng me
                  
                     Iuſt in thy mercy mayſt thou alſo be.
               
               
                  For lo, in ſinne, Lord, I begotten was,For loe, I was ſhapen in wickednes, and in ſinne my mother cō
                        ceiued me.
                  
                  With ſede and ſhape my ſinne I toke alſo,
                  Sinne is my nature and my kinde alas,
                  In ſinne my mother me conceiued: Lo
                  I am but ſinne, and ſinfull ought to dye,
                  Dye in his wrath that hath forbydden ſinne.
                  Such bloome and frute loe ſinne doth multiplie,
                  Such was my roote, ſuch is my iuyſe within.
                  I plead not this as to excuſe my blame,
                  On kynde or parentes myne owne gilt to lay:
                  But by diſcloſing of my ſinne, my ſhame,
                  And nede of helpe, the plainer to diſplaye
                  Thy mightie mercy, if with plenteous grace
                  My plenteous ſinnes it pleaſe thee to deface.
               
               
                  Thou loueſt ſimple ſooth, not hidden face
                  With trutheles viſour of deceiuing ſhowe.But lo, thou haſte loued trueth, the hidden and ſecrete thinges of thy wiſedome thou haſte opened vnto me.
                  
                  Lo ſimplie, Lord, I do confeſſe my caſe,
                  And ſimplie craue thy mercy in my woe.
                  This ſecrete wiſedom haſt thou graunted me,
                  To ſe my ſinnes, & whence my ſinnes do growe:
                  This hidden knowledge haue I learnd of thee,
                  To fele my ſinnes, and howe my ſinnes do flowe
                  With ſuch exceſſe, that with vnfained hert,
                  Dreding to drowne, my Lorde, lo howe I flee,
                  Simply with teares bewailyng my deſert,
                  Releued ſimply by thy hand to be.
                  Thou loueſt truth, thou taughteſt me the ſame.
                  Helpe, Lord of truth, for glory of thy name.
               
               
                  With ſwete Hyſope beſprinkle thou my ſprite:Sprinkle me, Lorde, with hiſope and I ſhalbe cleane: waſhe me and I ſhalbe whiter then ſnow.
                  
                  Not ſuch hyſope, nor ſo beſprinkle me,
                  
                     As law vnperfect ſhade of perfect lyght
                  Did vſe as an apointed ſigne to be
                  Foreſhewing figure of thy grace behight.
                  With death and bloodſhed of thine only ſonne▪
                  
                  The ſwete hyſope, cleanſe me defyled wyght.
                  Sprinkle my ſoule. And when thou ſo haſte done,
                  Bedeawd with droppes of mercy and of grace▪
                  
                  I ſhalbe cleane as cleanſed of my ſynne.
                  Ah waſh me, Lord: for I am foule alas:
                  That only canſt, Lord, waſh me well within,
                  Waſh me, O Lord: when I am waſhed ſoe,
                  I ſhalbe whiter than the whiteſt ſnowe.
               
               
                  
                     Thou ſhalt make me heare ioye and gladneſſe, at the bones which thou haſt broken ſhal reioyſeLong haue I heard, & yet I heare the ſoundes
                  Of dredfull threates and thonders of the law,
                  Which Eccho of my gylty minde reſoundes,
                  And with redoubled horror doth ſo draw
                  My liſtening ſoule from mercies gentle voice,
                  That louder, Lorde, I am conſtraynde to call:
                  Lorde, pearce myne eares, & make me to reioyſe▪
                  
                  When I ſhall heare, and when thy mercy ſhall
                  Sounde in my hart the goſpell of thy grace.
                  Then ſhalt thou geue my hearing ioy againe,
                  The ioy that onely may releue my caſe.
                  And then my brooſed bones, that thou with paine
                  Haſt made to weake my febled corps to beare,
                  Shall leape for ioy, to ſhewe myne inward chere.
               
               
                  
                     Turne away thy face from my ſinnes, and do away all my miſdedes.Loke on me, Lord: though trēbling I beknowe,
                  That ſight of ſinne ſo ſore offendeth thee,
                  That ſeing ſinne, how it doth ouerflowe
                  My whelmed ſoule, thou canſt not loke on me,
                  But with diſdaine, with horror and deſpite.
                  Loke on me, Lord: but loke not on my ſinne.
                  
                     Not that I hope to hyde it from thy ſight,
                  Which ſeeſt me all without and eke within.
                  But ſo remoue it from thy wrathfull eye,
                  And from the iuſtice of thyne angry face,
                  That thou impute it not. Looke not how I
                  Am foule by ſinne: but make me by thy grace
                  Pure in thy mercies ſight, and, Lord, I pray▪
                  
                  That hateſt ſinne, wipe all my ſinnes away.
               
               
                  Sinne and deſpeir haue ſo poſſeſt my hart,Create a cleane hart within me, O God: and renew a ſtedfaſt ſpirit within my bowels.
                  
                  And hold my captiue ſoule in ſuch reſtraint,
                  As of thy mercies I can fele no part,
                  But ſtill in languor do I lye and faint.
                  Create a new pure hart within my breſt:
                  Myne old can hold no liquour of thy grace.
                  My feble faith with heauy lode oppreſt
                  Staggring doth ſcarcely creepe a reeling pace,
                  And fallen it is to faint to riſe againe.
                  Renew, O Lord, in me a conſtant ſprite,
                  That ſtayde with mercy may my ſoule ſuſteine▪
                  
                  A ſprite ſo ſetled and ſo firmely pight
                  Within my bowells, that it neuer moue,
                  But ſtill vphold thaſſurance of thy loue.
               
               
                  Loe proſtrate, Lorde, before thy face I lye,Caſt me not away from thy face, and take not thy holy ſpirit from me.
                  
                  With ſighes depe drawne depe ſorow to expreſſe▪
                  
                  O Lord of mercie, mercie do I crye:
                  Dryue me not from thy face in my diſtreſſe,
                  Thy face of mercie and of ſwete relefe,
                  The face that fedes angels with onely ſight,
                  The face of comfort in extremeſt grefe.
                  Take not away the ſuccour of thy ſprite,
                  Thy holy ſprite, which is myne onely ſtay,
                  The ſtay that when deſpeir aſſaileth me,
                  
                     In fainteſt hope yet moueth me to pray,
                  To pray for mercy, and to pray to thee.
                  Lord, caſt me not from preſence of thy face,
                  Nor take from me the ſpirite of thy grace.
               
               
                  
                     Reſtore to me the comforte of thy ſauing helpe, & ſtabliſhe me with thy free ſpirit.But render me my wonted ioyes againe,
                  Which ſinne hath reſt, and planted in theyr place
                  Doubt of thy mercy ground of all my paine.
                  The taſt, that thy loue whilome did embrace
                  My chearfull ſoule, the ſignes that dyd aſſure
                  My felyng ghoſt of fauor in thy ſight,
                  Are fled from me, and wretched I endure
                  Senſleſſe of grace the abſence of thy ſprite.
                  Reſtore my ioyes, and make me fele againe
                  The ſwete retorne of grace that I haue loſt,
                  That I may hope I pray not all in vayne.
                  With thy free ſprite confirme my feble ghoſt.
                  To hold my faith from ruine and decay
                  With faſt affiance and aſſured ſtay.
               
               
                  
                     I ſhal teach thy waies vnto the wicked, & ſinnes ſhall be tourned vnto thee.Lord, of thy mercy if thou me withdraw
                  From gaping throte of depe deuouring hell,
                  Loe, I ſhall preach the iuſtice of thy law:
                  By mercy ſaued, thy mercy ſhall I tell.
                  The wicked I wyll teache thyne only way,
                  Thy wayes to take, and mans deuiſe to flee,
                  And ſuche as lewd de
                        •
                     ight hath ledde aſtray,
                  To rue theyr errour and returne to thee.
                  So ſhall the profe of myne example preache
                  The bitter frute of luſt and foule delight:
                  So ſhall my pardon by thy mercy teache
                  The way to finde ſwete mercy in thy ſight.
                  Hyue mercy, Lorde, in me example make
                  Of lawe and mercy, for thy mercies ſake.
               
               
                  
                  O God, God of my health, my ſauing God,Deliuer me from bloud o God, God of my helth & my tong ſhall ioyful lye talke of thy iuſtice.
                  
                  Haue mercy Lord, and ſhew thy might to ſaue,
                  Aſſoile me, God, from gilt of giltleſſe blod,
                  And cke from ſinne that I ingrow
                        •
                     ng haue
                  By fleſhe and bloud and by corrupted kinde.
                  Vpon my bloud and ſoule extende not, Lorde,
                  Vengeance for bloud, but mercy let me finde,
                  And ſtrike me not with thy reuengyng ſworde.
                  So, Lord, my ioying tong ſhall talke thy praiſe,
                  Thy name my mouth ſhall vtter in delight,
                  My voice ſhall ſounde thy iuſtice, and thy waies,
                  Thy waies to iuſtifie thy ſinfull wight.
                  God of my health, from bloud I ſaued ſo
                  Shall ſpred thy prayſe for all the world to know.
               
               
                  Lo ſtraining crampe of colde deſpeir againe
                  In feble breſt doth pinche my pinyng hart,Lord, open thou my lippes, and my mouth ſhal ſhewe thy praiſe.
                  
                  So as in greateſt nede to cry and plaine
                  My ſpeache doth faile to vtter thee my ſmart.
                  Refreſhe my yeldyng hert, with warming grace,
                  And looſe my ſpeche, and make me call to thee.
                  Lord open thou my lippes to ſhewe my caſe,
                  My Lord, for mercy Loe to thee I flee.
                  I can not pray without thy mouyng ayde,
                  Ne can I ryſe, ne can I ſtande alone.
                  Lord, make me pray, & graūt whē I haue praide.
                  Lord looſe my lippes, I may expreſſe my mone▪
                  
                  And findyng grace with open mouth I may
                  Thy mercies praiſe, and holy name diſplay.
               
               
                  Thy mercies praiſe, inſtede of ſacrifice,If thou haddeſt deſired ſacrifice, I wold haue geuen thou delyteſt not in burnt offringes.
                  
                  With thankfull minde ſo ſhall I yeld to thee.
                  For if it were delitefull in thine eyes,
                  Or hereby mought thy wrath appeaſed be▪
                  
                  
                     Of cattell ſlayne and burnt with ſacred flame
                  Vp to the heauen the vaprie ſmoke to ſend:
                  Of gyltleſſe beaſtes, to purge my gilt and blame,
                  On altars broylde the ſauour ſhold aſcend,
                  To peaſe thy wrath. But thy ſwete ſonne alone,
                  With one ſufficing ſacrifice for all
                  Appeaſeth thee, and maketh the at one
                  With ſinfull man, and hath repaird our fall.
                  That ſacred hoſte is euer in thine eyes.
                  The praiſe of that I yeld for ſacrifice.
               
               
                  
                     The ſacrifice to God is a trobled ſpirit: a broken and an humbled hart, o god, thou wilt not deſpiſe.I yeld my ſelf, I offer vp my ghoſte,
                  My ſlayne delightes, my dyeng hart to thee.
                  To God a trobled ſprite is pleaſing hoſte.
                  My trobled ſprite doth drede like him to be,
                  In whome taſtleſſe languor with lingring pain
                        •
                     
                  
                  Hath febled ſo the ſtarued appetite,
                  That foode to late is offred all in vaine,
                  To holde in fainting corps the fleing ſprite.
                  My pining ſoule for famine of thy grace
                  So feares alas the faintneſſe of my faithe.
                  I offre vp my trobled ſprite: alas,
                  My trobled ſprite refuſe not in thy wrathe.
                  Such offring likes thee, ne wilt thou deſpiſe
                  The broken humbled hart in angry wiſe.
               
               
                  
                     Shew fauour, o lord in thy good will vnto Sion, that 
                           〈◊〉
                         walles▪ of Hieruſalem may be bylded.Shew mercie, Lord, not vnto me alone:
                  But ſtretch thy fauor and thy pleaſed will,
                  To ſprede thy bountie and thy grace vpon
                  Sion, for Sion is thy holly hyll:
                  That thy Hieruſalem with mighty wall
                  May be encloſed vnder thy defenſe.
                  And bylded ſo that it may neuer fall
                  By myning fraude or mighty violence.
                  
                     Defend thy chirch, Lord, and aduaunce it ſoe,
                  So in deſpite of tyrannie to ſtand,
                  That trēbling at thy power the world may know
                  It is vpholden by thy mighty hand:
                  That Sion and Hieruſalem may be
                  A ſafe abode for them that honor thee.
               
               
                  Then on thy hill, and in thy walled towne,Then ſhalt thou accept the ſacrifice of righteouſneſſe, burnt offringes and oblations▪ then ſhall they offre yonge bullockes vpon thine altare.
                  
                  Thou ſhalt receaue the pleaſing ſacrifice.
                  The brute ſhall of thy praiſed name reſoune
                  In thankfull mouthes, and then with gentle eyes
                  Thou ſhalt behold vpon thine altar lye
                  Many a yelden hoſt of humbled hart,
                  And round about then ſhall thy people crye:
                  We praiſe thee, God our God: thou onely art
                  The God of might, of mercie, and of grace.
                  That I then, Lorde, may alſo honor thee.
                  Releue my ſorow, and my ſinnes deface:
                  Be, Lord of mercie, mercifull to me:
                  Reſtore my feling of thy grace againe:
                  Aſſure my ſoule, I craue it not in vaine.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   