
      
         
            
            
            ¶To Dauid Dicars when.
            
               ¶To him that doth dreame,
               Dauid Dicars when,
               And euen ſo from hym,
               to ſuch other men.
            
            
               FRom when vnto when, to come to this when.
            Whē fooles of your folly, wyl worke lyke wyſe men
            And know theyr owne fautes, & leaue faulting other
            And fyrſt mende them ſelues, & thē warne theyr brother,
            Enuiyng none, for that theyr ſorte is not
            Such as they would be, lyke others I wot.
            Goddes of degree, to rule and beare ſwaye,
            Whoſe maners mete not, to ſtand in ſuch ſtay,
            And yet wold haue mouthes, to rore lyke the Lyon
            Beyng but Aſſes, brute of condicion.Eſopus de aſino ru
                     •
                  ēte
            
            Forgettynge that order doth thus aſke and craue,
            That eche ſhould hym ſelfe in order behaue.
            As beaſtes of lowe ſorte, to be meke of theyr mynde,
            To thoſe that be hygher, and greater of kynde.
            The Bore not to bragge, to ſtryue wyth the Lyon.
            The Hart not to ſtand, wyth the Bull in contencion,
            The Oxe that doth draw, to thyncke hym ſelfe able,
            To runne for a wager, wyth the Horſe of the ſtable.
            It grees not, it cordes not, nor orderly fyttes
            That men ſhould fynd fault, wyth Gods and theyr wyttes.
            Iupiters ſeate ſtandes ſomewhat to hye
            For vs to iudge it, that come it not nye.
            And iudgementes of geſſe, in any ſuch ſorte,
            May ſerue to the Gods, for a laughter and ſporte.
            To ſe how Iudas, would fayne become Iuda,
            
            To iuſte at the life, of Iuli apoſtata.
            
            Let Beaſtes that be meete, for carte and caryage,
            Leane to theyr laboure, as manne to hys maryage.
            And ſynce we be members of one common wealthe.
            Let vs ioyne aptly, as fyttes for our health.
            The eye as the eye, let hym ſtare and looke,
            And let the leg learne, to bowe and to crooke.
            Let the hand anſwere, to helpe and to dooe.
            As the wyl of the hert, ſhall wyll hym vnto.
            And let not the foote, make murmur and cry.
            To aſke why our head is placed ſo hye.
            Our inſtrument iarres, it makes no ryght melody.
            If we thus tune not to order our armony.
            Then mayſter when, when bothe you and I,
            And euery man els wyl learne to applye,
            To our ryght metyarde, and kepe oure iuſt compaſſe,
            And looke not ſo deepe in an other mannes glaſſe.
            And leaue dreaming dreames of dead Dauid Dicar,
            And ſend ſuch whens home, to our perſon or vycar.
            And therwyth remember, thys verſe of Cato,
            Whoſe wyſdō doth warne vs, with theſe wordes I trowe
            
               Que ſoles culpare, ea tu ipſe:
            
            
               ne feceris. when wee marke this nipſe,
            And leaue drawyng dialles, on other mens dooyng
            And learne for to looke to our owne woorkes and brewynge,
            Then I ſay then, when you agayn when:
            wyll ſay well your ſelfe, and ſuche other men,
            And all folke wyll doo well. Lo thus I ende then,
            All thynges ſhall be well, whiche god graunt. Amen.
            Domine ſaluum fac Regem
& da pacem in diebus noſtris.
Quod T. Camel.
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London by Hary Sutton, dwellyng in Poules
Churchyarde, at the ſygne of the blacke boye.
         
      
   