
      
         
            
            
            
            
            REMAINES
OF
A GREATER
WORKE,
Concerning
Britaine, the inhabitants thereof,
their Languages, Names, Surnames,
Empreſes, Wiſe ſpeeches,
Poëſies, and
Epitaphes.
            
            AT LONDON
Printed by G. E. for Simon Waterſon.
1605.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL,
WORTHY,
and Learned Sir Robert Cotton
of Connington Knight.
            
               
                  TEmples (ſaith the
auncient Ariſtides)
are to be dedicated to
the Gods, and Bookes
to Good-men. Vpon
warrant of which words, and long
experience of your goodneſſe,
Right worſhipfull, this ſilly, pittifull,
and poore Treatiſe was once
vnaduiſedly forward to haue bin
dedicated to your good worſhip.
But vpon more aduiſed conſideration,
whereas Ariſtides in his
wiſdome knew nothing but that
which was good, to be ſeemly and
ſortable for goodmen, & therfore
meant moſt certainly, that onely

good Bookes are to be dedicated
to good men: It recalled it ſelfe
in good tine, for that it cannot
challenge any ſuch title either for
matter or manner of handling,
being only the rude rubble and
out-caſt rubbiſ
                  •
                (as you know)
of a greater and more ſerious
worke. Whereas therefore neither
in reſpect of it ſelfe it dare,
neither in regarde of you it may
preſent it ſelfe by way of Dedication,
for that ſhould implie
honour vnto you, which it cannot
bring, and require patronage
from you, which it needeth not,
beeing by the pittifull ſillyneſſe
thereof ſecured from enuie, onelie
reaching at eminencie. I
heere ſende it vnto you in loſe
leaues, as fitt to be Ludibria venti:
               
and withall ſubmit it to your
cenſure, not as he did Siue legi,
ſiue tegi iuſſeris. Albeit I aſſure
my ſelfe that you in your learned
iudgement cannot but ſentence
it, as I haue done with this
doome.
            Tineas paſcat taciturnus inertes.
            From my Lodging xii. Iunii.
1603.
            
               Your worſhips aſſured
M. N.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Britaine
            
               WHereas I have purpoſed in all this Treatiſe
to confine my ſelfe within the bounds
of this Iſle of Britaine, it cannot be impertinent,
at the verie enterance, to ſay ſomewhat
of Britaine, which is the onely ſubiect
of all that is to be ſaid, and well knowne to
be the moſt flouriſhing and excellent, moſt
renowmed and famous Iſle of the whole world: So rich in
commodities, ſo beautifull in ſituation, ſo reſplendent in all
glorie, that if the moſt Omnipotent had faſhioned the world
round like a ring, as hee did like a globe, it might haue beene
moſt worthily the onely gemme therein. For the ayre is moſt
temperate and wholeſome, ſited in the middeſt of the temperate
Zone, ſubiect to no ſtormes and tempeſts as the more
Southerne and Northerne are; but ſtored with infinite delicate
fowle. For water, it is walled and garded with the Oc
                  •
               an moſt
commodious for trafficke to all parts of the world, and watered
with pleaſant fiſhfull and navigable rivers, which yeelde
ſafe havens and roads, and furniſhed with ſhipping and Saylers,
that it may rightly be termed the Lady of the ſea. That I
may ſay nothing of healthfull Bathes, and of Meares ſtored
both with fiſh and fowle; The earth fertile of all kinde of
graine, manured with good husbandrie, rich in minerall of
coles, tinne, lead, copper, not without gold and ſilver, aboundant
in paſture, repleniſhed with cattell both tame and wilde,
(for it hath more par
                  •
               es than all Europe beſides,) plentifully
wooded, prouided with all complete proviſions of Warre,

beautified with many populous Citties, faire Borroughs, good
Townes, and well-built Villages, ſtrong Munitions, magnificent
Pallaces of the Prince, ſtately houſes of the Nobilitie, frequent
Hoſpitals, beautiful Churches, faire Colleges, as well in
other places, as in the two Vniverſities, which are comparable
to all the reſt in Chriſtendome, not onely in antiquitie, but alſo
in learning, building, and endowments. As for governement
Eccleſiaſticall and Civill, which is the very ſoule of a kingdome,
I neede to ſay nothing, whenas I write to home-borne,
and not to ſtrangers.
            
               But to praiſe Britaine according as the dignitie thereof requireth
is a matter which may exerciſe, if not tier the happieſt
wit furniſhed with the greateſt variety of learning; and ſome
already have buſied their braines and pennes heerein with no
ſma
                     •
                  l labour and travel: let therefore theſe few lines in this behalfe
ſuffice, out of an antient Writer. Britaine, thou art a gloriou
                  ••
               ſle,
extolled and renowmed among all Nations; the navies of
Tharſis can not be compared to thy ſhipping bringing in all pretious
commodities of the world: the Sea is thy wall, and ſtrong fortifications
doe ſecure thy Portes: Chivalrie, Cleargie, and Merchandize do
flouriſh in thee. The P
                     •
                  ſans, Genoveſes, and Venetians do bring
thee Saphires, Emeraldes and Carbuncles from the Eaſt: Aſia ſerveth
thee with Silke & Purple, Affrica with Cinamon and Balme,
Spaine with Golde, and Germanie with Silver: Thy Weaver
Flaunders dooth drape Cloth for thee of thine owne Wooll; Thy
Gaſcoigne dooth ſend thee Wine:Gaſcoigne then vnder the crown of England. Bucke and Doe are plentifull in
thy Forreſts: Droves of Cattle, and Flockes of Sheepe are vpon thy
Hilles: All the perfection of the goodiuſt 
                  •
               and is in thee: Thou haſt
all the Foule of the aire. In plenty of Fiſh thou dooſt ſurpaſſe all
Regions. And albeit thou art not ſtretched out with large limites,
yet bordering Nations clothed with thy Fleeces, doe woonder at
thee for thy bleſſed plenty. Thy Swordes have beene turned into
Plow-ſhares: Peace and Religion flouriſh in thee; ſo that thou arte
a Mirrour to all Chriſtian Kingdomes.
            
               Adde heerevnto (if you pleaſe) theſe few lines out of a farre
more antient Panegyriſt in the time of Conſtantine the Great.
O happy Britaine and more blisfull then all other Regions: Nature

hath enriched thee with all commodities of heaven and earth,
wherein there is neither extreame colde in Winter, nor ſcorching
heate in Summer; wherein there is ſuch aboundant plenty
of Corne, as may ſuffice both for Bread and Wine: wherein are
Woodes without wilde Beaſts, and the Fields without noyſome
Serpents; but infinite numbers of milch Cattle, and Sheepe
weighed downe with rich Fleeces: And that which is moſt comfortable,
long dayes, and lightſome nights.
            So that, not without cauſe, it was accounted one of the
faireſt and moſt glorious Plumes in the triumphant Diademe
of the Roman Empire, while it was a Province vnder
the ſame;Alfred
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . and was truely called by Charles the Great,
The Store-houſe, and Granary of the whole weſterne world.
            
            But whereas the ſaide Panegyriſt falleth into a gladſome
admiration, how from hence there hath riſen gratious princes,
As good gods honoured throughout the whole world. That
if ever, as it was lately to our glorious ioy evidently, & effectually
verified in our late Soveraigne, of moſt deare, ſacred
and ever-glorious memorie QV
                  •
               ENE ELIZABETH, the honour
of her time, and the mirrour of ſucceeding ages: ſo
with an aſſured confidence, wee hope it will likewiſe bee
prooved true in her vndoubted and rightfull ſucceſſor, our
dread Lord and Soveraigne. That to his endleſſe honour
MERCIE and TRVTH, RIGHTEOVSNES and PEACE may
heere kiſſe together; and true RELIGION, with her attendants
IOY, HAPPINES, and GLORY, may heere for ever
ſeate themſelves vnder him; in whoſe perſon the two mightie
kingdomes of England and Scotland hitherto ſevered, are
now conioyned, and beginne to cloſe together into one, in
their moſt antient name of BRITAINE.
            If any would vndertake the honour and precedence of
Britaine before other Realmes in ſerious maner (for heere
I proteſt once for all, I will paſſe over each thing lightly &
ſlightly) a world of matter at the firſt view would preſent
it ſelfe vnto him. As that the true Chriſtian Religion was
planted heere moſt auntiently by Ioſeph of Arimathia, Simon
Zelotes, Ariſtobulus, yea by ſaint Peter, and ſaint Paul,
               
as may be prooved by Dorotheus, Theod
                     •••
                  , Sophronius,
& before the yere of Chriſt 200. it was propagated, as Tertullian
writes to places of Britaine 
                     •
                  acceſſa Ro
                     •
                  anis, whither
the Romans never reached, which can not be vnderſtoode,
but of that parte which was afterward called Scotland. The
kingdomes alſo are moſt auntient, helde of God alone, acknowledging
no ſuperiours, in no vaſſalage to Emperour
or Pope.Tho▪ Moore in the Debellation Parl. 43. Edw. 3. The power of the Kings more abſolute, than in
moſt other kingdomes, their territories very large; for the
Kings of England, beſide Ireland, have commaunded from
the Iſles of Orkenay, to the Pyrene Mountaines, and are de
iure, Kings of all France by deſcent. The Kings of Scotland,
beſide the ample realm of Scotland commands the 300
Weſterne Iſles, the 30. of Orkney & Schetland. Alſo, which
was accounted a ſpecial note of maieſty in former ages, the
Kings of England, with them of Fraunce, Ieruſalem, Naples,
and afterward Scotland, were antiently the onely annointed
Kings of Chriſtendome: which manner beganne among
the Iewes, was recontinued at length by the Chriſtian Emperors
of Constantinople, with this word at the annoynting,

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Curopalares. that is, Be holy; and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Be worthie;
and from thence was that ſacred ceremonie brought to vs
and the other kingdomes.
            As for that admirable gift hereditary to the annoynted
Princes of this Realme,
                  Chariſma of doctor Tooker. in curing the Kings Evil, I referre
you to the learned Diſcourſe thereof lately written. Neyther
would it be forgotten, that England in the opinion of
the Popes (when they ſwayd the world, and their authoritie
was held ſacred) was preferred, becauſe it contained in
the Eccleſiaſticall Diviſion, two large Provinces, which
had their ſeverall Legatinati, whereas Fraunce had ſcantly
one, That Scotland was by them accompted an exempt
kingdome,Epiſt. Bonif. ſept. ad 
                     •
                   d. 1. reg. Angl
                     ••
                  . and a Peculiar properly appertaining to the Roman
Chappell. And which was accompted in that age a
matter of honour, when all Chriſtianitie in the Counſell
Constance was divided into Nations, Anglicana Natio was
one of the principall and no ſub alterne. As alſo, that in times

paſt, the Emperour was accounted Maior filius Eccleſiae, the
King of France, Filius Minor, and the King of England, Filius
Tertius, and Adoptivus. And ſo in generall Councells,
as the King of Fraunce had place next the Emperour on
the right hand, ſo the King of England on the left; and the
Kings of Scotland, as appeereth in an antient Roman Provinciall,
had next place before Caſtil
                     •
                  . The Archbiſhops
of Canterbury, who were antiently ſtiled Archbiſhoppes of
Britaine, were adiudged by the Popes, tanquam alterius orbis
Pontifices Maximi, and they had their place in all general
Councells, at the Popes right foote. The Title alſo of Defenſor
fidei, is as honourable, and more iuſtly conferred vpon
the Kings of England, than, either Chriſtianiſſimus vpon
the French, or Catholicus vpon the Spaniard. Neither is it
to be omitted, which is ſo often recorded in our Hiſtories,
when Brithwald the Monke, not long before the Conqueſt
buſied his brain much about the ſucceſſion of the Crown,
becauſe the blood Royall was almoſt extinguiſhed, he had
a ſtrange viſion, and heard a voyce, which forbade him to
be inquiſitive of ſuch matters, reſounding in his eares. The
kingdome of England is Gods owne kingdome, and for it God
himſelfe will provide. But theſe, & ſuch like are more fit for a
graver Treatiſe than this. I will performe that I promiſed,
in handling nothing ſeriouſly, and therfore I will bring
you in ſome Poets, to ſpeake in this behalfe for mee, and
will beginne with olde Alfred of Beverlie, who made this for
Britaine in generall, which you muſt not reade with a cenſorious
eye; for it is, as the reſt I will cite, of the middle age,
having heeretofore vſed all of more auntient and better
times in an other worke. But thus ſaide he of Britaine.
            
            
               Inſula praedives quae toto vix eget orbe,
               Et cuius totus indiget orbis ope.
               Inſula praedives, cuius miretur, & optet,
               Delicias Salomon, Octavianus opes.
            
            For Scotland, one lately in a far higher ſtraine, and more
Poetically, ſung theſe;

                  
                  Quis tibi frugifera 
                        〈…〉
                     ,
                  Aut aris gravides, & 
                        〈◊〉
                      p
                        ••
                     dere 
                        〈…〉
                     ,
                  Et nitidos auro monces, ferr
                        •
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      rigent
                        ••
                     
                  
                  De
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      met all
                        •
                     feris manantia 
                        〈…〉
                     :
                  Quae
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      bea
                        •
                     t alias communia commoda g
                        ••
                     tes
                        •
                     
                  
               
            
            For England a very olde Epigr
                     •••
                  tiſt made theſe with a
Proſopopoeia of Nature, the indulgent mother to England,
which doth compriſe as much as the beſt wittes can nowe
conceive in that behalfe.
            
               Anglia terra ferax, tibi pax ſecura quietem,
               Multiplicem luxum merx opulenta dedit.
               Tu nimio nec ſtricta gelu, nec ſydere fervens.
               Clementi coelo, temperie
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   places.
               Cùm pareret Natura parens, vario
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   favore,
               Divideret dotes omnibus vna locis:
               Sepoſuit potiora tibi, matrem
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   profeſſa
               Inſula fis 
                     •
                  oelix, plena
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   pacis, 
                     ••
                  t.
               Quicquid amat luxus, quicquid deſiderat vſus,
               Ex t
                     •
                   proveniet, vel aliunde tibi.
            
            Accordingly it is written in the Blacke booke of the Exchequer,
that our Aunceſtors termed England, a Store-houſe
of Treaſure, and a Paradiſe of Pleaſure, in this verſe;

                  Divitijſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſinum, delicijſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      larem.
               
            
            So that not without cauſe Pope Innocentius the fourth,Mathew Paris.
moſt willingly, and eſpecially deſired to ſee Divitias Londini,
& delicias Weſtmonaſterij. In theſe reſpects, to conclude,
moſt truely our Lucan ſingeth of this our countrey;Samuel Daniel.
               
                  The faireſt Land, that from her thruſts the reſt,
                  As if ſhe car'd not for the world beſide,
                  A world within herſelfe vvith vvonders bleſt.
               
            
         
         
            
            The inhabitants of Britaine
            
               AS all the Regions with the whole worlds
frame, and all therein was created by the
Almightie,Cicero. for his laſt and moſt perfect
worke, that goodly, vpright, provident,
ſubtile, wittie, and reaſonable creature,
which the Greekes call 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , for his
vpright looke; the Latines Homo, for that he was made of
Molde;
               Petrus Nanuius. and we with the Germains, call Man of his principall
part, the mind, being the verie image of God, and a pettie
world within himſelfe: ſo he aſſigned in his divine providence,
this ſo happy and worthy a region to men of anſwerable
worth, if not ſurpaſſing, yet equalling the moſt
excellent inhabitants of the earth, both in the endowments
of minde, lineaments of bodie, and their deportment
both in peace and warre, as if I would enter into diſcourſe
I could very eaſily ſhew.
            But overpaſſing their naturall inclination by heauenly
influence,P
                     •
                  ol. in Quad
                     •••
                  . anſwerable to the diſpoſition of Aries, Leo, and
Sagittary, & Iupiter, with Mars Dominators for this Northweſt
part of the world, which maketh them impatient of
ſervitude, lovers of libertie, martiall and couragious. I will
only in particular note ſomewhat, and that ſummarily of the
Britaines, Scottiſh, and Engliſh, the three principall inhabitants.
            The Britaines,Britains the moſt antient people of this Iſle antiently
inhabited the ſame from ſea to ſea, whoſe valour and
prowes is renowned both in Latine & Greek monuments,
and may appeare in theſe two points which I will heere

onely note. Firſt that the moſt p
                  ••
               ſſant Roman forces,
when they were at the higheſt, could not gaine of them, being
but then a halfe-naked people,Plinius. in thirtie whole yeares
the countries from the Thames to Str
                     ••
                  ling. And when
they had gained them, and brought them into forme of a
province, they found them ſo warlike a people, that the Romanes
levied as many Cohorts,Notitia provin
                  
                     ••
                  arum. companies, and enſignes of
Britans from hence for the ſervice of Armenia, Aegypt,
Illyricum, their frontire Countries, as from any other of
their Provinces whatſoeuer.Pict-Britans. As for thoſe Britane which
were farther North, and after as is moſt probable, called
Pictes, (for that they ſtill painted themſelues when the Southerne
parts were brought to civilitie,) they not onely moſt
couragiouſly defended their libertie, but offended the Romans
with continuall and moſt dangerous incurſions. The
other remainder of the Britans, which retyred themſelues
to weſt parts, now called W
                     ••
                  es, with like honour of fortitude,
for many hundred yeares repelled the yoake both of
the Engliſh and Norman ſlaverie. But ſince they were 
                  ••
               
               ted
to the imperiall Crowne of England,
               Welſh-Britans. they have, to their
iuſt praiſe, performed all parts of dutifull loyaltie and allegiance
moſt faithfully therevnto.] Great alſo is the glorie
of thoſe Britans,American or French Britans. which in moſt dolefull time of the Engliſh
invaſion, with-drew themſelves into the Weſt parts of Gallia,
then called Armorica: For they not onely ſeated themſelves,
there maugre the Romans, (then indeede low, and
neare ſetting,) and the French: but alſo impoſed their name
to the countrey, held and defended the ſame againſt the
French, vntill in our grandfathers memorie, it was vnited
to France by the ſacred bonds of matrimonie.]
            Next after the Britans,Scottiſhmen. 
                     •
                  
                the Scottiſhmen comming out of
Ireland, planted themſelves in this Iſlco
                  •
                the North ſide of
Cluid,
               B
                     ••
                  a lib. 
                     •
                  . partly by force, partly by fauour of the Pictes, with
whom a long time they annoyed the Southerne parts, but
after many blody battels amongſt themſelves, the Scottiſhmen
ſubdued them, and eſtabliſhed a kingdome in thoſe
parts, which with 
                  〈◊〉
                courag
                  •
                and warlike proweſſe,

they have not onely maintained at home, but alſo hath purchaſed
great honour abroad. For the French cannot but acknowledge
they have ſeldome atchieved any honourable
acts without Scottiſh hands, who therefore are deſervedly
to participate the glorie with them. As alſo divers parts of
France, Germany, and Suitzerland, cannot but confeſſe, that
they owe to the Scottiſh Nation, the propagation of good
letters and Chriſtian religion amongſt them.
            After the Scottiſhmen, the Angles, Engliſhmen or Saxons,
by Gods wonderfull providence were tranſplanted hither
out of Germanie.
               Engliſhm
                     ••
                  
                A people compoſed of the valiant
Angles, Iutes, and Saxons, then inhabiting Iutland, 
                     •
                  olsten,
and the ſea coaſts along to the river Rhene, who in ſhort
time ſubduing the Britans, and driving them into the
mountanous Weſterne parts, made themſelves by a moſt
compleate conqueſt, abſolute Lords of all the better ſoyle
thereof, as farre as Orkeney. Which cannot be doubted of,
when their Engliſh tongue reacheth ſo farre along the Eaſt
coaſt, vnto the fartheſt parts of Scotland, and the people
thereof are called by the Highland-men, which are the true
Scots, by no other name then Saxons, by which they alſo
call vs the Engliſh.
            This warlike, victorious, ſtiffe, ſtowt, and rigorous Nation,
after it had as it were taken roote heere about one hundred
and ſixtie yeares, and ſpread his branches farre and
wide, being mellowed and mollified by the mildenes of the
ſoyle and ſweete aire, was prepared in fulnes of time for the
firſt ſpirituall bleſſing of God, I meane our regeneration in
Chriſt, and our ingrafting into his myſticall bodie by holy
baptiſme. Which Beda our Eccleſiaſtical Hiſtorian recounteth
in this manner, and I hope you will give it the reading.
Gregorie the Great Biſhop of Rome, on a time ſaw beautifull
boyes to befold in the market at Rome, & demanded from
whence they were▪ anſwer was made him out of the Iſle of
Britaine Then asked he againe, whither they were Chriſtians
or no
                  •
                they ſaid no. Alas for pittie ſaid Gregorie, that the ſoule

                     〈…〉
                   be Lord of ſuch faire folkes▪ and that they which

carrie ſuch grace in their 
                     〈…〉
                  
in their hearts. Then he would know of them by what name
their Nation was called, and they told him 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , And
iuſtly be they ſo called (quoth he,) for they haue Angelike faces,
and ſeeme meete to be made cohair
                     ••
                   with the Angells in heaven.
            
            Since which time, they made ſuch happy progreſſe in
the Chriſtian profeſſion both of faith and works, that if I
ſhould but enter into conſideration thereof, I ſhould be
over-whelmed with mayn tides of matter. Many and admirable
monuments thereof, do every where, at home preſent
themſelves to your view, erected informer times, (and
no ſmall number in our age, although few men note them,)
not for affectation of 
                  •
               ame, or oſtentation of wealth, but to
the glorie of God, increaſe of faith, of learning and to maintenance
of the poore. As for abroad, the world ca
                  •
                teſtifie
that foure Engliſhmen have converted to Chriſtianitie,
eight Nations of Europe, Wi
                     •
                  frid alias Boniface, the D
                  ••
               
               ſhire-man
converted the German Saxons, Franc
                     •••
                  ns Hoſſians,
and Thuringians, Willebred the Northerne man, the
Friſians and Hollanders. Nicholas Braksp
                     ••
                  
                of Middleſex,
who was after called Pope Hadrian the Normegians, and not
long ſince, Thomas of W
                     •
                  lden of Eſſex, the Lit
                     •••
                  ians.
Neither will I heere note which ſtrangers have noted, that
England hath bred more Princes renowned for ſanctitie,
then any Chriſtian Nation whatſoever. It doth alſo redound
to the eternall honour of England, that our countrimen
have twice beene ſchoolemaiſt 
                  〈…〉
                
               France. Firſt
when they taught the Gaules the diſcipline of the 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
and after, when they and the Scottiſhmen firſt taught the
French the liberall Arts, and perſuaded Carelus Magnus to
found the Vniverſitie of Paris. They alſo brought into
Fraunce the beſt lawes which the Parl
                  •
               ament of 
                  〈◊〉
                and
Burdeaux have now in vſe.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . They at the loweſt ebbe of learning,
amazed the world with their excellent knowledge
in Philoſophie, and Divinitie: for that I may not 
                  〈◊〉
               
of Alexander of Hales, the 
                  〈…〉
                Schoolemaſter

to the 
                  〈◊〉
                Doctor Thomas Aq
                     •••
                  , one Colledge
in Oxford brought forth in one age thoſe foure lights
of learning:
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   colledge 
               Sco
                     •
                  us the Subtile, Bradward
                     •
                  ne the Profound,
Okham the Invincible, and Burley the Perſpicuous, and as ſome
ſay, Baconthorpe the Reſolute; which Titles they hadde
by the common conſent of the iudiciall and learned of that
and the ſucceeding ages. Yet their militarie glorie hath ſurpaſſed
all, for they have terrified the whole world with
their Armes in Syria, Aegypt, Cyprus, Spaine, Sicill, and India.
            
            They have traverſed with moſt happy victories both
France and Scotland, brought away their Kings captives,
conquered Ireland and the Iſle of Cypres, which King Richard
the firſt gave frankly to Guie of Luſigni
                     ••
                  , and lately
with a maidens hand, mated the mightieſt Monarch in his
owne Countries. They beſide many other notable diſcoveries,
twice compaſſed the whole globe of the earth with
admirable ſucceſſe, which the Spaniards have yet but once
performed. Good Lord, how ſpaciouſly might a learned
pen walke in this argument! But leſt I ſhould ſeeme over
prodigall in the praiſe of my countrimen, I will onely preſent
you with ſome few verſes in this behalfe, and firſt this
Latine Rythme of the middle time in praiſe of the Engliſh
Nation, with ſome cloſe cautions. Its quilted as 
                  •
               t were out
of ſhreds of divers Poets, ſuch as Schollers do call a Cento.
            
            
               Quo verſu Anglorum poſſim deſcribere gentem,
               Saepe mihi dubiam traxit ſententia mentem.
               Sunt in amicitia percuſſo foedere veri.
               Maior at eſt virtus, quàm quarere, parta tu
                     ••
                  i.
               Su
                     ••
                   bello fortes, al
                     •
                  res, validi
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   duel
                     ••
                  s,
               Aſpera ſe
                     •
                   po
                     ••
                  tis 
                     ••••
                  ſcant ſecula bellis.
               Sunt 
                     〈…〉
                  , florent virtutis 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               S
                     •
                  d nihil eſt virtus, niſi cum 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               Quid fit avaritia pestis gens Anglicaneſcit,
               Cr
                     •
                  ſcit amor dandi, quantum ipſa 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   prima 
                     〈◊〉
                  , dare largè, 
                     〈◊〉
                   vireſcit,
               Vas niſi ſyncerum quodcun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   infundis aceſcit.
               
                  
L
                     •
                  uti
                     •
                  r eſt ill
                     •
                  s cum menſa divite cu
                     ••
                  us,
               Accedunt hilares ſemper ſuper 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               Non ibi Damaetas pauper dicit Melyb
                     ••
                  ,
               In cratere meo Thetis eſt ſociata Ly
                     ••
                  .
               Gratius ingenium datur his, & gratia m
                     •
                  rum,
               Sic norunt quàm ſit du
                     •
                  cis 
                     ••
                  xtura bonorum.
               Anglorum cur eſt gens quaevis invida genti?
               Summa petit livor, perflant altiſſima venti.
               And for the Scottiſh nation this of their owne Poet:
               Illa pharetratis est propria gloria Scotis,
               Cingere venatu ſaltus, ſuperare natand
                     •
                  
               
               Flumina, ferre famem, contemnere frigora & 
                     •
                  stus:
               Nec foſſa & muris patriam, ſed Marte tueri,
               Et ſpreta incolumem vita defendere fam
                     ••
                  ,
               Polliciti ſervare fidem, ſanctum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   vereri
               Numen amicitia, mores non munus amare.
            
         
         
            The Languages.
            
               FRom the people we will now proceede to
the languages. Heere would Schollers
ſhew you the firſt confuſion of languages
out of Moſes, that the gods had their
peculiar tongue out of H
                     ••
                  er, that brute
beaſts, birdes, and fiſhes, had their owne
proper languages out of Clemens Alexandri
                     •••
                  . They
would teach you out of Euphorus, that there were but 52.

tongues in the world, becauſe ſo many ſoules out of Iacob
deſcended into Aegypt,
               In Pſalm. 104. and out of Arnobius, that there were
ſeaventie and two: Albeit Timoſthenes reporteth that in
Dioſcurias a mart towne of Colchis, their trafficked 300.
Nations of divers languages: And howſoever our Indian or
American diſcouerers ſay, that in every foureſcore mile in
America, and in every valley almoſt of Peru you ſhall finde
a new language. Neither would they omit the Iland where
the people have cloven tongues out of the fabulous Narrations
of Diodorus Siculus: yea, they would laſh out of the Vtopian
language with
Volvola Barchin hema
                     ••
                  , la lalvola drame pagloni.
whenas it is a greater glory now to be a Linguiſt, then a Realiſt.
They would moreover diſcourſe at large, which I will
tell you in a word. Firſt the Britiſh tongue or Welſh (as we
now call it) was in vſe onely in this Iſland,Britania Camdem. having great affinitie
with the olde Galliqua of Gaule, now Fraunce, from
whence the firſt inhabitants in all probability came hither.
Afterward the Latin was taken vp when it was brought into
the forme of a Proviner, about the time of Domitian, according
to that notable place of Tacitus, where he reportteth
that Iulius Agricola Governour heere for the Romans,
preferred the Britans, as able to doe more by witte, then the
Gaules by ſtudie: Vt qui (ſaieth he) modò linguam Romanam
abnuebant, eloquentiam concupiſcerent. Inde etiam habitus noſtri
honor & frequens toga. But the Britiſh overgrewe the
Latine, and continueth yet in Wales, and ſome villages of
Cornwall intermingled with ſome Provinciall Latine. After
the Iriſh tongue was brought into the Northweſt partes of
the Iſle, out of Ireland by the auntient Scottiſhmen, and
there yet remaineth. Laſtly, the Engliſh-Saxon tongue came
in by the Engliſh-Saxons ont of Germany, who valiantly and
wiſely performed heere all the three things, which implie a
full conqueſt, viz. the alteration of lawes, language, and attire.
            This Engliſh tongue extracted out of the olde German,
as moſt other from Iſland to the Alpes, is mixed as it is now,

of the olde Engliſh-Saxon & N
                     •••••
                  
               
of Latine, German, and the olde 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                the 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Latine
and German-Gotiſh, and the Spaniſh of Latine, Gotiſh-German
and Arabique, Saracen, or M
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  ſq
                     ••
                  . And to the
honour of our progenitors the Engliſh-Saxons be it ſpoken,
their conqueſt was more abſolute heere over the Brita
                     ••
                  s,
than either of the Francs in Fran
                     •
                  c
                     •
                  
                over the G
                     ••
                  l
                     •
                  s, or the
Gothes and Lombardes in Italie over the K
                     〈…〉
                  , or of the
Gothes, Vandales, and Moores over the auntient Spaniards
in Spaine. For in theſe nations much of the provinciall Latine
(I meane the Latine vſed whileſt they were Provinces
of the Romans) remaineth, which they politi
                  •
               ely had ſpread
over their Empire, by planting of Colonies and enfranchiſing
all Nations ſubiect vnto them. But the Engliſh-Saxon
conquerors, altred the tongue which they found here wholy:
ſo that no Britiſh words, or provinciall Latine appeared
therein at the firſt: & in ſhort time they ſpread it over this
whole Iland, from the Orcades to Iſle of Wight, except a few
barren corners in the Weſtern
                     •
                  
                parts, wherevnto the reliques
of the Britans and Scots retyred, reſerving in them both their
life and their language. For certainely it is that the greateſt
and beſt parts, the Eaſt and South of Scotland, which call
themſelves the Lawland-men, ſpeake the Engliſh tongue varied
onely in Dialect, as deſcended from the Engliſh-Saxons:
and the old Scottiſh, which is the verie Iriſh, is vſed onely by
them of the Weſt, called the Hechtland-men, who call the
other as the Welſh call vs Saſſons, Saxons, both in reſpect of
language and originall, as I ſhewed before.
            I dare not yet heere affirme for the antiquitie of our language,
that our great-great-great-grandſires tongue came
out of Perſia, albeit the wonderfull Linguiſt Ioſeph Scaliger
hath obſerved, Fader; Moder, Bruder, 
                     〈◊〉
                   &c. in the Perſ
                     〈…〉
                  
               
tongue in the very ſence as we now vſe th
                  〈…〉
               .
            It will not be vnproper I hope to this purpoſe, if I note
out of the epiſtles of that learned Ambaſſadour Busbeq
                     〈…〉
                  ,
how the inhabitants of Taurica-Ch
                     •
                  rſon
                     •
                  ſſus, in the vtter-moſt
part of Europe eaſtward, have theſe words, Wind, Silver,

Kor
                     ••
                  , Sak, Fiſh, Son, Apple, Waggen, Singen, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , Beard,
with many other in the very ſame ſence and ſignification,
as they now are in vſe with vs, whereat I mervailed not a
little when I firſt read it. But nothing can bee gathered
thereby, but that the Saxons our progenitours, which planted
themſelves heere in the Weſt, did alſo to their glorie
place Colonies likewiſe there in the eaſt.
            As in the Latine tongue, the learned make in reſpect of
time, foure Idioms, the Antient, the Latine, the Roman, the
Mixt: ſo we in ours may make the Antient Engliſh-Saxon, and
the Mixt. But that you may ſeeme how powerable time is
in altering tongues as all things elſe, I will ſet downe the
Lords prayer as it was tranſlated in ſundrie ages, that you
may ſee by what degrees our tongue is riſen, and thereby
coniecture how in time it may alter and fall againe.
            If we could ſet it downe in the antient Saxon, I meane
in the tongue which the Engliſh vſed at their firſt arrivall
heere, about 420. yeares after Chriſts birth, it would ſeeme
moſt ſtrange and harſh Dutch or Gebriſh, as women call
it; or when they firſt embraced Chriſtianitie, about the
yeare of Chriſt 600. But the antientſt that I can finde, was
about 900. yeare ſince, about the yeare of Chriſt 700.
found in an antient Saxon, gloſſed Evangeliſts in the hands
of my good friend M. Robert Bowyer, written by Eadfride
the eight Biſhop of Lindiffar
                     ••
                  ,
               Holy-Iland. (which after was tranſlated
to Durrham,) and divided according to the antient Canon of
Euſebius, not into chapters, for Stephen Langton, Archbiſhop
of Canturburie, firſt divided the holy Scriptures into chapters,
as Robert Stephan did lately into verſe; and thus it is.
               
               Vren Our Fader Father thic which arth art in in heofnas heaven,
Sie be gehalgud hallowed thin  thin noma   name., to cymeth  come
                  
thin thy ric kingdom.. Sie Be thin thy willa will ſue ſo is as inin
                  
                  
heofnas heaven, and and in in eortho earth.. Vren Oure hlaf lofe
                  
ofer Super- wirtlic ſubstantiall ſel give vs vs to to daeg day,, and and
                  
forg
                     •
                  f forgive vs vs ſcylda debts urnaeu
                        •
                     es, ſue ſo we we for for
                  .
gefan give ſcyldgum debts vrum oures,, and and no do inlead not led
                  
vſith vs in into  cuſtnung temptation., Ah But gefrig deliver vrich every one
                  
from from ifle evill.. Amen.
            
            Some two hundred yeeres after, I finde this ſomewhat
varied in two tranſlations.
            
               Thu vre fader the eart on heofenum
Si thin nama gehalgod. Cum thin ric.
                  Gewurthe thin willa. Si thin willa on eorthan, ſwa ſwa on heofo
                  
num. Syle vs to daeg vrn daegthanlican 
                     dayly
                   hlaf.
And forgif vs vre gyltas 
                     trespaſſes
                   ſwa, ſwa we for
                  
gifathVrum gyltendum.  tham the with
                     againſt
                   vs 
                     vs
                   agyltath 
                     have trespaſſed
                  . And ne
led the vs on coſtnung, Ac alys vs from
yfle.Sothlice. Si 
                     Be
                   it 
                     it
                   ſwa. 
                     ſo.
                  
               
            
            About an hundred and three ſcore yeeres after, in the
time of king. Henry the ſecond, I find this in time ſent from

               Rome by Pope Adrian an Engliſhman, to be taught to the
people.
            
               
                  Ʋre fadyr in heaven rich,
               Thy name be halyed everlich:
               Thou bring vs thy michell bliſſe,
               Als hit in heaveny-doe,
               Evar in yearth beene it alſo:
               That holy bread that lasteth ay,
               Thou ſend it ou
                     •
                   this ilke day.
               Forgive ous all that we havith don,
               As wee forgivet vch other mon:
               Ne let ous fall into no founding,
               Ac ſheild ous fro the fowle thing. Amen.
            
            Neither was there any great variation in the time of king
Henry the third, as appeereth in this of that age, as I coniecture
by the Character;

                  Fader that art in heavin bliſſe,
                  Thin helge nam it wurth the bliſſe.
                  Cumen & mot thi kingdom,
                  Thin holy will it be all don,
                  In heaven and in erdh alſo,
                  So it ſhall bin full well Ic tr
                        •
                     .
                  Gif vs all bread on this day,
                  And forgif vs vre ſinnes,
                  Ai we do vre wider winnes:
                  Let vs not in fonding fall,
                  O ac fro evill thu ſyld vs all. Amen.
               
            
            In the time of king Richard the ſecond about a hundred
and odde yeeres after, it was ſo mollified, that it came to be
thus, as it is in the Tranſlation of Wickliffe, with ſome Latine
wordes now inſerted, whereas there was not one before.
            Our fadyr, that art in heaven, halloed be thy name,
thy kingdom com to, be thy will done, ſo in heaven,

and in erth: gif to vs this day our bread over other
ſubstance: and forgif to vs our dettis, as we forgeven
to our detter
                  •
               , and leed vs nott into temptation,
but deliver vs fro evill. Amen.
            Hitherto will our ſparkefull Youth laugh at their great
grandfathers Engliſh, who had more care to do well, than to
ſpeake minion-like, and l
                  •
               ft m
                  •
               re glory to vs by th
                  •
               ir exploiting
of great actes, than we ſhall do by our ſonnetting.
            Great verily was the glory of our tongue before the Norman
Conqueſt in this, that the olde Engliſh could expreſſe
moſt aptly, all the conceiptes of the minde in their owne
tongue without borrowing from any. As for example:
            The holy ſervice of God, which the Latines called Religion,
becauſe it knitted the mindes of men together, and moſt
people of Europe have borrowed the ſame from them, they
called moſt ſignificantly Fan-fastnes, as the one and onely
aſſurance and faſt anker-holde of our ſoules health.
            The gladſome tidings of our ſalvation, which the Greekes
called Evangelion, and other Nations in the ſame word, they
called Godspel, that is, God ſpeech.
            
            For our Saviour, which wee borrowed from the French,
and they from the Latin Salvator, they called in their owne
word, Haelend from Hael, that is, Salus, ſafetie, which we

                  ••
               tame ſtill in Al-hael, and Waſ-hael, that is, Ave, Salve, Sis
ſalvus.
            
            They could call the diſciples of Chriſt,Leorning 
               Leorning Cnibtas,
that is, Learning Servitours. For 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                which is now a name
of worſhip, ſignified with them an Attendant, or ſervitour.
            They could name the Phariſes according to the Hebrew,
Sunder-halgens, as holy religious men which had ſundred
and ſevered themſelves from other.
            The Scribes they could call in their proper ſignification,
as Booke-men, Bocer. So they called parchment which
wee have catcht from the Latine Pergamenum, Boc-fell in
reſpect of the vſe.
            So they could call the ſacrament Haligdome, as holy
iudgement. For ſo it is according as we receive it.
            
               
They could call Fortilitie and fruitfulneſſe of land ſignificatively
Eordeſ-wela, as wealth of the earth.
            They could call a Comet, a Faxed ſtarre; which is all one
with Stella Crinita, or Cometa. So they did call the iudgement
ſeate Domeſettle.
            
            That which we call the Parlament of the French Parier
to ſpeake, they called a Witten mot, as the meeting and aſſembly
of wiſe men.
            The certaine and inward knowledge of that which is
in our minde, be it good or bad, which in the Latine word
we call Conſcience, they called Inwit, as that which they
did inwardly wit and wote, that is, know certainely.
            That in a river which the Latines call Alveus, and Cana
                  
                     •
                  is,
and from thence moſt nations of Europe name the Chanel,
Kanel, Canale, &c. they properly called the Streamerace.
            
            Neither in the degrees of kinred they were deſtitute of
ſignificative woordes; for he whom we of a French & Engliſh
compound word call Grandfather, they called Eald-fader,
whom we call Great Grandfather, they called Thirdafader.
So Proavus, which we call Great Great Grandfather,
they called Fortha-fader, as Abavus, Fiftha-fader.
            
            An Eunuch, for whome we have no name, but from the
Greekes, they could aptly name Vnſtana, that is, without
ſtones, as we vſe Vnſpotted for without ſpotte, Vnlearned, for,
without learning.
            A Covetous man whome we ſo call of the French Convoitiſe,
they truely called Git-ſor, as a fore & eagre Getter, and
Gatherer.
            
            That which the Latines call Abortus, and wee in many
wordes, Vntimely Birth, or, Borne before the full time, they
called Miſs-borne.
            
            A Porter, which wee have received from the French,
they could in their own word as ſignificatively call A Doreward.
            
            I could particulate in many more, but this woulde appeare
moſt plentifully, if the labours of the learned Gentlemen

Maiſter Laurence Nowell of Lincolnes Inne, who firſt
in our time recalled the ſtudie heereof, Maiſter William
Lambert, Maiſter I: Ioſcelin, Maiſter Fr: Tate were once
publiſhed. Otherwiſe it is to bee feared, that devouring
Time, in few yeeres will vtterly ſwallow it, without hope
of recoverie.
            The alteration and innovation in our tongue as in all others,
hath beene brought in by entrance of Strangers, as
Danes, Normans, and others which have ſwarmed hither, by
trafficke, for new words as well as for new wares, have alwaies
come in by the tyranne Time, which altereth all vnder
heaven, by Vſe, which ſwayeth moſt, and hath an abſolute
command in words, and by Pregnant wits: ſpecially ſince
that learning after long baniſhment, was recalled in the
time of King Henry the eight, it hath beene beautified and
enriched out of other good tongues, partly by enfranchiſing
and endenizing ſtrange words, partly by refining and
mollifying olde words, partly by implanting new wordes
with artificiall compoſition, happily containing themſelves
within the bounds preſcribed by Horace. So that our long
is (and I doubt not but hath beene) as copious, pithie, and
ſignificative, as any other tongue in Europe: and I hope we
are not yet and ſhall not heereafter come to that which Seneca
ſaw in his time,I
                     •
                   Epiſtolis. 
               When mens mindes beginne once to iniure
themſelves to diſlike whatſoever is vſuall, is diſdained. They affect
noveltie in ſpeech, they recall forworne and vncuth words,
they forge new phraſes, and that which is neweſt, is beſt liked;
there is preſumptuous and farre fetching of words. And ſome
there are which thinke it a grace if their ſpeech doe hover,
and thereby hold the hearer in ſuſpence: you know what followeth.
            Omitting this, pardon me and thinke me not overballanced
with affection, if I thinke that our Engliſh tongue
is (I will not ſay as ſacred as the Hebrew, or as learned as the
Greeke,) but as fluent as the Latine, as courteous as the Spaniſh,
as courtlike as the French, and as amorous as the Italian,
as ſome Italianated amorous have confeſſed. Neither hath

any thing detracted more from the dignitie of our tongue,
than our owne affection of forraine tongues, by admiring,
praiſing, and ſtudying them above meaſure: whereas the
wiſe Romans thought no ſmall part of their honour to conſiſt
in the honour of their language, eſteeming it a diſhonour
to anſwer any forraine in his owne language. As for
a long time the Engliſh placed in the Borrough townes of
Ireland and Wales, would admit neither Iriſh nor Welſh among
them. And not long ſince for the honour of our native
tongue, Henry Fitz-Allan Earle of Arundell, in his travaile
into Italie, and the Lord William Howard of Effingham,
in his government of Calice, albeit they were not ignorant
of other forraine tongues, would anſwer no ſtrangers
by word or writing, but onely in Engliſh. As in this conſideration
alſo before them Cardinall Wolſey in his ambaſſage
into France, commaunded all his ſervaunts to vſe no
French, but meere Engliſh to the French, in all communication
whatſoever.
            As for the Monoſyllables ſo rife in our tongue which were
not ſo originally, although they are vnfitting for verſes and
meaſures, yet are they moſt fit for expreſſing briefly the firſt
conceipts of the minde, or Intentionalia as they call them in
ſchooles: ſo that we can ſet downe more matter in fewer
lines, than any other language. Neither do we or the Welſh
ſo curtall Latine, that we make all therein Monoſyllables, as
Ioſeph Scaliger chargeth vs;In Catalecti
                     •
                  . who in the meane time forgetteth
that his Frenchmen have put in their Proviſo in the edict
of Pacification in the Grammaticall warre, that they
might not pronounce Latine diſtinctly, as the Engliſh common
Lawyers obtained then a Reſervation that they might
write falſe Latine, and the Iriſh not to obſerve quantitie of
ſyllables. I cannot yet but confeſſe that we have corruptly
contracted moſt names both of men and places, if they were
of more then two ſillables, and thereby hath enſued no little
obſcuritie.
            Whereas our tongue is mixed, it is no diſgrace, whe
                  ••
               as
all the tongues of Europe doe participate interchangeably

the one of the other, and in the learned tongues, there hath
been like borrowing one from another.In Mithridat
                     •
                  . Yet is it falſe which
Geſner affirmeth, that our tongue is the moſt mixt and corrupt
of all other. For if it may pleaſe any to compare but the
Lords Prayer in other languages, he ſhall finde as few Latine
and borrowed forraine words in ours, as in any other
whatſoever. Notwithſtanding the diverſiue of Nations
which have ſwarmed hither, and the practiſe of the Normans,
who as a monument of their Conqueſt, would have
yoaked the Engliſh vnder their tongue, as they did vnder
their command, by compelling them to teach their children
in ſchooles nothing but French, by ſetting downe their
lawes in the Norman-French, and enforcing them moſt rigorouſly
to pleade and to be impleaded in that tongue onely,
for the ſpace of three hundred yeares, vntill K. Edward
the third enlarged them firſt from that bondage. Since which
time, our language hath riſen by little, and the proverbe proved
vntrue, which ſo long had beene vſed, Iacke would be a
gentleman, if he could ſpeake any French.
            
            Heerein is a notable argument of our Anceſtors ſtedfaſtnes
in eſteeming and retaining their owne tongue. For
as before the Conqueſt they miſliked nothing more in K.
Edward the Confeſſor, than that he was Frenchified, & accounted
the deſire of forraine language, then to be a foretoken
of the bringing in of forraine powers, which indeede
happened. In like manner after the Conqueſt, notwithſtanding
thoſe enforcements of the Normans in ſupplanting it,
and the nature of men, which is moſt pliable with a curious
iolitie to faſhion & frame themſelves according to the manners,
attyre, and language of the Conquerours. Yet in all
that long ſpace of 300. yeares, they intermingled very few
French-Norman words, except ſome termes of law, hunting,
hawking, and dicing, whenas wee within theſe 60.
yeares, have incorporated ſo many Latine and French, as
the third part of our tongue conſiſteth now in them. But
like themſelves, continue ſtill thoſe old Engliſhmen which
were planted in Ireland, in Fingall, & the Country of Weyſford,
               
in the time of K. Henry the ſecond, who yet ſtill continue
their antient attyre and tongue, in ſomuch that an Engliſh
gentleman not long ſince, ſent thither in Commſſion
among them, ſaid that he would quickly vnderſtand the
Iriſh, when they ſpake the antient Engliſh. So that our Anceſtors
ſeemed in part as iealous of their native language, as
thoſe B
                     •
                  itans which paſſed hence into Armorica in France,
               Ne
                     •
                  nius.
and marrying ſtrange women there, did cut out their tongs,
leſt their children ſhould corrupt their language with their
motters tongues, or as the Germans which have moſt of all
Nations oppoſed themſelves againſt all innovations in habite,
and language.
            Whereas the Hebrew Rabbines ſay, and that truly, that
Nature hath given man five inſtruments for the pronouncing
of all letters, the lips, the teeth, the tongue, the palate,
and throate; I will not denie but ſome among vs do pronounce
more fully, ſome flatly, ſome broadly, and no few
mincingly, offending in defect, exceſſe, or change of letters,
which is rather to be imputed to the perſons and their education,
than to the language. Whenas generally wee pronounce
by the confeſſion of ſtrangers, as ſweetely, ſmoothly,
and moderately, as any of the Northerne Nations of the
world, who are noted to ſoupe their words out of the throat
with fat and full ſpirits.
            This variety of pronuntiation hath brought in ſome diverſitie
of Orthographie, and heere-vpon Sir Iohn Price, to
the derogation of our tongue, and glorie of his Welſh, reporteth
that a ſentence ſpoken by him in Engliſh, & penned
out of his mouth by foure good Secretaries, ſeverally, for trial
of our Orthography, was ſo ſet downe by them, that they
all differed one from the other in many letters: whereas ſo
many Welſh writing the ſame likewiſe in their tongue varied
not in any one letter at all. Well, I will not derogate from
the good Knights credite; yet it hath beene ſeene where
tenne Engliſh writing the ſame ſentence, have all ſo concurred,
that among them all there hath beene no other
difference, than the adding, or omitting once or twice of

our ſilent E, in the end of ſome wordes. As for the Welſh,
I could never happen on two of that Nation together, that
would acknowledge that they could write their owne language.
            Sir Thomas Smith her Maieſties ſecretarie not long ſince,
a man of great learning and iudgement, occaſioned by ſom
vncertainty of our Orthographie, though it ſeeme grounded
vpon Sound, Reaſon, and Custome, laboured to reduce
it to certaine heads; Seeing that whereas of Neceſſity there
muſt be ſo many letters in every tongue, as there are ſimple
and ſingle ſounds, that the Latine letters were not ſufficient
to expreſſe all our ſimple ſounds. Therefore he wiſhed
that we ſhould have A ſhort, and A long, bicauſe a in
Man, and in Mân of horſe hath different ſounds; E long as
in Mên moderate, and e ſhort as in Men, and an Engliſh e
as in wée, thee, he, me: I long, and I ſhort, as in Bi, per,
and Bî, emere: O ſhort, and O long, as in ſmōk of a woman,
and ſmôk of the fire: V long, as in Bût, Ocrea, and
V ſhort, as in Būt, Sed: and v or y Greeke, as ſlu, nu, tru.
For conſonants he would have C be never vſed but for Ch,
as it was among the olde Engliſh, and K in all other words;
for Th, he would have the Saxon letter Thorne, which was
a D with a daſh through the head, or 
                  •
               ; for I conſonant the
Saxon 
               
                  •
               , as 
                  
                     •
                  et, not Ieat for Ieat-ſtone, 
                  
                     •
                  ay for Iay:
Q, if he were king of the A, B, C, ſhould be putte to the
horne, and baniſhed; and Ku in his place, as Kuik, not
quik, Kuarel, not Quarel: Z; he would have vſed for the
ſofter S, or eth, and es, as dîz for dieth, liz for lies, and
the ſame S inverted for ſh, as Sal for ſhall, fler for fleſh.
This briefly I have ſet you downe his deviſe, which albeit
Sound and Reaſon ſeemed to countenance, yet that Tyranne
Cuſtome hath ſo confronted, that it will never be admitted.
            If it be any glorie which the French and Dutch do brag
of, that many wordes in their tongues doe not differ from
the Greeke, I can ſhew you as many in the Engliſh; whereof
I will give you a few for a taſte, as they have offred themſelves

in reading; but withall, I truſt you will not gather
by conſequence, that wee are deſcanded from the Graecians.
Who dooth not ſee an identitie in theſe wordes, as if
the one deſcended from the other.
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to call.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a path.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to lappe.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , raine
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to rappe.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , laſt.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to ſeethe.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , raſh.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , new.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , graſſe.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , an Orchard.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to creake.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a ſtarre.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , whole.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , foule.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a Dere.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a rodde.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , reſt.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the Moone.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a mill.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a treate.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a ſhippe.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a rope.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to galloppe.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ache.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a ragge.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a climbing.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , an vdder.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , whooriſh ſporte.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to kiſſe.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to hang.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , earth.
               
                  
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a crabbe.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a phoale.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a li
                     •
                  ke.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to cut.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to raze out.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , oker.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to mocke.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , leſſe.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , an axe.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to ſcoffe.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to ſtrowe.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a skirmiſh.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a Church.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a potte.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Muſtaches.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a doore.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a hulke.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to you know what. With many more
if a man would be ſo idle to gather them with Budans, Baifius,
Iunius, Pichardus, and others.
            
            Heereby may be ſeene the originall of ſome engliſh
words, and the Etymology or reaſon whence many other are
derived, beſide them alreadie ſpecified may as well be found
in our tongue, as in the learned tongues, although hardly;
for that heerein as in other tongues, the truth heth hidden
and is not eaſilie found, as both Varro and Iſidor do acknowledge.
But an indifferent man may iudge that our name of
the moſt divine power, God, is better derived from Good,
the chiefe attribute of God, than Deus from 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , becauſe
God is to be feared. So Winter from Winde, So
                     ••
                  er from
the Sonne, Lent from ſpringing, becauſe it falleth in the
ſpring, for which our Progenitours the Germans, vſe Glent.
The feaſt of Chriſts Riſing, Eaſter, from the old world Eaſt,
which we now vſe for the place of the riſing of the Sunne,
Sayle as the Sea-haile, Windor or Windowe, as a doore againſt
the winde, King from Conning, for ſo our Great grandfathers
called them, which one word imployeth two moſt

important matters in a Governour, Power and Skill, and
many other better anſwering in ſound and ſence, then thoſe
of the Latines, Frater quaſi ferè alter, Tempestas quaſi Tempus
peſtis, Caput à capiendo, Digiti quia decentèr iuncti, Cura
quia cor vrit, Peccare quaſi pedam capere.
            
            
               Dionyſius a Greeke coyner of Etymologyes is commended
by Athenaeus, in his ſupper-gulls, table-talkers, or Deipnoſ
                     •
                  
                  phiſtae,
for making mowſe-traps of Muſteria: and verily if
that be commendable, the Mint-maſters of our Etymilogies,
deſerve no leſſe commendation: for they have merily forged
Mony from My-hony, Flatter from flie-at-her, Shovell
from ſhove-full, Mayd as my ayd Maſtiefe as Maſe-thiefe,
Staffe as Stay of, Beere, Be-heere, Symony See-mony, Stirrup,
a Sayre-vp, &c.
            
            This merry playing with words too much vſed by ſome
hath occaſioned a great and high perſonage, to ſay, that as
the Italian tongue is fit for courting, the Spaniſh for treating,
the French for trafficke; ſo the Engliſh is moſt fit for trifling
and toying. And ſo doth Giraldus Cambrenſis ſeem to think
whenas in his time he ſaith, the Engliſh and Welſh delighted
much in licking the letter and clapping together of Agnominations.
But now will I conclude this trifling diſcourſe
with a true tale out of an antient Hiſtorian.
            Of the effectuall power of words, great diſputes have
beene of great wits in all ages; the Pithagoreans extolled it,
the impious Iewes aſcribed all miracles to a name which
was ingravened in the reveſtiarie of the Temple, watched
by two brazen dogges, which one ſtale away and enſeamed
it in his thigh, as you may reade in Oſorius de Sapientia, and
the like in Rabi Hamas Speculation: and ſtrange it is what
Samonicus Serenus aſcribed to the word ABRADACABRA, againſt
agues. But there was one true Engliſh word of as
great, if not greater force than them all, now out of all vſe
and will be thought for ſound barbarous; but therefore of
more efficacie (as it pleaſeth Porphyrie) and in ſignification
it ſignifieth as it ſeemeth, no more then abiect, baſe minded,
falſe harted, coward, or nidget. Yet it hath levied Armies,

and ſubdued rebellious enemies; and that I may hold you
no longer, it is Niding.
               William Malmſbury. For when there was a daungerous
rebellion againſt King William Rufus, and Rocheſter Caſtle
then the moſt important & ſtrongeſt fort of this Realm
was ſtowtly kept againſt him, after that he had but proclaimed
that his ſubiects ſhould repaire thither to his Campe,
vpon no other penaltie, but that whoſoever refuſed to come,
ſhould be reputed a Niding: they ſwarmed to him immediatly
from all ſides in ſuch numbers, that he had in few daies
an infinite Armie, and the rebells therewith weere ſo terrified,
that they forthwith yeelded. While I runne on in this
courſe of Engliſh tongue, rather reſpecting matter then
words, I forget that I may be charged by the mi
                  ••
               ion refiners
of Engliſh, neither to write State-Engliſh, Court-Engliſh,
nor Secretarie-Engliſh, and verily I acknowledge it.
Sufficient it is for me, if I have waded hither-vnto in the
fourth kinde, which is plaine Engliſh, leaving to ſuch as are
compleat in all, to ſupply whatſoever remaineth.
         
         
            Chriſtian Names.
            
               NAmes called in Latine Nomina quaſ
                     •
                  
Notamina, were firſt impoſed for the
diſtinction of perſons, which wee call
now Chriſtian names: After for difference
of families which wee call Surnames,
and have beene eſpecially reſpected
as whereon the glorie and credite
of men is grounded, and by which

the ſame is convayed to the knowledge of poſteritie.
            Every perſon had in the beginning one onely proper
name, as among the Iewes, Adam, Ioſeph, Solomon; among the
Aegiptians, Anubis, Amaſis, Buſuris; among the Chaldaeans,
Ninus,
               V
                     ••
                  to Iulius. Paris Viglius. 
               Ninias, Semira
                     ••
                  ; among the Medians, Astiages, Bardanes,
Arbaces; among the Grecians, Diomedes, Vliſſes, Oreſtes;
among the Romans, Romulus, Remus, Fauſtulus; among
the old Gaules, Litavicus, Cavarilus, Divitiacus; among the
Germans, Arioviſtus, Arminius, Naſſua; among the Britans,
Caſſibellin, Caratac, Calgac; among the antient Engliſh,
Hengeſt,
               Plinius Marcellin
                     ••
                  . 
               Aella, Kenrie, likewiſe among all other Nations, except
the ſavages of Mount Atlas in Barbary, which were reported
to be both nameleſſe and dreameleſſe.
            The moſt antient Nation of the Iewes gave the name
at the Circumciſion the eight day after the nativitie; the
Romans to females the ſame day, to males the ninth day,
which they called Dies luſtricus, as it were the cleanſing day;
vpon which day they ſolemnized a feaſt called Nominalia,
               De Anima ca. 19.
and as Tertulian noteth, Fata ſcribenda advocabantur, that is,
as I conceive, their nativitie was ſet. At what time other
Nations in auntient times gave names I have not read:
but ſince Chriſtianitie, moſt Nations for the time followed
the Iewes, celebrating baptiſme the eight day after the birth,
onely our Anceſtours in this Realme, vntill latter time baptized,
and gave name the very birth day, or next day after,
following therein the counſell of S. Cyprian, in his third Epiſtle
Ad Fidum. But the Polonians gave name in the
ſeaventh yeare,Mart. Crom
                     ••
                  . at which time they did firſt cut their childrens
haire.
            The firſt impoſition of Names was grounded vpon ſo
many occaſions, as were hard to be ſpecified, but the moſt
common in moſt antient times among all nations, as well as
the Hebrewes, was vpon future good hope conceived by
parents of their children, in which you might ſee their firſt
and principall wiſhes toward them. Whereupon Saint Hierome
ſaith, 
                  Ʋotiva & quaſi ob virtutis auspicium imponuntur
vocabula hominibus, & appellativa vertuntur inpropria, ſicut apud

Latines, Victor, Probus, Castus, &c. And ſuch hopefull
luckie names called by Cicero,
               Cic de Divinatione. 
               Bona nomina, by Tacitus, Fanſta
nomina were ever firſt enrolled and 
                  •
               anged in the Roman
Muſters; firſt called out to ſerve at the firſt ſacrifices, in the
foundation of Colonies, as Statorius, Faustus, Valerius, which
implied the perſons to be ſtowt, happy, and valorous. As
contrariwiſe Atrius V
                     ••
                  ber is accounted in I
                     •
                  vie, abominandi
ominis nomen, an abhominable name, for that it participated
in ſignification with diſmall darkenes, dead ghoſts, and
ſhadowes. And you remember what Plautus ſaieth of one
whoſe name was Lyco, that is, a Greedy Woolfe;
               
                  Voſmet nunc facit
                        •
                      coniectur 
                        〈◊〉
                      caeterùm
                  Quid id ſit hominis, cui Lyco nomen ſiet.
               
            
            Yea ſuch names were thought ſo happy and ſo fortunate,
that in the time of Galienus one Regilianus,
               See Herodot. lib. 
                     •
                  . de Hegeſiſtrato. Trebellius. Polli
                     •
                  . which commanded
in Illyricum, got the Empire there, only in favour of
of his name. For when it was demanded at a ſupper from
whence Regilianus was derived, one anſwered, à Regno, another
beganne to decline Rex, Regis, Regi, Regilianus; whereat
the ſouldiers (which in all actions are forward.) beganne
with acclamation, Ergo poteſt Rex eſſe, Ergo poteſt regere,
Deus tibi regis nomen impoſuit: and ſo inveſted him with imperiall
roabes. In this Iſle alſo at Silcaſter in Hamſhire, Conſtantinus
a militarie man of ſome reputation, in hope of his
luckie name, and that he would proue another Conſtantinus
Magnus to the good of the people, was by the Britan Armie
proclaimed emperour againſt Henorius: who exployted
great matters in his owne perſon in Gallia, and by his
ſon in Spaine.
               Lampridiu
                     •
                  . So in former times the name of Antoninus in
remembrance of Antoninus Pius, was ſo amiable among the
Romans, as he was ſuppoſed vnfit for the empire, who
bare not that name, vntill Antoninus Elagabalus with his filthie
vices diſtained the ſame. We reade alſo that two Ambaſſadours
were ſent out of France into Spaine, to King Alphonſe
the 9, to d
                  •
               mand one of the daughters that he begat
of the daughter of King Henry the ſecond of England, to be
married to their Soveraigne, King Lewes the eight: one of

theſe Ladies was very beautifull called Vrraca, the other
not ſo beautifull, but named Blanche. When they were preſented
to the Ambaſſadours, all men held it as a matter reſolved
that the choyce would light vpon Vrraca, as the elder
and fairer: But the Ambaſſadours enquiring each of their
names, tooke offence at 
                  Ʋrraca, and made choyce of the
Lady Blanche, ſaying, That her name would be better received
in France than the other, as ſignifying faire and beautifull,
according to the verſe made to her honour.
            Candida, candeſcens candore, & cordis, & oris.
            So that the greateſt Philoſopher Plato might ſeeme, not
without cauſe, to adviſe men to be carefull in giving faire
and happie names: as the Pythagoreans affirmed the mindes,
actions, and ſucceſſes of men to be according to their Fate,
Genius, and Name. One alſo well obſerveth that theſe ſeven
things; Virtue, good Parentage, Wealth, Dignity or Office,
good Preſence, a good Chriſtian name, with a gratious Surname,
and ſeemely attire, doe eſpecially grace and adorne a
man. And accordingly ſaieth Panormitan; Ex bono nomine
oritur bona preſumptio. As the common Proverb, Bonum
nomen, bonum omen.
            
            The divell nevertheleſſe who alwayes maligneth God
and goodneſſe,Ammianus Macellinus lib 19. wrought by the cruelty of Valens the emperour
the deſtruction of many men of worth, who hadde
happy names beginning with Theo ſignifying God, as Theodorus,
Theodubis, Theodoretus, Theodoſius, &c. For that diverſe
curious companions had found by the falling of a ring
magically prepared, vpon thoſe letters onely of all the Alphab
                     •
                  t,
graven in a Charger of ſundry mettals, and ſet vpon
a Laurell trivet; that one who had his name beginning with
Theod, ſhould ſucceede in the empire, which was verified
in Theodoſius not long after.
            In times of Chriſtianity the names of moſt holy and vertuous
perſons, and of their moſt worthy progenitors were
given to ſtir vp men to the imitation of them, whoſe names
they bare. But ſucceeding ages (little regarding ſaint Chryſostoms
admonition to the contrary, have recalled prophane

names, ſo as now 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  ,
names of vnhappy diſaſtre are as 
                  〈◊〉
                ſome 
                  〈…〉
               
they were in Paga
                     ••
                  ſm
                     •
                  s▪
                Albeit in our late 
                  〈…〉
               
of good conſideration have brought in 
                  〈…〉
               
               Ioſias, &c. as better agreeing with our ſaith, but without
contempt of our countrey names (as I hope) which have
both good and gratious ſignifications, as ſhal appeare hereafter.
            Whereas in late yeeres Surnames have beene given for
Chriſtian names, among vs, and no where elſe in Chriſtendome;
although many diſlike it, for that great inconvenience
will enſue: nevertheleſſe it ſeemeth to proceede from
hearty good-will and affection of the Godfathers to ſhow
their love, or from a deſire to continue and propagate their
owne names to ſucceeding ages. And is in no wiſe to be diſliked,
but rather approoved in thoſe which matching with
heires generall of worſhipful antient families have given
thoſe names to their heires, with a mindefull and thankefull
regard of them, as we have now, Pickering Wott
                     •
                  n, Grevill
Varney, Baſſingburne Ga
                     ••
                  dy, Culthorp Parker, Peeſ
                     •
                  ll Brac
                     ••
                  ,
Fuz-Raulfe Chamberlaine, who are the hei
                  ••
               s of Pickering,

                     〈◊〉
                   Baſſingburn, Grevill, Calthorp, &c. For beſide the continuation
of the name, we ſee that the ſelfe name, yea & ſomtime
the ſimilitude of names doth kindle ſparkles of love
and liking among meere ſtrangers.
            Neither can I beleeve a waiward olde man, which would
ſay, that the giving of Surnames for Chriſtian names firſt
began in the time of king Edward the ſixt, by ſuch as would
be Godfathers, when they were more then halfe fathers,
and thereupon would have perſwaded ſome to change ſuch
names at the Confirmation. Which (that I may note by
the way) is vſuall in other countries, as wee remember two
ſonnes of king Henry the ſecond of France, chriſt
                  ••
               ed by the
names of Alexander and Hercules, ch
                  •••
               ged them at their
Confirmation into 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                and Francis.
            
            But two Chriſtian names are rare in England, and I only
remember now his Maieſty who was named Charles Iames,
               
as the Prince 
                  〈…〉
                and among private
men, Thomas Maria Wingfield, and ſir Thomas P
                     •
                  sth
                     •••
                  us
Hobby. Although it is common in Ita
                     ••
                  e, to adioyne the
name of ſome Saint, in a kinde of devotion to the Chriſtian
name, as 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Baptista Spinalu, Iohannes Franciſcns
Bor
                     •
                  omeus, Marcus Antonius 
                     〈◊〉
                  : and in Spaine to
adde the name of the Saint on whoſe day the childe was
borne.
            If that any among vs have named their children Remedian

                     〈◊〉
                  , Imago ſ
                     •
                  eu
                     •
                  , or with ſuch like names, I knowe
ſome will thinke it more then a vanitie, as they do but little
better of the new names, Free-gift, Reformation, Earth,
Dust, Aſhes, Delivery, More fruite, Tribulation, The Lord is
neare, More triall, Diſcipline, Ioy againe, From above: which
have lately beene given by ſome to their children with no
evill meaning, but vpon ſome ſingular and preciſe conceit.
That I may omit another more vaine abſurditie, in giving
names and ſurnames of ruen,Suetonius in Domit. cap. 10 yea and of the beſt families
to dogges, beares, and horſes. Whenas wee reade it was
thought a capitall crime in Pompoſiamas for calling his baſe
bondſlaves by the name of grand captaines. Here I might
remember how ſome miſlike the giving of parents names
ſucceſſively to their heires,Se Demoſthenes contra Boetua
                     •
                  , de Nomine. for that if they ſhould be forced
to proove deſcent, it will be hard to proove the Doner and
the Done in Formedon, and to diſtinguiſh the one from the
other.
            It were impertinent to note heere, that deſtinies were
ſuperſtitiouſly by Onomantin deſciphered out of names, as
though the names and natures of men were ſutable, and fatall
neceſſitie concurred heerein with voluntary motion, in
giving the name, according to that of Auſonius to Probus.
            
            
               Qualem cravit moribus,
               Iuſſit vocari nomine.
               Mundi ſupremus arbitar.
            
            And after, where he playeth with bibbing mother Mere
                     •
                  ,
as thogh ſhe were ſo named, bicauſe ſhe would to drink

meere wine without water, or as he pleaſantly 
                  〈◊〉
                it 
                  
                     ••
                  
                  rum
Merum; for as he ſaieth;

                  Qui primus Mere
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      tibi 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  Theſida nomen condidit Hippolit
                        •
                     .
                  Nam divinare eſt, nomen componere, quòd 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  Fortuna, morum, vel nocis indici
                        ••
                     .
               
            
            For Hyppolitus the ſonne of Theſeus was torne in 
                  〈◊〉
               
by his coach horſes, according to his name. So 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
ſignified he ſhould linger long before Trey. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                that
he ſhould be redeemed out of bondage in his childehoode,
Tantalus, that he ſhould be moſt wretched, becauſe 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
in the one, and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , in the other, and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
in the third implieth ſuch accidents vnto them. Hither alſo
may be referred that of Claudius Rutilius.
            
            
               Nominibus certis credam decurrere mores?
               Moribus aut potiùs nomina certa dari
                     •
                  
               
            
            But to confront Poet with Poet, our good Epigr 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
Poet, olde Godfrey of Wincheſter thinketh no ominous
forſpeaking to lie in names, in that to Fauſtus:
               
                  Multùm Fauſte tua de nobilitate ſuperbis,
                  Quodq, bone Fauſtus omine nomen habes,
                  Sed nullum nomen nomenti, ſit licèt omen.
               
            
            Memorable is that which may be obſerved out of hiſtories,
how that men of the ſelfe ſame name have begun
and ended great ſtates and empires: as Cyrus the ſonne of
Cambiſes beganne the Perſian Monarchy, Cyrus 
               
                  •
               he ſonne
of Darius ruinated the ſame. Darius the ſonne of Hiſtaſpes
reſtored it. And againe, Darius the ſonne of Arſ
                     ••
                  is vtterly
overthrew it. Philip the ſonne of Ami
                     •••
                  tas eſpecially
enlarged the kingdome of Macedonia, Philip the ſonne of
Antigonus wholy loſt the ſame. Auguſtus was the firſt eſtabliſhed
emperour of Rome, Auguſtulus the laſt. Conſtantinus
Magnus borne in this Iſle firſt beganne the Empire of
Conſtantinople, Conſtantinus the laſt left it to the Turkes, and
vtterly loſt the ſame, &c.
            
               
Such 
                  〈◊〉
                curions obſervations bred the ſuperſtitious
kinde of Divination called 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , condemned by the
laſt generall Counſell,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . by which the Pithagoreans iudged
the even number of vowells in names to ſignifie imperfections
in the left ſides of men, and the odde number in the
right. By this Auguſtus the emperour encouraged himſelfe,
and conceived good hope of victory,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . whenas the night before
the ſea-battell at Actium, the firſt man hee mette was a
poore wayſa
                  •
               ing man driving his aſſe before him, whoſe
name when hee demaunded, he anſwered, Eutyches, that
is, Happyman; and that his aſſes name was Nicon, that is,
Victor. In which place when he accordingly had obtained
the victory, he builded the Cittie Nicopolis, that is, the citty
of Victory, and there erected braſen Images of the man and
his aſſe.C
                     ••
                  . Rodog
                     •••
                   lib. 13 cap. 35. By this Theodatus king of the Gothes, when he was
curious to knowe the ſucceſſe of his warres againſt the Romans,
an On
                     •
                  manticall or Name-wiſard Iew willed him to
ſhut vp a number of ſwine in little hog-ſties, and to give
ſome of them Roman names, to other Gotiſh names, with
ſeverall markes, and there to leave them to a certaine day;
At the day appointed, the king with the Iew repaired to
the hog-ſties, where they found them only dead to whom
they had given the Gotiſh names, and thoſe alive to whom
they had given the Roman names, but yet with their briſſels
more then halfe ſhed. Whereupon the Iew foretolde,
that the Gothes ſhould wholy be diſcomfited, and the Romans
ſhould looſe a great part of their forces.Tackes 4 
                     〈◊〉
                  . By this Veſpaſian
was incouraged to take vpon him the empire, when
comming to the Temple of Serapi
                     •
                  
                at Alexandria, and being
there alone at his devotion, he ſodainly ſawe in a viſion,
one Baſilides, a noble man of Aegypt, who was then foure
ſcore miles off. Vpon which name of Baſilides derived from
Baſileus, ſignifying a King, hee aſſured himſelfe of royaltie,
and the empire which hee then complotted for. As concerning
this On
                     •
                  mantia a German lately ſet foorth a Table,
which I wiſh had beene ſuppreſſed, for that the divell by
ſuch vanities, doth abuſe the credulitie of youth to greater

matters, and ſometimes to their 
                  〈…〉
               .
            I can not tell how you would like it if I ſhould 
                  〈◊〉
                remember
how the Greekes ſuperſtitiouſly iudged them more
happy, in whoſe names the numerall letters added together
made the greater ſumme, and therefore Achilles forſooth
muſt needes vanquiſh Hector, becauſe the numerall
Greeke letters roſe to a greater number in his name then in
the others. Or how the amorous Romans kiſſed the Cup
with a health ſo often at their meetings, as there were letters
in their Miſtreſſe names, according to that of merry
Martiall of his two wenches, Navia which had ſix letters,
and Iuſtina that had ſeaven in her name;
Navia ſex cyathis, ſeptem Iuſtina 
                     •
                  ibatur.
            
            Our Nation was farre from thoſe and ſuch curious 
                  〈◊〉
               
therefore heere will I overpaſſe them, and ſet downe Alph
                     •
                  
                  betically
the names which wee now call Chriſtian names,
moſt vſuall to the Engliſh Nation, with their ſignifications.
For this is to be takē as a granted veritie, that names among
all nations and tongues (as I partly noted before) as ſignificative
and not vaine ſenſeleſſe ſounds. Among the Hobrew
                     •
                  s
it is certaine out of ſacred Scriptures, S. Hicrome, and
Philo likewiſe among the Greekes, Romans, German, French,
&c. yea among the barbarous Turks, for with them M
                     ••
                  emet
ſignifieth glorified or laudable,Bell forreſt. 
               H
                     •
                  mar lively, Abdall
                     •
                  
               
Gods ſervant, Seliman peaceable, Agm
                     ••
                  
                good, Ha
                     •
                  iza readie.
Neam
                     •
                  
                pl
                  •
               aſant.Ioſeph Acoſta. And the ſavages of Hispa
                     ••
                  la and all
America, name their children in their owne languages, Gliſtering
light, Sunne bright, Gold-bright, Fine gold, Sweete, Rich
feather, &c. as they of Congo, by names of birdes, pretious
ſtones floures, &c.
            So that it were groſſe ignorance and to no 
                  •
               mall reproach,
of our Progenitours, to thinke their names onely nothing
ſignificative, becauſe that in the daily alteration of our 
                  •
               ong,
the ſignification of them is loſt, or not commonly knowne,
which yet I hope to recover, and to make in ſome part
knowne, albeit they cannot eaſily and happily be 
                  〈◊〉
               ,

becauſe as 
                  〈◊〉
                noteth; Barberous name
                  •
                (as hee
terme th
                  •
                them,)Theolo
                     •••
                   Ph
                     •
                  nicum. were very emphaticall and very ſhort. But
in all the ſignifications of theſe names, you ſhall ſee the good
and hopefull reſpects which the deviſers of the names had,
that there is an Orthetes or certitude of names among all
Nations according to Plate,
               In Cratyl
                     •
                  , and thereby perceive that many
were tranſlated out of the Greeke and Latine. With all we
may make this fruit by conſideration of our names, which
have good, hopefull, and luckie ſignifications, that accordingly
we do carrie and conforme our ſelves; ſo that wee
faile not to be anſwerable to them, but be Noſtri nominis
homines, and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , as Severus, Preb
                     •
                  s, and Aur
                     ••
                  lus are
called Sui nominis imporatores. And accordingly it ſeemeth
to have beene the manner at giving of names, to wiſh the
children might performe and diſcharge their names, as
when Gunthr
                     ••
                  
                King of the French, named Clatharius at
the font, he ſaid; Creſcat puer, & huius ſit nominis executer.
            
            But before I proceed farther, this is to be noted. In moſt
antient times the Britans had heere their peculiar names,
for the moſt part taken from colours, (for they vſed to pain
                  •
               
themſelves) which are now loſt or remaine among the
Welſh. Afterward they tooke Roman names when they
were Provincialls, which either remaine corrupted among
them, or were extinguiſhed in the greateſt part of the
Realme, after the entrance of the Engliſh Saxons, who
brought in their German names, as Cridda, Ponda, Oſwald,
Edward, Vchtred, Edmund, &c. Then to ſay nothing of the
Danes, who no doubt brought in their names, as Suayn, Harold,
Knute, &c. The Normans conqueſt brought in other
German names, for they originally vſed the German tong,
as William, Henry, Richard, Robert, Hughe, Roger, &c. as the
Greeke names,Olden dorplu
                     •
                  . 
               A
                     •
                  labius, i. Innocent, Aſpaſious i. Delightful,
Beëthius, Symmachus. i. Helper, Texetius. i. Archer, &c. were
brought into Italy after the diviſion of the Empire. After
the Conqueſt, our Nation (who before would not admitte
ſt
                  ••
               nge and vnknowne names, but avoyded them therefore
as vnluckie) by little and little beganne to vſe Hebrew and

ſacred names, as Mathew, David, Sampſon, Luke, 
                     〈…〉
                  , &c.
which were never received in Germany,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
               
                  〈…〉
                the 
                  〈◊〉
               
of Frederick the ſecond, about ſome 300. yeares ſince.
            So that the Saxons, Daniſh, Norman, and Britiſh tongues.
are the fitteſt keyes to open the entrance for ſearching out
of our antient names yet in vſe. For the Hebrew I wil follow
the common tables of the Bible, which every one may do
as well, and Philo Do nominibus mutatis. For the Greeke the
beſt Gloſſaries with mine owne little skill. For the Welſh,
I will ſparingly touch them, or leave them to the learned of
that Nation. But for old Engliſh names, which heere are the
ſcope of my care, I muſt ſift them as I may out of old Engliſh-Saxon
treatiſes, as I have happened vpon heere and
there: and ſome coniecturally, referring all to the iudgement
of ſuch, as ſhall be more happy in finding out the truth, hoping
that probability may either pleaſe, or be pardoned by
ſuch as are modeſtly learned in hiſtories and languages; to
whoſe iudgement in all humilitie, I commit all that is to be
ſaid. For that they cānot but obſerve the diverſity of names,
from the originall in divers languages, as how the French
have changed Petrus into Pierre, Iohaunes to 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , Benedictus
to Beneiſt, Stephanus to Eſti
                     •
                  n, Radulphus to R
                     ••
                  l: how
the Italians have changed Iohannes into Giovanni, Conſtans
into Gostante, Christopherus into Christophan
                     •
                  , Iacobus into
Iacope, Radulphus into Ridulpho, Laurentius into Lorenz.
How the Welſh have altered Ioannes into Even, Aegidius
into Silim, George into Sior, Lawrence into Lowris, Conſtantinus
into Cuſtenith. How the Engliſh have changed Gerrard
into Garret, Albric into Aubry, Alexander into Sanders, Conſtantin
into Cuſtance, Benedict into Bennet. How the Engliſh
and Scottiſh borderers do vſe Roby and Rob for Robert,
L
                     •
                  kky for Luke, Io
                     •
                  ie and Ionie for Iohn, Criſtie for Chriſtopher,
&c. That I may omit the Spaniard which have turned Iohn
into Iuan, and Iacobus into Iago and Diego: as the Germans
which have contracted Iohannes into Houſe, and Theodoric
into Doric. Theſe and the like, whoſoever will learnedly
conſider, will not thinke any thing ſtrange which ſhal

hereafter follows; howſoever the vnlearned will boldly cenſure
it. I had purpoſed heere, leſt I might ſeeme heereafter
to lay my foundations in the ſands of coniecture, and not
on grounds of truth and authoritie, to have given you the
ſignification of ſuch words as offer themſelves moſt frequent
in the compoſitions of our meers Engliſh names,
viz.
            
            
               Ael
               Al
               Aelf
               Ard
               Ar
               Bert
               Bald
               Cin
               Cuth
               Ead
               Fred
               Giſle
               Gund
               Hold
               Helm
               Hulph
               Hare
               Here
               Leod
               Leof
               Mer
               Mund
               Rad
               Red
               Rod
               Ric
               Sig
               Stan
               Theod
               Ward
               Wald
               Weld
               Wi
               Will
               Win, &c.
            
            And theſe not out of ſuppoſitive coniectures, but out of
Alfricus Grammer, who was a learned Archbiſhop of Canterbury,
well neere ſix hundred yeare ſince, and therefore
not to be ſuppoſed ignorant of the Engliſh tongue, out of
the Engliſh-Saxon Teſtament, Pſalter, and Lawes, out of Willeramus
Paraphraſis vpon the Canticles, and the learned
Notes thereon by a man skilfull in the Northerne tongues,
as alſo out of Beatus Rhonanus, M. Luther, Daſipodius, Killianus,
who have laboured in illuſtration of the old German
tongue, which vndoubtedly is the matrix and mother of
our Engliſh. But I thinke it moſt fitting to this purpoſe, to
ſhew thoſe my grounds in their proper places heereafter.
            In the Table following.
               Gre. noteth the name to be Greeke; Germ. German,
Lat. Latine, Fre. French, Hebr. Hebrew, Brit.
Welſh, Sax. Saxon, or old Engliſh.
         
         
            
            
               Ʋſuall Chriſtian names.
            
               ARAON, Heb. a Teacher, or Mountaine
of ſortitude.
               ABEL, Heb. Iuſt.
               ADAM, Heb. Man, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , or red.
               ADOLPH, ſ
                     •
                  e Eadulph.
               
               ADRIAN, 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Hadrian.
               
               ALAN, is thought by Iuhas Scaliger (ſome of
whoſe progenitors bare that name) to ſignifie
an hownd in the Sclavonian tongue,
and Chancer vſeth 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   in the ſame ſenſe:
neither may it ſeem ſtrange to take names
from beaſts. The Romanes had their Caninius,
Apur, Aſinus, &c. and 
                     〈…〉
                  ,
Lup
                        ••
                      
                     Ʋrſula. But whereas 
                     〈…〉
                  
into England with Alan earle of Britaine, to
whome the Conqueror gave the greateſt
part of 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , and hath 
                     〈◊〉
                   moſt
common ſince that time in the Northern
parts, in the yonger children of the noble
houſe of Percies, and the family of Zouch,
deſcended from the Earles of Britaine; I
would feeles it rather out of the Britiſh,
than 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   tongue, and will beleeve
with an 
                     〈…〉
                  
from Aeliamus, that is, Sunne-bright, as
they 
                     〈…〉
                   into Guida
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
and hope 
                     〈…〉
                  ,

wealth and might, as Plutarchus, Architas,
Crates, Craterus, Polycrates, Pancratius,
with the Greekes, Regulus Opimius, &c. with
the Latines. The king of the Gothes, which
ſacked Rome bearing his name, was called by
the Romans Allaricus, the olde Engliſhmen
turned it into Alric, the Normans into Aiberic.
                  Rie.
That Ric, as it ſignified a kingdome, ſo alſo it
ſignified, rich, wealthy, mighty, able powerful,
attributes to a kingdome; the word yet remaines
in that ſence among all the German
nations diſperſed in Europe, and little molliſied
dooth ſufficiently proove. The Italians receiving
it from the Longobardes, have turned it
into Ricco, the Spaniards from the Gothes into
Rico, the French from the Frankes into
Richo, we from the Saxons into Rich, &c. Fortunatus
Venantius, who lived about a thouſand
yeares ſince, tranſlated it by Potens, and Fortis
in theſe verſes to Hilperic king of Fraunce:
                  
                     Hilperice potens, ſi interpres barbarus adſit,
                     Adiutor fortis hoc quoq, nomen habet.
                     Nec fuit in vanum ſic te vocitare parentes,
                     Praeſagum hoc totum laudis, & omen erat.
                  
               
               As that Hilperic did ſignifie, puiſſant and
mightie helper. This name is vſually written
Chilperic, but the C was ſet before the Coning,
that is, King, as in Clotharius, Clodovens, Cheribertus,
for Lotharius, Lodovaeus, Heribertus. Aubry
hath beene a moſt common name in the
honorable familie of Vere earles of Oxford.
               
               ALBAN, Lat. White, or High, as it pleaſeth other.
The name of our Stephen and firſt Martyr of
Britaine.
               
               ALVVIN, Sax. All victorious, or Winning all,
                  
as Victor and Vincontius, in Latine Nicetas and
Nicophorus. The Yorkeſhireman, which was
Schoolemaiſter to Carolus Magnus, and perſwaded
him to found the Vniverſitie of Paris,
is in an Engliſh-Saxon treatiſe called Alwin.
But the French, as it ſeemeth, not able to
pronounce the w, called him Alcumus, and
Albinus.
               
               ALBERT, Germ. All-bright, as Epiphanius, Phaedrus,
Eudoxus with the 
                     
                        •
                     racians: Lucilius, Illuſtrius,
Fulgentius, with the Latines, Beert and
Bert,
                  Bert. as Alfricus, and Rhenamus do tranſlate it,
is famous, faire, and cleare. Which the rather I
beleeve, for that Bertha a German Lady ſent
into Greece, was there called Eudoxia in the
ſame ſence, as Luitprandus reporteth. They
moreover that in auntient Bookes are written
Ecbert, Sebert, Ethelbert, in the latter are written
Echright, Sebright, Ethelbright: So that,
Bert in compoſition of names dooth not ſignifie
Beard, as ſome tranſlate it.
               AELFRED,Ealand Ael. 
                  Sax. All peace, not varying much in
ſignification from Irenans. Eal, Ail, Ael in
old Engliſh compound names is anſwerable
to Pan and Pam in Greek names, as Pamphilus,
Pammachius, Panaetius, Pantalcon, &c.
               
               ALDRED, Sax. All reverent feare.
               ALEXANDER, Gre. Succour-man, or Helper of
men.
               ALPHONS, if it be a German name, and came into
Spaine with the Gothes, a German nation, it
is as much as Holfa
                        •
                     s, that is, Our helpe, and
probable it is to be a Gotiſh name, for Alphens
the firſt king of Spaine of that name Anno 740
was deſcended from the Gothes.
               
               AMERY, in Latine Almaricus, from the German
Emerich, that is, alwayes rich, able, and powerfull,

according to Luther: the French write
it Aumery, as they of Theoderic, Henric, Frederic,
make Terrey, Henry, Frery.
               
               
                  AMBROSE, gr
                     ••
                   Divine, Immortall.
               AMIE, from the French Amiè, that is, Beloved,
and that from Amatus, as Renè from Renatus.
The erles and dukes of Savoy which be commonly
called Aimè, were in Latine called Amadeus,
that is, Loving God, as Theophilus, and
ſo was that erle of Savoy called, which did homage
to king Henry the third of England for
Bourg in Breſſe,
                  Math. Paris Saint Maurice in Chablais,
Chaſteau Bard, &c. which I note for the honour
of England. We doe vſe now Amias for
this in difference from Amie the womens
name. Some deduce Amias from Aemilius
the Roman name, which was deduced from
the Greeke Aimulios, Faire ſpoken.
               
               
                  ANANIAS, heb. The grace of the Lord.
               ANDREVV, gre: Manly, or Manfull Freculphus
turneth it Decorus, Comely and Decent; I know
not vpon what ground. See Charles.
               
               ANARAVD, brit. corrupted from Honoratus, that
is, Honorable.
               ANGEL, gre: a Meſſenger.
               ANTHONIE, gre: as Anthoros, flouriſhing, from
the greeke Anthos a floure, as Florens and Florentius
with the Latines, and Thales, Euthalius
with the Greekes. There are yet ſome that
drawe it from Anton a companion of Hercules,
               
               ANSELM, germ: Defence of Authoritie, according
to Luther. Whether this name came from
the Gotiſh word Anſes,
                  Iornandes cap. 13. by which the Gothes
called their victorious Capitaines as Demigods,
I dare not determine: yet Anſbert, Anſegis,
Anſw
                        •
                     ld, Germane names, and Ansketel
                  
vſed much in the antient houſe of the Mallories
ſeeme to deſcend from one head.
               
                  ARCHEBALD, vide Erchenbald.
               ARFAST, Sax. Goodly-man [Alfricus.]
               ARNOLD, ger: Honeſt, but the Germans write
Ernold. Probus in Latine [Luther.] It hath
beene common in the old familie of the Boyſes.
               
               ARTHVR, a Latin name in Iuvenal drawne from
the goodly fixed ſtarre Arcturus, and that
from Arctus is the Beare, as Vrſicinus amongſt
the Romanes. The famous Arthur made
this name firſt famous amongeſt the Brittaines.
               
               
                  AVGVSTINE, Latine, 
                     •
                  ncreaſing, or Maieſticall
from Auguſtus, as Victorinus, Iuſtinus, Conſtantinus
diminutives from Victor, Iuſtus, Conſtans,
according to Molinaeus. One obſerveth that
adoptive names doe end in anus, as Aemilianus,
Domitianus, Iuſtinianus, adopted by Aemilius,
Domitius, Iuſtinus [Lilius Giraldus.]
            
            
               B
               BALDVVIN, Ger. if we beleeve Luther, Speedie
Conquerour, if Rhenanus, and Lipſius, Victorious
power. But whereas Iornandes, cap. 29.
ſheweth that king Alaric was ſurnamed Baldh
id est,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  Audax: for that he was bold and adventurous,
and both Kilianus, and Lipſius him
ſelfe doth confeſſe,Epiſt. 43. Cent 3. that it was antiently in
vſe, for Bold and confident, Baldwin muſt ſignifie
Bold victor, as Winbald, the ſame name

inverted, Ethelbald nobly bold, Willibald very
bold and confident, concurring ſomewhat
in ſignification with Thraſeas, Thraſimachus,
Thraſibulus,
                  Win. 
                  Thraſillus of the Graecians. So all
the names wherein Win is found, ſeeme to imply
victorie, as Tatewin, Learned victor, Bertwin,
Famous victor, Earlewin, Glorions or honourable
victor, and 
                     Ʋnwin, yet amongſt the
Danes for invincible [Ionas Turſon] as Anicetus
in Greeke. Accordingly we may iudge
that moſt names wherein Win is found, to reſemble
the Greeke names, Nicetes, Nicocles,
Nichomachus, Nicander, Polynices, &c. which
have Nice in them.
               BAPTIST, gre: A name given to S. Iohn, for that
he firſt baptized, and to many ſince in honor
of him.Vlph. Wolph.
               
               BARDVLPH,Hulf. Aelf. 
                  Ger. from Bertulph .i. faire helpe,
Viph,
                  Hilp. Helf. 
                  Wolf, Hulf, Aelf, Hilp, Helf, ſignifie Help,
as Luther and others aſſure vs. So Aelfwin-Victorious
helpe, Aeelfric Rich or powerfull
helpe, Aelfwold Helping Governour, Aelfgiva
Helpe-giver. Names conformable to Boetius,
Symmachus, &c.
               BARTHOLMEVV, Hebr. the ſonne of him that
maketh the waters to mount, that is, of God
which lifteth vp the minde of his teachers,
and droppes downe water [Szegedinus.]
               BARNABAS, or Barnabie, Heb. ſonne of the Maſter,
or Sonne of Comfort.
               BARVCH, Hebr. the ſame which Bennet, bleſſed.
               BASIL, Gre. Royall, Kingly, or Princely.
               BEDE, Sax. He that praieth, or a devout man,
as Eucherius, or Euſebius in Greeke. We retaine
ſtill Bedman in the ſame ſence, and to
ſay our bedes, is but to ſay our praiers.
               BEAVIS, may ſeeme probably to be corrupted

from the name of the famous Celtique King
Belloveſus. Wher
                     •
                  as the French have made in
like ſort Beavois of the olde Cittie Bellovacum.
In both theſe is a ſignificancie of beautie.
In latter times Boge hath beene vſed in
Latine for Beavis.
               
               BENET, Lat. contracted from Benedictus. i. Bleſſed.
               
                  BENIAMIN, He. The ſon of the right hand, or Filius
dierum, [Phil
                     •
                  :] See Ioſeph. li. 1. Archaielogias.
               BERNARD, Germ. Saint Bernardes Cluniac
Monks drew it from Bona Nardus, by alluſion,
ſome turne it Hard child, in which ſence
Barne is yet retained with vs in the North. If
it be derived as the Germans wil have it from
Bearne,
                  Bern or Barn. which ſignifieth a Beare, it is anſwerable
to Arthur. Others yet more iudicially
tranſlate Bernard, into Filialis indoles, Childelike
diſpoſition toward parents, as Bernher, Lord
of many children. It hath been moſt common
in the houſe of Brus of Connigton and Exton.
Out of the which the Lord Harrington of
Exton, and Sir Robert Cotton of Connington are
diſcended, as his moſt excellent Maieſtie
from Robert Brus, eldeſt brother to the firſt
Bernard
               
               BERTRAN, for Bertrand, Faire and pure; ſome
thinke that the Spaniards have with ſweeter
ſound drawne hence their Fernando and Ferdinando.
               
               BLASH, Gr. Budding forth, or Sprewting with encreaſe.
               BONIFACE, Lat. Well doer, or Good and ſweete
face: See Winefrid.
               
               BONAVENTVRE, Lat. Good adventure, as Eutychius
among the Greekes, Pauſtus and Portunatus
among the Latines,
               
                  
BOTOLPH, Sax. contracted into Botall, Helpe
ſhippe, as Saylers in that age were called Boteſcarles.
In parte it is anſwereable to the
Greeke names, Nauplins, Naumachius. &c.
               BRIAN, Fre. written in old bookes, Briant and
Brient, Shrill voyce as among the Romans

                     Ʋoconins, [Nicotius]
               BALTHASAR, heb. Searcher of Treaſure, or
without treaſure.
            
            
               C
               CALER, Heb. Hearty, Philo.
               
               CALISTHENES, Gre. Beautifull & ſtrong.
               CARADOC, Bri. Deerely beloved. Quaere.
               
               CEASAR, This came a late to be a Chriſtian
name among vs. Spartianus ſaith it was firſt
given for killing of an Elephant, which in the
Moores language is called Caeſar, or that he
was cut out of his mothers woombe, or borne
with a buſh of haire, or grey eyes. Such variety
of opinions is concerning a name, which
as he ſaith, Cum 
                        •
                     ternitate mundi duratur
                        •••
                     .
               
               CHARLES, Germ. according to I. Du Tillet,
from Carl, that is, ſtrong, ſtowt, couragious,
and valiant, as Virius, Valerius, Ʋaleus, &c. with
the Romans, Craterus, &c. with the Greekes;
not from the Greeke Charilans, which ſignifieth
Publicola, the Claw-backe of the people.
The Hungarians call a king by a generall name
Carl [Aventinus.]. And Carl is onely in the
coines of Carolus Magnus, Ful. Scaliger makes
Caellman Carlman anſwerable to the Greeke
Andreas.
               
               
                  
CHRISTOPHER, Gre. Chriſte-carrier, a name, as
learned men thinke, deviſed, and a picture
thereunto myſtically applied as a repreſentation
of the dueties of a true Chriſtian,Gaſtius Briſacenſis. and was
as their Noſce teipſum. Of ſuch myſtical Symboles
of the Primitive Chriſtians; See Ioſeph
Scaliger ad Freherum.
               
               
                  CHRYSOSTOME, gre: Golden-mouth.
               
                  CLEMENS, lat: Meeke, Milde and Gentle.
               CONSTANTIN, Lat: Faſt, or Firme, for which
in ſome partes of the realme we vſe Cuſtance.
               
               CONRAD, germ: Able-counſell, or Adviſed valour,
as Iulius Scaliger will Exercitat.
                  Rad, Red, Rod. 256.
But heere is to be noted, that Rad, Red, and
Rod ſignifie counſell and adviſe. [Luther, Alfricus,
Killian] and differ onely in Dialect, as
Stan, Sten, Stone. And this appeereth by that
which the Northerne men cried when they
killed Walter biſhop of Dureſme, Short Rad,
good Rade, quell yee the Biſhop, that is, Short
councell, Good councell, &c. [M. Paris.]
               CORNELIVS, Lat: All drawe it from Cornis an
horne.
               CVTHBERT, Sax. Not Cut-beard, as ſome fable,
but famous, bright, and cleare skill or knowledge,
according to the olde verſe;
Qui
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      gerit certum Cuthbert de luce vocamen.
No man doubteth but Cuth ſignified knowledge,
as vncuth vnknowne; So Cuthwin skilfull
victor, Cuthred, skilfull in counſell.
               CYPRIAN, gre: from Cypria, a name of Venus, ſo
named of the Iſle of Cyprus, where ſhe was eſpecially
honoured.
               CADVVALLADER, Brit: A warrelike name, deduced
from Cad, that is, Battaile, as it ſeemeth:
but I referre it to the learned Britans.
               
               
                  CRESCENS, Lat: Increaſing.
            
            
               
               D
               
                  DANIEL, Hebr. Iudgement of God.
               
                  DAVID, Hebr. Beloved.
               DEMETRIVS, Ger. belonging to Ceres.
               
               DENIS, Gr. for Droniſius, which ſome fetch from
Dios nous, s. divine mind. It is one of the names
of the drunkard Bacehus, & derived by Nonnus
in his Dionyſiacis, from Iupiter his lame leg,
for Niſes ſignifieth, ſaith he, lame in the Syrian
tongue: and we will imagine that Iupiter halted
when Bacehus was enſeamed in his thigh
But Saint Denis of Fraunce hath moſt graced
this name.
               DRV, in Lat Drugo, or Dr
                        •
                     g
                        •
                     
                   Subtile, as Callidius
in Latin if it come from the Saxon or German;
but if it bee French, Lively and Luſtie [Ni
cetius]
               DVNSTAN, Sax. One that writeth S. Dunſtans
life, ſaith the name is anſwerable to Aaron
                        •
                     s.
Mountaine of fortitude. That Dun with the
old Engliſh ſignified a mountain or high hill,
is apparant that they called mountaine man
Dunlettan, and Downe continueth in the like
ſence with vs.Stan. Others ſuppoſe it to ſignifie
Moſt high, as among our Anceſtors Leofſtan
ſignified Moſt beleved, Betſtan, Beſt of al, Fridſtan,
moſt peacefull, &c. Stan being the moſt
vſuall termination of the Superlative degree.
            
            
               
               E
               EADGAR,Ead. 
                  Sax for Eadig
                        •
                     ar, Happy, or bleſſed
honor, or power, for I find it interpreted in
an old hiſtory Faelix poteſtas The laſt verſe of
Ethelwardus hiſtorie ſeemeth to proove the
ſame, and Eadigi (for the which Ead was vſed
in compoſition,) is the word in the c. of ſaint
Math. in the Engliſh Saxon teſtament, ſo oftē
                  
                     •
                  terated, for Bleſſed in the Beatitudes. That
Ear, or Ar, ſignifie Honor, it appeareth in the
Saxon lawes,Ar. and in Ionas Turſon Daniſh Vocabulary,
as Artic & Earlic,
                  Ear. Honourable. And
from honor commeth our honourable name
of Earles, which came hither with the Danes,
as may be gathered out of Ethetwerdus.
               
               EDMVND, Sax. for Eadmund, Happy, or bleſſed,
peace: Our Lawyers yet doe acknowledge
Muna for Peace. in their word Mundbzeck, for
breach of Peace.
                  Mund. So Aelmund all peace, Kinmund,
Peace to his kinred, Ethelmund noble
peace; yet I know that ſome tranſlate Mund
by Mouth, as Pharamund, True Mouth.
               EADVLPH, Sax. Happy helpe.
               EADVVIN, Happy victor.
               EDVVARD, in Sax. coins Eadward, happy keeper.
The Chriſtian humilitie of King Edward the
Confeſſor, broght ſuch a credit to this name,
that ſince that time it hath beene moſt vſuall
in all eſtates.Ward. That Ward ſignifieth a Keeper,
is apparant by Wood ward. Mill-wara, &c.
               EALDRED, Sax. All reverent feare.
               EALRED, Sax All Councell.
               EBVLO, See Thell.
               
               EGBERT, or rather Ecbert, Sax. Alwaies bright,

famous for ever, as the olde Engliſh called
Everlaſting life, Ec-life.
               
               ELLIS, Heb. corruptly for Elias, Lord God.
               ELMER, Sax. Contracted from Ethelmer, Noble
and renowened: For Willeranus tranſlateth

                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , by Celebris and Famoſus. So Merwin renowmed
Victor,Mer. 
                  Merwald renowmed Governour.
Yet I know B.Metr. 
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   turneth
Mier & Mere by Governor. Cap. vlt. Rer. Ger.
               
               EMANVEL, Heb. God with vs.
               EMERY, See Amery.
               
               ENION, Brit. From Aen
                        ••
                     s as ſome thinke, but
the Britiſh Gloſſarie tranſlateth it Iuſtus .i. Iuſt
and vpright.
               ENGELBERT, Germ. Bright Angell.
               ERASMVS, Gr. Amiable, or to be beloved.
               ERCHENBALD, Ger. Powerfull, bold, and ſpeedie
learner, or obſerver [Daſypodius.]
               ERNEST, Germ. in Caſar Arioviſtus, Severe [A
                     
                        •
                     entinus.]
in the 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſence we ſtill retaine it.
               ESAY, Heb. Reward of the Lord.
               ETHELBERT, or Edlebert, Noble bright, or nobly
renowmed,Ethel. Adel. for Ethel or Adel, ſignifie in
Germany, Noble. From whence happily Athalric
King of the Gothes had his name. From
hence it was that the heires apparant of the
Crowne of England, were ſurnamed Etheling .i.
Noble borne, and Clito .i. Inclitus; as in the declining
eſtate of the Roman Empire, the heires
of Emperours were called Nobiliſſſimi: hence
alſo the Spaniards which diſcended from the
German Gothes, may ſeeme to have partly
borrowed their Idal-guie, by which word they
ſignifie their nobleſt gentlemen.
               ETHELRED, Sax. Noble adviſe and Councell.
               ETHELARD, Sax. For which we now vſe Adelard,
Noble diſpoſition.
               
                  
E
                     •
                  HEL
                     ••
                  AN, Sax. Noble jewell, 
                     〈…〉
                  ,
or, moſt noble.
               ETHELVVARD, Sax. Now Ae
                        •
                     ward, Noble Keeper.
               ETHELVVOLD,Wold and Wald. 
                  Sax. Noble Governour, for the
old booke of S. Auguſtines in Canterbury. Wileranus
and Luther do agree that Wold & Wald
doth ſignifie Praefectus a Governour. So Bertwold
and Brightwold Famous Governour, Kinwald,
Governour of his kinred.
               ETHELVVOLPH, Sax. Noble helper.
               EVERARD, ger. Wel reported, as Geſnerus writeth,
like to Eudoxus of the Greekes: but other with
more probabilitie deduce it from Eberard .i.
excellent or ſupreme towardnes. A name
moſt vſuall in the ancient familie of the Digbyes.
               
               EVSEBIVS, gre. Pious and religious godly-man.
               EVSTACE, gre. Seemeth to be drawne from the
Greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which ſignifieth Conſtant,
as Conſtantinus▪
                   but the former ages turned it
into Euſtachius in Latine.
               EVAN, See Ivon.
               
               EVTROPIVS. gr. Well mannered.
               EZECHIAS, Heb. Strength of the Lord.
               EZECHIEL, Heb. Seeing the Lord.
            
            
               F
               FABIAN, from Fabius, who had his name
from beanes, as 
                     Ʋalerian from Valerius Fabianus
biſhop of Rome, martyred vnder Decius,
firſt gave reputation to this name.
               FOELIX, Lat: Happy, the ſame with Macarius
among the Graecians.
               
                  
FLORENCE, Lat: Flouriſhing, as Thales with the
Greekes, Antonius with the Latines.
               FRANCIS, g
                        •
                     rm: from Franc, that is, Free, not
ſervile, or bond. The ſame with the Greeke
Eleutherius, and the Latine Liberius.
               
               FREDERIC, germ: Rich peace, or as the Monk
which made this alluſion, Peaceable raigne.
               
                  Eſt 
                        ••
                     ibenda fides rationi nominis huius
                  Compoſit
                        •
                      Frederic, 
                        〈◊〉
                      componentia cuius.
                  S
                        ••
                     t FRIDERIC, Frith, ꝙ niſi pax, Ric ꝙ niſi regnū.
                  Sic per 
                        〈◊〉
                      Fredericus, quid niſi vel rex,
                  Pacificus vel regia pax? pax, pacificuſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     .
               
               For 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , th'Engliſh have commonly vſed
Frery and Fery, which hath beene now a long
time a chriſtian name in the antient family of
Tilney, and luckie to their houſe, as they report.
               FREMVND, Sax: Free-peace.
               FOVLK, or FVLKE, germ: Some derive it from
the German Vollg, Noble and Gallant. But
I from Folc, the Engliſh-Saxon woorde for
people, as though it were the ſame with Publius
of the Romanes, and onely tranſlated from
Publius, as, beloved of the people and commons.
               FVLBERT, Sax: Full bright.
               FVLCHER, Sax: Lord of people.
               FERDINANDO, See Beriram. This name is ſo
variable, that I can not reſolve what to ſay: for
the Spaniards make it Hernand, and Hernan,
the Italians Ferando, and Ferante, the French
Ferrant, which is now become a ſurname with
vs, and the Latines Ferdinandus: vnleſſe wee
may thinke it is fetcht by tranſpoſition from
Fred, and Rand, that is, Pure peace.
            
            
               
               G
               GA
                     •
                  RIEL, 
                     
                        •
                     ebr. Man of God, or Strength
of God.
               GAMALIEL, hebr. Gods rewarde, as Deodatus,
Theodorus, and Theodoſiu
                        •
                     .
               
               GARRET, for GERARD, and GERALD: See Everard,
for from thence they are de
                     ••
                  rted, if
we beleeve Geſ
                        •
                     erus. But rather Gerard may
ſeeme to ſignifie,Ger. Gar. Althamerus All 
                     〈◊〉
                  , as 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
All truth, Gerwin, All victorious, and the German
nation is ſo named, as All and fully men.
               GAVVEN, a name deviſed by the author of king
Arthurs fable, if it be not Walwin: See Walwin.
               
               GEORGE, gre: Husbandman, the ſame with
Agricola, a name of ſpeciall reſpect in England,
ſince the victorious King Edward the third
choſe Saint George for his Patro
                     ••
                  c, and the
Engliſh in all encounters, and batt
                     ••
                  les, vſed
the name of Saint George in their cries, as the
French did, M
                        ••
                     ti
                        •
                     y S. Denis.
               
               GEDEON, Heb: A Breaker, or Deſtroyer.
               GERMAN, Lat: of the ſame ſtocke, Tr
                     •
                  e, no
counterfeit, or a naturall brother. S. German,
who ſuppreſſed the Pelagian hereſie in Brittaine,
about the yeere 430. adva
                     ••
                  ced this
name in this Iſle.
               GERVAS, Ger
                        ••
                     ſius in Latine, for Gerfaſt, (as
ſome Germans coniecture) that is, All ſure,
firme, or faſt. If 
                     ••
                   be ſo, it is onely C
                        ••
                     stans
tranſlated. But it is the name of a 
                     〈◊〉
                   who
ſuffered vnder Nero at Ma
                        •
                     lai
                        ••
                     , who if hee
were a 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
was, it may ſignifie Grave & Antient, or Honourable,
as wreſted from Gero
                        •
                     ſius.
               
               GEFFREY, Ger. from Gaufred, Ioyfull peace. Kilianus
tranſlateth Gaw.
                  Frid. Fred. Ioyfull, as the French
doe Gay. That Fred and Frid, doe ſignifie
peace, is moſt certaine, as Fred-ſtole. i. Pacis
cathedra. See Frederic.
               
               GILBERT germ. I ſuppoſed heretofore to ſignifie
Gold-like-bright, as Aurelius or Aurelianus:
or yellow bright, as Fl
                        •
                     vius with the
Romans. For Geele is yellow in old Saxon,
& ſtill in Dutch, as Gilvus according to ſome
in L
                     •
                  tin. But becauſe it is written in Doomſday
booke▪ 
                  G
                        •
                     ſl
                        •
                     bert. I iudge it rather to ſignifie
Bright or brave pledge; for in old Saxon,
Giſle ſignifieth a pledge, & in the old Engliſh
booke of S. Auguſtines of Canterbury, ſureties
and pledges for keeping the peace are called
Fredgiſles. So it is a well fitting name for children
whi
                     •
                  h are the onlye ſweet pledges and
pawns of love between mā & wife, & accordingly
called Dulcia pignora & Pignora amoris.
               
               GILES, is miſerably disjoynted from Aegidius, as
Gillet from Aegidia, by the French, as appeareth
in luſtories by the name of Duke of Rollos
wife. It may ſeeme a Greeke name, for that
S. G
                        ••
                     es, the firſt that I have read ſo named,
was an Athenian, and ſo drawne from Aigidion,
that is, Little Kid, as we know Martia
                     
                        •
                     us
Capell. had his name in like ſenſe; 
                     •
                  or
ſome no
                     ••
                  ſſe probably fetch Giles from Iulius,
as G
                        ••
                     ha
                        •
                     
                   from Iuliana.
               
               GODFREY, ger. From Godfred, Gods-peace, or
god
                     •
                  v; for the D
                     •
                  nes call godlines Gudfreidhed.
[Ionas Turſon]
               GODARD ger. Strength of God, or Gods-man
as Gabriel according to Luther. But I thinke

it rather to ſignifie Godly diſpoſition or toward
                     •
                  es,
for Ard and Art in the German
tongue,Ard. do ſignifie Towardnes, aptnes or diſpoſition.
As Mainard,
                  Iunius. Lipfius. Kilianus. powerfull diſpoſition,
Giffard, Liberal diſpoſitiō, as Largus; Bernard,
Childlike diſpoſition, Leonard Lionlike diſpoſition,
as Leoninus; Re
                        ••
                     ard, pure diſpoſition,
as Syncerus.
               
               GODVVIN, ger. for Win-God, converted, or
Victorious in God.
               GODRICH. ger. Rich, or powerfull in God.
               GREGORY gre. Watching, watchfull, as Vigilantius,
and V
                        •
                     gilius in Latine.
               GRYFFITH, Brit. Some Britans interpret it,
Strong-faithed.
               GRVFFIN, Brit. If it be not the ſame with Griffith,
ſome do fetch from Rufinus, Red. as many
other Welſh names are derived f
                     •
                  ō colours.
               GRIM
                     •
                  ALD, ger. But truly Grim
                        •
                     ald, power over
anger, as Rodoalà power of councel [
                     
                        •
                     uther]
a name moſt vſuall in the old family of Pa
                        ••
                     
                     cefoote.
               
               GVVISCHARD, See Wiſchard.
               
               GVY, In Latine, Guide from the French Guide.
A guide, leader, or director to other.
            
            
               H
               HADRIAN, Lat. deduced from the city Hadria,
                  Ael Spartia
                     
                        ••
                     s
whence Hadrian the emperor had his
orig
                     •
                  nall.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      in libr. v
                        ••
                     ae ſuae. 
                  Geſner bringeth it from the Greeke

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Groſſe or weal
                     •
                  hie.
               HAMON, Heb. Faithfull.
               HANIBALL, A
                     •
                   
                  unick name. Gratious Lord.
               HECTOR gr. Defendour, according to 
                     
                        •
                     lat
                        •
                     .
               
               HENRY, ger. in Latine Henricus. A name ſo famous

ſince the yeare 920. when Henry the
firſt was Emperour, that there have beene 7.
Emperours, 8. Kings of England, 4. Kings of
France, as many of Spaine of that name. If Einric
be the originall, it ſignifieth Ever rich or
powerfull. If it be deduced from Herric, which
the Germans vſe now, it is as much as Rich-Lord.
I once ſuppoſed, not without ſome probabilitie,
that it was contracted from Honoricus,
of which name, as Procopius mention
                     •
                  th,
there was a Prince of the Vandales, in the time
of Honorius, and therefore likely to take name
of him, as hee did from Honor. And lately I
have found that Fr. Philelphus is of the ſame
opinion.In 
                        •
                     piſ
                        •
                     oli
                        •
                     . Howſoever it hath been an ominous
good name in all reſpects of ſignification.
               HENGEST, Sax. Horſe man, the name of him
which led the firſt Engliſhmen into this Iſle,
ſomewhat anſwerable to the Greeke names,
Philippe, Speuſiprus, Cteſippus, his brother in like
ſort was called Horſa.
               
               HARHOLD, Sax. Luther interpreteth it Governour
or Generall of an Armie, and ſo would I
if it were Harwold. But being written Harhold
& Herold, I rather turne it love of the Armie.
For Hold ſee Rheinhold.
                  Hare. Here. For Hare and Here
that they ſignifie both an Armie, and a Lord,
it is taken for granted: Yet I ſuſpect this Here,
for a Lord to come from the Latine Herus. See
Ethelwold.
               
               HERBERT, Germ. Famous Lord, bright Lord, or
Glorie of the Army.
               HERVVIN, ger. Victorious Lord, or Victor in
the Armie.
               HARMAN, or Hermon, ger. Generall of an Army,
the ſame which Strato or Polemarchus in
Greeke Caeſar turned it into Arminius [Tſcudus,]

Hence the German Dukes are called
Hertogen, as Leaders of Armies.
               HERCVLES, gr. Glorie or illumination of the
aire, as it pleaſeth Macrobius, who affirmeth it
to be proper to the Sunne, but hath bin given
to valiant men for their glorie.
               HIEROME, gr. Holy name.
               HILDEBERT, germ. Bright, or famous Lord. See
Maud.
               
               HILARY, Lat. Merrie and pleaſant.
               HOVVEL, A Brittiſh name, the originall whereof
ſome Britan may finde. Goropius turneth it
Sound or whole, as wiſely as he ſaith, Engliſhmen
were called Angli, becauſe they were
good Anglers. I rather would fetch Hoel from
Haelius, that is, Sunne-bright, as Coel from
Caelius.
               
               HV
                     •
                  H, Aventinus deriveth it from the German
word Hougen, that is, ſlaſher or cutter. But
whereas the name Hugh, was firſt in vſe among
the French, and O
                        •
                     frid in the yeare 900.
vſed Hugh for Comfort, I iudge this name to
be borrowed thence, and ſo it is correſpondent
to the Greeke names Elpidius, and Elpis.
               
               HVMFREY, ger. for Humfred, Houſe-peace, a
lovely and happie name, if it could turne
home-warres betweene man and wife into
peace. The Italians have made Onuphrius of it
in Latine.
               HVBERT, Sax. Bright forme, faire ſhape, or faire
hope.
               HORATIO, I know not the Etymologie, vnleſſe
you will derive from the Greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that
is, wel ſighted.
            
            
               
               J
               IACO
                     •
                  , Heb. A tripper, or ſupplanter. Whoſe
name becauſe he had power with God, that
he might alſo prevaile with men, was changed
into Iſrael by God. See Geneſ. ca. 32. Philo de
nominibus mutatis.
               
               IAMES, Wreſted from Iacob, the ſame. Iago in Spaniſh,
Iaques in French, which ſome frenchified
Engliſh, to their diſgrace, have too much
affected.
               IASPER.
               I
                     •
                  EL, See Ybel.
               
               IOACHIM, Heb. Preparation of the Lord.
               IEREMY, Heb: High of the Lord.
               IOAB, Heb: Fatherhood.
               IOHN, Heb: Gratious, yet though ſo vnfortunate
in Kings; for that Iohn of England well neare,
loſt his Kingdome; and Iohn of France was
long captive in England; and Iohn Balioll was
lifted out of his Kingdome of Scotland; that
Iohn Steward when the Kingdome of Scotland
came vnto him, renouncing that name,
would be proclaimed King Robert. See Iuon.
               
               IOB, Heb. Sighing or ſorrowing.
               IORDAN, Heb: The river of iudgement.
               IOSVAH, Heb: As Ieſuiah Saviour.
               IOSC
                     •
                  LIN, A diminitive from I
                        •
                     ſt or Iustus, as Iuſtulus
according to Iſlebius, but molefied from
Ioſtelin, in the old Netherland language, from
whence it came with Ioſcelin of Lovan, yonger
ſonne of Godfrey Duke of Brabant, Progenitour
of the honourable Percyes, if not the
firſt, yet the moſt noble of that name in this

Realme. Nicotius maketh it a diminitive from
Iost Iudocus.
               
               IOSEPH, Heb. Encreaſing [Phil
                        •
                     
                  ] or encreaſe of
the Lord.
               IOSIAS, Heb. Fire of the Lord.
               IOSVAH, Heb: The Lord Saviour.
               INGEIBERT, See Engelbert.
               
               INGRAM, Germ: Engelramus in Latine, deduced
from Engell which ſignifieth an Angell, as
Angelo is common in Italy, ſo Engelbert ſeemeth
to ſignifie bright Angell.
               ISAAC, Heb: Laughter, the ſame which Gelaſius
among the Greekes.
               ISRAEL, Heb. Seeing the Lord, or prevailing in
the Lord: See Iacob.
               
               IVLIVS, gr: Soft haired or moſſie bearded, ſo
doth Iulus ſignifie in Greeke. It was the name
of Aeneas ſonne, who was firſt called Ilus.
               
               Ilus erat dum res ſtetit Ilia regno.
               The old Engliſhmen in the North parts turned
Iulius into Ioly, and the vnlearned Scribes of that
time may ſeeme to have turned Iulianus, into Iolanus,
for that name doth often occurre in olde
evidences.
               IVON, is the ſame with Iohn, and vſed by the
Welſh, and Sclav
                        •
                     nians for Iohn; and in this
Realme about the Conquerours time Iohn
was rarely found, but Iuon as I have obſerved.
               IONATHAN, Heb. The ſame with Theodorus, and
Theodoſius, that is, Gods gift.
            
            
               K
               KENHELME, Sax. Defence of his kinred.
H
                        ••
                     m,
                  
                     
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     m. Defence, [Luther:] ſo 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  
Happy defence, Bright-helme, Faire defence,
Sig-
                        •
                     elme, Victorious defence.
               KENARD, Sax. Kinde diſpoſition, and affection
his kinred.
            
            
               L
               LAMBERT, Sax: As ſome thinke, Faire-lamb
Luther turneth it Farre famous.
               LANCELOT ſeemeth a Spaniſh name, and may
ſignifie a Launce, as the militarie men, vſe
the word now for an horſeman. Some think
it to be no auntient name, but forged by the
writer of king Arthurs hiſtorie for one of his
doubtie knights.
               LAVRENCE, Lat: Flouriſhing like a Baie tree:
the ſame that Daphnis in Greeke.
               LAZARVS, Hebr: Lords-help.
               LEOFSTAN, Sax: moſt beloved.
               LEOFVVIN, Sax: Winlove, or to be loved, as
Agapetus, and Eraſmus with the Greekes, and
Amandus with the Latines.
               LEONARD, ger: Lion-like diſpoſition, as Thymoleon
with the Greekes, or Popularis indoles,
as it pleaſeth Lipſ
                        ••
                     s, that is, People pleaſing
diſpoſition.
               LEVVIS, Wrenched from L
                        •
                     dowike, which Tilius
interpreteth, Refuge of the people.
               LEVVLIN, Brit. Lion-like, the ſame with Leominus,
and Leontius.
               
               LIONELL, Lat: Leonellus, that is, Little-lyon.
               LVKE, Hebr: Riſing or lifting vp.
               
                  
LEODEGAR, or LEGER, ge
                        •
                     m: Gatherer, of people,
                     Leod. Aimonius li 3. c. 
                        •
                      M. Wel
                        •
                     erus re
                     
                        •
                     um Boi
                        •
                     carum pag. 118.
                  Lipſius in. Poliorceticis, or, Altogether popular.
               LEODPOLD, ger: Defender of people, corruptly
Leopold. In our auncient tongue Leod ſignified
people of one Citie, as Leodſcip, was to
them Respublica, The northerne Germans
have yet Leud in the ſame ſenſe. So Luti, Li
                        •
                     di,
Leuti, and Leudi, as the Dialect varieth, ſignifies
people. In which ſence, the Normans in
the life of Carolus Magnus were called Nortleud.
The names wherein Leod are found,
ſeeme tranſlated from thoſe Greeke names
wherein you ſhall finde D
                        •
                     m
                        •
                     s and L
                        ••
                     s, as
Demoſthenes, that is, Strength of the people.
Dimochares, that is, Gratious to the people,
Demophilus, that is, Lover of the people. Nicodemus,
that is, Conqueror of people. L
                        ••
                     
                     medon,
that is, Ruler of people. L
                        •
                     od
                        •
                     mas,
that is, Tamer of people, &c.
               LIVIN, germ. The ſame with Amatus, that is,
Beloved [Kilianus]
            
            
               M
               MADOC, Brit: from Mad, that is, Good in
the Welſh, as Caradoc, from C
                        •••
                     , that
is, Beloved. The ſame with Agathias in Greek
[Dict: Walicum]
               MALACHIAS, hebr: My meſſenger.
               MANAS
                     ••
                   
                  hebr: not forgotten.
               MARC
                     •
                  LLV
                     •
                  , lat: Plutarch out of P
                        •
                     ſſido
                        •
                     ius do
                  
                     ••
                  vet
                     •
                  
it from Mars, as martiall and warlike,

other from Marculus, that is, an Hammer.
The latter times turned it to Martell and Mallet,
which diverſe tooke for a ſurname, becauſe
they valiantly didde hammer and beate
downe their adverſaries, See Malmeſ. pag. 54.
               MARMADVC, germ: Mermachtig as ſome coniecture,
which in olde Saxon ſignifieth More
mightie, being ſweetened in ſound by proceſſe
of time. A name vſuall in the North,
but moſt in former times in the noble families
of Tweng, Lumley, and Conſtable, and thought
to be Val
                        •
                     ntinianus tranſlated.
               MARKE In Hebrew ſignifieth High, but in Latine,
according to Varr
                        •
                     , it was a name at the
firſt given to them that were borne in the
moneth of March; but according to Feſtus
Pompeius it ſignifieth a Hammer or Mallet,
given in hope the perſon ſhould be martiall.
               MATHEVV, hebr. Gods-gift.
               MARTIN, Lat: from Martius, as Antoninus from
Antonius. Saint Martin the militarie Saint, biſhop
of Toures firſt made this name famous
among the Chriſtians by his admirable piety.
               MERCVRIE, Lat: Quaſi medius currens inter deos
& homines, as the Gramarians Etymologize
it, A mediate courſi
                     •
                  or betweene gods and
men.
               MEREDITH, Brit: in Latine Mereducius.
               
               MERRIC, Brit: in Latine Meuricus, I knowe
not whether it be corrupted from Maurice.
               
               MICHAEL, Hebr. Who is perfect? or, Who is
like God? The French contract it into Miel.
               
               MAXIMILIAN, A new name, firſt deviſed by
Frederic the third Emperour, who doubting
what name to give to his ſonne and heire,
compoſed this name of two worthy Romans
names, whome he moſt admired, Q. Fabius

Max
                        ••
                     us, and Scipio Aemili
                        •••
                     , with hope,
that his ſonne would immitate their vertues.
[Hieronymus Gebviterius de f
                        •
                     milia Auſtriaca.
               
               MILES, Lat: Mile, which ſome fetch from Milium,
a kinde of graine called Millet, as probably
as Plime draweth Fab
                        ••
                     , Le
                        •
                     tulus, C
                        •
                     eer
                        •
                     
                  
from Faba, Lens, Cicer, that is, beanes, lentill,
and chich peaſe. But whereas the French
contract Michael into Miel: ſome ſuppoſe
our Miles to come from thence.
               MOSES, hebr▪
                   Drawne vp.
               MORGAN, Brit▪
                   the ſame with Pelagius, that is,
Se
                     •
                  man, if we may beleeve an olde fragment,
and Mor ſignifies the Sea among the Welſh:
So Marius, Marinus, Marianus, and Pontius among
the Latines have their name from Mare
and Pontus the Sea. Qu
                        •
                     re.
               
               MAVGER, a name eftſoones vſed in the worſhipfull
family of Vavaſors. Malgerius, in olde
hiſtories. Quare.
               
               MORICE, from the Latine M
                        •••
                     itius, and that
from Maurus, A Moore, as Syritius from Syus
a Sy
                     •
                  ian. The name not of any worth in
his owne ſignification, but in reſpect of Saint
Maurice a Commander in the Thebane Legion
martyred for the Chriſtian profeſſion
vnder Maximianus.
               
            
            
               N
               NATHANIEL, Hebr: The gift of God, as
Theod
                        •
                     ſius, &c.
               
               NEALE, Fre: Blackiſh, or ſwart, for it is abridged

from Nigel, and ſo alwayes written, in Latine
records Nigellus, conſonant to Nigrinus,
and Atrius of the Latines, Melanius and Melauthus
of the Graecians.
               NICHOLAS, gre: Conquerour of the people,
               NORMAN, drawne from the Norman nation, as
Northerne-man, vſuall antiently in the familie
of Darcy.
               
               NOEL, Fre: the ſame with the Latine Natalis,
given firſt in honour of the feaſt of Chriſtes
birth, to ſuch as were then borne.
            
            
               O
               ODo, See Othes.
               
               OLIVER, A name fetched from the peacebringing
Olive, as Daphnis, and Laurence, from
the triumphant Lar
                        •
                     rell.
               
               OSBERN, Sax. Houſe-childe, as Filius familiàs,
[Luther.]
               OSBERT, Sax. Domeſticall brightnes, or light of
the family.
               OSMVND, Sax. Houſe-peace.
               OSVVOLD, Ger. Houſe-ruler or Steward: for
Wold in old Engliſh and high Dutch, is a Ruler:
but for this the Normans brought in Ledeſpencer
now Spencer. The holy life of S. Oſwald
King of Northumberland, who was inceſſantly
in prayer hath given much honour
to this name. See Ethelwold.
               
               OTHES, An old name in England, drawne from
Otho, written by ſome Odo, and by others, Eudo,
in Engliſh-Saxon Odan, and after the

originall,Hood. whereof when 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   could not
finde, I will not ſeeke. Av
                        •
                     nt
                        ••
                     s maketh it
Hud, that is, Keeper: but Petr
                        ••
                      Bleſ
                        ••
                     ſis Epiſt.
126. maketh it to ſignifie a Faithfull reconciler;
for he writeth, Od
                        •
                      in Epiſc
                        •
                     pum Pariſionſem
conſecratus nomen ſ
                        •
                     is operibus interpret
                        ••
                     i
non ceſſat, fidelis ſequeſter inter deum & 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
Ottwell and Ottey ſeeme to bee nurſenames
drawne from Othes.
               
               OVVEN, Lat. Audoenus, if it be the ſame with S.
Owen of France. But the Britans will have it
from old King Oenus father in law to Hercules;
others from Eugenius, that is, Noble or well
borne. Certaine it is that the Country of Ireland
called Tir-Oen, is in Latine Records, Terra
Eugenij; and the Iriſh Prieſts know no Lat
                     •
                  ne
for their Oen but Eugenius, as Rothericus
for Rorke. And Sir Owen Ogle in Latine Records,
as I have beene enformed, was written
Eugenius Ogle.
               
               ORIGINALL, May ſeeme to be deducted from
the Greeke Origenos, that is, Borne in good
time.
            
            
               P
               PASCAL, Deduced from Paſcha, the Paſſover.
               PATRIK, Lat. From Patricius, Quaſi Patram cians,
A Peere or State, he which could cite his father
as a man of honour. A name given firſt
to Senators ſonnes, but it grew to reputation
when Conſtantin
                        •
                     
                   the Greeke made a new ſtate

of Patricij, who had place befor the Praefectus
Praet
                        •
                     ri
                        •
                     , or Lord great Maſter of the houſe, if
it may be ſo tranſlated [Zoſim
                        •
                     s.]
               PAVL, Heb. Wonderfull or reſt: But the learned
Baronius drawing it from the Latine, maketh
it Little, or Humble.
               PAVLIN, From Paul, at Nigrinus from Niger.
               
               PERCIVAL, Is thought at firſt to have bin a ſurname,
and after (as many other) a Chriſtian
n
                     •
                  me: fetched from P
                        •
                     rcheval, a place in Normandie.
One by alluſion made this Percival,
Per ſe valens.
               
               PAYN, in Lat. Paganus, exempt from militarie ſervice,
a name now out of vſe, but having an oppoſite
ſignification to a millitarie man, as Scaliger
obſerveth vpon Anſdnius.
               
               PETRE, For which as the French vſed Pierre: ſo
our Anceſtours vſed Pierce, a name of high
eſteeme among the Chriſtians, ſince our Saviour
named Simon, the ſonne of Iona, Cephas,
which is by interpretation a ſtone, Ioan.
5. 42. But fole-wiſely have ſome Petres, called
themſelves Pierius.
               
               PEREGRINE, Lat. Strange, or outlandiſh.
               PHILEBERT, Ger. Much bright fame, or very
bright and famous, as Polyphemus in Greeke
[Rhenanus.]
               PHILIPPE, Gr. A lover of horſes, Philip B
                        •
                     roald
conceiting this his name, very clerckly proveth
that Phillippe is an Apoſtolicall name by Saint
Philip the Apoſtle, a royall name by King Philip
King of Macedonia, and an imperiall name
by Philip the firſt Chriſtian Emperour.
               POSTHVMVS, Lat. Borne after his fathers death.
            
            
               
               Q
               QVINTIN, Lat. From Quintus, the fifth
borne, a man dignified by Saint Qu
                        •
                     tin of
France.
               
            
            
               R
               RALFE, Germ. Contracted from Radulph,
which as Rodulph ſignifieth Help-councell,
not differing much from the Greeke Eubulus.
               
               RAYMVND, Germ. Quiet peace, as Heſichius in
Greeke.
               RANDAL, Sax. Corrupted from Ra
                        •
                     ulph, that is,
Faire helpe.
               RAPHAEL, Heb: The Phiſicke of God.
               REINHOLD, Sax. Sincere or pure love: for the
Germans call their greateſt and goodlieſt river
for purenes Rheine,
                  Rein, and Ran. and the old Engliſh
vſed Hold for love, Holdlic, for lovely, as Vnhold,
without love:Hold. 
                  Willeranus vſeth Hold for
favour, which is anſwerable to love. I have
alſo obſerved Hold for Firme, and once for a
Generall of an armie.
               RHESE, A Britiſh name, deduced as they thinke
from Rh
                        •
                     ſus the Thracian King, who was
(as Homer deſcribeth him by his Armour,)
of a Giantlike ſtature. But I dare not ſay the
wordimplieth ſo much in ſignification: yet
Rheſi, ſignifieth a Giant in the German tong.
               
                  
RICHARD, Sax. Powerfull and rich diſpoſition,
as Richer, an antient Chriſtian name, ſignified
Powerfull in the Armie, or Rich Lord, and
was but Herr
                        ••
                     
                   reverſed, Aventinus turneth it,
Treaſure of the kingdome. See Aubry.
               
               ROBERT, Germ. Famous in Councell, for it is
written moſt anciently Rodbert. Rod, Red, and
Rod,
                  Rad, Red, Rod. do ſignifie councell, See Conrad and Albert.
This name was given to Rollo, firſt
Duke of Normandy, an originall Anceſtour
of the Kings of England, who was called firſt
by the Normans and French Rou, wherevnto,
ſome without ground thinke that Bert was
added: ſo that it ſhould ſignifie Rou, the renowmed.
Others vntruly turne it Red-
                        •
                     eard,
as thogh it were al one with Aenobarbus of the
Latines, or Barbaroſſa of the Italians, Iohn Bodin
(or Pudding,) that I may give him his true
Engliſh name, maketh it full wiſely Red-bara;
but I thinke no Robert which knoweth what
Bardus meaneth, will like of it.
               ROGER,Frodo
                        •
                     rdi. Romenſis chronic. 
                  Ger. Ruger, Quiet, the ſame with Tranquilles
in Latine, Frodoard writeth it alwaies
Rottgarius, or Rodgarus, ſo it ſeemeth to ſignifie
All councell, or ſtrong councell.
               ROLLAND, Ger. Whereas it was anciently written
Rod, land, it may ſeem to ſignifie Councell
for the Land. And the firſt that I finde ſo named,
was land-wardē in France, vnder Carolus
Magn
                        •
                     s, againſt the Piracies of the Normans.
The Italians vſe Orland for Rowland by Metatheſis.
               
               ROMANE, Lat. Strong, from the Greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
anſwerable to 
                     Ʋalens.
               
               RVBEN, Heb. The ſonne of viſions, or a quickſeeing
ſonne. [Philo.]
               REINFRED, Sax. Pure peace.
            
            
               
               S
               SALOMON, hebr: Peaceabi
                     •
                  .
               SAMPSON, hebr: There the ſecond 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               SAMV
                     •
                  L, hebr: Place of God.
               SAVLE, Hebr: Lent of the Lord, or 
                     ••
                   ſome will,
Fox.
               S
                     ••
                  ASTIAN, gre: Honorable or 
                     〈◊〉
                  , as
Auguſtus or Auguſtinus among the Romans.
               SIG
                     •
                  SMVND, germ: Victo
                     ••••
                   peace, 
                     〈◊〉
                   victory
with peace;Sig, and Seg. That Sig ſignifieth Victorie,
A
                        •
                     frie, Daſ
                        •
                     podius, and Luther do all agree, yet
Hadr: 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   turneth it Victorious or prevailing
ſpeech. So Sigward, now Seward, victorious
preſerver, Sigh
                        •
                     m, victorious defence,
Sighere, Conqueror of an army, or victorious
Lord: and Sigbert, now Sebright, victorious
fame, or fame by victory.
               SILVESTER, Iat: Woodman.
               SYLVANVS, Lat: Woodman, or rather Woodgod.
See Walter.
               
               SIMON, Hebr: Obedientliſtening [Phil
                        •
                     
                  ]
               STEPHEN, gre: A Crowne.
               SVVITHIN, Sax: From the olde Engliſh Swithea
                        •
                     n,
that is, Very high, as Ce
                        •••
                     s or Ex
                        •
                     periu
                        •
                     
                  
with the Romans. This name hath bin
taken vp in honour of Saint Swithin the holie
Biſhop of W
                        •
                     ncheſter about the y
                     ••
                  re 860.
and called the Weeping ſaint 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , for that
about his feaſt Praeſepe and Aſelli, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   conſtellanons
do 
                     〈◊〉
                   Coſmic
                     ••
                  y, and commonly
cauſe raine.
            
            
               
               T
               THEOBALD, 
                     ••
                  mmonly Tibald, and Thibald,
Gods power, as B: Rhenanius noteth.
But certaine it is, that in our Saxon Pſalter
Gentes is alwayes tranſlated by Theod,
                  Theod. and in
the Engliſh-Saxon old Annales, the Engliſh
nation is often called Engl
                        •
                     -th
                        ••
                     d. The ſame
Lipſ
                        •••
                      in Poli
                        ••
                     ceticis affirmeth to be in the
auntient German Pſalters. So that Theobald
ſeemeth in his opinion to ſignifie Powerfull,
or bolde over people. It was the common
name in the familie of the Gorges; and of the
Lord Verdons, of whom the Earles of Shr
                        •
                     wſburie,
and Eſſex are deſcended.
               THEODORE, gre: Gods gift, now corruptly by
the Welſh-Britans called Tydder.
               
               THEODOSIVS, gre: the ſame with Theodore.
               
               THEODERIC, ger: contractly Deric and Torry
with the French, Powerable, or Rich in people
according to Lipſius.
               
               THEOPHILVS, gre: A lover of God.
               THOMAS, hebr: Bottomles deepe, or Twinne.
               TIMOTHY, gre: from Timotheus, Honou
                     •
                  ing
God.
               TOBIAS, hebr: The Lord is good.
               TRISTRAM, I knowe not whether the firſt of
this name was chriſtned by king Arthurs fabl
                     •
                  r.
If it be the ſame which the French 
                     •
                  all
Trist
                        ••
                     , it commeth from ſorrow: for P. Aemi
                        •
                     ius
noteth that the ſonne of Saint Lewes of
Franc
                        •
                     , horne in the heavie ſorrowfull time of
his fathers impriſonment vnder the Saracens,
was named Triſtan in the ſame reſpect.
               TVRSTAN, Sax: for Truſtan, moſt true and
truſtie, as it ſeemeth.
            
            
               
               
                  Ʋ
               
               VALENS, Lat: Puiſſant.
               VALENTINE, Lat: The ſame.
               VCHTRED, ger: High counſell, vſed in the old
family of Raby. From whence the Nevilles.
               
               VINCENT, Lat: Victorious.
               VITAL, Lat: Hee that may live a long life, like
to Macrobius; or Lively, the ſame that Zoſimus
in Greeke.
               VIVIAN, Lat: the ſame.
               VRBANVS, Lat: Curteous, civill.
               VRIAN, The ſame with George, as I have heard
of ſome learned Danes. It hath beene a common
name in the family of Saint Pier of Cheſſhire,
now extinguiſhed.
            
            
               W
               VVALTER, ger: from Waldher, for ſo it is
moſt auntiently written, a Pilgrime
according to Reneccius; other make it a Wod-Lorde,
or a Wood-man, aunſwerable to the
name of Silvius,
                  W
                        •
                     ld. 
                  Silvanus, or Sylveſter. The
old Engliſh called a wood, Wald, and an hermite
living in the woods, a Waldbro
                        •
                     der. But
if I may caſt in my conceit, I take it to be Herwald
inverted, as Herric and Richer, Winbald
                  
and Baldwin. And ſo it ſignifieth Governour
or Generall of an Arm
                     •
                  e, as Hegeſiſtratus, See
Herman and Harold:
               
               WALVVIN, Some have interpreted out of the
German tongue, a Conquerour, as Nicholaus
and Nicodemus, Victor in Latine; but wee
now vſe Gawen inſteede of Walwyn, Architrenius
maketh it Walganus in Latine. But if Walwin
was a Britan, and king Arthurs nephew,
as W: Malmeſbury noteth, where hee ſpeaketh
of his giant-like bones found in Wales, I referre
the ſignification to the Britans.
               WARIN, Iovianus libr. 1. de Aspiratione draweth
it from 
                     
                        ••
                     rro. But whereas it is written in
all Records. Guarinus: It may ſeeme mollified
from the Dutch Gerwm, that is, All-victorious.
See Gertrud.
               
               WILLIAM, ge: For ſweeter ſound drawne from
Wilhelm, which is interpreted by Luther,
Much Defence, or, Defence to many, as
Wilwald, Ruling many. Wildred, Much reverent
feare, or Awfull. Wilfred, Much peace.
Willibert, Much brightneſſe, or Very bright.
Willibrod Much increaſe. So the French that
cannot pronounce W have turnd it into Philli,
as Phillibert, for Willibert, Much brightnes.
Many names wherein wee have Will, ſeeme
tranſlated from the Greeke names compoſed
of 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , as Polydamas, Polybius, Polyxenus, &c.
Helm yet remaineth with vs,Helm Will and Willi. and Villi, Willi,
and Bills yet with the Germans for Many. Other
turne William, a Willing Defender, and
ſo it anſwereth the Roman Titus, if it come
from Tuendo, as ſome will have it. The Italians
that liked the name, but could not pronounce
the W if wee may beleeve Geſner, turned
it into Galeazo, retaining the ſence in part

for Helme. But the Italians report, that Galeazo
the firſt Viſcount of Mill
                        ••••
                     
                   was ſo called,
for that many Cockes crew luſtily at his
birth. This name hath beene moſt common
in England ſince king William the Conqueror,
inſomuch that vppon a feſtivall day in the
Court of king Henry the ſecond, when Sir
William Saint-Iohn, and Sir William Fitz-Hamon
eſpeciall Officers had commaunded that
none but of the name of William ſhould d
                     ••
                  e
in the great Chamber with them, they were
accompanied with an hundred and twentie
Williams, all Knights, as Robert Moutenſis recordeth
Anno 1173.
               WILLFRED, Sax: Much peace.
               WIMVND, Sax: Sacred peace, or holy peace, as
Wibert, Holy and Bright; for Wi, in Willeramus
is tranſlated Sacer.
               
               WISCHARD, or GVI
                     •
                  CARD, Norm: Wilie, and
crafty ſhifter: [W: Gemiticenſis] Falcandus
the Italian interpreteth it Erro, that is, Wanderer.
But in a Norman name I rather beleeve
the Norman Writer.
               WOLSTAN, Sax: Comely, decent, as Decentius,
[Daſipodius.]
               WVLPHER, Sax: Helper, the Saxon name of a
King of Middle-England, anſwering to the
Greeke name Alexias, or rather Epicurus. The
moſt famous of which name was a hurtefull
man, albeit he had a helpefull name.
            
            
               
               Y
               YBELL, Brit: Contracted from Eubulus, good
Councellor.
               YTHELL, Brit: Likewiſe contracted from Euthalius,
very flouriſhing.
            
            
               Z
               ZACHARY, Hebr: The memorie of the
Lord.
            
         
         
            
            Chriſtian Names of
Women.
            Leſt Women, the moſt kinde ſex, ſhould conceive
vnkindenes if they were omitted, ſomewhat
of neceſſitie muſt bee ſaide of their
names.
            
               ABIGAEL, Heb. The fathers ioy.
               AGATHA, Gr. Good, Guth in old Saxon.
               AGNES, Gr. Chaſte, the French write Ignatia,
but I know not why▪
               
               ALETHEIA, Gre. Veritie, or 
                     •
                  uth.
               ALICE, Ger. Abridged from Adeſiz, Noble.
See Ethelbert. But the French make it defendreſſe,
turning it into Alexia.
               
               ANNA, Heb. Gracious, or mercifull.
               ARBELA, Heb. God hath revenged, as ſome tranſlations
have it. [Index Bibliorum.]
               ADELIN, Ge. Noble, or deſcending from nobles.
               AVDRY, Sax. It ſeemeth to be the ſame with
Etheldred▪
                   for the firſt foundreſſe of Ely church
is ſo called in Latine hiſtories, but by the people
in thoſe parts, S. Audry. See Etheldred.
               
               AMIE, Fr. Beloved, in Latine Amata, the name
of the ancient King, Latinus wife. It is written
in the like ſence Amicia, in old Records.
               ANCHORET, Gr. for Anachoreta, Solitarie live
                     •
                  ,
which retyred her ſelfe from the world to ſerve
God.
               
                  
AVICE, Some obſerve that as it is written now
Avice, ſo in former times Hawiſia, and in elder
ages Helwiſa: where-vpon they thinke it detorted
from Hildevig, that is, Lady-defence, as
Lewis is wreſted from Lodovicus and Ludwig.
               
               AVREOLA, Lat. Pretty-little golden dame.
               ANSTASE, Gr. Anaſtaſia, and that from Anaſtaſis,
as Anaſtaſius, given in remembrance of
chriſts glorious reſurrection & ours in Chriſt.
            
            
               B
               BARBARA, Gr. Strange; of vnknowne language,
but the name reſpected in honour of
S. Barbara, martyred for the true profeſſion of
Chriſtian religion, vnder the Tyranne Maximian.
               
               BEATRICE, Lat. From Beatrix, Bleſſed.
               BLANCH, Fr. White, or faire.
               BRIGID, Contracted into Bride, an Iriſh name
as it ſeemeth, for that the ancient S. Brigid,
was of that Nation: the other of Suetia was
lately Canonized about 1400. Quaere.
               
               BERTHA, Ger. Bright and famous. See Albert.
               
               BONA, Lat. Good.
               BENEDICTA, Lat: Bleſſed.
               BENIGNA, Lat: Milde and gentle.
            
            
               
               C
               CASSANDRA, Gr. Inflaming men with love.
               CATHERIN, Gr: Pure, Chaſte.
               CHRISTIAN, A name from our Chriſtian profeſſion,
which the Pagans moſt tyrannically
perſecuted, hating as Tertullian writeth in his
Apologetico, a harmeleſſe name in harmeleſſe
people
               CLARA, Lat: Bright, the ſame with Berta, & Claricia
in latter times.
               CICELY, From the Latine Caecilia, Grey-eyed.
            
            
               D
               DENIS, See before among the name of men.
               DIANA, From the Greeke Di
                        •
                     s, that is, Iove,
as Iovina, or Ioves daughter, or Gods daughter.
               DIONYE, From Diana.
               
               DIDO, A Phaenician name, ſignifying a manlike
woman. [Servius Hon
                        •
                     ratus.]
               DOROTHYE, Gr: The gift of God, or given of
God.
               DORCAS, Gr: A Roe-bucke, Lu
                        •
                     retius lib. 4. noteth,
that by this name, the Amorous Knights
were wont to ſalute freckled, wartie, and wodden-faced
wenches, where he ſaith,
               Caeſ
                     •
                  a Palladi
                     •
                  n; naevoſa & 
                     •
                  ignea Dorcas.
               DOVZE, From the Latine Dulcia, that is, ſweetewench.
               
                  
DOVSABEL, Fr: Sweete and faire, ſomewhat like
Glycerium.
               
               DOVGLAS, of the Scottiſh ſurname, taken from
the river Douglas, not long ſince made a Chriſtian
name in England, as Iordan from the river
of that name in the holy Land, was made
a Chriſtian name for men.
            
            
               E
               ETH
                     •
                  LDRED, Noble adviſe: See Audrey.
               
               ELA, See Alice.
               
               ELEANOR, Deduced from Helena, Pittifull.
               ELIZA, Heb. God ſaveth.
               ELIZABETH, Heb. Peace of the Lord, or Quiet
reſt of the Lord, the which England hath found
verified in the moſt honoured name of our
late Soveraigne. Mantuan playing with it, maketh
it Eliza-bella.
               
               EADE, Sax. Drawne from Eadith, in which there
is ſignification of happines. In latter time it
was writen Auda, Ada, Ida, and by ſome Id
                        •
                     
                     nea
in Latine.
               EMME, Some wil have to be the ſame with Amie,
in Latine Amata. Paulus Merula ſaith it ſignifieth
a good nurſe, and ſo is the ſame with Eutrophime
among the Greekes, Rog: Hoveden
pag. 246. noteth that Emma daughter to Richard
the firſt Duke of Normandie, was called
in Saxon Elfgiva, that is as it ſeemeth, Helpegiver.
               EMMET, A diminitive from Emme.
               
               EVA, Heb. Giving life.
            
            
               
               F
               FAITH.
               FORTVNE, The ſignification well knowne.
               FREDISVVID, Sax. Very free, truely free.
               FRANCIS, See Francis before.
               FAELICE, Lat. Happy.
               FORTITVD, Lat.
               
               FLORENCE, Lat. Flouriſhing.
            
            
               G
               GERTRVD, gr: All true, and amiable; if German
ſignifieth All-man, as moſt learned
conſent, and ſo Gerard may ſignifie All-hardy.
[Althamerus.]
               GRACE, the ſignification is well knowne.
               GRISHILD, Grey Lady, as Caeſia, ſee Maud.
               
               GLADVSE, Brit: from Claudia.
               
               GOODITH, Sax: Contracted from Goodwife,
as we now vſe Goody: by which name king
Henry the firſt was nicked in contempt, as
William of Ma
                        •
                     neſbury noteth.
            
            
               H
               HELENA, gre: Pittifull: A name much vſed
in the honour of Helena mother to

                  Conſtantine the Great, and native of this Iſle
                     •
                  
although one on 
                     •
                  he Authour ma
                     •
                  eth h
                     •
                  r a
Bithini
                     •
                  n, but Baronius and our Hiſtorian
                     •
                  
will have her a Britaine.
               HAVVIS, See Avice.
               
            
            
               J
               IANE, See Ioane; for 32. Eliz: Reg
                        ••
                     a 
                  
                     •
                  t was
agreed by the court of the Kings Bench to
be all one with Ioane.
               
               IVDITH, Hebr. Praiſing, Confeſſing▪ our aunceſtors
turned it into Iuet.
               
               IOYCE, in Latine Ioco
                        •
                     a, M
                     •
                  rry, pleaſant.
               IAQVET, Fr: from Iacoba, See Iames.
               
               IENET, a diminitive from Ioan, as litle and prettie
Ihoan.
               
               IOANE, See Iohn. In latter yeeres, ſome of the
better and nicer ſorte miſliking Ioane, have
mollified the name of Ioane into Iane, as it may
ſeeme, for that Iane is never found in olde
Recordes: and as ſome will, never before the
time of king Henry the eight. Lately in like
ſort ſome learned Iohns and Hanſes beyond
the ſea, have new chriſtned themſelves by
the name of Ianus.
               
               ISABELL, The ſame with Elizabeth; if the Spaniardes
doe not miſtake, which alwayes tranſlate
Elizabeth into Iſabel; and the French into
Iſabeau.
               
               IVLIAN, from Iulius, Gilian commonly, yet
our Lawyers libr. Aſſiſ. 26. pa. 7. make them
diſtinct names, I doubt not but vppon ſome
good ground.
            
            
               
               K
               KATHARIN, See Catharin.
               
               KINBVRG, Sax: Strength and defence of
her kinred; as Kinulf, help of her kinred.
            
            
               L
               LETICE, Lat: Ioyfulneſſe, mirth.
               LYDIA, gre: Borne in that region of Aſia.
               
               LORA, Sax: Diſcipline, or Learning: but I ſuppoſe
rather it is corrupted from Laura, that is,
Bay, and is agreeable to the Greeke name
Daphne.
               
               LVCIA, Lat: Lightſome, Bright: A name given
firſt to them that were borne when daielight
firſt appeared.
               LVCRETIA, Lat: An honourable name in reſpect
of the chaſte Lady Lucretia; if it as
Lucretius doe not come from Lucrum, gaine,
as a good huſwife, I leave it to Grammarians.
Lucris, a wench in Plautus ſeemed to have hir
name from thence, when-as hee ſaieth it was
Nomen & omen quantivis pretij.
               
            
            
               
               M
               MAEEI. Some will have it to be a contraction
of the Italians from Mabella, that
is, my faire daughter, or maide. But whereas
it is written in Deedes, Amabilia and Mabilia,
I thinke it commeth from Amabilis, that is,
Loveable, or lovely.
               MAGDALEN, Hebr: Maieſticall.
               MARGARET, gre: commonly Marget, pearle or
pretious.
               MARGERIE, Some thinke to be the ſame with
Margaret: others fetch it from Marioria, I
know not what floure.
               MARIE, Hebr: Exalted. The name of the bleſſed
Virgine, who was bleſſed among women,
becauſe of the fruit of her wombe.
               MAVD for MATILD, ger: Matildis, Mathilidis,
and Matilda in Latine, Noble or honourable
Ladie of Maides. Alfric turneth Heroina by
Hild. So Hildebert was heroically famous,
Hildegard, heroicall preſerver: and Hilda was
the name of a religious Lady in the Primitive
church of England.
               
               MELICENT, Fr: Hony-ſweete.
               MERAVD: Vſed antiently in Cornewall, from
the pretious ſtone called the Emeraud.
               MVRIEL from the Greeke Muron, Sweete perfume.
            
            
               
               N
               NEST, Vſed in Wales for Agnes, See Agnes.
               
               NICHOLA, See Nicholas.
               
               NICIA, gre: Victorious.
            
            
               O
               OLYMPIAS, gre: Heavenly.
               ORABILIS, Lat: Eaſely intreated.
            
            
               P
               PENELOPE, gre: The name of the moſt patient,
true, conſtant and chaſte wife of Vlyſſes,
which was given to her, for that ſhe carefully
loved and fed thoſe birdes with purpre
neckes called Penelopes.
               
               PERNE
                     •
                  L, from Petronilla, Pretty-ſtone, as

                     
                        •
                     iere and Perkin ſtrained out of Petre. The
firſt of this name was the daughter of Saint
Petre.
               
               PRISCA, Lat: Antient.
               PRISCILLA, A diminutive from Priſca.
               
               PRVDENCE, Lat: whome the Greekes call Sophia,
that is, Wiſedome.
               PHILIPPA, See Philip.
               
               
                  
PHILADELPHIA, gre: A lover of her ſiſters, or
brethren.
               PHILLIS, gre: Lovely, as Amie in Latine.
               POLYXENA, gre: Shee that will entertaine many
gueſts, and ſtrangers.
            
            
               R
               RADEGVND, Sax: Favourable councell.
Hadrianus Iunius tranſlateth Gund Favor,Gund.
ſo Gunther Favorable Lord, Gunderic, Rich,
or mighty in favour, &c.
               RACHEL, Hebr: A ſheepe.
               REBECCA, Hebr: Fatte and full.
               ROSAMVND, Roſe of the world, or Roſe of
peace: See in the Epitaphs.
               ROSE, Of that faire floure, as Suſan in Hebrew.
            
            
               S
               SAEINA, As chaſte and religious as a Sabine,
who had their name from their worſhipping
of God.
               SANCHIA, Lat: from Sancta, that is, Holie.
               SARAH, Hebr: Ladie, Miſtris, or Dame.
               SCHOLASTICA, gre: Leaſure from buſines.
               SVSAN, Hebr: Lillie, or Roſe.
               SISLEY: See Caeſelia.
               
               
                  
SOPHRONIA, gre: Modeſt, and temperate.
               SYBILL, gre: Gods councell, other draw it from
Hebrue, and will have it to ſignifie Divine
Doctrine. [Peucerus.]
               SOPHIA, gre: Wiſedome; a name peculiarly
applied by the Primitive Chriſtians to our
moſt bleſſed Saviour, who is the wiſedome
of his Father, [Epiſtle to the Hebrewes] by
whome all things were made. And therefore
ſome godly men do more than diſlike it as irreligious,
that it ſhould bee communicated
to any other.
            
            
               T
               TABITHA, Hebr: Roe-bucke.
               TAMESIN, or THOMASIN: See Thomas.
               
               THEODOSIA, gre: Gods-gift.
               TACE, Be ſilent, a fitte name to admoniſh that
ſex of ſilence.
               TEMPERANCE, Lat. The ſignification knowne
to all.
            
            
               
                  Ʋ
               
               VENVS, Lat. Comming to all, as Cicero derived
it à Ʋeniendo, a fit name for a good
wench. But for ſhame it is turned of ſome to
Venice. In Greeke Venus was called Aphrodite,
                  
not from the foame of the Sea, but as Enripides
ſaith, from Aphroſune, that is, Maddefollie.
               VRSVLA, Lat. A little Beare. A name heeretofore
of great reputation in honour of Vrſula
the Britan Virgin-Saint, martyred vnder
Gods-ſcourge Attila.
               
            
            
               W
               VVALBVRG, Gratious; the ſame with Eucharia
in Greek [Luther] We have turned
it into Warburg.
               
               WINEFRID, Sax. Win, or get peace. If it be a
Britaine word, as ſome thinke it to be & written
Guinfrid, it ſignifieth Faire and Beautifull
countenance. Verily Winifred a native of this
Iſle, which preached the Goſpel in Germany,
was called Boniface; for his good face, or good
deedes, iudge you.
               OTher vſuall names of women I do not call
to remembrance at this time, yet I know
many other have beene in vſe in former ages
among vs, as Derv
                        •
                     rgild, Sith, Amphilas, &c:
And alſo Nicholea, Laurentia, Richarda, Guilielma,
Wilmetta, drawne from the names of
men, in which number we yet retaine Philippa,
Philip, Franciſca, Francis, Ioanna, Iana, &c.
               
               
                  
Theſe Engliſh-Saxon, German and other names may be
thought as faire, and as fit for men and women, as thoſe
moſt vſuall Praenomina among the Romans, 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   for that
hee was nouriſhed of the gods: Luciu
                        •
                     
                   for him that was
borne in the dawning of the day: Marcus, for him that was
borne in March: Manius for him that was borne in the morning:
Cneus for him that had a wart: Servius for him that
was borne a ſlave, Quinctius for him that was fift borne, &c.
And our womens names more gratious than their Rutilia,
that is, Red-head: Caeſilia, that is, Grey-eyed, and Caia
                        •
                     
                   the
moſt common name of all among them (ſignifying 
                     •
                  oy:)
for that Caia Caeſilia the wife of King Tarquinius Priſcus was
the beſt diſtaſſe-wife and ſpinſter among them.
               Neither doe I thinke in this compariſon of Names, that
any will proove like the Gentleman, who diſtaſting our
names, preferred King Arthurs age before ours, for the gallant,
brave, and ſtately names then vſed, as ſir Orſon, ſir Tor,
ſir Quadragan, ſir Dinadan, ſir Launcelot, &c. which came
out of that forge, out of the which the Spaniard forged the
haughty and lofty name Traquitantos for his Giant, which
hee ſo highly admired, when hee had ſtudied many dayes
and odde houres, before hee could hammer out a name ſo
conformable to ſuch a perſon as hee in imagination then
conceited.
            
         
         
            
            Surnames.
            
               SVrnames given for difference of

                  •
               amilies, and continued as hereditary
in families, were vſed in no nation
antiently but among the Romans,
(and that after the league
with the Sabines) which called thē
               Nomina, and Nomina Gentilitia, as
the former were called Praenomina.
But the French and wee termed
them Surnames, not becauſe they are names of the ſire, or
the father, but becauſe they are ſuper-added to Chriſtian
names, as the Spaniards call them Renombres, as Renames.
            
            The Hebrewes keeping memory of their Tribe, vſed
in their Genealogies in ſteede of Surnames, the name of
their father with Ben, that is, Sonne, as Melchi Ben-Addi,
Addi Ben-Coſam, Coſam Ben-E
                     ••
                  adam, &c. So the Graecians,

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Icarus the ſonne of Dedalus, Dedalus
the ſonne of Eupalmus, Eupalmus the ſonne of Metion.
            
            The like was vſed amongſt our aunceſtors the Engliſh,
as C
                     •
                  oured Ceolwalding, Ceolwald Cuthing, Cuth Cuthwining,
that is, Ceonred ſo
                  •
               ne of Ceolwald, Ceolwald ſonne of Cuth,
Cuthe ſon of Cuthwin, &c. And to this is obſerved by William
of Malmeſbury, where he noteth that the ſonne of Eadgar
was called Eadgaring,
               Libr. primo. and the ſon of Edmund, Edmunding.
            
            The Britans in the ſame ſence with Ap for Mab, as Ap Owen,
Owen Ap Harry, Harry Ap Rheſe, as the Iriſh with
their Mac, as Donald Mac Neale, Neale Mac Con, Con Mac
D
                     •
                  rm
                     •
                  tt, &c. And the olde Normans with Fitz for Filz, as
Iohn Fitz-Robert, Robert Fitz-Richard, Richard Fitz-Ralph,

&c.
               Scaliger de c
                     •
                  nſis linguae Lat: The Arabians onely as one learned noteth, vſed their
fathers names without their owne forename, as Aven-Pace,
Aven Rois, Aven-Z
                     •
                  ar, that is, the ſonne of Pace, Rois and
Zoar; As if Pace had a ſonne at his circumciſion named Haly,
hee would be called Aven Pace, concealing Haly, but his
ſonne, howſoever hee were named, would be called Aven-Haly,
&c. So Surnames paſſing from father to ſonne, and
cōtinuing to their iſſue, was not antiently in vſe among any
people in the world.
            Yet to theſe ſingle Names were adioyned oftentimes other
names, as Cognomina, or Sobriquetts, as the French call
them, and By-names, or Nicke-names, as we terme them,
if that word be indifferent to good and bad, which ſtill did
die with the bearer, and never deſcended to poſteritie. That
we may not exemplifie in other nations (which would afforde
great plenty,) but in our own. King Eadgar was called
the Peaceable, king Ethelred the Vnreadie, king Edmund
for his Valour, Iron-ſide; king Harold the Hare-foote, Eadric
the Streona, that is, the Getter or Streiner, Siward the Degera,
that is, the Valiant, King William the firſt, Baſtard,
king William the ſecond Rouſe, that is, the Red, king Henry
the firſt Beauclarke, that is, Fine Scholler: ſo in the houſe of
Aniou which obtained the Crowne of England, Geffrey the
firſt Earle of Aniou was ſurnamed Griſogonel, that is, Grey-cloake,
Fulco his ſonne Nerra, his grand-childe Rechi
                     •
                  , for
his extortion. Againe, his grand-childe Plantagenet, for
that he ware commonly a broome-ſtalke in his bonnet. His
ſonne Henry the ſecond, king of England, Fitz-Empreſſe, becauſe
his mother was Empreſſe, his ſonne king Richard had
for ſurname Corde-Lion, for his lion-like courage, as Iohn
was called Sans-terre, that is, Without land: So that wheras
theſe names were never taken vp by the ſonne, I knowe
not why any ſhould thinke Plantagenet to be the ſurname
of the royall houſe of England, albeit in late yeeres many
have ſo accounted it. Neither is it leſſe ſtrange, why ſo many
ſhould thinke Theodore or Tydur, as they contract it, to
be the ſurname of the Princes of this Realme ſince king

               Henry the ſeaventh. For albeit Owen ap Mer
                     •
                  dith Tydur,
which married Katharine the daughter of Charles the ſixth
king of France, was grandfather to king Henry the ſeventh,
yet that Tydur, or Theodore was but the Chriſtian name of
Owens grandfather. For Owens father was Meredith ap Tydur,
Ap Grone, Ap Tydur, who all without Surnames iterated
Chriſtian names, after the olde manner of the Britaines,
and other nations heeretofore noted, and ſo lineally deduced
his pedegree from Cadwallader king of the Britans, as
was found by Commiſſion directed to Griffin ap Lewellin;
Gitteu Owen, Iohn King, and other learned men both Engliſh
and Welſh in the ſeaventh yeare of the ſaid king Henry the
ſeventh.
            Likewiſe in the line Royall of Scotland, Milcolme, or
Malcolme was ſurnamed Canmore, that is, Great head, and
his brother, Donald, Ban, that is, White: Alexander the
firſt, the Prowde, Malcolme the fourth, the Virgine,
William his brother the Lion. As amongeſt the Princes of
Wales, Brochvail Schitrauc, that is, Gaggtothed, Gurind,
Barmbtruch, that is, Spade-bearded, Elidir Coſcorvaur, that
is, Heliodor the Great houſe-keeper, and ſo in Ireland Murough
Duff. that is, Blacke: 
                  〈◊〉
                
               Roo. that is, Red:
Nemoliah, that is, full of wounds: Patric Ban, that is, White:
Gavelc
                     •
                  , that is, Fetters.
            To ſeeke therefore the auntient Surnames of the royall,
and moſt antient families of Europe, is to ſeeke that which
never was. And, therefore greatly are they deceived which
thinke Valoys to have beene the ſurname of the late French
kings, or Borbon of this preſent king, or Habſburg, or Auſtriac
of the Spaniſh king, or Steward of the late kings of Scotland,
and now of BRITAINE, or Oldenburg of the Daniſh;
For (as all know that have but ſipped of Hiſtories) Valoys
was but the Apponage and Earledome of Charles yonger
ſonne to Philip▪
                the ſecond, from whome the late kings deſcended:
ſo Borbon was the inheritance of Robert a yonger
ſonne to ſaint Lewes, of whom this king is deſcended: Habſburg
and Auſtria were but the olde poſſeſſions of the Emperors

and Spaniſh Kings progenitours. Steward was but
the name of office to Walter, who was high Steward of
Scotland, the progenitour of Robert firſt King of Scots of
that family, and of the King our Soveraigne. And Oldenburg
was but the Erledome of Chriſtian the firſt Daniſh king
of this family, elected about 1448. But yet Pl
                     ••
                  tagenet,
Steward, Ʋalois, Borbon, Habsburg, &c. by preſcription of
time have prevailed ſo farre, as they are now accounted
ſurnames. But for ſurnames of Princes, well ſaid the learned
Marcus,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   conſti
                  
                     ••••
                  . 
               Salon de Pace. Reges cognomiue now vt
                     •
                  ntur, q
                     ••
                  ia vt
Regum familiae, & agnationes, & memoriae conſerventur, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
cognomina non ſunt neceſſaria prout in alijs inferioribus, quorum
ipſa cognomina agnationum ac familiarum memori
                     ••
                  
tutantur.
            
            About the yeare of our Lord 1000. (that we may not
minute out the time) ſurnames beganne to be taken vp in
France, and in England about the time of the Conqueſt, or
elſe a very little before, vnder King Edward the Confeſſor,
who was all Frenchified. And to this time doe the Scottiſhmen
referre the antiquitie of their ſurnames,Vit
                     •
                   Milcolumb
                     •
                  . although
Buchanan ſuppoſeth that they were not in vſe in Scotland
many yeares after.
            But in England certaine it is, that as the better ſort, even
from the Conqueſt by little and little tooke ſurnames, ſo
they were not ſetled among the common people fully, vntill
about the time of King Edward the ſecond: but ſtill varied
according to the fathers name, as Richardſon, if his father
were Richard, Hodgeſon, if his father were Roger, or in
ſome other reſpect, and from thenceforth beganne to be eſtabliſhed,
(ſome ſay by ſtatute,) in their poſteritie.
            This will ſeeme ſtrange to ſome Engliſhmen and Scotiſhmen,
which like the Arcadians thinke their ſurnames as
ancient as the Moone, or at the leaſt to reach many an age
beyond the Conqueſt. But they which thinke it moſt
ſtrange, (I ſpeake vnder correction,) I doubt they will hardly
finde any ſurname which deſcended to poſteritie before
that time: Neyther have they ſeene (I feare) any deede or

donation before the Conqueſt, but ſubſigned with croſſes
and ſingle names, without ſurnames in this manner in England;
               Ego Eadredus confirmavi. 
               ✚ 
               Ego Edmundus corroboravi.
               ✚ 
               Ego Sigarius concluſi. 
               ✚ 
               Ego Olfſtanus conſolidavi,
&c. Likewiſe for Scotland, in an old booke of Dureſme in
the Charter, whereby Edgare ſonne of King Malcolme,
gave lands neere Coldingham to that Church, in the yeare
1097. the Scottiſh Noblemen witneſſes therevnto, had
no other ſurnames than the Chriſtian names of their fathers.
For thus they ſigned S.Signu
                     •
                  . 
               ✚ 
               Gulfi filij M
                     •
                  niani, S ✚
               Culverti filij Donecani, S ✚ 
               Olavi filij Oghe, &c. As for my
ſelfe, I never hitherto found any hereditarie Surname before
the Conqueſt, neither any that I know: and yet both
I my ſelfe and divers whom I know, have pored and puſled
vpon many an old Record and Evidence to ſatisfie our
ſelves heerein: and for my part I will acknowledge my ſelfe
greatly indebted to them that wil cleare me this doubt.
            But about the time of the Conqueſt, I obſerved the very
primary beginnings as it were of many ſurnames, which
are thought very antient, when as it may be proved that their
very lineall Progenitors bare other names within theſe ſixe
hundred yeers. Mortimer and Warren are accounted names
of great antiquitie,Rob. de Mon 
                     ••
                   de ſundat. Monaſt. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . yet the father of them (for they were brethren)
who firſt bare thoſe names, was Walterus de ſancto
Martino. He that firſt tooke the name of Clifford from his
habitation, was the ſonne of Richard, ſonne of Puntz a noble
Norman,Lib. Dunelmen. who had no other name. The firſt Lumley
was ſonne of an antient Engliſh man called Liwulph. The
firſt Gifford,
               Ge
                     •
                  itieg
                     ••
                  . from whome they of Buckingham, the Lords of
Brimesfeld, and others deſcended, was the ſonne of a Norman
called Oſbert de Belebe
                     •
                  . The firſt Windſor deſcended
from Walter the ſonne of Other Caſtellan of Windſor. The
firſt who tooke the name of Shirley was the ſonne of Sewall,
deſcended from Fulcher without any other name. The firſt
Nevill of them which are now, from Robert the ſonne of
Maldred, a braunch of an olde Engliſh familie who married
Iſabel the daughter and heire of the Nevills which came out

of Normandy. The firſt Level came from 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   de Perce
                     •••
                  ll.
The firſt Montacute was the ſonne of Drogo 
                     ••
                  venis, as it is in
Record. The firſt Stanley of them now Earles of Derby was
likewiſe ſonne to Ad
                     •
                  vn de Aldeleigh, or Audley, as it is in the
olde Pedegree in the Eagle tower of Latham. And to omit
others, the firſt that tooke the name of de Burgo, or Burks in
Ireland was the ſonne of an Engliſh man called William Fitz
Aldelni
                     •
                  ;
               Record. regul Hibe
                     ••
                  iae. as the firſt of the Girald
                     ••
                  es alſo in that Countrey
was the ſonne of an Engliſhman called Girald of Windſor. In
many more could I exemplifie, which ſhortly after the conqueſt,
tooke theſe ſurnames, when either their fathers had
none at all, or elſe moſt different, whatſoever ſome of their
poſteritie doe overweene of the antiquitie of their names, as
though in the continuall mutabilitie of the worlde, converſions
of States, and fatall periods of families, five hundred
yeeres were not ſufficient antiquitie for a family or name,
whenas but very few have reached thereunto.
            In the autentical Record of the Exchequer called Domeſday,
Surnames are firſt found, brought in then by the Normans,
who not long before firſt tooke them: but moſt noted
with de, ſuch a place as Godefridus de Mannevilla; A. de
Grey. Walterus de Vernon; Robert de Oily, now Doyley; Albericus
de Vere; Radulphus de Pomerey; Goſcelinus de Dive.
Robertus de Buſl
                     ••
                   Guilielmus de Moiun; R. de Brai
                     •
                  ſe; Rogerus
de Lacy; Giſlebertus de Venables, or with Filius, as Ranulphus,
Aſculphi, Guilielmis; filius Oſbernie, Richardus filius Giſleberti;
or elſe with the name of their office, as Eudo Depifer:
Guil: Camerarius, Hervaeus Legatus, Giſlebertus Cocus, Radulphus
Venator: but very many with their Chriſtian names onlie,
as Olaff, Nigellus, Euſtachius, Baldricus, with ſingle names
are noted laſt in every ſhire, as men of leaſt account, and
as all, or moſt vnderholders ſpecified in that Booke. But
ſhortly after, as the Romans of better ſorte had three names
according to that of Iuvenal, Tanquam habeas trianomina, &
that of Auſonius,
               Vide Politian
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   libr. 3. 
               Tria nomina nobiliorum. So it ſeemed a diſgrace
for a Gentleman to have but one ſingle name, a
                  •
                the
meaner ſorte and baſtards had. For the daughter and 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
of Fitz-
                     〈◊〉
                  
                a great Lord, as Robert of Glouceſter in the
Librarie of the induſtrious Antiquary maiſter Iohn Stowe
writeth, when king Henry the firſt would have married hir
to his baſe ſonne Robert, ſhe firſt refuſing anſwered;
            
               It were to me a great ſhame,
               To have a Lord without'n his twa name.
            
            whereupon the king his father gave him the name of Fitz-Roy,
who after was earle of Glouceſter, and the onely Worthy
of his age.
            To reduce ſurnames to a Methode, is matter for a Ramiſt,
who ſhould happly finde it to be a Typocoſmie: I will
plainely ſet downe from whence the moſt have beene deduced,
as farre as I can conceive, hoping to incurre no offence
heerein with any perſon, when I proteſt in all ſinceritie,
that I purpoſe nothing leſſe than to wrong any man in
any reſpect, or to make the leaſt aſperſion vpon any whoſoever.
The end of this ſcribling labour tending onely to
maintaine the honor of our names againſt ſome Italianated,
who admiring ſtrange names, doe diſdainefully contemne
their owne countrey names: which I doubt not but I ſhall
effect with the learned and iudicious, to whom I ſubmit all
that I ſhall write.
            The moſt ſurnames in number, the moſt antient, and of
beſt accompt, have been locall, deduced from places in Normandy
and the countries confining, being either the patrimonaill
poſſeſſions or native places of ſuch as ſerved the
Conquerour, or came in after out of Normandy; as Aulbeny,
or Mortimer, Warren, Albigny, Percy, Gournay, Devreux, Tankervil,
Saint-Lo, Argenton, Marmion, Saint Maure, Bracy,
Maigny, Nevill, Ferrers, Harecourt, Baskervile, Mortaigne,
Tracy, Beufoe, Ʋaloyns, Cayly, Lucy, Montfort, Bonvile, Bovil,
Auranch, &c. Neither is there any village in Normandy, that
gave not denomination to ſome family in England; in which
number are all names, having the French De, Du, Des, De-la
prefixt, & beginning or ending with Font, Fant, Beau, Sainct
Mont, Bois, Aux, Eux, Vall, Vaux, Cort, Court, Fort, Champ,
Vil, which is corruptly turned in ſome into 
                  
                     •
                  eld, as in Ba
                     •
                  kerfeld,

Somerfeld, Dangerfeld, Trubl
                     •
                  feld, Gr
                     ••
                  feld, 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
for B
                     ••
                  kervil, Somervil, Dangervil, Turbervil, Gree
                     ••
                  vil, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
vil; and in others into Well, as Boſwell for B
                     •
                  ſſevil, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
for Freſchevil.
               Mart. Cro
                     •
                  ar
                     ••
                  . As that I may note in paſſage, the 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
Nobilitie take their names from places adding Ski or Ki
thereunto.
            
               Out of places in Britaine came the families of Saint Aubin,
Mor
                  •
               ey, D
                  •
               nant, lately called Denham, D
                  •
               le, Bal
                  ••
               , Conqueſt,
Valtort, Laſcells, Bluet, &c.
            
               Out of other partes of Fraunce from places of the ſame
names came, Courtney, Corby, B
                  •
               ll
                  •
               in, Crevecuer, Sai
                  •
               t-Leger,
Bohun, Saint George, Saint Andrew, Chaworth, Sainct Qu
                  ••
               ti
                  •
               ,
Gorges, Villiers, Cromar, Paris, Reims, Creſsy, Fines, 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
Coignac, Lyons, Chalons, Chaloner, Eſtampes, or Stampes, and
many more.
            
            Out of the Netherlands came the names of Levayne,
Gaunt, Ipres, Bruges, Malines, Odingſells, Tournay, Doway, Buers,
Beke; and in latter ages Dabridgecourt, Robſert, M
                     ••
                  y,
Grand
                     •
                  ſon, &c.
            
               From places in England and Scotland infinite likewiſe. For
every towne, village, or hamlet hath made names to families,
as Darbyſhire, Lancaſter, (do not looke that I ſhould as the
Nomenclators in olde time marſhall every name according
to his place) Eſſex, Murray, Clifford, Stafford, Barkley, Leigh,
Lea, Haſting, Hamleton, Gordon, Lumley. Douglas, Booths, Clinton,
Heydon, Cleydon, Hicham, Henningham, Popham, Ratcliffe,
Markham, Seaton, Framingham, Pagrave, Cotton, Cari
                  •
               , Hume,
Poinings, Goring, Prideaux, Windſor, Hardes, Stanhope, Sydenham,
Needehaus, Dimoc, Wi
                  •
               nington, Allington, D
                  •
               cre, Thaxton,
Whitney, Willoughby, Apſeley, Crew, Kniveton, Wentworth,
Fa
                  •
               ſhaw, Woderington, Manwood, Fetherſton, Penrudock, Tremaine,
Trevoire, Killigrew, Roſcarroc, Carminow, and moſt
families in Cornewall, of whome I have heard this Rythme:
               
                  By Tre, Ros, Pol, Lan, Caer and Pen,
                  You may know the moſt Corniſh men.
               
Which ſignifie a towne, a health, a poole, a church, a caſtle,
or cittie, and a foreland, or promontory.
            
               
In like ſort many names among the Romans were taken
from places, as Tarquinius, Gabinus, Volſcius, Vatinius, Norbanus,
from Tarquini, Gabij, Volic
                     •
                  , Vatia, Norba, townes in Italie,
Sigo
                     •
                  ius and other before him have obſerved; and likewiſe
Amerinus, Carrinas, Macenas as Varre noteth. So Ruric
                     •
                  us,
Fonteius, Fundanus, Agellius, &c. Generally, all theſe following
are locall names, and all which have their beginning or
termination in them, the ſignifications whereof, for the
moſt parte, are commonly knowne. To the reſt now vnknowne,
I will adioyne ſomwhat briefly out of A
                     •
                  fricus and
others, reſerving a more ample explication to his proper
place.
            
               
               AKER, drawne from
the Latine Ager.
               
               AY, vide Eye.
               
               BAC, Fre: A Ferry.
               BACH, the ſame which Bee
a river, [Munſter.]
               BANCKE.
               BARNE.
               BARROVV, vide Burrow.
               
               BATHE.
               BEACHE.
               BEAME, a Trunck, or ſtock
of a tree.
               BEAKE or Bec, (as Bach) vſed
in the North.
               BEGIN, a building. Alfricus.
               
               BENT, A place where ruſhes
grow.
               BEARNE, A wood. Beda
lib. 4. cap. 2.
               BERTON or Barton.
               
               BERRY, a Court. Others
make it a hill from the
Dutch word Berg, ſome
take it to bee the ſame
with Burrow, and onely
varied in dialect.
               
                  BEORH, Adceruus, as Stane
Beorh, Lapidum accruus
[Gloſſarium vetus.]
               BOLD, from the Dutch Bol,
a Fe
                     •
                  ne.
               BYE, From the Hebrew
Beth, an habitation. [Alfricus]
               BOIS, Fr: A wood.
               BORROVGH, from the Latine
Burgu
                        •
                     , a fortified
place or defence, pronounced
in the South
partes Bury, in other
Burgh and Brough, and
often Berry and Barrow.
Alfricus.
               
               BORNE, or Burne, a river.
               BOTTLE, An houſe in the
North partes. Alfricus
turneth it Aedes, & Aedilis,
Bottleward.
               BOOTH.
               BRIDGE.
               BROME-FIELD.
               BRVNN, A fountaine from
Burne.
               
               BRIEVVR, Fr: An Heath.
               BROVGH, See Burrowgh.
               
               BVRY, See Burrow.
               
               BVRGH, See Burrowgh.
               
               
                  BVRNE, Vide Borne.
               BVSH.
               BVTS.
               
                  
CAER, But a fortefied place,
or Citty.
               CAMPH.
               CAPELL, the ſame with
Chapell.
               CAR, A low waterie place
where Alders do grow,
or a poole.
               CARNES, the ſame with
ſtones.
               CASTELL.
               CASTER, Cheſter, Ceſter,
Chaſter, the ſame varied
in Dialect, a Citty or
walled place derived frō
                  Caſtrum.
               
               CAVE.
               CHVRCH.
               CASTER, See Cheſter.
               
               CHANELL.
               CHAPPELL.
               CHASE.
               CLEY, or Clay.
               
               COVE, A ſmall creeke.
               CLIFF, and Cleve.
               
               CLOVGH, A deepe deſcent
betweene hills.
               COB, A forced harborow
for ſhips, as the Cob of
Linne in Dorſetſhire.
               COPE, The top of a high
hill.
               COMER, a word in vſe both
in France and England
for a valley between two
high hills. Nicotius.
               
               COTE.
               COVRTE.
               COVERT, Fr: A ſhadowed
place or ſhade.
               CRAGGE.
               CREEK.
               CROFT, Tranſlated by Abbo
Floriacencis in Praedium
a Farme. Our Anceſtours
would ſay prover.
bially of a very poore
man, that He had ne Toft,
ne Croft.
               
               CROSSE.
               DALE.
               DELLE, A dike.
               DENE, A ſmall valley contrary
to Doun.
               
               DEEPES.
               DERNE, See Terne.
               
               DICH, or Diſh.
               DIKE.
               DOCK.
               DON, corruptly ſometime
for Ton or Towne.
               DON, and Doun, all one, varied
in pronuntiation, a
high hill or Mont. [Alfricus.]
               ENDE.
               EY, a watery place as the
Germans vſe now Aw,
Ortelius. Alfricus tranſlateth
Amnis into Ea or
Eye.
               
               FARME.
               FIELD.
               FELL, Sax: Cragges, barren

and ſtony hills.
               FENN.
               FLEET, a ſmall ſtreame.
               FOLD.
               FORD.
               FORREST.
               FOOTE.
               FONT, or Funt, a ſpring.
               FRITH, A plaine amiddeſt
woods: but in Scotland a
ſtreight betweene two
lands, from the Latine
Fretum.
               
               GARNET, a great granary.
               GARDEN.
               GARTH, A yarde.
               GATE.
               GILL, A ſmall water.
               GLIN, Welſh, A dale.
               GORST, Buſhes.
               GRANGE, Fr: A barne (Nicotius.)
               GRAVE, A dich or trench,
or rather a wood, for in
that ſence I have read
Grava in old deedes.
               GRAVET, The ſame with

                     
                        •
                     rove.
               
               GREENE.
               GROVE.
               HALE, or Haule, from the
Latine Aula, in ſome
names turned into All.
               
               HAM, Manſio [Beda] which
we call now Home, or
houſe often abridged into
Am.
               
               HATCH▪
               
               HAVVGH, or Ho
                        •
                     gh, A
greene plot in a valley,
as they vſe it in the
North.
               HAY, Fr: A hedge.
               HEAD, and Heveth, a Foreland▪
Promōtory, or high
place.
               HEADGE.
               HEATH.
               HERST, See Hurſt.
               
               HERN
                     •
                  , Sax: A houſe Beda,
who tranſlateth Whatbern,
Candida caſa.
               
               HITH, A Haven. [Alfricus.
               
               HIDE, So much land as one
plough can plow in a
yeare.
               HILL, Often in compoſition
changed into Hull
and Ell.
               
               HOLME, Plaine graſſie
ground vpon water ſides,
or in the water. [Buchanan]
               HOLT, A wood, Nemus,
[Alfricus.
               
               HOLD, A tenement, or the
ſame with Holl▪
                  
               
               HOPE. The ſide of a
                     •
                   hill,
but in the North, a low
ground amidſt the tops
of hills.
               HOVV, or H
                        ••
                     , An high
place.
               
                  
HORN. See Hurn.
               
               HOVSE.
               HVLL, See Hill,
               
               HVNT.
               HVRNE, or Horn, A corner
Alfricu
                        •
                     .
               
               HVRST, or Herſt, A wood
               ING, A meadow or low
ground, Ignulphus, and
the Danes ſtill keep it.
               ISLE, or Ile.
               KAY, A landing place, a
wharfe, the old Gloſſary
Kaij, Cancelli.
               
               KNAP.
               KNOLL, The top of a hill.
               KYRK, A Church, from the
Greeke Kuriace, that is,
the Lords houſe.
               LADE, Paſſage of waters,
Aquaeductus in the olde
gloſſarie is tranſlated
Water-lada.
               
               LAKE.
               LAND.
               LANE.
               LATH, A Barne among
them of Lincolnſhire.
               LAVND, A plaine among
trees.
               LAVV, A hill in vſe among
the hither Scottiſhmen.
               LE, Brit: A place.
               LEY, and Leigh, the ſame, or
a paſture.
               L'LYS, Brit: A place.
               LOD, See Lad.
               
               LOCK, A place where rivers
are vnſtopped, or a
lake, as the word is vſed
in the North parts.
               LOPPE, Salebra, An vneven
place which cannot
be paſſed without leaping.
               LOVND, the ſame with
Laund.
               
               MARCH, A limit, or confines.
               MARKET.
               MEAD
                     •
                  .
               MEDOVV.
               MERE.
               MESNILL, or Menill, in
Norman French, A manſion
houſe.
               MERSH.
               MILL.
               MYNE.
               MINSTER, contracted from
Monaſtery, in the north,
Mouſter, in the South
Miſter.
               
               MORE.
               MOSSR.
               MOTE.
               MOVTH, Where a river
falleth into the ſea, or into
another water.
               NESS, A promontory, for
that it runneth into the
ſea as a noſe.
               NORE, The ſame with
North.
               
                  
ORCHARD
               OVER, and contractly, Ore.
               
               PACE
               PARKE
               PEN, brit: the top of an hill,
or mountaine
               PITTS
               PLACE
               PLAT, Fr: Plaine ground
               PLAYN
               POLE
               POND
               PORT
               POVVND
               PRAT, Fre: A meddow
               PRINDLE, The ſame with
Croſt
               QVARRY
               REYKE
               RIDGE, and RIG
               RING, An encloſure
               ROAD
               ROVV, Fre: A ſtreete Raw
in the north.
               ROS, brit: A heath
               RY, Fr: from Rive, a ſhore,
coaſt, or bancke
               RILL, A ſmall brooke
               RITHY, brit: from Rith a
forde
               SALE, Fre: a Hall, an entraunce
[Iunius]
               SAND, or SANDS
               SCARR, a craggy ſtony hill
               SETT, Habitation or ſeate,
Ortelius
               
               SCHELL, a ſpring: See Skell
               
               SHAVV, Many trees neere
together, or ſhadowe of
trees.
               SHALLOVVE
               SHEAL, A cottage, or ſhelter,
the word is vſuall in
the waſtes of Northumberland
and Cumberland.
               
               SHORE
               SHOT, or SHVT, A Keepe
[Munſter]
               SKELL, a Well in the olde
northerne Engliſh
               SLADE
               SLOVVE, A mi
                     •
                  y foule place
               SMETH, a ſmoothe plaine
field, a woorde vſuall in
Norffolke and Suffolke
               
               SPIR, PYRAMIS: A ſhaft
to the olde Engliſh, or
ſpire ſteeple.
               SPRING
               STAKE
               STRAND, A banke of a river
               STRET
               STROAD, STROVD: as ſome
doe thinke, the ſame with
Strand.
               
               STABLE, as STALE.
               STALE and STAPLE, the
ſame: A ſtorehouſe.
               STAPLE
               STED, from the Dutch
Stadt, a ſtanding place,
a ſtation.
               STEEPLE
               
                  
STE
                     •
                  , A banke [Alfricus]
               STILE,
               STOCKE
               STOKE, the ſame with Stow
               
               STONE, or STANE
               STOVV, a place. Alfricus
               
               STRAITH, a vale along a river
               SYDE
               TEMPLE
               TERN, or DERN, a ſtanding
poole, a word vſuall
in the North.
               THORN
               THORP, from the Dutch:
Dorpe, a village
               THVRN, a tower: Ortelius
               
               THVVAIT, a word only vſed
in the north, in addition
of Townes: ſome
take it for a paſture from
the Dutch Hwoit
               
               TOFT, a parcell of ground
where there hath beene
a houſe: but for Toft and
Croft, enquire of Lawyers.
               TOR, a high place or tower
               TREY, brittiſh from Tref a
Towne
               TRENCH
               TREE
               Vale
               VAVLX, the ſame in french
               VPP
               VNDER
               WALD, a Wood; the ſame
with Wild.
               
               WALL
               WARE, or WEAR
               WARK, or WERK, a worke
or building
               WARREN
               WAST, A deſart or ſolitary
place.
               WASH
               WATH, a foorde; a worde
vſuall in Yorkeſhire
               WATER
               WAY
               WICK, and WICH, ī ſhort,
the curving or rech of
a River, or the Sea: Iunius,
Rhenanus: But our
Alfric, and ſo Tillius maketh
it a Caſtle, or little
Port.
               WICH, ī Long, a ſalt
ſpring.
               WELL
               WILD
               WOLD, hills without wood
               WOOD
               WORTH, auntiently Worth
and Woorthid: Alfricus
makes it Praedium, a poſſeſſion
or Farme: Abbo
tranſlateth it a court or
place: Ki
                        ••
                     anus a Fort
and an Iſle.
               YARD
               YATE, or YATES
            
            
               
At a word, all which in Engliſh had Of ſet before them,
which in Cheſhire and the North was contracted into A, as
Thomas a Dutton, Iohn a Standiſh, Adam a Kirkby, and all
which in La
                  •
               ine old 
                  •
               vi
                  •
               ences have had De praefixed, as
all heeretofore ſp
                  •
               cified, were borrowed from places. As
thoſe which had Le ſet before them, were not 
                  ••
               call, but given
in other reſpects. As I
                     •
                   Marſhall, Le L
                     ••
                  ner, Le Deſpencer,
Le Scroope. Le Sav
                     ••
                  e, Le 
                     •
                  av
                     •
                  ſour. Le Strange. Le
Norice, Le Fſcriva
                     •
                  , Le Bl
                     ••
                  d, Le Molineux, Le Bret. As they
alſo which were never noted with De or Le, in which number
I have obſerved, Gifford B
                     •
                  ſſet, Arundel, Howard, Talb
                     ••
                  ,
Bellot, Bigot, Bagot, Ta
                     •
                  leboiſe, Tale
                     ••
                  ch, Gern
                     ••
                  , L
                     •
                  vell, Lovet,
Forteſcu, Pancevolt, Tirell, Biund or Blunt, Biſſet, Bacun,
&c. And theſe diſtinctions of locall names with De, and other
with Le, or ſimply, were religiouſly obſerved in Recordes
vntill about the time of king Edward the fourth.
            Neither was there, as I ſaid before, or is there any towne,
village, hamlet, or place in England, but hath made names to
families, and ſo many names are locall which doe not ſeeme
ſo, becauſe the places are vnknowne to moſt men, and all
knowne to no one man: as who would imagine Whitegift,
Powlet, Bacon, Creping, Alſhop, Tirwhit, Antrobus, Heather,
Hartſhorne, and many ſuch like to be locall names, and yet
moſt certainely they are.
            
               Many alſo are ſo changed by corruption of ſpeach, and
altered, ſo ſtrangely to ſignificative wordes by the common
ſort, who deſire to make all to be ſignificative, as they ſeeme
nothing leſſe than locall names; as Wormwood, Inkepen, Tiptow,
Moone, Maners, Drinkewater, Cuckold, Goddolphin, Harleſtone,
Waites, Smalbacke, Loſcotte, Devill. Neithe
                  •
               mill, Bellows,
Filpot, Wod
                  •
               l, &c. for Ormund, Ingepen, Tiptoft, Mahune, Manors,
Derwentwater, Cuckswold, Godolchan, Hudleſton. Th
                  ••
               ts,
Smalbach, 
                  ••
               ſcot, Davill, or D'Eivill, Nettervil, Bell-houſe,
Phillipot, Wahul, &c.
            Neither is it to be omitted, that many locall names had
At prefixed before them in olde Evidences, as At More, A
                     •
                  
Stow, At Ho, At Bower, At Wood, At 
                     •
                  owne, &c. which A
                     •
                  ,
               
as it hath beene removed from ſome, ſo hath it beene conioyned
to other, as Atwood, Atſlowe, Atho, Atwell, Atmor.
As S alſo is ioyned to moſt now, as Mannors, Kn
                     •
                  les, Crofts,
Yates, Gates, Thornes, Groves, Hills, Combes, Holmes, Stokes,
&c.
            
            Rivers alſo have impoſed names to ſome men, as they
have to Townes ſituated on them; as that olde Ba
                  •
               on 
                  
                     •
                  ur-Teys,
that is, on the river Teys running betweene Yorkſhire
and the Biſhoppricke of Dureſine, Derwent-water, I de
                     •
                  ,
Troutbecke, Hartgill, Eſgill, Wampull, Swale, Stoure, Temes,
Trent, Tamar, Grant, Tine, Croc, Lone, Lun, Calder, &c. as
ſome at Rome were called Tiberij, An
                     •
                  eni, Aufidij, &c, bicauſe
they were borne neere the rivers Tibris, Anten, Auſidus, as
Iulius Paris noteth.
            Divers alſo had names from trees neere their habitations,
as Oke, Aspe, Box, Alder, El
                     ••
                  e, Elder, Beach, Coigniers, that is,
Q
                     •
                  ince, Zouch, that is, the trunke of a tree, Curſy and Curſon,
the ſtocke of a 
                  Ʋine, Pine, Plumme, Cheſney or Cheyney,
that is, Oke, Dauney, that is, Alder, Foulgiers, that is, Fearne,
Vine, Aſhe, Hawthorne, Turres, Buſh, Haſle, Coularay, that is,
Haſ
                     •
                  ewood, Bucke, that is, `Beech, Willowes, Thorne, Broome,
Blocke, &c. which in former time had at praefixed, as
at Beech, at Furres, at Aſhe, at 
                     •
                  lme. And heere is to be noted,
that diverſe of this ſorte have beene ſtrangely contracted,
as at Aſhe into Taſh, at Oke into Toke, at Abbey into
Tabbey; at the End into Thend; As in Saints names, Saint
Olye into Tolye, Saint Ebbe into Saint Tabbe, Saint Oſyth
into Saint Tows.
            
            Many ſtrangers alſo comming hither, and reſiding here,
were named of their Countries, as Picard, Scot, Lombard,
Flemming, French, Bigod, that is, ſuperſtitious, or Norman.
(For ſo the Frenchmen calld the Normans, becauſe at every
other word they would ſweare,) By God; Bretton, Britaine,
Bret, Burgoin, Germain, Weſtphaling, Dane, Daneis, Man, Gaſcoigne,
Welſh, Walſh, Walleys, Iriſh, Corniſh, Cornwallis, Faſterling,
Maigne, Champneis, Poitevin, Angevin. Loring, that is, de
Lotharingia, &c. And theſe had commonly Le praefixed

in Records and Writings, as Le Fle
                     ••
                  ing, Le Picard, Le
Bret, &c. viz. the Flemming, the Picard.
            
            In reſpect of ſituation to other neere places riſe theſe vſuall
names, Norrey, North▪ South, Eaſt, Weaſt▪
                and likewiſe
Northcote, Southcote, Eſtcote, Weſtcote; which alſo had originally
At ſet before them. Yea the names of Kitchin,
Hall, Sellar, Parler, Church, Lodge &c. may ſeeme to have
been borrowed from the places of birth, or moſt frequent
abode; as among the Greekes, Anato
                     ••
                  us. i. Eaſt Zephirius,
i. Weaſt, &c.
            Whereas therefore theſe locall denominations of families
are of no great antiquitie, I can not yet ſee why men
ſhould thinke that their Aunceſtours gave names to places,
when the places bare thoſe very names, before anie
men did their Surnames. Yea the very terminations of
the names are ſuch as are onely proper and appliable to
places, and not to perſons in their ſignifications, if any will
marke the Locall 
                  •
               erminations which I lately ſpecified.
Who would ſuppoſe Hil, Wood, Field, Ford, Ditch, Pole,
Pond, Towne, or Ton, and ſuch like terminations to bee
convenient for men to beare in their n
                  •
               mes, vnleſſe they
could alſo dreame Hilles, Woods, Fieldes, Fordes, Ponds,
Pounds &c. to have beene m
                  •
               tamorphoſed into men by
ſome ſupernaturall transformation.
            And I doubt not but they will confeſſe that Townes
ſtand longer then families continue.
            It may alſo be prooved that many places which nowe
have Lordes denominated of them, had Lordes and owners
of other Surnames, and families not many hundred
yeeres ſince. But a ſufficient proofe it is of anti
                  •
               nt deſcent
where the inhabitant had his Surname of the place where
he inhabiteth, as Compton of Compton, Terringham of Terringham,
Egerton of Egerton, Portington of Portington, Skeffington
of Skeffington, Beeſton of Beeſton, &c.
            
            I know nevertheleſſe, that albeit moſt Townes have
borrowed their names from their ſituation, and other reſpectes;
yet ſome with apt terminations have their names

from men, as Edwarſton, Alfredſton, Vbsford, Malmeſbury,
corruptly for Maidu
                     •
                  p
                     •
                  ſbury. But theſe names were from
fore-names or Chriſtian names, and not fro
                  •
                Surnames.
For Ingulphus plainely ſheweth, that W
                     •
                  burton▪
                and Leffrington
were ſo named,pag. 491. becauſe two knights, Wiburt, and
Leofric there ſometimes inhabited. But if any ſhould affirme
that the Gentlemen named Le
                     •
                  frington, Wiburton,
Lancaſter, or Leiceſter, Boſſevill, or Shordich, gave the
names to the places ſo named, I woulde humbly, without
preiudice, crave reſpite for a further day before I beleeved
them. And to ſay as I thinke, verily when they ſhall better
adviſe themſelves, and marke well the terminations of
theſe, and ſuch like Locall names, they will not preſſe me
ov
                  •
               r eagrely heerein.
            Notwithſtanding, certaine it is that Surnames of families
have beene adioyned to the names of places for diſtinction,
or to notifie the owner, as Melton Mowbray, Higham
Ferrers, Minſter-L
                     •
                  vel, Stanſted Rivers, Drayton-Baſſet,
Drayton-Beauchamp, &c. for that they were the poſſeſſions
of Mowbray, Ferrers, Level, &c. Neither do I denie,
but ſome among vs in former time, aſwell as now, dreaming
of immortalitie of their names, have named their houſes
after their owne names, as Camois-Court, Hamons,
Bretts, Bailies, Theobaldes, whenas now they have poſſeſſors
of other names. And the olde verſe is, and alwayes
will be verified of them, which a right worſhipfull friend
of mine not long ſince writ vpon his new houſe:
Nunc mea, mox 
                     •
                  uius, ſed poſteà neſcio cuius.
            
            Neither muſt all, having their names from places, ſuppoſe
that their Aunceſtors were either Lordes, or poſſeſſors
of them; but may aſſure themſelves, that they originally
came from them, or were borne at them. But the
Germans and Polonians doe cleare this errour by placing
In before the Locall names, if they are poſſeſſours of the
place, or Of, if they onelie were borne at them, as Martinus

Cromerus noteth. The like alſo ſeemeth to be in vſe in
the Marches of Scotland, for there you ſhall have Trotter
of Folſhaw, and Trotter in Fogo, Haitly of Haitly, and H
                     ••
                  
                  ly
in Haitly.
            
            Whereas ſince the time of king Henry the third the
Princes children tooke names from their natall places, as
Edward of Carnarvon, Thomas of Brotherton, Ioann
                     •
                  
                of Acres,

                     ••
                  dmund of Woodſtocke, Iohn of Gaunt, who named his
children by Cath. Swinford, Beaufort of the place wher they
wer born
                  •
                u
                  •
                nothing to our purpoſe, to make further mentiō
of thē whenas they never deſc
                  •
               nded to their poſteritie.
            After this locall names, the moſt names in number
have beene derived from Occupations, or Profeſſions, as
Taylor, Potter, Smith, Sadler, Arblaſter, that is, Baliſtarius,
Archer, Taverner, Chauſer, i. Hoſier, Weaver, Pointer,
Painter, Walker, 
                  
                     •
                  d eſt, Fuller in olde Engliſh, Baker, Baxter,
Boulengem, all one in ſignification, Collier, Carpenter,
Ioyner, Salter, Armorer, Spicer, Grocer, Monger, id eſt,
Chapman, Brower. Braſier, Webſter, Wh
                  •
               eler, Wright,
Cartwright, Shipwright, Baniſter, id eſt, Balneator, Forbiſher,
Farrar, Goff, id eſt, Smyth in Welſh. And moſt which
end in Er in our tongue, as among the Latines, Artifice
                  •
               s
names have arius, as lu
                     •
                  tcariarius, veſtiarius, calcearius, &c.
or eo, or 
                  
                     •
                  o for th
                  •
               ir termi
                  •
               ations, as Linteo, Pellio Phrygio.
Neither was there any trade, craft, arte, profeſſion, occupation
never ſo meane, but had a name among vs commonly
ending in Er, and men accordingly denominated, but
ſome 
                  •
               re worne out of vſe, and therefore the ſignificatio
                  ••
               
vnknowne, and other have beene mollified ridiculouſly
by the bearers, leſt they ſhould ſeeme vilified by them.
And yet the like names were amōg the nobleſt Romans,
as Figul
                     •
                  s, Pictor, Fabritius, Scribon
                     ••
                  s, Sal
                     ••
                  tor, Ruſticus, Agricola,
Carbo, 
                     •
                  unarius, &c. And who can deny but they
ſo named may be Gentlemen, if Virtue which is the ſoule
of Gentrie ſhall ennoble them, and Virtus (as one ſaieth)
Nulli praluſa eſt omnibus patet. Albeit Doctour Turner in
a Booke againſt Stephan Cardiner ſaieth the contrary, exemplifying

of their owne names. At which time wiſe was
the man that tolde my Lord Biſhop that his name was not
Gardiner, as the Engliſh pronounce it, but Gardiner vvith
the French accent, and therefore a Gentleman.
            Hitherto may be referred many that end in Man, as,
Tubman, Carreman, Coachman, F
                  •
               rriman, Clothman,
Chapman, Spelman, id eſt, Learned man, Palf
                  •
               iman, Horſman,
&c.
            Many have beene aſſumed from offices, as, Chambers,
Chamberlaine, Cooke, Spenſer, that is, Steward, Marſhall, Latimer,
that is, Interpretour, Staller, that is, Conſtable or Standard-bearer,
Reeve, Wo
                     •
                  dreeve, Sherif
                     •
                  , Sergeant, Parker,
Foſter, that is, Nouriſher, Forraſter, contractly Forſter, Hunter,
Kempe, that is, Souldier in olde Engliſh; (for Alfricus
tranſlateth T
                     •
                  ro, Yong-Kempe) Faulconer, Fowler, Page, Butler,
Clarke, Proctor, Abbot, Frier, Monke, Prieſt, Biſhop, Spigurnell,
that is, a ſealer of Writs, which office was hereditarie
for a time to the Bohunes of Midherſt. Deacon, Deane,
Bailive, Franklin, Leach, Warder, i. Keeper; & frō th
                  •
               nce
Woodward, Millward, Steward, Dooreward, tha
                  ••
               , Porter,
Beareward, Heyward, Hereward, that is, Conſerver of
the armie, Bond, that is, Paterfamilias, as it is in the booke
of olde termes belonging ſometimes to Saint Auguſtine
in Canterbury, and we retaine it in the compound Huſb
                     •
                  nd.
In which booke alſo Horden is interpreted a Steward.
            Names alſo have beene taken of honours, dignities, or
eſtate, as King, Duke, Prince, Lord, Baron, Knight, Valuaſor,
or Vavaſor, Squire, Caſtellan, partly for that their
anceſtours were ſuch, ſerved ſuch, acted ſuch parts, or were
Kings of the Beane, Chriſtmas Lords, &c. And the like
names we reade among the Greeks and Romans, as Baſi
                  
                     •
                  us,
Archias, Archel
                     ••
                  , Regulus, Servius, Flaminius, Caeſarius,
Auguſtulus: who notwithſtanding were neither Kings,
Prieſts, Dukes, or Caeſars. Others from the qualities of the
minde, as Good, Through good, Goodman, Goodchild,
Wiſe, Hardie, Plaine, Light, Meeke, Bold, Beſt, Prowd,
Sharpe, Still, Sweete, Speede, Quicke, Sure, &c. As thoſe

old Saxon names, Shire, that is, Cleere, Dyre, that is, Welbeloved,
Blith,
               Chauces. that is, merry, Drury, that is, jewell. Alſo
theſe French names, Galliard, that is, Frolicke, Muſard, that
is, Delayer, Bland, that is, Faireſpoken, Coigne, that is, Valiant,
Baud, that is, Pleaſant, Barrat; Kus, Ruſh, that is, Subtile,
and ſo is Prat in the old booke of Petreborrough, Huttin,
that is, Mutiner. As among the Grecians, Agathias, A
                     •
                  dragathius,
Sophocles, Eubulus, Eumenius; Thraſeas. Among
the Romans, Prudentius, Lepidus, Cato, `Pius, Valeus, Conſtans,
Aſper, Tacitus, Dulcitius, &c. And accordingly names
were borrowed, as Plutarch ſaieth, from the nature of the
man,Plutarch. in Matio & Sylla. from his actions, from ſome marke, forme or deformitie
of his body, as Macrinus, that is, Long, Torquatus,
that is, Chained, Sulla that is, White and Red: And in like
ſort, Mnemon, that is, Mindefull, Grypus, that is, Hawkesnoſe,
Callinicus, that is, Faire Victor. From the habit
                  •
               des
of body, and the perfections or imperfections thereof, many
names have beene impoſed, as Strong, Ar
                     ••
                  ſtrong, Long,
Low, Short, Broad, Bigge, Little, Speed, Faire, Goodbody, Free
body, 
                     ••
                  ll, that is, Faire, Bell
                     •
                  t, that is, Bel
                     •
                  ulus, proper
in French: Helder, that is, Thinne, Heile, that is, Healthfull,
Fairfax, that is, Faire-lockes, in antient Engliſh Whitlocks.
As thoſe Britiſh names ſtill in vſe amongſt vs, Vachan,
that is, Little, Mool, that is, Bald, Gam, that is, Crooked,
Fane, that is, S
                  •
               lender, Grim, that is, Strong, Krich, that is,
Curlepate, Grig, or Krig, that is, Hoarſe. No more to bee
diſliked than this Greeke and Roman names, Ner
                     •
                  , that is,
Strong, as alſo Romulu
                     •
                  ; Longus, Longinus, Minut
                     ••
                  s, Macros,
Megaſthenes, Caliſtus, Calliſthenes, Paulus, Cincinnatus, Criſpus,
Caluus, Terentius, that is, tender according to Varr
                     •
                  .
Gracchus, that is, Thinne, Baſſus, that is, Fatte, Saluſ
                     ••
                  us, that
is, Healthfull, and Cocles one-eye. As Pap
                     •
                  rius Maſonius
reporteth that Philippus Auguſtus King of France, was ſurnamed
Borgne for his blinking with one eye.
            Others in reſpect of age have received names, as Yong,
Olde, Baby, Child Stripling, as with the Romau
                  •
               
               ▪ 
               Senec
                     ••
                  ,
Priſcus, Iuvenalis, Iunius, Virginius, &c.
            
            
               
Some from the time wherein they were borne, as Winter,
Summer, Chriſtmas, Day, May, Sunday, Holiday, Munday,
Paſcall, Noel▪ Penticost: as with the ancient Romans, Ianuarius,
Martius, Manius, Lucius, F
                     •
                  ſtus, and Vergilius borne
at the riſing of the Vergiliae, or ſeaven ſtarres, as Pontanus
learnedly writeth againſt them which write his name 
                  Ʋirgilius.
            
            Some from that which they commonly carried,Claud. 
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  cher. as Palmer,
that is, Pilgrime, for that they carried Palme when
they returned from Hieruſalem. Long-ſword, Broad-ſpeare,
Forteſcu, that is, Strong-ſhield, and in ſome ſuch reſpect,
Breake-ſpeare, Shake-Speare, Shotbolt, Wagſtaffe, Bagot,
in the old Norman, the ſame with Scipio, that is, a ſtay
or walking ſtaffe with the Latines, which became a ſurname,
for that Cornelius ſerved as a ſtay to his Blinde father.
Likewiſe Biliman, Hookeman, Talevas, of a ſhield ſo called,
whereof William ſonne of Robert de Beliſme Earle of
Shrewsbury had his name.
            
               Some from parts of the body, as Head, Redhead, Whitehead,
Legge, Foote, Pollard, Arme, Hand, Lips, Hart, as Corculum,
Capito, Pedo, Labeo, Naſo, among the Romans.
            
            Garments have alſo occaſioned names, as Hos, Hoſatus,
Hat, Cap, Frocke, Petycote, Gaicoat: as with the Romans, Caligula,
Caracalla, Fimbria, and Hugh Capet, from whom this
laſt houſe of France deſcended, was ſo called, for that hee
vſed when he was young to ſnatch off his fellowes caps, if
we believe Du Tillet.
            
            Not a few from colours of their complexions, garments,
or otherwiſe have gotten names, as White, Blacke,
Browne, Red, Greene, and thoſe Norman names: Rous,
that is, Red, Blunt or Blund, that is, Flaxen haire, and from
theſe Ruſſell and Blundell, Gris, that is, Gray, Pigot, that is,
Speckled, Blanch and Blanc, that is, White, with thoſe Britiſh
or Welſh names, who whereas they were wont to
depaint themſelves with ſundry colours, have alſo borrowed
many names from the ſaid colours, as Gogh, that is,
Red, Gwin, that is, White, Dee, that is, Blacke, L
                     •
                  uid or

               
                  
                     •
                  lud, that is, R
                  •
               ſſet: Names to be no more diſliked than
Albinus, Candidus, Flavius, Fulvius, Fuſc
                     ••
                  , 
                     〈◊〉
                  , C
                     •
                  cc
                     ••
                  us,
Rutilius, Rufus, Niger, Nigrinus, among the Roman
                  •
               
and Pyrrhus, Chlorus, Le
                     •
                  cagus, Chryſes, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , &c. among
the Graecians.
            Some from flowers and fruits, as Lilly, Li
                  •
               , Roſe,
Peare, Nut, F
                  •
               lbert, Peach, Peſcod, Vetch, as faire names,
as Lentu
                     •
                  us, Piſ
                     •
                  , Fabius, among the Romans. Others
from beaſts, as Lambe, Lion, Boare, Beare, Bucke, Hind,
Hound, Fox, Wolph, Hare, Hog, Roc, Broc, Badger,
&c. Neither are theſe & ſuch like to be diſliked, whenas
among the nobleſt Romans, Leo, Ʋrſicinus, Catulus, Lupus,
Leporius, Aper, Apronius, Canimus, Caſt
                     •
                  r, &c. and Cyrus,
that is, Dog, with the Perſians were very vſuall.
            From fiſhes likewiſe, as Playce, Salmon, Trowt, Cub,
Gurnard, Herring, Pike, Pikerill, Breme, Burt, Whiting,
Crab, Sole, Mullet, Baſe, &c. nothing inferiour to the Roman
names, Murena, Phocas, Orata, that is, Gilihed, &c. for
that happily they loved thoſe fiſhes more than other.
            Many have beene derived from birds, as Corbet, that
is, Raven, Arondell, that is, Swallow: the Gentlemen of
which name, do beare thoſe birds in their Coat-armours,
Biſſet, .i. Dove, Larke, Tiſſon, Chaffinch, Nitingall, Iay-Cocke,
Peacocke, Sparrow, Swanne, Crow, Woodcocke,
Eagle, Alecocke, Wilcocke, Handecocke, Hulet or Howlet,
Wren, Goſling, Parret, Wilde gooſe, Finch, Kite, &c.
As good names as theſe, Corvinus, Aquilius, Milvius, Gallus,
Picus, Falco, Livia, .i. Stockedove, &c Therefore I cannot
but mervaile why one ſhould ſo ſadly mervaile ſuch
names of beaſts and birds to be in vſe in Congo in Africa,
when they are and have beene common in other Nations,
as well as they were among the Troglodites inhabiting neere
Congo in former times.
            
               Of Chriſtian names as they have been without change,
many more have beene made, as Francis, Herbert, Guy,
Giles, Leonard, Michael, Lewis, Lambert, Owen, H
                  •
               wel, Ioſcelin,
Humfry, Gilbert, Griffith, Griffin, Conſtantine, Iames, Thomas,

               
                  〈…〉
                Godfrey, G
                  •
               rvas, Randall, Alexander,
Charles, Daniel, &c.
            
               Beſide theſe & ſuch like, many ſurnames are derived from
thoſe Chriſtian names which were in vſe about the time of
the Conqueſt, & are found in the Record calld Doomeſday
book, & elſe where; as Achard, Alan, Alpheg, Aldelme, Aucher,
A
                  •
               ſel
                  •
               , A
                  •
               ſelm, A
                  •
               ſger, Askaeth, Haſcuith, Alberic, Bagot,
Baldric, Bardolph, Belchard, Berenger, Berner, Biſo, Brient,
Ca
                  ••
               t, Knout or C
                  •
               ute, Carbonell, Chettell, Colf, Corbet
Corven, Crouch, Degory, Dod, Done, Donet, as it ſeemeth
frō
                Donatus, Dru, Duncan, Durand, Eadid, Edolph, Egenulph,
El
                  •
               er, Eud
                  •
                or Fde, Fabian, Fulcher, Gamelin, Gernegan, Girth,
Goodwin, Godwin, Goodrich, Goodlucke, Grime, Grimbald,
Guncelin, Guthlake, Haco or Hake, Hamon, Hamelin, Harding,
Haſting,Brand, a ſtirring vp, Iunius. Herebrand, and many ending in Brand, Herman,
Hervye Herward, Howard, Heward, Hubald, Hubert,
Huldrich, Iollan, Ioll, contractly from Iulian, Iuo, or Iue,
Kettell, Leofwin, Lewin, Levin, Liming, Macy, Maino, Maynerd,
Meiler, Murdac, Nele, Norman, Oddo or Hode, Oger,
Olave, Orſo or Vrſo, Orme, Osborne, Other, Payne, Picotte,
Pipard, Pontz, Pu
                  •
               tz, Reyner, Remy, Rolph, Rotroc, Saer,
Searle, Semar, Sewal, Sanchet, Siwald, Siward, Staverd, Star,
calf, Swain, Sperwicke, Talbot, Toly, Tovy, Turgod, Turrold,
Turstan, Turchill, Vctred, or Oughtred, Vde, Vivian, Voner,
Wade, Walarand, Wistan, Winoc, Walklin, Warner, Winebald,
Wigod, Wigan, Wi
                  ••
               arc, Woodnot, &c.
            And not onely theſe from the Saxons and Normans,
but alſo many Britan or Welſh Chriſtian names, as well
in ancient time, as lately hath been taken vp for Surnames,
when they came into England, as Chun, Blethin, Kenham,
frō 
               Cynan or Conanus, Gittin-Mervin, Bely, Sitſil, or Ceſil, Caradoc,
Madoc, Rhud, Ithell, Meric, Meredith, Edern, Bedow,
from the Engliſh Bede, .i. A devout prayer, beſide the
Welſh Chriſtian names vſuall and knowne to all As in
like manner many names were made from the Praenomina
among the Romans, as Spurilius, Statilius, Titius, from
Spurius, Statius, Titus, And as Qu
                     •
                  itilian ſaieth, Agnom
                     ••
                  
                  
& cognomina 
                     〈…〉
                  .
            
            By contracting or rather corrupting of Chriſtian names,
we have Terry from Theodorie,
               Tillius. 
               Frerry from Frederic, Collin
and Cole from Nicholas, Tebald from Theobald, Ieſſop,
from Ioſeph, Aubry, from Alberic, Amery, from Almeric,
Garret, from Gerrard, Nele, from Nigel, Elis, from Elias,
Bets, from Beatus, as Bennet, from Benedict, &c.
            
            
               By addition of S to Chriſtian names, many have beene
taken, as Williams, Rogers, Peters, Peirs, Davies, Harris,
Roberts, Simonds, Guyes, Stevens, Richards, Hughes, Iones,
&c.
            
               From Nicknames or Nurſenames, came theſe (pardon
me if it offend any, for it is but my coniecture,) Bill for
William, Clem for Clement, Nat for Nathaniel, Mab for Abraham,
Kit for Chriſtopher, Mund for Edmund, Hall for
Harry, At and Atty for Arthur, Cut for Cuthberd, Mill for
Miles, Baul and Bald for Baldwin, Ran for Randal, Crips
for Crispin, Turk for Turktetill, Sam for Sampſon or Samuell,
Pipe for Pipard, Gib for Gilbert. Dan for Daniel, Greg for
Gregory, Bat for Barthobnewe, Law for Lawrence, 
                  〈◊〉
                
               for
Timothy, Rol for Rolland, Ieff for Ieffrey, Dun for Duncan or
Dunſtan, Duke for Marmaduke, Daye for David, God. For
Godfrey or Godard, for otherwiſe I cannot imagine how
that moſt holy name vnfit for a man, and not to be tolerated,
ſhould be appropriate to any man: and many ſuch like
which you may learne of Nurſes.
            
            
               By adding of S to theſe Nicknames or Nurſenames,
in all probabilitie we have Robins, Nicks, Nicolls, Tho
                  •
               s,
Dickes, Hickes, Wills, Sims, Sams, Iecks, Iucks, Collins, Ienks,
Munds, Hodges, Hobs, Dobi, Saunders from Alexander, Gibs
from Gilbert, Cuts from Cuthberd, Bats from Barthol
                  ••
               we
Wats from Walter, Philips from Philip, Hai
                  •
               es from Anulphus,
as ſome will, for Ainulphesbury in Cambridgſhire is
contracted to Aiusbury, and ſuch like.
            
            Many likewiſe have beene made by adioyning Ki
                     ••
                  
               
and Ius to thoſe nurſenames, making them in Ki
                     •
                  s as it

were diminutives, & thoſe in Ius, as Patronymica. For ſo Alfric
Archbiſhop of Canterbury, & the moſt ancient Saxon
Grammarian of our Nation, noteth that names taken
from Progenitours, do end in Ins; ſo Dickins, that is, little
Dick, Perkins from Peir or Peter, little Petre; ſo Tomkins, Wilkins,
Hutchins, Huggins, Higgins, Hitchins; from Hughe,
Lambkins, Hopkins, Hobkins; from Hob, Dobbin
                     •
                  , Robbins,
Atkins; from Arthur, Gibbins, Simkins, Hodgekins, Hoskins,
Watkins, Ienkins, Iennings, Tipkins; from Tibald, Daukins;
from Davy, Rawlins from Ra
                     •
                  ul, that is, Rafe, and Hankin
for Rand
                     •
                  ll in Cheſhire. In this manner did the Romans
very names, as Conſtans, Conſtantius, Conſtantinus; Iustus,
Iuſtulus, Iuſtinus, Iuſtinianus: Aurelius, Aureolus, Aurelianus,
Auguſtus, Auguſtinus, Auguſtinianus, Auguſtulus, &c,
            
            Beſide theſe, there are alſo other diminitive names after
the French Analogie in Et or Ot, as Willet; from Will,
Haket; from Hake, Bartlet; from Bartholmew, Millet from
Miles, Huet from Hughe, Allet from Allan, Collet from
Cole, Guyet from Guy, Eliot from Elias and Beckvet, that is,
Little Sharpe noſe.
            
               But many more by addition of Son, to the Chriſtian
or Nickname of the father, as Williamſon, Richardſon, Dickſon,
Harryſon, Gibſon; for Gilbertſon, Simſon, Simondſon, Stevenſon,
Dauſon; for Daviſon, Moriſon, Lawſon, id eſt, Lawrenſon,
Robinſon, Cutbertſon, Nicholſon, Tomſon, Willſon, Leweſon,
Iobſon, Waterſon, Watſon, Peerſon, and Pierſon, Peterſon,
Ha
                  •
               ſon from Hankin, Wilkinſon, Daniſon for Daniel, Beniſon,
and Benſon from Bennet, Deniſon, Patiſon; from Patrick,
Ienkinſon, Matiſon; from Mathew, Colſon; from Cole,
or Nicholl, Rogerſon, Herdſon; from Herdingſon, Hodgskinſon,
Hugheſon, Hulſon; from Huldric, Hodſon from Hod or Odd
                  •
               ,
Nelſon from Neale or Nigell, Davidſon, Saunderſon, Iohnſon,
Raulſon; from Raoul or Ralf. So the ancient Romans
vſed Publipor, Marcip
                  •
               r, Lucipor; for Publij puer, Marci puer,
Lucij puer, according to Varro: As afterwards in the Capitolin
Tables, they were wont to note both father and
grandfather for proofe of their gentry in abbreviations,

as A. Sempronius, Aulifilius Lucij Nep
                  •
               s, that is, 
               
                  〈◊〉
                Se
                  •
               
               pronius,
ſonne of Aulus, grandchild or nephew of Lucius,
C. Martius, L. F. C. N. &c. Neither is it true which
ſome ſay, Omnia nomina in Son ſunt boralis generis, whenas
it was vſuall in every part of the Realme.
            
            Some alſo have had names from their mothers, as Fitz-parnell,
Fitz-Iſabell, Fitz-Mary, Fitz-Emme, Mandle
                     •
                  s,
Suſans, Mawds, Grace, Emſon, &c. As Veſpaſian the Emperour,
from Veſpaſia Polla his mother, and Popaea Sabina the
Empreſſe, from her grandmother.
            In the ſame ſence it continueth yet in them which
deſcended from the Normans, Fitz-Hughe, Fitz-william,
Fitz-Herbert, Fitz-Geffrey, Fitz-Simon, Fitz-Alian, Fitz-Owen,
Fitz-Randoll, being names taken from their Progenitours,
as among the Iriſh, Mac-william, Mac-Cone,
Mac-Dermot, Mac-Mahon, Mac-Donell, Mac-Arti, .i. the
ſonne of Arthur.
            
            
               So among the Welſh-Britans likewiſe, Ap-Robert, Ap-Evans,
Ab-Yihel, Ap-Hary, Ap-Hughe, Ap-Rice, Ap-Richard,
Ap-Howell, Ap-Enion, Ap-Owen, Ap-Henry, Ap-Rhud,
which be contracted into Probert, Bevans, Bythell,
Parry, Pughe, Price, Prichard, Powell, Benion, B
                  •
               wen, Peurbye,
Prud, &c.
            So in the borders of England and Scotland, Gawis I
                     •
                  k,
for Iohn the ſonne of Gawin, Richies Edward, for Edward
the ſonne of Richard, Iony Riches Will, for William the
ſonne of Iohn, ſonne of Richard. The like I have heard to
be in vſe among the meaner ſort in Cornwall.
            
            Daintie was the deviſe of my Hoſt at Grantham, which
would wiſely make a difference of degrees in perſons, by
the terminations of names in this word Son, as betweene
Robertſon, Robinſon, Robſon, Hobſon; Richardſon, Dickson, and
Dickinſon; Willſon, Williamſon, and Wilkinſon, Iackson, Iohnſon,
Ienkinſon, as though the one were more worſhipful than
the other by his degrees of compariſon.
            The names of aliance, have alſo continued in ſome for
ſurnames, as where they of one family being of the ſame

Chriſtian name, were for diſtinction called R. Le Frere, Le
Fitz, Le Coſm, that is, Brother, the Sonne, &c. all which paſſed
in time into Surnames.
            Many names alſo given in merriment for By-names or
Nicke-names have continued to poſteritie: as Malduit for
ill ſchollerſhip, or ill taught, Mallieure commonly Mallyvery,
i. Malus Leporarins, for ill hunting the hare, Pater noſter
for devout praying. The Frenchman, which craftily,
and cleanely conveyed himſelfe and his priſoner, T: Crioll
a great Lord in Rent, about the time of King Edward the
ſecond out of Fraunce, and had therefore Swinfield given
him by Crioll, as I have read, for his fine conveyance, was
then called Fineux, and left that name to his poſteritie. So
Baldwin le-Pettour, who had his name, and held his land
in Suffolke, Per ſaltum, ſufflum & pettum, ſive bumbulum, for
dauncing, pout-puffing, and dooing that before the King
of England in Chriſtmaſſe holy dayes, which the worde
Pet ſignifieth in French. Inquire if you vnderſtand it not
of Cloacinas chaplaines, or ſuch as are well read in A
                     •
                  ax.
            
            Vpon ſuch like occaſions names were given among the
Romans,Macrobius. as Tremellius was called Scropha or Sow, becauſe
when he had hid his neighbours Sow vnder a padde, and
commanded his wife to lie dovvne thereon; he ſware when
the owner came in to ſeeke the Sow, that hee had no Sow
but the great Sow that lay there, poynting to the padde,
and the Sow his vvife. So one Cornelius was ſurnamed Aſina,
for that when he was to put in aſſurance for payment
of certaine ſummes in a purchaſe, hee brought his Aſſe laden
with money, and made ready payment. So Auguſtus
named his dwarfe Sarmentum,
               Suetonius. i. ſprigge, and Tiberius called
one Tricongius, for carowſing three gallons of wine. So
Servilius was called Ala, for carrying his dagger vnder his
arme-pit, vvhen hee killed Spurius. So Pertinax the Emperor
being ſtubbernly reſolute in his youth to be a wood
monger as his father vvas,Capitolinus. vvhen hee vvoulde have made
him a Scholler, vvas named Pertinax. So the father of Valens
the Emperour, who was Camp-maiſter heere in Britaine,
               
for his faſt holding a rope in his youth, vvhich 
                  〈◊〉
               
ſouldiers could not plucke from him, vvas called 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  .
About vvhich time alſo Paul a Spaniard, a common Informer
in Britaine vvas named Catena, i. the Chaine, for
that he chained and fettered many good men heere, vvith
linking together falſe ſurmiſes, to their vtter vndooing in
the time of Conſtantinus, who alſo that I may remember it
in paſſage, named his attendant ſcholler by no vnfitting
name, Muſonius. But what names the beaſtly monſter, rather
than Emperour Commmodus gave to his attendants, I
dare not mention, leſt I ſhould be immodeſtly offenſive to
chaſte eares, and modeſt mindes. But hitherto with modeſty
may be referred this of the familie of Gephyri, i. Bridges
in Greece, who tooke their name from a Bridge; for
vvhen their mother was delivered of nine children at a
birth, and in a fooliſh feare had privily ſent ſeven of them
to be drowned at a bridge, the father ſodainely comming
to the bridge, ſaved them, and thereupon gave them that
name. Of theſe, and the like, we may ſay, Propi
                     •
                  ra ſunt honori,
quàm ignominiae. Infinite are the occaſions which in
like manner have made names to perſons, I will onely reporte
one or two French examples, that thereby you may
imagine of others in other places and former ages.
            In the firſt broyles of Fraunce, certaine companies ranging
themſelves into troupes, one Captaine tooke newe
names to himſelfe and his company from the furniture of
an horſe. Among theſe new named gallants, you might
have heard of, Monſieur Saddle, (to engliſh them) Mounſieur
Bridle, Le Croupier, Le Girte, Horſh
                     •••
                  , Bitte, Trappiers,
Hoofe, Stirrope, Curbe, Muſrole, Frontſtall, &c. Moſt of the
which had their paſport, as my Author noteth, by Seign
                     •••
                  
de la Halter. Another Captaine there alſo gave names to
his, according to the places where he found thē, as Hodge,
Hieway, River, Pond, Vine, Stable, Street, Corner, Gall
                     •
                  ws, Taverne,
Tree, &c. And I have heard of a conſort in England,
who when they had ſerved at Sea, tooke names from the
equipage of a ſhippe, when they would ſerve themſelves

at land, as, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , Ball
                     •
                  ſt, Planke, F
                     •
                  re-decke, Decke, Loopehole,
Pumpe, Rudder, Gable, Anchor, Miſen ſaile, Capſon,
Maſte, Bolt.. So that is true which Iſidore ſaieth, Names are
not alwayes given according to Nature, but ſome after our
owne will and pleaſure, as we name our landes and ſervants according
to our owne liking. And the Dutchmans ſaying may
be verified, which when he heard of, Engliſhmen called
God and Divell, ſaide, that the Engliſh borrowed names
from all things whatſoever, good or bad.
            It might be heere queſtioned, whether theſe ſurnames
were aſſumed and taken at the firſt by the perſons themſelves,
or impoſed and given vnto them by others. It may
aſwell ſeeme that the locall names of perſons were partely
taken vp by themſelves, if they were owners of the place,
as given by the people, who have the ſoveraignty of words
and names, as they did in the Nicke-names before Surnames
were in vſe. For who would have named himſelfe,
Peaceable, Vnready, Without-land, Beauclerke, Strongbow,
Gagtooth, Blanch-mayne, Boſſue, i. Crook-backe,
but the concurrent voyce of the people, as the women
neighbours gave the name to Obed in the booke of Ruth;
and likewiſe in Surnames. In theſe pretty names, as I may
terme them, from floures, fiſhes, birdes, habitudes, &c: it
may bee thought that they came from Nurſes in former
times heere, as very many, or rather moſt in Ireland and
Wales doe at this preſent. Theſe Nicke-names of one ſillable
turned to ſurnames, as Dickes, Nickes, Toms, Hobbes,
&c. may alſo ſeeme to proceed from Nurſes, to their Nurſlings;
or from fathers and maiſters to their boyes and ſervants.
For, as according to the old proverb, Omnis herus
ſerv
                     •
                   Monoſyllabus, in reſpect of their ſhort commands: ſo
Omnis ſervus har
                     •
                   Monoſyllabus in reſpect of the curtolling
their names, as Wil, Sim, Hodge, &c. Neither is it improbable,
but that many names that ſeeme vnfitting for men, as
of brutiſh beaſts, &c. came frō the very ſignes of the houſes
where they inhabited; for I have heard of them which
ſaid they ſpake of knowledge, that ſome in late time dwelling

at the ſigne of the Dolphin, Dull, White-horſe, 
                  •••
               
               ket,
Peacocke, &c. were commonly called 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                at the
Dolphin, Will at the Bull, George at the White horſe, Robin
at the Racket, which names as many other of like ſort, with
omitting At, became afterward herod
                  •
               ta
                  •
               le to their children.
            Heereby ſome inſight may bee had in the originall of
Surnames, yet it is a matter of great difficultie, to being
them all to certain heads, whenas our language is ſo greatly
altered, ſo many new names daily brought in by Aliens,
as French, Scots, Iriſh, Welch, Dutch, &c. and ſo many old
words worne out of vſe. I meane not only in the old Engliſh,
but alſo the late Norman, for who knoweth nowe
what theſe names were, Giffard, Baſſet, Gernon, Mallet, Howard,
Peverell, Paganell, or Paynell, Taile boiſe, Talb
                     •
                  t, L
                     •
                  vet,
Panc
                     •
                  volt, Tirrell, &c. which are nothing leſſe than locall,
and certainely ſignificative, for they are never noted, as I
ſaid before in olde evidences with De as locall names, 
                  〈◊〉
               
alwayes abſolutely, as W. Giffard, R. Baſſet, as Chriſtian
names are, when they are made Surnames; and yet I will
not affirme, that all theſe heere mentioned were at anie
time Chriſtian names, although doubtleſſe ſome were.
            For wee knowe the ſignifications of ſome of them, as
Mallet, an Hammer, Bigot, a Norman, or ſuperſtitious
Tailebois.
               Nicotlus. i. Cutwood, Lovet, Little Woolfe, and Baſſet, (as
ſome thinke) Fatte; Giffard is by ſome interpreted Liberall;
and Howard,
               M. Lambert p
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  amb, Cantu, pa. 538. High Warden, or Guardian (as it ſeemeth
an office now out of vſ
                  •
               ) whenas Heobeorg ſignified in
olde Engliſh High defence, and He
                     •
                  h-faeder, Patriarch or
High father. Certaine it is, that the firſt of that right noble
family who was knowne by the name of H
                     •
                  ward, was
the ſonne of William de Wigenhall, as the honourable Lord
William Howard of Naworth, third ſonne to Thomas late
Duke of Norffolke, an eſpecial ſearcher of Antiquities, who
equalleth his high parentage with his vertues, hath lately
diſcovered.
            To find out the true originall of Surnames,Change of names is full of difficulty,
ſo it is not eaſie to ſearch all the cauſes of alterations

of Surnames, which in former ages have beene verie
common among vs, and have ſo intricated, or rather, obſcured
the trueth of our Pedegrees, that it will be no little
hard labour to deduce many of them truly from the Conqueſt;
Somewhat nevertheleſſe ſhall be ſaid thereof, but
more ſhall be left for them which will ſound deeper into
this matter.
            To ſpeake of alteration of names, omitting them of
Abraham, and Sara, Iacob, and Iſrael, in holy Scriptures,
I have obſerved that the change of names, hath moſt commonly
proceeded from a deſire to avoyd the opinion of
baſenes.Cre
                     ••
                  as Guid
                     •••
                  
                So C
                     •
                  d
                     •
                  marus when he ſucceeded Ochus in the
kingdome of Perſia, called himſelfe by the princely name
Darius. So new names were given to them which were
deified by the Paganiſh conſecration, as Romulus was called
Quirmus, Melicertus was called Portunus, and Palaemon,
Likewiſe in adoptions into better families and teſtament,
as the ſonne of L. Aemilius, adopted by Scipio, tooke the
name of Scipio Africanus. So Auguſtus who was firſt named
Thureon, tooke the name of Octavian by teſtament:
by enfranchiſing alſo into new Citties, as he which firſt
was called Lucumo, when he was infranchiſed at Rome,
tooke the name of Lucius Tarquinius Priſcus. So Demetrius
Mega when he was there made free of the Citty, was
called Publius Cornelius. Cicero Epiſt. 36. lib. 13.
            Likewiſe ſlaves when they were manumiſed, tooke
often their maſters names, whenas they had but one name
in their ſervile ſtate. As they which have read Artemidorus,
do know, how a ſlave, who when he dreamed he had tria
virilia, was made free the next morning, and had three
names given him.
            Neither is it to be forgotten, that men were not forbidden
to change name or ſurname, by the reſcript of Diocleſian
L. Vinc. c. de mutat. nom. ſo be that it were Sine aliqua
fraude, iure licito. As that great Philoſopher which was
firſt called Malchus in the Syrian tongue, tooke the name
of Porphyrius, as Eunapius reporteth: as before Suetonius
               
the Hiſtorian looke to ſurname 
                  〈◊〉
               , whenas his father
was Suetonius L
                     •
                  uis. Thoſe notvvithſtanding of
ſtrange baſe parentage were forbidden L. ſuper 
                     〈◊〉
                   c. de
quaeſt. to inſert, or inthruſt themſelves into noble and honeſt
families by changing their names, which will growe
to inconvenience in England, as it is thought, by reaſon that
Surnames of honourable and worſhipfull families are given
now to meane mens children for Chriſtian names,
as it is growen nowe in Fraunce, to the confuſion of their
Gentry, by taking new names from their purchaſed landes
at their pleaſures.Alex. ab Alexandro Genial. dier. lib. 2. c. 28. Among the Romans nevertheles they
that were called ad Equeſtrem ordinem, having baſe names,
were new named nomine ingenuorum veterum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Romanorum,
leſt the name ſhould diſgrace the dignitie,In Philebo. when according
to Plato, comely things ſhould have no vncomely
names.
            It was vſuall amongeſt the Chriſtians in the Primitive
church, to change at Baptiſme the names of Catechu
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  i,
which were in yeeres, as that impious Renegado, that was
before called Lucius, was in his Baptiſme called Lucianus.
So the Popes vſe to change their names, when they enter
into the Papaci
                  •
               , which as Plati
                     •
                  a ſaith, was begunne by
Pope Sergius the ſecond, who firſt changed his name, for
that his former name was Hoggeſ-mouth, but other referre
the change of names in Popes to Chriſt, who changed Simon
into Peter, Iohn and Iames into Bonarges: Onely Marcellus,
not long ſince choſen Pope, refuſed to chaunge his
name, ſaying, Marcellus I was, and Marcellus I will be, I
will neither change Name nor Manners. Other religious
men alſo when they entred into ſome Orders, chaunged
their name 
                  •
               n times paſt, follovving therein, (as they report)
the Apoſtle, that chaunged his name from Saule to
Paule, after he entred into the Miniſtery, borrovving (as
ſome ſay) that name from Sergius Paulus the Roman lievtenant,Chryſoſtomus.
but as other will from his lovve ſtature, for hee was
but three cubites high, as Saint Chryſoſtome ſpeaking of
him. Tricubitalis ille tamen coelum aſcendit.
            
            
               
Of changing alſo Chriſtian names in Confirmation we
have ſaide before; but overpaſſing theſe forraine matters
let vs ſay ſomewhat as concerning chaunge of names in
England.
            
            As among the French in former time, and alſo nowe,
the heire tooke the fathers ſurname, and the yonger ſonnes
tooke names of their landes allotted vnto them. So likewiſe
in times paſt did they in England;
               Lib Prioratus de Wroxhall. and the moſt common
alteration proceeded from place of habitation. As if
Hugh of Suddington gave to his ſecond ſonne his Mannour
of Frydon,
               Yvo Catnotenſis in his Epiſtles complaineth of th
                     ••
                  . to his third ſonne his Mannour of Pantley, to
his fourth his Wood of Albdy; the ſonnes calld themſ
                  •
               lves
De Frydon, De Pantley, De Albdy; and their poſteritie removed
De. So Hugh Montfortes ſecond ſonne called Richard
being Lord of Hatton in Warwickeſhire tooke the name of
Hatton. So the yongeſt ſonne of Simon de Montfort Earle of
Leiceſter ſtaying in England, when his father was ſlaine, and
brethren fled, tooke the name of Welſborne, as ſome of that
name have reported. So the name of Ever came from the
Mannour of Ever, neere Vxbridge, to yonger ſonnes of L.
Iohn Fitz-Robert de Clavering, from whom the Lorde Evers,
and ſir Peter Evers of Axholme are deſcended So ſir
Iohn Cradocke knight great grandfather of ſir Henry Newton
of Somerſetſhire tooke firſt the name of Newton, which
was the name of his habitation: as the iſſue of Huddard in
Cheſhire tooke the name of Dutton.
            
            Bnt for varietie and alteration of names in one familie
vpon divers reſpects, I will give you one Cheſhire example
for all, out of an antient roule belonging to ſir William
Brerton of Brerton knight, which I ſawe twenty yeares
ſince. Not long after the Conqueſt William Bellward lord
of the moietie of Malpaſſe, had two ſonnes, Dan-David of
Malpaſſe, ſurnamed Le Clerke, and Richard; Dan-David
had William his eldeſt ſonne ſurnamed De Malpaſſe, from
whom the Baron Dudley is deſcended by heire generall.
His ſecond ſonne was named Philip Gogh, one of the iſſue
of whoſe eldeſt ſonnes tooke the name of Egerton; a third

ſonne tooke the name of David 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and one of his
ſonnes the name of Goodm
                     ••
                  . Richard the other ſonne of
the aforeſaid William Belward had three ſonnes, who tooke
alſo divers names, viz. Thomas de C
                     •
                  tgrave, William de Overton,
and Richard Little, who had two ſonnes, the one
named Ken-clarke, and the other Iohn Richardſon. Heerein
you may note alteration of names in reſpect of habitation
in Egerton, Cotgrave, Overton, in reſpect of colour in G
                     •
                  g
                     •
                  ,
that is, Red, in reſpect of qualitie in him that was called
Goodm
                     •
                  n, in reſpect of ſtature in Richard Little, in reſpect
of learning in Ken-clarke, in reſpect of the fathers Chriſtian
name in Richardſon, all deſcending from William Bellward.
And verily the Gentlemen of thoſe ſo different
names in Cheſhire would not eaſily be induced to beleeve
they were deſcended from one houſe, if it were not warranted
by ſo antient a proofe.
            In reſpect of ſtature I could recite to you other examples,
but I will onely adde this which I have read, that a
yong Gentleman of the houſe of Preux, being of tall ſtature
attending on the Lord Hungerford, Lord Treaſourer
of England, was among his fellowes called Long H: who
after preferred to a good marriage by his Lorde, was called
H. Long, that name continued to his poſteritie, knights and
men of great worſhip.
            Other took their mothers ſurnames, as A. Audley yonger
brother to Iames lord Audley, marrying the daughter
and heire of H. de Stanley left a ſonne William, that tooke
the name of Stanley, from whome Stanley Earle of Derby,
aud other of that name are deſcended. Geffrey the ſonne of
Robert Fitz-Maldred, and Iſabel his wife, heire of the Norman
houſe of the Nevilles, tooke the name of Nevill, and
left it to his poſteritie which was ſpread into very manie
honourable families of England. In like manner the ſonne
of Ioſcelin of Lovan a yoonger ſonne to the Duke of Brabant,
when he had married Agnes the onely daughter of
William Lord Percy ſo named of Percy forreſt in the county
of Maen, from whome they came, (and not of piercing

the king of S
                     ••
                  ts through the 
                  〈◊〉
               , as H
                     •
                  ct
                     •
                  r B
                     ••
                  tius fableth)
his ſonne and poſteritie vppon a compoſition with the
ſame Lady, tooke her name of Percy, but retained theyr
olde coate armour, to ſhew from whome they deſcended;
So Adam de Montgomery marrying the daughter and heire
of Carew of Molesford, her ſonne relinquiſhing his owne,
left to his poſteritie his mothers name Carew, from whom
the Barons Carew, the Carews of Haccomb, of Berry, of Authony,
Beddington, &c. have had their names and originall.
Likewiſe Ralph Gernon marrying the daughter of Cavendiſh,
or Candiſh, left that name to his iſſue, as Th: Talbot,
a learned Genealogiſt hath prooved. So Robert Meg the
great favourite of king Iohn took the name of Braybrooke,
whereof his mother was one of the heires. So ſir Iohn de
Haudlow marrying the daughter and heire of the Lorde
Burnell, his poſteritie tooke the name of Burnell. So ſir
Tibauld Ruſſell tooke the name of De Gorges to him and
his iſſue, for that his mother was ſiſter and one of the heirs
of Ralfe de Gorges, as it appeareth in the controverſie betweene
Warbleton and the ſaide Tibauld de Corges for the
coate of Armes Lozengy, Or, and Azure, 21. of Edward
the third, before Henry Earle of Lancaſter, and others, at
the ſiege of Saint Margaret. Not many years ſince, when
Iames H
                     •
                  rſey had married the daughter of De-Le-vale of
Northumberland, his iſſue tooke the name of De-la-vale.
            
            Heerevnto may they alſo bee referred who changed
their names in remembrance of their Progenitours being
more honourable, as the ſonnes of Geffrey Fitz-Petre,
tooke the name of Magnavilla or Mandevile, when they
came to be Earles of Eſſex, becauſe their grandmother Beatrix
was of the houſe of Mandevile, as appeareth by the
Abby booke of Walden. So Thomas de Molton tooke the
name of Lucy, and many other, which I omit.
            Others alſo have taken the name of them whoſe lands
they had: As when King Henry the firſt gave the lands of
the attainted Robert Moubray Earle of Northumberland,
being 120. Knights fees in Normandy, and 140. in England,
               
to Nigall or N
                     ••
                  le de 
               
                  〈…〉
                who in
the battell at 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , tooke Robert Duke of 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
priſoner: he commanded withall, that his poſteritie
ſhould take the Surname of Mo
                     •
                  bray, which they accordingly
did, and retained the ſame as long as the iſſue male
continued, which determined in Iohn Mo
                     •
                  bray Duke of
Norfolke, in the time of King Edward the fourth: whoſe
heires were married into the families of Howard and
Barkeley.
            
            Remembrance of benefits made others to change their
names, as William Mortimer deſcended from thoſe of Richards
Caſtle, tooke the name of La-Zouch, and named
his ſonne Alan de la-Zouch, for ſome favour received from
the Lord Zouch of Aſhby de la-Zouch, as appeareth by Inquiſition.
11. & 21. Ed. 3.
            In reſpect of adoption alſo, very many in all ages have
changed their names: I neede not particulate it, for all know
it. Some of their owne diſlike of their names, have altered
them: for as I have read in the booke of Forneſſe, William
Fitz-Gilbert Baron of Kendall, obtained licence of
King Henry the ſecond, to change his name and call himſelfe
and his poſteritie Lancaſter, from whom the Lancaſters
in Weſtm
                     •
                  rlaud &c. are deſcended.
            Heerevpon ſome thinke that without the Kings licence
new names cannot be taken, or old names given away
to others. Yet Tiraquell the great Civilian of France, in
Leg. quin. Conub. Tit. 92. ſeemeth to incline, that both name
and Armes may be transferred by will and teſtament, and
produceth Auguſtus, who by his Teſtament commanded
Tiberius and Livia to beare his name. How in former times
Herevile,
               
                  
                     •
                  . Wirl
                     •
                  y. 
               Dunvile, Clauwowe, gave and granted away their
Armes, which are as ſilent names, diſtinctions of families;
and the ſame was thought vnlawfull afterward, when the
Lord 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                would have done the ſame, ſhall be declared in
more convenient place. But the inconvenience of change
of names, hath beene diſcovered to be ſuch in France, that
it hath beene pr
                  •
               pounded in 
                  〈◊〉
                at 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , that it

ſhould not be permitted but in theſe two reſpects, eyther
when one ſhould bee made heire to any with eſpeciall
words, to aſſume the name of the teſtatour; or when any
one ſhould have a donation ſurmounting a thouſand
crownes, vpon the ſame condition. But to retyre to our
purpoſe.
            Not a few have aſſumed the names of their fathers
Baronies, as in former times the iſſue of Richard Fitz-Gilbert,
tooke the name of Clare, which was their Barony: and
in late time, ſince the Suttons came to the Barony of Dudley,
all their iſſue tooke the name of Dudleyes: that I may
omit others. The diſlike of others hath cauſed alſo a
change of names, for King Edward the firſt, diſliking the
iteration of Fitz, commanded the Lord Iohn Fitz-Robert,
a moſt ancient Baron,Lib. Monaſterii Sibeton. (whoſe Anceſtours had continued
their Surnames by their fathers Chriſtian names,) to leave
that manner, and to be called Iohn Clavering, which was
the capitall ſeate of his Barony. And in this time, many that
had followed that courſe of naming by Fitz, tooke them
one ſetled name, and retained it as Fitz Walter, and others.
            Alſo at that time the names of Thomſon, Richardſon,
Willſon, and other of that forme began to be ſetled, which
before had varied according to the name of the father. Edward
the fourth likewiſe (as I have heard,) loving ſome
whoſe name was Picard, would often tell them that hee
loved them well, but not their names, wherevpon ſome of
them changed their names: and I have heard that one of
them which tooke the name of Ruddle, being the place of
his birth in that reſpect. And in late yeares in the time of
King Henry the eight, an ancient worſhipfull gentleman
of Wales, being called at the panniell of Iury by the name
of Thomas Ap William, Ap Thomas, Ap Richard, Ap Hoel,
Ap Evan Ʋaghan, &c. was adviſed by the Iudge to leave
that old manner. Wherevpon he after called himſelfe Moston,
according to the name of his principall houſe, and left
that Surname to his poſterity.
            Offices have brought new names to divers families, as

when Edward Fitz-Th
                     ••
                  bald, of Ireland,
the Earles of Ormond and others deſcended from them,
tooke the name of Butler. So the diſtinct families of the
Conſtables in the County of Yorke, are ſaide to have taken
that name, from ſome of their Anceſtours which bare
the office of Conſtables of ſome Caſtles. In Like manner
the Stewards, Marſhalls, Spencers. That I may ſay nothing
of ſuch as for well acting on the ſtage, have carried away
the names of the perſonages which they acted, and have
loſt their owne names among the people.
            Schollers pride hath wrought alteration in ſome names
which have beene ſweetned in ſound, by drawing 
                  •
               hem to
the Latine Analog
                     ••
                  . As that notable Non-reſident in our
fathers time Doctor Magnus, who being a foundling at
Newark vppon Trent, where hee erected a Grammer
ſchoole, was called by the people T. Among vs, for that he
was found among them: But he profiting in learning, turned
Among vs, into Magnus, and was famous by that name,
not onely heere, but alſo in forraine places where he was
often Ambaſſadour.
            It were needeleſſe to note heere againe, how many
have taken in former times the Chriſtian name of their
father, with prefixing of Fitz or Filz, as Fitz-bugh, Fitz-alan,
Fitz-william, or adding of Son, as Richardſon, Tomſon,
Iohnſon, &c. and ſo altered their Surnames if they had any.
Whereas divers ancient Gentlemen of England do beare
Coates of Armes, which by old roules and good proofes
are knowne to belong to other names and families, and
cannot make proofe that they matched with thoſe families,
it is worth obſervation, conſidering how religious
they were in elder times in keeping their owne Armes:
whether they were not of thoſe ancient houſes whoſe
Armes they beare, and have changed their names in reſpect
of their habitation, or partitions and lands gotten by
their wives. As Pickering of the North, beareth Ermin a
Lion rampant Azure crowned, Or, which, as it is in the
old Abby booke of Furneſſe, was the coat of Roger de Miyth
                     •
                  rp.
               
In the ſame booke the coate of Dacr
                     •
                  , Gules 3. Eſcal
                     •
                  pes
Arg. is the coate of R. Ger
                     ••
                  th of Cumberland, and ſo
the three pillowes Ermin of Redman of Northumberland, is
the coate of Ran. de Greyſtock. So 
                  Ʋfford E. of Suffolk, and
Peit
                     •
                  n, Fetiplace, and Hide, and many other Gentlemen of
the ſame Armes, may ſeeme to haue beene of the ſame
ſtocke, and to haue varied their names in diuers reſpects.
            Finally, among the common people which ſway all in
names, many Surnames haue bene changed in reſpect of
occupations, and not a few have beene changed in reſpect
of maſters, for in every place we ſee the youth very commonly
called by the names of their ocupations, as Iohn Baker,
Thomas Taylor, Will Butcher, Dic Barber, and many
by their maſters names, as Iohn Pickering, Thomas Watkins,
Nicholas French, whenas they ſerved maiſters of thoſe
names, which often were conveyed to their poſteritie, and
their owne Surnames altogether forgotten. Some other
cauſes of alteration of names may be found, as for crimes
committed when men have beene enforced to leave their
countries. But heereby it may be vnderſtood that an Alias
or double name cannot preiudice the honeſt: and it is
knowne that when Iudge Catiline tooke exception at one
in this reſpect, ſaying, that no honeſt man had a double
name, & came in with an Alias. The party asked him what
exception his Lordſhip could take to Ieſus Chriſt, Alias,
Ieſus of Nazareth.
            
            I doubt not but ſome men among vs in changing their
names, do imitate olde Goffer Simon the Cobbler in Lucian,
who when he grew fat in the purſe, would needes be
called for Goodman Si
                     ••
                  on. Maſter Simonides, as ſome women
do follow the good Greeke wench, Meliſſarton, that
is, Pretty honny-Bee, who when of a Commediant ſhee
became a wealthy mans wife,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                would be ſaluted Madam
Pithias, or Prudence. And ſome likewiſe can change themſelves
from ſhee, to hee, and conſequeetly their name, as
Cenis the wench, into Ceneus the yong man, as you may
ſee in Ovid.
            
            
               
Among the alteration of 
                  〈…〉
               
how Kings of Armes, 
                  〈◊〉
               , and 
                  〈◊〉
                are
new named with a bole of wine powred vpon their heads
by the Prince or Earle Marſhall, when they are inveſted,
and the Kings crowned, as Garter, Clerenceux, N
                     •
                  rrey: L
                     ••
                  
                  caſter,
Yorke, Richmond, Somerſet, &c. which is as ancient
as the time of King Edward the third. For we reade, that
when newes was brought him at Windſor, by a Purſuvant,
of the victory at the battell of Auroy,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . hee bountifully rewarded
him, and immediately created him Herold, by the
name of Windſor.
            
            Heere might I note that women with vs at their marriage
do change their ſurnames and paſſe into their huſbands
names, and iuſtly for that then Non ſunt du
                     •
                  , ſed car
                     •
                  
vna: And yet in Fraunce and the Netherlands, the better
ſort of women will ſtill retaine their owne name with their
husbands, as if Mary daughter of Villevill be married to
A. Vavin, ſhe will write herſelfe Mary Vavin Ville vill. But
I feare husbands will not like this note, for that ſome of
their dames may be ambitiouſly over-pert and too-too
forward to imitate it.
            
               Beſide theſe former alterations, the tyran Time which
hath ſwallowed many names, hath alſo in vſe of ſpeach,
changed more by contr
                     •
                  cting ſyncopating, cu
                     •
                  telling and
mollifying them, as beſide them before mentioned. Adr
                  •
               
               
               
                  •
               y
is now turned into Darcy, Aldethelight into Awdley, Sabrigworth
into Sapsford, Sitſil into Cecil, Mount
                  ••
               y into
Mungey, Dunevet into Knevet, if you bel
                     •
                  eve Leland, Gr
                  •
               
               vile
into Greenefeild, Haverington into Harrington, Bourgchier
into Bowcer, Le Dai
                  •
               erell into Dairell, Ravensford into
Rainsford, Mohune into Moone, Danvers into Davers, Gernegan
into Ierningham, Cah
                  •
               rs into Chaworth, Din
                  ••
               t into
Dinham, Wooderington into Witherington, Estlegh into
Aſt
                  •
               y, Turbervile into Troublefeild, De Oilei
                  •
                
               into D
                  •
               iley,
P
                  •
               gli into Polye, De Alanſon into Daliſon, Purefoy into Purfrey,
Cavend
                  •
               ſh into Cand
                  •
               ſh, Ʋeinour into Fenner, Harecourt
into Harcot, Sanctpaul into Sampol, Forteſen into F
                  •
               ſk
                  •
               ,

Ferrers 
                  〈…〉
               , Culwen
into Curwen, P
                  ••
               tevin into Petſin, Berenger into Be
                  •
               ger.
Montacute into Montague, Ger
                  ••
               us into Garniſh, Pul
                  ••
               ſton
into P
                  •
               ſton, Cholmondley into Cholmley, Groſvenour into
Gravener, Meiſuilwarin into Manwaring, after into Man
               
                  •
               ering,
Fitz-Gerard into Garret, Ok
                  •
               ver into Oker, Vvedale
into Vdall, Damprecourt firſt into Dabrig
                  •
               court, now into
Dabſcot, Leventhrop into Lenthrop, Wilburnhame into Willbram,
A
                  •
               kow from Aſcouth, and that from the old Chriſtian
name Aſcuith, which in Latine was Haſculphus and Haſtulphus,
that is, Speedy helpe, &c.
            
            It may not ſeem from this purpoſe, if I here ſet down &
compare a few names of ancient good families, as they are
written in old Latine Records and hiſtories, with them
now in vſe: whereof many are as it were ſo transformed
in common pronunciation from the originall, as they will
ſcantly ſeeme to have beene the ſame.
            
               
                  ASHE, De Fraxi
                     •
                  is.
               
                  BELLEVV, De Bella aqua.
               
                  BEAVFOE, De Bella fago,
               
                  BOYS, De Boſc
                     •
                  .
               
                  BEAVPRE, `De Bello prato.
               BOVRCHIER, De Burgo chare, onely once.
               
                  BEAVMONT, De Bello-monte.
               
                  BEAVCHAMP, De Bello-campo.
               BLOVNT, Flavus, ſometimes.
               
                  BOVVES, De Arcubus.
               
                  BOVIL, De Bovis Villa.
               
                  CHAVVORTH, De Cadurcis.
               
                  CHENEY, De Caſineto, and De Querceto.
               
                  CHAMPAIGNE, De Campania.
               
                  CANTLOVV, De Cantelupo.
               
                  CHAVVMOND, De Calvo Mont
                     •
                  .
               
                  CHAMPFLOVR, De Campo-florid
                     •
                  .
               
                  CAPELL, De Capella.
               
                  CREVECVRE, De Crepito corde.
               
                  
                  CHAMP
                        •
                     RNOVN, De 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               
                  D'EVREVX, De Ebr
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  is.
               
                  D'AVTR
                        •
                     Y, De Altaripa.
               
                  D'AVNEY, De Al
                     •
                  eto.
               
                  D'AVBENEY, De Albeneie.
               
                  FRESHMERSH, De Friſco-Mariſco.
               
                  FERRERS, De Ferrarijs.
               
                  HVSSEY, De Hoſato, & Hoſatu
                     •
                  .
               
                  LORTY, De Vrtiaco.
               LOVE, Lupus.
               
               LOVET, Lupettus.
               
               LOVELL, Lupellus.
               
               
                  LISLE, De Iuſula.
               
                  MALLOVELL, Malus Lupellus.
               
                  MONTIOY, De Moute Iovis.
               
                  MANNOVRS, De Mannerijs.
               
                  MINORS, De Minerijs.
               
                  MARSH, De Mariſco.
               
                  MAVLEY, De Mal
                     •
                  -Lacu.
               
                  MONTCHENSEY, De Monte Caniſio.
               
                  MORTIMER, De Mortuo Mari.
               
                  MVSTERS, De Monaſterijs.
               
                  MEVVS, De Melſa.
               
                  MONTHERMER. De Monto Hermer
                     ••
                  .
               
                  MONTFICHET, De Monte-
                     •
                  ix
                     •
                  .
               
                  MONTPERSON, De Monte Peſſonis.
               
                  MOLINES, De Molindinis.
               MOIGNE, Monachus.
               
               
                  NEVVMARCH, De Noue Mercatu.
               
                  NOVVRES, De Nodorijs.
               
                  NEVILL, De Nova Villa.
               
                  PECHE, De Peccato.
               
                  PERPOINT, De Petra-Ponte.
               
                  PVDSEY, De Puteaco.
               
                  ROCH, De Rupe.
               SELLENGER, or Saint LEGER, De Sancto 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               
                  
                  SYMBER
                        •
                     , De Sancta Barb
                     ••
                  
               
               STRADLING, Eaſterling, becauſe they firſt came
out of the Eaſt part of Germany.
               
               
                  S
                        •
                     NLIS, Sylv
                     •••
                  ct
                     ••
                  ſis, and De Sancto Lizi
                     •
                  .
               S. FOSTER, De S. Vedasto.
               
               SEMARC, De S. Medardo.
               
               SEIMOR, De S. Maur
                        •
                     .
               
               SAMPIER, De S. Petro.
               
               SAMPOL, De S. Paul
                        •
                     .
               
               SENTLO, De S. Land
                        •
                     .
               
               SENTLOVV, De S. Lup
                        •
                     .
               
               SYNCLER, De S. Clara.
               
               SEMARTON, De S. Martino.
               
               SINGLIS, in Ireland, De S. Gelaſio.
               
               S. TOMER, De S. Aud
                        •
                     mar
                        •
                     .
               
               S. OVVEN, De S. Aud
                        ••
                     n
                        •
                     .
               
               SAMOND, De S. Amand
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  SV
                        •
                     TEYES, Super Teyſam.
               
                  SALTMERSH, De Salſo Mariſco.
               SPENCER, or Le Despencer, Dispenſat, or,
               
                  SCALES, De Scalarijs.
               STRAVNGE, Extrancus.
               
               
                  VIPOVNT, De Veteri-ponte.
               DE LA ZOVCH, De Stipite ſicc
                        •
                     .
               
            
            For William de la Zouch Archbiſhop of Yorke, is ſo called
in this verſe, for his valour in an encounter againſt the
Scottiſhmen at Bearparke. 134
                  •
               .
            Eſt pater invictus ſicc
                  •
                de ſtipite dictus, &c.
            For Zouch ſignifieth the ſtocke of a tree in the French
tongue. And this tranſlation of names into Greeke or
Latine, is ſtill in vſe among the Germans, for hee whoſe
name is Ertſwert or Blackland, will be Melancthon; if Newman,
Neander; if Holieman, Oſiander; if Brooke, Torrenti
                     •
                  s; if
Fenne, Paludanus, &c. which ſome amongeſt vs beganne
lately to imitate.
            To drawe to an end, no man whatſoever is to be diſliked
in reſpect either of originall, or of ſignification, for

neither the good names doe grace the bad, neither do evil
names diſgrace the good; if names are to bee accounted
good or bad. In all countries both good and bad have bin
of the ſame ſurnames, which as they participate one with
the other in glory, ſo ſomtimes in ſhame. Therfore for anceſtors,
parentage and names (as he ſaid) let every man ſay
Vix ca noſtra voco.
               Sen
                     •
                  ca. Time hath intermingled & confuſed all,
& we are com al to this preſent, by ſucceſſive variable deſcents
from high and lowe: or as hee ſaieth more plainely,
the low are deſcended from the high, and contrariwiſe, the
high from low.
            If any doe vaunt of their names, let them looke to it, leſt
they have inania nomina; you know who faith, Veſtra nomina
nunquam ſum admiratus, 
                     〈…〉
                   vobis reliquerunt,
magnos arbitrabor. And if they glory in their auntient fai
                  •
               e
names, and farr
                  •
                fetcht deſcents, with contempt of others,
happly ſome ſuch like as Marius was, may returne vppon
them Marius wordes; Si iure despiciunt nos, faciunt idem
maioribus ſuis, quibus vti nobis ex virtu
                     ••
                   nobilitas caepit. Invident
honori noſtro: ergo invideant labori, innocentiae. periculis
etiam noſtris, quoniam per haec ill
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . Yea ſome
of theſe occupation and office names, which doe ſeeme ſo
meane to ſome, are as auntient in this Realme as moſt other.
For in that moſt authenticall Regiſter Doomeſday
book in the Exchequer, ye ſhal have C
                     ••
                  us, A
                     •
                  rifaber, 
                     ••
                  
                  tor,
Piſtor, Accipitrarius, Camera
                     •
                  ius, Venator, 
                     〈◊〉
                   Modicus, 
               
                  •
               
Cook, Goldſmith, Painter, Baker, Falconer, Chamberlaine,
Huntſman, Fiſher, Marſhall, Porter, Leach, and
others, which then held land in Capite, and without doubt
left theſe names to their poſteritie, albeit happly they are
not mentioned in thoſe tables of B
                     •••
                  aile Abbey, of ſuch as
came in at the Conqueſt: which whoſoever conſider well,
ſhall finde alwayes to be forged, and thoſe names to be inſerted
which the time in every age favoured, and were never
mentioned in that authenticall Record.
            If you pleaſe to compare the Roman names that ſeeme
ſo ſtately, becauſe you vnderſtand them not, you will diſdaine

them in reſpect of our meaneſt names; For what is
Fronte but Beetle-browed? Caſius but Cattes-eies? Petus
but Pink-eyed? Cocles One-eye, Naſo Bottle-noſe, Galba
Maggot, as Suetonius interpreteth; Sil
                     •
                  
                Apes-noſe, Ancus
Crooked arme, Pauſa Broade foote, Strabo Squint-eye,
Suillius Swincheard, Capito Iobbernoll, Calvus Bald-pate,
Crispus Curle-pate, Flaccus Loll-eares, or Flagge-eared,
Labeo Blabber-lippe, Scaurus Knobd heele, 
                  Ʋarus Bowlegged,
Pedo Long-ſhankes, Marcellus Hammer, for it
commeth from Marculus, Hortenſius Gardner, Cilo Petty-long
pate,In Orthographi
                     •
                  
                
               Chilo Flap-lippes, or, as Velius Longus ſaith,
Impro
                     •••
                  ribus labris hom
                     •
                  .
            
            Thoſe great names alſo Fabius, L
                     •
                  ntulus, Cicero, Piſo,
Stolo, are no more in our tongue then Bean-man, Lentill,
Chich-peaſe,Lib. 18 c. 3. Peſcod-man, Braunch; for as Plinie ſaieth,
theſe names were firſt appropriated to them, for skill in
ſowing thoſe graines. Neyther thoſe from beaſts which
Varro reciteth in the ſecond de Ruſtica, Taurus, Vitulus, Ovilius,
Por
                     •
                  ius, Caprilius, were better than Bull, Calfe, Sheep,
Hogge, Goate, &c.
            In reſpect of theſe names all the names of England are
ſuch as I thinke few would take the benefite of Diocleſians
reſcript, which I lately mentioned. But in France (where
the fowle names Marmot, Merd
                     •
                  oyſon, Boreau) and in
Spaine (where Verdugo, i. Hangman, Putanero, and ſuch like
are rife) it is no marvel that ſome procure licence from the
King to change their names: and that a Gentlewoman,
doctor Andreas the great Civilians wife ſaid;
                  
                     •
                  . Andr. in C
                     •
                  dum sec
                     •
                  ndum de P
                     •
                  ab. 
               If faire names
were ſaleable, they woulde be well bought.
            
            Thus much of Chriſtian names and Surnames, or Praenomina
and Nomina. As for Cognomina and Agnomina, or
By-names were rare in our Nation; onely I remember
theſe three, Le Beuf in the familie of the Giffardes, of Meuill
among the Darcies, and Bouchard in one houſe of the
Latimers, and ſome ſay Algernoun in the familie of Percies:
but that as yet is out of the reach of my reading, vnleſſe it
be the ſame that is corruptly in the deſcent of the Earles of

               Belleyn belonging to the late Queene Mother of France,
ſet downe Agernouns, for Alger
                     ••••
                  s; For ſo Euſtace the
ſecond is there by-named, who in other olde Pedegrees is
called Euſtace with the cleare eyes.
            As for additions given over and beſide names, and ſurnames
in Law cauſes, that I may note them out of a Lawe
booke, they are either of eſtate, or degree, or myſterie, or
towne, or hamlet, or countie. Addition of eſtate are theſe;
Yeoman, Gentleman, Eſquire. Addition of degree are
thoſe which wee call names of dignitie, as Knight, Earle,
Marqueſſe, Duke. Additions of myſterie are ſuch, Scrivener,
Carpenter, Smith. Addition of townes, as of Padington,
Iſlington, Edelmeton. And where a man hath houſhold
in two places, he ſhall be ſaide to dwell in both of them, ſo
that his addition in one of them doth ſuffice.
            By the Statute the firſt yeere of king Henry the fift and
fift chapter, it was ordained, that in ſuites or in actions
where proceſſe of Vtary lieth, ſuch addition ſhould be
to the name of the Defendant, to ſhew his eſtate, myſterie,
and place where he dwelleth, and that ſuch Writts ſhall
abate, if they have not ſuch additions, if the Defendant do
take exception thereat, they ſhall not abate by the office of
the court.
            Alſo, Duke, Marqueſſe, Earle, or Knight be none of
that addition, but names of dignitie, which ſhould have
beene given before the ſtatute. Aud this was ordained by
the ſayde ſtatnte, made in the firſt yeare of king Henry the
ſeaventh chap. 5. to the intent that one man may not be
grieved or troubled by the vtlary of an other, but that by
reaſon of the certaine addition every man might be certainely
knowne, and beare his owne burden.
            How the names of them which for capitall crimes againſt
Maieſtie, were creazed out of the publike Records,
Tables, and Regiſters, or forbidden to be borne by their
poſteritie, when their memory was damned. I could ſhew
at large, but this and ſuch like, with Miſnomer in our lawes,
and other Quidities, I leave to the profeſſours of lawes.
            
               
Somewhat might be ſaid here of the adjuncts to names
or titles, which in moſt antient times were 
                  ••
               ther none, or
moſt ſimple. For Auguſtus was impatient to be called Domin
                     •••
                  
               
yet Domitian liked well to be called Dom 
                     •
                  nus Deuſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
               
and Dominus was taken vp by everie private man, as appeereth
by Seneca, and the poore Graecian which refuſed
that title by alluding 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
Nevertheles it was never vſed by the Emperors, from Domitian
to Diocleſianus, as Victor noteth; but afterward it
was continued by the Chriſtian Emperors, yea vpon their
Coines.
            And that which is more ſtrange, they vſed then as appeareth
in the Conſtitutions, for themſelves. Aeternitat
noſtra, Perennitas noſtra, Numen noſtrum; and to their principall
officers, Vir illuſtri
                     •
                  , Vi
                     ••
                  ſpectabilis, Magnifica cellitudo,
Sublimis magnit
                     •
                  do tua, Illuſtris magnificentia, Sublim
                     •
                  tas,
Miranda ſublimitas, Eminentia tua, Excellentia tua, Praecelſa
magnificentia tua, &c. As appeareth in the Volumes of the
Civill Lawe. So as I know not wh
                  •
               e that Spite king Buchanan
ſhould envy leſſer titles to Princes, the verie Tipes
of Gods maieſtie, yea verie Gods in earth, and brand
them with the marke of Seric
                     •••
                   nebulones, which honour
Princes therewith.
            The Romans vnder the latter Emperours had a verie
curious and carefull obſervation, in giving titles to men of
reputation, which as I have read were onely five; Illuſtris
was the higheſt appropriated to the Praefecti Praetorio of Italy
and Gallia,
               Cod. Theod. & Iuſtinian. the Prafectus of the Cittie of Rome, Magiſter
Equitum, Magiſter Peditum, Quaeſtor Palatij, Comes Largitania,
&c. and all that had voice in the Senate. Spectabil
                     ••
                  
               
was the ſecond 
                  〈◊〉
                due to the Lievtenants generall, and

                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                of Provinces &c. So in Notitia Provinciarum, Vicarius
Britanniarum, Comes Littoris Saxonici per Britanni
                  
                     ••
                  .
Dux Britanniae are ſt
                  ••
               ed Viri ſpectabiles. Clariſſimus
was the third title peculiar onelie to the Conſulares, Correctores,
and Praeſides of Provinces. Perfectiſſimus was the
fourth. Egregius the fift. And as Clariſſimus was a title to

thoſe great officers above ſpecified, ſo no other could have
that, as neither of Perfectiſſimus, and Egregius, but graunted
by Patents. And in that age, as it is in the Code of
Theodoſius, Titulo, Vt Dignitatem ordo ſervetur. Si quis indebitum
ſibi locum vſurpaverit, nulla ſeignoratione defendat,
ſit
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   planè ſacrilegij reus.
            
            Amongſt vs the Kings had theſe adiuncts, when they
were written and ſpoken vnto, Glorioſus, Glorioſiſſimus, Pracellentiſſimus,
Chariſſimus Dominus, Rex illuſtris, lately Potentiſſimus,
Invictiſſimus, Sereniſſimus; Our 
                  •
               ege Lord, Our
Soveraigne. Our Dread Soveraigne &c.
            As for Grace, it beganne about the time of Henry the
fourth. Excellent Grace vnder Henry the ſixt. High and
mighty Prince vnder Edward the fourth. And Maieſtie
which firſt beganne to the Roman Emperours about the
time of Gallienus,
               Trebellius Pollio. came hither in the time of King Henry the
eight, as Sacred Maieſtie lately in our memory. Whereas among
Chriſtians it was appli
                  •
               ble onely in former ages to
God,Ovid. Faſt. as among the old Romans to the Goddeſſe Maieſtie
the daughter of Honour and Reverence.
            
            Among other men in former ages D
                     •
                  n corrupted from
Dominus, was the greateſt attribute both to Spi
                  •
               ituall and
Temporall, and afterward Worſhipfull, and Right Worſhipfull,
hath been thought convenient among vs for the great
Dukes and Fa
                  •
               les; but wee nowe beginne ſo to overlade
men with additions, as Spaniardes did lately, vntill they
were reſtrained by the Pragmaticall 1586. At which time
Paſquil at Rome being demanded why Philip of Spaine had
ſo taken away all titles from all ſortes of men, aunſwered
merrily, albeit not religiouſly. That it may be verified of
him which is ſaide, Tu ſolus Do
                     ••
                  inus, tu ſolus altiſſimus, in
reſpect of his voluminous long Title which will 
                  •
               i
                  •
               e the
Reader.
            Thus farre had I proceeded in names, when it was hie
time to ſtay, for I am advertiſed that there is one, which by
Arte Trochilick, will drawe all Engliſh ſurnames of the
beſt families out of the pitte of Poetrie, as Bourchier from

               Buſyris the tyrant of Aegypt; Percy from flying Perſeus;
Darcy from Dircaus Apollo; Lee from Laetus turned into a
Swanne in Ovid; Iakeſon from Iaſon: well hee may ſatisfie
them herein, whom I cannot. As for my ſelfe, I acknowledge
that I cannot ſatisfie neither them, nor my ſelfe in all
particularities: and well therefore I doe like h
                  •
               m that ſaid,
He dooth not teach well which teacheth all; leaving nothing
to ſubtill wittes to ſift out. And ſure I am ſcrupulous
Diligence lieth open to Envie. But for ſuch as wil not
be content with that which is ſaid, I wiſh ſir Iohn de Bilbao
would coniure vp William Ockam the father of the Nominalles
(as Appion did Homer,) for their better ſatisfaction
heerein. Meane while I deſire no man will take offence
at any thing heere ſpoken, when as I have beene ſo farre
from giving offence, that I dare proteſt it in that ſolemne
auntient forme, Superos, & Sydera teſtor. Hating it in others,
and condemning it in my ſelfe, even vnto the bottomles
pitt of hell.
         
         
            
            Alluſions.
            
               I Will now preſent vnto you a
few extracts out of names, (I
feare you will call them fooliſh
foppe
                  ••
               es,) but call them what
you pleaſe, I hope a little folly
may be pardonable in this our
ſo wiſe an age
            Out of Names the buſie
wit of man continually working
hath wrought vpon liking
or diſlike Alluſions, very common in all ages, and among
all men, Rebus, 
               
                  〈…〉
                ages both with learned and vnlearned,
and Anagramme
                     •
                  
                though long ſince invented, yet
rare in this our refined times. In all which, I will briefly
ſhew our Nation hath beene no leſſe pregnant, then thoſe
Southerne which preſume of wits in reſpect of 
                  〈◊〉
               .
Afterward ſomewhat ſhall be ſaid of Armes, which as ſilent
names diſtinguiſh families.
            An Alluſion is as it were a d
                  •
               lliance or playing with
words, like in ſound, vnlike in ſence, by changing, adding,
or ſubſtracting a letter or two; ſo that words nicking and
reſembling one the other, are appliable to diffrent ſignifications.
As the Almightie (if we may heerein vſe ſacred authority,)
in ratification of his promiſe to the ſeede of Iſaac,
changed Abram, ⸫ High father, into Abraham, that is, father
of many; and Sarai, that is, my Dame, into Sara, that
is, Lady or Dame. The Greekes (to omit infinite others,)

nicked Antiochus Epiphanes, that is, the famous, with Epinanes,
that is, the furious. The Romans likewiſe played
with bibbing Tiberius Nero, calling him Biberius Mero. So
Tully called the extorting Verres, in the actions againſt
him Verrens, as Sweepe-all. So in Quintilian the ſower fellow,
Placidus was called Acidus, and of late one called Scaliger,
Aliger.
            
            Excellent is that which our countriman Reverend Beda
reporteth in his Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtory of England, of the
cauſe that mooved Gregory the Great to ſend Auguſtine
into England. On a time (as I ſhewed before) when he ſaw
beautifull boyes to be ſold in the market at Rome, and demanded
by what name their Nation was called; and they
told him Engliſh-men; and iuſtly be they ſo called (quoth
he,) for they have Angelike faces, and ſeeme meete to be
made Coheirs with the Angells in heaven: After, when it
was tolde him that their King was called Alla, then ſaid
he ought Alleluya to be ſung in that Country to the praiſe
of their Creatour: when it was alſo ſignified vnto him, they
were borne in a part of the Kingdome of Northumberland,
called then Deira, now Holderneſſe Deira Dei, (then
ſaid he,) ſunt liberandi.
            
            
               Laurens Archbiſhop, which ſucceeded that Auguſtine,
was by alluſion called Lauriger, Mellitus, Mellifluus,
Brith-wald, Bright-world, Nothelhelme, Noble-helme, Celnothu
                     •
                  ,
Caelo natus, all archbiſhops of Canterbury. And ſuch
like were framed out of the names of many Engliſh Confeſſours,
which I omit.
            
               Arletta, the good wench which ſo kindely entertained
Robert Duke of Normandy, when he begate of her William
the Conquerour, (as I had rather you ſhould read in others
then heare of me,) was for his honeſty, cloſely with
an aſpiration called Harlot. But the good and learned Recorder
would ſay, that this name beganne from her, and in
honour of her, was appropriated by the Normans in England,
to all of her kinde profeſſion, and ſo continueth.
            When Herbert firſt Biſhop of Norwich, and founder of

the Cathedrall Church there, had ſimoniacally procured
that Biſhopricke to himſelfe, and the Abbacy of Wincheſter
to his father, they were alluded vpon by the name of Simon
in the worſt ſence, in this verſe.
            Filius eſt Praeſul, pater Abbas, Simon vter
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               .
            Strong and ſuddaine was that Alluſion of Gilbert Folioth
Biſhop of Hereford,
               Minor hiſt. M. Paris. who when hee had incurred the
hatred of many, for oppoſing himſelfe againſt Thomas Becket
Archbiſhop of Canterbury, one c
                  ••
               ed with a lowd
voyce at his chamber windowe at mid-night, Folieth, 
                     •
                  olioth,
thy god is the goddeſſe Azaroth.Venu
                     •
                  . Hee ſuddenly and
ſtowtly replied, Thou liſt fowle feind, my God is the God of
Sabaoth.
            
            Hitherto may be referred that which Giraldus Cambrenſis
reporteth. An Archdeacon named Pecc
                     •
                  tum or Peche,
a rurall Deane called De vill,
               Sinne. & a Iew travailing together
in the Marches of Wales, when they came to Illuſtrate,
the Archdeacon ſaid to his Deane, that their Iuriſdiction
began there, & reached to Malpaſſe: The Iew conſidering
the names of the Deane, Archdecon, & limits, ſaid by Alluſion:
Marvaile may it be if I ſcape well out of this Iuriſdiction,
where Sinne is Archdeacon, the Divell the Deane, and the
bounds Illuſtrate with Malpaſſe.
            
            
               Alexander Nequam, a man of great learning, borne at
Saint Albanes, and deſirous to enter into religion there,
after hee had ſignified his deſire, writ to the Abot Laconically.
            
            Si vis, veniam, ſin autem, tu autem.
            Who anſwered as briefly, alluding to his name.
            Si bonus ſis, venias, ſi Nequam, nequaquam.
            Wherevpon he changed his name to Neckam.
            
            
               Philip Rependum, Abbot of Leiceſter, alluded thus vpon
the name of Neckam,
            
            
               Es niger & nequam, cùm ſis cognomine Neckam.
               
                  
Nigrior eſſe potes, nequior eſſe nequis.
            
            But hee repaied him with this re-alluſion vppon the
name of Philipp.
            
            Phinota faetoris, lippus malus omnibus horis, &c.
            A London Poet dallied thus with the name of Fuſtachius,
when he was preferred from Treaſurer of the Exchequer,
to be Biſhop of London, 1222. which was thought
a great preferment in that age.
            
               Euſtachi nupèr benè ſtabas, nunc benè ſtabis.
               Ille ſtatus valuit, praevalet iſte tamen.
            
            
               Robert Paſſelve, an eſpeciall favorite of Henry the third,
afterward by a court-tempeſt ſo ſhaken as he was glad to
be Parſon of Derham in Norfolke; was alluded vnto while
he was in the Sun-ſhine, by Paſſ
                     •
                  le-eau, as ſurpaſſing the
pure water, the moſt excellent element of all, if you beleeve
Pindar.
            
            This Alluſion was compoſed to the honour of a religious
man called Robertus, reſolving it into Ros, Ver, Thus.
            
            
               Tu benè Robertus quaſi Ros, Ver, Thuſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   vocaris,
               Ros ſata, ver flores, Thus h
                     •
                  locauſta facit.
               Sic tu Ros, Ver, Thus, geris haec tria, Ros ſata verbi,
               Ver floris morum, Thus holocauſta precum.
            
            Vpon the ſame, another framed this.
            
               Robertus titulo dotatur triplice, Roris
               Temperie, Veris dulcedine, Thuris odore.
            
            Vpon the ſame name and invention I have alſo found
this,

                  Es benè Ros, Ʋer, Thus, Ros es qùod nectare ſtillas,
                  Ver, qùod flore vires, Thus, quia mente ſapis.
                  Ros (inquam) Ver, Thus: Ros qui dulcedine ſtillat,
                  Ver quod flore nitet, Thus quod odore ſapit.
                  Nam qùod tu ſis Ros, Ver, Thus, perhibet tua Roris,
                  Temperies, Veris gratia, Thuris odor.
               
            
            
               
Vpon the ſame name Robertus, an other made Robur,
Thus, with this Diſtiche:
               
                  Tu benè Robertus quaſi Robur, Thus: benè Robur,
                  Nam virtute vig
                        •
                     s, Thus, quia mente ſapis.
               
When Pandulphus the Popes Nuncio came into England,
a ſcholler ſmoothed him with this fooliſh alluſion.
            
               Te totum dulcor perfundit, & indè vocaris,
               Pandulphus quid Pan niſi totum? Dul niſidulcor!
               Phu
                     •
                   niſi fuſus? id eſt, totus dulcedine fuſus.
            
            One in a dedication alluded vnto Roger an Eccleſiaſticall
pe
                  •
               ſon in this verſe:
Qui Cleri Rogere Roſam geris, annno vati.
            
            A poore Poet begging of one, whoſe name was Iohn,
which is in Hebrew, The grace of God, begged of him by
praiſing his name in this manner.
            
               Nomen habes non immeritò Divina, Iohannes,
               Gratia, voce ſua conveniente rei.
               Ergo vel gratus ſummo, vel gratia ſummi,
               Es, pro parte meâ caſus vter
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   facit.
               Si ſummo gratus, ergo pietatis alumnus,
               Ergo pauperibus ferre teneria apem.
            
            Another played vpon the name of Turbervill, when
practiſing with the French, he plaied falſe with his Soveraigne
K. Edward the firſt.
            Turbat tranquilla clàm Thomas Turbida Vil
                  •
               a.
            Theſe may ſeeme over many in ſo ſlight a matter, yet
I will in reſpect of the perſons, offer you two or three
more to be regarded. William, Lord Monti
                     •
                  y, famous for
his learning, great Grandfather to the honourable Charles,
now Earle of Denſhire, who is no leſſe famous for his vertue
and hereditary love of learning; when hee was the
Queenes Chamberlaine, in an Epiſtle to Eraſmus, called

king Henry the eight Octavius for Octavus reſembling him
thereby to Octavius Auguſtus the onely mirror of Princely
vertues.
            Lady Iane Grey daughter to the Duke of Suffolke, who
payde the p
                  ••
               ce of others ambition with her bloud, for her
excellency in the Greeke tongue was called for Greia,
Graia, and this made to her honour in that reſpect.
            
               Miraris Ianam Craio ſermone valere?
               Quo nata eſt primùm tempore Crata fuit.
            
            When the duke of Buckingham was put to death by the
practiſe of cardinall Wolſey a Butchers ſonne, the Emperour
Charles the fift ſaide, It was great pitty, that ſo faire
and goodly a Bucke ſhould be woried to death by a Buchers
curre; alluding either to the name of Buckingham, or
to a Bucke, which was a badge of honour to that familie.
            
               Domingo a Spaniard in the time of Queene Mary, offended
with an Engliſhman that called him Domingus, tolde
him hee was Dominicu
                     •
                  ; but hee was I aſſure you more
highly offended, when hee after for Dominicus called him
D
                     •
                  moniacu
                     •
                  .
            
            In the beginning of her late Maieſties raigne one alluded
to her name Eliſabetha, with Illaſa-Beata, that is, Safe
without hurt, and happy. The ſenſe whereof, as the Almightie
by his fatherly mercy performed in her perſon, ſo ſhee
by her motherly providence vnder God effected in this
realme in blisfull peace and plenty, whereas contrariwiſe
other con
                  •
               ining Regions have beene overwhelmed with
all kinde of miſeries. The cauſe whereof, one in this laſt
French broyles referred by Alluſion to Spania and Mania
two Greeke words, ſignifying Panury and Furie; but implying
therein cloſely the late King of Spaine, and duke du
Maine.
            
         
         
            
            Rebus, or Name-deviſes.
            
               MAny approoved cuſtomes, lawes, maners,
faſhions, and phraſes have the Engliſh alwayes
borrowed of their neighbours the
French, eſpecially ſince the time of King
Edward the Confeſſour, who reſided long
in Fraunce, and is charged by Hiſtorians of his time, to
have returned from thence wholy Frenchified; then by
the Norman Conqueſt which immediately enſued, after
by the honourable aliances of the Kings of England, with
the moſt renowned families, yea and with the verie royall
houſe of Fraunce. But after that the triumphant victorious
king Edward the third had traverſed Fraunce with his victories,
and had planted Engliſh colonies in Calice, Havres
and Guynes, our people bordering vpon the pregnant Picardes,
beganne to admire their fooleries in painted Poeſies.
For whereas a poeſie is a ſpeaking picture, and a picture
a ſpeechleſſe Poeſie, they which lackt wit expreſſe
their conceit in ſpeech, did vſe to dep
                  •
               int it out (as it were)
in pictures, which they called Rebus, by a Latine name
well fitting their deviſe. Theſe were ſo well liked by our
Engliſh there, and ſent hither over the ſtreight of Callice
with full ſaile, were ſo entertained heere (although they
were moſt ridiculous) by all degrees, by the learned and
vnlearned, that he was no body that coulde not hammer
out of his name an invention by this wit-craft, and picture
it accordingly: whereupon who did not buſie his braine
to hammer his deviſe out of this forge.
            
               
Sir Thomas Cavall, whereas Cavall ſignifieth an horſe,
engraved a gallopping horſe in his ſcale with 
                  〈◊〉
                limping
verſe;
Thomae credite, cùm cernitis eius equum.
            
            So Iohn Eagleſhead, as it ſeemeth, to notifie his name, about
his Armes, as I have ſeene in an olde S
                  •
               ale with an
Eagles head, ſet downe this:
Hoc aquila caput eſt, ſignum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   figura Iohannis.
            
            The Abbot of Ramſey more wiſely ſette in his Seale a
Ramme in the ſea, with this verſe, to ſhew hee was a right
ramme;
Cuius ſigna gero dux gregis eſt, vt ego.
            
            
               William Chaundler Warden of New colledge in Oxford,
playing with his owne name, ſo filled the hall-windowes
with candles, and theſe wordes, Fiat lux, that hee darkened
the hall. Whereuppon the Vidam of Charters
when hee was there, ſaide, It ſhould have bin, Fiant tenebrae.
            
            Did not that amorous Youth myſtically expreſſe his
love to Roſe Hill, whome hee courted, when in the border
of his painted cloth, hee cauſed to be painted as rudely, as
he deviſed groſely, a roſe, an hill, an eye, a loafe, a well,
that is, if you will ſpell it.
            Roſe-Hill I love well.
            You may imagine that Frauncis Corn
                     •
                  field did ſcratch
his elbow when hee hadde ſweetely invented to ſignifie
his name, Saint Francis with his Frierly kowle in a cornefield.
            It may ſeeme doubtfull whether Bolton Prior of Saint

                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                In Smithfield, was vviſer vvhen hee invented
for his name a bird bolt through a T
                  •
               nne, or when hee
built him an houſe vppon Harrow Hill, for feare of an
mundation after a great coniunction in the watry Triplicitie.
            
               
               Iſlip Abbot of Weſtminſter, a man moſt favored by king
Henry the ſeaven
                  •
               h, had a quadruple deviſe for his ſingle
name; for ſomewhere hee ſ
                  •
               tte vppe in his windowes an

                  •
               ie with a ſlip of a t
                  •
               ee, other places one ſlipping boughs
in a tree, in other places an I wi
                  •
               h the ſaide ſlip; and in
ſome places one ſlipping from a t
                  •
               ee with the woorde Iſlip.
            
            Whoſoever deviſed for Thomas Earle of Arundell, a capitall
A in a Rundle, wherewith hee decked an houſe
which hee built, did thinke I warrant you, that hee did the
Nobleman great honour.
            No leſſe did he 
                  〈◊〉
                his invention, which for ſir Anthony
Wingfield, deviſed
                  •
                Wing with theſe foure letters,
F, E, L, D, quarterly about it, and over the Wing a croſſe,
to ſhew he was a Chriſtian, and on the croſſe a red roſe, to
ſhew that the followed the houſe of Lancaſter.
            
            
               Morton Archbiſhop of Canterbury, a man of great
wiſedome, and borne to the vniverſall good of this realme,
was content to vſe Mor vppon a Tunne; and ſometime a
Mulbery tree called Morus in Latine out of a Tunne. So
Luton, Thorneton, Aſhton did notifie their names with a
Lute, a Thorne, an Aſh vpon a Tunne. So an Ha
                  ••
                on
a bottle for Harebottle; a Maggot-pie vppon a goate for
Pigot, an Hare by a ſheafe of 
                  •
               e in the Sunne for Harriſon;
Med written on a calfe for Medcalfe; Cheſter, a cheſt with
a Starre over it: Allet a Lot; Lionel Duckes a Lion with L.
on his head, whereas it ſhould have beene in his 
                  〈◊〉
               . If
the Lion had beene eating a ducke, it had beene a ra
                  •
               e deviſe
woorth a duckat, or ducke-egge. And if you require
more, I referre you to the witty inventions of ſome I 
                  ••
               
               doners,
but that for Garret Dews is moſt memorable, two
in agarret caſting Dews at dice. This for Rebus may ſuffice,
and yet if there were more, I thinke ſome lips would
like ſuch kinde of Lettice. In parte to excuſe them yet,
ſome of the greateſt Romans were alittle blaſted with this
fooleri
                  •
               , if you ſo cenſure it. Our great Maiſter Cicero in
a dedication of his to his gods, inſcribed Marcus 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               
and that 
                  〈◊〉
                pulſe leſſe than, 
                  〈…〉
                call (I
thinke) a 
                  〈◊〉
                peaſe, and the Latines Cicer, in ſteede of
Cicero. As in the coines of Iulius Caſar wee have ſeene an
Elephant, for ſo Caeſar ſignifieth in the Mauritanian tong,
and the two Mint-maiſters in that age, L. Aquilius Florus,
and Voconius Vitulus; the one vſed a Floure, the other a
Calfe in the reverſes of their coynes, alluding vnto their
names.
         
         
            
            Anagrammes.
            
               THE onely Quint-eſſence that hitherto
the Alchimy of wit coulde
draw out of names, is Anagrammatiſme,
or Metagrammatiſme, which
is a diſſolution of a Name truly
written into his Letters, as his Elements,
and a new connexion of it
by artificiall tranſpoſition, without
addition, ſubſtraction, or chang
of any letter into different words, making ſome perfect

                  〈…〉
               .
            
               
                  〈…〉
               
omitting or retaining it, for that it cannot challenge the 
                  ••
               ght
of a letter. But the licentiats ſomewhat licentiouſly leſt
they ſhould preiudice poeticall libertie, will pardon themſelves
for doubling or reiecting a letter, if the ſence fall aptly,
and thinke it no iniury to vſe E for AE, V for W, S for Z,
and C for K, and contrariwiſe.
            The French exceedingly admire and celebrate this facultie,
for the deepe and farre fetched antiquitie, the piked
fines and the myſticall ſignifications thereby: for that
names are divi
                  •
               e notes, and divine notes do notifie future
events; ſo that events conſequently muſt lurke in names,
which onely can be pried into by this myſtery. Affirming
that each mans fortune is written in his name, as Aſtrologians
ſay, all things are written in heaven, if a man could

read them: They exemplifie out of the Rabbins; they quote
dreaming 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , with other allegations; they vrge
particular experiments, and ſo enforce the matter, with
ſtrong words and weake proofes, that ſome credulous
yong men, hovering betweene hope and feare, might caſily
be carried away by them into the forbidden ſuperſtition
of Onomantia, or South-ſaying by names.
            But ſome of the ſower ſort will ſay it is nothing but a
troublous toy, and becauſe they cannot attaine to it, will
condemne it, leſt by commending it, they ſhould diſcommend
themſelves. Others more milde will grant it to be a
daintie deviſe and diſport of wit not without pleaſure, if it
be not wreſted out of the name to the reproach of the perſon.
And ſuch will not deny, but that as good names may
be ominous, ſo alſo good Anagrammes, with a delightfull
comfort and pleaſant motion in honeſt mindes, in no
point yeelding to many vaine pleaſures of the body. They
will alſo afford it ſome commendations in reſpect of the
difficultie, (Diffici
                     ••
                  a quae pulchra,) as alſo that it is a whetſtone
of a patience to them that ſhall practiſe it. For ſome
have beene ſeene to bite their penne, ſcratch their head,
bend their browes, bite their lips, beate the boord, teare
the paper when they were faire for ſomewhat, and caught
nothing heerein.
            If profound antiquitie, or the inventour may commend
an invention, this will not give place to many. For as the
great Maſters of the Iewes teſtifie, Moſes received of God
a literall law, written by the finger of God, in the two Tables
of the ten Commaundements to be imparted to all,
and another Myſticall to be communicated onely to ſeaventy
men, which by tradition they ſhould paſſe to their
poſteritie, whereof it was called Cabala. Which was devided
into Mercana, concerning onely the ſacred names of
God, and Breſith of other names conſiſting of Alphabetary
revolution, which they will have to be Anagrammatiſme,
by which they ſay Marie reſolved made, Our holy
Miſtris. But whether this Cabala is more ancient than the

               Talmudicall learning, hatched by the curious Iewes, (as
ſome will,) about 200. yeares after Chriſt, let the learned
conſider.
            The Greeks referre this invention to Licophron, (as Iſaac
Tzetzes hath in his preface to his obſcure Poeme Caſſandra,
who was one of thoſe Poets which the Greekes
called the Seaven-ſtarres, or Ple
                     •
                  ades, and flouriſhed about
the yeare 380. before Chriſt, in the time of Ptolomaus Philadelphus,
king of Aegypt, whoſe name hee thus anagramatiſed.
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Made of h
                     ••
                  ny.
               And vpon Arſinoe his wife, thus;
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Iunes violet.
            
            Afterward as appeareth by Euſtachius there were ſome
Greekes diſported themſelves heerein, as he which turned
Atlas for his heavie burthen, in ſupporting heaven to Talas,
that is, wretched, Aret, Virtue into Erate, that is, louely,
Ilaros, merry, into Liar
                     •
                  s, that is, warme. But in late
yeares, when learning revived vnder Francis the firſt in
France, the French beganne to diſtill their wits heerein, for
there was made for him.
            
               Francis de Valoys.
               DE FACON SVIS ROYAL.
               For his ſonne Henry de Valoys.
               
               ROY ES DE NVL HAY.
               For Charles of Barbon, the Prince of Conde.
               
               Borbonius.
               ORBI BONVS.
               For the late Queene of Scotland, his Maieſties mother.
               Maria Stevarta.
               
                  ƲERITAS ARMATA.
            
            And that Greeke one, which is moſt excellent, of the
ſacred name of our ſweete Saviour Ieſus, according to that
of the 53. of Eſay, He is brought as a ſheepe to the ſlaughter,
thus:

                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is, Thou art that ſheepe.
               
            
            The Italians who now admire them, beganne not 20.
yeares ſince to vſe them as the Biſhop of Graſſa a profeſſor
heerein teſtifieth.
            In England I know ſome who 30. yeares ſince have beſtowed
ſome idle houres heerein with good ſucceſſe, albeit
our Engliſh names running rough with cragged conſonants,
are not ſo ſmooth and eaſie for tranſpoſition as the
French and Italian. Yet I will ſet downe ſome which I
have happened vpon, framed o
                  •
               t of the names of divers
great perſonages, and others in moſt of the which in the
ſence may ſeeme appliable to their good parts.
            To begin with his moſt Excellent Maieſtie our d
                  •
               ead
Soveraigne, was made this declaring his vndoubted rightfull
claime to the Monarchy of Britan, as the ſucceſſor of
the valourous king Arthur.
               
                  Charles Iames Steuart.
                  CLAIMES ARTHVRS SEATE.
               
            
            As this alſo truly verified in his perſon.

                  Iacobus Sextus Stuartus.
                  VITA CASTVS, EX SE ROBVSTVS.
               
            
            For our late Queene of happy memory, to whoſe gratious
government vnder God, we owe much happineſſe.
I have found the letters of Elizabetha Regina tranſpoſed to
ſignifie that happineſſe, as ſpeaking vnto her in this ſence.
O Englands Soveraigne thou hast made vs happy: thus
            
               Elizabetha Regina,
               ANG
                     •
                  IAE HERA, BEASTI.
            
            And whereas the French compare Anagrames by themſelves
to gems, but when they are caſt into a diſtich or Epigram
to gems enchaſed in enameled gold. Thi
                  •
                diſtich was
then made thereon with a moſt humble and 
                  〈◊〉
                wiſh.
            
               Nos Anglos radijs hera noſtra beata beaſti,
               Sis hera noſtro ſolo, ſis Deaſera poſo.
            
            The ſame bleſſednes of her Maieſtre to England vnſpeakeable
good, and her ioyfull raigne were noted thus
out of

                  
                  Elizabetha Regina,
                  ANGLIAE ERIS BEATA.
                  EIA, LETA REGNABIS.
               
            
            
               Carolus Vienhovius my good friend made this 30. years
ſince in Greeke, when he attended heere vpon Monſieur
Foix, Ambaſſadour from the French King.
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  that is, The devine dew of her Kingdome.
               Likewiſe out of the Greeke was this,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  that is, A Goddeſſe Queene.
            
            Her moſt milde government of her ſubiects, and Lionlike
courage againſt her Spaniſh enemies, was thus declared
out of
            
               Elizabetha Regina Anglia,
               ANGLIS AGNA, HIBERIAE LEA.
            
            Whereas ſhe was as a Sweepnet for the Spaniſh ſhips,
which (as the Athenians ſaid of their fortunate Timothye,)
happily fell into her net: this was made by tranſpoſing of
            
               Elizabeth Regina Angliae,
               GENTI HIBERAE,
               ILLA SAGENA.
            
            In reſpect of her great warres exploited againſt that
mighty Monarch, this was wrought out of
            
               Elizabetha Anglorum Regina,
               MAGNA BELLA TV 
                     •
                  EROINA GERIS.
            
            The good government of her Maieſtie, was thus noted
vnder the name of the flouriſhing Muſe Thalia
            
            
               Elizabetha Regina,
               BENE THALIA REGIS.
            
            In this following was compriſed the wiſh then of all
true Engliſh,

                  Elizabetha Regina Anglorum,
                  GLORIA REGNI SALVA MANEBiT.
               
            
            Have now ſome framed vpon the names of divers honourable

perſonages and others, lovers I hope of good letters,
neither let any conceive offenſively if they a
                  •
               e not here
remembred: I have imparted all that came to my hands.
            Out of the name of the late right reverend, the Lorde
Archebiſhoppe of Canterbury, the mirrour of Praelats
in our daies was found this, in reſpect of his milde proceedings.
            
               Ioannes Whitegiftius.
               NON VI EGIT FAVIT 
                     ••
                  ESVS.
               For the Lord Chancelor, Lord Elleſmer.
               
               Thomas Egerton,
               GEST AT HONOREM.
               Oris honore viget, Vt mentis geſtat honorem
               Iuris Egertonus, dignus honore col
                     •
                  .
            
            For the late Lord Treaſurer, a moſt prudent and honourable
Councellor to two mightie Princes.
            
               Guilielmus Ceciſius Baro Burglio.
               VIGILI CVM LABORE ILLVCES REGIBVS.
               Regibus illuces vigili Gulielme labore,
               Nam clarè fulget lux tua luce Dei.
               For the Earle of Nottingham, Lord Admirall.
               Carolus Howarde,
               CHARVS, ARDVO LEO.
               For the Earle of Northumberland.
               
               Henricus Percius,
               HIC PVRE SINCERVS.
            
            Vpon which with a relation to the Creſcent or ſilver
Moone his Cogniſance, was framed thus:
            
               Percius HIC PVRE SINCERVS, Percia Luna
               Candida tota micat, pallet at illa p
                     •
                  lo.
            
            This was made as a wiſh to the Earle of Shrewsbury,
that his name and Talbot may be as terrible to the French,
as it was when the French ſo feared his progenitour Iohn,
Lord Talbot, firſt Earle of Shrewsbury of that family.
            
               Gilbert
                     ••
                   Talbottius.
               CALLOS TV TIBI TVRBES
               Vt proavi preavus, ſic GALLOS TV TIBI TVRBES;
            
         
         
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            Impreſes.
            
               AN Impreſe (as the Italians call it) is a deviſe
in picture with his Motte, or Word,
borne by noble and learned perſonages,
to notifie ſome particular conceit of their
owne: as Emblemes (that we may omitte
other differences) doe propound ſome
generall inſtruction to all: As for example: Wheras Coſmi
Medici Doke of Florence had in the aſcendent at his
nativitie the ſigne Capricorue, vnder which alſo Auguſtus
and Charles the fift, two great and good Princes were
borne: hee vſed the celeſhall ſigne Capricorne, with this
Mone; FIDEM FATI VIRTVTE SE QVEMVR
for his Impreſe, particularly concerning his good hope
to proove like vnto them. But a faire woman pictured
with an Olive crowne repreſenting Peace, carrying in
one hand the horne of Plenty, leading a little golden boy
for Plutus in the other, with, EX PACE RERVM
OPVLENTIA, is an Embleme, and a generall document
to all, that Peace bringeth Plentie.
            There is required in an Impreſe (that wee may reduce
them to few heades) a correſpondencie of the picture,
which is as the bodie, and the Motte, which as the ſoule
giveth it life. That is, the body muſt be of faire repreſentation,
and the word in ſome different language, wittie,
ſhort, and anſwerable thereunto neither too obſcur
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
too plaine, and moſt comm
                  •
               nded, when it is an Hemiſlich,
or parcell of a verſe.
            
               
According to theſe preſcripts neither the ſtarres with
the Moone in Tide
                     •
                  s ſhield in Aeſchilus, neither Amphiaraus
dragon in Pindare, neither the ſtemme of a ſhippe vſed
for a ſeale by Pompey, can have heere place: Much
leſſe the reverſes in Roman coynes, which were onely hiſtoricall
memorialles of their actes; as that of Claudius,
with a plowman at plow and this COL: CAMALODVN
was to ſignifie that he made Maldon in 
                  
                     •
                  ſſex a Colony,Britannia 
                     〈◊〉
                  . and
that of Hadrian with an Emperour, three ſouldiers, and
EXERC: BRITANNICVS was in memorie of ſome
good ſervice by the three Legions reſiant in this Iſle at
Yorke, Cheſter, and Car-leon vpon 
                  Ʋske. That alſo of Severus
with a woman ſitting vppon Cliffes holding an enſigne
in one hand, and as it were writing vppon a ſhield,
with VICTORIA BRITANN: was onely to ſhew his
victories here.
            Such alſo as are ſet downe in Notitia Provinciarum, as
a Boore ſeiant for Iovij, a circle party per Saltier for Britanniciani,
a carbuncle (as Blazoners terme it) for Britannici,
&c. cannot be admitted into the number of Impreſes,
for they were the ſeverall enſignes of ſeverall militarie companies,
whereof the two laſt ſeemed to be leavied out of
this Iſle.
            Childiſh it is to referre hither the ſhieldes of King Arthurs
round-table Knights, when they were deviſed, as it
is probable, for no other end, but to teach yoong men the
termes of Blazon.
            Neither are Armes to be referred hither, which were
deviſed to diſtinguiſh families, and were moſt vſuall among
the nobilitie in warres, tiltes and tournaments in
their coates called Coate-armours, Shields, Standards, Banners,
Pennors, Guydons, vntill about ſome hundred yeeres
ſince, when the French and Italian in the expedition of
Naples, vnder Charles the eight beganne to leave Armes,
happly for that many of them had none, and to beare the
curtaines of their miſtreſſes beddes, their miſtreſſes colours,
or theſe Impreſes in their banners, ſhields, and capariſons:

in which the Engliſh have 
                  〈…〉
                and
albeit a few have borrowed ſomewhat from them, yet
many have matched them, and no few ſurpaſſed them in
wittie conceit, as you ſhall perceive heereafter, if you will
firſt give me leave to remember ſome imperfect Deviſes
in this kinde of ſome former Kings of England, which you
may well ſay to be liveleſſe bodies, for that they have no
word adioyned.
            Of King William Conquerour I have heard none, neither
dare (as Iovius taketh the Sphinx Auguſtus ſignet for
an Impreſe) ſo ſet downe our Conquerours ſeale? which
had his owne picture on horſebacke with theſe verſes to
notifie his Dominions.
            
               Hoc Normannorum Willelmum noſce patronum:
               On the other ſide;
               Hoc Anglis Regem ſigno fatearis eundem.
               As a King of Sicile had about that time this;
               Apulus & Calaber, Siculus mihi ſervit & Afer.
            
            
               Stephen of Bloys the Vſ
                  ••
               per tooke the ſigne Sagutarius,
for that hee obtained this kingdome when the Sunne
was in the ſaide ſigne.
            King Henry the ſecond grievouſly moleſted by the diſobedience
of his foure ſonnes, who entred into actuall rebellion
againſt him, cauſed to be painted in his great
Chamber at his pallace in Wincheſter an Eagle with foure
yong chickens, whereof three pecked and ſcratched him,
the fourth picked at his eyes. This his deviſe had no life,
becauſe it had no Motte: but his anſwer gave it life, when
he ſaid to one demaunding his meaning, That they were
his ſonnes which did ſo pecke him, and that Iohn the yongeſt
whome he loved beſt, practiſed his death more buſily
than the reſt. [Giraldus Cambrenſis distinct]
            King Henry the third as liking well of Remuneration;
commaunded to be written in his Chamber at Woodſtocke,
as it appeareth in the Recordes in the Tower,
Qui non dat quod amat; non accipit i
                     •
                  le quod optat.
            
            
               Edmund Cr
                     •
                  uch-backe his ſecond ſonne firſt Earle of

               Lancaſter, vſed a red Roſe, wherewith his Tombe at Weſtminſter
is adorned.
            
               Edward the third bare for his deviſe the rayes of the
Sunne diſperſing themſelves out of a cloude, and in other
places, a golden truncke of a tree.
            The victorious Blacke Prince his ſonne vſed ſometimes
one feather, ſometime three, in token of his ſpeedy execution
in all his ſervices, as the Poſtes in the Roman times
were Pterophori, and wore feathers to ſignifie their flying
poſt-haſte. But the tradition is, that hee wonne them at
the battell of Poitiers, whereunto hee adioyned this olde
Engliſh word IC DEN,
               Thegn. that is, I ſerve, according to
that of the Apoſtle, The heire while he is a childe, differeth
nothing from a ſervant: Theſe feathers were an an
                  •
               ent ornament
of militarie men, as is evident by that of 
                  Ʋirgil:
               Cuius olorina ſurgunt de vertice pennae:
            
            And were vſed by this Prince before the time of Canoy
Chan the Tartarian, who becauſe his life was ſaved by an
Owle, would have his people weare their feathers: from
whome Haithon fableth, that the people of Iurope received
firſt the vſe of feathers.
            
               Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaſter, brother to this Prince,
tooke a red Roſe to his deviſe (as it were by right of his
firſt wiſe the heire of Lancaſter, as Edmund of Langley,
Duke of Yorke, tooke the white Roſe. Before theſe two
brethren tooke theſe two Roſes, which the fautors and followers
of their heires after, bare in that pittifull diſtraction
of England, betweene the families of Lancaſter and York,
a white Roſe-tree at Longleete, bare vpon one branch a
faire white roſe on the one ſide, and as faire a red roſe on
the other; which might as well have beene a fore-token of
that diviſion, as the white henne with the bay ſprigge
lighting in the lap of Livia Auguſta, betokened the Empire
to her poſteritie, which ended in Nero, when both the
brood of that hen failed, and the baies of that ſprigge withered.
            The ſaid Edmund of Langley, bare alſo for an Impreſe

a Faulcon in a fetter-locke, implying that he was locked
vp from all hope and poſſibility of the Kingdome, when
his brethren beganne to aſpire therevnto. Wherevpon he
asked on a time his ſonnes when he ſaw them, beholding
this deviſe ſet vp in a window, what was Latine for a fetter-locke:
Whereat when the yong gentleman ſtudied,
the father ſaid, well then you cannot tell me, I will tell
you, Hic haec hoc tacea
                     •
                  s, as adviſing them to be ſilent and
quiet, and therewithall ſaid, Yet God knoweth what may come
to paſſe heereafter. This his great Grandchilde King Edward
the fourth reported, when he commanded that his
yonger ſonne Richard Duke of Yorke, ſhould vſe this deviſe
with the fetter-locke opened, as Roger Wall an Herald
of that time reporteth.
            King Richard the ſecond, whoſe vntrained youth and
yeelding lenitie haſtened his fall, vſed commonly a white
Hart couchant with a crowne, and chaine about his 
                  ••
               cke.
For wearing the which, ſoone after his depoſition loſt
their lives. He alſo vſed a peſcod branch with the cods open,
but the peaſe out, as it is vpon his Robe in his Monument
at Weſtminſter.
            
            His wife Anne, ſiſter to Wenceſlaus the Emperour, bare
an Oſtrich, with a naile in his beake.
            King Henry the fourth (as it is in Maiſter Garters
booke,) vſ
                  •
               d onely a Fox tayled pendent, following lyſanders
adviſe, if the Lions skin were too ſhort, to peece it out
with a Foxes caſe.
            His halfe brethren ſurnamed Beauſort, of their natall
place, who after were dukes of S
                     •
                  mmerſet, &c. bare a portcullis
golde; wherevnto not long afterward was added
this word ALTERA SLCVRITAS. And not long ſince
by the Earles of Worceſter, iſſued from them MVTARE,
AVT TIMERE SP
                     •
                  RNO.
            
            His yonger ſonne Humfrey Duke of Gloceſter, a noble
fautor of good letters, ba
                  •
               e in that reſpect a Laurell branch
in a golden cup.
            
               
That moſt martiall Prince King Henry the fift, carried a
burn
                  •
               ng Creſſet, ſometime a Beacon: and for his word,
(but not appropriate therevnto,) VNE SANS PLVS. One
and no more.
            
            King Henry the ſixt had two feathers in ſaltire.
            King Edward the fourth, bare his white Roſe, the fetterlocke
before ſpecified, and the ſunne after the battell of
Mortimers croſſe, where three Sunnes were ſeene imm
                  •
               
               diately
conioyning in one.
            King Richard the third bare a white Boare, which gave
occ
                  •
               ſion to the ryme that coſt the maker his life.
            
               The Cat, the Rat, and Lovell the Dog,
               Rule all England vnder an Hog.
            
            King Henry the ſeaventh, in reſpect of his deſcent from
the houſe of Summerſet, vſed the Portcullis before mentioned;
and in reſpect of the vnion of the two houſes of
Lancaſter and Yorke by his marriage, the white Roſe vnited
with the red, ſometime placed in the Sunne. And in
reſpect he was crowned in the field with King Richards
crowne, found in an hawtherne buſh, hee bare the hawthorne
buſh with the crowne in it; & with this he filled the
windowes at Richmond, and his Chappell at Weſtminſter.
            
            His wife Queene Elizabeth, had a white and red roſe
knit together.
            His mother Lady Margaret, Counteſſe of Richmond,
had three white Daſies growing vpon a turfe.
            When king Henry the eight beganne his raigne, the
Engliſh wits beganne to imitate the French and Italian
in theſe deviſes, adding the Mots. Firſt king Henry himſelfe
at the interview betweene him and king Francis the
firſt, whereat alſo Charles the fift was preſent, vſed for his
Impreſſe, an Engliſh Archer in a greene coat, drawing his
arrow to the head, with this inſcription, CVI ADHAEREO,
PRAEEST: whenas at that time thoſe mighty
Princes banding one againſt the other, wrought him for
their owne particular.
            His wife Queene Anne, a happy mother of Englands
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
happines by her moſt happy daughter, bare a white crowned
Faulcon, holding a Scepter in her right talon, ſtanding
vpon a golden truncke, out of the which ſprowted both
white and red roſes, with MIHI, ET MEAE
            
            To the honour of Queene Iane, who died willingly
to ſave her childe King Edwarde, was deviſed after her
death a Phaenix in his funerall fire, with this Motte, NASCATVR
VT ALTER.
            
            King Edward the ſixt bare (as the Blacke Prince) three
feathers in a crowne while his father ſurvived, as Prince of
Wales, with IC DEN.
            
            Queene Mary when ſhe was Princeſſe of Wales, vſed
both a red and white Roſe, and a Pomegranate knitte together,
to ſhew her deſcent from La
                     •
                  caſter, Yorke, and
Spaine. When ſhe came to the kingdome, by perſwaſion
of her Cleargie, ſhe bare winged Time drawing Trueth
out of a pit, with VERIT AS TEMPORIS FILIA.
            
            Her Succeſſor of bleſſed memory Queene Elizabeth;
vpon occaſions, vſed ſo many heroicall deviſes, as would
require a volume; but moſt commonly a Sive without a
Motte, for her words, VIDEO, TACEO, and SEMPER
EADEM, which ſhee as truely and conſtantly
performed.
            Cardinal Poole ſhevvd the terreſtrial globe incompaſſed
with a Serpent, adding this out of Saint Mathew, ESTOTE
PRVDENTES.
            
            NOw I will deſcend from the bloud Royall and former
time, and preſent vnto you a few Impreſes born
by noble, and gentlemen of our nation, in our age, without
commenting vpon them, as the Italians vſe. For the perſons
names I am to be pardoned as knowing them not,
when I obſerved them at Titles and elſe-where: But ſuch
as adioyned after the olde and moſt laudable Italian manner,
their Armes withall.
            
               
He ſignified his conſtancie in aduerſitie, which painted
a man ſwimming and ſtriving againſt the ſtreame in a
tempeſtuous ſea, with this, ANIMƲS TAMEN IDEM.
            
            Deſirous was he to riſe, but found counterblaſts, who
figured a man aſcending a Mountaine, but repelled with
contrarie winds, with this Mot, NITENS AD SVMMA,
REPELLOR.
            
            
               Henry Howard Earle of Surrey, ſonne and heire to Thomas
Duke of Norfolke, deviſed for himſelfe, I know not
vpon what conſideration, a broken piller with this word,
SAT SVPEREST. But I reade he was charged at his arraignement
with that deviſe, the impaling of his Armes
with the Armes of Saint Edward, and erecting three banqueting
houſes, as Baſtilions in his garden neere Norwich;
as matters of great conſequence and high treaſon, to the
loſſe of his life. This is that noble Earle of Surrey, who firſt
among the Nobilitie of England, conioyned the honour of
learning to the honour of high Parentage. Of whom the
learned Hadrianus Iunius giueth this teſtimonie in Lattine,
which I cannot ſo well expreſſe in Engliſh, H
                     •
                  roicum
corporis filium, ingenium velox, & expromptum, memoria inexhauſta,
plane
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Mythridatica, ſermo ob ipſis Gratiis effictus,
linguarum multiplex cognitio, &c.
            
            He would either finde a way or make a way to his preferment,
which cauſed to be pourtrayed, a hand working
out a way in a craggie hill with a pickaxe, and this woord,
INVENIT AVT FACIT.
            
            Sir Philip Sidney, to note that he perſiſted alwayes one,
depainted out the Caſpian ſea ſurrounded with his ſhoares,
which neither ebbeth nor floweth, and over it: SINE
REFLVXV.
            
            He acknowledged his eſſence to be in his gratious Soveraigne,
which bare a Sunne-diall, and the Sun ſetting, adding
OCCASV DESINET ESSE.
            
            Hee might ſeeme to beare a vindicative minde, but I
thinke it was for ſome amorous affection, which bare a ſhe
vpon an eye, with SIC ƲLTVS PEREAM.
            
            
               
Vpon his Princes favour he wholy 
                  〈◊〉
               , which deviſed
the Sunne ſhining vpon a buſh, ſubſcrib
                  ••
               g SI DES
                     •
                  RIS
PEREO.
            
            As he which in like ſenſe bare the Sunne reflecting his
rayes from him, with QVOVS QVE AƲERTES▪
               
            
            His devote minde to his Lady hee devoutly, though
not religiouſly ſhewed, which vnder 
                  Ʋenus in 
                  •••
               owde
chaunged the vſuall prayer into, SALVA ME DOMINA.
            
            He ſhewed his affectionate goodwill in height of courage,
that ſhewed in his ſhield, Atlas bearing heaven with
a roule inſcribed in Italian, INTENDAM, CHE PƲO.
            
            The force of love was well figured by him that gave an
Vnicorne (happly the badge of his family) repoſing his
head in a Ladies lappe, with this worde, O QVANTA
POTENTIA.
            
            Excellent was that of the late Earle of Eſſex, who when
he was caſt downe with ſorrow, and yet to be employed
in Armes, bare a blacke mourning ſhield without any figure,
but inſcribed, PAR NVLLA FIGVRA DOLORI.
            
            A ſtedfaſt ſettled minde was in that gentleman, that deviſed
for himſelfe a Pyramis open to winde and weather,
with NEC FLATV, NEC FLVCTV.
            
            He noted our peaceable times, when having a Martia
                  •
               l
minde, ſhewed an armed Knight ſoundly ſleeping in
a cocke-boate vpon a calme Sea, with, AEQVORA
TVTA SILENT.
            
            Hee played with a Name, and hoped remedy to his
Love, which d
                  •
               viſed a Roſe, with that of Ovid, (leaving
out the neg
                  •
               tive) AMOR EST MEDICABILIS
HFRBIS.
            
            A Gentleman committed, and after to his great commend
                  •
               tion
enlarged, tooke to him for an Impreſe, a Ball
vpon a Racket, ſaperſ
                  •
               ebing, PERCVSSA RESVR
                  
                     •
                  O.
            
            The Sunne declining to the Weaſt, with Occidens,

Occidens, I being ſhort in the firſt word, and long in the
ſecond, ſhewed that the ſafetie and life both of the bearer
and of others did depend on the light and life of the Soveraigne.
            A ſtudious lover of good letters framed to himſelfe only
the figure of I with this philoſophicall principle, OMNIA
EX VNO.
            
            Out of Philoſophie likewiſe an other, to notifie his
greateſt impeachment, drew this principle, EX NIHI
                  
                     •
                  O
NIHIL: and inſcribed it bend-wiſe, with his Armes
in a bare ſhield.
            One weighed downe with ſome adverſe happe, and
yet not altogether hopeleſſe, painted an heavy ſtone faſtned
to a mans arme with, SPES MIHI MAGNA TAMEN.
            
            Neither ſeemed he voide of all hope for his paines, after
long ſervice, which painted a followe fielde with, AT
QVANDO MESSIS.
            
            The Needle in the Sea Compaſſe ſtill moving but to
the North poynt onely with MOVEOR IMMOTVS,
notified the reſpective conſtancie of the gentleman to one
onely.
            The ornament of our land was meant by him which
placed only the Moone in heaven in full light with, QVID
SINE TE COELVM?
            
            Farre was he from Venus ſervice with bare Venus portrayed
in a cloude with NIHIL MINVS.
            
            But whole devoted was hee to that goddeſſe, which
contrariwiſe bare the Aſtronomicall character of 
                  Ʋenus,
with NIHIL MAGIS.
            
            The ſucceſſive varietie of wordly affaires, or his owne
favours, a ſtudious Gen
                  •
               leman well noted, which painted
in an Hemiſphere ſome ſtarres riſing ſome ſetting, with,
SVRGVNT QVE CADVNT QVE VICISSIM.
            
            His whole truſt repoſed that good Divine in God, which
after ſome adverſities ſet vppe a Rocke beaten with winde
& weather, to expreſſe his ſtate yet ſtanding, with DEO

IVVANTE, DEO CONSERVANTE.
            
            Heavenly cogitations were in him, who onely figured
a man kneeling, with 
                  •
               is hands lifted vp to the heavens,
with this inſcribede, SVPREMA OPTIMA MVNDI.
            
            A verie good invention was that to ſhew his ſtay and
ſupport by a virgin Prince, who preſented in his ſhield,
the Zodiacke with the Characters onely of Leo and Virgo,
and this word, HIS EGO PRAESIDIIS.
            
            It may bee thought that he noted deſerts to bee everie
where excluded, and meere happe to raiſe moſt men, who
inſcribed within a Laurell Garland, FATO, NON
MERITO.
            
            A laviſh tongue might ſeeme to have damnified the
Gentleman which tooke for his device Landskip, as they
call it, and ſolitarie Mountaines, with TVTI MONTES,
TVTVM SILENTIVM.
            
            He had no great care to exp
                  •
               eſſe his conceit in an Impreſe,
which nevertheleſſe he did expreſſe, which bare a
white ſhield enſcribed, NEC CVRA, NEC CHARACTER.
            
            No Knight of Venus was he, who as triumphing over
her force, bare her Sonne winged Cupid in a nette, with
QVI CAPIT, CAPITVR.
            
            The Starre called Spica Virginis, one of the fifteene
which are accompted to be of the firſt magnitude among
the Aſtronomers, with a ſcrole in written, MIHI VITA
SPICA VIRGINIS, declared thereby happly, that hee
had that Starre in the aſcendent at his Nativitie, or rather,
that he lived by the gracious favour of a virgin Prince.
            One in our ſea-faring age adventuring himſelfe and all
he had to the Seas, propoſing no certaine arrivall to himſelfe,
made a Ship with full ſayles in the Sea, and ſuperſcribed,
PORTVS IN IGNOTO.
            
            His minde mounted above the meane, which deviſed
for himſelfe, one that had clambred much more then halfe
the way of a ſleepe Mountaine, adding this worde neere
him, DIXERVNT FATVI, omitting the other part of

the verſe, Medicum tenuere beati.
            
            Likewiſe he hoped to attaine the height of his deſire,
which made one climing to the middle of a Piramis, with
HAC SPE, by him, and ILLIC SPES aboue him.
            Another alſo which climed in his conceyt, but as it ſeemeth
fearing a fall, made a man vpon the vpp
                  •
               r degree
                  •
                of
a Ladder, with this Mot adioyned, NON QVO, SED
VNDE CADO.
            
            He referred Fate, Fortune and all to his Soveraigne,
which drew for himſelfe the twelve houſes of heaven, in
the forme which Aſtrologians vſe, ſetting downe neither
Signe, nor Planet therein, but onely placing over it this
worde, DISPONE.
            
            The like reference had he which onely vſed a white
Shield, and therein written, FATVM INSCRIBAT
ELIZA.
            
            It may bee doubtfull whether hee affected his Soveraigne,
or iuſtice more zealouſly, which made a man hovering
in the aire, with FEROR AD ASTAEAM.
            
            You may eaſily coniecture what he conceyued, who in
his ſhield reared an Oare with a 
                  •
               aile faſtned therevnto,
adding. FORS ET VIRTVS MISCENTVR IN VNVM.
            
            Full of loving affection was he to his Ladie, which bare
a Roſe vpon his pricking branch, and ABIGITQVE
TRAHITQVE.
            
            With many a bluſtring blaſt he ſeemed to have beene
toſſed, which painted an Horizon, with all the Cardinall
and collaterall windes blowing, and in the middeſt RAPIVNT
QVEFERVNT QVE.
            
            As to the honour of Magellanus (whoſe ſhip firſt paſſed
round about the world, though he miſcaried) was deviſed
the terreſtriall Globe, with, TV PRIMVS CIRCVMDEDISTI
ME. So our Sir Francis Drake, who fortunately
effected the ſame, had deviſed for him a Globe terreſtriall,
vpon the height whereof in a ſhip vnder ſayle,
trayned about the Globe with two golden halſers, by direction

of an hand out of a cloud, and a dragon volant vpon
the hatches, regarding the direction with theſe wordes,
AVXI
                     •
                  IO DIVINO.
            
            An Impreſe too perplexed and vnfitting for ſo worthy
a mā, who as one ſaid to him moſt excelētly in this Diſtich

                  PLVS VLTRA, Herculeis inſcribas Drake 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
                  Et magno dicas Hercule maior 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
            
            A man ve
                  ••
               ly worthie to bee eternized by ſome good
p
                  •
               n, as alſo his ſeruant Iohn Oxenham, who ariving with
70. men in the ſtraight of Dariena in America▪
                drew a land
his ſhip▪ and hiding it with boughes, marched ouer the
l
                  •
               nd with his companie, guided by Negros, vntill bee came
to a riuer where he cut wood made him a Pinaſſe, entred
the South ſea, went to the Iſland of Pearles, lay there ten
dayes, intercepted in two Spaniſh ſhippes 60. thouſand
weight of gol
                  •
               e, and one hundred thouſand in barres of
ſilver, returned ſafely to the maine land: but through the
mutinie of his ſouldiers he miſcaried, and as the Poet ſai
                  •
               h,
Magnu excidit auſis. In an adventure never attempted by
any, and therefore not to be forgotten, when as the Lopez
a Spaniard hath recorded it not without admiration, as
you may ſee in the Diſcoveries of the lea
                  •
               ned and induſtrious
M Rich. Ha
                     •
                  kluit: But pardon this d
                  •
               greſſion occaſioned
by the memorie of Sir Fr. Drake.
            
            It ſeemed a difficultie vnto him to l
                  ••
               e rightly, either in
libertie or in bondage, w
                  •
               i
                  •
               h painted one Greyhound
courſing, with, IN LIBERTATE LABOR, and another

                  •
               i
                  •
               d to a tree g
                  •
               z
                  •
               ng on the game, with, IN SERVITVTE
DOLOR.
            
            I can not imagine what he m
                  •
               ant, which too
                  •
               e for his
deuiſe a ſmall brooke paſſing along the lands 
                  ••
               ldly, till it
came to a damme, and there riſing and raging overflowed
the lands, with, MAGIS MAGIS QVE, written in the
place ouerflowed: vnleſſe he would giue vs to vnderſtand
that the more his affections were ſtopped, the more they
were ſtirred.
            He which tooke a man armed at all poynts with, ME,

ET MEVM, while he ſhewed a reſolution in his owne
behalfe, forgat God, and that of King Henrie the eight,
DIEV ET MON DROIT, God and my right.
            In the Impreſes of Ruſcelli, I find that Sir Ri
                     •
                  hard Shetley,
Knight of S: Ioh
                     •
                  s, vſed a white Faulcon, with th
                  •
               s
Spaniſh Motto, FE Y FIDALGVIA. Id eſt. Faith and
gentleneſſe, which Faulcon he quartered in his arme
                  •
                by
the name of Michelgroue, As they ſay.
            Whereas the Laurell ſacred to learning is never hurt by
lightning, and therefore the Cocke reſorteth therevnto in
tempeſts, as naturall Hiſtorians teſtifie. He ſeemed ſtudious
of good learning, and feareful of daunger, which cauſed
to be painted for him a Cocke vnder a Laurell, with,
SIC EVIT ABILE FVLMFN.
An amorous affection was onely noted in him which ſet
downe an eye in an heart, with, VVLNVS ALO.
            
            Hee alſo helde one courſe, and levelled at one marke,
which made a Riuer in a long tract diſgorging himſelfe
into the Sea, with SEMPER AD MARE.
            
            Hee doubted not to find the right courſe by indirect
meanes, which did ſet downe a ſphericall crooked paire of
Compaſſes, with PER OBLIQVA RE
                     •
                  TA.
            
            Hee propoſed to himſelfe honour in Martiall ſeruice,
which made a Trophee, or truncke of a tree, with harneſſe
and abillements of warre, and a Sepulchre not farre off,
adding vnder-neath, AƲT SPOLIIS LAETEMVR
OPIMIS. Omitting that which followeth in Virg
                     ••
                  l, Aut
Laetho inſigni.
            
            A warie man would he ſeeme, and carefull for his owne,
which ſhewed a village on fire, with I AM PROXIMVS
ARDET.
            
            Tyred might he ſeeme with Law-delayes, or ſuch like
ſutes, which deuiſed for himſelf a tottering ſhip with torne
ſayles driuen vp and downe, with I AM SEVTIMA
PORTAT. You know what followeth, Omn
                     •
                  bus errantem
terris & fluctibus aſtas.
            
            In the beginning of her late Maieſties raigne, one vpon

happie hope conceyved, made an halfe of the Zodiake,
with Virgo riſing, adding I AM REDIT ET VIRGO:
Suppreſſing the wordes following, Redeunt Saturma
regna.
            
            Varietie and viciſſitude of humane things he ſeemed to
ſhew, which parted his ſhield, Per Pale, Argent, & Sables,
and counterchangeably writte in the Argent, ATER,
and in the Sables, ALBVS.
            
            He elegantly ſhewed by whom he was drawne, which
depainted the N
                  ••
               ticall cōpaſſe, with, AVT MAGNES,
AVI MAGNA.
            
            Another aſcribing his life and all to his Ladie, pictured
at 
                  〈◊〉
                neere a ſpring, and at the roote thereof, QVOD
VIVAM TVVM.
            
            He ſhevved himſelfe to be a Martiall, and a Mercuriall
man, vvhich bare a ſvvorde in one hand, and a Bay in the
other, vvith ARTI ET MARTI.
            
            It might ſeeme a craving Impreſe, vvhich ſet nothing
but Ciphers downe in a ro
                  •
               le, with ADDE VEL VNVM.
            
            Likewiſe hee which ſet downe the nine numerall figures▪
with ADDE, VEL ADIME.
            
            His meaning might be perceyved out of the laſt Eglogue
of Virgill, containing Gallus loving lamentations,
which po
                  ••
                trayed a tree, and in the barke engraved E,
adding this worde, CRES
                     •
                  ETIS.
            
            Studious in Alchimy might he ſeeme, or in ſome abſtruſe
Art which he could not finde out, which ſhewed
for his deviſe onely a golden branch, with LATET ARBORE
OPACA.
            
            Hee ſe
                  •
               med not to reſpect hopefull tokens without
good effects, which made a ſhip ſinking, and the Rainebow
appearing, with QVID TV, SI PEREO.
            
            I know one which overcome with a praedominant humour
was ſo troubled with a fancifull v
                  •
               ine cogitation,
ſo that no counſel or company could withdraw him from
it, figured a man with a ſhadow pro
                  •
               ected before him,

with this word, IT COMES.
            
            A Gentleman ſcholler drawne from the Vniverſitie
where he was well liked to the Court, for which in reſpect
of his baſhfull modeſtie, he was not ſo fit; painted a red
corall branch, which while it grew in the ſea was greene,
with this, NVNC RVBEO, ANTE VIREBAM.
            
            Maſter Richard Carew of Anthony, when he was in his
tender yeares, deviſed for himſelfe an Adamant vpon an
Anvile, with a hand holding an hammer thereover, and
this Italian Motto, CHE VERACE DVRERA: which
alſo contained his name Anagranimatically.
            He ſeemed not to be ſufficiently warmed, living in the
Sun-ſhine of the Court, which framed for his deviſe a
glaſſe of Parabolicall concavitie, or burning glaſſe as ſome
call it, with the Sunne ſhining over it, and a combuſtible
matter kindled vnder it, with NEC DVM CALESCO.
            
            He doubted not but continuall ſuit would molifie his
Miſtris heart, which made an eye-dropping teares vpon
an heart, SAEPE CADINDO.
            
            He lacked but ſome gracious hand to effect ſome matter
well forward, which made more then halfe a circle with
a paire of compaſſes, the onefoote fixed in the center, the
other in the circumference, placing thereby, ADDE MANƲM.
            
            His conceit was godly and 
                  •
               owe ſpondent to his name,
who made an, Hart to his race to a fountaine and over it,

                  ƲT CFRVVS FONTEM, and vnder it, SIC ABRAHAMVS
CHRISTVM. The meaning is plaine to all
which know Scriptures, and I take the Gentlemans name
to be Abraham Hartwell: The ſame Impreſe was vſed by
Boromeo the beſt Cardinall which I have heard of, but with
this word, VNA SALVS.
            
            When the Spania
                  •
               ds purpoſed the invaſion 1588, and
their Navie was ſcattered to their confuſion, by a ſhip fierd
and carried among them by direction from her late
Maieſtie. A Gentleman depainted that Navie in confuſion

with a fiered ſhip approaching, adding to her honour
out of 
                  Ʋirgil: DVX FAEMINA FACTI.
            
            This calles another to my remembrance, which I have ſeen
caſt in ſilver, as concerning that matter, A great Navy vppon
the ſea neere the South coaſt of Englād, with VENIT,
VIDIT, FVGIT: As that of Iulius Caſar, when he had
overcome Pharmaces, VENI, VIDI, VICI.
            
            About that time, vvhen ſome diſlikes grew betweene
the Engliſh and the States of the vnited Provinces, they
fearing that it might tend to the hurt of both, cauſed to be
imprinted two pitchers floating on the water vpon a Medalia,
with SI COLLIDIMVR, FRANGIMVR.
            
            In the like ſenſe, there vvere comed peeces vvith two
Oxen drawing the plough, the one marked vvith a roſe
for England, the other vvith a Lyon on the ſhoulder for
Holland, and vvritten thereby, TRAHITE AE QVO
IVGO.
            
            He meaſured himſelfe vvith a meane, and ſeemed to
reſt content, which made a To
                  •
               tois in his ſhell, vvith MECVM
HABITO.
            
            His conceit vvas obſcure to mee vvhich painted a ſavadge
of America pointing toward the Sun, vvith TIBI
ACCESSV, MIHI DECESSV.
            
            Sir Philip Sidney, vvho vvas a long time heire apparant
to the Earle of Leiceſter, after the ſaid Earle had a ſonne
borne to him, vſed at the next Tilte-day following
SPERAVI, thus daſhed through, to ſhew his hope
therein was daſhed.
            He ſignified himſelfe to be revived with gracious favor,
which made the Sun-ſhining vpon a
                  •••
               hered tree, but
new blooming, with this, HIS RADIIS REDIVIVA
VIRESCO.
            
            The late Earle of Eſſex tooke a Diamond onely amidſt
his ſhield, with this about it, DVM FORMAS MINVIS:
Diamonds, as all know, are impaired while they are faſhioned
and pointed.
            Sir Henry Lea vpon ſome Aſtrologicall conſideration,

vſed to her late Maieſties he now, the whole conſtellation
of Ariadnes crowne, culminant in her nativitie, with this
word: CAELVM QVE SOLVMQVE BE AVIT.
            
            A ſetled conſcience did he ſhew, which made a Haleyon
hovering againſt the winde with, CONSTANS CONTRARIA
SPERNIT. The Fiſhers do ſay, that when
it is dead and hanged vp, turneth the belly alwaies to the
winde.
            He might ſeeme to be in ſome hard diſtreſſe, which carried
a Viper vpon his hand, with this word over written,
MORS, VEL MORSVS.
            
            He might ſeeme to reach at ſome of Vulcans order,
which made a Bucke caſting his hornes, with INERMIS
DEFORMIS over him; and vnder him, CVR DOLENT
HABENTES?
            
            It was ſome loving conceite expreſſed by him, which
bare two Torches, the one light, the other out, with, EXTINGƲOR
A SIMILI.
            
            Another preſenting himſelfe at the Tilt, to ſhew himſelfe
to be but yong in theſe ſervices, and reſolving of no
one Impreſe, tooke onely a white ſhield, as all they did in
olde time, that had exployted nothing: and in the baſe
poynt thereof made a Painters penſill, and a little ſhell of
colours, with this Spaniſh word, HAZED ME QVE
QVIRES, 
                     •
                  d eſt, Make of me what you will.
            At that time one bare a paire of Scales, with fire in one
ballance, and ſmoake in the other, thereby written, PONDER
ARE, ERR ARE.
            
            The ſame day was borne by an other, many flies about
a candle, with, SIC SPLENDIDIORA PETVNTVR.
            
            In an other ſhield, (if I am not deceived) droppes fell
downe into a fire, and there-vnder was written, TAMEN
NON EXTINGVENDA.
            
            The Sunne in another ſhield did ſeeme to caſt his rayes
vpon a ſtarre, partely over-ſhadowed with a cloude, and
thereby was ſet downe, TANTVM, QƲANTVM.
            
            
               
A letter folded and ſealed vp, ſuperſcribed, LEGE ET
RELEGE, was borne by another, and this laſt I referre
to the Readers conſideration.
            Confident vvas he in the goodnes of his cauſe, and the
Iuſtice of our Land, who onely pictured Iustiti
                     •
                  
                with her
Ballance and Sword, and this beeing an Anagramme of
his name, DVM ILLA, EVINCAM.
            
            For whom alſo was deviſed by his learned friend, Pallas
defenſive Shield with G
                     •
                  rg
                     •
                  ns head thereon, in reſpect
of his late Soveraignes moſt gratious patronage of him,
with this Anagrammaticall woorde, NIL MALVM,
CVI DEA.
            
            
               
                  Caetera deſunt.
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶Grave Speeches, and wittie Apothegmes
of woorthie Perſonages
of this Realme in former
times.
            
               TWenty yeares ſince, while I: Biſhop
(whoſe memory for his learning is
deare to me) and my ſelfe turned
over all our Hiſtorians wee could
then finde, for diverſe endes, wee
beganne to note aparte the Apothegms
or Speeches (call them
what ye wil) of our nation. Which
ſince that time I have ſo farre encreaſed, as our Countrey-Writers
ſpare in this point, have affoorded; and
heere doe offer them vnto you. Albeit I doe knowe
they will lie open to the cenſure of the youth of our time,
who for the moſt part, are ſo over-gulled with ſelf-liking,
that they are more then giddy in admiring themſelves, and
carping whatſoever hath beene done or ſaide heeretofore,
Nevertheleſſe I hope that all are not of one humour, and
doubt not, but that there is diverſitie of taſtes, as was among
Horaces gueſts; ſo that which ſeemeth vnſavorie to
one, may ſeemed dainty to another, and the moſt witleſſe
ſpeech that ſhalbe ſet downe, wil ſeeme wittie to ſome. We
knowe that whereas Dianaes Temple at Epheſus was burned
that night that Alexander the Great was borne;
                  
                     ••
                  eer. de Nat. Deorum lib. 2. one
ſaide, It was no marvel, for ſhe was then abſent, as mother
Midwiſe,
               Plutarch in Alexand
                     ••
                  . 
               at ſo great a child-birth▪ Tully dooth commend
this for a wittie conceit, and Plutarch condemneth it as a

witleſſe ieaſt. The like is to be looked for in theſe, which
nevertheleſſe whatſoever they are in themſelves, or in other
mens iudgements, I commend them to ſuch indifferent,
courteous, modeſt Readers, as doe not thinke baſely
of the former ages, their country, and countriemen; leaving
to other to gather the pregnant Apothegmes of our time,
which I knowe wil finde farre more favour. And that I
may ſet them in order of time, I will beginne with the antient
Britan Prince, called by the Rom
                  •
               ns Caratacu
                     •
                  
                (happly
in his owne tongue Caradoc) who flouriſhed in the
partes now called Wales, about the ſixt
                  •
               eth yeare after the
birth of Chriſt.
            CAratacus a Britaine that 9. yeeres withſtood the Roman
p
                     ••
                  ſſance, was at length vanquiſhed, and in triumphant
manner with his wife, daughters, and brethren,
preſented to Claudius the Emperour, in the view of the
whole cittie of Rome. But he nothing appalled with this
adverſitie, delivered this ſpeech; Had my moderation and
carriage in prosperitie, beene anſwerable to my Nobilitie and
Eſtate, I might have come hither rather a friend than a captive;
neither would you have diſdained to have entred amitie
with me being nobly deſcended and ſoveraigne over many people.
My preſent ſtate, as it is reproachfull to me, 
                  •
               o it is honorable
to you: I had horſemen, munition and money, what marvel
is it, if I were loath to looſe thems If you will be ſoveraign
                  •
               
over all, by conſequence all muſt ſerve you: Had I yeelded at
the firſt, neither my power, nor your glorie had beene renewned,
and after my execution oblivion bad anſewed: But if you
ſave my uſe, I ſhall be for ever a preſident and proofe of your
clemencie. This manly ſpeech purchaſed pardon for him
and his, and the Senate aſſembled adiudged the taking of
this poore Prince of Wales, as glorious, as the conquering
of Siphax King of Numidia by P. Scipio, or of Perſes King
of Macedonia by L. Paulus. [Tacitu
                  •
               ]
            
               
When this 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                now enl
                  •
               rged was carried about
to ſee the ſtate and magnificence of Rome, Why doe you
(ſaide hee) ſo greedily deſire our poore cottages, when as you
have ſuch ſtately and magnificall pallaces? [Zonaras]
            In the time of Nero, when the Britans could no longer
beare the iniuſtice wherewith the Romans both h
                  •
               re and
elſewhere grounded their greatnes; Bundica, called by ſome
Boadicia, Princeſſe then of the partes of Norffolke and Suffolke,
exceedingly iniuried by them, animated the Britan
                  •
               
to ſhake off the Roman bondage, and concluded: Let the
Romaines which are no better than Hares and F
                     •
                  xe
                     •
                   vnderſtand
that they make a wrong match with Wool
                     •
                  es and Greyhoundes:
And with that woorde lette an Hare o
                  •
               t of her
lappe, as a fore-token of the Romans fearefulneſſe, but
the ſucceſſe of the b
                  •
               ttell prooved otherwiſe. [Xiphilinus.]
            
               Calgacus a warrelike Britan commaunding in the north
parte of this Iſle, when he had encouraged his people with
a long ſpeach to withſtand the Romans ready to invade
them, concluded emphatically with theſe words, You are
now come to the ſhocke, thinke of your aunceſtors, thinke of
your poſteritie: for the Britans before the arivall of the Romans
enioyed happy liberty, and now were in daunger of
moſt heavy ſlaverie.
            
               Severus the Emperour an abſolute Lorde of the moſt
parte of this Iſle, when from meane eſtate hee had aſcended
to the higheſt honour, was woont to ſay, I have beene
all, and am never the better.
            
            When hee lay ſicke of the gowt at Yorke, and the ſouldiers
had ſaluted his ſonne there by the name of Auguſtus as
their Soveraigne: he got him vppe, cauſed the principall
practiſers of that fact to be brought before him, and when
they proſtrate craved pardon, hee laying his hand vppon
his head, ſayde; You ſhall vnderſtand, that my head, and not
my feete dooth governe the Empire: and ſhortly after ended
his life in the cittie of Yorke with theſe wordes; I found the
State troubleſome every where, and I leave it quiet even to

the Britans, and the Empire ſure and firme to my children, if
they be good, but vnſure and weake if they be bad: A man he
was verie induſtrious, of marvellous diſpatch, and ſo invred
in continuall action, that at the laſt gaſpe he ſaid, And
is there any thing for me to doe now?
            
            While he ruled, the world was ſo looſe that three thouſand
were indicted at Rome of adultery, at which time Iulia
the Empreſſe blamed the wife of Argetocox a northern
Britaine Lady, that the Brittiſh women did not according
to womanhoode carry themſelves, in accompanying
with men, (for then tenne or twelve men hadde twoo or
three wives common among them.) But ſhe not ignorant
of the Roman incontinencie, replied; Wee accompany indeede
with the beſt and braveſt men openly, but moſt vile and
baſe companions doe vſe you ſecretly. [Xiphilinus]
            
            At Yorke alſo died Conſtantinus Chlorus the Emperour,
who being not able to furniſh Diocleſian his conſort in the
Empire with ſuch a maſſe of mony, as he required at that
inſtant, ſaide, Hee thought it better for the common-weale
that many ſhould be in the handes of private men, then ſhutte
vp in the Emperors coffers; concurring with Traiane, who
compared the treaſure of the Prince vnto the ſplene, that
the greater it groweth, the limbes are the leſſer. [Euſebius.]
            His ſonne C
                     •
                  nſtantine, inveſted in the Empire at Yorke,
(and a Britan borne as all Writers conſent, beſide Nicophorus
who lived not long ſince, and now Lipſius deceived
by the falſe printed coppie of Iul. Firmicus,) the firſt Emperour
which advanced the faith of Chriſt, followed the
humilitie of Chriſt, for hee vſed to call the common people,
His fellow ſervants and brethren of the Church of God.
            
            When a ſlattering Prieſt (for in all ages the Clericall
will flatter, as well the Laicall) tolde him that his godlines
& virtues iuſtly deſervd to have in this world the empire
of the world, and in the world to come, to raigne with the
ſonne of God: The humble Emperour cried, Fie, fie, for
ſhame, let me heare no more ſuch vnſeemely speeches: but rather

ſuppliantly pray vnto my Almightie Maker, that in this
life, and in the life to come, I may ſeeme worthy to be his ſervant.
            
            When hee ſought by ſevere edicts to aboliſh all heatheniſh
ſuperſtition, and laboured by godly lawes to eſtabliſh
the true religion and ſervice of Chriſt; yea, and vnceſſantly
endevoured to draw men vnto the faith, perſwading,
reproving, praying, intreating in time, out of time,
publikely and privately: he one day ſaid merrily, yet truly
vnto the Biſhop, that he had bidden to a banquet, As ye
be Biſhops within the Church, ſo may I alſo ſeeme to be a Biſhop
out of the Church.
            
            He diſſwading one from covetouſnes, did with his lance
draw out the length and bredth of a mans grave, ſaying:
This is all that thou ſhalt have when thou art dead, if thou canſt
happily get ſo much.
            
            He made a law, that no Chriſtian ſhould be bondman
to a Iew, and if that any Iew did buy any Chriſtian for his
ſlave, hee ſhould bee fined therefore, and the Chriſtian
enfranchiſed; adding this reaſon: That it ſtoode not with
equitie, that a Chriſtian ſhould be ſlave vnto the murderers of
Chriſt.
            
            Ethelbert King of Kent, was hardly induced to imbrace
Chriſtian Religion at the perſwaſion of Auguſtine, ſent to
convert the Engliſh Nation: but at length, being perſwaded
and deſirous to be baptized, ſaid: Let vs come alſo to
the King of Kings, and giver of Kingdomes: it may redound to
our ſhame, that we which are firſt in authoritie, ſhould come
liſt to Chriſtianitie: But I doe beſeech that true King, that
he would not reſpect the precedence in time, but devotion of my
m
                  •
               nde, [Ioſcelinus.]
            
               When Paulinus brought vnto Edwin king of Northumberland,
the glad tidings of the ſalvation of mankinde by
Chriſt, and preached the Goſpel vnto the king and his
Nobilitie, zealouſly and eloquently, opening vnto them
the myſteries of our faith and precepts of Chriſtian Religion;
one of the Lords thus ſpake vnto the King, (but

ſome now happily will ſmile at this ſpeach,) We may 
                  ••
               ely
compare mans ſtate vnto this little Robbin-redbreſt, that is
now in this cold weather heere in the wa
                  •
               me chamber chirpeng
and ſinging merrily, and as long as ſhe ſhall remaine heere, wee
ſhall ſee and vnderſtand how ſhe doeth: but anone when ſhe ſhall
be flowne hence abroad into the wide world, and ſhall be forced
to feele the bitter ſtormes of hard winter, we ſhall not know
what ſhall become of her: So likewiſe we ſee how men fare as
long as they live among vs, but after they be dead, neither wee
nor our Religion have any knowledge what becomes of them:
Wherefore I do thinke it wiſedome to give care vnto this man,
who ſeemeth to ſhew vs, not onely what ſhall become of vs, but
alſo how we may obtaine overlaſting life heereafter. Beda.
            
            When Rodoald king of the Eaſt Angles, being wonne
with rewards, was ſhamefully minded to have delivered
vnto Edelfride the king of Northumberland, the innocent
Prince Edwin, who had fled vnto him to be ſaved from
the bloodie hands of Edelfride, who had vnlawfully bereaft
him of his kingdome: His wife turned his intent, by
telling him, that It ſtoode not with the high and ſacred state
of a King to buy and ſell the bodies of men, as it were a peti
                     •
                  
                  chapman:
or that which is more diſhonourable, ſlave-like to
ſell away his faith, a thing which hee ought to hold more precious
then all the gold and gemmes of the whole world yea and his
owne life. Beda.
            
               Ina King of Weſt-Saxons, had three daughters, of
whom vpon a time he demanded whether they did love
him, and ſo would do during their lives above all others;
the two elder ſware deepely they would, the yongeſt, but
the wiſeſt told her father flatly without flattery, That albest
ſhe did love, honour, and reverence him, and ſo would whilſt
ſhe lived, as much as nature and daughterly dutie at the vttermoſt
could expect: Yet ſhe did thinke that one day it would come
to paſſe, that ſhe ſhould affect another more ſervently, meaning
her husband, when ſhe were married: Who being made one fleſh
with her as God by commaundement had told, and nature had
taught h
                     •
                  r ſhe was to cleave faſt to, forſaking father and mother,

kiſſe and kinne. [Anonymus.] One referreth this to the
daughters of king Leir.
            
            Imperious was that ſpeech of Theodore the Grecian,
Archbiſhop of Canterbury, in depriving a poore Engliſh
Biſhop, Although we can charge you with nothing, yet that
we w
                     ••
                  l we wi
                     •
                  l: like to that, Sie volo, ſic 
                     •
                  ubeo, ſtat pro ratione
voluntas: But humble was the Engliſh Biſhops reply: Paul
appealed from the Iewes to Caeſar, and I from you to Chriſt. Vita
S. Wilfredi.
            
            The reverend Bede, whome wee may more eaſily admire,
than ſufficiently praiſe for his profound learning in
a moſt barbarous age, when he was in the pangs of death,
ſaide to the ſtanders by; I have ſo lived among you, that I am
not aſhamed of my life, neither feare I to die, becauſe I have a
moſt gratious Redeemer. Hee yeelded vp his life with this
praier for the Church; O King of glory, Lorde of Hoſtes,
which haſt triumphantly aſcended into heaven, leave vs not
fatherleſſe, but ſend the promiſed ſpirit of thy trueth amongeſt
vs. Some write that hee went to Rome, and interpreted
there S, P, Q, R, in deriſion of the Gothes ſwarming to
Reme, Stultus Populus Quaerit Roman: and that in his
returne hee died at Genoa, where they ſhew his toombe:
But certaine it is that he was ſent for to Rome by Sergius
the Pope, and more certaine that hee died at Weremouth,
and from thence was tranſlated to Durham: And that I
may incidently note that which I have heard: Not manie
yeeres ſince a French Biſhop returning out of Scotland,
comming to the Church of Durham, and brought to the
ſhrine of Saint Cu
                     •
                  hbert, kneeled downe, and after his
devotions, offered a Baubie, ſaying; Sancte Cuthberte, ſi
ſanctus ſi
                     •
                  , ora pro me: But afterward, being brought vnto
the Toombe of Bed
                     •
                  , ſaying likewiſe his Oriſons, offered
there a French crowne with this alteration, Sancte Beda,
quia ſanctus es, ora pro me.
            
            
               Iohannes Erigena ſurnamed Scotus, a man renowned for
learning, ſitting at the Table, in reſpect of his learning,
with Charles the bawld Emperour and King of Fraunce,
               
behaved himſelfe as a ſlovenly Scholler, nothing Courtly;
whereupon the Emperour asked him merrily, Quid intereſt
inter Scotum & Sotum; What is betweene a Scot
and a Sot? Hee merrily, but yet malapertly aunſwered,
Menſa, The Table; as though the Emperour were the
Sot, and hee the Scot. [Rog: Hovede
                     •
                  us,]
            On an other time the Emperour did ſerte downe vnto
him a diſh with two faire great fiſhes, and one little one,
willing him to be carver vnto two other Schollers that fate
beneath him: Then Maiſter Iohn, who was but a little
man, layed the two great fiſhes vppon his owne trencher,
and ſet downe the one little fiſh vnto the other two Schollers,
who were bigge men. Which when the Emperour
ſawe, hee ſmiling ſaide; In good faith Maiſter Iohn, you
are no indifferent divider: Yes if it like your Highneſſe, verie
indifferent (ſaide he) for heere (poynting to himſelfe and
the two great fiſhes) be two great ones, and a little one, and
ſo yonder (reaching his hand towardes the Schollers) are
two great ones and a little one. Idem
            
            Wenefridus borne at Kirton in Devonſhire, after furnamed
Boniface, who converted Freeſel and to Chriſtianitie,
was wont to ſay, In olde time there were golden Prelats, and
woodden Chalices, but in his time woodden Prelates, and golden
Chalices. [Beatus Rhenanus libr. 2. rerum Germen
                  •
               arum.]
            
               Ethelwold the Biſhop of Wincheſter in the time of king
Edgar, in a great famine, ſolde away all the ſacred golde
and ſilver veſſells of all his church, to releeve the hungerſtarved
poore people, ſaying, That there was no reaſon that
the ſenſeleſſe temples of God ſhould abound in riches, and living
temples of the holy-ghoſt ſtarve for hunger.
            
            Whenas Kinnad King of Scot
                     •
                  
                a vaſſall to King Eadgar
of England, had ſaide at his Table, That it ſtoode not with
the honour of the Princes of this Iſle to be ſubiect to that Dandiprat
Eadgar, who was indeede but of ſmall ſtature, yet
full of courage. He vnderſtanding thereof withdrew Kinnad
privately into a wood, as though hee had to conferre

with him of ſome important ſecret; where he offered him
the choice of two ſwords, prepared for that purpoſe, with
theſe wordes, Now we are alone, you may try your manhood:
now may it appeare who ſhould be ſubiect to the other: retire
not one foote backe: It ſtandeth not with the honour of Princes
to brave it at the Table, and not to dare it in the field. But Kinad
heere-at diſmaied, deſired pardon by excuſe, and obtained
it. [Malmeſburienſis pag. 33.]
            The ſame king Eadgar, having brought into his ſubiection
the aforeſaid Kinnad king of Scottes, Malcolm king
of Cumberland, Mac cuis the arch pirate lord of the Iſles,
with Dufnall, Griffith, Howell, Iacob, Iudethil
                     •
                  
                Princes of
Wales, was rowed by them in triumphant manner in his
barge vpon the river of Dee at Cheſter, at which time it
is reported he ſaide; Then may my ſucceſſours the Kings of
England glorie, when they ſhall doe the like. [Marianus Scotus
Anno 973.
            When Hinguar of Denmarke came ſo ſodainely vppon
Edmund the king of the Eaſt-Angles, that hee was forced
to ſeeke his ſafetie by flight, hee happened vnhappily on a
troupe of Danes, who fell to examining of him, whether
hee knew where the king of the Eaſt-Angles was, whome
Edmund thus anſwered; Even now when I was in the palace,
he was there, and when I went from thence, he departed thence,
and whether he ſhall eſcape your handes or no, onely God knoweth.
But ſo ſoone as they once heard him name God, the
godleſſe infidells pittifully martired him. [Vita Sancti Edmundi.
            
            When Brithwold a noble Saxon marching againſt the
Danes encamped neare Maldon, was invited by the Abbot
of Elie to take his dinner with him, he refuſing, anſwered;
Hee would not dine from his companies, becauſe hee could not
fight without his companies. Liber Elienſis.
            
            King Canutus, commonly called Knute, walking on the
ſea ſands neare to Southampton, was extolled by ſome of
his flattering followers, and tolde that hee was a king of
kings, the mightieſt that raigned farre and neare, that both

ſea and land were at his commaund: But this ſpeach did
put the godly King in mind of the infinite power of God,
by whome Kings have and enioy their power, and therevpon
hee made this demonſtration to refell their flatterie:
He tooke off his cloake, and wrapping it round together,
ſ
                  •
               te downe vpon it neare to the ſea, that then beganne to
ſlowe, ſaying, Sea, I commaund thee that thou touch not my
feete: 
               
                  〈◊〉
                he had not ſo ſoone ſpoken the worde, but the
ſurg
                  •
               ng wave daſhed him. He then riſing vp, and going
backe, ſaide: Ye ſee now my Lorde, what good cauſe you have
to call me a King, that am not able by my commaundement to
ſtay one wave: no morta
                     •
                  l man doubtleſſe is woorthy of ſuch an

                     〈◊〉
                   name, no man hath ſuch commaund, but one King, which
ruleth all: Let vs honour him, let vs call him King of all kings,
and Lord of all nations: Let vs not onely confeſſe, bvt alſo pr
                     •
                  
                  feſſe
him to be ruler of the heavens, ſea, an
                     •
                   land. [Polydorus
and others.
            When Edric the extorte
                  •
                was deprived by King C
                     •
                  ute
of the government of Mercia; hee impatient of the diſgrace,
tolde him he had deſerved better, for that to pleaſure
him, hee had firſt revolted from his Soveraigne king
Edmund, and alſo diſpatched him. Whereat C
                     •
                  ute all appalled,
anſwered; And thou ſhalt die for thy deſert, when
                     ••
                  
thou arte a traitour to God and me, in killing thy king, and my
confederate brother; His bloud be vpon thy head, which haſt
layed handes vpon the Lordes annoynted. Some reporte that
he ſaide; For his deſerts he ſhould be advaunced above all the
Nobilitie of England, which h
                  •
                c
                  •
               mmediately performed,
advauncing his head vpon the Tower of London. [Florilegus.
            
            King Edward the Confeſſour, one afternoone lying in
his bedde with the curtaine, drawne round about him, a
poore pilfering Courtier came into his chamber, where
finding the Kings Casket open, which Hugoline his chamberlaine
had forgotten to ſhut, going foorth to pay money
in haſte, hee tooke out ſo much money as hee could
                  •
               
well carry, and went away. But inſatiable deſire brought

him againe, and ſo the third time, when the King who lay
ſtill all this while, and would not ſeeme to ſee, beganne to
ſpeake to him, and bade him ſpeedily be packing; For he
was well if hee coulde ſee, for if Hugoline came and tooke him
there, he were not onely like to looſe all that he had gotten, but
alſo ſtretch an halter. The fellow was no ſooner gone, but
Hugoline came in; and finding the Casket open, and much
money taken away, was greatly mooved: But the King
willed him not to he grieved, For (ſaide he) he that hath it
had more neede of it then wee have. This at that time was
adiudged Chriſtian lenitie, but I thinke in our age it will
be accounted ſimplicitie in the woorſt ſenſe. [
                  Ʋita Sancti
Edwardi.
            
            This Edward haſted out of Normandie, whither his
expelled father king Ethelred had fled with him, with a
great power to recover the kingdome of England from
the Danes, neere vnto whoſe forces hee was encamped,
ready to give them battell: But when his Captaines promiſed
him aſſured victorie, and that they would not leave
one Dane alive: God forbid (quoth Edward,) that the kingdome
ſhould be recovered for me one man, by the death of ſo
many thouſand men: It is better that I do leade a private and
vnbloody life, then be a King by ſuch but chery: And therewithall
brake vp Campe and retyred into Normandy,
where he ſtaied vntill God ſent oportunitie to obtaine the
kingdome without blood. [Paulus Aemilius.]
            
               Harold as hee waited on the cup of the ſaid king Edward,
chanced to ſtumble with one foot that he almoſt
kiſſed the ground, but with the other legge he recovered
himſelfe and ſaved the wine, whereat his father Godwyn
Earle of Kent, who then dined with the King, ſmiling ſa
                  •
               d:
Now one brother did helpe another: At this word, although
ſpoken proverbially, the Kings blood beganne to riſe,
thinking how ſhamefully they had murdered his brother
Alfrede, and angerly anſwered: And ſo might my brother
have beene a helpe to me, if it had pleaſed you. [ƲitaS. Edwards.]
            
               
               The ſame king Edward paſſing out of this life, commended
his wiſe to the Nobilitie, and ſaid; That ſhe had
carried her ſelfe as his wife abroad, but as his ſiſter or daughter
at home: Afterward ſeeing ſuch as were preſent weeping
and lamenting for him, he ſaid; If you loved me, you would
for beare weeping and reioyce, becauſe I go to my father, with
whom I ſhall receive the ioyes promiſed to the faithfull, not
through my merits, but by the free mercy of my Saviour,
which ſheweth mercy on whom he pleaſeth. [Eilredus Rivallenſis]
            
               Sywarde the martiall Earle of Northumberland, feeling
in his ſicknes that he drew towards his end, aroſe out
of his bed and put on hi
                  •
                Armour, ſaying, That it became
not a valiant man to die lying, like a beaſt: and ſo he gave vp
the Ghoſt ſtanding: As valiantly both ſpoken and performed,
as it was by Veſpaſian.
            
            When the ſaid Siward vnderſtood that his ſonne whom
he had ſent in ſervice againſt the Scottiſhmen, was ſtaine,
he demaunded whether his wound were in fore part or
hinder pa
                  •
               t of his body, when it was anſwered in the fore
part, he replied: I am right glad, neither wiſh any other death
to me or mine. [Hen. Hunt
                     •
                  ngdon.]
            In this age when a Biſhop living looſely was charged
that his converſation was not according to the Apoſtles
lives, he made a mocke at it▪ and excuſ
                  •
               d himſelfe with this
verſe, which was after taken vp for a common excuſe in
that behalfe: Nunc aliud tempus, a
                     ••
                  j pro tempere m
                     •
                  res. [Anonymus.]
            When the fatall period of the Saxon Empire was now
complete, and battells were marſhalled betweene William
Duke of Normandy, and Harold King of England, Girthe
Haroldes yonger brother, not holding it beſt to hazard the
kingdome of England at one caſt, ſignified to the King,
that the ſucc
                  •
               ſſe of warre was doubtfull, that victory was
ſwayed rather by fortune than by valour, that adviſed delay
was moſt important in Martiall affaires, and if ſo bee

brother (ſaid he,) You have plighted your faith to the Duke,
retyre your ſelfe, for no force can ſerve againſt a mans owne
conſcience, God will revenge the violation of an 
                     •
                  the: You may
reſerve your ſelfe to give them a new encounter, which will be
more to their terrour: As for me, if you will commit the charge
to me, I will performe both the part of a kinde brother, and a
couragious Leader. For being cleare in conſcience, I ſhall ſell
my life, or diſcomfit your enemy with more felicitie.
            
            
               But the King not liking his ſpeech, anſwered: I will never
turne my backe with diſhonour to the Norman, neither
can I in any ſort diſgeſt the reproach of a baſe minde: Wel, then
be it ſo, (ſaid ſome diſcontented of the company,) let him
beare the brunt that hath given the occaſion. [Anonymus.]
            
               VVIlliam Conquerour when he invaded this Iland,
chanced at his arrivall to be graveled, and one of
his feete ſtacke ſo faſt in the ſand, that he fell to the ground.
Wherewithall one of his attendants caught him by the
arme and helped him vp, ſaying: Stand vp my 
                     •
                  iege Lord
and be of good cheare, for now you have taken faſt footing in
England: and then eſpying that he brought vp ſand and
earth in his hand, added: Yea and you have taken livery and
ſeiſin of the Country: For you know that in delivering of
livery and ſeiſin, a peece of the earth is taken. [Hiſt. Normanica.]
            A Wizard, (or a Wiſe-man as they then called them,)
had fore-told William that he ſhould ſafely arrive an England
with his whole Armie, without any impeachment of
Harold: the which after it came it paſſe, the King ſent for
the Wizard to conferre further with him. But when it was
told him that he was drowned in that ſhip which onely of
all the whole fleete miſcarried, The Conquerour ſaid: He
would never make account of that ſcience that profited more
the ignorant then the skilfull therein, for he could fore-ſee my
good fortune, but not his owne miſhap. [Idem.]
            
               
That morning that he was to ioyne battell with Harold,
his atmorer put on his backe-peece before, and his breaſtplate
behinde, the which being eſpied by ſome that ſtood
by, was taken on them for an ill token, and therefore adviſed
him not to fight that day; to whom the Duke anſwered:
I force not of ſuch fooleries, but if I have any skill 
                     〈◊〉
                  
South-ſaying, (as in ſooth I have none,) it doth prognoſticate
that I ſhall change copie from a Duke to a King. [Idem.]
            
            Magike in the time of Ner
                     •
                  , was diſcovered to be but
a vanitie, in the declining ſtate of the Roman Empire accounted
by the Gentiles a verity: in the time of Hildebrand,
(if we beleeve Authors,) ſo approoved that it was commonly
practiſed: For as in the time of Vale
                     •
                  s, divers curious
men (as hath beene ſaid,) by the falling of a ring Magically
prepared vpon the letters 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , iudged that one
Theodorus ſhould ſucceede in the Empire, when indeede
Theodoſius did. So when Hildebrand was Pope, by like curioſities
it was found that Odo ſhould ſucccede. Wherevppon
Odo Earle of Kent, and Biſhop of Bayeux, brother to
king William the Conquerour, devoured the Papacy in
hope, ſent mony his perſwading meſſengers to Rome, perchaſed
a pallace there, and prepared thitherward; when
king William for his preſumption, and other his miſdemenours
ſtaied him, and committed him, ſaying: Offenſive
foole-hardines muſt be timely reſtrained [Liber Cadomenſis.]
            
            When the ſame Od
                     •
                  
                who was both Biſhop of Bai
                     •
                  ux
in Normandy, and Earle of Kent, in former time had ſo diſloyally
carried himſelfe againſt king William the Conquerour,
that he complained of him to his Lords: Lanfranc
Archbiſhop of Canterbury adviſed the King to commit
him. But what ſay you
                     •
                  
                (quoth the King,) whenas he is a
Clergyman? You may not, ſaide he, commit the Biſhop of Baieux,
but you may well 
                     〈◊〉
                   the Earle of Kent [W: Malmſbur]
Like vnto this was that diſtinction of Piramus, Secretary
to Charles the fift in late yeares, when Pope Iulius
the ſecond did combine with the French king, againſt the
Emperour, of the Popes honeſty, and Iulius diſhoneſty.
            
               
This King William, by reaſon of ſickenes, kept his
chamber a long time, whereat the French King ſcoffing
ſaide: The King of England heth long in childe-bed. Which
when it was reported vnto King William, hee aunſwered;
When I am churched there ſhal be a thouſand lights in France:
(alluding to the lights that women vſed to beare when
they were churched,) and that hee performed within few
dayes after, waſting the French frontires with fire and
ſword.
            The ſame King at the time of his death, ſaide; I appoint

                     〈◊〉
                   ſucceſſour in the kingdome of England, but I commend it to
the eternall God, whoſe I am, and in whoſe handes all thinges
are: happly remembring that of the Monke before ſpecified,
pag. 5.
            This king perceiving his owne defects, in ſome poynts,
for want of learning, did exhort his children oftentimes
to learning with this ſaying, An vnlearned Prince is a crowned
Aſſe: Which ſpeech tooke ſo great impreſſion in his
ſonne Henry, that hee obtained by ſtudie and learning the
ſurname of Beauclearke, or fine Scholler. [Annales Eccleſia
Cant. Malmeſburienſi
                     •
                  .
            
            
               VVilliam Rufus loved wel to keep vacant Biſhopriks
and Abbies in his handes, ſaying; Chriſtes bread is
ſweet, dainty, and moſt delicate for Kings.
            
            But although this King made moſt commonly, as it
were, port-ſale of the Spirituall livings; yet when twoo
Monkes were at drop-vied Bezantines (the currant golde
of that age) before him for an Abbey, hee eſpied a third
Monke of their company ſtanding in a corner, whom the
King asked, what hee would give to be Abbot? Not one
farthing (ſaide he) for I renounced the world and riches, that
I might ſerve God more ſincerely. Then (ſaid the King) thou
arte moſt woorthy to be made Abbot, and thou ſhalt have it.
[Liber Cantuar.
            
            
               
When newes were brought him that the French King
had beſieged the cittie of Conſtances in Normandy, 
               
                  •
               e poſted
with a few to the ſea coaſt, to take ſhip. But becauſe
the winde blew very ſtrong from South, the ſailers ſignified,
that it was very dangerous for him to take Sea, but
the King replied, Hoiſe vp ſailes in Gods name, for I have
not heard of a King drowned by tempeſt: You ſhall ſee both
winde and weather ſerviceable to vs. Anſwerable to that of
Iulius Caeſar, which inforced a poore Pilote in the like caſe
to launch foorth, and in the rage of the ſtorme comforted
him with ſaying, Caeſarem & Caeſaris fortunam vebis. And
as couragiouſly as that of Charles the fift, who in the battel
of Tunis when he was adviſed by the Marquiſe of Gu
                     •
                  
                  ſto
to retire his perſon, when the great ordonance began
to play, ſaide; Marqueſſe, thou never heardſt that an Emperour
was ſlaine with a great ſhot.
            
            I will heere preſent you with an other ſpeech (or call
it what you will) of the ſame King William Rufus, out of
the good and hiſtoricall Poet Robert of Gloceſter, that you
may compare a Princes pride in that age, with our private
pride, and that our firſt fineſt Poets may ſmile at the verſes
of that time, as ſucceeding ages, after ſome hundred
yeeres will happly ſmile at theirs:

                  As his Chamberlaine him brought, as he roſe on a day.
                  A morrow for to weare, a paire of hoſe of Say:
                  He asked what they coſtned, three ſhillings he ſeid,
                  Fie a dibles quoth the King, who ſey ſo vile a deede:
                  King to weare ſo vile a cloth, but it coſtned more,
                  Buy a paire for a marke, or thou ſhalt ha cory f
                        •
                     re.
                  A worſe paire enough, the other ſwith him brought,
                  And ſaid they coſtned a marke, & vnneth he them ſo boght:
                  Aye bel-amy, quoth the King, theſe were well bought,
                  In this manner ſerve me, other ne ſerve me not.
               
            
            Hitherto alſo may be referred that of this king William,
who the morning before hee was ſlaine with an arrow in

hunting, tolde his company he dreamed the laſt night before,
that an extreame cold winde paſſed throgh his ſides:
whereupon ſome diſſwaded him to hunt that day, but hee
reſolved to the contrary anſwering. They are no good Chriſtians
that regard dreames. But he found the dreame too
true, being ſhot through the ſide by Walter Tirell. [Tragmentum
antiquae hiſtoriae Franc. à P. P
                     •
                  th
                     ••
                   aditum.
            
            OF Henry the firſt I have read no memorable ſpeach,
but what I have read I will report. He was by common
voice of the people commended for his wiſedome, eloquence,
and victories, diſpraiſed for covetouſnes, cruelty,
and lechery: Of which hee left proofe by his ſixteene
baſtards. But it ſeemeth that his iuſtice was deemed by the
common people to be crueltie, for the learned of that age
ſurnamed him the Lion of Iuſtice, [Huntingd. Polycraticon,
Gemeticenſis.
            
            It was the cuſtome of the Court in the time of King
Henry the firſt, that bookes, billes, and letters ſhoulde be
drawne, and ſigned for ſervitors in the Court, concerning
their owne matters, without fee. But at this time Turſtane
the kings ſteward, or Le Deſpencer, as they then called him,
from whom the family of the L. Spencers came, exhibited
to the king a complaint, againſt Adam of Yarmouth clarke
of the Signet, for that he refuſed to ſigne without fee, a bill
paſſed for him. The king firſt heard Turſtane, commending
the olde cuſtome at large, and charging the Clarke for
exacting ſomewhat contrary thereunto, for paſſing his
booke. Then the Clarke was heard, who briefly ſaide, I
received the Booke, and ſent vnto your ſteward, deſiring
him only to beſtow of me two ſpice cakes,Gastellos. made for your
owne mouth, who returned anſwer; He would not, and
thereupon I denied to ſeale his Booke. The King greatly
diſliked the ſteward for returning that negative, and
forthwith made Adam ſit downe vppon the bench, with

the ſeale and Turſtanes Booke before him, but compelled
the ſteward to put off his cloake, to fetch two of the beſt
ſpice cakes for the kings owne mouth, to bring them in a
faire white napkin, and wi
                  •
               h lowe curtſie to preſent them
to Adam th
                  •
                C
                  •
               arke; which being accordingly performed,
the Ki
                  •
               g comma
                  •
               ded Adam to ſeale and delive, him his
Booke, and made them ſ
                  •
               endes, add
                  •
               ng this ſpeech, Officers
of the Court muſt gratifie, anaſhew a caſt of their office,
not onely one to another: but alſo to all ſtrangers, whenſoever
neede ſhall require. [
                     •
                  ualterus Mapes. De nugis Curialium.
            
            There was allowed a pottle of wine for livery everie
night to be ſerved vp to king Henry the firſt chamber,
but becauſe the king did ſeldome or never vſe to drinke in
the night, Paine Fitz-Iohn his Chamberlaine, and the Pages
of the Chamber did carowſe the wine among them.
On a time it happened the King at midnight called for
wine, but none was to be found: Paine and the Pages beſtured
them
                  •
               elves in vaine, ſeeking wine heere 
                  •
               nd there.
Paine was called in to the King, who asked him if there
were not allowance for livery: hee humbly anſwered that
there was a pottle allowed everie night, but for that hee
never called for it (to ſay the trueth in hope of pardon) wee
drunke it vp amongſt v
                  •
               ; Then (quoth the King) have
you but one pottle every night? that is too ſhorte for mee
and you, from hencefoorth there ſhall be a whole gallon
allowed, whereof the one pottle ſhall be for mee, the other
for you and yours. This I note, not for anie gravi
                  •
               e,
but that the King in that age was commended herein both
for bountie and clemencie. [Cualterus Mapes.
            
            Queene Mawd wife to King Henry the firſt of England,
and daughter to Malcolme Canmore King of Scotland, was
ſo devoutly religious, that ſhe would goe to church barefoote,
and alwayes exerciſe herſelfe in workes of charitie,
inſomuch that when David her brother came out of Scotland
to viſite her, he found her in her privie chamber with
a towell about her middle, waſhing, wiping, and kiſſing

poore peoples feete, which he diſliking ſaide, Verily if the
King your huſband knew this, you ſhould never kiſſe his lippes.
She replied; That the feete of the King of heaven are to bee
preferred before the lippes of a King in earth. [Guil: Malmeſ:
& Math. Paris.
            
            
               Simon Deane of Lincolne, who for his Courtlike carriage
was called to Court, and became a favourite of this
king Henry the firſt, was wont to ſay, I am caſt among courtiers,
as ſalt among quicke Eeles, for that he ſalted, powdred,
and made them ſtirre with his ſalt and ſharpe quipping
ſpeeches. But what ſaieth the Author, who reporteth this
of him; The ſalt loſt his ſeaſon by the moyſture of the Eeles,
and was caſt out on the dunghill: For hee incurring hatred
in Court, was diſgraced, committed, and at laſt baniſhed.
Henr. Huntingdon in Epiſtola.
            
            VVHen the Scottes in the time of king Stephen with
a great army invaded England, the Northerne
people brought to the field the Earle of Albemarle the only
reſpective heire of thoſe partes in his cradle, and placed
him by the Standard, hoping thereby to animate the people:
But Ralph Biſhop of Dureſme animated them more
with this ſaying, Aſſure your ſelves, that this multitude not
trained by diſcipline wil be comberſome to it ſelfe in good ſucceſſe,
and in diſtreſſe eaſily diſcomforted. Which proved accordingly,
for many Scottiſhmen left their carcaſes in the
field. [Hiſtoriola de Standardo.
            
            
               MAwd the Empreſſe, daughter and heire of this king
Henry the firſt, which ſtiled her ſ
                  •
               lfe Lady of the
Engliſhmen, would often ſay to her ſonne king Henry the
ſecond; Be haſty in nothing; Hawkes are made more ſerviceable,
when yee make faire ſhewes of offering meate often, and

yet with-hold it the longer. [Cualterus Mapes. Others Maximes
of her, In arte Reguands proceeding from a niggiſh
olde wife I wittingly omitte, as vnbefitting a Prince.
            
               Robert Earle of Glouceſter baſe ſonne to king Henry the
firſt, the onely martiall man of England in his age, vſed
Stephen Beauchampe with all grace and countenaunce, as
his onely favorite and privado, to the great diſlike of all his
followers. Whereupon when he was diſtreſſed in a conflict,
he called to ſome of his companie for helpe, but one
bitterly bade him, Call nowe to your Stephen. Pardon mee,
pardon me, replieth the Earle, In matters of Venery I muſt
vſe my Stephen, but in Martiall affaires I relie who he vppon
you. [Gualter Mapes de Nugis Curialium.
            
            HEnry the ſecond cauſed his eldeſt ſonne Henry to bee
crowned k
                     •
                  ng, and that day ſerved him at the Table,
Whereuppon the Archebiſhop of Yorke ſaid vnto the
yoong king, Your Maieſtie may reioyce, for there is never a
Prince in the world that hath this day ſuch a waiter a
                  •
                his Table
as you have. Wonder you ſo much a
                  •
                that my Lord (ſaide
the yong king) and dooth my father thinke it an abaſement
for him being diſcended of royall bloud, onely by his mother, to
ſerve me at the Table, that have both a King to my father, and
a Queene to my mother? Which prowde ſpeech when the
vnfortunate father heard, hee rounded the Archbiſhop in
the care, and ſaide; I repent mee, I repent me of nothing more
than of vntimely advauncements. [Anonymus.
            
               Wimund Biſhop of the Iſle of Man, in the time of King
Stephen, a martiall Prelate (as many were in that age) after
he had with many an inrode annoyed the Scots, ſome
Engliſh procured by them ſodainely apprehended him,
put out his eies, and gelded him (as my Author ſaieth) for
the peace of the kingdome, not for the kingdome of heaven.
Who after retiring himſelfe to the Abbey of Biland
in Yorkeſhire, would often couragiouſly ſay, Had I but a

ſparrowe, eye, my enemies ſhould never carry it away ſcot-free.
[Newbrigenſis.]
            When king Plenry the ſecond was at S. Davis in Wales,
and from the cliffes there in a cleere day diſcovered the
coaſt of Ireland, that moſt mighty Monark of this realme,
ſaide; I with my ſhippes am able to make a bridge thither, if it
be no further: which ſpeach of his beeing related to Murchard
king of Lemſter in Ireland; he demaunded if hee added
not to his ſpeech (with the grace of God:) when it was
anſwered, that hee made no mention of God: Then ſaide
hee more cheerefully, I feare him leſſe which truſteth more to
himſelfe, than to the helpe of God. [Giraldus Cambrenſis.
            
            
               Owen of Kevelsoc Prince of Powis admitted to the table
of king Henry the ſecond at Shrewſbury, the king the more
to grace him, reached him one of his owne loaves, which
he cutting in ſmall peeces, and ſetting them as farre off as
he could reach, did eate very leaſurely. When the king demaunded
what he meant thereby, he aunſwered, I doe as
you my Soveraigne, meaning that the king in like manner
tooke the fruition of offices and ſpirituall preferments, as
long as he might. [Giraldus.
            
            The ſame king Henry returning out of Ireland, arrived
at ſaint Davis in Wales, where it was ſignified vnto him,
that the Conqueror of Ireland returning that way, ſhould
die vpon a ſtone called Lech-laver neere the churchyard:
whereupon in a great preſence he paſted over it, and then
reprooving the Welſh-Britans credulity in Merlins Prophecies,
ſaid; Now who will heereafter credite that liar Merlin?
[Giraldus.
            
            
               Gilbert Foliot Biſhop of London diſliking Thomas Becket
Archbiſhop of Canterbury, woulde ſay oftentimes, Ad
Zachaeum non divertiſſet Dominus niſi de ſicomoro iam deſcendiſſet:
That Zachaeus had never entertained and lodged
Chriſt, vnleſſe he had come downe from the figge tree:
As though Chriſt could never like the lofty, vntill they
ſhould humiliate themſelves, and come downe. [Anonymus
Ms.
            
            
               
The ſame king would often ſay, The whole world is 
                     〈◊〉
                  
enough for a great Prince. [Girald. in Diſtinct.
            
            In the time of this Henry the ſecond, the See of Lincolne
was ſo long voyde, as a certaine Convert of Tame prophecied,
that there ſhould be no more Biſhoppes of Lincolne:
But he prooved a truthleſſe prophet, for Geffrey the kings
baſe ſonne was preferred after ſixteene yeeres vacancie
thereunto, but ſo fitte a man, as one ſaide of him, That he
was skilfull in fleecing, but vnskilfull in feeding. [Vitae Epiſcoporum
Eboracenſium.
            
            This gallant baſe Biſhoppe would in his proteſtations
and othes alwayes proteſt, By my faith, and the King my father.
But Walter Mapes the kings Chaplan told him, You
might doe aſwel to remember ſometimes your mothers honeſty,
as to mention ſo often your fathers royaltie. [Mapes de Nugis
Curialium. This Biſhop Ceffrey in all his Inſtruments paſſing
from him, vſed the ſtile of G. Archiepiſcopus Eborum;
but in the circumference of his Seale, to notifie his royall
parentage, Sigillum Galfredi filij Regis Anglorum, as I obſerved
in his Seales.
            
               SAvage a Gentleman which amongſt the firſt Engliſh,
had planted himſelfe in Vlſter in Ireland, adviſed his
ſonne for to builde a caſtle for his better defence againſt
the Iriſh enemy, who valiantly anſwered; that hee woulde
not truſt to a caſtle of ſtones, but to his caſtle of bones, Meaning
his body. [Mar
                     •
                  ebrigenſis.
            
            
               Robert B
                     •
                  anchmaines Earle of Leiceſter was wont to ſay
Soveraigne Princes are the true types or relemblances of Gods
true maieſtie, in which reſpect, ſaieth mine Author, treaſon
againſt the Princes perſon was called Crimen maieſt at is
[Polycraticon.
            
            
               Pope Adrian the fourth an Engliſh man borne, of the
familie of Breakespeare in Middleſex, a 
                     〈◊〉
                   commended
for converting Norway to chriſtianity, before his Papacie.

but noted in his Papacie, for vſing the Emperour Fredericke
the ſecond as his Page, in holding his ſtirroppe, demaunded
of Iohn of Sariſbury his countryman what opinion
the world had of the Church of Rome, and of him, who
anſwered: The Church of Rome which ſhould be a mother, is
now a ſtepmother, wherein ſit both Scribes and Phariſes; and
as for your ſelfe, whenas you are a father, why doe you exſpect
penſions from your children? &c. Adrian ſmiled, and after
ſome excuſes tolde him this tale, which albeit it may ſeeme
long, and is not vnlike that of Menenius Agrippa in Livie,
yet give it the reading, and happly you may learne ſomewhat
by it. All the members of the body conspired againſt
the ſtomacke, as againſt the ſwallowing gulfe of all their labors;
for whereas the eies beheld, the eares heard, the handes labored,
the feete traveled, the tongue ſpake, and all partes performeds
their functions, onely the ſtomacke lay ydle and conſumed
all. Hereuppon they ioyntly agreed al to forbeare their labors,
and to pine away their laſie and publike enemy. One day paſſed
over, the ſecond followed very tedious, but the third day was
ſo grievous to them all, that they called a common Counſel; The
eyes waxed d
                  •
               mme, the feete could not ſupport the body, the
armes waxed laſie, the tongue faltered, and could not lay open
the matter; Therefore they all with one accord deſired the adviſe
of the Heart. There Reaſon layd open before them, that

                  •
               ee againſt whome they had proclaimed warres, was the cauſe
of all this their miſery: For he as their common ſteward, when
his allowances were withdrawne, of neceſſitie withdrew theirs
fro them, as not receiving that he might allow. Therfore it were
a farre better courſe to ſupply him, than that the limbs ſhould
faint with hunger. So by the perſwaſion of Reaſon, the ſtomacke
was ſerved, the limbes comforted, and peace re-eſtabliſhed.
Even ſo it fareth with the bodies of Common-weales; for albeit
the Princes gather much, yet not ſo much for themſelves, as for
others: So that if they want, they cannot ſupply the want of others;
therefore do not repine at Princes heerein, but respect
the common good of the whole publike eſtate. [Idem.
            
               Oftentimes would he ſay, All his preferments never added

any one iote to his happineſſe or quietneſſe. [Idem.
            
               He alſo (that I may omitte other of his ſpeeches) would
ſay, The Lord hath dilated me by hammering me vpon the anvild;
but I beſeech him he would vnderlay his hand to the vnſupportable
burthen which he hath layde vpon me. [Idem.
            When it was ſignified vnto king Richard the firſt, ſon
to the foreſaide King Henry ſitting at ſupper in his pallace
at Weſtminſter (which we call the old pallace now) that the
French king beſieged his towne of Vernoil in Normandie:
he in greatnes of courage proteſted in theſe wordes, I will
never turne my backe vntil I have confronted the French: For
performance of which his princely word, hee cauſed the
wall in his pallace at Weſtminſter to be broken downe directly
towardes the South, poſted to the coaſt, and immediately
into Normandie, where the very report of his ſodaine
arrivall, ſo terrified the French, that they raiſed the
ſiege, and retired themſelves. [Ypodigma.
            
            The ſame king Richard purpoſing an expedition into
the holy land, made money at all handes, and amongſt other
things ſolde vnto Hugh Pudſey Biſhop of Durham the
Earledome of Northumberland, merrily laughing when he
inveſted him, and ſaying; Am not I cunning, and my crafieſmaiſter,
that can make a yoong Earle of an olde Biſhoppe?
But this Prelate was fitte to be an Earle, for the worlde (as
one of that age ſaide of him) was not crucifixus to him, but
infixus in him. [Lib. Dunelm.
            
            One Fulke a Frenchman of great opinion for his holineſſe
tolde this king Richard that hee kept with him three
daughters, that would procure him the wrath of God, if
he did not ſhortly ridde himſelfe of them. Why hypocrite
(quoth the king) all the worlde knoweth that I never hadde
childe, Yea (ſaide Fulke) you have as I ſaide, three; and their
names are Pride, Covetouſneſſe, and Lechery. (It is ſo (ſaide
the king) you ſhal ſee me preſently bestow them: the Knightes

Templers ſhal have Pride, the while M
                     •
                  nkes Covetouſneſſe,
and the Cleargy Lechery; and there have you my three daughters
beſtowed among you.
            
            When there was a faire opportunitie offered vnto this
king Richard, and to Hugh duke of Burgundie for the ſurpriſe
of Ieruſalem, they marched forward in two battalles
from Acres. The king of England led the firſt, the Duke
of Burgundie the other; when they approched, the Duke
of Burgundie envying the glory of the Engliſh, ſignified to
the king of England, that he would retire with his companies,
becauſe it ſhould not be ſaid, that the Engliſh had taken
Ieruſalem. While this meſſage was delivering, and
the King grieving that ſo glorious an enterpriſe was ſo overthwarted
by envie; one amongeſt the Engliſh companies
cryed alowde to the King and ſaid, Sir, S
                     •
                  r, come hither
and I will ſhew you Ieruſalem. But king Richard caſt his
coate of armes before his face, and weeping vttered theſe
wordes with alowde voice; Ah my Lord God, I beſeech thee
that I may not ſee thy holy Cittie Ieruſalem, whenas I am not
able to deliver it out of the handes of the enemies. [Ian Sire
Signour de Ionville in the life of Saint Le wes. cap. 70. This
Author alſo giveth this teſtimony of the ſaide king, in the
eight chapter of the ſaide Booke. This Prince was of ſuch
proweſſe, that he was more feared and redoubted amongeſt the
Sarazens then ever was any Prince Chriſtian. Inſomuch that
when as their little infants beganne to crie, their mothers would
ſay to make them holde their peace; King Richard commeth,
and wil have you, and immediately the little children hearing
him named, would forbeare crying: And likewiſe the Turkes
and Sarazens, when their horſes at any time ſtarted, they
woulde putte ſpurre to them and ſay; What you iades, you
thinke King Richard is heere?
            
            When the ſame king Richard had fortunately taken in
a skirmiſh, Philippe the Biſhop of Beavoys a deadly enemy
of his, hee caſt him in priſon with boltes vpon his heeles,
which being complained of vnto the Pope, he wrote earneſtly
vnto him, not to detaine his deere ſonne, an Eccleſiaſticall

perſon, and a ſheepheard of the Lordes, but to
ſend him backe vnto his flocke. Whereuppon the King
ſent vnto the Pope the armour that he was taken in, and
willed his Ambaſſadour to vſe the words of Iacobs ſonnes
vnto their father, when they had ſolde away their brother
Ioſeph, Hanc invenimus, vide vtrum tunica filij tui ſit, an 
                     〈◊〉
                  
This wee found, ſee whether it be the coate of thy ſonne, or no.
Nay (quoth the Pope) it is not the coate of my ſonne, nor of my
brother, but ſome impe of Mars, and let him procure his deliverie
of he will, for I wil be no meane for him.
            
            When the French king and king Richard the firſt beganne
to parlee of peace, his brother Iohn, who had falſely
and vnnaturally revolted vnto the French king, fearing
himſelfe, came in of his owne accord, and ſuppliantly beſought
Richard brotherly to pardon his manifolde offences,
that he had vnbrotherly committed againſt him, hee
reherſed the ſtraight league of brotherly piety, he recounted
the many merits of his brother, he bewailed with teares
that hitherto he had beene vnmindefull of them, as an vnnaturall
and vnthankefull perſon. Finally, that hee dooth
live, and ſhall live, hee dooth acknowledge that hee hath
received it at his handes. The king being mollified with
this humble ſubmiſſion, ſaide: God graunt that I may as eaſily
forget your offences, as you may remember wherein you
have offended.
            
            IN the wofull warres with the Barons, when king Iohn
was viewing of the Caſtle of Rocheſter held againſt him
by the Earle of Arundel, he was eſpied by a very good Arcubaliſter,
who tolde the Earle thereof, and ſaide, that hee
would ſoone diſpatch the cruell tyrant, if he would but ſay
the word; God forbid, vile varlet (quoth the Earle) that we
ſhould procure the death of the holy one of God. What (ſaide
the ſouldier) he would not ſpare you if hee had you at the
like advantage. No matter for that (quoth the Earle) Gods

good wil be done, and be wil dispoſe, and not the King.
[Math: Paris.
            
            When one about him ſhewed him where a noble man,
that had rebelliouſly borne armes againſt him, lay verie
honourably intoombed, and adviſed the king to deface the
monument, he ſaid; No, no, but I would al the reſt of mine enemies
were as honourably buried. [Idem.
            
            When diverſe Greekes came hither, and offered to
proove that there were cettaine 
                  •
               rrours in the Church of
England at that time, hee reiected them, ſaying, I will not
ſuffer our faith eſtabliſhed to be called in queſtion with doubtful
disputations. [Fragm: antiquum aeditum à P. Pithaeo.
            
            Yet when the ſaide king Iohn ſawe a fatie Bucke haunched,
he ſaide to the ſtanders by, See how faire and fatte this
Bu
                     •
                  ke is, and yet hee never heard Maſſe all his life long. But
this may be forged to his diſgrace by the envious. [Math.
Paris.
            
            IN a ſolemne conference betweene king Henry the third
of England, and Saint Lewes king of France, the onely
devout kings of that age, when the French king ſaide, He
had rather heare Sermons, than heare Maſſes. Our king
replied, which ſome will ſmile at now, but according to
the learning of that time, That he had rather ſee his loving
friend (meaning the reall preſence in the Sacrament) than
to heare never ſo much good of him, by others in ſermons.
This I note, becauſe it was then thought facetious, which
I doubt not but ſome wil now condemne as ſuperſtitious
[G
                     ••
                  l: Riſhanger.
            
            
               Pecham that Opticall Archbiſhop of Canterbury, who
writte Perspectiva Communis, when Pope Gregorie the
tenth, who had created him Archbiſhop, commaunded
him to pay foure thouſand markes within foure moneths,
vnder paine of excommunication, hee that came vnto the
See then deepely indebted, ſaide; Beholde, you have created

me, and as a creature doth deſire to be perfected by his creator,
ſo I doe in my oppreſſions flie vnto your Holmeſſe to be recreated.
Archiep. Cantuar.
            
            
               Sewall Archbiſhop of Yorke much agrieved with ſome
practiſes of the Popes collectors in England, tooke all patiently,
and ſaide; I will not with Cha
                     •
                   diſcover the nakednes
of my father, but cover and conceale it with Sem. As Conſtantine
the Great ſaide, that hee would cover the faults of
Biſhops and Fathers of the Church with his Imperiall
robe. [Mat. Paris.
            
            Pope Innocentius the fourth when he offered the kingdome
of Sicil and Naples to Richard Earle of Cornewall
with many impoſſible conditions, You might as well (ſay de
the Earles Agent at Rome) ſay to my Lord and Maiſter, I ſell
or give you the Moone, climbe vp, catch is, and take it. [Anonymus
qui incipit. Rex Pictorum.
            
            
               Alexander ſucceſſor to Innocentius ſent vnto the ſaide
Earle Richard to borrow a great maſſe of money; but the
Earle anſwered, I wil not lend to my ſuperior, uppon whome I
cannot distraine for the debts. This Richard is reported by
the ſaide Author, to have had ſo great treaſure, that hee
was able to diſpend for tenne yeeres an hundred markes a
day, which according to the Standard of that time was no
ſmall ſumme. [Idem.
            
            In the raigne of king Henry a Biſhop of London ſto
                  ••
               
               ly
withſtoode the Popes Nunci
                     •
                  , that would have levied
exactions of the Cleargie: Whereupon the N
                     ••
                  ci
                     •
                  
                complained
vnto the king, who ſhortly menaced the Biſhop,
and tolde him he would cauſe the Pope to plucke his peacockes
toile: but the Biſhop boldely anſwered the King,
that the Pope and he being too ſtrong for him, might bereave
him of his biſhoprick, by might, but never by, right;
and that although they tooke away his Mitre, yet they
would leave him his Helmet. [Lib. Cantuar.
            
            Wicked rather than wittie is that of a Deane high treaſurer
of England, that had demeaned himſelfe ſo well in his
office, that when he died he made this wicked will; I bequeathe

all my goodes and poſſeſſions vnto my liege Lords the
King, my body to the earth, and my ſoule to the divell. [Idem.
            
            VVHen Edward the firſt heard of the death of
his onely ſonne, hee tooke it grievouſly as a father,
but patiently as a wiſe man. But when hee vnderſtoode
ſhortely after of the departure of his father king
Henry the third, he was wholy deiected and comfortleſſes
whereat when Charles king of Sicile, with whome he then
ſoiourned in his returne from the holy land, greatly marvelled,
He ſatisfied him with this, God may ſend more ſonnes,
but the death of a father is irrecoverable. [Wa
                     •
                  ſingham.
            
            This is that king Edward the firſt, who as in lineaments
of body he ſurpaſſed all his people, being like Saul, higher
than any of them; ſo in prudence conioyned with valour
and induſtry, he excelled all our Princes, giving ther by
ſure ankerholde to the governement of this realme, waving
vp and downe before moſt vncertainely. Which hee
effected not ſo much by eſtabliſhing good lawes, as by
giving life vnto his lawes, by due execution. And as my
Author ſaith, Iudices potiſſimùm iudicans quos conſtituit indices
aliorum. Who addeth alſo this of him; Nem
                     •
                   in conſilijs
illo argutior, in eloqu
                     ••
                   torrenti
                     •
                  r, in periculis ſocurior, in
prosperis 
                     ••
                  uti
                     •
                  r, in adverſis conſtanti
                     •
                  r. [Commendatie lamentabilis
in tranſi
                     •
                  n Regis Edw: pri
                     ••
                  .
            
            Whereas the kings of England, before his time, vſed to
weare their Crowne vpon all ſolemne feaſt dayes, he firſt
omitted that cuſtome, ſaying merrily, That Crownes doe
rather 
                     •
                  nerate, than honour Princes. [Idem tractatus.
            
            When a ſimple religious man ſeeing him meanely attired,
wondering thereat, asked him, why hee beeing ſo
potent a Prince ware ſo ſimple a ſute, he anſwered, Father,
Father, you know how God regardeth garments, What can I
doe more in royall robes, than in this my gabbardine? [Idem.
            
            
               
When the Cleargie pretending a diſcharge by a 
                  〈◊〉
               
lately made at the Councell held at Lyons in Fra
                     •••
                  , would
contribute nothing to the temporall neceſſities of King
Edward, hee ſaide vnto them in parliament, Seeing you
doe refuſe to helpe me, I will alſo refuſe to help you, &c. If you
deny to pay tribute to me as vnto your Prince, I will refuſe to
protect you as my ſubiects; and therefore if you be ſpoyled, robbed,
mai
                     ••
                  ed, and nurthered, ſeeke for no ſuccourner defence
of me, or mine.
            
            The Pope ſent an Iniunction vnto the ſame Edward, the
which was delivered vnto him in one of his iornies againſt
the fautors of Iohn Balleal king of Scotland, the tenour of it
was, that he ſhould ſurceaſe to diſquiet the Scottes, which
were an exempt nation, and properly appertaining to the
Roman Chappell, wherefore the citty of Ieruſalem could
not but defend her Cittizens, and helpe them that did
truſt in the Lord, like mount Si
                     ••
                  . Hee hadde no ſooner
read it, but rapping out an othe, ſaide; I will not holde my
peace for Syon nor Ieruſalems reſt, as long as there is breath in
my bodie, but wil proſecute my iuſt right knowne vnto all the
world, and defend is to the death. [Tho: Walſing ham.
            
            When Iohn Earle of Ath
                     •
                  ll nobly deſcended, who had
with other murthered Iohn Co
                     ••
                  in, was apprehended by
king Edward the firſt, and ſome intreated for him, The
king anſwered, The higher his calling is, the greater muſt his
fall be; and as he is of higher parentage, ſo he ſhalbe the higher
hanged: which accordingly was performed, for he was
hanged on a gallowes fiftie foote high. [Florilegus.
            
            Whenas in ſiege of the Caſtle of Strivelin in Scotland,
king Edward the firſt, by his over-forwardneſſe was often
endaungered, ſome adviſed him to have more regarde to
his perſon, hee aunſwered them with that of David in the
Pſalme, A thouſand ſhall fall as my fide, and tenne thouſand at
my right hand, but it ſhall not come neere me. [Florilegus.
            
            When the learned Lawyers of the realme were conſulted
in a cauſe by him, and after long conſultation did not
ſatisfie him, hee ſaide, (as kings impatient of delayes may

be bolde with their Lawyers,) My Lawyers are long adviſing,
and never adviſed. [Florilegus. As for other ſpeeches
of his I wittingly and willingly overpaſſe.
            
               Eleanor wife to king Edward the firſt, a moſt vertuous
and wiſe woman, when hee tooke his long and dangerous
voyage into the holy land, would not be diſſwaded to tarrie
at home, but woulde needes accompany him, ſaying;
Nothing muſt part them whome God hath ioyned, and the way
to heaven is as neare in the holy land, (if not nearer) as in
England, or Spaine.
            
            This worthy Queene maketh mee remember Eubulus
a ſcoffing Comicall Greeke Poet, which curſeth himſelfe
if ever hee opened his mouth againſt women, inferring albeit
Medea were wicked, yet Penelope was peereleſſe: if
Clytemnestra were naught, yet Alcestes was paſſing good:
if Ph
                     •
                  dra were damnable, yet there was an other laudable.
But heere ſaith he I am at a ſtand, of good women I finde
not one more, but of the wicked I remember thouſandes.
Beſhrew this ſcoffer, yee good wives all, and let his curſe
fall vpon him, for of your kinde may many a million bee
found, yea of your owne country, and that I may reſerve
other to a fitter place, I will ſhew vnto you a rare example
in this Queene of England, a moſt loving and kinde wife,
out of Rodericus Sanctius not mentioned by our Hiſtorians.
            When king Edward the firſt was in the holy land, hee
was ſtabbed with a poyſoned dagger, by a Sarazen, and
through the rancor of the poyſon, the wound was iudged
incurable by his Phyſitions. This good Queene Eleanor
his wife, who had accompanied him in that iourney, endangering
her owne life, in loving affection ſaved his life,
and eternized her owne honour. For ſhe daily and nightly
ſucked out the ranke poyſon, which love made ſweete
to her, and thereby effected that which no Arte durſt attempt;
to his ſafety, her ioy, and the comfort of all England;
So that well woorthy was ſhee to be remembred by thoſe
Groſſes as monuments, which in ſteade of Statues were

erected by her husband to hir honour at Lincolne, Gr
                     ••
                  
                  tham,
Stanford, Goddington, Northampton, St
                     ••
                  y Straford,
Dunſtaple, Saint Albanes, Waltham, and Weſtminſter called
Charing croſſe, all adorned with her Armes of Castile, Leon,
and Pontive
            
            
               Robert Winchelſey the Archbiſhop of Canterbury was
baniſhed by king Edward the firſt, but afterward reſtored
againe by him, and all the rents that had beene ſequeſtred
during his abſence, repayed him: whereby he became the
richeſt Archbiſhop that had been in that feate before him:
Wherefore often recording his troubles hee woulde ſay;
Adverſitie never burteth, where no uniquity over-rule
                     ••
                  . [Liber
Cantuar.
            
            
               William de March Lord Treaſourer vnto king Edward
the firſt, cauſed all the treaſure throughout all the land, that
was layed vppe in the Monaſteries and Churches, to be at
one iuſtant violently taken away by military men, ſaying,
It is better that money ſhould be mooving, and according to the
name be currant, and goe abroad to the vſe of the people, than
reſting in cheſts without fruits and occupation: concurring in
this laſt poynt with a Maxime of the Vſurers hall.
            Of king Edward the ſecond I finde nothing memorable,
but that which griefe and great indignitie wreaſted
from him, when Corney and his raſcall rabblements after
his depoſition, would needes ſhave him on the way, leſt he
ſhould be knowne and reſcewed. They enforced him to
ſit downe vpon a mole hil, and the knave Barber inſulting,
told him that cold water taken out of the next ditch ſhould
ſerve for his trimming at that time. Hee anſwered, Whether
you will or no, there ſhall be warme water: and therewithall
hee ſhedding teares plentifully, verified his words.
[Thom: de la More.
            
            After the battell of Poitiers 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                Lorde Audley was
brought to the Blacke Prince in a Litter moſt grievouſly

wounded, for hee had carried himſelfe moſt valiantly that
day. To whome the Prince with due commendations,
gave for his good ſervice foure hundred markes of yeerely
revenews. The which hee returning to his tent, gave as
franckely to his foure Eſquiers, that attended him in the
battell: whereof when the Prince was advertiſed, doubting
that his gift was contemned as too little for ſo great
good ſervice: the Lord Audley ſatisfied him with this anſwer;
I muſt doe for them who deſerved beſt of me. Theſe my
Eſquiers ſaved my life amiddeſt the ennemies. And God bee
thanked, I have ſufficient revenews left by my A
                     •
                  nceſtours to
maintaine me in your ſervice. Whereupon the Prince praiſing
his prudence and liberalitie, confirmed his gift made
to his Eſquiers, and aſſigned him moreover ſixe hundred
markes of like land in England. [
                     •
                  roſſard.
            
            
               William Wickham after Biſhoppe of Wincheſter came into
the ſervice, and alſo into the great favour of King Edward
the third, by beeing overſeer of his great woorke at
Windeſor, wheras before he ſerved as a poore pariſh prieſt.
Wherfore he cauſed to be written in one of his windows,
This worke made Wickham. Which being tolde vnto the
King, hee was offended with Wickham, as though hee had
gone about to robbe him of the glorie of that magnificent
worke. But when Wickham tolde him that his meaning
was, that that worke had beene his making, and advauncement,
the King reſted content and ſatisfied, [Vita Wiccami.
            
            When the ſaide William Wickham (as it is commonlie
ſaide) ſued vnto Edward the third for the Biſhoppricke of
Wincheſter, the King tolde him that hee was vnmeete for
it, becauſe he was vnlearned, but hee ſaide, In recompence
thereof I will make many learned men. The which hee performed
indeed. For he founded New Colledge in Oxford
and another in Wincheſter, which houſes have affoorded
verie many learned men, both to the Church and to the
Common-wealth.
            When Henry of Lancaſter ſurnamed the Good Earle of

Darby had taken 1341. Bigerac in Gaſcoigne, hee gave
and graunted to every ſouldier, the houſe which every one
ſhould firſt ſeaze vpon, with all therein. A certaine ſouldier
of his br
                  •
               ke into a Mint-maiſters houſe, where hee
found ſo great a maſſe of money, that hee amazed therewith,
as a prey greater than his deſert or deſire, ſignified
the ſame vnto the Earle, who with a liberall minde aunſwered,
It is not for my ſtate to play boyes play, to give and take;
Take thou the money, if it were thrice as much. [Walſingham.]
            When newes was b
                  •
               ought vnto king Richard the ſecond,
that his vnkles of Yorke and Glouceſter, the Earles of
Arundell, Warwicke, Darby, and Nottingham, with other of
that faction, who ſought to reforme the miſorders of the
King, or rather, of his wicked Counſellors, were aſſembled
in a woodde neere vnto the Court; after hee had aſked
other mens opinions, what was to be done in ſo weightie
and doubtfull a caſe. At length hee mernly demaunded
of one ſir Hugh a Linne, who had beene a good militarie
man in his dayes, but was then ſomewhat diſtraught
of his wittes, what he would adviſe him to doe: Iſſue out
(quoth ſir Hugh) and let vs ſet vppon them, and ſtay them every
mothers ſonne; and by Gods eyes, when thou haſt ſo done,
thou haſt killed all the faithfull friendes that thou haſt in England.
[Anonymus.]
            
               KIng Henry the fourth, a wiſe Prince, who full well
knew the humour of the Engliſh, in his admonition
to his ſonne, at his death, ſaide; Of Engliſhmen, ſo long as
they have wealth and riches, ſo long ſ
                  •
               alt thou have obeyſance;
but when they be poore, then they be alwayes ready to make inſurrections
at every motion. [Hall.
            King Henry the fourth, during his ſickenes, cauſed his
Crowne to be ſet on his pillow, at his beds head, and ſodain
                  •
               ly
his pangue ſo ſore troubled him, that hee lay as

though his vitall ſpirites had beene from him departed:
Such chamberlaines as had the care and charge of his bodie
thinking him to be dead, covered his face with a linnen
cloth. The Prince his ſonne being thereof advertiſed, entred
into the chamber, and tooke away the Crowne, and
departed. The father being ſodainely revived out of his
traunce, quickely perceived that his Crowne was taken away:
and vnderſtanding that the Prince his ſonne had it,
cauſed him to repaire to his preſence, requiring of him for
what cauſe he had ſo miſ-uſed himſelfe. The Prince with
a good audacitie anſwered: Sir, to mine and all men: iudgements
you ſeemed dead in this world, wherefore I, as your next
and apparant heire tooke that as mine owne, not as yours. Well
faire ſonne, (ſaide the King with a great ſigh) what right I
had to it, and how I enioyed it, God knoweth, Well (quoth the
Prince) if you die King, I will have the garland, and truſt to
keepe it with the Sworde againſt all mine enemies, as you have
done. [Hall.
            
            KIng Henry the fift, when he prepared warres againſt
Fraunce, the Dolphin of Fraunce ſent him a preſent
of Paris Balles, in deriſion: but hee returned for anſwere,
That he would ſhortly reſend him London Balles, which ſhould
ſhake Paris Walles. [Anonymus Angticè.
            
            When King Henry the fift had given that famous overthrowe
vnto the French at Agincourt, hee fell downe vppon
his knees, and commaunded his whole armie to doe
the ſame, ſaying that verſe in the Pſalme, Non nobis Domine,
non nobis, ſed nomini tuo da gloriam: Not vnto vs (O
Lord) not vs, but vnto thy name give the glorie.
            
               
               HEnry the ſixt did take all iniuries, whereof he received
plenty ſo patiently, that he not only did not ſeek
to revenge them, but Gave God thankes that hee did ſend
them to puniſh his ſinnes in this life, that hee might eſcape puniſhment
in the life to come. [Vita Henrici Sexti. As the
Emperor Fredericke the third, when he heard of the death
of a great noble man of Austria, who lived ninety three
yeeres moſt wickedly in fleſhly pleaſures, and yet never
once afflicted with griefe or ſickenes, ſaide; This pro
                     •
                  veth
that which Divines teach, that after death there is ſome place
where wee receive rewarde or puniſhment; when wee ſee often
in this worlde, neyther the iuſt rewarded, nor the wicked
puniſhed.
            
            The ſame King Henry having in Chriſtmaſſe a ſhew of
yoong women, with their bare breaſts layde out, preſented
before him, hee immediately departed with theſe
wordes, Fie, fie for ſhame, forſooth you be too blame. [Idem.
            
            He receiving on a time a great blowe by a wicked man,
which compaſſed his death, hee onely ſayde, Forſooth, forſooth
yee doe fowly to ſmite a King annoynted.
            
            
               Not long before his death, being demaunded why hee
had ſo long held the Crowne of England vniuſtly, hee replied,
My father was King of England, quietly enioying the
Crowne all his raigne, and his father my grandfire was alſo king
of England, and I even a childe in cradle was proclaimed and
crowned King without any interruption, and ſo held it fortie
yeeres, wel-neere all the ſtates doing homage vnto mee, as to
my Aunceſtors. Therefore wi
                  ••
                I ſay with King David, My
lot is fallen in a faire ground, I have a goodly heritage, my
helpe is from the Lord which ſaveth the vpright in heart. [Idem.
            
               Thomas Montacute 
               
                  •
               arle of Sariſbury, when hee beſieged
Orleans, and had ſo enforced it, that the Inhabitants
were willing to articulate, and to yeelde themſelves to the
Duke of Burgundie, then being in his company: he highly
diſdaining it, ſaide in the Engliſh proverbe; I wil not

beate the buſh, and another ſhal have the birdes. Which proverbiall
ſpeech ſo offended the Burgundian, that it wholy
alienated his minde from the Engliſh, to their great loſſe
in all the French warres following. [Paulus Aemilius
Lib. 10.
            
               Iohn Lorde Talbot firſt Earle of Shrewſbury of that familie,
ſuppriſed vppon the ſodaine by the French army
at Chaſtilion, farre from cowardly f
                  •
               are of death, and fatherly
affected to his ſonne the Lorde 
                  
                     •
                  iſle, who woulde
not forſake him in that danger, adviſed him to f
                  •
               le, ſaying;
My death in reſpect of my former exploites can not be but honourable;
and in reſpect of thy youth, neither can it be honourable
for thee to die, nor diſhonourable to f
                     •
                  ie. But this yong
Lord in height of courage, nothing degenerating from ſo
worthy a father, loſt his life with his father in the field, and
with them a baſe ſonne, and a ſonne in lawe of the ſayde
Earles. [Paulus Aemilius Lib. 10. & Commentarij Pij
PP. 2. Lib. 6.
            After this battell, when the flames of inward warre beganne
to flaſh out in England, the martiall men of England
were called home out of Fraunce, to maintaine the factions
heere: at which time a French Captaine ſcoffingly asked
an Engliſh-man when they woulde returne againe into
Fraunce. He anſwered feelingly, and vpon a true ground:
When your ſinnes ſhal be greater and more grievous in the ſight
of God, than ours are now.
            
            ¶Vntill this time, from the beginning of King Edward
the firſt, which was about an hundred and ſixtie
yeeres, whoſoever will with a marking eie conſider the
comportment of the Engliſh Nation, the concurrent of
martiall men, their Councells, military diſcipline, deſigns,
actions, and exploites, not onely out of our owne Writers,
but alſo forraine Hiſtorians; cannot but acknowledge,
that they were men of eſpeciall worth, and their proweſſe
both great and glorious. Why afterward it ſhould decay,
as all other profeſſions, which even like plants have their
times of beginning or in-rooting, their growing vp, their

flouriſhing, their maturitie, and than theſe fading, were
a diſquiſition for the learned. Whether it proceedeth
from celeſtiall influence, or thoſe Angelles which Plato
makes, or the Secundei which Trith
                     •••
                  ius imagined to have
the regiment of the world ſucceſſively, or from the degenerating
of numbers into ſummes, which I confeſſe I vnderſtand
not, being an ignorant in abſtruſe learning. Onely
I have read in Paterculus,
               Velleius Paterculus. li. 1. Naturaliter quod procedere non poteſt, recedit. that when either envie, or admiration
hath given m
                  •
               n an edge to aſcend to the higheſt,
and when they can aſcend no higher, after a while they
muſt naturally deſcend. Yet I relie vpon that of Ecccleſiaſtes,
as I vnderſtand it, Cuncta fecit bona in tempore ſu
                     •
                   Deus,
& mundum tradidit diſputationi eorum, vt non inveniat
home quod operatus eſt Deus ab initio vſque ad finem. But
pardon mee, I cannot tell how I have beene by admiration
of our Progenitours diverted from my purpoſe.
            In the yeere of our Lord 1416. when a fifteene hundred
Engliſh vnder the cōduct of I: Beaufort erle of Derſet
were encompaſſed betweene the ſea, and fifteen thouſand
French. The Erle of Arminac generall of the French,
ſent to the Earle, adviſing him to yeelde himſelfe, but hee
anſwered, It is not the manner of the Engliſh, to yeelde without
blowes, neither am I ſo heartleſſe that I will deliver my
ſelfe into their handes, whom God 
                     •
                  ay deliver into mine. And
accordingly God gave him the honour of the day, to the
great confuſion of the enemy. [Walſingham in Ypodigmate.
            
            VVHen Elizabeth the widow of ſir Iohn Gray was a
ſuter vnto King Edward the fourth (againſt
whome her husband loſt his life) for her ioynture: the
kinde King became alſo a ſuter to her vnto her for a nights
lodging: But ſhe wiſely anſwered him, when hee became
importunate, That as ſhe did account her ſelfe too baſe to be
his wife, ſo ſhee did thinke her ſelfe too good to be his 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            
               
When love grew ſo hote in this K. Edward the fourth,
that hee would needes marry the ſaide Elizabeth, widow
of ſir Iohn Grey, to the great diſcontent of his Counſell, but
eſpecially of his mother, who alleaging many reaſons to the
contrary, ſaide, That onely widowhood might be ſufficient
to reſtraine him, for that it was high diſparagement to
a King, to be diſhonoured with bigamy in his firſt marriage.
The King merrily aunſwered; In that ſhee is a widdow,
and hath already children; by Gods bleſſed Lady I am a
batcheller, and have ſome too: and ſo each of vs hath a proofe,
that neither of vs are like to be barren. And therefore Madam,
I pray you be content, I truſt in God ſhe ſhal bring you forth
a yong Prince; that ſhall pleaſe you. And as for the bigamy, let
the Biſhop hardly lay it in my way when I come to take Orders:
for I vnderſtand it is forbidden to a Prieſt, but I never wiſt it
yet that it was forbidden to a Prince.
            
            His note love nevertheleſſe was partable among three
other of his Miſtreſſes, of whome hee was woont to ſay,
The one was the faireſt, the other the merrieſt, and the third
the holieſt, for ſhe had wholy devoted her ſelfe to his bedde and
her beades.
            
            When Lewes the eleaventh French King entertained
diverſe Councellors of king Edward the fourth with large
penſions to ſteede him in England, hee ſent Peter Cleret
one of the maiſters of his houſholde vnto the Lorde Haſtings
the Kings Chamberlaine, to preſent him with twoo
thouſand crownes. Which when he had received, Petre
Cleret did pray him, that for his diſcharge he would make
him an acquittance; The Lorde Chamberlaine made a
great difficultie thereat. Then Cleret dooth requeſt him
againe that hee would give vnto him onely a letter of three
lines for his diſcharge to the King, ſignifying that hee had
received them. The Lord Chamberlaine anſwered; Sir,
that which you ſay is very reaſonable; but the gift comes from
the goodwill of the King your Maister, and not at my request
at all: If it pleaſe you that I ſhall have it, you ſhall put it within
the pocket of my ſleeve, and you ſhall have no other acquittance

of me. For I will never it ſhalbe ſaide for mee, that the Lorde
Chamberlaine of the King of England had beene Pentioner to
the King of Fraunce: Nor that my acquittances ſhal be found
in the Chamber of accompts in Fraunce. The aforeſ
                  •
               id Cleret
went away male-content, but left his money with him,
and came to tell his meſſage to his King, who was very
angry with him. But thenceforth the Lord Chamberlaine
of England was more eſteemed with the French, and alwayes
payde without acquittance. [Philippe de Commines.
            
            KIng Richard the third, whoſe monſtrous birth foreſhewed
his monſtrous proceedings, for he was born
with all his teeth, and haire to his ſhoulders, albeit hee lived
wickedly, yet made good Lawes, and when diverſe
ſhires of England offered him a benevolence, hee refuſed
it, ſaying, I know not in what ſence; I haa rather have
your hearts, than your money. [Ioannes Roſſus Warwiceuſis.]
            Iohn Morton then Biſhoppe of Elie, but afterward of
Canterbury, being ſolicited by the Duke of Buckingham
then alienated from Richard the third, to ſpeake his minde
frankely vnto him, in matters of State: the Biſhoppe aunſwered
him; In good faith my Lord I love not much to talke
with Princes, as a thing not all out of perill, although the words
be without fault. Foraſmuch as it ſhall not be taken as the partie
meant it, but as it pleaſeth the Prince to construe it. And
ever I thinke on Aeſopes tale, that when the Lien had proclaimed,
that on paine of death, there ſhould no horned beaſt
abide in that wood, one that had in his forehead a bounch of
fleſh, fledde away a great paſe. The Foxe that ſawe him ruune
ſo faſt, asked him whither he made all that haſte: hee anſwered;
In faith I neither wote nor recke, ſo I were once hence, becauſe
of this proclamation made of horned beaſts. What fo
                  •
               le
(quoth the Foxe) thou mayeſt well enough abide, the Lion

meant not by thee, for it is no horne that is vppon thy head: No
Mary (quoth hee) that wote I well enough, but what and hee
call it an horne, where am I then? [Tho: Moore.
            
               Sir Thomas Rokeſby being controlde for ſuffering himſelfe
to be ſerved in treene Cuppes, anſwered; Theſe homelie
cuppes and diſhes pay truly for that they containe: I had rather
drinke out of treene, and pay golde and ſilver, than drinke
out of golde and ſilver, and make woodden payment.
            VVHen Richard the third was ſlain at Boſworth, and
with him Iohn Howard Duke of Norffolke, King
Henry the ſeaventh demaunded of Thomas Howard Earle
of Surrey the Dukes ſonne and heire then taken priſoner,
how he d
                  •
               rſt beare Armes in the behalfe of that tyranne
Richard. He anſwered; He was my crowned King, and if the
Parliamentary authority of England ſette the Crowne vppon a
ſtocke, I will fight for that ſtocke. And as I fought then for him,
I wi
                     •
                   fight for you, when you are eſtabliſhed by the ſaid authoritie.
And ſo hee did for his ſonne King Henry the eight at
Flodden field. Anonymus.
            
            When Margaret the widdow of Charles the Hardie
Duke of Bargundie, and ſiſter to king Edward the fourth,
envying much the happy eſtate and raigne of Henry the
ſeaventh deſcended of the adverſe family of Lancaſter, had
at ſundry times ſuborned two raſcalles to counterfeit
the perſons of her two brothers ſonnes, thereby to withdrawe
the hearts of his ſubiects, and raiſe vproares in his
realme, the king ſent over vnto Philippe the Duke of Burgundie
doctour Warrham afterward Archbiſhop of Canterbury,
to informe him of her treachery. This Doctour
in the latter 
                  ••
               d of his Oration thus nipped the ſeditious
Dutcheſſe That within few yeeres after ſhee was past threeſcore
yeeres of age, ſhe had brought foorth two monſters, Lambert
and Peter, and not in the nine and tenth moneths, as women
naturally doe, but in the hundred and foureſcore moneth,

(for they were both about fifteene yeeres of age when ſhee
brought them abroade, as it were, out of her belly:) neither
were they Criſomers, but ſuch childe-choppers, that as ſoone
as ever they were borne, they were able to wage warre with a
mighty King. [Th: More.
            
            The earle of Kildare being charged before king Henry
the ſeaventh for burning the Metropolitane Church of
Caſſilles in Ireland, and many witneſſes procured to avouch
the trueth of the Article againſt him, hee ſodainely
confeſſed it to the great wondring and deteſtation of the
Counſell. Then it was looked how he ſhould iuſtifie that
fact. By Ieſus (quoth hee) I would never have done it, if it
had not beene tolde me that the Archbiſhop had beene within
it. And becauſe the Biſhop was one of the buſieſt accuſers
preſent, merrily laughed the king at the plainneſſe of
the man, to ſee him alledge that intent for excuſe, which
moſt of all did aggravate his fault.
            When among many articles the laſt article exhibited
by the Iriſh againſt that Earle of Kildare, the laſt was: Finally,
All Ireland cannot rule this Earle. Then (quoth the
King) ſhall this Earle rule all Ireland; and ſhortly after hee
made him Deputie thereof.
            When one reprooved King Henry the ſeaventh for his
ſlowneſſe in making warres on thoſe that wronged him,
he anſwered, If we Princes ſhould take every occaſion that is
offered vs, the worlde ſhould never be quiet, but wearied with
continuall warres.
            
            When a Gentleman, none of the wiſeſt, tolde King
Henry the ſeaventh, that hee found ſir Richard Gr
                     •
                  ftes,
who was made Banneret at the battell of Stoke to be a very
wiſe man. The King anſwered, Hee doubted not that,
but marvelled much how a foole could knowe a wiſeman.
            
            It h
                  •
               ppened that there was fallen in communication
the ſtory of Ioſeph, how his maiſter Putiphars wife a great
m
                  •
               n with the King of Aegipt, would have pulled him to

                  •
               e
                  •
               b
                  •
               d 
                  •
               n
                  •
                he fled away. Now Maiſter M
                     ••
                  o (hee was
the King Almoner) quoth king Henry the ſeaventh, You

be a tall ſtrong man on the one ſide, and a cunning Doctor on
the other ſide, what would you have done, if you had not beene
Ioſeph, but in Ioſephs ſteade? By my troth fir (quoth he) and
it like your Grace, I cannot tell what I would have done, but I
can tell you what I ſhould have done. [Tho: Moore.
            
            
               The Lady Margaret Counteſſe of Richmond mother
to king Henry the ſeaventh, a moſt worthy Patroneſſe of
good Letters, would often ſay, On the condition that Princes
of Chriſtendome would combine themſelves, and march againſt
the common enemy the Turke, ſhee would moſt wil
                  •
               ingly attend
them, and be their Laundreſſe in the campe.
            There was a poore blind man in Warwick-ſhire, that
was accounted verie cunning in prognoſticating of weather:
vpon a day, Empſon a great lawier, as hee road that
way, ſayd in ſcorne of his cunning. I pray you tell me father
when doth the Sunne change? The chafed old man that
knew his corrupt conſcience, anſwered: when ſuch a wicked
Lawier as you goeth to heauen.
            Doctor Collet the Deane of Paules ſaid, that if the Clergie
were naught, the Laitie were worſe, for it could not otherwiſe
be, but the laye men muſt ever be one degree vnder
the Clergie: for ſurely it can be no 
                  〈◊〉
                that our Sauiour
ſayth himſelfe, who ſayth of the Cleargie, that they be the
ſalt of the earth, and if the ſalt once appall, the world muſt
needes waxe vnſauerie: and he ſayeth that the Clergie bee
the light of the world; and then ſayeth he, if the light bee
darkened, how darke will then the darkeneſſe be? that is to
wit, all the world beſide, whereof he calleth the Clergie
onely the light.
            Cardinall Wolſey, his teeth watering at the rich Biſhopricke
of Wincheſter, ſent one vnto Biſhop Foxe (who had
advaunced him vnto the kings ſervice) for to move him to
reſigne the Biſhopricke, becauſe extreame age had made
him blind: the which meſſage and motion Foxe did take
in ſo ill part, that he willed the meſſenger to tell the Cardinall
thus from him: that although olde age bereaving me
of ſight, I know not white from blacke, yet I can diſcerne

truth from falſhoode, and right from wrong: yea, and that
now I am blind I haue eſp
                  •
               ed his malicious vnthankfulneſſe:
the which I could never before perceive when my
e
                  •
               e ſight was at the beſt. And let my lord Cardinall take
heede, that his ambition and covetouſneſſe, bring him not
into a worſe blindneſſe then I have, and make him fall before
he feare.
            At ſir Thomas Moore his firſt comming to the ſervice of
King Henrie the eight the King gave him this godly leſſon.
Firſt looke vnto God, and after vnto me.
            He would alſo wiſh, as I have heard of an ancient man
of that age, that his Councellers would commit ſimulation,
diſſimulation, and part
                  ••
               litie, to the Porters lodge, when
they came to ſit in councell.
            The ſame King Henrie the eight, finding fault with the
diſagreement of Preachers, would often ſay; Some are too
ſtiffe in their olde Mumpſimus, and other to buſie and curious
in their new Sumpſimus. Happly borrowing theſe
phraſes from that which Maſter Pace his Secretarie reporteth
in his booke De Fructu doctrinae, of an old Prieſt in
that age, which alwayes read in his Portaſſe, Mumpſimus
Domine, for Sumſimus: whereof when he was admoniſhed,
he ſaid that he now had vſed Mumplimus thirtie yeares, and
would not leave his olde Mumpſimus for their new Sumpſimus.
            
            A noble man of this time, in contempt of learning ſayd,
that it was for noble mens ſonnes enough to winde their
horne, and carrie their Hauke faire, and to leave ſtudie and
learning to the children of mean men. To whom the foreſaide
Richard Pace replied. Then you and other noble men
muſt be content, that your children may wind their bornes, and
keepe their Haukes while the children of meane men do manage
matters of eſtate [R. Pacaeus De fructu doctrinae.]
            
               Iohn Fiſher Biſhop of Rocheſter, when the King would
have tranſlated him from that poore Biſhopricke to a better,
he refuſed, ſaying: He would not forſake his poore little
olde wife, with whom he had ſo long lived. Happly thinking

of the fifteenth canon of the Nicone Councell, and that of
the Canoniſtes, Matrimonium inter Epiſcopum, & Eccleſiam
eſſe contractum, &c.
            
            There was a Nobleman merry conceited, aud 
                  •
               iotouſly
given, that having lately ſold a Mannor of an hundred tenements,
came ruffling into the Court, in a new ſute, ſaying:
Am not I a mightie man, that beare an hundred houſes
on my backe? Which Cardinall Wolſey hearing, ſaid: You
might have better employed it in paying your debts. Indeede
my Lord (quoth he) you ſay wel; for my Lord my father, owde
my maiſter your father three half pence for a Calfs head, hold,
here is two pence for it. As Skelton ieſted at the Cardinal, that
he was deſcended of Sanguil
                     •
                  er, hee was caſt out of a Butchers
ſtall, for his father was a Butcher of Ipſwich.
            
            When Stephen Cardiner was advaunced vnto the Biſhopricke
of Wincheſter, and ſent over as Ambaſſadour
into Fraunce with great pomp
                  ••
                hee ſaide vnto an old acquaintance
of his that came to take his leave of him; Nowe
I am in 
                     〈◊〉
                   Gloria Patri: Yea (ſaide his friend) and I hope, 
                     •
                  t
nunc & ſemper. Or (replied the Biſhop) if it pleaſe the king
my maiſter, Sicut erat in principio. A poore Scholler of Cambridge
againe.
            
            When ſir Thomas, Moore was Speaker of the Parliament,
with his wiſ
                  •
               dome and eloquence, hee ſo croſſed
a purpoſe of Cardinall Wolſey that the Cardinall in a chafe
ſent for him 
                  〈◊〉
                
               White-Hall; where when he had daunced
attendaunce long, at length the Cardinall comming out,
ſaide in the preſence of many; Maister Moore, I woulde
you had beene at Rome, when you were made Speaker of the
Parliament houſe. Hee immediately replied: And if it
pleaſed your Grace, ſo would I, for then I ſhould have ſeene a
famous Cittie, whereof I have heard much, but never ſawe.
[Vita Tho: Mori impreſſa.
            
            The ſame cardinal at a ful Counſel table, when ſir Th
                     •
                  
Moore was firſt made privie Counſeller, moved that there
might be a Lievteuant generall of the Realme choſen for
certaine conſiderations; and the body of the Counſell inclined

thereunto. Sir Thomas Moore oppoſed himſelfe.
Whereuppon the Cardinall in a chafe ſaide; Are not you aſhamed
who are the meaneſt man heere, to diſſent from ſo many
honourable and wiſe perſonages: you proove your ſelfe a plaine
foole. Whereunto maiſter Moore foorthwith aunſwered;
Thankes be to God that the Kings maieſtie hath but one foole
in his right honourable Counſell. [Idem.
            
            When hee was Lorde Chauncellour, hee inioyned a
Gentleman to pay a good round ſumme of money vnto a
poore widdowe whome he had oppreſſed; and the Gentleman
ſaide: Then I doe hope your Lordeſhip will give mee a
good long day to pay it. You ſhall have your requeſt (ſaide ſir
Thomas) Munday next is Saint Barnabas day, the longeſt day
in all the yeere, pay her mee then, or elſe you ſhall kiſſe the
Fleete.
            
            When hee had no luſt to growe greatly vpward in the
worlde, neyther would labour for office of authoritie, and
over that, forſake a right worſhipfull roome when it was
offered him, his wife fell in hand with him, and asked him;
What will you do that you liſt not to put foorth your ſelfe
as others doe? Will you ſit ſtill by the fire, and make goſelings
in the aſhes with a ſticke, as children doe? Woulde
God I were a man, and looke what I would doe. What?
By God goe forward with the beſt; for as my mother was
wont to ſay, It is ever more better to rule than to be ruled,
and therefore I warrant you, I would not be ſo fooliſh to
be ruled, where I might rule. By my trueth wife (quoth
he) I dare ſay you ſay trueth, for I never found you willing to
be ruled yet.
            
            He vſed, when hee was Lord Chauncellor, vpon every
Sonday, when he was at home, to ſitte in the Quire in his
ſurplice and ſing the Service: and being one day eſpied in
that attire by the Duke of Norffolke. The Duke beganne
to chafe, crying, Fie, fie, my Lorde, the Lord Chauncellour
of England a pariſh prieſt, and a paltrie ſinging man,
you diſhonour the King, you diſhonour the King. No my
Lord (quoth ſir Thomas) it is no ſhame for the King, if his

ſervant ſerve his Soveraigne and Saviour, who is King of
kings.
            
            During the time of his Chancellourſhip of England, he
vſed to ſend his Gentleman-Vſher to his wifes pew, after
divine ſervice was done, to tell her that he was gone: but
the next Sonday after hee gave vp his Chancellourſhip of
England, he came himſelfe to her pew, and vſed the vſuall
words of his Gentleman-Vſher, Madame, my Lorde is
gone.
            
            His latter wife was a widdow, of whom Eraſmus writeth,
that hee was wont to ſay, that ſhee was, nec bella, nec
puella: who as ſhee was a good huſwife, ſo was ſhee not
voyde of the fault that often followeth that vertue, ſomewhat
ſhrewd to her ſervants: Vppon a time ſir Thomas
found fault with her continuall ch
                  •
               ding, ſaying; if that nothing
elſe would reclame her, yet the conſideration of the
time (for it was Lent) ſhould reſtraine her. Tuſh, tuſh, my
Lord (ſaide ſhee) looke, heere is one ſteppe to heaven-ward,
ſhewing him a Friers girdle. I feare mee (quoth ſir Thomas
Moore) this one ſteppe will not bring you vppe a ſteppe
higher.
            
            One day when ſhee came from ſhrift, ſhee ſaide merrily
vnto him, Be merry ſir Thomas, for this day was I
well ſhriven, I thanke God, and purpoſe now therefore
to leave off all my olde ſhrewdneſſe; Yea (quoth hee) and
to beginne afreſh.
            
            When he was ſent priſoner vnto the Tower, and the
Lievtenant, his olde friend, received him with a heavy
cheere, hee ſayde; Is this the entertainement and good countenance
you give your gueſts when they come to you? Why looke
man, heere are twenty angell nobles (ſhewing him his purſe)
and when this is ſpent, turne me out at doores, as a bare gameſter,
and not able to pay for that he takes. Hitherto may bee
referred his ſilent anſwere, when at his entring into the
Tower, one of the Officers claimed for a fee, his vpper
garment, (meaning his gowne or his cloke) he offred
him his cappe.
            
               
Being asked after his condemnation, and before his execution,
whether hee had changed his minde, hee ſaide:
Yea, for I thought to have beene ſhaven, but now ſeeing I ſhall
die ſo ſhortly, I will let my beard growe.
            
            
               His daughter Roper one day as ſhee repaired vnto him
into the Tower, counſelled him to recover the Kings favour,
and his owne former libertie, by doing I know not
what, the which ſhee ſaide one of the greateſt States of
this Realme, and a man learned too, and his tender friend,
ſaide he might doe, without ſcruple of conſcience, as moſt
of the Nobilitie of the Realme hadde doone, not once
ſticking thereat, ſave onely himſelfe, and one other man.
This ſpeach of her hee aunſwered with a pleaſaunt tale.
At a Bartholomew faire at London, there was an Eſcheater of
the ſame city, that had arrested a Clothier that was outlawed,
and had ſeized his goodes, which he had brought into the faire,
tolling him out of the faire by a traine. The man that was arrested
was a Northerne man, which by his friendes made the
Eſcheator to be arreſted within the faire, vppon an Action I
not neere what, and called a Court of Pipowders. Now 
                  •
               ad
the Clothier, by friendſhip of the Officers, found the meanes to
have all the Quest almost made of the Northerne men, ſuch
as had their Boothes ſtanding in the faire, who were no ſooner
departed from the barre, and come into the houſe, but the
Northerne men were agreed, and in effect all the other, to caſt
our London Eſcheater. They thought they needed no were to
proove that hee did wrong, than even the name of his bare office
alone. But then was there amongeſt them, as the Divell
woulde, an honeſt man of another quarter called Company.
And the fellow ſeemed but a ſeely ſoule, and ſate ſtill, and ſayde
nothing; they made noreckoning of him, but ſaide. We be agreed
now, come, let vs goe and give vp our verdict. Then when the
poore fellow ſawe that they made ſuch haſle, and his minde nothing
gave him that way that theirs did (if that their 
                  ••
               ndes
gave them that way they ſaide,) hee prayed them to tarry and
talke vpon the matter, and tell ſuch reaſon therein, that 
                  •
               ee
might thinke as they did, and when they ſhould ſo doe, be would

be glad to ſay with them; or elſe hee ſaide they muſt pardon
him: For ſith 
                  •
               ee had a ſoule of his owne to keepe, as they had,
be muſt ſay as he thought for his ſoule, as they muſt for theirs.
When they heard this they were halfe angry with him, What
good fellow, (quoth one of the Northerne men) whare wannes
thou? Be not we eleaven heere, and thou but one all alone, and
al we agreed, whereto ſhouldſt thou ſticke? Whates thy name
gud fellow? Maiſters (quoth he) my name is called Company.
Company (quoth they) now by my troth good felow, play then
the gud companion, come thereon foorth with vs, and paſſe even
for gude company. Would God good maiſters (quoth the
man againe) that there lay no more weight thereon. But now,
when we ſhall hence, and come before God, and that hee ſhall
ſend you vnto heaven for doing according vnto your conſcience,
and me to the divell, for doing againſt mine, al paſſing at your
requeſt heere for good company now, By God Maiſter Dickenſon
(that was one of the Northerne mens names,) If I
then ſhall ſay vnto you al againe; Maiſters, I went once with
you for good company, which is the cauſe that I goe now to hell,
play you the good felowes now againe with mee, as I went then
for good company with you, ſo ſome of you go now for good company
with me: would you goe maiſter Dickenſon? Nay, nay, by
our Lady, nor never a one of you all. And therefore muſt you
pardon me for paſſing as you paſſe; for the paſſage of my poore
ſoule paſſeth all good company.
            
               In the like ſence he vſed often to ſay, That he would never
pinne his ſoule at another mans backe, not even the beſt
man that he knew that day living; for he knew not whither he
might hap to carry it.
            When one came to him, to ſignifie that hee muſt prepare
himſelfe to die, for hee coulde not live, he called for
his vrinall, wherein when hee had made water, hee caſt
it, and viewed it (as Phyſitions vſe) at laſt hee ſaide ſoberly,
That hee ſaw nothing in that water, but that he might
live, if it pleaſed the King.
            
            When he was in priſon, and his bookes and papers taken
from him, he did ſhutte his chamber windowes both

day and night, ſaying; When the wares are gone, and the
tooles taken away, we muſt ſhut vp ſhop.
            
            When he went to death, a certaine woman offered him
a cuppe of wine, which he refuſing, ſaide; Good woman,
Chriſt in his paſſion drunke gall, and no wine.
            
            When he was to mount the ſcaffold hee ſaide to one of
the Shiriffes men, I pray thee helpe mee vp, as for comming
downe I take no care.
            
            
               When the hangman (according to his manner) deſired
him to pardon him his death, hee anſwered, I doe forgive
thee with al my heart: but one thing I wil tel thee, thou w
                  ••
               t
never have honeſtie in cutting off my head, my necke is ſo ſhort.
            NOw we have done with ſir Thomas Moore his owne
Apothegmes which have come to my handes, I will
tranſcribe out of his workes, a few Tales, or call them
what you pleaſe.
            
               A poore man found a prieſt over familiar with his wife,
and becauſe he ſpake it abroad, and could not prove it, the
prieſt ſued him before the Biſhops Officiall for defamation,
where the poore man in paine of curſing was commaunded,
that in his pariſh Church hee ſhould vppon the
Sonday, at high Maſſe, ſtand vp, and ſay, Mouth thou
lieſt: Whereuppon for fulfilling of his penaunce, vp was
the poore ſoule ſet in a pew, that the people might wonder
at him, and heare what hee ſayde: and there all aloude
(when hee had rehearſed what hee had reported by the
prieſt) then hee ſette his handes on his mouth, and ſayde;
Mouth thou lieſt: And by and by thereupon, he ſette his
handes vpon both his eyes, and ſayde; But eyne (quoth
hee) by the Maſſe yee lie not a whit.
               
            
            
               When ſir Thomas Moore had told one whom hee tearmeth
in his Dialogue the Meſſenger, how he might yeerly
have ſeene a myracle done at the Rhodes, if he would have
gone thither. So farre, quoth the Meſſenge? nay, yet I

had rather have Gods bleſſing to beleeve that I ſee not,
then to go ſo farre for it. I am well apaid (ſaid ſir Thomas)
thereof, for if you had rather beleeve, then take the paine
of a long pilgrimage, you will never be ſo ſtiffe in any opinion,
that you will put your ſelfe in ieopardie for pertinacy,
and ſtubborne ſtanding by your part. Nay Marie ſaid the
Meſſenger, I warrant you that I will never be ſo madde,
to hold, till it waxe too hot, for I have ſuch a fond fantaſie
of mine owne, that I had rather ſhiver and ſhake for colde
in the Summer, then be burned in the mids of Winter.
            
            
               It happened that a yong Prieſt verie devoutly in a Proceſsion,
bare a Candle before the Croſſe for lying with a
Wench, and bare it light all the long way, wherein the
people tooke ſuch ſpirituall pleaſure and inward ſolace,
that they laughed apace. And one merrie Marchant ſayd
vnto the Prieſts that followed him, Sic luceat lux veſtra
coram hominibus, Thus let your light ſhine before the people.
But a lewde Prieſt in later time, being reproved of his looſe
life, and told that he and other of the Clergie ought to bee
the Lanthornes of light, How can we (ſaide the ſhameleſſe
Prieſt) be Lanthornes of light, when as ye Lay men have all the
hornes.
               
            
            
               When a luſtie gallant ſaw a Frier going barefoote in a
great froſt and ſnowe, hee asked him why hee did take
ſuch paine. Hee aunſwered, that it was a verie little paine
if a man would remember hell: Yea Frier (quoth the
Gallant) but what and if there be no Hell? Then arte
thou a great foole: Yea Maiſter (quoth the Frier) but
what if there be hell, then is maſterſhip much more foole.
            
            
               A Frier as he was preaching in the Countrey, eſpied a
poore wife of the pariſh, whiſpering with her Pew-felow,
and he falling angrie thereat, cried out vnto her aloude,
Holde thy babble I bid thee, thou wife in the red hoode,
which when the huſwife heard, ſhe waxed as angrie, and
ſodainly ſhe ſtarted vp, and cried vnto the Frier againe
that all the Church rang thereon; Mary ſir, I beſhrew his
heart, that babbleth moſt of vs both, for I do but whiſper

a word with my neighbour here, and thou haſt babled
there a good large houre.
            
            
               King Ladiſlaus vſed much this maner among his ſervants,
when one of them praiſed any deed of his, or any
condition in him, if he perceyved that they ſayde nothing
but the truth, he would let it paſſe by vncontrolled: But
when he ſaw that they did ſet a gloſe vpon it for his praiſe,
of their owne making beſide; then would he ſhortly ſay
vnto them, I pray thee good fellow, when thou faiſt grace,
never bring in Gloria patri, without a Sicut erat. Any act
that ever I did, if thou report it againe to mine honour,
with a Gloria patri, never report it but with a Suut trat.
That is to wit, euen as it was, and no otherwiſe, and lift not
me vp with lies, for I loue it not.
            
            
               Frier Donalde preached at Paules Croſſe, that our Ladie
was a virgin, and yet at her pilgrimages, there was
made many a foule meeting. And loude cried out, Ye men
of London, gang on your ſelues with your wiues to Wilſdon,
in the Divils name, or elſe keepe them at home with
you with a ſorrow.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Moore was wont to compare the chooſing of a
wife vnto a caſuall taking out at all a verie ventures of Eles
out of a bagge, wherein were twentie Snakes for an Ele.
            
            Sir Iohn Fineux, ſometime chiefe Iuſtice of the Kings
bench, was often heard to ſay: Who ſo taketh from a Iuſtice
the order of his diſcretion, taketh ſurely from him more than
halfe his office.
            
            
               Wiſe was that ſaying of Doctor Medealfe: You yong men
do thinke vs olde men to be fooles, but we olde men do know that
you yong men are fooles.
            
               Katherine wife to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolke:
when her husband at a feaſt, willed everie Ladie to take to
ſit by hir, him that ſhee loued beſt, prouided hee were not
her husband, ſhe tooke Stephen Cardiner, Biſhop of Wincheſter,
ſaying: Seeing ſhe might not have him whom ſhe loved
beſt, ſhe would take him whom ſhe loved worſt.
            
            
               
KIng Edward the ſixt when three ſwordes were delivered
at his coronation vnto him, as king of England,
Fraunce, and Ireland, ſayd, There was yet another ſworde
to be delivered vnto him. Whereat when the Lords marvelled,
he ſayd: I meane (ſayd he) the ſacred Bible, which is
the ſworde of the ſpirit, without which we are nothing, neither
can do any thing. [Balaeus in Centurijs.]
            When ſit Ralfe Fane was condemned to die by the practiſe
of the Duke of Northumberland, he ſaid no more, proteſting
his innocencie, but, My blood ſhall be the Dukes bolſter,
as long as he liveth: Meaning, as I thinke, that his conſcience
affrighted with ſhedding innocent blood, ſhoulde
enioy little quiet, but paſſe reſtleſſe nights. Relatio Gallica.
            
            
               Thirlby Biſhop of Elie, when he was Ambaſſador at
Rome, one of hir men negligently laying downe his liuery
cloake, in his lodging loſt it: wherewith the Biſhop being
angrie rated the fellow roughly, who told him that hee ſuſpected
nothing in ſo holy a place as Rome was, but did
take them all for true men. What knaue (qvoth the Biſhop)
when thou commeſt into a ſtrange place, thinke all
men there to be theeves, yet take heede thou doe not call
them theeves.
            When hee was priſoner in the Tower, he was ſearched
by the Lievetenaunt, and five hundred French crownes
found in his purſe, and in his doublet about him: whereat
when the Lievetenant wondering, asked him, what hee
meant to carry ſo much money about him: hee anſwered,
I love to have my friends ſtill neere about mee, and can not tell
how I ſhould be vſed if I lacked them.
            
            In the rebellion in the Weaſt, during the raigne of king
Edward the ſixt, ſir Anthony Kingston marſhall of the field,
hanged vp a fellow that was ſervant to a rebellious Miller,
whome he affirmed himſelfe to be, vntill hee came vnto
the gallowes, and then his deniall would not be allowed.
Afterward the matter being better knowne, ſir Anthonie
was tolde that hee had executed the man for the maiſter.

It is well enough (quoth ſir Anthony) hee coulde never have
doone his maiſter better ſervice, than have hanged for him.
            THeſe following are taken out of the life of Cardinall
Poole Archbiſhop of Canterbury, written by a learned
man, and Printed at Venice.
            
            When one asked counſell of Cardinall Poole, what methode
and way was beſt to be taken, to vnderſtand the
obſcure places in Saint Paules Epiſtles: he anſwered him
he thought the beſt and ſhorteſt way was, to reade firſt
the latter parte of thoſe Epiſtles, which dooth intreate of
Chriſtian manners, and vnderſtand it, and expreſſe it in
life and good manners; and then to go vnto the firſt part,
where the matters of faith are ſubtily and exactly handled,
ſaying; That God wil give his ſpirite of vnderſtanding ſoonest
vnto thoſe, that with al their whole hearts ſeeke to ſerve him.
            
            
               He was wont to ſay, That he and all other Biſhops ought
to conſider that they were ordained, not onely Iudges over thoſe
of their Dioceſes, but father Iudges.
            In communication when mention hapned to be made
of a certaine Biſhoppe, who was woont to blame the Biſhops
that lived at Rome, and neglected their charge, and
yet he himſelfe was reſident at Rome. He (quoth Poole) doth
like vnto thoſe that cannot abide the ſmel of garlicke, for if they
have to do with them that have eaten garlike, they eate ſome too
themſelves, that they may not percerve their ſtinking breaths.
            
            
               Speach was heard of a yoong man that was learned indeede,
but too bolde, and ready to cenſure. Learning
(quoth Poole) doth worke almoſt that in yong men, that wine
doth in the fatte; there it worketh, there it boileth vppe, and
ſwelleth. But as ſoone as it is purged, and put in the veſſel, having
gathered his forces together, it is quiet and ſtil.
            
               When one very skilfull in Aſtrologie tolde him, that
hee had very exactly calculated his-nativitie, and found
that great matters were portended of him: Poole aunſwered,
Perhaps it may be as you affirme, but you muſt remember

that I was borne againe by baptiſme, and that day of nativitie
wherein I was borne againe, doth eclipſe the other before.
            When one had ſaide, that we muſt be ſo wholy buſied
in the ſtudie of the Scriptures, that no time ſhould be left
for other ſtudies: and another man had added, that the
ſtudies of other learnings were to bee vſed as Wayting-maides,
and Bond-women, What do you not know (quoth
Poole) that Agar was caſt out of the doores, becauſe ſhee was
a bond-woman?
            
            
               When Sadolet adhorted him vnto the ſtudie of Philoſophy,
giving to it the price above all other ſtudies: Poole
anſwered him, While al the worlde was overwhelmed with
the darkeneſſe of Paganiſme, it did excel al other Artes: but
ſince that thicke miſt was chaſed away, by the bright beames of
the preaching of Chriſt and his Apoſtles, and their ſucceſſours;
the ſtudy of the ſacred Scriptures and divinitie had gotten the
pa
                  •
               ne and chiefe praiſe, adding, that Philoſophy was now as
Tenedos, of whome Virgil writeth:
            
               —notiſſima fama
               Inſula div
                     •
                  s opum Priami dum regna manebant.
               Nunc tantùm ſinus & ſtatio malefida carinis.
            
            
               A famous Iſle of riches great while Priamus kingdome ſtoode,
               Now nothing but a baggage bay, and harbour nothing good.
            
            He vſed friendly to admoniſh a certaine Biſhop, not
to forſake his ſheepe, but rather leaving Rome to repayre
home and execute his office. This Biſhop vpon a time
came vnto him, and tolde him that hee was minded to goe
out of the cittie, for one moneth, and to viſite his ſheepe,
and therefore hee did deſire that hee might departe with
his good leave and liking: Poole anſwered, I ſhal take this
comfort by your departure, that you ſhal bee beaten the leſſe.
            
            When Letters were ſhewed vnto him very artificially
penned, which one had ſent vnto a great man, to comfort
him for the death of his friendes, and to tha
                  •
                intent had vſed
all the places of Rhethoricke, hee read them, and then
ſaide; That hee never in al his life had ever read Letters, that
could bring greater comfort; for they were ſuch, that no man

that ſhoulde reade them, could be able to keepe himſelfe from
laughing.
            
            Having heard a certaine Preacher of great name, who
arrogated much to himſelfe, and did paſſingly pleaſe himſelfe;
hee was asked what hee thought of the man. Poole
aunſwered; Well, but I would that hee would firſt preach vnto
himſelfe, and then afterward to other.
            
            When a Nobleman of Rome tolde him, that hee did
truſt that he ſhould come to his pleaſaunt gardines, which
hee had ſumptuouſly made, yea thirtie yeeres after, and
wonder at the beauty of them. Poole anſwered, I hope I
have not deſerved ſo ill of you, that you ſhould wiſh me ſo long a
baniſhment from my heavenly country.
            
            While he was in the Low countries, and one day would
have gone vnto Charles the Emperour, but hee could not
be admitted to his ſpeach: but two dayes after the Biſhop
of Arras was ſent vnto him by the Emperour, to excuſe
his long ſtay, and deſire him to come vnto him: Poole
ſayde, that hee had ſtrange happe, That whereas be ſpake
daily vnto God for the Emperour, yet he was not admitted vnto
the Emperour, to talke with him about a matter belonging
to God.
            
            There was one that was very curious in keeping of his
beard, and it was reported that hee beſtowed every moneth
two duckats vpon the trimming of it. If it be ſo (ſaid
Poole) his beard wil ſhortly be more woorth than his head.
            
            
               After the death of Paulus Tertius when many Cardinals
came vnto him, and tolde him, that if hee liked of it, they
would make him Pope: He deſired them to looke well to it,
that they were ſwayed by no paſſion of the minde, or did ought
for favour, and good-will, but referre all their cogitations wh
                  •
               
               lie
vnto the honour of God, and the profite of his Church; the
which only they all ought especially to have alwayes before their
eyes.
            
               When one of the Cardinalls of the adverſe faction did
one day charge him with ambition, and ſaide that hee did
vntimely and over-haſtily ſeeke the Popedome: He anſwered

gravely That he thought not the burthen of that great
office to be ſo light, but that he was of the minde, that it was rather
to be feared, than deſired. A
                  •
                for them which vnderstood
not, and thought more baſely of ſo great a place, hee lamented
their caſe, and was ſory for them.
            
               When the Cardinall Farneſi, and diverſe other of his
fri
                     •
                  nds came vnto him, at midnight, to make him Pope,
by adoration, he repelled them ſaying; He would not have
ſo weighty a matter tumultuouſly and raſhly done, but v
                  ••
               aily
and orderly, that the night was no convenient time therefore,
that God loved the light more than darkeneſſe, wherefore they
ſhould deferre it vntill the next day, and that then of it plea
                  •
               ed
God, it might very well be done. But this his pious modeſty
loſt him the Papacie.
            
            
               He vſed often to ſay, Thoſe which would betake them vnto
the ſtudy of the holy Scriptures, (which was as though they
would goe into the inner and ſecret parte of the Temple) muſt
paſſe thorow a lowe and a narrow doore: For that no man can
attaine to the vnderſtanding of the Scriptures, that is prowde
and puffed vp with the ſharpeneſſe of his wit, or excellencie of
humane learning; but be that bringeth lowlineſſe of minde, and

                  〈◊〉
                tempt of himſelfe, and yeeldes his vnderstanding (as the Apoſtle
ſaith) captive vnto faith.
            
               Of this alſo did hee often admoniſh thoſe that woulde
ſtudy the ſacred Scriptures, That they ſhould ſpecially beware
that they never went to the reading of them with this intent and
minde, that they might diſpute of them to ſhew their learning,
and by that knowledge to get them honors and riches: for both
purpoſes, were every contrary to this kind of ſtudie. Wherevnto
ought to be adhibited, first fervent prayers▪ then a lowely mind,
and finally an heart voyde of all ambition and greedy deſire.
Thus farre of this good Cardinall.
            
            Wil
                  •
               iam Marq
                     •
                  es of Winchester, being asked how hee
continued of the counſel on the trobleſome times of divers
Princes, aunſwered. By being a Willow, and not an Oake.
Hee woulde alſo often ſay, that he found great eaſe in this:
               
That I never ſought to rule the r
                  •
               ſte, and to be the director of
others, but alwayes ſuffred my ſelfe to be ſwayed with the moſt
and mightieſt. As another Courtier of former times ſaide
he had borne off many court-ſtormes indangerous times.
By ſuffering iniuries and giving thankes for them.
            A luſty gallant that had waſted much of his patrimony,
ſeeing maſter Dutton a gentleman in a gowne, not of the
neweſt out, tolde him that hee had thought it had beene
his great grandfathers gowne, It is ſo (ſaide maiſter Dutton)
and I have alſo my great grandfathers lands, and ſo have
not you.
            
            A reverend man my firſt teacher would often ſay in the
middeſt of his mirth, Sorrowe is good for nothing ſave ſinne
onely.
            
            NOw we draw to an end, have a few ſavings of merie
M. 
                  
                     ••
                  elwood the great Epigrammatiſt. When Qu:
Mary tolde this Heiwood, that the Prieſts muſt forgoe
their wives. Hee merrily aunſwered, Your Grace muſt allow
them Lemmans then, for the Cleargie can not live without
ſawce.
            
            He being asked of the ſaide Queene Mary, what winde
blew him to the Court, anſwered her, Two ſpecially, the one
to ſee your Maieſtie, We thanke you for that, ſaid Queene
Mary; But I pray you, what is the other? That your Grace
(ſaide he) might ſee me.
            
            When one told him, that Pace being a maiſter of Arte
had diſgraced himſelfe with wearing a fooles come, he anſwered,
It is leſſe hurtfull to the common-weale, when wiſemen
goe in fooles coates, than when fooles goe in w
                     ••
                  e m
                     •
                  ns
gownes.
            
            
               When hee ſawe one riding that bare a wanton behinde
him, hee ſaide; In good faith ſir, I would ſay that your horſe
were overloaden, if I did not perceive this the 
                  〈◊〉
               
you carry were very light.
            
               
When a man of worſhip, whoſe beere was better hopped
than maulted, asked him at his Table, how hee liked
of his beere, and whether it were not well hopped: Yes
by the faith of my body (ſaide hee) it is very well hopped:
but if it ha
                     •
                   hoppea a li
                     •
                  tle further, it had hopped into the water.
            
            When one ſaide, that the number of Lawyers woulde
marre the occupation; hee aunſwered, No, for alwayes
the more ſpaniels in the field, the more game.
            
            
               This vſuall ſpeech of ſir Th: Moore, both of himſelfe
& other Book breeders, which is alſo extant in an Epiſtle
of his, I have reſerved to cloſe vp this part. Booke-makers
are ful
                  ••
               ſe folke who p
                  •
               ine and 
                  ••
               ne themſelves away by writing,
to ſubiect themſelves to the cenſure of ſuch which in Ordinaries
and in Ale-benches will 
                  〈…〉
                pull them by their
wordes, phraſes, and lines, as it were by the beards; when ſome
of them are ſo pill
                  •
                themſelves, as that they have not one haire
of honeſtie; or to vſe his owne wordes, Ne pilum boni hominis.
But theſe he reſembleth to thoſe vnmanerly gueſts,
which when they have bin well and kindely entertained flinch
away never giving thankes, but depraving and dispraſing their
curteous entertainement.
         
         
            
            CERTAINE
Poemes, or Poeſies, Epigrammes,
Rythmes, and Epitaphs of the
Engliſh Nation in former
Times.
            
            POEMS.
            
               OF the dignity of Poetry much hath
beene ſaid by the worthy Sir Philipp
Sidney, and by the Gentleman which
proued that Poets were the firſt Politicians,
the firſt Philoſophers, the firſt
Historiographers. I will onely adde
out of Philo, that they were Gods
owne creatures, who in his Booke de Plantatione Noe, reporteth,
that when he had made the whole worlds maſſe;
he created Poets to celebrate and ſet out the Creator himſelfe,
and all the creatures: you Poëts read the place and
you will like it. Howſoeuer it pleaſeth the Italian to cenſure
vs, yet neither doth the Sunne ſo farre retire his charriot
from our Climate, neither are there leſſe fauourable aſpects
betweene Mercurie, Iupiter, and the Moone, in our
inclination of heauen, if Poëts are Fato, as it pleaſed Socrates,
neither are our Poets deſtitute of Arte preſcribed by reaſon,
and grounded vpon experience, but they are as pregnant
both in witty conceits and deuiſes, and alſo in imitation,
as any of them. Yea and according to the argument excell
in granditie and grauity, in ſmoothneſſe and proprietie,
in quickneſſe and briefneſſe. So that for skill, varietie,
efficacie, and ſweetneſſe, the foure materiall points required
in a Poët, they can both teach and delight perfectly.
            This would eaſily appeare if any lines were extant of
that worthy Britiſh Lady Claudia Rufina, ſo commended
by Martial, or of Gildas which Lilius Giraldus ſawe in the
libraries of Italie,
               Beda Eccl. hiſt. lib. 4. cap. 24. or of old Chedmon who by diuine inſpiration
about the yeare 680. became ſo diuine a Poët in our
Engliſh tongue, that with his ſweete verſes full of compunction,
he withdrew many from vice to vertue, and a religious
feare of God: or of our Claudius Clemens one of
the firſt founders of the Vniuerſity of Paris: and doth moſt
clearely appeare to all that can iudge by many learned
Poems publiſhed in this our learned age. But whereas
theſe later are in euery mans hand, and the former are

irrecouerable, I will onely giue you a taſte of ſome of midle
age, which was ſo ouercaſt with darke clouds, or rather
thicke fogges of ignorance, that euery little ſparke of liberall
learning ſeemed wonderfull: ſo that if ſometime you
happen of an vncouth word, let the time entreate pardon
for it, when as all words haue their times, and as he ſaith.
            
               licuit ſemperque licebit,
               Signatum praeſente nota procudere nomen.
            
            We will begin with Ioſeph of Exceſter, who followed
our King Richard the firſt in his warres in the holy land,
celebrated his acts in a booke called Antiocheidos, and turned
Dares Phrigius ſo happily into verſe, that it hath been
Printed not long ſince in Germany, vnder the name of Cornelius
Nepos.
            
            The paſſing of the pleaſant riuer Simois by Troy, & the
encounter betweene the waues of the Sea, and it, at the diſemboging,
or inlett therof, he liuely ſetteth forth thus:

                  Proxima rura rigans alio peregrinus ab orbe
                  Viſurus Troiam Simois, longoque meatu
                  Emeruiſſe velit, vt per tot regna, tot vrbes
                  Exeat aequoreas tandem Trotanus in vndas.
                  Dumque indefeſſo miratur Pergama viſu
                  Lapſurum ſuſpendit iter, fluuiumque moratur,
                  Tardior & totam complects deſtinat vrbem:
                  Suſpenſis infenſus aquis violentior inſtat
                  Nereus, atque amnem cogens procùl ire minorem;
                  Proximus accedit vrbi, contendere credas
                  Quis propior, ſic alternis concurritur vndis,
                  Sic crebras iterant voces, ſic iurgia miſcent.
               
            
            You may at one view behold mount Ida with his trees, &
the country adiacent to Troy in theſe few lines, as in a moſt
pleaſant proſpect preſēted vnto you thus, by the ſaid Ioſeph.
            
            
               Haud procul incumbens intercurrentibus aruis
               Idaeus conſurgit apex, vetus incola montis
               Silua viret, vernat abies procera, cupreſſus
               Flebilis, interpres laurus, vaga pinus, oliua
               Concilians, cornus venatrix, fraxinus audax,
               
                  
Staet comitis patiens vlmus, nunquamque ſeneſcens
               Cantatrix buxus: paulò procliuiùs aruum
               Ebria vitis habet non dedignata latere
               Cancricolam poſcit Phoebum, vicinus ariſtas
               Praegnantes faecundat ager▪ non plura Falernus
               
                  Ʋina bibit, non tot paſcit Campania meſſes.
            
            A right woman and Ladylike diſdaine may be obſerued in
the ſa
                  •
               e Author, where he bringeth in Pallas, mating dame
Iuno with modeſt diſdamfulneſſe before Paris, in the action
of beauty, a matter of greateſt importance in that ſex, after
this manner of reply.
            
               Magna parens ſuperûm, nec enim nego; magna Tonantis
               Nupta, nec inuideo; meritum, Paris inclyte, noſtrum
               Si quod erat carpſit teſtor freta, teſtor Olympum,
               Teſtor humum, non armatas in praelia linguae
               Credideram veniſſe deas; hâc parte loquacem
               Erubeo ſexum, minùs hîc quàm faemina poſſum;
               Martem alium didici, victoria faeda vbi victis
               Plus laudis victore feret, noſtriſque trophaeis
               Hic hand notus honos. Sed quo regina dearum
               Effatu tendit, Dea ſit, cedo, imò Dearum
               Maxima, non dextrae ſortiri ſceptra potentis,
               Partiri ue Iouem certatim venimus, illa
               Illa habeat, quae ſe oſtentat.
            
            In the commendation of Britaine, for breeding Martiall
men, and praiſe of the famous King Arthur, he ſong in his
Antiocheidos theſe which onely remaine out of that worke,

                  Inclita fulſit
                  Poſteritas ducibus tantis, tot diues alumnis,
                  Tot faecunda viris, premerent qui viribus o
                        •
                      bem,
                  Et famà veteres. Hinc Conſtantinus adeptus
                  Imperium, Romam tenuit, Byzantion auxit.
                  Hinc Senenum ductor captiuà Brennius vrbe,
                  Romuleas domuit flammis victricibus arces.
                  Hinc & Scaeua ſatus pars non obſcura tumultus
                  Ciuilis, Magnum ſolus qui mole ſoluta
                  Obſedit, meliorque ſtetit pro Caeſare murus,
                  
                     
Hinc celebri fato faelici floruit ortu
                  Flos regum Arthurus, cuius tamen acta ſtupori
                  Non micuere minùs, totus quòd in aure voluptas
                  Et populo plaudente fauus. Quacunque priorum
                  Inſpice, Pellaeum commendat fama Tyrannum,
                  Pagina Caeſareos loquitur Romana triumphos,
                  Alciden domitis attollit gloria monstris.
                  Sed nec pinetum coryli, nec ſydera ſolem
                  Aequant, Annales Graios, Latioſque reuolue,
                  Priſca parem neſcit, aequalem poſtera nullum
                  Exhibitura dies. Reges ſupereminet omnes
                  Solus praeteritis melior, maiorque futuris.
               
            
            If a painter would portraite deuills let him paint them in
his coulors, as Foelix the old Monke, of Crowland depaynted
the bugges of Crowland in his verſes, and they will
ſeeme right hell-hounds.
            
               Sunt aliqui quibus eſt crinis rigidus, caput amplum,
               Frons cornuta, gena diſtorta, pupilla coruſcans,
               Os patulum, labra turgentia, dens praeacutus,
               Et quibus est crinis quaſi ſeta, caput quaſi truncus,
               Frons quaſi cera, gena quaſi pix, oculus quaſi carbo,
               Os quaſi ſporta, labra quaſi plumbum, dens quaſi buxus.
               Sunt alij quibus eſt vultus gibboſus & acer,
               Naſus curuatus & foedus, auris acuta,
               Et grandis, ceruix dependens & macilenta:
               Caeſaries & barba rigens, frons & gena pallens,
               Naſus & auris olens, vertex & ſinciput horrens.
               Et ſunt perplures qui crine videntur adusto,
               Fronte truci, naſo praegrandi, lumine toruo.
               Faucibus horrendis, labris pendentibus, ore
               Igniuomo, vultu ſquamoſo, vertice groſſo,
               Dente fero, mento peracuto, gutture rauco,
               Pelle nigra, ſcapulis contractis, ventre rapaci,
               Coſtis mobilibus, lumbis ardentibus, anis
               Caudatis, genibus nodatis, cruribus vncis,
               Plantis auerſis, taliſque tumentibus, & ſunt
               Nonnulli, quibus eſt non horrida forma, ſed ipſe
               
                  
Horror, cum non ſint ſcelerati, ſed ſcelus ipſum.
            
            He did ſeeme alſo a good poet in his age, which deſcribed
a great battaile betweene the Danes and the Engliſh; thus.
            
               Eminùs in primis hiberni grandinis instar
               Tela volant, ſyluas hastarum fragmina frangunt;
               Mox ruitur propiùs, praeſcinditur enſis ab enſe,
               Conculcatur equus ab equo, ruit hoſtis in hoſtem.
               Hic effoſſa trahit hoſtili viſcera ferro,
               Hic tacet exanimis fuſâ cum ſanguine vitâ.
               Hic pedis, ille manus, hic pectoris, ille lacerti
               Vulnere damnatus reditum proponit inanem.
            
            If he which ſcraped together the fragments of ancient
poets, had hapned on the verſes following, written to a Biſhop
of Norwich, happely he would haue inſerted them.
            
               Magnus Alexander bellorum ſaepe procellas
               Immixtus fregit ſtudijs, Socrateſque ſtudend
                     •
                  
               
               Continuum ſolitus interrupiſſe laborem,
               Threicias tremulo numerauit pollice chordas.
               Cedit Atlas oneri, ciuili ſcriptor ab enſe
               Iulius abstinuit, inuictus ſaepe quieuit
               Alcides, rigidum mollis lyra flexit Achillem,
               Tu quoque lugenti patriae grauiterque diuque
               Expectate parens, ſibi quem viduata maritum
               Iam Paſtoralis Norwici regia poſcit. &c.
            
            
               Iohn Hanuill a Monke of S. Albanes made this good &
godly inuocation before his poeme, comparable with many
of the latter broode.
            
               Tu Cyrrhae latices noſtrae Deus implue menti,
               Eloquij rorem ſiccis infunde labellis,
               Diſtillaque fauos, quos nec dum pallidus auro
               Scit Tagus, aut ſitiens admotis Tantalus vndis.
               Dirige qua timidè ſuſc
                     •
                  pit dextera, dextram
               Audacem pauidamque iuua, tu mentis habenas
               Feruoremque rege, quicquid dictauerit ori
               Spiritus aridior, oleum ſuffunde fauoris.
               Tu patris es verbum, tu mens, tu dextra, Verbum
               Expediat verbum, mens mentem, dextera dextram.
            
            Laſie and ſuperficiall ſcholers which thruſt the day forward

ward with their ſhoulders in the vniuerſity, and returne as
wiſe as they came thether he deſcribeth in this ſort:

                  Hi ſunt qui ſtatuae veniunt-ſtatuaeque recedunt,
                  Et Bacchi ſapiunt non Phaebi pocula, Nyſae
                  Agmina non Cirrhae, Phaebo Bacchoque miniſtrant,
                  Hoc pleni illo vacui.
               
            
            The old ale knights of England were well depainted out
of him, in the ale houſe coulours of that time, in this maner,

                  Iamque vagante ſcypho, diſcincto gutture was-heil
                  
                  Ingeminant was-fieil; labor eſt plus perdere vini
                  Quam ſitis, exhaurire merum vehementius ardent,
                  Quàm exhaurire ſitim.
               
            
            The ſame Iohn Hanuill when he would ſignifie whatſoeuer
enuy had wrought againſt Troy, the Roman vertue
had repayred, ſung briefely.
            
               Si quid de cùlmine Troiae
               Diminuit liuor, virtus reparauit, vt orbi
               Hic vrbem rapuit, haec orbem reddidit vrbi.
            
            Paſſionate are theſe verſes vpon the death of K. Richard
the firſt, penned by one Gaulfrid.
            
            
               Neuſtria ſub clypeô Regis defenſa Richardi
               Indefenſa modò gestu teſtare dolorem,
               Exundent oculi lachrimas exterminet ora
               Pallor, connodet digitos tortura, cruentet
               Interiora dolor, & verberet aera clamor:
               Tota peris ex morte ſuâ, mors non fuit eius
               Sed tua, non vna ſed publica mortis imago.
               O Veneris lachrimoſa dies, ô ſidus amarum.
               Illa dies tua nox fuit, & Venus illa venenum.
               Illa dedit vulnus, ſed peſſimus ille dierum
               Primus ab vndecimo, qui vitam victricus ipſam
               Clauſit, vterque dies homicida, tyrannide mira,
               Traiecit clauſus incluſum, tectus apertum,
               Prouidus incautum, miles munitus inermem,
               Et proprium Regem.
            
            And after a fewe verſes: he ſpeaking to Death, addeth in
commendation of that prince.
            
               
               —, Nihil addere nouerat vltrà
               Ipſe fuit quicquid potuit natura, ſed iſtud
               Cauſa fuit quare rapuiſti, res pretioſas
               Eligis, & viles quaſi dedignata relinquis.
            
            Theſe former verſes were mentioned by Chaucer
our Engliſh Homer in the deſcription of the ſodaine
ſtirre and Panicall feare when Chanteclere the cocke
was caried away by Reynold the Foxe with a relation
to the ſaid Galfride.
            
            
               The ſilly widow and her daughters two
               Herd the hennes crie and make ado.
               And out at the dore ſtert they anon
               And ſaw the fox toward the woodygon,
               And bare vpon his back the cock away
               And cried out harow and well away.
               Aha the fox, and after him they ran,
               And eke with ſtaues many other man.
               Ran Coll our dogge, Talbot and eke Garland,
               And Malkin with her diſtaffe in her hand,
               Ran Cow and Calfe and eke the very hogges,
               For they ſo ſore affraid were of the dogges.
               And ſhowting of men and of women eake.
               They ran ſo her hert thought to breaks
               They yellen as fends do in hell,
               The Duckes cried as men would them quell,
               The Geeſe for feare flew ouer the trees,
               Out of the heues came ſwarmes of Bees.
               So hideous was the noyſe, ah benedicite
               Certes Iack Strawe, ne his meiney
               Ne made neuer ſhoutes halfe ſo ſhrill
               When that they would any Fleming kill,
               As that day was made vpon the Fox.
               Of braſſe they blew the trumpes and of box,
               Of horne, and box, i which they blew and pouped,
               And therewith they ſhriked and ſhouted,
               It ſeemed as though heauen ſhould fall.
               O Gaulfride dere maister ſoueraigne,
               
                  
That whan the worthy King Richard was ſlaine
               With ſhot, complainedſt his death ſo ſore,
               Why ne had I now thie ſcience, and thy lore?
               The Friday for to chide as did ye,
               For on a Friday ſhortly ſlaine was he.
               Then would I ſhew you how that I could plaine,
               For Chauntecleercs dred and for his paine.
               Certes ſuch crie, ne lamentation,
               Was neuer of Ladyes made when that Ilion
               Was won, an Pirrhus with his bright ſword,
               Whan he hent King Priam by the beard,
               And ſlough him (as ſaith Aeneidos)
               As made all the hennes in the cloos,
               Whan they lost of Chantecleere the ſight:
               But ſouerainly dame Pert
                     •
                  lott ſhright,
               Well louder than did Haſdruballs wife,
               Whan that her husband hath lost his life,
               And that the Romans had brent Cartage,
               
               She was ſo full of torment and of rage,
               That wilfully into the fire ſhe ſtert,
               And brent her ſelfe with a ſtedfast hert.
               O wofull Hennes right ſo cried ye,
               As when that Nero brent the city
               Of Rome, cried the Senators wives,
               For that her husbonds ſhould loſe her lives.
            
            Theſe may ſuffice for ſome Poeticall deſcriptions of
our auncient Poets, if I would come to our time, what a
world could I preſent to you out of Sir Philipp Sidney, Ed.
Spencer, Samuel Daniel, Hugh Holland, Ben: Iohnſon, Th.
Campion, Mich. Drayton, George Chapman, Iohn Marſton,
William Shakeſpeare, & other moſt pregnant witts of theſe
our times, whom ſucceeding ages may iuſtly admire.
         
         
            
            Epigrammes.
            
               IN ſhort and ſweete Poems, framed to
praiſe or diſpraiſe, or ſome other ſharpe
conceit which are called Epigrammes,
as our countrie men now ſurpaſſe other
nations, ſo in former times they were
not inferior, if you conſider ages, as the
indifferent Reader may iudge by theſe.
            In the praiſe of our natiue Countrie England, Alfred of
Beuerley made this.
            
               Anglia plena iocis, gens libera et apta iocari,
               Libera gens cui libera mens & libera lingua,
               Sed lingu. i melior, liberiorque manus.
            
            And in another olde Booke I finde this.
            
               Anglia dulce ſolum, quod non aliena, recenſque,
               Sed tua dulcedo priſtina dulce facit,
               Quae nihil à Galli
                     •
                  , ſed Gallia ſuſcipit à te
               Quicquid amoris habet quicquid honoris, habet.
            
            In the darke miſle of all good learning, about 800.
yeares ſince, in commendation of the godly King Saint
Oſ
                     •
                  uald, was made this.
            
               Quis fuit Alcides? quis Caſar Iulius? aut quis
               Magnus Alexander? Alcides ſe ſuperaſſe
               Fertur, Alexander mundum: ſed Iulius hoſtem:
               Se ſimul Oſuualdus, & mundum vicit, & hoſtem.
            
            To the honour of Elfleda noble Lady, which repaired
Darby, Cheſter, Warwicke, &c. I haue found this.
            
               O Elfleda potens, ô terror virgo virorum,
               Victrix naturae, nomine digna viri;
               Te quo ſplendidior fieres, natura puellam,
               Te probitas fecit nomen habere viri.
               Te mutare decet, ſed ſolum nomina ſexus
               Tu Regina potens, Rexque trophaea parans.
               Iam nec Caeſarei tantum meraeri triumphi,
               Caeſare ſplendidior virgo, virago viges.
            
            
               
This alſo may here haue place, which William Conquerours
Poet made to him whē he had obtained this Realme.
            
               Caeſariem Caeſar tibi ſi natura negauit,
               Hanc Wilielme tibi ſtella comata dedit.
            
            It may ſeeme he alluded to the baldneſſe of Iulius Caeſar,
who for that cauſe vſed a Lawrell Garland, to the Comete
appearing before his conqueſt of this kingdome, portending
the ſame as it was thought, and to the manner of the
French in that time: among whom long buſhie haire was
the ſignale marke of Maieſtie, as Agathias noteth, when as
all ſubiects were rounded, and the Kings only long haired.
Which cuſtome continued among the French Kings, vntill
Peter Lombard Biſhop of Paris diſſwaded them from it,
and among ours, as appeareth by their ſeales vntill King
Henry the 5.
            The happy ſucceſſe of Engliſh and Normans, with the
cowardly flight of the French, at Nugent 1109 in the time
of King Henry the firſt, was thus expreſſed.
            
               Henricus regum rex & decus, abſtulit altos
               Francigenis animos, Ludouicum namque Nugenti
               Rex regem campo magnum maior ſuperauit:
               Praepoſuere fugam bellis, calcaria telis
               Galli praecipites: fama ſpolijſque potitos
               Laureâ Normanos, & laus aterna coronat,
               Sic decus iſte ducum ſic corda tumentia preſſit,
               Oraque Francorum ſuperba mutire coegit.
            
            
               Maud daughter to Malcolm King of Scots, a woman of
rare pietie, buried at Weſtminſter, to which Church ſhe
would come dayly barefoote, while the Court laye there,
had an excellent Epigramme made to her commendation,
whereof theſe foure verſes onely remaine.
            
               Proſpera non laetam fecere, nec aſpera triſtem,
               Aſpera riſus erant, proſpera terror erant.
               Non decor effecit fragilem, non ſceptra ſuperbam,
               Sola potens humilis, ſola pudica decens.
            
            No bad Poet was he which wrote to the honor of Adeliza,
ſecond wife to King Henry the firſt, who was daughter to

the Duke of Brabant, & ſiſter to Lord Ioſcelin, from whom
the Percies Earles of Northumberland deſcended.
            
               Anglorum Regina tuos Adeliza decores
               Ipſa referre parans Muſa, ſtupore riget.
               Quid Diadema tibi pulcherrima? quid tibi gemma?
               Pallet gemma tibi, nec Diadema nitet.
               Deme tibi cultus, cultum natura miniſtrat,
               Non exornari forma beata potest.
               Ornamenta caue, nec quicquam luminis inde
               Accipis, illa micant lumine clara tuo;
               Non puduit modicas de magnis dicere laudes,
               Nec pudeat dominam te precor eſſe meam.
            
            But among all our olde Epigrammatiſts all commendation
is carried away by olde Godffery Prior of Wincheſter,
who liued Anno 1100. which Citie hath brought forth ſo
many excelling in Poeticall facultie, not onely in former
ages, but alſo in latter, out of the worthy Colledge there,
that the very Genius loci doth ſeeme Poeticall. Out of his
Epigrammes firſt imparted to me by the right learned
Maiſter Th. Allen of Oxford, I will here impart a few vnto
you.
            To one that would know how long he ſhould learne,
he wrighteth thus.
            
               Diſcendi Damiane modum te quaerere dicunt,
               Diſcas dum neſcis, ſit modus iſte tibi.
            
            That the contempt of fooles is not to be reſpected.
            
               Contemptum ſtulti contemnere Dindime laus est,
               Contemni a ſtulto dedecus eſſe nego.
            
            Againſt pride in proſperitie.
            
               Extolli noli quùm te fortuna beauit
               Pompone, haec eadem quae leuat, ipſa premit.
            
            Againſt ſuch as teach well, and liue not accordingly.
            
               Multa Solon, ſed plura Cato me verba docetis,
               At nemo veſtrum quanta docetis, agit.
            
            To one which had eaten ſtinking meate.
            
               Druſe comediſti quem miſit Siluius hircum,
               Vel tibi non naſus, vel tibi naſus olet.
            
            
               
He teacheth vs to relye vpon firme and ſure ſupports,
leſt we fall to the ground with them in this.
            
               Non eſt ſecurus ſuper titubantia fultus
               Iungere labenti, labitur ille, ruis.
            
            That we muſt looke for like meaſure, if we doe not as we
would be done vnto, he admoniſheth all vnder the name
of Albius.
            
            
               Iurgia, clamores tibi gloria gloria lites,
               Et facis & dicis omnibus, vnde noces.
               Expectes ead
                     •
                  m quae nobis ſeceris Albi,
               Nam quem tu laedis, te ferit ille libens.
            
            Youth which in their haughty heat, reiect the aduiſe of
ould men, he aduiſeth thus.
            
               Pannorum veterum facile contemnitur vſus
               Non ſic conſilium, posthumiane, ſenum.
            
            The vanity of them which vaunt of their auncient nobility,
and haue no nobility in themſelues, he thus taxeth.
            
               Stemmata continuas, recitas ex ordine patres,
               Queis niſi tu ſimilis, Rufule quid recitas?
            
            That there was no contending with him who with miſſiue
bribes can preuaile againſt Iuſtice.
            
               Miſſilibus Daciane tuis Aſtraea receſſit
               Vincis m
                     •
                  ſſilibus Ius Dac
                     ••
                  nc tuis.
            
            The common prouerbe, Loue me loue mine, he thus aduiſed
vs to obſerue,
            
               Me tanquam ſocium te dicis amare Trebati,
               Et quos totus amo dente furente teris
               Sed niſi ſis ſocius ſocijs, & amic
                     •
                  s
               Non potero noſtrum dicere te ſocium.
            
            Againſt hooked gifts which draw others.
            
               Multa mihi donas, vereor ne multa requiras,
               Nolo mihi doncs Aulice, ſi repetas.
            
            Againſt one that ſought a benefice and would teach before
he could teach.
            
               Quâ doceat ſedem quaerit Pl
                     •
                  timus & aedem,
               Quarit quâ doceat, non ea quae doceat,
            
            
               
Againſt a couetous wretch.
            
               Naſidiane diu vixiſti ſemper anarus,
               Oro tibi 
                     ••
                  uas Naſidiane dus.
            
            Againſt one that would exact of others, and do nothing
himſelfe.
            
               Ex
                     •
                  gis a nobis quem 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſoluis amorem,
               Quam nulli praeſtes exigis. Aule ſidem.
               Exig
                     ••
                   à nobis quem non m
                     •
                  rearis honorem,
               Mirum eſt quod non das, id tibi velle 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            Againſt an Abbot that would defend his monks from
others, but worrye them himſelfe.
            
               Tollit onem de fauce lupi perſaepe moloſſus,
               Ereptamque lupo ventre recondit ouem.
               Tu quoque Sceuae tuos praedone tueris ab omni,
               Vnus praedo tamen perdis vbique tuos.
            
            One amidſt the warres betweene King Stephen and Henrie
the ſecond, commended the ſame Henry in theſe verſes.
            
               Praelia quanta mouet Stephanus, moucat volo namque
               Gloria nulla foret ſi pralia null: moueret.
               Tu contra Stephanum cui copia multa virorum;
               Duxiſti pautos, our paucos? gloria maior,
               Eſt▪ multos paucis, quàm paucos vincere multis.
            
            At the ſame troubleſome time and as it were deſolation
of England were written to the ſame Henry as it were in a
Proſopopcia of England.
            
            
               Dux Henrice nepos Henrici maxime magni;
               Anglia tota ruo, nec iam ruo, tota ruina. &c.
            
            Vpon two other fearfull flights of the French, one at
Vernoil, the other at Vandoſme in the time of King Henry
the ſecond, one made this.
            
               Gallia fugiſti bis, & hoc ſub rege Philippo,
               Nec ſunt ſub modio facta pudenda duo.
               Vernolium ſumit teſtem fuga prima, ſecunda
               Vindocîum, noctem prima▪ ſecunda diem.
               Nocte fugam primam celeraſti, mane ſecundam,
               Prima pauore fuit, vique ſecunda fuit.
            
            
               
When one had flattered William Longchampe Biſhop of
Elye the only powerable man of England in his time with
this blandation.
            
               Tam benè, tam facile, tu magna negotia tractas,
               Vt dubium reddas ſis homo, ſiue deus.
            
            
               Giraldus Cambrenſis a man well borne and better lettered,
of that houſe from whence the Giraldines of Ireland are
deſcended, and ſecretary to King Iohn, played vpon theſe
verſes, and that Biſhop after he was apprehended in womans
attire flying out of the realme.
            
               Tam male, tam temerè, tam turpiter omnia tractas,
               Vt dubium reddas bellua ſis, vel homo.
               Sic cum ſis minimus tentas maioribus vti,
               Ve dubium reddas ſimia ſis, vel homo.
            
            He that made the verſe following (ſome aſcribe it to
that Giraldus) could adore both the ſonne riſing, and
the ſonne ſetting, when he could ſo cleanly honour
King Henry the ſecond then departed, and King Richard
ſucceeding.
            Miracano ſol occubuit, nox nulla ſequuta.
            Great was the commendation of Maecenas, who when he
could do all with Auguſtus, yet neuer harmed any, wherevpon
in an Elegie vpon his death, Pedo Albinouanus writeth.
            
               Omnia cum poſſes, tanto tam carus amico,
               Te ſenſit nemo poſſe nocere tamen.
            
            Which commendation king Henry the eight gaue to that
worthy Duke of Suffolke Charles Brandon, who neuer vſed
the Kings fauour to the hurt of any. And the ſame Giraldus
teſtified the like of King Henry the ſecond, in this verſe very
effectually.
            
               Glorior hoc vno, quòd nunquam vidimus vnum,
               Nec potuiſſe magis, nec nocuiſſe minùs.
            
            Theſe alſo following are referred vnto him.
            
               Viue deo, tibi mors requies, tibi vita labori,
               Viue Deo, mors eſt viuere, vita mori.
            
            
               
Theſe following were likewiſe written by him againſt
lewde loue.
            
               Nec laus, nec probitas, nec honor ſuperare puellam,
               Sed Veneris vitium vincere laudis opus.
               Vis melius ſapiens, melius vis ſtrenuus eſſe,
               Si Venerem ſuperes, iſtud & iſtud eris:
               Noli caſtra ſequi Veneris, ſed caſtra Mineruae,
               Haec docet, illa furit, haec iu
                     •
                  at, illa nocet.
            
            
               Cum ſit amor vetitus, vetiti malus actus amoris,
               Si malus ergo nocet, ſi nocet, ergo fuge,
               Cuius caepta timor, medium ſcelus, exitus ignis,
               Tu fuge, tu reproba, tu metuendo caue.
            
            Why the Sun appeareth ruddy and as it were bluſheth at
his firſt riſing. Alexander Necham ſomtime prior of Cirenceſter
rendreth the cauſe thus.
            
               Sol vultu roſeo rubicundo fulget in ortu,
               Inceſtae noctis facta pudore notans.
               Nempè rubore ſuo tot damnat damna pudoris,
               Cernere tot Phaebum geſta pudenda pudet▪
               
               Tot blandos nexus, tot ſuauia preſſa labellis,
               Tot miſerae Veneris monſtra nouella videt.
               Frigida quòd nimium caleat laſciua ſenectus,
               Ignis quòd gelido ferueat amne ſtupet.
            
            Of the fiery coulour of the planet Mars, and the ſpotts in
the Moone he giueth this reaſon.
            
               Mars Venerem ſecum deprenſam fraude mariti
               Erubuit, ſupereſt flammeus ille rubor.
               Sed cur lunaris facies fuſcata videtur?
               Quae vultu damnat, furta videre ſolet.
               Adde quòd Eccleſiam Phaebe, maculae nota culpam
               Signat, habet maculas vtr
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Luna ſuas.
            
            If you will read carping Epigrammaticall verſes of a Durham
Poet againſt the prior Ralfe, here you may haue
them.
            
               De ſene, de caluo, de delirante Radulpho
               Omnia monſtra cano, nil niſi vera tamen:
               
                  
Imputat errores alijs ſemper, ſibi nunquam,
               Est alijs Argus, Tyreſiaſque ſibi.
               Non vult eſſe bonus, ſed vult bonus eſſe videri▪
               
               Est ouis exterius, interiuſque lupus.
               Sus vita, canis officio, vulpecula fraude,
               Mente lepus, paſſer renibus, ore lupus.
               Talis qui daemon nunquam poterit niſi morte
               Eſſe bonus, poſtquam deſinat eſſe malus.
            
            The ſame Author plaid alſo pretily vpon William and
Alan Arch-deacons of Northumberland and Durham.
            
            
               Archileuitas in ſorte Northumbria largos,
               Dunnelmum cupidos ſemper habere ſolet.
               Nunc è conuerſo ſedem dotauit vtramque
               Willelmi probitas, crimen Alane tuum.
               Vos nunc degeneres patribus ſucceditis ambo,
               Hic bonus, antè malus, hîc malus, antè bonus.
            
            Anſwerable to theſe, were theſe verſes of the ſaid Durham
Poet, vpon the fate of a Potte and a Pipkin, when the
potte was all broken, and the Pitcher loſt but the handle,
by the fall of a window.
            
               Lapſa feneſtra ruit, luit vrna ſciphuſque propinquus,
               Deſinit haec eſſe prorſus, hic eſſe bene.
               Alias.
               Lapſa feneſtra ruit, ſciphus vrna luunt, nihil illa
               Quo teneat, nihil hic quo teneatur, habet.
            
            When King Richard the firſt was deteined priſoner
with the Emperour, one did write this ſupplicant verſe to
the Emperour in a ſharpe cloſe.
            
               Magnus es, & genibus flexis tibi ſupplicat orbis,
               Cum poſſis, noli ſaeuire, memento Neronis.
            
            A huſwife which had encreaſed her family in her huſbands
abſence with a new bratte, aſſured her husband at
his returne, that ſhe conceiued it of a Snow-ball caſt at her.
But he conueying it away, ſelling it to a begger aſſured her
with the like lye; that as it was conceiued by Snowe, ſo it
was melted away by the Sunne, which a Poet in the time
of K. Iohn expreſſed thus very briefly, & for that age pretily.
            
               
               Rebus in augendis longè remorante marito,
               Vxor maecha parit puerum; poſt multa reuerſo,
               Dè niue conceptum fingit, fraus mutua, cautè
               Suſtulit, aſportat, vendit, matri
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   reportans
               Ridiculum ſimile, liquefactum ſole refingit.
            
            But two others compriſed the ſame matter more ſuccinctly
in this maner.
            
               De niue conceptum quem mater adultera fingit,
               S
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  ſus eum vendens, liquefactum ſole refi
                     •
                  xit.
            
            
               Vir quia quem reperit genitum niue famina fingit
               Vendit, & a ſimili liquefactum ſole reſinxit.
            
            That ſcholler alſo could play at euen and odd, that could
keepe the figure Compar ſo preciſely in theſe two verſes
vpon the ſpring.
            
               Turba colorum, vis violarum, pompa roſarum,
               Induit hortos, purpurat agros, paſcit ocellos.
            
            A ſuter wearied with delais in the Emperours court, did at
the length frame this diſtiche, and coled it on a wall.
            
               Si nequeo placidas affari Caeſaris aures,
               Saltem aliquis veniat, qui mihi dicat, Abi.
            
            So a poore Engliſh man fed with vaine hope by many, in
the time of King Henry the third did write this diſtiche.
            
               Spem mihi dent alij magnam, rem tu citò paruam,
               Res me parua iuuet, ſpes mihi magna nocet.
            
            Againſt a carping companion was this made about that
time by Iohn Hauill.
            
            
               Zoile tu laudem cunens, tu ſerra bonorum,
               Magna doles, maiora notas, in maxima ſaeuis.
            
            Such as can ſpeake feelingly of church liuings, will not diſſemble
that theſe were the fowre entraunces into the
church, which a countriman of ours long ſince in this manner
Epigrammatically opened.
            
               Eccleſias portis his quatuor itur in omnes,
               Principis, & Simonis, ſanguinis at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , Dei.
               Prima patet magnis, nummatis altera, charis
               Tertia, ſed raris ianua quarta patet.
            
            
               
Good alſo is that vnder S. Peter in the Cathedral church of
Norwich, (were it not for the fault which is in the former,)
but therein you haue S. Peters ſhip Sea, Nets, and Fiſhe.
            
               Eccleſiam pro Naue rego, mihi climata mundi
               Sunt mare, ſcriptura retia, piſcis homo.
            
            When Euſtathius was elected Biſhop of London, one congratulated
his aduancement thus.
            
               Omnes hic digni, tu dignior omnibus, omnes
               Hic plenè ſapiunt, plenius ipſe ſapis.
            
            Of a bragging braule betweene two well met, was framed
this by Henry of Wincheſter, but the beginning is loſt.
            
               Hic ait, ille negat, hic aſſerit, ille refellit,
               Hic proauos multum praedicat, ille premit.
               Fiſus vter
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſibi ſe venditat, iste decorem
               Iactitat, ille decus, hic opus, alter opes.
               Hic bonus, ille beatus, hic multis diſſerit, ille
               Multiplicata refert: hic leuis, ille loquax.
            
            When Adrian our countriman had conuerted ſome people
of Norway, and was made Pope, this was compoſed to his
honour.
            
               Conferet hic Romae, plus laudis quam ſibi Roma,
               Plus dabit hic orbi, quàm dabit orbis ei.
            
            But this would not eaſily be matched in our age, which
was written in the time of King Henry the 6. ouer the entrance
into the Reccipt at Weſtminſter, to admoniſh accontants
to be circumſpect in entring, as Ianus with his two
heads, and as vigilant in ending Exchequer accounts, as
Argus with his hundred eyes.
            Ingrediens Iani, rediture ſis aemulus Argi.
            
               RYTHMES.
               RIming verſes which are called Verſus Leonini, I know
not wherefore (for a Lions taile doth not anſwere to
the middle parts as theſe verſes doe) began in the time of
Carolus Magnus, and were onely in requeſt then, and in
many ages following, which delighted in nothing more
then in this minſtrelſie of meeters. I could preſent you

with many of them, but few ſhall ſuffice, when as there
are but few now which delight in them.
               In the praiſe of Miles Earle of Hereford,Sub Stephano rege. was this penned,
in reſpect he was both martiall and lettered.
               
                  Vatum & ducum gloria
                  Milo, cuius in pectore
                  Certant vires & ſtudia,
                  Certat Hector cum Neſtore.
                  
                     Ʋirtutum priuilegia,
                  Mente geris & corpore.
                  Te
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      coronat arbore
                  Mars Phoebi, Phabus propria.
               
               
                  Walter de Mapes Archdeacon of Oxford, who in the time
of King Henry the ſecond filled England with his meriments,
confeſſed his loue to good liquor, with the cauſes, in
this maner.
               
                  Mihi est propoſitum in taberna mori,
                  
                     Ʋinum ſit appoſitum morientis ori:
                  
                     Ʋt dicant, cùm venerint, Angelorum chori,
                  Deus ſit propitius huic potatori.
                  Poculis accenditur animi lucerna,
                  Cor imbutum nectare volat ad ſuperna,
                  Mihi ſapit dulcius vinum in taberna,
                  Quàm quod aqua miſcuit praeſulis pincernn.
                  Suum cui
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      proprium dat natura munus,
                  Ego nunquam potui ſcribere iciunus:
                  Me iciunum vincere poſſet puer vnus.
                  Sitim & iciunium, odi tanquam funus.
                  Vnicui
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      propriumdat natura donum,
                  Ego verſus faciens, vinum bibo bonum,
                  Ft quod habent melius dolia cauponum,
                  Tale vinum generat copiam ſermonum.
                  Tales verſus facio, quale vinum bibo,
                  Nihil poſſum ſcribere, niſi ſumpto cibo,
                  Nihil valet penitus, quod iciunus ſcribo,
                  Naſonem post caelices carmine praeibo,
                  Mihi nunquam ſpiritus prophetiae datur.
                  
                     
Niſi tunc cùm fuerit, venter bene ſatur
                  Cum in arce cerebri Bacchus dominatur,
                  In me Phoebus irruit, ac miranda fatur.
               
               The infirmity and corruption of our nature prone to ſenſuality
he acknowledgeth thus.
               
                  Via lata gradior more iuuentutis,
                  Implico me vitijs, immenor virtutis,
                  Voluptatis auidus, magis quam ſalutis
                  Mortuus in anima curam gero cutis.
                  Mihi cordis grauitâs, res videtur grauis,
                  Iocus est amabilis, dulcior
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      fauis.
                  Quicquid Venus imperat labor eſt ſuauis,
                  Quae nunquam in mentibus habitat ignauis.
                  Quis in igne poſitus igni non vratur?
                  Quis in mundo demorans caſtus habeatur?
                  Vbi Venus digito iuuenes venatur,
                  Oculis illaqueat, facie praedatur.
               
               This luſtie prieſt when Pope Innocent the third forbade
the Clergie their wiues, became Proctor for himſelfe, and
them with theſe verſes: deſiring onely for his fee, that euery
prieſt with his ſweet hart would ſay a Pater noster for him.
               
                  Priſciani regula penitùs caſſatur,
                  Sacerdos per Hic et Haec olim declinatur,
                  Sed per Hic ſolummodo, nunc articulatur.
                  Cum per noſtrum praeſulum Haec amoueatur.
                  Ita quidem preſbyter caepit allegare,
                  Peccat criminaliter qui vult ſeperare,
                  Quod Deus iniunxerat, faeminam amare.
                  Tales dignum duximus
                        •
                     fures appellare.
                  O quam dolor anxius, quàm tormentum graue,
                  Nobis est dimittere, quoniam ſuaue.
                  O Romane pontifex, statuiſti prauè,
                  Ne in tanto crimine moriaris, caue.
                  Non eſt Innocentius, immò nocens verè,
                  Qui quod facto docuit ſtudet abolere:
                  Et quod olim inuenis voluit habere,
                  Modò vetus pontifex, studet prohibere,
               
               
                  
                  Gignere nos praecipit vetus Teſtamentum:
                  Vbi nouum prohibet, nuſquam eſt inuentum.
                  Praeſul qui contrarium donat documentum,
                  Nullum neceſſarium his dat argumentum,
                  Dedit enim dominus maledictionem
               
               
                  Viro qui non fecerit generationem.
                  Ergo tibi conſulo, per hanc rationem,
                  Gignere, vt habeas benedictionem.
                  Nonnè de militibus mili
                        •
                     es procedunt?
                  Et reges à regibus qui ſibi ſuccedunt?
                  Per locum à ſimili, omnes iura laedunt.
                  Clericos qui gignere crimen eſſe credunt.
               
               
                  Zacharias habuit prolem 
                        •
                     t vxorem.
                  Per virum quem genuit adeptus honore
                        •
                     :
                  Baptiz
                        •
                     uit enim noſtrum ſaluatorem:
                  P
                        •
                     reat, qui teneat nouum hunc errorem,
               
               
                  Paulus caelos rapitur ad ſuperiores,
                  Vbi multas didicit res ſecretiores,
                  Ad nos tandem rediens, inſtruenſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      mores.
                  Suas (inquit) habeat quilibet vxores.
               
               
                  Propter haec et alia dogmata doctor
                        ••
                     .
                  Reor eſt m
                        •
                     lius, et magis decorum,
                  Quis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſuam habeat et non proximorum,
                  Ne incurrat odium & iram eorum.
               
               
                  Proximorum faeminas filias, & neptes,
                  Violare nefas eſt, quare nil deceptes.
                  Verè tuam habeas & ha
                        •
                      del
                        ••
                     les
                  Diem vt ſic vltimum tutius expectes
               
               
                  Ecce iam pro clericis multum allegaui,
                  Nec non pro preſbiteris plura comprobaui:
                  Pater noſter nunc pro me quoniam peccaui,
                  Dicat quiſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      preſbiter, cum ſua ſuaui.
               
               Mery Michaell the Corniſh poet piped this vpon his pipe
for mery England, but with a mocking compaſſion of Normandy,
when the French vſurped it in the time of K. Iohn;
               
               
                  Nobilis Anglie pocula, prandia, donat et aera:
                  Terra iuuabilis, et ſociabilis agmine plena
                  
                     
Omnibus vtilis Anglia fertilis eſt, et amaena.
                  Sed miſerabilis et lachrimabilis abſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      cateruà,
                  Neuſtria debilis, et modo flebilis et quia ſerua,
               
               He begged his exhibition of King Henry the third with
this diſtich.
               
                  Regie rector, miles vt Hector, dux vt Achilles,
                  Te quia ſector, melle 
                        •
                     vector,Money my honye. mel mihi ſtilles.
               
               The ſame Michael highly offended with Henry of Aurench
the kings Poet for diſgracing Cornwall, thought to draw
bloud of him with theſe bobbing times.
               
                  Eſt tibi gamba capri, crus paſſeris, et latus apri,
                  Os leporis, catuli naſus dens et gena muli,
                  Frons vetulae, tauri caput, et color vndi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Mauri:
                  His argumentis quaenam eſt argutia mentis?
                  Quod non a monſtro differs: ſatis hic tibi monſtro.
               
               If you pleaſe to heare a ſolemne plea at Reaſons barre betweene
the Eye & the Heart, runne ouer this, which a contriman
of ours made in time of king Henry the 3.
               
                  
                     Quiſquis cordis et oculi
                     Non ſentit in ſe iurgia,
                     Non nouit qui ſunt ſtimuli,
                     Quae culpae ſeminaria.
                  
                  
                     Cauſam neſcit periculi,
                     Cur alternant convitia,
                     Cur procaces & aemuli
                     Replicent in ſe vitia.
                  
                  
                     Cor ſic affatur oculum
                     Te peccati principium,
                     Te fontem, te ſtimulum,
                     Te mortis voco nuntium.
                  
                  
                     Tu domus meae ianitor
                     Hosti non claudis oſtium,
                     Familiaris proditor
                     Admittis aduerſarium.
                  
                  
                     Nonnè feneſtra diceris
                     Quod mors intrat ad animam;
                     Nonnè quod vides ſequeris
                     
                        
Vt bos ductus ad victimam.
                  
                  
                     Saltem ſordes quas ingeris,
                     Cur non lauas per lachrimam
                     Aut quarè non crueris
                     Mentem fermentans azimam?
                  
                  
                     Cordi reſpondet oculus,
                     Iniuſtè de me quaereris,
                     Seruus ſum tibi ſedulus,
                     Exequor quicquid iuſſeris.
                  
                  
                     Nonne tu mihi praecipis,
                     Sicut et membris caeteris,
                     Non ego, tu te decipis,
                     Nuntius ſum quò tu miſeris.
                  
                  
                     Cur damnatur apertio?
                     Corpori neceſſaria,
                     Sine cuius obſequio,
                     Cuncta languent officia.
                  
                  
                     Quo ſi fiat ereptio.
                     Cum ſim fenestra peruia,
                     Si quod recepi nuntio,
                     Quae putatur iniuria?
                  
                  
                     Addo quòd nullo puluere
                     Quem immitto pollueris,
                     Nullum malum te laedere
                     Poteſt, niſi conſenſeris.
                  
                  
                     De corde mala prodeunt
                     Nihil inuitum pateris,
                     Virtutes non intereunt,
                     Niſi culpam commiſeris.
                  
                  
                     Dum ſic vter
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         diſputat
                     Soluto pacis oſculo:
                     Ratio litem amputat
                     Diffinitiuo calculo.
                  
                  
                     Vtrum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         reum reputat
                     Sed non pari periculo,
                     Nam cordi cauſam imputat,
                     Occaſionem oculo.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Dan Elingham a Monke of Linton of Saint Benedicts order,
comming to the White-friers in Nottingham, found
there Iohn Baptiſt painted in a white Friers weed, whereat
marueling, he coled out theſe verſes vpon the wall
neere to the picture.
               
                  Chriſti Baptiſta, veſtis non te decet iſta,
                  Qui
                        •
                     e veſtiuit fratrem, maledictus abiuit.
                  Nunquam Meſſias 
                        •
                     iater fuerat, nec Helias,
                  Non ſtat plebs lata, dum ſit pro fratre propheta.
                  Si fratrem Ionam fingis Geezi tibi ponam:
                  Ac Iebuſaeum, ne iungas his Heliſaeum.
               
               But a white Frier there anſwered Elingham, with theſe
following in the perſon of Iohn Baptist.
               
               
                  Elingham mentiris, metris fatuis quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      miris
                  At
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ea quae neſcis, ſic aſtruis vt ea quae ſcis.
                  Nam deus est teſtis, decet haec me candida veſtis,
                  Pluſquàm te veſtis pulla, ſiue nigra cuculla.
                  Sum Carmelita meritò, ſed tu Geezita.
                  A
                        •
                      frater fictus Benedicti, non benedictus.
               
               He which made this when King Edward the firſt, and the
Pope concurred in exacting a paiment from the Cleargie,
ſhould haue ſmarted, had he beene knowne.
               
                  Eccleſiae nauis titubat, regni quia clauis
                  Errat, Rex, Papa facti ſunt vnica capa,
                  Hoc faciunt do, des, Pilatus hîc alter Herodes.
               
               A merry learned Lawyer which had receiued Wine for a
regarde, or remembrance, from the Abbot of Merton,
who had entertained him in a cauſe, ſent theſe two verſes,
as ſtanding vpon his integrity againſt bribes, and requiring
rather good euidence than good Wine.
               
                  
                     Ʋinum tranſmiſſum nunc me facit eſſe remiſſum,
                  Conuiuis vina, cauſis tua iura propina.
               
               The Abbot which perſwaded himſelfe what would moue
a Lawyer, when Wine could not, returned theſe three diſtiches.
               
                  Tentaui temerè vinô te, poſſe movere,
                  Non movi verè, ſed forte moveberis aere.
                  
                     
                     Ʋinum non quaeris, ſed tinnit ſi ſonus aeris,
                  Et ſpe duceris, forſitàn alter eris.
               
               
                  Vt mihi ſis mitis, tibi miſi pocula vitis,
                  Nec tamen illa ſitis deſinit, vndè ſitis.
               
               King Edward the third when he firſt quartered the Armes
of France with England, declared his claime in this kinde
of verſe, thus.
               
                  Rex ſum regnorum binâ ratione duorum,
                  Anglorum regno ſum rex ego iure paterno,
                  Matris iure quidem Francorum nuncupor idem.
                  Hinc est armorum variatio facta meorum.
               
               Theſe following were made by his Poet, when Philip de
Valoys the French King lurked in Cambray, and ſo well liked
of him, that he ſware by Saint George they were valiant
verſes; and commanded them to be ſhot vpon an arrow
into the Cittie, as a cartell of challenge.
               
                  Si valeas, venias Valoys, depelle timorem,
                  Non lateas, pateas, maneas, oſtende vigorem.
               
               In the Chapiter houſe of Yorke Minſter is written this in
commendation thereof:
               Vt roſa flos florum, ſic est domus iſta domorum.
               The Exchequer officers were extortours in the time of
King Henry the 4, otherwiſe Henry Bell Collectour of the
Cuſtome, (as he ſtileth himſelfe at that time,) would neuer
haue written a riming long Satyre againſt them, which beginneth
thus.
               
                  O Scacci Camera, locus est mirabilis ille.
                  Vt referam vera, tortores ſunt ibi mille.
                  Si contingat ibi temet quid habere patrandum,
                  Certe dico tibi caetum reperire nefandum.
               
               And concludeth in this maner.
               
                  O ſic vexatè tortoribus & cruciate
                  Non dices vere propter tales Miſerere.
               
               But this is good aduiſe, which he giveth to ſuch as haue to
deale with the officers of the Receipt.
               
                  
                  Qui tallas ſcribunt, cum murmure ſaepè loquuntur,
                  Summas qui
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſolent in magnâ ſcribere pelle.
                  Scribere valdè dolent, dùm non ſit ſoluere bellè.
                  Eſcas manè datas propter ientacula pones,
                  Coſtas aſſatas, piſces, pingueſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      capones,
                  Illos conforta pariter per fortia vina,
                  Weſtminſter porta, pro talibus est medicina.
               
               Now for the Fleet then, he writeth thus.
               
                  Cum ſis in Fleta, patioris mille moleſta,
                  Illic dona dabis, ſi ſanus vis fore puncto,
                  Nam cuſtos Fletae bona de priſonibus vnit,
                  Ni ſoluant laete mox hos per vincula punit:
                  Illis qui baculos portant, oſtendere debes,
                  Valde pios loculos, & ludere praebeo, praebes.
               
               In the time of King Henry the 4. when in leauying of a
Subſidie, the rich would not, and the poore could not pay,
ſo they of the meaner ſort bare the burthen: a skilfull dicer,
and no vnskilfull rimer wrote theſe verſes.
               
                  
                     Dews As non poſſunt, & Siſe Sinke ſoluere nolunt,
                  Est igitùr notum, Cater Tre ſoluere totum.
                  Of the decay of gentry one made theſe rimes.
                  Ex quo nobilitas ſeruilia caepit amare,
                  Nobilitas caepit cum ſeruis degenerare.
               
               Many more and of great varietie of meeters in this kinde I
could preſent you with all, for theſe rimers haue as curious
obſe
                     ••
                  ations in their Arte Rithmizandi, as the Italian makers,
in their Stanzas, Quartetts, Tercetts, Octaves: but now
they are counted long eared which delight in them.
               Beſide theſe, our Poets hath their knacks as young Schollers
call them, as Ecchos, Achroſtiches, Serpentine verſes,
Recurrents, Numeralls, &c. yea and our proſe Authors
could vſe Achroſtiches, for Ranulph of Cheſter began the
firſt Chapter of his Polychronicon with P, the 2. with R,
the 3. with E. the 4. with S. the fift with N. and ſo forth,
as if you would ſpell the firſt Chapters of his Booke, you,
ſhall find, Praeſentem chronicam compilauit Ranulphus Monachus
Ceſtrenſis. And why not as well as Agapetus the

Greeke, who did the like in his admonitions to Iuſtinian
the Emperour.
               But I will end with this of Odo, houlding Maiſter Doctors
Mule, and Anne with her table-cloth: which coſt the
maker much fooliſh labour, for it is a perfect verſe, and
euery word is the very ſame, both backward and forward.
               
                  Odo tenet mulum, madidam mappam tenet Anna.
                  Anna tenet mappam madidam, mulum tenet Odo.
               
            
            
               Epitaphes.
               
                  GReat hath bene the care of burial euen
ſince the firſt times, as you may ſee by
the examples of Abraham, Iacob, Ioſeph,
Ioſua, the old prophet in Bethel,
and Tobie; and alſo by that in holy
ſcriptures: Mortuo ne deneges gratiam.
The Iews annoynted the dead bodies,
wrapped them in ſindon, layed them in couered ſepulchers
hewed out of ſtone: The Aegyptians embalmed and filled
them with odoriferous ſpices, reſeruing them in glaſſe or
coffins, the Aſſirians in wax and hony, the Scythians caried
about the cleanſed carkaſes to the freinds of the deceaſed
for 40. daies with ſolemne banquets. And that we may not
particulate, the Romaines ſo far exceeded in funerall honors,
and ceremonyes, with oyntments, images, bonfires of
moſt precious woods, ſacrifices, & banquets, burning their
dead bodies vntill about the time of Theodoſius,
                  Macrobius. that lawes
were enacted to reſtraine the exceſſe. Neither haue any
neglected buriall, but ſome ſauage nations as Bactrians,
(which caſt the dead to their doggs) ſome varlet Philoſophers,
as Diogenes which deſired to be deuoured of fiſhes,
ſome diſſolute courtiers as Mecaenas, who was wont to ſay.
               Non tumulum curo, ſepelit natura relictos.
               As an other ſaid.
               De terra in terram, & quaeuis terra ſepulchrum.
               
                  
Yea ſome of eſpeciall note amongſt vs neglecting the laſt
duty eyther vpon a ſparing or a preciſe humour, are content
to commit to the earth their parents, wiues, and the neareſt
vnto them in tenebris with little better than Sepultura aſinorum.
                  Plinius lib. 6. Epiſt. 10. & lib. 9. Epiſt. 19.
As for thoſe which philoſophically diſlike monuments
and memorialls after their death, and thoſe that affect
them, I thinke as Plinie did, ſpeaking of Virginius, and
Apronius: that both of them do ambitiouſly march with
like paces toward glory, but by diuerſe wayes, theſe openly,
in that they deſire their due titles, thoſe other couertly, in
that they would ſeeme carleſly to contemne them.
               But among all funerall honours Epitaphes haue alwaies
bene moſt reſpectiue, for in them loue was ſhewed to the
deceaſed, memory was continued to poſterity, friends were
comforted, and the reader put in mind of humane fraielty.
               The inuention of them proceeded from the preſage or
forfeeling of immortality implanted in all men naturally,
and is referred to the ſchollers of Linus, who firſt bewayled
their maiſter when he was ſlaine, in dolefull verſes then
called of him Aelinum, afterward Epitaphia, for that they
were firſt ſong at Burialls, after engraued vpon the ſepulchers.
               It were needleſſe to ſet downe heere the lawes of Plato,
that an Epitaph ſhould be compriſed in foure verſes, or
of the Lacedemonians, who reſerued this honor only to
Martiall men, and chaſt women: or how the moſt ancient,
(eſpecially Greeke) were written in Elegiac verſe, after in
proſe:
               How monuments were erected moſt vſually along the
high waye ſide, to put paſſengers in minde that they are,
as thoſe were mortall.
               How ſuch as violated ſepulchres were puniſhed with
death, baniſhment, condemnation to the mines, loſſe of
members, according to circumſtance of fact aud perſon,
and how ſacred they were accompted.
               
                  In which regard I cannot but giue you the words out

of the Nouellae leges Valentiniani Auguſti: De Sepulchris
titulo. v. which are worth reading Scimus, nec vana fides,
& ſolutas membris animas habere ſenſum, & in originem ſuam
ſpiritum redire caeleſtem. Hoc libris veteris ſapientiae, hoc
religionis, quam veneramur & colimus, declaratur arcanis.
Et licaet occaſus neceſſitatem mens diuina non ſentiat, amani
tamen animae ſedem corporum relictorum, & neſcio qua ſorte
rationis occultae ſepulchri honore laetantur: cuius tanta permaneat
cura temporibus, vt videamus in hos vſus ſumptu nimio
praetioſa montium metalla tranſferri, operoſaſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   moles
cenſu laborante componi. Quod prudentium certè intelligentia
recuſaret, ſi nihil crederet eſſe poſt mortem. Nimis barbara
eſt & veſana crudelitas, munus extremum luce carentibus
inuidere, & dirutis per inexpiabile crimē ſepulchris, monſtrare
caelo corporum reliquias humatorum. Againſt which I
cannot without griefe remember, how barbarouſly, and
vnchriſtianly ſome not long ſince haue offended, yea ſome
Mingendo in patrios cineres, which yet we haue ſeene
ſtrangely reuenged.
               
               I could here alſo call to your remembrance how the
place of buriall was called by S. Paul Seminatio, in the
reſpect of the aſſured hope of reſurrection, of the Greekes
Caemiterion, as a ſleeping place vntill the reſurrection, and
of the Hebrews The houſe of the liuing in the ſame reſpect,
as the Germaines call Churchyardes vntill this day Gods
aker, or Gods field. And in the like ſence tombes were named
Requietoria, Oſſuaria, Cineraria, Domus aeternae, &c.
As you may ſee in ould inſcriptions at Rome, and elſewhere.
Which Lucian ſcoffingly termed Campes and
Cottages of Carkaſes.
               
               Notorious it is to all how the ſame Lucian bringeth in
Diogenes laughing and outlaughing King Mauſolus for
that he was ſo pitifully preſſed and chruſhed with an huge
heape of ſtones vnder his ſtately monument Mauſoleum.
for the magnificence accompted among the worlds wonders:
But monuments anſwerable to mens worth, ſtates,
and places, haue alwaies bene allowed, yet ſtately ſepulchers

for baſe fellowes haue alwayes lyen open to bitter
ieſts, as that marble one of Licinus the barber, which
one by way of compariſon thus derided, with a doubt
thereon, whether God regarded men of worth.
               
                  Marmoreo Licinus tumulo iacet, at Cato paruo,
                  Pompeius nullo. Credimus eſſe Deos?
               
               Whereunto another replied with an aſſurance that God
doth regard worthy men.
               
                  Saxa premunt Licinum, vehit altum fama Catonem,
                  Pompetum tituli, Cedimus eſſe Deos.
               
               As for ſuch as bury themſelues liuing, and ſay they liue
to themſelues, when they liue neither to themſelues, nor
to other, but to their belly, eaſe, and pleaſure, wel worthy
are they to haue while they liue, that Epitaph which Seneca
deuiſed for Vatia their fellow to be inſcribed vpon his
houſe, Hic ſitus eſt Vatia. and no memoriall at all when
they are dead.
               It is not impertinent to note in one worde as the auncient
Romans beganne Epitaphes with D. M. for Dijs
Manibus. D. M. S. i. Dijs Manibus ſacrum. Hic ſitus eſt.
Hoſpes, as ſpeaking to the reader. So we & other Chriſtians
began them with Hic deponitur, Hic iacet, Hic requieſcit,
Hic tumulatur▪
                   in French Icy giſt. Here lieth. and in latter
time according to the doctrine of the time Ora pro. &c. Of
your charity, &c. And now after the auncient manner D.
O. M. for Deo. Optimo. Maximo. Poſteritati Sacrum.
Memoriae Sacrum. Deo & Posteris. Virtuti & Honori
Sacrum. &c.
               
               
                  Likewiſe as our Epitaphes were concluded with
On whoſe ſoule God haue mercy. Cuius animae prepitietur
Deus. God ſend him a ioyfull reſurrection. &c. So theirs
with, Hoc Monumentum poſuit vel fecit, in theſe letters.
M. P. M. F. in the behalfe of him that made the Monumente.
With Vale, Vale, & Salue anima, nos eo ordine quo
natura iuſſerit. ſequemur. With H. M. H. N. S: for Hoc
monumentum haeredes non ſequitur. When they would
not haue their heires entombed therein; with Rogo per

Deos ſuperos inferoſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   oſſa noſtra ne violes, And moſt
commonly with Sit tibi terra leuis in theſe notes, S. T. T. L.
And ſomtime with Quietem poſteri non inuideant.
               But omitting this diſcourſe I will offer vnto your view
a Century of choiſe Epitaphes of our nation for matter
and conceit, ſome good, ſome bad, that you may ſee how
learning ebbed and flowed: moſt of them recouered from
the iniury of time by writers. And will beginne with that
at Rome as moſt auncient erected to the memory of a
Britanne; who after the maner of the time, tooke a Romane
name.
M. VLPIO IVSTO. Q. SIG. AVG. MILITAVIT. AN.
XXV. VIXIT. XLV. NATIONE BRITTO. 
                        •
                     EC.
M. VLSIVS RESPECTVS VEH. AVG. AMICO OPTIMO
DE SE BENE MERENTI.
               
               
                  Arthur the valerous vpholder of the ruinous ſtate
of Britaine againſt the Saxons about the yeare 500. was
buried ſecretly at Glaſtenburie, leaſt the enimie ſhould
offer indignity to the dead body, and about 700. yeares
after when a graue was to be made in the Churchyard
there, a ſtone was found betweene two Pyramides deepe
in the ground with a croſſe of lead infixed into the lower
part thereof, and inſcribed in the inner ſide of the croſſe
in rude Characters, which the Italians now call Gotiſh
letters.
               HIC IACET SEPVLTVS INCLYTVS REX ARTVRIVS
IN INSVLA AVALONIA.
               Vnder which in a trough of Oke were found his
bones, which the Monkes, tranſlated into the church and
honoured them with a tombe, but diſhonored him with
theſe horne pipe verſes.
               
                  Hic iacet 
                        •
                     rturus flos regum, gloria regni,
                  Quem morum probitas commendat laude perenni.
               
               Auguſtine the firſt Archbiſhop of Canterbury, who firſt
preached Chriſt to the Engliſh nation, conuerted the
Kentiſhmen, & reuiued Chriſtianity in this Iſle, which flouriſhed
among the Britaines, many years before his cōming,

was buried at Canterbury in S. Peters Porch, with this
Epitaph.
               Hic requieſcit dominus Auguſtinus Dorobernenſis Archiepiſcopus
primus, qui 
                     •
                  lim huc a beato Gregorio Remanae
vrbis pontifice directus, & a Deo operatione miraculorum
ſuffultus Aethelbertum regem, ac gentem
illius ab idolorum cultu ad Chriſti fidem perduxit. &
completis in pace diebus officij ſui, defunctus est ſeptimo
Kalendas Iunias, eodem rege regnante:
               In the ſame place were interred the ſixe ſucceeding Archbiſhops,
for whom and Auguſtin making the ſeauenth,
were theſe verſes, as cōmon to them all, written on the wall
with this title: as I finde them in Geruaſius Dorobernenſis.
               
            
            
               Septem primae eccleſiae Anglorum
columnae.
               Auguſtinus, Laurentius, Mellitus, Iuſtus, Honorius. Deus-dedit. Theodorus.
               
                  Septem ſunt Anglis primates & protopatres,
                  Septem rectores, caelo ſeptem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      triones,
                  Septem ciſternae vitae, ſeptem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      lucernae,
                  Et ſeptem palmae regni, ſeptem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      coronae
                  Septem ſunt ſtellae quas haec tenet area cellae:
               
               But Theodore the laſt of the 7. which firſt taught Greeke
in England, and died in the yeare 713. had this ſeuerally
inſcribed vpon his tombe.
               
                  Scandens alma nouae foelix conſortia vitae
                  Ciuibus Angelicis iunctus in arce poli.
               
               
                  Cedwall King of the Weſt Saxons went to Rome in the
yeare 689. & there being Baptized, renounced the world,
ended his life, and lieth buried with this Epitaph.
               
                  Culmen, opes, ſobolem, pollentia regna, triumphos
                  Exuuias, proceres, mania, caſtra, lares.
                  Quae
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      patrum virtus, & quae congeſſerat ipſe,
                  Caedwal armipotens liquit amore Dei.
               
               With ſome more which you may ſee in Paulus Diaconus,
and Beda:
               
               
                  
King Eadgar ſurnamed the Peaceable, the great patron
and fauourer of Monkes, deſerued well for his foundation
of ſo many Abbayes this Epitaph.
               
                  Autor opum, vindex ſcelerum, largitor honorum
                  Sceptriger Eadgarus, regna ſuperna petit.
                  Hic alter Salomon, legum pater, orbita pacis,
                  Quòd caruit bellis, claruit inde magis.
                  Templa Deo, templis monachos, monachis dedit agros
                  Nequitiae lapſum, iuſtitiae
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      locum.
                  Nouit enim regno verum perquirere falſo.
                  Immenſum modico, perpetuum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      breui:
               
               To the honor of King Alfred, a godly, wiſe, and warlike
prince, and an eſpeciall aduancer of learning, was made this
better then that time commonly afforded.
               
                  Nobilitas innata tibi probitatis honorem
                  Armipotens Alfrede dedit, probitas
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      laborem,
                  Perpetuum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      labor nomen: cui mixta dolori
                  Gaudia ſemper erant: ſpes ſemper mixta timori,
                  Si modò victor eras ad craſtina bella pauebas
                  Si modó victus eras in craſtina bella parabas.
                  Cui veſtes ſudore iugi, cui ſica cruore
                  Tincta iugi, quantum ſit onus regnare probarunt.
                  Non fuit immenſi quiſquam per climata mundi
                  Cui tot in aduerſis vel reſpirare liceret:
                  Nec tamen aut ferro contritus ponere ferrum,
                  Aut gladio potuit vitae finiſſe labores.
                  Iam poſt tranſactos vitae regni
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      labores
                  Chriſtus ei ſit vera quies, et vita perennis.
               
               It is meruailous how immediately after this time learning
decayed in this Kingdome, for Iohn Erigena alias
Scotus, fauoured of Charles the Bald King of France, and
the forſaid King Alfred for his learning, when he was ſtabbed
by his ſchollers at Malmeſbury was buried with this
rude, rough and vnlearned verſe.
               
                  Clauditur in tumulo Sanctus Sophiſta Iohannes
                  Qui ditatus erat, iam viuens dogmate miro.
                  Martyrio tandem Chriſti conſcendere regnum
                  
                     
Quo meritis, regnant ſancti per ſecula cuncti.
               
               And from this time learning ſo lowe ebbed in England
that betweene Thames & Trent, there was ſcant one found
which could vnderſtand Latin, and that you may perceiue,
when as Hugolin Treaſurer to King Edward the Confeſſor,
had theſe moſt ſillie verſes in grauen vpon his monument in
the olde Chapter houſe of Weſtminſter.
               
                  Qui ruis iniuſtè capit hic Hugoline locus te,
                  Laude pia clares, qnia martyribus nece clares:
               
               But ſhortly after the Conqueſt learning reuiued, as appeareth
by theſe that follow, which were caſt in a more learned
mould than the former.
               King William ſurnamed the Conqueror for his conqueſt of
England, was buried at Caen in Normandie, with this Epitaph,
diſcouered in the late ciuill warres of France, but mentioned
in Gemeticenſis.
               
               
                  Qui rexit rigidos Normannos at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Britannos,
                  Audacter vicit, fortiter obtinuit:
                  Et Caenomanenſes virtute contudit enſes,
                  Imperij
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſui legibus applicuit.
                  Rex magnus parua iacet his Gulielmus in vrna:
                  Sufficit & magno paruae domus domino.
                  Ter ſeptem gradibus ſe voluerat at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      duobus,
                  Virginis in gremio Phoebus, et hic obijt.
               
               Vpon Stigand Archbiſhop of Canterbury degraded for his
corruptiō, I finde this moſt viperous Epitaph in an olde Manuſcript.
               
                  Hic iacet Herodes Herode ferocior, huius
                  Inquinat infernum ſpiritus, oſſa ſolum.
               
               
                  William the Valiant, Earle of Flaunders, nephew to this
King William the Conquerour, ſonne to Robert, who vnhappy
in his ſtate, looſing the hope of the Kingdome of
England, & dying of a wound in his hand, was not altogether
vnhappy in his Poet, which made him this Epitaph.
               
                  Vnicus ille ruit, cuius non terga ſagittam,
                  Cuius noſſe pedes non potuere fugam.
                  Nil niſi fulmen erat, quoties res ipſa mouebat,
                  Et ſi non fulmen, fulminis inſtar erat:
               
               
                  
King Henry the firſt, for his learning ſurnamed Beauclerc,
had this flatterng Epitaph, as Poets could flatter in all ages.
               
                  Rex Henricus obit, decus olim, nunc dolor orbis,
                  Numina flent numen deperijſſe ſuum.
                  Mercurius minor eloquio, vi mentis Apollo,
                  Iupiter imperio, Mars
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vigore gemunt.
                  Anglia quae curá, quae ſceptro Principis huius,
                  Ardua ſplenduerat, tam tenebroſa ruit.
                  Haec cum rege ſuo, Normania cum Duce marcet,
                  Nutrijt haec puerum, perdidit illa virum.
               
               Of him alſo another compoſed theſe in reſpect of his peaceable
gouernment, and the troubles which enſued vnder
King Stephen, both in England and Normandie.
               
                  Anglia Iugeat hinc, Normannica gens fleat illinc,
                  Occidit Henricus modò lux, nunc luctus vtri
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                  
               
               Vpon William ſonne of, King Henry the firſt, and heire apparent
of this Realme, drowned vpon the coaſt of Normandie,
I haue found this Epitaphe.
               
                  Abſtulit hunc terrae matri maris vnda nouerca,
                  Proh dolor? occubuit Sol Anglicus, Anglia plora:
                  Quae
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      priùs fueras gemino radiata nitore,
                  Extincto nato viuas contenta parente.
               
               But well it was with England in that he was ſo preuented,
which threatned to make the Engliſh draw the Plough as
Oxen. (Hypodigma)
               
                  Mawd daughter to the foreſaid King, wife to Henry the
Emperour, mother to King Henry the 2. who intitled her
ſelfe Empreſſe & Auguſta, for that ſhe was thrice ſolemnly
crowned at Rome as R. de Diceto teſt fieth, & Anglorum
Domina, becauſe ſhe was heire apparent to the crowne of
Englād, was very happy in her Poet, who in theſe 2. funerall
verſes, contained her princely parentage, match, & iſſue.
               
                  Magna ortis, maior
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      viro, ſed maxima partu,
                  Hic iacet Henrici filia, ſponſa, parens.
               
               
                  Alberic Vere graundfather to the firſt Earle of Oxford, and
his ſonne William were buried together Anno 1088. with
this Epitaphe at Colne where he was founder & afterward
Monke, as it is in the Annales of Abingdon.
               
                  
                  En puer, en ſenior, pater alter, filius alter,
                  Legem, fortunam, terram venêre ſub vnam:
               
               In which the maker ſeemed to imitate that of Conrad the
Emperour at Spires in Germany.
               Filius hîc, pater hîc, annus hî, proauus iacet iſtic.
               
                  Thomas Beket Arch-biſhop of Canterbury had theſe Epitaphes
expreſſing the cauſe, the time, & place of his death,
made by his eſpeciall fauourer.
               
                  Pro Chriſti ſponſa, Chriſti ſub tempore, Chriſti
                  In templo, Chriſti verus amator obit
                  Quinta dies natalis erat, flos orbis ab orbe
                  Carpitur, et fructus incipit eſſe poli.
                  Quis morritur? praeſul. cur? pro grege. qualiter? enſe:
                  Quando? natali. quis locus? ara Dei.
               
               For Theobald of Bloys Earle of Champaine nephew to
King Henry the firſt. Giraldus Cambrenſis Biſhop of S. Dauids
in Walles made this.
               
                  Ille comes, Comes ille pius Theobaldus eras, quem
                  Gaudet habere polus, terra carere dolet.
                  Non hominem poſſum, non audeo dicere numen:
                  Mors probat hunc hominem, vita fuiſſe Deum.
                  Trans hominem, citra
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Deum, plus hoc, minus iſtud,
                  Neſcio qui
                        •
                      neuter, inter vtrum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      fuit:
               
               
                  Vitalis Abbot of Weſtminſter which died in the time of
the Conquerour, had this Epitaph:
               
                  Qui nomen traxit a vita, morte vocante
                  Abbas Vitalis tranſijt, hic
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      iacet:
               
               And for Lawrence Abbot of the ſame place which died
1176. was made this alluding to his name:
               
                  Pro meritis vitae dedit iſti Laurea nomen,
                  Detur ei vitae laurea pro meritis.
               
               Theſe two happely, may finde as much fauour with ſome
if one word do not preiudice, as that auncient one of Floridus
ſo highly commended.
               
                  Quod vixi flos eſt, ſeruat lapis hic mihi nomen,
                  Nolo Deos manes, flos mihi pro titulo.
               
               
                  
                  Geruays de Bloys baſe ſonne to King Stephen, and Abbot
alſo of the ſame church was buried with the foreſaid in the
cloyſter with this.
               
                  De Regum genere pater hic Geruaſius ecce
                  Monſtrat defunctus, mors rapit omne genus:
               
               
                  William de Albeney Erle of Arundel, and Butler to the
King, was buried at Wimodham which he founded with
this.
               
                  Hunc Pincerna locum fundauit, & hîc iacet alla
                  Quae dedit huic domui, tam ſine fine tenet.
               
               That mighty Monarch King Henry the ſecond, which
by his owne right adioyned Anioy, Maine and Tourain, by
his wife Aquatine, Poyctov, and by conqueſt Ireland to the
Crowne of England, and commanded from the Pyrene
mountaines to the Orcades, had this Epitaph according to
his greatneſſe.
               
                  Rex Henricus eram, mihi plurima regna ſubegi
                  Multiplici
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      modo, Dux
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Comes
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      fui.
                  Cui ſatis ad votum non eſſent omnia terrae
                  Climata, terra modo ſufficit octo pedum.
                  Qui legis haec penſa diſcrimina mortis, et in me
                  Humanae speculum conditionis habe.
                  Sufficit hic tumulus, cui non ſuffecerat orbis.
                  Res breuis ampla mihi, cui fuit ampla breuis:
               
               
                  Roſamond the faire his paramour, daughter to Walter Lord
Clifford, and mother to William Longſpee, the firſt Earle of
Sariſbury aeterniſed by maiſter Daniels muſe, had this nothing
anſwerable to her beauty.
               
                  Hac iacet in tumba roſa mundi non Roſamunda,
                  Non redolet, ſed olet quae redolere ſolet.
               
               William Longſpee Earle of Sarum, baſe ſonne to King
Henry the ſecond by this Lady, had an Epitaph not vnlike
to that of his mother.
               
                  Flos comitum Willielmus cognomine longus
                  Enſis, vaginam caepit habere breuem.
               
               The glory of that magnanimous and lionlike prince
king Richard the firſt, renowned for his Conqueſt of Cyprus.
                  
The king whereof he tooke and kept in ſetters of
ſiluer, and for his great exployts in the holy land ſtirred
vp the wits of the beſt Poets in that age, to honor him, with
theſe Epitaphs which follow, when he was ſlaine in viewing
the Caſtle of Chaluz in Limoſin.
               
               
                  Hic Richarde iaces, ſed mors ſi cederet armis
                  Victa timore tui, cederet ipſa tuis:
                  Another alſo writt of him.
                  Iſtius in morte perimit formica leonem:
                  Proh dolor, in tanto funere, mundus obit.
               
               An Engliſh poet imitating the epitaph made of Pompey &
his children, whoſe bodies were buried in diuerſe contries,
made theſe following of the glory of this one king deuided
in three places by his funerall.
               
                  Viſcera Carccolum, corpus fons ſeruat Ebrandi,
                  Et cor Rothomagum magne Richarde tuum.
                  In tria diuiditur vnus, qui plus fuit vno:
                  Non vno iaceat gloria tanta loco.
               
               At Font Euerard where his body was enterred with a
gilt image, were theſe ſixe excellent verſes written in
golden letters, contayning his greateſt and moſt glorions
atchieuementes: as his victory againſt the Sicilians,
his conquering of Cyprus, the ſinkinge of the great Galiaſſe
of the Saracens, the taking of their Conuoie, which
in the Eaſt partes is called a Caruana, and the defending
of Ieppe in the holye land againſt them:

                     Scribitur hoc tumulo Rex auree, laus tua, tota
                     Aurea, materiae conueniente notâ.
                     Laus tua prima fuit Siculi, Cyprus altera, Dromo
                     Tertia, Caruena quarta, ſuprema Iope.
                     Suppreſſi Siculi, Ciprus peſſundata. Dromo
                     Merſus, Caruana capta, retenta Iope.
                  
               
               But ſharpe and ſatyrical was that one verſe, which by alluding
noted his taking the Chalices from Churches for his
ranſome, and place of his death which was called Chaluz.
               
               Chriſte tui calicis praedo ſit praeda Caluzis.
               
                  
                  Sauaricus Biſhop of Bath and Wells a ſtirring prelate,
which laboured moſt for the redeeming King Richard,
when he was captiue in Auſtria, and is famous in the decretalls
(lib. 3. tit. 9. 0 Nouit ille) had this Epitaph, for that
he was alwayes gadding vp and downe the world, and had
little reſt.
               
                  Hoſpes erat mundo per mundum ſemper eundo,
                  Sic ſuprema diès, fit ſibi prima quies.
               
               And the like in late yeares was engrauen vpon the monument
of Iacobus Triulcio a military man of the ſame metall,
as Lodonic Guicciardin reporteth.
               
                  HIC MOR TVVS REQVIESSCIT SEMEL.
                  QVI VIVVS REQVIEVIT NVNQVAM.
               
               But 
                     
                        •
                     imilis Captaine of the guard to Adrian the Emperor,
when he had paſſed a moſt toyleſome life, after
he had retired himſelfe from ſeruice, and liued priuatly 7.
yeares in the countrie,Xiphilinus. acknowledged that he had liued only
them 7. yeares, as he cauſed to be inſcribed vpon his monument
thus.
               
                  Hic iacet Similis cuius aetas multorum
                  annorum fuit, ipſe ſeptem duntaxat
                  annos vixit.
               
               It may be doubted whether Wulgrine the Organiſt was ſo
good a Muſician, as Hugh Archdeacon of Yorke was a Poet,
which made this Epitaph for him.
               
                  Te Wulgrine cadente cadunt vox, organa, cantus,
                  Et quicquid gratum gratia vocis habet.
                  Voce, lira, modulis, Syrenes, Orphea, Phoebum
                  Vnus tres poteras aequiperare tribus.
                  Si tamen illorum non fallet fama locorum,
                  Quod fueras nobis, hoc eris Eliijs.
                  Cantor eris, qui cantor eras, hic charus et illî,
                  Orpheus alter eras, Orpheus alter eris.
               
               Vpon one Peter a religious man of this age I found
this.
               
                  Petra capit Petri cineres, animam Petra Chriſtus.
                  Sic ſibi diuiſit vtra
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      petra Petrum.
               
               
                  
Vpon the death of Morgan baſe ſonne of king Henry the 2.
was made this Epitaph, alluding to his name in that alluding
age.
               
                  Larga, benigna, decens, iacet his ſtirps regia, morum,
                  Organa Morgano fracta iacente, ſilent:
               
               In the time of king Henry the third they began to make
Epitaphs, as they call it now out of Propria quae maribus, as
ſome do in our age, but among them this was ſhort and
good for William Erle of Pembroke and Marſhall of England,
buried in the Temple church.
               
                  Sum quem Saeturnum ſibi ſenſit Hibernia, Solem
                  Anglia, Mercurium Normannia, Gallia Martem.
               
               And this was not bad for Richard de Clare, Erle of Gloceſtor
and Hertford which died, Anno 1262.
               
                  Hic pudor Hippoliti, Paridis gena, ſenſus Vliſſis,
                  Aeneae pietas, Hectoris ira iacet.
               
               I doubt not but this time of Simon Montfort Earle of
Leiceſter, ſlaine at Eueſham found fauour in that age, as the
Earle himſelfe who was ſo followed by the people, that he
durſt confront his ſoueraigne king Henry the 3. and as the
Epitaph doth implie, was the peereleſſe man of that time,
for valour, perſonage, and wiſdome.
               
                  Nunc dantur fato, caſu
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      cadunt iterato
                  Simone ſublato, Mars, Paris, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Cato.
               
               Vpon a gentleman as ſome thinke named None buried at
Wimondham who gaue nothing to the religīous there, was
made this.
               
                  Hîc ſitus eſt Nullus, quia nullo nullior iſte;
                  Et quia nullus erat, de nullo nil tibi Christe.
               
               Excellent is this (which I found in the booke of Wimondham)
for Pope Lucius borne at Luca, Biſhop of Oſtia Pope
of Rome, and dying at Verona.
               
               
                  Luca dedit lucem tibi Luci, Pontificatum
                  Oſtia, Papatum Roma, Verona mori.
                  Imo Verona dedit tibi verè viuere, Roma
                  Exilium, curas Oſtia, Luca mori.
               
               If you will ſee an ould Deane named Ham
                        •
                      Sol, reſembled

to the twelue ſonnes of olde father Annus which had euery
one as Cleobulus was wont to call them thirty daughters,
ſome faire, ſome foule, all dying and neuer dying,, read
this epitaph.
               
                  Participat menſis dotes cuiuſlibet Hamo
                  Circumſpectus erat vt Ianus, crimina purgans,
                  Vt Februus, veterana nouans vs Martius ipſe,
                  Semina producens vt Ap
                        •
                     ilis flore coruſcans,
                  Vt Maiu
                        •
                     , facie plaudens vt Iunius, intùs
                  Feruens vt Iulius, frugis maturi
                        ••
                      adultae
                  Meſſor vt Auguſtus, faecundans horrea more
                  Septembris, replens vino cellaria more
                  Octobris, p
                        •
                     ſtor pecundum ſed ſpiritualis,
                  More Nouembris epulator dapſilis inſtar,
                  Omne Decembris habet hiemalis peſte quieſcens.
               
               Another playing vpon the name Hamon made this for him

                     Olim piſcator hominum quaſi piſces ab hamo
                     Mortis captus hamo, celebrat conuiuia vitae.
                  
But witty was this, whereas he died in a Leape yeare vpon
the leape day accounted ſo vnhappy a day of the Romans
that Valentinian the Emperour durſt not peepe out in that
day: one, made this:

                     Hamo Decane iaces, toto fugit exul ab anno
                     Interitum Solis, auſa videre dies.
                  
Verely he was a man of ſome good note in that time, for I
finde another of him alluding alſo to this leape day.
               
                  Nulla dies anni niſi biſextilis, et anni
                  Iudicio damnata ſui, nec ſubdita menſi,
                  Sed noctis lux inſtar erat, lux neſcia lucis,
                  Et lux exiſtens inter luces, quaſi bubo,
                  Inter aues, huius poterat concludere vitam
                  Solis, et humanum genus hac priuare lucerna.
               
               Alexāder Nechā
                   a great learned man of this age, as appeareth
by his books de diuinae ſapientiae laudibus, was buried in
the cloiſter at Worceſter with this, but deſerued a better.
               
                  Eclipſim patitur ſapientia: ſol ſepelitur;
                  Qui dum vinebat, ſtudij genus omne vigebat:
                  
                     
Soluitur in cineres Neccham, cui ſi foret haeres
                  In terris vnus, minus eſſet flebile funus.
               
               A mery mad maker as they call poets now was he which
in the time of K. Henry the 3. made this for Iohn Calf.
               
               
                  O Deus omnipotens vituli miſerere Iohannis,
                  Quem mors praeucaiens noluit eſſe bouem.
               
               
                  Robert de Courtn
                        •
                     y was buried at Ford, as appeareth by the
regiſter of that place 12 
                     •
                  2. vnder a ſtately Piramis, who
whether he was deſcen
                     •
                  ed from the Earles of Eodeſſa, or
from Petre the ſōne of 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   the Groſſe K. of Frāce, had but
this bad inſcriptiō which I inſert more for the honor of the
name, then the worth of the verſe.
               
                  Hic iacet ingenui de Courtney gleba Roberti,
                  Militis egregij, virtutum laude referti.
                  Quem genuit ſtrenuus Reginal dus Courtenienſis
                  Qui procer eximius fuerat tunc deuonienſis.
               
               A Mōke of Dureſme buſied his braine in nicking out theſe
nice verſes vpon the death of W. de La-march Chauncellor
of England vnder king Iohn.
               
               
                  Culmina qui cupitis
                  Laudes pompaſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſititis
                  Eſt ſedata ſitis
                  Si me penſare velitis
                  Qui populos regitis
                  memores ſuper omnia ſitis
                  Quod mors immitis
                  non parcit honore potitis
                  Vobis prapoſitis 
                  ſimilis fucram benè ſcitis
                  Quod ſum vos eritis
                  ad me currendo venitis
               
               William de valentia cōmonly called Valens Earle of Pembroke,
& halfe brother to K. Henry the 3. from whom, the
Earles of Shrewsbury, Kent, and others are deſcended, is
intombed at Weſtminſter, with theſe ranke rimes.
               
                  Anglia tota doles, moritur quia regia proles,
                  Qua ſlorere ſoles, quam continet infima moles:
                  Guilelmus nomen inſigne valentia praebet
                  Celſum cognomen, nam tale dari ſibi debet
                  Qui valuit validus, vincens virtute valore
                  Et placuit placido ſenſu, morum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vigore.
               
               
                  Robert Groſteſt cōmonly called Robin Groſhead biſhop of
Lincolne, a moſt learned prelate, reported by Mathew Paris
                  
to be a ſeuere reproouer of the Pope, a fauourer of learning,
a ſearcher of ſcriptures, a preacher of the word, & generally
a man of great worth cōmanded this only to be engrauen
ouer his Tombe.
               
                  Quis ſim noſſe cupis? caro putrida, nil niſi vermis;
                  Quiſquis es, hoc de me ſit tibi ſcire ſatis.
               
               But vpon his death this was written.
               
                  Rex dolet ac regnum gemit, et flet Anglia tota,
                  Plebs plangit gemitus ingeminare iuuat,
                  Quippe Groſredus ſpeculum, virtutis, aſylum
                  Iuſt
                        ••
                     ciae, Regis inchora morte iacet.
                  Non poterit tamen ille mori, cui fama perorat,
                  Laus loquitur, redolet fructus, abundat honor,
                  Vnde 
                        〈◊〉
                      triſtatur homo, canit Angelus inde,
                  Vnde ſerenantur ſidera, pallet humus.
               
               Vpon the tombe of doctor Iohn Bekingale ſomtime biſhop
of Chicheſter this is engrauen which I ſet here, for rare
correſpondency of the rime.
               
                  Tu modo qualis eris? quid mundi quaeris honores?
                  Crimina deplores, in me nunc te speculeris:
                  En mors ante fores, quae clamitat omnibus adſum
                  In paenis paſſum, pro me te deprecor ores.
               
               Which is the ſame in ſence with that at Geneua.
               
               VIXI VT VIVIS
MORIERIS VT SVM MORTVVS
SIC VITA TRVDITVR.
               
                  Lewes de Beaumont that learned biſhop of Dureſme, who
was preferred therunto for his affinity vnto the Queene, although
he could not with all his learning read this word
Metropoli
                        •
                     ice at his cōſecration, but paſſed it ouer with Soit
pour dict. and would ſweare by S. Lewes that they were diſcourteous,
which ſet downe ſo many hard words in the ordering
of prieſts, had this vpon his tombe in Dureſme
Church where he was buried 1333.
               
                  De Bello Monte iacet hic Lodouicus humatus,
                  Nobilis ex fonte regum, Comitum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      creatus &c.
               
               King Edward the firſt a moſt worthy, and mighty prince
the firſt eſtabliſher of the kingdome of England, had affixed

at the Aulter of S. Edward neare his tombe at Weſtminſter,
a large Epitaph in proſe, whereof I haue found onely
this fragment.
               Abauus autem & tri
                     •
                  vus eius dilatantes imperia,
ſubie
                     •
                  erunt ſibi Ducatus & Comitatus. Edwardus
vero paternarum magnificentiarum amplius aemulator
existens. Regale
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſolium perornans in clypeo & in haſtà,
Principatum Walliae truncatis eius principibus, Leclino
& Dauid potentiſſimè adquiſiuit. Quinimò dominium
regni Scotiae, primò magni induſtria conſilij, de inde virtute
bellorum victorioſiſſimè eſt adeptus. Nihilominus
Comitatibus Cornubiae & Northfolke (diſponente 
                     •
                  o cuius
eſt orbis terrae & plenitudo eius) ad manus Edwardi
mirabilitèr deuolutis, ſuis ſucceſſoribus ampliſſimam reliquit
materiam gloriandi. Vbicun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   igitur Chriſtus habet
nomen, inter praecellentiſſimos reges fidelium habeat
& Edwardus honorem.
               The famous K. Edward the 3. which had ſo great victories
ouer the French, to the greater glory than good of
England as ſome ſay, is entombed at Westminster with
this.
               
                  Hic decus Anglorum, ſlos regum praeteritorum,
                  Fama futurorum, rex clemens, pax populorum,
                  Tertius Eduardus regni complens Iubilaum:
               
               
                  Robert Hawley a valiant Eſquire, was murthered in
Weſtminſter Church in ſeruice time, where he had taken
ſanctuary, and is there buried in the place, where he was
firſt aſſaulted with theſe verſes.
               
                  Me dolus, ira, furor, multorum militis at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     ,
                  in hoc gladiis celebri pietatis aſylo,
                  Dum leuita Dei ſermones legit ad aram
                  Proh dolor, ipſe meo Monachorum ſanguine vultus
                  Aſperſi moriens, chorus est mihi teſtis in 
                        •
                     uum,
                  Et me nunc retinet ſacer hic locus Hawle Robertum,
                  
                     
Hic quia peſtiferos malè ſenſi primitùs hoſtes:
               
               Famous is L. Siccinius Dentatus, who ſerued in an hundred
and twentie battailes. And glorious is Henry the third Emperour,
who fought 62. battailes, and likewiſe honourable
ſhould the memory be of Sir Mathew G
                        •
                     urnay out Countriman,
of whoſe houſe Sir H. Newton is deſcended, which
commaunded in 6. battailes, & was buried at Stoke Hamden
in Somerſetſhire, with this French memoriall now defaced.
               Icy gist le noble & valient Cheualer, Mahe
                     •
                   de Gurnay
iadis ſeneſchall de Landes & Capitayn du Chaſtell d'Aques
pro noſtre Signior le Roy en la Duche de Guien que
in ſa vi
                     •
                   fu a la battaile, de Benamazin & a la pres a la
ſiege de Algezir ſur le Sarazines & auxi a les battayles
de Scluſe, de Creſſy, de Ingeneſſe, de Poyters, de Nazara,
&c. Obijt 96. aetatis 26. Septemb. 146.
               
                  Henry Chichely although he was founder of All Soules
Colledge in Oxford, and an eſpeciall furtherer of learning,
was but little honoured by this vnlearned Epitaph 1443.
               
                  Pauper eram natus, post Primas his releuatus
                  Iam ſum prostratus, & vermibus eſca paratus,
                  Ecce meum tumulum:
               
               His next ſucceſſour one Iohn Kempe, happened vpon a better
Poet, who in one verſe comprehended all his dignities
which were great.
            
            
               Thomas Kempe.
               Bis Primas, ter praeſul erat, bis cardine functus.
               For he was Biſhop of Rocheſter, Chicheſter, and London,
Archbiſhop of Yorke, then of Canterbury, and Cardinall,
firſt Deacon, than Prieſt.
               This that followeth is engrauen about a faire tombe in
a goodly Chappell adioyning to the Quire of Saint Maries
Church in Warwick, being a worthy monument of ſo
noble a perſon, ſince whoſe time although but late, you
may obſerue a great change both of the heyres of his
houſe, and the vſe of words in this Epitaph.
               
                  
Pray deuoutly for the ſoule whome God aſſo
                     •
                  le of one of the
most worſhipfull Knights in his dayes of manhood and
cunning, Richard B
                        •
                     auchampe late Earle of Warwicke,
Lord diſpenſer of Bergeuenny, and of many other great
Lordſhips, whoſe body reſteth here vnder this tombe, in a
full faire vaulte of ſtone, ſet in the bare roche. The which
viſited with long ſickneſſe, in the caſtle of Rohan, therein
deceaſed full Chriſtianly the last day of Aprill, in the
yeare of our Lord God 1439. he being at that time Lieutenant
generall of France, and of the Duchie of Normandie,
by ſufficient authoritie of our Soueraigne Lord
King Henry the ſixt. The which body by great deliberation
and worſhipfull conduct, by ſea and by land, was
brought to Warwicke the fourth of October, the yeare
abou
                     •
                  ſaid, and was laid with full ſolemne exequies in a
faire Cheſt made of Stone, in the Weſt dore of this Chappell,
according to his last Will and Teſtament therein to
rest, till this Chappell by him deuiſed in his life were
made, the which Chappell founded on the Roche, and all
the members therof his executors did fully make, & apparail,
by the auctority of his ſaid laſt Will & Teſtament.
And therafter by the ſaid auctoritie, they did tranſlate
worſhipfully the ſaid body into the vaulte aforeſaid:
Honoured be God therefore.
               His ſiſter the Counteſſe of Shrewsbury was buried in Saint
Faithes vnder S. Paules at London with this:
               Here before the image of Iheſu lyeth the Worſhipfull and
right noble Lady, Margaret Counteſſe of Shrouſeburie,
late wife of the true & victorious Knight, & redoubted
Warriour Iohn Talbot, Earle of Shrouſebury, which
worſhipfully died in Gien for the right of this lond, the
first daughter and one of the heires of the right famous
and renowned Knight Richard Beauchampe, late Erle
of Warwicke which died in Roane, and of dame Elizabeth
his wife, the which Elizabeth was daughter and

heire to Thomas late Lord Berkely, on his ſyd, and of 
                     〈◊〉
                  
moders ſide Lady Liſle, and Ties, which Counteſſe paſſed
from this world the xiiii, day of Iune, the yeare of our
Lord 1468. On whoſe ſoule the Lord haue mercy.
               For that valerous Earle her husband the terror of France,
I found no Epitaph, but inſteed thereof I will giue you 
                     •
                  o
vnderſtand, that not long ſince his ſworde was found in the
riuer of Dordon, and ſolde by a peſant to an Armorour of
Burdeaux, with this inſcription, but pardon the Latin, for
it was not his, but his Camping prieſts.
SVM TALBOTI M.IIII.C.XLIII.
PRO VINCERE INIMICO MEO.
               
               This inſcription following is in the Cathedrall Church at
Roan in Normandie, for Iohn Duke of Bedford, and Gouernour
of Normandie, Sonne to King Henry the fourth,
buried in a faire plaine monument; which when a French
Gentleman aduiſed Charles the eight French King to deface,
as being a monument of the Engliſh victories, he ſaid:
Let him reſt in peace now he is dead, whom we feared
while he liued.
               Cy gist feu de noble memoire haut & puiſſant, prince
Iean en ſon viuant regent du Royaume de France, Duc
de Bethfort, pour lequel est fondè vne Meſſe eſtre par
chacun iour perpetuellement celebr
                     •
                  e en cest autel par le
college, des Clementins incontine
                     ••
                   apres prime: & treſpaſſa
le 13. Septembre 1435. Au quel 13. iour ſemblablement
eſt fondè po
                     •
                  r luy vn obït en ceſte egliſe. Dieu
face pardon à ſoname.
               Vpon an auncient Knight Sir Iernegan buried Croſſe-legd
in Somerly in Suffolke ſome hundred yeares ſince, is written:

                     Ieſus Chriſt both God and man,
                     Saue thy ſeruant Iernegan.
                     
                  
Happy & prudent K. Henry the 7. who ſtopped the ſtreames
of ciuill bloud, which ſo long ouer-flowed England, & left
a moſt peaceable ſtate to his poſteritie, hath his magnificall
monument at Weſtminſter, inſcribed thus:
               
                  
                  Septimus hic ſitus eſt Henricus gloria regum
                  Cunctorum illius qui tempeſtate fuerunt,
                  Ingenio at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      opibus geſtarum nomine rerum:
                  Acceſſere quibus naturae dona benignae,
                  Frontis honos, facies auguſta, heroica forma
                  Iuncta
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ei ſuauis coniunx perpulchra, pudica
                  Et faecunda fuit, foelices prole parentes,
                  Henricum quibus octauum terra Anglia debes.
               
               Hic iacet Henricus, huius nominis VII. Angliae quondam
rex Edmundi Richmundiae Comitis filius, qui die 22. Aug.
Rex creatus, ſtatim poſt apud Weſtmonaſterium 30. Octob.
coronatur, anno Domini. 1485. moritur deinde xxi April.
anno aetatis Liii. Regnauit annos xxii. menſ. viii. minùs
vno die.
               This following I will note out of Hackney Church, that
you may ſee that the Clergie, were not alwaies anticipating,
and griping many liuings by this worthy man, which
relinquiſhed great dignities, and refuſed greater.
               Chriſtopherus Vrſwicus Regis Henrici Septimi Elemozinaerius,
vir ſua aetate clarus, ſummatibus at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   infimatibus iuxtà
charus. Ad exteros reges vndecies pro patria legatus. Decanatū
Eboracenſem, Archidiaconatum Richmundiae, Decanatū
Windſoriae habitos viuens reliquit. Epiſcopatū Norwicenſem
oblatum recuſauit. Magnos honores totâ vita
ſpreu
                     •
                  t, frugali vita contentus, hic viuere, hic mori voluit.
Plenus annorū obi
                     ••
                   ab omnibus deſideratus. Funeris pompam
etiam teſtamento vetuit. Hic ſepultus carnis reſurrectionem
in aduentum Christi expectat:

                     Obijt anno Chriſti incarnati 1521. Die 23.
                     Martij. Anno aetatis ſuae 74.
                  
               
               This teſtamentarie Epitaph I haue read in an ould Manuſcript.
               
                  Terram terra tegit, Daemon peccata reſumat.
                  Res habeat Mundus, ſpiritus alta petat
               
               The name of the defunct is as it were enigmatically expreſſed
in this ould epitaph.
               
                  Bis fuit hic natus, puer & bis, bis iuueniſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                  
                  
                     
Bis vir, bis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſenex, bis doctor, bis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſacerdos,
               
               In the Cathedrall church of S. Pauls in London, a ſtone is
inſcribed thus without name.
               Non hominem aſpiciam
vltra.
OBLIVIO.
               This man yet would not willingly haue bene forgotten,
when he adioyned his Armes to continue his memorye,
not vnlike to Philoſophers which prefixde their
names before their Treatiſes of contemning glorie.
               Another likewiſe ſuppreſſing his name, for his Epitaph
did ſet downe this goodly admonition.
               
                  Looke man before thee how thy death haſteth,
                  Looke man behind thee, how thy life waſteth:
                  Looke on thy right ſide how death thee deſireth.
                  Looke on thy left ſide how ſinne thee beguileth:
                  Looke man aboue thee, ioyes that euer ſhall laſt.
                  Looke man beneth thee, the paines without reſt.
               
               The Abott of S. Albanes which lieth buried there in the
high Quire, ſuppreſſed his name as modeſtly as any other,
in this.
               
                  Hic quidam terra tegitur
                  Peccato ſoluens debitum,
                  Cuius nomen non impoſitum,
                  In libro vitae ſit inſcriptum:
               
               In the Cloiſter on the north ſide of S. Pauls now ruinated,
one had this inſcription vpon his Graue, without
name.
               
                  ƲIXI, PECCAVI, PAENITƲI,
NATVRAE CESSI.
               Which is as Chriſtian, as that was prophane of the Romane:
               AMICI,
DVM VIVIMVS
V
                     •
                  VAMVS.
               Queene Iane who died in Child birth of King Edward
                  
the ſixt and vſed for her deuice a Phaenix, has this therevnto alluding for her Epitaph.

                     Phenix Iana iacet, nato Phaenice, doendum
                     Secula Phaenices nulla tuliſſe duos:
                  
               
               The noble Thomas Earle of Surrey, father to Thomas late Duke of Norfolk, and the right honourable and nobly learned now Earle of Northampton, in the time of King Henry the eight, firſt refined our homly Engliſh Poeſy; among many other, made this Epitaph comparable with the beſt, for Thomas Clere Eſquire his friend and follower buried at Lambeth .1545.

                     Norfolk ſprang thee, Lambeth holds thee dead,
                     Clere of the County of Cleremont though high.
                     Within the wombe of Ormondes race thou bread
                     And ſaweſt thy coſin crowned in thy ſight;
                     Shelton for loue, Surrey for Lord thou chaſe,
                     Aye me, while life did laſt that league was tender:
                     Tracing whoſe ſteps thou ſaweſt Kelſall blaze,
                     Launderſey burnt, & battered Bullen render,
                     At Muttrell gates hopeles of all recure
                     Thine Earle halfe dead gaue in thy hand his will:
                     Which cauſe did thee this pining death procure,
                     Ere ſummers ſeauen times ſeaven, thou couldeſt fulfill.
                     Ah, Clere, if loue had booted, care, or coſt;
                     Heauen had not wonn, nor earth ſo timely loſt.
                  
               
               The Duke of Suffolke and his brother, ſonnes of Charles Brandon, which died of the ſweat at Bugden, were buried together with this.

                     Vna fides viuos coniunxit, religio vna,
                     Ardor et in ſtudijs vnus, et vnus amor.
                     Abſtulit hos ſimul vna dies: duo corpora iungit
                     Vna vrna, ac mentes vnus Olympus habet.
                  
               
               The Earle of Deuonſhire Edward Courtney honorably deſcended, from one of the daughters of King Edward the fourth, is buried at Saint Anthonies in Padua with this

which I ſet downe more for his honor, then the elegancy of the verſe.

                     Anglia quem, genuit, fuerat
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         habitura patronum,
                     Corteneum celſa haec continet ar
                           •
                        a Ducem:
                     Credita cauſa necis, regni affectata cupido,
                     Reginae optatum tunc quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         connubium—
                     Cui regni proceres nou coſenſere, Philippo
                     Reginam Regi iungere poſſe rati,
                     Europam vnde fuit iuuem peragrare neceſſe:
                     Ex quo mors miſero contigit ante diem.
                     Anglia ſi plorat defuncto principe tanto,
                     Nil mirum, Domino deficit illa pio.
                     Sed iam Corteneus caelo fruitur
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         beatis
                     Cum doleant Angli, cum ſine fine gemant:
                     Cortenei probitas igitur, praeſtantia, nomen,
                     Dum ſtabit hoc templum, viuanda ſemper erunt.
                     Anglia
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         hinc etiam ſtabit, ſtabunt
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Britanni,
                     Coniugij optati fama perennis eris.
                     Improba naturae leges Libitina reſcindens,
                     Ex aequo iuuenes praecipitat
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſenes.
                  
               
               
                  Walter Milles, who died for the profeſſion of his faith, as ſome ſaye made this Epitaph for himſelfe.

                     Non praua impietas, aut actae crimina vitae
                     Armarunt hoſtes in mea fata truces.
                     Sola fides Christi ſacris ſignata libellis,
                     Quae vitae cauſa eſt, eſt mihi cauſa necis.
                  
               
               This man was not ſo godly, as he was impious (as it ſeemeth▪) who was buried in the night without any ceremony vnder the name of Menalcas, with this.

                     Here lyeth Menalcas as dead as a logge▪
                     
                     That liued like a deuill & died like a dogge:
                     Here doth he lye ſaid I? then ſaye I lye,
                     For from this place, he parted by and by.
                     But here he made his diſcent into hell,
                     Without either booke, candell, or bell.
                  
               
               
                  
This may ſeeme too ſharpe, but happily it proceeded from
ſome exulcerated minde, as that of Don Petro of Toledo
Viceroy of Naples, wickedly detorted out of the Scriptures.

                     Hic est.
                     Qui propter nos & noſtram ſalutem, deſcendit ad inferos:
                  
               
               A merry and wealthy Goldſmith of London in his life
time prepared this for his Graueſtone, which is ſeene at
S. Leonards neere Foſter-lane.
               
                  When the Bells, be merrilie runge,
                  And the Maſſe deuoutly ſonge,
                  And the meate merrily eaten:
                  Then is Robert Traps, his wife and children quite forgetten,
                  Wherefore Iheſu that of Mary ſprong,
                  Set their ſoules the Saints among;
                  Though it be vndeſerued on their ſide,
                  Let them euermore thy mercy abide,
               
               Doctor Caius a learned Phiſition of Cambridge, and a cofounder
of Gunwell and Caius colledge, hath onely on his
monument there:
FVI CAIVS.
               
               Which is as good as that great learned man of his profeſſion
Iulius Scaliger.
                  SCALIGERI QVOD RELIQVVM.
               
               But that which Cardinall Pole appointed for himſelfe, is
better than both.
Depoſitum Poli Cardinalis.
               
               This enſuing for Sir N. Bacon Lord Keeper of the great
Seale, is worthy to be read, both for the honour of the perſon
who was a moſt wiſe Councellour, and the rareneſſe of
Iambi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                   verſes in Epitaphes (albeit this our age doth delight

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) But as he ſaith, Malos Iambus enecat, beat
bonos.
               
               
                  
                     Hic Nicolaum n
                           •
                         Baconum conditum
                     Exiſtima illum, tam diu Britannici,
                     Regni ſecundum columen; exitium malis.
                  
                  
                     
                     Bonis aſylum, caeca quem non extulit,
                     Ad hunc honorem ſors; ſed aequitas, fides,
                     Doctrina, pietas, vnica, & prudentia,
                  
                  
                     Non morte raptum crede, qui vnica
                     Vita perennes emerit duas: agit
                     Vitam ſecundam caelites inter animos.
                  
                  
                     Fama implet orbem, vita quae illi tertia eſt.
                     Hac poſitum in arca est corpus, olim animi domus:
                     Ara dicata ſempiternae memoriae.
                  
               
               
                  W. Lambe, a man which deſerued well of the citie of London
by diuerſe charitable deeds, framed this for himſelfe.
               
                  As I was ſo be yee,
                  As I am yee ſhall be:
                  That I gaue, that I haue,
                  That I ſpent, that I had:
                  Thus I end all my cost,
                  That I left, that I lost.
               
               All which Claudius Secundus a Romane contained in theſe
foure words:
HIC MECVM HABEO OMNIA.
               
               Shorte and yet a ſufficient commendation of M. Sandes
was this.
               
                  Margareta Sandes.
                  Digna haec luce diuturniore,
                  Niſi quod luce meliore digna.
               
               And anſwerable thereunto is this, for a Gentleman of the
ſame name.
               
                  Who would liue in others breath?
                  Fame deceaues the dead mans trust:
                  When our names do change by death:
                  
                     Sands I was, and now am dust.
               
               Sir Philip Sidney (to whoſe honour I will ſay no more,)
but that which Maro ſaide of Marcellus nephew of Auguſtus.
Oſtendunt terris hunc tantum fata, nec vltra eſſe ſinunt,
which alſo was anſwered by the Oracle to Claudius
                  
the 2. Emperour of his brother Quintilius) hath this moſt
happily imitated out of the French of Monſ. Boniuet,
made by Ioach. du Bellay, as it was noted by Sir George Buc
in his Poetica.
               
               
                  
                     England, Netherland, the heauens, and the arts,
                     The ſouldiers, and the world hath made ſix parts,
                     Of noble Sidney, for who will ſuppoſe,
                     That a ſmall heape of ſtones, can Sidney encloſe.
                  
                  
                     England had his body for ſhe it fed,
                     Netherland his bloud in her defence ſhed:
                     The heauens haue his ſoule, the arts haue his fame,
                     The ſouldiers the griefe, the world his good name.
                  
               
               Vpon the golden Lion rampaut in Gueles of the houſe
of Albenye which the late Earle H. Fitz-Alan bare in his
armes as receauing the Earledome of Arundel from the
houſe of Albenye, one compoſed this Epitaph.
               
                  Aureus ille leo (reliqui trepidate leones)
                  Non in ſanguineo nunc ſtat vt ante ſolo:
                  Nam leo de Iuda vicit, victo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      pepercit,
                  Et ſecum patris duxit ad vs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      domos.
                  Sic cadit vt ſurgat, ſic victus vincit, et illum,
                  Quem modo terra tulit, nunc Paradiſus habet.
               
               In the Cloyſter of New Colledge in Oxford, this following
is written with a coale, for one Woodgate who bequeathed
200 pound to one, who would not beſtowe a plate for his
memoriall:
               
                  H
                        •
                     us Peripatetice,
                  Conde tibi tumulum, nec fide haeredis amori:
                  Epitaphium
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      compara,
                  Mortuus est, nec emit libris haec verba ducentis.
                  WOODGATVS HIC SEPVLTVS EST.
               
               Therefore the counſaile of Diego de Valles is good, who
made his owne tombe at Rome with this inſcription.
               
                  Certa dies nulli est, mors certa, incerta ſequentum
                  Cura, locet tumulum qui ſapit, ante ſibi.
               
               
                  
A Gentleman falling off his horſe brake his necke, which
ſoddaine hap gaue occaſion of much ſpeech of his former
life, and ſome in this iudging world, iudged the worſt. In
which reſpect a good friend made this good Epitaph, remembring
of S. Auguſtin. Miſerecordia Domini inter pontem,
& fontem.
               
               
                  My friend iudge not me,
                  Thou ſeest I iudge not thee:
                  Betwixt the ſtirrop and the ground,
                  Mercy I askt, mercy I found.
               
               To the honour of Sir Henry Goodyer of Poleſworth, a knight
memorable for his vertues: an affectionate friend of his,
framed this Tetraſtich.
               
               
                  An yll yeare of a Goodyer v
                        •
                      
                     
                        ••
                     reſt,
                  Who gon to God, much lacke of him heere left:
                  Full of good gifts, of body and of minde,
                  Wiſe, comely, learned, eloquent, and kinde.
               
               Short and ſufficient is this of a moſt worthy Knight, who
for his Epitaph hath a whole College in Cambridge, and
commaunded no more to be inſcribed than this.
               
                  Virtute non vi.
                  Mors mihi lucrum.
                  Hic iacet Gualterus Mildmay Miles, et vxor eius.
                  Ipſe obijt vltimo die Maij 1589.
                  Ipſa decimo ſexto Martij 1576.
                  Reliquerunt duos filios et tres filias
                  Fundauit Collegium Emanuelis Cantabrigiae.
                  Moritur Cancellarius & ſubtheſaurarius Scaccarij, et
                  Regiae Maieſtati â conſilijs.
               
               Vpon a youngman of great hope, a ſtudent in Oxford w
                     ••
                  a
made this.
               
                  Short was thy life,
                  yet liuest thou euer:
                  Death hath his due,
                  yet dieſt thou neuer.
               
               
                  
But I feare now I haue ouercharged the Readers minde,
with dolefull, dumpiſh, and vncomfortable lines. I will
therefore for his recomfort, end this part with a few conceited,
merry, and laughing Epitaphes, the moſt of them
compoſed by maiſter Iohn Hoſtines when he was young,
and will begin with the Bellowes maker of Oxford.
               
               
                  Here lyeth Iohn Cruker a maker of Bellowes,
                  His craftes-maſter and King of good-fellowes;
                  Yet when he came to the hower of his death,
                  He that made Bellowes, could not make breath.
               
               
                  Thomas Elderton, who did arme himſelfe with Ale (as ould
Father Ennius did with Wine) when he ballated, had this,
in that reſpect made to his memorie.
               
                  Hic ſitus est ſitiens at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ebrius Eldertonus,
                  Quid dico hic ſitus eſt? hic potiùs ſitis est.
               
               Of him alſo was made this.
               
                  Here is Elderton lyeng in dust.
                  Or lyeng Elderton, choſe which you lust.
                  Here he lyes dead, I doe him no wrong,
                  For who knew him ſtanding, all his life long.
               
               Some wiſe man was he, and ſo reputed for whom this was
compoſed.
               
                  Here lyeth Thom Nicks bodie
                  Who liued a foole and dyed a nodye:
                  As for his ſoule aske them that can tell.
                  Whether fooles ſoules go to heauen or to hell.
               
               Neither may this offend any, for that of Durandus the ould
prieſt is little better.
               
                  Hic eſt Durandus poſitue ſub marmore duro,
                  An ſit ſaluandus ego neſcio, nec ego curo.
               
               Miſerable was Hermon, who when he had onely dreamed
that he had disburſed money, dyed for woe, likewiſe

                  Ph
                        •
                     idon who weapt not for that he ſhould dye, but that
his buriall would ſtand 
                     〈◊〉
                   at 4. s. But moſt miſerable was
that pinchpenie Hermocrates, that in his laſt will and teſtament
made himſelfe his owne ſole heire and executor
of all he had, and yet refuſed to liue when he might, becauſe
he would not be at charge of a purgation. And our
countriman ould Sparges 
                  
                     •
                  ight ſeeme to be of his tribe,
for whom was made.
               
                  Here lyeth father Sparges
                  That died to ſaue charges.
               
               Maiſter Wills doctor of Phiſick who died lately at Vienna
would often ſay that he would haue this verſe only for his
Epitaph.
               Here lyeth willing Wills.
               But a friend of his that knew him to be Caprichious, wiſhed
him to adde one verſe more to make vp time after the
manner, but when he ſaid, he had nothing he might adde
more, one extempore ſayed it might be wel made vp thus.
               
                  Here lyeth willing Wills
                  With his head full of Windmills.
               
               For one that had continuall new encounters in his owne
minde, and crammed his head with contrary diſcontents, I
haue heard this.
               
                  Here lyeth he,
                  Which with himſelfe could neuer agree.
               
               You ſhall haue this out of the Cathedrall Church of Norwich
whatſoeuer you account of it.
               
                  Vnder this ſtone
                  Lies Iohn Knapton.
                  Who died iuſt
                  The xxviii of Auguſt
                  M.D.XC. and one
                  Of this church Peti-Canon,
               
               
                  
Vpon merry Tarlton, I haue heard this.
               
                  
                     Hic ſitus est cuius vox, vultus, actio poſſit
                     Ex Heraclito reddere Democritum.
                  
                  
                     
                        Here lyeth Richard a Preene,
                     One thouſand, fiue hundred, eighty nine,
                     Of March the 22. day,
                     And he that will die after him may.
                  
                  
                     Here lieth he, who was borne and cried,
                     Told 
                           •
                        hreeſcore yeares, fell ſick, and died.
                  
                  
                     Here lyes the man whoſe horſe did gaine,
                     The Bell in race on Salsbury plaine:
                     Reader, I know not whether needs it,
                     You or your horſe rather to read it.
                  
                  
                     Here lyes the man that madly ſlaine,
                     In earneſt madneſſe did complaine,
                     On nature that ſhe did not giue,
                     One life to looſe, another to liue.
                  
                  
                     
                     Here lyeth C. vnder ground,
                     As wiſe as L. thouſand pound.
                     He neuer refuſed the Wine of his friend,
                     Drinke was his life, and drinke was his end.
                  
                  
                     Here lyeth N. a man of fame
                     The firſt of his howſe and laſt of his name.
                  
               
               At Fa
                        •
                     lam on the weſt marches neare Naworth Caſtle.
               
                  Iohn Bell broken-brow
                  
                  Ligs vnder this ſtean:
                  Four
                        •
                      of myne een ſonnes
                  Laid it on my weam.
                  I was a man of my meate
                  Maſter of my wife
                  I liued on myn own land
                  Without micle ſtrife.
               
               For old Th. Churchyard the poore Court-Poet this is now
commonly current.
               
                  Come Alecto and lend me thy torch,
                  To finde a Church-yard in the Church-porch.
                  Pouerty, and Poetry this tombe doth encloſe,
                  Therfore Gentlemen be mery in Proſe.
               
               With this memoriales of the dead which giue a little liuing
breath to the dead: for as he ſaith, Mortuorum vita
in memoria vi
                        •
                     orum poſita eſt, I conclude:
               
                  Et veniam pro laude peto: laudatus abundè:
                  Non faſtiditus ſi tibi Lector ero.
               
            
         
         FINIS.
      
   