
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  Songs of Mourning:
BEVVAILING
the vntimely death of
Prince Henry.
                  
                  VVorded by THO. CAMPION.
                  And ſet forth to bee ſung with one voyce
to the Lute, or Violl:
By JOHN COPRARIO.
                  
                  
                     LONDON:
Printed for Iohn Browne, and
are to be ſould in S. dunſtons
Churchyard, 1613.
               
            
         
         
            
            ILLVSTRISSIMO,
POTENTISSIMOQVE PRINCIPI,
FREDRICO QVINTO, RHENI
COMITI PALATINO, DVCI BAVARIAE, &c.
            
               COgimur; inuitis (Clariſsime) parce quaerelis
            Te ſaluo; laetis non ſinit eſſe Deus:
            Nec ſperatus Hymen procedit lumine claro,
            Principis extincti nubila fata vetant.
            Illius inferias maeſto iam Muſica cantu
            Proſequitur, miſeros haec Dea ſola iuuat.
            Illa ſuos tibi ſummittit (Dux inclite) quaeſtus,
            Fraternus fleto quem ſociauit amor.
            Sed noua gaudia, ſed tam dulcia foedera rupit
            Fati infoelicis liuor, & hora nocens.
            Quod ſupereſt, nimios nobis omni arte dolores
            Eſt mollire animus, ſpes meliora dabit:
            Cunctatoſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                olim cantabimus ipſi Hymenaeos,
            Laeta ſimul fas ſit reddere vota Deo.
         
      
      
         
            
            AN ELEGIE
vpon the vntimely death of
Prince Henry.
            
               REade you that haue ſome teares left yet vnſpent,
            Now weepe your ſelues hart ſicke, and nere repent:
            For I will open to your free acceſſe
            The ſanctuary of all heauineſſe:
            VVhere men their fill may mourne, and neuer ſinne:
            And I their humble Prieſt thus firſt beginne.
            Fly from the Skies yee bleſſed beames of light,
            Riſe vp in horrid vapours vgly night,
            And fetter'd bring that rauenous monſter Fate
            The fellon, and the traytour to our ſtate
            Law-Eloquence wee neede not to conuince
            His guilt, all know it, 'tis hee ſtole our Prince,
            The Prince of men, the Prince of all that bore
            Euer that princely name: O now no more
            Shall his perfections like the Sunne-beames dare
            The purblinde world, in heau'n thoſe glories are.
            VVhat could the greateſt artiſt, Nature, adde
            T' encreaſe his graces? deuine forme hee had
            
               
Striuing in all his parts which ſhould ſurpaſſe;
            And like a well tun'd chime his carriage was
            Full of coeleſtiall witchcraft, winning all
            To admiration, and loue perſonall.
            His Launce appear'd to the beholders eyes
            VVhen his faire hand aduanc't it in the skyes
            Larger then truth, for well could hee it wield,
            And make it promiſe honour in the field.
            VVhen Court and Muſicke cal'd him, off fell armes,
            And as hee had beene ſhap't for loues alarmes,
            In harmony hee ſpake, and trod the ground
            In more proportion then the meaſur'd ſound.
            How fit for peace was hee, and roſie beds?
            How fit to ſtand in troopes of iron heads?
            VVhen time had with his circles made complete,
            His charmed rounds? All things in time grow great.
            This feare euen like a commet that hangs high,
            And ſhootes his threatning flaſhes through the skye,
            Held all the eyes of Chriſtendome intent
            Vpon his youthfull hopes, caſting th' euent
            Of what was in his power, not in his will:
            For that was cloſe conceal'd, and muſt lye ſtill
            As deepely hid, as that deſigne which late
            VVith the French Lyon dyed. O earthly ſtate
            How doth thy greatneſſe in a moment fall?
            And feaſtes in higheſt pompe turne funerall?
            But our young Henry arm'd with all the arts
            That ſute with Empire, and the gaine of harts,
            Bearing before him fortune, power, and loue
            Appear'd firſt in perfection, fit to moue
            Fixt admiration: though his yeeres were greene
            Their fruit was yet mature: his care had beene
            Suruaying India, and implanting there
            The knowledge of that God which hee did feare:
            
               
And eu'n now, though hee breathleſſe lyes, his ſayles
            Are ſtrugling with the windes, for our auayles
            T' explore a paſſage hid from humane tract,
            VVill fame him in the enterpriſe, or fact.
            O Spirit full of hope why art thou fled
            From deedes of honour? why's that vertue dead
            VVhich dwelt ſo well in thee? a bowre more ſweet
            If Paradiſe were found, it could not meete.
            Curſt then bee Fate that ſtole our bleſsing ſo,
            And had for vs now nothing left but woe,
            Had not th' All-ſeeing prouidence yet kept
            Another ioy ſafe, that in ſilence ſlept:
            And that ſame Royall workeman who could frame
            A Prince ſo worthy of immortall fame;
            Liues, and long may hee liue, to forme the other
            His expreſt image, and grace of his brother.
            To whoſe eternall peace wee offer now
            Guifts which hee lou'd, and fed, Muſicks that flow
            Out of a ſowre, and melancholike vayne,
            VVhich beſt ſort with the ſorrowes wee ſuſtaine.
         
         
            
            TO THE MOST SACRED
King James.
            
               
                  〈♫〉
               
               O Griefe, O Griefe, how diuers are thy ſhapes wherein men lan-

                  〈♫〉
               
guiſh? The face ſometime with teares thou fill'ſt, Sometime the hart thou kill'ſt with vnſeene anguiſh,

                  〈♫〉
               
Somewhile thou ſmil'ſt to view how fate, playes with our humane ſtate. So farre from

                  〈♫〉
               
ſuretie here are all our earthly ioyes, That what our ſtrong hope buildes when leaſt we feare, a

                  〈♫〉
               
ſtronger power deſtroyes.

                  〈♫〉
               
            
            
               
               1
               O Griefe, how diuers are thy ſhapes wherein men languiſh?
               The face ſometime with teares thou fil'ſt,
               Sometime the hart thou kill'ſt
               With vnſeene anguiſh.
               Sometime thou ſmil'ſt to view how Fate
               Playes with our humane ſtate:
               So farre from ſurety here
               Are all our earthly ioyes,
               That what our ſtrong hope buildes, when leaſt wee feare,
               A ſtronger power deſtroyes.
            
            
               2
               O Fate, why ſhouldſt thou take from KINGS their ioy, and treaſure?
               Their Image if men ſhould deface
               'Twere death, which thou doſt race
               Euen at thy pleaſure.
               Wiſedome of holy Kings yet knowes
               Both what it hath, and owes.
               Heau'ns hoſtage which you bredd
               And nurſt with ſuch choyce care.
               Is rauiſht now great KING, and from vs ledd
               When wee were leaſt aware.
            
            
               The Baſe.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            2 TO THE MOST SACRED
Queene Anne.
            
               
                  〈♫〉
               
               TIs now dead night, and not a light on earth, orſtarre in

                  〈♫〉
               
heau'n doth ſhine, Let now a mother mourne the nobleſt birth that euer was both mortall, and diuine.
            
               
                  〈♫〉
               
O ſweetnes peereles! more then humane grace! O flowrie beauty! O vntimely

                  〈♫〉
               
death! Now Muſicke fill this place with thy moſt dolefull breath. O ſinging waile a fate more truely

                  〈♫〉
               
fune rall, Then when with all his ſonnes the ſire of Troy did fall.

                  〈♫〉
               
            
            
               
               1
               Tis now dead night, and not a light on earth,
               Or ſtarre in heauen doth ſhine:
               Let now a mother mourne the nobleſt birth
               That euer was both mortall, and diuine.
               O ſweetneſſe peereleſſe! more then humane grace!
               O flowry beauty! O vntimely death!
               Now Muſicke fill this place
               With thy moſt dolefull breath:
               O ſinging wayle a fate more truely funerall,
               Then when with all his ſonnes the ſire of Troy did fall.
            
            
               2
               Sleepe Ioy, dye Mirth, and not a ſmile be ſeene,
               Or ſhew of harts content,
               For neuer ſorrow neerer touch't a QVEENE,
               Nor were there euer teares more duely ſpent:
               O deare remembrance, full of ruefull woe!
               O ceaceleſſe paſſion! O vnhumane hower!
               No pleaſure now can grow,
               For wither'd is her flower.
               O anguiſh doe thy worſt and fury Tragicall,
               Since fate in taking one hath thus diſorder'd all.
            
            
               The Baſe.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            3 TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY
Prince Charles.
            
               
                  〈♫〉
               
               FOrtune and glory may be loſt and woone, But when the worke of

                  〈♫〉
               
nature is vn- done, that loſſe flyes paſt retur- ning, No help is left but mourning: What can to kinde

                  〈♫〉
               
youth more deſpightfull proue then to be rob'd of one ſole bro- ther? Father and mother aske reue-

                  〈♫〉
               
rence, a brother onely loue, Like age and birth like thoughts and pleaſures moue. What gaine can

                  〈♫〉
               
he heape vp though ſhowers of Crownes deſcend, Who for that good muſt change a brother and a friend?

                  〈♫〉
               
            
            
               
               1
               Fortune and Glory may be loſt, and woone,
               But when the worke of Nature is vndone
               That loſſe flyes paſt returning,
               No helpe is left but mourning.
               What can to kinde youth more deſpightfull proue
               Then to be rob'd of one ſole Brother?
               Father and Mother
               Aske reuerence, a Brother onely loue:
               Like age, and birth, like thoughts, and pleaſures moue:
               What gayne can he heape vp though ſhowers of Crownes deſcend
               Who for that good muſt change a brother and a friend?
            
            
               2
               Follow, O follow yet thy Brothers fame,
               But not his fate, lets onely change the name,
               And finde his worth preſented
               In thee, by him preuented:
               Or paſt example of the dead be great,
               Out of thy ſelfe begin thy ſtorie:
               Vertue, and glorie
               Are eminent being plac't in princely ſeate:
               Oh heau'n his age prolong with ſacred heate,
               And on his honoured head let all the bleſſings light
               Which to his brothers life men wiſh't, and wiſht them right.
            
            
               The Baſe.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            4 TO THE MOST PRINCELY AND VERTVOVS
the Lady Elizabeth.
            
               
                  〈♫〉
               
               SO parted you, So parted you as if the world for e-

                  〈♫〉
               
uer had loſt with him her light, Now could your teares hard flint to ruth ex- cite, yet may you neuer

                  〈♫〉
               
your loues againe partake in humane ſight. O why ſhould loue ſuch two kinde harts diſ- ſeuer,

                  〈♫〉
               
As nature neuer knit more faire or firme toge- ther?

                  〈♫〉
               
            
            
               
               1
               So parted you as if the world for euer
               Had loſt with him her light
               Now could your teares hard flint to ruth excite,
               Yet may you neuer
               Your loues againe partake in humane ſight:
               O why ſhould loue ſuch two kinde harts diſſeuer
               As nature neuer knit more faire or firme together?
            
            
               2
               So loued you as ſiſter ſhould a brother
               Not in a common ſtraine,
               For Princely blood doeth vulgar fire diſdaine:
               But you each other
               On earth embarc't in a celeſtiall chaine
               A laſſe for loue that heau'nly borne affection
               To change ſhould ſubiect be and ſuffer earths infection.
            
            
               The Baſe.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            5 TO THE MOST ILLVSTRIOVS AND MIGHTY
Fredericke the fift, Count Palatine of the Rhein.
            
               
                  〈♫〉
               
               HOw like a golden dreame you met and par- ted, That pleaſing

                  〈♫〉
               
ſtraight doth vaniſh, O who can euer ba- niſh the thought of one ſo princely and free-har- ted?
            
               
                  〈♫〉
               
But he was pul'd vp in his prime by fate, And loue for him muſt mourne though all too late. Teares to the

                  〈♫〉
               
dead are due, let none forbid ſad harts to ſigh, True griefe, true griefe, true griefe cannot be hid.

                  〈♫〉
               
            
            
               
               1
               How like a golden dreame you met and parted
               That pleaſing ſtraight doth vaniſh:
               O who can euer baniſh
               The thought of one ſo princely and free harted?
               But hee was pul'd vp in his prime by fate,
               And loue for him muſt mourne though all too late.
               Teares to the dead are due, let none forbid
               Sad harts to ſigh, true griefe cannot be hid.
            
            
               2
               Yet the moſt bitter ſtorme to height encreaſed
               By heau'n againe is ceaſed:
               O time that all things moueſt
               In griefe and ioy thou equall meaſure loueſt:
               Such the condition is of humane life,
               Care muſt with pleaſure mixe and peace with ſtrife:
               Thoughts with the dayes muſt change, as tapers waſte
               So muſt our griefes, day breakes when night is paſt.
            
            
               The Baſe.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            6 To the moſt diſconſolate
Great Brittaine.
            
               
                  〈♫〉
               
               WHen pale famine fed on thee with her inſatiate i
                  ••
               es, When ciuill broyles ſet

                  〈♫〉
               
murther free contemning all thy lawes, When heau'n enrag'd conſum'd thee ſo with plagues that none thy

                  〈♫〉
               
face could know, Yet in thy lookes affliction then ſhew'd leſſe, Then now for ones fate

                  〈♫〉
               
all thy parts ex- preſſe.

                  〈♫〉
               
            
            
               
               1
               When pale famine fed on thee,
               With her vnſatiate iawes,
               When ciuill broyles ſet murder free
               Contemning all thy lawes,
               When heau'n enrag'd conſum'd thee ſo
               With plagues that none thy face could know,
               Yet in thy lookes affliction then ſhew'd leſſe
               Thou now for ones fall all thy parts expreſſe.
            
            
               2
               Now thy higheſt States lament
               A ſonne, and Brothers loſſe;
               Thy nobles mourne in diſcontent,
               And rue this fatall croſſe;
               Thy Commons are with paſſion ſad
               To thinke how braue a Prince they had:
               If all thy rockes from white to blacke ſhould turne
               Yet couldſt thou not in ſhew more amply mourne.
            
            
               The Baſe.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            7 To the World.
            
               
                  〈♫〉
               
               O Poore diſtracted World, partly a ſlaue to Pagans ſinnefull rage, partly ob-

                  〈♫〉
               
ſcur'd with igno- rance of all the meanes that ſaue, And eu'n theſe parts of thee that liue aſſur'd of

                  〈♫〉
               
heau'nly grace: O how they are de- uided? with doubts late by a Kingly pen deci- ded.
            
               
                  〈♫〉
               
O happy world if what the ſire be- gun had beene clos'd vp by his religious ſonne.

                  〈♫〉
               
            
            
               
               1
               O poore diſtracted world, partly a ſlaue
               To Pagans ſinnefull rage, partly obſcur'd
               With ignorance of all the meanes that ſaue,
               And eu'n thoſe parts of thee that liue aſſur'd
               Of heau'nly grace: Oh how they are deuided
               With doubts late by a Kingly penne decided?
               O happy world, if what the Sire begunne
               Had beene clos'd vp by his religious Sonne.
            
            
               2
               Mourne all you ſoules oppreſt vnder the yoake
               Of Chriſtian-hating Thrace; neuer appear'd
               More likelyhood to haue that blacke league broke,
               For ſuch a heauenly prince might well be fear
                     ••
                  
               
               Of earthly fiends: Oh how is Zeale inflamed
               With power, when truth wanting defence is ſhamed?
               O princely ſoule reſt thou in peace, while wee
               In thine expect the hopes were ripe in thee.
            
            
               The Baſe.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A Table of all the Songs contayned in
this Booke.
            
               O Griefe. 1
               Tis now dead night. 2
               Fortune and glory. 3
               So parted you. 4
               How like a golden dreame. 5
               VVhen pale famine. 6
               O poore diſtracted world. 7
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   