
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     
                        ANNALES The True and Royall Hiſtory of the famous Empreſſe Elizabeth.
                        Queene of ENGLAND FRANCE and IRELAND &c. True faiths defendreſſe of Diuine renowne and happy Memory.
                        Wherein all ſuch memorable things as happened during hir bleſsed raigne, with ſuch acts and Treaties as past betwixt hir Matie. and SCOTLAND, FRANCE, SPAINE, ITALY, GERMANY, POLAND, SWEDEN, DENMARK, RUSSIA, and the NETHERLANDS, are exactly described.
                        LONDON printed for Beniamin Fiſher and are to be ſould at the Talbott in Pater Noster Rowe 1625
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The explication of this Bookes FRONTISPICE.
                  The Pillers deckt with Arms, Palms, Laurell bows,
                  Supporting the Rare PHOENIX, to you ſhows
                  The Nobles, on whoſe loyall prudent breſt,
                  The Phoenix-Queene, ELIZA'S peace did reſt:
                  Whoſe Wiſedomes pillars did vphold her Crowne,
                  As columnes, on which rested her renowne.
                  Their ſtable valour did ſupport this land;
                  And all her proud inſulting foes withſtand:
                  For whoſe exploits it pleasd her Maiesty
                  To dub, ſome Knights of dreadleſſe chiualry;
                  Whom ſhe not only did to Knighthood rayſe,
                  But of this kingdome made them props and ſtayes.
                  And thoſe whoſe merits added to their worth
                  Renowned Glory, Honour to their birth.
                  In whoſe true worthy acts ſhe most delighted,
                  She, with the Order of the Garter, knighted.
                  Some ſhe reſtor'd in their Anceſtors place▪
                  
                  Made viſcount Bindon, one of Noble Ra
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     
                  
                  Some Earles, ſome Barons, all ſhe did reſtore,
                  Or did create as they had won before:
                  Other ſhee ſummon'd, by her wiſedome's choyce,
                  To Parliament as Peeres to have there voyce:
                  Whoſe prudence, and whoſe valors (vnder God)
                  Prou'd Englands peace, to Spaine a heauy rod.
                  The fired townes, which on each ſide are plac't,
                  Do memorize how Spaine was once diſgract:
                  When that braue Eſſex, Englands Generall,
                  With Nottingham, that famous Admirall,
                  Their Citie Cadiz did with force ſurpriſe
                  
                     
                        •
                     o crowne their countrey with their victories.
                  And Cumberland, whoſe fame no Age can blot
                  
                     
                        •
                     ooke Por
                        •
                     arico with his Thundring ſhot
                  That Spaniſh towne; yet his victorious force
                  
                     
                        •
                     lew the reſiſting, pardn'd with remorſe
                  Thoſe that with bended knees did him entreat,
                  He would not them nor theirs of life defeat.
                  Now vnderneath DRAKES famous ſhip is ſhow
                        •
                     
                  
                  Whoſe bright renown ſwift Honors trump hath blow
                  How he therein did circuit earth's whole frame▪
                  
                  And in his voyage added to his fame.
                  The glory of a prize won through his paine,
                  The CACAFOGVE, Royall Ship of Spaine.
                  At the two corners, two great Spaniſh Fleets
                  Your gazing eyes with admiration greets.
                  One is conſum'd by vnquench't flames of fire,
                  The other is ore'whelm'd through NEPTVNE'S ir
                        •
                     
                  
                  Which moralizeth, our good God doth bend
                  His wrath, gainst thoſe that Albions ill inten
                        •
                     
                  
                  Which wrath did fall most mercileſſe on Spaine,
                  And euer will to their diſgrace remaine.
                  One thouſand (doth) fiue hundred eighty ſeuen,
                  Their ambitions with infamy, make euen.
                  The Port of Gilbaltars ſtraights, ſure can tell,
                  How that a Spaniſh Fleet (by DRAKE) there fe
                        •
                     
                  
                  The very ſeas will witneſſe, that with foure
                  Of royall Ships, he burnt two hundred more.
                  If you enquire, from whence thoſe Royals came;
                  From Englands ſhore, Spaines fury for to tame.
                  To end, the Fleet of Eighty-eight doth ſhow,
                  England was ayded in that ouerthrow
                  Giuen to Spaine, by God, whoſe potent hand
                  Preſeru
                        •
                     d ELIZA'S glory, and her land.
                  Gainst thoſe that owe true Religion ſpight,
                  Both ſeas and earth, for Albions cauſe will fight.
                  Not to the ſeas let's bend, but to that power
                  Which must preſerue vs, at the dreadfull houre.
                  And as 'tis meet ſo let vs proſtrate fall
                  Vnto our Hope, our Ayde, our Generall.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        IH̄S
                     
                  
                  Here reade the dayes,
                  when Britanns ground,
                  VVith bleſsings all,
                  was compaſt round.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        PER TAL VARIAR SON QVY ✚.
                        portrait of Queen Elizabeth I
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  TO THE MOST Auguſt, moſt Sacred, and moſt excellent Maieſty of IAMES THE FIRST, Emperour of Great Britanne, king of France, Ireland and Virginia, defendor of the Faith.
                  The Tranſlator of theſe ANNALLS wiſheth to His Imperiall Maieſtie, bleſſedneſſe, perpetuall health, with all happineſſe, proſperitie, and felicitie, in both worlds.
               
               
                  
                  THE FRENCH Epiſtle dedicatory to His ſacred Majeſty of Great Britanne.
                  
                     EXcellent monarch; heere is the firſt-borne of a Labour, as vnhoped for as the occaſion is extraordinarie, which proſtrates it ſelfe, with all humilitie, at the feete of your Maieſtie, to doe you an Homage of his Birth, and in paying vnto you his firſt duetie, craues leaue to wander the World, and viſit his friends.
                  In theſe vnhappy times, which lately made France (my countrey) the ſad obiect of pitie, and the mournfull ſubiect of

good peoples ſorrowes; on a day, ſitting vpon the ſhores of Babylons gulph, aſpecting with watty eyes the deplorable eſtate of Chriſts true Church, which in the throng of theſe miſeries was ſore wounded with iniuries, appearing as if ſhe
                        •
                      had attained the decrepit age of a dying life, which breath's forth her laſt gaſpe: And as I expreſſed by my teares the dolor of her afflictions, and by my ſighes the deſires of her deliuerance, my eyes imitating in their glances the wiſhes of my ſoule, ſought for the place where the great god Pan vſed to feed and keepe his flockes at noone day: I diſcouered a far off, ſome ſparkes of the Sunne of Iuſtice, which in this happy country of Goſhen ſhines perpetually, whileſt an eternal night couers Egypt with the gloomie clouds of darkeneſſe. Thither ſuddenly I directed my Vowes; which God proſpered ſo happily by his prouidence, that (after many dangers, tedious and toylſome iournies) I at length arriued here, where I found
                  A PEACEABLE KING, in whom is brightly diſcerned an harmonious vnity of all chriſtian & roial vertues, the Empire of that great Empreſs of vertue, Piety, from whence all others deriue, & the admirable Oeconomy of Charity, conducted with Prudence, educated by Experience, and that experience drawn from diuers examples of precedent ages, & proofs of this preſent; which produceth in him all kindes of actions both iuſt and neceſſary, by which he freely giueth himſelfe to the Church and Common-wealth for pledge and caution of their peace and proſperity.
                  AN HAPPY NATION (which vnder the fauourable Scepter of ſuch a Prince, in whom the ſacred fountaine of the moſt exquiſite graces of heauen, abounding with all ſorts of

proſperity, hath aboue others the honour to ſettle the Church of Chriſt, and with her, Piety and Iuſtice her conſtant followers) whom the benigne aſpect of heauen cauſeth to flouriſh with ioy and perfect peace, whileſt a cruell Warre ſpoiles and ranſackes both neighbouring countries and remoter parts, with vnheard-of torments and exceſsiue ſorrowes.
                  God, who calls himſelfe the Prince of Peace, ſtiles himſelfe alſo the King of Warre; to ſhew, that he rules all worldly affaires with his incomprehenſible eye of prouidence, as well as with his inuincible hands of all-powerfulneſſe. But, to make plaine to all mens vnderſtandings how farre God is againſt Warres, Strifes, and Contentions; and on the contrary, how much he loues Peace and Vnitie, it is ſaid, Bleſſed be the Peaceable, becauſe they ſhall be thereby knowne to be the elect of Chriſt, and heyres of heauen.
                  Your Maieſty (great Monarch) on whoſe head God (as his Lieutenant here on earth) hath placed three Crownes; beares both the warlike Sword of Ma
                           •
                        s, and the peaceable Oliue branch of Minerua, as did that Pallas, whom the Athenians took for their titulary goddeſſe, becauſe ſhe preſided in peace as well as in warre. But what is the expedition of Warre, to the ſubduing vnder his lawes, by the ſweetneſſe of Peace, the paſsions of men? to bring them to reaſon, and to ſettle them in a firme and aſſured reſt? what to vanquiſh by force a people, to the conquering of whole nations hearts by loue? to loſe them, in ſtead of gayning them? The multitude, wondring at the Sonne of God, who calm'd the greateſt tempeſt, cryed out, What is he whom both Seas and Windes do obey? Euen ſo (happy King) when I ſaw at my landing ſo many exquiſite effects of your rare wiſedome, the peace & happineſſe

of your ſubiects, with the tranquillitie & bleſſedneſſe of your diuine ſoule; I could not but likewiſe exclaime, Ah! what is this IVST MASTER, and prudent King, whoſe admirable ſpirit workes ſo many wonders!
                  
                  God gouernes, from the higheſt place of heauen, the earth; and from the loweſt place of it, the heauens: becauſe his prouidence and almighty power, being infinite, fills all places, yet vnlimited. For though by his omni-preſence hee be euery where, yet he is included no where.
                  Your Maieſtie, who by the excellent and harmonious order of your wiſe diſpenſation, doe rule with a melodious & delightfull harmonie, with One of your Kingdome, all the Three; & from the fartheſt place of Great Brittanne, all Great Brittanne; preſiding by your power in all places, diſpoſing by your wiſedome all things neere and farre, and perfecting them by your iuſtice: you cauſe all the dependences of your eſſence to be found in all places, and all things to be but one and the ſame thing, & each thing to be as all things. And euen as to the humane body, that excellent part of the brain, which the Anatomiſts call the admirable lines or traces, by their ſerpentine courſes and turnings, exquiſitely folded and vnited together, whoſe number is no leſſe infinite than the workmanſhip thereof moſt rare; doth ſo excellently refine the vital ſpirits, that they are ſent thither from the heart, which makes them moueable, and ſerue as inſtruments of Conception, of Iudgement and Memory: Your Maieſtie doth in like maner receiue in your Spirit, which is the moſt admirable and exquiſite peece of that great imperiall body, of which your Maieſtie is the head, the aduiſes and counſailes, the requeſts and demonſtrances, which from the heart of your eſtate, as the

vitall ſpirits of it, are ſent to you, for to paſſe them thorow (that labyrinth of Rarity) your iudgement, where you refine them ſo with the diuers conſiderations of your prudency, that they proue neceſſary inſtruments of peace, the tranquillitie and proſperitie of all your ſubiects.
                  The entrance or beginning of a raigne is moſt commonly thornie and difficulty, yea dangerous and painefull; not onely full of cares, but alſo tedious and troubleſome: ſo that it had beene better for ſome kings to haue neuer raigned, or elſe to haue ended their dayes at their beginning. This moued the Philoſopher Solon to ſing theſe verſes to Mydas king of Phrygia, at the entrance of his Cities:
                  
                     Le puiſſant Dieu de tout Souuerain Maistre
                     Ne ſcauroit mieux les hommes ſecourir,
                     Qu'entre mortels ne les laiſſer point naistre,
                     Oueſtans nez, les faire tost mourir.
                  
                  But your Maieſtie (great King) who by the ſpeciall grace of God, and the prudence wherewith he hath endued you, farre aboue all other Princes, haue found the entrance of your raign ſpacious, delightfull and ſecure: and being grounded vpon the protection, enuironed with the bleſsings, & conducted by the prouidence of that Soueraigne diſpenſer of Scepters and Crownes; you haue hitherto raigned, to the admiration of all the world, PVISSANT AND MAGNIFICENT, RICH AND CONTENT, HAPPY AND GLORIOVS; and in all, perfect and accompliſht.
                  PVISSANT AND MAGNIFICENT indeede, ſith that (with full power and authoritie you raigne ouer ſo many puiſſant

Nations, which God hath ſubiected to your Maieſtie, vnder the homage and duety which you daily pay vnto him, as to the onely ſoueraigne King of kings.
                  RICH AND CONTENT, in poſſeſsing them peaceably, without oppoſition; extracting pleaſure of all that can be contributed for the glory of God, which you ſeeke for your owne contentment.
                  HAPPY AND GLORIOVS alſo, ſith that (by thoſe teſtimonies of loue which God giues you, and the thankeſgiuing which your Maieſty yeeldeth him) you haue vpon all occaſions free acceſſe to his incomprehenſible Maieſty, a familiar entertainment with his infinite goodneſſe; Heauen being alwayes open to your contemplations, and whatſoeuer your Maieſty can thinke moſt exquiſite, rare on earth, fauourable to your wiſhes, is all bent for your felicitie. Oh how happy is your ſacred Maieſtie! what mortall can apprehend it? how glorious! and who is he that can expreſſe it?
                  But behold, this is the chief point, ouer which my conſiderations cannot paſs without ſtaying; & yet reſt they neuer ſo little, they enter as it were into a labyrinth for a while. Gods graces and bleſsings fall moſt commonly into vngratefull hands, who diſpence thereof the more niggardly, by how much they receiue them aboundantly: and the moſt part of men erre ſo farre, that in ſtead of worſhipping in them the ſoueraigne power and prouidence of God, they ſtriue to excell him; nay, it lies meerly in their owne vnpowerfulneſſe, that they doe not ouerthrow his incomprehenſible Empire and Throne of glory. By meanes whereof, it falls out that it ofttimes chances to them, as to thoſe ſubalternal Deities, who for putting themſelues in Iupiters bedde, were by a boyſterous

winde, ſuddenly metamorphoſed into ſtrange ſhapes.
                  But your Highneſſe (mighty king) makes vſe of it, as fire of the perfume; you returne thoſe bleſsings to heauen againe through your praiſes and thankſgiuing: you diſperſe them about you by your royall liberality; for whoſoeuer hath the honour to approach neere your Diuinity, is enlightned with the beames of your diuine vertues. And as Salomon did build and (with the ſtones of mountaines, and Cedars of Libanus) erect Altars to God: ſo you make therof inſtruments, and materialls to prop the houſe of God.
                  Soueraigne authority vpon the people, meetes oftentimes with violent hearts, which makes him not vnlike the daily motion of the Sunne; ſo ſwift, that it is terrible; and ſo terrible, that it would conſume away if it ſhould laſt long: but your Maieſty knowes well how to temper your Authoritie by your Iuſtice, & likewiſe your will by your prudence; inſomuch that this firſt courſe is moderated by the ſecond, which is yearely, and runneth from Weſt to Eaſt by the oblique Zodiaque circle: by this ſweet, temperate and moderate courſe you order the ſeaſons in your Monarchy: you cauſe a delightſome Spring, that produceth diuerſity of flowers in aboundance; a rich and pleaſant Summer, which yeelds all kinde of fruites plentifully, by which you reward paines and labours, you reflect the deſires, you content the hopes of euery one, according to your wiſe diſpenſation. And as God is not contented meerely to bring forth his actions in the higheſt heauen; but by his Spirits adminiſtration, deſcends from that palace of glory, to the loweſt deep, runing & flying thorow all quarters of this Hemiſphere, to diſpoſe all things by his almighty powerfulneſſe: Your Highneſſe (prudent King) imitating

the proceedings of that incomprehenſible Monarch of Heauen and earth, which alone is a patterne to your ſoueraigne Maieſty, do not anchor your actions in that Imperiall Hauen of your glory, the kingdome of England, which, gouerned by the Soueraign authority of your Highneſſe, as her primum mobile, carries thoſe to others which are ioined to him, by the bands of one only power, Scotland and Ireland: but alſo the fame of your rare vertues ſpreads all ouer beyond the ſeas, your admirable prudency; & your immortal pen, the fruit of your deep learning, at which nations being amazed, admire with reuerence, ſo rare and accompliſht a Maieſty.
                  But what Eaſt wind driues my ſails into ſo wide an Ocean, carrying away my endeuours farre beyond the reach of my power? Stay, my thoughts; whither runne yee? Reſt contented. My curioſitie, what ſeekeſt thou? Silence, my tongue; what doſt thou ſay? Oh! would my skill, which is ſo ſmall, dare to aſpire to ſo high a taske, ſo weake and raſhly to think to penetrate thorow ſo bright a ſunne? ſo ſhort, and preſume to ſound his depth? Good King pardon theſe hardy glances of my ſpirit, enlightned with a diuine light, and animated by an extraordinary vertue. Thoſe which aſpect the beames of the Sunne, within the Sunne, thinke a long time after they behold ſtill a Sunne before their eyes; not being able, by withdrawing the ſenſe of the obiect, to draw the Idea of the ſpirit. Thus ſince I haue had the honour to ſee in ſo happy and glorious deeds your actions, in your actions your vertues, in your vertues your Maieſty, and your Maieſty in it ſelfe; theſe rare and exquiſite obiects, as ſo many Sunnes, haue ſo rauiſhed my ſenſes and eyes, that they ſeeme to ſee them alwaies preſent before them. Moreouer, the Idea which is remayning in my intellect, hath

brought them to ſuch extraordinary deſignes, that if my forces were correſpondent to my deſires, and my vnworthineſſe to the dignity of the ſubiect which animates me, I had alreadie proclaim'd your diuine perfections from one end of the earth to the other, yea from the earth to the heauens: and taking for my auditors ſo many bleſſed ſoules, which there gloriouſly inhabite, I ſhould haue recited to them, with the admirable actions of your incomparable vertues, theſe glorious and bleſſed deeds which iſſue thereof, and the moſt excellent glory which your Maieſtie thereby inherites; at leaſt, how in theſe laſt fearefull troubles of my ſad, afflicted, and ſorely deſolate countrey, which ſo farre oppreſt her, that loſing the ſight of her owne reaſon, ſhe had almoſt loſt her ſelfe in it ſelfe; or, as I may well ſay, ſpoyled her ſelfe with her owne ſtrength and defence. Your Piety (all-rare Prince) which is all-Iuſtice, caſt her compaſsionate eyes vpon the deplorable and moſt lamentable condition of her poore oppreſſed brood: your Iuſtice, which is all-Charity, lent her eare to their wofull & ſorrowfull complaints: your Charity, which is all-Prudence, opened her heart to their needy miſeries and extreme wants, and your Prudence (which hath alwayes the eyes, the eares, and the heart open at all times to ſuch poore afflicted wretches, who doe implore of your Maieſtie like pious actions) making at that time a charitable diſtribution, euer bound both publike and particulars to vow their heartie prayers to heauen for your health; & their true ſeruices to the world for the proſperitie, greatneſſe, pleaſure and contentment of your Maieſtie.
                  But the worthineſſe of the ſubiect, and my inſufficiency, hauing deterr'd me from ſo high an enterpriſe; I haue moderated

my deſignes, which aſpired ſo high, and placing them in a meane region, I rul'd my endeauours by my might, doing my beſt to finde out, as well for my owne ſatisfaction, as for the good of others, to whom I communicate as many conſolations for miſeries, and inſtructions of this wicked ages experience; in which we ſee regenerated what remained of workmen, inſtruments, materials and labours, to perfect the worke of this ages iniquity, the lees of ages paſt, which with his muddy wine troubles the braines, corrupts the manners, and debaucheth the nobleſt functions of manie: I haue deſtinated them for to ſeek out the growth, beginning, and progreſſe of this happy and magnificent reeſtabliſhment of Euangelicall truth and puritie, the firſt and ſoueraigne cauſe of your Maieſties glory, the ſecuritie of your eſtate, and proſperitie of your people, which in this flouriſhing Empire hath three crowns, of which your Ma: is the firſt Monarch, who receiue from Gods fauourable grace, by the hands of your religious prudence, ſo great a perfection, that it makes the whole work moſt wonderfull: a prop ſo ſolid, that when the raine is fallen, the ſtormy ſtreames and impetuous floods come againſt it, and when the windes haue raged ſtrongly, and blowne furiouſly at it, it could not be ſhaken, but ſtill remained firme, ſtrong, conſtant, and alwayes a flouriſhing pillar of ſecuritie.
                  And my deſignes haue ſo happily, though vnfortunately, ſucceeded, that when I had collected my ſenſes, and prepared my ſelfe for this Work, I found it ready done by one of your Ma: ſubiects, in the Latine Hiſtory, which he hath digeſted into yeares, deſcribing ſuch things as paſſed during the moſt glorious raigne of that heroick & inuincible Princeſſe, aboue her ſexe, full of magnanimitie, rare in Piety, admirable in her

counſailes, wonderfull in her courage, and bleſſed in all her enterpriſes, that incomparable Queene ELIZABETH, who in her time vndertooke to build the royall worke of this happy reeſtabliſhment, vpon the ground and ancient foundations laid by her anceſtors, for a time ſlackt and decayed; but after her Maieſty had gloriouſly raiſed it to the laſt Story, ſhe left the reſt vnto your moſt ſacred Maieſties care, to perfect, who hath truely brought it into that happy and magnificent eſtate now flouriſhing, hauing vtterly diſsipated the many errors and abominations, which here (before her raigne) abounded; as he, who bearing Armes after Ionathan, ſlew the Philiſtines, who fell dead before him.
                  Had I not regarded others, but my ſelfe onely, I had ſufficient matter to content my curioſitie (in enioying, with reſt & leiſure, the ſweet fruit of a labor meerly premeditated) without bringing it to this moſt tedious & no leſſe pennible, than difficult action. But as my naturall diſpoſition & reaſon poſſeſſe my inclinations, ſtill to practiſe, ſtudy and labour for the common good, though neuer ſo much preiudicial to my particular affaires; and as this Piety, of which I carefully ſought the myſtery (directly oppoſite to the myſterie of iniquitie riſen in theſe later times) permits me not to bury my talent in the earth, how ſmall, and of little value ſoeuer it be; and likewiſe the experience which I haue purchaſed in the diuerſe voyages, forraigne abodes, acceſſe, frequentation, and knowledge of this my peregrination, taught and aſſu
                        •
                     ed me, that this Hiſtory cannot but be welcome, kindly receiued, deerely cheriſhed, and preciouſly valued of an infinite number, as well your Maieſties ſubiects, as others, to whom their ignorance in the language, interdicted 
                        〈…〉
                      And as my

ſelfe in the vnderſtanding of it, found that it was in its nakedneſſe and ſimplicity, adorned with the moſt rare draught, moſt liuely and naturall colours, which can be found eyther in Art or Nature, and in the chiefeſt parts thereof, filled with exquiſite and ſolid inſtructions, which the beſt able can giue, the moſt curious wiſh, and the moſt ſubtle and ready witts apprehend; iudging, that the more it is knowne, the more glory comes thereby to God, the more ſeruice to your ſacred Maieſty, the more proſperitie to your bleſſed raigne, the more ſtrength to your powerfull ſtate, and the more terrour to all your foes: I haue done it in the French, my natiue language, which is now the only tongue that entertains the commerce of conceptions, amongſt the diuerſitie of nations, to ſhew to the world, that among an infinitie of memorable cauſes and things, remarkeable effects and ſucceſſe, at leaſt this magnificent peace and proſperitie, which begun to bud forth vnder the raigne of this moſt prudent, pious, magnanimous, truely Catholike and Chriſtian Empreſſe (who can neuer be by any duely praiſed, and to this day propagated & continued in this your Maieſties moſt bleſſed and peaceable gouernment, with ſo illuſtrious ſplendor, that though it be enuied of many, yet it is admired of all) proceedeth directly from the reeſtabliſhment of Chriſts true and pure ſeruice; and by ſo many, diuerſe, happy, glorious, and particular deeds moſt eminent, ariſing to this triumphant nation, is plainly manifeſted, that truly the only meanes well and happily to raigne, is ſincerely to ſerue God, who defends thoſe that defend his Faith, and honours them that honour him; For to ſuch as firſt ſeeke the tranquility and aduancement of his raigne, all things fall out anſwerable to their wiſhes; alſo that the ſeedes of iuſtice are

ſowed in the fields of peace, to be reaped by the peace-makers; that piety hath both the promiſe of the preſent and the future life, and that indeed it is the originall ſource from whence ſpring all other vertues.
                  Your ſacred Highneſſe (pious Monarch) hath already ſeene and peruſed the manuſcripts of this worke, which I preſented to your Maieſty ſome moneths agoe, to receiue from you, as from my Oracle, direction, whether I ſhould publiſh it or not. But ſince it hath pleaſed your moſt ſacred Ma: to honour theſe lines of mine with your iudicious approbation, I haue cauſed them to be printed, and vpon this expreſsiue caution, as earneſt of your gracious fauour, I aſſure my timorous deſires, that your Ma: will be pleaſed to ſee the ſame now in its perfect ſhape. Sith your Highneſſe daign'd to grace it with the benigne beames of your goodneſſe at its birth, I proſtrate it at your feete, as a praeludium of my induſtry, and the premiſes of my moſt humble ſeruice. And if I may be ſo happy, as to ſee this my labour once more approued, & my oblation graciouſly receiued of your Ma: I hope that my courage, animated with ſo good fortune, will performe a greater enterpriſe; and ſo great a fauour, rouſing vp and reuiuing my ſpirits, will make my labours ſo fruitfull, that I may be able in time to quit my ſelfe of my vowes and duties, & pay vnto your Ma: (with a better labour) more agreeable ſeruices, & to the world fairer fruits of my ſtudy.
                  I once thought to detaine it captiue vnder ſilence, fearing to aduenture ſo vnpoliſht a peece of worke among ſo many Worthies (who haue already ſettled their worth in the beleef of others) leſt they, by the ſhril ſound of their luſtre, might obſcure this worthleſſe worke: neyther would I haue expoſed

(but vnder your Maieſties protection) its fortune to the malignant malice of this age, its honeſt meaning and ſimplicitie, to the ſcoffes and wicked interpretation of helliſh ſlanderous tongues, and baſe worldlings, my contentment to the deſpiſings of the enemies of its originall, my talent and its gaine, to the pillage & ranſacking of thoſe, who (being partially intereſſed, hauing their eyes & iudgements blinded with affected intereſt) perhaps will diſcharge their paſsions herein, paying my labours with ingratitude, and my holieſt intentions with perſecutions. But ſith 'tis in a maner a tranſlatiō which repreſents faithfully the authors conceptions (ſo well approued, that it is a true proofe of his ingenious induſtry; which will ſufficiently content the moſt curious, cleare the Reader of doubt, and chiefly thoſe doubts conceiued by this works ill-willers) the worſt which can befall me, is to be a caution of my deeds and faults, and in neyther changing, adding, or diminiſhing, free & abſolue me from all blames: ſith Piety, which begot it, expreſſely commands me; and Charity, which brought it forth, graciouſly ſummons me to publiſh it, and to beſtow the profit & pleaſure thereof vpon my neighbours, to whom queſtionleſſe it will be moſt delightfull, pleaſant, and vſefull. And truly thoſe which it moſt concernes, haue had, of a long time, that power vpon my owne proper benefites, ſith my contentment conſiſts not in the praiſe of Printing, but to pleaſe and profite thereby the vertuous and gracious. The courſes of this worlds affaires, and the diuerſe inclinations of men, inſtruct me that it will be beneficiall to diuers, yea to the enemies hereof, who for not vnderſtanding truely the Latine hitherto, could not haue a true knowledge of its particularities. And for as much as your Maieſties gracious approbation

aſſures me of your royall protection, and God which hath preſerued it heretofore, doth warrant me from all misfortunes, I venture this aſſay of my luck, and publiſh this commerce of my talent, both vnder his Diuine prouidence, and your Maieſties leaue and authority, that it may therfore wander the world with ſecurity, and yeeld contenting pleaſures to thoſe who ſhall honour it with the gracious beams & fauorable aſpect of their eies: I doubt not but it may meet with peaceable mindes, fauourable ſpirits, pure hearts, and ſincere affections, who will reade it without paſsion, cenſure it (with meekeneſſe) without partialitie, to draw thereby the good which I intend them. May it therefore be acceptable to your moſt excellent, moſt Auguſt, and moſt Imperiall Maieſtie, to whom I dedicate and conſecrate it, vpon the Altar of my ſinceritie, in teſtimonie of my humble ſeruices, deuotions, and to purchaſe to my ſelfe the dignitie to be entitled,
                  
                     Your Majesties most humble, and moſt obedient ſeruant, P.D.B.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Illuſtrious, and Gracious:
                  
                  
                     
                        As there is nothing in this world in euery reſpect bleſſed, & in each particular happy; ſo there is no conſtancy in humane things eſpecially, and according to Saint Jerome, of the felicity of this world, whileſt we ſeeme to, poſſeſſe it, we part from it.
                        We ſee, and dayly experience proues vnto vs, what the condition and ſtate of this life, with the goods of it is, the motion of it being (as Saint Gregory ſaith) ſo ſwift, the poſſeſſion ſo vncertaine, as now we bee fatted in the fragrant poſture of proſperity, now pined and languiſhing, & on the bare commons of miſery, ſo that neither in weale or woe, there is any conſtancy, but all things are ſuddenly changed, and vary in a moment, ſo that we may repoſe more truſt in letters written in the wind or water, then in the happineſſe of this humane life.
                        According to Herodotus, it is as a circle of humane things, which by her turning ſuffers not a man to be alwaies fortunate and proſperous.
                        
                           
                              Ʋirgil exclaimes, Time alters all things: and Cicero tels vs, The courſe of this mutable life is vnconſtant, and all the fortunes of men are vaine, voluble and variable: a meere Euripus for ebbing and flowing of worldly goods: in a moment our mirth being turned to mourning, & our ſorrow into ſolace.
                        The Royall Houſe of the STVARTS, and the illuſtrious Family of the SACKVILES, not long ſince, had wofull experience. Of the Royal one, there being pulled from the boughes of it, two beautifull Roſes, to wit, the two Noble Dukes of Lenox, LODOVVICKE, and ESME, two rare Brothers, of moſt vertuous and laudable conuerſation. Of the other, a Noble branch was cut from that Tree of Honour; RICHARD, the moſt good and moſt Noble Earle of Dorſet, and Baron of Buckburſt, of happy and bleſſed memory: All which, in this yeere, within the ſpace of fiue moneths, piouſly and peaceably ſlept with Chriſt.
                     
                     LEARNED CICERO, that King of ORATORIE, vvho telleth vs, that the courſe of this mutable life is inconſtant, and the worldly fortunes of mortals truely vaine and variable, doth very eloquently commend Hiſtory, calling it The witneſſe of times; intimating, that wee could not attaine to the knowledge of ſeuerall actions, done at ſundry ſeaſons, but by her helpe, and how much the ſcience of Hiſtories profits, is proued, in regard they are the handmaids to Prudence and VViſdome, the which may be eaſily and truely purchaſed out of the deeds and examples of others, there written. How much it conduceth

to the good gouernement of Common-wealths to haue the examples of Councels before our eyes, it appeareth, in regard of the general reſpect the wiſeſt men haue had to them. Neither are true Hiſtories a little commodious for ſhunning of horrible alterations and calamities: for they recite the examples of all times, for the puniſhments of Seditions, Treaſons, and ſuch other abominable Crimes, the which eſcape not vnpuniſht, no not in this life: Out of which examples we may collect moſt wholſome inſtructions, for the good vſing of our both priuate & publike Offices, that ſuch Euils may be ſhunned in vs, which were puniſhed in others; the which is true wiſedome, according to that in the Prouerbe:
Other mens harmes are wiſe-mens armes.
                  
                  
                     
                     Plato ſaith, that a certaine Aeyptian Prieſt reprehended the Greekes, calling them Children, becauſe they had no knowledge in Antiquity, they had no skill in the paſſages of former times, they were indued with no ancient and graue Science: For euen as children, through the imbecillity of their capacity, and ſlendernes of their intellect, cannot diſcerne Vice from Vertue, good from bad: ſo they, whoſe mindes doe comprehend no knowledge of former times, deſerued not to be called men, in regard they exceeded not children in vnderſtanding.
                  For which cauſe, learned men in all Ages, haue not onely read diligently, but alſo written Hiſtories carefully, by which kind of writing, they haue purchaſed vnto themſelues a liuing name.
                  The ANNALS of this Heroicke Empreſſe, Queene ELIZABETH,

I confeſſe, I haue raſhly vndertaken to tranſlate: for the Subiect deſerued a farre better and more skilfull Pen-man, in regard I am a Stranger: Yet, to ſhew the deſire I haue to doe this Noble Nation ſeruice, (as bound in duety) I haue faithfully the beſt I was able, finiſhed my Enterprize, which I hope will be very beneficiall to all Honourable and impartiall Readers, as moſt vſeful, & fit for theſe preſent times.
                  And as therefore in my former Bookes, I haue choſen Patrons Honourable and beneficiall, by whoſe authority, fauour, and countenance they might more happily be publiſhed, ſo I could finde none more worthy the dedication of this Royall and true Hiſtory, then your Honours, whom I know, aboue all perſons, to tender moſt the bleſſed memory of this matchleſſe Queene, who in her life time ſo much

honoured and affected you, or your Noble Anceſtors and illuſtrious Predeceſſours, that they (for their deſerts and vertues) were by her Maieſtie graced with the moſt honourable Dignities, and higheſt places of Honour in this Kingdome: And alſo, becauſe your Honours bee addicted to Hiſtory, fauourable to humane arts, religiouſly deuoted, & piouſly affected. VVherefore I, in moſt ſubmiſsiue manner, requeſt your Honours to accept this worthy Oblation, with a mild aſpect, cheerfull countenance, and vſuall Clemency, from him who vnfainedly wiſhes to all your Honors in generall, and to each of them in particular, perfection of ioy and happines, as,
                  
                     The true Admirer, and humble obſeruer of your Graces, of your Honours, and of your Ʋertues: Abraham Darcie.
                  
               
               
                  
                  TO THE NOBLE AND VVEL-DISPOSED READER, indued with either of theſe rare Vertues, Iuſtice, Valour, Honour, Temperance, Magnanimity, Clemency, Truth, Liberality, Ciuility, and Courteſie; Health and happineſſe in IESVS CHRIST.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Of Iuſtice.
                                    IVSTICE is a conſtant and perpetuall will, to giue impartially euery one their iuſt due: the one is generall, diuided in politicke and oeconomicke: the other ſpeciall, diuided in diſtributiue and commutatiue; her ſubiectiue parts are to doe good acts, and fly from bad ones. It ſtands therefore much in need of Religion, Piety, Obſeruance, Obedience, Thankſgiuing, of expulſions of iniuries, alſo of Truth, Affability, Amity, and Liberality.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     ALl-Vertuous and impartiall Reader, here is preſented to thy iudicious view, the Tranſlation of a Maſter-piece of Hiſtory, in its owne originall Language truely moſt rare; which I (for the worthineſſe of the Subiect) wiſh with my ſoule, I could haue Engliſhed accordingly: But though

my poore ſtraine & weake capacity would not permit mee to equalize the eloquence and elegancie thereof, yet I can aſſure you,
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Of Ʋalour.
                                    VALOVR, which moderates feare, and Hardineſſe, is a Vertue which encourages one to blame or defend things iuſtly: her mediocrity is betwixt cowardneſſe and temerity. To her belong Magnanimity, Magnificency, Patience, and Perſeuerance.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                      I haue had a ſpeciall care, to doe it faithfully: And truely I muſt confeſſe ingenuouſly, doubting of my weakneſſe in ſo important and laborious a Worke, (becauſe I am a Stranger borne) I haue ſought the beſt helpe I could,
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Of True Honour.
                                    TRue HONOVR, which belongeth to Liberality and Iuſtice, is a Diuine Vertue, ſubiect neither to fortune nor force: it is that which all good and vertuous men aime at, & leuell their actions.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                      from thoſe that are holden good Schollers, for the perfecting of the Engliſh phraſe and ſtile, but it hath beene amended ſo contrary to my expectation, that I haue beene forced to peruſe it againe, beſt I was able, and as the time & Preſſe would giue me leaue.
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Of Temperance.
                                    TEMPERANCE is a morall Vertue, which moderates ſenſuall voluptuouſneſſe, and the couetouſneſſe thereof, and the dolour or griefe which is ſtill, as it were, linked with couetouſnes: ſhee mediates, or is a meane betweene Intemperancy and Stupidity: ſhee is perfected & made whole by Baſhfulneſſe & Honeſty: ſhee keepes vnder her, Abſtinēcy, Continency, Sobriety, and Chaſtity: To her do belong, Gentleneſſe, Clemency, Humility, Meekneſſe, and Moderation.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                      I beſeech you therefore to beare with it, not doubting, but (as I haue obſerued the inuention and meaning of my Author) it will affoord you ſufficient content: and if I may bee ſo happy, as to drawe gently the gracious aſpect of your eyes vpon theſe my worthleſſe Lines, I will euer be bound to your Noble fauour, for a milde and courteous Cenſure, in reſpecting the affection and deſire I haue, to imploy my time about that which may tend to immortalize the Honour and Glory of Englands dreaded, and vndaunted Nation;
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Of Magnanimity.
                                    MAGNANIMITY belonges to Force and Courage: it is a carefull vertue, and as it were a ſpur to purchaſe ſupreme honours; her mediocrity or mean is betweene Saperba and 
                                          ••••
                                       animity.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
in ſtriuing to make vulgar the heroicke

Acts, and Diuine Vertues of Albions beſt Queen, and the moſt Religious, learned and prudent Empreſſe that euer liued on earth: and Soueraigne Head, or ſupreme Ruler, next God,
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Of Clemency.
                                    CLEMENCY is a morall vertue, which moderating anger, quencheth in vs fre or choler, to produce pious actions: ſhe mediates, or is a meane betweene Cruelty, and too great Indulgency.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                      ouer this flouriſhing Kingdome, ayming thereby more at the conſeruation of her glorious memory, then at any thing elſe. I therefore doubt not but this worke will ſoone purchaſe your kind fauour, and louing commendation: and ſo I commit you to the Almighty, wiſhing you his bleſſings,
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Of Truth.
                                    TRVTH, by which, in all our actions & humane ſociety, we ſhould make things as they be: her meane or moderation is betweene Simulation and diſſimulation.
                                 
                                 
                                    Of Liberality.
                                    LIBERALITY is a Vertue truely, Noble, and moſt Diuine, appertayning to Iuſtice? This excellent Vertue moderating the deſire to abound in riches, rules the purchaſing of goods, and orders expences, to produce in vs, and bring forth to the world rare actions: it is a meane betweene Auarice and Prodigality.
                                 
                                 
                                    Of Ciuility.
                                    CIVILITY is alſo a morall vertue, which conſiſteth in vttering gracefully a ſpeech or diſcourſe in Company: by this Vertue, both praiſe and a good opinion is acquired: it is a meane betweene Mirth and Melancholy.
                                 
                                 
                                    Of Courteſie.
                                    COVRTESIE is a Vertue truely morall, by which we purchaſe loue, in ſhewing our ſelues gracious and officious to thoſe who ſtand in need of vs: it is a meane betweene ſubmiſsion and rudeneſſe or harſh diſpoſition.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
and the perfection of happines, I reſt,
                  
                     
                        A true deuoted to your Vertues, ABRAHAM DARCIE.
                  
               
               
                  
                  THE AVTHOR TO THE READER.
                  
                     
                        WILLIAM CECIL, Baron of Burghley, Lord High Treaſurer of England, (about 16. yeers past) opened vnto me (farre from my thought) firſt, ſome memorials of State of his own: afterwards, thoſe of the Kingdome; and from them, willed me to compile a Hiſtorie of Q. Elizabeths Raigne from the beginning. I know not to what intent, vnleſſe whileſt he prouiding for the propagation of the Queenes honour, meant to take a taſte of my abilitie in this kind. I obeyed, and indeed not vnwillingly, leſt I ſhould be thought to haue been wanting to the memory of the beſt Princeſſe, his expectation, and truth it ſelfe; which to me equals them both. For ſhee being eſcaped, and hauing hidden herſelfe, my hope is to finde her there, or no where.
                  But in the firſt entrie, a moſt intricate difficultie deterred me: I fell vpon whole maſſes of writings, & inſtruments of all kinds, well enough digeſted for the computation of the times, but very confuſed for varietie of argument; in examining whereof, I was couered with duſt and ſweat. I diligently collected together fit matter, harder to find out than I expected: but he dying, mine induſtrie ſlackt. And after that, that incomparable Princeſſe had rendred her diuine ſoule to heauen, I waited a while with a greedy expectation, not only who, but if ſome one, of ſo great a number of learned men, who by her bounty abound in riches & leaſure, would repay this due and deſerued thanks. But when I had certainly obſerued, that weightier affaires hindred ſome that were beſt able to performe it; others, (I know not for what cauſes) with ſpecious excuſes refuſed it: Afterwards, I eftſoones betook myſelf to my interrupted ſtudy, & embraced it more vehemently than before. I ſought all manner of helps on euery ſide, I ſedulouſ
                        ••
                      volued & reuolued Characters of Kings & Peers, Letters, Conſultations held at the Councell-Table; I ran through the inſtructions & letters of Ambaſſadors, & likewiſe the Records & Iournals of Parliaments, Acts & Statuts, & read ouer al Proclamatiōs. For moſt of which (as I ought) I hold my ſelf chiefly bound to ſir R: Cotton, kt. Baronet, who with great expence, & happy labor, hath gatherd together moſt choice variety of Hiſtories & Antiquity: for at his torch, he willingly ſufferd me to light my taper. So as (Reader) if in this I haue don any thing pleaſing vnto thee or profitable, thou oweſt him the merited thanks.
                  I haue alſo made ſearch throughout mine own Cabinets; & although I am an admirer of venerable antiquitie, I am not iniurious to later things: I haue ſeen & obſerued much, & haue from elder men than my ſelfe, worthy of beliefe (who were preſent when theſe were acted, & ſtudious on both ſides, in this diuiſion of

Religion) receiued them, & haue weighed thē in the ballance of my Iudgment, ſuch as it is leſt by a deceiueable credulity I ſhould incline towards thoſe which are falſe. For the ſtudy of TRVTH, as it hath been the only ſpur to prick me forward to this Worke; ſo hath it beene mine only Scope. To detract from Hiſtorie, is nothing elſe than to pluck out the eies of a beautifull creature, and for a medicinable potion, to offer poiſon to the Readers vnderſtanding.
                  All thoſe things which are wont to hinder the light of Truth, I purpoſely auoided, and as much as in me lay, haue vncaſed IGNORANCE & FALSHOOD, by the light of a Witneſſe pure & neat, drawn from theſe VNSKILFVLNESSE & her deriuatiues, DOVBT & FALSITY haue I diſpelled, as well as I could, by the ſplendor of an incorrupt faith, out of thoſe monuments aboue al exception; & it may be, from them haue gotten no leſſe knowledge of thoſe things, than they which haue had long & great imployment in the Common-wealth. I haue auoided PREIVDICE, as an abuſer of the Iudgement, which ſo infects the mind in affairs of Religion and the Reipublique; that like them that haue ſore eyes, they ſee nothing cleerly. I haue not feared DANGER, no not from them, who by their preſent power thinke the memorie of the ſucceeding Age may be extinguiſhed. And let them remember, that as many as haue beene iniurious to Writers, louers of the Truth, haue procured to themſelues diſhonour; to them glorie.
                  The hope of a LITTLE GAINE miſſe-led me not; To make the dignitie of Hiſtorie mercenarie, I (who haue alwaies contented my ſelfe with a meane fortune) haue held ſordid and ſeruile. I haue left no place to the SVSPICION OF FAVOVR OR PRIVATE GRVDGES; for of theſe I am to write of Scarce two were known to me by any benefit: by iniury, not one; that I ſhould be reckoned among the PARTIAL or the OFFENDED. Thoſe which are aliue, I haue ſcarſe touched at. Inueighing againſt the enemies of my Countrie, I haue held it ridiculous, to hunt after the name of a good Patriot, with the aſperſion of an ill Hiſtorian. Theſe things haue I been carefull of, that (as POLYBIVS commands) I might SACRIFICE ONLY TO TRVTH. Neither ſhall any man, I hope, finde wanting in me, that ingenious liberty (ioyned with modeſtie) of ſpeech, worthy of an Historian: That, which vnder a falſe diſguiſe ioyned with the poiſon of obtrectation perſonates libertie, and is ſo pleaſing to euery eare, I deteſt from my heart. Things MANIFEST, I haue not concealed, things DOVBTFVL I haue tenderly interpreted: the more ABSTRVSE, I haue not been too inquiſitiue of; The vnſearchable intents of Princes (ſaith that Prince of Hiſtorie) and what they out of reaſons of State pretend, is not fit to inquire; & being doubtfull, not to be explored. And with HALYCARNASS AEVS, I am iuſtly angry which the ignorant critiques, who go about to know or find out more than is iuſtly permitted. As to the reſt, although I know, that matters militarie and politique are

the proper ſubiects of an Hiſtorian, yet I neither could nor ought to omit Eccleſiaſticall affaires (for betwixt Religion and policy there can be no diuorce. But ſeeing the Writer of the Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtorie, may lawfully challenge theſe things, as proper to himſelf, I haue not touched at them otherwiſe than as it were with a light and curſory hand; whereas it is the Law and dignitie of an Hiſtorian, to run through the moſt eminent actions, and not to dwell vpon ſmall ones: I haue not therefore laboured in them, yet there are paſſages of leſſe cōſequence, which may concern another profeſſor, though not him. I haue not omitted any circumſtances, by which, not only the euents of things, but their reaſons alſo and cauſes may be known; That of POLYBIVS pleaſeth me exceedingly, If you take out of Hiſtory, WHY, HOVV, TO WHAT END, and WHAT IS DONE▪
                      and whether the Actions anſwer the intents, that that remaines, is rather a mocking than an inſtruction; And for the preſent may pleaſe, but will neuer profit Poſteritie; I haue not betrayed my IVDGEMENT to affection for writing with an impartiall minde, I haue rather deſired to finde out the affections of other men. I haue inſerted little of mine own, treating of matters in another kind, it being a controuerted point, whether or no it be lawfull for an Hiſtorian to doe it. Let euery one abound in his owne ſenſe: I haue thruſt in no occaſions, but ſuch as were truly ſpoken; or thoſe reduced to fewer words: much leſſe haue I fained any. I haue ſeldome vſed Sentences, nor beautified my diſcourſes with thoſe obſeruatiōs which the Greeks aptly call 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , my intent being as it were inſenſibly to inſtruct the minde. I haue ſhunned digreſsions; I haue vſed formall words; I haue not neglected diſcriptions of places, pedigrees, nor Chronologies, following, as neere as is poſsible, the order of the Times; beginning the yeare (as our Chronologers were wont) from the firſt of IANVARY.
                  
                  I haue inſcribed my diſcourſes with the name of ANNALS, becauſe I place euery paſſage in his owne yeare; and becauſe TACITVS directs vs, that great & illuſtrious Actions ſhould be committed to Annals; whoſe principall office it is to take care, that Vertue be not obſcured, and by the relation of euill words or deeds, to propoſe the feare of infamie, with poſteritie. And that ſterile and contracted kind of writing (ſuch as mine is) is for Annals, of all other, moſt fit.
                  With theſe beginnings I applyed my mind to write, with this reſolutiō I proceeded, & intended to beſtow the reſt of my time and induſtrie, in the beautifying poliſhing, and exornation of theſe Annals: and then by my laſt Will, to bequeath them to my honorable friend IAMES AVGVSTVS THVANVS, who hath begun a Hiſtorie of his owne Times, with great truth and modeſtie; leſt that, as ſtrangers are wont, he, a man moſt deare vnto me, ſhould like a traueller in a forraine Countrie, be ignorant of our affaires. But this reſolution I was forced

(I know not by what fate) to alter; for a great part being ſent vnto him, ſome few years paſt, whē they were like rough-drawn pictures ſcarcely begun, deformed with blots & imperfect places, ſwarming with errors & patches thrust in, as they fell from a haſty pen, & ill vſed by Tranſcribers: Out of theſe he took & as it were inter-weaued ſome things into the eleuenth and twelfth Tomes of his Hiſtorie, hauing firſt poliſhed them by adding, altering, ſubſtracting, but all with good iudgement (according to that order of the worke which he propoſed to himſelfe) (for he intended a vniuerſall Hiſtorie of his owne Time) ſelecting ſome few things concerning ENGLAND and IRELAND, ommitting many things not only fit, but peraduenture neceſſary for vs to know, and I had heard that beyond the Seas, the Hiſtorie of Engliſh affaires was much (and not without reproach) deſired; I therefore betook me to my intermitted ſtudy, read all ouer againe, corrected, added diuers things, refined the eloquution, yet without affectation; for it ſufficeth me, if I may place this Booke like a picture in water colours, vnskilfully done, in a commodious light.
                  But when all was done, I was much perplext & irreſolute, whether I ſhould publiſh it or not. But CENSVRES, PREIVDICE, HATRED, OBTRECTATION, which I foreſaw to diſplay their colors, and bid battell againſt me, haue not ſo much deterred me, as the deſire of TRVTH, the loue of MY COVNTRY, and the memory of that PRINCESSE, (which deſerues to be deare and ſacred amongſt Engliſh men) did excite me against thoſe, who ſhaking off their allegeance towards their Prince and Country, did not ceaſe beyond the Seas, to wound aſwel the Honor of the one, as the glory of the other, by ſcandalous libels, conceiued by the malice of their own hearts; & now, (which they ſticke not to confeſſe) are about to publiſh a Book to remain to poſteritie, as a monument of their wickedneſſe. As for me, I deſire nothing more, than to be like my ſelf, & they like themſelues. Succeeding ages will giue to euery one their deſerued Honor. I confeſſe with ſorrow, that I haue not done ſo wel, as the height of the argumēt requires; but what I could, I haue done willingly. To my ſelfe, as in other writings, ſo neither in theſe, haue I giuen ſatisfaction. But I ſhall hold it more than ſufficient, if out of an earneſt deſire to conſerue the memorie of things, of truth in relating them, & inſtructing mens minds with that which is wiſe and honeſt, I ſhall be ranked only amongst the lowest writers of great things:
                  
                     WHATSOEVER IT IS, AT THE ALTAR OF TRVTH, I Dedicate, and Conſecrate it
TO GOD,
MY COVNTRIE,
AND POSTERITIE.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     ❧TO THE TRVE MIRROR AND PATTERNE OF PRINCES, THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY, CHARLES PRINCE OF GREAT BRITAINNE, &c.
                  
                     SIR,
                  
                  
                     I COVLD not but shelter this Hiſtorie vnder your moſt renowned Name: for to whom can I commit the Story of Her, who whilſt shee liued, was the ioy of England, the terror and admiration of the VVorld,

but to your HIGHNESSE, who is the Fame and Honour of this ſpacious hemiſphere & Great Britaines both hope & ſolace, by your princely valour & conſtant vertues, no leſſe dreaded and admired abroad than feared & beloued at home.
                  
                     A true admirer & humble Obſeruer of your diuine worth A. Darcie.
                  
               
               
                  
                  To the Highly Borne Princeſſe, Frances Ducheſſe Dowager of Richmond & Lenox.
                  
                  This Noble Princeſſe's Father was Thomas Lord Howard, created Viſcount Bindon, by Queen Elizabeth, the firſt yeare of her raigne, ſecond ſon to Thomas Duke of Norfolke.
                  
                  
                     AND To the noble Prince, her Coſin, Thomas Earle of Arundell & Surrey, Earle Marſhall of England.
                     This Duke of Norfolke, the Ducheſſe of Richmond and Lenox's Grandfather, had two wiues; the firſt, was the noble Princeſſe Anne, Daughter to King Edward the fourth; by which he had iſſue, a young Prince, who died young: The other was the Lady Elizabeth, daughter to Edward Stafford, Duke of Buckingham, by whom he had iſſue, the Lord Henry H
                              •
                           ward, whoſe ſon ſucceeded to the Dukedome of Norfolk (which Dukes eldeſt ſon, Philip Howard was by Queen ELizabeth al
                           •
                        o created, and ſummoned in Parliament where he ſate as Earl of Arundel, being the primary Earledome of England, in the right of his Mother, ſole daughter and heire to Henry Fitz-Allen, Earle of Arundell. He was this Noble Earles Father) Thomas Viſcont Bindon, and a Daughter, who was Ducheſſe of Richmond and Somerſet, Counteſſe of Nottingham, Aunt to the now Ducheſſe of Richmond and Lenox: This ſaid Duke of Norfolke, after a long ſickneſſe, tooke his iourney peaceably to Heauen, at his Palace in Kinninghall in Norfolke, the firſt yeare of Queene Mary.
                     
                  
                  
                     AND To the Illuſtrious fauourers of Vertue, true mirrors of Honour, and exact patternes of Nobilitie
                     
                        William Earle of Hartford, &c, AND To the Noble Lady, Frances his Princely Counteſſe.
                        This Earles grandfather Lord Edward Seimor, ſon to Edw. Duke of Somerſet, was reſtored to his honours & patrimonie by Queene Elizabeth, who created him Earle of Hartford, and Baron of Beauchamp, in the Tower of London, the ſecond yeare of her raigne. This noble Counteſſe's grandfather, alſo was created Earle of Eſſex, &c. by Qu. Elizabeth, the 14. of her raigne, he died in Ireland, 1575. and was magnificently buried at Carmarden in Wales, where he was borne.
                     
                     
                        Edward Earle of Dorſet, Baron of Buckhurſt. AND To his noble ſiſters, the lady Anne Beauchamp, And the Lady Cecilia Compton.
                        
                        This illuſtrious Earle and honourable Ladies grandfather, was a moſt prudent and learned man, for his heroick deſerts and Princely deſcent from an ancient and true noble blood, was created by Q. Elizabeth, Baron of Buckhurſt, next by her Maieſtie enſtalled in the royall order of the Garter, one of her intimate priuy Counſellors, & Lord High Treaſurer of England, &c.
                        Chancellor of the Vniuerſity of Oxford. Hee died in White-hall 1608.
                     
                     
                        Theophilus, Lord CLINTON, Earle of LINCOLN.
                        
                           Anno 1572. Edward Lord Clinton, Lord high Treaſurer of England, was created Earle of Lincolne, by Queene Elizabeth, for his Noble merits, and faithfull ſeruice to his Soueraigne Lady. The ſame day her Maieſty created Sir Walter Deureux, Earle of Eſſex; He died the eighth day of Ianuary, Anno 1585. and was with great ſolemnitie buried at Windſor
                        
                        To this right Honorable Lord, Theophilus Earle of Lincolne, he was great Grand-father.
                     
                     
                        Thomas Earle of Suffolke, knight of the moſt honorable Order of the Garter.
                        This worthy Earle (ſecond ſonne to Thomas Howard, the laſt Duke of Norfolke) by his martiall valour, was Princely vertue, and by Queene Elizabeth created Lord Howard of Walden, and tooke place in the high Court of Parliament, among the Peeres, as Baron of Walden. And Q. Elizabeth, partly to requite his warlike exploits, (for ſhee imployd him in ſundry Sea-ſeruices, to his immortall honour and commendation) made him Knight of the Garter.
                     
                     
                        Charles Earle of Notingham, Baron of Effingham.
                        
                           Anno 1597, The 23. of Octob. the Lord Charles Howard, for his Princely deſert, and illuſtrious birth, was created by Q. Elizabeth, Earle of Nothingham: Likewiſe for his worthy ſeruices done to his Prince and Countrie, in generouſly repelling Spaines inuincible Nauy of 88, being Lord High Admirall; As alſo for his Martiall valiancy, in the ſacking of Cadiz, with the Earle of Eſſex: her Maieſtie honour'd him with the Gartet, the nobleſt order of Knighthood.
                     
                     
                        Iohn Baron of Elſemere Ʋiſcont Brackley, Earle of Bridge-water.
                        This Noble Earles Father, Sir Thomas Egerton, Viſcont Brackley Baron of Elſemere, Lord high Chancellour of England, was a Noble man of admirable parts, excellency well ſeene in the Lawes of England, induſtrious in State affaires, which mou'd Q. Elizabeth to chooſe him her Maieſtie Solicitor, Anno 1583. And for his other deſerts, Anno 1593, ſhe Knighted him; Next ſhe made him Maſter of the Rolls; and finally, Lord Keeper of the great Seale of England, Anno 1594.
                     
                     
                        
                        William, Earle of Salisbury, &c. And William Earle of Exceſter, &c.
                        Sir William Cecil, for his graue wiſedome, and excellent vertues, was by Q. Elizabeth created Baron of Burghley, he was alſo one of her Maieſties Priuy Councell, Lord High Treaſurer, and Chancellor of Cambridge's Vniuerſitie. He was theſe two Noble Earles gra
                              ••
                            father: both iſſued of two of his Sonnes.
                     
                     
                        William Baron of Compton, Earle of Northampton.
                        This noble Earles grandfather, Sir William Compton, wa
                              •
                            for his worthineſſe, created Baron Compton by Queene Elizabeth.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     To the no leſſe Illuſtrious than Noble,
                     
                        Henry Lord Cary, Baron of Hunſdon, Viſcont Rochford. AND The Noble Lady, Elizabeth Barkeley, now married to Sir Thomas Chamberlaine.
                        
                           HENRY CARY, Lord Chamberlain to Queen Elizabeth. His couſin (for he was the ſonne of William Carie, Eſquire to the body of King Henry the eight, by the Lady Mary Bullen, his wife, ſiſter to Queene Anne Bullen, the mother of Q
                              •
                           eene Elizabeth); this Henry was by Queene Elizabeth, created Lord Carie, Baron of Hunſdon: Alſo, by her Maieſtie, made Knight of the Garter; one of the Lords of her Priuie Councell, and gouernour of Barwicke. To this Noble Lord Henry, Viſcont Rochford, hee was Grandfather; and this Illuſtrious Lady Barkley, was his only daughter and heire.
                     
                     
                        Rob. Lord Willoughby of Eresby, Baron of Perke. AND Henry West, Baron de la Warre.
                        
                           Peregrin
                                 •
                              , the Father to this generous Lo: Willoughby, was reſtored in his anceſtors Honors by Qu. Elizabeth, who created him Baron Willoughby of Ereſ
                              •
                           y, the 14. of her ra
                              •
                           gn 1582. (before thee ſent him with the Garter to the King of Denmarke) being the ſon of the Ducheſſe of Suffolke, ſole daughter and heire to the Lo: Willoughby of Eresby.
                        Alſo, Sir William Weſt (This Lord de la Warr's grand Sire) was created Baron de la Warre by Queene Elizabeth, being Nephew to Thomas Weſt, Lord de la Warre, and knight of the Garter, in King Henry the eight's daies; who died without iſſue, Anno 1570.
                     
                     
                        IOHN POVLET, Lord Saint Iohn Baron of Baſing, heire apparant to the Lord Marqueſſe of Wincheſter, &c.
                        
                           Anno 1594. WILLIAM POƲLET, this Noble Lord's Grandfather, was (in the time of his Father, IOHN Lord Marqueſſe of Wincheſter) by Queene ELIZABETH made a Petre of England, and ſate in that High Court of Parliament, among the Barons and Peeres of the Realme, as Baron Saint Iohn of Baſing. He died the firſt day of Ianuary 1598. and was ſumptuouſly buried by his predeceſſours, at Baſing.
                        
                     
                     
                        The truly Pious Lady Frances Wray, Counteſſe dowager of Warwicke. AND The Lady Elizabeth, daughter, and ſole heire to Francis, Lord Norice, late Earle of Barkſhire Viſcount Thame, and Baron of Ricot; wife to the right Noble & worthy, Edward Wray, Eſqu.
                        
                        Sir Chriſtopher Wray, for his great deſerts, & the noble family, from whence hee was deriued, was by Qu Elizabeth Knighted; and for his rare wiſedome, being expert in the Law, was aduanced (to his great Praiſe, and immortall fame) to diuers Honourable dignities in this Kingdome: Firſt, he was made Lord Chiefe Iuſtice of England, and then Lord Keeper of the Priuy Seale. He was one of her Maieſties moſt prudent Counſellours, and Father to this Religious Counteſſe, Dowager of Warwick: Alſo Grandfather to theſe Noble Brothers, Sir Iohn Wray, Knight; Edward Wray, and Nathanaell Wray, Eſquires. Anno 1572. Sir Henry Norrice, was for his Noble worth, created by Queene Elizabeth, Baron Norrice of Ricot. He was this Noble Ladie ELIZABETH WRAY her Grandfather.
                     
                     
                        DVDLEY, Lord North, Baron of Kirtling, AND To the vertuous Lady, his only Siſter, the Lady Mary. Conningsby.
                        
                           Anno 1594. Roger Lord North, Baron of the ancient Baronry of Kirtling; for his Vertues and Prudency, was in gracious fauour neare Q. Elizabeth, who reſpecting him much, made vſe of his faithfull ſeruices, in diuers honourable affaires of importance. Anno 1574. he was, by her Maieſtie, ſent Ambaſſadour Extraordinary into France, to giue King Henry the third good Counſell, and to condole with his Maieſtie, after the death of K. Charles the ninth. And although this Noble-man, was not created Baron by Q. Elizabeth, yet I haue erected theſe lines to his noble and immortall memory, for his Vertues ſake▪ and for the duty and humble ſeruice which I muſt euer owe to his illuſtrious Grand-Children; The Lord North, Sir Iohn North, Captaine Roger North, Gilbert North, and the noble Lady Conningsby.
                        
                     
                     
                        To the Honour of the right Worſhipfull Sir Arthur Capell, & his noble Sons▪ AND The Nobly deſcēded Ralph Sadleir, Eſquire; of Standen in Hertfordſhire:
                        
                        This worthy Knight was the laſt which her Maieſty Knighted.
                        Alſo, this noble Eſquires Father, Sir Thomas Sadleir, ſon to Sir Ralph. Sadleir, was the laſt knight banneret, of England, Chancellour of the Duchy of Lancaſter, and Priuy Counſellor▪ to King Henry the eight, Edward the ſixt, Queen Mary, and Queene Elizabeth.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  A PREPARATION AND INTRODVCTION TO THE HISTORY.
                  
                     THE All-glorious,
                        Qu. Elizabeths extraction by the Fathers ſide.
                      All-vertuous, incomparable, inuict, and matchleſſe Patterne of Princes, the Glory, Honour, and mirror of Woman kind, the Admiration of our Age, ELIZABETH, Queene of England, was by the Fathers ſide truely Royall, being Daughter to HENRY the Eighth, Grand-child to HENRY the Seuenth, and great Grand child to EDVVARD the Fourth: of the Mothers ſide indeed vnequall,

yet nobly deſcended, and had many great Alliances ſpred through England and Ireland. Her great-Grandfather was Iefferay of Bolene, deſcended from the famous Houſe of Norfolke, who, in the yeere 1457. was Maior of London, and was then graced with the Dignitie of Knighthood: a man of much integrity, and of ſuch reputation, that Thomas, Baron of Hoo and Haſtings, Knight of the Order of S. George, gaue him his daughter and heire to wife: he was of ſo great meanes, that he married his Daughters into the famous houſes of the Chenies, Heidons, and Forteſcues: he left a great Patrimonie to his ſonnes; and by Will gaue a thouſand pounds ſterling to the poore of London, and two hundred to the poore of Norfolke: Hee had to Sonne, William Bolene, who was made one of the eighteene ſelected Knights of the Bath, at the inauguration of Richard the Third. To whom, Tho. Earle of Ormond (who was had in ſo great eſtimation with the Kings of England, that hee only of all the Peeres of Ireland, had place and voice in the Parliament, and before the Barons of England) gaue him his Daughter and Coheire to wife; he had by her (beſides the Daughters which he married to Shelton, Caltrop, Chaire, and Sackuil, beeing very rich, and of renowned Race) Tho. Bolene, who beeing but a Youth, Thomas Howard, then Earle of Surrey, and afterwards Duke of Norfolke, a famous

Warrier, choſe him to bee his Sonne in Lawe, and gaue him his Daughter Elizabeth to wife. HENRY the Eighth employed him in two honourable Embaſſies, after hauing made him Treaſurour of his Houſe, Knight of the Order of Saint George, and Vicount Rochford, afterwards Earle of Wilton and Ormond, and Lord Priuie Seale. He,
                        The birth of the Lady Anne Bolene.
                      amongſt other Children, had Anne Bolene, who beeing ſent in her tender yeeres into France, was ſeruant to Mary of England, Wife to Lewis the 12. afterwards to Claudia of Brittaine, wife to Francis the Firſt; and after her death, to Mary of Alanſon, who from her cradle, was a ſpeciall fauourour of the Proteſtants Religion in France. Afterwards, ſhe being returned into England, and entertained to be one of the Queenes Maids of Honour, in the twentieth yeere of her age, King HENRIE being eight and thirtie, fell vehemently in loue with her, for the modeſt behauiour which accompanyed her beauty, and the French iollity which ſeaſoned her modeſty: but not being able to ouercome her chaſtity, he ſought to haue her to wife, in hope to haue a Linage by her.
                  Now before, (to take this matter a little more deepely) after he had liued ſeuenteene yeeres with Katherine his wife, who was of a pious conuerſation, and of the Spaniſh grauitie, but ſubiect to aborſements, that of all her Children, ſhee brought

foorth none liuing, but MARIE, he begunne to diſtaſte her, by the cunning practice of Cardinall Wolſey,
                     
                        The King fals in loue with Anne of Bolone.
                      who was then raiſed to the higheſt degree of power and authority about the King, but in ſome fort ouer ſwayed by his owne affections: For being diſpleaſed with Charles, the fifth Emperour, Nephew to Katherine, becauſe he had denyed him the Arch-biſhopricke of Toledo, and then aſpiring to the Papaſie, his hatred to him, and his loue ſo affectionately carried toward the French King; he ſo wrought, that he purpoſed a wife for Henry out of France. The King beeing prone to his pleaſures, prepared this ſcruple of conſcience,
                        The reaſon why he puts away his wife.
                      That the marriage which he had contracted with Katherine, who before had beene wife to his brother Arthur, was forbidden by the Diuine Lawe, although Pope Iulius the ſecond had giuen a Diſpenſation for it. Afterwards he did inculcate into the Kings eares, how greatly he had offended God in marrying Katherine, and how grieuous a ſin he ſhould wallow in if hee kept her: that hee had incurred the Sentence of Excommunication; that God had powred his wrath vpon ſo vnlawfull a Marriage, not ſuffering a Male to liue, that was begotten of her, and that if there were not a lawfull Heire aſsigned to the Kingdome, no other thing was to be expected, but that thoſe mortall and cruell wars which had beene but lately lul'd aſleepe, ſhould be awakened

with new ſlaughters of his people; and therefore that he ought, for the taking away of all ſcruple from his conſcience, to repudiate her, and that by aſſuring himſelfe of a Succeſſor in a lawfull line, he ſhould prouide for the ſafety of his ſoule (which and likewiſe yeeres had been polluted with inceſt) for ſo many of his Kingdome.
                  Theſe reaſons cauſed the King to entreate Pope Clement the Seuenth, to depute ſome to take knowdedge of this cauſe, and either to confirme the Diſpenſation by authority of holy Scriptures, or abſolue him of the Sentence of Excommunication, and to declare this marriage to be of no force, and that it might be lawfull for him to marry any other woman whom he ſhould thinke fit, notwithſtanding any Canon to the contrary. Hereupon the Pope delegates Cardinall Wolſey, and the Cardinall of Campepe, to whom he ſecretly gaue a Bull to this effect, that he approued of the Kings vowes, and granted his requeſts ſo farre as God would giue him leaue, if the marriage which he had contracted with Katherine ſhould be found vnlawfull, and ſo declared to be. But this Bull was to bee conceal'd or publiſht according to the ſucceſſe of the Emperours Affaires in Italy. Then theſe queſtions begun to be moued euery where, whether it were lawfull for a man to take his brothers wife? or, it beeing prohibited by the Diuine Law, whether the Popes

Diſpenſation could make it lawfull, or no? And when many Academies of Chriſtendome, and the moſt learned men had giuen their opinions, and reſolued that ſuch a Marriage was repugnant to the Laws both of the Old and New Teſtament, howſoeuer the Popes Diſpenſation might legitimate it. The King became more paſſionatly amorous of the Lady Anne of Bolene then euer, and the Cardinall (repenting himſelfe too late of what hee had begun) grew diſcontented, and wrought ſo vnder hand,
                        The King entreats the Pope for expedition.
                      that the Pope by his pontificall authority refuſed to confirme the opinions of the Academies, and by delayes after delayes, the buſines was drawn into length, both at Rome & in England. The Cardinall feared Bolene, who for the loue that ſhee bore to the Euangelicall Doctrine, hated his proud and inſolent carriage; and the Pope feared the Emperour, who at that time was powerfull in Italy, who maintained, to his vtmoſt power, the cauſe of Katherine his Aunt: neither would the Pope prouoke HENRY, becauſe hee had lately employed both his paines and pence, to redeeme him from the Emperours men, who kept him priſoner. HENRIE boyling in choler for this refuſall (yet diſſembling it) both by Ambaſſadours and Letters, continually ſolicited,
                        The Prelates and Peeres doe the like.
                      and humbly prayed the Pope, (and after him the Prelates and Peeres of England, by requeſt ſigned with their owne hands, which

they cauſed to be carried and preſented at his feete) to confirme by his Apoſtolicall Authority, what the two Academies of England, of Paris, and many others, and very learned and moſt entire men, both within and without the Realme, had ſet down for a truth, and were ready to mainiaine it, both by word and writing: repreſenting vnto him, that it would be a remarkeable vnhappines, if He ſhould not obtaine this fauour from the Apoſtolicall Sea, He beeing the onely man that had employed his Sword, his Pen, his word and power, to defend the authority of the Pope, and reſiſting many that ſtroue againſt it, ſhould bee the onely man to bee denyed the benefit of it; and therefore they coniured him to grant it, for feare that inteſtine warres ſhould riſe for the right of Succeſſion.
                  Notwithſtanding, the Clergie fearing leſt the Pope ſhould proſcribe the Kingdome, and excommunicate the King, by ſeuerall Letters put him in mind of the ſad diſcord which had been betweene Pope Alexander the Third, and Henry the ſecond, King of England, and repreſenting vnto him many reaſons of importance, infinitely beſought him, almoſt in the very ſame words that Gilbert, Biſhop of London did at the ſame time, (viz.)
WEe moſt humbly beſeech you, to ſhut vp for a time your burning zeale within the

bounds of modeſtie, leſt by interdicting the Kingdome, or cuting off the King from the communion of the Catholike Church, you cauſe the ruine of many particular Churches, and irreuokeably turne from your obedience both the King and infinite numbers with him. Cutting off brings deſpaire, whereas dreſsing the wound often cureth. And therfore, if there be a wound, it is more expedient, if it may bee your pleaſure, to labour preſently to cure it, leſt by cutting off a moſt noble member of the Church of God, you trouble beyond expreſsion, as matters now ſtand. The Blood-Royall cannot be ouercome till it hath ouercome, and is not aſhamed to yeeld after it hath conquered. Hee muſt be wonne with meekenes, and ouer-ruled with admonitions and patience. What is it to haue loſt ſome temporall things by patience, or by a continuall patience to loſe more, as the times now are? Whether is Seuerity to bee withdrawne, when ruine and ſlaughter threaten a People? To caſt many goods into the ſea, when the prouoked waues with the confuſion of hideous ſurges threaten a Ship-wrack?
                  
                  But the Pope and Cardinals could not endure that the Papall authority ſhould be queſtioned in matter of Diſpenſation, and all maner of contempt for the ſpace of fiue yeeres little more or leſſe, neglected

to lend an eare thereto,
                        The King ſeeing himſelfe contemned, renounceth the Pope.
                      but were of opinion that the King ought to be cited to Rome: Inſomuch, that this Prince, who was full of courage, being ſtirred vp to wrath by the arrogancy which ſome Eccleſiaſticall perſons had lately ſhewed, thought that for the iuſtneſſe of his cauſe, hee was vniuſtly dealt with, moſt vnworthily for his Royall dignitie, and moſt ingratefully conſidering how much good he had done for the Church of Rome; that almoſt all at one time hee diuorced Katharine, depriued Wolſey of his goods, and drew a great ſumme of mony from thoſe Biſhops who had acknowledged the authority of his Delegation, to the preiudice of his Royall preeminence; accepted the title of Soueraigne head, next vnder Chriſt, of the Church of England, which was offered vnto him by a Synod, and by both the Vniuerſities of England; with the conſent of the Peeres of his Kingdome, made Anne Bolene Marchioneſſe of Pembrooke, for the nobleneſſe of her extraction, and the merit of her vertues, (ſo are the words;) hauing apparelled her in Royall Robes, he married her,
                        Marrieth Anne.
                      and commanded her to be ſacred, Queene. Clement the Seuenth was much diſpleaſed, (but to little purpoſe) iudged the former marriage to be of force and Canonicall, and pronounced that the King had incurred the penaltie of the great excommunication.
                  Of this Marriage was ELIZABETH borne at

                     Greenwich, vpon Thames, the ſeuenth day of September 1533. Shortly after, the marriage contracted with Katherine, was iudged by authority of Parliament, inceſtuous and void, and that with Anne, lawfull by the Diuine Law, and ELIZABETH Heire of the Kingdome, if Iſſue-Male of the Royall Line ſhould fayle. All ſweare fidelity to the King, and to the Heires which he had or ſhould haue by Anne. And as it was conſidered vpon, that Paulus the Third would againe at Rome proclaime againſt this Marriage, and that within the Realme certaine Religious Women of Kent,
                     
                        A Nunne of Kent ſuborned.
                      ſuborned by ſome religious men, caſt out at randome ſome indiſcreete words againſt Anne, ELIZABETH, and the King, as if they had been ſtrucken with ſome diuine fury.
                        Authoritie of Eccleſiaſticall giuen to the King.
                      The Title of the Soueraigne head of the Church of England is giuen to the King, with all manner of authority for the reforming of errours, hereſies, and abuſes, and the oath of fidelity to the Heires which hee ſhould haue by Anne is confirmed. Neuertheleſſe three yeeres ſcarce paſſed, but giuing himſelfe to new Loues, to diſtruſts, to wrath, to murther, and to bloud; to make way to his new Loue Iane Seymor, he accuſed Anne (who had miſcarried of a Male-Childe) to haue defiled his Bed, and for a light ſuſpition put her into the hands of iuſtice, where being examined, ſhee ſo reſolued the obiections which were made vnto her, that the whole

multitude which were there preſent, iudged her innocent, and that ſhe was circumuented. She notwithſtanding is condemned by her Peeres, and being told of it, ſent to the King, and pleaſantly thankes him for many benefits which ſhee had receiued from him, viz. that ſhee not being very noble by extraction, hee had vouchſafed to adde to her condition, the dignity of Marchioneſſe, to make her his companion of honour, and to raiſe her vnto Royall Maieſtie: And which is more than all this, that not being able to aduāce her to an higher on earth, he pleaſed to lift her vp to heauen, where ſhee ſhould enioy eternall glory with innocent ſoules.
                        Anne beheaded.
                      Shee tooke her puniſhment quietly and Chriſtianly, wiſhing all happines to the King, and pardoning all her enemies.
                  The day following, hee married Iane, and by authority of the Parliament, declares the marriage with Anne to be no leſſe vnlawfull and voyd, than the marriage with Katherine, and that MARIE and ELIZABETH, their Daughters, were illegitimate, and to be excluded from the Succeſſion of the Kingdome. Iane, being in labour of EDWARD, (who ſucceeded his Father in the Kingdome) dyed before hee was borne, and hee cut out of her wombe.
                  The King being but little grieued for the death of his Wife, forthwith applyes himſelfe to new

Loues both in Italy and France, to procure friends: Neuertheleſſe, as he was of an ambiguous minde, and fearefull of euery thing, leſt the Papiſts ſhould riſe in Rebellion, and the Nobles moue ſedition, or ioyne with his forreine enemies, hee cauſed ſome to be beheaded for light and trifling matters, & ſome before euer they were heard: and euery houre hee puniſhed the Papiſts,
                        The King exerciſeth his cruelty vpon Papiſts and Lutherans, and his auarice vpon the Monaſteries.
                      as Traytors which did perſeuere in defending the Popes authoritie; and beeing tranſported with couetouſneſſe, hee tooke occaſion (and ſubiect by the vices of humane frailtie, as of idle and free liuing) to demoliſh the great Monaſteries, as he had done the ſmaller, that were full of venerable antiquity and Maieſty, tooke all the riches which had beene gathered of many yeeres, and at the ſame time burned Proteſtants aliue for Heretiques, by vertue of a Law called the Law of the Six Articles,
                     
                        The Law of Six Articles. made againſt thoſe which did impugne the doctrine of the Church of Rome, touching Tranſubſtantiation, the celebration of the Euchariſt vnder one kinde, the ſingle life of Prieſts, Vowes, priuate Maſses, and auricular confeſsion. In ſo much, that at one time, and in the ſame place, hee exerciſed his crueltie againſt the Papiſts, cauſing them to be hanged and quartered: and againſt the Proteſtants, cauſing them to be burned aliue. By which acts, he made himſelfe terrible in his owne Kingdome, and to be holden a Tyrant abroad: and firſt,

being reiected by Marie of Lorraine, daughter to the Duke of Guiſe, whom hee deſired as riuall to Iames King of Scotland his Nephew: afterwards, of Chriſtian of Denmarke, Dutcheſſe of Milan, Grandchild to Charles the Fifth. In the end, ſeeking the friendſhip of the Proteſtants of Germanie,
                     
                        He marries and diuorces Anne of Cleue.
                      with much adoe he obtained Anne of Cleue for his wife. But beeing as readie to diſtaſte Women as to loue them, turning his heart away from her as ſoone as he had marryed her, put her away, as not beautifull enough for a Prince, grounding himſelfe vpon this, that ſhee had beene betrothed before to the Duke of Lorraine's Sonne, and that ſhee had ſome womaniſh weakneſſe that made her vnfit for marriage. But it was to take in her ſtead Katharine Howard, daughter to Edmond Howard, and Neece to Thomas of Norfolke, whom he beheaded the yeere following, accuſing her to haue violated her chaſtity before ſhee was married, and opens the Royall-Bed to Katharine Parre, a Knights daughter,
                        Katharine Parre.
                      and the ſecond time Widdow.
                  Now when through intemperancy of his youth, he perceiued the vigor of his body to decay; being angry with the French King for hauing ayded the Scots againſt the Engliſh, hee reconciles himſelfe, and makes alliance with the Emperour Charles, againſt the French, who hauing quite forgot the diuorce of Katharine his Aunt, ſecretly giues him hope

to reconcile him to the Church of Rome.
                     
                        Reconciles himſelfe with the Emperour Charles.
                      After, hauing reſolued to ſet vpon France, thereby ſo much the more to worke himſelfe into the Emperours friendſhip, and quickly to cure the vlcers of his conſcience,
                        Aſſures the ſucceſsion to his Children.
                      propounded to the Parliament, which was then aſſembled, that when hee ſhould happen to dye, and his Sonne EDVVARD without iſſue, MARIE ſhould firſt ſucceed to the Crowne, and afterwards, ſhee leauing none, ELIZABETH. That if neither left any, the Crowne of England ſhould deuolue vpon ſuch as he would deſigne eyther by Letters Patents or by Will. Which paſſed for a Law, with the good liking and conſent of all, and that the penaltie of Laeſae Maieſtatis ſhould be inflicted vpon any that ſhould goe againſt it.
                  
                     
                        Take Bologne.
                     Being returned from France, after he had taken Bologne, and conſumed much treaſure, and beeing ſad and heauy to ſee England deuided by new opinions which daily ſprang vp, and England groaned for ſorrow to ſee her ſelfe ſo exhauſted of her riches, her Money corrupted with Braſſe, her Monaſteries, with the Monuments of great antiquity, ruined, the bloud of Nobles, Prelates, Papiſts, and Proteſtants promiſcuouſly ſpilt, and entangled in a Scottiſh warre,
                        Dyed.
                      hee died with a perpetuall fluxe of Greaſe flowing from him, cauſed by a poyſonous inflammation in the thigh: An. 1547. he breathed his laſt. A magnanimous Prince, but I know not

what confuſed temper of ſpirit he had: great vertues he had; and no leſſe vices.
                  EDVVARD his ſonne hauing ſcarce attained to the age of tenne yeeres, ſucceeded him,
                        King Edward the Sixth ſucceedeth his Father.
                      and had for his Protector, Edw. Seymor Duke of Sommerſet, his Vnkle, vnder whom the Engliſh hauing taken vp armes, for to reuenge the violated faith of the match agreed vpon betweene Edward and Marie Queene of Scotland; the Engliſh obtained a notable victory ouer the Scots neere Muſſelborough; this pernicious Law of Six Articles, and others which had beene eſtabliſhed by King HENRY the Eighth, againſt the Proteſtants, are ſuppreſſed, and thoſe which tended to the aboliſhing of the Popes authoritie confirmed; the Maſſe abrogated;
                        The doctrine of the Gospel is brought in.
                      the Images taken out of the Temples; the Bookes of the Old and New Teſtament imprinted; the Diuine Seruice celebrated in the vulgar Tongue; the Euchariſt diſtributed vnder both kindes: But neuertheleſſe the auaritious ſacriledge fell rauenouſly vpon pillaging the goods of the Church, Colledges,
                        A miſerable reigne vnder a King that is a Childe.
                      Quiers, Hoſpitals, as things iudged to bee for ſuperſtitious vſes: ambition and enuy among the great ones, audacitie and diſobedience among the Commons, ſo inſolently exulted, that England ſeemed to be raging madde with rebellious tumults, taking ſides, deprauation of money, and withall, the euils that are accuſtomed to be during the minority

of a King, theſe waſted and conſumed within the Land: Alſo, dammage was receiued abroad; as the loſſe of Forts which the Engliſh had made in Scotland and in France, and the Towne of Bologne, which had coſt ſo much, which, to the ſhame of the name of Engliſh, was deliuered vp into the French Kings hands for money, with all the Fortreſſes of the Countrey of Bologne which the Engliſh had built, the Cannons and Munitions of warre; when England was ſo diſioynted by diuiſion, that it was not able to keepe them; and Charles the Emperour hauing no will to ayde it, although he was intreated, in conſideration of the alliance with him, excuſing himſelfe for that it had beene conquered ſince; no, not to accept of it, being offered vnto him gratis. And to adde an ouer-plus of infelicity, the Protector not being wary enough of the ſubtilty and deceits of Dudley, Duke of Northumberland,
                     
                        The Protector is ſacrificed to death.
                      is by vertue of a new law condemned of Felony: for, entring into counſell how to take away the liues of ſome of the Kings Councellors, to wit, of Dudley, and ſome others, hee loſt his head, and his Sonne by a priuate Law bereaued of the greateſt part of his patrimony, and of his Fathers honours. The King being vnprouided of his faithfull Guard, is ſnatched away (vncertaine whether by ſickneſſe or poyſon) before hee was ripe, leauing an incredible griefe with his people

for the great and excellent vertues which hee had, farre ſurpaſſing his age.
                  At the ſame dolefull and heauy time, Dudley hauing broken the fraternall amity that was between the Protector and Tho. Seimor his brother, vpon occaſion of an emulation of Women, which was betweene the Queene Dowager, wife to Thomas, and the Dutches of Somerſet, the Protectors wife, amongſt other things, to conuict Thomas, of Crimen laeſae Maieſtatis, that he intended to reduce the King into his owne power, and to marry ELIZABETH the Kings Siſter; ſhee indeed ignorant of the matter, grew vp in yeeres,
                        Elizabeth in fauour with her brother.
                      and was in ſingular fauour with EDWARD her brother (who neuer ſaluted her, but called her his ſweet Siſter;) as alſo with the Peeres, and the Common-people. For ſhe was full of grace and beauty, and worthy of Soueraigne Authority, of modeſt grauity, cleere and quickwitted, of a happy memory, and indefatigable in the ſtudies of beſt letters, inſomuch that before ſhe attained to the Age of 17. yeeres,
                        Her ſtudies.
                      ſhe very well vnderſtood the Latine tongue, the French, the Italian, and the Greeke indifferently. Neither wanted ſhee skill in Muſicke that was beſeeming a Prince, and ſhe ſung and plaid cunningly and ſweetly. With Roger Aſcham, who was to guide her in her Studies, ſhe read the Common places of Melancthon, all Cicero, a great part of the Hiſtory of Titus Liuius, the

choice Orations of Iſocrates (wherof ſhe tranſlated two into Latine) Sophocles Tragedies, and ſhe read the New-Teſtament in Greeke. By which meanes ſhe adorned her tongue with pure words, and inſtructed her mind with the beſt documents, and good learning, not for pompe or oſtentation, but to recreate her life, and frame her ſelfe to vertue, that among the learned Princes of her time, ſhee was held Miraculous.
                  But the death of EDVVARD interrupted the ſtudies of the Liberall Arts: For ſcarce was he expired, but Dudley Duke of Northumberland (who earneſtly coueted the Kingdome for Iane Gray, to whom he had affianced his Sonne) vſed ſome perſons to perſwade her to quit the right which ſhee had to the Kingdome for a certaine ſumme of money, and great poſſeſſions in Land. She modeſtly anſwered, that they ought firſt doe well to agree with Mary her elder Siſter, becauſe that during her life, ſhe could pretend no right to it. Anon after, by the publike voice of a Cryer, Iane Gray, HENRY the Eighth's Neece by his ſecond Siſters Daughter, was proclaimed Queene of England: the cauſe thereof being ſought out, was found to bee, that in regard of a Lawe by Act of Parliament, which had neuer been duely abrogated, MARIE and ELIZABETH had beene declared illegitimate, (although that by the ſame Lawe the King

their Father had declared, that after EDVVARD the Sixth, if Iſſue fayled, that they ſhould ſucceede him in order) and that by the Ciuill-Law of England, ſuch Siſters could not hereditarily ſucceede EDVVARD, becauſe they were not Couſin Germanes, but (as our learned in the Law ſay) of the halfe Blood. They adde likewiſe, that HENRY the Eighth had by his laſt will nominated Iane Gray. Moreouer it was ſhewed, what danger there were, if MARIE and ELIZABETH ſhould marrie ſtranger Princes, which would re-eſtabliſh the Popes authority, which was reiected out of the Kingdome. And to that purpoſe they produce Letters Patents that EDVVARD the Sixth a little before his death had perfected, and many of the Peeres, Biſhops, Iudges, and others, by their ſignes in writing had fortified; neuertheleſſe, the goodwill that the Lords and the Commons bore to the Daughters of HENRIE the Eighth, within twentie dayes had driuen away this ſtorme, and MARY proclaimed Queene through all parts of England,
                     
                        Mary is proclaimed. Elizabeth ioynes with her.
                      who comming toward the Citie of London with an Armie, ELIZABETH (not to bee wanting, her Siſters cauſe and hers being yet diſquieted) went accompanied with fiue hundred Horſe to meet her vpon the way.
                  In the firſt Aſſembly of the Parliament that MARY cauſed to bee holden, what things ſoeuer had

beene decreed againſt the marriage betweene Qu. Katharine, and HENRY the Eighth, were abrogated, and it was iudged lawfull by the Diuine Law, and at all times, and at all places auaileable for theſe reaſons, Becauſe it had bin contracted by the conſent of both their Parents, of moſt Illuſtrious Princes, of moſt graue Perſonages as well of England as Spaine, and with a graue and conſtant deliberation of the learnedeſt men of Chriſtendome, and conſummated by the procreation of Children. The ſame religious Seruice, and adminiſtration of the Sacraments which were in vſe at the deceaſe of HENRY the Eighth, are re-eſtabliſhed; notwithſtanding without any mention of acknowledging the Popes authority, which thing put the Queene and Cardinall Pole into great trouble and vnquietneſſe, who thinke that for matter of the marriage, conſent of Parents, and the iudgement of the wiſe, did but onely depend vpon the Diſpenſation of Pope Iulius the ſecond: and were very angry that the vſe of the Sacraments were permitted to thoſe who were not as yet well and duely receiued into the Church, without the authoritie of the Pope. But the States of the Kingdome (and MARY bethought her ſelfe of it) feared to receiue and acknowledge the Popes authority which they had already ſhaken off, neither could they ſuffer that the Queene ſhould quit the Title of Soueraigne head of

the Church of England, to which the moſt part of them, Prelates, Peeres, and Common-people, had ſworne to HENRY the Eighth, his heires and ſucceſſors, and there were many of them that had got their riches from thoſe of the Church.
                        The Engliſh with much adoe ſubiect themſelues to the power of the Pope. But tooke it greatly to heart to forſake him, perſwading herſelfe that all the right that ſhe had to the Kingdome of England, was vpholden by no other meanes, then by the power of the Pope, who gaue ſentence of her ſide, after her Father had declared her illegitimate. Verily, many at that time had the Popes power in ſuch hatred, and a ſtrangers yoke, that within tenne dayes after that MARY was married to Phillip King of Spaine, Tho. Wyat, and many others of Kent, brake out into rebellion, perſwading themſelues, that this marriage was made to no other end, but the more rigorouſly to preſſe them downe vnder the Romane yoke, by the ſtrength of Spaine, and diſpatch ELIZABETH out of the way, who was next heire to the Kingdome of England. Charles the fifth Emperour knowing what ſpirits were in England, and that Cardinall Pole was going with power of Legate from the Pope, caſt a blocke in the way (not without the Queenes counſell) leſt he ſhould trouble buſineſſe not as yet eſtabliſhed, that he ſhould not come into England till fifteene moneths were expired, when the third Parliament was ended, and the marriage

of MARY and Philip ſhould be celebrated by the Diſpenſation of Pope Iulius the third, becauſe they were allied in the third degree, and that the Emperour Charles himſelfe had heretofore contracted to marry her, being then vnder age, for time to come. At laſt, being diſmiſſed from the Emperour, he came into England, by demands and obteſtations propounded orders, that the lawes againſt Heretikes might be re-eſtabliſhed, all Lawes publiſhed againſt the Sea of Rome, ſince the twentieth yeere of Henrie the eighth aboliſhed, and the whole body of the Kingdome reconciled to the Church of Rome. The which with great difficulty he obtained, yet not before the goods taken from the Monaſteries, Colledges, Biſhops, &c. by Henry the eighth,
                        Vpon what conditions they were reconciled to the Church of Rome.
                      and Edward the ſixth, were confirmed vpon like Couenant, to the Queene and the poſſeſſors, leſt the Kingdome ſhould be diſquieted. Foorthwith hereupon, he abſolued both the Clergie and people, of the crime of Schiſme, and Pope Iulius the third, himſelfe with great ioy, celebrated a ſolemne Maſſe at Rome,
                     
                        Reioycing for it at Rome.
                      ordained Prayers, publiſhed a Iubile, and granted a plenarie Indulgence to all who had giuen God thankes for the revnion of the Kingdome of England. Then is ſent vnto him Anthony Viſcount Montaigue, Thomas Thurlbe, Biſhop of Ely, and Edward Carne, to giue thankes for the pardon which he had granted for the Schiſmes, and

in the name of the King, the Queene, and the Kingdome, and that due ſubmiſſion and obedience ſhould be performed to the Pope and See of Rome. Iulius then being deceaſed, Paulus 4. gaue them audience and publike conference in the Apoſtolike Palace, and in the Hall of Kings, receiued their obedience, approued the pardon and abſolution granted by Cardinall Pole: And for the well deſeruing of Mary and Philip, he,
                        Ireland erected a Kingdome by the Pope.
                      out of the fulneſſe of his power, erected for euer Ireland to be a Kingdome, and adorned and marked it with dignities and Royall preheminences. The which the States of Ireland had liberally offered to Henry the eighth, and the Queene a little before vſed and enioyed the ſame. But theſe things are not for this place.
                  The Romane Religion ſeemed then to be well eſtabliſhed in England: howbeit the Eccleſiaſticall company ſeeing that Mary was now fortie yeeres old, growne dry and ſickly, ſcarce hoping for any ofſpring,
                        The Papiſts feare Elizabeth.
                      began forthwith to be afraid of ELIZABETH: For they knew ſhe was brought vp in the Proteſtant Religion, and obſerued that all men caſt (as vpon a riſing Sunne) both heart and eye vpon her. Therefore they ſeriouſly conſult from the very beginning of Maries Raigne, how to preuent that the Religion now called backe, ſhould receiue any detriment by her. The wiſer and more conſciencious ſort iudged it to be an exceeding foule crime

to deſtroy Royall Linage, and Mary herſelfe, who was a godly Princeſſe (though diſpleaſed with her Siſter, for the diſcord of their Mothers) yet certaine ſicke-braind fellowes (who neither durſt vndertake any thing, nor performe any thing by right or wrong to eſtabliſh the Catholike Religion) did thinke it fit. And it happened very commodiouſly, for them, that Tho. Wyat, Peter Carew, Iames Crofts, and others for the Proteſtants, ſeditiouſly endeuoured to doe raſh and turbulent things, labouring with all haſte to mary ELIZABETH to Edward Courtney, Earle of Deuon-ſhire. She, as being guilty hereof,
                        They perſecute her.
                      is thruſt into priſon: firſt of all vncertaine rumors are diſperſed, that ſhe was a partaker of ſedition, thereupon many are brought in queſtion for their heads, and others brought to the Racke. Croft, with a religious aſſeueration openly affirmed, that ſhe was no way guilty, and out of all offence for ſedition. Wyat alſo, it was thought, (who was ready to vnder-goe his laſt puniſhment) would haue accuſed her, and hee openly profeſſed the ſame: Neuertheleſſe ſhe is put into the hands of Keepers, who hurry her this way and that way, at length her Seruants and Maides are laide in fetters; harder dealing then her dignity deſerued.
                  
                     
                        The Kings of France & Spaine comfort her.
                     In the meane time, the French King, Henry the ſecond, by priuate Letters, full of loue, comforts her, and by many and great promiſes ſeekes to

draw her into France; whether for loue, or by deceit to beget her a greater danger, I will not ſay, to make way to the Queene of Scots his Neece to the Crowne of England, after Queene MARY. In like manner, Chriſtian the Third, King of Denmarke, who long before made profeſſion of the Proteſtants Religion, endeuours all he can, and treates vnder-hand to marry her to Frederick his Sonne.
                  Which when the Papiſts of England perceyued, they againe threaten perill and miſchiefe, and fearing her, cry out, that all of the Romane Religion, Queene and Kingdome, are in ieopardy while ſhee ſubſiſts, therefore neceſſarily to condemne her, eyther Laeſae Maieſtatis, or as a depraued Heretique: and during that ſtorme, whileſt cruelty was rigorouſly exerciſed vpon the meaner ſort of Proteſtants, I. Storie, Doctor of the Law, and others, cunningly giue it out in all places, in ſeuerall aſſemblies, that they vnderſtood it was practiſing to extirpate and ridde out Hereſie (ayming at her) without ſparing the ſmalleſt branches. Notwithſtanding, moderating her ſelfe (imitating the Mariner when a ſtorme violently increaſeth) heard diuine Seruice, according to the rule of the Romiſh Church, came often to Confeſſion,
                        Shee is for feare of death conſtrained to follow the Romiſh Religion.
                      and verily beeing oft rudely and churliſhly diſturbed by Cardinall Pole, the terrour of death made her confeſſe her ſelfe to bee a Romane Catholique. Howbeit

MARY hardly beleeued it, not forgetting that herſelfe, being forced by the ſame apprehenſion, had by Letters written to her Father with her owne hand (which I haue ſeene) renounced for euer the authority that the Pope pretended to haue in England, and acknowledged her Father to be [Soueraigne Head of the Church of England] and that the marriage betwixt him and her Mother was inceſtuous and vnlawfull. Neyther could the Cardinall, and other Prelates, perſwade themſelues to it, who to aſſure the Romane Church, wiſhed her to be taken out of the way. But Philip, MARY'S Husband, and other Spaniards, being more iuſt on ELIZABETHS behalfe, would not heare of that; Not that the fortune of an afflicted Princeſſe mooued them ſo much to mercy, as their owne reaſon circumſpectly aduiſed them. Becauſe (fore-ſeeing) if ELIZABETH were cut off, that by Marie, Queene of Scots, (next Heire to the Kingdome of England, now married to the Dolphin of France,) England, Ireland, and Scotland, might be ioyned to the Scepter of France; then which, nothing could be more fearefull to the greatnes of Spaine, with whom they haue continuall warres.
                  
                     
                        They goe about to ſend her out of the Kingdome, and exclude her from the ſucceſsion thereof.
                     When therefore without impietie they could not put ELIZABETH to death, many thought it would be moſt aduiſedly done, to remooue her farre from England, and marry her to Emanuel Philibert, Duke

of Sauoy. Neyther did this pleaſe Spaine, who before had purpoſed her for Charles his ſonne. And Thomas Cornwallis, who was of the Queenes Councell, likewiſe diſſwaded it, telling Her, that the people of Englād would hardly beare it, yea in no wiſe ſuffer it, that the next Heire of the Kingdome ſhould be carryed away into a forreine Countrey: At which time, MARY, for her inueterate hatred to ELIZABETH, and becauſe ſhee refuſed to marry with Sauoy, grew to that heat of anger, that ſhee ouer-charged her with reproaches, and often-times would not ſtick to ſay, that Marie, Queene of Scotland was the certaine and vndoubted Heire of the Kingdome of England, next to her ſelfe. Theſe conſultations holden againſt ELIZABETH, were taken away by a warre which MARY denounced in the behalfe of her Husband againſt France, which although that was the prime and principall cauſe, ſhee neuertheleſſe alledged others, and thoſe moſt true, viz. That France, againſt the Lawes of couenant, had nouriſhed and ſuſtained by his Agents and miniſters, the Rebellions of the Duke of Northumberland, and Tho. Wyat, the machinations and workings of Dudley and Aſhton againſt her perſon, ſent out Pyrats againſt the Engliſh Merchants, furniſhed Stafford with Ships and Armes to poſſeſſe the Caſtle of Scarborough, had attempted by wicked practices to ſurprize Callais, permitted Engliſh mony

to be counterfeited and adulterated in France, and inuaded the Low-Countries, which the Engliſh by couenant are bound to defend. In this flaming warre, and the Scots ſtirred vp by the French inuading the Frontiers of England,
                     
                        Calais loſt.
                      
                     Calais is loſt, the Caſtles of Lisbanck, Newnambrig, Mere, Oyes, Hammes, Sandgate, the Caſtle and Towne of Guines, and amongſt the frequent Funerals of Prelates, which ſad preſage ſeemed to fore-ſhew the diſpleaſure of the diuine power, MARY, neglected of her Huſband, and with concocted griefe for the loſſe of Callais, (which had beene Englands rightfully two hundred yeeres) with a Feuer and the Dropſie, the ſeuenteenth day of Nouember 1558.
                        Qu. Mary dyes:
                      departed, hauing reigned fiue yeeres & foure moneths: A Princeſſe of a holy behauior to al, her piety to the poore, liberalitie to the Nobles, and Clergie, can neuer enough be prayſed. But, the time was infamous, by the incredible crueltie of Prelates, who polluted England through all parts, with a moſt ſad & dreadfull ſpectacle, in burning the Proteſtants aliue. For (as ſome haue obſerued) there were more conſumed of all rankes, Biſhops, Miniſters, and common people, by this vengible and direfull way of death theſe fiue yeeres, than England ſaw in all the ſeuen and thirtie yeeres of HENRY the Eighth.
                  In the reigne of Iohn, Chriſtians againſt Chriſtians with vs, began to tyrannize with flames. The

ſame day that MARY dyed, within a few houres after, Cardinall Pole, Arch-biſhop of Canterbury,
                     
                        And Cardinall Pole. tormented with a quartane Feuer, expired. A man whom pietie, learning, and integritie, had made much more famous than the ſplendor of his Royall Race, though hee was Nephew to George, Duke of Clarence, Brother to Edward the Fourth, King of England.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Booke 1. 1558.A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS of this matchleſſe and famous HISTORIE. The firſt Booke.
                  
                     
                        
                           Anno M.D.LVIII.
                        
                           QVeene ELIZABETH is proclaymed Queene of England. Fol. 2.
                        
                        Choyce of her Priuy Councell. Fol. 3.
                        
                        Her care to re-eſtabliſh the Catholike Chriſtian Religion. Fol. 4.
                        
                        
                           Philip, King of Spaine, Queene MARY's Widdower, is a Sutor to her Siſter. Fol. 5.
                        
                        Queene ELIZABETH refuſed him, and wherefore. Fol. 7.
                        
                        Conſultations about the ſafe re-eſtabliſhment of true Religion. Fol. 9.
                        
                        Diuine Seruice allowed by the Queene in Engliſh. Fol. 11.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           Anno M.D.LIX.Booke 1· 1559.
                        
                        CReation and reſtoration of diuers Noble-men. Fol. 12.
                        
                        A Parliament ſummoned and held at Weſtminſter. Fol. 14.
                        
                        Propoſition to reforme Religion. Fol. 15.
                        
                        Diſpute eſtabliſhed betweene Proteſtants and Papiſts. Fol. 17.
                        
                        Sir Edward Crane, Ambaſſadour for England, is detayned at Rome. Fol. 18.
                        
                        Diſputes and ſtrifes for Callais. Fol. 19.
                        
                        A Treatie of peace with the French King in Cambreſis Caſtle. Fol. 22.
                        
                        The Articles of the ſaid peace. Fol. 23.
                        
                        Peace concluded betweene the Queenes of England and Scotland. Fol. 24.
                        
                        The Baron of Wentworth, and others, queſtioned about Calais. Fol. 25.
                        
                        The Parliament exhort the Queene to marry. Fol. 26.
                        
                        Her Maieſties anſwer. Fol. 27.
                        
                        Lawes and Ordinances eſtabliſhed by the Parliament. Fol. 29.
                        
                        The Nobles of the Land re-eſtabliſhed, and Papiſts depoſed. Fol. 30.
                        
                        By what degrees Religion was altered in England. Fol. 33.
                        
                        The profit proceeding by Religions alteration. Fol. 34.
                        
                        Queene ELIZABETH's Poeſie, or Motto. Fol. 35.
                        
                        Her Maieſties anſwer to forreine Princes interceding for the Papiſts. ibid.
                        
                        The Emperour ſeekes Queene ELIZABETH for his ſonne. Fol. 36.
                        
                        The French King challenged the Kingdome of England for the Queene of Scots. Fol. 37.
                        
                        The King of France his ſodaine death, being kill'd at a tilting. ibid.
                        
                        
                           Francis the Second, King of France, and Mary, Queene of Scots, his Wife, take vpon them the Title of King & Queene
                           
of England and Ireland.
                              Booke 1. 1560.
                            
                           Fol. 38.
                        
                        The originall of the hidden hatred which hath beene betweene the Queenes of England and Scotland. Fol. 39.
                        
                        The Scots refuſe to obey the Queene-Regent, but ſeeke helpe of Queene ELIZABETH. Fol. 40.
                        
                        They reſolue to driue the French out of Scotland. Fol. 42.
                        
                        The Engliſh are ſent into Scotland both by Land and Sea. Fol. 43.
                        
                        The death of Francis Talbot, the firſt Earle of Shrewsbury. Fol. 44.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Anno M.D.LX.
                        A Treatie of peace in Barwicke. Fol. 45.
                        
                        
                           Martigues brings French-men into Scotland, and the Marqueſſe of Debeux is driuen by a tempeſt. Fol. 47.
                        
                        Spaines counſell to peace. Fol. 48.
                        
                        Spaniards detaine from the Engliſh, munition. ibid.
                        
                        The French call the Engliſh from Scotland, and doe proteſt they are meerely the cauſe that peace is broken. Fol. 49.
                        
                        The Guizes are ſworne and profeſt enemies to Queene ELIZABETH. ibid.
                        
                        The French offer to render vp Calais. Fol. 50.
                        
                        Queene ELIZABETH anſwered them, and ſends Viſcount Montague into Spaine. ibid.
                        
                        
                           Arthur Gray, ſonne to the Lord Gray, wounded, and lyeth beſieged. Fol. 51.
                        
                        The Engliſh repulſed, Crofts is accuſed. Fol. 52.
                        
                        The Queene-Regent of Scotlands death. Fol. 53.
                        
                        The Treatie of Edenborough. ibid.
                        
                        A peace is publiſhed. Fol. 54.
                        
                        Queene ELIZABETH is ſought in marriage by diuers potent Princes. ibid.
                        
                        Spaine fauoured England againſt the French. Fol. 58.
                        
                        The King of Spaine deliuered backe the Order of the Garter. ibid.
                        
                        
                           Hee is diſdained to be refuſed in things of ſmall importance; and the Count of Feria whets his indignation. Fol. 59.
                        
                        The Pope is incenſed againſt Queene ELIZABETH. Fol. 60.
                        
                        Yet the Pope writes, and ſends his Nuncio ouer. Fol. 61.
                        
                        The King and Queene of France and Scotland refuſe to confirme the Treatie of Edenborough, with their reaſons. Fol. 63.
                        
                        
                           Francis the Second, King of France, dyed. ibid.
                        
                        An Edict ſet forth by Queene ELIZABETH againſt Anabaptiſts, and ſacrilegious perſons. Fol. 64.
                        
                        The Colledge of Weſtminſter founded. ibid.
                        
                        The Coyne brought to full valew. ibid.
                        
                        Good Coyne ſtampt for Ireland, which wee call Sterling. Fol. 65.
                        
                        The death of the Earle of Huntingdon, the ſecond of that Race. Fol. 66.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Anno M.D.LXI.1561.
                        
                        THe Queene Dowager of France, Queene of Scotland, deferred the confirmation of Edenboroughs Treaty. Fol. 68.
                        
                        The Queene of England refuſed paſſage to the Queene of Scotland from France ouer. Fol. 69.
                        
                        Shee complayned to Throckmorton, Ambaſſadour for England. Fol. 71.
                        
                        
                           Throckmortons anſwer to the ſaid Queeene. Fol. 72.
                        
                        Conteſtation betweene them two. Fol. 73.
                        
                        The Queene of Scotland laboured to content Queene ELIZABETH. Fol. 74.
                        
                        But in vaine. ibid.
                        
                        The Queene of Scotland takes her iourney out of France into Scotland, where ſhe well and ſafely arriued. Fol. 75.
                        
                        She ſends to Queene ELIZABETH, who anſwered her. Fol. 76.
                        
                        Queene ELIZABETH preſseth the confirmation of the treatie. Fol. 77.
                        
                        The Guizes, and other French Noble-men, who had conueyed

the Queene of Scots into Scotland, returning home thorow England, are magnificently entertained with all royall courteſies by Queene ELIZABETH. Fol. 77.
                        
                        That the right to aſſemble a Councel, belongeth not to the Pope. Fol. 78.
                        
                        How farre an Ambaſſadour ought to beare an offence. Fol. 79.
                        
                        Queene ELIZABETH prepares things neceſsary for the warre. ibid.
                        
                        She findes the Calamite ſtone. Fol. 80.
                        
                        And prepares a Fleet. ibid.
                        
                        The Engliſh in emulation of their Queene, ſtriue who can build the beſt Ships. ibid.
                        
                        Tillage more vſed than euer. Fol. 81.
                        
                        An Edict in fauour of the King of Poland. ibid.
                        
                        S. Pauls famous Steeple in London is burnt. Fol. 82.
                        
                        The Earle of Bathe dyed. ibid.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Anno M.D.LXII.
                        
                           
                              1562.
                           
                           ARthur Pole, his Brother, and others, are examined. Fol. 84.
                        
                        The Lady Katherine Gray is impriſoned. ibid.
                        
                        The Guizes practize againſt Queene ELIZABETH. Fol. 85.
                        
                        
                           Henry Sidney is ſent into France, and preſently after into Scotland. Fol. 86.
                        
                        They deliberate the inter-uiew of the Queene of Scotland. Fol. 87.
                        
                        The Cardinall of Lorraine propoundeth a marriage to the Queene of Scotland, and Queene ELIZABETH endeuours to diuert her from it. Fol. 88.
                        
                        Shee excuſes the French Fugitiues. Fol. 89.
                        
                        The death of Iohn de Vere, Earle of Oxford. Fol. 90.
                        
                        
                           Shan O-Neale comes into England to defend his cauſe. ibid.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           Anno M.D.LXIII.
                        LAw eſtabliſhed by Parliament. Fol. 92.
                           
                              1563.
                           
                        
                        Fifteenes and Subſidies granted. Fol. 93.
                        
                        The Prince of Condé is taken in the Battel of DREVX. Fol. 94.
                        
                        The King of Spaines anſwer. ibid.
                        
                        Hoſtages giuen for the reſtitution of Calais. Fol. 95.
                        
                        Attempt to flye away. ibid.
                        
                        Peace made in France. ibid.
                        
                        Warre proclaymed betweene France and England. ibid.
                        
                        The Queene offers to giue Haure de grace for Calais. Fol. 96.
                        
                        The Engliſh Souldiers are afflicted with the plague. ibid.
                        
                        
                           Haure de grace beleagred by the French. Fol. 97.
                        
                        Articles for Haure de grace's Reſtitution. Fol. 99.
                        
                        The Souldiers comming ouer, infect London, and other places in England with the plague. ibid.
                        
                        Another marriage propounded to the Queene of Scotland. Fol. 100.
                        
                        Queene ELIZABETH recommends Robert Dudley vnto her for a Husband. ibid.
                        
                        The French diuert the Queene from it. Fol. 101.
                        
                        The Baron of Gray dyes, and the Biſhop of Aquila. ibid.
                        
                        The Spaniards againſt the Engliſh. Fol. 102.
                        
                        The Lord William Paget dyes. ibid.
                        
                        The ſupreame dignities of honour in England. Fol. 103.
                        
                        The death of Henry Manners, Earle of Rutland. ibid.
                        
                        And alſo of the Lady Frances Brandon, Ducheſse of Suffolke. ibid.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Anno M.D.LXIIII.
                        THe Articles of peace concluded betweene France and England.
                              1564.
                            
                           Fol. 106.
                        
                        
                           The French King enſtalled in the Order of the Garter. Fol. 107.
                        
                        The Engliſh and Hollanders ill vſed in Spaine. ibid.
                        
                        A Mart eſtabliſhed by the Engliſh in Edenborough. Fol. 108.
                        
                        
                           Robert Dudley created Baron of Denbigh, and Earle of Leiceſter, who accuſed Sir Nicholas Bacon. Fol. 110.
                        
                        
                           Cambridge honoured with Queene ELIZABETHS preſence. ibid.
                        
                        Diuers opinions about Englands ſucceſsion. Fol. 111.
                        
                        
                           Lenox ſent for by the Queene of Scotland. ibid.
                        
                        The true diſcent and extraction of the Dukes of Lenox. ibid.
                        
                        
                           Leiceſters treatie of a match with Scotlands Queene. Fol. 114.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           1565.
                           Anno M.D.LXV.
                        THe Lord Darley's iourney into Scotland, where hee is beloued of the Queene. Fol. 116.
                        
                        Queene ELIZABETHS conſent required about that marriage. Fol. 117.
                        
                        
                           Throckmorton ſent to hinder it. Fol. 118.
                        
                        
                           Lenox and Darley re-called out of Scotland, who excuſe themſelues, and the Queene marries with the Lord Darley. Fol. 119.
                        
                        Queene ELIZABETH endures it with moderation, but ſome Scots take diſtaſte about that marriage. Fol. 120.
                        
                        The Emperour is a ſutor for his Brother to Queene ELIZABETH. Fol. 121.
                        
                        As the Queene of Sheba came to ſee Salomon, ſo the rare vertues of Queene ELIZABETH, brought Cecilia, Queene of Sueden, bigge with Childe, from the furtheſt part of the North, to ſee ſo compleat a Maieſtie. ibid.
                        
                        Creation of the Earle of Glencarne. ibid.
                        
                        
                           Nicholas Arnold, ſent Deputie into Ireland. Fol. 124.
                        
                        The death of Sir Thomas Chaloner. Fol. 125.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           Anno M.D.LXVI.1566.
                        
                        
                           THomas, Duke of Norfolke, and Robert, Earle of Leiceceſter, are honoured with the chiefe order of Knighthood of France. Fol. 126.
                        
                        The Earle of Arundell in voluntary exile. Fol. 127.
                        
                        The Engliſh carry both their armes and courage to the Hungarian warre. Fol. 127.
                        
                        The happy birth of King IAMES. ibid.
                        
                        Queene ELIZABETH reioyceth much thereby, viſits Oxenford, and holds a Parliament. Fol. 128.
                        
                        The States ſollicite her to marry, and declare her Succeſſor. Fol. 129.
                        
                        The Great-Ones modeſtly, and the popular ſort eagerly. Fol. 130.
                        
                        Queene ELIZABETH is thereby angred. Fol. 131.
                        
                        The Queene of Scotlands right to England apparant. Fol. 134.
                        
                        Biſhops Ordinations confirmed. ibid.
                        
                        
                           Bedfords Earle, Ambaſſadour from Queene ELIZABETH, to the chriſtning of King IAMES in Scotland. Fol. 135.
                        
                        The death of Iohn Maſſon, and Sir Edward Sackuille. Fol. 136.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Anno M.D.LXVII.1567.
                        
                        THe murder of the Lord Darley, who was married to the Queene of Scots. Fol. 137.
                        
                        
                           Buchanan condemned for falſhood by the States of Scotland. Fol. 138.
                        
                        
                           Iames, Prior of Saint Andrewes, the Queenes baſtard-Brother, diſcontented for want of greater aduancement, returnes into Scotland. ibid.
                        
                        Hee ſeekes to be Regent of Scotland, whereof being fruſtrate, hee oppoſeth againſt the Queene, and makes his ambition openly and euidently knowne. Fol. 139.
                        
                        
                           Hee is created Earle of Murray; he perſecutes the great men of Scotland, and diſſwades the Queene from marriage. Fol. 140.
                        
                        He takes armes againſt her, after ſhee was married; and flyes into England. Hee ſeekes to ſow diſcord betweene the Queene and her Husband the Lord Darley. Fol. 141.
                        
                        The murder of Dauid Rice, in the Queene of Scots ſight. Fol. 142.
                        
                        
                           Murray is repealed. Fol. 142.
                        
                        Earle Morton flyes into England. Fol. 143.
                        
                        Diſſention betweene the King and the Queene. Fol. 144.
                        
                        Earle Bothwell, and others, murder the Queenes Husband. ibid.
                        
                        Earle Bothwell commended to the Queene for her Husband. ibid.
                        
                        Teſtimony of the murder of the Lord Darley. Fol. 145.
                        
                        Earle Bothwell is freed of the murder of the King. Fol. 147.
                        
                        Hee marries the Queene. ibid.
                        
                        They conſpire both againſt him and the Queene. ibid.
                        
                        Earle Murray retyres into France. Fol. 148.
                        
                        Earle Bothwell is expelled. ibid.
                        
                        The Queene is impriſoned. ibid.
                        
                        Queene ELIZABETH, by Throckmorton, complaynes thereof to the Confederates. ibid.
                        
                        They conſult what is to be done with the Queene-priſoner. Fol. 149.
                        
                        
                           Throckmorton defends the Queenes cauſe. ibid.
                        
                        The Scots maintaine the contrary, out of Buchanans reaſons. Fol. 150.
                        
                        They extort from their Queene a reſignation of the gouernement. Fol. 151.
                        
                        
                           IAMES the Sixth, conſecrated and inaugurated King. Fol. 152.
                        
                        Earle Murray returnes into Scotland. ibid.
                        
                        Hee preſcribes the Queene what ſhee ſhould doe. Fol. 153.
                        
                        Hee is eſtabliſhed Regent or Vice-Roy. ibid.
                        
                        Some of the Murderers of the King are put to death. ibid.
                        
                        They acquit the Queene of all ſuſpition. Fol. 154.
                        
                        The Queene of England, and the King of France, labour to

procure her libertie. Fol. 154.
                        
                        Queene ELIZABETH demands the reſtitution of Calais. ibid.
                        
                        The French maintaine, how they ought not to doe it. Fol. 155.
                        
                        Sir Thomas Smith's anſwer to the French. Fol. 157.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Anno M.D.LXVII.
                        THe Earle of Suſſex is ſent to the Emperour. Fol. 160.
                        
                        The Earle of Leiceſter hinders it repreſenting to the Queen all the diſcommodities that might happen if ſhee married a ſtranger. ibid.
                        
                        Articles of the marriage propounded. Fol. 162.
                        
                        Ambaſsadours ſent from the Emperour of Muſcouia. Fol. 163.
                        
                        The Engliſh open the way to goe to Ruſſia by ſea. Fol. 164.
                        
                        The Company of Muſcouy Merchants inſtituted. ibid.
                        
                        A ſecret meſſage from the Emperour of Muſcouie. Fol. 165.
                        
                        The death of Nicholas Wotton, and of the Ducheſſe of Norfolke. ibid.
                        
                        
                           Shan O-Neale raiſeth troubles, and rebelleth. Fol. 166.
                        
                        
                           Sir Henry Sidney armes againſt him, and diſcomfits him. Fol. 167.
                        
                        
                           Shan re-aſſumes courage; he vſeth cruelty to his men. Fol. 168.
                        
                        Hee meanes to yeeld. ibid.
                        
                        Hee is ſlaine. Fol. 169.
                        
                        
                           Turlogh-Leinich proclaimed O-Neale by the Queens permiſſion. ibid.
                        
                        
                           Hugon, Nephew to Shan, who was afterwards Baron of Dungannon, receiued to grace for an oppoſite to Turlogh. ibid.
                        
                        Troubles in Munſter. Fol. 170.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Anno M.D.LXVIII.1568.
                        
                        THe Papiſts abſolue many. Fol. 171.
                        
                        
                           The innouators ſhew themſelues, and procure vnto themſelues thereby the odious ſtyle of Puritans. Fol. 172.
                        
                        The ſecond ciuill warre in France. ibid.
                        
                        The Duke of Aniou commended to Queene ELIZABETH for a Husband. Fol. 173.
                        
                        The Engliſh Ambaſsadour vſed diſgracefully in Spaine. ibid.
                        
                        
                           Hawkins ill intreated by the Spaniard
                              •
                            in America. ibid.
                        
                        The Queene of Scots eſcapes out of priſon. Fol. 174.
                        
                        Shee is vanquiſhed. ibid.
                        
                        Her Letter to Queene ELIZABETH. Fol. 175.
                        
                        Shee writes againe. Fol. 177.
                        
                        Queene ELIZABETH pitties her. Fol. 178.
                        
                        The Priuy-Councell conſult of it. ibid.
                        
                        The Councell reſolue ſhee ſhould be retained in England. Fol. 179.
                        
                        The Counteſſe of Lenox complaines of her. ibid.
                        
                        The Baron of Heris intercede
                              •
                            for her. Fol. 180.
                        
                        Earle Murray is commanded to yeeld a reaſon of the Queenes depoſing. ibid.
                        
                        Deputies for the King of Scots. Fol. 181.
                        
                        Others for the Queene of Scots. ibid.
                        
                        
                           Lidingtons declaration to the Scots. ibid.
                        
                        The proteſtation of the Queene of Scots. Fol. 182.
                        
                        A declaration for the Queene of Scots. Fol. 183.
                        
                        The anſwer of the Kings Deputies. Fol. 184.
                        
                        The Queene of Scots reply. 185.
                        
                           Murray refuſeth to yeeld an account of the Queenes depoſing. Fol. 188.
                        
                        Authoritie of the Commiſsioners reuoked. Fol. 189.
                        
                        The Duke of Norfolke glad. ibid.
                        
                        New Commiſsioners granted. ibid.
                        
                        The Queene of Scots will not ſubmit her cauſe to their hearing, but vpon condition. Fol. 190.
                        
                        The proceedings diſſolued. ibid.
                        
                        Debate about the gouernement of Scotland. Fol. 191.
                        
                        
                           Murray offers to marry the Duke of Norfolke to the Queene
                           
of Scots, yet diſperſeth rumours againſt her. Fol. 192.
                        
                        The Duke of Norfolke is ſuſpected. ibid.
                        
                        The third Ciuill War in France. Fol. 193.
                        
                        The French and Flemmings make England their refuge, and were the firſt that made Bayes & Sayes, & other light Stuffes Linnen and Woollen. Fol. 194.
                        
                        The beginning of the Warres in the Low-Countries. ibid.
                        
                        
                           Ferdinando Aluares, Duke of Alua, conſtituted ſupreame Gouernour. Fol. 195.
                        
                        Moneyes ſent into the Low-Countries deteyned in England. ibid.
                        
                        The Engliſh-mens goods deteyned and ſeized vpon in the Low-Countries. Fol. 196.
                        
                        The like done to the Flemmings in England. Fol. 197.
                        
                        The death of Roger Askam. ibid.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Anno M.D.LXIX.
                        A Proclamation touching goods detayned by the Duke of Alua.
                           
                              1569.
                            
                           Fol. 198.
                        
                        A Declaration againſt the ſaid Proclamation. ibid.
                        
                        Practices againſt Cecill. Fol. 199.
                        
                        The money formerly detayned in England, is demanded by the Duke of Alua. Fol. 200.
                        
                        Free Traffique eſtabliſhed at Hamborough for the Engliſh. ibid.
                        
                        Doctor Story taken. ibid.
                        
                        The Duke of Alua enraged againſt the Engliſh. ibid.
                        
                        Men of Warre called in. Fol. 201.
                        
                        Traffique of Ruſſia hindred. ibid.
                        
                        The liberties of the Engliſh in Ruſſia. ibid.
                        
                        Their Traffique into Ruſſia. Fol. 202.
                        
                        And into Perſia, by the Caſpian Sea. ibid.
                        
                        
                           A Ruſſian Embaſſadour comes into England. Fol. 202.
                        
                        Alliance with Ruſſia. Fol. 203.
                        
                        The Emperour of Muſcouia and Ruſſia is irritated and inflamed againſt the Engliſh. ibid.
                        
                        
                           Murray appeaſeth the friends of the Queene of Scotland. Fol. 204.
                        
                        Rumor ſpred throughout Scotland againſt Murray. ibid.
                        
                        Queene ELIZABETH is diligent, and doth endeuour to quench ſuch falſe rumours. Fol. 205.
                        
                        She deales by letters concerning her reſtoring. Fol. 206.
                        
                        A marriage intended betweene the Prince of Scotland, and Margaret, the Duke of Norfolkes onely Daughter. Fol. 207.
                        
                        
                           Murraies Proprſition to the Duke of Norfolke. ibid.
                        
                        
                           Throckmortons Counſell. Fol. 208.
                        
                        Propoſitions of the Match made by Leiceſter to the Duke. Fol. 209.
                        
                        The Articles of marriage propounded to the Queen of Scotland. ibid.
                        
                        She agrees to them in ſome manner. Fol. 210.
                        
                        A Deſigne to free the Queen of Scotland. Fol. 211.
                        
                        Notice is giuen thereof to Queene ELIZABETH. ibid.
                        
                        The Earle of Leiceſter reueales the whole buſineſſe to the Queen at Tichfield. Fol. 212.
                        
                        She rebukes the Duke of Norfolke. ibid.
                        
                        The Duke departs the Court without leaue. ibid.
                        
                        
                           Cecill finds out the matter. Fol. 213.
                        
                        The Duke of Norfolke goes into Norfolke. ibid.
                        
                        Feare cauſed in the Court through the Duke of Norfolke. Fol. 214.
                        
                        He returnes to the Court. ibid.
                        
                        
                           Murray diſcouers the buſineſſe. ibid.
                        
                        The Duke and others are impriſoned. Fol. 215.
                        
                        Their Complices craue pardon. Fol. 216.
                        
                        Libels againſt the marriage. ibid.
                        
                        
                           Chapin Vittelli comes into England, and why. ibid.
                        
                        Rebellion in the North by Northumberland and Weſtmerland. Fol. 217.
                        
                        The Rebels Prteext. Fol. 219.
                        
                        
                           Their declaration. ibid.
                        
                        They write to the Papiſts. Fol. 220.
                        
                        They rent and tread vnder-foot the Bible. ibid.
                        
                        Their Colours and number. ibid.
                        
                        They returning, take Bernard Caſtle.: And flie. Fol. 221.
                        
                        Some are put to death. Fol. 222.
                        
                        Some are baniſhed. ibid.
                        
                        A new Rebellion. ibid.
                        
                        The Rebels are defeated. Fol. 223.
                        
                        Queen ELIZABETH lends ſuccour to the reformed Churches in France. Fol. 224.
                        
                     
                  
                  The end of the Table of the Contents of the Firſt Booke.
               
               
                  
                  A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS of this matchleſſe and famous HISTORIE. The ſecond Booke.
                  
                     
                        
                           Anno M.D.LXX.
                        
                           THe Earle of Murray demands that the Queene of Scotland might bee put into his hands.
                              1570.
                           
                        
                        
                           Fol. 233.
                        
                        He purſueth the Engliſh Rebels, and is ſuddenly ſlaine.
                        
                           234.
                        
                        Diuers opinions are had of him.
                        
                           235.
                        
                        The Scots and Engliſh Rebels make incurſions vpon England.
                        
                        
                           236.
                        
                        The Engliſh take reuenge thereof.
                        
                           237.
                        
                        And ſuccour thoſe of the Kings party in Scotland.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        They take the Caſtle of Hamilton.
                        
                        
                           238.
                        
                        The Earle of Lenox is eſtabliſhed Vice-Roy of Scotland.
                        
                        
                           239.
                        
                        The King of Spaine giues ſuccours againſt thoſe who were of the Kings ſide.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        
                           The Lord Setone his Embaſsage to the Duke of Alua.
                        
                        
                           239.
                        
                        The Anſwere of the Duke of Alua.
                        
                        
                           241.
                        
                        The Biſhop of Roſſe is ſet at liberty, who laboureth the libertie of the Queene of Scots.
                        
                           242.
                        
                        They conſult about the freedome of the Queene of Scots.
                        
                           243.
                        
                        The Sentence of Pope Pius the fifth againſt Queene ELIZABETH.
                        
                        
                           245.
                        
                        Rebellion in Norfolke, as ſoone ended as begun.
                        
                           249.
                        
                        
                           Felton puniſhed for ſticking vp the Popes Bull.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        The Papiſts and greateſt part contemne the Bull.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        Diuers are impriſoned.
                        
                           250.
                        
                        Suſsex choſen a Priuy Councellour.
                        
                           251.
                        
                        Treaty with the Queene of Scotland.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        The Queene of Scotlands anſwer to the Propoſitions of the Engliſh.
                        
                           253.
                        
                        They cannot agree.
                        
                           254.
                        
                        The Biſhop of Roſſe requires helpe to free the Queene of Scotland.
                        
                           255.
                        
                        The death of the Earle of Cumberlend.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        The death of Nicholas Throcmorton.
                        
                        
                           256.
                        
                        Rebellion in Ireland quencht before they ſaw the day.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        
                           Stukeley flieth out of Ireland.
                        
                           257.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Anno M.D.LXXI.
                        THe Royall Exchange named.
                        
                           Fol. 258.
                           
                              1571.
                           
                        
                        The Creation of Baron Burghley.
                        
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        The manner of creating Barons.
                        
                           259.
                        
                        Letters from the Pope to the Queene of Scotland.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        Edict of the Scots againſt the Authority Royall condemned by Queene ELIZABETH.
                        
                        
                           260.
                        
                        The demands of the Engliſh for the freedome of the Queene of Scotland.
                        
                           261.
                        
                        
                           The Engliſh refuſe the offers of the Scots.
                        
                           261.
                        
                        Alteration amongſt the Scots.
                        
                           262.
                        
                        Complaints of the Scots againſt the Engliſh.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        A Remembrance ſent from the Queene of Scotland to the Duke of Norfolke.
                        
                           263.
                        
                        The counſell of the Biſhop of Roſſe.
                        
                        
                           265.
                        
                        The attempts of others.
                        
                           266.
                        
                        A great Earth-quake.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        The Embaſsage of Baron Buckhurſt.
                        
                        
                           267.
                        
                        A Propoſition of a Match betweene Queene ELIZABETH and the Duke of Aniou.
                        
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        The hopes which they conceiued, with the Articles of Marriage.
                        
                           268.
                        
                        The Anſwer.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        To what end this marriage was propoſed.
                        
                           270.
                        
                        They haſte the marriage of the Queen of Scotland.
                        
                           271.
                        
                        The Biſhop of Roſſe and others committed.
                        
                           272.
                        
                        Money ſent into Scotland.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        The Duke of Norfolke and others committed to the Tower.
                        
                           274.
                        
                        Propoſitions touching an Embaſſadour anſwered.
                        
                           276.
                        
                        The Biſhop of Roſſe queſtioned.
                        
                           277.
                        
                        He declines from the Engliſh Witneſſes.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        
                           Lenox, Vice-Roy of Scotland, is ſlaine.
                        
                           279.
                        
                        The Earle of Marre is elected Vice-Roy.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        Lawes againſt diſturbers.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        Lawes againſt Papiſts.
                        
                           280.
                        
                        
                           Iohn Story condemned to dye.
                        
                           282.
                        
                        Differences appeaſed betweene the Engliſh and the Portugals in Guienne.
                        
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        Marquis of Northampton dyes.
                        
                           283.
                        
                        The death of Biſhop Iewell.
                        
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        Affaires in Ireland.
                        
                           284.
                        
                        
                           William Fitz-Williams, Deputy.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           Anno M.D.LXXII.
                        
                           Thomas Duke of Norfolke is preſented before the Nobles and Peeres, and arraigned in Weſtminſter Hall.
                              1572.
                           
                        
                        
                           285.
                        
                        The manner of his Arraignement.
                        
                           286.
                        
                        The chiefe points of his accuſation.
                        
                           287.
                        
                        The Duke demandeth an Aduocate to pleade his cauſe.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        The ſecond Article of his accuſation.
                        
                           290.
                        
                        The third Article.
                        
                           292.
                        
                        His reply, and that he was contrary to the Romane Religion.
                        
                           293.
                        
                        The Letters of the Biſhop of Roſſe to the Queen of Scots produced.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        The Dukes Letter to his ſeruant.
                        
                           294.
                        
                        The Letters of Ridolph.
                        
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        Of the Pope.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        The teſtimony of Strangers.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        The third Article of his accuſation.
                        
                           295.
                        
                        The Peeres conſult among themſelues.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        The ſentence of death pronounced againſt the Duke.
                        
                           296.
                        
                        Baray and Marter are put to death.
                        
                           297.
                        
                        Earles created.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        Barons elected.
                        
                           298.
                        
                        Lawes eſtabliſhed for the better ſecurity of the Queene and her Kingdome.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        The Duke of Norfolke beheaded.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        His ſpeech at his death.
                        
                           299.
                        
                        Sundry cenſures of him.
                        
                           300.
                        
                        
                           Catenes relation of the precedent matters.
                        
                           301.
                        
                        Pope Pius the fifth, incenſed againſt Queene ELIZABETH, imployeth Robert Ridolph, a Gentleman of Florence, into England.
                        
                           301.
                        
                        He perſwades the Kings of France and Spaine againſt her.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        
                           The Queene of Scots accuſed.
                        
                           304.
                        
                        Her anſwere.
                        
                           305.
                        
                        Sedition in Scotland.
                        
                        
                           306.
                        
                        The Queene of Elngand and the King of France endeuour to accord them.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        They differ in opinion.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        Cauſes alledged, why the French fauour the Queene of Scotland.
                        
                        
                           307.
                        
                        The Queene of England conteſteth with the French.
                        
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        The rebellious Flemmings being commanded out of England, take the Breele.
                        
                        
                           310.
                        
                        The Duke of Alua's careleſneſſe.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        The Engliſh repaire into the Low-countries to warre.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        The diſsimulation of the King of France.
                        
                           311.
                        
                        The alliance of Blois.
                        
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        The Articles of the ſame.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        The confirmation thereof.
                        
                           313.
                        
                        
                           Mont-morancy admitted to the Order of the Garter.
                        
                           314.
                        
                        He intercedes to accord the differences of Scotland.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        Anſwer made vnto him.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        He alſo treats of a marriage with the Duke of Aniou.
                        
                        
                           315.
                        
                        The Maſſacre of Paris.
                        
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        Marriage of the Duke of Alanzon propounded to Queene ELIZABETH.
                        
                        
                           316.
                        
                        The Earle of Northumberland beheaded.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        Death of the Marquis of Wincheſter, and of the Earle of Darbie.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        
                           Cecill made Treaſurer.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        Death of Sir George Peters.
                        
                        
                           317
                        
                        Queene ELIZABETH ſicke.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        Her care of the Publique.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        She cuts off the ſuperfluous number of followers attending Noblemen, and curbeth Enquirers after conceald Lands of the Crowne.
                        
                           318.
                        
                        Rebellion in Ireland: alſo the Omores rebellion there.
                        
                           319.
                        
                        
                           A ſtrange Starre.
                        
                           319.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Anno M.D.LXXIII.1573.
                        
                        THe Spaniſh Fleete diſcomfited by the Hollanders.
                        
                           321.
                        
                        Queene ELIZABETH diſchargeth her Fathers and Brothers debts.
                        
                           322.
                        
                        The Papiſts trouble the Common-wealth.
                        
                           323.
                        
                        The Ambaſſage of Gondy, Count of Rez.
                        
                        
                           324.
                        
                        Ambaſſage of the Earle of Worceſter into France.
                        
                        
                           325.
                        
                        The French Proteſtants handle the French Papiſts in England ſhrewdly; and the French Leger Ambaſſadour complaines to Queene ELIZABETH for ayding the Proteſtants beſieged.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        She is earneſtly ſollicited to marry with the D. of Alanzon.
                        
                        
                           326
                        
                        She grants him leaue to come into England.
                        
                        
                           327.
                        
                        
                           Gondy returnes into England, and Earle Morton is made Regent of Scotland.
                        
                        
                           329.
                        
                        The Engliſh are ſent to beſiege Edenborrough.
                        
                        
                           332.
                        
                        The Caſtle beſieged, yeelded.
                        
                           333.
                        
                        
                           Kircald and others hanged; and Lidington dyes.
                        
                           334.
                        
                        
                           Lodowick Zuniga ſucceedes Duke d'Alua.
                        
                        
                           335.
                        
                        
                           Burche's Hereſie, for which hee is hanged.
                        
                           336.
                        
                        The Lord of Effingham, the Earle of Kent, and Caius the Phyſician, dyed.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        Troubles in Ireland, & the Earle of Eſſex is ſent thither.
                        
                           338.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Anno M.D.LXXIIII.1574.
                        
                        
                           ALanzon deſires to viſit Queene ELIZABETH, and hath leaue to come into England.
                        
                           342.
                        
                        He, ſuſpected in France, hath a Gard ſet ouer him.
                        
                           343.
                        
                        
                           Charles the Ninth, King of France, dieth, and the right Noble Roger, Lord North, is ſent Ambaſſadour extraordinary to Henry of Valois, King of France and Poland.
                        
                           344.
                        
                        
                           The Earle of Huntington made Preſident of the North.
                        
                           345.
                        
                        An Edict againſt pride.
                        
                           346.
                        
                        London Miniſters deceyued. A Whale caſt on ſhore: Thames ebbes & flowes twice in one houre. The Skie ſeemeth to burne.
                        
                           347.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           1575.
                           Anno M.D.LXXV.
                        THe League with France renewed.
                        
                           349.
                        
                        The Prince of Orange intended to flye to the protection of the King of France.
                        
                           352.
                        
                        The Ambaſsie of Campigni, and de Requiſens dyeth.
                        
                           354.
                        
                        The death of the Duke of Chaſtelraut.
                        
                        
                           357.
                        
                        The Earle of Eſſex diſtreſsed in Ireland.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        
                           Sidney's progreſſe in Ireland, for the third time Deputie there.
                        
                           358.
                        
                        The death of Peter Carew.
                        
                        
                           359.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           1576.
                           Anno M.D.LXXVI.
                        QVeene ELIZAB. is offered a match by the French.
                        
                           361.
                        
                        A confuſion in the Netherlands: Antwerpe ſacked by the Spaniſh mutiners.
                        
                           362.
                        
                        The comming of Iohn d'Auſtria into Flanders.
                        
                        
                           363.
                        
                        
                           Sir Martin Forbiſher ſent to diſcouer the Straits in the North part of America.
                        
                        
                           364.
                        
                        The death of the Emperour Maximilian, and of the Elector Palatine, heauy to Queene ELIZABETH, who ſends Sir Philip Sidney Ambaſſador extraordinary to Rodulphus his Succeſſour.
                        
                           365.
                        
                        The death of Walter Deuoreux, Earle of Eſſex, and of Sir Anthony Coke.
                        
                        
                           367.
                        
                        Tumults in Ireland, and William Drury made Preſident of Munſter.
                        
                           368.
                        
                        The Queene takes pitty of the Iriſh.
                        
                        
                           369.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           Anno M.D.LXXVII.1577.
                        
                        
                           AVſtria inclined to peace at Queene ELIZABETHS perſwaſion.
                        
                           370.
                        
                        The Prince of Orange diuerts her from it.
                        
                           371.
                        
                        Sir Thomas Copley made Baron in France.
                        
                           372.
                        
                        
                           Iohn of Auſtria's diſsimulation.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        Why Queen ELIZABETH couenanted with the Scots.
                        
                           373.
                        
                        Spaine is pleaſed with it.
                        
                           375.
                        
                        England the Ballance of Europe.
                        
                           376.
                        
                        
                           Prieſt Maine executed▪ Baron of Latimer, and Secretarie Smith of Saffron Walden dyes.
                        
                           377.
                        
                        Rebellion againe in Ireland, and Rorio Oge is ſlaine, Harington and Cosby wounded.
                        
                           378.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Anno M.D.LXXVIII.1578.
                        
                        QVeene ELIZABETH's care for the Low-Countries.
                        
                           380.
                        
                        Count Swartzeberg, Bellieure, and Cobham Deputy for France, Germany, and England, and for the treaty of peace, and Egremond Ratcliffe and his aſſociate are put to death, and Don Iuan de Auſtria dyes.
                        
                           381.
                        
                        
                           Aniou's Duke purſues his intended marriage with Qu. ELIZ. and Leiceſter murmurs at it.
                        
                           383.
                        
                        The Counteſse of Lenox death.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        King IAMES ſends an Ambaſsador to Queene ELIZAB.
                        
                        
                           385.
                        
                        
                           Morton, Regent, takes vpon him the adminiſtration of the Realme againe.
                        
                           386.
                        
                        The Peeres are againſt him.
                        
                           387.
                        
                        How to inuade England, conſulted by Spaine.
                        
                           387.
                        
                        
                           Thomas Stukeley, a Traytor, takes Armes againſt his Countrey, and is ſlaine with three Kings.
                        
                           388.
                        
                        
                           William Drury made Lord Deputie of Ireland.
                        
                           389.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           1579.
                           Anno M.D.LXXIX.
                        
                           CAſſimiere, Palatin's Sonne, comes into England.
                        
                           390.
                        
                        Queene ELIZABETH ſends money into Holland.
                        
                           391.
                        
                        One is ſhot with a Piſtoll, who was in Queene ELIZABETH's Barge with her Maieſtie, the French Ambaſſadour, the Earle of Lincolne, and Sir Chriſtopher Hatton.
                        
                        
                           392.
                        
                        The Duke of Aniou comes into England.
                        
                           ibid.
                        
                        
                           Aimé Stuart, Lord Aubigny, into Scotland.
                        
                           393.
                        
                        Sir Nicholas Bacon, Sir Thomas Bromley, Sir Thomas Greſham, dye one after another.
                        
                           396.
                        
                        
                           Dauile murdered in his bed.
                        
                           398.
                        
                        The death of the Lord Druty, Deputie.
                        
                           401.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           1580.
                           Anno M.D.LXXX.
                        
                           ARthur, Lord Gray, made Deputie of Ireland.
                        
                           405.
                        
                        The Spaniards and Italians land in Ireland.
                        
                           406.
                        
                        They are all ſlaine, and the ſubiects hanged.
                        
                           407.
                        
                        The taking of Malines. And of an Earth-quake.
                        
                           409.
                        
                        The beginning of the Engliſh Seminaries.
                        
                           410.
                        
                        
                           Perſons and Campian, Ieſuites, came into England.
                        
                           413.
                        
                        Sir Francis Drake returnes into England.
                        
                           417.
                        
                        
                           Iohn Oxenham ſayleth into America.
                        
                        
                           419.
                        
                        
                           Drakes voyage, and warlike exploits.
                        
                           424.
                        
                        The Spaniards demand his riches.
                        
                           428.
                        
                        The death of Fitz-Allen, Earle of Arundell.
                        
                           430.
                        
                        The Earle of Lenox, enuyed by the Scots, is accuſed by them to Queene ELIZABETH.
                        
                        
                           432.
                        
                        
                           Alexander, Earle of Homes, Baron of Dunglas, is ſent from King IAMES to excuſe it.
                        
                           434.
                        
                        Regent Morton is caſt into priſon.
                        
                           435.
                        
                     
                  
                  The end of the Contents of the Second Booke.
               
               
                  
                  THE CONTENTS Of this royall and famous HISTORY. THE THIRD BOOKE.
                  
                     
                        
                           RANDOLPHS interceſsion for Morton, against Lenox.
                     
                     
                        Folio 1.
                     
                     The King of Scotts anſwer.
                     
                        2
                     
                     
                        Norris his victories in Freezland.
                     
                        4
                     
                     Albanois.
                     
                        5
                     
                     Drunkenneſſe brought out of the Low-countries.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     By what right the King of Spaine poſſeſſeth Portugall.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     The Qu. of France her title to Portugall, reiected.
                     
                        6
                     
                     
                        Antonio baniſht Portugall.
                     
                        7
                     
                     Couenants of marriage betweene the Duke of Anjou and Q. Elizabeth, concluded on.
                     
                        8
                     
                     
                        The K. of France vrgeth the marriage, and the Q. of Engl. deferreth.
                     
                        10
                     
                     Qu. Elizabeth giueth the Duke of Anjou a Ring.
                     
                        12
                     
                     The queene much diſquieted.
                     
                        13
                     
                     Reaſons, diſſwading her from marriage, and a booke ſet out against it.
                     
                        14
                     
                     The Queens declaration against this pernicious libell.
                     
                        15
                     
                     
                        Champian the Ieſuite, and other Prieſts put to death.
                     
                        17
                     
                     New lawes against Papiſts.
                     
                        18
                     
                     The Duke of Anjou ſayleth into Flanders.
                     
                        19
                     
                     A Comet.
                     
                        21
                     
                     Qu. Elizabeth beſtoweth the Order of the Garter vpon the King of Denmarke.
                     
                        21
                     
                     The treaty concerning the queene of Scotts is deferred.
                     
                        22
                     
                     
                        Gowry and others tumult in Scotland.
                     
                        23
                     
                     The Duke of Lenox driuen out of Scotland.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     An Ambaſsie from the French K. for the deliuery of the king of Scots.
                     
                        24
                     
                     The qu. of Scotland's letter to queen Eliz
                              •
                           beth.
                     
                     
                        25
                     
                     The Duke of Lenox returnes thorough England.
                     
                        33
                     
                     Conſultations about the deliuery of the queene of Scotland.
                     
                        34
                     
                     The K. of Scotland ſeekes the loue of the queene of England.
                     
                        36
                     
                     The King of Scotland ſets himſelfe at liberty.
                     
                        37
                     
                     
                        Walſingham is ſent into Scotland from queene Elizabeth.
                     
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     The king of Scots anſwers him freely.
                     
                        38
                     
                     
                        Walſinghams remonstrations to his ſacred Maieſty.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     The King anſwereth them.
                     
                        39
                     
                     His Maieſty reeſtabl
                           •
                        ſhed the reputation and honour of the Duke of Lenox, cauſing likew
                           •
                        ſe his children to returne into Scotland.
                     
                        39
                     
                     The Miniſters of Scotland are againſt their Kings authority.
                     
                        40
                     
                     A peace obtained for the King of Sweden.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     The Emperour deſires alliance with England, and is a ſuiter to her Maieſty to graunt him an Engliſh Lady for his wife.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     The Emperours death.
                     
                        41
                     
                     A Polonian Nobleman commeth into England to ſee queene Elizabeth.
                     
                     
                        42
                     
                     A wonderfull earth-quake in Dorſet-ſhire.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     The death of Thomas Ratcliffe Earle of Eſſex.
                     
                        43
                     
                     Sir Humfrey Gilbert drowned by ſhipwrack.
                     
                        44
                     
                     The death of E. Grindall Archbiſh. of Canterbury.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     
                        Iohn Whitgift preferred to bee Archbiſhop of Canterbury.
                     
                        45
                     
                     The Engliſh betray Aloſt; and do deliuer

it into the hands of the cruell Spaniard.
                     
                        48
                     
                     A miſerable end of traytors.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     The Earle of Deſmond is ſlaine.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     
                        Nicholas Sanders an Engliſh Seminary Prieſt famiſht himſelfe.
                     
                        49
                     
                     Viſcount of Baltinglaſſe fled out of Ireland.
                     
                        50
                     
                     Labouring men ſent into Ireland.
                     
                        51
                     
                     The geſtures and behauiour of Sir Iohn Perrot, Viceroy of Ireland.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Troubles in Scotland.
                     
                        52
                     
                     The Earle of Gowry is taken, the conſpirators are d
                           •
                        ſperſed, queene Elizabeth ſuccoureth ſome of them, the king demandeth them by the league; but in vaine.
                     
                        53
                     
                     
                        Walſingham fauoureth the fugitiue Hunſdon againſt them.
                     
                        54
                     
                     The power of a Secretary argued.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     The arraignement of Gowry.
                     
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     He is beheaded.
                     
                        55
                     
                     The treaſon of Fr. Throkmorton.
                     
                     
                        56
                     
                     The Lo: Paget retyreth into France.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     The queenes clemency towards Papiſts.
                     
                        57
                     
                     The Prieſts are baniſhed.
                     
                        58
                     
                     Spaniſh Ambaſſadour ſent out of England.
                     
                        59
                     
                     
                        Thokmortons confeſsion.
                     
                        61
                     
                     A new treaty with the qu. of Scots.
                     
                        63
                     
                     She anſwereth propoſitions made vnto her.
                     
                        64
                     
                     She demandeth to be aſſociated to the kingdome with her ſonne.
                     
                        65
                     
                     The queene of Scotts maketh new propoſitions.
                     
                        66
                     
                     The Scotts, of the Engliſh faction, oppoſe them.
                     
                        67
                     
                     The inſolency of the Scottiſh Miniſters.
                     
                        68
                     
                     
                        Buchanans writings reproued.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     The Scottiſh and Engliſh make incurſions one vpon another.
                     
                        69
                     
                     
                        Patrick Grayes Ambaſſage.
                     
                        ib.
                     
                     The queen of Scotts committed to new guardians.
                     
                        72
                     
                     Councell holden amongst the Papiſts.
                     
                        73
                     
                     The death of the Earle of Weſtmerland
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     The death of Plowden.
                     
                     
                        ib.
                     
                     
                        Alancon dyeth, and the Prince of Orenge is ſlaine.
                     
                        74
                     
                     The French king inueſted with the Order of the Garter.
                     
                        75
                     
                     Is accuſed of treaſon.
                     
                        76
                     
                     His confeſsion.
                     
                        77
                     
                     He conſulteth with the Ieſuites about the murdering of the queene.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     He diſcloſeth the matter to the queen.
                     
                        78
                     
                     
                        Alans booke addeth freſh courage to him.
                     
                        79
                     
                     
                        Neuill offereth him his helpe.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     
                        Parry is arraigned and executed.
                     
                        80
                     
                     
                        Lawes demanded in Parliament againſt Biſhops, and against Non-reſidents.
                     
                        81
                     
                     Lawes againſt Ieſuites and Prieſts.
                     
                        82
                     
                     The Earle of Arundell reſolueth to flye out of England.
                     
                        83
                     
                     The Earle of Northumberland is found dead.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     The cauſes of his impriſonment manifest.
                     
                        85
                     
                     Lamentation for the Earle of Northumberland.
                     
                        87
                     
                     Queene Elizabeth laboureth to contract a league with the Princes of Germany.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     The like with the king of Scotts.
                     
                        88
                     
                     Ar
                           •
                        at
                           •
                        on of the death of Ruſſell and the manner thereof.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     The death of Thomas Carre.
                     
                     
                        90
                     
                     The fugitiue Scots are ſent out of England back into Scotland.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     They are reconciled vnto the King.
                     
                        92
                     
                     The rebellion of the Bourkes in Ireland.
                     
                     
                        93
                     
                     The Sccots of Hebrides called into Ireland.
                     
                        94
                     
                     The Gouernour laboureth for a peace, but in vaine.
                     
                        95
                     
                     He purſueth the Scotts, and defeateth them.
                     
                        96
                     
                     The States of the Netherlands conſult of a Protector.
                     
                        97
                     
                     They are ref
                           •
                        ſed of the French, and the Engliſh conſult about it.
                     
                        98
                     
                     The Dutch offer themſelues to the queene.
                     
                        100
                     
                     Antwerpe is yeelded vp: the queene deliberateth with her ſelfe, and takes vpon her the protection.
                     
                        101
                     
                     Vnder what conditions.
                     
                        102
                     
                     Queene Elizabeth publiſheth the cauſes, and ſends to the Weſt Indies, to diuert the Spaniard.
                     
                        103
                     
                     
                        Iames town taken from the Spaniard.
                     
                        104
                     
                     Hiſpaniola, or S. Dominick ſurpriſed.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Spaniards motto, Auarice and Couetouſneſſe.
                     
                     
                        105
                     
                     Carthagena aſſaulted.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Saint Anthony and S. Helena fired by the Engliſh.
                     
                        106
                     
                     Booty of the Engliſh voyage and expedition.
                     
                        107
                     
                     A ſearch made for a diſcouery of a way to the Eaſt Indies.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     An Edict againſt Woad.
                     
                        108
                     
                     Death of the Earle of L
                           •
                        ncolne, and of the Earle of Bedford.
                     
                        109
                     
                     Earle of Leister ſent into Holland.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     His inſtruction.
                     
                        110
                     
                     Abſolute authority giuen to the Earle of Leyſter, by the States.
                     
                        111
                     
                     Queen Elizabeth offended thereat, ſhe expoſtulateth the matter.
                     
                        112
                     
                     The States excuſe themſelues.
                     
                        113
                     
                     Leiſter ſendeth ſuccour to the city of Graue: it is yeelded, and the Spaniard expelled.
                     
                        114
                     
                     
                        An aduentrous enterpriſe.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Venolo is loſt.
                     
                        115
                     
                     Axell is taken.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Graueline attempted.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Ausborough beleagred.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Sir Philip Sidney ſlaine.
                     
                        116
                     
                     States of Holland complaine to Leyſter.
                     
                        117
                     
                     He returneth into England.
                     
                        118
                     
                     Earle of Arundell queſtioned, and anſwereth for himſelfe.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     King of Denmarke intercedeth for a peace with the queene of England.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Queene Elizabeth anſwereth.
                     
                        119
                     
                     She furniſheth Henry king of Nauarr with money.
                     
                        120
                     
                     Shee deſireth a league with Scotland.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Ieſuites and Popiſh Prieſts ſuggeſt diuerſe things to the queene of Scots.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     King of Scotland propoundeth conditions, and is not a whit deterred by the French.
                     
                        121
                     
                     King Iames anſwer to them.
                     
                        122
                     
                     A conſpiracy againſt queene Elizab.
                     
                     
                        129
                     
                     How diſcouered.
                     
                        130
                     
                     
                        Ballard returneth into France.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     
                        Ballard ſent back into England, meeteth with Babing
                              •
                           on.
                     
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     
                        Babington receiueth letters from the queene of Scots.
                     
                        131
                     
                     He writeth back to her, and ſhe anſwereth him.
                     
                        132
                     
                     His aſſociates in the conſpiracy.
                     
                        133
                     
                     
                        Babington giueth to euery one his taske.
                     
                        134
                     
                     They conſult together.
                     
                        135
                     
                     
                        Babington vndertakes to bring in forreine ayde, and ſends Ballard to worke for him.
                     
                        136
                     
                     
                        Gifford diſcouereth all the conſpiracy.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Sendeth the letters hee receiued, to Walſingham.
                     
                     
                        137
                     
                     
                        Ballard is taken.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     
                        Babington ſolliciteth for Ballards liberty, and falleth into the ſame net.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Getteth himſelfe out, lyeth in a wood, and is found.
                     
                        138
                     
                     All the reſt of the conſpirators are diſcouered.
                     
                        139
                     
                     Queene of Scots kept with a guard, and ſeparated from her ſe
                           •
                        uants.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Her coffer, with letters ſent to the qu.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     
                        Giffard ſent into France, dyeth miſerably.
                     
                        140
                     
                     The traytors come to iudgement.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Queene of Scots Secretary examined.
                     
                        143
                     
                     King of France aduertiſed.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Sundry opinions how to diſpoſe of the Sccottiſh queene.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     By what law ſhe ſhould be iudged.
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           44
                     
                     Commiſsion granted to that end.
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     Who met at Fotheringham Caſtle.
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           46
                     
                     
                        Her ſudden anſwer to the letters.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     She refuſeth to be tryed.
                     
                        148
                     
                     Exception againſt the new law.
                     
                        149
                     
                     Sir Chriſtopher Hatton perſwadeth her to appeare.
                     
                        150
                     
                     Her tergiuerſation.
                     
                        151
                     
                     She yeeldeth at laſt to appeare and anſwer.
                     
                        152
                     
                     Manner of the ſitting.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Lord Chancellors ſpeech.
                     
                        153
                     
                     Her proteſtation, recorded.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Proceeding.
                     
                        154
                     
                     She denieth the former allegation.
                     
                        ib.
                     
                     Copies of letters ſhewed.
                     
                        155
                     
                     Extracts out of Babingtons confeſsion.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Shee is vrged with the confeſsions of Sauage and Ballard.
                     
                     
                        156
                     
                     
                        Walſingham is blamed.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Maketh his Apologie.
                     
                        157
                     
                     
                        Pagets and Babingtons letters produced.
                     
                        158
                     
                     Secretaries teſtimonies.
                     
                        ibid
                     
                     Their credites queſtioned.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Arguing about transferring the kingdome.
                     
                        159
                     
                     Giuing of a penſion to Morgan excuſed.
                     
                        160
                     
                     Queene of Scots offereth the Duke of Guiſe and her ſonne pledges.
                     
                        161
                     
                     Lord Burghley's anſwer.
                     
                        162
                     
                     She interrupteth him, but hee proceedeth.
                     
                        163
                     
                     Letters ſhewed againe.
                     
                        164
                     
                     She interrupteth their reading.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Her Secretaries not to be credited.
                     
                        ib.
                     
                     She is accuſed againe for transferring the kingdome, and accuſeth her Secretaries of periury.
                     
                        165
                     
                     Sir Thomas Egertons demonstration.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     She craueth a hearing in open Parliament.
                     
                        ibid
                     
                     Sentence pronounced against her.
                     
                        166
                     
                     Declaration that the ſentence against the queen of Scotl. was not preiudiciall to her ſonne.
                     
                        167
                     
                     The States approue the ſentence.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Queene Elizabeth's anſwer.
                     
                        168
                     
                     Some other remedy deſired by the qu.
                     
                        172
                     
                     Anſwer to her.
                     
                        ibid
                     
                     Her reply to them.
                     
                        173
                     
                     Queene of Scotland is certified of her Iudgement.
                     
                        177
                     
                     French Ambaſſadour ſtayeth the publiſhing of the ſentence.
                     
                        178
                     
                     Courage of the queene of Scots.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     A requeſt made to queene Elizabeth.
                     
                     
                        179
                     
                     Opinions of the queene of Scots cauſe.
                     
                        180
                     
                     Queen of Scotlands ſonne intercedeth for her.
                     
                        18
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Some Scots againſt her.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     King of Scots propoundeth ſome thing
                           •
                         conſiderable.
                     
                        18
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Bellieures reaſons for the queene of Scotland.
                     
                        18
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Anſwers to his reaſons.
                     
                        28
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        French Ambaſſador attempteth queen Elizabeth's life.
                     
                        192
                     
                     
                        Stafford diſcouereth it.
                     
                        193
                     
                     French Ambaſſador rebuked.
                     
                        194
                     
                     Whether an Ambaſſador be bound to diſcouer any attempt againſt the Prince to whom he is ſent.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Buſineſſe weighed.
                     
                        196
                     
                     Courtiers perſwade by reaſons.
                     
                        197
                     
                     The queene perplexed with doubtfull feares.
                     
                        199
                     
                     She cauſeth a Warrant to be drawne for the execution.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Her Councell ſend ſecretly.
                     
                        200
                     
                     The queene of Scotland prepares her ſelfe for death.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Her ſpeech.
                     
                        201
                     
                     She is brought to the ſcaffold.
                     
                        202
                     
                     Her ſpeeches to Meluine her ſteward,
                     
                        203
                     
                     Alſo to the Earles.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     In the behalfe of her owne ſeruants.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Her attendance by officers to the ſcaffold.
                     
                        204
                     
                     Her prayers.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Her laſt words.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Deane of Petherboroughs ſpeech.
                     
                        205
                     
                     Her variety of fortunes related.
                     
                        206
                     
                     Her Epitaph.
                     
                        207
                     
                     Gods prouidence plainly ſeene in her death.
                     
                        208
                     
                     
                        Queene Elizabeth is much grieued at her death.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Is angry with her Councell.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Her letter to the King of Scotland.
                     
                        209
                     
                     Dauiſon brought into the Star-chamber.
                     
                        210
                     
                     He is obiected againſt.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     He anſwereth for himſelfe.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     He is vrged vpon his owne confeſsion.
                     
                        211
                     
                     He is reproued by the queenes Sergeants.
                     
                        212
                     
                     Iudges giue their opinion.
                     
                        ibid
                     
                     He is chekt.
                     
                        213
                     
                     Lord Gray defendeth him.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Earles agree with him.
                     
                        214
                     
                     Sentence giuen againſt Dauiſon.
                     
                     
                        215
                     
                     A requeſt made to the Commiſsioners.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     
                        Dauiſon his particular Apology.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Indignation of the Scots
                     
                        217
                     
                     Suggeſtions to the king.
                     
                        218
                     
                     
                        Drake ſent into Spaine.
                     
                        221
                     
                     
                        Stanley and Yorke traytors.
                     
                        223
                     
                     
                        Leyceſter blamed.
                     
                        228
                     
                     Death of Henry Neuill.
                     
                     
                        234
                     
                     Baron of Abergauenny.
                     
                        236
                     
                     Of the Ducheſſe of Somerſet.
                     
                     
                        237
                     
                     Of Radolph Sadleir.
                     
                     
                        238
                     
                     Of ſir Thomas Bromley.
                     
                     
                        240
                     
                     Of the Earle of Rutland.
                     
                        241
                     
                     Of ſir Chriſtopher Hatton Lo. Chancellour.
                     
                        242
                     
                     
                        William Fitz-William Deputy of Ireland.
                     
                        250
                     
                     
                        Great preparations in Spaine to inuade England, and by what counſail.
                     
                        252
                     
                     The reaſon.
                     
                        253
                     
                     Conſultation how to aſſault and ſubdue England.
                     
                        254
                     
                     Preparation in Flanders.
                     
                        255
                     
                     The Pope giues aſsistance.
                     
                        256
                     
                     Conſultation how to defend the kingdome.
                     
                        257
                     
                     King of Scotlands alacrity against the Spaniard.
                     
                        258
                     
                     Commiſsioners ſent into Flanders to treat of peace.
                     
                        259
                     
                     Propoſitions of the Engliſh anſwered.
                     
                        260
                     
                     Complaint made vnto the Duke of Parma.
                     
                        262
                     
                     Conference of peace breakes.
                     
                        263
                     
                     The Spaniſh Armado.
                     
                        264
                     
                     Sets forth, and is diſperſed.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Sets out againe.
                     
                        266
                     
                     The Engliſh Nauy ſets out.
                     
                        267
                     
                     The firſt fight.
                     
                        268
                     
                     Ability of the Engliſh Elect.
                     
                        269
                     
                     
                        Peter Valdes taken.
                     
                        270
                     
                     The Ship of Oquenda taken.
                     
                        271
                     
                     Admirall of Englands prouidence.
                     
                        273
                     
                     The third fight.
                     
                        275
                     
                     Knights created for their valour, by the Lord Admirall.
                     
                        276
                     
                     Diuers Noblemen and Knights ioyne with the Engliſh Fleet.
                     
                        277
                     
                     Spaniſh Fleet at anchor.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Duke of Parma ſent for by the Spaniard, but he is vnprepared.
                     
                        278
                     
                     Hollanders good ſeruice.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Spaniards flight.
                     
                        279
                     
                     
                        Hugh Moncada ſlaine.
                     
                        280
                     
                     Fourth combate.
                     
                        281
                     
                     The Spaniards reſolue to return home by the North Sea.
                     
                        282
                     
                     Queene Eliz. viſites her Campe.
                     
                        283
                     
                     Conditions offered vnto the King of Scotts.
                     
                        284
                     
                     Money coyned in memory of this famous victory.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Miſery of the Spaniards in Ireland.
                     
                        285
                     
                     Cauſes of the defeat.
                     
                        ibid
                     
                     Patience of the Spaniard in this ouerthrow.
                     
                        286
                     
                     A generall thankeſgiuing and publick reioycing in England.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Prayſe of thoſe who were of the Engliſh Nauy.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Publike ioy encreaſed by good newes out of Scotland.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     
                        Leiceſters goods are ſold.
                     
                        289
                     
                     Bergen ap Zone beſieged by the Duke of Parma.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Who rayſeth the ſiege.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Innou
                           •
                        tions in England.
                     
                        ibid.
                     
                     Martin Mar-Prelate, and other ſcandalous bookes.
                     
                        290
                     
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE HISTORIE OF THE MOST High, Mighty, and Inuincible Princeſſe,Booke 1. 1558. Queene ELIZABETH, of moſt happy and neuer-dying memory: OR ANNALLS Of all the moſt remarkable things that happened during her bleſſed Raigne ouer the Kingdomes of England and Ireland, &c.
                  
                     The firſt yeere of her Raigne, Anno 1558.
                     
                     
                        AFter that for certaine houres,
                           Queene Maries death is knowne.
                         the deceaſe of Queene MARY had beene concealed, the Peeres, Prelates and Commons of England, being at that time aſſembled together in Parliament: Firſt, notice was giuen to them of the vpper houſe, which were in a manner ſtrucke ſilent with griefe and aſtoniſhment for a while. But they preſently after rowzed vp their

ſpirits and amazed ſenſes, moderating their mournings with ioy, either not to ſeeme altogether ſad, or ſorrowfull, that Queene ELIZABETH ſucceeded the Crowne; or elſe ioyfull, that by the death of Queene MARY, the ſucceſſion thereof fell to her Maieſty: ſo they bent their cares to publike affaires, and with a common accord and firme reſolution, concluded and agreed, that by the law of ſucceſſion in the 35. yeere of King HENRY the eighth, ELIZABETH was, & ought to be declared true and legitimate Heire of the Kingdome. Therefore at that inſtant Nicholas Heath, Lord Archbiſhop of Yorke, and Lord Chancellour of England, carried the firſt newes to thoſe of the Lower-houſe, giuing them to vnderſtand, with much ſorrow and ſighs, that death preuenting the courſe of nature, had depriued them of a Queene, no leſſe fauourable to the Roman Religion, then kinde and louing to the Common wealth, and that each member of the Vpper-houſe had receiued ſuch extreme griefe thereby, that they ſeemed to be comfortleſſe, without hope of conſolation, if God (through his ſpeciall grace & fauour towards the Engliſh Nation) had not reſerued for them ELIZABETH, another Daughter to King HENRY the 
                           •
                        . to ſucceed her Siſter, and that her right to the Crowne was ſo euident and true, that no man could, nor ought to make any doubt or queſtion thereof, and that the Peeres and Prelates of this Realme had all, with one accord and voice determined, that ſhe ſhould be forthwith publiſht Queene, and proclaimed Soueraigne, if they were ſo pleaſed to condeſcend thereunto. Which words being ſcarce vttered, the whole Aſſembly immediatly, with a common acclamation cryed aloud,
                           Queene Elizabeth is proclaimed Queene by the Kings & Heraulds of Armes.
                         GOD SAVE QVEENE ELIZABETH, that her Raigne may be long and happy. And immediatly, the whole Parliament riſing, ſhe was openly proclaimed Queen by ſound of Trumpets (firſt in Weſtminſter-Hall; and then ſoone after, thorow the whole City of London) by the title of Queene of England, France and Ireland, and Defendreſſe

of the faith, with the happy applauſe and ioyfull ſhouting of all the people (vndoubted preſages, truly moſt happy) for indeed no Prince was euer cheriſht of his people and Subiects with more ardent and conſtant loue, and zealous affection, then this Queene was, nor none receiued and welcommed with more reſpect and ioy, then ſhe hath beene, nor bleſſed and prayed for with more vowes and prayers, ſo often iterated, as this happy Princeſſe hath beene all her life time: chiefly, when ſhee ſhewed her ſelfe in publike, or openly abroad.
                     Queene ELIZABETH was about fiue and twenty yeeres of age when her Siſter died. But ſhe was ſo rarely qualified by aduerſity, and ſo well accompliſht and accommodated by experience (which are moſt effectuall Tutors) that ſhe had purchaſed Prudence and Iudgement, farre aboue the capacity of her age, and of her pregnant wit and admirable wiſdome: ſhe gaue ſufficient proofe and worthy teſtimony in the election and choice that ſhee made of her Priuie Councellors; for ſhe tooke into her Priuie Councell,
                           Her Maieſtie makes choice and election of a priuie Councell.
                         the aforeſaid Nicholas Heath, Archbiſhop of Yorke, a Prelate no leſſe prudent, then modeſt and diſcreet, William Poulet, Marqueſſe of Wincheſter, Lord high Treaſurer of England, Henry Fitz-Allen, Earle of Arundel, Francis Talbot, Earle of Shrewsbury, Edward Stanley, Earle of Darby, William Herbert, Earle of Pembrooke, Edward, Baron of Clynton, Lord high Admirall, The Lord Howard, Baron of Effingham, Lord Chamberlaine, Sir Thomas Cheney, Sir William Peter, Sir Iohn Maſon, Sir Richard Sackuile, Knights, and Nicholas Wotton, Deane of Canterbury. All which had beene Priuie Councellors to Queene MARY, and profeſſing her owne Religion. Shee adioyned to them by temporizing (according to the time) theſe vndernamed (who were all Proteſtants, and had had no office at all) nor charge of gouernment in Queene MARIES Raigne) William Parr, Marqueſſe of Northampton, Francis, Lord Ruſsell, Earle of Bedford, Thomas Parr, Edward Rogers,

Ambroſe Caue, Francis Knollys, and William Cicill, who before had beene Secretary to King EDVVARD the ſixth, a noble Gentleman, moſt wiſe, vnderſtanding and iudicious, whoſe learning and worth exceeded many others: and a little after ſhe brought in Sir Nicholas Bacon, whom ſhe made Lord Keeper of the great Seale of England. She ſo ordered and tempered them in place with all thoſe which ſucceeded ſince in ſuch ſort, that they were true, faithfull, and affectionate to her Maieſty, and ſhe alwaies free, and not ſubiect to any.
                     
                        
                           Her Maieſtie hath a ſpeciall care aboue all things to re-eſtabliſh the true Religion.
                        At theſe happy beginnings, her firſt and chiefeſt care was, to re-eſtabliſh the Proteſtant Religion: the which, as much by the inſtruction and knowledge that ſhee had receiued thereof from her infancy, as alſo by her owne particular iudgement, ſhe firmely held and maintained to be very true, and moſt conformable to the holy Scripture, and to the ſincerity of the primitiue Church, & ſo effectually reſoluing in her heart to ſettle and re-eſtabliſh the ſame, that ſhe imployed to that purpoſe ſome of her Councellors, being the moſt intimate: & with the reſt of the other Lords of her moſt honorable Priuy-Councel, ſhe tooke order that the Ports & Hauen-Townes ſhould be faſt ſhut, ſecured, and fortified. The Tower of London, ſhe committed to the care of one, whoſe fidelity and loyalty had been fully approued; a new Commiſſion ſhe ſent to Thomas Earle of Suſſex,
                        
                           She ordaines and ſettles ſtates and domeſticall affaires.
                         Lord Deputie of Ireland who with a Garriſon of three hundred and twenty Horſe, and one thouſand, three hundred and ſixty foot, yeelded in ſubmiſſion the whole Countrey, which otherwiſe had not bin quiet nor peaceable. Alſo, the like Commiſſion ſhee ſent, with a clauſe or reſtraint, not to conferre any office to Iudges and Magiſtrates, for to hinder the Conuocation of the Aſſembly of the iuriſdiction by the authority there appointed. New Iuſtices and Sheriffes ſhee likewiſe eſtabliſhed in each County, and tooke order, that no money nor coine ſhould be tranſported by exchange out of the Realme to forraine Nations beyond Sea; and that the Preachers ſhould deſiſt and abſtaine

from treating of queſtions, or diſputing about Controuerſies in Religion, and withall, concerning State-affaires out of the Kingdom, ſhe gaue order that Ambaſſadors ſhould be ſent to all Chriſtian Princes,
                           Her Maieſtie takes a great care for forraine affaires.
                         to let them vnderſtand Queen MARY's deceaſe. She therefore appointed and ſent with all ſpeed to the Emperour Ferdinando, Sir Thomas Chaloner, with letters of her owne hand-writing, by which ſhee gaue him notice of her Siſters death; and that firſt, by Gods ſpeciall grace, next, by her hereditary right, and through the generall loue and conſent of all her Subiects, ſhe ſucceeded theſe her Crownes and dignities. And that now ſhe deſired nothing more than to maintaine the loue, and to encreaſe the ancient amitie, which of long time had beene betweene the Houſes of England and Austria. To the King of Spaine, who at that time was in the Low-Countries, ſhe alſo ſent Ambaſſador the Lord Brook, Baron of Cobham, with the like Embaſſage and Commiſſion, by which ſhee of new imployed and delegated the Earle of Arundell; Turlbey, Biſhop of Ely, and L. Wotton, who before had beene delegated, and appointed by Queene MARY for the treatie of peace in the Citie of Cambray: and adioyned to them W. Howard, Baron of Effingham. She alſo ſecretly ſent Sir Henry Killigrew Ambaſſadour to the Princes of Germany, to inflame them in the zeale of Gods pure Religion. To the King of Denmarke, D. B. was ſent Ambaſſador: and to the Duke of Holſatia, alſo Armigild Waade.
                     
                     
                        Philip King of Spaine, hearing of the death of Queen MARY,
                           Queene Elizabeth is earneſtly ſolicited to marriage with Philip King of Spaine her Siſters Widdower.
                         fearing one way to loſe the title of King of England, and the force of that Realme, which were vnto him moſt vſefull and profitable, and likewiſe that the kingdomes of England, Ireland, and Scotland, ſhould be vnited to the Crowne of France, by the meanes of the high and mighty Princeſſe, the Queene of Scotland, hee therefore treats ſeriouſly of a match with Queene ELIZABETH, with promiſe to obtaine a ſpeciall diſpenſation from the Pope. And to that effect imployed the Earle of Ferie, who had viſited her MAIESTIE, by the

like meanes as he had done Queene MARY in her ſickneſſe. This Sutor puts Queene ELIZABETH into great anxiety and perplexity, conſidering how inconſiderate and ingratefull her Maieſtie might ſeeme to be in refuſing a Chriſtian Prince, who had already obliged her in other things much, but yet more in this, as to ſeeke her to his wife, through his owne free deſire and motion.
                     The French King likewiſe was in an extaſie, conſidering how important and dangerous it was to France, if Spaine her enemy ſhould vnite & adioyne to his kingdoms, the Realmes of England and Ireland: therefore hee vſeth his beſt endeuours at Rome, by the intermiſſion of the Biſhop of Angouleſme, to hinder the grant of ſuch diſpenſation, ſhewing to that end, that Queene ELIZABETH was held for Supportreſſe of the Proteſtant Religion, and (rather than faile) went about to declare her illegitimate: But all this moſt ſecretly and cloſely, for feare to irritate England, before that his affaires were throughly well ſettled. The Earle of Ferie contrariwiſe, on the other ſide, labours as hard to bring this marriage to paſſe, and to that end giues the Engliſh Papiſts to vnderſtand, (who were diſperſed throughout all parts of the Realme) that it was the ſole and onely way left for them to preſerue their Religion, and defend their ancient dignities and honours: and that if they ſhould contemne it, hee could not but deplore the miſery and calamity of England, as being out of money, vnprouided of men trained vp, and vnskild in the military diſcipline, void of fortification, and lacking munition and garriſons for Warre, and her Councellors of State depriued likewiſe of good aduice. And indeed to ſpeake truely, Englands affaires were at that time in a moſt miſerable caſe, and lamentable ſtate: for England had warre on the one ſide with Scotland, and on the other ſide with France; and was in a manner vndone by thoſe debts that King HENRY the Eighth, and King EDWARD the Sixt had run into, and her treaſury was exhauſt and empty, and the Town of Callais
                        
had beene but newly loſt, and the whole Countrey of Oyes, with all the munition and furniture of warre. The people here were diuided into contrarieties, through differency of religion, and the Queene left without any powerfull friend to aſſiſt her; hauing no alliance at all abroad with forrain Princes.
                     But when as her Maieſtie had more ſeriouſly agitated her ſpirit,
                           Her Maieſtie refuſed to marry with the King of Spaine.
                         and carefully conſidered in her minde the propoſition of this match, ſhee findes the holy Scripture expreſſely inioyning, that no woman ought to ioyne with him who had beene her ſiſters Husband, no more than it is lawfull for a man to marry his brothers widdow; and therefore that ſuch marriages were directly illegitimate, and wholly forbidden by Gods Law; although the Pope ſhould neuer ſo much grant a Diſpenſation. And moreouer, that if ſhe ſhould contract it by vertue thereof, ſhee ſhould acknowledge and proue her ſelfe illegitimate, ſith ſhee was iſſued from the match that King HENRY her father had contracted, after his diuorcing and putting away Katherine of Spaine,
                        
                           The reaſon why.
                         for hauing beene his brothers wife, which neuertheleſſe had beene approued iuſt and lawfull, according to the Diuine Law by all the Academies of Chriſtendome, and likewiſe the Synod of London, as well as that of Katherine, vniuſt and vnlawfull. Her Maieſtie therefore endeuours to ſtop, preuent, and hinder by little and little the courſe of King Philips ſuite, by an honeſt anſwer, truely modeſt, and well-beſeeming the chaſte integrity of her conſtant virginity, and chiefly grounded vpon ſcruple of her conſcience. But he, notwithſtanding all this, ſurceaſed not his ſuite, but perſiſted therein, vrging her with feruent and frequent Letters: By which ſhee obſerued the manners and behauiours of ſo great a King, compounded with grace and graue modeſty, and truely worthy his Maieſtie, the ſaid Letters being much by her admired, in the often publiſhing of them; yea, her Maieſtie taking pleaſure to imitate them, vntill ſome Nobles of her Court began to

defame and ſpeake againſt the matchleſſe pride and practices of the Spaniards. Alſo, ſome of the intimate Lords and fauorites of her Maieſties Priuy-Councell, fearing leſt the tender and young ſpirit of a Maide, often moued, might eaſily condeſcend to their deſires, told to her MAIESTIE ſecretly, that both her Maieſtie, and friends, with the whole Realme of England, were vndone, if in ſuch Diſpenſations, or in any thing elſe whatſoeuer, ſhe ſhould giue any credit, or make the leaſt eſtimation of the Popes authoritie and power, ſince that two of them had declared and publiſhed her Mother illegitimate, and vnlawfully ioyned in wedlocke with King HENRY the Eighth. Alſo, that by vertue of ſuch Declaration, the moſt high and moſt mighty Princeſſe the Queene of Scotland ſhould pretend right to the Crownes of England, &c. and that the Pope would neuer retract nor goe from that iudgement, and that her Maieſtie ſhould not expect nor looke for any thing good or iuſt from the Popes hand, who had beene enemies, and ſhewed themſelues vniuſt both towards her Maieſtie, and her Mother: And that the French King laboured hard, vſing his vtmoſt power and beſt endeuours at the Popes Court in Rome for to cauſe the high and mighty Princeſſe Mary Queene of Scotland, to be acknowledged and declared Queene of England; yet Queene ELIZABETH neuer intended nor meant in her heart to match with the King of Spaine, being quite contrary to her vertuous diſpoſition; hauing a feruent deſire and ſettled reſolution to ground and aduance the true Proteſtant Religion, to which ſhee was moſt zealous. Therefore deeming that ſhee could not vndertake or vphold a worthier thing, more agreeable to God, nor more efficacious for to quench the flames of the pretended loue of ſo importunate a Sutor, then to labour to procure an alteration of Religion with all poſſible meanes and ſpeede which could be, not doubting in ſo doing to alter likewiſe the will and intent of King Philip: Whereupon and forthwith her Maieſty conſulted and tooke aduice with her moſt intimate

and ſincere Priuy Councellors,Booke 1. 1559. how in aboliſhing the Roman Religion, ſhe could conueniently ſettle, in ſtead of it, the true Catholike and Chriſtian Faith, and examining what dangers might ſucceed and happen thereby,
                           Her Maieſty deliberates and labours for the re-eſtabliſhment of the Proteſtants Religion.
                         and how they could be preuented and auoyded: who fore-ſee and iudge what dangers could be procured either out of the Kingdome, or within the Realme: without, either by the Pope, who ſurely would not miſſe (raging with his excommunications) to expoſe the Realme as a prey to whoſoeuer could inuade it: Or by the French King, who taking ſuch opportunity at the occaſion, by that would ſlake and delay the Treatiſe of Peace, which was already begun in the City of Cambray: or elſe, and rather in the behalfe of the Royall Queene of Scotland, would declare open war with England, vnder colour of Enemies, and Heretiques,
                           She conſiders what dangers might happen therby.
                         and would poſſeſſe thereunto Scotland to condiſcend to it, which at that time was at his command and diſpoſing: Or by the Iriſh, who were moſt addicted to Papiſtry, and much apt and giuen to rebellion; or by the King of Spaine, who was then moſt mighty and powerfull in the Netherlands, Englands neighbouring Countries.
                     Vpon this, throughly and well conſidered,
                           Without the Realme.
                         they firſt reſolue: that for the Popes excommunication, her Maieſtie ſhould not feare, accounting it but as a brutiſh rage and fury, and that if a Peace was offered by the French King, it was behoofefull and requiſit to entertaine it; if not, to ſeek it by all meanes, becauſe in it, it would cōprehend the loue of Scotland, yet neuertheleſſe not to forſake or diſparage any kinde of waies, the Proteſtants of France and Scotland. Alſo, that it was requiſite to fortifie and ſtrengthen the Towne and Garriſon of Berwicke, with the reſt of the Frontires of Scotland, and Ireland, and by all meanes poſſible to increaſe and maintaine ſuch formal Ioue, and the ancient alliance with thoſe of Burgundie.
                     
                     Within the Realme: firſt,
                           Within the Kingdome.
                         by ſuch Nobles who had bin

deiected from the Queenes Priuy Councell;Booke 1. 1558. next, by ſuch Biſhops and Church-men, who ſhould be degraded and put out of their benefices and places; and after, by thoſe Iuſtices of the peace, that were for each County: as alſo, by the common people, who vnder Queen MARIES raigne were moſt affectionate to the Roman Church. Therefore they deemed and thought good, firſt, to depriue ſuch of their offices, and reprehend them by the ſeuerity of Laws, as Queene MARY had formerly vſed the Proteſtants: and therefore, to admit and inſtitute, in each place and office of command, the Proteſtants onely, and to ſettle them in euery Colledge of both Vniuerſities, and by the like meanes to diſcharge and turne out all Papiſts-Profeſſors, and Rectors there, and alſo ſuch Schoole-maſters and Tutors of Wincheſter, Aeton, and other free Schooles: and for thoſe, who being poſſeſt onely of a deſire of Change, (though Proteſtants) had begun to inuent a new Eccleſiaſticall Policie, that it was likewiſe requiſit to reprehend them in time: and to ſuffer and tolerate but one and the ſelfe-ſame Religion through the whole Realme, for feare that diuerſities of Religion ſhould kindle ſeditions betwixt & among the people of England, being a warlike Nation, both couragious and generous. Therefore ſpeciall charge and care was giuen to Sir Thomas Smith, a worthy Knight, truely iudicious and wiſe, alſo to the noble Gentlemen, M. Parker, Maſter Bill, Maſter Coxe, Maſter Grindall, Maſter Whitehead, and Maſter Pilkinton, (who all were moſt learned and temperate) for the correcting of the Liturgie, which had been before penned and publiſhed in Engliſh in King EDWARD the Sixt's raigne, without making any more priuy thereunto, but the Lord Marquis of Northampton, the Earle of Bedford, I. Gray of Pyrg, and Cecil.
                     
                     
                        
                           The Queene rebukes, and reprehends
                        But certaine Miniſters, impatient of delay, by the length of time which ranne and paſt away in theſe things, deſiring rather to runne before good Lawes, than to expect

them, in their feruent zeale began to preach the Goſpell of Chriſts true Doctrine, firſt, priuately in houſes, and then, openly in Churches at which, the Commons,
                           the impatience of certaine zealous Miniſters of the Word of God.
                         curious of nouelties, ranne thither, and whole flockes of people reſorted to their hearing, from all parts and places, in great multitudes, conteſting ſo earneſtly one with another (the Proteſtants againſt the Papiſts) vpon queſtions of controuerſies in Religion, that, for to preuent tumults and ſeditions, and alſo the occaſions of further quarrels and ſtrifes, the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie was, as it were, compelled of neceſſity to defend expreſſely by ſtrict Proclamation to all in generall, not to diſpute any more, nor enter into any ſuch queſtions: yet notwithſtanding, giuing full leaue and authoritie to reade to her people the holy Goſpell, and the Epiſtles and Commandements,
                           Queene Elizabeth allowes diuine Seruice to be read in the Engliſh Tongue.
                         (but not as yet to make any explication thereof) and to haue the Lords Prayer, the Apoſtolicall Creede, and the Letanie in the vulgar tongue. And for the reſt, ſhee ordained the Romane ſtile to be obſerued, vntill that, by the authoritie of a Parliament, the whole forme of Gods Diuine Seruice ſhould be ſettled, and of new inſtituted: and in the meane while,
                           Her Maieſtie celebrates her Siſters Funerall, and that of the Emperour Charles the Fifth.
                         her Maieſtie ſolemnized Qu. MARIES Funerall; which glorious preparation made then a moſt magnificent ſhew, in Weſtminſter: and ſhortly after, ſhee payed to Charles the Fifth his honours, who two yeares afore (rare example of all Caeſars, and more glorious than all his victories) in conquering himſelfe, had renounced his Empire, withdrawing himſelfe from this mortall life, to liue for euer wholly with God.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Booke 1. 1559.THE SECOND YEERE OF HER RAIGNE. Anno Domini, 1559.
                     
                     
                        
                           Queene Elibeth re-eſtabliſheth and creates diuers Noblemen.
                        
                        AT the beginning of this yeere, Queene ELIZABETH re-eſtabliſhed, and reſtored of new, W. Parr to the dignity of Marquis of Northampton, who vnder Queene MARIES raigne had beene degraded of that honour.
                     Her Maieſty alſo reconferred the Barony of Beauchamp, and Earledome of Hartford, vnto Edward Seymor, a noble Gentleman, who by the force of a priuat Law, the malice and enuy of his aduerſaries, had beene depriued of the greateſt part of his Patrimony, and Anceſtors honours. Her Maieſtie likewiſe honoured with the Title of Viſcount Bindon, the Lord Thomas Howard, ſecond ſonne to Thomas Duke of Norfolke, (who was father to the gracious Princeſſe Frances Dutcheſſe of Richmond and Lenox,
                        
now liuing.) Moreouer, her Maieſtie created Sir Henry Carie, Baron of Hunſdon, who was allyed to her Maieſty by the Lady M. Bullen; and that Noble Gentleman, Oliuer Saint Iohn, ſhee made Baron of Bletſo, who all were free from the Popiſh Religion. After this, her Maieſty is conuayed in pompe and Royall Magnificency,
                           On Wedneſday, the 23. day of Nouemb. Queene Elizabeth remoued from Hatfield vnto the Charterhouſe, to the Noble Lord NORTHS Houſe, where her Maieſty lay fiue dayes, and rode in open Charet, from the Lord NORTHS Houſe, along Barbican, entring into the City at Criple-Gate. and ſo came to the Tower, from thence to Weſtminſter, where ſhe was inaugurated.
                         from the Tower of London to Weſtminſter, thorow the Citie of London, with incredible applauſe, and generall acclamations, (which, as her Maieſtie was equally venerable, in ſight and hearing, increaſed meruailouſly) and the next morning, her Maieſtie was there inaugurated with the right of her Anceſtors, and anoynted by Owen Oglethorpe, Biſhop of Carlile, when as the Arch-Biſhop of Yorke, and diuers other Prelates, had refuſed the performance of that duty, through a ſuſpicious feare of the Roman Religion; conceiued partly, becauſe her Maieſty had beene brought vp from the Cradle, in the Proteſtant Religion: and partly alſo, that ſhe had a little before, forbidden a Biſhop (at the Diuine Seruice) from lifting vp and adoring the Hoſte▪ and likewiſe permitted to haue the Letany, Epiſtles & the Goſpell in Engliſh, which they held as execrable: Yet Queen ELIZABETH was truely godly, pious, and zealouſly deuoted: for her Maieſtie was not ſo ſoone out of her bed, but fell vpon her knees in her priuate Cloſet, praying to God deuoutly: Certaine houres were by her Maieſtie reſerued and vowed to the Lord. Moreouer, her Maieſtie neuer failed any Lords day and holy day to frequent the Chappell; neither was euer any Prince conuerſant in Diuine Seruice, with more deuotion, then her ſacred Maieſtie was. Shee zealouſly heard all the Sermons in Lent, beeing attyred in blacke, and very diligently gaue attention thereunto, according to the ancient vſe and cuſtome, although ſhee ſaid & repeated oftentimes, that which ſhe had read of HENRY the third, her Predeceſſor, that her Maieſtie had rather in her Prayers ſpeake to God deuoutly, then heare others

ſpeake of Him eloquently. And concerning the Croſſe, our bleſſed Lady, and the Saints, ſhe neuer conceiued irreuerently of them,
                           
                              Q. Elizabeths opiniō concerning ſacred things.
                           
                           
                              She cals a Parliament, which is held the ſecond yeere of her raigne.
                           
                         neither ſpake her ſelfe, nor ſuffered any others to ſpeake of them, without a certaine kinde of Reuerence.
                     Within few dayes after, there was a Parliament held, in which was enacted by a generall conſent: Firſt, that Queen ELIZABETH was and ought to bee, both by the Diuine and Ciuill Law, and the Statutes of this Realme, (and as I may vſe their proper termes and forme) the lawfull, vndoubted, and direct Queene of England, rightly and lawfully deſcending from the Royall Blood, according to the order of ſucceſſion; which was likewiſe formerly enacted by Parliament, in the fiue and thirtieth yeere of King HENRIE the Eighth; yet neuertheleſſe, that Law was not aboliſhed, by which her Father excluded both her and her Siſter MARY, from ſucceeding him in the Crowne: And therefore it was thought by ſome, that the Lord Bacon, vpon whom her Maieſty relyed, as an Oracle of the Law, had forgotten himſelfe, and was deſtitute in that particular of his wonted Prudencie, in not foreſeeing the euent: and eſpecially, becauſe the Duke of Northumberland had obiected the ſame both againſt her Siſter MARY, and her ſelfe; and to that end Queen MARY had aboliſhed it, in as much as concerned her ſelfe. At which time, there were ſome that drew againſt her Maieſtie moſt dangerous inuectiues and concluſions, in ſuch manner as if ſhe had not bin lawfull Queene, although the Lawes of England many yeeres agoe determined, Que la Couronne vnefois prinſe ofte toute ſorte de defaults. That the Crowne once poſſeſſed, cleareth and purifies all manner of defaults or imperfections. But many, on the other ſide, commended the wiſdome of the Lord Bacon therein, as vnwilling, in regard of ſuch confuſion of the Lawes and Acts, to open a wound already clozed vp with the Time: For, that which made for Queene

ELIZABETH, ſeemed to tend to the ſhame and diſgrace of Queene MARY. And therefore ſhee held her ſelfe to the Law made in the fiue and thirtieth yeere of King HENRY the Eighth, who reſtored and vpheld, in a certaine manner, each of their Honours.
                     Afterwards,
                           Propoſitions to reforme Religion.
                         there was in the Parliament likewiſe propounded, that foraſmuch as concerned the Crown of England, and the ancient iuriſdiction in Eccleſiaſticall matters, ſhould be re-eſtabliſhed, with the Lawes of King HENRY the Eighth, againſt the Sea of Rome; and of EDVVARD the Sixth, in the behalfe of the Proteſtants, which Queene MARY had vtterly aboliſhed; ordaining, That all Iuriſdictions, Priuiledges, and Spirituall Preheminences, which heretofore were in vſe, and appointed by Authority, for to correct Errours, Hereſies, Schiſmes, Abuſes, and other Enormities in Eccleſiaſticall Affaires, ſhould for euer remaine as vnited to the Crowne of England; and that the Queenes Maieſtie with her ſucceſſors, ſhould likewiſe haue full power to appoint Officers by their Letters Patents, to execute this Authority: neuertheleſſe, vpon this charge, that they ſhould not define any thing to be haereticall, but that which had beene declared ſuch long agoe, by the holy and Canonicall Scriptures, or by the foure firſt Oecuminike Councels, or others, according to the true and naturall ſenſe of the holy Scripture; or which ſhould afterward in ſome Synod, by the authority of the Parliament, and approbation of the Clergie of England, be declared, That euery Eccleſiaſticall Magiſtrate, and ſuch as receiue penſion out of the publike Treaſure, to aduance and promote themſelues in the Vniuerſities, to emancipate Pupils, to inueſt Domaines, or receiue ſeruants of the Royall Houſe, were oblig'd by Oath, to acknowledge her Royall Maieſtie, the ſole and ſoueraigne Gouernour of the Realme (for as much as concerneth the Title of Soueraigne Head of the Church of England, it pleaſed her not) in all things, or cauſes as

well ſpirituall as temporall, all forraigne Princes and Potentates excepted, entirely excluded, to informe of any cauſes within the Lands of her obeyſance.
                     
                        
                           The 18. of March.
                        But there were nine Biſhops that ſare the ſame day in the vpper Houſe of Parliament, and oppoſed themſelues, and were wilfully refractary againſt theſe Lawes (beeing then but foureteene aliue) namely, the Arch-Biſhop of Yorke, the Biſhops of London, of Wincheſter, of Worceſter, of Landaff, of Couentrie, of Exceter, of Cheſter, and of Carlil, with the Abbot of Weſtminſter. And amongſt the Nobility, there were none that gaue aduice that England ſhould bee reduced againe to the vnity of the Romane Church, and obedience of the Apoſtolike Sea, except the Earle of Shropſhire, and Anthony Browne, Vicount Montaigue; who, as I ſaid here before, was in Queene MARIES Raigne, ſent in Ambaſſage to Rome, by the States of the Kingdome, with Thurbey, Biſhop of Ely; who by a feruent zeale of Religion, inſiſted ſharpely, that it were a great ſhame for England, if ſhe ſhould retire ſo ſuddenly from the Apoſtolike Sea, vnto which it was but lately reconciled; and more danger, if by reaſon of ſuch reuolt, it ſhould be expoſed (by the thunder of an Excommunication) to the rage of her enemies: That by order and authority of the States, hee had, in the name of the whole Kingdome of England, offered obedience vnto the Pope, and hee could not but acquite himſelfe of this promiſe. And therefore he tryed and endeuoured to preuaile ſo much by Prayers, that they would not retyre or draw backe from the Sea of Rome, of which they held the Chriſtian Faith, which they had alwaies kept. But when theſe things were brought to the Lower Houſe, there were many more than in the vpper Houſe, that conſented ioyntly to theſe Lawes. Wherevpon the Papiſt, murmuring much, ſaid, that of a deliberate purpoſe, they had elected the moſt part of the Deputies amongſt the Proteſtants, aſwell of the Shires, as of the Cities & Corporations,

and that the Duke of Norfolke, and the Earle of Arundell, the moſt powerfull and mightyeſt amongſt the Peeres, had induſtriouſly bribed the ſuffrages for the profit which they drew, or hoped to draw thereby.
                     Spirits then diſagreeing for matters of Religion, by one and the ſame Edict, all perſons were forbidden to ſpeake irreuerently of the Sacrament of the Altar; and permitted to communicate vnder both ſpecies: And a Conference appointed againſt the laſt of March,
                        
                           They eſtabliſh a Diſpute betwixt Proteſtant and Papiſt.
                         betwixt the Proteſtants and the Papiſts, in which the States of the Land ſhould bee preſent; and for the ſame, to keepe and hold elect, for the Proteſtants, Richard Coxe, Whitehead, Edmund Grindall, Robert Horne, Edward Sandes, Edward Gueſts, Iohn Elmar, and Iohn Iewell: For the Papiſts, Iohn White, Biſhop of Wincheſter, Rad. Bain, of Couentrie and Lichfield, and Thomas Watſon of Lincolne; Doctor Cole, Deane of Saint Paul; Doctor Landgal, Arch-Deacon of Lewis, Doctor Harpeſfield of Canterbury, and Doctor Chatſie of Middleſexe. The Queſtions propounded, were theſe following: Of the celebration of the Diuine Seruice in the Vulgar Tongue: of the authority of the Church, for to eſtabliſh or aboliſh Ceremonies, according as it is expedient, and of the Sacrifice of the Maſſe. But all this Diſputation came to nothing;
                           The ſucceſſe thereof.
                         for after ſome conference, and writings deliuered from the one to the other ſide, and not agreeing vpon the forme of the diſputing, the Proteſtants began to triumph, as obtayning the Victory, and the Papiſts to complaine of their hard vſage, for not beeing aduertiſed but a day or two before: and that Sir Nicholas Bacon, the Lord Keeper (being a man little read in Theologie) and their great Enemie, ſate as Iudge, although he was but meerely appointed for Moderator. But the truth is, that hauing thought more ſeriouſly vpon this matter; they durſt not, without expreſſe order frō the Pope, call in queſtion ſuch high points which are not argued in the Church of Rome. And they

cryed of all ſides, When is it, that one ſhall knowe, what hee ought truely to beleeue, if it be alwaies permitted to diſpute of Faith? Diſputers of Religion alwaies returne to the Scepters, and ſuch like things. And the Biſhops of Lincolne and Wincheſter were ſo offended with it, that they were of opinion, that the Queen, and thoſe that had cauſed her to forſake the Church of Rome, ſhould be excommunicated, and puniſhed with impriſonment for it: But the wiſer ſort, that it muſt be left to the Iudgement of the Pope, for feare that thoſe which were her Subiects, ſhould not ſeeme, in doing this, to ſhake off their obedience due to their Princeſſe, and to diſplay the Enſigne of Sedition. And that was not hidden to the Pope,
                           Sir Edward Carne is detayned at Rome.
                         who beeing alſo preſently moued with Choller, commands Sir Edward Carne of Wales, a Ciuill-Lawier, who had beene Ambaſſadour at Rome for HENRY the Eighth, and MARY, and was then for Queene ELIZABETH, to quite this charge, and (to vſe the ſame termes) by the vigor or force of the commandement that was made vnto him, by the Oracle of the liuely voice of our moſt holy Lord the Pope, in vertue of the moſt holy obedience, and vpon paine of the greateſt Excommunication, and loſse of all his goods, not to goe out of the Citie, but to take vpon him the adminiſtration of the Hoſpitall of the Engliſh: And did it, to hinder, that hee ſhould not giue notice of the ſecret traines of the French, againſt Queene ELIZABETH, as he had done before, with a great care, for the loue he bore to his Countrey. Neuertheleſſe, ſome thought that this old man, voluntarily choſe this exile, for the zeale he bore to the Roman Religion.
                     
                        
                           Diſputes and ſtrifes for the Towne of Calais.
                        In the meane time, (I omit for a while the affaires of the Church and Parliament, to obſerue the order of time) the Embaſſadours of England & Spaine, which treated of Peace in the Citie of Cambray, were in debate with the French about the reſtitution of Calais, but they could not in any manner obtaine it, although they ſhould haue propounded

to quit thē of three Millions of Gold, which France ought by lawfull obligation. The Spaniard, who otherwiſe altogether different from Peace, held the Engliſh ſide, and ſurely with as much trueth as honour, becauſe the Queene had loſt this Town by his occaſion; & fore ſaw that it was expedient for Flanders, that it ſhould be in their obedience. The French interrupted him▪ ſaying, that ſhee alone could not recompence the damages which the Engliſh had done them, their Townes beeing taken by the Spaniards by reaſon of their ayde; and many Borroughs in baſe Brittaine were ſackt and burned; many Ships taken, and their Commerce or Traffique, which is the ſinewes of War, broken: That they had disburſed infinite ſummes of money, to hinder their firings; that Calais was the ancient patrimony of France, and that if it had beene loſt by Warre long agoe, it had alſo then beene recouered by Armes; therefore, that it ought not to be reſtored, and that the States of France had ſo reſolued. That ſurrendring it, were, to put weapons into their Enemies hands, and withdraw for euer the Kings Subiects from his obedience: and therefore that it was an vniuſt thing for the Engliſh to demand it. The Engliſh, on the contrary, maintained, that they demanded it with reaſon and Iuſtice; becauſe, ſay they, during one, yea, two ages, he had tooke Englands part, and that they had not onely conquer'd it by Warre, but that it was alſo falne vnto them by hereditary ſucceſſion, and by ceſſion made by vertue of the pactions and agreements, in exchanges of other places, which the Kings of England had likewiſe granted to them of France. That theſe damages ought not to be imputed to them, but to the Spaniards, who, againſt their will, had drawne and aſſociated them in this Warre; in which, through the loſſe of well-fortified places, & the taking of many of their Captaines, they had receiued much more damage than the French, and had had no profit therby. That all that the States of France order or decree, is

not reaſonable, becauſe it is only profitable; and that Calais could not be lawfully or iuſtly detayned, ſeeing that by the Conditions already agreed vpon, all the places that were taken in the late Warres, were reſtored vnto other Princes.
                     To which, the French replyed, that it was done in conſideration of the marriages which ought to be contracted with the other Princes, and hereupon propounded to marry the firſt Daughter who ſhould iſſue by the mighty Princeſſe Mary Queene of Scotland, and the Dolphin of France; with the firſt Sonne that might be procreated by Queene ELIZABETH, to whom ſhe ſhould bring in dowry the Towne of Calais; and that for this cauſe, the Queene of Scotland ſhould quit her right which ſhee had vnto the Kingdome of England; or otherwiſe, to marry the firſt Daughter which ſhould be borne of Queene ELIZABETH, with the eldeſt Sonne that ſhould deſcend from the Queene of Scotland: and hereupon the Engliſh ſhould renounce the right which they pretend vnto the Realme of France, and the French ſhould be diſcharged of all the debts they ought to England, and that Calais ſhould in the meane time remaine in their hands. But theſe propoſitions being vncertaine for another time, they ſought to win time, and increaſe the delayes, but were contemned by the Engliſh, who made as if they ſeemed not to haue heard them. As they ſtood vpon theſe termes, the Spaniard hauing aduice that Queene ELIZABETH did not onely breake the marriage which hee had offered her, but likewiſe changed many things in Religion, began to giue ouer the deſire which he ſeemed to haue before the reſtitution of Calais; and his Ambaſſadours almoſt loſing their patience, were ſomewhat of accord with the French: for the reſt made account to continue the warres no longer for Calais, vnleſſe the Engliſh would contribute more men and money as before, and would aduance it for ſixe yeere.

This raiſed the heart of the Cardinall of Lorraine, who aſſured the Spaniards that the Queen of Scotland his Niece was truely and vndoubtedly Queen of England, and therefore that the King of Spaine ought to imploy all his forces, if he made any account of iuſtice, to cauſe Calais to be deliuered into the hands of his Niece, the direct Queene of England. But the Spaniards, which ſuſpected the power of France, not hearing that willingly, tryed ſecretly to draw out of England the Lady Katherine Gray, the yonger Niece of King HENRY the Eighth, for his Siſters ſake, to oppoſe her to the Queene of Scotland, and the French, if Queene ELIZABETH ſhould happen to deceaſe, and to hinder thereby that France might not be augmented by the ſurcreaſe of England and Ireland; And ſtrongly inſiſted, that there ſhould be a Truce betwixt England, and France, vntill ſuch time they ſhould agree together, and that in the meane time Calais ſhould be ſequeſtred in the hands of the King of Spaine, as an Arbitrator of honour. But that was refuſed as much by the French as the Engliſh.
                     
                     Queene ELIZABETH had well preſaged that: for ſhee could not hope for any good from the Spaniards ſide, ſeeing that ſhe had contemned and deſpiſed to marry with their King, and changed Religion. She alſo had knowledge, that the treatie of Cambray was not made for any other purpoſe, but to exterminate & roote out the Religion of the Proteſtants. And truely the conſideration of her Sex, and the ſcarſitie of treaſure, made her Maieſty finde, that peace was more to be wiſht for than warre, though moſt iuſt. Alſo, it was her ordinary ſaying, that there was more glory in ſettling a peace by wiſdome, than in taking vp armes to make warre; neither did ſhee thinke that it was beſeeming either to her dignity, or to the dignity of the name of the Engliſh, to relye vpon the defence of the Spaniard. And ſhe thought therefore, that it was better for her to make a peace aſide and ſeparably, and to go thorow

and conclude for Calais with the King of France, being ſollicited thereunto by continuall Letters from the Duke of Mont-morancy, Conſtable of France, and the Duke of Vandoſme,
                        
                           A treaty of peace with the French King.
                         as alſo by meſſage of the Duke of Guiſe, who ſent the Lord Gray (who had beene taken priſoner at Guienne, and releaſed to that end. And for to conclude this agreement, B. Caualcance, a Lord of Florence, was employed, who from his infancy had been brought vp in England, with whom the French King hauing conferred in ſecret, did hold that it ſhould be ſafer to treat thereof by new Commiſſioners in ſuch priuat Country-houſes of the Kingdomes of England or France, that were of no great note. But Queene ELIZABETH being mooued, ſhewed her ſelfe to be of a manly courage, in declaring that ſhee was a Princeſſe abſolutely free, for to vndergoe her affaires either by her owne ſelfe, or by her Miniſters: and although that during the reigne of her Siſter, nothing was concluded, but according to the Spaniards aduice, and that ſhee would neuertheleſſe, without giuing him the leaſt notice, or taking his counſell, diſpatch theſe affaires betweene the Deputies of both ſides, not in an obſcure and priuate place,
                           The Caſtell in Cambreſis.
                         but openly in the Caſtle of Cambreſis, neere Cambrai. This offended no leſſe the Spaniard, than the refuſall and contempt of his marriage with her Maieſtie, with the alteration of Religion, had done heretofore. Neuertheleſſe, the French, who was crafty and cunning enough, to diſcouer how ſhe was affected to match with Spaine, prayed her Maieſtie firſt of all to take away two ſcruples from them, before the yeelding of Calais; to wit, that they forſaking that Towne, before they were aſſured whom ſhee ſhould marry, it might eaſily fall into the hands of the Spaniard, becauſe that he would haue her Maieſtie, if poſſible, vpon any condition, and that there is nothing ſo deare, but women will part with it to their beloued husbands: the other, whether, as the Spaniards boaſt, that the Engliſh haue

ſuch neere alliance with them, that they ought to ioyne in armes with them againſt all Nations whatſoeuer, to theſe it was anſwered, that her Maieſtie bore ſuch motherly affection toward the Kingdome of England, that ſhe would neuer part with Calais, for to fauour a husband, and that although her Matie ſhold grant it, yet England would neuer ſuffer it. Moreouer, that betwixt her Maieſty, and Spaine, there was not any ſuch alliance, but a meere forced amitie, and that her Maieſty was moſt free for any contract with any Prince which might be commodious and beneficiall to England. Vpon this, it was thought good and expedient, that the Commiſſioners of each part ſhould equally vſe their vtmoſt endeuours in the Caſtle of Cambray, to agree all differences, and to conclude a peace. Therefore Queene ELIZABETH ſent for England, as Commiſſioners, Thurlbie Biſhop of Elie, the Lord Howard, Baron of Effingham, Lord high Chamberlaine to her Maieſty, and Doctor Wotton Deane of the two Metropolitan Sees of Canterburie and Yorke. For the French King, Charles Cardinall of Lorraine, Archbiſhop and Duke of Rheims, the chiefeſt Peere of France, Anne Duke of Mont-morancy, Peere, Conſtable, and great maſter of France, Lord Iames Aulbon, Lord of Saint Andrewes, Marquis of Fronſac, and Lord Marſhall of France, Iohn of Moruillier, Biſhop of Orliens, and Claude Aubeſpine, Secretary of the Priuy-Councell of France. Theſe ioyntly agreed and concluded ſuch Articles as are heere ſet downe almoſt in the ſame words.
                     
                        That none of theſe Soueraignes ſhall goe about to inuade each others Countries,
                        
                           Articles of Peace, made and agreed vpon 'twixt the Queenes Maieſtie and the French King, Henry the ſecond.
                         
                        nor giue aſsiſtance to any that ſhould intend any ſuch deſigne: if any of their Subiects ſhould attempt any thing tending to that effect, they ſhould be puniſhed, and the peace thereby not infringed nor violated. The commerce ſhould be free; and that the Subiects of each Prince, who haue ſhips of Warre, before they goe to Sea, ſhall giue ſufficient caution not to robbe each others ſubiects. The fortifications

of Aymouth in Scotland ſhall be rayſed; that the French King ſhall enioy peaceably for the ſpace of eight yeeres, Calais, and the appurtenances thereunto; as alſo, ſixteene of the greatest peeces of Ordnance; and that time being expired, hee ſhall deliuer it vp into the hands of Queene ELIZABETH; and that eight ſufficient Merchants, ſuch as are not ſubiects to the French King, ſhould enter into bond for the payment of fiue hundred thouſand crownes to be payed, if Calais were not reſtored, notwithſtanding the right of Queene ELIZABETH ſtill to remaine firme and whole; and that fiue Hoſtages ſhould bee giuen to her Maieſty, vntill ſuch time as theſe Cautions ſhould be put in, if, during that time, ſomething might be attempted or altered by Queene ELIZABETH, or her Maieſties Subiects, of her owne authority, command and approbation, by Armes directly or indirectly, againſt the moſt Chriſtian French King, or the moſt mightie Queene of Scotland, they ſhall be quitted, and diſcharged of all promiſe and faith plighted to that purpoſe; the Hoſtages and the Marchants ſhould be freeed: if either by the ſaid Chriſtian King, the Queene of Scots, or the Dolphin, any thing ſhould be attempted againſt the Queen of England, they ſhall bee bound to yeeld her the Poſſeſsion of Calais, without any further delay.
                     
                     
                        
                           A Peace is concluded & agreed vpon betweene the Queenes Maieſty and the Queene of Scotland.
                        At the very ſame time and place, and by the ſame Deputies, there was alſo a peace concluded betweene the Queen of England, and Francis and Mary, King and Queene of the Scots: whereupon they brought vnto the Engliſh & Scots, certaine Articles, concerning the grant of ſafe conduct for thoſe who had ſpoiled and rob'd the Frontiers, and for the Fugitiues of the Countrey: About which, there being a meeting at Vpſaltington, betweene the Earle of Northumberland, Cuthbert Tunſtall, Biſhop of Dunelme, Gu. Lord Dacre of Grilleſland, and Iac. Croft, Captaine of the Town and Caſtle of Barwicke, all Engliſh-men, on the one part: the Earle of Morton, the Lord of Home, and S. Cler. Deane of Glaſco, all Scottiſh-men, on the other part: They proclaimed

thorowout all England, the Peace concluded between the Queene of England, the King of France, the Dolphin, and the Queene of Scots, which ſeemed very harſh vnto the people, and conceiued to be much diſhonourable, in regard that Calais which they had loſt, was not reſtored, the Proteſtants laying the fault vpon the Papiſts,
                           The Lord Baron Wentworth, and others, are called in queſtion, and brought in compaſſe of the Law, concerning the loſse of Calais.
                         and they vpon the Baron Wentworth, a Proteſtant, who hauing beene vnder the gouernement of Queene MARY, accuſed in that behalfe, and not brought to publique hearing, was againe taxed, and brought to iudgement, but vpon hearing, was freed by the ſentence of the Peeres. But Rad. Chamberlaine, who had beene ſometime Gouernour of the Caſtle of Calais, and Iohn Hurleſton of the Fort of Risbanc, were adiudged to dye, as guilty de laeſa Maieſtate, for abandoning their places; howſoeuer their cenſure was remitted. The Parliament being ready to breake vp, thoſe which were there, thought good to aduiſe the Queene, forthwith to marry, the great ones being vnwilling to yeeld to that,
                           The whole Parliament doe exhort Queene Elizabeth to marry.
                         for feare leſt ſome of them might be thought to make this propoſition out of ſome hope which they might haue for themſelues. Hauing then appoynted Th. Gargraue, Deputie of the Lower-houſe, to deliuer this meſſage, he addreſſes himſelfe to the Queene, with a few choyce men: Hauing firſt by way of preamble intreated admittance, and excuſing himſelfe with the graciouſneſſe of her Maieſty, and the importance of the affaires he had to deliuer, by this meanes procured audience, and in this manner ſpake vnto her

                           
                              
                                 
                                    MADAME:
                              
                              There is nothing which wee continually begge at the hands of God with more ardent Prayers,Thomas Gargraue's Speech made to her Maieſty to that purpoſe. than the perpetuity of that happineſſe, which

your iuſt and vigilant gouernement hath hitherto procured vnto the Engliſh Nation. But wee cannot conceiue how this ſhould alwayes continue, vnleſse that (which wee cannot hope for) you ſhould continually reigne, or by diſpoſing your ſelfe to marriage, might leaue Children, which might inherite both your vertues and Kingdome together; the Almightie and good God ſo grant. This (MADAME) is the ſimple and vnanime deſire of all the Engliſh, which is the conceit of all others: Euery one ought to haue a care of that place and eſtate hee hath, and Princes eſpecially, that ſithence they are but mortall, the Common-wealth might bee perpetuis'd in immortalitie. Now, this eternitie you may giue vnto the Engliſh, if (as nature, age, and your beauty requires) you would eſpouſe your ſelfe vnto a Husband, who might aſsiſt and comfort you, and, as a Companion, participate both in your proſperities and aduerſities. For queſtionleſſe, the onely aſsiſtance of an Husband, is more auayleable in the ordering of affaires, than the helpe of a great many ioyned together, and nothing can be more repugnant to the common good, than to ſee a Princeſſe, who by marriage may preſerue the Common-wealth in peace, to leade a ſingle life, like a Veſtal Nunne. Kings muſt leaue their Children their Kingdomes, which were left them by their Anceſtors, that by them they may be embelliſht, and be ſettled; and the Engliſh haue neuer had greater care, than to preſerue the Royall Houſe from default of Iſſue. Which is freſh in memory, when HENRY the Seuenth, your Grand-father, prouided marriage for ARTHVR, and HENRY his Children, being yet of tender yeeres; and how your Father procured in marriage for EDWARD his ſonne, hauing ſcarce attayned to eight yeeres of age, Mary the Queene of Scots; and ſithence, how MARY your Siſter, notwithſtanding

ſhee was deepely ſtrucken in yeeres, married Philip the King of Spaine. So, as if the want of Iſsue be ordinarily giuen by GOD as a curſe vnto priuate Families, how great an offence is it then in a Princeſſe, to be a voluntary author of it to her ſelfe, ſithence ſo many miſeries enſue thereby; that they muſt needes peſter the Common-wealth with a multitude of calamities; which is fearefull to imagine? But, MADAME, wee, this ſmall number of your Subiects, who heere humble our ſelues at your Maieſties feete, and in our perſons, all England in generall, and euery Engliſh-man in particular, doe moſt humbly beſeech, and with continuall ſighs coniure your Maieſtie, to take ſuch order, that that may not be.
                           
                        
                     
                     This is the whole ſumme of what he ſpake vnto her, with a great deale of eloquence, and more words.
                     To whom, in few words, ſhee anſwered thus;

                           IN a thing which is not much pleaſing vnto mee,
                              Her Maieſties anſwer to them all.
                            the infallible teſtimonie of your good will, and all the reſt of my people, is moſt acceptable. As concerning your inſtant perſwaſion of mee to marriage, I muſt tell you, I haue beene euer perſwaded, that I was borne by God to conſider, and, aboue all things, doe thoſe which appertaine vnto his glory. And therefore it is, that I haue made choyce of this kinde of life, which is moſt free, and agreeable for ſuch humane affaires as may tend to his ſeruice onely; from which, if eyther the marriages which haue beene offered mee by diuers puiſſant Princes, or the danger of attempts made againſt my life, could no whit diuert mee, it is long ſince I had any ioy in the honour

of a Husband; and this is that I thought, then that I was a priuate perſon. But when the publique charge of gouerning the Kingdome came vpon mee, it ſeemed vnto mee an inconſiderate folly, to draw vpon my ſelfe the cares which might proceede of marriage. To conclude, I am already bound vnto an Husband, which is the Kingdome of England, and that may ſuffice you: and this (quoth ſhee) makes mee wonder, that you forget your ſelues, the pledge of this alliance which I haue made with my Kingdome. (And therwithall, ſtretching out her hand, ſhee ſhewed them the Ring with which ſhee was giuen in marriage, and inaugurated to her Kingdome, in expreſſe and ſolemne termes.) And reproch mee ſo no more, (quoth ſhee) that I haue no children: for euery one of you, and as many as are Engliſh, are my Children, and Kinsfolkes, of whom, ſo long as I am not depriued, (and God ſhall preſerue mee) you cannot charge mee, without offence, to be deſtitute. But in this I muſt commend you, that you haue not appoynted mee an Husband: for that were vnworthy the Maieſtie of an abſolute Princeſse, and the diſcretion of you that are borne my Subiects. Neuertheleſse, if GOD haue ordayned mee to another courſe of life, I will promiſe you to doe nothing to the preiudice of the Common-wealth, but, as farre as poſsible I may, will marry ſuch an Husband as ſhall bee no leſſe carefull for the common good, than my ſelfe. And if I perſiſt in this which I haue propoſed vnto my ſelfe, I aſſure my ſelfe, that GOD will ſo direct my counſels and yours, that you ſhall haue no cauſe to doubt of a Succeſſour: which may be more profitable for the Common-wealth, than him which may proceede from mee, ſithence the poſterity of good Princes doth oftentimes degenerate. Laſtly, this may be ſufficient, both for my memorie, and honour

of my Name, if when I haue expired my laſt breath, this may be inſcribed vpon my Tombe:
                     
                     
                        Here lyes interr'd ELIZABETH,
                        A Virgin pure vntill her Death.
                     
                     And moreouer then this, they inſtituted in this Aſſembly of State, certaine Orders,
                           Other Laws and ordinances eſtabliſhed by that Parliament.
                         to preuent any forcible attempt vpon the perſon of the Queene; to reſtore tenths, and firſt fruites to the Crowne, and to eſtabliſh in euery Church an vniformity of publike Prayer, termed the Letany, and the forme of adminiſtring the Sacraments vſed vnder EDVVARD the Sixth, with very little alteration; with a penaltie vpon ſuch as ſhould depraue them, or vſurpe any other then that forme: to attend Diuine Seruice, Sundayes and other holy dayes, vpon twelue-pence damage, to be imployed for the poore, for euery ſuch default cōmitted. As alſo cōcerning ſeditious broyles againſt the Queen, the ſale of Deaneries, all maritime Cauſes, the traffique for Cloth and Iron, mutinous and vnlawfull Aſſemblies: And (to omit the reſt, ſithence there is no order imprinted) things concerning the poſſeſſions of the Arch-Biſhops, and Biſhops; intending, that they could neither giue, or farme out the Church-Liuings, but onely for the ſpace of one and twentie yeeres, or for tearme of three liues, as they ſay, to any other perſon but the Queen and her ſucceſſors, the reuenews of former Arrerages ſtill reſerued. So as this reſeruation of the Queene, which onely tended to the benefit of her Court, who abuſed her bounty; and the Biſhops, who were carefull enough for their own profit, continued ſtill in force, vntill King Iames came to the Crown, who vtterly cut it off for the good of the Church.
                           The Nobles of the Land reeſtabliſhed.
                         But there was no Act for it; howbeit in the former Parliaments of Kings there was often. Thoſe who were reſtored to their

goods and honour, were, Greg. Finch, Baron Dacre, and Tho. his Brother, whoſe Father was put to death vnder HENRY the Eighth; H. Howard, who was afterward Earle of Northampton, and his three Siſters, the children of H. Howard, Earle of Surrey, who, about the death of King HENRIE the Eighth, had his head cut off for very ſmall offences: Ioh. Gray of Pirg. brother to the Marqueſſe of Dorſet: Iames Croft, and H. Gates, who were conuicted of Treaſon, de laeſa Maiestate, vnder Queene MAREIS Raigne, and diuers others.
                     
                        
                           The Lyturgie appointed in Engliſh.
                        The Parliament being diſmiſt, the Lyturgie conceiued in the Vulgar tongue, was forthwith ſent vnto all Churches; the Images, without any adoe, taken from the Temples, the Oath of Supremacy propoſed vnto the Biſhops, to the Papiſts, and other Eccleſiaſticall profeſſors, who for the moſt part had formerly lent vnder King HENRY the 8. and all that refuſed to lend, depriued of their Benefices, Dignities,
                           Papiſt Biſhops depoſed and diſcharged from their Benifices.
                         and Biſhopricks. But, certes, as themſelues haue certified, in the whole Kingdome, wherein are numbred 9400. Eccleſiaſticall Dignities, they could find but 80. Paſtors of the Church, 50. Prebends, 15. Rectors of the Colledge, 12. Arch-Deacons, and ſo many Deanes, 6. Abbots, and Abbeſſes, and all the Biſhops that were then in Seance, and were 14. in number, beſides Anthony, Biſhop of Landaff (who was the calamity of his Sea.) Alſo N. Heath, Archbiſhop of Yorke, who, for nothing, had voluntarily left the Chancellorſhip, & liued many yeeres after in a little houſe of his owne at Cobham in Surrey, ſeruing God, and ſtudying good workes, and ſo acceptable to the Queene, that ſhe refuſed not to viſite him in that obſcure place, with admirable courteſie. Edward Bonner, Biſhop of London, who was ſent Ambaſſador to the Emperour, the Pope, and the King of France; but ſuch a one, as mixt his Authority with ſuch a ſharpnes of nature, that he was noted of diuers for cruelty, and kept priſoner the moſt part of his life. Cuthbert Tunſtal
                        
of Durham, a man moſt expert in Learning, poſſeſt of many honours within the Kingdome, beſides, employ'd as Ambaſſadour abroad, in diuers waighty Affaires; conteſted rudely (being yet very young) againſt the primacy of the Pope, by a Letter written to Cardinall Pole: and being a little elder, dyed at Lambeth; where dyed alſo, Th. Thurlbey, Biſhop of Ely, who had the honour to bee accounted moſt diſcreet in an Ambaſſage, ſent to Rome to offer obedience to the Pope, and about the Treaty at Cambray. Gilbert Bourn of Bath and Wels, who had worthily deſerued in his place. Iohn Chriſtopherſon of Chester, ſo vnderſtanding in the Greeke Tongue, that hee tranſlated diuers workes of Euſebius and Philon, to the great benefit of the Chriſtian Common-wealth. Ioh. White, de Winton, generally learned, and reaſonably qualified in Poetry, according to the faſhion of the time. Tho. Watſon of Lincolne, very pregnant in the acuteſt Diuinity, but ſomewhat in an auſtere graue manner. Rad. Bain of Couentrie and Lichfeild, who was one of the reſtorers of the Hebrew tongue, and chiefe profeſſour of the ſame in Paris, vnder the Gouernment of Francis the firſt, vnder whom Learning beganne to flouriſh. Owen Oglethorp of Carlile: Ia. Turberuile of Exceter: and D. Pole of Peterborough: Fequenham the Abbot of Benedictins, a ſage and good man, who liued long, and by his publique almes, wonne the heart of his Aduerſaries, but was put by his place. All theſe were firſt impriſoned; but forthwith, for the moſt part, left to the guard, either of their friends, or the Biſhops: except theſe two, more turbulent then the reſt; the Biſhop of Lincolne, and the Biſhop of Wincheſter, who threatned to excommunicate the Queene. But theſe three, Cuthbert, a Scottiſh-man, Biſhop of Cheſter: Richard Pat of Wigorne: and Tho. Goldwell of Aſaph, voluntarily forſooke the Countrey: in like maner, ſome religious, and afterward ſome Nobles, amongſt whō, the moſt remarkable, were, H. Baron of Morle, Inglefeild,
                        
and Pecckam, both whom were of the Priuie-Councell to Queene MARY, Tho. Shelle, and Ioh. Gagd.
                     
                     
                        
                           Other Proteſtants learned and zealous Diuines, are inſtituted Biſhops in their places.
                        The learned'ſt Proteſtants that could bee found, were prefer'd to the places of Biſhops deceaſed, and of Fugitiues; and Mat. Parker, a godly, wiſe, and right modeſt man, who was one of the Priuie-Councell to King HENRY the 8. and Deane of the Colledge Church of Stocclair, beeing ſolemnly choſen Arch-Biſhop of Canterbury, after preaching of the Word, calling of the holy Ghoſt, and celebration of the Euchariſt, was conſecrated by the impoſition of hands of three ancient Biſhops; Gu. Barlo, Biſhop of Bath, Ioh. Scor. of Cheſter, Miles Couerdall of Exceter; Ioh. Suffragant de Bedford, de Lambeth: and afterward the ſame Biſhops conſecrated Ed. Grindall, a rare Diuine, Biſhop of London: Richard Coxe, who was Tutor to EDVVARD the Sixth when he was a Child, of Ely: Edward Sands, an eloquent Preacher, of Wincheſter: Rob. Merick, of Bangor: Tho. Yong, a deepe profeſſor in the Ciuill and Canonicall Law, of Saint Dauids: N. Bolingham, Councellour of the Law, of Lincolne: Iohn Iewell, abſolutely iudicious in all liberall Science, of Salisburie: Richard Dauis, of Aſaph: Edward Gueſts, of Rocheſter: Gilbert Barde, of Bath: Thomas Bentham, of Couentrie and Lichfield: Gu. Alle, a pithy expounder of the holy Scripture, of Exceter: Iohn Parkhurſt, a famous humaniſt, of Norwich: Robert Horne, of a hardie and copious ſpirit, of Wincheſter: Richard Cheſne, of Gloceſter: and Edw. Scamber, of Peterborough: but they placed Gu. Barlo, Biſhop of Cheſter, who, during the reigne of HENRY the Eighth, was Biſhop of Saint Dauids, and afterward of Wells: & for B. of Hereford was appointed Ioh. Scori, a skilfull and iudiciall man, who was formerly Biſhop of Chicheſter: in like maner in the Prouince of Yorke, Yong being transferred from his place of Saint Dauids to Yorke, conſecrated Ia. Pilkinton, a moſt godly and learned man, Biſhop of Dunelme: Io. Beſt, of Carlile, and Gu. Downham,
                        
of Cheſter. I leaue Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtorians to relate what theſe men were, and what miſeries they ſuffered vnder the Gouernment of Queene MARY, being either fugitiues in the Low-Countries, or hidden cloſe in England.
                     
                     And foraſmuch as Learned men were rare to be found, diuers Mechanicke Shop-keepers, as ſimple as the Papiſts Prieſts, attained vnto Eccleſiaſticall Dignities, Prebends, and Benefices of good reuenue; which diuers Prieſts perceiuing, and hoping aboue all things, to expulſe the Proteſtants out of their Churches, and by this meanes, to get ſomething to relieue the neceſſities of ſuch amongſt them as were depoſed, thought it moſt expedient, both for the aduancement of themſelues and their Religion, to ſweare obedience to their Princeſſe, in renouncing the Authority of the Pope, deeming this wiſedome meritorious, and were in ſome hope, to procure from his Holineſſe, according to his Iuriſdiction, a Diſpenſation for his Oath.
                     Thus was Religion chang'd in England,
                        
                           By what degrees Religigion was altered here.
                         all Chriſtendome beeing amazed, that it could ſo eaſily bee effected without Sedition: But the truth is, that this change was not ſo ſuddenly made: neither can it (ſince it is ſo) be eaſily tolerated, but by little and little by degrees: For, ſummarily to repeat what I haue herevpon ſpoken: The Romane Religion continued in the ſame ſtate it was firſt, a full Moneth and more, after the death of Queene MARY: The 27. of September, it was tolerated to haue the Epiſtles and Goſpels, the ten Commandements, the Symbole, the Lettany, and the Lords Prayer, in the Vulgar Tongue: The 22. of March, the Parliament being aſſembled, the Order of EDVVARD the Sixth was re-eſtabliſhed, and by Act of the ſame, the whole vſe of the Lords Supper granted vnder both kinds: The 24. of Iune, by the authoritie of that which concern'd the vniformity of publike Prayers, and adminiſtration of the Sacraments, the Sacrifice of the Maſſe was aboliſhed, and the Lyturgie in the

Engliſh Tongue, more & more eſtabliſhed. In the Moneth of Iuly, the Oath of Allegiance was propoſed to the Biſhops, and other perſons; and in Auguſt, Images were thrown out of the Temples and Churches, and broken and burned. And becauſe ſome malignant ſpirits, detracting from the Queene, as if ſhee had aſſumed vnto her ſelfe the Title of Chiefe Soueraigne of the Church of England, and authority to celebrate ſacred Rites in the Church, ſhe declared by Proclamation,
That ſhe attributed no more vnto her ſelfe, then what did of long time belong to the Crowne of England; which was, that next vnder God, ſhe had ſupreme Soueraignetie and power ouer all States of England, whether Eccleſiaſticall or Laye, and that no other Forraigne Power, had, or could haue any Iuriſdiction or authority ouer them.
                     
                     
                        
                           The profit which proceeds from change of Religion.
                        By this alteration of Religion, (as Politicians haue obſerued) England became the freeſt Kingdome in all Chriſtendome; becauſe by this meanes, it had freed the Scepter from forraigne ſlauery of the Pope of Rome: and moſt rich, becauſe it preuented the great ſummes of mony, which were dayly tranſported to Rome, for Firſt-fruites, Indulgences, Appellations, Diſpenſations, and ſuch other like things; and thereby the Common-wealth was voide and depriued, beyond all imagination.
                     
                        
                           Her Maieſties diligent care to defend both the the true Religion and Common-Wealth.
                        The Proteſtants Religion being thus eſtabliſht by th'authority of of the Parliament, the firſt and principall care of Queene ELIZABETH was, to defend and maintaine it ſtill ſound and impregnable againſt all ſort of machynation whatſoeuer, in the very middeſt of her Enemies, which, through this occaſion, ſhe had incurred againſt her; And ſhee would neuer endure to heare the leaſt Newes at all. Her ſecond care was, to maintaine equity all her life time,

and in all her Actions: in token whereof, ſhee tooke this deuice vnto her ſelfe:
                     ALWAYES ONE:
                           Qu. Elizabeths Motto or Poſey. SEMPER EADEM.
                     
                     For her other deſignes, ſhe concluded them to prouide for the ſafety of her Subieſts: For, as ſhe often ſaid, that to the end the Common-wealth ſhould bee in ſafety, her ſelfe neuer could bee: And that, to make her Subiects loue her, her Enemies feare her, and all to praiſe her; knowing, that what was begunne with wiſedome, and kept by care, was firme and laſting. Now, how by her Maſculine care and counſell, ſhe ſurmounted her Sexe, and what ſhee did moſt wiſely, in preuenting, diuerting, and powerfully reſiſting the attempts of her Enemies, thoſe that now liue, and ſhall hereafter, will bee able to iudge of what I ſhall drawe out and ſet forth of things, if I may call them ſo, in the Kingdomes owne memory.
                     At that time, the Emperour,
                           Her anſwer to forraigne Princes, interceding for the Papiſts.
                         and the Chriſtian Princes interceding by continuall Letters, that ſhe would vſe the Biſhops which were retyred out of her Realme, gently, and ſuffer the Papiſts to haue Churches in Townes by the Proteſtants: She anſwered, that although the Biſhops had, in the ſight of all the world, againſt the Lawes and Peace of the Kingdome, and obſtinately reiected the ſame Doctrine which the moſt of them had, vnder the Raigne of HENRY the Eighth, and EDVVARD the Sixth, propounded to others, voluntarily and by publike writings, that ſhe would vſe them meekely, for thoſe great Princes ſakes; notwithſtanding, ſhee could not doe it without offending her Subiects: But to let them haue Churches by the others, ſhee could not, with the ſafety of the Common-wealth, and without wounding of her Honour & Conſcience: neither had ſhee reaſon to doe it, ſeeing that England imbraced no new Religion, nor any other, then that which

Ieſus Chriſt hath commanded, that the Primitiue and Catholike Church hath exerciſed, and the ancient Fathers haue alwayes, with one voice and one mind, approued. And, to allow them to haue diuers Churches, and diuers manners of ſeruice, beſides that it is directly oppugnant to the Lawes eſtabliſhed by the authority of the Parliament, it were to breede one Religion out of another; and drawe the ſpirits of honeſt people into varieties; to nouriſh the deſignes of the factious; to trouble Religion and Common-wealth, and to confound humane things with Diuine, which would be ill in effect, and worſe in example; pernicious to her Subiects, and not aſſured at all to thoſe to whō it ſhould be allowed; and aboue all, at their requeſt, ſhe was reſolued to cure the particular inſolency of ſome, by winking at ſomething; neuertheleſſe, without fauouring in any ſort,
                           The Emperour ſeekes the Queene for his Son.
                         the obſtinacie of their ſpirits.
                     The Spaniard hauing loſt all hope to marry her, and beeing ready to marry the Daughter of France, notwithſtanding, thinkes ſeriouſly of England, nothing deſirous that it ſhould be ioyned to the Scepter of France, and to retaine the dignity of ſo great a Kingdome in his Houſe; obtained of the Emperour Ferdinand, his Vncle, that he would ſeeke her to wife for his ſecond Sonne: which he as ſoone did by very louing Letters, and followed it very carefully by Iaſper Preimour, a reſolute Baron of the Countrey of Stibing. The Spaniard himſelfe, to bring her to that, promiſed her ſpeciall affection; and ſhe of her ſide, made him offer, by Thomas Chaloner, of her Ships, and commodity of her Hauens, for his Voyage for Spaine, which he was about, with all remarkable duties of Friendſhip.
                     
                        
                           The King of France challengeth the Kingdome of England, for the Queene of Scotland.
                        The French, on the other ſide, caſting an eye vpon England, left the French Garriſon in Scotland, in fauour of the King, Dolphin his ſonne, and Mary Queene of Scotland, which hee had promiſed to take from thence, vpon the agreement before mentioned, and ſent thither vnder-hand

ſupplies, ſollicites the Pope of Rome more vehemently than euer, to declare Queene ELIZABETH an Heretique, and illegitimate, and Queene Mary of Scotland legitimate of England; and although the Spaniard, and the Emperour, hindered by their contrary and moſt ſtrong practices, (though ſecretly by the Agents which they had at Rome) neuertheleſſe, the Guizes carried their credulous ambition with ſuch a flattering hope, to ioyne Englands Scepter to France, by the meanes of the Queene of Scots their neece, that hee came ſo farre, as to challenge it for his Sonne, and for his Daughter in Law, and commanded them in all their Royall Letters, to take this Title, Francis and Mary, by the grace of God, King and Queene of Scotland, England, and Ireland; and to let the Armes of England be ſeene in all places, cauſing them to be painted and grauen together with the French Armes, in their moueables and vtenſils, in the walls of their houſes, in their Heralds coates of Armes, notwithſtanding any complaint that the Engliſh Ambaſſadour could make, that it was a notorious wrong to Queene ELIZABETH, with whom hee had newly contracted a friendſhip, being manifeſt that hee had not done it during the reigne of Queene MARIE, though ſhe denounced warre againſt him. Hee alſo leuied horſe and foote in France and Germanie, to goe to the Territories of Scotland, neereſt adioyning to England, inſomuch that Queene ELIZABETH had good cauſe to apprehend it, ſeeing that he breathed nothing, but after the bloud & ſlaughter of the Proteſtants. But theſe enterprizes were broken by his vnlooked-for death, hapning at the Tilting,
                           Is killed as hee prepared for the war.
                         which was for the recreation and ſolemnizing of the marrriages of his Daughter with the King of Spaine, and of his Siſter with the Duke of Sauoy: And much to the purpoſe it fell out for Queene ELIZABETHS buſineſſe, whom hee reſolued to ſet vpon with all his forces, as well for being an heretique, as alſo illegitimate; on the one ſide by Scotland,
                        
and on the other ſide, by France. Neuertheleſſe, to giue him royall honours after his death, ſhee cauſed his funerall ſolemnities to be performed, as to a King a friend, with the greateſt pompe, in Saint Pauls Church in London; and forthwith ſent Ch. Howard, Effinghams ſonne, now great Admirall of England and Ireland, to condole with him for the death of his Father, and to congratulate his ſucceſſion to Francis his Sonne and Succeſſour, exhorting him to entertaine inuiolably the friendſhip which had lately beene begun.
                     
                        
                           Francis the Second, and the Queene of Scotland, tooke the title of the Kings of England.
                        But Francis, and the Queene of Scotland his wife, by the counſell of the Guizes, who then had ſome power in France, behaued himſelfe publiquely, as King of England, and Ireland, kept alwaies the Engliſh Armes, which hee had vſurped, and made ſhew of them more than euer; and N. Throgmorton, ordinary Ambaſſadour, a wiſe, but a hote man, complained to them of this. They firſt anſwere him, that the Queene of Scotland had right to carry thoſe Armes with a barre, to ſhew the proximity of bloud which ſhee had with the royall Race of England. After, when he had maintained, that by the Law, which they call the Law of Armes, it is not permitted to any to take the Armes, and Markes of any Houſe, vnleſſe hee be deſcended of ſome of the Heires of it, obſeruing to tell him, that ſhee carried them not, but to cauſe the Queene of England to leaue thoſe of France. But, hauing vpon that put them in minde how D. Wotton had afore-time treated at Cambray, how twelue Kings of England had carried the Armes of France; and, by a right ſo ſeldome called in queſtion, that by any of the treaties which were made betweene the Engliſh and the French, nothing had beene reſolued to the contrary; hee gained in the end, that they ſhould forbeare abſolutely to beare theſe Armes, by the interceſſion of M. Memorency, the Guizes Emulator, who thought it not to be any honour for the King of France, to take any other

Title, or to graue in his Seales any other armes, than the Armes of the Kings of France; and ſhewed, that this Title alone was of more importance than many others; and that the precedent Kings had no other, when they ſought their right in Naples and Milan. And truely, from theſe Titles, and theſe Armes, which the King of France, at the inſtigation of the Guizes, hath taken from the Queene of Scotland, then vnder age,
                           The original of the hidden hatred which hath beene betweene the Queenes of England and Scotland.
                         all the diſaſters which afterwards happened vnto her, haue flowed from that: for from thence came the enmities openly declared by Queene ELIZABETH againſt the Guizes, and thoſe which ſhee practiſed againſt her priuatly, which by the ſubtil malice of men, who made vſe of the growing enuy, and of the occaſions which ſprung from day to day, haue beene ſo fomented on both ſides, that nothing could extinguiſh them but death; for,
Soueraigntie admits no Companion, and Enmitie againſt Maieſtie is grieuous.
                     
                     A few daies after,
                           The French deale vniuſtly with the Engliſh.
                         in ſtead of giuing foure Hoſtages for the Towne of Calais, as they were bound by the treaty of Cambray, they gaue onely three: the Engliſh Merchants are iniuriouſly dealt with, in France: one of the Ambaſſador Throgmortons ſeruants was ſent to the gallies, which F. great Prior of France, had taken & carried away by force from a publique place: Some Piſtols were ſhot at the Ambaſſadour himſelfe, and in his owne lodging; and to make him the more contemptible, hee was ſerued at the Table, with no other Veſſell, but ſuch as the Armes of England and France were ioyntly grauen on. Finally, la Broſſe was ſent into Scotland with a troupe of choyce men; Gallies were ſent for from Marſeilles, and from the Mediterranean Sea.
                     Thoſe in Scotland,
                        
                           Send men of warre into Scotland.
                         which profeſſed the Proteſtants Religion, and qualified themſelues with the title of the Aſſembly, perſwaded by certaine heady Miniſters, and eſpecially

by Knox, a moſt hot controller of the Royall authority, that it behooued the Peeres of the Realme, to take away Idolatry from their authority, & by force to ſettle the Princes within the limits preſcribed by the Lawes, had already refuſed to obey the Queene-Mother,
                           The Scots refuſe to obey the Queene Regent.
                         and Regent, though ſhee was a modeſt and a prudent woman, changed Religion, tumultuouſly ranſacking and burning the ſacred places, & drawne to their partie Hamilton Duke of Chaſtelraut, the moſt powerfull of all the Kingdome, much prouoked by the wrongs done by the French, and many Nobles were bayted with hope to haue the Eccleſiaſticall Reuenues: inſomuch, as they ſeemed not to thinke of Religion, but to plot in good earneſt a reuolt againſt the Queene Regent, and againſt the French, which made warre in Scotland: and accuſed Iames, Prior of Saint Andrewes, Baſtard brother to the Queene, their Coriphea, who ſince was Count of Mura, to haue coueted the Kingdome from his Siſter. But, by the holy proteſtations which hee made vnto them, hee tooke away all ſuſpition of hauing any other ayme but the glory of God, and the Countries liberty; and that, ſeeing it oppreſt by the Queene Regent, and the French, he could not chuſe but lament moſt bitterly for it. They ſent William Maitland of Lidington Secretary,
                           They ſeeke helpe of Qu. Elizabeth.
                         to Queene ELIZABETH; and hee, in a pittifull diſcourſe complained to her, that ſince the marriage of the Queene of Scotland with the Daulphin, the adminiſtration of the Kingdome had beene changed, ſtrange Souldiers ſpoyl'd and ruin'd all, the French were placed in the chiefeſt offices of the Kingdome, the Caſtles and ſtrong places put into their hands, the pure money corrupted for their particular profit, and that by theſe deuices and the like, they fortifie themſelues, fraudulently to take away the Kingdome, as ſoone as the Queene ſhould be dead. Cecill, who was the principall miniſter that Queene ELIZABETH vſed in this buſineſſe, and in all other, for his ſingular wiſedome,

employeth H. Percy, who afterwards was Earle of Northumberland, to know what end the Lords of that Aſſembly propounded to themſelues, what meanes they had to obtaine that which they deſired; and, if one ſhould ſend them ſuccour, vpon what conditions might Amitie bee maintained betweene the two Kingdomes. They anſwered, that they propounded not to themſelues any other end, but the aduancement of the glory of Ieſus Chriſt, and the ſincere preaching of Gods Word, to extirpate ſuperſtition and idolatry, and to keepe the liberty of their Anceſtors: which they knew not by what meanes it might be done, but they hoped that God would giue ſucceſſe to their deſignes, according to their deſire, to the confuſion of their aduerſaries. And, as for the intertaining of amitie betweene the two Kingdomes; that that, was the abridgement of their wiſhes; and thereunto vowed their goods, their faith, and their conſtancy.
                     They deliberate ſlowly of theſe things in England,
                        
                           They deliberate of theſe things.
                         becauſe the Scots were not well furniſhed with money and armes, nor very faithfull among themſelues. But they conſidered that the Marquis D' Elbeuf, Vnkle to the Queene of Scotland, had leuied men in Germanie, by the meanes of the Ringraue for the Scottiſh warre; that they had brought downe into the Hauens, peeces for battery; that the preparations which were made, were greater than was neceſſary for the reſtraining, as was pretended, of a ſmall number of vnarmed Scots; that the French, to draw to their league the King of Denmarke, promiſed him, that the Duke of Lorraine ſhould quit the right which hee pretended to haue to his Kingdome, and that likewiſe the cenſure of the Pope againſt the Queene, was more importunately ſollicited, than euer, and a ſentence declaratory for the right of the Queene of Scots to England: there was ſent vpon the frontiers of Scotland, one Sadler, a prudent man, and the Counſellor of the Duke of Northumberland, who guarded the South

frontier, and Iames Croft, Gouernour of Barwicke. For the Councell of England could not ſee what theſe things tended vnto, except to inuade England, and to purſue by armes, that which they attributed to themſelues by their Coates and Titles.
                     
                        
                           They reſolue to driue the French out of Scotland.
                        Now doe they in England ſeriouſly conſult vpon the buſineſſe, and it ſeemed to them to be a very bad example, that one Prince ſhould lend ayde and ſuccour to the ſubiects of another Prince, who rayſe vp broyles and tumults: but it ſeemed alſo, that it were an impietie to abandon thoſe who profeſſe the ſame Religion, a ſlow wiſdome to permit the French (who were ſworne enemies to the name of Engliſh, challenged the Realme of England, and enioyed at that time, in all places, an aſſured peace) to remaine armed in Scotland ſo neere England, and ſo opportunely for the inuading of that ſide, where Nobles and Commons of England are moſt affectionate to the Romiſh Religion. That it were to deliuer cowardly into the Enemies hand, the ſafetie of particulars, and the peace of the generall. For that cauſe, it behooued not to ſtand vpon dreaming and ſlow Counſels, but to diſpatch and take armes. That the prudence of England had alwaies beene accuſtomed to goe meete their enemies, and not to waite for them; and that it had euer beene aſwell ſuffered to preuent dangers, as to expell them; to defend themſelues with the ſame weapons that they are aſſayled with. That England was neuer aſſured, but when it was powerfull and armed; that it was more powerfull when it had nothing to feare but the Scottiſh coaſt; and that to take away this feare, it were meete to aſſiſt thoſe which profeſſed the ſame Religion, and chace the French out of Scotland, againſt whom Armes are very auaileable, but not Counſels. That for hauing contemned them too much heretofore, they had loſt Calais with ſhame and hurt, and a little before, by ſurprize, Ableville, and

the forts neere Bullen, whiles they fained to ſeeke a peace, which was the cauſe that Bullen afterwards was conſtrayned to render, and that they ſhould looke for no leſſe of Barwicke, and the frontier Townes, if they tooke not armes the ſooner, without ſtaying to ſee what the French will doe, who looke as if they meant to make peace in Scotland; Their deſigne being hidden, their ambition infinite, their reuennew exceeding great, inſomuch that it is growne a Prouerbe long agoe in England, that France cannot be three yeeres both without warre, and without meanes. Queene ELIZABETH alſo often alledged this ſaying of the Emperour Valentinian, Haue French for a friend, but not for a neighbour. It was reſolued then, that it was iuſt neceſſary, and profitable, to driue the French out of Scotland, as ſoone as could be poſſible.
                     In the end, a Nauy was ſent into Borrough,
                        
                           The Engliſh are ſent into Scotland, both by Land and Sea.
                         which is now called Enden-borrough Frith, cōducted by W. Winter, maſter of the Nauall Artillery, who, to the great terrour of the French, ſet vpon their ſhips, which were there in the Road, and vpon the Garriſon that they kept in the Ile of Inch-Keith. Likewiſe, preſently, the Duke of Norfolke was eſtabliſhed▪ Lieutenant generall in the Northerne parts towards Scotland; the frontiers of the Eaſt, and of the South, were cōmitted to the Lord Baron Gray, who, not long ago, had couragiouſly, but vnluckily, defended Guien againſt the French; and Thomas Earle of Suſſex, who, in the reigne of Queene MARY, had beene Deputy of Ireland, is ſent back thither, with title of Lieutenant, together with ſpeciall command, to ouer-looke this Iriſh Nation, being ſo much the more ſuperſtitious, by how much leſſe it was husbanded and tilled, ſhould not be ſtirred to rebellion, by the practices of the French, vnder pretext of Religion: to furniſh Ophalie, with ſome ſmall Forts, to giue to the old Soldiers ſome lands, to be to them and their heires males begotten of their bodies; to receiue Sulij-Boy Scotſh-Iriſh, to

hold the poſſeſſions which hee had claimed by hereditary right in the Countrey of Vlſter, to hold in fee, and to doe homage and ſeruice for the ſame: to increaſe moderately the reuenues of the Prince, and reduce the treaſury to the forme of that of England.
                     
                     
                        
                           The death of Francis L. Talbot, Earle of Shrewsburie.
                        While theſe things paſſed thus, F. Talbot, the fifth Earle of the Houſe of Shrewsburie dyed, who was one of the chiefe Councellors of the Kingdome, leauing for Heire, George his onely Sonne, by Marie, Daughter to T. Dacre of Gilſland.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     THE THIRD YEERE OF HER RAIGNE.Booke 1. 1560. 
                        Anno Domini, 1560.
                     
                        AS ſoone as the Duke of Norfolke was come to Barwicke, the Prior of Saint Andrews, the Baron of Rethuen, and others, came to meete him, and in the name of the Duke of Chastelraut and his Confederates, treated allyance with him for the Queene of England, in theſe termes:
Whereas, the French haue ſtriuen, by right or wrong,A Treaty of peace in Barwicke. to ſubdue Scotland, and to vnite it to the Scepter of France: the Queene of England will take into her Protection, the Duke of Chaſtelraut, the Heire apparent

to the Kingdome of Scotland, as long as the marriage of the King of France, and Mary, Queene of Scots ſhall laſt, and one yeere more: He ſhall ſet forth Armies by Land and Sea, with all ſort of warlike Munition, to chaſe and driue the French out of Scotland: He ſhall not make peace with them, but with condition that Scotland ſhal enioy its former libertie: The Forts which ſhall be taken from them by the ayde of the Engliſh, ſhall be alſo preſently demoliſhed, or put into the hands of the Duke of Norfolke, according as hee ſhall thinke good. The Engliſh ſhall not fortifie any place in Scotland, but by the counſel of the Duke of Chaſtelraut, and the Peeres of the Kingdome: The Scots ſhall aſsiſt the Engliſh to their vttermoſt endeuours, they ſhall hold their Enemies theirs, and ſhall not ſuffer that the Kingdome of Scotland ſhall bee ioyned to France, otherwiſe then by marriage, as now it is. If England be ſet vpon by the French, on this ſide Tine, the Scots ſhall ſend, at the Queenes charge, two thouſand Horſe, and a thouſand Foot-men: If on the other ſide, they ſhall ioyne themſelues to ſuccour the Engliſh, with all the ſtrength they are able to make, and at their owne charge for thirtie dayes, as they haue beene accuſtomed to doe for the defence of Scotland. The Earle of Argaehel, Iudge of Scotland, ſhall labour to reduce vnto due obedience the Northerne parts of Ireland, vnder certaine Conditions which ſhall bee agreed vpon betweene the Vice-roy of Ireland and himſelfe. Finally, it is determined, what the one and the other ſhall doe, if Iames Maconel, or others, raiſe any commotion in the Countrey of Hebride, in Scotland, or in Ireland. For eſtabliſhing theſe things, Hoſtages ſhall bee ſent into England, before the Engliſh Armie enter into Scotland; which ſhall be changed at the diſcretion of the Scots, from ſixe moneths to ſixe moneths; or from foure

to foure Moneths, ſo long as the Marriage betweene the King of France and the Queene of Scotland ſhall laſt, and a yeere ouer and aboue. That the Duke of Chaſtelraut, the Earles and Barons Conferrates, ſhall ratifie theſe Co
                              ••
                           entions vnder their Signes and Seales within twenty dayes and ſhall declare, that in all things, which ſhal not tend to the oppreſsing of their ancient Liberty, they ſhal yeeld obedience to the Queene of Scotland, and to the King of France her Husband, foraſmuch as the Queene of England vndertakes not theſe things, but by way of friendſhip and neighbourhood, and to free the Scots from Bondage.
                     
                     It was already diſcouered by Meſſages from ſtranger Princes, and intercepted Letters, that the French were reſolued to ſet vpon England: Seb. Martigues,
                        Martigues comes and brings French-men into Scotland.
                         a young Gentleman of the Houſe of Luxembourg, with a thouſand old Souldiers, and two wings of Horſe, was come into Scotland; and Doiſel a Frenchman, aſſuring himſelfe too much to be of the Councell of the Queene Regent of Scotland, had propounded to the chiefe of the Kingdome, at Aymouth, neere Barwicke, that ioyning their forces, they, at the very inſtant, would put the King and Queene of Scotland in poſſeſſion of England: but hauing conſidered the difficultie of the thing, and not willing to violate the Peace newly agreed vpon, they refuſed it: Neuertheleſſe, Martigues, being yong and liuely, did ſo burne in deſire to attempt England, that with much adoe was he hindred by the wholſome councell of the Queene Regent: but this heat was quickly quenched,D'Elbeuf driuen by a Tempeſt.
                         when it was knowne that a ſtorme had ſo beaten the Marquis D'elbeuf vpon the coaſts of Holland, who ſayled towards Scotland with greater Forces, that he was conſtrain'd to returne to Diepe, frō whence he departed, with loſſe of ſome Ships & of many Souldiers.
                     At that time, Ph. Stauel of Gl
                              •
                           ion, Knight of the Golden

Fleece, and Maſter of the Artillerie, was ſent into England, employed from Spaine, to expoſe the complaints that the French made againſt the Queene, touching the Affaires of Scotland;
                           The Spaniard counſels to Peace.
                         and to counſell, in the name of the King, to Peace and concord: yet neuertheleſſe, hee ſecretly counſelled the Queene to purſue with courage, what ſhe he had begun in Scotland, though contrariwiſe the Spaniard had openly forbidden to tranſport into England, thoſe munitions of War,
                           The Spaniards detaine from the Engliſh their munition.
                         which ſhe had couenanted for at Antwerp, inſomuch as ſhe was conſtrained to make a new prouiſion thereof in Germany. And the Propoſition that Stauel made, was not without ſuſpition, that ſome Companies of Spaniards ſhould be ſent into Scotland, together with the French, to ſuppreſſe the Scottiſh Rebels, and by the ſame meanes, the French themſelues, if they ſhould attempt any thing vpon England. At the ſame time, M. Seuerin, ordinary Embaſſadour of the King of France, inſtantly ſollicited the Queene, to call backe her Armies both by Sea and Land from Scotland; which ſhe willingly accorded vnto, prouided, that the French ſhould be recalled: but by delayes ſought out of the one ſide and the other, the buſineſſe is drawne into length, till the comming of I. de Mouluc, Biſhop of Valence, who differed not much from the Proteſtants Religion; who, vpon his arriuall from France, being carried vnto the place, ſaid, that he was not furniſhed with any power for this buſines: and notwithſtanding he was very eloquent,
                           The French doe endeuour to call the Engliſh backe from Scotland.
                         ſtrained himſelfe to his vttermoſt, that thoſe Armies ſhould be recall'd from Scotland; and maintain'd, that it was not to defraud the Queene of England, that the King and Queene of Scots carried the Armes of England; but by that, rather to honour the Royall Houſe. But not beeing able to perſwade the one, as being abſurd; nor the other, as dangerous; Seuerin deſired Stauel, and the Biſhop of Aquilé, Embaſſadour ordinary of Spaine in England, to bee preſent and witneſſes, when he ſhould proteſt againſt the

Queene of England, that ſhee had violated the Treatie of Peace; to which they refuſed him, becauſe they had it not in Commiſſion: Neuertheleſſe he made,
                           The French proteſt againg the Engliſh, that they are meerely cauſe that the peace is broken.
                         by a diſcource prolixe enough, his proteſtation; to which the Queene made an Anſwere, which was publiſhed, and ſet foorth, by which ſhee teſtified to all the world, That the violating of the Treaties proceeded only from the French, and that nothing could happen to her more vexing and odious, then this Warre, and ſuch like things, which might eaſily be drawne from what had beene ſpoken heretofore, and by a declaration in writing, which ſhe had formerly cauſed to be publiſhed.
                     Notwithſtanding that although ſhe had receiued many wrongs and iniuries,
                           An Anſwer to them.
                         in that they had vſurped the Title and Armes of her Kingdome, ſhe could not for all that beleeue, that it had beene done with the conſent of the King or Queene of France, or the Princes of the Blood, but by the wicked deuices of the Guizes; who, abuſing the King and riches of the French, were ready to wound England through the ſides of Scotland: That ſhee could not abandon her ſafety, nor her Subiects.
                     And ſurely, it is not to be doubted, that the Guizes, for the loue which they bore to the Queene of Scotland,
                        
                           The Guizes are ſworne and profeſsed enemies to Queene Elizabeth.
                         the hatred to Queene ELIZABETH, in regard of Religion; and the ambition to oblige France, by adding new Kingdomes vnto it, being aſſured of an Engliſh party, of contrarie Religion to the Proteſtants, linckt themſelues together obſtinately, to ruine Queene ELIZABETH. But they were diuerted by meanes of diſcontentments, and hidden hatreds, which grew vpon the Subiect of the adminiſtration of the affaires which were put into their hands, after they had taken them from the Princes of the Bloud. And the QVEENE went ſo prudently to worke, and

vpon the nicke to meete the deſignes of her Enemies; that ſhe hath beene alwayes had in admiration of her friends, and in terrour to her Enemies.
                     The ſame day that Gray entered into Scotland with an Armie,
                           The French offer to render vp Calis.
                         
                        Seuerin and Mouluc earneſtly ſollicited Queene ELIZABETH to call it backe, giuing her hope that Calais ſhould bee rendred, if ſhee did it. But ſhee anſwered very plainely,
                           Her Maieſties Anſwer to them.
                         
                        That ſhe made no account of Calais, a ſmall Fiſher-Towne, in compariſon of the ſafety of all Great Brittaine. And the ſame day, ſent into Spaine, Anthony Browne, Vicount of Montaigue, a man very remarkable for his wiſedome,
                           She ſends the Lord Ʋicount Montaigue into Spaine.
                         but very zealous in the Romiſh Religion, thinking, that for that conſideration, he would bee more pleaſing to the King of Spaine; together with Tho. Chamberlaine, Embaſſadour Ordinary; to iuſtifie, vpon how many iuſt cauſes ſhe had ſent an Armie into Scotland, to wit, thoſe that I haue heretofore declared; and to ſhew, the Queen of Scotland had beene married very young to a ſickly King, vvho was without hope to leaue Iſſue; that Hamilton, Duke of Chaſtelraut, hauing beene by the authority of the Parliament, deſigned of the Kingdome of Scotland, the Guizes had prepared Ambuſcadoes for his Sonne, as he ſhould paſſe through France: their deſignes were bent, to ioyne the Crowne of Scotland to the Crowne of France, and to conſerue it for the Queene. This matter the King of Spaine examined ſeriouſly, how dangerous it was to the Prouinces of the Low-Countreys, and of Spaine: that it behoued not blaſt with Rebellion, the aſſembly of the great ones in Scotland, which was made for no other end, but to keepe (as by duty they are bound) the Kingdome for the Queen and her lawfull ſucceſſors;
                           Who makes known to the Spaniard the cauſe of the Wars of Scotland.
                         not induring to permit, that by the wiles of the Guizes, it ſhould be ruined, or transferred to the French, without wronging them or theirs.
                     Vpon the beginning of Aprill, the Engliſh Armie, compoſed of an hundred Horſe, and ſixe thouſand Foote, marcheth

toward Lieth, which is a place ſituated neere Bodir
                        ▪ where all the Seas of Great Brittaine doe beate, and the Riuer of Lieth ſpreading broader, diſchargeth it ſelfe, and makes a commodious Rode for Ships, ſcarce two miles diſtant from Edenborrough, the Capitall Towne of Scotland. The French knowing this commodity, had fortified it, to retire thither, and there receiue the ſuccour which might be ſent vnto them: & the Engliſh ſhewing themſelues there, Martigues goes as ſpeedily out vpon them with ſome companies of Foote, to hinder their approach to a Hill, vpon which he ſuppoſed they intended to Campe: but, after a Skirmiſh of foure houres, where ſome were ſlaine, they driue them backe into the Towne: next after,
                           he alſo excuſed the Scots Confederates
                         they make Trenches, and raiſe Mounts, from which they battered no leſſe the Towne then the Ships. The French make many Sallies out, with more courage than ſtrength, and ſhewe many proofes of Magnanimity. Amongſt others, vpon the fifteenth day of Aprill, they tooke the Trenches, nayled three of the greateſt Cannons, tooke and led away priſoner, M. Berclé: But I. Croft, and C. Vaghan driue them backe as faſt into the Towne; and it was not done without loſſe of men. Arthur Gray, ſonne to the Lord Baron Gray,
                        
                           Arthur Gray, ſon & heire to the Lord Gray, is wounded.
                         who had the principall command in the Campe, was ſhot into the ſhoulder.
                     After that, they bring the Campe neerer to the Towne, becauſe the Battery was ſo farre off, that the Bullets, for the moſt part, fell without effect; and a ſhort time after,
                           Lieth is beſieged.
                         part of the Towne, and a great quantity of Corne, was burned by caſuall fire, which was much encreaſed by the Engliſh, who placed on that ſide their biggeſt Cānons, and being in the meane time entred into the Ditch, tooke the height of the Wall; and the ſixth of May (while the Engliſh and the Scots were together of accord) hauing placed the Ladders on all ſides, gaue three powerful alſſaults to gaine the Wall, but becauſe they were too ſhort, and the

waters higher then ordinary, the Sluces beeing ſhut, they were repulſed with a ſhowre of Bullets, that ouerwhelmed them from aboue, and there were many ſlaine, yet more wounded.
                           The Engliſh repulſed. Croft is accuſed.
                         This check was imputed to Croft's fault, becauſe he had ſtayed in his Quarter with his Armes foulded, as if he had reproued this expedition, ſeeing others doe, without putting himſelfe in action to aſſiſt thoſe who had neede thereof: and I cannot tell whether hee did it out of iudgement, or for affection which he bore to the French, or for hatred to Gray. But ſo it is, that Norfolke and Gray, accuſed by Letters which they writ to the Queene, to haue had ſecret conſultations with the Queene of the Scots, and to haue oppoſ'd this deſigne; and in hauing ſequitiuely bin brought in iuſtice, the gouernment of Barwicke was taken from him, and giuen to the Lord Baron Gray. But the Queene ſhewing him fauour, conſeru'd it for him; and for his merit, eſtabliſhed him afterward Controwler of her Maieſties Houſe.
                     This firſt Mis-hap hauing abated the courage of the Engliſh and Scots, the Duke of Norfolke raiſ'd them as quickly vp againe, by new Troops which hee brought to ſtrengthen; and ſince that time, there were ſome light combates, vntill that the King of France hauing aduice that his men were ſo blockt vp at Lieth, that all the Paſſages by Sea and Land were ſhut, alſo conſidering, that they could not ſend him ſuccour in time requiſite, for the great diſtance of places, and the ſeditions, which augmented from day to day in his Kingdome, gaue power to the Biſhop of Valence, and De la Roche Faucaud, to accord the Affaires with Qu. ELIZABETHS Commiſſioners: eſteeming, and the Queene of Scotland with them, that it were a thing vnworthy their Maieſty, to enter into equall diſpute with their Subiects. And Queen ELIZABETH deputed as ſpeedily into Scotland, W. Cecill, and N. Wotton, Deane of Canterburie and Yorke. At the ſame time, the C. of Murray made

ſome propoſitions. But Cecill thought that they ought not to be made by Subiects, nor agreed on by Princes.
                     During theſe debatings, the deceaſe of Queene Marie of Lorraine, mother to the Queen,
                           The Queene Regent of Scotland dyes.
                         and Regent of the Kingdome of Scotland, hapned: a pious & moſt prudēt Princeſſe, who was neuertheleſſe ignominiouſly and vnworthily handled by hot-headed Preachers (as it may appeare euen by the Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtory of Scotland, which Queene ELIZABETH cauſed to be ſuppreſſed vnder the Preſſe) and by the Lords of the Aſſembly, who, as being borne Councellors of State, had, vnder the name of Queene of Scotland, and her Husband, ſuſpended her from all adminiſtration, as contrary to the glory of God, and the libertie of Scotland.
                     
                     The Articles of which, the Commiſſioners, after the ſiege begun, agreed vpon, are theſe:

                           THe treaty of peace,The treaty of Edenborrough. made in the Caſtle of Cambray, betwixt Queene ELIZABETH and Henry the Second the French King, ſhall be renewed and confirmed. They ſhall ceaſe, both the one ſide, and the other, to make preparation of warre. The Fortreſſe of Aymouth in Scotland ſhall be demoliſht. The ſaid King and Queene Mary, ſhall quit the title and armes of England and Ireland.
                           
                           The ſtrifes touching the recompence of the iniurie done to Queene ELIZABETH, and the aſſurance of the firſt Article, are remitted to another Aſsembly, which ſhall be holden at London: and if they cannot then be agreed of, it ſhall be referred to the Catholique King. The King and the Queene ſhall reconcile themſelues, with the Nobles, amongst their Subiects of Scotland: the Confederates ſhall be therein compriſed, and aboue all, the Catholique King.
                              
This Treatie ſhall be confirmed within ſixtie dayes: the intertayning of it ſworne on both ſides.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           A peace is publiſhed.
                        This Peace is publiſhed as well in the Campe as in the City, with a common reioycing of all: The Engliſh growing weary of the warre, ſeeing their neighbouring Countrey vtterly ſpoyled: The French, becauſe they were depriued of all traffique & commerce: and the Scots, for not hauing beene payed their wages. And indeed it was holden for the weale, good, and well-fare of Great Brittaine, ſince Scotland retained his ancient liberty, and England kept the dignity and ſurety which it had gotten. And ſince that time, ſhe hath beene really exempt and freed from all ſubiects of feare from Scotland ſide. The Engliſh haue merrily acknowledged, that Queene ELIZABETH was the founder of the ſurety; and the Proteſtants of Scotland, Reſtoreſſe of the liberty.
                     
                        
                           Queene Elizabeth is ſought in marriage, by Charles, Arch-Duke of Auſtria.
                        During all that time, Queene ELIZABETH, for the ſingular loue which ſhee bore to the parties, was ſo attentiue to the publique good, that ſhee razed from her heart the loue of powerfull Princes who ſought her in marriage; to wit, CHARLES, Arch-duke of Auſtria, ſecond Sonne of Ferdinando the Emperour, who made this ſuit by the Count of Elpheſton: Of Iames Earle of Arran, who was recommended by the Proteſtants, the which propounded to themſelues to vnite,
                           by Iames Earle of Arran: by his meanes, the Kingdomes of England and Scotland, which were diuided; which was alſo quickly reiected,
                           and, by Erric, King of Sueden: and neuertheleſſe to her Maieſty, praiſe: Of Erric King of Sueden, who, to the ſame purpoſe, imployed Iohn his Brother, Duke of Finland, to this end ſent into England by Guſtaue his Father, a little before his death, and grounding his hopes vpon this, that hee was of the ſame Religion as Queene ELIZABETH was, made himſelfe ſo credulouſly importunate, that hee thought of nothing but England; notwithſtanding that the King of

                        Denmarke his ſworne enemy, had reſolued to take him in the way, thinking that it concerned him greatly, if England and Sueden, betweene which Denmarke lyes, ſhould be ioyned by the meanes of a marriage. Queene ELIZABETH acknowledged and praiſed his ſingular and Soueraigne loue, and made him anſwer, that his comming ſhould be very agreeable and pleaſing to her: but ſhe could not yet finde in her heart to marry, in changing her preſent condition, which was vnto her much more delightfull, & pray'd him to proue her good wil in any other thing, aſſuring him, that although hee could not enioy his deſires, neuertheleſſe hee ſhould perceiue that his loue had not beene ill placed; and admoniſhed him not to deferre the time any longer, to make choyce of a Wife which might be worthy of him. With this anſwer, I. C. of Finland returnes into his Countrey. After, hauing imployed all kinde of meanes to make this marriage, in courting her Maieſtie importunately, by bold demands, vſing of great liberality towards her Courtiers, captiuating the good will of the inferior ſort, amongſt which he often ſtrowed pieces of Siluer; telling them, that when his Brother ſhould come, he would diſtribute largely pieces of Gold to the common people in generall. Neuertheleſſe, his Brother, ſuſpecting that he had made this ſuit for himſelfe, receiued and intertained him ill at his returne, and obſtinating himſelfe in his deſigne, ceaſed not to continue this ſuit two yeeres after, and made the condition of it to be propounded by Nicholas Guildenſtain: but as hee was imprudent and light at the ſame time, hee demanded the daughter of Philip, Landgraue of Heſſen, hauing beene refuſed, at laſt married with a Lady of meane condition.
                     But as for Charles Duke of Auſtria, he conceiued ſuch hope, that his Houſe already allied by marriages with great Princes, would be much more augmented by the addition of the alliance with England, and that the ancient Religion

ſhould be tolerated, if not altogether eſtabliſhed: which he ſo expected, as a thing which he could not faile of, and Qu. ELIZABETH tooke not at an inſtant this hope from him. For, her Matie ſhewed openly to euery one, proteſted in the preſence of C. Elphinſtain, and writ to the Emperour, that of all the illuſtrious marriages which were propounded to her, there was not any more or greater, than that of the Arch-Duke: that neuertheleſſe, neither the ſtorme of dangers had not power heretofore, nor the fauourable winde of honour could yet, for the preſent, diuert her from that manner of life, in which ſhee had ſettled her ſelfe. Notwithſtanding, without being come ſo farre, as to renounce altogether the ſtate of marriage, and that ſhee hoped that God, vpon whoſe goodneſſe ſhee wholly ſupported her ſelfe, would addreſſe his ends in that, and in euery other thing, to the ſafety both of her and her Subiects.
                     
                        Adolphe, Duke of Holſatia.
                        
                        Adolphe likewiſe, Duke of Holſatia, was ſtirred vp by Frederic the Second, King of Denmarke, his Nephew, to hinder her from marrying with the King of Sueden, and carried with hopes to be able to effect it, by the deſire which her ſelfe had by her Letters witneſſed vnto him, that he was poſſeſt with the ſame affection towards the Engliſh, as he had beene long agoe towards the Spaniards, and by the promiſe that ſhee had moſt louingly made him, hee came into England, where ſhe intertained him royally, honoured him with the Order of the Garter, gratified him with an annuall penſion, and (through her extraordinary courteſie) profeſt vnto him, her Maieſtie obliged for euer, a moſt illuſtrious Prince, who had purchaſed the renowne to be a moſt famous warriour, in a conqueſt lately by him wonne againſt thoſe of DITHMARS.
                     
                     There were alſo in her Kingdome certaine Lords, who, according to the cuſtome of Louers, vainly prated concerning the marriage,
                           Sir W. Pickering.
                         (viz.) Sir William Pickering, Knight of the Order, who had an indifferent good eſtate, but honourably

deſcended, hee, through his rare ſtudy and affability, had gotten much honor, and no leſſe applauſe, by his Ambaſſage in France and Germanie.
                     
                     The Earle of Arundel, a man of a moſt ancient Houſe,
                           The Earle of Arundel. no leſſe great in meanes than illuſtrious by birth, but growing into yeeres: and Robert Dudley,
                        Robert Dudley. the yongeſt Sonne of the Duke of Northumberland, whom Queene MARY reſtored to his right and honours, a noble young Lord, of moſt comely lineaments of body; who was as farre in fauour with the Queene, as his Father and Grand-father were generally hated of the people, out of a rare and royall clemency which ſhe profeſſed towards him, in conferring & heaping honours vpon him, whoſe Father would haue attempted her death. Whether this might proceed from ſome ſecret inſtinct of thoſe vertues apparant in him, or out of common reſpect, they both being priſoners vnder Queene MARIE, or from their firſt procreation, by a ſecret coniunction of the Planets at the houre of their birth, combining their hearts in one, no man can eaſily conceiue. Howſoeuer it were, it is moſt certaine, that onely Deſtinie cauſeth Princes to affect ſome, and reiect others. In token of honour, and for the teſtimony of her well-wiſhing towards him, the firſt yeere of her reigne,
                           Whom ſhee fauoured.
                         (after ſhe had made him her Champion) ſhee made him Knight of the Garter, which amongſt the Engliſh, is the moſt honourable dignitie of all, with the Duke of Norfolke, the Marquis of Northampton, and the Earle of Rutland, at which euery one wondered. In the meane time, Vicount Montaigu,
                        
                           
                              Ʋicount Montaigu, Ambaſſador to the King of Spaine.
                         Ambaſſadour for Spaine, moued him of the neceſſitie of the warres of Scotland, and laboured (what in him lay) to preuent the imputation of the Scots to be Rebels, ſhewed him, by the inſtructions wherein he was commanded, but coldly, in regard hee was a zealous profeſſour of the Roman Religion, that that which was eſtabliſhed in England, was conformable and grounded vpon the holy Scripture, and

the Aecunomicke Councels, and intreated him to renew the alliance of the Burgundians, formerly contracted betweene the Kings of England and their predeceſſours. The Spaniard, howſoeuer it was agreeable and vſuall amongſt Princes, to confirme ſuch a renouation, in reſpect it giueth as it were life to their Alliances, and teſtifieth to the world their mutuall good will; and howſoeuer himſelfe and Charles his Father, in the treaty of marriage with MARY Queene of England, in the yeere 1533. were bound to confirme this alliance, anſwered (notwithſtanding) that it was needleſſe, lamented the alteration of Religion happened in England, ſeemed to diſtaſte the raiſing of an army, and rooting out the Rebels in Scotland, and fained to be too late aduertized thereof.
                           He fauoured notwithſtanding Elizabeth againſt the French.
                         But for all this, hee ſtill oppoſed the deſignes of the French, who laboured to excommunicate ELIZABETH, and brought it ſo to paſſe, that ſhe could be no way ſubiect to excommunication without his conſent, and to aduertiſe her, though it were too late, that they ought for her aduantage, to inſert in the Articles concluded with the King of France, that if the French ſhould returne into Scotland, it might be lawfull for the Engliſh to expulſe them, and, in expreſſe termes, to condition for the certaine aſſurance of the reſtitution of Calais. The Earle (notwithſtanding) perceiued well, and ſo did the Queene, that he was diſpleaſed, as well by the circumſtances I haue related,
                           He re-deliuered the order of the Garter.
                         as principally for that hee re-deliuered into the ſaid Vicounts hands, the tokens and enſignes of the order of Saint George. For, hee ſeemed hereby vtterly to breake off all amity and friendſhip with England: but ſhewed it much more by the refuſall which was made him afterwards, how he practiſed by his Ambaſſadour, (as hee did intercede by Count of Feria, who had married the Daughter of W. Dormer, which hee had by the Lady Marie Sidney) for that the Queene permitted certaine men, women, and Children, to ſtay in Flanders, who for Religion

were retired without leaue, (viz.) to the Lady Iane Dormer, Daughter of Thomas Newdigate, and Widdow to Sir Robert Dormer, Knight, and to the Lady Clarence, Grand-mother to the Count of Feria, being very olde, who had beene Fauourite to Queene MARIE, and Almoner for the particular reliefe of poore women; to Richard Shelley, Prior of the order of Saint Iohn in England, of which wee will ſpeake hereafter, and to Thomas Haruie: all which were zealous profeſſors of the Romiſh Religion, and well beloued of the Spaniard.
                     
                     This refuſall was grounded vpon a reſtraint (by the ancient cuſtome & Lawes of England) prohibiting any perſon (the Nobles and Peeres of the Kingdome excepted) vpon paine of confiſcation of their goods,
                           He diſdained to be refuſed in things of ſmall importance.
                         to depart out of their Countrey, without ſpeciall licence from the King, and to reſide in forraine parts beyond a certaine time prefixed, and that, either for the recouery of their health, vnder a more warme climate, or for the aduancement of their ſtudies in the Academies, or for their practice in militarie Diſcipline.
                     Whereof there was no preſident extant of any toleration granted to women, to be continually abſent from their Countrey: and that moreouer, the thing in it ſelfe ſeemed to be of no great importance. Neuertheleſſe, in reſpect that thoſe who deſired it, reaped not ſo much benefit thereby, applying it to their owne particular ends, as others were animated by their example, to the detriment of the common good, it was vnreaſonable to condiſcend vnto: as the Queene ſignified to the King of Spaine.
                     The Earle, ſtomaking this as a particular iniury,
                           The Count Ferie whets his indignation.
                         to reuenge himſelfe, cauſed to be apprehended (as an Heretique) one of the ſeruants of Chamberlaine, being there

then Ambaſſadour ordinary for England, and caſt him into the Inquiſition, and rather (as it were) enuying the Queene, and the Engliſh, than the King himſelfe, added more fuell to his fire,
                           He incenſes the Pope againſt the Queene. notwithſtanding all the meanes his Wife vſed to diſſwade him. It was alſo knowne, that he was imployed to Pope Pius the Fourth, in the beginning of his Papacy, to preſſe the Excommunication of the Queene: yet neuertheleſſe, the Pope, (vpon what good hope I know not) ſent vnto her Vincent Parpalia, Abbot of Saint Sauiours, with diuers ſecret aduertiſements, with a kinde Letter,
                           The Pope writes to Elizabeth. all which I will here at large inſert, howſoeuer I may ſeeme to ſinne againſt the Law of Hiſtorie.
                     
                        
                        TO OVR MOST DEARE DAVGHTER,
                              The Pope Pius the fourth of that name, his Letter ſent vnto Queene Elizabeth, by his Nuncio, Vincent Parpalia. IN CHRIST, ELIZABETH, Queene of ENGLAND.
                        
                           
                              
                                 MOST deare Daughter in Chriſt, Salutation, and Apoſtolicall Benediction. God, the ſearcher of all hearts, knoweth, and you may perceiue, by the aduice that wee haue giuen you, to behaue your ſelfe towards this our eldeſt Son, Vincent Parpalia, whom you know well, how much we tender, and deſire, according to the duty of our Office of Pastorſhip, to prouide for your ſaluation & honour, together with the eſtabliſhment of your Raigne, thereby exhorting and admoniſhing your Greatneſse, (moſt deare Daughter) that in reiecting thoſe lewd Councellors, who loue themſelues better th
                                    •
                                 n you, and aime but at their priuate ends: You implore the feare of God to your Councell, and remembring the time of your viſitation, you obſerue our fatherly admonitions, & wholſome Counſels, and we will promiſe you of our part, all th'aſsiſtance you can deſire, not onely for the comfort of your ſoule, but for th'eſtabliſhment and confirmation

of your royall dignities, according to the authority, place, and charge committed to vs from God: And if (as wee most feruently deſire and hope) you returne into the boſome of the Church, We will receiue you with the like affectionate loue, as the Father (of whom it is ſpoken in the Goſpell) receiued his Sonne when he returned to him: and our ioy ſhall be farre greater then the ioy of a Father for his ſonne onely. But you, in drawing after you the whole people of England, ſhall heape with ioyes, not onely to your owne particular ſaluation, but to your whole Nation: Vs, and the Vniuerſitie of our Brethren, whom you ſhall ſhortly (God willing) heare to be aſſembled in an Aecumenique and generall Councell, for th'extirpation of Hereſies: and the whole Church together. You ſhall alſo cauſe the Heauens to reioyce, and by ſuch a memorable act, purchaſe renowned glory to your name, and a far more glorious Crown then that wherewith you are already crowned: But of that, the ſaid Vincent ſhall more amply certifie you, and fully demonſtrate our fatherly affection toward you; whom we deſire your Highneſſe to receiue courteouſly and graciouſly, hearing him attentiuely, and giue ſuch credit to what he ſhall declare vnto you; as you would vnto our ſelfe.
                              
                                 
                                    Giuen at Rome, at Saint Peter's Palace,

                                       the fifth day of May, 1560.
                                       and of our Papacy the firſt.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        I haue not found what Propoſitions were made by Parpalia, for I cannot thinke that he was put in writing, neither doth it pleaſe me to ſuppoſe, as ordinarily Hiſtorians doe. All the world knowes, Queene ELIZABETH liued like her ſelfe, and, ALWAYES THE SAME: and that the buſines ſucceeded not to the Popes expectation.

The common fame alſo went for truth, that the Pope promiſed to cut off, as a thing vniuſt, the ſentence giuen againſt the marriage of Queene ELIZABETHS Mother, to confirme out of his owne authority, the Engliſh Liturgie, and to allow in England the vſe of the Sacrament vnder both kinds; prouided, that her Maieſty ſhould ranke her ſelfe with the Roman Church, and to giue ſome thouſands of Crownes to ſuch as laboured in theſe things.
                        The time of confirming the Treatie of marriage at Edenborrough was then come;
                              The King and Queene of France refuſe to confirme the Treatie for Edenborrough.
                            Queene ELIZABETH hauing by ſolemne Oath, confirm'd, and ſent vnto the King and Queene of France alſo, to ratifie the ſame on their part, as it was meete; Throgmorton, Ordinary Ambaſſadour in France, and Sir Peter Meuté, Knight, diſpatched after him for the ſame purpoſe, laboured to bring them to it: But they preuailed not, notwithſtanding they had in expreſſe words, vpon the Faith, and royall word of a King, by Commiſſion from the Biſhop of Valence, deputed for paſſing this Treaty, promiſed to confirm it. The reaſons they alledged to exempt themſelues, were,
                              The reaſons.
                            That the Scots had paſt thorow Barwicke with the Engliſh, not by Royall Licence, but of themſelues; which they ought not to doe: that they paſt like Rebels, and that vnder colour of being Subiects, they falſly profeſt themſelues loyall, and had no way ſhewed the obedience promiſed by it.
                        Whiles they were diſputing hereupon,
                              Francis the ſecond dyeth.
                            
                           Francis the ſecond, (king of France) not being yet eighteene yeeres of age, left the moſt high and mighty Princeſſe, Mary, Queene of Scotland, a Widdow: at which newes, I cannot well ſay whether the Papiſts more lamented, or the Proteſtants reioyced.
                        Queene ELIZABETH, now perceiuing her ſelfe more ſecure then euer before, to the end that the Church might ſubſiſt, and encreaſe in her partie, and that the Commonwealth might more & more flouriſh in honour and riches,

proclaimed two moſt wholſome Edicts; by the firſt wherof, ſhe commanded all Anabaptiſts, and ſuch other like Heretiques,
                              The Edict of Qu. Elizabeth againſt the Anabaptiſts.
                            who, vnder pretence of ſhunning perſecution, were come from Countries beyond the Seas, to certaine Port Townes vpon the Coaſt of England, to depart the Kingdome within twentie dayes, whether they were natiue or ſtrangers, vpon paine of impriſonment, and forfeiture of their goods.
                              Her Maieſties Edict againſt ſacreligious perſons.
                            And by the ſecond Edict, her Maieſty ſuppreſt a Sect of ſacrilegious men, who, vnder colour of extirpating ſuperſtitions, had begun to demoliſh ancient Sepulchers, Epitaphs, and Enſignes of Noble Families, and other Monuments of reuerend Antiquity; which had eſcaped the furie of the prophane, vnder King HENRIE the Eighth, and King EDVVARD the Sixth, and to pull off the Lead that couered the Churches.
                        
                           
                              The Colledge of Weſtminſter founded.
                           And moreouer, cōuerted the Monaſtery of Weſtminſter, a moſt famous place for the ſacring of the Kings of England, and the place where the Armes and Royall Enſignes were alwaies kept, into a Colledgiall Church, or (as I may better terme it) into a Seminary of the Church: And there inſtituted one Deane, twelue Prebends, one Maſter, one Vſher, fortie Schollers, whom they call the Kings Nurſeries, out of which there be ſixe euery yeere, or more, choſen for the Academies of Miniſters, and Singers; twelue poore, &c. to the glory of God, and the increaſe of true Religion, and good Learning: And certainly, there comes out from thence, happily for Church and Cōmon-wealth, a number of Learned men.
                        
                           
                              The Coine brought to full value.
                           Tooke away by little and little (whereby ſhee gained great Honour, and no leſſe Glory) the courſe of money mingled with Copper, and brought in vſe that which was pure & fine ſiluer, to reſtore the honour of the Kingdome, to preuent the deceit of thoſe, which both within and without this, had corrupted the kinds, and chang'd things much auaileable for the good of the Common-wealth, into

coynes of falſe money, and tranſported the good ſiluer into forraigne Nations: and to abate the prices of vendible commodities, which were extremely inhaunc't, to the great preiudice of the Common-wealth, and aboue all, for Stipendiars, Soldiers, Seruants, and all ſuch as are payde for their labours by hyer: and brought it moſt happily to paſſe in a few moneths, without making any ſtirre; firſt, in forbidding all perſons to melt, or tranſport out of the Kingdome; as well the good and pure money, as that which was mingled with Copper. Moreouer, in bringing that which is ſo mingled, to his value, that is to ſay, the Penny to a halfe-penny; the two-penny piece to threehalfe-pence; the ſixe-pence to a groat; and the reſt to two and a farthing, becauſe there was no more money: and finally, buying them for good ſiluer of all ſuch as had any of it, prouided that they brought it within the time prefixt in the Table of money; which could not be done without loſſe to her: inſomuch that wee ought to acknowledge it to proceede from Queene ELIZABETH, that the ſiluer was better and more pure in England during her Raigne, then in full two hundred yeeres before, and that it was not vſed in any other part of Europe.
                        
                        She afterward cauſed good Coyne to bee ſtamped for Ireland, which we call ſterling; of which, the ſhilling is worth twelue-pence in Ireland, and in England, nine: A matter (indeed) waighty, great, and moſt memorable, which neither King EDVVARD the Sixth could, nor Queene MARY durſt enterprize,
                              This was corrupted by King Henry the Eighth. His lauiſh expence.
                            ſithence King HENRY the Eighth was the firſt King that euer cauſed Copper to be mingled with Siluer, to the great ſhame of the Kingdome, damage of his Succeſſors and people, and notable token of his exceſſiue expence, ſithence his Father had left him more wealth, then euer any other King left his Succeſſor, and likewiſe he had drawne abundance of money,

by the meanes of Tributes, and Impoſts, (without grounding our ſelues vpon that which Cardinall Poole had left in writing: That he had drawne more then all the other Kings which had raigned ſince the Victory of the Normanes) and heapt vp an infinite deale; when, by the power of a Parliament, hee tooke vnto himſelfe all the Lordſhips which the Engliſh, beeing abſent, had held in Ireland; all the firſt Fruites of Eccleſiaſticall Liuings, and the Tenths, which were in England and Ireland; all the reuennews, gifts, and goods belonging to Monaſteries.
                        
                           
                              The Earle of Huntington dyeth.
                           This yeere dyed Francis, Lord Hastings, Earle of Huntington, the ſecond of that Race; who had by Katharine, the Daughter of Henry, Lord Montaigue, Brother to Reinald Cardinall Poole, Iſſue, Henry, who ſucceeded him, and diuers other Children, who agreed well in brotherly loue, but not in Religion.
                        In Ireland, Shan, otherwiſe called O-Neale, a great and potent man in the Countrey of Vlſter, and lawfull Heire to Coni O-Neale, who ſurnamed himſelfe Baco (which is as much to ſay, as Claude) and was created Earle of Tyr-Oene by HENRY the Eighth, after he had put to death Mathew, Baron of Dungannon, his baſtard Brother, who was taken for legitimate, ſpoyled his Father of his rule and domination, for which hee quickly dyed with ſorrow, tooke vpon himſelfe the Title of O-Neale, couering his head, after a barbarous manner, with that hee wore vpon his legges and feete, caſt himſelfe into Rebellion, for feare of beeing purſued by the Lawe: ſo as fiue-hundred Foote were ſent out of England, to ioyne with two Companies of Horſe, leuied in Ireland,
                           Shan O-Neale ſtirs vp ſedition in Ireland.
                            againſt him. But after, hauing made ſome light Skirmiſhes, perceiuing himſelfe vnable to reſiſt the Engliſh, and to bee hated of his owne men, and that Surly-Boy, Iacob Mac-Connell, and Odonnell
                           
were riſen againſt him, hee layde downe Armes at the perſwaſion of the Earle of Kildare, his Kinſman, and promiſed to come into England to aske pardon, as wee ſhall deſcribe it in a more ample manner in its proper place.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Booke 1. 1561.THE FOVRTH YEERE OF HER RAIGNE. Anno Domini, 1561.
                     
                        AT the beginning of the yeere, Fr. Earle of Bedford (hauing beene ſent into France, to end the mourning for the death of Francis the ſecond) to congratulate with King Charles for ſucceeding him; ſummoned often the Queene of Scotland, ſometimes himſelfe alone, and ſometimes accompanyed with Throgmorton,
                        
                           The Queene of Scotland puts off the confirmation of the Treatie.
                         to confirme the Treaty of Edenborrough, but all in vaine: For he could drawe no other Anſwer of it, but, That it behoued and was requiſite, not to reſolue vpon ſo great a thing, without mature deliberations; and that ſhee neither would, nor

could confirme it without the Peeres of Scotland. Throgmorton neuertheleſſe ceaſed not to preſſe her inſtantly, by all the meanes hee could deuiſe. In like manner, the Cardinall of Lorraine, and all the other Guizes, her Vnkles, and Iames her baſtard-brother, who was newly arriued in France. But whiles they thus did nothing, but deferd it from day to day, by forged reaſons, Queen ELIZABETH, doubting leſt they intended the ruine of England, reſolued to ſuppreſſe them. Shee ſent thereupon T. Randolph into Scotland, to perſwade the Peeres to a mutuall amitie, grounded vpon the vnity of Religion, aduertiſing them, that the Princes of Germanie were vnited together againſt the Pope, and that ſhee deſired nothing more, than that the Engliſh and Scottiſh were combined in this accord; ſhewed them, that the Queene of Scotland, being a Widdow, now was the onely opportunitie for the appeaſing of all diſcords betwixt England and Scotland, who had ſo many Ages the one fought againſt the other, with ſo much bloud-ſhed on either part, whether in contracting a perpetuall League with the Engliſh, or in razing out of the ancient league with the French, thoſe Couenants which were wont to breed diſcord betweene England and Scotland. Laſtly, ſhee exhorted them to beware, that the Queene (who was now a Widdow) ſhould not diſpoſe her ſelfe in marriage to a ſtranger Prince, by whoſe power ſhee might reuenge her ſelfe vpon thoſe, who had lately reſiſted the French, and ſo expoſe their freedome to the hazard of ſeruitude.
                     In the meane time, the Queen of Scotland, who thought to retyre her ſelfe into her Kingdome, hauing ſent before Doyſell, a French-man, intreating ELIZABETH, by him, to giue her Highneſſe leaue to paſſe by Sea, and to Doyſell through England, vnder the common faith:
                           The Queene of England denieth paſſage to the Queene of Scotland. ELIZABETH vtterly denyed her, in preſence of a whole multitude of her Aſſiſtants, alledging for excuſe, that ſhee had not yet ratified the Treaty of Edenborrough, as ſhee had

promiſed to doe, and aſſured her, that in caſe ſhee ſhould performe all that ſhee might expect from a Queene, being her Couſin and Neighbour, ſhee might freely paſſe either by Sea or Land into Scotland. The Queene of Scots extremely ſtomaking this refuſall,
                           She complained to Throgmorton Ambaſſadour from England. called for Throgmorton, and intertained a great deale of diſcourſe with him about this occaſion, which I will briefly here inſert, according to the Contents of Throgmortons Letters collected by mee, howſoeuer I muſt repeat diuers things, of which I haue formerly ſpoken, to the end that the originall, and degrees of the ſecret grudges and hatred betweene two of the prudenteſt, and moſt puiſſant Princeſſes of our Age, might more euidently and clearely appeare. Shee being then withdrawne a little aſide, and there being no more but her ſelfe, and Throgmorton, ſhe ſpake in this manner vnto him:

                           ALthough I were ſo weake, that I did not ſufficiently know it, nor whither the heat of my ſpirit might carry mee, yet am I not ſo weake, that I ſhould deſire ſo many witneſſes of mine infirmitie, as your Miſtreſſe not long ſithence held diſcourſes with my Ambaſſadour Doyſell. Nothing vexeth mee ſo much, as to haue intreated her for that I could well haue beene without, and as I am come hither againſt her will, and notwithſtanding the hinderance by her Brother EDWARD, I ſhall alſo be as well able, God willing, to returne into my Countrey, without asking her leaue. And I want not friends, nor friends that are willing and powerfull to bring mee backe thither, as they were to bring mee hither. But I choſe rather to try her friendſhip than any others. I haue often heard you ſay, that it was chiefly neceſsary to our two Kingdomes to intertaine amity, the one with the other: and

neuertheleſſe it ſeemes that ſhee hath another meaning, otherwiſe ſhee would not haue refuſed mee ſo ſmall a courteſie. But peraduenture ſhe loues thoſe Scots better which are Rebels to me, who am Queene of Scotland, of equall Maieſtie to her, her neere Kinſwoman, and the moſt certaine Heire. Doe you thinke, that with ſo great a faith and loue which is betweene her and me, ſhe ſhould keepe correſpondency with the Scots which rebell againſt me? Does ſhee thinke that I ſhall be forſaken of my friends? Truely, ſhee hath brought mee to that paſse, that I haue reclaymed the ayde of thoſe which otherwiſe I would not haue imployed, and I cannot maruell enough by what counſell ſhe hath heretofore aſsiſted my Subiects againſt mee, and now that I am a Widdow, am hindered from returning into my Countrey. I ſtirre not vp any buſineſſe, nor meddle with thoſe of England, although I be aſſured that many Engliſh are not content with ſuch as paſſe there at this preſent. She reproches mee for my ſmall experience. I confeſſe, age brings that: yet neuertheleſſe I haue ſo much as to know how to carry my ſelfe louingly and iuſtly with my friends, I doe not caſt at randome any word againſt her, which may be vnworthy of a Queene, and a Kinſwoman; and, by her permiſsion, I dare ſay, that I am a Queene as well as ſhee, and want no friends more than ſhee doth, and can carry my courage as high as ſhee knowes how to doe: inſomuch as it is fitting for vs to meaſure our ſelues with ſome equality. But I leaue compariſons, which cannot be, but with debate and hatred. As for the Treaty of Edenborrough, it was made in the life-time of the King my Husband, to whom I was bound by duety to obey in all things; and ſince hee deferred the confirmation of it, the fault ought to be his, and not mine. Since his death, the Councell of France hath left me to be guided

by mine owne friends, and my Vnkles would not meddle with the affaires of Scotland, for offending in any thing either Queene ELIZABETH, or the Scots. The Scots that I haue neere about me, are priuate perſons, and are not ſuch as I would aske their counſell in things of ſo great importance. As ſoone as I haue conſulted with the States of my Kingdome, I will giue you a reaſonable anſwer, and to giue it ſo much the ſooner, I goe forward to returne to my Houſe. But ſhee makes account to ſtop my paſsage, inſomuch that ſhee her ſelfe is the cauſe that I cannot ſatisfie her; and peraduenture ſhe does it to the end, that there may not be any end of our diſcords. Shee often obiects vnto me, as to my ſhame, that I am young: and truely ſhee might rightly ſay it, both very young, and very ill-aduiſed, if I would treate of a buſineſſe of that importance, without the conſent of my States. A woman, as I haue learned, is not bound either by honour or conſcience to her Husbands fact. But I will haue no diſpute vpon that, and neuertheleſſe I will truely ſay, that I haue done nothing to my moſt deare Siſter, that I would ſhould not haue beene done vnto my ſelfe. I haue rendred her all duties of friendſhip, but ſhee either beleeues them not, or deſpiſeth them. I would to God that I were as deare to her, as I am neere to her, for that would be a precious kinde of proximitie. God pardon thoſe which ſow diſcords betweene vs, if there be any. But you, who are her Ambaſſadour, ſay, if you dare, wherefore ſhee is ſo much offended againſt mee, who vntill this preſent neuer offended her, neither in word, nor in effect.
                     
                     
                        Throgmorton's anſwer to the Qu. Mary of Scotland.
                        To which, Throgmorton told her:

                           
                              I Haue no Commiſsion to anſwer to that, but to heare that which you haue to anſwer, touching the confirmation

of the Treaty of Edenborrough. But if it pleaſe you to heare the cauſe of this offence, hauing quitted the qualitie of an Ambaſſadour, I will tell it you in few words. As ſoone as the Queene my Miſtris was ſacred and inaugurated, you vſurped the name and armes of England, although you had not done it before in the reigne of Queene MARY. You ſhall iudge in your owne wiſdome, if a greater offence can be done to a Prince. Surely priuate perſons themſelues doe not willingly digeſt theſe offences, much leſſe Princes.
                           But (ſaid She) my Husbands Father and my Husband would haue it ſo, commanded it. As ſoone as they were deceaſed, and that I was of my ſelfe, I preſently quitted both the Armes and the Title. And notwithſtanding I know not, if this be to defraud the Queene, that I, who likewiſe am one, and Grand-child to the eldeſt Sister of HENRY the Eighth, carry theſe Armes, ſeeing that others haue borne them, which are further off of kinne than I am.
                        
                     
                     Indeed Courtney, Marquis of Exceter, and the Dutches of Suffolke, Neece to HENRY the Eighth, by his yonger Siſter, by a ſpeciall fauour carryed the Armes of England, in adding to them the Limbes for a marke of difference.
                     The Queene of Scotland,
                        
                           Conteſtation betweene the Queene of Scotland, and Throgmorton, Queene Elizabeths Ambaſſador into France.
                         not being able by theſe words to giue Qu. ELIZABETH content, who ſtedfaſtly beleeued that ſhee ſought but delayes, to husband ſome new hope, ſeeing that at the holding of the States of Scotland, who had aſſembled twice ſince the death of Queene MARIE, ſhee had not made any propoſition which concerned the confirmation of this Treaty: as ſhee was already vpon the way to come for Scotland, ſhee cauſed Throgmorton a ſecond

time to come to her to Ableville, and asked him curteouſly, How ſhee might either by word or deed, giue ſatisfaction to Queene ELIZABETH.
                           The Queene endeuours to content Qu. Elizabeth.
                     
                     In ratifying (ſayes he) the Treaty of Edenborrough, as I haue often told you.
                     Whereupon, ſhe ſaid vnto him:
HEarken then, to iudge, if this which ſhee thinkes to be delayes, and vaine excuſes, are not moſt iuſt reaſons. The firſt Article of this Treaty, which concernes the ratification of that which paſſed in the Caſtle of Cambray, betweene England and France, toucheth mee nothing at all. The ſecond, which concernes that of the Treatie paſſed in the ſame place betweene England and Scotland, hath beene ratified by my Husband and mee, and I cannot ratifie it more amply, if it be not concluded in my name alone, ſeeing my Husband is there expreſly named. The third, fourth, and fifth Articles are already effected: for the preparatiues of Warre haue ceaſed, the French Garriſons are called backe out of Scotland, the Fort which was neere Aymouth, is razed. Since the death of my Husband, I haue refrained to carry the Armes and the Title of England, and it is not in my power to raze them out of the Vtenſils, Edifices, and the Letters Royall which are diſperſed through France, no more than I can ſend backe the Biſhop of Valence, and of Raadan, ſince they are not my Subiects, to conteſt vpon the ſixth Article. As to the laſt, I hope that my ſeditious Subiects will not complaine of my inclemencie. But, as I ſee, ſhee which thinkes to hinder my returne, will goe about to hinder that they ſhall not try my clemencie. What remaines now in this Treatie, which is preiudiciall

to your Queene? Neuertheleſſe, to heape her vp with ſatisfactions, I will write to her of it more amply, with mine owne hand, though ſhee vouchſafes not to write to mee, but by a Secretarie. As for you, Ambaſſadour, I pray you to doe the duetie of an Ambaſſadour, rather to ſweeten buſineſses, than make them ſowrer.
                     
                     But theſe Letters did not giue Queen ELIZABETH any contentment,
                           But in vaine.
                         who had euer in her heart the iniury which ſhee had done her, in taking the title and armes of England, and at that time feared much that ſhee tooke them yet, if by the confirmation of this Treatie, and the Religion of the othe, ſhee was not bound to forbeare them.
                     In the meane time,
                           She returnes into Scotland.
                         the Queene of Scotland finding the time fit, goes to Calais, and gets into Scotland, hauing the fauour of Heauen which was cloudy and darke, got the winde of the Engliſh Ships, that ſome thought had beene ſent to Sea in honour to conuoy her, others to take Pirates, and others to take her: they grounding it vpon this, that Iames, her baſtard-brother, a little before returning from France, and paſsing through England, had counſelled Queene ELIZABETH to doe it, if ſhee would prouide for Religion, and her owne ſafetie: The which, Lidington, being ioyfull that Doyſell was retayned in England, perſwaded, as his Letters make mention.
                     Leſt, being returned, ſhee ſhould ſtirre vp Tragedies, take away the commerce of letters and meſſages with the Engliſh, ruine the faction which was at their deuotion, and exerciſe crueltie vpon the Proteſtants of Scotland, not vnder colour of diſloyaltie, but of hereſie, euen as MARIE Queene of England had lately done.
                     
                        Howbeit, her Maieſtie being returned into Scotland, ſhewed all gentleneſſe to her Subiects, ſhee changed nothing in Religion, although tumultuouſly brought in; and begun to temper the Common-wealth by excellent Lawes and good Ordinances. Her Maieſtie ſent Lidington to Queene ELIZABETH, with Letters from her ſelfe, and from the Peeres of Scotland, by which ſhee referred to her all the care to make and intertaine the peace betweene England and Scotland, prayed her to ſeeke ſome good diſpatch thereof, and gaue for her aduice, that ſhee did not thinke of a better and more certaine remedie, than that Queene ELIZABETH, dying without iſſue, ſhould declare her Heire, to ſucceed her in the Kingdome of England, &c. by authority of Parliament.
                     This ſeemed ſtrange to Queene ELIZABETH, who expected to receiue the Confirmation of the Treaty of Edenborrough, promiſed both by word and writing. Notwithſtanding, ſhe anſwers him:

                           
                              Elizabeth anſwers him.THat for concerning the matter of Succeſsion, ſhee hoped that the Queene of Scotland would not violently take the Scepter from her, nor from her Children, if ſhee ſhould haue any. Promiſeth not to derogate in any manner from the right which ſhe had to the Kingdome of England, howſoeuer by the precipitate and ouer-haſted ambition of others, ſhee had attributed to her ſelfe the Title and the Armes of the ſame, for which it were iuſt and requiſit ſhee ſhould make ſome ſatisfaction: And ſaid, ſhee feared that the Deſignation of a Succeſsour, would diſioyne their friendſhip, rather than re-vnite it, by reaſon that thoſe which rule, haue alwayes thoſe in ſuſpition which ought to ſucceed them: That the inconſtant people, vexing themſelues at the preſent ſtate of things, turne away the eyes from the Sunne-ſetting, and looke toward the Sunne-riſing;

and that thoſe which are once deſigned Succeſsors, cannot containe themſelues within the limits of equitie, nor can keepe vnder the ill deſires of their owne, and of others: inſomuch that if ſhe did confirme and aſſure the ſucceſsion, ſhe ſhould depriue her ſelfe of all ſecurity, ſhe ſhould in her life-time ſet her winding-ſheete before her eyes, yea, ſhe ſhould likewiſe make her own funerall, liuing, and ſeeing it.
                     
                     Hauing made this anſwere,
                           Qu. Elizabeth preſſeth the confirmation of the Treatie.
                         ſhe ſweetly admoniſheth her againe by Letters, which were deliuered her by Peter Meutis, to confirme the Treatie; which ſhe refuſed not directly; but gaue him to vnderſtand, that ſhe could not commodiouſly doe it, vntill the Affaires of Scotland were well eſtabliſhed. In the meane time, Queen ELIZABETH, with all maner of courteſie, entertaines Monſieur le Duc D' Aumale, the Grand Prior, and Monſieur le Duc D'elbeuf,
                        
                           Receiues the Guizes courteouſly.
                         her Vnkles, and other French Noble-men, which had conducted her into Scotland.
                     
                     And yet notwithſtanding,
                           The Guizes vſe the Engliſh ill.
                         
                        Monſieur de Guize behaued himſelfe in that ſort, that the Engliſh Ships are taken vpon the Coaſts of Brittanie, and the Marchants vnworthily handled, and labours againe cloſely at Rome, to procure Queene ELIZABETH to bee excommunicated. Howbeit the Pope, Pius the fourth, aduiſed, that it behoued to deale more gently with her Maieſty; and as he had already ſought by courteous Letters, as I haue ſaid vpon the laſt yeere, hauing then alſo, to appeaſe the diſcords which were for matter of Religion, aſſigned a day to the Councell of Trent, long ſinnce begunne, and broken off by continuall Warres, and drawing gently thither, all the Princes which had forſaken the Romiſh religion, hee deputed into England the Abbot of Martinegues, with Letters full of aſſurance of loue.
                     But becauſe that by an ancient Law, it is moſt expreſſely

forbidden the Popes Nuncio's to goe thither, before he had obtained leaue from thence, and taken Oath, not to worke any thing by ſubtilty there, tending to the preiudice of the King and Kingdome; The Abbot being vpon the way, ſtayed in Flanders, and demanded leaue to come hither: But Englands Councell of State iudg'd, that it was not ſafe to admit him hither, in regard that ſo many people from all parts, nouriſhed in the Romiſh religion, laboured carefully, both within and without the Realme, to trouble the affaires thereof.
                     The Abbot not being permitted to come into England, the Biſhop of Wittenberg, the Popes Nuncio, with the King of France, labours that Queene ELIZABETH ſhould ſend Ambaſſadours to the Councell, and many Princes of Chriſtendome, (viz.) the Kings of France, of Spaine, and of Portingall, Henry Cardinall of Portingall, and aboue all, the Duke of Albe, who yet bore good will to her Maieſtie, counſelled her, that in matters of Religion, which is the onely Anker of Chriſtians, and ſtay of Kingdomes, ſhe would rather aſſcent to the Oecumenique Councell of Trent, than to the particular opinions of a few men, although they be learned.
                     She anſwers them,

                           That the right to aſſemble a Councell belongs not to the Pope.That ſhee deſired with all her heart, an Oecumenique Councell, but that ſhee would not ſend to that of the Popes, with whom ſhe had nothing to doe, his authority being vtterly beaten downe and reiected in England, with the conſent of the States of the Kingdome. That it is not for him, but for the Emperour, to aſsigne a Councell, and that he hath no greater authority then any other Biſhop.
                     
                     At the ſame time (that this Abbot was denyed acceſſe into England, beeing the laſt Nuncio that the Popes of

                        Rome haue ſent hither) Sir Edward Carne, aforementioned, being a moſt iudicious and wiſe man, very well vnderſtood in the right of Emperours, & by the Emperour Charles the fifth, honoured with the dignitie of Knight-hood,Carne dyes.
                         he dyed at Rome, and was the laſt Ambaſſadour ſent from the Kings of England to the Pope.
                     
                        Chamberlaine, Ambaſſadour for England in Spaine, perceiuing that this anſwere did more and more alienate the affection of Spaine, who iudged it to bee iniurious to the Pope, and fearing no more, that England, Scotland, and Ireland ſhould fall into the hands of the Kings of France, ſince that King Francis was dead, began to make no more account of the Engliſh, tooke leaue of him, and returned into England. Thomas Chaloner is ſent in his place, who, as he was impatient of iniuries, and had beene many times Ambaſſadour in Germany, where he had receiued all manner of courteſies, as ſoone as he was arriued in Spaine, inſtantly beſought by Letters to be reuoked, complaining, that according to the cuſtome of the Countrey, they had ſearched his Trunkes. But Queene ELIZABETH admoniſhed him,
                           How far an Ambaſſadour ought to beare an offence.
                         that an Ambaſſadour muſt ſupport all that which is of equity, prouided that the honour of his Prince were not wronged.
                     Queen ELIZABETH being then capable of good counſell, and very prudent and prouident, and Religion ſomewhat wel eſtabliſhed, to ſtrengthen her ſelfe with remedies againſt forces, prouides for the ſafety of her ſelfe and of her Subiects; and to enioy Peace more ſweetly, although ſhe found the Coffers empty at her comming, began to eſtabliſh a Magazin of all ſorts of Inſtruments of War,
                           Qu. Elizabeth prepares things neceſſary for Warre.
                         and to that end, employed great ſummes of money in Germany, (The Spaniard retained thoſe Furnitures which ſhee had agreed for at a price, at Antwerpe) cauſeth many Cannons of Braſſe and Iron to be caſt, diſcouers in the Country of Cumberland, neere Keſwicke, by a ſpeciall fauour from God

                           〈2 pages missing〉
                        
                        
on what occaſion, how farre, and at what time ſhee ſhould vſe her liberality, and indeed, was prouidently bountifull to thoſe that deſerued it. For, notwithſtanding that King HENRY her Father, howſoeuer charged with three Children, and EDVVARD and MARIE, who had none, had beene bountifull of the Crowne Land, ſhee neuertheleſſe, hauing none neither,
                           Qu. Elizabeths huſbandrie.
                         gaue very little of it, and yet what ſhe gaue, was vpon condition, that for default of iſſue it ſhould returne to the Crowne; for which, both the Realme and their ſucceſſors ought to remember her, and thanke her, as a carefull fore-ſeer.
                     Whileſt this good correſpondencie was betweene the Queene and her people (the Common-wealth ſeeming to take life and ſtrength, to the common ioy of all) fell out a ſad accident.
                           S. Pauls Steeple burnt.
                         A moſt rare Piramide of the Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul, in London, which was frō the ground to the top of the ſquare Tower, 525. foote, & from thence 260. and was couered with wood, & ouer-laid with Lead) was ſtrucken at the top with fire from heauē, which was ſo deuouring, and burnt downeward with ſuch violence, (to the great terrour of all the Inhabitants) that in the ſpace of fiue houres, it reduced it to aſhes, with the whole couering of the Church, which was moſt ample and ſpacious, but the vaults, which were of ſolid ſtone, remained entire. Notwithſtanding, all this couering was new made by the Queenes liberality, and to the effecting of the ſame, gaue great quantity of money and materials, beſide the collection of Eccleſiaſticicall perſons, and others: So all was repaired, ſaue the Piramide.
                     
                        
                           The death of Earle Bathon.This yeere dyed Iohn Bourchier, a man of ancient Nobility, Earle of Bath, ſecond of that name, and Baron of Fitzwarin, who, by Elenor, daughter of George, Baron of Roſſe, had a great Progenie, and left his Sonne William (yet liuing) his Succeſſor.
                  
                  
                     
                     THE FIFTH YEERE OF HER RAIGNE.Booke 1. 1562. 
                        Anno Domini, 1562.
                     
                        THe troubles of France begunne then to waxe hot, in the minority of Charles the Ninth, the Princes which enuied one another, pretending on both ſides, the ſpecious name, the defence of Religion, and thoſe of the reformed Religion beeing grieuouſly oppreſſed. And herevpon, the Papiſts of England, by I knowe not what hope which they had conceiued thereby, to oppreſſe the Proteſtants; many diſcourſes of importance were whiſpered very ſecretly in priuate aſſemblies, and all full of ſuſpicion. Margaret, Counteſſe of Lenox, who had a ſecret intelligence with the Queen of Scotland, and the Earle of Lenox, her husband, were for a time put and detayned

vnder the cuſtodie of the Maſter of the Rolles. Arthur Pole and his Brother, Nephews ſonnes to George, Duke of Clarence,
                        
                           Pole had vnder examination.
                         King Edwards Brother, Anthony Forteſcue, who had married their Siſter, and others, were brought into examination, for hauing conſpired to withdraw themſelues into France to the Guizes, and from thence to returne with an Armie into Wales, and declare the Queene of Scotland Queene of England, and Arthur Pole Duke of Clarence, as they at their Tryall ingenuouſly confeſſed, neuertheleſſe proteſting that they intended not to doe it while Queene ELIZABETH liued, and that they had been ſeduced by diuiners, to beleeue that ſhee ſhould dye that yeere: for which they were condemned to dye; notwithſtanding, for the reſpect which was had vnto their bloud, they were ſuffered to liue. But (as many haue thought) they vſed Katherine Gray very ſeuerely, though ſhe was much neerer of kinne to the Queene,Katherine Gray impriſoned.
                         being Daughter to the Duke of Suffolke: For, hauing beene married to Henry, eldeſt Sonne to the Earle of Pembrooke, by him lawfully repudiated, and left long time in great contempt, finding her ſelfe with child, & neere her lying down, was put in the Tower of London, although ſhee proteſted that ſhe was married to Edward Seimor, Earle of Hertford, and great by him. Hee himſelfe being returned from France, whither he went for his pleaſure, by the Queenes permiſſion, hauing made the like acknowledgement, was alſo impriſoned in the ſame Towre; the Arch-biſhop of Canterbury, and others, were appointed to examine and decide the Cauſe, without appeale: and when hee could not produce witneſſe of his marriage within the time preſcribed him, the Arch-biſhop, by a definitiue Sentence, pronounced, That the Carnall company which he had had with her, was illegitimate and vnlawfull, and that for this offence, they ought both to be puniſhed. This Sentence was impugned as wicked and vniuſt, by Iohn Hales, a man very opinatiue, but otherwiſe

very learned, who maintained, that their ſole conſent did legitimate their coniunction; for which reaſon, he himſelfe was committed. She was deliuered in priſon of her firſt-borne, and afterwards, her Keepers being corrupted by the Earle of Hertfords deuice, Edward Warner, Lieutenant of the Towre, was puniſhed, as conſcious of the fact,
                           He is fined.
                         and diſplaced. Hertford is accuſed in the Starre-Chamber of three crimes, that he had deflowred a Virgine of the Bloud-Royall, broken the Priſon, and had accompanied with her ſince. Whereupon, after hauing proteſted that hee was lawfully married to her, he confeſſed, that hauing found the doores of the Priſon open, hee had viſited her in the affliction which was cauſed by the ſentence pronounced againſt them, and had payed her the duty of wedlocke. For which cauſe,
                           He is fined.
                         hee was fined fiue thouſand pound for euery offence, and kept Priſoner nine yeeres. Yet neuertheleſſe, by perſwaſion of Lawyers, hee inſiſted againſt the Arch-biſhops ſentence, by interiecting an appeale, and continued to viſit her priuily. But in this time, hee voluntarily, and publiquely left it off: and ſhe, after ſome yeeres, (to the end I may in the time of their ſeparation ſpeake ioyntly of them) fell into a grieuous ſickneſſe; after hauing in the preſence of Hopton Lieutenant of the Towre, demanded pardon of the Queene, in regard ſhee had married without her aduice, and with Prayers re-commended her Children to her truſt, and Hertford his libertie; She dyed in Chriſt piouſly and peaceably.
                     Warre renewing then in France betweene the Princes of the Bloud, and the Guizes, vnder a feigned pretence of Religion, as I haue ſaid, one ſought for to ſtrengthen both parties; Queene ELIZABETH began to feare leſt neighbour-warres ſhould intangle England therein:
                           The Guizes practice againſt Elizabeth. For ſhe had learned, that the Guizes, to draw Anthonie of Burbone to their partie, had boaſted to put him in poſſeſſion of Nauarre, to marry him to the Queene of Scotland, and to

giue him in dowry the Kingdome of England, at the expence of the Spaniard, and by the authority of the Pope, who would breake the marriage, becauſe his Wife was an Heretique, and by the ſame meanes, depoſe Qu. ELIZABETH of her Kingdome,H. Sidney is ſent into France.
                         as being ſo. Vpon that, ſhe ſent H. Sidney, a man of great renowne, that he might informe himſelf more ſurely of theſe things, & to exhort vnto peace, the Conductors of theſe ſeuerall parties. But, the buſineſſe was come to ſuch a paſſe, that the eares of both parties were ſhut againſt peace. Sidney being returned from France,
                        
                           After into Scotland.
                         is forthwith ſent to the Queene of Scotland, that the Colloque which ſhee deſired to be holden in England with Queene ELIZABETH, might be prorogued vntill the yeere following, or vntill the Warres in France were abated.
                     
                        
                           They deliberate the inter-view of the Queene of Scotland.
                        Now it is conſulted on, whether it were expedient or not, that theſe two Princeſſes ſhould ſpeake together: in that the Queene of Scotland deſired it the firſt, it was not without ſuſpition ſhe did it to ſerue her owne ends, and ſought out ſtratagems in their ſeaſon, or to affirme the right which ſhee pretended to haue in England, or to giue hope and increaſe of courage to the Papiſts of England, and to the Guizes in France. Some thought the contrary, that this would be a meanes to vnite them with a firme friendſhip, to decay by little and little the alliance with France, and to draw the Queene of Scotland to the Proteſtants Religion. Others obſerued, that ſuch communications might rather ſow ſeedes of emulation than of loue, and that the ſhew of riches and power of the one, would euer excite the enuy of the other, and that the preſence not anſwering to the opinion and reputation of the body, of the grace in ſpeaking, and of the gifts of the ſpirit, would leaue both to the one and the other, ſome thing of reprehenſion.
                           Which puts her in doubt.
                         The Queene of Scotland did likewiſe iudge, that it were not ſafe for her to expoſe her ſelfe into the

power of Queene ELIZABETH, with whom ſhee had contended for the right of the Kingdome, and as ſhee had learned, that ſhee had openly declared her ſelfe for the Proteſtants of France: ſhee was likewiſe in doubt on what ſide to ranke her ſelfe, conſidering how ſhee her ſelfe had written, that of the Father ſide ſhe had drawne her extraction from England, and of her Mother ſide from France: that ſhee had beene crowned Queene of France, and was Dowager of it: that ſhee was the moſt certaine Heire of England, and looked for the ſucceſſion: that if ſhee were obliged to her Vnkles of France, who brought her vp, ſhe would be no leſſe to the loue of her Siſter Queene ELIZABETH.
                     Notwithſtanding, as ſhee was ſubtill of ſpirit, ſhee was afraid, if ſhee ſhould tye her ſelfe with a ſtricter friendſhip to Queene ELIZABETH, to incurre the diſgrace of the King of France, and to be abandoned of the Guizes her Vnkles, and loſe the money which ſhee drew from France for her dowry, while ſhee ſhould preferre this friendſhip which was vncertaine; and, as ſhee ſaid her ſelfe, there is none but tranſgreſſeth, and of the friendſhip of the French ſhe was aſſured. And that that was the cauſe, why the interuiew which had beene in deliberation many moneths, came to nothing, chiefly after ſhe had declared by Letters, that ſhee altogether refuſed it, vnleſſe, that, for to ground a certaine peace,
                           
                              Ʋnleſſe it were vpon certaine conditions.
                         and the vnion of the two Kingdomes ſo much deſired, ſhe were by authority of the Parliament deſigned Heire of the Kingdome of England, or adopted Queene ELIZABETHS Daughter: and that if theſe things were granted her, ſhe promiſed to be wholly at the deuotion of Queene ELIZABETH, though ſhe quitted all conſideration and reſpect to the Guizes her Vnkles. Furthermore, ſhe aſſured, that ſhe did not preſſe theſe things, but vpon aduice which ſhe had giuen her of the ſecret practices of ſome, vnder pretence of religion, intended to ſuborne

ſome other Succeſſour than her ſelfe, howbeit ſhe tolerates the Proteſtants Religion in Scotland.
                     
                     
                        
                           The Cardinall of Lorraine propoundeth a marriage to the Queen of Scotland. Queene Elizabeth endeuoureth to diuert her from it.
                        But, as the Cardinall of Lorraine treated at the ſame time with the Emperour Ferdinand, to marry her with Charles his Sonne, Arch-Duke, who then ſought to haue Queene ELIZABETH, ELIZABETH declareth vnto her, by Thomas Randolph, that if ſhee lent any eare to this marriage to the Cardinall, capitall enemy to the Enggliſh, ſhe might diſſolue the amity betweene England and Scotland, and peraduenture therewith to include the loſſe of the Kingdome of England: admoniſheth her amiably, not to fall off, but to chuſe her a Husband in England; firſt, to pleaſe her ſelfe, and afterwards for the contentment of her owne Subiects, and of the Engliſh, and to intertaine the friendſhip which was betweene them, and to prepare her ſelfe a way to a certaine aſſurance of the ſucceſſion of England, of which, declaration could not be made, if it did not firſt appeare with whom ſhe meant to marry.
                     All theſe cares held Queene ELIZABETH in great ſuſpence, neuertheleſſe ſhe was altogether attentiue to the warres of France, to hinder that the flames of it in Normandie ſhould not be blowne into England, and, after mature deliberation, receiued into her protection the King of France his Subiects, which were in Normandie, and implored her ſuccour, by a Couenant which ſhee paſſed with the Princes of Condé, Rohan, Coligni, and others, to this effect, That ſhee would ſend them a hundred thouſand crownes, and paſſe ouer ſixe thouſand Souldiers, of which, three thouſand ſhould be employed for the defence of Deepe and Roüan: That they would put into her hands for aſſurance, Ville-Franche, which is ſituated at the mouth of Sene, and was built by King Francis the Firſt, (the French calling it Haure de grace, and the Engliſh, New-Hauen) to be kept by a Garriſon of three thouſand Enggliſh Souldiers, vnder the name of the King of France, vntill

                        Calais be rendred. The ſame day that this agreement paſt, to giue a reaſon of her deſigne, ſhee publiſhed a manifeſtation to this effect.
                     That ſhee ſent not an armie into Normandie,Giues her reaſons. to recouer this Prouince, an ancient patrimony of England, which had been wrongfully vſurped, but to conſerue it for the King of France, being but yet a Childe, and to warrant it againſt the Guizes, who had begun cruelly to ouer-runne thoſe who profeſsed the pure Religion, and iniuſtly to robbe her of her right which ſhee had to Calais, and to take poſſesſsion of the Ports of Normandy; from thence, they threaten next to fall vpon England, which they haue by hope deuoured already: inſomuch, as ſhee could not chuſe but meete their attempts, vnleſſe ſhee ſhould ſeeme to be fayling to the young King her Brother and Confederate, and his Subiects that are oppreſſed, to enuy the quiet of Christendome, and, which is more, cowardly betray her Religion, her ſecuritie, and her ſaluation.
                     And as Paul de Foix, Ambaſſadour of France in England, ſummoned her by vertue of the Treaty of Cambray, to deliuer into the Kings hands, the Vidame of Chartres, of Hai, and others, who had ſigned the accord, as Traitors to their Countrey:
                           Shee excuſes the French fugitiues.
                         ſhee excuſed her ſelfe of that by her Letter to the King, diſcharging them of the crime, and charged the turbulent ſpirits of the Guizes for it, who had wrapped in the tempeſt of warre the Kings Father and Brother, and the King himſelfe.
                     In the moneth of September, one part of the Engliſh Army landed at New-Hauen, vnder the conduct of Adrian Poining, who was appointed Marſhall, where they were with ioy receiued by the inhabitants: the other part landed at Deepe. The Earle of Warwicke, Generall of the

Army, arriued there later, hauing been by contrary windes twice driuen backe into England. Afterwards, they made diuers incurſions into the Countrey neere thereabout, but to hinder the ſame, the Ringraue came and camped neerer. The Engliſh, and the French had notwithſtanding often light skirmiſhes, and thoſe which were men of warre, vpon the Sea, brought in rich ſpoyles, taking and bringing in euery day French ſhips, from the neighbouring harbors.
                     
                        
                           The death of the Earle of Oxford.
                        This yeere, Iohn Vere, the Earle of Oxford, died, the ſixteenth of that illuſtrious Houſe, who, by his firſt Wife, Daughter to Ralph Neuill Earle of Weſtmerland, had Katherine, who was wife to Edward, Baron of Windſor: by his ſecond Wife Margaret Goulding, Edw. Earle of Oxford, who ouer-threw and waſted his Patrimony, and Mary, who was married to Peregrine Bartie, Baron of Willoughbie.
                     
                     At the ſame time, Shan O-Neale came out of Ireland, to performe that which he had promiſed the yeere before, hauing for his Guard, a troupe of Galloglaſſorum, who had their heads naked, and curled haire hanging on their ſhoulders, yellow ſhirts, as if they had beene died with Saffron, or ſteeped in Vrine, wide ſleeues, ſhort Caſſockes, and rough hairy Clokes. The Engliſh admired them no leſſe, than they ſhould doe at this day to ſee thoſe of China, or America. Hauing beene receiued with all courteſie, hee caſt himſelfe at the Queenes feete, and with teares acknowledged his crime, asked pardon, and obtained it. After, being graciouſly queſtioned, Wherefore he had excluded Matthew his Brother from the ſucceſſion of his great Grand-father, anſwered fiercely, as hee was vſed to doe in Ireland, that it was his right, and being the certaine and lawfull ſonne and Heire of Cone,
                        
                           Defends his cauſe.
                         borne of a legitimate woman, he had taken his ſucceſſion. That Matthew was the iſſue of a Lock-Smith of Dundalke, married with a woman named Aliſon, after this marriage: and notwithſtanding,

had beene deceitfully ſuppoſed by his Mother Cone, to be her ſonne, to the end falſly to take away the dignity of O-Neale. And although he ſhould ſuffer it, ſome of the Houſe of O-Neales would not. The grant which his father had made to King HENRY the Eighth, and the reſtitution that HENRY the Eighth had made vnto him, were nothing conſiderable, ſeeing that Cone had nothing in the things granted, but during her life, & could not haue made this grant, without the conſent of the Peeres, and of the people, who had elected him to the honor of O-Neale. That ſuch Letters alſo could not be of any valew, vnleſſe witneſſed by the othes of twelue men, that hee was the certaine Heire of the Houſe, which had not been done in this matter. That by diuine and humane right, he was vndoubted Heire: moreouer, the eldeſt Sonne of his Father, begot in lawfull marriage, & deſigned O-Neale with a generall conſent of the Peeres & people, by vertue of the Law of Temſter, which was his Countrey; by which, a man of ripe yeeres ought to be preferred before a Child, and an Vnkle before a Nephew whoſe great Grand-father out-liued the Father. To conclude, hee had not vſurped any authority ouer the Lords of Vlſter, though in times paſt his Anceſtors, by a particular right, had vſed it. But of this I haue ſpoken elſe-where. Which when the Queene found true, he was ſent home with honour, where he behaued himſelfe both faithfully and induſtriouſly againſt the Iriſh Rebels.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Booke 1. 1563.THE SIXTH YEERE OF HER RAIGNE. Anno Domini, 1563.
                     
                        IN the moneth of Ianuary, the States of the Kingdome aſſembled at Weſtminſter, and eſtabliſhed Lawes for the reliefe of the poore, for the increaſe of traffique by Sea, and for husbandry, to repreſſe South-ſayers, Negromancers, Sodomites, Coyners, and Periury, and tranſlated the Holy Bible and Liturgy into the Welſh Tongue: And, to maintaine the Maieſty of the Queene and Realme, tooke order, that the like inconueniences might not happen to them, which ſhamefully fell out by the Popes vſurped authority; and, to curbe the violence of thoſe which vpheld it, declared them criminals laeſae Maieſtatis, whoſoeuer, after three admonitions, ſhould maintaine in print, in words, or in deedes, that any Prince,

Prelate, or ſtranger, ſhould haue any authority in Spirituall things, in England, or any other Countries of the Queenes Dominions; or whoſoeuer ſhould refuſe twice to take the Oath which ſhould be offered to him, for acknowledging of the Queenes ſoueraigne authority in Spiritual things, and ouer Eccleſiaſticall perſons; yet with this charge, without ſpilling of blood, neither that it ſhould bee required of any Baron of this Kingdome, or of thoſe of more eminent dignity, the Queene not doubting their fidelity, nor any others:
Saue thoſe which were, which had been, or hereafter ſhould be of ſome Eccleſiaſticall Order; or thoſe, who after hauing bin aduertiſed of the forme of ſeruice of the Engliſh Church, will not obſerue it; or ſhall publikely in words or actions depraue it; which ſhall celebrate or heare Maſſe, with like things, which is ſeene in the Ordinance eſtabliſhed for it.
                     
                     Now, to witnes the ioy which they had to ſee the proſperity of the times, the Clergie granted the Queene a Subſidie, and the Lay people another, together with two Tenths, and two fifteenths, in acknowledgment of her reformation of Religion, eſtabliſhment of Peace, deliuering England and Scotland from ſtranger Enemies, to put downe baſe money, repaire the Fleet, make preparation for Warre and Nauigation beyond expectation, and of the laudable deſigne which ſhe had for France, to aſſure England and the yong King of France, and to recouer Calais.
                        
                           Fifteenths. Tenths.
                         Now this Tenth and Fifteenth (that I may make it remarkable in the behalfe of ſtrangers) is a Taxe, which long agoe hath bin impoſed vpon euery City, Borrough, and village, not by the pole, but by generalities, according to the fifteenth part of the reuenew of the places.
                           Subſidies.
                         A Subſidie is that which is impoſed vpon euery particular, for goods and lands

which he poſſeſſeth. But neither of theſe two Taxes are euer impoſed, but by the Parliament.
                     
                        
                           The Prence of Condé taken in the Battell of Dreux.
                        In the meane time, the Prince of Conde, who made haſte to get into Normandy, to the Engliſh ſuccour, is taken in the famous Battell of Dreux and with him Nicholas Throgmorton, who ſuffered himſelfe voluntarily to bee taken by the Proteſtants, to communicate ſome ſecret deſignes vnto them. And beeing preſently after ſet at liberty, he preſented the money which was promiſed to Coligni, who was marched forward with the Troupes of auxiliary Engliſh to the Caſtle of Cane which he then beſieged, and eaſily compelled Cane, Bayeux, Falexe, and the Temple of Saint Lo, to render.
                     While things were thus carried in France, Queen ELIZABETH made knowne to the King of Spaine, by Chaloner her Ambaſſadour, that, to preuent the Guizes in time, who inſultingly, and with deadly intent raiſ'd vp againſt her, pernitious things and dangerous Treaties, that ſhee had ſent an Armie into France, and kept ſtill in her hands Haure de grace, which was deliuered vp to her, till ſhee receiued full ſatisfaction for Calais.
                        
                           The Kings anſwer.
                         He anſwered her, That if ſhe demanded onely the reſtitution of Calais, it was all ſhee deſired from the beginning, but if ſhe vndertooke this warre for Religions ſake, he could not likewiſe abandon that of his Grandfathers and Predeceſſors. As for the Guizes, who are they, ſaid he, for a moſt puiſſant Queene of England to feare, they beeing of no alliance to the King of France, as hereto fore they haue beene?  Whereunto ſhe made no other reply, but conformable to that Engliſh Prouerbe; which ſayes, Euery one must looke to their own, when their neighbours Houſe is on fire. And the King of Spaine vnderſtood well inough, how ſhee politikely treated with the Proteſtant Princes of Germany, by the ſollicitation of then Henry, but now, Lord Knowles, and Chriſtopher Hill, for the Prince of Condé's reliefe, and to defend the common

cauſe of Religion, whereat being more highly offended, he likewiſe ſecretly ſought meanes againſt her, vnder the colour and pretext of Religion.
                     Withall, thoſe French Hoſtages,
                           Hoſtages giuen for the reſtitution of Calais, attempt to fly away.
                         who were ſent into England, for the ſecurity of the payment of 
                           •
                        ne hundred thouſand Crownes, promiſed, in caſe Calais were not reſtored, perceiuing all things enclining to a warre, laboured all they could to flye away: but beeing ready to take Barke, they were taken and brought backe againe, together with that famous Pylot, Iohn Ribant, who came ſecretly into England, to conuay them ouer. In the meane while,
                           Peace made in France.
                         peace was accorded in France, between the King, and the Prince of Condé, allured thereunto, out of hope that hee ſhould haue the generall managing of all affaires, and marry the Queene of Scots; the Proteſtants, and the Queenes Maieſtie of England being no waies therein comprehended; all men, with one generall voice, proteſted, that if the Engliſh withdrew not themſelues forthwith out of Haure de grace, the promiſe of ſurrendting Calais, intimated by the Treaty of Cambray, ſhould be fruſtrate, and take no effect: and by publique ſound of Trumpet, the French were permitted in this caſe, to aſſaile the Engliſh, to take, and pillage them, while they yeelded it vp.
                           War proclaimed between the French and the Engliſh.
                         The Queenes Maieſty of England alſo, for her part, permitted the Engliſh to repute of the French-men as enemies, thoſe onely excepted, that did inhabite in London, while they detayned Calais: and the Engliſh put to ſea, with ſuch a powerfull Nauie, as was incredible, clozing it vp from all French nauigation, as alſo from the Spaniards, making ſo many, and ſuch inſolent ſurprizals of them both, as her Maieſtie was vrg'd to excuſe the ſame to the King of Spaine, and to divulge prohibitions, by publike Proclamation, to the Engliſh.
                     
                     The Earle of Warwicke, Gouernour of Haure de grace, obſeruing, how the fidelity and loyaltie of the French Inhabitants began to wauer, and that vpon ſo weake a rumor

of Peace, they held ſecret Councels amongſt themſelues, and that the Ryngraue was in the adiacent parts, with his forces, to ſurprize the Towne, and expell the Engliſh: he in like manner draue out all the French indifferently, both Papiſts and Proteſtants, out of the Towne, and ſeazed on their ſhipping, which they tooke in grieuous ill part; complaining, that the Engliſh were not ſo carefull to protect the afflicted French-men, as to make themſelues abſolute Maſters of the place; and how they felt their oppreſſion more heauy, then that of the Enemie himſelfe. And certainely, to ſpeake but truth, nothing euer ſo alienated the hearts of the Normanes, thoſe of Guyenne, the Poytouines, and all other Prouinces liuing vnder the ſubiection of the Kings of England, as becauſe the Engliſh euer reputed, and entreated them like meere ſtrangers.
                     The French-men had now ſtudiouſly prepared all things to aſſaile the Towne:
                           The Qu. Maieſtie offers to ſurrender Haure de grace, for Calais. The King, and the Prince of Condé at the ſame time laboured hard, and very earneſtly in England, by Brickmore and D. for the ſurrender of the Towne, and her Maieſtie conſented thereunto, vpon theſe conditions:

                           Firſt, That the King of Spaine ſhould ioyne in Caution, for the reſtitution of Calais, within the time prefixed: Then, the Treatie of Cambray was to be confirmed by the Kings Oath, the Queene Mothers, and that of the Princes of the Bloud, & ratified by all the Parliaments of France, and Gentlemen of greateſt note and quality, giuen for Pledges.
                     
                     
                        
                           The Engliſh Soldiers moleſted with the Peſtilēce.
                        In the meane while, the Plague raigned very hot in Haure de grace, amongſt the Soldiers of the Garriſon; and two-hundred, ſent for their reliefe and ſuccour, were loſt by ſhip-wracke, with Sir Thomas Finch, their Conductor, and two Brothers of the Lord Wentworth
                        ▪ Wherefore, there being no great likely hood of maintayning and holding

the Towne, Sir Thomas Smith, ordinary Leager in France, receiued expreſſe Commandement, to propound the reſtoring of it, for Calais, and ſo in like maner, that the King of Spaine ſhould arbitrate this affaire, who had married the King of France his Siſter. But the French would in no wiſe giue any eare vnto it, alleadging, that the King of France acknowledged none for his Superiour, neither would hee commit his affaires to the arbitrement of any Prince. They detayned Maſter Nicholas Throgmorton, ſent to moue theſe Conditions, ſuſpecting he was returned into France, for the diſturbance of proceedings (as hee could play his part well) grounding their Action vpon this, that he had no publique Commiſſion, though he had about him Letters of Credit, beſides others he had from the French Ambaſſadour Leager in England: and they would in no wiſe heare him, verily beleeuing, that Haure de grace would preſently be recouered by maine force, by reaſon the Peſtilence cauſed there ſuch a fearefull mortality. Monſieur Memorancie was already come thither, with all the moſt remarkeable Nobility in his company. Not long after, arriued the Prince of Condé, with the whole Flowre of the Proteſtant Cheualrie: and the Engliſh wondring at this ſudden alteration, anſwer was made them, that Peace was now generally eſtabliſhed, and the forces of both parties ioyn'd in one, and now no motiues were made of fighting for Religion, but for defence of their Countrie.
                     A Trumpet was ſent from Monſieur Memorancy, to the Earle of Warwicke, to ſummon him to ſurrender, and another returned from the ſaid Earle, to the Conſtable Memorancie, with a Gentleman, one Maſter Paulet, to certifie him, how the Engliſh were reſolued to ſuffer all extremities,Haure de grace beleagred and aſſailed by the French.
                         rather than to yeeld vp the Place, without the Queenes expreſſe Commandement. Wherfore the Frenchmen hauing raiſ'd Mounts to make their Batterie, ruin'd and battered the Towne for the ſpace of many daies, broke vp all

the Conduit-heads, and diuerted the water out of its proper Chanell, which was ſeated aboue the Sea: they applied all their endeuours to take the Towne by force: the Engliſh, on the other ſide, with moſt loyall and couragious fidelity, oppoſed theirs, daylie loſing more men by the Plague, than by the Armes of their Enemies.
                     When Queen ELIZABETH heard of the lamentable and vnhappy eſtate of her people, no longer to expoſe ſuch valiant ſpirits to ſlaughter, and peſtilentiall Infection; after an approofe of her Captaines and Soldiers valours, in a publike Proclamation, ſhe ſent to the Earle of Warwicke, commanding him to compound with the French, vpon reaſonable and equall Conditions. There were alſo incontinently delegated from the Earle of Warwicke, to Monſieur Memorancy, Maſter Paulet, & Maſter Pelham, with whom in a ſhort time they came to an Accord, vpon theſe Capitulations enſuing:

                           Articles for the reſtitution of Haure de grace.
                           That the Towne, with all the war-like munition, ſhould be ſurrendred to the King of France, and his Subiects. That preſently Monſieur Memorancie ſhould take poſſeſsion of the greateſt Towre within the Towne. That the priſoners both of the one and other ſide, ſhould inſtantly be redeliuered. And that the Engliſh might de part with all freedome and liberty, carrying whatſoeuer belonged to their Queene or themſelues, within the compaſſe of ſixe dayes, if the Winds would permit.
                     
                     For performance whereof, they deliuered for Hoſtages, Mr. Oliuer Mannors, Brother to the Earle of Rutland, Mr. Leighton, Mr. Pelham, and Mr. Horſie. The laſt remaining, was, Mr. Edm. Randolph, Marſhall of the Campe, who, with a pitty and commiſeration, neuer ouer-highly to be extolled, ceaſed not to carry vpon his owne ſhoulders, poore, miſerable, and weake Soldiers into the Ships.
                     
                        And thus, Haure de grace, being more violently aſſailed by the Plague, then any enemie, was left to the French, hauing beene formerly in the Engliſhmens hands, about eleuen Moneths; during which time, beſides priuate Soldiers, there dyed of the Peſtilence, theſe famous Captaines, Somerſet, Zouch, Alb. Darcy, Drurey, Entweſsel, Ormesby, Vaughan, Crookes, Cocſon, Proud, Saul, and Kemiſh: and with the Sword, two Brothers of the Tremayns, Sanders, Bromfield, Maſter of the Ordnance, Robinſon, Baylife of the Towne; Strangewaies, very expert in Sea-ſeruice; & Good-all, maruelous vnderſtanding in caſting of Mines.
                     For the ſo happy recouery of this little Towne,France reioyceth for recouery of Haure de grace. the King of France gaue publike thankſgiuing vnto God; the Papiſts all ouer France, made Bonefires of ioy, exulting and boaſting, in that the Engliſh-men were driuen out by the ayde and helpe of the Proteſtants, who firſt called them in, and that by this meanes, ſome ſeeds of diſcord were ſowne betweene them and the Proteſtants of France; and the Chancellour of the Hoſpitall, in an ample Diſcourſe, expreſſing to them the preſent felicity they thereby enioyed, and the generall contentment they ought to receiue, and teſtifie the ſame withall, for the amplification of this ſubiect; and, out of a falſe ſurmize, he reported to them, that the day before the Townes ſurrender, there was ſeene within the view thereof, an Engliſh Fleet, which came for ayde and ſuccour: and he openly auerred, that by reaſon of this warre, the Engliſh were wholly fruſtrate of their right and demand, touching the reſtoring of Calais.
                        
                           The Engliſh Soldiers bring the Plague into London, and other parts of England. The infected Soldiers were tranſported into England, who ſo ſpred the face of this ſickneſſe, through a contagious and infectiue poyſon, as all the Kingdome was therewith grieuouſly afflicted, & onely in the Citie of London, conſiſting of an hundred twenty and one Pariſhes, within the compaſſe of one yeere, an hundred and thirty thouſand men, rather more then leſſe, dyed.
                     
                        
                        Monſieur de Guize, Vncle to the Queene of Scots, dying while this Ciuill Warre laſted, the Queenes Maieſty of Scotland not beeing paid her Dowrie, Marquis Hamilton depriued of the Duchy of Chaſtelraut, and the Scottiſh Guard being excluded from the King of France, the Queen of Scots tooke it very much to heart. But the Cardinall of Lorraine,
                        
                           Marriage againe propounded to the Queene of Scots.
                         her other Vncle, fearing that this would bee a ſubiect which might cauſe her to reiect the French, and become friend to the Engliſh, ſends her word againe by Croc, to marry with Charles of Auſtria, and to offer for her Dowrie, the County of Tyrol. Shee aduertiſeth Queene ELIZABETH thereof, who counſelled her, by Randoll (who I haue ſpoken on before) to make choice of a Husband, as heretofore I haue ſaid: and withall (more plainely then yet ſhee had done) recommended Robert Dudley (whoſe wife (beeing heire to Robſert) had lately broke her necke) and promiſed her,
                           The Queene of England recommends Dudley for her husband.
                         in caſe that ſhe would marry him, to declare her, Her Siſter, or Daughter, and Englands Heretrix, by Act of Parliament. Foix, the French Ambaſſadour, made the Queene Mother, and her Vncles acquainted with this, who preſently diſdained the Party ſo much, as altogether vnworthy of that Race and Royall Maieſtie, that they promiſed not onely to pay her Dowrie, but alſo, that the Scots ſhould haue their ancient immunities, yea, and more, if ſhee would ſtand firme in amity with France, and reiect the marriage which was offered her: telling her, that Queen ELIZABETH did not propound this marriage to her ſeriouſly, but with diſſimulation, as hauing deſtin'd Dudley for her owne Husband: and that ſhee ſhould not ground her hope vpon the authority of the Parliament, becauſe that in England,
                        
                           The French diuert her.
                         one Parliament aboliſheth what another hath eſtabliſhed. Furthermore, that the deſignes of the Councell of England were no other, but to hinder her from marrying at all.
                     
                        She neuertheleſſe referres it to the Colloque, being moleſted with troubles in her Kingdome, to ſee that the Arch-biſhop of Saint Andrewes had beene impriſoned by the command of the Earle of Murray, for not deſiſting to celebrate the Maſſe, who would ſcarce grant him pardon, though he asked it with flowing teares: and that the feruent Miniſters, ſupporting themſelues by Murrayes authoritie, did violence to the Prieſt who had celebrated Maſſe in her Court (being allowed by the Law,) and were not puniſhed.
                           They inſult ouer their Queene.
                         And it was not poſſible for her to ſuppreſſe thoſe which troubled the affaires, though all her care was wholy for the Common-wealth, granting a perpetuall forgetfulneſſe of all that was paſt, increaſing the ſtipend of Iudges, eſtabliſhing wholeſome Lawes, inflicting capitall puniſhment vpon Adulterers, and often her ſelfe hearing cauſes pleaded in the Seat of Iuſtice, ſo that by an equall Law, ſhee gouerned both the great and the ſmall.
                     In this vnlucky yeere dyed William Gray,
                        
                           The Baron of Gray dyes,
                         Baron of Wilton, Gouernour of Berwicke, who had in warre purchaſed great glory, & much diminiſhed his patrimony for the ranſome that he payed when he was taken priſoner in France. The Proteſtants lamented much for him, and Francis Earle of Bedford was ſubſtituted in his place.
                     
                        Aluarus of Quadra, Biſhop of Aquila,
                        
                           And the Biſhop of Aquila, Ambaſſadour of Spaine in England, likewiſe dyes, who was no leſſe lamented by the Papiſts, whom he had fed with hope, that the Romiſh Religion ſhould haue beene re-eſtabliſhed. The Poles, of whom I haue ſpoken, were his intimates, whereby he made himſelfe ſuſpected to haue nothing elſe in his minde, but to trouble and diſorder the affaires of England, and to breake the amitie which was betweene the Queene and the King of Spaine: whereupon, the Queene intreated the King to reuoke him. But hee excuſed it by his piety, and writ backe, that it would be a great incommoditie

to Princes, if at the firſt diſcontentment that is taken at their Ambaſſadours, they ſhould be conſtrayned to reuoke them. And to ſay truth, hee was diſpleaſed, that without giuing him notice, they had ſhut him vp in his Houſe, ſubiect to be queſtioned and publiquely reprehended, for no other cauſe, but that one Italian hauing ſhot another with a Piſtoll, he admitted him into his Houſe, and conueyed him priuately away: whereupon, he was more prouoked againſt the Engliſh than euer tofore;
                           The Spaniard againſt the Engliſh.
                         taking occaſion thereby to ſay, that the Engliſh Pyrates moleſted the entries of Spaine, and prepared to goe for the Weſt-Indies; and made it appeare manifeſtly, ſending Richard Shelley, an Engliſh Fugitiue for Religion, (who was greatly bent againſt his Prince) vpon an Embaſſie of honour to Maximilian the deſigned King of the Romanes, to congratulate with him, and ſeyzed vpon ſome Engliſh Merchants Ships, in the Ports of Beotia, becauſe the Engliſh purſuing the French, had intercepted ſome Spaniſh Ships.
                     
                        
                           Lord Paget dyeth.
                        
                        William, Lord Paget, who for his vertue was exalted to three eminent dignities, died. Hee was ſo learned, that HENRY the Eighth made him his Secretary, ſent him in an Embaſſie to the Emperour Charles the Fifth, and to Francis the Firſt, King of France, and he nominated him to be one of the Gouernours of the Kingdome, during the minority of his Sonne: Then Edward made him Chancellor of the Duchie of Lancaſter, Controller of the Kings Houſe, honoured him with the dignity of a Baron, gratified him with the Order of the Garter, which was reprochfully taken from him, by Dudley Earle of Northumberland, but reſtored againe with honour by Queene MARIE, becauſe, by his prudence and ſound aduice, he had done good ſeruice to the Common-wealth: and hee conferred vpon him the keeping of the Priuy Seale, which is one of the foure higheſt dignities of ciuill honour. For, HENRY the Eighth, by Act of Parliament, conſtituted the firſt in

the Chancellor, the ſecond in the Treaſurer, the third in the Lord Preſident of the Priuy Councell, and the fourth in the Keeper of the Priuy Seale, aboue all Dukes;
                           The ſupreme dignities of honour in England. and inferiour onely, to the Children, Brethren, Vnkles, or Nephewes to the King. Queene ELIZABETH, perceiuing that his old yeeres exempted him from being conuerſant in matters of State, as formerly he had beene, remitted him of whatſoeuer belonged to publique adminiſtrations, and loued him affectionately, though hee ſtood zealouſly affected to the Romane Religion. Hee left behinde him, Henry and Thomas, his Children, who ſucceeded him one after another, in his dignity of a Baron: Charles, who purchaſed renowne to his name, and ſome Daughters, who were married into honourable Families.
                     
                        Henry Mannors, or Manners, Earle of Rutland, died,
                           Death of the Earle of Rutland. who was Sonne to Thomas the firſt Earle of that Family, Nephew to Iames, Baron of Roſſe, who came of the Daughter of Thomas S. Leger, and Anne his wife, who, by reaſon ſhe was Siſter to EDVVARD the Fourth, gaue wonderfull luſtre and ſplendor to that name; Couſin-germaine to Robert, who hauing married the Daughter and Heire to the Baron of Roſſe, an honourable and ancient Family, augmented his owne with mightie reuenewes, and the title of Baron of Roſſe: and he had by the Lady Neuill, Daughter to Ralph Earle of Weſtmerland, two Sonnes, Edward and Iohn, who were each of them, in their due times, Earles of Rutland: and a Daughter, who was married to William Courtney of Powderham.
                     
                     
                        Frances, Duches of Suffolke,
                        
                           Ducheſſe of Suffolke. Daughter to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolke, and Mary ſecond Siſter to HENRY the Eighth, and Queene Dowager of France, died, who was afflicted with many miſeries during her life. She ſaw her eldeſt Daughter Ianes head cut off, after ſhee had beene proclaymed Queene, and preſently after, her Husbands: her ſecond Daughter, married to the Earle of Pembroke, to

be diuorc'd and impriſon'd: and her third Daughter, meanly married to Key, who in his time was Maſter of the Reuels at Court: And then her ſelfe, forgetting from what degree ſhe deſcended, to her great diſhonour, yet notwithſtanding for her beſt ſecurity, married with Andrew Stoakes, a meere priuate Gentleman.
                  
                  
                     
                     THE SEVENTH YEERE OF HER RAIGNE.Booke 1. 1564. 
                        Anno Domini, 1564.
                     
                        
                           FRance then reioyced for the peace ſhee enioyed, which in ſome manner was maintayned with the Queene of England, as being eſtabliſhed, to ſhut vp all entry to the Engliſh, who began to flye out, in calling to mind the cruell ſlaughters made by them in former ages, when the Duke of Burgundie called them in, for reuenge of his peculiar rancours and hatreds. But this peace hauing rather ſlaked the feruent heat of warre, than faſtned any true concord or amity betweene the Engliſh and the French; and the Queenes Maieſty perceiuing how the Proteſtants neglected and contemned her, ingratefully returning thoſe pleaſures and fauours ſhee had done them, reſolued to trouble her ſelfe no more in others

behalfe, to the preiudice and hinderance of her owne proceedings. Wherefore, ſhe bent all her care and thoughts to her owne occaſions, deliberated to make peace, commended the ouerture thereof to Sir Thomas Smith, a wiſe and learned man; and the French, lending a ready eare to the ſame, gaue him Throgmorton for his Aſſiſtant, who was then in France a priſoner at large, to the end they might both together negotiate and procure the ſame. The French King for his part, aſſigned a Commiſſion to Moruillier, Biſhop of Orleance, and to Iohn Bourdin, one of his Secretaries. You may hereunder ſee the Articles whereupon they came to an accord, in the moneth of Aprill, within the Towne of Troyes in Champaigne.
                     
                     
                        Articles of peace accorded on betweene the Engliſh and the French.
                        THat one ſhould not violently aſſaile the other, neither yeeld ſuccours to any other that made aſſault either vpon the one or other, particulars onely ſhould be lyable to their peculiar inſults and offences. No Traytors nor Rebels of eyther ſide were to be receiued. All former iniuries were to be buried in obliuion. Excepted all rights, actions, ſuites, and pretenſions, which eyther they haue, or pretend to haue reſpectiuely one againſt another, ſhall remaine forcible and entire, and ſo likewiſe all exceptions and prohibitions to the contrary.
                     Theſe Articles concluded vpon, the day following they annexed theſe Couenants ſeparately, and apart: That a certaine ſumme of money ſhould be payd to the Queene of England, at daies conſtituted and appointed: The Hoſtages in England were to be deliuered after the ſatisfaction of fiue hundred crownes. And ſo this Treaty being ratified and confirmed, Throgmorton might freely returne into his Country. The King of France made Bone-fires of ioy, according to the cuſtome, and after the Queene of England had ratified

the ſame by oath in the preſence of Gunor, and Foix, himſelfe likewiſe within a very ſmall time confirmed it, in the preſence of the Lord of Hunſdon, who, hauing at the ſame inſtant admitted his Maieſty to the Order of S. George,
                        
                           The King of France enſtalled in the Order of the Garter. he ſolemnely inveſted him with the Garter, the Robe of honour, a Collar of Eſſes, whereat hung the picture of Saint George, and other ornaments belonging to that Order.
                     In thoſe dayes, there arriued in England, clad in the habit and grauity of a Prieſt, to appeare more venerable, Diego or Drilaco, Guzman de la Forreſta, a Canon of Toledo, ſent in ſtead of the Biſhop of Aquilar, deceaſed ſome moneths before, during which internall, Roderic Gomez de la Forreſta, out of an hatred to Religion, had bin the procurer of ſome rude entreaties of the Engliſh in Spaine, who notwithſtanding was much qualified by the Duke of Alua,
                        
                           The Engliſh ill entreated in Spaine, no man being able truely to ſay, whether hee did it out of any loue he bare to the Engliſh, or hatred to Gomez. The like ill entreaty they alſo found in the Prouinces of the Low-Countries, that liued vnder the Spaniſh gouernement,
                           And in the Low-countries. at the inſtigation of the Cardinal of Granuella, who, to ſow diſſention betweene them and the Flemmings, who held friendly and neighbourly commerce together, in hatred to the ſaid Religion, he ſo brought it to paſſe, that the yeere before the Flemmings complayned by Aſſonuil, that the cuſtomes of England were enhaunſt, (though this was performed during the reigne of Philip and MARY) and that by Act of Parliament, many of their handy-workes were there interdicted. The Engliſh on the other ſide,
                           The mutuall complaints of the Engliſh and Flemmiſh. they exhibited alſo Bills of complaint, how for ſmall and trifling occaſions, their goods were confiſcated in Flanders, by vertue of new Edicts, which alſo prohibited the bringing in of certaine merchandizes, or to goe into Italie, and Germanie, by way of Flanders, with horſe, Salt-Peter, and Powder. That they iniuriouſly exacted of them greater

Impoſts than euer were ſo much as mentioned in former times, and all this againſt that Treaty of Commerce heretofore concluded on, which was called the Grand Intercourſe.
                     
                        
                           Engliſh Merchants prohibited in the Low-Countries.
                        In the meane while, the Princeſſe of Parma, Regent of the Low Countries, cauſed publique prohibitions to be diuulged: firſt, that no forbidden merchandize ſhould be tranſported into England, and then preſently after, for the importing of any Engliſh clothes into Flanders, colouring it with the pretext of the plague, which not long before had ſpred it ſelfe all England ouer. But the naked truth is, all theſe things were managed, by the cautelous counſels and ſtratagems of Cardinall Granuelle, to cauſe the Clothiers, and other workemen depending on them, to riſe, when they ſaw no clothes to be tranſported: and yet the traffique of Clothes was eſtabliſhed in Flanders,
                        
                           The Engliſh conſtitute a Faire or Mart at Embden. to the preiudice of the Engliſh, who prouoked hereat, conſtituted a Faire of Engliſh cloth and merchandizes at Embden in Eaſt Frizeland, as if they feared the Spaniſh Inquiſition, which now was entred into the Low-Countries, and fore-ſaw that troubles would preſently enſue.
                     Againſt all this, the Regent publiſhed an Edict, importing an expreſſe prohibition of all men, vpon paine of confiſcation, to entertaine any traffique with the Engliſh at Embden, or any where elſe, or to tranſport into the Low-Countries, any Merchandizes bought of them.
                     
                        Guzman labors to atone this difference.
                        
                        Guzman blam'd theſe proceedings, as beeing too ſtrict and rigorous, dammageable both to the one and other part: For this wiſe man conceiued truely, what wealth dayly came into Flanders, by meanes of the Engliſh Taffique, euer ſince Lewis Malan, Earle of Flanders, about the yeere 1338. by a Grant of great immunities, had drawne the Engliſh, to ſettle a Mart, or Staple of Engliſh Wools at Bruges: for euer ſince that time, in a manner all Nations flocking into Flanders, to buy Clothes, and other Engliſh Merchandizes,

as alſo to ſell their owne there, it is incredible, what Traffiques, Commerces, Nauigations, and Fiſhings, haue euer ſince flouriſht among the Flemmings. So as this wooll was vnto them a true Golden Fleece: and that Noble Order of the Golden Fleece, forcheth from hence its originall, and the Dukes of Burgundy, their great wealth and Treaſure. And queſtionleſſe, in theſe very dayes wherein wee liue, (I ſpeake according to the papers of Account) the Commerce that is betweene the Engliſh and the Flemmings, hath amounted to aboue twelue Millions of gold each yeere: And the Clothes tranſported euery yeere to Antwerpe, (omitting to ſpeake of Lead, Tinne, and other things) is eſtimated at fiue Millions of gold. Wherefore, vpon theſe conſiderations, Guzman employing all meanes poſſible, to atone this difference, at laſt hee obtained, that the Commerce lately broken off betweene the two Nations, might be reſettled in its former ſtate, and that whatſoeuer had beene ordained and decreed, from the firſt day of the firſt yeeres raigne of Queene ELIZABETH, both of the one ſide and on the other, ſhould ſurceaſe, till,: by Deputies both for the one and the other partie, more ample prouiſion could be made. But the yeere following, when my Lord Mountaigue, Nicholas Watton, and William Haddon, Maſter of the Requeſts, Delegates for the Engliſh, Montigny, Aſſonuil, and Io. Egidius, for the Flemmings, had begunne twice to treate of theſe matters in the Towne of Bruges, the Flemmings falling into their precedent tumules, interrupted this Treatie, after an Agreement made, that this Commerce and Traffique ſhould be free, while one of the Princes made an oppoſite denountiation to the other, the Marchants of both parties being aduertiſed forty dayes before, to prouide and take ſome order for their liuing commodities.
                     Theſe things beeing thus ordain'd out of the Kingdome, the Queenes Maieſty betooke her ſelfe to the pleaſure

and recreations of the Countrey; and to this end ſhee viſited the Vniuerſity of Cambridge, which is one of the two reſplendent Lampes of England, where beeing entertained of the Schollers,
                           Queenè Elizabeth viſits the Vniuerſity of Cambridge.
                         with all manner of honours, and taken contentment in beholding their Comedies, Tragedies, and exerciſes of Armes, ſhe perſonally viſited all the Colledges, and in a Latine Oration, gaue them great thanks for their ſingular loue and affection, highly commended their profound and diuers E
                           •
                        uditions, exhorting them to apply their hearts to the ſtudies of piety and learning, and for their vertuous ſtimulation, promiſing alwaies to fauour and cheriſh them.
                     
                        Robert Dudley raiſed to honors.
                        When ſhee returned, the more to honour Robert Dudley, Sarlatan, a ſpeciall Fauourite of hers, whō, with a ſecret deſigne, ſhe made choice of for an husband to the Q. of Scots, ſhe created him Baron of Denbigh, giuing him the Caſtle of Denbigh in property, with all the appurtenances of ſoyle, and Demeanes; and the day after, Earle of Leiceſter, to himſelfe, and the heires males of his body lawfully begotten: hauing likewiſe before, for his ſake, confer'd vpon Ambroſe, his elder Brother, the dignities of Baron of Liſle, and Earle of Warwicke, to him, and his lawfull heires males, for euer. The Lord Dudley, exalted by all theſe ſupereminent honours, and to currey fauour with the Queen of Scots, whom he affected, and ſtudied by all manner of Offices to deſerue well of; preſently, before Queene ELIZABETH,Dudley accuſeth Bacon. he accuſed Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the great Seale, of diſcuſſing the point of Succeſſion, againſt the Queene of Scots, and that he was priuy to a Libell, wherein that ſame Hales, of whom before I ſpake, laboured to intimate, that if the Queenes Maieſty of England, then liuing, dyed without Iſſue, the right of the Crowne came to the Houſe of Suffolke. For which cauſe, he was committed priſoner; and as for Sir Nicholas Bacon, though he abſolutely denyed it, my Lord Cecill reſoluing to conceale

what hee thought, vntill the Queene (whoſe Maieſtie hee was aſſured, would neuer in this caſe impoſe on him any demand) ſhould command him to ſpeake his minde: had much adoe to recouer him her fauour, and long time he was a compaſſing it;
                           Diuers opinions about the point of Succeſſion.
                         for nothing could be more diſtaſtfull to her, then to heare any debatements about this Title of Succeſſion. But ſo the wiſer and wealthier ſort were more carefull and ſtudious of nothing then of this, they obſeruing how by reaſon of the contrariety of Religion, the Proteſtants, tranſported with an ardent zeale, held opinion, that the Queene of Scots, being of an oppoſite Religion, (though otherwiſe her right was neuer ſo much as called in queſtion) ought neuertheleſſe, by the ſubtill conſtruction of the Lawes, to bee reiected from ſucceſſion: Some Papiſts againe, and thoſe who had reference to that which was iuſt and equall, maintain'd how ſhe was to be receiued as the true, right, and vndoubted Inheritrix. Others there were, who prefer'd before her, MARGARET, her Aunt by the Mothers ſide, and Wife to Mathew Stuart Earle of Lenox, and her Children, of whom they conceiued good hopes, becauſe they were borne in England. All this lay not hid from the Queene of Scots; who, to preuent it ſo farre as was poſſible, by the Counteſſe of Lenox, her Aunt, ſent for Mathew, Earle of Lenox, to come into Scotland,
                        
                           The Queene of Scots cal
                                 •
                               home the Earle of Lenox into Scotland.
                         vnder pretext to re-eſtabliſh and ſettle him in the Inheritance of his Predeceſſors. But this was to conſult further with him, who, by his Wiues meanes, obtained leaue, and Letters from Q. ELIZABETH, after he had bin baniſht out of his natiue Countrey, for the ſpace of 20. yeeres.
                     This Earle of Lenox (to the end that relating the ſame from the eſſentiall extraction of his eminent Nobility,
                           The diſcent of the Earle of Lenox.
                         I may giue the better light & luſtre to things) was deſcended from the very ſame race of the Stuarts, as the Royall Progeny of the Scots came from; and moreouer lately by the Hamiltons, of the bloud-Royall: For Marie, daughter to

                        Iames 2. King of Scotland, had by Iames Hamilton, Iames, who was the firſt Earle of Arraine, & Mary, who was wife to Matt. Stuart, firſt Earle of Lenox of that name. Iames, Earle of Arraine, being diuorced from his firſt Wife, tooke in her place the Lady Ienet Beton, Aunt by the Mothers ſide, to the Cardinall Beton, by whom hee had Iſſue, Iames Hamilton Duke of Chaſtel-Heraut. Marie, Siſter to the Earle of Arraine, bore to Mathew, Iohn, Earle of Lenox, who being ſlaine by the Hamiltons, when hee attempted to ſet King IAMES the fourth at liberty, left this Mathew, Earle of Lenox, whom King Iames the Fifth loued moſt dearly in reſpect of his Father.
                     When the King was dead, and the Hamiltons in full authority, Mathew went ſecretly into France; from whence, being ſent backe, by the French King Henry the ſecond, into Scotland, to preuent all detriment to the Scottiſh Common-wealth, through the practices of the Regent Hamilton, hee valiantly carried himſelfe in this employment. But being of an honeſt milde nature, and very open-hearted, permitting himſelfe to bee outreached by Hamilton, and the Cardinall Beton, in a ſmall time hee loſt the amity of the French, and when hee could neither tarry in Scotland, nor returne into France, he went into England, and committed himſelfe in truſt to King Henry the Eighth, who very graciouſly entertained him, as one that was powerfull & well beloued in the Weſterne parts of Scotland: Whervpon, he acknowledged him for next Heire to the Crowne of Scotland, after Queene MARY, who was then exceeding yong, (though neuertheleſſe the Hamiltons condemned him, and confiſcated all his Lands) gaue him to Wife the Lady Margaret Douglaſſe, his Neece by the elder Siſters ſide, with demeanes in England, which amounted in an annuall reuennew, to the ſumme of 1700. Marks, after hee had made promiſe to ſurrender into his hands, the Caſtle of Dunbritton, and the Ile of Buthe,
                        
with the Caſtle of Rothſay, which is in England. The which hee vndertooke with courage, but fayled in the ſucceſſe.
                     The Queene of Scots, beeing a wiſe and prudent Lady,
                           Cauſes of the Repeale of the Earle of Lenox.
                         all whoſe drifts aymed at England, ſhee gaue him her ſafe conduct, and reſtored vnto him his Fathers goods, both that hee might oppoſe the deſignes of Iames, his baſtard brother, whom ſhee had honoured with the Earledome of Murray, as alſo to cut off the hopes of others, by the meanes of Darley her Sonne, which they might any wayes foſter and nouriſh, of ſucceſſion to the Diadem of England. For ſhee feared, that being of the Blood Royall, borne in England, and very well beloued of the Engliſh
                        ▪ if hee were ioyned with any puiſſant Family in England, relying on the Engliſh power and forces, hee might happely one day diſturbe her right of ſucceſſion to the Kingdome of England; many men reputing him for the ſecond Heire apparant after her: and ſhee affected nothing more feruently, then by his meanes, to bring the Kingdomes of England and Scotland, to fall into ſome Scottiſh Race, and Name, and ſo by him to propagate them to poſteritie, in the name of the Stewards, his Anceſtors.
                     Queene ELIZABETH well diſcerned all this,
                           The Queene of England endeuours to preuent the Qu. of Scots proiect.
                         and to preuent it, gaue the Queene of Scots to vnderſtand by Randolph, that this Marriage was ſo diſtaſtfull to all the Engliſh, as againſt the conſent of her Councell, ſhe was enforſt to prorogue the conuentions of Parliament, to ſome other fitter time, for feare, leſt the States of the Kingdome therewith prouoked, ſhould enact ſomewhat, to the preiudice of her right to the ſucceſſion. And therefore, to cut off all occaſions of this Iſſue hereafter, and to ſatisfie the Engliſh, ſhe aduiſed her to thinke of ſome other marriage; and ſo by this meanes, ſhee once againe, and with great affection, commended vnto her the Earle of Leiceſter,
                        
for an Husband, who, for this ſpeciall reaſon, ſhe had exalted to the Dignity of an Earle.
                     
                        
                           Another commendation of the Earle of Leiceſter. A Treaty of Marriage betweene the Queene of Scots and the Earle of Leiceſter.
                        For proſecution of this, the Earles of Bedford, of Randolph, and of Lidington, were deputed to treat of this marriage at Barwicke, in the Moneth of Nouember. The Engliſh promiſed vnto her, a firme and conſtant Amity, a perpetuall Peace, and that vndoubtedly ſhee ſhould ſucceed to the Crowne of England, if ſhe married with the Earle of Leiceſter. The Scots on the other ſide conteſted; alleadging, That their Queenes Dignitie, who had beene ſued vnto, by Charles, Sonne to the Emperour Ferdinand, the King of France, the Prince of Condé, and the Duke of Ferrara, could not permit her, ſo farre to embaſe and vnder-valew her ſelfe, as to match with a new-made Earle, a Subiect of England, and who propounded nothing but bare hopes, without any certaine Dowrie: neither ſtood it with the honour of the Queene of England, to commend ſuch a man for an Husband to ſo great a Princeſſe, her neere Kinſwoman; but rather, ſhee ſhould giue an infallible teſtimonie of her great loue and affection towards her, to giue her abſolute libertie to make choice of ſuch an husband, as might entertaine perpetuall peace with England, to aſſigne her a yeerely Penſion, and with the authority of the Parliament, confirme the right which ſhee had to ſucceede. In all this buſines, the extreme deſire of Queene ELIZABETH was (although ſhe made diſcreete haſte) to aſſure, by ſuch a marriage, the ſucceſſion of the Kingdome in an Engliſh Race. The Queene of Scotland ſeeing that this buſineſſe had beene prolonged full two yeeres, and making account to marry Darley, doubted whether ſhe was proceeded withall in good earneſt, or no; and that Queene ELIZABETH did not propound this marriage, but to make a pre-election of the moſt worthy for herſelfe, or to marry the more excuſable with Leiceſter, She beeing

abſolute Queene, after ſhe ſhould haue really conſented to marry him. But the Commiſſioners of Scotland, weighing theſe reaſons, to maintaine their power with the Queene, had reſolued to hinder, by all meanes, all kinde of marriages. Queene ELIZABETH admoniſheth them to hinder that with Darley; Leiceſter himſelfe full of hope to enioy Queene ELIZABETH, by ſecret Letters, priuily warnes the Earle of Bedford, not to preſſe the thing, and with this hope, it is credibly thought, that hee ſecretly fauoured Darley.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Booke 1. 1565.THE EIGHTH YEERE OF HER RAIGNE. Anno Domini, 1565.
                     
                        Darley goes into Scotland.
                        
                        
                           DARLEY in the meane time, by the interceſſion of his Mother, with Prayers and diligence to Queene ELIZABETH, obtained (though with much difficultie) leaue to goe into Scotland, and to ſtay there three Moneths, vnder pretext, to be partaker of his Fathers eſtabliſhment; and came to Edenborrough in the Moneth of February, in the great winter, when the Thames was ſo frozen, that people paſſed dry ouer on foot.
                           He is beloued of the Queene of Scotland.
                         Hee was a Youth of a moſt worthy Carriage, fit to beare rule, of an excellent compoſition of members, of a milde ſpirit, and of a moſt ſweet behauiour. As ſoone as the Queene of Scotland had ſeene him, ſhe fell in loue with

him; and to the end to keepe her loue ſecret, in diſcourſing with Randolph the Engliſh Ambaſſadour in Scotland, ſhe often-times intermixt her diſcourſe with the marriage of Leiceſter, and at the ſame time, ſeekes a diſpenſation from Rome for Darley, ſhee being ſo neere in bloud, that according to the Popes Ordinance, they ſtood in neede of one. This being come to euery bodies knowledge,
                           Asketh Qu. Elizabeths conſent.
                         ſhee ſends Lidington to Queene ELIZABETH, to haue her conſent to contract with Darley, and not to be any longer detained with a vaine hope of marriage.
                     Queene ELIZABETH propounds the matter to her moſt intimate Councellors; who,
                           Deliberation vpon it.
                         by the ſecret ſuggeſtions of the Earle of Murray, eaſily beleeued that the Queene of Scotland had no other deſigne, but to ſtrengthen her ſelfe by ſuch a marriage, to carry the right which ſhee pretended for the Kingdome of England, and at length, to eſtabliſh it, and likewiſe the Romiſh Religion: that ſome did adhere vnto her, ſeeing that, by reaſon of her children, the ſucceſſion was aſcertained to her Houſe; and others, for the affection which they bare to the Romiſh Religion, there being found more Eirenarch's in England deuoted to the Romiſh Religion, than to the Proteſtants. That to preuent theſe accidents, it was chiefly requiſite, firſt, to pray the Queene to marry ſpeedily, to the end that the affaires and hopes of England ſhould not depend elſe-where, but of the certainty of Succeſſion, which ſhould come of her, and of her Linage: (for they feared that if the Queene of Scotland did marry, and ſhould haue iſſue firſt, many would incline towards her for the certainty and aſſuredneſſe of ſucceſſion.) Secondly, to ruine (as much as may be) the Romiſh Religion in England, and to aduance and carefully eſtabliſh the reformed: the one, by vſing more moderately in things indifferent, ſuch Proteſtants that are carried with a feruent zeale: the other, in ſetting Guards againe vpon the depoſed papiſticall Biſhops, who were then

diſperſed through the Countrey by reaſon of the plague, conferring vpon the other Biſhops greater authority to execute the Eccleſiaſticall Ordinances then they had, contrary to the terrifying Praemunire which the Lawyers doe obiect, ſuppreſſing thoſe Bookes which Harding, and the fugitiue Diuines had ſent out of the Low-Countries into England, driuing out ſome Scottiſh Prieſts, who hid themſelues in England, depriuing the Engliſh fugitiues of the Eccleſiaſticall Benefices which they enioyed vntill then, and compelling the Iudges of the Land, who were for the moſt part Papiſts, to acknowledge the Queenes Soueraigne authority, and to ſweare vnto it: And that to hinder the marriage of Darley, it was fit to leuy Souldiers vpon the Frontiers of Scotland, to the end to raiſe a terrour: to fortifie the Garriſon of Berwicke: to ſet a guard vpon the Counteſſe of Lenox, Darley's Mother, and on Charles her Sonne: and to re-call out of Scotland into England, the Earle of Lenox and Darley his Sonne, vpon paine of loſſe of their goods, before they made any alliance with the French, or with Spaine: and to aſſiſt thoſe which were bent againſt this match, and to receiue the Earle of Hertford and Katherine Gray ſomewhat into fauour: which thing onely was thought that the Queene of Scotland very much apprehended; in regard that ſhee likewiſe pretended a right to the Kingdome, and it ſeemed none other could bring a greater impediment to this marriage than ſhe.
                     
                        Throgmorton is ſent to hinder.
                        From hence, Throgmorton is ſent to the Queene of Scotland, to aduiſe her, that it behooued to deliberate long of a thing that can be but once determined on, and that a precipitate marriage was followed with repentance: to re-commend Leiceſter to her againe, and againe, and that it was altogether contrary to Canon Law, to contract with the Sonne of her Aunt by the Father-ſide: For Queene ELIZABETH deſired aboue all, that ſome of the Engliſh Race ſhould by her meanes ſucceed to both the Kingdomes,

albeit there fayled not, who for matter of Religion, and for the two Kingdomes, made account to ſucceed, if ſhee dyed without iſſue.
                     She anſwers, That it was now paſt reuoking,
                           He is anſwered.
                         and that Queene ELIZABETH had no cauſe to be angry, ſeeing that by her Councell ſhe had made choyce of a Husband which was no ſtranger, but an Engliſh man borne of the Royall bloud of both the Kingdomes, and the moſt noble of all Great Brittaine. Amongſt theſe things, Lidington treateth of affaires in England, and diſſembling with Leiceſter, often ſpoke vnto him touching marriage with the Queene of Scotland, as alſo to the Duke of Norfolke, (much more worthy to marry a Queene) who then refuſed it with a modeſt excuſe.
                     The Qu. of England,
                        Lenox and Darley are re-called out of Scotland. to interpoſe ſome hindrance to this ſo haſtened marriage, calls backe Lenox, and his Son Darley, as being her Subiects, according to the forme of the leaue which ſhe had granted them.
                           They excuſe themſelues.
                         The Father excuſes himſelfe modeſtly by Letters; the Sonne prayes her not to hinder his aduancement, repreſenting vnto her, that hee might be vſefull to England his deareſt Countrey, and openly declared vnto her, that aboue all things hee loued and honoured the Queene of Scotland: To anſwere which loue, ſhe had adorned him forthwith, with the dignity Equitis Aurati, with the titles of Baron of Ardmanock, Earle of Roſſe, and Duke of Rotheſie;
                           The Queene of Scotland marries the Lord Darley. and fiue moneths after his comming into Scotland, marries him with the conſent of many Peeres, and declares him King. The Earle of Murray, who imbraced nothing ſo affectionately as ambition, and vnder pretence of Religion, had drawne to his faction the Duke of Chaſtelraut, a man without leauen,
                           The Earle of Murray and others murmure.
                         
                        Murray murmuring exceedingly, and others ſtorming and ſtirring vp ſuch like queſtions:
Whether a Papiſt might be admitted King or no? If

the Queene of Scotland might chuſe her ſelfe a Husband? If the States might not impoſe their authoritie?
                     
                     
                        
                           The Queene of England indures it with moderation.
                        The Queene of England bare this peaceably, knowing the ſweete and tractable nature of Darley, and the open heart of his Father, and taking pitty to ſee a kinſman and a Queene very young, to haue to doe with turbulent men, who hauing beene already more than twenty yeeres looſed from Royall command, could not indure Kings; and feared them not, ſeeing that the power of this Queene, who enuied her, was not increaſed by ſo meane a condition; hauing Darleyes Mother in her power: and fore-ſeeing that troubles in Scotland would ſpring out of this marriage, as it happened quickly after: for ſome great ones of the Kingdome,
                           Some Scots take diſtaſte about the marriage.
                         and the chiefe of them, Hamilton and Murray, diſdaining this match; the one, becauſe it had beene contracted without the conſent of the Queene of England; the other, for the enuy which he bare to the Houſe of Lenox: but both the one and the other, pretending the conſeruation of Religion, to diſturbe the marriage, brought their Enſignes into the field: inſomuch as ſhe was conſtrained to raiſe forces to celebrate it in ſafety; and, with the helpe of the King her Husband, purſued the Rebels ſo ſwiftly,
                           They are put to flight.
                         that ſhe conſtrained them to flie into England, before the Engliſh troupes, which were promiſed them for ayde, were arriued: and the Queene of England, conniuing with Murray, who was much addicted to the Enggliſh, aſſigned him a conuenient place to lye heere in ſafetie, and ſent him money vnder-hand by the Earle of Bedford, vntill his returne into Scotland, which was the morrow after the murder of Dauid Riz, as wee ſhall ſpeake of it in its owne place.
                           They are maintained in England.
                         Now the reaſons why ſhee receiued the Scottiſh Rebels into England, were theſe: Becauſe the the Queene of Scotland had receiued into her protection,

                        Yaxley, Standon, and Walſh, Engliſh Fugitiues, and the Iriſh Oneale, and that ſhe had held Councels with the Pope againſt the Engliſh, and had not done iuſtice vpon Theeues and Pirates.
                     This marriage being accompliſhed,
                           They counſell the Qu. of England to marry.
                         thoſe which laboured moſt for Religion and Englands ſafetie, thought that Queene ELIZABETH could not doe better for that purpoſe, than to take away all hope of the Succeſſion to England from the Queene of Scotland. And it fell very commodiouſly; for, at the ſame time, Maximilian the Second, Emperour,
                           The Emperour recommendeth his Brother.
                         ſent word by Adam Smicorit his Ambaſſadour, of very honourable conditions for her to marry with his Brother Charles. But there aroſe inſtantly a moſt vehement hatred in the Court, betweene Suſſex and Leiceſter, I know not whereupon, vnleſſe about this marriage,
                           It cauſeth hatred to grow in the Court.
                         which Suſſex ſought very eagerly to bring to paſſe, and Leiceſter vnder-hand hindered, hoping to haue her for himſelfe (verily great and vnſatiable hopes doe thoſe conceiue, who haue obtained things beyond their hope.) Indeede Suſſex iniuriouſly deſpiſed him as an vpſtart, and, to detract him, would ſay, that hee could cite onely two of his pedigree, that is to wit, his Father and Grand-father, both being enemies to their Countrey, and attempters againſt the State, that put the Court in diuiſion: Inſomuch, as when the Earles went abroade, they drew great troupes after them, armed with Swords and piked Targets, which were then in vſe, as if it were come to the extremitie. But, within few dayes,
                           The Queene reconcileth them.
                         the Queene reconciled them, and rather ſmothered than tooke away their malice, but endeuoured what ſhee could to extinguiſh it quite. For, ſhee condemned diſſention among Peeres, and that old prouerbe vſed by many, Diuide & Impera, and ſome, who were of opinion, that the force of command, is by the obeyers conſent. And ſhe delighted her ſelfe, at the emulation and grudging of inferiour women, yet not

without making ſpeciall good vſe thereof.
                     Among theſe things, ſhee is not vnmindfull of the affaires of Scotland. A moneth after the ſolemnization of the marriage there, ſhe ſent one Tamworth, a Gentleman of her Priuy-Chamber, to the Qu. of Scotland, to exhort her not to breake the peace, to expoſtulate about the marriage which ſhee had ſo raſhly contracted without her conſent, and withall, to ſend backe Lenox, and Darley his Sonne, according to the tranſ-action, and to receiue Murray into grace.Tamworth not admitted.
                         She, perceiuing whereunto this tended, admitted not Tamworth, but by Articles in writing,

                           They anſwere by writing.Promiſeth, by the word of a Princeſſe, that neither ſhee nor her Husband would enterpriſe any thing to the preiudice of the Queene of England, or to her Children lawfully begotten of her bodie, or to the tranquillity of the Kingdome, by admitting of Fugitiues, or making alliance with ſtrangers, or by any other means; but, to the contrary, they would moſt freely contract ſuch an alliance with the Queene and Kingdome of England, as ſhould be commodious and honourable for both the Kingdomes, and innouate nothing in Religion, contrary to the Lawes and liberties of England, if they ſhould happen to enioy the ſame. Notwithſtanding, vpon condition that Queene ELIZABETH, on her part, ſhould fully performe the ſame to her and her Husband, and, by authoritie of the Parliament, ſhould confirme the Crowne of England vpon her and her iſſue lawfully begotten; and, for fault of ſuch iſsue, vpon Margaret Counteſſe of Lenox, her Husbands Mother, and of her Children lawfully begotten. Moreouer, as ſoone as ſhee had reſolued to marry, ſhee had aſſured the Queene that it ſhould be with Darley, and had no anſwere from the Queene vpon it. That ſhee had ſatisfied her demands, ſeeing ſhee had married

an Engliſh man, and no ſtranger, whom ſhee knew to be more nobly deſcended, and more worthy of her, than any in Great-Brittaine. But it ſeemed ſtrange that ſhee might not retaine Darley by her, to whom ſhe was bound in the ſacred bond of marriage, or Lenox, who was naturally Earle of Scotland. As for Murray, whom ſhee had proued to be her ſworne enemy, ſhee graciouſly intreated her to giue her freedome ouer her Subiects, ſeeing ſhe meddled not with the affaires of England.
                        
                     
                     
                        Tamworth returned with this anſwere, not hauing been intertained according to his worth. And indeed being an impudent man, hee had wronged the reputation of the Queene of Scotland, and diſdained to giue her Husband title of King.
                     At the ſame time, Queene ELIZABETH had this augmentation of honour, that at the report of her vertue, which was equally ſpred in all places, Cecillia,
                        Cecillia, Queene of Sueden, comes into England.
                         
                        Henry the Second King of Suedens Siſter, and Wife to Chriſtopher, Marquis of Baden, being then great with Childe, came from the furtheſt part of the North, and a great iourney, through Germanie, to viſit her. She intertained her and her Husband very magnificently, gaue him a yeerely penſion, chriſtened his Sonne, and named him Edward the Fortunate. And Donald Mac Cartymore, one of the greateſt Peeres of Ireland, humbly ſubmitted himſelfe and his large Territories to the Queene, to hold them from her hereafter in fee for him and his heires males lawfully begotten, and for default of ſuch iſſue, to the Crowne of England. This Princeſſe, who was borne to draw the affections of men, according to her humanity, moſt graciouſly receiued him, inſtalled him ſolemnely, and like himſelfe, Earle of Glencar; and Tegue his Sonne,
                           Creation of the Earle of Glencar. Baron of Valance; gaue them gifts, payed the charge of their voyage,

and all this, to get a party againſt the Earle of Deſmond, who was ſuſpected to renouate new things.
                     
                        
                           Vice-Royes and Iuſtices of Ireland.The ſame yeere, Nicholas Arnold, of the Country of Gloceſter, Knight, was ſent to gouerne Ireland with the title of Iuſticiary, and had for his Garriſon, onely one thouſand fiue hundred ninety ſixe Souldiers. But, within a while after, being called backe, hee gaue vp his place to Henry Sidney, who in the reigne of Queene MARY was Iudge and Treaſurer of Ireland, and preſently after, Preſident of Wales. Now, to note this by the way, the chiefe Gouernours of Ireland, which now in Latine are termed Proreges,
                        
                           Affaires of Ireland. ſince the firſt entrance of the Engliſh, vntill the time of Edward the Third, were called Iuſtices of Ireland, and their Lieutenants, Deputies. Since, according to the pleaſure of the Prince, they are called one while Iuſtices, and another while Lieutenants, which is a moſt honourable title, but for the moſt part of like authority. And without doubt, theſe chiefe Iuſtices of Ireland, as the Iuſtices of England, which were called at that time, ſimply, Iuſtices, were ordained to keepe the peace, and to doe Iuſtice to all and to euery particular, as, in times paſt, the Romanes had their Pro-Pretors and Pro-Conſuls, which were ſent into Prouinces with Soueraigne authority.
                     
                        Sidney, being Gouernour of this Prouince, found the Countrey of Mounster, which lyes toward the South, in great confuſion,
                           Diſcord betweene the Earles of Deſmond and Ormond. in regard of great and ſharpe troubles which were betweene Girauld, Earle of Deſmond (who had faithfully promiſed to performe all the dueties of a loyall Subiect) and others, who were broken out into ciuill warres. To extinguiſh theſe Controuerſies, Queene ELIZABETH calls Deſmond into England, and makes him Gouernour and Iuſtice of that Prouince,
                        
                           Chiefe Preſident of Mounſter. with an Aſſeſſor, two Lawyers and a Clerke, and nominated Warham S. Leger chiefe Preſident, a man that had beene long conuerſant in Iriſh affaires.
                     
                        About the middle of October, the ſame yeere, dyed Thomas Chaloner, lately returned Ambaſſadour from Spaine, a famous man, borne in London, brought vp at Cambridge,
                        
                           The death of Sir Thomas Chaloner. who had addicted himſelfe as well to Mars as to the Muſes, and being but young, got honour vnder Charles the fifth, in the expedition of Alger, who hauing ſuffered ſhip-wrack, and had ſwomme ſo long, that his ſtrength and armes fayled him, ſaued himſelfe, by taking hold of a Cable with his teeth, whereof he loſt ſome: Vnder EDVVARD the Sixth, at Muſsleborrough, where hee behaued himſelfe ſo valiantly, that the Duke of Sommerſet honoured him with the Dignitie of Knight-hood: And vnder Queene ELIZABETH, in an extraordinary Ambaſſie to the Emperour Ferdinand; and foure yeeres ordinary Ambaſſadour in Spaine, where he compoſed fiue Bookes in pure and learned Verſe, of the reſtauration of the Engliſh Commonwealth, which he called [Hieme in fumo, aeſtate in horreo.] Hee was honourably buried at Saint Pauls in London, Cecill being chiefe mourner, when Thomas, his Sonne (who liued neere HENRY, Prince of Wales) was very yong.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Booke 1. 1566.THE NINTH YEERE OF HER RAIGNE. Anno Domini, 1566.
                     
                        IN the beginning of the yeere, Charles the 9. King of France, ſent into England to the Queene, Rambouillet, with the Robes of the order of S. Michael, to bee giuen to two of the Peeres of England, whom ſhee pleaſed.
                           The Duke of Norfolke, and the Earle of Leiceſter, Knights of the Order of France. She made choice of the Duke of Norfolke, as being much more noble then any other, and to the Earle of Leicester, louing him very well. Rambouillet hauing beene, for and in the Name of his King, placed honourably at Windſor, amongſt the Knights of the Order of Saint George, inueſted them ſolemnly

in the Royall Houſe at Weſtminſter. This ſhee tooke for a great honour, remembring her ſelfe, that no Engliſh was euer honoured with this Order, ſaue HENRY the Eighth, EDVVARD the Sixth, and Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolke. But when ſhe exactly obſerued all things that belonged to the honour of it, ſhe was at length much diſpleaſed, to ſee it ſo vilified, that it was proſtituted indifferently to euery man. And ſhee buſied her ſelfe, not onely in things concerning honour, but chiefely what was for the good of her Subiects: For, the Ayre beeing ſo intemperate that yeere, that experienced men feared a want of Corne and other victuals,
                           Prouiſion of Corne.
                         ſhe did not onely prohibit any Corne to be carried out of the Kingdome, but tooke care that great quantity was brought in.
                     While theſe things paſt, Henry, Earle of Arundell, being great and powerfull among the Lords of the Realme,
                           The Earle of Arundel goes out of the Kingdome.
                         after hauing conſumed much wealth vpon a vaine hope to marry the Queene, and the Earle of Leiceſter, who then was in great credit with her, and his friends, which had failed in the truſt which hee repoſed in them, taking away this hope quite from him, tooke leaue of her, and voluntarily went out of the Kingdome, vnder colour to recouer his health, but in effect, to ſtrengthen himſelfe againſt ſorrow. But the other Engliſh,
                        
                           The Engliſh carry their Armes and their courages to the Hungarian Warre.
                         who for their naturall valour, thought themſelues borne to liue in Armes, and not in idlenes, ſeeing the Nobility of all parts, did riſe at the report of the warre againſt the Turke, and carried their Armes and Courages into Hungarie. Amongſt whom, the moſt remarkeable were, Iohn Smith, couſin german to EDVVARD the Sixth, by the Siſter of I. Seimor, the Kings Mother; H. Champernon, P. Butſhid, R. Greuill, G. George, T. Cotton, &c.
                     In Iune following, the Queene of Scotland had a moſt auſpicious and happy Deliuery,
                           The birth of King Iames the ſixth of Scotland. for the eternall proſperity of Great Brittaine, IAMES her Sonne, who is now Monarch

thereof: whereof ſhe gaue preſent notice to Queene ELIZABETH, by Iohn Meluin. Queene ELIZABETH, howſoeuer angry to ſee her out-ſtrip her in honour, who enuied her, as ſpeedily ſent H. Killigrewe, to congratulate her lying in,
                           The Queene of England reioyceth.
                         and the birth of her Sonne: and to admoniſh her, not to fauour any longer Shan O-Neale, who rebelled in Ireland, nor to aſſiſt Roquerbay, an Engliſh Fugitiue, and to puniſh ſome theeues that rob'd vpon the Borders.
                     After, hauing vn-wearied her minde by a Progreſſe, to ſhew herſelfe as fauourable to the Muſes of Oxford, as well as of Cambridge,
                        
                           Viſits the Vniuerſity of Oxford.
                         betweene which there was then a ſincere emulation, goes toward the Vniuerſitie of Oxford, where ſhe was magnificently entertained, and ſtaid there full ſeuen dayes, taking pleaſure in the pleaſant aſpect of the place, at the beauty of the Colledges, in the ſpirits and learning of moſt exquiſit Schollers, which paſſed the nights in Comedies, and the dayes in learned Diſputations; for which ſhe gaue them ample thankes, by a moſt ſweet diſcourſe in Latine, and a moſt louing farewell.
                     
                        
                           Holds a Parliament.
                        As ſoone as ſhee was returned to London, the States of the Kingdome aſſembled there the firſt day of Nouember, beeing the day aſſigned, and after hauing eſtabliſhed a Statute or two, they begun to diſpute among themſelues, of the Succeſſion of the Kingdome; ſeeing that the Queene hauing vowed Virginity, had already reigned eight yeeres, without thinking ſeriouſly of an Husband: that on the one ſide, the Papiſts made account of the Queene of Scots, who had lately had a Sonne: that on the other ſide, the Proteſtants being deuided, ſome of them made account of one, and ſome of another, and euery particular prouiding for their ſafety and Religion, preſaged the ſtormes of a moſt fearefull time, if ſhee ſhould dye, without aſſuring a Succeſſor. And the keener ſort of ſpirits proceeded ſo far, as to blame her, as if ſhe abandoned both her Country and Poſteritie: and to teare, by reprochfull & defaming Libels,

wicked Councellor therein: and to curſe Huic, her Phiſicion, becauſe he diſſwaded her to marry, for I know not what womaniſh infirmity. The Earles of Pembroke and Leiceſter were openly, and the Duke of Norfolke, couertly, of opinion, that a neceſſity of marriage ſhould be impoſed vpon her, or elſe publikely to appoint a Succeſſor by authority of the Parliament, whether ſhe would or no: which cauſed them to bee forbidden to enter into the Priuie Chamber, or come neere the Queene, who neuertheleſſe granted them pardon, as ſoone as they demanded it.
                     They neuertheleſſe being much troubled,
                           The States ſollicite her to marry, and to declare her Succeſsor.
                         and all the reſt of the vpper Houſe of Parliament, touching the Succeſſion; all with one mind, by the mouth of Bacon, Keeper of the great Scale, according to the dutie which they ought vnto God, the fidelity to their Prince, and the charity to their Countrie, ſo to doe; that as by her meanes they then ſweetly enioyed all the benefits of Peace, Iuſtice, and Clemency, they and their poſterity might by her meanes likewiſe enioy the ſame aſſuredly and continually. But withall they ſhewed her, that it could not bee done, except ſhe married, or deſigned a certaine Succeſſor. For which cauſe, they deſired, and, aboue all things, beſought her to be ioyned by the ſacred bond of Marriage, with whom ſhe would, in what place ſhe liked, & as ſoone as ſhe pleaſed, to the end to haue Children, for helps to the Kingdome: withall, to ordaine with the States of the Realme, a Succeſſor certaine, in caſe that ſhee, or the Children which ſhe might haue, ſhould dye without Children, which God forbid.
                           The modeſtie of the great Ones.
                         And for the obtaining of theſe things ſo much the more eaſily, being ſo neceſſary, they repreſented vnto her many reaſons for the ſame: the feare, which of freſh memory had ſeized vpon them with ſuch a ſickneſſe, of which they had beene but newly recouered; the opportunity of the time, the States of the Kingdome beeing then aſſembled, which might maturely deliberate of ſo great matters; the terrour

which ſhe ſhould giue to her enemies by this meanes, and the incredible ioy which ſhe ſhould fill the hearts of her Subiects withall. They praiſe the examples of her Anceſtors, who in like caſes prouided for the ſuretie of their Poſterity, condemning this ſaying of Pyrrhus, who would leaue his Kingdome to him that had the ſharpeſt ſword. And moreouer ſhewing her, with what a ſtorme England were threatned, if ſhe ſhould dye without deſigning a certaine Succeſſor: there would follow impetuouſly vpon it, ſeditions, and inteſtine Warres, of which the Victory it ſelfe is moſt miſerable: and that Religion ſhould bee driuen out, Iuſtice ouerwhelmed, the Lawes trodden vnderfoot, there beeing no Prince (who is the ſoule of the Law) and the Kingdome a prey to ſtrangers. They numbered and exaggerated many other like calamities, which would inuolue all ſorts of Families, if ſhe ſhould dye without Iſſue. And modeſtly they added counſels, Precepts, and examples, drawne from the holy Scriptures.
                     
                        
                           The popular ſort eagerly.
                        But thoſe of the Lower Houſe debated of theſe things more tumultuouſly; Bell, and Monſon, Lawiers of great renowne, Dutton, P. Wentworth, and others, refuted Royall Maieſtie too much; and among other things maintained, that Kings were bound to deſigne a Succeſſor; that the loue of Subiects was the moſt ſtrong and inexpugnable Rampart of Princes, their onely ſtay and Support. That Princes could not obtaine this loue, if they did not prouide for the good of their Subiects, not onely while they liued, but after their death. That that could not be done, if a Succeſſor did not plainely appeare. That the Queene, for lacke of deſigning one, prouoked Gods wrath, and alienated the hearts of her Subiects. That then, to gaine the fauour of God, and haue Subiects moſt affectionate and obliged, and to raiſe her vp Statues in the hearts of men, which would neuer periſh, ſhee ſhould declare a Succeſſor. Others, that ſhee ſhould knowe, that they did

hold her, not for a Mother and a Nurſe, but for a Stepdame and a murdereſſe of her Countrie, ſeeing ſhee loued her ſelfe better than England (which then breathed by her ſpirit) would expire with her, rather then ſubſiſt aliue. That there were neuer, but cowardly Princes, haters of their Subiects, and fearefull weake women, who conceiued feare becauſe of their Succeſſors; and that ſuch as be enuironed with the loue of their Subiects, ought not to apprehend the danger which might bee ſtirred vp againſt them, by a declared Succeſſor.
                     Theſe things ſhe heard with a great deale of diſpleaſure,
                           The Queene is angry.
                         but ſhee contemned them for a time, and for a time kept them hidden. For, as vſe had inſtructed her, ſhe well knew what danger there is to deſigne a Succeſſor; inſomuch that Queene MARIE reigning, many of the Nobility, and of the people, had caſt their eyes and hearts vpon her, as beeing to ſucceed her: that euen as any thing had bin ſaid or done in her moſt holy Cabinet, or ſecret Councell, they reported it to her; and that Wyat and others, miſliking their ſtate, and deſiring to innouate things, had conſpired againſt her, to ſet her vpon the Royall Throne in her place. Shee knew that the hopes of Competitors were better reſtrained, and they kept in their duety, while ſhe ſuſpended the wayting of euery one, and made no declaration of any. That by a precipitate deſire to reigne, euen Children haue tooke Armes againſt their Fathers, and that ſhee could not looke for leſſe from her kindred. She had obſerued in reading, and when ſhe diſputed of that, remembred incontinently, that it was rarely found, that the Succeſſors had bin declared in the collaterall line. That Lewis, Duke of Orleans, had neuer been declared Succeſſor in the Kingdome of France, to Charles the Eighth; nor Francis, Duke of Angouleſme, to Lewis, yet neuertheleſſe they ſucceeded without any noiſe. That ſuch deſignation had alwaies in England beene the ruine of the deſigned, and that Roger

Mortimer, Earle of March, deſigned Heire by King Richard, had not beene ſo ſoone extinct, and his ſonne Edmond conſtituted and kept priſoner twentie yeeres together, but for this cauſe: That I. Polhem, Earle of Lincolne, declared Succeſſor by Richard the 3. & after the death of his ſonne, by Henry the Seuenty, was alwaies ſuſpected, and finally killed in warre, as he was weauing of innouations, and his brother Edward beheaded vnder HENRIE the Eighth. But theſe things make vs goe from the purpoſe.
                     But as ſome ceaſed not with prouoked ſpirits, and ſharpe contention, daily more and more to cry aloud, theſe things which I come to tell, and other things which had a greater ſting, the Queene hauing commanded that choyce ſhould be made of thirty of the Vpper-Houſe of Parliament, and as many of the Lower, and that they ſhould appeare before her;
                           She ſweetens the moued ſpirits.
                         Shee, with a light reprooſe, made them milder, and by force of her moſt worthy Maieſty, diuerted them from their deſigne, promiſing them with many words, not onely the care of a Princeſſe, but alſo the affection of a Mother. And the States hauing offered her for Subſidies, more than they were accuſtomed to doe, vpon condition, that ſhe would deſigne a Succeſſour: Shee vtterly refuſed it, as being too much, receiued the ordinary, commending their affection,
                           Giues backe part of the Subſidie.
                         & remitted the whole fourth payment of the granted Subſidie, ſaying, That her Subiects money was as well in their owne coffers, as in hers.
                     The laſt day of theſe Seſſions, ſhe ſpoke thus in few words, which I will ſhut vp in fewer.
                     
                        Chides the States.
                        SEeing that the words of Princes doe often penetrate deepe into the hearts and eares of men, heare theſe from mee. As I haue ſimply cheriſhed truth, ſo haue I alwayes thought that you would ingeniouſly haue cheriſhed

her: but it hath beene in vaine. For I haue diſcouered, that diſsimulation thruſts her ſelfe into theſe aſſemblies, vnder the maske of libertie, and of ſucceſsion. There are ſome of them among you, who are of opinion, that I ought preſently to grant, or vtterly to refuſe libertie to diſpute of the Succeſsion, and to eſtabliſh it. If I ſhould haue granted it, thoſe would triumph ouer mee, hauing their wiſhes: If I refuſed, they had thought to haue excited the hatred of mine own, which my greateſt enemies hitherto could neuer doe. But their wiſdome was out of ſeaſon, their deſignes too farre aduanced, and they haue not regarded the euent. And I haue eaſily diſcouered by theſe things, who haue beene iuſt on my behalfe, and who haue not, and doe ſee well, that all your Aſſembly is compoſed of foure ſorts of perſons. For ſome haue beene Architects and Authors, others Actors, who with ſweet words haue perſwaded: who being perſwaded, haue accorded to that which was propounded: others, who haue maruelled at this audacitie, kept ſilence; and thoſe in truth are the more excuſable. Thinke you that I contemne your good and ſafetie, that you ground vpon a Succeſſor? or that I will infringe your libertie? So farre am I from that, that I haue not ſo much as thought of it. For I haue conſidered, that it behooued you to retyre from the pit into which you runne head-long. Euery thing hath his ſeaſon. Peraduenture you ſhall haue after me a wiſer Prince, but not that loues you more than I doe. I know not if I ſhall liue to ſee ſuch Aſſemblies once more: but take heede of offending the patience of your Prince: and notwithſtanding, take it for a certaine truth, that I haue a good opinion of the moſt part of you, and that I loue you all with all my heart, as heretofore.
                     
                        Thus, the wiſdome of a Woman quieted theſe ſtirres, the time which became clearer, cauſed ſuch a calme, that, beſide the ſeditious and timorous, few were ſince found, to ſtorme for a Succeſſour. And certainely all men, what face ſoeuer they ſet vpon it, doe not penetrate more deepely into publique affaires, than they finde it neceſſary for their owne particular. Yet that the Succeſſour ſhould more plainely appeare,
                           Maketh it plainely to appeare, that the Queene of Scotland had the right of Succeſsion.
                         which ſhee thought could not be doubted of, ſhe impriſoned Thornton, Reader of the Law at Lincolnes Inne in London, becauſe the Queene of Scotland had complained, that he called her right in queſtion.
                     In theſe Aſſemblies of the States, beſides other things, which were for the good of the Common-wealth, it was declared with the generall conſent of all,

                           The ordination of Biſhops is confirmed.THat the election, conſecration, and inſtalment of Arch-biſhops and Biſhops of England, (which many, by calumniating them, had called in queſtion) was lawfull, and well and duely conſecrated, according to the Acts and Statutes of the Realme: And ordained, that all theſe, and thoſe which for the time to come, ſhould be conſecrated as they had beene, were and ſhould be holden well and duely conſecrated, notwithſtanding any Law or Canon.
                     
                     For the Papiſts had detracted them as falſe Biſhops, peraduenture becauſe the Vnction, the Ring, and the Crozier were not vſed with the Benedictions: and, as if they had not beene ſolemnely inſtituted to this Order, by three Biſhops, which could bring their ordination, riſing from the Apoſtolique authority receiued from Chriſt, although they moſt truely could, as appeares by the Regiſters, hauing beene conſecrated with godly prayers, deuout inuocation of the holy Ghoſt, the impoſition of hands of ſuch Biſhops, the preaching of the Word, and celebration of the Lords Supper.
                     
                        About that time (after they had reſtrained the inſolency of ſome Ruffians, who violated theſe delators, which the vulgar call Promoters, purſued them through the ſtreetes with cryes and clamours,
                           Promoters ſuppreſt.
                         and killed them) came the day appointed for the baptizing of the Prince of Scotland. The Queene hauing beene intreated to receiue him at the ſacred Font, ſent the Earle of Bedford with the Lauor made of maſſie Gold, for a Preſent of State,
                           The Earle of Bedford ſent Ambaſſrdour to the Queene of Scotland, for the baptizing of her Sonne.
                         and commanded him expreſly, & all the Engliſh which accompany him, to take heed that they honour Darley with the Title of KING.
                     The ceremony being ended, the Earle, according as he had beene commanded, treated with the Queene of Scotland, to haue the Treaty of Edenborrough ratified, and to accord the domeſticke diſcords which were betweene her and her Husband. For ſome ill-willers, both to the one and the other, had by craft ruined this agreeable ſocietie of life and loue which was betweene them. Shee refuſed to make this ratification, alledging this reaſon, That there was in that Treaty, ſome Articles that did derogate the right which ſhee and her Children had to England: neuertheleſſe, promiſed to ſend Commiſſioners into England, which ſhould treat about it, for the altering of ſome things; to wit, that ſhe ſhould leaue off the Title and armes of England, as long as Queene ELIZABETH, or any of hers ſhould liue, (as if the Treaty had imported, that ſhe ſhould giue it ouer altogether,) and they they ſhould let her ſee what iniuries ſhee had receiued by the wicked practices of thoſe which too much abuſed the ingenious credulitie of her Husband. And, finding her ſelfe vnhealthfull, ſhee recommended her Sonne to the truſt and Gardianſhip of Queene ELIZABETH, by Letters bearing,
That although ſhee knew well, (I vſe her owne termes)
                           
ſhee was by right the vndoubted Heire of England, after the Queene, and that many at their pleaſure forged many things againſt this right;
                     
                     She promiſed neuertheleſſe, ſhe would not preſſe her any more to a declaration of it, but that ſhee would aſſiſt and adhere to her alwaies, and againſt all, with all her affection.
                     
                        
                           The death of I. Maſon, and Sir R. Sackuile.In the yeere 1566. there dyed two of the Lords of her Maieſties moſt honourable Priuy Councell, (both in one day) I. Maſon, Treaſurer of Queene ELIZABETHS houſhold, a moſt learned, iudicious, and graue perſonage, moſt diligent and carefull to the preſeruation of benefits. In his place and office, was preferred Sir Francis Knolles, who had married the Lady Katherine, Couſin-Germane to her Maieſty, by the Lady Mary of Bulleine, & Richard Sackuile alſo, Couſin to her Maieſty, by the Lady Anne Bulleine her Mother. Sir Walter Mildmay, an vncorrupt and conſiderate man, ſucceeded in his place.
                  
                  
                     
                     THE TENTH YEERE OF HER RAIGNE.Booke 1. 1567. 
                        Anno Domini 1567.
                     
                        A Little before the Commiſſioners from the Queene of Scotland were arriued,
                           The murder of the Lord Darley, who was married to the Qu. of Scots. a moneth or two after the chriſtening of the Prince of Scotland, the King, at the age of one and twenty yeers, was ſtrangled in his bed, in the dead time of the night: a dreadfull and horrible wickedneſſe, which was deteſted of all honeſt men: afterwards throwne into his Garden, the Houſe being blowne vp with Gun-powder. The report of it being ſpread through both the Kingdomes, the crime was caſt vpon Morton, Murray, and their Confederates, who inſulting

ouer the weaker Sex, laide it vpon the Queene. Which by bookes, as alſo a Libell, written by Buchanan, which was imprinted, none can be ignorant of: But being of the party, and carryed away by Murray's bountie, the bookes were condemned to be falſe by the Councell and State of Scotland,
                        Buchanan condemned for falſhood by the States of Scotland.
                         to which more credit is to be giuen: and, as I haue heard, he himſelf to the King, whoſe Schoolemaſter he was, reprehended himſelfe for it, that hee had vſed ſo poyſonous a penne againſt the Queene, and being ready to dye, he wiſhed but to liue ſo long, that hee might take away the ſtaine which he had ſpread vpon the Queene, or to cleanſe it with his bloud, vnleſſe (as he ſaid himſelfe) his ſlanders might be accounted vaine, by reaſon of his doting age. Giue me leaue that the other ſide may be heard, by diuers that writ thereof, and at that time publiſht it in print: but ſuch writings were ſoone call'd in, both in fauor of the Earle of Murray, and in hatred of the Queene, and likewiſe by Ambaſſadours Letters worthy to bee beleeued.
                     
                        
                           A digreſsion from Scottiſh affaires.
                        In the yeere 1558. at the marriage of Francis the Dolphin of France, and Mary Queene of Scotland, Iames, the Queenes Baſtard-Brother, commonly called the Prior of Saint Andrewes, (Metropolitan of the Order of Saint Andrewes) deſpiſing that title,Iames, Prior of Saint Andrews.
                         was ambitious after a more ſplendid one: but when the Queene, by the aduice of the Guizes, refuſed it him, hee returned into Scotland diſcontented, wherein, vnder a faire pretext of reforming Religion, and to eſtabliſh the liberty of Scotland, hee begun to trouble the State, and effected it; and ſo brought it to paſſe (without the knowledge of the Queene, in a Conuenticle of Confederates) Religion was changed, and, by the calling in of ayde from England, the French were driuen out of Scotland. Francis, King of France, being dead, he preſently went to his Siſter into France, and hauing put away all ſuſpition tending to her preiudice or diſ-reputation for

the affaires of Scotland, ſwore vnto her, (calling GOD to witneſſe) to performe all dueties that a Siſter could expect from a Brother, and vpon the hope which he had, that ſhee being brought vp from her tender age in the delicacies of France, would not returne into Scotland,
                        
                           Hee ſeekes to be Regent of Scotland.
                         workes with the Guizes to appoint ſome Noble-man of Scotland to be Regent there, and almoſt poynted at himſelfe to be the fitteſt man of all. But, hee being ſent backe into Scotland, without any authority, but Letters of Commiſſion, by which the Queene gaue power to the States to aſſemble, and conſult for the good of the Kingdome, and ſeeing himſelfe deiected from his hope, returned much vexed; and paſſing thorow England, made it there knowne, that if they wiſhed well to Religion in Scotland, to the peace of England, and the ſecurity of Queene ELIZABETH,
                           Being fruſtrated of it, vnder-hand oppoſes himſelfe againſt the Queene.
                         they ought by all meanes to hinder the Queene of Scotland to paſſe into Scotland. Shee neuertheleſſe being ſafely arriued in Scotland, the Engliſh Ships being diſappointed by obſcure weather, and being there, embraced her Brother with all ſignes of fauour and good-will, and in a kinde of manner, committed vnto him the generall adminiſtration of affaires. Notwithſtanding all this, the branches of his ambition are not cut off, which grew daily, and appeared both in words and deedes. For, hee could not containe himſelfe, but often, among his friends, deplored that the warlike Scottiſh Nation was no leſſe ſubiect to the command of a Woman, than the Engliſh was, and by the inſtruction of Knox, whom he eſteemed as a Patriarke, often debates, that Kingdomes were due to merit, and not to linage, and that Women ſhould be excluded from ſucceeding, and that their gouernement were monſtrous. He treated likewiſe with the Queen, by his friends,
                           Makes his ambition to be openly and euidently knowne.
                         that ſhe ſhould ſubſtitute foure of the Royall Houſe of the Stewards, who, if ſhe dyed without iſſue, ſhould ſucceed to the Crowne one after another, without regarding who were

legitimate or no, thinking he ſhould be one, ſeeing he was the Kings Sonne, though vnlawfully begotten.
                     But the Queene, wiſely conſidering that ſuch a ſubſtitution was contrary to the Lawes of the Kingdome, to defraud the right Heires, a moſt pernicious example, dangerous for her Subiects, and would be an hinderance to her ſelfe for her ſecond marriage, ſhe mildely anſwered, That ſhe would more aduiſedly deliberate with the States of the Kingdome, about a matter of ſuch weight & conſequence; and to teſtifie her fauour and bounty towards her Brother, ſhee honoured him with the title of Earle of Mar, afterwards,
                           He is created Earle of Murray. with the Earledome of Murray, (for the dignity of Mar was then in controuerſie,) being ignorant all this while, that he aymed at the Kingdome, and affirmed himſelfe to be the lawfull Sonne of Iames the Fifth. To make the eaſier way hereunto, by meanes of the extraordinary fauour the Queene ſhewed to him,
                           He perſecutes the great men of Scotland. he ſuppreſt the moſt noble Family of the Gordons, powerfull in vaſſalage and command, whom he both feared in reſpect of themſelues, as alſo by reaſon of the reformed Religion, which adhered vnto him: he expelled Hamilton, Duke of Chaſtelraut, out of the Court, who was reputed next Heire to the Crowne, impriſoned the Earle of Arraine his Sonne, baniſhed Count Bothwell, into England; diſmiſſed all oppoſites of their honourable offices, and places, and retained the Queene vnder his power and ſuruey, as a Gardian might doe his Ward: aboue all other things being carefull, that Shee might not negotiate, nor intend any marriage.
                     And when he ſaw, that of the one ſide, the Emperour ſollicited her,
                           Hee diſſwades the Queen from marrying.
                         for his Brother, and the Spaniard on the other part for his Sonne, he abſolutely diſſwaded her both from the one and the other, alledging vnto her, how the ancient immunities of Scotland would not permit nor indure a ſtrange Prince, and whenſoeuer the Scepter fell into

the hands of Women, they neuer made choyce of an Huſband, but within their owne Countrey of Scotland. But in concluſion, he perceiuing that all the Scots generally affected her marrying, and diſcerning that by the perſwaſion and inducement of the Counteſſe of Lenox, ſhe deſired to marry with the Lord Darley, hee himſelfe likewiſe then commended him vnto her for an Husband; hoping, in reſpect of his youth, and for that he was of a tractable nature and diſpoſition, he would be euer at his direction and diſpoſe. Neuertheleſſe, when hee ſaw how dearely the Queene loued him, & himſelfe to fall by little and little out of her fauour and grace, hee repented of the counſell and aduice he had giuen, and admoniſhed Queene ELIZABETH to croſſe this marriage by all the meanes poſſible that ſhe could.
                     Preſently after the Nuptials were accompliſhed, and the Lord Darley proclaimed KING, the King then preſently reuoked ſuch gifts, as during his minority, the Queene had conferred both vpon him, and others: whereupon, being nigh aſſociated with them,
                           He takes armes againſt her, after ſhee was married.
                         he tooke vp armes againſt the King and the Queene, pretending that this new King was diſ-affected to the Proteſtant Religion, and how ſhe contracted this marriage without the conſent of the Queene of England. But, hauing ſcarcely made any triall of the fortunes of warre, he fled, as I ſaid, into England, where, deſpayring of all ſuccour,
                           
                              He flies into England.
                           
                              He ſeekes to ſow diſcord betweene the Husband and the Wife.
                           
                         he laboured by Letters to Morton, a man of great ſubtilty, and another like himſelfe, to effect, that ſeeing the marriage could not be broken off, yet that the affection and loue of the married couple might be abated, by ſome ſecret practices: and a fit occaſion offered it ſelfe: for after ſome domeſticall and priuate grudgings, to quaile the courage of this young King, which boyled a little too hot, and to preſerue entyre her owne Royall prerogatiues; in all publique acts, ſhee began to ſet her Husbands Name after her owne, and altogether to

leaue out and omit it, in Moneyes and Stampes.
                     Earle Morton, who was a notable Make-bate, by his flatteries eaſily perſwaded this young King, to ſet the Crowne of Scotland vpon his owne head: yea, though the Queene wold not giue her conſent therunto, & to ſhake off the domination and controll of a Woman, becauſe women were borne to obey, and men to command: he hoping, that by meanes of this counſell, he ſhould make the King, not onely to loſe the Queenes affection, but further, the loue of all the great Men of the Kingdome, and the people. To make him loſe the Queenes heart, firſt he inſtigated him by diuers calumniations, to kill Dauid Rice, a Pie-mountaine, and by doing this, to preuent the croſſing of their deſignes, by his reaching and ſubtile ſpirit. By profeſſion he was a Muſician, and came the yeere before into Scotland, with the Ambaſſadour Moret, and then grew to be admitted into the Queenes Houſe, and fauour, in that hee was induſtrious, and obſeruant, and in the Secretaries abſence, he aſſiſted, and diſpatched Letters into France, and managed ſecret conſultations. Then, the more to exaſperate this buſineſſe, he brought him to be preſent in perſon, at this Murder, in company with Rauen, and the other murderers, who entring with himſelfe into the Queenes Chambers, their ſwords naked drawne, as ſhe was ſitting at the Table, with the Counteſſe of Arguile, and this man, ſtanding by a Buffet-ſtoole, was eating ſomwhat taken off from the Table, as ordinarily Wayters of the Dining-chamber will doe, bending alſo a Piſtoll againſt the Queenes breſt, who was then with Childe, ſo as vpon the ſudden affrightment ſhee thought to haue miſcarried in the place,
                           The murder of Dauid Rice in the Queene of Scots ſight.
                         they layde hold of him in her preſence, and drawing him into an outward Chamber, moſt cruelly they murthered him, and ſhut vp likewiſe the Queene within the ſame Chamber.
                     
                        Murray is repealed.
                        This Murder was cōmitted, the day before that the Earle

of Murray was aſſigned to make his appearance before the Aſſembly, and in hearing of the States, there, to anſwere an Accuſation of Rebellion, which was informed and put in againſt him. Hee appeared the day following, and no body ſate, neither came any witneſſes againſt him, by reaſon of theſe great garboyles and troubles in the State: that, (as it might ſeeme) this murder was purpoſely vndertaken for Murrayes ſecurity and ſafety. Notwithſtanding, the Queene, at the Kings intreaty, receiued him into fauour, and was confident in his brotherly loue. But when the King had more deliberately waighed the quality of his offence, and the Queene began to take it deepely to heart, he repented himſelfe much of this rage and fury, and with many teares and ſighes, humbly on his knee craued her pardon, confeſſing freely, that he was excited to ſo bloudy a crime by Murray and Morton: from which time, euer after hee conceiued ſo mortall an hatred againſt Murray, that he thought on nothing elſe, but how to be rid of him: Earle Morton, and the other Homicides, by reaſon of this Murder, being fled into England,
                        
                           Earle Morton flies into England.
                         with Letters of recommendation, which Murray had written in their behalfe, to the Earle of Bedford. But the paſſionate affection of his youth not being able to reſerue his moſt ſecret thoughts, and his high reſpect to the Queene, curbing all boldneſſe, for the executing of him, at laſt hee was ſatisfied, to let her vnderſtand thus much, that for publique good, and the ſecurity of her owne houſe, ſhee muſt remoue him. The Queene in all ſort deteſting this courſe, diſſwaded him there-from, yea euen with threates, for hauing moued this vnto her, and putting him in hope to make a perfect reconciliation betweene them. And yet notwithſtanding, in that ſhee could not but with great ſpleene digeſt the authority this Baſtard vſurped ouer her, tranſported with wonderfull impatience, ſhee opened this deſigne to others: which, comming to Murrayes vnderſtanding,

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
to preuent her, hee laid many ſecret ambuſhes in waite for her, vnder colour of ſhewing himſelfe to be very officious and diligent, vſing herein Earle Mortons counſell and aduice, though he were then abſent.
                     
                        
                           Diſſention ſet betweene the King and the Queene.
                        Their Reſolution ioyntly was, that the Queene muſt be cleane alienated from the loue and affection ſhe bare to the King, while this affection was not yet well knit, and reioynted. Then to draw into their ſociety Earle Bothwell, who, not long before had beene reconciled to Murray, vpon promiſes, that he ſhould be diuorc'd from his owne Wife, and be married to the Queene, when ſhe were a Widow. For effectuall performance whereof, and to warrant and defend him againſt all others, they bound themſelues in writing, ſubſcribed and ſealed, perſwading themſelues, that at one blow, they could cut off the King, depraue the reputation and good opinion which the Nobility and people held of her, ſuppreſſe afterwards Bothwell, and ſo be poſſeſt themſelues of the whole and abſolute Adminiſtration of all affaires.
                     
                        
                           Lord Darley the Queenes Husband, murdered.
                        Earle Bothwell, who was of himſelfe a wicked man, and blinded with Ambition, which made him bold and daring, readily intertained theſe hopes propounded to him, and moſt trecherouſly performed this bloudy Aſſaſſinate, hauing hardly fifteene houres warning, to prouide a ſufficient number of Complices if need had beene, (for Earle Murray was gone farre off, to proſecute his owne buſineſſe) and to lay the whole ſuſpition and imputation vpon the Queen. When hee was returned to the Court, both hee, and all thoſe of the Conſpiracy, commended Earle Bothwell to the Queene;
                           Earle Bothwell commended to the Queene, to marry him.
                         and, to perſwade her to make choyce of him for her Husband, they intimated by all meanes vnto her, how hee was moſt worthy and deſeruing of her loue, both in reſpect of the eminency of his Family, his valiant Attempts againſt the Engliſh, and the many infallible proofes and trials of his fidelity. Moreouer, they layd open vnto

her, that being alone, and without any helpe, or aſſiſtance, ſhe was not able to pacifie thoſe troubles and tumults that were then raiſed, to diſcouer the plots that might be proiected againſt her, and to diſcharge the adminiſtration and gouernement of the Kingdome. And therefore ſhe ſhould doe very well, to admit to the ſocietie of her bed, & counſell, ſuch an one, as had both will, power, and courage, to oppoſe them: So as, they wrought thus farre with her, that ſhe yeelded her conſent, trembling for feare, and danted with horror, for hauing beheld ſuch direful occiſions, & calling to minde what fidelitie Bothwell had euer ſhewed both to her and her Mother, and not knowing whither to haue recourſe, but to her Brothers faith and loyaltie. But neuertheleſſe, with ſpeciall prouiſo, carefully to intend the ſafety of her young and tender Sonne, that Bothwell ſhould firſt cleare himſelfe of the murder of the King, and be diuorc'd from his former Wife.
                     I am deſirous here to ſet downe, what the Earle of Huntley and Arguile, who are the principall of all the great Nobility of Scotland, teſtified hereof, as I coppied it out of a Writing ſeal'd, and ſubſcribed with their owne hands, which they ſent to the Queene of England:
                        BEcauſe Earle Murray, and others,Teſtimony of the murder of the Lord Darley.
                            to couer their owne Rebellion againſt the Queene, whoſe authoritie they vſurped, openly imputed her, as culpable and guiltie of her Husbands death: wee publikely protest, and teſtifie this which enſues. In the Moneth of December, 1556. the Queene being at Cragmill, the Earles of Murray and Lidington acknowledged in our preſence, that Morton, Lyndſay, and Rauen, murdered Dauy Rice, to no other end, but to preſerue the Earle of Murray, who the ſame day was to be proſcrib'd. Wherefore, that they might ſhun the note of ingratitude, their deſire was, that Morton and others

baniſhed by reaſon of this murder, might be repealed. But withall they implyed, that this could not be done, except the Queene by a Diuorce were ſeparated from her Husband, and they promiſed to doe it, if wee would yeeld our conſents. After that, Earle Murray promiſed to me, of Huntley, that I ſhould re-enter the inheritances of my Anceſtors, and haue the perpetuall loue and affection of the baniſhed, if I did but further and procure this Diuorce. Then they went likewiſe to Earle Bothwell, to draw alſo from him his conſent and liking: and laſtly, they went to the Queene, whom Lidington in the name of all the reſt, inſtantly requested, to releaſe Morton, Lindſay, and Rauen, of their baniſhment: in very outragious termes, he exaggerated the Kings faults, and the offences hee had committed againſt the Queene, and the Realme, prouing how the Queene, and the State, were deepely intereſſed, in procuring ſpeedily this Diuorce: becauſe the King and Queene could not liue ſecurely together in Scotland. Her Maieſtie made anſwer: That ſhe had rather for a time returne into France, while her Husband did more truely diſcend into the errours and vnſtaidneſſe of his youth, not willing any thing ſhould be done to her Sonnes preiudice, or her owne diſhonour. Whereunto Lidington replyed: Wee of your Councell will looke to this well-enough. But in any wiſe, (ſaid Shee) I prohibite you to performe, any thing that may in the leaſt manner blemiſh my honour, or burthen my conſcience. Let things ſtand as they doe, till God from aboue vouchſafe ſome fitter remedie. I much feare, leſt, that you iudge requiſite for my good, may redound to my hurt. A few dayes after, when the King was murdered, after a moſt execrable manner, wee are aſsured, out of the inward touch and teſtimony of our Conſciences, that the E. Murray and Lidington were

the Authors, Proiectors, and Plotters of this abominable Parricide, whoſoeuer the other were, that put it in execution. This is that which they affirmed in writing.
                        
                     
                     The Confederates aymed then at nothing elſe,Bothwell is freed of the murder of the King. but how to free Bothwell of this Parricide: Wherefore, a Seſſion of Parliament was ordained for this onely cauſe, and apprehenſion of their bodies enioyned, of whom the leaſt ſuſpition was conceiued, and the Earle of Lenox accuſing Bothwell, and feruently vrging, that he might come to a triall before the States were aſſembled, it was granted, and ſo command impoſed vpon the Earle, to appeare within twenty dayes. But within the compaſſe of this time, hauing receiued no inſtructions nor aduertiſements from the Queenes Maieſtie of England, and in that hee could not liue without danger of his life, in a place repleniſhed with his enemies, Earle Bothwell made his appearance, and hauing Morton for his Aduocate, preuayled in the cauſe, and ſo was ſent away abſolu'd, by the Sentence of all the Iudges.
                     This buſineſſe being thus contriued;
                           He marries the Queene.
                         the other Complices ſo wrought, that diuers of the Nobility conſented to the marriage, whereof they made a Draft in Writing, ſubſcribed and ſealed, for feare, that if it ſhould euer be broken, Bothwell might haue accuſed them to be the Authors of all that villany. This marriage thus ſolemnized with Earle Bothwell, who was created Duke of the Orcades, cauſed euery one to ſurmize that the Queene was guiltie of this murder, and the Conſpirators ſtrengthened the ſame opinion, by Letters ſent into all parts, as likewiſe they held aſſemblies at Dundagh,
                        
                           They conſpire both againſt him, and the Queene.
                         where they conſpired to depoſe the Queene, and deſtroy Earle Bothwell. Although Murray, becauſe he would not appeare to be one of this Combination, obtained leaue of the Queene to goe into

                        France, and for the remouing of all diſtruſt, hee re-commended to her Royall care, and Bothwell's fidelitie, all his proceedings and occaſions whatſoeuer in Scotland.
                     
                     
                        
                           Earle Murray retyres into France.He was ſcarcely arriued in France, but they, who abſolued Bothwell of that crime, and gaue conſent to this marriage, tooke vp armes, as if they would haue ſeyzed on his perſon.
                           Earle Bothwell is expelled.
                         But in effect, vnder-hand, they priuily admoniſhed him ſpeedily to with-draw himſelfe, for feare leſt being taken, he might haue reuealed the whole Complot, and that from his flight, they might draw argument and ſubiect whereof to accuſe the Queene, for the murder of the King,
                           The Queene empriſoned.
                         they ſeyzed on her perſon, and entreated her ſo ignominiouſly and diſgracefully, that although ſhee had nothing on, but a very homely night-Gowne, yet they ſo clapt her vp in priſon at Lake-Leuin, vnder the cuſtody of Earle Murray's Mother, who was Iames the 5. his Concubine, who further perſecuted her with moſt ſhameleſſe malice, during her reſtraint, boaſting how ſhee was lawfull Wife to Iames the 5. and her Sonne lawfully deſcended from him.
                     
                        
                           Queene Elizabeth complaines.
                        So ſoone as Queene ELIZABETH had certaine notice of all theſe proceedings, deteſting in her heart this vnbrideled inſolency of Subiects towards a Princeſſe, who was her Siſter, and Neighbour, terming them perfidious, rebellious, ingratefull, and cruell: Shee ſent into Scotland, Nicho. Throgmorton, to complaine hereof vnto the Confederates, and to conſult of ſome meanes how to reſtore the Queene to her former liberty and authority, for the puniſhments of the Kings murderers, and that the yong Prince, might bee ſent into England, rather than into France for his more ſecure preſeruation, and ſafety. For that which paſſed ſucceſſiuely while Throgmorton lay in Scotland, I will deliuer it faithfully, euen as I collected it out of his owne Letters, which queſtionleſſe are very ſincere, and well approued of.
                     
                        Many in Scotland were very much incens'd againſt the Queene, inſomuch, as they abſolutely refus'd to behold her, as likewiſe Villeroy, and De Croc, Ambaſſadours for France. Yet the Conſpirators could not agree among themſelues, how to diſpoſe of her. The Lord of Lidington, and ſome others, were of opinion, to haue her re-eſtabliſhed in her authority vpon theſe conditions: That the Murderers of the KING ſhould be puniſhed according to the Lawes; and the young Prince his ſafety procured.
                           They conſult what is to be done with the Queene priſoner.
                         That Bothwell ſhould be ſeparated from her by a firme Diuorce; and Religion eſtabliſhed. Others perſwaded a perpetuall baniſhment of her, eyther into France or England, ſo the Queene of England, or King of France, would be content to be Cautions and Pledges, that ſhee ſhould transferre all the Regall authority to her Sonne, and ſome other great and eminent perſons of the Kingdome. Againe, ſome would haue cited her to a peremptory triall, haue had her condemned, committed to perpetuall priſon, and her Sonne crowned KING. Finally, there wanted not others, who for her ſummary chaſtiſement, and puniſhment, would haue had her depriued both of her Royall Authority and life. And this was vſually preach'd and diuulged by Knox, and ſome other Miniſters, in the open Pulpit.
                     
                        Throgmorton produced againſt this,Throgmorton defends the Queenes cauſe.
                         many reaſons and Arguments taken out of the holy Scriptures, touching due obedience and ſubmiſſion to ſuperiour power, who retaine the Sword of Authority in their hands: arguing very ſtrongly and conſtantly, How the Queene was vnder no other Tribunall, but that of the heauenly IVDGE, neither could ſhee iuridically be conſtrayned to appeare and anſwer in the Court of any earthly Iudge. That in Scotland the ſame authoritie which the Queene had not delegated, nor made ouer to any other, was nothing, and by her reuocable.
                     
                     But the Scottiſh-men replying, alledged the peculiar rites

and priuiledges of Scotland, and that in extraordinary occurrents, they might extraordinarily determine, euen as they had collected out of Buchanans reaſons, who, by the Earle of Murrayes perſwaſion,
                           The Scots maintaine the contrary out of Buchanans reaſons.
                         then writ that Dialogue of the Right of Reigning or gouerning among the Scots, who was condemned: wherein he maintained, againſt the Teſtimony of the Scottiſh Hiſtories, that the people were priuiledged, to create or depoſe their Kings. Notwithſtanding, Throgmorton ceaſed not importunately to ſollicite them, for the Queenes re-eſtabliſhment, and that himſelfe might viſit her, though he no ſooner opened his mouth in this poynt, but they all replyed, how this by no meanes could be granted him, becauſe herein they had denyed the French, and that by this meanes they would not diſtaſte the King of France, to pleaſe and ſatisfie the Queene of England, who (as often experience heretofore had taught them) laboured for nothing, but her owne peculiar intereſts, when ſhee was a meanes to driue the French away out of Scotland, and lately ſhewed her ſelfe but niggardly, and ſparing of her fauours towards the Scottiſh Exiles. Whereupon, he thought it fit to take heed, leſt this importunity might vrge them, to embrace the amity of the French, and ſhake off that of the Engliſh; when, according to the French Prouerbe, Qui quicte la partie la perd, He that leaues his partie, loſeth it: aduiſed and counſelled the Engliſh to be carefull and iealous, how they forſooke and loſt the Scots.
                     
                     After this, by a Writing vnſeal'd, filled with variety of diſcourſe, which they committed to Throgmortons hands, they vowed and proteſted, that the Queene was remoued, and reſtrained to a cloſe place, for no other end, but to diſioyne her from Earle Bothwell, whom ſhee moſt entyrely loued, till this heat of affection, and her wrath conceyued againſt them, might ſomewhat ſlacken: and therefore they requeſted him to be ſatisfied in this Anſwer, while

ſome other Nobles of the Kingdome were aſſembled: and yet neuertheleſſe they reſtrayned the Queenes liberty, euery day more and more, though with teares ſhee intreated them to vſe her more fauourably, if not as Queene, yet as ſhee was a Kings Daughter, and Mother to their Prince: and ſo hee many times requeſted, that hee might goe and viſit her, but all in vaine. Briefly, not to rip vp in particular all the iniuries and diſgraces offered her, at laſt they made triall, whether by milde and faire meanes, they could induce her, freely to giue ouer the gouernement, either by reaſon of her weakeneſſe and indiſpoſition, or in reſpect of the trouble and annoyance it brought her to, to reigne and gouerne: which indeed they deuiſed for an excuſe, or elſe as others counſelled her, with more drift and ſubtilty, to the end that being more weakly and graceleſſely garded, ſhee might the more ſafely and eaſily make her eſcape. But when all this tooke no place, they threatned to bring her to a publique triall, to accuſe her that ſhee had led an incontinent life, murdered the King her former Husband, and practiſed tyranny in violating the Lawes, and ancient priuiledges of their Country, eſpecially thoſe which De R. and De Oiſel had enacted in the King of France his name, and her owne. Finally, through feare of death, and without euer hearing her anſwers,
                           They extort from their Queene a Reſignation of the Gouernement.
                         they forced her to ſeale three Patents: the firſt of which contained, that ſhee aſſigned the gouernement ouer to her Sonne, who was ſcarcely thirteene moneths old: the ſecond comprehending, how ſhee conſtituted Earle Murray to be Vice-Roy, during her Sonnes minority: and the third implyed, that in caſe Murray refuſed this charge, ſhee ordayned for Rectors and Protectors of her Sonne, the Duke of Chastelraut, and the Earles of Lenox, Arguile, Athol, Morton, Glencarne, and Mar: But then ſhee preſently certified the Queene of England by Throgmorton, how ſhee had ſurrendred the gouernement of the Kingdome by compulſion,

and againſt her will ſubſcribed to the Patent thereof, by Throgmortons perſwaſion, who informed her, that any Grant extorted from her during impriſonment, which cauſeth a iuſt and true feare, was inualidious, and of no effect. But I will relate theſe things more at large in the yeere enſuing, according as they may be faithfully extracted out of the Accuſations, and Anſwers of parties, which were propounded at Yorke before the Commiſſioners, to whom the abſolute determination of this buſineſſe was referred.
                     
                        Iames the 6. conſecrated and inaugurated King.Fiue dayes after this Reſignation or Grant, IAMES, Sonne to the Queene, was conſecrated and crowned King, Iohn Knox then preaching publiquely, after the Hamiltons had proteſted, how it was without any manner of preiudice to the Duke of Chaſtelraut, in the right of Succeſſion, againſt the Family of Lenox. But Queene ELIZABETH forbade Throgmorton to be preſent hereat, to the end that by the preſentiall aſſiſtance of her Ambaſſadour, ſhee might not ſeeme to approue this vniuſt depoſition of the Queene.
                     
                        Murray returnes into Scotland.Twenty dayes after, Murray returned out of France into Scotland, where hauing remained onely three dayes, he went to the Queene with certaine of the Conſpirators in his company, he obiected vnto her many crimes, and like a religious Confeſſor, layd open vnto her many demonſtrations, to moue her to conuert vnto God with true repentance, and to implore his mercy. Shee ſhewed her ſelfe penitent for the ſinnes of her life paſt, confeſt part of them obiected to her, extenuated ſome, and excuſed others, out of humane fragility and weakeneſſe, but abſolutely denyed the greater part, entreated him, to aſſume the mannaging of affaires vnder her Sonne, and coniured him to be tender of her reputation and life. Whereunto he made anſwer, how this lay not in his power, but ſhee muſt ſue for it, from the Eſtates of the Kingdome, perſwading

her notwithſtanding to obſerue theſe things, if ſhe regarded either her life, or honour. That ſhe ſhould not diſturbe either the peace of the King or Kingdome:
                           Hee preſcribes the Queene what ſhee ſhould doe.
                         not to attempt the breaking of her impriſonment: no wayes to excite the King of France, or Queene of England to any domeſticall or externall Warre: no more to affect Bothwell, and neuer to ſeeke any reuenge againſt them that were his enemies.
                     So ſoone as he was proclaimed Vice-Roy or Regent,
                           Hee is eſtabliſhed Regent, or Vice-Roy.
                         he obliged himſelfe by Writings vnder hand and ſeale, to attempt nothing that ſhould concerne either war or peace, the perſon and marriage of the King, or the Queenes liberty, without the conſent of the other Complices: and hee cauſed the Lord of Lidington to informe Throgmorton, that he ſhould no more intercede for the Queene, and that both himſelfe, and all others, made choyce rather to indure any thing elſe, than to permit that ſhee enioying liberty, ſhould ſtill retaine Bothwell about her, expoſe her Sonne to danger, the Countrey to moleſtation, and themſelues to baniſhment. We well know (ſaid hee) what you Engliſh men can effect by a warre, if you harraſſe our frontiers and wee yours: and are well aſſured out of the ancient alliance they haue alwaies entertained, will neuer forſake vs. Neuertheleſſe, hee denied Ligneroll the French Ambaſſadour Leager, to ſee the Queene, while Bothwell were taken: and contrary to that which he had promiſed to the King of France, he daily intreated this miſerable Queene moſt rigorouſly, for all the good ſhee had formerly done him. Hitherto, ſo much as I could collect out of Throgmortons Letters.
                     Preſently after,
                           Some of the murderers of the King, are put to death.
                         Earle Murray put to death Iohn Hepborne, Paris, French Dowglas, and ſome other of Bothwels ſeruants, who aſſiſted in the murdering of the King. But when they came to their excution, they proteſted before God, and his Angels, (whereunto he gaue no eare) that

they heard Earle Bothwell ſay, how himſelfe and Morton were the originall Authors, and diſcharged the Queene of all ſuſpition.
                           They acquit the Queene of all ſuspition.
                         As alſo, Bothwell himſelfe, when hee was priſoner in Denmarke, had often proteſted, both during his life, and at his death, with a moſt ſincere and religious atteſtation, that ſhe was innocent thereof: and foureteene yeeres after, when Morton came to vndergoe his laſt puniſhment, he confeſt: that Bothwell ſollicited him to conſent thereunto, and he vtterly refuſing to attempt the ſame, except he firſt ſaw an expreſſe command in writing from the Queenes owne hand, he replyed, that this in no manner could be compaſſed, but excluded it muſt be without communicating of it formerly to her.
                     
                        
                           The Queene of England, and the King of France, labour to procure her libertie.
                        Queene ELIZABETH, and the King of France, being much incenſed with ſuch a precipitant depoſition, and the Conſpirators obſtinacy againſt the ſute of their Ambaſſadours, it turning as it were to the reproch of Royall Maieſty, they began to fauour the Hamiltons, who ſtill held the Queenes party. Paſquier alſo, Ambaſſador Leager for France, treated with Queene ELIZABETH, to procure her re-eſtabliſhment by force of Armes, who thought it moſt expedient, firſt to prohibit the Scots all commerce with England and France, while ſhe were deliuered: that ſo, ſome diuiſion might grow betweene the Nobility and the people, which Nobility ſeemed to conſpire againſt her. But for a while, to paſſe ouer theſe affaires of Scotland.
                     
                     
                        
                           Queene Elizabeth demands the reſtitution of Calais.
                        Queſtion being then made of reſtoring the Towne of Calais to the Engliſh, according to the Treaty of Cambray, ſeeing the eight yeeres therein ſpecified were now expired, Smith being ſent into France, with G. Winter, Maſter of the Nauall Artillery, after the ſounding of a Trumpet before the gate of Calais, which lookes towards the Sea, with a lowd voyce, & in the French Tongue he demanded, that, according to the Articles of that Treaty, the Town &

Territory, with ſome Canons, might be ſurrendred into his hands: he alſo at the ſame time, drew an Act, by the hand of a publique Notary, in the preſence of ſome Germane and Flemiſh Merchants, who were accidentally there at the ſame time, and taken for witneſſes, and then he went preſently to the King of France, at Caſtell de Foſſat, where, with Norris, Ambaſſadour Leager, he made againe the ſame demand. The King ſent to his Councellors, amongſt whom M. de l'Hoſpitall, Lord Chancellor, Proloquutor for the reſt, with a graue and well compiled diſcourſe, ſpake to him in this manner:
THat if the Engliſh had any right to lay claime to Calais,
                           The French maintaine, how they ought not to doe it. they might as well challenge and pretend title to Paris, for by the fortune of Warre, they had conquered and loſt both the one and the other. That the right they pretended to Calais, was but new, whereas that of the French, tooke beginning with the Kingdome it ſelfe. And though the Engliſh poſſeſſed it for the ſpace of three and twenty yeeres more or leſſe, yet the originall title euer remained to the King of France, as well as that of the Duchies of Guyenne, and Normandy, which the Engliſh likewiſe detayned for a long time, by the force of their Armes. That the French did not conquer, but rather recouered Calais, with their Armes, euen as they did their former Dukedomes. That the preſcription of times, alledged by the Engliſh, tooke no place betweene Princes, but their right lay alwayes in their force, and in the Law of the twelue Tables: for one might eternally challenge his owne properties out of the hand of his enemie. That the Engliſh, though ſufficiently inſtructed in Treaties and contractations of affaires, were neuer mindefull of Calais, in the Treaty which paſsed not long ſince, at Troyes, though they

enterpriſed a warre principally for the recouery thereof: ſo as hereby they manifeſted, that they had giuen ouer all pretence to the ſame. That this Treaty of Troyes was a Renouation, by meanes whereof that of Cambray was in ſome poynts reformed, notwithſtanding the clauſe of the Reſeruation of rights and claimes, becauſe that touched onely inferiour and petty Priuiledges and claimes, whereas that of Calais was held for one of the moſt principall, and important. That, notwithſtanding any thing which Francis the Second attempted in Scotland, this would not accrue to the preiudice of Charles the Ninth. That in ſome ſpeciall caſes, the attempts of particular men, were ſubiect to the Lawes, but in the proceedings of Kings and Princes it tooke quite otherwiſe. That, for whatſoeuer was vndertaken in the Kingdome of Scotland, made ouer in dowry to King Francis, the Engliſh, who by ſurmizes aymed at his, and the Queene of Scots proiect, they ſhould rather complaine vnto her, ſeeing they entred Haure de grace, which is in France, vnder a colourable pretext of the Kings preſeruation, where placing a ſtrong Garriſon, and diuers warlike munitions, they held it by force of Armes, and furniſhed the Prince of Condé with Moneyes: for which cauſe, they loſt the claime which they had to Calais. That, GOD permitting the French to recouer the ſame, reſolued in his heauenly prouidence, that it ſhould be a meanes, to end the warres that had beene betweene them, in that they were ſeuered and ſeparated by the Sea, which running betwixt both coaſts, ſerues for iuſt borders and limits: as that Poet ſings,
And the Engliſh, who are certaine Nations, Seuer'd by Sea, from other Regions.
                     
                        
                        That the Queene of England ſhould take a better courſe, in embracing Peace with the King of France, then by ſeeking to recouer Calais. Finally, that no man ſhould dare to moue a word to the King, about ſurrendring it to the Engliſh, but if any were ſo preſumptuous, that he deſerued extreme puniſhment, yea, greater torments then thoſe of hell fire.
                        
                           Whereunto Smith made anſwere:
                           Sir Thomas Smith's anſwere. That it nothing concerned him, and to ſearch out what right and title the French had in former times to Calais, one muſt rip vp wonderfull ancient and abſolute Antiquities; but well he perceiued at laſt, that what the French laid hold of, either by right or wrong, they take it for their own, as if their claimes and titles lay in nothing but Armes, and little car'd, whether they poſseſt a good or bad conſcience. That they reſolued to hold Calais, by that Law of Nations, which permits captiues to releaſe themſelues from their enemies, and recouer former libertie, though the other held it by vertue of a ſolemne Conuention and Accord. And that they cal'd not to conſideration, how after the firſt, there was another, ſo as they determined in no wiſe to performe their promiſe giuen touching the reſtitution of Calais. And yet neuertheleſſe, this was of more waight and conſequence then the moſt important reaſons that could bee alleadged. That they euer tooke to themſelues, and denyed the Engliſh, the glory and honour which then they willingly aſcribed to them, for beeing capable and apprehenſiue in Contractations. That this renouation of Contract, was but a meere Antistrophe, which might iuſtly bee returned vpon the French, becauſe the reaſon why the Queene redemanded Calais, was for nothing elſe, but in that the French attempting and innouating by their Armes in Scotland, had loſt the right they pretended

thereunto: becauſe the Queene of England, vpon this, ſurprized Haure de grace: As if in ſo doing, the one Prince minded not to yeeld one iot to the other. We, ſaid he, accorded a Peace at Troyes; which, if it induced any nouation or change, this innouation or change, cut off the right which the French had to Calais, and confirmed the Engliſh Title, which the Engliſh could not as yet iuſtly claime, becauſe the eight yeeres were not then fully expired. Whereupon riſing, and turning toward the Councell of France; I appeale, ſaith hee, to your faith and conſcience, ſeeing your ſelues were then preſent, when wee inſiſted in making a Reſeruation, by expreſse termes, for our right to Calais, you labouring as much to haue it omitted, becauſe the full time was not expired: Is it not true, that the Accord was made betweene vs, with this prouiſo, and ſecret reſeruation, expreſt in this Clauſe, All other reſpectiue intentions and demands to remaine ſolid and entire, and ſo likewiſe, the exceptions and prohibitions both of the one and the other ſide reſerued. As for Haure de grace, the Engliſh entred it without one blowe ſtrucke, at the intreaty of the Inhabitants, and the Normane Nobility, and after a ſolemne proteſtation, that it ſhould bee kept and held to the King of France his behoofe, ſo as heerein they vndertooke nothing againſt him by courſe of Armes, nor innouated not any thing to the infringement of the former Treaty. As for the moneys lent to the Prince of Condé, and his Confederates, this was done with no other drift or intention, then to ſatisfie the Almaine Souldiers, who mutined for their pay, and to detaine them from forraging thoſe Countries, that liued vnder the King's obedience, which the King himſelfe acknowledged to haue beene done to a good end, and for his owne ſpeciall ſeruice.
                     
                     
                        And thus you ſee what Sir Thomas Smith vttered, with diuers ſuch matters and allegations.
                     Whereupon, Monſieur Memorancy, beeing Conſtable of France, holding vp his Sword on high, the Scabbard whereof was ſet with Flowers-de-Luce, for a marke and embleme of his high Office, and vſing many words of the great warlike preparations which the Engliſh brought before Haure de grace, as if they had not only beene able to defend a ſmall Towne, but further to haue taken in all Normandy.
                     
                     No man (ſaid Smith) need to wonder, becauſe the Engliſhmen, being a maritime Nation, vnderſtanding that they haue no command ouer the Winds, who are Lords of the Sea, they prouide plentifully and in due ſeaſon for time to come.
                     Then the Frenchmen complaining, that conformable to the Accord, the Proteſtants that fled out of France, were refuſed to bee deliuered to the French Ambaſſadour, who had demanded them: this buſines was put off till another time, and ſo by little and little, came to be buried in ſilence, the Ciuill Wars inſtantly renewing in France. And certainely, the French-men were reſolued among themſelues, neuer to deliuer vp Calais againe: For they no ſooner tooke it, but they razed all the old Fortifications, began to make new, let houſes and grounds for fiftie yeeres, and granted a perpetuitie in others.
                     While theſe matters thus paſſed in France, the Count of Stolberg came into England, from the Emperour Maximilian, to treate of a Marriage with the Arch-duke, for which end likewiſe, the Queenes Maieſtie not long before had ſent to the Emperour, the Earle of Suſſex, with the Order of the Garter; who, for the loue he bare to his Countrey, and hatred to the Earle of Leiceſter, employed all his beſt

endeuours, to bring to paſſe, that the Queene might marry with a ſtrange Prince, and Leicester by this meanes to bee fruſtrated of his hopes; this alwaies readily comming out of his mouth,
                           The Earle of Suſſex is ſent to the Emperour.
                         That whether in reſpect of honour, power, or meanes, a ſtrange Prince was to be preferred before the moſt noble Subiect of the Kingdome of England. Which made one of a contrarie opinion, vpon a certaine time, vtter ingeniouſly theſe words in his preſence: That in marriages, wherein reſpect is had to three things, to honour, power, and riches, the Diuell, and the World were the Paranymphes and Solliciters. Notwithſtanding, Leiceſter conceiuing good hopes, found meanes to ſuborne the Lord North, whom the Earle of Suſſex had choſen to accompany him in his voyage, that he ſhould giue an eare to what he ſpake, caſt a vigilant eye ouer what hee did, and vnder-hand to plucke backe the Marriage of the Arch-duke, as faſt as hee aduanced and ſet it forward: letting him vnderſtand, that the Queene was farre from it, whatſoeuer ſhew ſhee made of a willing mind, and what face ſoeuer Suſſex ſet on it. As alſo himſelfe laboured inceſſantly in Court, to diuert the Queene from any ſuch reſolution, he hauing the command of her eare, and to this end, he repreſenting vnto her all the diſcommodities which might accrew,Leiceſter hinders it.
                         by her marrying out of the Realme.
                     
                        Repreſenting to her all the diſcommodities that might happē if ſhe married a ſtrangerThe Marriage of late memory that her Siſter MARY contracted with the King of Spaine, whereby ſhee caſt her ſelfe into perpetuall ſorrow, and England into danger of comming vnder the Spaniſh ſeruitude. That it was vnpoſsible to diſcouer the manners, cogitations, and inward inclinations of ſtrangers, though theſe things ought to be lookt into in the perſon of an Husband, who by an inſeparable band, is one and the ſame fleſh. How it was an extreme miſery and griefe, to be dayly conuerſant with a man of ſtrange maners and language. That

Children begotten in ſuch marriages, tooke from their birth, I know not what kind of extraordinarie propertie and diſpoſition. That frequent commerce with ſtrangers, brought into the Common-wealth ſtrange maners and faſhions of life; and that Ladies Princeſſes, by theſe Marriages, in ſtead of augmenting their owne Kingdomes, added to thoſe of their Husbands, ſubmitted themſelues and their Subiects to their commands, and laid open to ſtrangers the ſecrets of their Kingdoms. That a ſtrange Husband, out of the naturall affection he bare to his owne Countrey, would preferre his owne Subiects, before the Subiects of England. That England had no need of the helpe of any ſtranger, beeing ſtrong enough of it ſelfe, to defend the Kingdome, and the riches thereof, and to repell any forraigne Force. That the annexing of another Kingdome, would breed but charge, care, and trouble, and how Kingdomes, as well as humane bodies, fell many times by their owne waight. That ſome alleadged in ſcorne of the Nobility, That the Queene marrying within the Kingdome, ſhould ſomewhat impaire her Royall dignity; whereas her Maieſtie, who by her vertue opened a way to riſe vnto this Soueraigntie, was extracted from Nobility, and that yet there are ſome Nobles of the Royall Blood, who are like Sprigs of the ſame Royall Branch or Arme, and hereupon, the Kings of England haue euer in their Letters, honoured Dukes, Marquiſſes, Earles, and Vicounts, with this Title of Couſins.
                     In the meane while, the Earle of Suſſex, taking his Iourney by Antwerp, Cullen, Magunce, Wormes, Spire, Vlme, and Ausberg, came into Austria with a great and magnificent Traine: who beeing honourably entertained, he there remained fiue moneths at the Emperours charge, hauing daily conference with him about ſerious and waighty

matters, and touching the Marriage of Charles; and on a day appointed, he inueſted him with the Order of the Garter, at an Euening Prayer, refuſing, through ſcruple of conſcience,
                           Articles of the marriage propounded.
                         to bee preſent at the celebration of Maſſe. In this affaire, many difficulties preſented themſelues about Religion, and the Arch-duke's mayntenance, the ſtile of King, and the ſucceſſion to the Kingdome; and many points were argued both of the one ſide and the other: For the Title and Stile of King, it was accorded he ſhould haue it. For the Succeſſion, in that hee could not enioy it by the Lawes of the Kingdome, in that it was preiudiciall to the Children, hee ſhould haue the tutelage and gardianſhip of them. And that nothing more was granted to Philip, King of Spaine, when he married Queene MARY. As for his maintenance, if hee would furniſh them at his charge, whom he ſhould bring with him and retaine in the Court, the Queene, out of her Royall Dignitie, would abundantly diſcharge the reſt, yea, and that too, if he required it. But one ſcruple ſtill remained touching Religion: For the Emperour demanded, as alſo Charles himſelfe, that he might haue a publike Church granted him, whither hee might repaire with his Court, to the celebration of diuine Seruice according to the Romane forme. But this beeing refuſed, the Emperour was ſatisfied with an indifferent motion, which was, That hee might haue a peculiar place ordained within the Court for this purpoſe, where he might quietly performe his Deuotions, as euer it is permitted the Ambaſſadours of Romane Princes, with a prouiſo that the Engliſh ſhould not bee thereto admitted, and that neither hee nor his Followers did oppugne the Religion receiued in England, neither fauour any oppoſites. If any diſcontentment grew about Diuine Seruice, hee ſhould for a time forbeare his ordinary exerciſe, and with the Queene repaire to that celebration performed according to the Church of England. When this Treatie had beene ſagely

diſcuſſed of in England, (that I may not relate any further of the negotiation) the Queene made anſwere, That if ſhee yeelded to this, ſhe ſhould offend her owne Conſcience, and openly violate the publike Lawes of the Kingdome, to the extreme perill both of her dignitie and ſafety: But if Charles were pleaſed to come into England, to ſee her, he ſhould reape fruites worthy his trauell and paines. And thus the Emperour diſmiſſed the Earle of Suſsex with great honour: and the Earle of Suſsex turning a little out of his way to ſee Charles, tooke his leaue of him at Gratz; and the Arch-duke Charles, expecting to receiue a more fauourable Anſwere, found himſelfe fruſtrated of his intention. For this proſecution was giuen ouer by little and little, which made a progreſſion of ſeuen whole yeeres, with diuers intercourſes of honourable Embaſſies: it leauing notwithſtanding a mutuall loue and amity betweene the Princes, ſo cordiall and inherent, that the Emperour alwaies croſt the Popes deſignes againſt Queene ELIZABETH. Not long after, the Arch-duke married Mary, Daughter to Albert the fifth, Duke of Bauaria, by whom, amongſt other Children, he had two Daughters, whereof the one was Queene of Spaine, the other of Poland.
                     
                     About this time, came into England,
                        
                           Ambaſsadours ſent from the Emperour of Muſcouie. from the mightie Emperour of Ruſsia and Muſcouie, Ioh. Baſilius, E. Twerdico, and T. Pogarella, with moſt Martlet, Sable, and Ermyne Skins, whereof at that time, and in precedent ages, the Engliſh made great account, both for ornament and health: and they promiſed to the Queene and the Engliſh Nation, continuance of that affection which the Emperour had manifeſted, and what great ſtudie and care he had taken for the Engliſh, euer ſince they frequented thoſe parts, whereof you ſhall hereunder ſee the beginning.
                     In the yeere 1553. certaine Marchants of London, the principall of whom were An. Iudd. G. Barnes, and A. Huſay, ſhaping out a courſe for Cathay, by the frozen or

Hyperborean Sea, vnder the conduct of Sir Henry Willowbie, who was frozen to death in the Iourney, Ro. Chancelour,
                        
                           The Engliſh opened the way to goe to Ruſsia by Sea.
                         his Lieutenant, happily opened the paſſage of Ruſsia, before this time vnknowne, running vp with the Riuer of Duina, till he came to ſixtie degrees of the Pole Articke, where a little Monaſteerie is ſeated, conſecrated to Saint Nicholas. When the Emperour heard of it, he ſent for him to the Moſco, in Caroches made after the manner of the Countrie: he entertain'd and diſmiſt him with many graces and fauours, promiſing the Engliſh great immunities, if they would trade into his Empire, and reioycing that hee had met with a meanes to tranſport by Sea into Ruſsia, forraign merchandize, which the Ruſsiās could not come by before, but with great difficultie, by the Narue, and the Kingdome of Poland, enemies. When Robert Chancelor vpon his returne gaue inforamtion thereof, and of what high eſteeme the Clothes of England were in thoſe parts, the low rate of Hempe and Flaxe, whereof they made their Cables and cordage,
                           The Company of Muſcouie Marchants.
                         and what rich Skins they affoorded, theſe Marchants raiſed a ſociety or company, by Queene MARIES permiſſion, in a faire Building appropriated to their vſe, which at this day we call the Moſcouie houſe; and Baſilius granting them many immunities, they haue ſince that time, ſent euery yeere a Fleet of Ships, and maintained traffique, the which likewiſe hath been greatly augmented ſince the yeere 1569. when out of his loue to Queene ELIZABETH, he granted them, that none but the Engliſh of this Company, might traffique into the North part of Ruſsia, and they onely ſhould ſell their merchandizes throughout the whole extent of his Empire, which is large and ſpacious, as in fit place ſhall be declared.
                     
                        An. Ienkinſon returned with theſe Ambaſſadours into England, who had obſeruantly runne ouer all this Countrey: he deſcribed the ſame in a Geographicall Map, and was the firſt man of the Engliſh, that croſs'd the Caſpian

Sea, and landed in the Countrey of the Bactrians. The Emperour committed vnto him ſecret matters, which hee would by no meanes communicate to any of his owne people, which was,
                           A ſecret meſſage from the Emperour of Muſcouy.
                         ſeriouſly to treat with Queene ELIZABETH in his name, that ſhe would enter into mutuall league with him offenſiue, and defenſiue, againſt all the world, and that ſhe would ſend into Ruſsia, Ship-wrights, Mariners, warlike Munitions, and to oblige her ſelfe by ſolemne oath, courteouſly to receiue him, with his Wife, and Children, if he were driuen out of his Empire, eyther by rebellious Subiects, or open enemies. And thus this Tyrant, whom no man could truſt, ſeemed to be diſtruſtfull euen of himſelfe: and though he were ſomewhat moued with the ſhort and ambiguous anſwer that her Maieſty returned, yet did he not giue ouer ſolliciting of her in theſe things, both by Letters and Ambaſſies, as hereafter ſhall be expreſſed, requeſting her continually, to ſend him backe that ſame Anthony Ienkinſon, who, as he thought, had not beene ſo faithfull, as in matters of ſo great waight was requiſite.
                     The firſt Moneth of this yeere, dyed Nicholas Wotton,
                        
                           The death of N. Wotton: a Doctor of the Ciuill Law, and Deane of the Churches of Canterbury and Yorke: a very honourable perſon, for his parentage, but much more for his prudence: whereof he had giuen ample teſtimony both within and without the Realme. For, hee was one of the Priuy-Councell to the Kings, HENRY the Eighth, and EDVVARD the Sixth; as alſo, to Queene MARY, and Queene ELIZABETH. Nine times he went Ambaſſadour to the Emperour, the Kings of France and Spaine, and other Princes. Three times he was a Commiſſioner to make peace betweene the Engliſh, French, and Scots; and one of the ſixteene, whom HENRY the Eighth choſe for Executors of his laſt Will and Teſtament.
                           And the Ducheſſe of Norfolke.
                        
                     
                     There dyed alſo El. Leyborne, third Wife to Thomas,
                        
Duke of Norfolke, and formerly Widdow to the Lord Dacres, hauing brought him forth no Children. But ſhe had one by her firſt Husband, George the Baron: who dyed young, with a fall off of a Vauting-Horſe of wood, when he learned to vaut: and three Daughters, who were all affianced by promiſes of performance to the Dukes three Sonnes.
                     I told you, how Shan O-Neale, lawfull Sonne to Cone-Oneale, ſurnamed Bacon; that is to ſay, Lame; the mightieſt man in the North part of Ireland, which is called Vlſter, was come into England, and craued pardon for his offence, in the yeere 1563. When hee was returned into his Countrey, hee valiantly defended that part of Ireland againſt the Scots which landed there out of Cantria, and Hebride:
                        
                           Shan O-neale raiſeth troubles.
                         and he ſlew 10. Mac O-Neale, his father in Law, and Anny his Brother, who conducted them. This victory cauſing him to be inſolent, he began to exerciſe tyranny vpon other petty Lords of Vlſter, not of ſo powerfull a command as himſelfe: hee burnt Armach, the Metropolitane City of Ireland, for hatred to the Arch-biſhop, draue Mac-Guire out of the inheritance of his Predeceſſors, pilled and ſacked Mac-Geniſſe, and others; and the Engliſh, receiuing them into their protection, hee ſpred rebellious colours againſt Queene ELIZABETH.
                           He rebels.
                         But he preſently wrapt them vp againe, at the inſtigation of Cuſac, a Knight of the Order, yeelded vp his Sonne in Hoſtage, and ſubmitted himſelfe. And Queene ELIZABETH, to containe him within bounds, hauing rent and torne all thoſe Letters, by which HENRY the Eighth declared Matthew falſly reputed for his Sonne, to be Heire to Cone, ſhe reſolued to conferre vpon him, the honourable titles of Earle of Tyrone, and Baron of Dungannon, as being the vndoubted Sonne and Heire. But this man altogether impatient of repoſe, and peace, perceiuing that he was able to bring into the field a thouſand Horſe, and foure

thouſand foot of his Vaſſals, and Tenants, and he had already fiue hundred of his Guard, with barbarous pride hee reiected ſuch titles of honour, in compariſon of the name of O-Neale, but cauſed himſelfe, by his owne people, to be ſtyled King of Vlſter: He trayned vp the Peaſants to War, offered the Kingdome of Ireland to the Queene of Scots, and conceiued ſuch a mortall hatred againſt the Engliſh, that hauing built a Caſtle vpon the Lac Eaugh, he named it Feognegall, which is to ſay, the Hatred of the Engliſh, and ſtrangled ſome of his people, becauſe they ate the bread of the Engliſh, though hee would neuer ſpeake otherwiſe than honourably of the Queene.
                     Sir Henry Sidney was commanded to arme againſt him,
                           Sir Henry Sidney armes againſt him.
                         and Randolph, a braue Conductor, ſent by Sea, vpon the Northerne Frontiers of Vlſter, to Derry, which is a ſmall Epiſcopall See, neere to Loygh-foy, with a troupe of horſe, and ſeuen hundred foot, to aſſaile him vpon the backe, when the Vice-Roy would come vp, and ſet vpon him in his Van. Shan vnderſtanding this, hotly beleaguerd Dundalk, but was repelled by the Garriſon, with great loſſe of men: as he was likewiſe from Wittſcaſtell, where hee met with no leſſe loſſe. Then being about with fire and ſword to waſte the Earledome of Louth, with the ouerthrow of a number of men, he was rowted by a ſmall troupe of the Engliſh: when, making towards Derry, he forraged all the Countrey round about,
                           He is diſcomfited.
                         and prouoked the Engliſh Garriſon to fight, who ranging themſelues in battell, fell on all ſides vpon this diſordered multitude, diſarrayed, ouerthrew, and put them to open flight. But the victory proued but ſorrowfull, by reaſon of a lamentable accident that light vpon Randolph, who was ſlaine fighting valiantly among the thickeſt of his enemies: as braue a Gentleman queſtionleſſe, as our preſent times haue ſeene, and none euer purchaſed greater reſpect, ioyned with loue, among Souldiers, than this man had done. S. Lo being

conſtituted in his place, he much endammaged the Rebels in that quarter, till on a day, when the Fort by an vnhappy accident, was ſet on fire, with all the Munition, and Powder, which blew vp many Souldiers. For then, embarking all his foot in ſhipping, and with a wing of Horſe, commanded by one Haruey, he paſt through the middeſt of his enemies, who continually galled him, and, by a way of foure dayes iourney, went to the Lord Deputy, who, to honour Randolphs vertue, ſolemnized his Obſequies, and was himſelfe in mourning.
                     And raiſing forces preſently to goe into Vlſter, Shan retyred with his men into the Woods and Forreſts, re-amaſſing againe together at ſeuerall times, here and there, the reſt of his men, about Clogner, and Caſtell Salmon, belonging to Turlogh-Leinich, who then had left it. But when the Lord Deputy had conſtituted Garriſons, ſettled Odonel againe in his State, and was returned to appeaſe the differences between the Earles of Ormond and Deſmond, who in an ill time bandied one againſt another, Shan re-aſſuming courage,Shan re-aſsumes courage.
                         after he had ſpoyled and ranged farre vp into the Countrey, he againe beſieged Dundalch, which he was preſently conſtrained to giue ouer with great loſſe, and ſhame, many of his men being ſlaine: inſomuch, that enraged with fury and madneſſe, he practiſed moſt barbarous cruelty againſt them:
                           He vſeth cruelty to his men.
                         for, many had forſaken him, and he perceiuing that his number was greatly diminiſhed, (for beſides thoſe that left him, he loſt a thouſand in fight) and how the paſſages were ſtopped, and all places of retreat ſeyzed vpon by the Engliſh, he reſolued to proſtitute himſelfe at the Deputies feet,
                           He meanes to yeeld.
                         and to craue pardon with an Halter about his necke. But, being diſſwaded by his Secretary, and firſt to try the amity of the Scots of Hebrides, who were returned into Clande-boy, from whence he had formerly driuen them, and were there re-entred into an hot warre, vnder the conduct of A.Oge; which is to ſay,

the youngeſt, and M. Gilleſpic, whoſe Brethren, Anne, and Ioh. O-Neale, himſelfe had ſlaine in fight: he firſt ſent vnto them, their Brother Surley-boy, that is to ſay, Surley the Redde, to recouer their fauour, and then went to them himſelfe, with the Wife of Odonel, whom he had ſtolne away. They, boyling with choller, to bee reuenged for their brethren, and couſins, whom he had ſlaine, entertayned him but with feigned courteſie, but preſently leading him into their Tent, in drinking they quarrelled with him, vpon ſome obſcene ſpeeches he vſed of their Mother, and ſo falling vpon him with their naked ſwords,
                           He is ſlaine.
                         ſlew both himſelfe, and many others of his company.
                     And thus you may ſee, what a bloudy end this Shan came to, in the middeſt of Iune, after he had taken away all gouernement from his Father, and life from his baſtard-Brother. A man wonderfully polluted with Homicides, and Adulteries, a great gourmand, and an infamous drunkard, who, to refreſh his body inflamed with too-much Wine, and Vſquebagh, he was faine to bury himſelfe often-times in ground, vp to the chin. He left behinde him, Henry, and Shan, his Sonnes, that he had by his Wife, and many others whom he begot on the Wife of Odonel, & his other Concubines. His poſſeſſions and goods were confiſcated by the Parliament of the Kingdome of Ireland, and Turlogh-Leinich, the mightieſt man of the Family of O-Neale, and of a ſtayed ſpirit, proclaimed O-Neale, by the Queenes permiſſion, and the peoples election. Neuertheleſſe, the Queen, for an oppoſite to him, if he ſhould chance to exceed the bounds of his duety,Hugon, who was afterwards Baron of Dungannon.
                         receiued to grace Hugon, Nephew to Shan, by reaſon of Matthew his Brother, who was commonly called the Baron of Dungannon, a young man then of ſmall note, and yet afterwards he proued the Tempeſt, yea the very Plague and Peſtilence of his Countrey.
                     Thus peace was concluded vpon Vlſter. But in the meane

while, new troubles grew in Munſter, through the debate and ſecret grudgings, about their ſeuerall limits and borders,
                           Troubles in Munſter.
                         which fell out betweene the Earles of Ormond and Deſmond, ſo as they came to hand-blowes neere to Dromell, and were both ſummoned into England, to plead their cauſes before the Qu. Priuy-Councell. But they, the matter much encombred, ſent them backe to the Vice-Roy in Ireland, where they might haue both their titles and teſtimonies neere at hand. Both of them being equall in the number of warlike ſubiects, in courage, and friends at Court, contemning the deciſion of Lawes, they reſolued to end their ſuite by the ſword. The Vice-Roy hindred it as much as he could, both by his authority and armes. But Ormond, who would be thought to haue the beſt cauſe, ſo wrought, that the Vice-Roy was blamed for bearing too-much with Deſmond, and commanded to ſeyze his perſon, which he did, when hee leaſt thought of it, and together with himſelfe, he tooke Ioh. Deſmond, his Vnkle by the Fathers ſide, neere to Kilmalec, and ſo, he ſent them both into England, where, they had a ſtrong Guard ſet about them.
                  
                  
                     
                     THE ELEVENTH YEERE OF Her Reigne.Booke 1. 1568. 
                        Anno Dom. 1568.
                     
                        WHen Tho. Harding, N. Sanders, and T. P.
                        
                           The Papiſts abſolue many.
                         Diuines, and Fugitiues out of England, boldly exerciſed the Epiſcopall Authority they had lately receiued from the Pope:
IN iuriſdiction of conſcience, to abſolue all thoſe Engliſh that would returne into the boſome of the Romane Church, to diſpence in caſes of irregularity, except in poynts proceeding from voluntary manſlaughter, or growne to a contentious iuriſdiction, and of irregularitie, by reaſon of Hereſie, ſo the abſolued abstaine for three yeeres, from miniſtring at the Altar:
                     
                     
                        On the other ſide, it hapned, that Colman, Button, Hallingham, Benſon, and ſome others, who with ardent zeale profeſſed the more pure Religion,
                           The Jnnouators ſhew themſelues.
                         reprehended whatſoeuer was performed without authority out of the holy Scriptures, and, whether tranſported with a deſire of purer doctrine, of nouelty, or of diſſentions, but, in the open view of all men, they queſtioned the Diſcipline of the Engliſh Church, authorized and receiued the Liturgie, and vocation of Biſhops, expreſly condemning them, as ſenting too ſtrongly of the Romane Church, with which to hold any thing in common, they daily preached to be a ſingular impiety, vſing all meanes and endeuour that matters in the Engliſh Church might be reformed, according to the forme of Geneua. And, although the Queene commanded them to be clapt vp in priſons, yet they had an incredible number of Followers, who were preſently branded with that odious ſtyle of Puritans:
                           Puritans.
                         And in all places they encreaſed, out of a wilfull obſtinacy, the imprudence of the Biſhops, and the ſecret fauours of ſome of the Nobilitie, who barked at, and maligned the riches of the Church.
                     
                        
                           Second ciuill warre in France.
                        And, when ſome French likewiſe laboured after reformation of Religion, and fearing leſt the Papiſts would enter into league againſt them, they repayred to the King with armes in hand, by reaſon of the iuſt feare they ſtood in, and in this manner preſented vnto him a Supplication. A ſecond ciuill warre hapned; for ceſſation whereof, the Queene commanded her Ambaſſadour Norris, to ſollicite the King; and ſo, hereupon, a Peace was agreed vpon, but, queſtionleſſe hollow, and full of deceit, and ſtratagem. At the ſame time, the Queene, mother to the King of France, ſhewing great affability and grace, both to the Ambaſſadour himſelfe, and diuers of the Engliſh, couertly ſhee vſed ſome ſpeech, as pretending to treat of other affaires, that ſhee was deſirous to marry Henry, Duke of Anjou,
                        
her Sonne, to Queene ELIZABETH, who was hardly ſeuenteene yeeres old, to diuert her, as diuers ſuppoſed, from aſſiſting the Proteſtants of France, in the third Ciuill-Warre, which ſhee plotted preſently to be ſet on foote.
                           
                              The Duke of Aniou, commended to Queene Elizabeth.
                           
                              for an Husband.
                           
                           
                              The Engliſh Ambaſſador diſgracefully vſed in Spaine.
                           
                        
                     
                     But then in Spaine, Man, the Engliſh Ambaſſadour, was diſgracefully entreated: For, it beeing imputed to him, that he had ſpoken vnreuerently of the Pope, hee was prohibited the Court, afterwards baniſht from Madril, to a little Village among booriſh and ruſticall people; he is forced to heare Maſse, and the exerciſe of his owne Religion forbidden him. Wherein, I am not able to ſay whether the Spaniards ſhewed greater hatred to Queene ELIZABETH, or to Religion, conſidering that at the ſame time, ſhe vſed all manner of humanity to Guzman, the Spaniſh Ambaſſadour in England, permitting him the exerciſe of his religion: Her Maieſtie was wonderfully moued with this Inſult, eſteeming it offered to her own perſon, in that they vſed her Ambaſſadour ſo, as likewiſe for the iniurie which was done at the ſame inſtant to one Iohn Hawkins.
                        Hawkins ill intreated by the Spaniards in America. This man went to traffique at the Port of S. Iohn de Vlua, within the Mexican Gulfe, hauing fiue Ships laden with merchandize, and ſome Negro ſlaues, of whom the Engliſh then made ordinary ſale, hauing learn'd it of the Spaniards: but I know not with what honour they might ſo doe. The day after his arriuall, came in alſo the King of Spaine's Fleet, which (becauſe he would not violate the Peace) he ſuffered peaceably to enter into the Port, though he might haue hindred it, obtayning firſt a firme promiſe of ſecurity for himſelfe and his people, vpon certaine prouiſoes and conditions. The Spaniards thus entered, ſcorning to haue conditions impoſed vpon them in their owne Proprieties, obſerued a fit time, and falling vpon the Engliſh, ſlew many of them, ſeized on three of their Ships, and made pillage of the goods; a victory notwithſtanding that coſt themſelues much blood. This treacherous Action, cauſed

the Souldiers and Sea-men of England to murmur, vrging them to call out for warre againſt the Spaniard, and dayly exclaiming, how they were breakers of Peace and Accord, becauſe it was agreed vpon between the Emperour Charles the fifth, and HENRY the Eighth, that commerce ſhould bee free betweene their Subiects, in all and each of their Kingdomes and Dominions, as alſo in the Ilands, not excepting ſo much as America, which then appertayned to Charles.
                     
                     
                        
                           The Queene of Scots eſcapes out of priſon.
                        About the ſame time, the ſecond day of May, the priſoner Queene at Lake-Leuin, made an eſcape out of priſon, and retired to Hamilton Caſtle, by meanes of George Dowglaſſe, to whoſe Brother ſhee was committed in guard; where, vpon the teſtimonies of R. Meluin and others, and with an vnanimous conſent of all the Nobles, who flockt thither in great numbers, Sentence definitiue was vttered, That the Grant or Reſignation, extorted by meere feare from the priſoner Queene, was void from the beginning: and the Queene her ſelfe beeing preſent, tooke a ſolemne Oath, that it was extorted and forced from her. By meanes whereof, in two dayes ſuch multitudes of men repayred to her out of all parts, as ſhe raiſed an Army of ſixe thouſand braue Souldiers, who notwithſtanding, when they came to ioyne battell with Murray,
                        
                           She is vanquiſhed.
                         & fighting rather hare-braindly, then with wit or diſcretion, they were ſoone diſcomfited. This timorous Lady, beeing daunted with that hard ſucceſſe, betooke her ſelfe to flight, and rode the ſame day threeſcore miles; when comming by night to Maxwel's houſe, Baron of Heris, ſhe had rather expoſe herſelfe to the mercy of the Sea, and rely vpon Queen ELIZABETHS Protection, than vpon the fidelity of her Subiects: But yet before her embarking, ſhee ſent vnto her, Iohn Beton, with a Diamond that Queen ELIZABETH had formerly giuen her for a gage of their mutuall loue and amitie, to the end to aduertiſe her, that ſhee meant to come into England,
                        
and demand ſuccour of her, if her owne Subiects any longer purſued her by courſe of Warre. Queene ELIZABETH promiſed her all the kindneſſe and loue of a Royall Siſter: but ſhe not ſtaying the returne of the Meſſenger, committed her ſelfe to a ſmall Veſſell, againſt the aduice and counſell of her friends, and ſo the ſeuenteenth of May, with the Barons, Heris and Flemming, and ſome fewe others, came to Werrington in Cumberland, neere to the mouth of the Riuer Derwenton: and the ſame day ſhee wrote to Queene ELIZABETH a Letter in French, the principall heads whereof, I thinke good to ſet downe, euen as I extracted them out of the originall Copie it ſelfe, which comprehend a Relation of that which paſſed againſt her in Scotland, more at large then what before I haue deliuered.
                     MY moſt deare Siſter, you very wel vnderſtand,She writes to Qu. Elizab.
                         how ſome of my Subiects, whom I haue raiſed to ſoueraigne degrees of honor, haue conſpired to ſuppreſſe and impriſon both mee and my Husband: as alſo, that when by force of Armes I had expelled them out of my Kingdome, I receiued them againe into grace, at your entreatie; notwithſtanding all this, they violently entred into my Chamber, and though I was great with Child, cruelly ſlew mine owne ſeruant in my preſence, and ſhut vp my ſelfe vnder guard and cloſe keeping. When I pardoned them of this crime, then preſently they perpetrate another, the which, though it were plotted by them, and had obliged themſelues to the execution thereof, by ſeal'd writings, ſubſcribed with their owne hands, yet they imputed it to mee, and were ready with armed power to ſeize vpon me. But beeing confident in mine owne innocence, for the ſparing of blood, I was content to yeeld my ſelfe vnto them: Foorthwith they committed mee to priſon, beeing depriued of all my

ſeruants, except two wayting-Maides, a Cooke, and a Phiſician; enforcing me, by menacings and terrors of death, to reſigne ouer the gouernment of the Kingdome, refuſing to heare either me or my Attourneys, in a Conuention of the Eſtates, ſummon'd by their owne authority onely, ſtript off all my goods, and denyed the meanes to ſpeake with any. After this, by Gods direction, I vſed a courſe to eſcape this impriſonment, and beeing aſsiſted with the whole Flowre of the Nobilitie, who cheerefully made recourſe vnto me out of all parts, I put mine enemies in minde of their duety, and of the fidelity they had ſworne vnto me, offered them pardon, tooke order that each partie might bee heard in the Conuention of the Eſtates, to the end the Common-wealth might no longer bee rackt and tormented with inteſtine miſchiefes; and for this effect, I ſent towards them two Meſſengers: But they impriſoned both of them, proclaimed them Traytors that aſsiſted me, and ordayned that they ſhould preſently forſake me. I entreated them vnder publike warrant and ſafety, to negotiate with the Baron of Boyd, for the according of theſe differences: but in this motion they alſo refuſed me. Neuertheleſſe, I conceiued ſome hope, that they might bee brought vnder obedience by your procurements: but when I ſaw that I muſt either dye, or vndergoe another impriſonment, I thought to goe to Dunbritton, and was onward in my way: They oppoſed and way-laid me, beat and ouerthrew my people, my ſelfe beeing conſtrained to flie. Then I retired to the Baron of Heris, and with him repayred into your Kingdome, relying on your Princely and Royall affection, that you will ayde me in my need, and by your example inuite others thereunto. Wherefore, I requeſt you in all kinde affection, that beeing ſo deepely plunged in many diſtreſſes, as at this inſtant I am, you will cauſe mee to be conducted out of hand to

your preſence, and if you be pleaſed to commiſerate my caſe, I will at large informe you of all. God grant you a long and happy life, and me the patience to attend that comfort I hope for from Him, by your gracious meanes, and dayly Prayer for, with all my heart.
                     Queene ELIZABETH returning her great comfort in Letters, and by the mouth of Francis Knowles, and others, promiſed her aſſiſtance, according to the equitie of her cauſe: but neuertheleſſe ſhe refuſed her acceſſe, becauſe ſhee was commonly taxed with many groſſe crimes, and commanded ſhe ſhould be conuayed to Carlile, where ſhee might remaine in greateſt ſecurity, if her Aduerſaries attempted any thing againſt her, by Lowder, Lieutenant Gouernour of the place, and the Gentlemen of the Countrey. Hauing receiued this anſwere and refuſall, ſhe once againe made her requeſt by Letters, and by the mouth of Maxwell, Baron of Heris, to this effect:
THat ſhe would admit her in her own preſence,She writes againe. to report the iniuries and indignities had been offered her, and to anſwer thoſe crimes laid to her charge: Intimating to her Maieſty, how it was iuſt that Qu. ELIZABETH, who was ſo neere vnto her in blood, ſhould giue care to her in her baniſhment, and to re-eſtabliſh her in her Kingdome, againſt thoſe, who hauing beene expelled for their offences committed againſt her, by Queene ELIZABETHS interceſsion they were againe reſtored, and to her owne finall ruine, if the ſtorme were not out of hand preuented. Wherefore ſhee requeſted her, that either ſhee might bee admitted to ſpeake perſonally to her, and to grant her ſome ayde, or elſe to permit and be pleaſed that ſhe might preſently depart out of England, to ſeeke for ſuccour ſome where elſe, and that ſhe might not be detained any longer time

in the Caſtle of Carlile, in that ſhee came voluntarily into England, vpon the confidence ſhee had in the loue and affection which had ſo many times beene honourably promiſed her, by Meſſengers, Letters, and Remembrances.
                     
                     
                        
                           Queene Elizabeth pitties her.
                        Theſe Letters, and Heris words, ſeemed (for who can diue into the ſecret thoughts of Princes? and wiſe men lay them vp in their hearts) to moue Queene ELIZABETH to compaſſion of a Princeſſe, her neere Kinſwoman, and ſo deepely diſtreſſed, who hauing been ſurprized by her own Subiects with force, and Armes, committed to priſon, brought to extreme danger of her life, condemned, and depriued of her Kingdome, without beeing heard, (although no Iudgement can paſſe vpon a priuate man without former hearing) ſhee was retyred into England vnto her, with infallible hopes of finding ayd and ſuccour. And the free offer which this vnfortunate Queene made, to pleade her owne cauſe in her preſence; the charge ſhe tooke vpon her, to conuince her Aduerſaries of the ſame malefacts whereof they accuſed her, (though moſt innocent) were to her hopefull and encouraging motiues thereunto.
                     
                        
                           The priuy Counſell conſult of it.
                        What pitty and commiſeration ſoeuer Queen ELIZABETH had of her, the Councell of England deliberated grauely and aduiſedly, what in this caſe was to bee done. They fear'd, that if ſhee remained any longer in England, hauing a perſwaſiue and mouing tongue, ſhe might drawe many to her partie, who fauoured the Title which ſhe pretended to the Crowne of England, who might peraduenture inflame her ambition, and attempt all meanes to maintaine her claime. That forraigne Ambaſſadours would be preſent at her Conſultations, and the Scots would not in this caſe forſake her, ſeeing ſo rich a booty to offer it ſelfe. Beſides, they conſidered, that the fidelity of her Guard might be doubtfull; and, if ſhee chanc'd to dye in England,
                        
though it were of ſome infirmity or ſickneſſe, many ſlanders might be raiſ'd, and ſo the QVEENE ſhould be dayly encumbred with new cares. If ſhe were ſent into France, the Guizes, her Couſins, would againe ſet on foot the Title whereby ſhe laid claime to the Crowne of England. That, what opinion ſoeuer was conceiued of her, ſhe might preuaile greatly in England, with ſome, for pretext of Religion, with others, for the probability of her right, as before I told you, and with the moſt part of men, out of their precipitate affection of Nouelties. That the Amity betweene England and Scotland, ſo behoofefull and beneficiall, would be broken, and the ancient Allyance between Scotland and France renewed, which would then bee more dangerous then heretofore, becauſe the Burgundians, who had no infallible friends but the Scots, ſhould bee linckt to the Engliſh by a firme Alliance. If ſhee were ſent backe into Scotland, thoſe that tooke with the Engliſh partie, ſhould thereupon be baniſht, and that of France raiſ'd to the publike adminiſtration of gouernment of Affaires, the young Prince expoſed to danger, Religion chang'd, the French, and other ſtrangers ſtill retained in Scotland, Ireland would bee more grieuouſly moleſted by the Scots of Hebrides, and her ſelfe expoſed to the perill of life within her owne Kingdome. Wherefore the greater part ioyned in opinion, that ſhee was to be retained in England,
                        
                           The Councell reſolues ſhe ſhould be retained in England.
                         as beeing taken by the Law of Armes, and not to bee releaſt, till ſhee had giuen ouer her preſent claime to the Crowne of England, which ſhee tooke vpon her, and anſwered for the death of the Lord Darley her husband, who was a naturall Subiect of England. For the Counteſſe of Lenox, mother to the Lord Darley,
                        
                           The Counteſse of Lenox complaines of her.
                         blubbered all ouer with teares, had, not long before, prefer'd a Petition about her and her husband, to the Queene of England, with ſupplication that ſhe might be brought to Iudgement for the murder of her Sonne. But the Queene graciouſly comforting her, admoniſht her, that ſhe would

not accuſe ſo great a Princeſſe, who was her very neere Kinſwoman, of a crime which could not be prooued by any euident teſtimonies: intimating vnto her, how the times were bad and wicked, and hatred blind, imputing offences oftentimes to the Innocent.
                     
                        
                           The Baron of Heris interceds for her.
                        On the contrary, the Baron of Heris was a ſuiter to Qu. ELIZABETH, that ſhe would ſuddenly beleeue nothing to the preiudice of truth, and that Earle Murray might not hurrie vp Aſſemblies of Parliament in Scotland, to the iniurie and wrong of the Queene, who was expelled, and the abſolute ruine of her good Subiects. But though the Queene of England much preſſed this point, Earle Murray, the Vice-Roy, ſummoned them ſtill in the Kings name, baniſhed ſome that remained yet behind of her partialitie, and vented the malice hee bare to them, vpon their demeanes and houſes. The Queene of England beeing herewith mightily incenſ'd, certified him in expreſſe termes by Mildemay, that ſhe could not endure, for a moſt pernicious Preſident to Kings, that the Royall Authoritie of ſacred Maieſtie, ſhould bee eſteemed vile and abiect amongſt the Subiects, and trampled vnder-foot at the will and pleaſure of men turbulent and factious. That howſoeuer they forgot the duety and fidelitie which Subiects owe to their Prince, yet for her part, ſhee could not bee vnmindfull of that pitty and Commiſeration, which obliged her to a Siſter,
                           Earle Murray is commanded to yeeld a reaſon of the Queenes depoſition.
                         and a neighbour Qu. Wherefore ſhe wiſht him either to come in perſon, or to ſubſtitute vnderſtanding men, to anſwere thoſe complaints which the Queene of Scots would exhibit againſt him and his Confederates, and to yeeld ſome iuſt cauſe and reaſon of his depoſing her. If not, that herſelfe would preſently ſet her at liberty, and employ all her forces for her re-eſtabliſhment. And ſo likewiſe ſhe admoniſhed him, not to ſell her precious habits and ornaments, though the States of the Kingdome had permitted him.
                     
                        Earle Murray obeyed: there being no other way, to call in queſtion his adminiſtration and gouernement, but thoſe that came out of England, and the great Men of the Kingdome refuſing any manner of deputation. Wherefore, he came himſelfe in perſon to the City of Yorke, a place appointed for this proceeding, with ſeuen of his moſt inward friends, being Deputies for the Infant-King; that is to ſay, the Earle of Morton, the Biſhop of Orcades,
                        
                           Deputies for the King of Scots:
                         the Gouernour of Dunfermlin, the Baron of Lindſay, 10. Macgill, and Henry Barneuay, accompanied with the Earle of Lidington, whom Murray drew thither with faire promiſes, in that he durſt not leaue him behinde in the Kingdome, and George Buchanan, who was wholly at his deuotion and becke. And the very ſame day came thither the Duke of Norfolke, and the Earle of Suſſex, who not long before was conſtituted Preſident of the North, and Sir Ralph Sadler, a Knight, and one of the Priuy-Councell, who were nominated, to heare, and examine the cauſe, why the Queene of Scots was depoſed. The Biſhop of Roſſe,
                        
                           For the Qu. of Scots.
                         the Barons of Leuingstone, and of Boyd, the Gouernour of Kenivinin, Iohn Gordon, and Iohn Corburne, appeared there for the Queene of Scots, who was wonderfully wroth, that the Queene of England would neither ſee nor heare her, hauing commanded that her owne Subiects ſhould ſtand vp againſt her before the Commiſſaries, in that being an abſolute Princeſſe, ſhe ſtood not bound, except ſhe liſted, to make anſwer to her Subiects accuſations, and obiections.
                     Being aſſembled on the ſeuenth of October, and read the Commiſſions, both of the one ſide, and the other, Lidington, who was there preſent, turning towards the Scots, admoniſhed them, with a marueilous free and plaine diſcourſe:
That ſeeing it ſeemed,
                              Lidingtons declaration to the Scots. the Queene of England pretended no other thing by the authority ſhee had conferred

vpon the Commiſsaries, but to ſtaine the honour, and impaire the reputation of the Queene, the Kings Mother, and to interpoſe herein her owne cenſure, as an honourable Arbitratrix: but that they ſhould weigh and well conſider, what a perill they expoſed themſelues vnto, and how they were like to purchaſe not onely the hatred of the Scots, who continued deuoted and affected to the Queene, but further the ill-will of other Chriſtian Princes, and of ſuch affinitie as ſhee had in France, in criminally accuſing and hazarding her reputation, in ſuch a publique and iuridicall Tryall before the Engliſh, ſworne enemies to the Scottiſh name; and what account could they giue to the King of ſuch a preſumptuous and inſolent accuſation, which could not but redound to the preiudice of Scotland, when, being of riper yeeres, hee ſhall repute both himſelfe, his Mother, and countrey hereby diſhonoured? And therefore hee thought it very fitting, to let fall this odious accuſation of ſo great a Princeſſe, except the Queene of England had contracted with them a mutuall League, offenſiue, and defenſiue, againſt thoſe that ſhould in caſe moleſt or trouble them. And thus much (ſaid hee) out of his loyaltie and dutie, a Scottiſh Secretarie hath aduertiſed you of. Hereupon, looking vpon one another, they remained not vttering one word.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           The proteſtation of the Queene of Scots Deputies.
                        The Queene of Scots Deputies, who had the honour to ſpeake firſt, before the taking of their Oath, proteſted, That though the Queene of Scots thought good, to haue the cauſe betweene her Maieſty and her diſloyall Subiects, handled before the Engliſh, yet neuertheleſſe they conceiued not themſelues herein to be vnder the command of any but their owne Princeſſe, ſeeing Shee was free and abſolute, and ought neither faith nor homage to any other.

The Engliſh, in like manner, proteſted, How they accepted not of this proteſtation, to the preiudice of any right or prerogatiue, which the Kings of England haue heretofore challenged, as Soueraigne Lords of the Kingdome of Scotland.
                     
                     The next day, the Queene of Scots Deputies put in their Declaration in writing:
                           A declaration for the Queene.
                        
                        HOw the Earles of Morton, Mar, and Glencarne, the Barons of Hume, Lindſay, Reuthen, and Sempil, and others, had rayſed an Armie in the Kings name, againſt the Queene her ſelfe, taken her, vſed her diſgracefully, and clapt her vp in priſon, at Lake-Leuin: They broke open the Mint, carried away all ſorts of Coyne, Gold, and Siluer, Money or no Money, crowned the King her Sonne, who was yet but an Infant: and the Earle of Murray, vnder the title of Vice-Roy or Regent, vſurped his power and authority, and ſeyzed on all the wealth, munition, and reuenewes of the Kingdome. Afterwards, they alledged, that the Queene being eſcaped out of Priſon, after ſhee had beene there reſtrayned for the ſpace of tenne dayes, denounced publiquely vpon her oath, That whatſoeuer ſhee had yeelded vnto during her impriſonment, was extorted from her againſt her will, by force, threats, and terrour of death. Notwithſtanding, to prouide for common tranquillitie, ſhee had giuen authoritie to the Earles of Argathel, Eglenton, Caſſil, and Rothſay, to accord all differences with her Aduerſaries, who, for all this, forbare not with a ſtrong and armed hand to ſeyze on her perſon, as ſhee retyred by priuy wayes towards Dunbritton: they ſlew the moſt of her loyall Subiects, and, for thoſe remayning, ſome they carried away priſoners, others they baniſhed, and all this for nothing, but onely in that they had faithfully ſerued

their Princeſſe: And that for theſe inhumane outrages, ſhee was conſtrained to repaire into England, to implore of Queene ELIZABETH that ayd and ſuccour, which ſhee had oftentimes promiſed her, that ſo ſhee might be reſtored to her Countrie and former dignitie.
                     
                     A few dayes after, Earle Murray, Vice-Roy, and the Deputies for the Infant-King, (for ſo they were nominated) put in their Anſwer: which was;

                           The anwer of the Kings Deputies.THat Lord Darley, the Kings Father, beeing ſlaine, Earle Bothwell, who was reputed the author of this Murder, had ſo bewitched the Queenes heart, as hee carried her away by force, remoued her to Dunbar, and, after a ſeparation from his owne Wife, married her. That the Nobles of the Kingdome, being moued herewith, they thought they could not diſcharge a better office, than to puniſh Bothwell, the author of this aſſaſsinate: for, all ouer the Country, it was imputed to a generall conſpiracy among the principall of the Nobilitie, to reſtore the Queene to her former libertie, to diſſolue this vniuſt marriage, and to prouide for the young Kings ſafetie, and the quiet and tranquillitie of the Kingdome. When the matter was ſo exaſperated, as they were readie to come to hand-blowes, the Queene cauſed Bothwell to retire out of the Realme; againſt the Nobilitie ſhee thundred out ſuch threats, and threatned ſuch reuenge, as they were enforced to commit her to a guard, while they could finde out, and execute Bothwell. But ſhee, weary of reigning with ſo infinite many diſturbances, had willingly reſigned, and transferred ouer the Kingdome to her Sonne, conſtituting the Earle of Murray for Vice-Roy. That hereupon, her Sonne was ſolemnely conſecrated

and crowned King, all confirmed and ratified in Parliament, by the States of the Kingdome. That, by reaſon of Iuſtice, which was equally ministred, the Scottiſh Common-wealth had recouered ſome vigour, and ſtrength, while ſome particulars, who could not endure the publique repoſe, had, contrary to their oath, cautelouſly releaſed the Queene out of ſafe cuſtodie, and taken vp Armes, violating herein the fidelitie they owe to their King, and though (thankes be to GOD) they obtayned victory ouer them, yet notwithſtanding, with an hoſtile and diſloyall heart, they preſumptuouſly enterprized againſt their Countrey and Prince: and therefore, the Royall Authoritie muſt needes conformably haue beene ſuppreſt by ſuch tumultuous and mutinous Subiects.
                     
                     After a reiteration of the former proteſt, the Queene of Scots Deputies replyed in theſe words:
THat what Earle Murray and his Complices alledged,The Queens Reply. for hauing taken vp Armes againſt the Queene, in that Bothwell, whom they accuſed of killing the KING, was in great grace and authoritie about her, could not iuſtly brand them with the marke of diſloyall Subiects, ſeeing there was no euident proofe of his murdering the King; but contrariwiſe, by ſentence of the Peeres, hee was cleared thereof, and this abſolution confirmed by Act of Parliament, with their very approbation and conſent, who at this time accuſe him, and that then perſwaded the Queene to take him for her Husband, as beeing more ſufficient than all others, to ſway and gouerne the Kingdome: they obliged vnto him their fidelitie in Writing, and not ſo much as in words, diſallowed of this marriage, while they had drawne to their partie

the Captaine or Gouernour of the Caſtle, and the Maior of Edenborrough. For, then in the night, which was a very vnfit ſeaſon, in hoſtile manner they aſſayled the Caſtle of Bothwick, where the Queene was, and ſhee, retyring her ſelfe, by the fauour of the night, they preſently rayſing an Armie, vnder pretext of her defence, went themſelues into the field, way-layde her, as ſhee went to Edenborrough, and aduertized her, by Grange, whom they ſent to her, that ſhee ſhould ſhake off Bothwell, while hee had appeared in iudgement, and cleared himſelfe: all which ſhee willingly did, to auoid effuſion of bloud. But Grange, vnder-hand, admoniſhed Bothwell to with-draw himſelfe, promiſing him with oath, that no bodie ſhould purſue him; ſo as hee made away with their owne conſent, and (beeing minded) they might eaſily haue taken him afterwards. But, when they had once gotten the Queene into their hands, for the mannaging of their ambitious deſignes, they made no great reckoning of him: and it is no great wonder, when they beeing the Queenes Subiects, and hauing vowed fidelity to her, ſhee bitterly rebuked them, hauing ſo baſely and vnworthily entreated her Royall Maieſty. Shee freely referred the matter to the whole Eſtates of the Kingdome, and made a declaration thereof vnto them, by Lidington her Secretary. But, they would not ſo much as giue any eare vnto it, but conueyed her away ſecretly by night, and empriſoned her at Lake-Leuin. In ſaying, that wearied with her Reigne, ſhee reſigned and gaue ouer the Kingdome, is a moſt palpable inuention, becauſe ſhee is neither too-much broken with yeeres, nor of ſuch a feeble and weake conſtitution, but equally vigorous both in bodie and minde, to mannage weightie and great affaires: but moſt certaine it is, that the Earles of Athol, Tubardine, and Lidington, who were alſo of

her Councell, aduized her to ſeale the drafts of Reſignation, to auoyd death, where-with ſhee was daily threatned: and this was not done with any preiudice eyther to her ſelfe, or her Heires, becauſe ſhee was then a priſoner, and impriſonment is a iuſt feare; for, according to the opinion of Ciuilians, a promiſe made by a priſoner, is of no worth. Hereunto alſo ſhe was perſwaded by Throgmorton, who preſented vnto her a draft written with his owne hand; whom ſhee entreated to informe the Queene of England, that ſhee did it conſtrained, and contrary to her will. That when Lindſay preſented to her the Patents, for her to ſubſcribe vnto, hee terrified her with feare and horrour of death, and ſo by this meanes, enforced her to ſeale with weeping eyes, not hauing ſo much as read the Contents. That the Lord of the Caſtle of Lake-Leuin, vnderſtanding, and ſeeing apparantly, that ſhee had ſubſcribed and ſealed againſt her will, hee would not ſet to his hand, as alſo this Reſignation was moſt vniuſt, becauſe ſhee had nothing hereby aſsigned her for her owne behoofe and entertainement, neither grant of libertie, nor aſſurance of life. That whoſoeuer will but equally ballance things, hee cannot but iudge this, to be a weake infringement of Royall Authoritie; becauſe, when the Queene was at libertie, in the preſence of many Nobles of the Kingdome, ſhee declared how ſhee had done it out of meere conſtraint. And what they boaſt to haue effected by Act of Parliament, can no wayes preiudice her Royall prerogatiue, becauſe in this tumultuarie Parliament, there were preſent but foure Earles, one Biſhop, two Abbots, and ſixe Barons, though aboue an hundred, betweene Earles, Biſhops, and Barons, haue a voyce in the Parliament of Scotland: and yet of ſo ſmall a number, ſome proteſted, that what was done, ſhould not redound to the preiudice of the Queene

or her Succeſſours, becauſe ſhee was a priſoner. That the Ambaſſadours of France and England, could neuer be certified from her, though they had many times inſtantly vrged it, whether ſhe voluntarily reſigned ouer the Kingdome or no. And ſo farre the Common-wealth hath beene from beeing iuſtly gouerned, vnder the vſurping Vice-Roy; that on the contrary, all manner of impieties neuer bare a greater ſway: for hee hath beene ſeene to demoliſh ſacred buildings, to ruine illuſtrious Families, and to afflict and grinde the faces of the miſerable poore. And therefore, they humbly entreated the Queens Maieſtie of England, to be aſsisting with her beſt fauour, counſell, and ayde, to the Queene her neere Kinſewoman, ſo lamentably oppreſt. Thus farre I copied out of the proper Writings of the Commiſſioners.
                        
                     
                     Theſe matters thus heard, the Commiſſioners enioyning Murray to produce and proue with more ſolid reaſons, the occaſion of ſo ſtrange a rigour vſ'd to an abſolute Queene, becauſe all formerly alledged, had no pregnant teſtimonies, but only ambiguous and improbable Letters: and Lidington hauing priuily made known, that he himſelf had often counterfaited the Qu.Murray refuſeth to yeeld an account of the Queenes depoſition.
                         hand: Murray would no further proſecute before ſtrangers, the accuſation he had framed againſt his Siſter, except the Queene of England promiſed of her part, to take vpon her the Protection of the Infant King, and wholly abandon the Queene of Scots. But the Deputies, by vertue of their Delegation, hauing no authoritie to promiſe any ſuch matter, two on both parts were ſent vp to London; to whom Queene ELIZABETH made knowne, that ſhee could not yet diſcharge the Subiects of Scotland of the offence they had committed againſt their Princeſſe, but notwithſtanding, that ſhee would requeſt her in their behalfe, and alſo heare them, if they could

alledge any thing for their iuſt excuſe. Earle Murray, who preſently followed them, abſolutely refuſed to inſiſt by Accuſation againſt his Siſter,
                           Authoritie of the Commiſsioners reuokt.
                         but vpon the conditions hee had mentioned at Yorke. The Commiſſioners were preſently called home, and their authority diſanulled; whereof, the Duke, who alwayes fauoured the Queene of Scots, was very glad, and thought he had nothing more then to effect, but only to brand her with an eternall infamy,
                           The Duke of Norfolke glad.
                         to exclude her, with her young Sonne, from all right of ſucceſſion to the Crowne of England, and that hee had auoided two dangers: for, in giuing ſentence againſt her, he feared to ruine her, and violate his owne conſcience; and denouncing Iudgement on her ſide, to vndergoe the vnplacable wrath of his owne Queene, and of all thoſe, who, for Religions ſake, and any other conſideration, were oppoſite to the Queene of Scots.
                     
                     But when Earle Murray ſaw, that the friends ſhee retained in Scotland, diſturbed all affaires, and that his preſence was requiſite, he framed his Accuſation in the preſence of the Queene, Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the great Seale, the Earle of Leiceſter, Clynton, Lord Admirall, Cecill, and Sadler, who by new letters were conſtituted new Commiſſioners;
                           New Commiſsioners granted.
                         and to proue the Queen of Scots culpable of her Husbands murder, hee produced ſome probable and coniecturall Articles, the Depoſitions of ſome Witneſſes, the Acts digeſted in the Aſſemblies of the States, but aboue all, certaine Loue-Letters and verſes, written (as hee affirmed) with the Queenes own hand: as alſo he brought foorth Buchanan's Booke, entituled, [The Diſcouery] to be openly read: but the greater number of the Commiſſioners gaue not much credit thereunto, it proceeding from a partiall man, and one that had made ſale of his fidelity. As for the Verſes and Letters, becauſe they had no names, ſubſcriptions, nor dates, and ſo many Impoſtors there be, who can counterfait others hands ſo naturally, as the one

can hardly be diſcerned from the other, Queene ELIZABETH would in no wiſe affoord them beliefe or credit, though ſhee were much inſtigated out of feminine emulation, wherewith that Sex is many times violently tranſported: remaining ſatisfied, that theſe Accuſations had impoſed vpon the Queene of Scots ſome reprochfull Aſperſions.
                     Her Deputies hearing that ſhee was dayly accuſed by Murray, preſented themſelues to make anſwere; but ſhee had now reuoked their authority, which was but Delegatorie, as ſhee had beene ſecretly informed by certaine Engliſh Ciuilians; and this ſhee might doe by Law, ſeeing that of the Duke and others had beene ſo formerly reuoked. Afterwards ſhee peremptorily refuſed the new Commiſſioners,
                           The Queene of Scots, wil not ſubmit her cauſe to their hearing.
                         two of whom ſhee ſuſpected, except the Ambaſſadours of France and Spaine were ioyned in commiſſion with them, that ſhee might be admitted to defend her own innocency openly in the preſence of the Queen of England and them, except Murray were reſtrained, & called to a Triall: auerring how ſhe could conuince him, and proue that he was the author of the Lord Darleys murder. The Duke of Norfolke,
                        
                           But vpon certaine conditions.
                         the Earles of Arundel, Suſſex, Leiceſter, and Lincolne, eſteeming this to be but iuſt and equall, Qu. ELIZABETH grew into wonderfull choller, and told them openly, that the Queen of Scots could neuer want an Aduocate, till the Duke of Norfolke came ſhort of his life; and ſhee was contented to impart thoſe crimes, whereof Murray imputed her, to euery one of her priuy Councell, and to the Earles of Northumberland, Weſtmerland, Shrewsbury, Worceſter, Huntington, and Warwicke, whom ſhee conuocated to this end, vnder an oath of ſilence exhibited, not to damnifie either of the parties. And becauſe Murray was called backe into Scotland, and 'twas commonly bruted abroad,
                           The Proceedings diſſolued.
                         that Boyd attempted to releaſe the Queen of Scots of her impriſonment, this Proceeding was deferr'd to ſome other

time, Queene ELIZABETH, ſo farre as ſeem'd probable, ſharply reprehending the inſolency of the Scottiſh-men, in depoſing their Queene.
                     At that time, Hamilton, Duke of Chaſtelraut,
                        
                           Debate about the Gouernment of Scotland.
                         came out of France, ſent vnder-hand by the Guizes, to oppoſe Murray in the gouernment and adminiſtrations of the Kingdome during the yong King's minority, and maintayned before Queene ELIZABETH, that beeing neereſt of blood to the King, he ſhould be preferred before Murray, who was but a Baſtard. Contrariwiſe, Murray, and the Kings Ambaſſadors alleadged, that the gouernment of the Kingdome was not to bee aſſigned alwaies to thoſe neereſt of blood, but to ſuch, who by a generall conſent of the States, were elected and choſen, as moſt ſufficient and capable of that Charge. That it were a moſt vniuſt courſe, to put the King, who was young, into his hands, who by proximity of blood aſpiring to the Kingdome, might eaſily be tempted to violate right, out of a deſire to rule and reigne▪ And how this was greatly to be feared, eſpecially of the Hamiltons, who had practiſed many enmities againſt the Earles of Lenox, the Kings Grandfathers, wickedly ſlaine his great Grandfather by the Fathers ſide, expell'd Mathew, his Grandfather out of Scotland, after he had reduced him to low pouerty; and alſo of himſelfe, who made this motion, who with bitter and implacable hatred, wonderfully moleſted Henry, the Kings Father, and, the more eaſily to enioy the Kingdome, he married his Maieſties Mother with the King of France. The which when Queen ELIZABETH vnderſtood, ſhee made knowne to Hamilton, how his demand was moſt vniuſt, and forbade him to depart out of England, till Earle Murray were returned into Scotland.
                     
                     
                        Murray, a little before his departure, was ſo ſubtill, as that ſecretly by his man Meluin, he offered the Duke of Norfolk to marry with the Queene of Scots, and her he promiſed to re-eſtabliſh in her Kingdome, as preſently we will declare.

Notwithſtanding, to conceale it from Queene ELIZABETH, he cauſ'd a rumor to be ſpred, that ſhee had made ouer her claime of the Kingdome of England, to the Duke of Aniou,
                        
                           
                              Murray offers to marry the Duke of Norfolke to the Qu. of Scots.
                           
                           
                              He diſperſeth rumors againſt her.
                           
                         and how this alienation was confirmed at Rome: he ſhewed certaine Letters ſhee had written to thoſe of her partie, wherein ſhee blamed Queene ELIZABETH for fayling of her promiſe, and vaunted, that ſhee expected ſuccours otherwiſe then from her. Whether theſe reports were true or fained, I am not able to ſay: But certainely, Queene ELIZABETH was much moued herewith, who could not imagine from whom ſhe ſhould attend theſe new reliefes, becauſe ciuill warre was ſo hotly kindled in France, as the Biſhop of Rhemes, ſent by the King, entreated her that ſhe would not haue any hand in thoſe affaires, and the Duke of Alua, who was come the yeere before into the Low-Countries to ſupplant the Proteſtant Religion, ſtaid ſtill there, by reaſon of the troubles.
                     But as afterward it proou'd apparant, and as H. Catene writ to Cardinall Alexandrine, Pope Pius 5. not daring to ſend an open Nuncio, had ſuborn'd R. Ridolpho, a Florentine, who had lyen a long time Factor in London, vnderhand to ſtir vp the Papiſts againſt Queen ELIZABETH, as queſtionleſſe he very induſtriouſly performed, and with great ſecreſie. A ſlender, but maruelous weake ſuſpition was raiſ'd of ſome priuie conferences were held at Yorke, betweene the Earle of Lidington,
                        
                           The Duke of Norfolke ſuſpected.
                         the Biſhop of Roſse, and the Duke of Norfolke, who being ſollicited to employ his aduice and care for the ſafety of the afflicted Queen, by the Earle and the Biſhop, who promiſed to marry him to her; with a modeſt anſwere he made refuſall thereof, promiſing neuertheleſſe, that hee would not forſake her in her aduerſities, ſo far as might ſafely ſtand with his honour, and the dutie and fidelity he ought to his Prince. This ſuſpicion was greatly augmented by meanes of Ligan, one of the Dukes ſeruants, being a great Papiſt, by reaſon of the daily

goings and commings he made to Bolton Caſtle, which belonged to my Lord Scroope, where the Queene of Scots was kept by Francis Knowles, vnder colour to viſit and ſalute his wife, who was the Dukes Siſter. And though nothing was yet certainely knowne, neuertheleſſe the Queene was remooued from Bolton, where a number of Papiſts dwelt neere together on all ſides, to be conducted to Tudberry, ſituated in the heart of the Kingdome, and was committed to the keeping of the Earle of Shrewsburie.
                     
                     Queene ELIZABETH was then the more carefull, both of her owne, and of the ſafety of Religion and the Common-wealth, becauſe the Guizes in France, and the Duke of Alua in the Low-Countries, had begun to put in execution thoſe Deſſignes they proiected formerly at Bayon, touching the vtter extirpation of the Proteſtants Religion. For the Propoſitions of Peace, ſet downe in France about the beginning of this yeere, came to nothing: For Edicts were publiſht, whereby the exerciſe of the Proteſtant Religion was abſolutely prohibited; they that made profeſſion thereof, depriued of their publike places; the Miniſters commanded to depart the Realme within a prefixt time; they were threatned with warre all ouer, runne vpon in euery place, and cruelties practiſed againſt them:
                           The third Ciuill-war in France. though Queene ELIZABETH vſed many and importunate intreaties by her Ambaſſadour Seris, to bring them to a firme and ſolid Peace, perſwading the King not to excite mens ſtomacks by vnſeaſonable courſes, and that he ſhould take heed of them, who by remouing from about him his faithfull Subiects, laboured ſo to breake and diſ-vnite the Forces of France, that it might be expoſed as a prey to other Nations. When he made no account of her Entreaties or Remonſtrances, and forbare not to draw out of Italy, Germany, and Spaine, both money and men; to re-enforce Queene ELIZABETH alſo, not to abandon them who ioyned with her in one and the ſame cauſe, ſhe ſent

an hundred thouſand Crownes, in pieces of gold, cald Angels, with great warlike preparations, to the Proteſtants, who then profeſſed religiouſly, that they tooke not vp Armes to make warre vpon the King, but onely to defend themſelues; and ſhee with all humanity entertain'd the French that made their refuge into England, as alſo the Flemmings, who ſeeing that the Duke of Alua breathed nothing but blood and ſlaughter, were in great multitudes retired thither, as to an Aſyle, and planted by permiſſion, both at Norwich, Gloceſter, Sandwich, Maidſtone, and Southhampton, to the ſingular benefit (certainely) of England: For they were the firſt that brought in the Art and knowledge of making thoſe light Stuffes which are called Bayes and Sayes,
                           Who did good to England. with other ſuch like of linnen and woolen.
                     But becauſe I muſt often commemorate the warres of Flanders, as linkt and combin'd with the intereſt & affaires of England, I ſhall not digreſſe much from my purpoſe, if I heere relate how they tooke their beginning.
                     
                        
                           The beginning of the Wars in the Low countries.
                        When the Spaniard would by no prayers nor intreaties mitigate his bloody Edicts againſt Religion, and thoſe who made profeſſion thereof in the Low-Countries, but in ſtead thereof exerciſed all manner of cruelty againſt mens conſciences, by the meanes of the Spaniſh Inquiſition, prohibited all the Aſſemblies of the States Prouinciall of the Low-Countries, which is the onely and moſt vſuall remedy for the appeaſing and according of their differences: but gouerned the Common-Wealth by Acts digeſted in Spaine, and not by the Councels of the people of the ſame Countreys; it ſo happened, that a few of the very ſcumme of the Vulgar ſort, tooke certaine Images in euery place out of the Churches, and tumultuouſly brake them in pieces, and though this Tumult was as ſoone appeaſed as excited, yet following their counſell who deſired to impoſe a yoke on this Nation ſtrongly bent to liberty, and taking occaſion

from the temerity of ſome few particulars, he entoyled all the people with a publike Delict of manifeſt Rebellion; and as if they had then loſt all their liberty; to inuade the Gouernment, he ſent Ferdinando Aluarez, Duke of Alua,
                        
                           The Duke of Alua. a cruell and bloody man, who beeing conſtituted ſupreme Gouernour, contrary to the ancient cuſtomes and immunities of the Countrie, though hee was in no ſort a Prince of Blood, raiſ'd a long and fearefull Warre, abridging the Authority of former Iuriſdictions, erecting new Tribunals, condemning the Nobility of the Country, by the miniſtery and proſecution of ſuch as were not their Iudges, putting them to death, placing Spaniſh Garriſons in the Borroughs and Townes, building Citadels, and for each alienation and commotion, drawing by force out of their purſes, the tenth part of their immouables, and the twentieth part of their mouable goods.
                     At the very ſelfe-ſame time it happened,
                           Moneys ſent into the low-Countries detained in England.
                         that certaine Marchants of Genoa and other parts of Italy, ſent out of Spaine into Flanders, a quantity of coine, to haue it put out to vſe, in a great Ship of Biſcay, and foure leſſe, which the Spaniards tearme Zabres, which beeing chaſed by Chaſteler, a French-man, and defended by Winter, an Engliſh-man, had much adoe to ſaue themſelues, in the Ports of Plimouth, Fawmouth, and Southhampton in England. So ſoone as the Queene was aduertiſed of it, ſhe commanded all the Magiſtrates of thoſe Ports, to vſe the Spaniards very kindly, and to defend their Shipping from the French: and G.D'eſpes, Knight of the Order of Calatraua, Ambaſſadour Leager of the King of Spaine in England, fearing the French, obtayned of the Queene, who thought verily that this money had belonged to the Spaniard, that new Mandates might bee ſent downe, for the defence of theſe ſhips againſt the French, who lay in wayte for them: and afterwards hee vſed the meanes to haue this money brought into England, and from thence to Antwerpe by Sea. But in the meane

while the French had almoſt taken away one of the Ships, which had bin perform'd, but that they were repell'd by the Engliſh: And therefore it was thought expedient to land it, for better ſecurity, which was done out of hand. But notwithſtanding it was not all brought on ſhore: for D' Eſpes ſuppoſing the Queenes intention to be other then is was, gaue the D. of Alua to vnderſtand, how ſhe had ſeized vpon it. While he was in Conſultation with him, Odet de Chastillon Cardinall; who was retired into thoſe parts by reaſon of the troubles in France, certified the Queene, that this money belonged to certaine Marchants of Gen
                              •
                           a, and not to the Spaniard, and that hee would ſeize on it againſt their wils, to employ it to the ruine of the Proteſtants. And this was the reaſon the Councell made a queſtion whether they ſhould detaine it or no; and the greateſt of them that ſate in Councell were of opinion, that it ſhould bee ſent into the Low-Countries, for feare of prouoking the Spaniard, who was a great Prince, and ſtood already but hardly affected to England. But Queene ELIZABETH, beeing aſſured by two of them to whom it belonged, that the Marchants were onely intereſſed in it, the King of Spaine nothing at all, ſhe reſolued to take it vp of the Marchants by way of loane, and giue them caution for it, as Princes many times vſe to doe with ſuch goods as they find in their Ports, and the Spaniard, not long before, had done the like. And when the Spaniſh Ambaſſadour ſhewed her the Letters the Duke writ vnto her, for the tranſportation of this money, ſhe told him, ſhe had taken it by loane, and religiouſly proteſted to reſtore it againe,
                           The Engliſh mens goods detained and ſeized vpon in the Low-Countries.
                         ſo ſoone as ſhe ſhould truely vnderſtand that it belonged to the King of Spaine. The very ſame day, which was the twentie ninth of December, the Duke, in hot rage and furie, ſeiz'd on the Engliſh-mens goods, all the Low-Countries ouer, where he found any, and taking their perſons priſoners, committed them to the guard of his Souldiers. So that euery one may conceiue, by comparing

the times, that he did this to terrifie the Engliſh, what ſatisfaction ſoeuer the Queene gaue afterwards for the money. But her Maieſtie, nothing at all daunted with this,
                           The like done to the Flemmings in England.
                         commanded likewiſe the Flemmings goods to be ſeyzed vpon in England, their merchandize and ſhipping, which was much more than thoſe of the Engliſh, that the Duke light vpon in Flanders: ſo as he repented too late, that hee had vnſeaſonably enlarged that wound, which in the beginning might eaſily haue beene cured.
                     The laſt day but one of this preſent yeere,
                           The death of Roger Askham. (pardon mee this ſhort digreſſion, for the memories ſake of an honeſt and vertuous man) who beeing borne in the Countie of Yorke, and brought vp at Cambridge, was the firſt of our Nation that refined the Greeke and Latine Tongues, and the puritie of the Stile, with ſingular commendation for his eloquence. Hee was ſometimes a Reader to Queene ELIZABETH, and her Secretarie for the Latine Tongue. And yet notwithſtanding, in that he was giuen to play, and Cock-fighting, he both liued and dyed not very rich, leauing behinde him two elegant Bookes, as monuments of his rare wit and vnderſtanding, one of which was ſtyled, Toxophilus; the other, Scholarca. But let vs returne to our Hiſtorie.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Booke 1. 1569.THE TWELFTH YEERE OF Her Reigne. Anno Dom. 1569.
                     
                        
                           A Proclamation touching goods detained.
                        
                        THe ſixth of Ianuary, there was a Proclamation publiquely read in London, concerning goods detayned by the Duke of Alua, wherein moſt of the circumſtances I formerly mentioned were expreſt, and the fault laide vpon D'eſpes; and another Writing diuulged by him to the contrary, in which hee alledged,
                           Another declaration againſt the former Proclamation.
                         That this Proclamation came not out by the Queenes Order, but from the authority of ſome diſaffected to the King of Spaine, in the behalfe of the Flemmiſh Rebels: he highly commended the fauour that the Queene had alwaies beene

ready to ſhew to the Spaniards, grieued that ſhee was alienated in her affection for nothing, and much ſtomacked that no more credit was giuen to him being Ambaſſadour, and to the Duke of Aluae's Letters; as alſo, hee wondred the Money was detained, conſidering the Queene, (as hee ſaid) had more reaſon to furniſh the Spaniard with money againſt the Rebels, than to take any from him: and finally, taxed her with offering the firſt wrong, excuſed both himſelfe, and the Duke of Alua's proceedings, and not reſting there, he ſpred abroad infamous Libels, wherein hee offended the Queenes reputation, vnder the title of Amadis Oriana.
                     
                     Some great men of England,
                        
                           Practices againſt Cecil. among whom was the Marquis of Wincheſter, the Duke of Norfolke, and the Earles of Arundell, Northumberland, Weſtmerland, Pembroke, Leyceſter, and others, laboured to lay the blame of this detention of the Money, vpon Cecill, as formerly they did that which was ſent to the Proteſtants in France; and in effect, they did ſo: for they could not digeſt the great power and authority he had about the Queene: they ſuſpected he fauoured the Houſe of Suffolke for the ſucceſſion to the Crowne, and feared hee would oppoſe himſelfe to their deſignes. Wherefore, they conſulted one with another to impriſon him, at the ſuggeſtion of Throgmorton, his emulator, who gaue them to vnderſtand, that if hee were but once clapt vp, he might eaſily be ruinated. But ſome one, whom I cannot name, diſcouered this proiect to the Queene; and Cecill, by the fauour of this Princeſſe, who bare a very great liking and affection to him, without any difficultie, ouercame thoſe plots that were prepared for him, and at the ſame inſtant, cut off another more ſecret intention they had, which was, to proclaime the Queene of Scots, vndoubted next Heire apparant to the Kingdome, after Queene ELIZABETHS death, againſt a certaine Libell that was written, and publiſhed, in the

behalfe and fauour of the Earle of Suffolke.
                     
                     
                        D'Aſſonuil came at that time from the Duke of Alua, to demand the money which was detained;
                           The money detayned in England, is demanded.
                         but, hauing no Letters to that effect from the King of Spaine, Queene ELIZABETH referred him to her Councell, to whom, at firſt hee was not willing to addreſſe himſelfe. Wherefore he went preſently to them: and when he was heard, about a moneth after hee returned, without doing any thing in the buſineſſe.
                     
                        
                           Free traffique eſtabliſhed at Hamborrough for the Engliſh.
                        The Engliſh Merchants carry their Merchandizes to Hamborrough in Germanie, as to a place lately ordayned for free traffique. The Duke of Alua perceiuing this, prohibited abſolutely all commerce with the Engliſh, and keeping all things from being imported or tranſported out of the Low Countries, hee ſuborned certaine Spies, amongſt whom,
                           Doctor Story taken.
                         one Iohn Storie, a Doctor of the Ciuill Law, was very ſubtilly induſtrious, who before, had practiſed with Prinſtal, an impoſtorous Magician, againſt the life of his owne Prince, and ſent aduertiſements to the Duke of Alua, for the inuading of his owne Countrey. But, being purpoſely brought into a Ship, which was reported to haue brought heretical commodities and bookes out of England, the Marriners preſently ſetting ſayle, hee was thither conueyed, and afterwards executed, as ſhall be declared in proper place.
                     
                        
                           The Duke of Alua enraged againſt the Engliſh.
                        The Duke of Alua not ſatisfied with this, prohibited all ſhipping to goe out of Flanders, who were not armed, and he commanded them to ſeyze on the Engliſh, whereſoeuer they met them: and gaue directions that the like ſhould be done in Spaine; where, the Engliſh Merchants and Saylors goods were confiſcated, themſelues put into the Inquiſition, and condemned to the Gallies. The Spaniard alſo, by Letters written to the Count De Mont-Agond, Gouernour of Boetia, forbade the tranſportation of Oyle, Allum, Sucker, Aromatiques, and all other ſuch like

things, into England, ſuppoſing, that if the Engliſh wanted theſe things, they would readily rebell: and ſo vpon this, he likewiſe treated with the Duke of Norfolke, and the Earle of Ormond, by ſecret meſſengers, to the end the latter might hold the Queene play in Ireland, and the former in England. But they freely diſcouered his motions, out of the fidelity and loyalty they bare to the Queene. When the inhabitants of the coaſts of England heard of theſe things, it is incredible to ſee with what ioy they made our to Sea, and how reſolutely they put in execution their Letters of Mart againſt the Spaniards: ſo that, to depreſſe them, Proclamations were faine to be publiſhed,
                           Men of war called in.
                         prohibiting the buying of any Merchandize of ſuch as came by it by way of reprizall.
                     As the Engliſh men were denyed traffique in the Low Countries,
                           Traffique of Ruſsia hindred.
                         ſo were they no leſſe debarred the ſame in Ruſſia, as well through the falſe dealing of Factors, and bad intelligence that paſt betweene them, as out of the enuy of the Germanes and Ruſsians: the Ruſsians complaining of fraudulent commodities, and that the price of Merchandizes was enhaunſed; and the Germanes, of their monopoly and ſocietie. To remedy theſe euils, Thomas Randolph was ſent thither the yeere before, who, (though with no liking to the Emperour of Ruſsia, becauſe, whereas hee ſhould haue treated of the amity hee deſired to entertaine with Queene ELIZABETH, whereof wee ſpake in the yeere 1567. hee onely employed himſelfe carefully in the matter of traffique,) neuertheleſſe obtayned ſo much by his ſollicitations, that the Emperour, for the ſingular good will he bare to the Queene, and the Engliſh nation, granted to the Company of Engliſh reſiding in Ruſſia, immunities from cuſtomes, with Commiſſion to ſell their commodities ouer all the Countrey where they would, within the extent of his Empire,
                           Liberties of the Engliſh in Ruſsia.
                         which is ample and large, and to tranſport them into Perſia and Media,
                        
by the Caſpian Sea, though Merchants of other Nations were permitted to goe no further than a mile beyond the Citie of Moſco: hee allotted them houſes to winde and twiſt their Ship-tacklings, with Wood for their yron-workes: and he receiued the Engliſh for OPPRISM
                           •
                        Y; that is to ſay, the elect ſeed, and choyce of his people.
                     
                        
                           Their traffique into Ruſsia:
                        Wherefore, they began to trauell more confidently ouer all thoſe Countries, and to tranſport their commodities to Vologda vpon the Dwine, in Veſſels made of one entire peice, drawne by force of arme, againſt the current of the water, by an handiworke gouerned with Oares, and long Piles: & from thence to Yeraſlaue, which is ten daies iourney by Land: afterwards into Germanie, for 30. dayes and nights trauell, downe the riuer of Volga, which is about a mile in breadth, and runnes along a clay ſoyle, ſet with Oakes and Bouleaux:
                           And into Perſia, by the Caſpian Sea.
                         and when they had built Boats, they oftentimes croſſed the Astracane, and the Caſpian Sea, that in many places may be waded ouer, and ſo by the Defarts of Hercania, and Bactriana, they came to the Teueres and Casbine Cities of Perſia, out of an aſſured confidence they ſhould at laſt open a way and paſſage to Cathay. But, the warres that ſuddenly grew betweene the Turkes and Perſians, and frequent robberies of the Barbarians, cut off this commendable deſigne of the London Merchants: and, as for the Emperour, he ſent backe Randolph with gifts and preſents, and with him An. Gregoritzki, an Ambaſſadour, in very honourable equipage certainely for the cuſtome of that Countrey, who was receiued of the Londoners with great feſtiuities, and of the Queenes Maieſtie with much honour.
                     
                        
                           A Ruſsian Ambaſſador in England.
                        This Ambaſſadour exhibited a formall Writing in the Ruſsian Tongue, and required, that the alliance and amitie might be confirmed in his preſence, in the ſame termes, & a ſecret Letter which hee propounded, tranſlated into the Ruſsian Tongue, with all the Letters ſubſcribed with the

Queenes Hand, and ſealed with her Seale; and that ſhee ſhould likewiſe ſend an Ambaſſadour into Ruſsia, reciprocally to receiue from the hand of the Emperour, priuy Letters, written in the ſame words, which in his preſence ſhould be ſealed with his Seale, and confirmed with a kiſſing of the Croſſe. The Queene agreed to this Alliance, reſeruing onely this Clauſe:
So farre as that formerly contracted with other Princes, might permit.
                     
                     That they might ſo ayde one another againſt their common enemies,
                           Alliance of Ruſsia.
                         that nothing be performed vniuſt or vnlawfull: and, by the word of a Chriſtian Princeſſe, in the preſence of the Ambaſſadour, and the moſt honoured of her Priuy-Councell, ſhee promiſed inuiolably, whereof likewiſe hee had Letters ſealed with her owne Priuy-Seale; that if accidentally eyther by his owne Subiects or ſtrangers, he brought to ſuch a poynt, as to forſake his Countrey, ſhe would receiue and entertaine both himſelfe and his children, with al the honour befitting ſo great a Prince; ſhee would aſſigne him a peculiar place for his reſidence, permit him freely to exerciſe his Religion, and to depart at his pleaſure. For theſe things hee earneſtly required in his ſecret Letters. But this was ſo far from ſatisfying this harſh-natur'd and ſauage man, who held for all right and Law, meerely his will & pleaſure: that he, by numerating and ſetting out at large, by Letters, the ſundry benefits and good deedes which hee had done to the Engliſh Nation,
                           The Emperour of Muſcouia, and of Ruſsia, is irritated and inflamed againſt the Engliſh.
                         and reproaching them with ſuch fauours and friendſhips, growes angry, and is irritated againſt Queene ELIZABETH, for not ſending an Ambaſſadour, with his, to take the Oath; blames her Maieſtie, that ſhee made no greater account of her ſelfe; ſaying, ſhee was ouer-much giuen to Merchants affaires, (as much vnworthy to be ſo much reſpected

of a Prince) and ſuſpecting the Marchants to be oppoſite to his deſigne, as being ouer-baſe, vpbraided them in contemptible, deſpitefull and iniurious manner, as ſordid people, who reſpect their owne profit and priuate gaine, more then the Honour and credit of their Soueraignes, threatning them in a moſt barbarous manner, to ſuppreſſe and aboliſh all former Priuiledges by him granted to them. Which neuertheleſſe hee effected not, beeing moderated and appeaſed by the courteous and kind Letters that Qu. ELIZABETH wrote vnto him, which were ſent by Ienkinſon: he ſhewed himſelfe all his life time moſt diligent and carefull to pleaſe her Maieſtie, cheriſhing and honouring her as a Siſter, often vrging her to confirme more ſtraitely and firmely that Alliance, and lou'd ſingularly the Engliſh, far aboue all other Nations.
                     
                        Murray had then procured a ſafe returne into Scotland, propounding vnto the Queene herſelfe and the Duke of Norfolke, and the reſt of her friends in England, her re-eſtabliſhment in the Kingdome of Scotland, who to that end had hindred and kept in awe the Scots who ſought to kill him,
                           Murray appeaſed the friends of the Queene of Scotland.
                         by ſtraitely charging and prohibiting, not to hinder his comming. Being firſt arriued in Edenborough, he ſummon'd all ſuch Nobles as fauoured the Queene, vnder pretence and colour to conſult with them about her re-eſtabliſhment. But the Lord Hamilton, Duke of Chaſtelraut, (then made Lieutenant of Scotland by the Queene) and the Baron of Heris, were perſwaded by the Letters of the credulous Qu. But Murray, fearing to be deceiued by them, circumuents them, and claps them vp in priſon, not expecting the comming of others,
                           Rumors ſpred through-out Scotland againſt Murray. and purſued grieuouſly, in oppreſſing all the fauourers of the Queene with all the rigors of Warre.
                     This Act produceth rumours through all Scotland, That Murray had agreed and determined with Qu. ELIZABETH that the young King IAMES ſhould be giuen her to be

brought vp, and educated in England; and that the Caſtles of Edenborrough & Sterling, were to be fortified with Engliſh Garriſons, Dunbriton alſo taken by force for the vſe and profit of the Engliſh, and Murray be publiſht and declar'd true and lawfull Succeſſour of the Kingdome of Scotland, if the King ſhould happen to dye without Iſſue, and to hold the Kingdome, as Tenent to Queene ELIZABETH. Theſe rumours increaſed, ran, and were divulg'd in this manner, and through a certaine probability, ſtrook in ſuch faſhion, the ſpirits of men all ouer Great Brittaine, that Qu. ELIZABETH thought herſelfe obliged to take away and clenſe all ſuch ſpots, both for her honour,
                           Queene Elizabeth is diligent, and endeuours to quench ſuch falſe rumors.
                         and Murray's ſake. To which end, her Maieſtie declar'd by a Royall Speech, publiſhed and ſet forth in Print, That theſe things were farre oppoſite to the Truth, and meerely forged and inuented by ſuch as enuyed the Peace and tranquillitie of both Kingdomes. That ſince the laſt departure of Murray from England, there was not any ſuch thing propounded, nor ſuch Paction paſt, either by word of mouth, or writing, betweene her Maieſty, or any of her Officers and him, that came to her knowledge. But that the Earle of Lenox, Grandfather to the yong King, had prayed her Maieſty that he might be ſent into England, if hee could not bee ſecure in Scotland from the plots of the wicked. Likewiſe her Maieſtie affirmed, that ſhe held the Compact as falſe, which was reported to bee betweene Murray and the Earle of Hartford, to wit, that they had both agreed and reſolued together, mutually to helpe and giue aſſiſtance one to another, for to enioy the Crowne of both Kingdomes: and to conclude, that it was not her fault, that the affaires and buſineſſes were not ended betweene the Queene of Scotland and her Sonne; but rather ſhe ſtill endeuoured that it might be finiſht: and though her Maieſty was in a conflict, through feare and inueterate emulation, which neuer dyes betweene Femall Princeſſes, yet out of the remembrance

and recordation of the miſery of Scotland, and the commiſeration of humane frailety, ſhe ſincerely laboured to effect it.
                     The Queene of Scots made an addition to that her pious pitty, and ſollicited her with many kind Letters, in which ſhe ſolemnly proteſted, that in regard of the kindneſſe ſhe had found, and the propinquity of their affinity, ſhe would attempt nothing againſt her, neither be willing to owe reſtitution to any other Prince for her re-eſtabliſhment. This cauſ'd Queene ELIZABETH, by Letters ſent by Wood, to deale with Murray and other Scots, for her re-eſtabliſhment to her Royall Dignity;
                           She deales by Letters concerning her reſtoring.
                         or if that could not be granted, that ſhee might bee permitted to leade a priuate life, and ſpend her daies at home freely and honourably; which notwithſtanding could not any wayes moue Murray, hauing brought his buſines to perfection.
                     There was a rumor at this time, amongſt thoſe of better ſort, that the Duke of Norfolke ſhould be linked in Hymens bonds with the Queene of Scots, the which was deſired of many, the Papiſts expecting by it the aduancement of their religion, & others hoping by that meanes for the welfare of the Common-wealth. Truely, many which ſaw the Queene remote and farre from marriage, and the forraigne Princes, which were deadly profeſſors to England, did ſettle their eyes and hearts vpon the Queene of Scots, as the true and vndoubted heire of England; they eſteem'd, (for to ground their reſt and tranquillity, and to keep thereby the Queene of Scotland within the bounds and limits of her Kingdome) it was much more behoofefull and expedient that ſhe ſhould be married with the Duke of Norfolke, who was the moſt Noble, and the greateſt Peere of England, beloued of the people, educated and brought vp in the Proteſtants Religion, then to a forraigne Prince, by whoſe meanes both Kingdomes ſhould be in danger, and the hereditary ſucceſſion by him apprehended, which they

had alwayes and from the beginning wiſht to be re-vnited in an Engliſh Prince of the blood, the yong King of Scotland happening to dye, whom they propounded to ſend into England, to the end, that as he was the true apparent heire thereof, and being educated and brought vp there by the Engliſh, he ſhould be to them dearer and more beloued, all ſcruple of Religion taken away, and Queene ELIZABETH hauing him in her power, were free from all feare and apprehenſion, both of the Duke of Norfolke, and the Queene of Scots. Moreouer, leſt the Duke ſhould attempt any thing againſt her, but ſhould more dearely affect her, they reſolued, that Margaret, the only Daughter of the Duke, ſhould bee marryed afterward to the young King of Scotland. Amongſt theſe were the Earles of Northumberland, Weſtmerland, Suſsex, Pembroke, Southampton, and many other Barons: and Leiceſter himſelfe, (it being doubtfull whether aiming & intending the deſtruction of the Duke) thought it fit, firſt to acquaint the Queene with it, and to commit it to her iudgement & cenſure, and that ſhe ſhould preſcribe and make wholſome Lawes, ſalutiferous to her ſelfe, Religion, and the Kingdome. But this, if you pleaſe, you may haue written more at large, in the Dukes Confeſſion, and the Commentaries of the Biſhop of Roſſe, which was a great part of this buſineſſe.
                     When as the Deputies and Arbitrators put in truſt with thoſe affaires, had met at Yorke, Lidington,
                        
                           The firſt mention of of this marriage.
                         and the Biſhop of Roſse, in their Enquirie, acquainted the Duke with the intended Contract, as Murray himſelfe did alſo at Hampton Court: who in his priuate conference with the Duke and ſome others, diſſembled,Murray's propoſition to the Duke of Norfolke. and did ſeeme that he deſired and wiſht for nothing more, then that all differences being ended in Scotland, ſhee might be reſtored to her former Dignities, prouided that ſhe ſhould truely and heartily affect her Subiects, as ſhe had done formerly, all iniuries on both ſides beeing forgotten, forgiuen, and buryed in obliuion.

Notwithſtanding hee feared, that if (as ſhee deſired) ſhee ſhould marry a man out of France, Spaine, or Auſtria, ſhee would reuenge her former iniuries, make an alteration of Religion in Scotland, and much damnifie the State of England. To preuent all which, he promiſed his aſſiſtance and beſt endeuours, that ſhe, who formerly had beene married to a Child, an improuident young man, nay more, a furious young man, ſhould now be contracted to the Duke, a man of ſtayedneſſe & mature iudgement, the which would conduce (to the welfare of both Kingdomes) the peace of either Prince, and chiefly for the aduancement of Religion, ſince he, who was ſo great and worthy in Queen ELIZABETHS eſtimation, ſhould make friendſhip betweene the Scots and the Engliſh, and might more eaſily perſwade the Queene of Scots to the true Religion which hee had embraced.
                     
                        Murray alſo, by the meanes of Robert Meluin, imparted this cloſely to the Queene of Scots, and officiouſly promiſed his aſſiſtance: but the Duke anſwered, that he could not determine any thing of the marriage, till ſhe could cleare her ſelfe from her ſuſpected crimes, and wipe off thoſe infamous aſperſions: but Roſſe notwithſtanding perſiſted in his perſwaſion, and ceaſt not to draw him (though vnwilling) to it.
                     
                        
                           Throgmortons counſell.
                        Not long after, Nicholas Throgmorton met the Duke in Westminſter, who profeſſing himſelfe as euery way obliged and bound to performe all dueties of obſeruance, ſaid, that he vnderſtood that Leiceſter dealt with the Duke concerning the match twixt him and the Scots: which ſeemed ſtrange, and moued admiration in him, ſince Leiceſter himſelfe not long ſince had beaten the ſame buſh, and gone about it, and friendly aduiſed the Duke, that hee ſhould put it off to Leiceſter, who formerly had ſought the honour of that marriage: but if that could not be done, that he ſhould refuſe it, in regard the Scots accuſed her of many crimes:

but Throgmorton ſaid, that hee wiſht that ſhee might bee ioyned to him in marriage, that it might be proſperous to Religion, and that ſhe might wholly and ſoly depend and rely vpon Queene ELIZABETH. But I doe premoniſh you, that if you proceede in this matter, Leiceſter may precede and goe afore you in counſell: for by your owne meanes onely you cannot procure the aſſent and good will of the Queene.
                     Two dayes after,
                           Propoſitions of the match, made by Leiceſter to the Duke.
                         the Earle of Leiceſter propounded the affaire to the Duke, and receiued of him the anſwere that Throgmorton had forged and inuented afore-hand, and when it came to the crimes, he did moderate them according to the inſtructions and aſſurance that he had receiued of R. Cauendiſh; of whom, though ſuſpected yet he recommended him to the Duke, to make vſe of his ſeruice. After this, he acquaints therewith the Earle of Pembroke, who giues notice thereof to the Earle of Arundell, and they all, with Throgmorton, doe write to the Queene of Scotland, recommending vnto her Maieſtie the Duke of Norfolke for her Husband, as likewiſe Murray had formerly done. The Duke himſelfe alſo writes, and witneſſeth his loue vnto her, offering her Maieſtie louingly his humbleſt ſeruice: and from that time he ſtill communicated vnto them all ſuch Letters as paſt betwixt them. As for them, they had ordinary and familiar diſcourſes with the Biſhop of Roſſe, concerning the meanes whereby they could effectuate and bring this marriage to paſſe; and the twentieth of May, 1558. a Propoſition was made to the Queene of Scotland by Cauendiſh: Theſe enſuing Articles were written by the owne hand of the Earle of Leiceſter:
                           The Articles of marriage propounded to the Queene of Scotland.
                        THat ſhe ſhould not vndertake any thing in the ſucceſsion of the Kingdome of England, preiudicious to Queene ELIZABETH, or the iſſue her Maieſtie might that haue; ſhe ſhould paſse

an offenſiue and defenſiue League 'twixt their two Crownes. That ſhe ſhould ſettle and firmely eſtabliſh the true Proteſtants Religion in Scotland. That ſhe ſhould receiue to her mercy, all ſuch Scots as then were againſt her: ſhe ſhould reuoke the aſsignation that ſhe had giuen of the Kingdome of England, to the Duke of Aniou,
                           She agreed them in ſome manner. and that ſhee ſhould take to her Husband ſome of the Engliſh Nobility, and namely, the Duke of Norfolke.
                        
                     
                     And they promiſed her, that in caſe her Maieſtie ſhould conclude and agree the Articles, to re-eſtabliſh her anew in her Kingdome, with all poſſible ſpeed as could bee, and to confirme her in the ſucceſſion of the Crowne of England. The Queene of Scots accorded them preſently, except that concerning the Allyance, ſhee excuſ'd her ſelfe, as not able to anſwere to it, except ſhee had firſt conſulted with the French King: and concerning the aſſignation of the Kingdome of England, ſhe proteſted that ſhe had neuer made any, yet neuertheleſſe ſhee would labour (if they ſhould deſire it) that the Duke of Aniou ſhould renounce it: Admoniſhing them, to procure aboue all things, the will and conſent of Queene ELIZABETH, for feare the affaire ſhould turne, and be preiudiciall both to herſelfe and the Duke of Nolfolke, as ſhee had formerly experimented in the match with the Lord Darley, priuately contracted without Queene ELIZABETHS conſent. Yet they neuertheleſſe eſteemed fit, firſt to ſound the will and affection of many Noble-men, who for the moſt part gaue their voice and conſent, prouided, their Queene alſo to grant hers: and likewiſe the Kings of France and Spaine were not againſt it; but they onely had an apprehenſion of Murray: and foraſmuch as he had beene the firſt to propound this affaire, promiſing to employ himſelfe therein with all his might, he ſhould bee the firſt now to hinder it.

They yet notwithſtanding were all of a mind, that Lidington, who then was lookt for, ſhould firſt ſound the intention and diſpoſition of Queene ELIZABETH. In the meane while the Duke declares to the Lord Baron of Lumley, all that was done and paſt in this buſineſſe; and with much adoe could hee obtaine from the Earle of Leiceſter, leaue to take further conſultation and aduice of his other friends: he neuertheleſſe made Cecill acquainted with it, the Earle of Pembroke conſenting thereunto.
                     At the ſame time,
                           A deſsigne to free the Qu. of Scotland.
                         the Lord Dacray reſolued in himſelfe to ſteale away the Queen of Scotland, who at that time was priſoner at Winfield in the County of Derby, vnder the keeping of the Earle of Shrewsburie. The Earle of Northumberland, who was of his counſell, gaue notice thereof to the Duke of Norfolke, who forbade to doe it, fearing they went about to marry her to the Spaniard, being then vpon hope to obtaine the loue and conſent of Queene ELIZABETH.
                     The rumors and pretence of this match,
                           Notice is giuen thereof to Queene Elizabeth. arriued preſently to Queene ELIZABETHS eare, beeing told her by ſome of thoſe craftie and curious courtizans, who ſmell and find out ſooneſt the ſecrets of Louers. The Duke knowing it, labours with his vtmoſt power, to make a propoſition thereof to the Queen, and to that end employed therein the Earle of Leiceſter, the Earle of Pembroke, and Throgmorton, putting it off, and deferring it from day to day, as if he expected a fitter time and opportunity. But Cecill ſeeing the ſaid Duke perplexed in his mind, counſelled him himſelfe to declare the buſineſſe to the Queene, for to take ſooner away all ſcruple. But the Earle of Leiceſter, contrary to that opinion, is againſt it, promiſing him to propound the ſame to her Maieſtie, when ſhe ſhould walke abroad in the fields. But whileſt that hee by ſuch ſweete courteſies deferred the affaire from time to time, Queene ELIZABETH beeing at Farnham, cauſeth the Duke to

approch neere vnto her Table, and with a moſt graue and ſerious ſmile, warned him,
That hee who was repos'd, and reſted himſelfe vpon a Cuſhion, ſhould take heed, and looke to himſelfe.
                     
                     And finally, the Earle of Leiceſter beeing at Tichfield, found himſelfe ill, (or elſe he counterfaited the ſicke) and being viſited and graciouſly comforted by the Queene,
                           The Earle of Leiceſter reueales the whole buſines to the Queen at Tichfield.
                         he was ſeized with ſuch feare, that her Maieſtie could eaſily diſcerne it, beholding his blood and vitall ſenſes to ſhrinke in himſelfe: which was the cauſe, that after he had asked pardon, and implored forgiueneſſe with ſighs and teares of the Queene, he declared vnto her all the buſineſſe from the beginning.
                     In that very ſame time, the Queen tooke the Duke aſide into a Gallery,
                           She rebukes the Duke of Norfolke. where ſhe rebuked him ſharpely, for hauing ſought the Queen of Scotland in marriage without her leaue and permiſſion, commanding him to free himſelfe of it, for the fidelity and loyalty ſake which hee ought to beare vnto his Soueraigne. The Duke moſt willingly promiſed the ſame, as if he had deſpiſed the match; and fear'd not to aſſure, that his reuennues and commings in heere in England, were not whitleſſe to thoſe of the Kingdome of Scotland, then miſerably exhauſted by the Warre; and that when he was in the Tenis-Court of his Palace at Norwich, he ſeemed in ſome faſhion to be equall, and not inferiour to ſome Kings. But in a ſhort ſpace, this courage begunne to grow weake and flexible, diſcerning by the aſpect and ſpeech of the Queene, that her Maieſtie was irritated againſt him, and that her anger rather augmented then diminiſhed,
                           The Duke parts from the Court without leaue.
                         alſo that many Noble-men withdrew themſelues by little & little from his familiarity, ſaluting him but with much adoe, and breaking off in haſte their diſcourſes: At this, the Duke tooke his iourney to London, without leaue,

and vpon the way, tooke his lodging at the Earle of Pembroke's houſe, who counſelled him to be cheerefull, to hope well, and gaue him ſolace and conſolation in his affliction. That very day, Queene ELIZABETH moued with anger, refuſed to ſet at liberty the priſoned Queene, to the Scottiſh Ambaſſadour, who implored it of her Maieſtie, and commanded that ſhe ſhould behaue herſelfe peaceably, or elſe ſhe ſhould ſee ſhortly, thoſe vpon whom ſhe moſt relyed, cut off and beheaded.
                     Now,Cecill findes out the matter.
                         when as the rumor of the match had more increaſed, and the fame of it was euery where diuulged, and the Ambaſſadour of the French King, (more by the perſwaſion of ſome Engliſh than the command of his Prince, as it afterwards appeared) did earneſtly labour, and vehemently vrge, that the Queene of Scots might haue her libertie; new ſuſpicions were generally rayſed, and Cecill, who was alwaies diligently carefull, and ſtudying for the well-fare of Religion, was deſirous to finde out the matter; he dealt therefore with Suſſex by Letters, who was then Preſident of the North Countries, and a deare friend to the Duke, that if ſo be he vnderſtood any thing concerning the Dukes marriage, he ſhould certifie the Queene of it; what he anſwered, I am vncertaine. And when it appeared that the Duke had priuate conference at Hampton-Court with Murray, the Vice-Roy of Scotland, George Carie, the ſonne of the Lord of Hunſden, was ſent to enquire if the Duke had imparted any thing to him concerning the marriage.
                     In the meane time,
                           The Duke of Norfolke goes into Norfolke.
                         the Duke affrighted with the falſe rumor of the rebellion and inſurrection in the North, and being certified of Leiceſter, that he ſhould be committed to priſon, went into Norfolke, till his friends at Court (as they promiſed) had ſtilled the ſtorme, and he pacified the offended minde of the Queene with ſubmiſſiue ſupplicatiue Letters.
                     
                        When hee found no comfort amongſt his owne, and Heiden, Cornwallis, and other of his traine, perſwaded him, that if he were guilty, ſhould flye to the Queenes mercy, he was almoſt diſtracted with ſorrow.
                     
                        
                           Feare cauſed in the Court through Norfolke.
                        In the meane time, the Court was ſollicited and poſſeſt with feare, leſt hee ſhould haue made Rebellion: which if hee did, they report it was determined to cut off the Queen of Scots.
                     
                     But hee, out of his innate goodneſſe, and a moſt pious conſcience, had not offended againſt any Law of her Maieſtie (that Statute made in the Reigne of HENRY the Eighth, which prohibited the marrying any of the children of the Kings Siſter, Brother, or Aunt, without the conſent and knowledge of the King, being aboliſhed and nullified by EDVVARD the Sixth) and alſo out of a feare that they ſhould vſe the Queene of Scots more hardly, ſends Letters to his friends at Court; in which, he certified that he went into the Countrey for feare of impriſonment, that through time and abſence, he might finde a remedy againſt ill reports and defamations, which the Court was ready to intertaine: hee moſt ſubmiſſiuely intreateth pardon, and forthwith prepareth to goe to the Court.
                     
                        
                           He returnes to the Court.
                        In his returne, hee being at Saint Albons, Owen, the Earle of Arundels man, was ſent priuately to him from Throgmorton and Lumley, who formerly had beene in cuſtody, aduiſing him, that hee ſhould take all the blame on himſelfe, and not lay any fault on Leiceſter or others, leſt he ſhould turne them from being friends, to enemies. There Edward Fitz-Gerald, brother to the Earle of Kildare, Lieutenant of the Penſioners, went before, drew him from thence, and brought him to Burnham, about three miles from Windſor, where the Queene was: to whom, foure dayes after,
                           Murray diſcouers the buſineſſe.
                         the Abbot of Dunfermline deliuered Letters in the behalfe of Murray, importing, how the Duke had ſecretly treated with him in the Royall Mannor of Hampton-Court,
                        
to procure his fauour to this marriage; on the contrary, greatly menacing him in caſe he did refuſe. That to auoyd the dangerous practice of one Norton, who watcht to kill him, at his returne, he gaue his promiſe to the Duke; That the Duke aſſured him, neither Norton, nor any other, ſhould attempt any thing againſt his life: and a little while after, being ſollicited by Letters written in Cypher, to giue conſent to this marriage, he gaue him to vnderſtand by Boyd, that he would neuer abandon the Queene of Scots: and moreouer, how her Maieſties owne Officers had in ſome ſort perſwaded the Vice-Roy, that Queene ELIZABETH gaue alſo her liking and approbation to this marriage, and putting the ſame Queene of Scots in hope, that ſhee ſhould ſucceed to the Kingdome of England. Renowned Queene ELIZABETH perceiuing alſo very euidently, that to draw ſome great men of England to her partie, ſhee gaue them expreſly to vnderſtand, how ſhe was taking a courſe for the Queenes Maieſties ſecuritie, and the infallible ſafety of the whole Kingdome.
                     The Duke, who ſubtilly held correſpondency by Letters with the Biſhop of Roſse, Leiceſter, and Throgmorton, cauſing them to be priuily conueyed in bottles of Beere, being at the ſame time ſtrictly examined about the poynt of this marriage, after his confeſſion of the greateſt part, and a bitter checke giuen him for departing the Court without leaue, and being further accuſed of Innouation, was ſent to the Tower of London,
                        
                           The Duke is impriſoned.
                         vnder the guard of Neuill, a Knight of the Golden Order. Two dayes after, the Biſhop of Roſſe was likewiſe examined, and Ridolph, that Florentine Councellor, of whom, both hee and others made familiar and common vſe, committed in keeping to Sir Francis Walſingham:
                           And others.
                         the Earle of Pembroke commanded to betake himſelfe to his Houſe, and reſerued to a priuate examination. But, by reaſon of his Nobility, and old age, it was agreed, that by reaſon himſelfe could not write,

his Confeſſion ſhould not be taken in writing. After this, ſome great men were prohibited the Court, as Complices, who exhibited their petitions, and demanded pardon, when they had acknowledged,
                           Their Complices craue pardon.
                         that they were conſenting with the Duke to this marriage, which Murray had formerly propounded: yet after ſuch a manner, as the Queene of Scots, the Duke, and all the others were aduertized, how the matter was firſt imparted to the Queenes Maieſtie of England, before any treatie of it. The Earles of Northumberland and Westmerland being Confederates in this deſſigne, made in like manner their ſubmiſſions to the Earle of Suſſex, then Gouernour in the North parts, whom they intreated to ſollicite the Queene for them.
                           Libels againſt this marriage.
                         Many Libels were in like manner diſperſed againſt this marriage, the Queene of Scots, and the right and title, whereby ſhe layde claime to the Crowne of England, as next heire apparant, with ſuch ſhameleſſe inſolency, as the Queene reſolued to ſend out prohibitions, by a ſeuere Proclamation to the contrary, and playing at hood-winke with the Biſhop of Roſſe, ſhe appointed him to anſwere them, as hee did by another Booke, intituled, Morgan Philips, wherein hee maintained the honour of the Queene of Scots, her right of ſucceſſion, and that the Kingdome might be ſwayed and gouerned by women, as this poynt was alſo called in queſtion. But ſince, he ingeniouſly confeſt in his Commentaries, that his reaſons he ſet downe, about her right of ſucceſſion, he drew out of Sir Anthony Brownes bookes, chiefe Iuſtice of the common Pleas, and of Carrell, both very vnderſtanding Gentlemen in the common Lawes of England.
                     
                     
                        Chapin Vitelli comes into England, and why?
                        In thoſe daies, there came from the Duke of Alua, Chapin Vitelli, Marquis of Ceton, with Letters from the Spaniard, (who ſeemed to haue cleane loft his writing) vnder pretext to accord ſome differences about commerce, but really to obſerue the iſſue of this rebellion, which was preſently

to be raiſed, and to command the Souldiers priuily to march downe into Flanders, according to the Duke of Alua's promiſe, who likewiſe ſent for his fore-runner, Le Mot, Gouernour of Dunkerke, apparelled like a Mariner, that he might the better diſcouer and found the Ports, as himſelfe ſince hath auerred. But when it appeared, how this Marquis was onely ſubſtituted by the Duke of Alua, who was the principall partie himſelfe, wherein the other was but a meere Lieutenant, a doubt was made whether they ſhould treatie with him, as an Ambaſſadour. Notwithſtanding all this, the Queenes Maieſtie made knowne that ſhe would acknowledge him for the Ambaſſadour of Spaine. But when he made ſhew of no further Commiſſion, than to re-demand ſome moneys detained, the Queene affecting peace, aduiſed him to procure a larger Commiſſion for the ordering of affaires: while hee ſtayd, and attended the ſame, the rumor of that Rebellion to be excited in the North Countrey, was daily augmented.
                     To relate the matter more originally, there ran a great fame and brute of this Rebellion,
                           Rebellion in the North.
                         about the beginning of Autumne, which at the firſt being contemned, it preſently ſtrengthned and encreaſed, by reaſon of the frequent meetings of the Earles of Northumberland, Weſtmerland, and ſome others: ſo that the Earle of Suſſex, then Gouernour, and Deputie of the North, cited them before him, and interrogated them preciſely, about theſe reports and rumors. They could not deny, but they had heard of it, marry ſo, they were in no wiſe guiltie or culpable, with many and deepe proteſtations, offering to loſe their liues in the Queenes ſeruice, againſt any Rebels whatſoeuer: and thus he ſent them backe to their owne houſes, with authoritie to enquire and ſearch out the authors of this report, which neuertheleſſe daily ſo augmented, as her Maieſtie, conceiuing that nothing was raſhly to bee credited of ſo great men, ſo commanded them by the Lord of Suſſex, to

repaire preſently to London, for the remouing of all ſuſpition. Notwithſtanding, my Lord of Suſſex, I know not for what drift or policy, enioyned them to come and meet him, as if he meant to conſult with them about ſome occaſions of that Prouince. At the firſt they drew backe, but preſently after, expreſly refuſed to repaire thither. This miniſtred occaſion to the Queenes Maieſtie, to command them by peremptory Letters which ſhee writ, and cauſed to be conueyed with all expedition, that laying apart all delayes and excuſes, they ſhould incontinently appeare in her Royall preſence; and this onely to terrifie and abſolutely diuert them from entring into this Rebellion, or at leaſt, that they might precipitantly vndertake the ſame, before they rallied their forces, or that the matter grew to any maturitie. For they relyed vpon ſome ſecret ſuccours, which the Scots Leaguers, and the Duke of Alua were to land at the Port of Herripoole, within the Biſhopricke of Dunelme, as afterwards it was manifeſted.
                     So ſoone as the Earle of Northumberland had read theſe Letters, being of a tractable nature, guiltie in his owne conſcience, deepely affected to the Romane Religion, and excited to choller, by reaſon that out of the prerogatiue Royall in Mynes, a rich Copper Myne found in his owne grounds was taken from him, wherein hee thought himſelfe to be wronged: but neuertheleſſe, fed with notable hopes of the Queenes clemency, hee was in a wonderfull perplexitie, whether he ſhould flye, or openly rebell. His Friends and ſeruants being now prepared for a reuolt, and ſeeing him floating in theſe ambiguities, came vpon him a certaine night on a ſuddaine, and headlongly and continually beating into his eares, how Oſwell, Vlſtrop, and Vaughan, his enemies, were arriued with a troupe of armed men, ready to take him priſoner, they vrged, entreated, and coniured him, that he would not forſake himſelfe, his friends, and the Religion of his fore-fathers, aſſuring

him, how the Catholiques were then in armes all England ouer, to re-eſtabliſh the Romane Religion: and to ſtirre vp the multitude, they tumultuarily ſounded a Larum bell in all the Countrie Townes and Villages, though 'twas not yet time to attempt any ſuch matter. Affrighted, hee preſently ſtart out of his Bed in the Chamber, retyred to a Gallerie, which looked into a Parke neere to Topcliffe, and the night following, he went to Blanſpeth, to the Earle of Weſtmerlands Houſe, where many were aſſembled, who knew not what the matter was.
                     For to amaſſe, and draw together an ignorant multitude, they commanded ſome to take vp armes for the Queenes defence: others were made beleeue, that all the great men of England conſpired with them, to re-erect the Romane Religion: otherſome they told,
                           Pretext of the Rebels.
                         how they were enforced to take vp armes, for preuention that the ancient Nobility of England might not be trampled vnder foot by late ſtart-ups, and their Countrey yeelded as a prey to ſtrangers. This carried them violently into a manifeſt Rebellion,
                           They runne violently into a Rebellion.
                         and they were the firſt, who diſturbed the publique peace of this Kingdome, which had continued vnſhaken for the terme of eleuen yeeres, vnder the happy Reigne of Queene ELIZABETH, they being boldly and powerfully incited hereunto by Nicholas Morton, a Prieſt, ſent from the Pope, to denounce Queene ELIZABETH for an Heretike, and therefore depriued of all power and gouernement. Suddenly likewiſe, they diuulge by a publique Manifeſtation, That they tooke vp armes to no other end,
                           Their declaration.
                         but to ſet vp againe the Religion of their Anceſtors, to remoue from about the Queenes bad Councellors, to reſtore the Duke and ſome other great Men, who were diſmiſſed of their places and dignities, to former libertie and grace. But as for the Queenes Maieſtie, they would attempt nothing againſt her, but vowed, that both then, and at all times, they would perſeuer and continue her moſt obedient Subiects.

They writ alſo to the Papiſts, diſperſed throughout the whole Kingdome, to ioyne their forces together. But, in ſtead of cohering to them, the moſt part ſent to the Queene,
                           They write to the Papiſts.
                         both their Letters, and the Bearers: All the particular men of the Kingdome, and the Duke of Norfolke himſelfe, both their ſeruice and meanes, and to be employed againſt them. So that, vpon this occaſion, ſhee made a iuſt triall of her Subiects ſingular and vnſpotted fidelitie, and of Gods rare clemency and protection, for which ſhee gaue him great and vnfaigned thankes.
                     
                        
                           They rent, and tread vnder-foot the Bible.
                        The Rebels went preſently to Durham, the next Epiſcopall See, where they rent and trampled vnder foot, the ſacred Bibles, and Bookes of the Liturgie, written in the Engliſh Tongue, as they light vpon them in the Churches. Afterwards, they celebrated Maſſe, whereſoere they went; they leuied and brought into the field many men, vnder flying colours,
                           Their Colours.
                         wherein were painted in ſome, the fiue wounds of our Lord; in others, the Challice of the Euchariſt; Robert Norton, a venerable and graue Gentleman, who was old and bald, carried the Croſſe, with the Colonell enſigne: they came by ſmall dayes marches, to Chiffordmore, which is not farre from Wetherbie, where, making a generall muſter of their Army, vpon the two and twentieth day of their Rebellion, they could make no more but ſixe hundred Horſe,
                           Their number.
                         and foure thouſand foot: and when they heard that the Queene of Scots, (for whoſe releaſement out of impriſoment, they had principally taken vp armes) was conducted from Tudberie, to Couentrey, a ſtrong Citie, and committed to the guard and cuſtodie of the Earles of Shrewsburie, and Huntington: that the Earle of Suſſex of the one ſide of them, had raiſed a mightie Armie, to ſet vpon them: that Sir George Bowes lay at their backes, with choſen and maine troupes, and had fortified Bernard-Castell: and how the Earle of Cumberland and the Lord Scrope had manned and ſecured Carlile, and dayly

leuied more forces, they retired from thoſe quarters, and returning ſpeedily, in a manner the ſame way they came, they came before Rabie, which is the principall houſe and ſeate of the Earles of Weſtmerland;
                           They returne. They take Bernard Caſtle.
                         from whence departing, they ſtraitly beleaguerd Bernard Caſtle, which in a ſhort time yeelded to them for want of prouiſion & victuall, all, and Sir George Bowes, with Robert Bowes his brother, and all the Souldiers of the Gariſon, iſſued out with their Armes.
                     They were formerly proclaimed Traitors, by ſound of Trumpet. The ſame very day, my Lord of Suſsex, accompanied with the Earle of Rutland, & the Lords of Hunſdon, Euers, and Willowbie of Parham, marched againſt them with ſeuen thouſand men. When they ſaw they were come to Ackland, being terrified and daunted, they fell to flight, and fell backe toward Hexham,
                        
                           They fly.
                         which place alſo leauing ſpeedily, they croſſed along by vnbeaten paths, that ſo they might creepe couertly vnder the hedges, and came to the Caſtle of Naworth; where, vnderſtanding that the Earle of Warwicke and the Lord Clynton Vice-Admirall, followed cloſe at their heeles, with twelue thouſand men, drawne out of the South parts of England; the two Earles fled into the neereſt parts of Scotland, with a few men, vnknowne to the reſt, where the Earle of Northumberland obſcured himſelfe for a while, about Harclaw, in the little countrey Hamlets, amongſt the Grymes, moſt notable Theeues, who deliuered him afterwards into the Earle of Murray's hands. The Earle of Weſtmerland found ſome meanes to hide himſelfe about Carry Furnhurſt, and Bucklie, and at laſt ſcapt into Flanders, with ſome other Engliſh in his company, where he liu'd a long, but a poore life, vpon a ſmall Penſion which the King of Spaine allowed him. The reſt ſaued themſelues, ſome by flight, ſome by lurking in holes and dennes. For example and terrour, ſixe inferiour Magiſtrates were hanged at Durham, and others,

among which, one Plumtree a Prieſt, was a man of greateſt note. There were formerly executed at Yorke, Digbie, Falthrope,
                        
                           Some are put to death.
                         
                        Biſhop, and Pouenham. And certaine moneths after, Chriſtopher and Thomas Nortons, brethren, were put to death at London, and ſome others in other places.
                     
                        
                           The reſt are baniſht.
                        After this, the moſt apparāt & notable Rebels, were condemned of high Treaſon, and baniſht, as namely, the Earles of North. & Weſtm. the Counteſſe of North. the Daughter to the Earle of Wigorne, Edward Dacres of Morton, Iohn Neuill of Leuerſerg, Io. Swineborne, Tho. Marquenfield, Egre. Ratcliffe, brother to the Earle of Suſſex, Char. Neuill, Ro. Norton of Nortonconniers, Chriſt. Marmaduke, and Thomas of the Family of the Nortons, Ro. and Na. Tempests, George Stafford, and about ſome fortie others of Noble and worthie Houſes, whoſe conuiction and baniſhment was confirmed by the whole houſe of Parliament, and pardon granted to ſome, who had no Eſtates, nor euer went out of the Kingdome. And thus the flame of this Rebellion was in a ſhort time quencht, Chiapine Vitelli, who was priuie to it, as I told you before, openly admiring the ſame in the preſence of her Maieſtie, and many great men of the Kingdome, but (no doubt) inwardly greeuing this Rebellion was ſo eaſily and ſuddenly ſuppreſt, and that ſo his owne comming into England tooke ſo little effect.
                     
                        
                           A new Rebellion.
                        From the combuſtions of this Rebellion, thus couered and extinguiſht, as out of the aſhes of that former fire, a little flame began to kindle at Naworth in Cumberland, neere to the Valley of Seuerus, which was raiſed by Lau. Dacres, ſecond ſonne to Geor. Lord Dacres of Gileſland. This man, after the death of the young Lord Dacres his Nephew, becauſe he was the ſonne of his elder Brother, being angry that ſo large a Patrimonie ſhould by Law diſcend vnto his Neeces, whom the Duke of Norfolke their Father in law had betrothed to his three ſonnes, hee commenced ſuite againſt them: but perceiuing that it would

come to no proſperous iſſue on his ſide, hee ſecretly combin'd with the Rebels, and attempted to carry away the Queene of Scots, but all in vaine. But the Rebels being defeated ſooner then he expected, and proclaimed Traitors openly, whileſt himſelfe lay in Court, after he had obtained the fauour to kiſſe the Queenes hands, hee promiſed to employ himſelfe with his whole power againſt them; wherevpon he was ſent home to his own houſe. But when he was in the way (as was diſcouered afterwards) hee imparted vnto them his deſſignes by meſſengers, which renew'd their ſpirit and courage, making them many promiſes in the behalfe of diuers Ambaſſadours to ſtrange Princes; and amongſt others, perſwading them, that with ſuch men as he would raiſe in the Queenes name, he would kill the Lord Scroope, Gouernour of the Weſt Borders, and the Biſhop of Carlile. But not being able to effect it, he followed the Earles who were fled with Letters recōmendatorie to the Scots, ſurprized Griſtock Caſtle, and other houſes belonging to the Dacres, fortifyed the Caſtle of Naworth, as if he had ſome right and intereſt in it, and vnder pretext of defending his owne goods, and oppoſing the Rebels, hee got together three thouſand theeues of the borders, and others, who ſtood beſt affected to the Dacres, much eſteemed and reſpected in thoſe quarters.
                     The Lord of Hunſdon, with the moſt expert Souldiers of the Garriſon of Barwicke, went into the Field againſt them, who truſting to no fortifications, went ſtill forward, and with an Armie rang'd in Triangular forme, and flanker'd with Horſe, they attended them, neere to a little Riuer called Gelt, where (queſtionleſſe) they had a ſound fight, both for the one part and the other; and Leonard, though he was lame, came ſhort of nothing required in a valiant and reſolute Captaine.
                           The Rebells are defeated.
                         But when the greateſt part of his men were ſlaine, he left the Victory to my Lord of Hunſdon, not greatly pleaſing to him, and ſo retired into

the neereſt places of Scotland, from whence, not long after, he croſt ouer into Flanders, where hee died poore at Louaine; ſo that the curſes impoſed vpon him by his dying Father, prooued true. The Lord of Hunſdon commended the keeping of thoſe Caſtles taken from the Rebells, to the Duke of Norfolks men, and the Queenes Maieſtie by a publike Proclamation, granted a generall pardon to all the multitude which he had excited to Rebellion.
                     
                        
                           Qu. Elizabeth lends ſuccours to the reformed Churches in France.
                        Though this Rebellion raiſd many tumults and diſturbances within her Kingdome, yet would not her Maieſtie neglect the Proteſtants in France, their State beeing at that time wretched and deplorable: For the Princes of the ſame Religion hauing much importuned her to defend the common cauſe, ſhe furniſht the Queen of Nauarre with money, vpon ſome Iewels and other ornaments, and permitted Hen. Champernoune, Brother by the Fathers ſide to Gawyn, who married the Earle of Mountgomeries Daughter, to conduct into France a Company of an hundred Noble voluntary Gentlemen, vnder one Guydon, who had written on it this Motto,
La vertu me donne fin.
                     
                     Among whom, were Phil. Butſhed, Fr. Barkley, and Gualter Raleigh, who was but yong, and tooke his firſt ſay and taſte of the wars. The K. of France conceiu'd, that either to draw vp, or at leaſt to diuert to ſome other employments, the great wealth of England, which was abundantly diſburs'd in ayde and ſuccour of the Proteſtants; he reſolued to kindle a new warre againſt England, by aſſiſting the Scots, who kept the Caſtle of Dunbriton for the Queene of Scotland. In which Seruice, Monſieur de Martigues was employed, a Souldier who then liued in the very prime of his Reputation; but he being ſlaine with an Harquebuzada at the ſiege of S. Iean d' Angeli, this Proiect vaniſht, & tooke no effect.
                     
                        
                        Ireland in thoſe times, was no more free from Rebellion: For Ed. and Phil. Butler, brothers to the Earle of Ormond, who had iniuriouſly entreated their neighbours in Munſter, refuſed to obey the Lawes, moleſted true Subiects with Pillories and waſtel, and colleagued themſelues with Ioh. Fitz-Morris of the houſe of Deſmond, Macartimore Fitz-Edmond, Steward of Imoquell, and others who had negotiated with the Pope and the King of Spaine, to re-eſtabliſh the Romane Religion in Ireland, and to ſuppreſſe Queene ELIZABETH: For which cauſe they were denounced Rebels againſt the State, and Sir Pe. Carne continually galled them with light Skirmiſhes, wherein Fortune was variable. Neuertheleſſe, hauing made an head of many Galloglaſses, they beleaguerd Kilkennie, and commanded the Inhabitants to deliuer into their hands the wife of Warham of Saint-Leiger: but being repelled by the Garriſon, who iſſued out vpon them, they miſerably forraged and waſted the whole Countrey round about. The more to excite and ſpread the flame of this ſedition, Iohn Mendoza came ſecretly in the behalfe of the Spaniard; and out of England, to extinguiſh it, the Earle of Ormond, who perſwaded his Brothers to ſubmit themſelues, who were neuertheleſſe impriſoned. But the Earle obtained of the Queen, through his continuall and dayly interceſſion, that their Triall and Iudgement might be deſired, and not be brought to the rigour of the Law, though their crimes and offences had deſerued it: the which he tooke grieuouſly, not beeing able to endure, that at their occaſion, ſuch infamie ſhould be vpon their moſt Noble and illuſtrious houſe, ſo neere allyed to Queene ELIZABETH, who reioyced and glorified ſo often, that the Nobility of that Houſe had euer beene pure, and their blood vntainted. But the Lord Deputie purſuing liuely the remainder of that Rebellion, diſſipated it in a very ſhort ſpace of time.
                     Some Troubles were alſo moued and ſtirred vp in Vlſter
                        
by Turlogh-Leinich, who, through inconſtancie, embraced ſometimes warre, and ſometimes peace; according to the headſtrong deſire & raſh pleaſure of his Followers, Officers and Seruants. But he was kept in awe & within the bounds of duety, not ſo much by the Engliſh Garriſons, as by the Hebrideans, who of thoſe poore and meagre Iſlands, ſeized vpon his earthly poſſeſſions. Againſt whoſe incurſions, there was ſent out of England a great deale of money, to fortifie and ſtrengthen the Sea-Coaſt: but in vaine, out of a misfortune, common as well to England as Ireland, where, for the moſt part, men intrude themſelues, and are admitted into thoſe publike places, who baſely reſpecting their owne priuate gaine, doe neglect the publike weale, and generall commodity of the Kingdome.
                  
                  
                     The end of the Firſt Book of the Annals and Hiſtory of that mighty Empreſse, Queene ELIZABETH, of moſt happy and bleſsed memory.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  THE HISTORIE OF THE MOST HIGH, MIGHTY, AND Euer-glorious Empreſſe, ELIZABETH, Inuincible Queene of England, Ireland, &c. True Defendreſſe of the Faith, of immortall Renowne, and neuer-dying Fame and Memory.
                  OR, ANNALLES OF ALL SVCH REMARKable things as happned during her bleſt Raigne ouer her Kingdomes of England and Ireland; as alſo ſuch Acts as paſt betwixt her MAIESTY and Scotland, France, Spaine, Italy, Germany, and the Netherlands.
                  
                  The ſecond Booke.
                  Faithfully tranſlated out of the French, and publiſht in Engliſh, with the KINGS leaue and Authority, granted by his moſt Excellent Maieſtie to ABRAHAM DARCIE.
               
               
                  
                  To my Noble and wel-deſeruing Friend,
                  
                     Mr. ABRAHAM DARSSIE
                  
                  
                     
                        Admire I would, but dare not, leſt that I
                     
                        Be thought to flatter, ſpeaking VERITY.
                     
                        Reaſon bids attribute to worth its due,
                     
                        And he detracts, that ſpares to ſpeake what's true:
                     
                        How ſhall I ſhunne (if ſhunne the Truth to ſhame)
                     
                        A Paraſites, or a Detractors name?
                     
                        Much care I not, yet this much dare I ſay,
                  
                  
                     
                        DARSSIE, thou haſt done well, deſeru'ſt thy pay,
                     
                        A Guerdon due to thy laborious Pen,
                     
                        Raiſing ELIZA's Royall Fame agen:
                     
                        Such as thy worke, ſuch honour as is due,
                     
                        Shall to thy well-deſeruing Pen accrue:
                     
                        In making vulgar now this matchleſſe Story,
                     
                        
                           England ſhall euer eternize thy glory.
                  
                  
                     THOMAS GASNALL.
                  
               
               
                  
                  To the worthy Patternes of true Nobilitie, and Noble Fauourers of LEARNING.

                        
                           Theophilus, Lord Howard, of Walden, Heire apparent to the Earledome of Suffolke.
                           
                              This Noble Family was honoured with the dignity of Lord Howard of Walden, by Queene Eliz.
                        
                        The Lady Elizabeth, Vicounteſſe of Walingford, his noble and vertuous Siſter.
                        
                        
                           Oliuer, Lord St. Iohn, Baron of BLETSO.
                        Lady Dorothy St. IOHN Counteſſe of BATH, his Right honourable ſiſter.
                              Their moſt ancient Houſe was honoured with the title of Baron of Bleſo, by Qu. Eliz. As alſo, this noble Counteſſes Husbands Predeceſſor, was alſo graced with the Earledome of Bath, by her MAIESTIE.
                        
                        
                           George,
                           
                              This Noble Lord is moſt highly borne from a moſt Honourable bloud, being by his Father-ſide deſcended from the illuſtrious Lord William, Berkeley, Earle of Nottingham, Vicount Berkeley, of Berkeley-Caſtell, and alſo Lord Marquis of Berkeley, Earle Marſhall of England.
                            Lord Berkeley, Baron of Berkeley-Caſtell.
                        And the moſt learned Lady, 
                              An illuſtrious Branch of the Noble Houſe of the Caries, created Baron of Honſdon, by Qu Elizabeth.
                            
                           Elizabeth Berkley, his Moſt Noble Mother.
                        
                        The Lord Mount-ioy Blunt, Baron of Mount-ioy.
                              Deſcended fro
                                    •
                                 
                               Charles Blunt Earle of Deuonſhire, Lord Deputy and Lieutenant of Ireland, a braue valiant Nobleman, who expulſed the Spaniards there, and compelled the Iriſh Rebells to ſubmiſsion: he was created Baron of Mount-ioy by Queene Elizabeth.
                        
                        SIR Fulke 
                           
                              Knighted by Queeene Elizabeth at Killingworth.
                            
                           Greuill Baron of Beauchams-Court, and Lord Brooke.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     ALthough a Hiſtory,
                        There is great differency and diuerſity, tending to the manner of deſcribing Stories: Firſt, there is Chronology, Chronicles, Ephemeride, Epitomies, Rhopſodies, Abridgment, Hiſtory, and ANNALS. Chronology hath two conditions, both particular and neceſſary: called by the Greekes, Alathea, and Apathia, which is the truth of things ſet forth without any paſsion. The Chronicle aymes at the originall of matters, and to ſeeke the immemoriall Time, from the firſt antiquity and foundation of peoples and Nations, as Herodole for Greece, Titus Liuius for the Latine, Lemaire in the illuſtrations of the Gauls, Mr. Speed for England, and others.
                        The Ephemerides deſcribes that which hath been ſaid or done betwixt two perſons.
                      (Right Noble & Illuſtrious) bee moſt dangerous, and no leſſe troubleſome to write, yet there is nothing more commodious, beneficial and

ſalutiferous to men, ſith it is the Teſtimony of Time, the light of Truth, and the preſeruer of Life; ſuffering ſcarce no mens Names to dye, nor their renownes to be buried in obliuion: for by the recordation of the deedes which they haue inacted in Times paſt, they are committed to future Times, eternized to the perpetuall honour of immortall fame, and neuer-dying glory: Nay more, they ſeeme as Alexander, Scipio, Pompey, Iulius Caeſar, Charles the Great, and diuers other whoſe memory is freſh and euer-liuing: nothing elſe, but the eternall monuments of Annalls deliuered Hercules, and freed other worthy men (who liued well and ſingularly profitable to their Countrey) from fading and periſhing, though dead and forgotten: It was this therefore which cauſed Princes, and other great men to deſire nothing more, then that their

worthy deedes and noble acts iudiciouſly performed in time of Peace,
                     
                        
                           Rhapſodis and Epittonnes are ſhort obſeruations of Hiſtory.
                        
                           Annalls and Hiſtory is different from all thoſe, for they deſcribe all the memorable deedes and particular actions that hapned yeerely, and from time to time: ſuch as Xenophon was in Greece, Saluſt among the Latins, Froiſsard in France, and Mr. William Cambden in England, and ſo diuers others.
                        The ſeuerall and yeerely acts muſt be deſcribed without any paſsion or affections.
                      as well as generouſly in Warre, ſhould be carefully written, and ſo propagated to all poſterities by ſome learned Hiſtoriographer: as appeareth by Alexander the Great, who when a meſſenger came to him, exulting with ioy, and running with a chearefull countenance fully to relate the proſperous ſucceſſe of his fortunate affaires, made him this anſwere, What greater and better newes can you participate and vnfold vnto mee, vnleſſe by certifying mee that Homer is liuing? Intimating thereby, that all the glory of his Heroicke actions, were like to wither and be forgotten, except ſome ſuch a one as Homer was, ſhould reuiue, to ſing worthily his Encomiums, & ſound his Praiſes and Victories with the ſhrill ſounding Trumpet of Fame.
                  Neuertheleſſe, confeſsing my ſelfe

vnable (though much deſirous to doe you that ſeruice, I haue vndertooke the tranſlation of the Heroick Annals of that euer bleſſed Queene Elizabeth of moſt happy memory, by which I aime at the preſeruation of her glory, Such courteſie from your Honours will ingraue your worth in the Temple of Eternity, making your names thereby immortall, ſith it is onely this or ſuch like ſeruice, that can make you liue againe in your graue, keepe your noble fame freſh, and your happy memory from fading, ſith it wil cauſe your aſhes to bring forth Laurell, and Palme flouriſh and ſpring out of your Tombes, when the baſe ignorant contemners of learning, (which doe abound in this iron age) will wither and fade: they ſeeme now only to liue on earth, but to warre againſt Vertues; much like vnto wormes in Libraries, to deſtroy and deuour learning, which they ſhould cheriſh. and to the perpetuall honor of your names, vnder whoſe honorable banner, I haue ſought to ſhelter theſe my poore labours: To ſhew aſwel the dutiful ſeruice of a poore Stranger to theſe Kingdomes in generall, as his humble and ſincere affection to all your Honours in particular. The worthines of the Subiect, makes me not doubt of your noble acceptance, & inuites mee to bring my Oblation to the Temple of your Vertues; where, after vnfeigned Prayers for your Honours perpetuall happineſſe, as well ſpirituall as temporall, I, with the loweſt ſtep of dutie, take my leaue; vowing euer to remaine
                  
                     Your Honours humbleſt deuoted obſeruant, ABRAHAM DARCIE.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE HISTORIE OF THE MOST High, Mighty,Booke 2. 1570. and Inuincible Princeſſe, Queene ELIZABETH, of moſt happy and neuer-dying memory: OR ANNALLES Of all the moſt remarkable things that happened during her bleſſed Raigne ouer the Kingdomes of England and Jreland, &c.
                  
                     The 13. yeere of her Raigne, Anno 1570.
                     
                     
                        REbellion being then extinct in England, the Earle of Murray,
                        
                           The Earle of Murray demands that the Qu. of Scotland might be put into his hands.
                         Vice-roy of Scotland, with much care and policie, perſwaded and induſtriouſly laboured that the Queene of Scots might bee reſigned and deliuered into his hands; proffering to that effect hoſtages and pledges: withall, the better to incite a condiſcending to this his demand, hee promiſed

that the Earles of Northumberland and Weſtmerland ſhould be immediately deliuered backe. In the meane time, he wrought with ſuch diligence, that the Biſhop of Roſſe, as an Author, Fauourer, and Aſſiſter of the Rebels, was committed into the ſafe guard and cuſtody of the Biſhop of London. And further to oblige Queene ELIZABETH by ſome ſpeciall ſeruice, he powerfully entred with an Armie vpon the frontier Prouinces of England, there to ſeeke out the Engliſh Rebells;
                           He purſueth the Engliſh Rebells.
                         but apprehending ſome fewe of ſmall note, in the concluſion finds out the Earle of Northumberland (whom he found hidden and diſguiſed among a company of Out-lawes and Fugitiues) by the meanes of his Oaſt that diſcouered him: The Vice-Roy much reioycing in his Noble Prize, ſent him as Priſoner to Lake-Leuin, ſafely there to be kept in guard, whileſt he perſiſting in his reuenge, with much rigour afflicted the inhabitants of thoſe Frontier parts.
                     But vnfortunately retyring himſelfe to a Towne called Limnuch (which vulgarly paſſeth by the name of Lithquo) there reſoluing with himſelfe, after ſo many weariſome trauails, and exceſſiue iournies, to giue a quiet repoſe to his ouer-charged ſpirits; the neuer-changing doome of heauen had there ſet downe the period of his dayes▪ for, riding through the Streetes, little ſuſpecting the diſaſter that attended him,
                           The Earle of Murray is ſuddenly kild
                         he was ſuddenly ſlaine by the ſtroke of a bullet vnder his nauell, ſent from the fatall hand of the Lord Hamilton, who by preſent flight ſaued himſelfe in France, where he remained certaine yeeres, oftentimes proteſting, that the ſtrength of his patience no longer able to hold out againſt the many inſolent iniuries done him by the Earle, he made his owne hands the author of his owne reuenge: For the Vice-Roy knowing him to be one of the Queenes partiſans, baniſhed him, and afterwards impriſoned him, and by many threats and menaces of ſeuere puniſhment, conſtrained him to releaſe to one of his Tenants, a little

Countrie Farme, which befell to him by reaſon of his wife that became lunaticke. Theſe inforſt him to ſuch rage, that hauing by ſome ſtrange meanes broke his priſon, hee committed this murder.
                     After this exploit, liuing in France, he was there reputed to be a very fit and ready inſtrument for ſuch actions: yet could he neuer be perſwaded or procured to doe the like to the Admirall Coligni; often anſwering, that he had himſelfe taken vengeance of his owne iuſt griefes and iniuries (of which he repented himſelfe) yet neither reward nor intreaties ſhould any way preuaile ſo much with him, as to be the inſtrument of anothers reuenge.
                     The rumor of this murder being ſtraight diuulged and ſpred ouer Great-Britaine, there aroſe various opinions,
                           Diuers opinions are had of him.
                         and diuers ſtrange iudgements vpon the ſame; and among other ſurmizes, his mothers dreame was then recalled to memory, of a Lyon and a Dragon combating in her wombe, after ſhe had beene priuately knowne by Iames the Fifth. Diuers were the opinions and cenſures of moſt men, but eſpecially of thoſe of ſounder iudgement and apprehenſion, according to their diuers affections: of ſome he was much commended, becauſe he was very ſtudious for the expelling of the Romiſh Recuſants out of Scotland, for ſo carefully preſeruing the King, being yet an Infant, and likewiſe for his great and liberall bounty to men of learning; and aboue all, to Bucchanan: on the contrary part, hee was of other-ſome greatly condemned, becauſe he, vnder the colour and couerture of Religion, enricht himſelfe and his friends with the ſpoiles of the Church; and with a moſt iniurious ingratitude, inſulted and tyrannized ouer the imbecillity of his Siſters weake Sexe, hauing before obliged him to her by many benefits. And of theſe, ſome would preſage, through their ſuſpicious coniectures, grounded vpon the miſchieuous inclination which is incident to moſt baſtards; That that man would not ſpare the

Sonne, that had bereaued the Mother of her Kingdome. The Queen of Scots expreſt much ſorrow for him, becauſe ſuch a violent and vnexpected death had ſnatcht him away before (as ſhe ſaid) he had by ſerious repentance expiated the multiplicity of the ſinnes hee had committed againſt God, his Countrey, and his Prince. But foraſmuch as hee greatly fauoured ſuch Engliſh as were affected to the Duke of Norfolke, hee was thought and accuſed to bee a faigned and diſſembling Politician.
                     
                        
                           The Scots & Rebels make incurſions vpon England.
                        The next ſucceeding night to this murder, T. Carrey of Fernihurſt, and Walter a Scottiſh-man of Buchlui, two of the hardieſt and valianteſt of thoſe Frontiers, and ſo much affected to the Queene of Scots, that for their deuout following of her faction and party, they ſuffered baniſhment, with the confiſcation of their goods, breathing forth defiance and vengeance againſt the Queene of England, becauſe the Vice-Roy in her fauour, had ſo cruelly afflicted the Frontier inhabitants; they violated the peace, and by force entred into England with a rout of Scottiſh and ſome Engliſh Rebells, conſuming and deuaſting with ſword and fire, the neighbouring Countries, as though they would haue made them deſolate like Deſarts: whereupon T. Randolph was incontinently diſpatcht into Scotland, there, in a publike Aſſembly of the Lords of the Realme, to giue notice of this iniurious outrage: And if by reaſon of the manifold troubles wherewith Scotland was at that preſent incumbred, they could not repreſſe the diſturbers of the Peace, the Queene would reuenge and right herſelfe by force of Armes, of that inſolent affront which ſhe had receiued; without any way indamaging others, ſaue thoſe that had deſeruedly incurred her vengeance. To this was only anſwered, That as yet there was no Vice-Roy choſen or deſigned amongſt them: Neuertheleſſe, that the iniuries done to the Frontier inhabitants might bee redreſſed, a command was giuen to the Lord of Suſſex, to leauie a competent

Armie, and march againſt the Lords of Buchlui and of Fernihurſt, to purſue and chaſe with deſerued rigour, onely thoſe that with the rebellious Engliſh had ouer-run & pillaged thoſe of the Frontiers. Now the Earles of Huntley and Argathel, that had all this while laboured in the behalfe of the Queene of Scots hearing of his approach, ſent vnto him one Trebon, to demand a Truce, and that they might obtaine ſo long reſpit, vntill they ſhould acquaint Queene ELIZABETH with their affaires. But they perceiuing that they could by no meanes wreſt him from his deſſignes, they began firſt to vſe threatnings, thinking to deterre him, but that not preuailing, they were enforſt to vſe ſubmiſſiue intreaties, that he would become an arbitratour for the aboliſhing of certaine ordinances which had beene created in Scotland, ſome two yeeres before.
                     Neuertheleſſe, Suſsex about the midſt of Aprill,
                        
                           The Engliſh take reuenge thereof.
                         entred into Scotland with the Baron of Hunſdon, Drury, Marſhall of Barwicke, and the Engliſh Armie: where they burned through the whole Countrey of Tiuiſdale, the houſes and villages of Buchlui and Carrey, ouerthrew and deſtroyed their countrey, and vtterly ruinated Fernihurſt and Craling, two of the principal Forts of T. Carrey. At the ſame inſtant, the Lord Scroope likewiſe entred vpon the Eaſt parts of Scotland, laying deſolate on euery ſide, through the Earledome of Anaudale, the poſſeſſions of Ionſton, & others that had in like maner fauoured the Engliſh Rebells, ſuch was his expedition at his firſt cōming, that there were 300. houſes conſumed by fire, & 50. Forts at leaſt laid leuell with the earth.
                           They ſuccoured thoſe in Scotland that were of the Kings partie.
                        
                     
                     A few dayes after, the Lord of Suſſex entred further into Scotland, with the Baron of Hunſdon, where they beſieged the Caſtle of Hume, which was the chiefe refuge of the Engliſh Rebels which yeelded vp as ſoone as the great Artillery, were planted againſt it. But there were found in it but two of the Rebells, which they cauſed preſently to be hanged; and placing a Garriſon in it, Drury was

forth-with commanded to batter downe Faſt-Caſtle, which was alſo a prime Fortreſſe of the Baron of Hume, which likewiſe without reſiſtance was yeelded vp.
                     The Engliſh Rebells then retired into the heart of Scotland, aſſociated with diuers other Rebels, there with fire and ſword they threatned the Frontier inhabitants of England, and thoſe in like manner of Scotland, that were of the Queenes partie: the Lord of Suſſex againe ſent forth Drury, who returned within ſeuen dayes with 1200. foote, and 400. horſe. Drury receiued from Collingham, certaine hoſtages for the Earles of Angus, of Morton, of Mar, of Glencarne, and for the Barons of Reuuen, and of Lindſay, who with diuers others had recalled the Engliſh. Then Suſſex himſelfe, accompanied with G. Carrey, P. Manours, R. Conſtable, which hee had honoured with the order of Knighthood with Druray, A. Bowes, G. Knolles, T. Brichwell, R. Gam, Elrington, Carnill, with other Captaines and Commanders in the Armie, marching toward Edenborrough, ioyned his forces with thoſe Earles, and the Duke of Lenox, then newly returned from England, who before was ſuſpected to be of the partie with the Duke of Norfolke and the Queene of Scots. Thus marching through Limnuch towards Glaſco, where the Lord of Hamilton, Duke of Chaſtelraut had retired himſelfe, and from thence towards the Caſtle Hamilton,
                        
                           They take the Caſtle of Hamilton.
                         which, after they had mightily battered with the Cannon, and almoſt beaten it downe, was yeelded vp in a ſmall ſpace. Then were the houſes of the Hamiltons, with their ſtately and magnificent buildings, defaced and conſumed with remorceleſſe fire, ranſacking their demaines of Cluiſdale, and at their chiefe Mannour houſe, ſituated neere Limnuch.
                     
                     Thus the Hamiltons with the reſt, that tooke part with the depoſed Queene, beeing extirpated and put to flight, the Lords of Scotland, and thoſe of the Kings part, beeing ready to aſſemble about the election of a new Vice-Roy,

they ſent to demand counſell of Queene ELIZABETH, who ſent them this anſwer: That becauſe ſhe would not preiudicate againſt the Queene of Scots (her cauſe not as yet being iudged of) ſhe would not intermeddle with that election. Vpon which anſwere, they choſe Lenox firſt of all Inter-Roy, and preſently after Vice-Roy,
                        
                           The Earle of Lenox is eſtabliſht Vice-Roy of Scotland.
                         the Queene of England not any way gaine-ſaying it; becauſe ſhe knew well, that he was naturally addicted to loue the King his Nephew, and was alſo aſſured that he was well affected to the Engliſh by reaſon of the many benefits receiued from them, and would alwaies be at her deuotion, in reſpect that his wife remained in her power.
                     In the meane time that the Queene thus fauoured the Kings party in Scotland,
                        
                           The King of Spaine giues ſuccours againſt thoſe who were of the Kings ſide.
                         the Spaniard failed not in any point towards the impriſoned Queene; but at the motion of the Lord of Hamilton, Rector of the Church at Dunbar, ſent vnder the hands of the Gouernour of Flanders, certaine prouiſion for warre, as a certaine quantitie of powder, with ſeuen Peeces of great Cannon, and ſome ſmall ſummes of money, to the Earle of Huntley, Gouernour for the Queene in the North parts of Scotland. Wherevpon the Earle of Huntley, the Duke of Chastelraut, and the Earle of Argathell, by a common aduice and conſent, with the approbation of the Queene of Scots, whoſe Lieutenants they were, did ſend this Ambaſie to the Duke of Alua, by the Baron of Setone, who thus in the Dukes preſence propoſed his meſſage in theſe termes:
THat he was ſent from a Realme, which,The Lord Setone his Ambaſſage to the Duke of Alua. by the treacheries of rebellious Subiects, was depriued of its publike peace, and a moſt gracious Princeſſe; and that the tenour of his Ambaſsie was, to demand and entreat aſsiſtance and ſuccours, to recouer her from a miſerable Captiuity, being detayned in a ſtrange Land, and the Realme from the oppreſsion of ſtrangers:

That the Scottiſh Rebells might not be ſuffered to traffique in the Spaniſh Confines, and that there might bee deliuered to the Queene the tenne thouſand Crownes that were aſsigned vnto her: ſhewing alſo, that ſhee did wholly caſt her ſelfe into the hands of the King of Spaine, well knowing that he did alwaies harbour in his heart a ſincere loue to true honour, iuſtice, and piety; obiects moſt worthy and ſitting for a Catholike Prince; and employed for Interceſſor the Duke D' Alua, who ſhe knew would endeuour himſelfe to accompliſh his deſires. That he propounded not to the King of Spaine any profit or commodity that might redound to him, beeing a thing vnworthy of ſo great a Maieſty, but onely offers to him from an vnfaigned heart, the perpetuall amity and humble ſeruice of his moſt Illuſtrious Queene, and her moſt warlike Countrey-men, the Scots. That the Glory of Charles the Fifth, his Father, would for euer liue eternized, for re-eſtabliſhing the Duke of Ferrara, and the Mahumetan King in their firſt dignity. But if hee ſhould re-eſtabliſh the Queene, being a conſtant Profeſſor of the true Catholique religion, and an abſolute Princeſse, of the conſanguinity and alliance of the greateſt Princes of Chriſtendome, and an vndoubted Heire to two flouriſhing Kingdomes, it would bee to him an euer-liuing glory, and an incomparable argument of moſt Chriſtian piety. That in ſo doeing, hee ſhould not onely binde France, Denmarke, Lorraine, the Guizes, S. Peter, and all Chriſtendome to his loue, but alſo make his fame equally celebrated with his Fathers, nay, euen ſurpaſse him farre, in relieuing and reeſtabliſhing by his example, Princeſses that are iniuſtly and treacherouſly depoſed from their lawfull Thrones: That being himſelfe the greateſt Monarch in Chriſtendome, and hauing vnder his command and obeiſance farre diſtant Countreys, which might giue occaſion

with great eaſe of ſuch and ſo inſolent arrogance, yet getting by this meanes intereſt in all Princes, they may with more eaſe be ſuppreſt; That this pernicious example of depoſing Kings, was neuer left vnreuenged; That he ſhould be a moſt excellent and fruitfull modell of rare Iuſtice, and that if he ſhould re-eſtabliſh her that flieth and ſueth to him for ſuccour, hee ſhould tye in moſt faſt bands of Amity and Alliance to himſelfe, a Queene Dowager of France, abſolute of Scotland, and moſt certaine Heire to England; with her the Scottiſh Nation, which ſince Charles the Great, haue manifeſted themſelues to all the world moſt firme, conſtant, and faithfull in their Alliance with France. And furthermore, that now occaſion was offered him, to reuenge the many iniuries which hee had receiued from the Queene of England, that aideth and fauoureth the Rebels of the Netherlands, that hath vniustly ſeized vpon his Coine, and the goods of his Subiects, and alſo euill-intreated and abuſed his Ambaſſadours. That to ſit ſtill any longer, and ſee the Scottiſh Nation fall vnder the ſubiection of the Engliſh, would be a lazie ſlumber, and abſurd ſottiſhnes. That through the increaſe of power and domeſticke ſtrength which that Woman hath acquired, ſhee will at laſt proue terrible to her neighbours, and as ſhe is of a Maſculine courage, and of a ſexe couetous of command, ſhee may eaſily finde a meanes to entangle the King of Spaine in a long and troubleſome warre. But if ſhee were preuented in this, ſhe might eaſily be kept vnder her proper feare. That there are but a very few in Scotland that will oppoſe the impriſoned Queene. That all the Catholikes, and the greateſt part of the Nobles, are fauourers of her cauſe. That ſhe hath all the Ports & Hauens in her power, and that the Pope would not ſpare the very goods of the Church, to maintaine a warre ſo iuſt and holy. And

that it meerely depended vpon the Catholike King, who was to muſter his forces, and ſhew his power in ſo iuſt, pious and ſalutiferous a cauſe, and that all the Catholikes of Great Brittaine expected from him onely, in this occaſion, either their comfort or vtter ruine.
                     
                     
                        
                           The anſwere of the Duke of Alua.
                        To this the Duke of Alua anſwered, that he was ready, and addreſt himſelfe to the King of Spaine for the aduancement of this affaire, but could not deny traffique with the Scottiſh Rebels, becauſe that might infringe the liberty of Flanders; promiſed to ſupply them for the moſt part with money. In the meane time, Setone, the deeper to oblige the King of Spaine and the Duke of Alua, paſſing ouer to the Flemmings Confederats in diſguiſed manner, procured by ſoothing flatteries, feaſtings, and other-like meanes of corruption, the Scottiſh Companies vnder them, to reuolt, and as he was ready to be queſtioned about it, and in great danger of his life, ſaued himſelfe with much adoe, vnder the Duke of Alua, who promiſed to furniſh him with ten thouſand Souldiers for ſixe moneths: but in vaine, in regard they were ſo full of troubles in Flanders, that they could not tranſport any Souldiers for Scotland.
                     
                     
                        
                           The Biſhop of Roſſe is ſet at liberty.
                        Whiles theſe things were a doing, the Biſhop of Roſse, who had meritoriouſly laboured the affaires of the Queene of Scotland, in England, and had beene committed to the cuſtodie of the Biſhop of London, about a ſecret practice of Rebellion, being now ſet at liberty, brought it ſo to paſſe, that the King of France, by his Ambaſſadour De Monluc, laboured moſt earneſtly with Queene ELIZABETH for the re-eſtabliſhment of the Queene of Scotland,
                        
                           Laboured the liberty of the Queene of Scots.
                         complayning that ſhe was more ſtrictly handled then formerly, vnder the cuſtodie of the Earle of Huntington, her ſworne enemie and emulator, who (as well as ſhe) had ſecret aimes to the Kingdome of England. The Ambaſſadour of Spaine alſo at the ſollicitation of the Biſhop of Roſse, preſt that

point very hard, in the name and behalfe of his King. But the Queene, after ſhee had ſeriouſly reuolued the cunning deuices that they all practiſed to free the Queene of Scots, and had couertly giuen out, that ſhe was ioyned with them in the Rebellion lately appearing, anſwered him,
THat it was an inconſiderate and dangerous folly, to free one that ſo apparantly aſpired by ill practice to the Crowne of England. That ſhe had need more ſtraightly then ordinary to looke vnto her, and diſcharge ſome of her Seruants, whom ſhe had (for the moſt part) choſen for her own proper deſsignes, and to giue for an aſsiſtant to the Earle of Shrewsbury, whom ſhe had appointed for her Keeper, who began to ſuſpect the loyaltie of theſe people, the Earle of Huntington, whom ſhe neuer knew to haue any title to the Kingdome, but onely out of ſome relation to her in affinity: and that neuertheleſſe, ſhe had diſcharged him long ſithence; promiſeth to omit no meanes of agreement with the Scots, and proteſteth to proſecute no iniuries receiued by her. That ſhe euer hoped, that the King of France, the King of Spaine, and the Queen of Scotland, would not take it in ill part, that ſhe onely prouided for the peace and ſafety of her ſelfe & her ſubiects, ſince nature, reaſon, and the honour of her Royall Name, did of right require the ſame at her hands: And that if any of them knew any way more expedient to preuent that imminent menacing danger, ſhee would not onely heare, but moſt willingly embrace it.
                     
                     After this,
                           They conſult about the freedome of the Queene of Scotland.
                         they ſate in Councell often hereupon at the Court, whether it were beſt to ſend the Queen of Scotland backe into her Countrie, or retain her ſtil in England, and how they might beſt prouide for the ſafegard both of the Queene, and their Religion. Whiles they were conſulting

hereabout, William Herbert, Earle of Pembroke, happened to dye, being iſſue to Richard, ſon to R. Herbert the eldeſt Earle of Pembroke, being in the Climactericall yeere of his age, as if he had preſaged what miſchiefe ſhould befal him, if hee had longer liued: leauing behinde him three children, Henry, Edward, and Anne. Hee was buried in S. Pauls Church, with ſtately and honourable Rites, and a moſt glorious Tombe erected for him; a Noble perſon, who out of his owne meanes raiſ'd a Fortune to himſelfe: For he ſo wrought into the fauour of HENRY the Eighth, that he made him one of the Gentlemen of his Chamber, and by his owne prudence increaſed his meanes, eſpecially after the King had married Katherine Parre, his wiues Siſter. And vnder EDVVARD the Sixth, hee procured (whiles the Court was diſtracted in ſeuerall factions) to be of the Order of Saint George, Knight of the Garter, the honour to be the Kings Squire, the Title of Baron Herbert of Cardiffe, and the dignity of the Earle of Pembroke. He was Generall, vnder Queene MARY, of her Troopes ſhe ſent againſt Wyat, and for the Engliſh Armie at S. Quintin, Preſident of Wales, twice Gouernour of Calais: vnder Queene ELIZABETH, he was conſtituted Steward of her houſhold, whoſe fauour he loſt for a time, in regard that hee was the firſt moouer of the match betweene the Duke of Norfolke and the Queene of Scotland, notwithſtanding his intention and will were no way ill affected therein, and failed narrowly a little before his death, of being queſtioned vpon certaine euidences at large dilated, and preſumptions ſecretly found out.
                     Hitherto Pope Pius the Fifth had laid a foundation of abſtruſe & darke conſpiracies for Queene ELIZABETH, and the yeere before, ſhe hauing no warning thereof, nor cited by a Bull declaratorie, priuily ſends forth an Anathema, and excites Rebellion, and cauſeth the ſaid Bull to be fixed to the Palace Gates of the Biſhop of London, in theſe words.
                     
                        
                        THE SENTENCE Declaratory of the Holy Father Pope Pius the Fifth, againſt ELIZABETH the pretended Queene of England, and thoſe Heretiques adhering to her: And finally, all ſuch as obey her, to be inſnared in the ſame.
                        
                           
                              PIVS, Biſhop, a ſeruant of the ſeruants of GOD, for the future memory of the buſineſſe.
                              
                                 HEe that rules in the Heauens aboue, and to whom all power is giuen both in Heauen and Earth, gaue vnto one onely vpon Earth, viz. to Peter, the chiefeſt amongſt the Apoſtles, and to the Pope of Rome, Peters Succeſſor, a holy, Catholique and Apoſtolique Church, (without which there is no Saluation) to gouerne it in the fulneſſe of power. And this he ordayned as chiefe aboue all Nations and Kingdomes, to pull downe, deſtroy, diſseuer, cast off, plant, and erect: to combine in the vnitie of ſpirit, his faithfull people, connext together

through mutuall charitie, and preſent them whole and ſound to his Sauiour. Which charge, Wee, who through the grace of GOD, are thereunto called, ſubmitting our ſelues to the gouernement of the ſame Church, ceaſe not with all our best labours and indeuours, to preſerue this vnitie and Catholique Religion, which hee, (who was the Author thereof) ſo ſuffered to be incumbred, for the triall of the faith of his, and for our correction. But the number of the ungodly is ſo great in power, that there is not a corner left vpon the whole Earth now vntainted with their wicked Doctrines. Amongſt which, ELIZABETH, pretended Queene of England, is, aboue all, the ſhelter and refuge of Error, and moſt noyſome enemies. It is She, who after ſhee had poſſeſsed the Kingdome, vſurping (monſter-like) the place of the chiefe Soueraigne of the Church in England, and the principall iuriſdiction and authoritie thereof, hath throwne into miſerable ruine the whole Kingdome, when it was euen brought to the Catholique faith, and began to bring forth good fruits. For, ſhee with a powerfull hand prohibiteth the exerciſe of the true Religion (which was heretofore ouerthrowne by HENRY the Eighth, the forſaker therof, and afterwards repayred with the helpe of this See, by MARIE, lawfull Queene of England, of famous memorie) and embraceth the Hereſies of obſcure perſons; the Royall Councell once compoſed of the Engliſh Nobilitie, ſhee hath broken off, oppreſſeth ſuch as made profeſsion of, and exerciſed the Catholique Religion, re-eſtabliſhed the wicked Miniſters and Preachers of impietie, aboliſhed the ſacrifice of the Maſſe, Prayers, Faſtings, the diuiding of the Meates, the Celibate, and all Catholique Ceremonies, ſent Bookes ouer her whole Kingdome, containing manifeſt Hereſies, commended to her Subiects the prophane Myſteries and Inſtitutions

which ſhee had receiued, and obſerued from the decree of Caluin, diſplaced the Biſhops, Rectors, and Catholique Prieſts from their Churches and Benefices, and diſpoſed of them to Heretiques, and is bold to take vpon her to iudge and determine Eccleſiaſticall affaires; forbade the Prelates, the Clergie, and people, to acknowledge the Roman Church, or obſerue her Commandements, and canonicall duties; inforced diuers to ſweare obedience to her deteſtable Ordinances, to renounce the authoritie due to the Roman dignitie, and acknowledge her the onely Soueraigne ouer temporall and ſpirituall things; impoſed penalties and taxes vpon ſuch as were refractory to her Iniunctions; inflicted puniſhments vpon thoſe who perſiſted in the vnitie of the faith and obedience, impriſoned the Prelates and Gouernours of the Catholique Churches; where diuers being, with a tedious languiſhing and ſorrow, miſerably finiſhed their vnhappy dayes. All which things beeing thus euident and apparant to all Nations, and ſo manifeſtly proued by the graue teſtimony of diuers, that there is no place left for any excuſe, defence, or tergiuerſation: Wee, perceiuing that theſe impieties and miſchiefes doe ſtill multiply one by another, and that the perſecution of the faithfull, and the affliction of the Church doth daily increaſe, and waxe more heauy and grieuous, and finding that her heart is ſo obſtinate and obdurate, that ſhe hath not onely deſpiſed the wholeſome Prayers and admonitions which the Chriſtian Princes haue made for her better health and conuerſion, but that ſhee hath denyed paſſage to the Nuncio's, who, for this end, were ſent from this ſiege into England; and being compelled to beare the armes of Iuſtice againſt her, Wee cannot moderate the puniſhment that Wee are bound to inflict vpon her, whoſe Anceſtors merited ſo well of the Christian Common-wealth. Being then ſupported by His Authoritie,

who hath placed Vs vpon this Soueraigne Throne of Iuſtice, howſoeuer incapable of ſo great a charge, out of the fulneſſe of our Apoſtolicall power, doe pronounce and declare the ſaid ELIZABETH an Heretique, and fauourer of Heretiques, and thoſe who adhere vnto her in the foreſaid things, haue incurred the Sentence of Anathema, and are cut off from the vnitie of the bodie of Chriſt. That ſhee is depriued of the right which ſhee pretends to the foreſaid Kingdome, and of all and euery Seigniorie, Royaltie, and priuiledge thereof: and the Peeres, Subiects, and People of the ſayde Kingdome, and all others vpon what termes ſoeuer ſworne vnto her, freed from their Oath, and from all manner of dutie, fidelitie, and obedience: As Wee doe free them by the authoritie of theſe Preſents, and exclude the ſaid ELIZABETH from the right which ſhee pretendeth to the ſaid Kingdome, and the reſt before mentioned. Commanding moreouer, & enioyning all, and euery the Nobles, as Subiects, people, and others whatſoeuer, that they ſhall not once dare to obey her, or any her directions, Lawes, or Commandements, binding vnder the ſame Curſe, thoſe who doe any thing to the contrary. And foraſmuch as it may ſeeme difficult for them to obſerue theſe Preſents in euery place where they haue occaſion for them, Our will is, that Copies hereof being written by ſome publique Notarie, and ſealed with the Seale of ſome Eccleſiaſticall Prelate, or of his Court, ſhall be of as good effect through the whole World, as theſe Preſents might doe, if they were exhibited and repreſented. Giuen at Rome, at S. Peters, the 5. of March, in the yeere of the Incarnation of our Sauiour 1569. and of our Pont. the 5.
                              
                              
                                 Caeſar Glorianus.
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           This cauſed new iealouſies to increaſe, that ſome Monſter was a breeding: alſo, it manifeſted a new Rebellion preſently begun in Norfolke, which neuertheleſſe was aſſoone extinct as kindled. Certaine of the Nobles of Norfolke, to free the Duke, whom all the World did with an eſpeciall loue affect, practiſed a deſigne of collecting a great number of people together, at the inſtant as they were flocking to a Faire at Harleſton,
                           
                              Rebellion in Norfolke aſſoone ended as begun.
                            vnder colour of expulſing the Flemmings out of England, who to eſcape the tyranny of the Duke of Alua, were fled into this Country in great numbers. Some of them being apprehended, were brought to iudgement, and condemned of high-Treaſon: ELIZABETH, neuertheleſſe, to teſtifie her clemency, would ſuffer but onely three to be puniſhed, amongſt whom, I. Throgmorton was moſt remarkeable, who being examined by the Iudge, would anſwer nothing, but being brought to execution, cleared the reſt, and acknowledged himſelfe the principall author and perſwader thereof.
                        
                           I. Felton, who ſtucke vp the Popes Bull vpon the Biſhop of Londons Gate,
                              Felton puniſhed for ſticking vp the Popes Bull.
                            making no great difficultie of retyring, and ſauing himſelfe, was preſently taken, and brought to iudgement, and confeſſing boldly the deede, howſoeuer no way acknowledging it as a fault, was hanged hard by the place where hee had ſtucke vp the Bul, affecting a vaine kinde of ſhew of a glorious Martyr. For the reſt, the modeſter ſort of Papiſts miſliked this Bull,
                              The Papiſts reproue the Bull.
                            becauſe no lawfull admonition had preceded, & that She had formerly granted to them free exerciſe of their Religion in their particular Houſes with ſecuritie; or ſuch as made no ſcruple of conſcience to bee preſent at the Seruice in the Engliſh Church, fore-ſeeing a huge weight of dangers thereby to hang ouer their heads, continued euer after firme in their due obedience, perceiuing that the neighbour Princes,
                              The greateſt part cōtemne this Bull.
                            and Catholique Prouinces, neglected not the Queene, notwithſtanding this Bul, but ſeemed to contemne it as a vain ſound of words.
                        
                           The ſame day that Felton was arraigned, the Duke acknowledging his errour to proceed from inconſideration, teſtified his repentance ſo farre, that hee did not onely ſeeme to diſclaim any thought of marriage with the Queen of Scotland, but that his eares abhorred the remembrance of it, and promiſed vnder his hand, neuer to thinke further of attayning it, was freed out of the Tower of London, (where the plague was already begun) and ſent to his owne Houſe, to the great ioy of euery one, to be vnder the free cuſtodie of Henry Neuill. Neither truely could they plead againſt him by right of her Maieſties Law, from the 25. yeere of Edward the Third,
                              Cecill aduiſeth him to marry.
                            as Cecill aduertiſeth, who out of the affection he bare vnto him, laboured to eſpouſe him to another Wife, to the end to put by his thought of compaſſing the other, and to prouide for the publique peace. But, after a few daies, many things that hee ſuſpected, diſcouered themſelues: and their faith, who were of his moſt ſecret counſell, either with hope, or by corruption, was broken.
                        
                           
                              Diuers are impriſoned.
                           The times then were full of ſuſpitions and conſpiracies. For T. and Ed. Stanley, the two youngeſt ſonnes of the Earle of Darbie, by the Duke of Norfolkes Daughter, Gerrard, Rolſton, Hall, and others of the Countie of Darbie, conſpired to free the Queene of Scotland out of priſon; but Rolſtons Sonne, who was one of the company of the Gentlemen guarders, diſcouered the conſpiracy, and the reſt were impriſoned, except Hall, who ſaued himſelfe at the Ile of Man, and from thence was ſent ouer to Dunbritton, with re-commendation to the Biſhop of Roſſe, where hee was afterwards taken at the ſurprize of the Caſtle: and laſtly, put to death at London. The Biſhop of Roſſe himſelfe, being lately in cuſtodie, and ſet at libertie, is againe committed to the cuſtodie of the Biſhop of London, for intertaining clandeſtine conferences with the Earle of Southampton, a moſt deuoted man to the Romiſh Religion.
                        
                           In the meane time, Suſſex, accompanied with the Lord Scroope, with Companies of Souldiers being gone againe into Scotland, burn'd the Villages in the Valley of Annandale, ruined the Caſtle of Annandale, which belonged to Heris, and the Caſtle of Caer-Laueroc, belonging to Maxwell, who had made ſome pillaging incurſiōs into England, and brought them to ſuch diſtreſſe who continued on the Queene of Scotlands ſide, that the Duke of Chaſtelraut, and the Earles of Huntley and Argathell, ſend them a promiſe in writing ſealed vnder their hands, obliging themſelues thereby no longer to maintaine warres, and to abandon the Engliſh Rebels. This being done, hee forthwith returned, and for their valour Knighted Haſtings, Ruſſell, Browne, Hilton, Stapleton, and Muſgraue, and himſelfe afterwards, for his approued wiſdome and vertue,
                              Suſsex choſen a Priuy-Councellor.
                            was admitted to be of the Queenes Priuy Councell.
                        ELIZABETH, hauing her thoughts full of doubts, with various ſuſpitions, by reaſon of this Bull, and Norfolkes conſpiracy, ſent vnto the Queene of Scotland,
                           
                              Treaty with the Queene of Scotland.
                            being then at Chetteſworth, in the Countie of Darbie, Cecil, and Walte
                                 ••
                               Mildmay, who, in regard the waters were riſen aboue meaſure, it being in the Moneth of October, came thither with much difficultie, to conſult with her about the moſt conuenient meanes how to compound the variance in Scotland, for the reſtoring of her to her former eſtate, to ſecure ELIZABETH, and prouide for the ſafetie of her young Sonne. Shee could ſay nothing, but deplore her afflicted condition, and complayned of the fraudulent deuices of Count Murray, iuſtified the Duke of Norfolke, and repoſed all her hope on the courteſie of ELIZABETH, vnderſtanding that ſhee had the generall gouernement of the affaires of Scotland, as well as of England. They propounded vnto her, that to conclude a certaine peace betweene the two Kingdomes, ſhe ought to oblige her ſelfe, to confirme the Treatie of Edenborrough, and diſclaime

the title and right which ſhee pretended to England, ſo long as ELIZABETH, or any iſſue of her body ſhould liue. Not to renew or entertaine any alliance with any Prince whatſoeuer, againſt England; Not to admit any forreine troupes into Scotland, nor hold any Councell with the Engliſh or Iriſh, without notice firſt giuen to ELIZABETH; To ſend backe the Engliſh Fugitiues and Rebels, to ſatisfie the dammages done vpon the Frontiers; To make ſearch, according to the Law, of the Murder aſwell of Darley her Husband, as of Murray, and deliuer her Sonne into England for a pledge; Not to contract her ſelfe in marriage with any Engliſh man, without acquainting the Queene of England, nor with any other, contrary to the Ordinances of Scotland; That the Scots might not goe for Ireland, without leaue of the Queene of England; That for the performance of theſe things, the Queene, and the Commiſſioners appointed for the ſame, ſhall thereto ſet their hands and Seales; Six Hoſtages, whom the Queene of England would nominate, ſhould be ſent into England; That if the Queene of Scotland, or any other by her procurement, attempted any thing againſt her, ſhe ſhould in that re
                              •
                           pect alone, be cut off from all right which ſhee might claime in England; That the Caſtles of Hume, and Faſt-Caſtle, were held from the Engliſh for three yeeres ſpace; That ſhee ſhould deliuer into their hands certaine Forts in the Countrey of Galloway, or Cantire, to the end that the Borderers on that coaſt might not inuade Ireland: And laſtly, that the State of Scotland ſhould confirme al theſe things by Act of Parliament.
                        To theſe things, her ſelfe ſuddenly with great dexteritie and wiſdome, made anſwere: neuertheleſſe referred it to be anſwered more fully by the Biſhop of Roſſe her Ambaſſadour in England, Alexander Gorden, Biſhop of Galloway, and to the Baron Leuinſtone, deputed by Her, lieutenants of Scotland; who afterwards allowing ſome of theſe Articles,

and reiecting others, made anſwer, as here followeth:
THat it was reaſonable to confirme the Treatie of Edenborrough,
                              The Anſwer to the propoſition of the Engliſh. and renounce the title of England, during the life of ELIZABETH; but as concerning the ancient alliance of France, it was to be conſidered, that if they did not intertaine that ſtill, the Queene ſhould loſe her dowrie, the 100. armed Men, and the 124. Souldiers of the Scottiſh Guard, being Archers, the Merchants, Schollers, and many who are to haue inheritance, their penſions and immunities which they enioy, ſhall be cast out, and depriued of them, and of the loue and aſsiſtance of a moſt puiſſant Nation: which things, if the Engliſh did not amply ſatisfie, the Queene of Scotland could in no manner renounce this alliance. But that ſhee would not entertaine any forraigne ſouldiers, vnleſſe ſuch rebellion might happen, which could not be ſuppreſſed by the ſtrength of the Countrey. That ſhe would haue no intelligence, or keepe correſpondancie with any of the Engliſh, to the preiudice of England, prouided that the Q. of England on the other ſide intertayned none with the Scots, to the preiudice of Scotland. That if there were any Engliſh Rebels, and Fugitiues in Scotland, they might demand them of the Scottiſh Rebels who were for the more part neere as they, to examine by deputies the dammages which they had receiued, and make inquiry, according to the Lawes of Scotland, of the death of Darley and Murray. That ſhee could not deliuer the King in pledge, in regard hee was in their cuſtodie, who vnder his name coloured the Rebellion againſt the Queene. That it was a ſtrange innouation, that a free Princeſſe ſhould receiue Lawes from a ſtranger-Prince, or his Subiects, for her marriage. That the Scots ſhould

not paſse into Ireland, to any preiudice of the Queene of England, prouided that the Iriſh were by a reciprocall Law obliged not to paſſe into Scotland. Agreed for confirmation of the ſecuritie, to giue ſuch pledges as the Queene of England ſhould nominate, the Duke of Chaſtelraut, and the Earles of Huntley, Argathell, and of Athole excepted. Furthermore, it ſhall be in their power to exclude the Queene of Scots from all right of Succeſsion in England, if ſhee ſhould goe about to doe any thing contrary to the right and authoritie of the Queene of England, ſo that the Queene of England would be bound in the like penaltie, if ſhee ſhould doe any thing againſt the power and priuiledge of the Queene of Scotland. They demand that restitution be made of Caſtle-Hume, and Faſt-Caſtle, to the Baron of Hume, being the Lord to whom by right they appertaine, and the Engliſh to hold them no longer. To deliuer vp the Forts in Galloway and Cantire, were to no other end, but to miniſter a new occaſion of warre.
                        
                        
                           
                              They cannot agree.
                           When theſe things could in no wiſe bee agreed vpon, neither any Commiſſioners came from the Vice-Roy of Scotland, in the meane while it was divulged all abroad, that the Pope, the King of France, and the Duke D' Alua, was importunately ſought vnto for ayde, to ſet the Queene of Scotland at libertie; and the Engliſh Rebels, the Earle of Weſtmerland, and the Counteſſe of Northumberland, and others (whom the Pope had ſupplyed with 12. thouſand Crownes by the Biſhop of Roſſe) were come backe out of Scotland; It is cleare that this Treaty brought forth nothing: but that ELIZABETH, (euen as one choſen by conſent to ſit at the Sterne of all Great-Brittaine, commands by her owne authority, that the Aſſembly of the States of Scotland ſhould be prorogued, and Truce often

talked of. The Commanders doe grieuouſly vexe and torment all parts of Scotland.
                        
                        
                           Roſſe ſends the Articles of this Treaty to the Pope,
                              The Biſhop of Roſſe requires helpe to free the Queene of Scots.
                            to France, and to Spaine, and certified that the Queene muſt neceſſarily conſent vnto them, vnleſſe their ſuccour and counſell came in time to relieue her, which he vehemently craued, but in vaine. For indeed their heads were poſſeſſed with other affaires; Spaine was preparing to marry Anne of Auſtria, daughter to Maximilian the Emperour, his Niece by the ſiſter-ſide, who at the ſame time departed from Zealand, to goe for Spaine. To whom, ELIZABETH, for a chiefe teſtification of honour and loue to the Houſe of Auſtria, ſent Charles Howard with a warlike fleete, and choyce Nobilitie, to conduct her thither through the Engliſh Sea.
                        The twelfth yeere of ELIZABETHS reigne beeing now happily finiſhed, in which the Papiſts expected, according to the prediction of their Diuines, the euent of a golden day, as they ſaid; all good people were ioyfull, and happy, and with a delightfull ioy began to celebrate the ſeuenteenth day of Nouember, (being the day of her comming to the Crowne) with Prayers and Thankeſ-giuing, which were performed in the Churches, vowes were multiplied, ringing of Bells, Carrolls, Turneyes, and publique ſolemne ioy euery-where. And this hath continued euer ſithence ſhe liued, in teſtimony of the loue and obedience that her Subiects did beare her.
                        In the middeſt of theſe things, dyed H. Clifford,
                           
                              The death of the Earle of Cumberland.
                            Earle of Cumberland, the Second of the name, Henries Sonne, whom HENRY the Eighth had rayſed to the honour of an Earle, in the yeere 1525. being otherwiſe of a very noble and ancient Houſe, and hauing gotten a great increaſe of honour by marriages, which he contracted with the heires of Veſciores and Viponts or Vieux-ponts, who had beene anciently hereditary Vicounts of Weſtmerland, who by his firſt Wife

begot Eleanor, the ſecond daughter of C. Brandon, Duke of Suffolke, and of Mary, Siſter to HENRY the Eighth, Margaret, who was married to Henrie the Earle of Darbies Son, of much hope, and with great pompe, beeing the onely heire of that Houſe. But hauing by his ſecond Wife, Anne Dacrey, two Sonnes, who were ſucceſſiuely heires to their fathers honour, this hope vaniſhed.
                        
                           
                              The death of Throgmorton.
                           There dyed alſo N. Throgmorton, of whom I haue often ſpoken, the fourth Son of G. Throgmorton, the Golden Knight, and of Katherine, daughter of N. Baron of Vaux; a man of great experience, of ſolid iudgement, and of a ſingular dexteritie of ſpirit, who, ſtirring many things vnder the reigne of MARY, with great difficultie, by his prudence and eloquence, ſaued his life: afterwards vnder ELIZABETH, hee was imployed in many Ambaſſies, wherein he got much honour, vntill, for the gaining of the Earle of Leiceſters fauour, hee oppoſed Cecill, who was his Emulator, for thereby hee could attaine but to very ſmall meanes, and triuiall preferments, as chiefe Butler of England, and Treaſurer of the Queens Chamber. Being at Supper in the Earle of Leiceſters Houſe, and eating ſallads, hee was ſuddenly taken with an inflammation of the Liuer, as ſome haue affirmed, or with a Catarre, as others ſay, and not without iealouſie of being poyſoned, whereof hee dyed in a good time, both for himſelfe and his, being then in great danger both of loſing his life and goods, beeing a man of a ſtirring and working ſpirit.
                        In Ireland, Connogher, O-Brien, Earle of Twomond, not able to endure Edward Fitton, Gouernour of Connaught, who began to gouerne the Prouince ſomething more ſeuerely,
                              Rebillion in Ireland quenched before they ſaw the day.
                            and to take away from the great Ones, and chiefe of the Countrey, all hope of polling the Subiects of Ireland, had ſecretly plotted Rebellion with others, but it was preuented by a happy chance. For, hauing appointed the day to take armes, comes in Fitton, who knew nothing, and

courteouſly aduertiſed the Earle, that he would lodge the morrow following with him, with certaine of his friends. The Earles conſcience accuſing him, and beeing poſſeſt with a ſtrange feare, (an ill ſigne in doubtfull things) thinking that he was now diſcouered, and that the Gouernour came to him rather like an enemy then a gueſt, retired himſelfe forth-with into France, leauing them all in doubt what was become of him. The Conſpirators, fearing that he was gone into England to diſcouer the plot, continued in obedience, whereof he vnderſtanding, ſhewed himſelfe wiſe at laſt, and hauing confeſt all the buſines to Norris, then Ambaſſadour in France, imployed him to mediate Queene ELIZABETHS fauour, with whom he found ſuch Grace, that he was reſtored againe to his Eſtate.
                        But Stukeley, an Engliſhman, a riotous Prodigall,
                              Stukeley flieth out of Ireland.
                            and vaine-glorious fellow, who after he had conſumed all his eſtate, retired into Ireland, hauing loſt all hope of getting the Marſhall-ſhip of Wexford, and perceiuing himſelfe to be deſpiſed of euery one, and being vnable to raiſe any commotion, after belching vp moſt vnworthy reproches of his Princeſſe, who had done him many fauours, ſlipped ouer into Italie, to Pope Pius the fifth, and by his flattering tongue, inſinuated beyond all credit into the fauour of this pernicious old man, who breathed out the ruine of Queene ELIZABETH, making great blags, and promiſing that with three thouſand Italians, he would driue all the Engliſh out of Ireland, and burne the Engliſh Fleet; which he afterward villainouſly attempted, but to his owne ruine, as hereafter we will ſhew.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Booke 2. 1571.THE FOVRETEENTH YEERE OF Her Reigne. Anno Dom. 1571.
                     
                        IN the firſt moneth of the yeere, Queene ELIZABETH entring into London in Royall State, viſited that faire Cloiſter called the Bourſe, which T. Greſham, Knight, a Citizen, and a Marchant Royall of London, had cauſed to be built for the vſe of Marchants, and by the voice of a Cryer, and with ſound of Trumpets in dedicating thereof, named it
                     
                        
                           The royall Exchange.The Royall Exchange.
                        A few dayes after, howſoeuer She were very ſparing in the diſpoſing of Honours, hauing made in twelue yeeres ſpace,
                              The ereation of Baron Burghley.
                            not aboue foure Barons, ſhe ſolemnly graced William Cecill with the Title of Baron of Burghley, hauing on Barons Robes, and with theſe formall words,

                              AS well in regard of the long ſeruice which he hath done in the time of our Progenitors, the Kings of England,
                              The manner of creating Barons. as alſo for the faithfull and agreeable obedience, which he hath alwaies and in diuers waies teſtified vnto vs from the beginning of our Raigne, not ceaſing dayly, not onely in our great and waighty affaires to afford vs counſell, but generally in all deſsignes concerning the Kingdome; as alſo in reſpect of his vigilancy, valour, prudence, dexterity, integrity of life, fore-knowledge, care, and fidelity: out of our ſpeciall fauour, certaine teſtimony, and meere motion, we haue created, eſtabliſht, and raiſed him to the ſtate, dignity, and honour of Baron Burghley, and haue impoſed vpon him, and giuen and granted vnto him the name, ſtile, and title of Baron of Burghley, to haue and to hold the ſame foreuer, to him and the heires males which ſhall be borne from his body.
                        
                        Of whom I haue already freely ſpoken, and will againe make mention, as well as of others whom ſhee hath raiſed to the ſtate of Barons, becauſe it is amongſt the moſt ample degrees of Honour. For the Barons of the Parliaments of England, are borne Peeres, and great Councellors of the Kingdome, and enioy diuers immunities and Priuiledges, which are not to be mentioned in this place, but I haue noted elſe-where.
                        A little after, Ridolph, a Florentine, who had vſed trading for fifteene yeeres ſpace in London, deliuered ſecretly vnto the Queene of Scotland, Letters from the Pope,
                              Letters from the Pope to the Queene of Scotland.
                            importing promiſes to imploy himſelfe for the aduancement of the Catholique Religion, and Himſelfe willed her to giue credit in all things to Ridolph, and to learne from him, who was then going for Italy, what meanes might be beſt for the re-eſtabliſhing of the Catholique Religion, and appeaſing of the miſchiefs in England. Ridolph alſo ſollicited the

Queene, by the ſeuerall Letters which he wrote vnto her, to aduiſe herevpon with the Duke of Norfolke & his friends, and to recommend it to them. But ſhee deferred the returne of any anſwer, vntill ſhe might perceiue how the Treaty which was already begun, would take effect, notwithſtanding the Kings of France and Spaine, and the Duke of Alua had written to her to the ſame purpoſe. For the Earle of Morton, Petcarne, Abbot of Dunfermelin, and I. Macgill, were come to treat about the affaires of Scotland, in the Kings name, and hauing receiued command from Queene ELIZABETH, more cleerely to vnfold the cauſes of the Queenes depoſing, and to proue them to be iuſt, exhibited a prolix Cōmentarie, by which, with an inſolent freedome,
                              Edict of the Scots againſt the authority Royall.
                            and vehemencie of words, they ſtrained themſelues to proue by ancient and moderne examples, ſearcht out of all places, that according to the ancient right of Scotland, the people of Scotland were vnder the King, and that by the authority of Caluin, the Magiſtrates were appointed to bridle their vnrulie appetites, and had authority to puniſh wicked Kings by impriſonment, & depoſe them from their Kingdomes; and vaine-gloriouſly boaſted to haue ſhewed the Queen courteſie, in permitting her to ſubſtitute her Sonne in her place, and appoint him Tutors. That it was not in reſpect of her innocency, that ſhee ſubſiſted, but out of the mercy of her people, with diuers other things, which factious ſpirits are accuſtomed to alledge againſt Royall Maieſty.
                              Condemned by the Qu. of England.
                            Queene ELIZABETH not able with any patience to read this, ſecretly condemned it, as iniurious to Kings; and as for the Deputies, ſhe anſwered them, that ſhe could not yet perceiue any iuſt cauſe why they ſhould ſo vexe and trouble their Queen, and therfore wiſht that they would rather ſeeke out ſome meanes to quench the diſcord in Scotland.
                        
                        In the proſecution whereof, it was propounded in the houſe of Bacon, Lord Keeper of the great Seale, to the Biſhops

of Roſſe and Galloway, and to Baron Leuiſton, Deputies for the Queene of Scotland, that for the ſafety of the Kingdome and Queene of England, and the Nobles of Scotland who were of the Kings part, that the Duke of Chaſtelraut, the Earles of Huntley and Argathell, of Hume, of Seris, and another Baron ought to be giuen in pledge, and the Caſtles of Dunbriton, and Hume deliuered for three yeeres vnto the Engliſh, before the Queene could be ſet at liberty. To which they anſwered,
THat it need not be doubted,The demāds of the Engliſh for the freedome of the Qu. of Scotland. that the Queene of Scotland, who had voluntarily put herſelfe vnder the Protection and guard of the Queene of England, would willingly giue contentment in any thing which might conueniently be done. But to deliuer ſuch great perſons in pledge, with ſuch Forts, were nothing leſse then in depriuing a miſerable Queene of the helpe of her faithfulleſt friends, and her ſtrongeſt places of defence, to be expoſed as a prey vnto her aduerſaries.
                        
                        But they offered to giue in pledge the two ſaid Earles, and two Barons: And as for the Forts, they ſaid, that according to their Couenants with France, they could not giue them to the Engliſh, that they could not grant them alſo to the French. But, ſaid Bacon,
                              The Engliſh refuſe the offers of the Scots.
                            
                           the whole Kingdome of Scotland, the Prince, the Peeres, and the Forts, are not ſufficient ſecurity for the Queene, and the moſt flouriſhing Kingdome of England: and therefore, what ſecurity ſoeuer the Scots might propoſe, the Queene of Scotland ought not to be ſet at liberty.
                        
                        Hereupon the Scots forthwith began to coniecture, and ſpake openly, that now they fully perceiued, that the Engliſh had reſolued to hold their Queene perpetually in England, and by the ſame meanes interrupt the Treaty, ſithence they ſtood ſo ſtiffly in demanding ſuch ſecurity, as Scotland
                           
could not any maner of way performe. Howſoeuer, the other Councellours of England proteſted to deſire nothing more then the freedome of the Queene of Scotland, prouided, that they gaue good and ſufficient ſecurity; and in this nature they treated hereupon, and to haue the King, with Morton and his Companions. Who plainely anſwered, that they had no power nor authority to treat, whether they ought to receiue the Queene into Scotland, or deliuer the King.
                              Alteration among the Scots.
                            But her Deputies reiected ſuch flying off, as friuolous, iudging that thoſe who were the authors of depoſing her, had power ſufficient to free her, without asking the other Conſpirators, ſithence the fault of one, equally polluteth all the Confederates. As for the Prince, who was yet ſcarce fiue yeeres of age, he could giue no power at all. And as for the Vice-Roy, that he had left all his affaires to the pleaſure of Queene ELIZABETH: They prayed them, either to bring in the others who were ſworne, into conſultation, or to proceed without them vpon equall conditions.
                        
                        But Queene ELIZABETH knowing well, that they could conclude of nothing for her ſecurity, or for the King and Queen of Scotland, if th'one and th'other conſented not, thought it reaſonable, that the States of Scotland, who ought forth-with to aſſemble, ſhould make choice of certaine men, who might labour the mediation of the peace. Whereupon the Biſhop of Roſse and his Colleagues openly complayned,
                              Complaints of the Scots againſt the Engliſh.
                            that certaine Councellors of England had abuſed the vnderſtanding of their Queene, and the patience of the Queene of Scotland, deceiued the Stranger Princes, and ſoothed the Scots with a preiudiciall hope; the Queene of Scotland her ſelfe being full of indignation and griefe, to ſee ſuch delayes, called home the Biſhop of Galloway, & Count Leuiſton, & notwithſtanding that Qu. ELIZABETH had commanded the Biſhop of Roſse, to depart from London, ſhe countermanded him to continue ſtill there, which was not without ielouſie to thoſe who

were of her part in Scotland, who determined to take vp Armes, and giue no more credit to thoſe hurtfull truces, and aſſembles.
                        For whileſt they treated of theſe things in England, they receiued great dammages in the puniſhments of many, and murdering of others, the taking of Dunbrittō, ſituated neere Glotte or Cluide, vpon an arme of the ſea, beeing the ſtrongeſt and beſt fortified Caſtle in all Scotland: I. Hamilton, Arch-biſhop of S. Andrews, brother to the Duke of Chaſtelraut, was hanged, as a confederate of murdering the King, without being brought, according to the cuſtome of the Countrey, to Iudgement, onely vpon the teſtimony of a prieſt, who iuſtified, that vpon taking confeſſion of the aſſaſſinates of the King, he heard them ſay that he was of the confederacie.
                        The Queene being priſoner, could no longer harbour in her heart what ſhee had a long time concealed, perceiuing herſelfe out of all hope, plunged in a deepe ſorrow, that of all her ſeruants they had left her but onely 10. and a prieſt, to doe her ſeruice, and that all meanes both for her health and liberty (being euer moſt charitable) ſeemed to bee taken away. She ſent thereupon ſecretly vnto the Duke of Norfolke a forme of her deſſignes,
                              A remembrance ſent from the Q. of Scotland to the Duke of Norfolke.
                            which ſhee had written long before, and certaine amorous Letters, written in a particular Character only betweene them two, with other Letters, to perſwade him ſtill to rely vpon the Pope and the Spaniard, by Ridolph, whom ſhee recommended vnto him, as one moſt affectionate to his ſeruice, and very neceſſary to be employed in his Affaires.
                        But Higford, the Dukes Secretary, who copied out this remembrance, and thoſe Letters in the vſuall Character, being commanded to throw them into the fire, hid them ſecretly vnder the mats in the Dukes Chamber, for ſome further Deſſigne as it ſeemeth This Ridolph being one day in the Dukes preſence, ſpake, and made Barker often iterate the ſame.
                        
                           THat he had obſerued, that there was as well among the Nobles as meaner ſort in England, three ſorts who ſtudied nouelties; ſome were ſuch as had flouriſhed vnder the authority of MARIE, and were then but few in number; others, who beeing zealous of the Romane Religion, fretted that they were not permitted the free exerciſe thereof: others, who being tranſported with a new hope, grieued at their preſent fortune, who to enterprize any thing that would be propounded vnto them, wanted nothing but a Leader of ſome Noble Race, money, and forraigne aſsiſtance. That there could not be found one more illuſtrious, and capable in ſuch reſpect, then the Duke, who had the generall fauour of the people, and that it ſtood with reaſon, that he ſhould reuenge the iniuries done him, in that they had ſo long kept him priſoner, againſt the Lawes of the Countrie, and that they had not called him to the Aſſembly of Parliament, ſithence hee had his place and voice, as beeing chiefe amongſt all the Peeres, & Earle Marſhall of the Kingdome of England.
                        
                        And with the greater efficacie to perſwade him to theſe things, ſhewed him a Catalogue of the Nobles, who had deuoted both themſelues and their fortunes to his ſeruice, if hee vndertooke this; aſſured him, that for forraigne helpe, the Pope would be at all the charges of the Warre, prouided that the Catholike Religion might bee aduanced, hauing to this end disburſed the yeere before a hundred thouſand Crownes, when the Bull was publiſht, of which he himſelfe had diſtributed to the Engliſh Fugitiues 12000. promiſed, that the Spaniard (prouoked by the iniuries of the Engliſh) would ſend him for aide 4000. horſe, and 6000. foot, which might very conueniently be brought in about the beginning of ſummer, at Harwich, a Port in Eſſex, at whoſe approch, the Duke had a great number of

ſtrong ſhips; and without ſuſpicion, becauſe about the ſame inſtant, the Duke Medinoe-Coeli was to come into Flanders with a great Fleet. Concluded laſtly, that this might be ſuppoſed to be a meanes to free the Duke from all ſuſpicion of attempting the Kingdome, and to prouide for the ſafety of the Queene of England; prouided that ſhe embraced, or at leaſt-wiſe tolerated the Romane religion, and conſented that the Queene of Scotland ſhould marry the Duke.
                        The Duke conceiuing theſe things ſomewhat probable, gaue eare vnto him, but neuertheleſſe refuſed to ſubſcribe the Letters of Credit, which were offered him by Ridolph being vpon departure, and would not harken to the counſel which the Biſhop of Roſſe ſuggeſted to him by Barker, after he had often reuolued it in his minde;
TO ſeize vpon the Queene on the ſuddaine,The counſell of the Biſhop of Roſse. with a number of choiſe Gentlemen, & to diſturbe the Parliament being then aſſembled. And that this might eaſily be done, conſidering the opportunity of times, ſince this Aſsembly afforded him ſo many Gentlemē at his deuotion, which could not be conuented in any other place without ſuſpition. That he had iuſt cauſe to be mooued hereunto, in regard they had kept him ſo long priſoner, againſt the Lawes of the Countrey, and that they would not admit him to the Parliament, and that they had ſought out moſt ſeuere Lawes againſt the Papiſts. And by pregnant examples, ſithence Caſtriot in Italy, and others in all Countreyes, hauing inopinately enterprized waighty affaires, haue happily ſucceeded in them. And if not long ſince, fiue Gentlemen of Scotland were able to breake off the Parliament, by which Murray was to be baniſhed, and bring the Queene vnder their power; they might by the ſame meanes, and as eaſily, if they would lay hold of the occaſion offered

vnto them) ſeyze vpon Qu. ELIZABETH, accompliſh the marriage of the Qu. of Scotland, and prouide in England for the Catholique Religion, without any great noyſe or need of forreine aſsiſtance.
                        
                        
                           
                              The attempts of oothers.
                           The Duke, who of his naturall good inclination was far from offending, reiected this counſell from his heart, as moſt pernitious and dangerous. But now H. Percy offered the Biſhop to imploy himſelfe about the deliuerance of the Queene of Scotland from priſon, prouided that Grange, and Carre Farnihurſt, ſhould receiue him at his entrance into Scotland, and that the Earle of Northumberland, (his Brother) who was priſoner, ſhould be ſet free. Howſoeuer, being ſuſpected, becauſe of his great familiaritie with Baron Burghley, and for that hee ſo long deferred the enterpriſe, they gaue as little credit to this counſell, as to that of Powels of Stanford, one of the company of the Gentlemen of the Guard, and to that of Owen, one of the vaſſals of the Earle of Arundell, who ſhould haue vndertaken this, but the Biſhop of Roſſe perceiuing they were vnable to effect it, being men of no note, hindered them. As for other buſineſſes which were cloſely done in theſe paſſages, wee will omit, vntill the light diſcouer them.
                        
                           
                              A great Earthquake.
                           Whiles all theſe things were ſecretly handled in London, there happened a moſt feareful Earth-quake in the Eaſterne parts about the Countie of Hereford, neere the Towne of Kinaſton. For, vpon the twelfth of March, about ſixe of the clocke in the euening, the Earth opened, and a Mountaine with a Rocke vpon which it was ſituated, after a hideous noyſe, and ſtrange craſh, that it was heard by the Neighbours a great wayes off, raiſed vp it ſelfe, as if it had wakened out of a profound ſleepe, and forſaking his deepe bed below, mounted vp into an higher place, carrying with it the Trees which were rooted thereupon, the Shepheards Tents, and the Flockes of Sheepe feeding thereon. Some Trees were almoſt quite couered with Earth, as if they had

but newly taken root there. It left in the place from whence it departed, an ouerture of fortie foot wide, and 80. elles long: the whole field was twenty Akers or thereabouts. It ouerthrew a little Chappell neere vnto it, carryed from the Eaſt into the Weſt, an Yew-tree which was planted in the Church-yard; and, with its violence, draue vp before it high-wayes, with Shepheards Caues, with Plants and Trees which were thereon. It made mountaines leuell, and arable grounds mountainous, as if then they had took their beginnings. And thus from Saturday at night, vntill Munday noone next following, it reſted not, till at laſt, as if it were then tyred with the long way, and wearied with its weighty burthen.
                        A little before, there was celebrated in France at Meſires ſur Meuſe, the marriage betweene Charles the Fourth King of France, and Elizabeth of Auſtrich, the Daughter of Maximilian the Emperour, with great and royall pompe. Elizabeth, to teſtifie her ioy with honour, according to the entyre affection ſhee bore vnto the Emperour, whom ſhe honoured as her father, and to ſhew her loue vnto the King of France her Neighbour and Confederate, and for her owne honour, ſent into France T. Sackuil, Baron of Buckhurſt, who, according to his owne worth,
                              The Ambaſſage of Baron Buckhurſt.
                            and his Princes dignitie, was magnificently intertained. Hee was accompanied with Guido Caulcancius, a Florentine, a man of great experience, with whom the Queene-Mother of France, mannaging the affaires of her and her children, openly treated of a match betweene ELIZABETH,
                              A propoſition of a match betweene Elizabeth, and the Duke of Aniou.
                            and Henry the Duke of Aniou her Sonne, and gaue him withall certaine Articles to preſent vnto ELIZABETH: and after that, the King of France made earneſt ſuit for his Brother by Mauluoiſie his Ambaſſadour ordinary, La Motte, F. Archant, and de Foix, who beſtowed a whole yeere in ſolliciting ELIZABETH, ſometimes all together, and otherwhiles ſeuerally. This marriage did ſomething fortifie

their hope, that the Romane Religion had taken no firme root in the Dukes heart, as well in reſpect of his tender yeeres,
                              The hopes which they conceiued.
                            as being educated vnder Carualet, who was much inclining to the Proteſtants Religion: the hopes which they had by little and little to win him to the profeſſion of it, and the ſuppoſitions of the benefits which this marriage might bring to the reformed Religion: hee being a young Prince, and of a warlike diſpoſition, might, by vniting the Forces of Germany and England, bring the refractory Papiſts to obedience, eſtabliſh a perpetual league of peace betweene England and France, and interrupt the deſignes of the Queene of Scotland, the King of Spaine, the Pope, and the Iriſh Rebels, ſithence hee might ioyne vnto the Crowne of England, the Dukedomes of Aniou, Burbonnions, and Auuergnia, yeelding great Reuenues: And it appeared that hee might adde greater things hereunto. Laſtly, if this match were refuſed, neuer would there be a more honourable match offered.
                        
                           
                              Articles of marriage.
                           After diuers debatings, the French propounded three Articles: the firſt of which concerned the crowning of the Duke: the ſecond, the gouernement of the Kingdome ioyntly with Queene ELIZABETH: the third, the toleration of their Religion: To which, anſwer was made;

                              The Anſwer.THat the Queene could not agree, without the conſent of the State of the Kingdome, that hee ſhould be crowned after the marriage was accompliſhed, but that ſhe would willingly conſent (if the States thought good) that vpon termes of marriage, he ſhould be graced with the matrimoniall Crowne, (ſo She termed it) without doing any preiudice to her Maiestie, nor to her Heires and Succeſſors: And that ſhe would not fayle to make him diſcerne a moſt ample honour when hee was once her Husband. As for the common gouernement, ſhee thought it not vnfit, to take

for a Companion, and Coadiutor in a coniunct adminiſtration, him whom ſhee had honoured with the title of a King, and her Husband. And as for the toleration of the Religion which hee profeſt, that ſhee could not giue her conſent thereto for certaine cauſes, which (as I haue collected them out of the Letters of Queene ELIZABETH, were theſe:) That howſoeuer the externall reuerence of Religion might bee tolerated between the Subiects of the ſame Kingdome vnder diuers manners and formes, neuertheles, this ſtrange forme, moſt repugnant of all, which ſhould bee betweene the Queene, the head of her People, and her husband, ſeemed not onely dangerous, but of all moſt auerſe and diſagreeing. That She deſired the King of France, and the Queene, his Mother, equally to weigh in euen Ballance, the perill which ſhe ſhould vnder-goe, and on the other ſide, the honour of the Duke of Anio
                                    •
                                 
                              : And that in tolerating his religion, ſhe violated the Lawes eſtabliſht in her Kingdome, beget a diſtaſte in her good Subiects, & lightened the heart of the wicked, all which ſhe verily ſhould vndergoe for the honour of the Duke.
                        
                        But the French-men vrged, that if ſhe liued without exerciſe of Religion, ſhee ſeemed to haue none at all, and that ſhe would not for her Honour bee accounted an Atheiſt. She on the contrary replyed:
THat if ſhe did but husbandize thoſe ſeedes of pure Religion which were in him, and receiue increaſe thereof, he ſhould ſee within a ſhort time, that it would redound greatly to his Honour.
                        
                        In the end they came ſo farre, that if the Duke would aſſiſt with the Queene in the celebration of Diuine Seruice,

and not refuſe to heare and learne the Doctrine of the Proteſtants, She would condiſcend, that neither hee nor his people ſhould be conſtrained to vſe the Ceremonies and Faſhions accuſtomed in the Engliſh Church, nor moleſted if they vſed other Ceremonies, not vtterly repugnant to the Word of God, prouided that they vſed them in priuate places, and that they miniſtred no occaſion to the Engliſh of violating their Lawes eſtabliſht. De Foix, vpon theſe words, To the Word of God, pauſed a little. Queene ELIZABETH, to giue them content, commanded that in ſtead of thoſe words, they ſhould put in, To the Church of GOD; but the one pleaſing no more then the other, he deſired that To the Catholike Church might be put in. Queen ELIZABETH would no way aſſent thereunto: and hereupon this matter began to waxe colder by little and little.
                        
                           
                              To what end this marriage was propoſed.
                           Some are perſwaded, that this Match was not ſeriouſly vndertooke by the King of France, and the Queene, his Mother, but onely to the end that the remembrance of a match contracted with a Proteſtant Princeſſe, might bee a teſtimonie vnto the Proteſtants, of their ſincere meaning vnto them, and to preuent the match which they ſuſpected to be treated of with the King of Nauar, whom the King of France would haue married to his Siſter. The like opinion was of Queene ELIZABETH in England, and that ſhee had not treated of this marriage, but to cauſe the King of France, his Mother, and Brothers, to ſhew themſelues more fauourable to the Proteſtants in France, breake off the hopes of the Queene of Scotland, and the plots which the Spaniard and the Iriſh practiſed againſt England, by the negotiation of the Cardinall of Lorraine, and to auoid the Thunderbolts of the Pope, by the interpoſition of the French: For about this time, the Earle of Leicester, who ſaw more cleerely into the deepeſt thoughts of Queene ELIZABETH then any other, wrote vnto Walſingham, Ambaſſadour in France,
                           
                              THat the Queene had a deſire to marry, but that ſhe was not very hot vpon it; and that ſhe was of opinion, that it was more neceſſary then her deſire was to effect it: & moreouer, that when the Duke of Aniou went from the Article concerning the toleration of Religion, which Queen ELIZABETH would with ſuch caution haue bound him to, that he no longer perſiſted in his ſuite.
                        
                        As the French tooke care and paine to make vp this Match, certaine of the Engliſh laboured no leſſe,
                              They haſten the mariage of the Qu. of Scotland.
                            to aduance that betweene the Queene of Scotland and the Duke of Norfolke, which through their wicked counſels they had againe reuiued, contrary to his promiſe, which firſt of all was diſcouered by theſe meanes.
                        
                           Ridolph the Florentine, who we told you was ſent vnto forraigne Nations, about the affaires of the Queene of Scotland, had declared vnto Charles Bayliffe, a Flemming, one of his houſhold ſeruants, all that he had laboured with the Duke of Alua, and put into his hands a packet of Letters, written in counterfait Characters to her, to the Ambaſſadour of Spaine, to the Duke of Norfolke, to the Biſhop of Roſſe, and to Baron Lumley, which hee carried with him, notwithſtanding the Biſhop commanded him to leaue it with the Gouernour of Callais to keepe. But hee had no ſooner landed at Douer, but hee was apprehended and impriſoned, and the Packet ſent to the Lord Cobham, Gouernour of the Cinque Ports: The Biſhop, who firſt of all knew it, wrought ſo quickly and craftily with Cobham, who was partly of counſell in the deſſignes of the Duke, that he deliuered him this Packet, and another in ſtead thereof was ſent to the Queenes Councell, wherein were old-dated Letters, tending to ſmall purpoſes, and aduertiſed Bayliffe thereof, who being brought into queſtion, neuertheleſſe confeſſed ſomething of what had paſt,

and amongſt the reſt, that this Packet had paſt through the Biſhops hands, who beeing aduertiſed thereof, forthwith ſent away Cutbert his Secretary, to diſperſe amongſt his friends the counterfait Characters, and all that might doe hurt; ſo as when Suſſex, Burghley, Mildmay, and Sadler came to ſearch his houſe, they could finde nothing at all, nor get any thing out of him by examination, he ſtanding vpon it, that an Ambaſſadour ought not to giue an account of his dealings to any but his Prince. He was notwithſtanding committed for two daies after to the Biſhop of Ely, and a little while after that, carried to the Iſle of Ely: Stanley and Gerard, Knights, and Rolſton, of whom I haue ſpoken,
                              The Biſhop of Roſſe and others committed.
                            were clapt vp in the Tower of London, and Howard, who aſpired to the Arch-biſhoprike of Yorke, was deliuered vpon ſuſpicion to the cuſtody of the Arch-biſhop of Canterbury.
                        
                        
                           
                              Money ſent into Scotland.
                           The Queene of Scots, hauing about this time ſent a certaine ſumme of money to the Ambaſſadour of France, to be conueyed to thoſe that were of her partie in Scotland, the Ambaſſadour deliuered it to Barker and Higford, who aduiſing with the Duke, put it into the hands of one Browne of the Towne of Shrewsburie, a ſeruant to the Duke, to be deliuered in Scotland to Baron Heris, by Baniſter and Lowder; Browne beeing a crafty fellow, perceiuing by the weight, that in ſtead of Siluer they, had giuen him Gold, deliuered it ouer to the Councell of State. Hereby the wiſer ſort began to obſerue, that the Duke had already begun to treſpaſſe againſt her Maieſty, in lending ayde to Heris, and to the Scots her profeſſed enemies, who had for
                              •
                           aged the Frontier Inhabitants of England. And hereupon Higford was committed to priſon, who preſently confeſſed all the buſineſſe concerning the money, and ſhewed where the Letters and other writings were, and the ſecret Characters, and the remembrances and inſtructions of the Qu. of Scotland, of which I haue ſpoken, hidden vnder Ma
                              ••
                           land Tiles, importing,

                              THat the French approued of the intended meeting with the Scots, but that the Propoſition of marriage of the Duke of Aniou with Queen ELIZABETH, was to no other end, but onely the better to colour the aſſiſtance performed to the Queene of Scotland, for her re-eſtabliſhment. That they ſecretly preuented any contract with Iohn of Auſtria, but fauoured the other with the Duke of Norfolke very much, for the hatred they bore to the Spaniard. That the Duke of Alua did ſo farre diſproue the Deſigne of ſending the Queene backe into Scotland, that it would certainely be the ruine of her ſelfe, and of the Catholique Religion through all Great Brittaine; becauſe, ſhee being returned, muſt of neceſsity, either hazzard the danger of beeing beſieged, or try her fortune of the warres againſt the Rebels, who by the aide of the Engliſh, might eaſily bring her vnder their power, before ſuch time that any Forraigne forces could arriue. That being then in no ſafety in Scotland, and no hope to be expected from France, ſo peſtred with inteſtine warres, he thought it more expedient to procure ayde from the Spaniard, who had made an offer of marriage with Iohn of Auſtria, which notwithſtanding ſhe neuer intended, ſithence ſhe had promiſed, by meanes of the Duke of Norfolke, to re-eſtabliſh the Romane Religion in Great Britaine: And moreouer, to ſend her Sonne out of Scotland into Spaine, where he might be ſafely preſerued, and inſtructed from his Infancy in the Romane Religion, and by this meanes, all pretence taken from the Scots, who ſhaddowed their rebellion vnder colour of him: and laſtly, for the effecting of theſe buſineſses, preſently to diſpatch away Ridolph, with caution, firſt, to conceale theſe things eſpecially from the French.
                           
                        
                        The Councell hauing receiued theſe inſtructions,

the Letters whereof I ſpake, and other diſpatches from the Pope: and Barker who was ſurprized, hauing confeſt all theſe particulars, they commanded Sadler, with a Company of armed men, to goe vnto the Dukes houſe in London, which was then at Charter-Houſe. Two dayes after, the Duke, who was altogether ignorant that thoſe people had confeſſed any thing, and confident that thoſe Letters and Remembrances were burned in the fire, beeing queſtioned, denyed all that they had confeſt: and therevpon was brought backe the ſeuenteenth day of September, by Sadler, Smith, Neuill, and Wilſon, (to the great griefe of the people) vnto the Tower of London, from whence he was but the yeere before deliuered. Afterwards they impriſoned Baniſter, a Lawyer, whoſe counſell the Duke had taken and followed; after that, the Earles of Arundell, and Southampton, Baron Lumley, and Cobham, and Thomas his brother, Percy, Lowder, Powell, and Godier, who all declared what they knew, in hope of pardon.
                        Aſſoone as the Councell had produced their Confeſſions in the Dukes preſence, the Queene of Scotland and the Biſhop of Roſſe's Letters, with the ſaid Remembrance, hee was very much deiected, & conſidering this remembrance, and thoſe Letters, which through a weake credulity he ſuppoſed to bee burned, he ſighed, and brake out into theſe words;

                              I Haue beene betrayed and vndone by mine owne people, in fayling to diſtruſt, which is the onely ſinnewe of Wiſedome.
                        
                        But he humbly beſought the Councell to mediate the Queenes fauour in his behalfe, promiſing to conceale nothing of what he knew, and ſeriouſly proteſted, that he neuer approued of any thing, which was to the preiudice of the Qu. or Kingdome. But on the contrary, from the very

bottome of his heart, condemned the deſigne of ſeizing vpon the Queenes perſon, or the Towre of London, and the ſetting at liberty of the Queene of Scotland: and that hee neuer harboured a thought ſo much of bringing forraigne Troupes into Great Brittaine, but only to ſuppreſſe certaine of the Scots, rebelling againſt the Queen. Being this day examined vpon 50. Articles or thereabouts, hee anſwered without diſſimulation. After that, they penned the ſubſtance of the whole buſineſſe, in the Star-Chamber, before a great Aſſembly of Noble-men, in preſence of the Lord Maior and Shiriffes of the Citie of London, & from thence, in the Palace of London, in view of all the inhabitants, by G. Fleetwood, Recorder of the Citie.
                        And foraſmuch as by all theſe confeſſions, eſpecially by the Dukes, the Biſhop of Roſſe was conuicted as Author of theſe Plots: they ſeriouſly conſulted what was beſt to bee done: For (as they doe ordinarily that haue ſuch charges) he conceiued, that it was lawfull for him to vſe any meanes for the aduancement of the affaires of his Princeſſe; and that by the oath and inuiolable right of an Ambaſſadour, he was not bound to acknowledge the authority of any other: and relying hereupon, expoſed himſelfe to the liberty of diuers turbulent Actions, kindling of ſeditions, and taking counſell in the night with the Earle of Southampton, and afterwards inclining to the Engliſh Fugitiues in Flanders, the Duke of Alua, the Spaniard, and the Pope, about the inuaſion of England. They propoſed hereupon vnto Lewes, Dale, Drury, Aubrey, and Iones, men of ſound iudgement in the Ciuill-Lawes. In the firſt place,
WHether an Ambaſsadour mouing ſedition againſt the Prince vnto whom he is ſent, may enioy the priuiledge of an Ambaſſadour, or not? and whether he be not ſubiect to puniſhment as an Enemy?
                        
                        
                           To which they anſwered, that by the Common Lawe of Nations, and Ciuill-Law of the Romanes, ſuch an Ambaſſadour was falne from all priuiledge, and was ſubiect to puniſhment, as an enemy.
                        WHether a Miniſter or Agent of a depoſed Prince, another being crowned in his place, ought to haue the priuiledge of an Ambaſsadour?
                        They anſwered, that if ſuch a Prince be lawfully depoſed, his Miniſter cannot challenge the priuiledge of an Ambaſſadour, foraſmuch as none but abſolute Princes, which haue ſoueraigne power, can conſtitute Ambaſſadours. In the third place,
WHether a Prince being come into another Kingdome, and kept in hold, may haue his Agent? and if this Agent ought to be accounted an Ambaſſadour, or not?
                        
                        They anſwere, That a Prince may prohibit an Ambaſſadour to enter into his Kingdome, and command him out of his Kingdome, if he doth not containe himſelfe within the limits preſcribed to Ambaſſadours, but in the meane time he ought to enioy the priuiledge of an Ambaſſadour, for the authority of his Ambaſſie.
                        Vpon the anſwers of theſe Ciuill-Lawiers, the Biſhop of Roſſe being called backe from the Iſle of Ely, and ſharply reprooued, the Councell denounced him not to be acknowledged an Ambaſſadour, but to be puniſhed as a pernicious Malefactor. To which he anſwered;
THat he beeing Ambaſſadour to an abſolute Queene, vniuſtly depoſed, had, according to his duty, laboured

for the libertie of his Princeſſe, and for the good of both the Kingdomes: that hee was come into England with ample authoritie, vnder publique teſtimony, which hee exhibited, and that the ſacred Rites of Ambaſſadours ought not by any meanes to be violated.
                        
                        Whereupon, Burghley grauely ſhewes him, that neither the Rites of the Ambaſſies, nor publique Letters of Credit, are of validitie for Ambaſſadours which offend againſt the publique faith, but are ſubiect to penall actions, and that otherwiſe it ſhould be permitted to wicked Ambaſſadours to attempt againſt the life of Princes, vnpuniſhed. He on the contrary, opinatiuely maintained, that the authority of Ambaſſadours had neuer beene violated by way of Rite, but onely by way of fact (to vſe his owne words) and boldly admoniſheth them not to deale with him more ſharpely then the Engliſh Ambaſſadours had beene dealt with, Throgmorton in France, Randolph and Tamworth in Scotland, who had apparantly excited and nouriſhed rebellions, and were acquitted vpon command to depart within a certaine time. They began to preſſe him vpon the witneſſe of ſome Engliſh-men:
                              He declines from the Engliſh witneſſes.
                            he gently intreated them not to doe it, becauſe (ſaith hee) that a receiued cuſtome doth eſtabliſh it ſelfe for a Law:
An Engliſhman ought not to beare witneſſe againſt a Scottiſhman, nor a Scottiſhman againſt an Engliſhman.
                        
                        After ſome arguings hereupon, whether ſuch cuſtome tooke place elſewhere then vpon the Frontiers of both the Kingdomes, and whether Engliſh Ambaſſadours had ſtirred Rebellion or no; Roſſe is carried to the Tower of London, where being ſtraitly kept, within a few dayes hee briefly made anſwere to all the interrogatories, with this caution, that his anſweres might not be preiudicious to any. And firſt, he excuſed the Queene of Scots, (who being

priſoner, and in the prime of her age) ſeeking to eſcape by any meanes, ELIZABETH hauing excluded all from ſeeing her, and barred her from all hope of libertie, and openly ſupported all her aduerſaries: afterwards excuſeth the Duke, that hee had not treated marriage with her, but by the aduice of many that were of Queen ELIZABETHS Councell, nor could he relinquiſh her, although he had vnder his owne hand-writing promiſed to doe it, foraſmuch as before that promiſe, a former promiſe of marriage had paſſed betweene them: And finally, excuſeth himſelfe, that being Ambaſſadour and Miniſter, could not without blame leaue the duety of his charge, and be wanting to his Princeſſe in her afflictions, and that he had propounded the ſeyzing of the perſon of Queene ELIZABETH, to no other end, but to try whether the Duke had a minde prepared to doe a miſchieuous act: and verily hee craftily extenuated the offences of the reſt, and would neuer diſcouer the names of the Nobles which offered themſelues to the Dukes ſeruice, for the ſeyzing of the Queenes perſon; onely confeſſed, that by the commandement of the Queene of Scots, he conſulted with the Earles of Arundel, Lumley, and Throgmorton, and by Lumley, and the Vicount of Mountague, becauſe that he was to deliuer into the hands of the Engliſh, the Caſtles which were in Scotland, the Hoſtages, and the King of Scots, to renounce the title to England, and the Engliſh Rebels. But for this matter, enough is ſpoken of this yeere; and the particularities of it, may be drawne from the Dukes confeſſion, and the memoriall ſent to the Queen of Scots, written by the Biſhop of Roſſe's own hand.
                        At the ſame time, Mathew, Earle of Lenox, Vice-Roy of Scotland, and great Grand-father to the King, hauing appoynted the aſſembly of States at Sterlin, and thinking to be ſafe there, was ſurprized by the Lords of the contrary faction, which met together by the Queenes authoritie

at Edenborrough, and hauing yeelded himſelfe to Dauid Spencer, who laboured very hard to protect him, was ſlaine with him by Bell and Cauder,
                           
                              Lenox Ʋice-Roy of Scotland is ſlain.
                            after hauing with much trouble and paines ruled the Kingdome for the King his Nephew, the ſpace of foureteene moneths, more or leſſe: at what time France tooke the Queenes ſide, and Queen ELIZABETH the Kings, not ſo much to get their friends the victory, as to keepe them from being ouercome. Queen ELIZABETH hoped that the young King ſhould haue beene deliuered into her hands, and the French thought that Dunbriton and Edenborrough ſhould be giuen them: whereupon ſome Scottiſh Merchants were very much troubled, and traffique in France was denyed them, which drew a great partie to the Queenes ſide, in hope thereby to haue freedome of trade there againe. In Lenox his place,
                              The Earle of Marre is elected Vice-Roy.
                            by the common conſent of the people, Iohn Areskin, Earle of Marre, was elected Vice-Roy, a man of a calme ſpirit, and a great louer of his Countrie, who beeing no leſſe afflicted with the turbulent counſels of his friends, then by the inſultings of his aduerſaries, for very griefe dyed, when hee had gouerned thirteene moneths.
                        The iniquitie of theſe times, and the loue which the people of England bore to their Queene and Countrey, drew the States to Weſtminſter, where they made a Law to preuent the plots of the ſeditious,
                              Lawes againſt diſturbers.
                            by which it was ordayned by ancient authoritie:
THat if any did attempt to ruine or hurt the Queene, to make warre, or excite others to doe it in any part of her dominions: or affirme that ſhee had no right to the Kingdome, but that it were more iuſtly due to another; or ſaid, that ſhee was an Heretique, a Schiſmatique, or Infidell; that ſhee did vſurpe the right from another that was liuing; or that the Lawes and Statutes were not of power to define and

tye the right of Succeſsion, It ſhould be Crimen laeſae Maieſtatis. If any one during the life of Queene ELIZABETH, ſhould expreſly affirme either by writing or Booke printed, that any one is or ought to bee the Queenes Heire or Succeſſour, except the naturall Line which ſhould proceede from her owne body; or that ſhould publiſh, print, or ſell Bookes written vpon this Subiect, he, and his maintainers, for the firſt time ſhould ſuffer a whole yeeres impriſonment, and loſe halfe their goods, but returning to the ſame offence againe, they incurred the penaltie of a Praemunire; which is, loſse of all goods, and impriſonment during life.
                        
                        This ſeemed grieuous vnto ſome, which thought that the tranquillity of the Kingdome ought to be ſtrengthened by the deſignation of an Heire, but it was beyond beliefe, what ieſts the maliciouſly-curious made of this clauſe, [Naturally begotten of her body,] becauſe the Ciuill Law calls thoſe Children naturall, which are borne out of marriage, and that nature onely, and not the honeſty of wedlocke begot them: and the Engliſh Law, [Legitimate,] thoſe that are lawfully begotten. And I remember being then young, to haue heard it ſpoken aloud, that this word was preſt into this Law by Leiceſter, that ſome baſtard-ſonne of his ſhould thruſt in as one of neereſt kinne to Queene ELIZABETH.
                        
                           
                              Lawes againſt Papiſts.
                           It was alſo ordained, that thoſe who had by any Bull or writing from the Pope, reconciled any to the Church of Rome, ſhould vndergoe the puniſhment of Crimen laeſae Maieſtatis. Thoſe who ſuſtaine the Reconcilers or bringers into England of Agnus Dei's, Graines, Crucifixes, or any other things conſecrated by the Pope of Rome, ſhould loſe all their goods, and indure perpetuall impriſonment: and thoſe that ſhall conceale and not detect theſe Reconcilers,

were holden guiltie of Miſpriſion of Treaſon. Furthermore, thoſe goods and lands, which were conuicted for Rebellion in the North, beeing in the poſſeſſion of Iames Pilkinton, Biſhop of Durham, who challenged Regall power betweene the Riuers of Teiſe and Tyne, were adiudged to the Queene and her Succeſſours, becauſe ſhe had with great coſt deliuered both the Biſhop and the Biſhopricke from Rebels, yet ſo, as that in time to come it ſhall not be preiudiciall to the Regall rite of that Church of Durham. It was alſo ordained, that to meete with the inſolencies of ſuch as were deuoted to the Pope, and deſpiſing the authority of the Lawes, and their obedience to their Princeſſe, who day by day with-drew themſelues into forraine Countries, without the Queenes licence, (hoping in time with a great number, and to innouate ſomething) they ſhould returne within a certaine time, and make their ſubmiſſions, and that the fraudulent conueyances which they had made, ſhould be burnt. So much for the Papiſts.
                        On the other ſide, by wholſome Lawes they ſuppreſſed as well the couetouſneſſe of certaine of the Clergie, who, as if they had beene borne onely to themſelues, with a notorious malice to their Succeſſours, waſted the goods of the Church, and let out the Lands for many yeeres, as the impudencie of others, who, with a deſire to innouate, oppoſed themſelues to Articles of the Synod of London, for the aboliſhing of Schiſme, in the yeere 1562. It was likewiſe againe propounded, that if the Queene of Scots ſhould againe offend the Lawes of England, ſhe might be proceeded againſt, as if ſhe were a Peeres Wife of the Realme of England. But the Queene by her authority, hindered that from being made a Law.
                        In the beginning of Iune, the Parliament being ready to be diſmiſſed, they ſate vpon Iohn Story, a Doctor of Law, and Spie to the Duke of Alua, of whom I haue made

mention in the yeere 1569. to know whether Iohn Storie being an Engliſh-man, ſhould be found guilty Laeſae Maieſtatis, for hauing conferred with a ſtranger-Prince in Brabant, for the inuading of his Countrey, and ſhewing the meanes to doe it. The learned'ſt ſort in the Law did affirme, that hee might be accuſed Laeſae Maieſtatis. Whereupon hee was called vnto iudgement, for hauing conſpired againſt the life of his Princeſſe with one Preſtoll, a man much addicted to magicke, and in giuing thankes at the Table, alwayes curſed her, and the King of Scotland, to the fiends of Hell, and demonſtrated to the Duke of Alua's Secretary the meanes to inuade England, to make Ireland reuolt, and at the ſame time to bring the Scots into England. He refuſed to ſubmit himſelfe to be iudged by the Lawes of England, maintayning, that being a ſworne Subiect not to Queene ELIZABETH, but to the King of Spaine,
                           
                              Iohn Storie condemned to dye.
                            the Iudges of England had no power ouer him. But hee was condemned according to the forme of (Nihil dicit) becauſe no man can free himſelfe from the Lawes of the Countrey where he is borne, nor renounce his naturall Countrey nor his Prince, and ſuffered as a Traytor.
                        
                           
                              
                                 Differences appeaſed betweene the Engliſh and the Portugals.
                              
                              
                                 Guienne.
                              
                           There was then for certaine yeeres, controuerſie betweene the Portugals and the Engliſh, during the commerce betweene them and the Moores for pure Gold, from the yeere 1552. in that part of Africa called Guienne, and others who had firſt diſcouered thoſe Coaſts, hindered as much as they could by force of armes, ſo as they fought ſometimes by Sea, and detained Ships on both ſides. But Sebaſtian, King of Portugall, being newly come to age, to make a peace, ſent Francis Gerard into England, who made a Couenant with the Queene almoſt in theſe very words:
THat a perfect amitie may be made, and free commerce had on both ſides, the one ſhall not attempt

any thing to the preiudice of the other, nor lend ſuccour to their enemies, Rebels, or Traytors; the Merchandize, Moneyes, and Ships, which are vnder arreſt, to be reſtored. And Queene ELIZABETH, to gratifie the King of Portugal, prohibiteth the Engliſh to vſe any Nauigation in the Seas, or to the Lands which the Portugals had conquered. And that if they ſhould doe otherwiſe, it ſhould be vpon their owne perill, if the Portugals ſhould depriue them both of goods and liues: The Kingdomes of Portugal and Argarbe, alſo the Iles of Azores and Madera excepted, in which, free Nauigation was permitted.
                        
                        This yere, W. Parre, Marquis of Northampton,
                           
                              The Marquis of Northampton dyes.
                            being very old, peaceably departed this life, a man much conuerſant and well read in the delectable ſtudies of Muſicke, and intertainement of Louers, and other courtly iucundities, who was firſt raiſed to the dignitie of Baron Parre of Kendal, afterwards he married Anne Bourchier, ſole daughter & heire to the Earle of Eſſex, at the ſame time when the King married his ſiſter; and afterwards b
                              •
                            EDVVARD made Marquis of Northampton; vnder the reigne of MARIE, hee was condemned of High-Treaſon for taking armes on the behalfe of Iane Grey, who was brought in by ſubornation to be Queene, but was ſhortly after pardoned, and reſtored to his inheritance, as he was afterwards to his honours by Queene ELIZABETH. He had no Children, but left to be his heire, Henrie Herbert, Earle of Pembroke, his other Siſters Sonne.
                        
                           Iohn Iewell,
                           
                              The death of Biſhop Iewell.
                            a man of an excellent ſpirit and exquiſit learning in Theologie, and of great pietie, died the ſame yeere, being hardly fiftie yeeres of age, deſcended of good Parents in Deuonſhire, and commendably brought vp in Corpus Chriſti Colledge in the Vniuerſitie of Oxford, who, in Queene MARIES reigne was baniſhed into Germanie,
                           
and afterwards by Queene ELIZABETH beeing made Biſhop of Salisburie, put forth, in the yeere 1562. an Apologie for the Engliſh Church, and moſt learnedly defended the Proteſtants Religion againſt Harding who was falne from it, in two Volumes in our owne Tongue, which are now tranſlated into the Latine.
                        
                           
                              Affaires of Ireland.
                           
                           Ireland at that time was quiet enough: for Iohn Per
                                 •
                              t, Preſident of Mounſter had ſo ranſacked Iohn Fitz-Morris, who had pillaged Kilmalocke, that hee was conſtrained to hide himſelfe in Caues, and in the end, as wee ſhall relate hereafter, brought to begge pardon with humble ſubmiſſion.
                              William Fitz William Deputy of Ireland.
                            
                           Sidney, Deputie of Ireland, returning into England, Fitz-William, who had married his Siſter, ſucceeded in his place.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     THE FIFTEENTH YEERE OF Her Reigne.Booke 2. 1572. 
                        Anno Dom. 1572.
                     
                        THe beginning of a new yeere, brought forth a new Tragicall ſpectacle to the Inhabitants of London; for in the Palace of Weſtminſter a Scaffold was erected, from the one end to the other, with a Tribunall vpon it, and ſeates on either ſide, the like had not bin ſeene for eighteene yeeres before.
                           Thomas, Duke of Norfolke is preſented before the Nobles and Peeres, and arraigned in Weſtminſter Hall.
                         Thither, vpon the ſixteenth day of Ianuary, was Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolke, conducted betweene Owen Hopton, Lieutenant of the Tower of London, and Peter Carew, Knight, before whom was borne the fatall Axe, with the edge forward; vpon the Tribunall was ſeated George Talbot, Earle of Shrewsbury, conſtituted Lord high Steward of England for that day; vpon either ſide of him were placed the Nobles appointed Commiſſioners, which we call Peeres,

to wit, Reynold Gray, Earle of Kent, Tho. Ratcliffe, Earle of Suſſex, Henry Haſtings, Earle of Huntington, Francis Ruſſell, Earle of Bedford, Henry Herbert, Earle of Pembroke, Edw. Seimor, Earle of Hartford, Ambroſe Dudley, Earle of Warwicke,
                        
                           Peeres of the Kingdome.
                         
                        Robert Dudley, Earle of Leiceſter, Walt. Deu
                              •
                           reux, Vicount of Hereford, Edward Lord Clinton, Admirall, William Lord Howard of Effingham, Chamberlaine, William Cecill, Lord Burghley, Secretarie, Arthur Lord Gray, of Wilton, Iea. Blount, Lord Mountioy, Will. Lord Sands, Tho. Lord Wentworth, William Lord Bourrowes, Lewes Lord Mordant, Iohn Pawlet, Lord S. Iohn of Baſing, Robert Lord Rich, Roger Lord North, Edm. Bruges, Lord Chandos, Oliuer Lord S. Iohn of Bletſo, Tho. Sackuill, Lord Buckhurſt, and Will. Weſt, Lord De-la-Ware.
                     
                     
                        
                           The maner of his arraignement.
                        Silence being commanded, the Commiſſion was read, importing the power giuen to the Iudge. Then Carter, chiefe King of Heralds, deliuered into his hands a white wand, which he preſently after deliuered to the Groome Porter, who ſtanding by, did hold it erected the whole time of the Court. Silence againe commanded, the Lieutenant of the Tower, was bidden to bring forth his charge, and preſent the Duke before the Seat of Iuſtice, who foorth-with appeared, on either ſide were the Lieutenants of the Tower, and Peter Carew, next of all, he that carried the Axe, the edge thereof turned from the Duke.
                     Silence the third time proclaimed, the Clerke appointed for the Acts of Iudgement, thus ſpake to the Duke,
Thomas, Duke of Norfolke, late of Kenninghale, in the County of Norfolke, hold vp thy hand.
                     
                     When he had holden vp his hand, the ſaid Clerke read aloud the Crimes of which he was accuſed, that is to ſay, That in the eleuenth yeere of Queene ELIZABETH, and afterwards, the Duke hath treacherouſly held counſell to depoſe the Queene from her Kingdome, to take away

her life, and to inuade the Realme by rayſing of warre, and bringing in troupes of Strangers. That notwithſtanding he had certaine knowledge, that Mary, late Queene of Scots, had arrogated to herſelfe the Crowne of England,
                        
                           The chiefe points of his accuſation.
                         with the Title and Armes thereof, yet hath he treated (vnknowne to the Queene) of a marriage betwixt them, and contrary to the promiſe vnder his hand and Seale, hath lent vnto her certaine large ſummes of money. That hee had aſſiſted and ſuccoured the Earles of Northumberland, Weſtmerland, Marquenfield, and others, notwithſtanding that hee had good notice, that they had raiſed Rebellion againſt the Queene, and were chaſed into Scotland. That in the thirteenth yeere of the Queenes Reigne, by Letters, he demanded ſuccours of the Pope, Pius Quintus, ſworne Enemy to the Queene, of the Spaniard, and Duke D' Alua, to ſet the Queene of Scots at liberty, and re-eſtabliſh the Romane religion in England. Finally, that hee had relieued and aided Heris a Scottiſh-man, and others, enemies to her Maieſtie in Scotland. Theſe Articles being read, the Clerke demanded of the D. if he were guilty of theſe accuſations.
                     Whereupon the Duke deſired (if the Law would permit it) that he might haue an Aduocate to defend his cauſe: to which Catelin the Chiefe Iuſtice anſwered, that it might not be allowed.
                     THen it is meet, ſaid he,
                        The Duke demandeth an Aduocate to plead his cauſe. that I ſubmit to the ſentences of the Iudges; but the matter is full of ambiguities; neither did I knowe within theſe foure and twenty houres, that I was to come to Iudgement, and ſo was vnprepared of Bookes. I ſee now well that I muſt enter into combate for my life without Armes. I haue heard neuertheleſſe, that in the reigne of HENRY the ſeuenth, in a cauſe of Laeſae Maieſtaris, Humphrey Stafford had an aduocate aſsigned him.
                     To which Dier Chiefe Iuſtice of the Common-Pleas,

anſwered, that Stafford (indeed) had an Aduocate allowed him, to pleade for him concerning the right of Azile, from whence by force he was taken, but for the crime of Laeſae Maieſtatis, without any aſſiſtance, hee pleaded his cauſe himſelfe.
                     
                        THen, this day (replyes the Duke) muſt I my ſelfe plead for my life, goods, my Children, and for what counteruailes all theſe, mine Honour: but let that Honour paſse; if I innocently periſh, GOD will not let it paſſe vnreuenged. Yet this one thing let me be permitted to queſtion; whether that enumeration of crimes will hold true in euery point, and to what point I muſt make anſwere? Catelin made reply, Since the cauſes are true, this enumeration alſo muſt be eſteemed true. I deſire to bee inſtructed (ſaith the Duke) whether euery of theſe bee crimes of Laeſae Maieſtatis? For I haue heard related, that in the cauſe of the Lord Scroope, vnder the Reigne of Henry the 4. But as he would haue proceeded, the Clerke interrupted him, ſpeaking with a loud voice,
                        
                        THomas, Duke of Norfolke, art thou guilty of theſe crimes, or no? The Duke denyed. Then he was further demanded, How wilt thou be tried? He anſwered, I commit my cauſe to God and to theſe Peeres. The odiouſneſſe of theſe crimes amazeth mee, but the Royall clemency of her Maieſtie, from which (beſides what I haue receiued, I can expect no more) much refreſheth me. But of you (my Lord Iudge) let me requeſt thus much, that I may bee iuſtly dealt withall, and that my memory, which is indeede but weake, may not bee too much oppreſſed with a confuſed variety of matters. I confeſſe my ſelfe happy, hauing you my Peeres for Iudges, and with much willingneſſe

would commit my life to the integrity of the moſt of you. I was aſsured in mine owne innocency, and therefore ſought no way to fly. Yet I cannot but ingenuouſly confeſſe, that I haue beene wanting in my duty towards the Queene, but neuer did I any thing which might touch or offend ſo Royall a Maieſtie. I beſeech you then, that thoſe higher matters may not bee commixt equally with thoſe of Laeſae Maieſtatis.
                        
                     
                     Then Barham, the Queenes Serieant at Law, began; Thoſe Crimes (ſaith hee) of Laeſae Maieſtatis, of which you thus expoſtulate, are theſe. You haue complotted to depriue the Queene both of Kingdome and life, you haue conſulted of a marriage with the late Queene of Scotland, you haue inuited forraigne powers to inuade the Realme, you haue ſuccoured Rebels, and haue ſent ayde to thoſe Scots which were the Queenes Enemies. The Duke interpoſeth, ſaying;
BArham, doe not (I pray you) exaſperate the matter with words, in obiecting againſt me the marriage, and other things which fall not amongſt the offences of high Treaſon.
                     
                     
                        Barham, turning to the Peeres, vrgeth this: He (quoth he) that will marry a wife that layeth claime to a Kingdome, doth likewiſe affect the ſame Kingdome. For the Duke had enterprized the ſame, being amongſt the Commiſſioners at Yorke, appointed for the hearing of the Queen of Scots Cauſe, being at that time bound by his oath, equally to ballance the accuſations and defences of either part.
                     The Duke replyeth,
There be diuers parts contained in that cauſe, which are not crimes of Laeſae Maieſtatis.
                        
                     
                     But the Lord high Steward commanded the Duke not

to ſtray ſo farre from the purpoſe by digreſſions: wherevpon (Barham clamorouſly inſiſting) he acknowledged that the Queene of Scots had laid claime to the Crowne of England, but had long time ſince deſiſted. Barham on the contrary demonſtrated, that ſhee had not as yet deſiſted, becauſe ſhe had not yet renounced the right which ſhe pretended: hee furthermore grieuouſly accuſed the Duke, that he inſtructed the Deputies of the Queene of Scots what to anſwere, according as it appeared in the Confeſſion of the Biſhop of Roſse. The Duke confeſſed, that Lidington had made a motion to him of the marriage, but he refuſed the ſame, neither gaue he any inſtructions, but deſired that Roſſe might be produced in preſence.
                     After this, Barham amply proſecuteth many things of the marriage, which haue beene ſpoken of, with an intent to prooue that the Duke had an affection to the Kingdome, and inſiſteth with often-repeated Interrogatories. What other thing could the Duke propound to himſelfe,
                           The ſecond Article of his accuſation.
                         whileſt (without the Queens knowledge) he determined to marry the Queene of Scots, being a woman without meanes or Kingdome (her Sonne being eſtabliſhed in the Kingdome) then that by her he hoped to enioy the Crowne of England, and ſo conſequently depriue the Queene both of rule and life?
                     You haue (quoth the Duke) lowdly repeated theſe things, to conuince me of enterprizing the depoſing and ruine of the Queene.
                     To come to the point (ſayes Barham) it is ſufficiently knowne, that you haue conſulted about the ſurprizing of the Tower of London, which is the ſtrongeſt place in the Realme, whereby it is neceſſarily manifeſt, that you had then plotted the ruine of the Queene, ſeeing that Rule is impatient of competitors. The Duke denieth not, hat one Hopton ſuggeſted him to the ſurprizing of the Tower of

                        London, but he vtterly reiected it. Why then (quoth Barham) did you aske counſell of the Earle of Pembroke concerning the ſame, who diſſwaded you from it.
                     
                        Barham proceedeth, and vrgeth, that when the Queene of England had demanded that the young King of Scotland, certaine Caſtles, and the rebellious Engliſh which were in Scotland, ſhould be deliuered into her hands: The Duke had vnder-hand aduiſed the Scots, not to conſent thereunto. He likewiſe accuſed him, that hee endeuoured to free the Queene of Scots out of priſon; and that, after hee had religiouſly promiſed by his hand-writing, not to meddle with her in any kind of buſines.
                     One Candiſh was then produced for a witneſſe, who depoſed, that the Duke had conſtantly reſolued of the marriage, and had asked him, if (after the death of Queen ELIZABETH, he might draw his Vncle to his partie. Theſe the Duke altogether denyed, reiecting his teſtimony, as of a poore and abiect fellow. After this it was demonſtrated, that the Duke had ſecretly ſent a Seruant to the Earles of Northumberland and Weſtmerland, to aduertiſe them, not to ſtir in the Rebellion, becauſe he thought it would be very dangerous. Letters alſo were brought in, which the Queene of Scots had written to the Duke, importing, that ſhee was much grieued that the Earle of Northumberland was apprehended before hee had taken vp Armes in the Rebellion: (For whether ſhee vnderſtood this by report, or it was inuented of purpoſe, I cannot ſay.)
                     To this the Duke anſwered:
THat by theſe reaſons it could not probably bee inferred, that hee had laboured the deſtruction of the Queene; neither was any thing that hath hitherto bin produced, of any moment againſt him, excepting the teſtimony of the Biſhop of Roſſe; and that

alſo of him being a forreiner (by the authoritie of Bracton, a man moſt expert in our Lawes) in no wiſe is to be admitted. That he neuer had Northumberland or Weſtmerland in ſuch eſteeme that hee would commit his life into their hands: and that his innocencie was ſuch a ſure rampire to him, that hee neuer meditated of any eſcape for himſelfe.
                     
                     
                        
                           The third Article of his accuſation.
                        Then Gerard, the Queenes Attourney, ſpake: It is more than ſufficiently apparant, that the Duke would haue eſpouſed the Queene of Scots, to deſtroy the Queene of England. The Letters which he hath writtē to the Pope, the King of Spaine, and Duke d'Alua, doe iuſtifie that hee had a determination to inuade England. That which hee conſulted of with Ridolfe, was now likewiſe openly knowne by the obſcure Characters which were found hidden vnder the tiles in the houſe of the Howards, and by the Letters alſo (which he commanded to be burnt) but were found at the entry of his Chamber vnder the Matte. And all theſe things may eaſily bee proued by the interrogatories and anſweres of them that haue not beene affrighted with torments, nor condemned to haue attempted ought againſt the State.
                     To which, the Duke replyed:

                           I Haue not (quoth hee) beene eyther author or fauourer of the counſels and deliberations holden with the Pope or Spaniard, but to the contrary, I haue alwayes reproued and diſallowed them. Thoſe that haue offended, let them ſuffer, and not diſcharge them vpon me.
                     
                     Beſides all this, Gerard accuſed the Duke, that hee had conſulted with Ridolfe for the landing of tenne thouſand men out of Flanders at Harwich, a Port in Eſſex: and this was iuſtified out of the examination of Barker. That Letters

were written by Ridolfe to the King of Spaine, and Duke d'Alua; to which, although the Duke ſubſcribed not, yet by the counſell of Roſſe, hee ſent Barker his Secretary as Ambaſſadour, to auerre them to be the Dukes owne Letters.
                     MY memory (replyeth the Duke) beginneth to falter, neither can it containe ſuch an intricate varietie of matters: You other pleaders haue your notes and memorialls with you, but I muſt ex tempore anſwere to all mine accuſers.The Duke of Norfolke contrary to the Romane Religion. But ſurely it is not probable, that I who haue alwayes beene contrary to the Roman Religion, ſhould entertaine a treatie with the Pope. I had a great deale rather be torne in pieces with wilde Horſes, than to depart from the Religion which I profeſſe. Conſider but the ſituation of Harwich, and it will eaſily annihilate the accuſation. Who ſees not how difficult a thing it is, to leade an Armie thorow that part of the Countrey, which is round incloſed with hedges, and moſt incommodious, by reaſon of the ſtreight and narrow wayes and paſsages? Had I had a determination to rayſe an army againſt my Princeſſe, without doubt I would not haue beene vnprouided of Armes: but I haue not for theſe tenne yeeres paſt, bought any more than eight Corſlets; and for Gunpowder, not any at all. I neuer committed any Letters to the truſt of Barker, but rather of Baniſter, that was to mee more than many Barkers.
                     
                     Then were the intercepted Letters of the Biſhop of Roſse,
                        
                           The Letters of the Biſhop of Roſſe, to the Qu. of Scots are produced.
                         which he writ in Priſon to the Queene of Scots produced, by which, what things were before ſpoken, were confirmed. The Duke requeſted to ſee them, for it ſeemed that he ſuſpected them to be ſuppoſed. But the Iudge anſwered, You need not call them in queſtion, for they are

written with the Biſhops owne hand. Beſides theſe, a little Letter was brought forth, which the Duke had written in Okar to one of his Seruants,
                           The Dukes Letter to his ſeruant.
                         wherein hee commanded him to burne the packet which was hidden in a certaine place, and to turne the fault vpon the Biſhop, who by the priuiledge of an Ambaſſadour, might delude the Law. To which, the Duke replyed in theſe words:
Being certified that it was diuulged abroad, that many had accuſed mee, I anſwered by this Letter, and ſeeing all things were ſo neerely ſearcht into, I commanded that packet ſhould be burnt, becauſe I would ſaue others from danger.
                     
                     
                        
                           The Letters of Ridolfe.
                        
                        Bromley, the Queenes Sollicitor, preſented the Letters of Ridolfe, wherein was conteined, that the Duke d'Alua had approued the deſigne:
                           Of the Pope.
                         likewiſe the Letters of the Pope to the Duke, dated the fourth of the Nones of May. Then Wilbraham made a faire diſcourſe, concerning what credit ſhould be giuen to the teſtimonies of the Biſhop, and of the Dukes ſeruants: whereto the Duke made anſwere:
CErtes, it falls not vnder the power of my faculties, to frame a replication to ſuch an elegant and poliſhed Oration. Yet this Oratour, ſuch and ſo great as he is, hath omitted to ſpeake how great the violence of feare is, which oftentimes doth remoue a firme and wel-compoſed minde out of its place and ſtate. Againe, hee alledged Bracton,
                           
                              The teſtimony of Strangers.
                            againſt the credit giuen to forreine witneſſes.
                     
                     But Catelin anſwered, that in ſuch cauſes as this, the teſtimonies of Strangers were auaileable, and that it was in the power of the Peeres, eyther to giue or deny them credit.
                     
                        Now was that matter come to be proued, that the Duke had ſuccoured the rebellious Fugitiues; which was found apparant by the Letters of the Counteſſe of Northumberland,
                        
                           The third Article of his accuſation.
                         in which ſhee gaue the Duke great thankes for the money wherewith he furniſhed her husband and her ſelfe. Finally, the laſt obiection of the relieuing of thoſe Scots which were enemies to the Queene, was prooued by the Letters of the Duke to Baniſter, by Baniſters confeſſion, and by the Mony which was deliuered to Browne of Shropſhire. Hereupon the Duke demanded of the Iudges, Whether the Subiects of another Prince, confederate with the Queene, may be accounted enemies to the Queene? Catelin anſwered, They might, and that the Queene of England might make warre with any Duke in France, and in the meane time, obſerue a peace with the King of France.
                     
                     But as the night began to approch, the Lord high Steward demanded of the Duke, if he had any thing more to ſpeake for himſelfe. The Duke anſwered, In the equitie of the Lawes, I repoſe my truſt. Then hee commanded the Lieutenant of the Tower, to retyre with the Duke awhile: after ſilence was proclaimed, turning to the Peeres, hee thus ſpake to them:
YOu haue heard, how Thomas, Duke of Norfolke, being accuſed of Laeſae Maieſtatis, and not confeſsing himſelfe guiltie, hath committed his cauſe to GOD, and to you. It is your part then, to conſider amongst your ſelues, whether hee is to be holden guilty or no, and to giue vp your verdicts according to conſcience and honour.
                     
                     They likewiſe withdrawing themſelues at his command,
                           The Peeres conſult amongſt thē
                              ſelues.
                         conſulted together: after a while, they returned to their places. Then the Lord High Steward, beginning at the loweſt, ſaid, Lord De la Ware, Is Thomas, Duke of Norfolke,

                        guiltie of the crimes of Laeſae Maieſtatis, for which he is heere arraigned at the Iudgement-Seate? De-la-Ware, riſing vp, and laying his hand on his breſt, hee anſwered, Guilty; the like did euery one in order, being demanded. Then was the Duke againe brought before the Tribunall, to whom the Lord High-Steward in this manner ſpake:
THomas, Duke of Norfolke, you are heere arraigned for diuers crimes of Laeſae Maieſtatis, and haue ſubmitted your ſelfe to God and theſe Peeres, by euery one of whom you are pronounced guiltie. Is there now any cauſe why Iudgement ſhould not be pronounced?
                     
                     The Duke anſwered:
The will of GOD be done, that will be iudge betweene mee and my falſe accuſers.
                     
                     Then euery man being ſilent, the edge of the Axe was turned towards the Duke, and Barham in the Queenes name required the Lord High-Steward to pronounce his Iudgement, which hee, with teares in his eyes, according to the forme, pronounced in theſe words:

                           The Sentence pronounced againſt the Duke.FOraſmuch as you Thomas, Duke of Norfolke, beeing accuſed of the crimes of Laeſae Maieſtatis, haue pleaded Not guiltie, and ſubmitted your ſelfe to the Iudgement of theſe Peeres, who declared you guiltie: The whole Aſsembly adiudged you to be committed back to the Tower, from thence to be drawne vpon a Sledde thorow the Citie, to the place of execution, there, to be hanged, and cut downe halfe dead, then to haue your Bowels taken out, your Head cut off, and your Body quartered into foure parts: whoſe Head ſhall be at her Maieſties diſpoſing, and at the Queenes

pleaſure: But GOD bee mercifull vnto your Soule.
                     
                     The Duke hauing heard this Sentence, with a minde full of courage, he ſaid:
THis Sentence is pronounced againſt mee as a Traytor: my confidence is in GOD and the Queene, hoping that if I bee depriued of your company, I ſhall reioyce with them in Heauen, and ſo will prepare my ſelfe for my death. I deſire no other thing, but that the Queene would ſhew her ſelfe propitious to my Children and Seruants, and bee carefull for the payment of my debts.
                     
                     Theſe, were the particulars that paſſed in theſe affaires, which I haue here declared, becauſe it is expedient for our poſterity, that in great matters the leſſe occurrences ſhould be remembred.
                     A few dayes after,
                           Barney and Marter are put to death.
                         
                        Barney and Marter were put to death, for hauing conſpired againſt the death of certaine of her Maieſties Councell, and plotted the freedome and libertie of the Duke. One Herle was priuy thereunto, and of the ſame company: but hee ſoone reuealed the ſame, and as hee was brought face to face before Barney, Truely (ſaid Barney) thou haſt preuented mee but of an houre: for if thou hadſt not ſo ſoone diſcouered it, I purpoſed to haue done it, and ſo now ſhould I be in thy place to accuſe thee, and thou in mine to be hanged. This conſpiration and other plots which were practiſed to ſet the priſoners at liberty, was the cauſe that a Parliament was forthwith ſummoned. At which time, the Queene created Walter d' Eureux,
                        
                           Earles created.
                         Earle of Eſſex, for that by his great Grand-mother hee was deſcended from the Bourchiers, ſometimes Earles of Eſſex. And Edward, Lord Clinton, who had large poſſeſſions in Lincolneſhire, Earle of Lincolne. Her Maieſtie likewiſe made

                        Iohn Pawlet of Baſing, Sonne to the Lord Marquis of Wincheſter, Henrie Compton, Henrie Cheyney, and Henrie Norrice, Peeres of England, ſummoned them into the Vpper-Houſe, there to haue their voyces, and after to beare the Title of Barons.
                           Barons elected.
                         Amongſt other Acts, it was made Felony to intercept, ruinate, or burne any of her Maieſties Ships,
                           Lawes eſtabliſhed for the better ſecurity of the Queene and her Kingdome.
                         Fortreſſes, or Harbours. Item, It was enacted, that whoſoeuer ſhould attempt to ſet at liberty any perſon or perſons committed by her Maieſties expreſſe command, or which had treſpaſſed againſt her Maieſtie, or was held ſuſpected to haue offended; if the partie were not indicted, he was to be puniſhed with onely loſſe of goods in ſtead of life, and impriſonment during her Maieſties pleaſure; if indicted, with death; if condemned, to be held guilty of treaſon. But as neceſſitie brought in Decrees for the time, ſo the States thought good they ſhould be temporary, or during the Queenes life. But as new practices were daily diſcouered, ſo they ſerued to haſten on the Dukes puniſhment, which notwithſtanding was yet deferred ſome fiue moneths more or leſſe; nor before, could either the Lower-Houſe of Parliament, the Lords of the Priuy-Councell, or the importunacy of Preachers, (aggrauating how great and eminent danger there was) ouercome her Maieſties mercifull clemency.
                     
                        
                           The Duke of Norfolke beheaded.
                        The fourth day of Iune, by eight a clocke in the forenoone, the Duke was brought to a Scaffold, built vpon the Tower-Hill; whereupon being mounted, and Alexander Nowell, Deane of Saint Pauls, (who was appointed his Comforter) had requeſted the confuſed People to be ſilent, he ſaid, among many other words that I heard, theſe:
IT is not ſtrange to ſee ſome ſuffer death in this place, although that ſince her Royall Maieſtie began to reigne, I am the firſt, and I pray God I may be the laſt; with that the People cried all aloud, Amen.
                     
                     
                        Then, continuing his Speech, he ſaid;
I know well (ſaid hee) the Peeres of the Realme haue iuſtly iudged mee worthy to dye,His ſpeech at the houre of his death. nor haue I purpoſe to excuſe my ſelfe. I haue treated, I freely confeſſe, in matters of great importance with the Queene of Scots, without the priuity of my Soueraigne, which I ought not to haue done, and for that I was firſt committed; and hauing had my libertie vpon my humble ſubmiſsion, I paſt my faithfull promiſe that I would neuer more conferre with her, yet I did, I confeſſe, which torments my Conſcience, but I neither promiſed, nor ſwore (as they ſay) at the Lords Table. I went, and but once, to Ridolfe, but with no intent of conſpiracie againſt her Maieſtie: For it is well knowne, that I had great dealings with him vpon my accounts and reckonings. I found he enuied the preſent peace of the Land, and was very ſubtill in plotting proiects of miſchiefe. Twice there came Letters to my hands from the Biſhop of Rome, to which I neuer gaue conſent, nor to the Rebellion in the North. I renounced Papistrie, after I taſted the ſweete of Religion, and reiecting the Popes doctrine, I embraced the true Religion of Ieſus Chriſt, beleeuing wholy and ſoly in his precious bloud, my Sauiour and Redeemer: yet I cannot deny, but many of my Family and familiars were addicted to the Romiſh Religion, wherein, if I haue offended GOD, the Church, and Proteſtants, I beſeech him and them to forgiue mee.
                     
                     Then, after they had ſung a Pſalme or two, he ſaid with a lowd voyce; Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my ſpirit. Then, imbracing Henry Ley, hee whiſpered ſomething in his Eare; and after, he ſpoke to the Deane of Pauls, who turning him to the people, ſaid; The Duke intreateth you all

to pray with him, that GOD would be mercifull to him; and that you would be ſilent, that his ſpirit be not diſturbed. Hee forgaue his Executioner, asking him pardon, refuſing to put the Napkin ouer his face,
                           The Duke of Norfolke's head is cut off.
                         which he offered him, ſaying, I feare not death. Then kneeling downe, his heart lift vp to GOD on high, hee proſtrated himſelfe on the Scaffold, the Deane praying intentiuely with him; then, laying his necke ouer the Blocke, at one ſtroke his head was cut off, which the Executioner ſhewed: a lamentable ſpectacle to the people, moſt mournfully then ſhedding teares and ſighing.
                     
                        
                           Sundry ſenſures of him after his death.
                        It is almoſt incredible how dearely the People loued him, and how by his naturall benignity, and courteous actions, (qualities well becomming ſo great a Prince) hee had gained the hearts of the Multitude: Diuers of the wiſer ſort (as they were affected) paſſed their cenſures diuerſly, ſome from an apprehenſion they had of great feare and danger might haue enſued, had hee ſuruiued; others, commiſerating the caſe of one ſo nobly borne, ſo gentle by nature, ſo comely of perſonage, of ſo manly an aſpect, ſo compleat in all parts, to periſh ſo pittyouſly one, who had not the ſubtill ſleights of his Aduerſaries, and the ſlippery hopes he had conceiued, vnder a colour of benefitting his Countrey and Common-wealth, diuerted from the firſt-begun courſe of his life, hee had beene the greateſt honour and ornament of his Countrey. They called alſo to memory the luckleſſe death and deſtiny of his late Father, who although vniuerſally admired for Arts and Armes, had ſome fiue and twentie yeeres before this, loſt his head in the ſame place, vpon ſleight occaſions, to wit, for hauing his Armes quartered with King Edward the Confeſſour, which we reade, the Mowbrayes, the Dukes of Norfolke, had borne, being giuen them by King Richard the Second, from which Mowbrayes he drew his petigree.
                     Whereupon, it ſhall not be impertinent to the purpoſe,

briefly to adde from what ſhop theſe Conſpiracies were firſt forged, as Hierome Catene in his Hiſtory of the life of Pius the fifth relateth. An Author, for his credit,
                           Catenes relations of the precedent matters.
                         made free Deniſon of Rome, and admitted Secretary to Cardinall Alexandrine, Nephew to Pius the fifth.
                     POpe Pius the 5. (ſaith he) burning with a zealous deſire to re-eſtabliſh the Romane Religion, and hauing no other ſo conuenient a Meſſenger to bee his Nuncio Apoſtolike,
                        Pope Pius the fifth incenſed againſt Qu. Elizabeth. imployed Robert Ridolph, Gentleman, of Florence, who comming into England, (vnder pretext of other buſineſſe) indeuoured himſelfe to nothing more, then to ſtir the hearts of the Queenes Subiects, to her deſtruction: wherein he dealt with ſuch dexterity, that he brought not onely Papiſts, but alſo ſome Proteſtants to be of his faction: ſome,How he imployed the Engliſh. for a priuate malice they bore to thoſe which aymed at the Kingdome; others, out of a deſire of innouation. As theſe matters were working vnder-hand and couertly, there happened a debate betwixt the Spaniard and the Queene, for certaine moneys that had been intercepted, now in her poſseſsion. Hereupon the Pope tooke occaſion to perſwade the King of Spaine, to lend his helping hand to thoſe which were combin'd Conſpirators in England,
                        The King of Spaine. againſt Qu. ELIZA. that ſo he might with the more facillity effect his affaires in the Low-Countries, and reſtore the Catholike Religion in England.
                        The King of France. In like maner dealt he with France, as if he were bound to aſsiſt his Kinſwoman, the Queen of Scotland, and to pleaſure the Scots, who to diuert the Engliſh from ayding the Proteſtants in France, had made incurſions vpon the Engliſh: nor ought be any leſſe to ſome great perſons of the confederacy in England, who by their policy had ſo preuented, as that the Queene ſhould not publikely ſend any ayde to the Huguenots of France; by reaſon whereof,

the King of France promiſed his aide to ſet free the Qu. of Scots, but failed to performe. In the meane time, Ridolph ſo wrought, that he brought Norfolke to bee chiefe of the conſpiracie, promiſing him marriage with the Queene of Scots, with her conſent. The better alſo to effect this buſineſſe, the Pope depoſed the Queene of her Crowne and Kingdome, and abſolued her Subiects of all Oath and Allegeance, by a Bull which hee cauſed to be publiſhed, whereof he ſent copies, printed, to Ridolph, to be diſperſed through the Kingdome. Hereupon the Earles of Northumberland and Weſtmerland raiſed Armes in the North of England againſt the Queene; but money failing there, they ſpeedily fled into Scotland, and the Duke of Norfolke, with others, were committed to priſon; amongſt which, Ridolph was one, who had receiued commandement from his Holineſſe, to deliuer to the Confederate League an hundred and fiftie thouſand Crownes, which hee could not doe, beeing now priſoner. But her Maieſty not looking ſo deepely (as concerned her) into the plot of the Conſpiracie,The King of Portugal. ſet Ridolph and ſome others at liberty, and hauing diſtributed the foreſaid moneys amongſt the Confederates,The Duke of Alua oppoſeth. was by them ſent home againe to the Pope, to aduertiſe him, that now all things were in a readineſſe for the diſpatch of the Queen, and to procure with all ſpeed the beſt ſupplies he might from the Spaniard, out of the Low-Countries. The Pope commended well this purpoſe, although indeed the Duke of Norfolke had formerly miſliked the ſame, as a matter full of much difficulty,Wherefore. in a priuate conference hee had with Ridolph once vpon the way; and, vnder a colour of other matter, addreſt himſelfe to the Kings of Spaine & Portugal, to informe them thereof. He promiſeth the Duke of Norfolke, by his Letters, to ſend him ſuccour, mooueth with the King of Spaine to bee aſsiſtant, and to further

the matter the more, offereth to goe himſelfe in perſon, and if neede were, to ſpend the goods of his See-Apoſtolike, Challices, holy Veſtiments, and Crucifixes, aſſuring him, that he could and would eaſily effect the ſame, nor was there any difficultie to be doubted, would hee ſend ouer Chappin Vittel with an Armie out of Flanders into England, which thing the Spaniard with all expedition commanded to be done, whileſt the Pope prouided money. But the Duke D'Alua, enuying that Vitel ſhould haue the honour of this ſeruice, ſought to preferre his Sonne thereunto, fearing that the French ſhould fall from them with their Forces, and doubting the Conqueſt of England might yeelde any profit to Spaine, or that the Pope was able to comply with them, for money ſufficient for ſo great a deſigne. Notwithſtanding, the King of Spaine gaue expreſſe command that he ſhould inuade England, and to that end ſent moneys by Ridolph into Flanders. But it pleaſed God, the matter was diſcouered to the Queene of England by ſome beyond ſeas, and the Duke of Norfolke apprehended, and iudged to death, which brought no leſſe griefe to the Pope then to the King of Spaine,
                        A vaine ſucceſſe, who ſaid in the preſence of Cardinall Alexandrine, his Nephew, That neuer was buſineſſe more deliberately attempted,Wherewith the Pope & the King of Spaine are vext and angry. carried with more courage and conſtancy of the Confederates, nor laſted longer time vndiſcouered by any of the coniurate-ſociety, That their military Companies might in foure and twentie houres ſpace, be put ouer out of Flanders into England, the Queene, and the City of London ſuddenly ſurprized, Religion reſtored, and the Queene of Scotland ſettled and crowned in her ſteade: All which were like to haue the better ſucceſſe, for that Thomas Stukeley, an Engliſh Fugitiue, was then in readineſſe with three thouſand men, to bring Ireland in ſubiection to the King of Spaine, and with three Ships

that were Spies, ſet the Engliſh Fleete on fire.
                     Thus H. Catene, of which much was vnknowne till the yeere 1588. when he publiſhed a booke, printed at Rome, and priuiledged by Sixtus the Sixth. Now returne wee to the purpoſe, if we be digreſt.
                     Scarce ten dayes after the Dukes death, were ſent to the Queene of Scots, then all mournefull and in ſorrow, Will. Lord de-la-Warre,
                        
                           The Queene of Scots accuſed.
                         Sir Ralph Sadler, Tho. Wilſon, Doctor of the Ciuill Lawes, and T. Bromley, the Queenes Attourney, who were ſo to expoſtulate with her, as to charge her for vſurping the Title and Armes of England, nor that ſhe had renounced them, according as it was conditioned at Edenborrough, and to aſſume them more freely, had ſecretly contriued to marry with the Duke of Norfolke; which the rather to bring to paſſe, ſhee had left nothing vnaſſayed by the miniſtery of her Agents; by force and Armes to ſet the Duke at liberty, had raiſed Rebellion in the North Countrey, had ſuccoured the conuicted Rebels of Scotland and Flanders; had, by Ridolph the Italian his ſolliciting, implored the aydes of the Pope, the King of Spaine, and others, for inuading the Countrey of England; they vrged alſo, that ſhee had receiued Letters from the Pope, who had promiſed to keepe her as ſafe vnder his wing, as the Hen doth her Chickens, calling her and her Complices, [The true Children of the Church.] And finally, that ſhee had procured a Bull from the Pope againſt the Queene, and and had ſuffered herſelfe by her friends in forraigne parts, to be called
The Queene of England.
                        
                     
                     To all theſe, with a bold countenance, and conſtant reſolution, (hauing firſt proteſted herſelfe to be a free Prince, and ſubiect to none) ſhe anſwered,

                           THat ſhe had not vſurped the Title or Armes of England, but that being yet young, and vnder the power of her Husband; the King of France,
                           
                              Mary Qu. of Scotland her anſwere to her accuſation.
                            neceſsity impoſed them vpon her; but ſince her Husbands death, ſhee neuer bore them: wherefore it was not to be imputed to her as any fault of hers, neither would ſhe take them to her, ſo long as ELIZABETH liued, or any Childe ſhee ſhould beare. That in the matching with the Duke of Norfolke, ſhee had no thought of any ill might happen to the Cōmon-wealth, but rather much good, and if ſhe ſhould renounce the marriage, it was contrary to the matrimoniall Vow ſhe had made, and that by dutie thereof, ſhe was bound to aduertiſe the Duke of his dangers, and to quit himſelfe out of priſon. That ſhe had neuer raiſed, nor conſented to the raiſing of any tumults, but was alwaies ready to diſcouer what plots ſhee knew of, againſt the Queene or Countrey, if ſhe had pleaſed by her to bee admoniſhed of, or to haue admitted her to her ſight or hearing; nor at any time had ſuccoured the Engliſh Rebels, but only by her Letters had recommended the Counteſſe of Northumberland to the Duke D'Alua. Of Ridolph ſhe was to haue neceſſary vſe for her penſionary Annuities, and in ſome money-matters; whom ſhee knew to be a great Fauourite of the Popes, but neuer had receiued any Letters from him, had neuer dealt with any touching her deliuery, but indeed had not refuſed to giue eare to ſuch as had offered the ſeruice in that kind, and for that cauſe had paſsed her priuie Seale to Rowlſton and Hall. She had ſometimes receiued Letters conſolatory and full of piety from the Pope, wherein was no mention of any ſuch matter, nor had ſhee procured any Bull from Rome; onely on a time a copie of one of them was ſhewed her, which, after ſhe had read, ſhee caſt it into the fire. But if any out of forraigne Countries

ſhall write or ſpeake otherwiſe then they ought, they ought to anſwere it, and to ſuffer the penaltie of their faults. She neuer ſought or ſent either to the Pope or K. of Spaine, for the procuring any inuaſion vpon England, but had implored their helpes for her reſtoring into her owne Realme, but not before her Maieſtie had preadmonition thereof. But if ſhee were to be called in queſtion concerning theſe Letters, ſhe requested (for that ſhee was iſſued from the Bloud Royall of England) that ſhe might anſwere for herſelfe in perſon in open Parliament.
                     
                     In the meane time was Scotland all vp in Armes, miſerably troubled with Ciuill Warres, whileſt on the one ſide,
                           Sedition in Scotland.
                         ſuch as fauoured the Queene, relying vpon aide from the French, and the other party expecting the like from England, had dayly encounters together, notwithſtanding both Engliſh and French ſhewed themſelues moſt deſirous to appeaſe and accord their diſſentions by the Ambaſſages which either countrey ſent into Scotland.
                        
                           The Queene of England, & the King of France endeuour to accord them.
                         Of which France propoſed, that their moſt commodious courſe would bee, to elect amongſt them ſome perſons of well-known worth and wiſedome, to gouerne the Kingdome for a time, not taking vpon them ſupreame authority, or the names of King or Queene: they were not willing to acknowledge for King the King of Scotland; for that they held hee had no right but by his mother, and that ſhee was vniuſtly depoſed of her Subiects, and therefore ſhee was iuſtly to bee reputed their Queene, and the ancient League of Alliance betwixt her and France to continue firme and inuiolable. Thoſe likewiſe from England,
                        
                           They differ in opinions.
                         on the contrary, maintained by ſtrong argument, that ſuch an Adminiſtration or popular gouernment would be an Anarchy, and that the Commonwealth was not to admit plurality of Gouernours, and that Scotland hauing alwaies beene commanded by Kings, was not now to haue an election of ſuch Adminiſtrators.

That the States of the Realme had depoſed the Queene, and lawfully crowned and inthroned the King, and that the ancient recited Alliance, was a contract, not of perſons, but of the two Kingdomes of France and Scotland, alledging alſo, that by an expreſſe Law, the moſt Chriſtian King was bound to defend the King of Scots in theſe termes.
                     If there happen at any time controuerſie about the Kingdome of Scotland, the Kings of France ſhall ſupport, ayde, and defend him whom the States of Scotland ſhall adiudge the Title of the Kingdome to.
                     And as touching the cauſes of the Queenes depoſing, it ſhould bee enquired of of thoſe Scots who haue depoſed her.
                     The French notwithſtanding,
                           Cauſes alleadged, why the French fauour the Queene of Scotland.
                         openly fauouring the partie of the Queene of Scotland, became ſerious interceſſours to her Maieſtie, for to ſet her at liberty, leſt that as his Ambaſſadour did freely, hee might bee thought not to reſpect her who had been wife to the King his brother, and now the Dowager of France; and to neglect the now puiſſant Family of the Guizes in France, or to approoue that pernicious example of depoſing of Kings. And which was the moſt capitall point of all, that ſhee finding her ſelfe abandoned of the French in her aduerſity, might ſeeke Patronage from Spaine, and that by her meanes, the three prepotent Realmes of England, Scotland, and Ireland, might colleague them in amity with Spaine, to the no ſmall endamagement of the State of France.
                     
                     To theſe Qu. ELIZABETH with milde alacrity anſwered.
                     THe King of France will be well aduiſed,The Queene of England conteſteth with the French. what or how he ſhall doe with the Queene of Scotland, notwithſtanding ſhe was their Queene,

and now is their Dowager, howbeit for the diſſoluing of the Duke of Aniou's mariages ſhe hath held ſecret cōſultation with the Spaniard. He will alſo conſider, whether that ancient Law of Alliance be violable, and whether he be bound therby, or no, to defend the King in his nonage. He will alſo bethinke him how much France is beholden or obliged to the Family of the Guizes, by whoſe practices the Countrey hath beene afflicted with long and bloody wars, the French haue beene forced to loſe the loue of Scotland, and the poore Queene brought into this calamitable caſe ſhe is in. In very deed, the example of depoſing Kings, I hold a thing moſt pernicious, and well deſeruing infernall puniſhment, but for that the Scots are to anſwere. And for mine owne part, I call to mind the things which grieue my heart to remember. But notwithſtanding I know not how the French in old times allowed of Pepin, when he ſupplanted Childeric; & Hugo Capet, Charles of Lorraine; depriuing them of their ancient ſucceſsions deſcended to them from a long-continued Race of Anceſtors, to transferre the Scepter to new-erected Families: As alſo Philip (ſurnamed, the good) Duke of Burgundie, exiled Iaquette from his countries of Hainault & Holland: or the Danes, when they expulſt from his Kingdome, Chriſtianus the ſecond, and his Daughters. Or the Spaniards, who impriſoned the Queene Vraca, after they had put her from the Crowne. It is no nouelty for Sonnes to ſucceed their depoſed Mothers. So Henry the Second was admitted King of England; Alphonſus, the yonger Sonne of Vraca, King of Caſtill; and of late memory, Charles the fifth King of Spaine and Sicily, their Mothers then ſuruiuing. The world is full of examples of many Queenes that haue exchanged their Diademes for priſons, which France doth teſtifie at large, hauing impriſoned (not to ſay further) the

wiues of three of their Kings, one after another, Lewes Hutin, Philip the long, and Charles the faire: For my part, I detaine the Queene of Scots vnder a reaſonable Guard, but I doe it for the preſeruation of England, and mine owne ſafety, after the example of the French, who for their better ſecurity of affaires, put Chilperic into a Monaſterie, Charles of Lorraine into a ſafe and ſtraite priſon, and Lodowicke Sforza, Duke of Mylan, into a Dungeon with Iron grates.
                     Whereunto (as ſhe was very conuerſant in the Hiſtories of all Nations) ſhee annexed other examples of the ſame nature, drawne out of the Hiſtorie of Spaine, and finally concluded, that true it was, ſuch Preſidents carried euer with them ſome ſemblance of Iniuſtice: but ſhe required, that the King of France would vndertake the defence of the Queene of Scotland, euen as he was bound by his Allyance; intimating, that it would bee an action of greater glory to the French, than all thoſe vnhappy enterprizes they aſſumed in the cauſe of that infamous woman, Iane of Naples.
                     
                     But when it was diſcouered, that at the ſame time the Queene of Scots practiſed ſecretly to confirme an alliance with the Spaniard, by the negotiations of the Lord Seton,
                        
                           The loue and affection which the King of France and Queene of England bore once to the Queene Mary of Scotland, growes cold.
                         who arriuing in Eſſex, diſguiſed in the habit of a Mariner, and returning from thence into Scotland, through England, hee had promiſed ſuccours in the Duke of Aluaes name, to the Scottiſh partakers with the Queene, ſhee was kept with a ſtraighter Guard, and the affection borne to her by the French, by little and little waxed cold. And certainely, as the Duke of Alua omitted nothing, wherein he might vent his hatred to Queene ELIZABETH, ſo was ſhee no leſſe cautelous to preuent it, and fruſtrate his diſſignes. For, in the firſt moneths of this yeere, hee complained by the Spaniſh Ambaſſadour in England, that the

                        Flemmiſh Rebels, bought all their warlike munition there, and were receiued into all her Ports and Hauens: ſhee preſently, by a ſtrict Proclamation, commanded, that all Flemmings, any wayes ſuſpected of ſedition, ſhould depart out of England, and that their ſhips of warlike equipage, ſhould be ſeyſed vpon in her harbours.
                           The rebellious Flemmings commanded to goe out of England. They take the Breele.
                         All which returned to the dammage of the Duke of Alua. For Humes, Earle of March, and other Flemmings, reduced as it were to a deſperate poynt, whether they were terrified by this Proclamation, or that they were vnder-hand admoniſhed to retyre, but they preſently ſurpriſed the Breele, which is ſeated vpon the mouth of the Meuſe, cauſed Fluſhing forthwith to reuolt, and other Townes, which expelled the Spaniards, as they were in hand to make cittadels, to captiuate their libertie, in a ſhort time, cut off the Duke of Alua by Sea, and through the meanes they had to make it good for themſelues, had a power to moleſt and detaine the Spaniard with a long and tedious warre: wherein Souldiers haue obſerued,
                           The Duke of Aluaes careleſneſse.
                         that hee ſhewed for his part ſuch palpable careleſſeneſſe, and negligence, as was not beſeeming ſo great a Generall, who, for the ſpace of foure whole yeeres, groſſely ouer-ſlipt the maritime affaires and expeditions of Flanders.
                     
                     At the ſame time, there was a famous generall muſter before the Queene at Greenwich, with a pleaſant trayning in Armes, by the Citizens of London, and after their returne from thence, martiall men, who began to ruſt and corrupt in their owne houſes, began to flow out of England into Flanders, and, according as they ſtood affected, betooke themſelues, ſome to the Duke of Alua, and others, the farre greater number, to the Prince of Orange, who oppoſed his proiects,
                           The Engliſh repaire into the Low-Countries to the warre.
                         for the defence of Religion, and his Countries libertie. Amongſt whom, Sir Thomas Morgan was the firſt, that brought three hundred men into Fluſhing, vpon the report whereof, the Duke, who intended

the recouery of it, forbare and retyred. Further, hee vſed ſuch expedition and diligence, as hee cauſed greater troupes to come: for, after himſelfe, there landed nine Companies more of Engliſh, conducted by Humfrey Gilbert, who, being conſorted with the French, firſt attempted to ſurprize Scluſe and Bruges, then hee ſet vpon Tergow in Suethebenelant. But their ſcaling-Ladders being too ſhort, hollow correſpondancie betweene the French and the Engliſh, and Mondragon comming on with freſh ſuccours for the aſſieged, they retyred to Fluſhing; of which, both the one and the other, ſought to make themſelues maſters, each to themſelues. But the Prince of Orange made good vſe of this enuy among themſelues, ſo as neither of them obtained their end and purpoſe.
                     At that very time, a pleaſing ſerenity ſeemed to ſhine vpon the Proteſtants in France, and Charles the Ninth pretending onely a warre in Flanders, which he affirmed to be the preſeruation of France, and couering himſelfe with this maske, he feigned as though hee meant to contract alliance and amitie with the Queene of England, and the Princes of Germanie, to giue ſome teſtimony herein of his loue to the Proteſtants, whoſe abſolute ruine notwithſtanding he couertly intended. And,
                           Diſsimulation of the King of France.
                         as if he leaned to them of the one ſide, and the Spaniard on the other, hee ſubſtituted to this end the Duke de Mont-Morancy, Birag de Anbiſine, the Biſhop of Limoges, and of Foix. The Queene of England, who truely apprehended the ſecret plots and ſtratagems of the Duke of Alua, deputed Sir Thomas Smith
                        ▪ and Sir Francis Walſingham: And Articles were drawne betweene them, whereof you ſhall ſee an abridgement in the ſame expreſſe words and termes.
                     THis alliance ſhall not tye Princes allyed,The Alliance of Blois. The Articles of the ſame. to leaue other Treaties paſt betweene them, ſo they be not oppoſite and contrary thereunto. There ſhall be a Confederation,

League, and Vnion betweene them, to defend themſelues mutually againſt all, who, vnder ſome pretext, or any other occaſion whatſoeuer, ſhall inuade, or attempt to inuade their perſons or Territories, whereof they are now poſſeſt. It ſhall remaine firme betweene them, not onely while they liue, but alſo betweene their Succeſſours, ſo the Heire of the firſt deceaſed giue notice to the ſuruiuant within the ſpace of a yeere, by Ambaſſadours and Letters, that hee accepts of the ſame conditions. Otherwiſe, the ſuruiuant ſhall be reputed diſcharged of the obſeruance of the ſame. It ſhall bee validious againſt all, yea, and euen againſt thoſe that are ioyned in affinitie to the one or other Prince, and againſt all other Alliances contracted, or to contract. If the Queene of England be required to ſend ſuccours, by Letters ſealed and ſubſcribed with the King of France his owne hand, ſhee ſhall be bound to paſse ouer into France, within two moneths after, a thouſand foot armed, or fiue hundred Horſe at her choyce, whom the King muſt pay, from the firſt day of their arriuall in France. Shee was to ſend for the warre of Flanders eight Ships of equall greatneſſe, wherein twelue hundred Souldiers muſt be imployed, with all things neceſſary, and there muſt bee no Marriners nor Souldiers but Engliſh, but yet they muſt be commanded by the Admirall of France, payed and victualled by the King, from the firſt day they enter into Seruice. Shee was alſo to victuall her Ships for two Moneths, which the King was alſo to pay within two moneths. And if the Queene be moued to any warre, the King hauing receiued Letters ſubſcribed with her owne hand, was to ſend ouer into England, or Ireland, within two Moneths, ſixe thouſand foot, or at her choyce, fiue hundred Conductors, armed at all poynts, who ſhould bring fifteene hundred Horſe, and about three thouſand foot,

with good Horſe and Armes, after the French manner, whom ſhee muſt pray, from the time they ſet foot in her Countries. And for the warre by Sea, he was to furniſh eight Shippes, with twelue hundred Souldiers, in manner and forme aboue mentioned. Order agreed vpon for ſuccours and pay, to be digeſt in writing, running in this forme, that the one ſhall bee bound to ſell vnto the other Armes, and all neceſſary things, to the Prince aſsayled. They ſhall innouate nothing in Scotland, but defend it againſt Strangers, and permit them to enter, and nouriſh the Scottiſh partialities. But the Queene of England was permitted to purſue with Armes, thoſe amongſt them, who maintained or foſtered the Engliſh Rebels, who were at that preſent in Scotland. That this Alliance ſhall be ſo taken and vnderſtood, as the onely proprietie and meaning of the words imported. Each of the two Princes ſhall confirme euery one of theſe Articles by Patents, and faithfully and really to deliuer them into the hands of Ambaſsadours, for the one and other within three moneths.
                     For ratification of this Alliance on the behalfe of the King of France,
                        
                           Confirmation thereof.
                         the Queene of England ſent into France the Earle of Lincolne, Admirall, with a great traine of Gentlemen, among which were theſe Barons, the Lord Dacres, the Lord Rich, the Lord Talbot, the Lord Sands, and others: And the King of France ſent into England, Anne Duke de Mont-Morancie, and Monſieur de Foix, with a magnificent traine, that in the preſence of them, and Mesſieurs de Saligna, and de la Mottef, his Ambaſſadour ordinary, the Queene might reciprocally confirme the ſame with oath: which was performed at Weſtminſter the ſeuenteenth of Iune: and the day after, the Queenes Maieſtie, with the conſent of the French, inueſted with the Order of Saint

                        George, the Duke de Mont-Morancy, in gratefull commemoration of the loue which Anne, Conſtable of France, manifeſted vnto her,
                           Mont-Morancy admitted to the Order of the Garter.
                         to whom, HENRY the Eighth vouchſafed the ſame honour, out of the loue he bare to the Houſe of Mont-Morancy, who carries the title of the firſt Chriſtian of France, and is there held for moſt Noble.
                     
                        
                           He intercedes to accord the differences of Scotland.
                        While Mont-Morancy remayned in England, hee moued certaine propoſitions in the King of France his name, that the Queene of Scots might there finde fauour, ſo farre as it might be performed without danger. That there might be a ceſſation of Armes in Scotland, and that a Concord might be eſtabliſhed by Act of Parliament. And if a Parliament could not commodiouſly be ſummoned, that ſome might be elected of the one and other part, among the Scots, to repayre to London, to ſettle affaires, with the Deputies of the King of France, and Queene of England.
                     
                     
                        
                           Anſwere made to him.
                        But anſwere was made him, That more fauour had been ſhewed to the Queene of Scots than ſhee deſerued, and yet for the King of France, more ſhould be ſhewed her, though the Eſtates of the Kingdome aſſembled had iudged, how the Queene of England could not liue in ſecurity, except ſome rigor were vſed to her. That the Queene had carefully employed her whole power, to eſtabliſh Concord, and procure a ceſſation of Armes, hauing for this end lately ſent into Scotland, Sir William Drewry, Gouernour of Berwicke, with de la Croce, the French Ambaſſadour. But they could by no meanes induce Grange to peace, nor the Garriſon of the Caſtle of Edenborrough, out of the hope they conceiued, to bee ſuccoured from France and Flanders: though Huntley, and Hamilton Arbroth for the Duke their Father had obliged themſelues in writing to Queene ELIZABETH, to enter it, and other of the Queenes partakers had plighted their faith and promiſe thereunto.
                     After theſe motiues, hee alſo propounded many other,

touching the marriage of the Duke of Aniou, but in that they could not agree about ſome circumſtances concerning Religion, the matter grew hopeleſſe, and he returned into France, when there was preparation of the Nuptials,
                           Hee alſo treats of a marriage with the Duke of Aniou.
                         betweene Henrie King of Nauarre, with Margarite, Siſter to the King of France, whereunto, with notable diſſimulation, the King of Nauarre, and the moſt noble Proteſtants were drawne, by ſweet promiſes, and probable hopes of perpetuating the peace, & bringing themſelues into grace: as alſo, the Earle of Leiceſter, and the Lord Burleigh, were inuited out of England, vnder an honourable colour, and out of Germanie, the Sonnes of the Elector Palatine, to the end, that being intangled in the nets, if thoſe of the Euangelicall Religion, together with themſelues, were not all denounced in an inſtant, yet they ſhould receiue a mortall and irrecouerable wound. For, when the Nuptials were ſolemnized, this ſo expected and wiſhed ſerenitie, was preſently ouer-caſt with that terrible and bloudie tempeſt, the Pariſian Butcherie,
                        
                           Maſſacre of Paris.
                         and through the cruell Maſſacres, that with execrable impietie were committed in all the Citie of France, againſt Proteſtants of all eſtates and conditions: the which notwithſtanding they would faine haue couered, with a pretext of equitie, yea, of pitty, and to practiſe this impious fraud, vnder the cloake and ſhelter of the Edicts, imputing to the Proteſtants, that they had wickedly conſpired againſt the King, the Queene his Mother, his Brethren, the King of Nauarre, and the Princes of the Bloud. For, pieces of money were coyned in memorial of this act, which had of the one ſide the Kings effigies, with this Inſcription; Vertu contre les Rebelles: Vertue againſt Rebels: and on the other, La pieté à eſmen la iuſtice, Pittie hath moued iustice.
                     
                     Not long before, the Queene-Mother of France, very ſubtill in counterfeiting good-will to the Proteſtants, being to vnderſtand the future euents, and credulous in Aſtrologicall

predictions, which by the coniunction of the Royall Planets at the birth of her Sonnes, prognoſticated Kingdomes to each of them,
                           Marriage of the Duke of Alenzon, propounded to Queene Elizabeth.
                         commanded la Mottef, to breake with Queene ELIZABETH about the marriage of her with Francis her youngeſt Sonne, Duke of Alenzon, to purchaſe him, if ſhee could, the title of a King, or at leaſt to diuert Queene ELIZABETH from ayding the Proteſtants in France. La Mottef propounded this matter at Kennelworth, two dayes before the Maſſacre of Paris. But Queene ELIZABETH excuſed her ſelfe, by reaſon of the difference in Religion, and diſparity in yeeres. For hee was hardly ſeuenteene yeeres old, and ſhe aboue eight and thirtie. Neuertheleſſe, ſhee promiſed to deliberate of it, and the Duke of Alenzon forbare not to ſollicite her, by the procurements of Fleri.
                     
                     
                        
                           The Earle of Northumberland beheaded.
                        In the ſame moneth, Thomas Percie, Earle of Northumberland, who, becauſe of his Rebellion fled into Scotland, had his Head cut off at Yorke, after hee was deliuered into the hands of the Lord of Hunſdon, Gouernour of Berwicke, by the treachery of one Morton, who ſtood much bound vnto him for many benefits, when hee was baniſhed into England, but was euer found gratefull towards the afflicted. And as this yeere, like a dreadfull Axe, cut off the Duke of Norfolke, and Earle of Northumberland, in the flower of their age, a milde and gentle death, carried likewiſe out of the World two others, in their decrepit yeeres, who were of the moſt eminent Nobilitie, and of the Priuy-Councell.
                           
                              Death of the Marquis of Wincheſter. Cecill is made Treaſurer.
                           
                           
                              Death of the Earle of Darbie.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        George Pawlet, Lord Treaſurer of England, Marquis of Wincheſter, Earle of Wilton, and Lord Saint Iohn of Baſing, who went through many great honours, attained to the age of ninetie ſeuen yeeres, and begot to the number of an hundred and three children. Sir William Cecill, Baron of Burleigh, ſupplied his place, in the dignity of Lord Treaſurer. Edward, Earle of Darbie, and Baron of le Strange of

                        Knoking, departed this life, with whom, in ſome ſort, dyed the glory of Engliſh hoſpitality.
                     After his commendable diſcharge of many honourable Ambaſſies, there dyed alſo Sir George Peters,
                        
                           And of Sir George Peters.
                         an honourable Knight, who was one of the priuy Councell, Secretary to King HENRY the Eighth, King EDVVARD the Sixt, Queene MARY, and Queene ELIZABETH, and Chancellour of the order of the Garter, deſcended from the worthy Family of Exceter: after that by his wiſedome and learning, he had collected a great Eſtate, out of his owne goods, and the permiſſion of Queene MARY, he augmented with annuall reuennues, Exceter Colledge, in the Vniuerſity of Oxeford, where he was a Student, and brought vp.
                     The Queene her ſelfe, who had alwaies liued in perfect health, (for ſhe neuer ate but when ſhe had a ſtomacke,
                           The Queene ſicke.
                         neither drunke any Wine) felt ſome ſmall grudging of infirmitie at Hampton-Court: But ſhe recouered her former health, before it was almoſt known ſhe was ſicke, and being vigilant ouer matters worthy of a Princes care & forecaſt, ſhee commanded that Portſmouth ſhould be rampard with new fortifications, & her Fleet increaſt with Ships of war, that at certaine conſtituted times, Soldiers might bee inrold throughout the Shires,
                           She hath a care of the publike.
                         and Youth to be trained vp in Armes, though ſhe liued then in moſt ſecure peace. Shee willingly and with much thankes, reſtored the money ſhee had borrowed of her Subiects; in doing of which, ſhe gained no leſſe loue of her people, then in ſending foorth two Proclamations, which ſhe cauſed to be publiſht in the beginning of the yeere. In one of which, ſhe ordained, that thoſe Noblemen ſhould be taxed according to the ancient Lawes, that tooke more followers and retainers then was permitted them, becauſe theſe their retainers & followers were hereby exempted from publike Offices, they maintained Factions, and many waies offended againſt the

Lawes, relying on the Protection of the Nobles, to whom they had proffered their ſeruice: And in the other ſhee curbed a rauenous kind of people, called Enquirers after conceald Lands,
                        
                           
                              She cut off the ſuperfluous number of followers, which dayly augmented. She curbeth enquirers after conceal'd Lands of the Crowne.
                           
                           
                              Rebellion in Ireland.
                           
                         by reuoking their warrants, and conſtraining them to reſtore many things taken away. For being appointed to ſeeke out, whether particular men concealed not ſome land that belonged to the Crowne, with moſt ſacrilegious auarice, they began to ſeaze on ſuch as had heretofore beene giuen by pious Anceſtors, to Pariſh Churches, and Hoſpitals; yea, to plucke downe the Bells, and Lead, wherewith the Churches were couered.
                     In Ireland, the burdenſome authority of one Fitton, Gouernour of Connath, produced ſome troubles: For the ſons of Richard, Earle of Clanricard, brought foorth by diuers women, not beeing able to endure it, in that they were headſtrong and giuen to liberty, they raiſed a Rebellion, and paſſing ouer Sene, made cruell Incurſions vpon the inhabitants of the weſterne parts of Mijs, which with many outrages committed, they pillaged and forraged. Their Father, who was of the ancient Family of Bourgh in England, venerably bald, and of a ſtaid diſpoſition, went to the Deputy, iuſtified himſelfe of this crime, and required aduice of the Councellours of Ireland, how he might depreſſe his ſonnes, that ſpoiled and waſted the Countrie in this manner. But her Maieſty thought fit, for publike tranquillity, by little and little to draw Fitton out of Connath, and to make him Treaſurer of Ireland. A little while after, the Earles ſonnes, defeated by the Garriſons, which fell vpon them, ſubmitted themſelues to the Depruie.
                     
                        
                           The Omors.
                        The Enlagen Omors, a kinde of ſeditious people, ſtird vp alſo new troubles; but they likewiſe being proclaimed Rebels, at the Earle of Kildares perſwaſion, came vnder due obedience: and at the ſame time, Sir Thomas Smith, a learned and prudent man, with pitty entring into conſideration, what ſmall account was made of Ireland, obtained of

the Queene, that a Colonie might be ſent thither, vnder the conduct of his owne onely baſtard ſonne, into the halfe Iland called Ardes, at the Eaſt entry into Vlſter, to inſtruct and ciuilize the Demibarbarous inhabitants, and to make them humane, hoping the place might eaſily bee defended, if Garriſons were planted in the ſtraight or Iſtmus, which ioynes it to the reſt of the Iland. He gaue to euery Footman 120. acres, & to each Horſeman 240. ammounting to fiue hundred acres of Engliſh ground, paying euery yeere but a penny for an acre. But this buſineſſe footed not according to his deſire: for Thomas his ſonne hauing conducted thither the Colonie, was ſurprized and ſlaine by the treachery of Neel Brian Artho. Afterwards, Malbie, an Engliſh Gouernour of Lecale, a frontier Prouince, iudging all meanes lawfull to kill a perfidious murderer, ſlew him likewiſe not long after, and ſo left him to the Wolues iawes, to be deuoured and eaten.
                     I know not whether it be materiall or no, here to make mention, as all the Hiſtoriographers of our time haue done, how in the moneth of Nouember was ſeene a ſtrange Starre,
                           A ſtrange Starre.
                         except you had rather haue me tearme it a Phinomene in the Chaire of Caſsioperaes Conſtellation, which exceeded in relucencie, that 
                           〈◊〉
                         himſelfe, then, when he is in the Perigie of his E
                           •
                        ce
                           •
                        trick or Epicicle, as I obſerued my ſelfe, and ſeated in the ſame Spheare of the heauens, as alſo moued by his diurnall motion, remained there 16. moneths. Tho. Digſay, and Ioh. Dee, rare Mathematicians among vs, learnedly did demonſtrate by the maximes of the Paralels, that it remained not onely in the elementall Region, but in the very Celeſtiall circle; and were of opinion, that daily mounting higher by little and little, at laſt it vaniſht out of our ſight. And certainely, their Iudgement was good and ſound; for after the eighth moneth, it continually diminiſhed. Theodore Beza ingeniouſly compared this Starre to that which appeared at the birth of Chriſt, and at the maſſacre

of Infants, which was perpetrated vnder Herod: and in this ſhort verſe,
Thou therefore, cruell Herod, ſhake and feare.
admoniſhed Charles, new King of France, who confeſt himſelfe to be the author of that which was executed at Paris, to tremble and feare: and this was not out of a vaine and credulous beliefe. For fiue moneths after the diſappearing of this Starre, he dyed of a bloody fluxe, rackt with long and terrible torments.
                  
                  
                     
                     THE SIXTEENTH YEERE OF Her Reigne.Booke 2. 1573. 
                        Anno Dom. 1573.
                     
                        THe proceedings of Spaine in the Low-Countries,
                        
                           The Spaniſh Fleet diſcomfited.
                         being wonderfully croſt, by the taking of Fluſhing, the reuolt of the Townes of Holland, and the loſſe and diſcomfiture of the Spaniſh Fleet by the Hollanders, with which the Duke de Medina coeli had a Commiſſion with Chapin Vitelli, to ſuccour the Papiſts in England: The Duke of Alua was conſtrained in deſpight of himſelfe, to ſhew himſelfe more fauourable to the Engliſh; and ſo it happened,
                           Commerce betweene the Flemmiſh and Engliſh reſtored.
                         that in the moneth of Ianuary, the commerce of the Engliſh with the Flemmings, which in the ſame moneth of the yeere, 1568. was interdicted, at laſt came to be opened for two yeeres, and the Articles were agreed vpon at Briſtoll, confirm'd by the Spaniard, in the moneth of Iune, amongſt which this clauſe was inſerted.
                     
                        THat though this mutuall correſpondencie and amity had beene obſcured, yet was i
                           •
                         in no wiſe to be reputed diſsol
                           •
                        ed and broken▪ and it was accorded, that if the Deputies, within a 
                           〈◊〉
                         p
                           •••
                        ſcript time, could not arbitrate the buſineſſe, that then the ſaid Entercourſe ſhould be expired, when the two yeeres came to an end.
                     But when the troubles renewed in Flanders, it grew dead by little and little: nay, and before the two yeers were fully accompliſhed, and a new one was commenſt, betweene the vnited States. And as for Queene ELIZABETH, ſhe recompenſed all the dammages of the Engliſh Marchants, with ſuch Flemmiſh goods as ſhe retained in her hands, reſtored the reſt to the Duke of Alua, and amply contented the Genoa Marchants for the money of theirs ſhe ſeized vpon and tooke vp at loane, which was the firſt cauſe of the warre, although the Duke of Alua reſtored nor one ſhilling to the Flemmings of the Engliſh-mens goods; which did accrue to the wonderfull honour of Queene ELIZABETH. And yet ſhe performed a farre more glorious Action then this, and more pleaſing to her Subiects, by diſcharging England of thoſe debts which her Father and Brother had taken vpon credit of Strangers,
                           She diſchargeth her Fathers and brothers debts.
                         which were greatly augmented, by reaſon of the long intereſts due: and, to the inexplicable ioy of the inhabitants of the Citie of London, calling in all the Citie obligations, which had beene ſo often renewed.
                     Neuertheleſſe, both the Queene and the whole Clergie were wonderfully vext with certaine Eccleſiaſticall perſons,
                           Innouators trouble the Church.
                         who boyling with zeale, and breathing nothing but Euangelicall Purity, reprehended not only the Eccleſiaſticall Gouernment, as ſtill defiled with Romane corruptions, as well publikely as priuately, both by Sermons & Books,

which were intituled [An Aduertiſement to the Parliament] and [An Appologie of the Aduertiſement:] but refuſed alſo to be preſent at the receiued forme of Common-Prayer, vſurping & framing to themſelues other courſes of ſeruing God. So as the Queene condemning them for people impatient of Peace, greedy of nouelties, and apt to ſubuert things well eſtabliſhed; to preuent Schiſme, cōmanded, that throughout the Kingdome, they ſhould, by rigour of Law, be vrged to obſerue a generall forme and manner of publike Prayers, and that theſe Libels might be deliuered into the hands of the Biſhops, or ſome one of the Priuie-Councell, vpon paine of impriſonment, although Iohn Whitegift, who was afterward Arch-Biſhop of Canterbury, had with learned ſoliditie refuted them.
                     There was alſo diuulged, by the Engliſh Rebels and Fugitiues, a booke full of iniurie and calumniation,
                           The Papiſts troble the Common-wealth.
                         whoſe title was [A Treatiſe of Treaſon] which, to make Sir Nicholas Bacon Keeper of the great Seale, and the Lord Burghley, Treaſurer of England, odious to their Prince, becauſe they had often by their prudence and vigilancie, cut off their wicked hopes and deſignes, they preferred an accuſation againſt them, of being Traitors to their Countrie. But the Queene was ſo farre from giuing credit to ſuch friuolous accuſations, that by a publike Proclamation ſhee declared them idle and fruſtrate, falſe, calumnious, and inuented by ſworne Enemies to Religion and their Countrie, by their wicked and ſecret practices to depriue the Queene of her faithfull Councellours. And therefore ſhee admoniſhed euery one to giue no credit to them,
                           Their Libell is ſuppreſſed
                         to contemne & throw them into the fire, except themſelues would bee puniſhed as ſeditious perſons, in ſtead of thoſe that were the true Authors. Notwithſtanding, through a ſpeciall vice, very incident to the naturall curioſity of men, they were frequently read, till (as it ordinarily fals out) comming at laſt to be neglected and contemned, the vſe of them grew out of requeſt.
                     
                        From the Month of Nouember, in the precedent yeere, Charles the Ninth, King of France, had a Daughter borne. The King, to make ſure with Queene ELIZABETH, and aſwell to render her fauourable by all offices of humanitie, and to take away from the Proteſtants of France, all hope of ſuccour from England, intreated her to receiue her at the ſacred Font of Baptiſme; and to this end, as alſo to obtaine ſome certaine Moneyes from her, hee ſent into England,
                        
                           The Ambaſſage of Gondy. Count of Rez.
                         
                        De Gondy, vulgarly called, the Count of Rez, who, by an elaborate diſcourſe indeuoured to perſwade her, that they had made the Maſſacre of Paris, (which ſome could call by no other name than a great and capitall wickedneſſe; hee, a ſafe and wholeſome remedy) not in hatred of the Proteſtant Religion, but to diſſipate the conſpiracy of the Admirall Coligni, and others; and that the King moſt inuiolably kept the Edicts touching Religion: That ſhee would not giue eare to thoſe fearefull ſpirits, that did nothing but adde to their owne affrightment, and cauſeleſly complaine; but that Shee would religiouſly conſerue the alliance of the new contract, and exhort them to obey the King, aſſuring her that they ſhould finde him moſt mercifull. To which, ſhee promiſed to be mindefull of the Alliance, and that ſhee would not faile the King in any thing, that was fitting and agreeable for a moſt affectionate Ally; but for the Money, ſhee excuſed her ſelfe. Nor did he demand it, but as a deſigne to giue impeachment to her ayding of the Proteſtants, in caſe they ſhould require it, after ſhee had made deniall of it to the King of France. And ſurely ſhee tooke occaſion from hence to make refuſall of it to them, calling to minde how euilly they had requited her, for that which ſhee had lent them in their firſt Ciuill Warre. By this Ambaſſage, the Count of Rez obtained, that from that time, the Proteſtants found leſſe fauour with her, than they had done before.
                     
                        A little after, the Lord Somerſet, Earle of Worceſter, was ſent into France, with a Baptiſtrey of Gold, for (in Qu. ELIZABETHS name) to promiſe the duetie of a Godmother at the chriſtening of the French Kings Daughter,
                           Ambaſsage of the Earle of Worceſter in France.
                         with the Lady Mary, the Emperours Wife, and the Deputies of the Duke of Sauoy. This, arriuing to the knowledge of the Proteſtants of France and Flanders, who, at the ſame time were as Pirats vpon the Sea, they ſuſpecting the ſaid Earle of Worceſter to be a Papiſt, miſt him narrowly, for they robbed two of his Ships,
                           The Sea is purged of Pirats by Holſtoc.
                         and ſlew diuers of his people: at which, Queene ELIZABETH being highly offended, ſent to Sea Sir William Holſtoc, Controller of the Royall-Nauy, who as much by his taking as chaſing of them, recouered ſome Ships loden with goods, and purged the Sea of ſuch. And foraſmuch as the moſt part of them had vowed their ſeruice to the Count de-Mont-Gommery, who then was in England, for helpe,
                           The French Proteſtants handle ſhrewdly the French Papiſts in England.
                         to ſuccour thoſe of Rochell beſieged, it hindered his diſpatch, parting from thence late, and with ſo little an Army, that hee did no good at all to Rochell. This occaſioned the French Proteſtants, refuged in England, being much moued, to vſe in iniurious manner ſome other Allens, being French Papiſts, in hatred of contrary Religion; yea, they aſſaulted them armed, and among others, the ſeruants of Monſieur Flery,
                        
                           The French Leger Ambaſſadour complained to Queene Elizabeth concerning the helpe and aſsiſtance ſent out of England to the Proteſtants of Rochell beſieged.
                         ſecretly ſent into England from the Duke of Aniou, to treat of a match with Queene ELIZABETH, whereof Monſieur le Vidame, de Chartres, not knowing his comming, accuſed Flery before the Councell of State, as to be come of purpoſe, and hyred to kill the ſaid Earle of Mont-Gommery.
                     
                     The ordinary Ambaſſadour of France, contrariwiſe complained to the Queene, that, againſt the Alliance, the Earle of Mont-Gommery had, through the helpe of England, vndertaken a voyage to Rochell, and the Engliſh Merchants furniſhed the beſieged Towne with victuals and

prouiſions. To this her Maieſty anſwered:

                           Her Maieſty excuſed her ſelfe.THat ſhe had alwayes inuiolably kept, and would ſtill, to future times, keepe her promiſe mentioned in the alliance. That this aide and Succour was compounded of Pyrats and Vagabonds, who could not tarry in their Countries, and that they were parted out of England, without her command vnder falſe Flagges. Enſigne, and that ſhee deſired they ſhould bee puniſhed. Moreouer, that ſuch Engliſh Merchants, baſely dealt withall in Bourdeaux, were gone to Rochell without leaue, and that men of their calling and kind, vſed to ſayle euery where, chiefly where their profit and gaine was greater. Shee likewiſe required that in ſtead of Rochell, they ſhould appoynt, in France, ſome Hauen-Towne more commodious for Negotiations.
                     
                     
                        
                           Queene Elizabeth is earneſtly ſollicited to marry with the Duke of Alanzon. Her Maieſtie heares of it willingly.
                        The French were much pleaſed with this anſwer, being aſſured that Qu. ELIZABETH would ſtill keepe promiſe, and that ſhee was ſo farre from ſending helpe to the Proteſtants of France, (who expected none from her.) The King of France, and his Mother, loued intirely more and more Queene ELIZABETH, ſeeing her Maieſty bore vnto them a true amitie and ſincere affection: they made the Duke of Alanzon write many amorous Letters vnto her from the Royall Campe before Rochell, endeuouring with much care, and no leſſe pain, to bring that marriage to paſſe, that whole yeere, by their Leger Ambaſſadour, Monſieur de Chaſteau-Neuf, extraordinarily ſent to that effect. And truely her Maieſty was moued to conſider it ſeriouſly, by a double apprehenſion ſhee had,
                           By a double apprehenſion.
                         both for the want of a Husband and Children. The firſt was, that her Maieſty ſhould perhaps be contemned by her owne Subiects. The ſecond, that forreiners would plot wicked practices againſt

her Scepter: her Maieſty was perſwaded, and ſaid often, that a Husband and Progeny are firme Fortreſſes againſt it: her Courtiers contrarywiſe, ayming at their particular ends, maintained:
THat true Religion, and Equitie, were aſſured Forts, and defenſiue Rockes againſt all ſorts of plots and deſignes: That her Maieſtie ought not to apprehend to be deſpiſed or contemned by her ſubiects, for they had ſettled their fortunes, ankered their hopes, and grounded their ſolace vpon her Maieſtie onely, as much obliged vnto her by a long race of Anceſtors, affecting and taking pleaſure more and more in the contemplation and admiration of her ſplendant and luſtrous vertues.
With ſuch other diſcourſes familiar to Courtiers. But as her Maieſty had often in her mouth, that the moſt part contemned the ſetting Sunne, theſe Flatterers alledged:
WHat is hee, that will contemne the ſalutiferous Beames of a Sunne brightly ſhining, for to aſpect the fatall and confounded light of little Starres, which riſe all at once? So they often termed her Competitors.
                        
                     
                     Among theſe things,
                           Queene Elizabeth grāts leaue to the Duke of Alanzon to come into England.
                         the Queene-Mother of France prayed her Maieſtie, to be ſo farre pleaſed, as to permit that the Duke of Alanzon, her Sonne, might paſſe into England to ſee her: which requeſt finally Queene ELIZABETH granted (wearied with the multiplicity of Letters ſent to her Maieſtie to that end) prouided hee ſhould not repute her leaue fraudulous or iniurious, if hee ſhould returne backe againe as he came. But ſo ſoone as her Maieſty heard, how Henrie, Duke of Aniou, his Brother, had beene elected King of Poland: Alſo, the French King to

be grieuouſly ſicke, ſhee ſent word to the Duke of Alanzon, to take not as yet his iourney for England, alledging him theſe reaſons:
                           And her Maieſty preſently ſends him word not to come as yet.
                        
                        THe Proteſtants Maſſacre, lately moſt cruelly acted on the Bloudy Theater of all France, and in hatred of their Religion, during the ſolemnizations and recreations of a marriage: That hee hauing already heretofore ſought her to Wife, the Proteſtants of England partly ſuſpected fatall the Nuptials: and the more, ſith himſelfe, tranſported of a courage, enemy to the Proteſtants, had gone in perſon to beſiege Rochell; and had written of all parts, that hee would come to ſee her Maieſtie preſently after the taking of the ſaid City: inſomuch, that hee ſeemed rather to hate the Proteſtants Religion, than to beare affection or loue to the Queenes Maieſtie; and that this cauſed the beſt part of England to ſuſpect, that hee would come into their Countrey, to marry the Queene, with a Sword dyed in the bloud of thoſe poore Chriſtians who profeſſed their owne Religion.
                     
                     Therefore, her Maieſty friendly counſelled him;
FIrſt, to procure and mediate a Peace in France, to yeeld ſome worthy proofe and noted teſtimony of his affection to the Proteſtants of France, to be the better welcome in England, and the more graciouſly receiued, according to his deſire.
                     
                     Since this, Peace was re-eſtabliſhed in France, the exerciſe of Religion granted in certaine places to the Proteſtants. The King and the Queene deſired nothing more than the abſence of the Duke of Alanzon, becauſe he was of a harſh and ſeuere nature, inclined to trouble their States

affaires▪ they did their beſt, and vſed their vttmoſt endeuoures to effect the match, and by like meanes prayed Qu. ELIZABETH, to permit to their other ſonne, the Duke of Aniou (if he ſhould goe by ſea to Poland) Authority to ſaile vnder publike aſſurance vpon Great-Brittaines Sea. This their requeſt her Maieſtie granted, not only moſt willingly, but more ſhee offered him a Fleet of Ships to conuay him; in the meane while the Duke of Alanzon fell ſicke of the ſmall poxe, and the Queene his mother giuing aduice thereof to Queene ELIZABETH, by the Earle of Rez, excuſeth him, by reaſon of his ſickneſſe, for not comming into England.
                        
                           Gondy returned into England.
                         
                        Gondy met Queene ELIZABETH at Canterbury, where ſhe entertained him with great magnificence: and the ſame time, Matthew Parker, Arch-biſhop of Canterbury, celebrating the Queenes birth-day, which was the ſeuenth of September, in the Arch-biſhops Hall, very ſpacious, and by him newly repaired, inuited the Queen thither, and Gondy, and la Motto, and feaſted them with like number of Nobility that Charles the fifth, and HENRY the Eighth had, being feaſted in the ſame Hall in the yeere 1519.
                     In Scotland, Iames Dowglaſſe, Earle of Morton,
                        
                           Earle of Morton Vice-Roy of Scotland.
                         beeing elected Vice-Roy of Scotland in Murray's place, by the meanes of Queene ELIZABETH, and his authority made ſure by the Aſſembly of the States, in the name of the King, eſtabliſhed theſe Lawes, for confirming Religion againſt Papiſts and Heretickes, and made ſure Alexander Areskin, Earle of Marre, the Kings Gardian by ſpeciall right, (being as yet in his minority) vpon theſe Conditions:
THat the Papiſts and Factious perſons, ſhould be excluded from hauing acceſſe to his perſon; an Earle might be admitted to him with two ſeruants only, and a Baron with one; all others alone, and without weapons.
                     
                     
                        In the Interim, the French hauing ſent Viriack, who endeuoured what he could to ſupplant the Vice-Roy, before he ſhould be authorized, ſet to oppoſe him, the Earles of Athole and Huntley,
                        
                           The King of France endeuours to deſtroy him. Qu Elizabeth to defend him.
                         promiſing them a reward. Queene ELIZABETH, to counter-ſcarfe theſe deſignes, let the Scots vnderſtand by H. Killigrewe, that this cruell Maſſacre of Paris had bin put in execution by the conſpiracy of the Pope, and the Kings of France and Spaine, to exterminate the Proteſtants: And therefore warned them to take heed, leſt being corrupted either with Penſions from France, or deuided by Factions, they open a way to Stranger Forces, which were thought ſhould be conducted by Stroſsie: To oppoſe themſelues all vallianty and with equall courage againſt it, for defence of Religion, which was the only bond of concord betweene the Engliſh and the Scots: And to be very carefull to preſerue their King, or to ſend him into England, to preuent his taking away and carrying into France.
                     
                     Neuertheleſſe, ſome great Ones, partakers with the impriſoned Queene, would in no ſort acknowledge the Authority either of the King or his Vice-Roy, vntill Queene ELIZABETH, by interpoſing her power, had by the Agencie of Killigrew, brought the Duke of Chaſtelraut, and the Earle of Huntley, who were the principals among them, to theſe Conditions, which were equall enough:
THat they ſhould acknowledge the Religion eſtabliſhed in Scotland, ſubmit themſelues to the King, and to the Gouernement of the Earle of Morton and his ſucceſſours, and renounce the authority of all others. That all thoſe which ſhould enterprize any thing againſt the Religion, the King, and the Vice-Roy, ſhould be adiudged Traitours by Act of Parliament. The ſentences giuen againſt the Hamiltons and the Gordons, ſhould be cut off and annihilated, except thoſe which concerned

the murdering of the Earles of Murrey and Lenox, Vice-Royes, which ſhould ſtand according to the pleaſure of Queene ELIZABETH:
                        
                     
                     Who neuertheleſſe ſent this buſineſſe backe to the King, and was of opinion that this Clauſe ought to be added to it, [Vntill that the King being come to age, ſhould take the Gouernement of the Realme, according to the Law of the Kingdome,] And that of all and euery crime committed ſince the fifteenth of Iune, 1567, the Murder of the Earle of Lenox excepted, pardon ſhould be granted to all that would aske it. Notwithſtanding, it was thought good, for the ſafety of the King, leſt hee ſhould bee expoſed to murder, that the Queene of England ſhould promiſe by a publike Inſtrument, that neither the Hamiltons nor any other, ſhould be adiudged for the murdering of the Vice-Royes, or fined without her conſent. And that was ordered in the Aſſembly of States, for the ſettling of a publike peace, in a turbulent ſeaſon. Howbeit Kirckall, Lord of Grange,
                        
                           Grange oppoſeth.
                         who had beene eſtabliſhed Captaine of Edenborrough Caſtle, after he had taken oath in the Kings name, and the Baron of Hume, Lidington, the Biſhop of Dunkeld, and others, thinking that iniuſtice was done to the Queene of Scotland, would by no meanes admit of theſe Conditions: but with vndaunted Courage, contemned the authority both of the King and Vice-Roy, kept and fortified the Caſtle in the Queenes name, by the counſell of Lidington, thinking themſelues ſure, in regard of the ſtrength of the place, which is of a moſt difficult acceſſe, and of the Munition which were in it, (for there all Munition Royall is kept) and of the Succours promiſed by the Duke D'Alua, and the King of France, who had vnder-hand ſent them ſome money, (the greater part whereof had been intercepted at Blackneſh) and ſhould haue ſent more, had not the long Siege of Rochell hindred it. Not being able then to draw them to

any conditions of Peace, neither by money which the Vice-Roy promiſed them nor by the perſwaſions of Queen ELIZABETH, but they defended the Caſtle againſt the Vice-Roy, moleſted the Towne of Edenborrough, being the Seate of Iuſtice, with Cannon-ſhot, by iſſuing violently out, and aſſaulting them euery day; and would call for the ayde of France: Queene ELIZABETH, who by no meanes could endure the French to be in Scotland, at length granted the requeſts of the Vice-Roy,
                           The Engliſh are ſent to beſiege it.
                         which were for Troupes, Cannon, and other warlike Munitions, for the beſieging and battering of the Caſtle, vpon theſe conditions:

                           
                              Ʋpon what Conditions.THe Vice-Roy ſhall not make any compoſition with the beſieged, without the aduice of the Generall of the Engliſh, nor the Engliſh Generall without his, and of thoſe of the Kings Councell. If the Caſtle fall into the hands of the Engliſh, it ſhall bee within 6. dayes after deliuered to the King, with all the Munitions of Warre, Vtenſils, Memorials, Euidences, and Records belonging to the King or Kingdome, the reſt left to the beſiegers. The Engliſh ſhall not fortifie any place in Scotland, but with the conſent of the Vice-Roy and the Peeres. The Vice-Roy ſhall lend the Engliſh ſuch aſsiſtance and ſafe conduct, as hee could poſsibly. The Caſtle being taken, the beſieged ſhall be kept to haue iuſtice executed vpon them according to the Lawes, the Queene of England beeing therevpon conſulted with before hand. If any Engliſh be kild, their wiues and Children ſhall haue two yeeres pay, If wounded, they ſhall haue pay till they bee cured: If any Engliſh Cannons be loſt, and the Powder and Shot bee waſted, they ſhall haue Munition Royall in their ſtead, which ſhall bee found in the Caſtle, or elſe the Rebels goods. Ten Hoſtages ſhall be ſent into England, for aſſurance

of the Troupes and Ordnance, which are to bee brought backe, except ſuch as are loſt by the hazzard of Warre.
                     
                     Vpon theſe Conditions, William Drury, Gouernour of Barwicke, went into Scotland, with ſome Peeces for battery, and fifteene hundred Souldiers, (among which were G. Carey, Henry Carey, T. Cecill, Hen. Lea, W. Knollis, Sutton, Cotton, Kelway, and other Gentlemen Voluntaries.) And beeing ioyned with the auxiliary forces of Scotland, beſieged the Caſtle, after hauing twice commanded them in the Kings name, that they ſhould render it vp, but in vaine. Firſt they raiſed vp fiue Mounts, from whence,
                           The Caſtle beſieged by the Engliſh Forces.
                         for the ſpace of foure daies together, they furiouſly beat againſt the Tower, but eſpecially vpon Dauids Tower, which fell within a few dayes after. After hauing giuen the aſſault, they tooke the Baſtion or Spurre, till thoſe which at the ſame made againſt them out of the Caſtle were repulſed, with loſſe of men. The morrow after, the beſieged hauing giuen the ſigne, asked to ſpeake to Drury, and after they had receiued for hoſtages into the Caſtle, Henry Lea, and Fleck, a Scottiſh-man, they let downe by cords, Kircald himſelfe, and Meluin, who demanded life and goods, that it might be permitted that Hume and Lidington might depart for England, becauſe of ſome particular enmities, and Kircald to remaine in Scotland, except he might depart with good licenſe.
                     That not being granted them, but onely the Souldiers permitted to goe out with their ſimple baggage, and without Armes; wanting men, diſagreeing amongſt themſelues, wounded, toyled, and wearied with watching and labouring, without hope of ſuccour, hauing no water, becauſe one of the wells which were within the Caſtle, had beene filled vp with the ruines of a dry wall,
                           The Caſtle yeelded.
                         and the other was expoſed to the ſhot of the Cannon, within three daies

after, they yeelded (which was the 33. day after the beginning of the Siege) to the diſcretion of the Queene of England and Drury, who, after he had receiued Letters out of England, deliuered vp the Caſtle to the Vice-Roy, for the vſe of the King, with all that had yeelded themſelues to him; of which, Kircald, Iames his brother, Moſman, and Cock,
                        
                           Kircald and others hanged.
                         gold-ſmiths, who had coined falſe money in the Caſtle, were hanged, although to buy Kircalds life, an hundred of the Houſe of the Kircalds had offered to be bound to doe perpetuall homage to the Vice-Roy, and pay him three thouſand markes of annuall rent, and the firſt day twenty thouſand pounds Scottiſh money, and to giue ſureties, that for the time to come, they ſhould remaine faithfull and obedient to the King.
                     
                        Hume and others being diſperſed into diuers Caſtles, obtained pardon of Queene ELIZABETH, who got great praiſe by it for her clemency. Lidington, hauing beene ſent to Lieth,
                        
                           Lidington dyes.
                         dyed of ſickneſſe, not without ſuſpition of beeing poyſoned. He was a perſon of great experience, and of a neate ſpirit, if he had bin leſſe changeable, as Buchanan, who hated him, painted him out in his life time, by a certaine Writing, which he intituled [The Cameleon,] by which he repreſented him to be more changeable then the Cameleon, and taxed him very ſharpely to bee an enemy of diuers colours to the Kings Grandmother, the Kings mother, to the Earle of Murray, to the King himſelfe, and to the Countrie. Since that time, Scotland hath beene free from Ciuill-Warre,
                           Peace made in Scotland.
                         and aſwell the Captaines of that ſide, as the common-Souldiers, carrying their courages to the wars of Sueden, France, and Flanders, brought backe this great commendation of Vertuous and valorous Warriours.
                     
                     
                        
                           The Biſhop of Roſſe baniſhed out of England.
                        To aſſure England from inbred enterpriſes, (in regard of the Queene of Scots) Iohn Leſley, Biſhop of Roſſe (a faithfull ſeruant to her, but not without the vndoing of many, and of bringing no few in danger) is commanded out of England,
                        
and went into France, but not without feare of the Earle of Southampton, whoſe life he had called in queſtion, and likewiſe of Henrie Howard, brother to the Duke of Norfolke, whoſe anger to appeaſe, he writ an Apologie for himſelfe. Hee was ſcarce departed thence, vntill Henrie Cockin, his Secretary, was apprehended, and Morgan, who was exceeding deſirous to ſerue the Queene of Scots in her moſt ſecret affaires, was detected, and fled. Atſlow, an Arch-papiſt, Good, a Doctor of Phiſicke, and Francis Berty, who priuately intelligenced her by Letters, were impriſoned for certaine moneths, and for the ſame cauſe Henrie Goodyere, and Richard Lowder were had in ſuſpition.
                     In the meane time Roſſe failed not to imploy all ſuch dutifull endeuours for the Queene of Scots,
                        
                           Abſence innouates Enterprizes.
                         as a faithfull Subiect was obliged to doe, towards the Pope, the Emperour, the King of France, the Papiſts Princes of Germany; all which gaue him hope, but did nothing. That this ſhould fall out ſo ill hee complained exceedingly, eſpecially, that the Duke of Alua, in whom his greateſt truſt was planted, was to leaue Flanders, hauing obtained leaue, vnder colour to recouer his health. For without doubt, he aduanced his victories ſo faſt, that he had reduced almoſt all Holland into his power; Spaine called him away, by the perſwaſion of Cardinall Granuellan,
                        
                           The Duke of Alua is called out of the Low-Countries.
                         and Roderico Gomezio de Silua, that his power grew too ſtrong, and his name aboue his Prince, and that by his violent and ſharpe command, he would cauſe the Flemmings to reuolt, yea, to grow to deſperation: although ſome thought, who were bloody-minded, that none was ſo fit by Warre to bring Holland into ſubiection. Which kinde of men thought their King too mercifull, if he intended by meekeneſſe to bring the Prince of Orange and his confederates, who had reſolued mindes to retaine their freedome, beeing confirmed thereto by their riches, and ſtrength of ſituation.
                           Lodowicke Zuniga ſucſeedes him.
                         
                        Lodowicke Zuniga of Requeſen was appointed to take his charge. The

great Commander of Caſtile, a milder natured man, who by all offices of loue, deſired to oblige Queene ELIZABETH, would by no meanes thruſt himſelfe into the affaires either of England or Scotland.
                     
                     
                        
                           Burches hereſie.
                        I know not whether I ſhould or no call to minde the opinion of Burchet, who thought it lawfull to kill thoſe that were aduerſaries to the Euangelicall truth, who was ſo tranſported therewith, that hee wounded with a poiniard, Hawkins, that famous Sea-man, thinking him to be Hatton, who was at that time one of the Queenes greateſt Fauourites, of her moſt intimate counſell, and an enemy to Innouators. The Queene was ſo extraordinarily prouoked herewith, that ſhee commanded him to be proceeded againſt according to the Marſhall Lawe,
                           Marſhall Law.
                         vntill ſhee was aduiſed by ſome of her prudent Councellours, that this Law had no place but in Warres and turbulent times, but at home it ought to bee done by ordinary forme of Iuſtice. Being called to Iuſtice, he maintained that what he did was conſonant to Scripture, and therefore lawfull. Afterwards, ſeeing himſelfe neere condemnation for hereſie, promiſed to renounce this opinion, yet neuertheleſſe, when hee had a little more debated the caſe, he would not. In the end, beeing committed to the Towre of London, hee killed one of his Keepers with a piece of wood, which hee tooke out of a Chimney, and threw at his head, and beeing condemned of murder, had his right hand cut off, and being at the Gallowes, obſtinately maintained his opinion, and ſo was hanged.
                           Burch is hanged.
                        
                     
                     In the beginning of this yeere, dyed George Howard, Baron of Effingham,
                        
                           Effingham dies.
                         Lord Priuie Seale, ſonne to Tho. Howard, Duke of Norfolke, the famous Warriour, by Agnes Tilnie, his ſecond wife, a man of remarkeable fidelity, and of an inuincible courage, who firſt was Gouernour of Calais, afterwards made a Baron by Queene MARY, Admirall of England, and Lord Chamberlaine, and likewiſe by Queene

ELIZABETH, vntill broken with age, he ſurrendred his Office to Suſsex, a few daies before he dyed, and (as I haue ſaid before) was made Lord Priuie Seale, the fourth degree of Honour in England: he had to ſucceed him in the honour of his Baronie, Charles his ſon, who was afterwards Chamberlaine to the Queene, and high Admirall of England.
                     
                     At the ſame time dyed likewiſe R. Gray, Earle of Kent,
                        
                           Gray, Earle of Kent dies.
                         whom the Queene from a priuate man had called to this honour, when that Title had beene vacant 50. yeeres, after the death of R. Gray, Earle of Kent (who had conſumed his Patrimony) elder brother to this mans great Grandfather, and Henrie his Sonne ſucceeded him.
                     It is not fit in ſilence to ouer paſſe I. Caius,
                        
                           Caius the Phiſition dyes.
                         a famous Phiſician, who dyed at the ſame time: he was borne at Norwich, brought vp at Cambridge and Padua, who gaue himſelfe wholly to the ſtudie of Phiſicke, tranſlated, and commented vpon the moſt part of Gallens and Celſus workes, and gaue all his meanes to Schollers. Adding a new Colledge to the old of Gonuell Hall, and 25. fellow Commoners to be perpetually brought vp, and of both made but one Colledge, called by the names of Gonuell and Caius,
                        
                           The Colledge of Gonuell & Caius.
                         in which he is intombed, with this Epitaph,
Fui Caius.
                     
                     In Ireland, the houſes of O-Conom, and O-More,
                        
                           Troubles in Ireland.
                         impatient of peace, hauing gathered ſome bands of Theeues and Rebels, made outragious incurſions, rob'd and burned Atlone vpon the Riuer Siney, and willing to ioyne their forces with the Rebels of Mounſter, they were hindred by I. Perot, Preſident of Mounſter, who ſo ranſackt Iames Fitz-Moris, and Fitz-Edmonds, Seneſchall of Imoquell, that rebelled, by continuall ouer-running them, and after hee had killed many of their men, and taken the Caſtle of Maine,
                        
and the French Garriſon, he compelled them to craue pardon moſt ſubmiſſiuely for their faults, within the Temple of Kilmalock, called The holy Cell of Malachie. At the ſame time, the Earle of Deſmond, and Iohn his Brother, authors of this Rebellion, being brought backe out of England into Ireland by Fitton, were impriſoned by the ſaid Fitton at Dublin, but after a while were let goe.
                     
                        
                           The Earle of Eſsex ſent into Ireland.
                        In Vlſter, Brian Mach-phelin, who had vſurped the moſt part of Clandeboy, burned the Towne of Knoc-fergus, and ſome others began to trouble the Countrie. George Deuereux, lately created Earle of Eſſex by Queene ELIZABETH, deſired to be imployed againſt them, by the counſell of thoſe who had a deſigne to haue him farre from the Court, vnder colour of increaſing his honour, to precipitate him into dangers, which were not hidden from him. But as he was vigilant, and from his youth addicted to the Warres, continuing conſtant in his deſigne, agreed with the Queene, that if hee draue out the Rebels, hee and his partners ſhould haue the halfe of Clandeboy, vpon certaine conditions: and to maintaine it, he would entertaine at his owne charge, two hundred Horſe, and foure hundred Foote. To this end he borrowed of the Queene a thouſand pounds,
                           The Deputie enuies it.
                         for which, and for Munition, hee engaged Lands that he had in Eſſex. G. Fitz-William, Deputie of Ireland, fearing that the ſplendor of ſo great an Earle ſhould dimme his in Ireland, counſelled the Queene not to ſend him, giuing her to vnderſtand, that all the Countrie of Vlſter would reuolt at his comming. Notwithſtanding, he is ſent, and to maintaine the honour and authority of the Deputy, was to take Letters from him to be Gouernour of Vlſter, which he obtained, though ſlowly, after many importunate ſollicitations.
                     After, hauing bin beaten with a terrible Tempeſt, he was driuen to Knock fergus, about the end of Auguſt, with the Lord Darcy, and Lord Rich, Henry Knollis, and his foure

brothers, M. and I. Carey, & Iohn Noris, with a company of Souldiers leuied in haſte. Brian Mac-phelin vnderſtanding of his comming, draue all his cattle (which were all his wealth) into the heart of the Countrey, (for, without counting Sheepe and Hogs, he had thirtie thouſand head of Cattell) and ſeeing him aſhore, ſaluted him, and congratulated his arriuall, and moſt courteouſly offered him all dutie and ſeruice, and likewiſe Mac-Gilleſpike, Mac-Gill, Hugh, Baron of Dungannon, and all of account neere thereabout. In conſideration whereof, he promiſed him pardon for his rebellion, and ſtudied which way he might oblige him. But he reuolted, and drew his men preſently to Turlough Leinich, and afterwards made light Skirmiſhes continually againſt the Engliſh. The Lord Riche's particular affaires called him into England, and returned within a moneth. Henry Knollis in like manner, in regard of his indiſpoſition of body, and diuers others, dayly taking ſome occaſion or other to excuſe themſelues, by little and little, ſecretly withdrew themſelues from that wild Countrie. Eſſex writ of it to the Queene, and to his friends, and complained very much, that the moſt worthy of his company languiſhed, becauſe the enterprize had bin begunne too late, and victuals came not in time, that they were corrupted, and that troupes inconſiderately leuied were many of them loſt. That Mac-phelin was reuolted fraudulently, and others by the perfidiouſnes of Percy, an Engliſh Captaine, who heretofore had commanded the Iriſh in that Countrey. That he was not able to furniſh the expence of War. That the Deputie had not ſent him his Commiſſion, and that for want of it, he could not vſe any authority againſt the Frontier Inhabitants: Therefore beſeecheth her to take the buſines in her own name and ſpeciall command, though he vnderwent halfe of the charges.
                     Then he beſought Suſſex, Leiceſter, and Burghley, to intercede with the Queene, that ſhe would grant him, at her

charge, a hundred Horſe, 150. Foot, and the Iland of May. And as the Queene was ready to call him from Vlſter, Leiceſter and others ſeeing new troubles growing in Mounſter, perſwaded that he ſhould ſtay there. And the Deputie commanded him, whiles he was going againſt Deſmond, to goe towards the Frontiers of Vlſter, which, although it troubled him, being fortifying Claudobie, obeyeth notwithſtanding, and entring into Mounſter with Kildare, perſwaded Deſmond to embrace peace, who ſhortly after ſubmitted himſelfe. Now Eſſex hauing receiued Letters of Authority, tooke a long iourney, and O-Donell ioyned with him. But Cone O-Donell, Turloghes Sonne in Law, would not ſerue vnder him, therefore hee tooke from him the Caſtle of Liffer, and gaue it to Hugh O-Donel: Turlogh in the meane ſpace protracted the buſineſſe by parleyes, vntill it was time for Eſsex neceſſarily to depart. Hee, after hauing wearied his body with labour, and broken his ſpirit with care all the Summer, Winter being now at hand, began to reuolue more deepely in his mind, by what meanes Vlſter ſo long neglected, and growne wilde and fierce, might be reduced to ciuilitie: and hauing maturely deliberated vpon it, thought, that if three Townes were built at the Queens charge, and (by the monies that his aſſociates would contribute) ten Forts, in thoſe places which hee had found to bee conuenient, aboue ſeuen thouſand pounds of current Engliſh money might be gathered euery yeere, neither ſhould there neede within the ſpace of two yeeres any Royall Garriſon. Whileſt theſe and the like things, and for ſupply of victuals, tooke all their care and ſtudie, they had beene almoſt ſurprized by the Iriſh. For Brian Mac-phelin (who lately had by treacherie ouerthrowne and ſlaine Moore, a Captaine of the Engliſh) hauing conſpired his ruine with Turlogh and the Scottiſh Hilanders, whereof as ſoone as he had notice, he moſt wiſely iudged, that it were not beſt to ſtay and expect them, but to

ſet forward to aſſault them: which did he ſo couragiouſly, that he ſlew two hundred Iriſh, tooke Brian and Rory Oge, his brother by the mothers ſide, and Brians wife.
                           Mac-Phelim is taken. The vnprofitable attempt and force of Chaterton.
                         With thoſe buſineſſes in Ireland this yeere was ſpent, to the good of none, but with much loſſe to Eſsex: and alſo to the notorious detriment of Chaterton, an Engliſh Gentleman, who vpon certaine conditions betweene the Queene and him, tooke to leade ſome Colonies of Engliſh into Fues, a neighbouring Territory to O-Hanlane.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Booke 2. 1574.THE SEVENTEENTH YEERE OF Her Reigne. Anno Dom. 1574.
                     
                        
                           The Duke of Alanzon deſires to viſit Queene Elizabeth.
                        
                        IN the firſt month of this yeere, the Duke of Alanzon laboured more then euer, as well by letters full of loue, as by Mauuiſſer the French Ambaſſador, to obtaine leaue to come into England vnder ſafe-conduct, to ſee and ſalute Queene ELIZABETH, to whom being abſent, hee teſtified all loue and reſpect. Queene ELIZABETH ouercome with his continuall prayers and ſollicitations,
                           Queene Elizabeth agrees to it.
                         granted him his requeſt, although ſhe gaue him contrary aduice, and vnder aſſurance of ſafety gaue him leaue to come when he pleaſed, ſo it were by the twentieth of May, with promiſe to vſe him with all offices of humanity, which he could expect from a Princeſſe which bore him great affection. And certainly, after ſhee

had diſcouered that he was much irritated and greatly ſtirred vp againſt the Guizes, her Maieſties ſworne enemies, ſhe bare him more loue and good will then before. But before he had receiued this anſwer, Valentine Dale, Doctor of the Law, Ambaſſador in France in Walſinghams place then Secretary, gaue aduice, that hee and the King of Nauarre were ſuſpected of innouation: For the mother Queene (a woman of great Spirit) beganne to ſuſpect that he couertly plotted with the King of Nauarre,
                        
                           He is ſuſpected in France.
                         and the Duke of Mont-Morancy, to depriue her (the King being dead) of the managing of State-affaires. The Guizes increaſed this opinion, giuing her to vnderſtand, that he had not long agoe imployed Coligni, Colonell of the Proteſtants, his intimate friend: vpon which being examined, he voluntarily acknowledged amongſt other things, that he had for a certaine time ſought the marriage of the Queene of England, and iudging the friendſhip of Admirall Coligni, profitable in this deſigne, had talked with him about it, and of the proſecution of the warres in the Netherlands;
                           
                              He is as it were priſoner being garded.
                           
                           
                              Queene Elizabeth comforts him.
                           
                         neuertheleſſe ouer him and the King of Nauarre was a Guard appointed to preuent them. But Thomas Wilkes, Secretary to to the Ambaſſadour Dale, went priuatly to ſee them, and hauing in the Queenes name comforted them, he promiſed tha
                           •
                         her Maieſty would let ſlip no occaſion to relieue and comfort them. Whereof this ſubtill and crafty old Queene hauing ſoone notice, handled Wilkes in ſuch manner, that he was conſtrained to leaue France, and returne into England, where ſhe ſo farre vrged her complants by letters vnto Queene ELIZABETH, that he was ſent backe againe to France to aske her pardon. Henry of Bourbon, King of Nauarre, buried not this friendly office: for he afterwards being King of France, and meeting with him 25. yeeres after in Normandy, he honoured him with the dignity of Knighthood: After this, Queene ELIZABETH ſent T. Randoll into France to the Queene mother, to reſtore

againe into her fauour (if it were poſſible) the Duke of Alanzon, and the King of Nauarre: but before his arriuall into France,
                        
                           Charles the ninth King of France died. The right Honourable Lord, Roger Lord North Baron of Catelage, is ſent Ambaſſador with a noble train to Henry of Valois the third of that name, King of France & Poland.
                         King Charles died, and his funerall Rites paid with great honour and magnificency in S. Pauls Church in London.
                     
                     As ſoone as Henry of Valois, the third of that name, King of France, his ſucceſſor, returned out of Poland, the right noble and vertuous Lord, Roger, Lord North, Baron of Kirtling, was ſent Ambaſſador extraordinary into France, to congratulate his happy returne and ſucceſſion to the Crowne of France, and to condole with him the diſtracted and wretched eſtate of that Realme ſo miſerably rent and ruinated with ciuill war, to counſell him to make peace, and entertaine the Edicts, to take to fauor the D. of Alanzon, to leſſen the hate he bore to the D. of Mont-Morancy & Deloſſe, to incite him to doe good to the religious Princeſſe, the Lady Charlotte of Bourbon, daughter to the Duke Mont-penſier, who fled for her Religion into Germany. But hee obtained nothing, for France, as it were puſhed by fate, ran headlong into a direfull warre. Neuertheleſſe, the King and his mother the Queene, writ iointly into England, and ſent La Garde to proſecute the marriage of the Duke of Alanzon:
                           
                              The King of France and mother Queene recommend the Duke of Alanzon to Queene Elizabeth.
                           
                           
                              They fauour the Queene of Scots againſt the Vice-Roy Morton.
                           
                         For ſeeing this young Prince grow cholericke, to ſee himſelfe ſo vnworthily handled by his mother on all ſides, as if he had beene a priſoner, and vnderſtanding that he held ſecret Councel with the Politicians of France, they thought it ſafeſt to diuert him from warre, to ſend him into England.
                     
                     In the interim, they imployed all their cunning in Scotland, to get Iames the young King ouer into France, and to diſplace Morton the Vice-roy from his charge, and for this purpoſe they ſent thither the Kings Scottiſh guard. The Queene of Scotland greatly deſired this, perſwading her ſelfe, that if her ſonne were in France out of danger, ſhee and the Catholikes ſhould be more gently handled in England,
                        
that the Engliſh faction which was in Scotland, and alwaies relying vpon the Kings name, would quickly be ruinated; as he riper increaſed in yeres, ſo the Engliſh ſhould increaſe in feares, as well of the French partie, as of the Scots ſide. The French did no leſſe deſire it, fearing that the Regent of Scotland (who was altogether at the deuotion of the Engliſh) would breake the ancient Alliance which was betweene them and the Scots: and neuertheles then, when he inſtantly required, that they would contract the Alliance of mutuall defence againſt ſtrangers, betweene England and Scotland, it was denied him, leſt perhaps he ſhould by the ſame meanes demand an annuall Penſion to bee aſſigned to him, and certaine Scottiſh men.
                           She giueth credit to thoſe who make reports aginſt the Queene of Scotland.
                         But eare was giuen to thoſe, who vpon a light ſuſpicion accuſed the Queen of Scotland, the Counteſſe of Shrewsbury, and the Earle himſelfe, to haue (without the Queenes priuity) made the marriage between Charles, the Paternall vncle of the King, (who had a little before confirmed vnto him by Parliament the County of Lenox) and the Lady Elizabeth Cauendiſh, the Counteſſe of Shrewsburies Daughter by her firſt Husband. Wherevpon the mothers of either ſides, and others, for this cauſe being kept priſoners a little time, imputed and laid all the fault vpon the Queene of Scotland.
                     
                     As it was vnknowne whither this marriage tended,
                           The Earle of Huntington, Preſident of the North.
                         and that diuers ſuſpicions had their birth by it, Henry Count of Lidington was eſtabliſhed Preſident of the Aſſembly of the North, with new inſtructions and ſecrets for this affaire. This kind of Magiſtrate, which at this preſent is very honourable, hath in a little time, from weake beginnings, growne to this greatneſſe; and now what I haue learned of it, by a free and ſhort digreſion, I meane to leaue to poſterity. When, in the reigne of HENRY the Eighth, the rebellion of the inhabitants of that Countrie had ſtirred vp, for the deſtruction of Monaſteries, was laid aſleepe, many made complaint of the iniuries which he had receiued during

that Rebellion, vnto the Duke of Norfolke, who remained in thoſe parts; ſome of which he determined, and left the reſt to be finiſhed by perſons which to this purpoſe hee had eſtabliſhed, with Commiſſions ſealed with his owne Seale; but the King being aduertiſed hereof, ſent him a particular Seale to ſerue in ſuch cauſes, and hauing reuoked him, gaue that Commiſſion to Tunſtall Biſhop of Dureſme, and appointed Commiſſioners with power to heare and determine the complaints of the poore. Hee was the firſt which bare the name of Preſident, and ſince, the authority of his Succeſſours hath bin of great value.
                     
                        
                           An Edict againſt the ri
                                 •
                              touſnes of apparell.
                        In theſe times, the ſuperfluity of Apparell ſo preuailed in England, (by a Vice peculiar to the Nation, which pleaſeth it ſelfe by imitating others) that the ancient faſhion fell in ſuch diſgrace, that the men, by a new faſhion of habit and too much brauery, made manifeſt the filthineſſe and inſolency of their ſpirits, ſwaggering euery where, couered with ſilke, gold, and ſiluer, pure and mingled. The Queene marking that this ſuperfluity drew euery yeere out of the Kingdome (to the dammage of the publike) great quantity of money, for the buying of ſilke and other ſtrange Merchandizes, and that many Gentlemen, who might doe good ſeruice to the Publike, and others, to ſeeme to be He, did not onely conſume their demeanes, to their particular dammage, but alſo increaſed their debts, vſed deceits, and by this meanes fell into the nets of the Law, and after they had prodigally lauiſht their goods, ſtudied to make a change, ſhe endeuoured to prouide a fit remedy for it. And although by the Lawes of HENRY the Eighth and MARY, ſhe could preuaile againſt them, and draw from it great ſummes of money, neuertheleſſe ſhe rather lou'd to preuent it by a ſimple commandement. She commanded therefore, that within 14. dayes, euery one ſhould forme his apparell to the preſcribed faſhion, if he would not incurre the ſeuerity of the Lawe, and ſhee herſelfe began this reformation

in her Court. But by the malice of time, this Edict, and theſe Lawes by little and little gaue place to this ſuperfluity, which grew to a greater height of inſolency, & was immediately traced by the riotouſneſſe of Feaſts, and ſplendor of Buildings: for ſince that time, more magnificent, ample,
                           
                              England imbelliſhed with magnificent ſtructures.
                           
                           
                              The Engliſh worke treaſon in Holland.
                           
                           
                              They are defeated.
                           
                         and faire Countrie houſes of Noble-men and priuate men haue beene raiſed vp in England, then in any other Ages whereby (truly) the Kingdome was greatly adorned, but the glory of Hoſpitality greatly decreaſed.
                     The Engliſh which were at warre in Holland, vnder Cheſter and Gainsford, failed this yeere, the one in vertue, the other in ſucceſſe: For thoſe which lay in Garriſon at Valkenburgh, gaue ouer the place, and yeelded to the Enemy; neuertheleſſe they were pardoned, for feare leſt Queene ELIZABETH ſhould not ſuffer the Spaniſh Fleet, which was ſayling towards Flanders, vpon the Sea of Great-Brittaine, to enter into her Hauens to victuall themſelues. The others which were in the Channell of Sluce, after they had ſuſtained a ſharpe Combate, and couragiouſly repulſed the Spaniards, being ſurprized by theit enemies, who had trauerſed the Riuer, were ouerthrowne and chaſed from the place, with the loſſe of three hundred men, and three Enſignes.
                     I know not whether it be expedient to record theſe triuiall things:
                           Miniſters deceiued.
                         That this yeere the pious credulity of certaine Preachers of London was deceiued by a young wench, who fained herſelfe poſſeſſed with a Deuill.
                           A Whale caſt on ſhore.
                         That there was a great Whale found dry on the Shores of the Ile of Thanet, whoſe length was twentie Elles of our meaſure,
                           
                              An extraordinary floud in the Thames.
                           
                           
                              The Skie ſeemed to be on fire.
                           
                         the breadth, from her belly to her backe bone, thirteene foote; the ſpace betweene her eyes, eleuen foote. That the Thames did ebbe and flowe twice in one houre. That in the moneth of Nouember, from the North to the South, fuming Clouds were gathered together in a round, the night following, the Skie ſeemed to burne, the Flames

running through all parts of the Horizon, met together in the verticall point of Heauen. Neuertheleſſe, let it not be imputed to me as a crime, to haue made mention of theſe things in a few words, and by a ſhort digreſſion, ſince the graueſt Hiſtorians haue recorded them in many words.
                  
                  
                     
                     THE EIGHTEENTH YEERE OF Her Reigne.Booke 2. 1575. 
                        Anno Dom. 1575.
                     
                        HENRY the third, King of France,
                        
                           The league with France renued.
                         being returned from Poland, and already inaugurated in the City of Rhemes, confirmed by his oath and ſigne of his owne hand, before all things, the Alliance paſſed in the City of Blois, in the yeere 1572. betweene Charles his brother and Queene ELIZABETH, and hauing giuen it to the Ambaſſador ordinary of England, Queene ELIZABETH alſo for her part ratified it at Saint Iames neere Weſtminſter. Notwithſtanding a while after, he inquired by letters, if the words, mutuall defence againſt all (mentioned in that alliance) comprehended the cauſe of Religion? And after that Queene ELIZABETH had diſcreetly replyed, Yes, and that ſhe was alwaies ready preſt, and deſirous to effect that mutuall defence, euen in the cauſe of Religion, if it was required by vertue of the alliance, he tooke armes againſt the Proteſtants: & the Duke of Alanzon being drawne to the contrary part, the marriage

ſlept in a long and profound ſilence. Notwithſtanding, Queene ELIZABETH in fauour of the Duke of Alanzon,
                        
                           Warre kindled in France.
                         furniſhed the Duke Caſimier with a great ſumme of mony, to carry into France the Alman Rutters againſt the diſturbers of the publike peace.
                     As her minde was buſied about the affaires of France, thoſe of Flanders happened: for De Requeſens, ſucceſſor to the Duke of Alua, was fully bent, and endeuored nothing more then to recouer (if it were poſſible) the Sea, which the Duke of Alua by a remarkable error in ſo great a thiefe had deſpiſed, and by this meanes had cauſed that long warre of the Low Countries, which indured ſo many yeeres: but he being not well furniſhed with neceſſary things to ſet forth a nauall Armie, becauſe the tempeſt had broken and loſt the Ships, which for this purpoſe had a little before beene conducted from Spaine to Flanders, by the aid of the Engliſh; hee ſent Boiſchot into England, to leuy ſhips and furniture of warre with the Queenes leaue, who being vnwilling to aduenture her ſhips and Sea-men in anothers cauſe,
                           The Queene of England denieth ſhips to Requeſens.
                         denied it, and gaue publike charge to all perſons, not to arme any Ships without her licence, and did forbid the Engliſh Sea-men to enrole themſelues vnder other Princes. Vpon this refuſall, Boiſchot prayed her not to take it in ill part, if the fugitiue Engliſh in Flanders ſhould ſerue in a nauall Warre againſt the Hollanders, vnder the command of the Spaniard; and permit them to touch freely in the ports of England to victuall themſelues. But ſhe would not approue, that the rebellious Engliſh (ſo ſhe termed thoſe whom he ſtiled Fugitiues) ſhould fight in the ſeruice of the Spaniard, not to perſwade her that Requeſens would gratifie them, prayed them not to doe it, and namely, T. Copely, whom the Spaniards had loaded with the titles of the great maſter of the Muze, Lord of Gaten and Rouchtey,
                        
                           The entrance of the Ports.
                         and intended to ſet to Sea, to rob both Engliſh and Dutch. For the ports, ſhe eſteemed it exceeding folly to

open them to Rebels and ſworne enemies. Yet Boiſchot, to obtaine more vniuſt things, required in the name of the Spaniard, that the rebellious Dutch might bee baniſhed from England. But ſhe refuſed that alſo,
                           To baniſh the Dutch fugitiues.
                         knowing that thoſe whom he called Rebels, were poore miſerable people of no note, and had neuer enterprized any thing againſt him, but being chaſed from their Country, and ſpoiled of their goods during the warre, had retired themſelues into England, thinking ſhe ſhould commit a great inhumanity, and violate the lawes of Hoſpitality, if ſhee ſhould deliuer them into the hands of a Cut-throat. She alſo remembred how far the affaires of Spaine were intereſſed in Flanders. Then when at the prayer of the Duke of Alua ſhe commanded 1572. the Dutch to leaue England, and that hauing commanded the Count of March and other Dutch to be gone, they had taken Brill, and ſuſcitated that warre; neuertheleſſe, not to ſeeme altogether to depart from the ancient Alliance of the Burguinions,
                        
                           
                              She denies the confederate Dutch entrance into the Engliſh ports.
                           
                           
                              Requiſens chaſeth the rebellious Engliſh from Flanders.
                           
                           
                              Diſsolues their Seminary.
                           
                           
                              The Prince of Orange thinkes to run to the protection of the King of France.
                           
                         although the Spaniard had refuſed to confirme it with him, ſhee forbad by publike writing the Dutch Ships prepared for warre to goe forth, and thoſe Dutch that had taken vp armes againſt the Spaniard, to enter into England, and expreſly the Prince of Orange and his houſe: the Count of Culenberge, of Berg, of March, and fifty others the moſt notable of that faction. And ſhe performed with more alacrity, in regard Requeſens, at the interceſſion of Wilſon, the Engliſh Ambaſſador, had cauſed the Earle of Weſtmerland, and other Engliſh to retire themſelues out of the Country of Flanders, which was vnder the Spaniard, and had diſſipated the Engliſh Seminary which was at Doway, in whoſe ſtead the Guizes, at the ſollicitation of Pope Cregory the 13. eſtabliſhed another in the City of Rhemes.
                     
                     The Prince of Orange, finding his forces no way equall to thoſe of the Spaniard, and expecting no ſuccour from England, conſulted with his friends in whom he might put

his truſt. Now when Queene ELIZABETH vnderſtood he had fixed his eye and heart vpon the King of France, ſhe firſt ſent Daniel Rogers to diſſwade him: but nothing being effected,
                           The Queene of England diſswades him.
                         in regard he had before created with the Admirall Coligni and the King of France, ſhe ſent H. Cobham to the King of Spaine, to let him vnderſtand how great the danger were, if Holland and Zealand ſhould reuolt from him, and giue themſelues to the King of France; and by the moſt important reaſons ſhe could repreſent, ſhe perſwaded him to make change of warre for peace, to which he ſeemed to accord. She then gaue aduice to Requeſens, by R. Corbet, and ceaſed not by all meanes to turne the Prince of Orange from his deſigne, by the imployment of I. Haſting, but ſhe could not obtaine her purpoſe, being countermined by Villiers a French Church-man, who came poore into England, with a ſcuruy Cloake all torne (I ſpeake this becauſe I knew him) but was inriched by a collection which was giuen him to reade Diuinity Leſſons, fearing leſt the Prince of Orange ſhould caſt his eye vpon the Engliſh, maintained amongſt other things, nay by a publike writing, that Queene ELIZABETH had no man of warre to whom ſhe would truſt an Army, but the Earle of Suſſex, and that he bare no good affection to the Proteſtants, and according as he had learned of Coligni, he gaue forth, that if the Engliſh did ſet foot in the Low-Countries, they would renew their ancient hate againſt the French.
                     Neuertheleſſe, the inteſtine warres of France hauing taken away all hope of ſuccour from the Prince of Orange, and the Dutch,
                           The confederat Dutch deliberate what Protector they ſhould chuſe.
                         they afreſh conſult to whom they may runne, and rely vpon for aid. They knew that the Princes of Almany were againſt the Spaniards, & alſo they hauing no good intelligence, did niggardly depart with their mony, diſcorded with the Dutch in certaine points of Religion, and that the Emperour, a neere Kinſman of the Spaniards, would giue impeachment to it. They alſo ſaw the

French ſo engaged in their owne ciuill warres, that they could finde no end; that there was ſimulated & inueterate hate betweene the inhabitants of the Low-Countries and the French; that the Brabanders, Flemmiſh, and the neighbouring people of France, would oppoſe it with all their force; that the Commandement of the French was rude and burthenſome, as well as that of the Spaniſh; and that the hauens of France are not much commodious for the nauigation of the Dutch. But for the Engliſh that were almoſt vnder one paralell with the Dutch, who alſo ſeemed to be of the ſame nature and Religion with them, that their language was not much different; their Countrey neere adioyning, furniſhed with Ports, commodious for Nauigation, and fruitfull in Merchandize. That the Queen both by Sea and Land was very powerfull, a milde and gracious Princeſſe, temperate in her commands, one that would conſerue their Liberties, and in no wiſe burthen them with exactions.
                     They forthwith ſent into England, Phil. Marnix,
                        
                           They haue recourſe to the Queene of England.
                         Lord of Saint Aldegonde, I. Douza of Nortwic, Paul Buſy, and D. Melſen, which with an honourable legacy, and learned oration, offered to the Queene, Holland and Zeland, eyther to poſſeſſe, or protect, as being a Princeſſe iſſued from the Princes of Holland, of the bloud of Philip, Wife to Edward the Third, Daughter to William Bauier, the third of that name, Earle of Hainaud, and of Holland, by whoſe ſecond Siſter the Spaniard came to the inheritance of the Prouinces.
                           She deliberateth thereupon.
                         The Queene gaue a willing and an attentiue hearing to theſe things. But firſt of all, ſhee weighed and conſidered in her minde the cauſe which they had vndertaken againſt their Lord and King, the enmities of the Spaniard, the enuy of the French, the great expences and doubtfull euents of the warre, and alſo what offence might be taken by this inſolent example. Then ſhee doubted whether by her diſcent from Bauier, ſhe might make claime to Holland
                        
and Zeland, and whether ſhee might lawfully contract a league of protection with the Subiects of another Prince, and whether they themſelues could doe this, without the conſent of the Emperour, who was Soueraigne Lord of the Fee. Then further, ſhe ſcarce gaue credit to what ſome whiſpered in her eares; that the Prouinces fell not to the Spaniard by hereditary right, but by the election of the Subiects.
                           She reiecteth their proffer.
                         Finally, hauing maturely deliberated vpon theſe things, (after ſhe had reſpectiuely rendred thankes to the Prince of Orange and the reſt, for their great good will) ſhe anſwered, that ſhe had alwayes had a ſpeciall regard of the honour and faith worthy a Prince, nor could ſhee yet conceiue, how ſhe could in honour and conſcience receiue the Prouinces into her protection, much leſſe into her poſſeſſion; but ſhe would imploy her beſt labours to mediate for a happy peace betweene them.
                     
                        
                           The Ambaſsy of Champigni.
                        At the ſame time arriued at the Court, Iohn Perenot of Champigni, from Lodwick Zuniga of Requeſens, who in his name modeſtly aduiſed the Queene to entertaine the league betweene England and Burgundie, and not to entermeddle in the affaires of the Netherlands: To whom, the Queene promiſed to obſerue the league, notwithſtanding the Spaniard had refuſed to confirme it. Yet would ſhee alwayes prouide for her owne honour and ſafety, if ſhee perceiued the ancient forme of command amongſt the Burgundians to be changed; and forreine Souldiers in great numbers daily to be admitted into the adiacent Prouince.
                     
                        
                           Requeſens dyeth.
                        Before Champigni was returned, Requeſens yeelded to death, and a ſtrange confuſion had ouercaſt the Netherlands, the Souldiers deuaſting all places with Sword and Fire; And the Eſtates of Brabant, Flanders, &c. aſſuming their former authority in the adminiſtration of the Common-wealth, which the Spaniard by neceſſity was conſtrained to confirme to them, vntill the comming of Iohn of Auſtria, whom hee had inſtituted Gouernour ouer the

Prouinces, Queene ELIZABETH carefully laboured that the Spaniard might receiue no diſcommoditie, & conſerue, as much as ſhe poſſible could, the Netherlāds intyre to him, and ſent Dauiſon diligently to exhort them to a peace.
                           The Queene ſtudieth to bring the affaires of the Netherlands to a compoſition.
                         But by reaſon of outragiouſneſſe of the Spaniſh Souldiers, nothing was effected.
                     
                        England, for this whole yeere, remained in a peaceable quiet, excepting, in the moneth of Iuly there happened vpon the Southerne borders of England, towards Scotland, a conflict betweene the borderers of eyther part,
                           A conflict vpon the borders of Scotland.
                         whereof the occaſion was this, Iohn Foſter, Knight, Gouernour of the Meridionall Frontiers, and at the ſame time of Barwicke alſo, entred into parley vpon the Mount Redſquire, with I. Carmichell, Warden of Liddiſdale in Scotland: notwithſtanding it was a cuſtome that none but Gouernours ſhould meete with Gouernours, and Wardens with Wardens, as equals in dignitie, they were of either ſide accompanied, beſides certaine Noble-men, with a multitude of Fugitiues, and Malefactours, all armed; of which, the moſt part quarrelled with one another about inueterate and mortall hatreds betweene them. Theſe ſort of fellowes, according to their cuſtome, hauing put their horſes out here and there to feed, round incircled the Gouernour & Warden; whom when they heard breake out into eager termes about the ſending backe of Fugitiues, they, whoſe Lawes were onely their weapons, knowing themſelues guilty, were afraid leſt they ſhould be deliuered into the hands of iuſtice; vpon a ſquabble which fell out about the taking away of a ſpurre, they tumultuouſly ranne to armes, and euery one, to reuenge their priuate ſpleene, aſſayled his particular enemy, or made prey of his Horſe. Whether a Scot or an Engliſh-man was the beginner, it is vncertaine. At the firſt encounter, the Engliſh repulſed the Scots, and tooke Carmichell. But as they, being too confident in their owne forces, ranged about for booty and trifling pillage, a troupe

of Scottiſh ſuccours ſallying out of Iedbourgh, Carmichell eſcaped, and the Engliſh were put to flight, George Heron, Knight, Warden of Tyndale and Ridiſdale, with others, was ſlaine,
                           Heron is ſlaine.
                         and the Gouernour Forſter himſelfe; Fran. Ruſſell, ſonne to the Earle of Bedford, and ſonne-in-law to Forſter; Cuthbert Collinwood,
                        
                           The Engliſh led as priſoners into Scotland.
                         
                        Iames Ogle, Henry Fenwich, and many others, were taken and carried to Dalquith in Scotland, where the Regent was reſident, who courteouſly receiued them: but fearing leſt, if hee ſhould ſo ſoone permit them to depart, their bloud yet boyling for the murther, ſhould inflame their courages to vengeance, and ſo rayſe a warre betweene the two Kingdomes, hee for a time deteined them, and would not releaſe them, before they had promiſed by writing, to appeare at a certaine day in Scotland.
                     
                     
                        
                           The Queene of England is much incenſed.
                        When Queene ELIZABETH had certaine notice of theſe matters, ſhee was then (if euer anger had preuayled with her) full of vexation and mightily incenſed, that the Scots, which were (as her ſelfe ſpake) indebted to her for their reſt and libertie, ſhould, violating the peace, aſſault and murder the Engliſh in England, ſhould ſurprize and leade into Scotland the Gouernour of the Meridional frontier, and of Barwick, and others, and not releaſe them before they had promiſed in writing to returne. Shee tooke all this as a great iniury and a diſgrace done to the name of the Engliſh, and to her honour; And ſo much the more, becauſe the Regent had conſtituted, that inquiſition ſhould be made vpon the borders of Scotland, whether thoſe which were of the Commiſſion, did come to the place armed. This propoſition ſhe iudged to come from a heart puff
                           •
                         vp with enmitie; but that other with ambition, that is to ſay, that the Regent ſhould preſcribe a place of meeting to the Queene of England, notwithſtanding that ſhee had not long before appointed a meeting-place in the City of Yorke to the Regent Murrey. Neither could the affrighted

Regent ſatisfie the Queene, vntill hee vnarmed had met with Huntington, Deputy for England, at Bonderod, a Towne vpon the Borders, and there promiſed with good offices to ſalue this hurt; and for the reparation of the Engliſh name, he ſent Carmichel his indeered friend into England, who for a ſpace was detayned there in free impriſonment at Yorke, and ſoone after was ſent backe with honour and rewards. For the fault was found to be ſprung from Forſter, whileſt hee aboue meaſure ſuſtained the Cauſe of a notorious Malefactor. Thus was the Queene reconciled to the Regent, who remained euer after conſtant in his friendſhip; chaſtiſing the Fugitiues of either ſide, to his great praiſe, and the good of both the Kingdomes.
                     In this yeere dyed not any in England,
                        
                           The death of the Duke of Castell-Herauld.
                         of any noble remarke or note: But in Scotland, the thrice-Noble Iames Hamilton, Duke of Caſtell-Herauld, who being ſonne to the Daughter of Iames the ſecond, King of Scotland, was giuen as a tutor to Mary Queene of Scots, appointed Gouernour and Heire to the Kingdome, ſo long ſhee was vnder age, and when he had deliuered her to the French, he was created Duke of Caſtell-Herauld, in France; afterwards was conſtituted the chiefe of the three Gouernours of Scotland, during Queene Maries impriſonment; whoſe Cauſe whileſt he conſtantly defended, being an open man, and of a nature peaceable, he was much afflicted by the iniuries and plots of ſome troubleſome ſpirits.
                     The Earle of Eſſex perceiuing himſelfe much troubled,
                           Eſſex reduced into diſtreſse in Jreland.
                         aſwell by the Ambuſhes of Turlogh, and the Lord of Dungannon, as alſo by the obiected Difficulties in England: and learning that it was deliberated in England concerning his repeale, he ſilently deplored the miſreies whereinto by extreme iniurie he was precipitated; he complained of the loſſe of his owne and his mens fortunes; hee lamented Ireland, which he perſwaded himſelfe, that with two thouſand Souldiers, he could reduce into obedience, he inſtantly

demanded, that for his honour he might compound the matter with Turlogh: and hauing giuen vp to the Vice-Roy his command in Vlſter, becauſe that with that ſmall Company of men which he had aſſigned him, he was not of power ſufficient to proſecute what he had begunne, hee was preſently commanded to reſume the ſame. But hee had ſcarce reſumed it, and began to march againſt Turlogh, but he receiued Letters of Command, wholly to with-drawe himſelfe from that warre, and, in as honourable termes as he could, to conclude a Peace. Which beeing preſently performed, he charged vpon the Scots of Hebrides, which had ſeized vpon Clandeboy, and forced them to fly into Caues: and hauing with the ayde of Norris ſurprized the Iſland Rachlin, and ſlaine 400. of the Iſlanders, hee forced the Caſtle to yeeld, and there placed a Garriſon. And beeing now in the middle courſe of victory, hee was againe commanded (beyond his expectation) to reſigne his authority, and onely as a priuate Captaine, had command ouer three hundred men. And ſure nothing was omitted by the cloſe and ſubtill dealings of Leiceſter, with continuall troubles to oppreſſe the milde and peaceable ſpirit of this Noble Worthy.
                     
                        
                           Sidney the third time Deputy, maketh his progreſse in Ireland.
                        
                        Henry Sidney was then ſent the third time Vice-roy into Ireland, when the Plague made large hauock of the Iſle: neuertheleſſe, he paſſed to Vlſter, where many humbled themſelues to him, and requeſted with Prayers their ſafe-guard, to wit, Mac-Mahon, Mac-Guir, Turlogh Leinich, and others; as many alſo in Lemſter, of the ſeditious Family of O-Conor, and O-Mor, who by force of Armes had holden their ancient Poſſeſſions in Leiſe and Ophale, whereof by an Ordinance they had beene diſpoſſeſſed. Beeing arriued at Mounſter, he aſſiſted as a mourner, to honour the Funerals of Peter Carew,
                        
                           The death of Peter Carew.
                         a true Noble Knight, and of memorable vertues (who, as heire to Stephanide, and Reymond Craſse, who were the firſt Conquerers of Ireland, and of the

of Ydorne, had conquered, by the Rites of Warre, part of his Patrimony.) Comming to Corcagh, the Earle of Deſmond viſited him, and with great reſpect offered vnto him all willing and ready ſeruices. From thence being carried to Connach, he receiued Homage of the ſonnes of Clan-Richard, which were Rebels, and pardoned all their offences, after they had humbly implored the ſame in the Church of Galloway: and ſo hee gouerned the Prouince with great and worthy applauſe.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Booke 2. 1576.THE NINETEENTH YEERE OF Her Reigne. Anno Dom. 1576.
                     
                        
                           The French propound a marriage to Queene Elizabeth.
                        
                        ANew yeere beginning, the two match-makers for the Duke of Alanzon, la Mottefenelon, and la Porte, began to charme the eares of Queene ELIZABETH, with ſweete and amorous diſcourſes. To whom reply was made,
                           She, peace to them.
                         
                        That it was then no time for ſuch talke, the Duke being ſo farre ingaged in the Ciuill Warres, wherewith France was infeſted, that he could not readily come into England. Neuertheleſſe, two Ambaſſadours were ſent into France, one after another,
                           She labours to diuert them from the Netherlands.
                         to renewe a fraternall friendſhip betweene the King and the Duke, and to dehort them from the affaires of the Netherlands, leſt the Spaniard ſhould kindle a new war in France; ſhewing them how eaſie a thing it would be to him (hauing then a puiſſant Army in Italy) to ſurprize Saluces, or beeing with his forces poſſeſt of Prouence, to command

the entry of the Mediterranean Sea, eſpecially the treaſury of France being ſo neere exhauſted: of other ſemblable matters ſhe admoniſhed them, to deterre them from the Low-Countries.
                     For the Prince of Orange, for his owne particular profit, and the hope of retaining the Principality of Orange, which was ſituate in France, hee ceaſed not to inuite the French into the Netherlands; and promiſed to the Hollanders and Zelanders, who as if they were borne to the Sea,
                           The Zelanders moleſt the Engliſh by Sea;
                         did infeſt the Sea, with their Veſſels, purpoſely built for their Pyracies, the pillaging of the ſhipping of the Engliſh Merchants, vnder a pretext framed, that they relieued the Dunkirkes their enemies with victuals, and vnder borrowed names, tranſported into Spaine the merchandizes of Antwerpe, and other places, which themſelues were accuſtomed to tranſport thither, and for their owne profit, but now durſt not, by reaſon they knew themſelues guiltie of reuolt. Holſtock was forthwith ſent with Ships furniſhed for the warres to repreſſe them,
                           are repreſſed.
                         who tooke aboue two hundred Pyrates, and impriſoned them vpon the ſea-coaſt; And for the goods which were taken away, William Winter, Knight, and Robert Beale, Counſellor, and Secretary for the Queenes Letters, were deputed into Zeland, to accord the differences on eyther ſide, and vpon equall conditions to cauſe reſtitution to be made. But the Auarice of the Engliſh Merchants, and the inſolency of the Zelanders, broached new contentions, which were preſently brought to concluſion with little dammage to either Nation.
                     Then there grew a great confuſion throughout the Netherlands,
                        
                           A confuſion in the Netherlands.
                         the Spaniards impriſoning certaine of the Councellours of the Eſtates, and perſecuting with all ſorts of outrages and exceſſe of iniuries the inhabitants of the Prouinces in ſuch manner, that the Eſtates were forced to take armes, and ſend forth meſſengers to all parts to manifeſt their wrongs. They diſpatched towards Queene ELIZABETH,

                        Aubigni, to demonſtrate to her Maieſtie the iniuries and cauſes for which they tooke vp armes. Queene ELIZABETH, by Wilſon, exhorted as much as was poſſible, both the Eſtates and the Spaniards to lay aſide their Armes; ſtudiouſly inquiring the cauſes why the Counſellors of the Eſtates were ſo violently impriſoned. In the meane ſpace,
                           Antwerpe ſacked by the Spaniſh mutiners.
                         the City of Antwerpe being the Illuminary of other Cities, which ſcarce giueth place to the ſecond of the moſt flouriſhing Marts in Europe, was miſerably ſacked by the Spaniards, the Houſe of the Engliſh Merchants there pillaged, and themſelues, although innocent, were conſtrained to pay large ranſomes to the Souldiers. Aubigni taking hold of this occaſion, with much importunity requeſted Queene ELIZABETH in the name of the Eſtates, to lend ſome notable ſumme of money, to be imployed for the repreſſing of the Spaniſh inſolence. But her Maieſty knowing that they had before demanded aſſiſtance of the French, made refuſall, neuertheleſſe ſhe promiſed incontinently, and with all diligence, to make interceſſion to the Spaniard in their behalfe for a peace and league;
                           The Queene laboureth a peace for the Netherlands.
                         and to this end, ſhe ſent Iohn Smith, Couſin-German to Edward the Sixth, a man perfect in the Spaniſh behauiour, and well knowne to the King of Spaine, who was graciouſly receiued of the King; and ſo wiſely retorted vpon Gaſp. Quirague, Arch-biſhop of Toledo, and the Inquiſitors, the contumelious iniuries which they ſpake againſt the Queen, out of hate to the Religion, and willing her not to adde to her titles, the Defendreſse of the Faith, that he receiued many thankes from their King, who was much offended with the Arch-biſhop, requeſting Smith to conceale from the Queene thoſe paſſages, and commanded ſeuerely that that attribute ſhould be allowed of. The King knew well that the Queenes Councel were ſufficient and expedient for her affaires, yet would he not conſent thereto, the fate of the Netherlands (if I may ſo call it) carrying him another way.
                     
                        At the ſame time, Iohn of Auſtria, naturall Sonne to the Emperour Charles the Fifth, arriued in Flanders with a ſoueraigne command; to whom, the Queene in like manner ſent Edward Horſey, Gouernour of the Ile of Wight,
                        
                           The arriuall of John of Auſtria in Flanders.
                         to congratulate his arriuall, and offer him her aſſiſtance, if the Eſtates ſhould call the French into Holland. Neuertheleſſe, by the importunate ſollicitation of Sweuingham, pleading for the Eſtates, ſhee ſent them 2000.
                           The Queene furniſheth the Eſtates with money;
                         pounds of Engliſh money, with this condition, that they ſhould not change their Prince, nor admit the French into Holland, nor refuſe the peace, if Iohn of Auſtria ſhould deſcend to any equall conditions. But if he ſhould accept of a peace, then the moneyes ſhould be imployed for the payment of the Spaniſh Souldiers, which had for want of pay rayſed all theſe troubles.
                           to continue the Prouinces in the King of Spaines obedience. The traffique re-eſtabliſhed betweene England and Portugall.
                         Such was her care and ſtudy to detaine theſe wauering Prouinces vnder the obedience and alleageance of the Spaniard, neuer pretermitting any occaſion of well-deſeruing, and for the conſeruation of peace.
                     In this inſtant, England triumphed in an agreeable tranquillity, and the traffique of the Engliſh with the Portugals, which, by the priuate auarice of ſome particular perſons had beene ſhut vp, was then opened againe, and the Engliſh had permiſſion to traffique in Portugall, Algarbia, the Iles of Medera, and the Azores, the Portugals likewiſe in England and Ireland, for the ſpace of three yeeres; during which time, all differences and contentions which had bin about the deteining of goods or merchandiſe, were made void. And this was publiquely diuulged by the ſound of a Trumpet.
                     Likewiſe certaine learned Ingenies of the time, inflamed with an honeſt deſire of diſcouering the more diſtant Regions of the Earth, and the ſecrets of the Ocean, incited certaine well-monyed men, who were no leſſe inflamed with the deſire of getting more, to make diſcouery, if in the North parts of America, there were any way, by which

men might ſayle to the rich Countrey of Cathay, and ſo, by a mutuall commerce, to ioyne the Riches of the Eaſt and Occident together.
                     
                        
                           With what probabilitie.
                        Thoſe learned men probably diſputed, taking it for granted, that the ſhore lay on that ſide; that the neerer we approach to the ſhore, the ſhallower the waters be: and by experience, thoſe which ſaile from the ſhore of the Weſterne Ilands, meet with higher Seas, which ſeeme to be all one with that Sea which Nauigators call Del-Sur on the other part of America: Furthermore, that when the Sea is carried by the diurnall motion of the primum mobile, it is driuen backe by the oppoſition of America, and runnes toward the Northerne Countries of Cabo Fredo, that is to ſay, the cold Promontory, there to vnburthen it ſelfe through ſome Chanell into the Del-Sur Sea, except it be by the like violence repulſed into Lappia and Finmarch, in which Region of the Southerne world, from the Inſulous ſtrait of Magellan, being incapable of ſuch a maſſe of waters by reaſon of the narrowneſſe of the Chanels of thoſe Ilands, they are beaten backe to Cabo Fredo by the Eaſterne ſhores of America.
                        
                           Witneſse, Ienkinſon an Engliſhman.
                         And they adde for Witneſſes, Ienkenſon, an Engliſhman, who better knew then any other the Northerne Climate of the world, (who ſhewed that thoſe huge and maſſie heapes of waters of the Sea Cronio, doe diſimbogue themſelues neceſſarily into the Sea Del-Sur,) and Bernard le Tor,
                        
                           Bernard le Tor, a Spaniard.
                         a Spaniard, who affirmed, that returning from the Moluccus, into America, aboue the Equinoctiall Line Northward, he was caſt backe againe by force of waters, comming from the North, violently ruſhing againſt his Ship,
                           Furbiſher is ſent to diſcouer the Strait in the North part of America.
                         into Moluccus; and other Witneſſes they produce to proue this: Whereupon, monyed-men were perſwaded to ſend Martin Furbiſher with three Ships to diſcouer this Strait: who looſing from Harwich the 18. of Iune, entred the ninth of Auguſt into the Gulfe or Strait, vnder the latitude of ſixtie three degrees, where hee found

men of blacke hayre, broad faces, flat wry noſes, of a ſwart and tawny colour, clothed with Sea-Calues skinnes, and the women were painted about the eyes and the balls of the Cheeke with a deepe azure colour, like the ancient Britans: but all things being ſo bound vp with Ice, in the Moneth of Auguſt, it was not poſſible for them to hold on their courſe, ſo as he returned for England, where he arriued the eighth of the Kalends of October, with the loſſe onely of fiue Mariners, which were taken by the Barbarians. Notwithſtanding to performe what he had begun, hee ſayled the next two yeeres about the ſame Shore, but was hindered from entring into the Gulfe by the Ice which was euery-where heaped vp like Mountaines. Being then beaten with Tempeſts, Snow, and Windes that were euer and anon changing, hauing gathered a great number of Stones (which he tooke to haue beene Minerals) he turnes ſailes: from which ſtones, when neither Gold, Siluer, nor any other metall could be drawne, we ſaw them throwne away to repayre the high-wayes. But theſe things are publiquely extant, deſcribed at large.
                     About the ſame time, Maximilian the Emperour dyed,
                           The death of Maximilian the Emperour.
                         a prudent and iuſt Prince, profitable to the Empire, & well-deſeruing both of Queene ELIZABETH, and the Engliſh: whereof, as ſoone as ſhee was certainely informed, being afflicted with an exceeding griefe, ſhee ſent Sir Philip Sidney, Ambaſſadour, to Rodulphus, King of the Romans,
                        
                           Queene Elizabeth mournes.
                         diligently to declare her ſorrow for the death of his father, and to congratulate his Succeſſion. And alſo, in paſſing by, to condole with the Sonnes of Frederick the Third,
                           The Elector Palatine dyes.
                         Elector Palatine, for the death of their Father; and by the way, to put Caſimere in minde of the Money which ſhee ſpent in the French warre; for by that warre, peace being reſtored to France, the Prouinces of Aniou, of Touraine, and of Berie aſſigned in Apennage, as they call it,
                           A Franc is two ſhillings Engliſh.
                         to the Duke of Alanzon, eleuen millions of Franc's, promiſed to Caſimere to pay

the Germaine Horſe-men, and three hundred thouſand Crownes, for which the French Queene had engaged her Iewels. But Queene ELIZABETH had none at all paid againe, and yet thought her ſelfe ſufficiently recompenced in hauing it ſo well ſpent in ſo good a cauſe. Caſimere ingenuouſly and with a Germaine ſincerity made anſwer, That the French had broke promiſe with him, and that it was not his fault that the Money was not re-payd.
                     As in Germany the Emperour Maximilian, and the Prince Elector Palatine, for their Chriſtian vertues, and ſingular moderation, had left a great affection and much griefe: So no leſſe did Walter Deureux, Earle of Eſſex, leaue in England and Ireland, though farre inferiour in place, verily a moſt excellent man, in whom ſweetneſſe of manners contended with his Nobleneſſe of Birth; all which notwithſtanding could not preuaile againſt Enuie: for indeed, he was compelled afterwards to leaue that which he had laudably begun in Ireland, with much diminiſhing his Patrimonie: and being returned into England, he openly threatned Leiceſter, whom he ſuſpected had iniured him: by the Court ſubtletie of Leiceſter, who was afraid of him, and by the peculiar myſteries of the Court, by ſtriking, and ouerthrowing men with Honour, he was ſent away againe into Ireland, vvith a vaine Title of [Earle Marſhall of Ireland] vvhere pining away vvith griefe, and being grieuouſly tormented vvith a Dyſſenterie, verie godlily rendred vp his Soule to God, after he had vvilled thoſe that vvere vvith him, to admoniſh his Sonne, then ſcarce ten yeeres old, that he ſhould alvvaies ſet before his Eyes the ſixe and thirtieth yeere of his age, as the longeſt meaſure of his life, vvhich neither he nor his Father ouer-liued, and truly he attained not vnto it, as in his place vve ſhall declare. Thus vvas the death of this moſt Noble perſon, by the Vulgar (vvho alwaies ſuſpect thoſe they hold deare, to be made avvay by poiſon) ſuſpected to be poiſoned, though Sydney, Lord Deputie of

                        Ireland, hauing made diligent inquiſition about it, writ to the Councell of England that the Earle often ſaid at his firſt falling ſicke, that as often as he was troubled in mind, hee was pained with this flux,
                           Eſsex death ſuſpected.
                         and that he neuer ſuſpected poyſon, that he had the ſame colour of bodie in his ſickneſſe as he had in perfect health, no ſpot, no conſumption, no blemiſh, no loſing of nailes, no ſhedding of haire, nor inward putrifactiō or appearance of poyſon when he was diſſected. That the Phiſicons did not agree in the cauſe of his ſicknes, neither miniſtred they any thing to him againſt poyſon, but that he that waited of his cup was falſly accuſed of.....dipt in water and mingled with wine: neuertheleſſe wee haue ſeene the man pointed at publickly for a poyſoner. This ſuſpition increaſed, becauſe Leiceſter ſo quickly after abandoned Douglas Sheffield, by whom he had had a ſonne (whether ſhe was his wife or paramour, I will not ſay) after hee had giuen her a ſumme of money and made her great promiſes; and openly profeſſed loue to the Lady Lettice, Eſſex his widdow, and married her twice. For though, it was ſaid, that he had maried her priuately, yet Henrie Knollis her father knowing his extrauagant affections, and fearing leſt he ſhould deceiue his daughter, would not beleeue it, vnleſſe he ſaw a contract himſelfe, expreſſely in the preſence of a publike Notarie and witneſſes. But that was performed two yeeres after.
                     At that time dyed in England Sir Anthony Coke at ſeuentie yeeres of age, a Knight that kept the ancient Seuerity,
                           The death of Sir Anthony Coke.
                         and very learned, Tutor to EDVVARD the Sixth in his Child-hood, happie in his Daughters, who being skilfull in the Greeke and Latine tongues aboue the expectation of their Sexe, he had married to theſe famous men, William Cecill, Lord Treaſurer of England, Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the great Seale, to Thomas Hoby, who dyed Embaſſador in France, Raph Roulet, and Henry Killigrew.
                     
                     That I may goe backe a little: Before Eſſex dyed, the

Sonnes of the Earle of Clan-Rickard, whom the Deputie of Ireland had pardoned for rebellion ſcarce two yeeres before,
                           Tumults in Ireland.
                         had gathered together a Companie of Scummes, Rogues, and Rebels, who rob'd and barbarouſly ſack't Connach, burnt Athenrie, which the Inhabitants were about to re-edifie, and with a barbarous hatred which they bore vnto them, who began to fauour Lawes and Humanity, killed the workmen. The Deputie makes haſte thither, diſſipates theſe Troopes of Robbers, and made them flye into their Dennes, according to their cuſtome; and impriſoned the Earle of Clan-Rickard their Father (as culpable of his Sons crimes) in the Caſtle of Dublin. But as ſoone as the Deputie was returned, they came out againe, and beſieged the Caſtle Balla-reogh, being their Fathers chiefe Seate (where there was a Garriſon commanded by T. Strange) but in vaine and with loſſe of their men. Afterwards being aſſiſted by the Ilander Scots, ranſack't and ſpoil'd whatſoeuer was vpon the Lands of Mac-Williams Eughter the younger: but the Deputie comming againe, they fled and hid themſelues as they did before.
                     
                        
                           William Drury, Preſident of Mounſter.
                        
                        William Drury, late Gouernour of Barwicke, now newly made Preſident of Mounſter, by his wiſedome and valour brought all the Prouince vnder command, and in obedience to the Lawes, except Kerria and the Countie Palatine, whither, like to a Sincke, a great number of Malefactors, Theeues, men in debt, and ſuch as were ſuſpected for Treaſon, by reaſon of the Immunity & priuiledges belonging to the place, were gathered together, a certaine impunitie imboldening them. For EDVVARD the third had granted to the Earle of Deſmond, all Regall Liberties, that the Kings of England had in that Countie; except for Burnings, Rapes, Foreſtallings, and Treaſure found. Notwithſtanding, the Preſident (iudging that theſe Liberties were granted rather for the exerciſe of Iuſtice, then for the protecting of Miſchiefe) valiantly defeated the moſt ſelected troopes of the forlorne

Rebels, which the Earle of Deſmond had layd in Ambuſcado, and made ſearch through all Kerria, and puniſhed many of them ſeuerely. The Earle of Deſmond vexing at this, and grieuouſly complaining to the Lord Deputie, of Drury,
                        
                           Malefactors purſued and puniſhed. Ceaſs, what it is.
                         as well of this, as of the Taxe, which they call Ceaſs. This Taxe is an exaction of Victuals at a certaine price (as the Glebe among the Ancients) for Prouiſion of the Deputies Family, and the Garriſon Souldiers. Of this Taxe,
                           The Iriſh complaine of exactions.
                         he complained not alone, but in Lemſter, the moſt ciuill part of the Iſle, the Viſcount Bultinglas, Deluin, Hoth, and Trimleſton Barons, and alſo other of the Nobler ſort, complaining, denied to pay it, as not to be exacted, but by authoritie of Parliament; And thereupon ſent Deputies into England, who, being heard before the Councell, were committed; and in like manner in Ireland were thoſe that ſent them, vntill they ſubmitted to pay it: It appearing by the Records of the Kingdomes Exchequer to be inſtituted long agoe, and is a certaine right of Maieſtie, called [Royall Prerogatiue] which is not ſubiect to the Lawes,
                           The Queene hath compaſſion.
                         nor yet repugnant as the Lawyers haue iudged it. But the Queene commanded the Lord Deputie to vſe a moderation in ſuch like exactions, and vſed the old ſaying, [While they may ſheare her ſubiects, doe not ſhaue them:] and ſaid moreouer,
AH, how greatly I feare leſt that which Bato in time paſt to Tiberius vpon the reuolting of Dalmatia, be obiected againſt vs by the Iriſh. You, you are in fault, who commit not your flockes to Shepheards but to Wolues.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Booke 2. 1577.THE TVVENTIETH YEERE OF Her Reigne. Anno Dom. 1577.
                     
                        
                           Auſtria inclines to Peace.
                        
                        
                           DOn Iohn of Auſtria perceiuing himſelfe too weake for the States of Holland, ſtrengthened by the amitie of neighbour Princes, ſent Gaſtel to Queene ELIZABETH to thanke her for the ayd which ſhe had offered him againſt the French, & to declare his deſire of Peace.
                           Elizabeth perſwades to it.
                         She by Edw. Horſey now ſent the ſecond time to him, commends his diſpoſition to Peace, and withall treates that the goods of the Engliſh detained in Antwerpe, might be reſtored. Anſwer was made verie ſlowly, he being much diſtracted (as he pretended) with other affaires, wholly intending [The perpetuall Edict for Peace] as they call it, which ſcarce laſted a yeere. Queene ELIZABETH ſeriouſly deſiring Peace, ſends Sir Thomas Leighton to the Prince of Orange, to perſwade

him, not to labour, or attempt any thing againſt Peace, vntill Iohn Smith, who was ſent into Spaine to procure a Peace, ſhould returne. The Prince of Orange,
                        
                           Orange diuerts her.
                         who from his heart condemned this perpetuall Edict, hauing opportunely learned, that Don Iohn of Auſtria did endeuour to marrie the Queene of Scots, which occaſion he willingly catch't, and by Famier forthwith aduertiſeth Queene ELIZABETH to auert her from Peace. She neuertheleſſe as ſeeming to know nothing, by Daniel Rogers congratulates with Don Iohn for the perpetuall Edict of Peace, although ſhe had diſcouered for certaine, that by the perſwaſion of the Earle of Weſtmerland, and the Engliſh Fugitiues, and the inclination of the Pope, and the fauour of the Guizes, he had an aſſured hope to attaine to this mariage, and together with it,
                           
                              Auſtria ſeekes to marrie the Queene of Scots.
                           
                           
                              And by her to get the Kingdome of England.
                           
                         to ſwallow England and Scotland; and had alreadie reſolued to poſſeſſe himſelfe of the Iſle of Man, ſituate in the Iriſh Sea, as a fit place for the inuading of England on Ireland ſide, and from the Weſt-ſide of Scotland, where the Queene of Scots had many people at her deuotion, and in the oppoſite part of England to make vſe of North-Wales, and the Counties of Cumberland, Lancaſter, and Cheſter, where the moſt part of the Inhabitants are moſt addicted to Poperie.
                     And certainly (as we haue learned by Perez the King of Spaines Secretarie) Auſtria, caried away with ambition, ſeeing himſelfe falne from all hope of the Kingdome of Tunis, had dealt ſecretly with the Pope, to pull downe ELIZABETH from her Throne; to marrie the Queene of Scotland; and to ſubdue England: and vnknowne to Philip, wrought with the Pope to excite Philip for the publike good to the Engliſh Warre. Don Iohn himſelfe is readie to goe for Flanders; this was proſecuted in Spaine; and anon after, Eſcouedo is ſent from Flanders, to deſire that a Port in Biskye might be granted him, from whence with a Nauie he might inuade England. But Philip not likeing theſe deſignes,

begun to neglect him as a man too ambitious. Neither did Queene ELIZABETH vnderſtand of theſe things, till (as I haue ſaid) the Prince of Orange did informe her.
                     
                        
                           Copley made a Baron of France.
                        Notwithſtanding, it wanted not ſuſpition, that Thomas Copley (a prime man among the Engliſh Fugitiues, being commended to the French King by Vaulx, Secretarie to Don Iohn) had beene made Knight and Baron. But Copley endeuouring to auoide ſuſpition, proteſted obedience to his Prince, and that he had accepted this Title out of no other reaſon but for the greater acceſſe of honour to his wife, his companion in exile, and that his Penſion from Spaine would be the greater, becauſe a Gentleman of Title is of more eſteeme among Spaniards; and he thought he was capable of the Title of a Baron, his Grandmother being the eldeſt Daughter to the Baron of Hoo, and his great Grandmother the eldeſt Daughter of the heires of the Baron of Welles.
                     
                     
                        
                           The diſsimulation of Austria.
                        In the meane time, Don Iohn (vnderhand) proſecutes this match, and withall, the better to cloke the matter, ſends the Viſcount of Gaunt Embaſſadour to ELIZABETH, who ſhewed her the Articles of Peace, and to demand a longer terme for the paiment of the Money which the States borrowed of her. This ſhe willingly grants; and after treates with him, by Wilſon, that the dammages which the Engliſh Merchants receiued at the ſacking of Antwerpe may be repared.
                           He takes vp armes again.
                         He deludes her, and while he pretended to be buſie about this perpetuall Edict of Peace, breakes out into Warre, and, by craft, ſurpriſes Caſtles, and Townes, and writes to the King of Spaine, that the wiſeſt courſe is to take the Iſlands of Zeland, before they lay ſiege to the interiour Prouinces; and being thus tranſported with hope, ſtriues to perſwade him by Eſcouede his Secretarie, that it were eaſier for him to take England than Zeland
                        ▪
                     
                     At length, when all things tended to warres in the Low-Countries,

the States ſend to Queene ELIZABETH the Marquis of Maure and Adoulfe Medkerke, to borrow of her a hundred thouſand pound ſterling for eight moneths: Shee made them this anſwer,
                           Elizabeth couenanted with the Scots.
                         That if they could borrow it elſe-where, Shee, with the Citie of London, would willingly giue caution for it; prouided, that ſuch Townes of the Low-Countries as She ſhall nominate, would be bound by writing to repay it within a yeere, and made alliance with them of mutuall ſuccour both by Land and Sea, vnder theſe conditions:
THe Queene ſhall ſend for ſuccour to the States a thouſand Horſe, and fiue thouſand foote, to whom they ſhall pay three moneths after their imbarking, their intertainement and expence in the City of London, and the warres ended, ſhall defray their expence for their returning into England. The Generall of theſe forces, who ſhall be an Engliſh-man, ſhall be receiued into the Councell of the States, and nothing ſhall be ordered concerning warre or peace, without conſulting thereupon either with the Queene, or him, nor make league with any whoſoeuer, without her approbation; and, if ſhee pleaſe, to be comprehended in the ſame. If any Prince doe any hoſtile act againſt the Queene or Kingdome of England, vnder any pretext whatſoeuer, the States ſhall reſiſt as much as in them lye, and ſhall ſend ayde to the Queene in the ſame number, and vpon the like conditions. If any diſcord ariſe among the States, it ſhall bee referred to her arbitrement. If the Queene be to prepare a Nauie againſt enemies, the States ſhall furniſh xl. Ships of a competent burthen, with Mariners, and euery thing elſe neceſsary, which ſhall obey and follow the Admirall of England, and ſhall be defrayed at the Queenes coſt. The States ſhall in no wiſe admit into the Low-countries, ſuch Engliſh as the Queene hath declared Rebels. If they conclude

a peace with Spaine, they muſt take heede that the Articles, whether ioyntly or ſeuerally, bee confirmed by the Queenes pleaſure.
                     
                     Immediately as this Treatie begun, the Queene, leſt ſhee ſhould be calumniated as a nouriſher of Rebellion in the Low-Countries,
                           She declares the reaſon of it to the Spaniard.
                         ſent Thomas Wilkes to the Spaniard, to declare vnto him as followeth:
FOraſmuch as there neuer want malicious ſpirits, which ſtudie craft and ſubtiltie, to breake friendſhip betweene thoſe Princes, and by vniuſt ſuggeſtion, to caſt aſperſions vpon their honours, by ſuppoſall, as if ſhee had kindled this fire in the Low-Countries: Firſt, ſhee prayes the King, and the Gouernours of the Low-Countries, that they would call to minde, how often and how earneſtly, like a friend, ſhee long-agoe forewarned of the euils hanging ouer the Low-Countries; And then, when they thought of reuolting, what ſtudious paines ſhe tooke in often Miſsitations to the Prince of Orange, and the States, that they ſhould continue in dutie and obedience to the King, yea euen when thoſe moſt opulent Prouinces were offered her in poſſeſsion, what ſinceritie ſhewed ſhee, not to take them into protection? Finally, when all things were deplorable, how much money did ſhee lately furniſh to hinder (the States being preſſed by vrgent neceſsitie) not to ſubiect themſelues vnder another Prince, and trouble the treatie of the late propounded peace. But when ſhee had notice that the Prince of Orange was vnwilling to embrace the peace already begun, ſhee did not onely admoniſh him to embrace it, but alſo (ſhee moſt ſacredly proteſted) interpoſed threatnings, and in ſome ſort commanded him. If theſe things be vnworthy of a Chriſtian Prince, ſtudious of peace, and moſt deſirous to deſerue well of her good

Confederate, the King of Spaine; let the King himſelfe, and all the Princes of the Chriſtian World iudge. And that wars might ſleepe on both ſides, and that hee might haue the Hollanders obedient, aduiſeth him to receiue them, as an afflicted people, into his ancient fauour, reſtore their priuiledges, obſerue the laſt couenants of peace, and elect out of his owne Family ſome other Gouernour. Which could by no meanes be effected, vnleſſe Don Iohn were remoued, whom the States diſtruſted, with more than a hoſtile and implacable hatred; and, whom ſhee certainely knew by his ſecret practices with the Queene of Scots, to be her vtter enemy. Inſomuch, that ſhee could expect nothing from the Low-Countries, but certaine dangers while He gouerned there. But now when ſhee doth perceiue what great number of forces Don Iohn inrolled, and how many Troupes of French there were in a readineſſe, ſhee profeſt, that, to keepe the Low-Countries to the King of Spaine, and to repell danger from England, ſhee had promiſed ayde to the States. Who reciprocally had promiſed to perſiſt in their obedience to the King, and to innouate nothing in Religion. From which, if ſhee ſhall perceiue the King auerſe, but to haue determined breaking the barres of their rights and priuiledges, to draw them into ſeruitude like miſerable Prouinces captiuated by conqueſt; ſhee cannot, both for the defence of her Neighbours, and her owne ſecuritie, be failing or negligent: But alſo, if the States doe breake their faith with the King, or enterpriſe any thing contrary to what they haue promiſed, ſhe would ſpeedily turne her Enſignes againſt them.
                     
                     The Spaniard was not pleaſed to heare theſe things,
                           The Spaniard did not willingly heare theſe things.
                         neuertheleſſe knowing that it lay much in Queene ELIZABETHS power, to eſtabliſh or ruine his affaires in

the Low-Countries, and knowing for certaine that Don Iohn laide Ambuſcadoes for her, diſſembled it, and prayed her to proſecute the deſigne which ſhee had for eſtabliſhing peace, and not raſhly to belieue the falſe reports that runne, or that be practiſed vnworthily againſt a Prince that is his friend.
                     Whiles Wilkes expoſeth theſe things in Spaine, Don Iohn, who feared Queene ELIZABETH, and withall wiſhed her ruine,
                           Don John complaines to Queene Elizabeth of the States.
                         ſends Gaſtell to her, who blamed the States exceedingly, accuſeth them of many foule crimes, and layde open at large the cauſes that moued Don Iohn to take armes againe. Queene ELIZABETH, like an Heroicke Princeſſe, ſtood Arbitratreſſe between the Spaniard, the French, and the States, inſomuch as ſhee had power to apply this ſaying of her Father, [He ſhal carry it away, for whom I am;] and that which he writ is found true, that France and Spaine are the ſcoales of the Ballance,
                           England the ballance of Europe.
                         and England the beame.
                     At the very ſame time, the Iudges holding the Aſſiſes at Oxford,
                        
                           A peſtilent ſickneſſe cauſed by the ſtinke of a priſon.
                         and R. Ienke, Stationer, an impudent talker, was accuſed and brought to triall for ſpeaking iniurious words againſt the Queene, the moſt part of the aſſiſtants were ſo infected with his poyſonous and peſtilent breath, and by reaſon of the ſtinke, whether of the priſoners or the priſon, that they almoſt all dyed within forty dayes, beſides women and children; and this contagion extended no further. Amongſt others, R. Bel, chiefe Baron of the Exchequer, a graue man, and learned in the Law, R. Doyley, Sir G. Babington, Vicount Doyley of Oxfordſhire, Harcourt, Waineman, and Fetiplace, perſons of great eſtimation in that Countrey, and Barham, a famous Lawyer, being almoſt of one Iury, and about three hundreth more died there.
                     Hitherto the Papiſts in England enioyed a cheerefull tranquillitie, who, by a kinde of merciful conniuency, exerciſed their Religion in priuate houſes in ſome ſort vnpuniſhed, although it was prohibited by the Law, vpon paine

of a pecuniary mulct to be inflicted; neither did the Queen thinke it fit to force the conſcience. But after that thundring Bull of Excommunication againſt the Queene, which came from Rome, was caſt abroad; that ſerenitie by little and little turned into clouds and tempeſts, and brought vp that Law which was made in the yeere 1571. againſt them which brought into the Kingdome ſuch [Bulls, Agnos Dei, and Grana Benedicta] being tokens of Papall obedience, or, as we haue ſaid, did reconcile any to the Church of Rome. Neuertheleſſe, this Law was not put in execution againſt any one in ſixe yeeres after, although it was knowne to haue beene violated by many. The firſt againſt whom this Law was put in practice, was Cuthbert Maine, Prieſt,
                           Maine, a Prieſt, executed.
                         a ſtubborne defender of the Popes authority againſt the Queene, hee was executed at Saint Stephens, commonly called Launſton in Cornewall, and Trugion a Gentleman, that intertained him into his houſe, had all his lands and goods confiſcated, and he condemned to perpetuall impriſonment: Of theſe, and ſuch like things, concerning the Church, I will but giue a touch, in regard of others that vndertake to write the Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtory of thoſe times, who, I hope (although it be ſcarcely to be hoped for, by reaſon of exaſperated mindes in this deuiſion of Religion) will faithfully performe it.
                     This yeere, the title of Baron of Latimer,
                        
                           The death of the Lord Latimer.
                         after it had flouriſhed in honour and riches from the time of Henry the Sixth, is now extinct in Iohn Neuill, who hauing no Iſſue male, left an ample inheritance to foure Daughters, the eldeſt of which, Henrie Earle of Northumberland married; the ſecond, Thomas Cecill, who was afterwards Earle of Exceter; the third, Sir William Cornwallis; and the fourth, Sir Iohn Dauers, of which came a plentifull ofspring.
                     Sir Th. Smith, one of the Secretaries of State,
                           Secretary Smith dyes.
                         likewiſe died of a conſumption, this being his clymactericall yeere; a man memorable for much learning, and wiſdome, approued

in many Ambaſſies. He was deſcended of noble Parents at Saffron Walden in Eſſex, brought vp at Queen Margarets Colledge in Cambridge, and beeing come to riper yeeres,
                           Saffron Walden.
                         was choſen to bee ſent into Italy vpon the Kings charge: (vntill our time many of the moſt hopefull youths were choſen out of both the Vniuerſities, and trayned vp in ſtrange Countries, for the better adorning and inabling of their mindes.) From thence, he returned Doctor of the Ciuill Law, he was in fauour with the Duke of Sommerſet, Protector of EDVVARD the Sixth, and made the other Secretary with Cecill, and Lord Warden of the Stanneries, Deane of Carlile, and Prouoſt of Eaton. Queene MARIE comming to the Crowne, tooke all theſe dignities from him, aſſigned him a hundred pound a yeere to liue on, with condition not to goe out of the Kingdome. As ſoone as Queene ELIZABETH inioyed the Scepter, he was called againe to the ſeruice of the Common-wealth, to be an aſſiſtant with the Diuines in correcting the Engliſh Liturgy; and afterwards, as I haue ſaid before, hauing with great applauſe performed his Ambaſſies, hee dyed. In the yeere 1571, being made ſecond Secretary to the Queene, hauing but one onely Sonne, ſent him to leade a Colony into the barbarous Pen-inſale Ardes in Ireland, where hee was vnfortunately ſlaine. Hee tooke ſpeciall care, and was the firſt that procured an order for the dyets of Students in Colledges; and by that meanes aduanced learning more than he did by his writings, although hee left a worke imperfect, de Reipublica Anglorum, a ſingular booke de Linguae Anglicae Orthographia; another, de Graecae pronunciatione; and an exact Commentary, de re nummaria, moſt worthy to come to light. In his ſtead, to the place of Secretary, came Thomas Wilſon, Doctor of the Ciuill Law, Maſter of Saint Katherines neere London, who dyed within foure yeeres after.
                     
                        
                           Rebellion in Ireland.
                        In Ireland, the O-Mores, O-Conores, and others, whoſe

anceſtors the Earle of Suſſex, Lord Deputie (in the reigne of Queene MARY, had, for wrongs and offences done by them) depriued of their inheritance, Leiſa, and Ophalia, neither had hee aſſigned them any other place to liue in, broke out into Rebellion, vnder the conduct of Rorio Oge,
                        
                           Rorio Oge.
                         that is to ſay, Rodorick the Younger, burnt a little Towne called Naaſſe; they aſſaulted Lachliny, and were repulſed by Sir George Crew Gouernour, but they tooke Henry Harrington, and Alexander Cosbie, in a deceitfull parley which they ſought of purpoſe to ſurprize them, whō when Captaine Harpole went about to recouer, ſet vpon a little Cottage by night where Rorio was, and they two tyed to a poſt; Rorio being awaked with the noyſe, gaue Harrington and Cosbie many wounds in the darke, and with a deſperate boldneſſe, ruſheth into the middeſt of the Souldiers which compaſſed him round, and by the benefit of the night eſcaped. Afterwards, hauing layde an Ambuſcado for the Baron of Oſſer, was taken, and being ſlaine,
                           Rorio ſlaine.
                         his neighbours were deliuered from much feare.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Booke 2. 1578.THE ONE AND TVVENTIETH YEERE OF Her Reigne. Anno Dom. 1578.
                     
                        
                           Queene Elizabeth is carefull of the Low-Countries.
                        
                        ALthough Spaine approued not of the propoſitions that Wilkes had made, and, as I lately ſaide, had diſſembled, Queene ELIZABETH notwithſtanding ſeriouſly pittying the Flemmings, whoſe Prouinces were ſo commodiouſly, and with a mutuall neceſſity ſituated to England, had for many ages adhered like Husband and Wife; and therefore impatient to ſee the French, vnder colour of taking them into protection, ſhould become Maſters of them, ſends Wilkes, at his returne from Spaine, to Don Iohn, to aduertize him, that the States had called the Duke of Aniou, (now ſo, but before Duke of

                        Alanzon) with an Armie of French, and that it would be more ſafe for him to make a Truce, leſt he ſhould expoſe the Prouinces to the preſent danger. But he being of a firie and warlike Spirit, and puffed vp with the Battell againſt the States at Gemblacke, anſwered in a word, that he neither thought of any Truce, nor feared the French. She neuertheleſſe, for her own behoofe and the Flemmings, ſends Sir Edward Stafford into France, to watch if they ſhould attempt any thing vpon the Frontiers of the Low-Countries, and how many Souldiers they had leuied.
                     Out of England are paſt ouer, I. North,
                        
                           Engliſh gone into the Low-Countries.
                         eldeſt Sonne of Baron North; Iohn Norris, ſecond Sonne of Baron Norris; Henry Cauendiſh, and Thomas Morgan, with many voluntaries, there to plant their firſt rudiments of Warre. Caſimire alſo, Sonne to the Prince Elector Palatine, drew a great Armie of Horſe and Foot out of Germanie, which coſt the Queene verie much. Don Iohn, burning to aſſault the Armie of the States at Rimenant, before all the auxiliarie Forces of the French and Germanes ſhould ioyne with it, flyes vpon them ſooner then they were aware of, and forthwith made the Cauallerie which were ſet to guard, retreate, runnes in vpon the Enemie as if he had been ſure of the victorie: but they reſuming their ſpirits, beat backe the Austrians, who being turned towards the Hedges and Buſhes where the Engliſh and Scottiſh voluntaries were placed, ſtroue to breake through them, but by no meanes could: they were valiantly entertained by the Engliſh and Scots, who for the feruent heat had caſt off their Cloathes, and with their Shirts, 
                           •
                        yed betweene their Thighes, ſo fought. Norris the Leader of the Engliſh, eagerly fighting, had three Horſes killed vnder him, and brought away the glorie of a valorous Warriour, and ſo did Stuart a Scottiſhman, Burham Lieutenant to Cauendiſh, and William Marckham.
                     
                     That theſe Prouinces of the Low-Countreys, afflicted and faint with theſe inteſtine Warres, might be comforted,

there came into Flanders from the Emperour, Count Swart-Zenberg; from France, Pomponio Belieure; from Queene ELIZABETH, the Lord Cobham, and Sir Francis Walſingham,
                        
                           The Embaſſie for the Low-Countries Peace is irritated.
                         to ſollicite a Peace▪ but the buſineſſe was ſo poyſoned, that they returne without doing any thing; Don Iohn refuſing to admit of reforming Religion, and the Prince of Orange to returne into Holland.
                     
                     About that time, Egremond Radcliffe, Sonne to Henrie Earle of Suſſex by his ſecond Wife, a man of a turbulent Spirit, and one of the chiefe in the Rebellion of the North, went to ſerue vnder Don Iohn,
                        
                           Egremond Radcliffe and his aſſociate are put to death.
                         and is accuſed by ſome of the Engliſh Fugitiues to be ſent to kill him, is apprehended in the Campe at Namurcke, with Gray an Engliſhman, as a partner in the plot, and are both executed. The Spaniards giue it out, that Radcliffe (which were the laſt words he ſpake before his death) of his owne accord, confeſſed that he was ſet at libertie out of the Tower of London, and excited with great promiſes by Sir Francis Walſingham to performe this. Some Engliſh that were preſent, denied that he confeſſed any ſuch thing, although the Fugitiues wrought by all the meanes they could, to draw the like confeſſion from them; but difference in Religion doth too much darken the light of the mind, both of honeſtie and truth on both ſides: and who knowes not, that the Fugitiues for verie hatred inuent many things to depraue and ſlander?
                     
                        
                           Don John dyes.
                        Within a little time after, Don Iohn, in the flowre of his age, whether of the Plague, or as others will haue it, with griefe, being neglected of his Brother, left his fond Ambition and life together, after he had gaped, firſt, after the kingdome of Tunis, which cauſed the loſſe of Guleta in Affrica: And ſecondly, after England: And vnknowne to France or Spaine,
                        
                           Aniou proſecutes the mariage with the Queene.
                         contracted alliance with the Guizes, for the defence of both the Crownes.
                     In the meane while, the Duke of Aniou, howſouer, bent to the Warres of the Low-Countries, proſecutes the mariage

which he had begun being Duke of Alanzon, that he might ſhew that he was able to giue his minde to the warres and to his Loue together. Firſt of all, Bucheruile for this purpoſe is ſent to Queene ELIZABETH: He finds her at the Houſe of one Cordall in Suffolke, taking her Countrey pleaſures. By and by after, comes Rambouillet from the French King, and a moneth after, Semier from the Duke of Aniou, a refined Courtier, who was exquiſite in the delights of Loue, and skilfull in the wayes of Courtſhip, accompanied with many French Gentlemen, whom Queene ELIZABETH receiued forthwith verie louingly at Richmond. Then began Leiceſter to grow diſcontented,
                           Leiceſter murmures.
                         ſeeing himſelfe falne from the hope which he had ſo long conceiued to marrie her, and that a little before ſhe had beene angry with Aſtley, a Lady of the Queenes Bed-Chamber, for commending him to her, and perſwading her to marrie him.
                     WHat (ſaith ſhe) thinkeſt thou me ſo vnlike my ſelfe, and vnmindfull of the Maieſtie of a Queene, that I will prefer a meane Seruant, whom I haue raiſed my ſelfe, before the greateſt Princes of the Chriſtian world?
                     Neere the ſame time, Margaret Douglas,
                        
                           The death of the Counteſſe of Lenox.
                         Counteſſe of Lenox, Daughter of the eldeſt Siſter of King HENRY the eighth, Widdow of Mathew Earle of Lenox, and Grandmother to IAMES, King of Great Britaine, after ſhe had outliued all her Children, which were eight in number, dyed in the Clymacteriall yeere of her age, and was buried at Weſtminſter, being brought thither with a ſumptuous Funerall, at Queene ELIZABETH's charge. A woman of ſingular pietie, patience, and chaſtitie, who had beene three times caſt into priſon, as I haue heard, not for any ſuſpition of crime againſt the Queene, but for matters of Loue. Firſt, when Thomas Howard, Sonne of Thomas Howard, firſt Duke

of Norfolke of that Name, was falne in loue with her, and dyed in the Towre of London. Secondly, for the loue of Henry Darley, her Sonne, and the Queene of Scots. Laſtly, for the loue betweene Charles, her younger Sonne, and Elizab. Cauendiſh, the Lady Arbella's Mother, to whom the Queene of Scots was accuſed to haue been maried, as I haue ſaid before.
                     
                        
                           The buſineſs of Scotland.
                        That we may lightly touch the affaires of Scotland; At the begining of this yeere, Thomas Randolph was ſent from Queene ELIZABETH into Scotland, that he by diligent ſearch might feele in what eſtate the affaires ſtood there, & to congratulate with the King, for his forward proceeding in good Letters (who from his Child-hood, hauing an exquiſite and happie memorie, had profited much beyond his age) and to wiſh him to loue the Engliſh, in regard of the many benefits ſhe had done to him, and motherly affection that ſhe bare him, and that he ſhould deale with the Earle of Argathel, that the Hebridians might not aſſiſt the Rebels of Ireland, and to perſwade the Regent, Earle Morton, to abandon in time the enmitie betweene him and the Earles of Argathel, Athole, and others, leſt he incurre the hatred of his Peeres, and alienate altogether the Queenes minde from him.
                     
                        
                           Morton the Regent admoniſhed.
                        He now was vnder-hand accuſed to haue ſtained the honour he had for wiſedome and valour, with filthy couetouſneſſe, and would ſhortly make himſelfe ſo hated of the common people, that the State with a general conſent will tranſlate the adminiſtration of the affaires to the King, though for his age (hauing ſcarce attained to twelue yeeres) he be not capable of it; and that twelue of the principall of the Nobilitie, be nominated; three of them for three moneths together by courſe, to aſſiſt the King in Councell; amongſt whom, Morton to be one, that he may ſeeme rather to be brought from one place to another, then to be put out.
                     
                        The King hauing taken the gouernment of his Kingdome, doth moſt thankfully, by Dunfermlin, acknowledge Queene ELIZABETH's fauours towards him, as proceeding not ſo much from the neereneſſe of Blood,
                           
                              The King ſends an Embaſſador into England.
                           
                           
                              The Summe of the Embaſſage.
                           
                         as from the common profeſſion of the true Religion: Prayes her that the Treatie of Edenborough contracted betweene the two Kingdomes, begun in the yeere 1559, may be ratified, the more happily to reſtraine the robbers vpon the Borders, and preuent the enterprizes of the Aduerſaries of true Religion; that Iuſtice might be equally miniſtred to the Inhabitants of both the Kingdomes; the goods taken by Pirats fully reſtored; and his Anceſtors patrimonie in England (viz. the poſſeſſions granted to Mathew his Grandfather, and Margaret his Grandmother) he being the next Heire, may be deliuered into his hands; likewiſe, Moneys being cleane exhauſted out of Scotland, he wanted to entertaine his Family and a Guard about him as the dignitie of a King required.
                     The firſt Demands the Queene readily promiſeth;
                           The anſwere of the Queene.
                         but to that, concerning the Patrimonie, ſhe caried her ſelfe more difficultly; neither would ſhe heare thoſe, which would aſſure the Lady Arbella borne in England, to be next to King Charles her Vnkle to the Inheritance in England; nor Embaſſador which would make it appeare by Hiſtorie, that the Kings of Scotland, borne in Scotland, had in time paſt, by hereditarie right, ſucceeded in the Countie of Huntington, and he inſtantly beſought her, that ſhe would not denie a Prince her neereſt Kinſman, that right of inhabitance, which ſhe vouchſafed to vnknowne Strangers. But ſhe commanded, that the Reuenues ſhould be ſequeſtred in the hands of the Lord Burghley, Gardian of the Pupils, and warneth the King to ſatisfie Creditors out of the Earle of Lenox his goods in Scotland. She tooke it impatiently, that it ſhould be ſuggeſted, that the King would reuoke the infeoffement of the Earledome of Lenox, to the preiudice of

the Lady Arbella; although by the Regall right of Scotland, it alwaies hath beene lawfull to reuoke Donations hurtfull to the Kingdome, and done in minoritie.
                     The Counſell of England doe not hold it conuenient and fit, that the Treatie of Edenborough ſhould be confirmed, thinking it yet to ſtand firme. They require that the Embaſſadour would propound ſomething that might ſomwhat recompence the fauors and friendſhip that the Queen had manifeſted to the King (who ſpared not the Blood of the Engliſh in his defence) and conſolidate a friendſhip. Whereupon he propounds according to his inſtructions, That a League may be made, not [Offenſiue] but [Defenſiue, and with mutuall ſuccours] againſt the Pope, and his confederates, with certaine Lawes againſt thoſe which ſhould attempt any thing againſt either Kingdome and Rebels, vnder pretence of Religion. But beſides theſe, the Engliſh thinke it Iuſt, that ſeeing the Queene had not omitted, nor would omit any thing for the defence of the King, and that for this cauſe ſhe had incurred the Indignation of many. That the States of the Kingdome of Scotland ſhould giue caution, that ſo long as the King is vnder age, he ſhould not contract, nor renew couenants with any, neither to marrie, nor be ſent out of Scotland without the Queenes aduice. But theſe things being of ſuch moment, require to be exactly and circumſpectly conſidered, and are put backe to Scotland till another time.
                     
                        
                           Morton takes vpon him the administration againe.
                        In the meane time Morton, (who indeed was of a moſt eager and ſharpe diſpoſition) truſting in his long experience and multitude of his vaſſals, thinking nothing wel done but what he did himſelfe, not being able to endure to be leſſe than he had been, contemning his Colleagues, and reiecting the manner of adminiſtration preſcribed, tooke againe the managing of affaires, and detained the King in his power in the Caſtle of Sterlin, admitting and denying entrance to whom he pleaſed. The Peeres prouoked therewith,

tooke the Earle of Athole to be their Generall, and in the Kings name, ſummoned all that were aboue fourteene yeeres of age, and vnder ſixtie, to meete together with Armes and Victuals to deliuer the King: and true,
                           The Peeres riſe vp againſt him.
                         many came, and hauing diſplaid their Colours, marched towards Faukirk, where Morton preſented himſelfe with his men. But Sir Robert Bowes, the Engliſh Embaſſadour, interceding, hindered them from comming to blowes. Morton being vext to ſee how matters went, preſently retires to his Houſe. The Earle dyed as quickly, and left a ſuſpition that he was poyſoned. Which thing, thoſe that were moued againſt Morton, tooke that aboue all to increaſe their hatred, vntill they brought him to his ruine, as we ſhall ſay hereafter.
                     This yeere nothing of note was done in Ireland. But the Spaniard, and Pope Gregorie the thirteenth, prouiding for their owne profit, vnder ſhadow of reſtoring Religion, held ſecret counſell how at one time to inuade both Ireland and England, and diſpoſſeſſe Queene ELIZABETH,
                           The inuading of England conſulted vpon.
                         who was the ſureſt defence of the Proteſtants Religion. The Pope, he was to conquer Ireland for his Sonne Iames Bon-Compagnon, whom he had created Marquis of Vignoles. The Spaniard, ſecretly to ſuccour the Iriſh Rebels, as Queen ELIZABETH had done the Hollanders, while he entertained Parlies of friendſhip with her, to enioy if he could, the Kingdome of England by the Popes authoritie, and then the States her confederates, he could eaſily reduce to a courſe, which he deſpaired to doe, vnleſſe he were Lord of the Sea, and this hee ſaw, could not be done, vnleſſe hee were firſt Lord of England. And it is not to be doubted, but that as he holds Naples, Sicilie, and Nauarre, of the Popes liberalitie, ſo moſt willingly would he hold England, as a Beneficiarie ought to doe. Thoſe which know the principall ſtrength of England conſiſts in the Nauie Royall, and in Merchants Shippes which are built for Warre,

thought it were good to fraught the Merchants Shippes for ſome long voyage by Italians and Flemmiſh Merchants, and whileſt they are vpon their voyage, this Royall Fleet might be ouer-whelmed by a greater. At the ſame time, Thomas Stukeley,
                        
                           Th. Stukeley takes Armes againſt his Countrie.
                         an Engliſh Fugitiue, of whom I haue ſpoken in the yeere 1570, ioyned to his Forces, the Rebels of Ireland, by this notable ſubtiltie, and his great oſtentation and ſhew, and the promiſes which he made of the Kingdome of Ireland to the Popes baſe Sonne, he had ſo wonne the fauour of this ambitious old man, that he honoured him with the Titles of Marquis of Lemſter, Earle of Wexford and Caterlaughie, Viſcount Mourough, and Baron of Roſse, all of them remarkeable Places in Ireland, and made him Generall of eight thouſand Italians, payd by the King of Spaine,
                        
                           Ciuita Vecchia.
                         for the Warres of Ireland. With which Forces, hauing weighed Anker from the [Ciuita Vecchia] in the end he arriued in Portugal, at the entry of Tage, where a greater power by the Diuine Prouidence, puft downe theſe that threatned England and Ireland.
                     
                     For Sebaſtian, King of Portugal, to whom the whole expedition was committed, becauſe, in the heate of his youth, and ambition, he had promiſed the Pope to goe againſt the Turkes and Proteſtants, and employ all his power, being drawne into Africa by Mahomet, Sonne of Abdalla, King of Feſſe, by great promiſes, treates with Stukeley to goe before with theſe Italians to Mauritania. And Stukeley being eaſily wonne to that (knowing that the Spaniard diſdaining that the Sonne of a Pope ſhould be deſigned King of Ireland) had conſented to it, hoiſted ſaile with Sabaſtian, and by an honeſt Cataſtrophe there he ended a diſſolute life,
                           He is ſlaine in the African Warre.
                         in a memorable combate. Wherein dyed three Kings, Sebaſtian, Mahomet, and Abdalemelech.
                     
                     If this fate of Sebaſtians had not altered the King of Spaines mind from inuading England, in hope of the Kingdome of Portugal, England had felt a terrible ſtorme of

warre, if credit may be giuen to Engliſh Fugitiues. For, they report, that the great forces which hee had begun to rayſe in Italy, to ſhowre vpon England, were ſtayed for the taking of Portugal. And being that his minde was wholly bent vpon that, hee could not be made to thinke of England, although the Engliſh Fugitiues earneſtly ſollicited him, and for that buſineſſe the Pope promiſed him a Croyſado, as for a ſacred warre. Moreouer, when certaine news came that Stukeley and thoſe Italians were loſt in Mauritania, and that Spaine thought on nothing elſe but Portugal, they called backe the Engliſh Fleet which attended for Stukeley vpon the Iriſh coaſt; and Henrie Sidney deliuered vp the Countrey to William Drury,
                        
                           William Drury, Lord Deputie of Ireland.
                         Preſident of Mounſter. When he had beene xi. yeeres at ſeuerall times Lord Deputie, and being ready to imbarke, he gaue this farewell to Ireland, with a Verſe out of one of the Pſalmes of Dauid,
                        When Iſrael came out of Egypt,Sidney's adieu to Jreland. and the Houſe of Jacob from a barbarous people.
                     
                     This Lord Sidney, verily, was a ſingular good man, and one moſt laudable among the beſt that had beene Deputies of Ireland: and although Deputies are often complained of, yet Ireland cannot but acknowledge to be much indebted to him for his wiſdome and valour.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Booke 2. 1579.THE TWO AND TVVENTIETH YEERE OF Her Reigne. Anno Dom. 1579.
                     
                        
                           Caſimire comes into England.
                        
                        
                           IOhn Caſimere, Sonne to Frederick the Third, Prince Elector Palatine, who the yeere before had brought a powerfull armie out of Germanie into the Low-Countries, with great charge to the States, and to Queene ELIZABETH, and at the latter end of the yeere without performing any thing, being drawne to Gaunt, by the tumult of the people who were in diuiſion, came into England in the moneth of Ianuary, in a ſharpe Winter full of Snowes, to excuſe himſelfe, and lay the blame vpon the French King, and after hee had beene ſumptuouſly receiued, and brought with a number of torches to the City of Londons Senate-houſe by the prime Nobility of the Court, he was intertayned with Barriers, Combats, Bankets, honoured with the order of Saint

                        George, and the Garter, which the Queene tyed about his legge with her owne hands, indued him with an annuall Penſion, & being loaden with many honorable gifts, about the middeſt of February hee paſſed into the Low-Countries in one of the Queenes Ships, where hee found this mercenary Army diſperſed. For the Germanes ſeeing Alexander Ferneſa, Prince of Parma, eſtabliſhed Gouernour of Flanders by the Spaniard, readie to thunder vpon them, and they wanting their pay, and being brought ſomewhat low, required money from him, that they might depart out of the Low-Countries. But he with an imperious faſhion, neuertheleſſe, which carried a grace and grauity, replyed, that he had ſpoke for them that they might depart, their liues ſaued: they were contented, ſo they might haue a ſure paſſe: they make haſte home, but not without the loſſe of reputation, but with greater detriment to the States. Queene ELIZABETH fayles them not for all that, but furniſheth them with great ſummes,
                           The Queene lends the States mony.
                         vpon the old gage of the rich ornaments and veſſels of the houſe of Burgundie, which by Matthew, Duke of Auſtria, and them were deliuered to Dauiſon, who (being ſent to appeaſe the commotions in Gaunt, which had falne vpon the Church and Church-men) brought them into England.
                     
                     During which time,
                           Semier ſolicites the marriage for the Duke of Aniou.
                         
                        Semier ceaſeth not louingly to call vpon the marriage for the Duke of Aniou: and although ſhee excellently put him off for a long time, yet he brought her to this poynt, that Leiceſter being intirely againſt this Match, and others, had rayſed a report, that hee had charmed her, and made her in loue with the Duke with drinkes, and vnlawfull arts: hee, to the contrary, ſues that Leiceſter may be degraded, and put out of the Queens fauour, telling that hee was married to the Earle of Eſsex his Widdow; whereat ſhe was ſo moued, that ſhe commanded him from the Court to Greene-wich Tower, and did purpoſe to haue put him into the Tower of London, which all his Enemies

much deſired. But Suſſex, who was his chiefe Emulator, and wholly bent to aduance this marriage, diſſwades her from it, being of a right noble minde, and in-bred generoſitie, was of opinion that it hath alwayes beene accounted honeſt and honourable, and that none ought to be troubled for lawfull marriage, notwithſtanding he was glad, that it had made Leiceſter out of all hope to marry the Queene. Neuertheleſſe, Leiceſter was herewith ſo prouoked, that he thought of nothing but of meanes how to be reuenged:
                           Thinkes on nothing but reuenge.
                         and they were not wanting that would doe what he would haue them doe. Tewdor, one of the Queenes guard, is ſuborned to kill Semier; which cauſed the Queene by a publique proclamation to forbid all perſons to offend by word or deed, him, his companions or ſeruants. And there happened at the ſame time, ſhee going for her recreation in her Barge vpon the Riuer of Thames neere to Greenewich, and with her Semier, the Earle of Lincolne, and Sir Chr.
                        
                           One was ſhot with a Piſtolet, being in the Boat with the Queene.
                         
                        Hatton, Vice Chamberlaine, that a young fellow from a-board a Ship-boat with a piſtolet ſhot a water-man thorow the arme, that rowed in the Queenes Barge, who anon after, was taken and brought to the Gallowes, to terrifie him: but when he had religiouſly affirmed not to haue done it maliciouſly, hee was let goe. Neither would the Queene beleeue, that he had beene ſuborned of purpoſe either againſt her or Semier. So farre ſhee was from giuing place to ſuſpition againſt her Subiects, that it was an vſuall ſaying with her;
That ſhee could beleeue nothing of her Subiects, that Parents would not beleeue of their Children.
                     
                     
                        
                           The Duke of Aniou came into England.
                        Within a few dayes after, the Duke of Aniou himſelfe came priuily into England, accompanied with two men onely, and went to the Queene to Greenewich, who likewiſe knew nothing of it, where they had priuate conferences

together, which is not lawfull to ſearch after, (the ſecrets of Princes being an inextricable Labyrinth) and afterwards went away vnknowne, except to very few. But a month or two after, ſhee commanded Burghley the Treaſurer, Suſſex, Leiceſter, Hatton, and Walſingham, that after they had ſeriouſly weighed the dangers and commodities that might ariſe vpon this marriage, they ſhould conferre with Semier vpon the Couenants of the marriage. There appeared ſome danger,
                           The dangers of the marriage.
                         leſt the Duke of Aniou ſhould attempt any thing againſt the receiued Religion, or take poſſeſſion of the Kingdome, as the Popes gift, or render it vp into the hands of the Queene of Scots; and, Queene ELIZABETH being dead, ſhould marry her; or, his Brother dying, ſhould returne into France, and place a Vice-Roy in England, which the Engliſh would neuer indure. Furthermore, leſt hee ſhould inuolue the Engliſh in forreine warres, leſt the Scots aſſuring themſelues of their ancient alliance with France, ſhould take better courage againſt the Engliſh, leſt Spaine being of ſo great power, ſhould oppoſe it. Laſtly, leſt the people, oppreſſed with taxations to maintaine his magnificence, ſhould ſtirre vp ſedition. The commodities may be ſeene;
                           The commodities of it.
                         a firme confederation with the French might be eſtabliſhed, the rebellions of Papiſts, if any ſhould be, the more eaſily ſuppreſt, all the Queene of Scots hope, and of all that ſeeke her in marriage, and fauouring her, are excluded. Spaine would be compelled to compound the buſineſſe of the Low-Countries, and confirme the League of Burgundie, and England at length ſhould enioy a ſolid and comfortable ſecuritie by the Queenes children ſo often times wiſhed for.
                           The incommodities, if it be neglected.
                         But if theſe marriages be neglected, it was to be feared that the French would be prouoked, the Scots alienated, the Duke of Aniou marry the Daughter of Spaine, with whom hee ſhould haue in Dowry the Low-Country Prouinces, draw the King of Scotland to be of their party, procure him a Wife to bring

him riches, aboliſh the reformed Religion; and the Engliſh, when they ſhould ſee no hope of Children by the Queene, would adore the Riſing-Sunne. Whereat ſhee could not chuſe but be much tormented in minde, and pine away to death.
                     As in theſe dayes very many Engliſh feared a change of Religion by the Duke of Aniou, ſo were the Scots afraid it would be with them by another French-man,
                           Aimé Stuart, Lord of Aubigni, came into Scotland.
                         
                        Aimé, or Eſme Stuart, Lord of Aubigny, who at the ſame time was come into Scotland to ſee the King his Couſin: for he was Sonne to Iohn Stuart, Brother to Matthew Stuart, Earle of Lenox, who was the Kings Grand-father, and tooke his denomination Aubigni,
                        
                           From whēce hee tooke the name of Aubigni.
                         from a Houſe ſituate in Berri, that is ſo called, which Charles the Seuenth, King of France, gaue in time paſt to Iohn Stuart, of the Family of Lenox, who was Conſtable of the Scottiſh Army in France; defeated the Engliſh at Baugency, afterwards ſlaine by them at the battel of Harrans; and euer ſince, that houſe hath deſcended vpon the younger Sonnes. The King, embracing him with a ſingular good affection, gaue him rich demains, and admitted him into his moſt intimate conſultations, eſtabliſhed him Lord high Chamberlaine of Scotland,
                        
                           He is raiſed to honours.
                         and Gouernour of Dunbriton, firſt created him Earle, and afterwards Duke of Lenox, after hauing directly reuoked the Letters of honour, by which in his non-age he had created Robert, Biſhop of Cathaneſse, Earle of the ſame place, his Grand-fathers third Brother, and had giuen him in recompence, the County of March. This flouriſhing fauour with the King,
                           He is ſuspected of the Proteſtants.
                         procured many to enuy him, who murmured becauſe hee was deuoted to the Guizes, and the Romane Religion, and that hee was ſent to ſubuert the true Religion. This ſuſpicion increaſed, in regard hee ioyned himſelfe to Mortons aduerſaries, and did intercede for the reuoking of Thomas Carr of Fernihurſt, who was moſt, if any were, addicted to the Queene of Scots; Morton, whoſe power was

apparently falling, ſtroue in vaine (although it might ſeeme that he had excellently well deſerued in defeating the Hamiltons, and taking the Caſtle of Hamilton, and Daffrane.) There were at that time,
                           Hamiltons deiected.
                         who ſtirred vp much hatred in the King againſt the Hamiltons, obiecting, and vrging their names as a thing of great terrour, ſo as out of a neceſſitie they were for their owne ſafetie compelled to defend the Caſtle again the King, but they were conſtrained to yeeld it vp,
                           Proſcribed.
                         and by authoritie of Parliament proſcribed for the murdering as well of Murrey, as Lenox, Regents, as a thing by them performed. Many of thoſe fled together into England,
                        
                           Succoured by Elizabeth.
                         for whom Queene ELIZABETH diligently interpoſeth by Erington, as well for honour, as in reaſon of Iuſtice, that ſhee had obliged her faith in the yeere 1573. for the ſettling of peace, that they ſhould not be called in queſtion for thoſe matters without her conſent.
                     Shee alſo at the ſame time was vndertaking in another part of the World, Amurathes Cham, or the Sultaine of the Turkes, granted to William Harburne, an Engliſh-man, and to Muſtapha Beg, Baſſa to the TVRKE, that the Engliſh Merchants, euen as the French, Venecians, Pollanders, the King of the Germanes, and other neighbouring Natitions, ſhould trade freely thorow all his Empire: whereupon they, by the Queenes authority, made a Company,
                           The Societie of the Turkey-Merchants.
                         which they call TVRKEY MERCHANTS, and ſince that time, they haue vſed a moſt gainefull Trade of Merchandize at Conſtantinople, Angoria, Chio, Petrazzo, Alexandria, Egypt, Cyprus, and other places in Aſia, for Drugges, Spices, Cottons, Raw-Silke, Carpets, Indian-Dyes, Corinthian-Grapes, Sope, &c.
                     As for that execrable impiety of Hamont,
                        
                           Hamonts impietie.
                         brought forth at that time in Norwich, againſt GOD and his Chriſt, and as I hope, is extinct with his aſhes, or rather confounded in obliuion, then remembred. Neither am I of opinion of thoſe which thinke, that the publique hath intereſt, that all

ſorts of vices, poyſons, and impieties to be made manifeſt: ſeeing that hee differs little from teaching, which ſhewes ſuch things.
                     
                        
                           N. Bacon dyes.
                        This yeere was the laſt of Nicholas▪ Bacon, Keeper of the Great Seale of England, who by decree of Parliament enioyed vnder this name the honour and dignitie of Chancellor of England; a very fat man, of a quicke ſubtill ſpirit, ſingular wiſdome, height of eloquence, ſtedfaſt memory, and the other pillar of the ſacred Councell: whoſe place Thomas Bromley enioyed,
                           Thomas Bromley ſucceedes.
                         with the title of Chancellor of England.
                     
                     
                        Bacon is followed by Thomas Greſham, Citizen of London,
                        
                           Greſham dyes.
                         a Merchant-Royall, and of the order of Knight-hood, (Sonne to Sir Richard Greſham, Knight,) who built, for the ornament of his Countrey, and vſe of the Merchants of London, that beautifull and goodly Walking-place, which Queene ELIZABETH named,
The Royall-Exchange.
And the ſpacious Houſes which hee had in the Citie, hee dedicated to the profeſſion of Learning,
                           His Colledge of London.
                         and conſtituted in the ſame, Lectures of ſacred Diuinitie, of the Ciuill Law, Phyſick, Aſtronomie, Geometrie, and Rhetoricke, with honeſt penſions.
                     
                        
                           Rebellion of James Fitz-Morris in Ireland,
                        In Mounſter, a Prouince in Ireland, new rebellion was kindled by Iames Fitz-Morris, who hauing before caſt himſelfe vpon his knees at the feete of Perot, Preſident of Mounſter, and with teares, ſighes, and humble ſupplications, asked pardon, made a holy vow of fidelitie and obedience to the Queene. Hee (I ſay, who found no reſt but in troubles) with-drew himſelfe into France, promiſed the King, if hee would lend ayde, to ioyne the whole Kingdome of Ireland to the Scepter of France, and reſtore the Romiſh Religion. But wearied with delayes, and in the

end derided, from France he goes to Spaine, and promiſeth the like to the Catholike King, who ſent him to the Pope, of whom (by the ſollicitation of Sanders, an Engliſh Prieſt, and Allan, an Iriſh Prieſt,
                           Stirred vp by the Pope, and the King of Spaine;
                         both Doctors of Diuinitie) with much adoe, hauing got a little money, and Sanders the authority of Legat, a conſecrated Enſigne, and Letters commendatorie to the King of Spaine, returnes to Spaine; and from thence, with thoſe Diuines, three Ships, and a few Souldiers, they came, and arriued about the Calends of Iuly, at the [Village of Saint Marie] (which the Iriſh call, [Smerwick]) in Kerrie, a-pen-Inſule in Ireland: and, after that the Prieſts had conſecrated the place, raiſed a Fort, and brought the Ships neere vnto it; thoſe Ships, Thomas Courtney, an Engliſh Gentleman, made haſte with a Ship of warre which lay in a Road neere vnto them, by and by to aſſault; and taking them, carries them away, and barres the Spaniards from all benefit of the Sea. Iohn, and Iames, brethren to the Earl of Deſmond, with great ſpeed drew together a few Iriſh, ioyne with their Confederate: Fitz-Morris, and the Earle himſelfe,
                           Fauoured by the Earle of Deſmond.
                         who fauoured the cauſe exceedingly, feinedly calls all his friends together, as though he meant to goe againſt them; the Earle of Clanricard, with a ſelected troupe of Souldiers going againſt the Enemies and Rebels, met him, but he deceitfully ſends him away.
                     The Deputie, hauing receiued certaine newes by Henry Dauile, a valiant Engliſh Gentleman, that the Enemy was landed, commanded the Earle of Deſmond, and his Brethren, ioyntly and forthwith to aſſayle the Fort: but when they had talked and conſidered vpon it, and found it full of perill, refuſed. Dauile departing, is followed by Iohn Deſmond, who ouertooke him in an Inne at Tralli, a little Burrough, and hauing corrupted the Oaſt, in the dead of the night, he, with other Murtherers, brake into the chamber, where Dauile, with Arthur Carter, (Lieutenant to the Marſhall of Mounſter, a very valiant old Souldier) ſlept

ſecurely, but being awaked with the noyſe, and beheld Iohn Deſmond with his naked Sword in his Chamber, raiſing himſelfe vp: What is the matter (ſayes he) my ſonne? (for ſo in familiarity hee was vſed to call him.) Now I am no more thy ſonne, (ſaith he) nor thou my Father, thou ſhalt dye.
                        
                           Dauile murdered in his bed.
                         And, at an inſtant, ranne him, and Carter that lay with him, many times thorow the Body; yea, after that Dauiles Foot-boy had throwne himſelfe naked vpon his Maſter, to defend him as much as in him lay, and receiued many wounds. And ſhortly after, he killed all Dauiles ſeruants, as he found them diſperſed here and there; and returning to the Spaniard, all rayed with Bloud, boaſts of the ſlaughter, and ſaid thus, [Let this be a pledge of my faith to you,
                        
                           Sanders approues of the ſlaughter.
                         
                        and to this cauſe.] And Sanders this, [That hee extolled it as a ſweete ſacrifice before God.] Fitz-Morris reproued the manner of it, wiſhing it rather had beene done vpon the way, than in bed. The Earle, when hee heard of it, condemned it with all his heart, as deteſtable.
                     The Spaniards ſeeing themſelues ioyned with a few Iriſh, and thoſe vnarmed and miſerable, contrary to what Fitz-Morris had promiſed, began to diſtruſt, and to cry, they were loſt, and to deplore their misfortune, not ſeeing any meanes to ſaue themſelues either by Land or Sea. Fitz-Morris exhorts them to patience, and to wait: aſſures them, that great forces were comming to their ſuccour: hee feinedly tooke a iourney to [the holy Croſſe of Triporarie] to pay the vow which hee had made in Spaine; but in truth it was, to draw together all the ſeditious of Connach and Vlſter.
                     
                     As he trauelled, with a few horſe, and twelue foot-men, through the grounds of William of Bourg his alliance, (who was with him at the League in the precedent Rebellion) his Horſes fayling, tooke vp the work-horſes that he found in his way: the Labourers crying out, aſſemble all the dwellers thereabout to recouer them, amongſt which, were the

ſonnes of William of Bourg, young men, and couragious, who being mounted on horſe-backe, purſued him ſo ſwiftly, that they ouertooke him. Fitz-Morris ſeeing Theobald of Bourg, and his Brethren, who were with him in the former Rebellion, ſpeaking friendly, ſaid; [Kinſmen, let not vs fall out for a Horſe or two, for when you ſhall know the cauſe why I am come backe into Ireland, I am aſſured that you will ioyne with mee.] Theobald anſwers, [Both I, and my Father, and likewiſe our friends, doe greatly grieue for the firſt Rebellion, and haue ſworne, and will performe our fidelitie to our moſt gracious Princeſſe, who pardoned vs, and gaue vs our liues; therefore, reſtore the Horſes, or I will make thee reſtore them; and withall, threw a Dart at him,
                           He fights with thoſe of Bourg. Fitz-Morris is ſlaine.
                         with a writhen Pike, and they fought a time. Theobald, and one of his brothers, were ſlaine, and ſome of their men. Fitz-Morris was runne thorow the Body with a Pike, and ſhot thorow the head with a Piſtoll; ſo hee dyed, and many of his men. They cut off his head, and hanged his quarters vpon poles ouer the Gates of Kilmalocke, where, (as wee haue ſaid before) in the Church, in the preſence of Perot, hee bound himſelfe with great obteſtations to be loyall to his Prince. The Queen writes conſolatory Letters to William of Bourg,
                        
                           William of Bourg, made Baron. He dyes for ioy.
                         (full of loue and ſorrow) for the loſſe of his ſonnes, creates him Baron of Caſtell-Conell, and rewards him with an annuall penſion. Whereupon, the old man (confounded with ſo vnexpected ioy) dyed ſhortly after.
                     
                        Drury, Lord Deputie, was now come almoſt to Kilmalock, and ſends for Deſmond, who came before him, promiſeth faith and obedience to the Queene, and bound himſelfe by oath, that he and his would warre againſt the Rebels. Whereupon, he is diſmiſſed, to collect his men, and returne to the Deputie. Iohn Deſmond, the Earles Brother, who was ſubſtituted in Fitz-Morris his place,
                           John Deſmond kils the Engliſh.
                         by treachery intercepts and kills Herbert and Priſie, Engliſhmen, with the Companies which they led, and he was wounded

in the face. This loſſe was ſupplied with ſixe hundred Souldiers out of Deuonſhire: Perot is ſent out of England with ſixe Ships of warre, to defend the mouth of the Harbour.
                     
                        
                           The Lord Deputy ſick.
                        At which time, the Deputie being vehemently ſicke, and growing daily worſe & worſe, muſt of neceſſity go to Waterford to recouer his health, and left his place to Nicholas Malbey, Preſident of Connach, and Gouernour of Mounſter, an old and a renowned Souldier.
                     Returning, the Wife of Deſmond offers her onely Sonne and Heire in hoſtage for the Father. For, after he departed from Kilmalock,
                        
                           N. Malbey Gouernour of Mounſter,
                         he appeared not, although Malbey often-times, by Letters, admoniſhed him of his duety and promiſe, and not willing to delay, remoues towards the Rebels in Conil, a wooddy and boggy Country: where Iohn Deſmond put his men in array, and diſplayes the Popes conſecrated Banner; he intertaines it, and ſignes giuen, they ioyne,
                           Defeats the Rebels.
                         where both ſides fought furiouſly; Fortune at length yeelding to the vertue of the Engliſh, Iohn was the firſt that fled, and left his men to the ſlaughter; amongſt whom, Allan the Diuine is found, who incouraged them to the battle, by promiſing the victory.
                     The Earle of Deſmond, who was a ſpectator from ſome Hill neere to that place, the ſame night writ diſſemblingly Letters congratulatory to Malbey, and, vnder a colour of friendſhip, warnes him to remoue his Campe from thence. Malbey ſends backe the Meſſenger, with Letters, commanding the Earle to come to him, and ioyne his forces, whom when in vaine he had expected foure dayes, hee remoued to Rekel, a little Towne of the Earle of Deſmonds.
                        
                           The Earle of Deſmond manifeſts himſelfe a Rebell.
                         Now the Earle, who had ſo long both in countenance and words egregiouſly maintained his diſſimulation, leaues to be the ſame man, and plainely puts on a Rebels minde, and the ſame night, it being darke, the Rebels inuaded Malbey's Campe, which they found ſo fortified, that

they returned backe, as from a thing infected. The Gouernour, thinking this to be a fit place to diſioyne the Rebels forces, put a Garriſon there, and from thence marched to Asketon, a Caſtle of the Earles, ſtanding vpon a Hill, inuironed with the Riuer Asketon, which was garded by Souldiers. But, before he would lay ſiege to it, he writ againe to the Earle, repreſenting vnto him the Queenes mercy, the ancient dignitie of the Houſe of Deſmond, the glory of his Anceſtors, & the infamy that he ſhould leaue to his poſterity, exhorts him, not to be tainted with the name of Rebell, but returne to his duetie. He, to the contrary, armes his minde with obſtinacy, and his Caſtle, on all ſides, with Spaniſh and Iriſh. At what time, Drury, the Deputy,
                           The death of Drury, Lord Deputy.
                         dyed at Waterford; a man of approued worth, who from his youth had beene trayned vp in the exerciſe of Warre in France, Scotland, and Ireland.
                     
                     Together with the death of the Deputie, dyed Malbey's authoritie in Mounſter, who, when he had put his men in Garriſon, went to Connach, the Prouince of his gouernement.
                           The Rebels thereby incouraged.
                         The Rebels take heart by the death of the Deputie, and deliberate how they might vtterly draw themſelues from vnder the Engliſh command, and are of opinion to blocke vp the Garriſons on all ſides, and ſtarue them by famine. Iames Deſmond then beſiegeth Adare, where W. Stanley, and G. Carew, were in Garriſon. But the beſieged, apprehending famine as the extremitie of all euils, ſo wearied the beſiegers with often eruptions, that they raiſed the ſiege, and gaue them libertie to forrage the Countrey neere about them: which they did luſtily and valiantly; Iames himſelfe was wounded there.
                     In the interim, the Councell of England choſe for chiefe Iuſtice of Ireland, William Pelham,
                        
                           William Pelham is Lord Chiefe Juſtice of Ireland.
                         with the authoritie of Lord Deputie, vntill they had choſe one; and the Earle of Ormond, Preſident of Mounſter, who ſent the Earle of Deſmonds ſonne to Dublin, there to be kept for hoſtage.

                        Pelham goes towards Mounſter, ſends for Deſmond; but hee excuſeth himſelfe by Letters ſent by his Wife. For that cauſe,
                           Admoniſheth the Earle of Deſmond of his duety.
                         
                        Ormond is ſent, who warnes him to ſend Sanders the Diuine, the Souldiers that were ſtrangers, and to deliuer vp into his hands, the Caſtles of Carigo-foyle, and Asketen, to ſubmit himſelfe abſolutely, and turne his forces againſt his Brethren, and the other Rebels, aſſuring him grace if hee did it; if not, to be declared a Traitor, and an enemy of the Countrey: but by ſubterfuges and flyings off, hee dallies and playes with theſe things. In the beginning of Nouember, hee was proclaymed Traytor,
                           Proclaimes him Traitor.
                         and guiltie Laeſae Maieſtatis, becauſe hee had dealt with forraine Princes for the ſubduing and ouerthrowing of the Countrie, and intertained Sanders and Fitz-Morris, Rebels; cheriſhed the Spaniards which were driuen from the Fort, cauſed faithfull Subiects to be hanged, diſplayed againſt the Queene the Enſigne of the Pope, and brought ſtrangers into the Kingdome. This declaration being publiſhed, the Lord chiefe Iuſtice gaue Commiſſion to Ormond to goe on with the warres. Deſmond, turning his deſignes into another part of the Countrey of Mounſter, and ſacketh Yoghall, ſurprizeth without reſiſtance,
                           The Earle of Ormond purſues the Rebels.
                         a Sea-Towne, and ſtrong enough. Ormond waſtes all farre and wide about Conile, the onely refuge of the Rebels, brings away their Flockes, and giues them in prey to the Souldiers, hanged the Maior of Yoghall before his owne doore, for refuſing to receiue the Engliſh Garriſon, fortified the Towne, and after, prepares himſelfe to beſiege the Spaniards in Strangicall. But they beforehand with-drew themſelues from that danger. Neuertheleſſe, the Engliſh purſued them, and left not one of them aliue,
                           The Earle of Deſmond writes to the Lord Chiefe-Justice.
                         and moleſted the Rebels in all parts of Mounſter. Deſmond, and his Brethren, although they lay hid, writ long Letters to the Lord chiefe Iuſtice, that they had vndertaken the protection of the Catholique faith in Ireland,
                        
by the Popes authoritie, and the aduice of the King of Spaine; therefore they courteouſly warne him, that in ſo pious and meritorious a cauſe, he would ioyne with them, for the ſaluation of his owne ſoule.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Booke 2. 1580.THE THREE AND TVVENTIETH YEERE OF Her Reigne. Anno Dom. 1580.
                     
                        THe Lord chiefe Iuſtice pleaſantly ieſting at theſe things, returnes to Mounſter, cals thither the Nobilitie, detaines them with him, not ſuffering any to depart, without giuing Hoſtages, and promiſe to imploy all their power and ayde with him and Ormond, againſt the Rebels. Who ſpeedily diuiding their forces, make diligent ſearch for the Rebels, conſtraine the Baron of Lixnaw to yeeld, beſiege the Caſtle of Carigofoyle, (kept by Iules an Italian, with ſome few Spaniards) and with their great Ordnance hauing made a breach in the Wall, which

was built but of dry ſtone, entered: killed part of the Garriſon, hanged the reſt, and Iules himſelfe. Then the Caſtles of Ballilogh and Asketen perceiuing the Engliſh to approach, ſets them on fire, and leaues them. Peter Carew, and George his brother, are made Gouernours of Asketen, with a new Garriſon of the Engliſh, they waſte the Lands of Mac-Aule; from thence, the chiefe Iuſtice, by a watery Mountaine, enters Shlewlougher in Kerrie, brings away great quantities of cattell, and defeats many Rebele: Iames,
                        
                           James taken, being wounded to death.
                         the Earle of Deſmonds brother, hauing pillaged Muske-roy, appertaining to Cormag-Mac-Teg, (whom the chiefe Iuſtice by Law ſet at libertie, as well deſeruing for his ſeruice againſt the Rebels) met with Donel, brother to Cormag, who hauing ſlaine many, and recouered the ſpoyle, tooke him, being wounded to death, and deliuered him to Wararm S. Leger, Marſhall of Mounſter, and to Walter Raleigh, a new Commander: They proceed againſt him in iuſtice, and hauing conuinced him, executed him for a Traitor, and ſet his head for a ſpectacle vpon the Gate of Corcage.
                        
                           Deſmond miſerably oppreſſed.
                         The Earle of Deſmond himſelfe being ouer-whelmed with miſery, and no where ſafe, remoues euery houre, ſends his Wife to the Lord chiefe Iuſtice to aske pardon, and imployes his friends to Winter, (who with a Nauall Army watcht the Spaniard in the mouth of the Hauen) that he might be tranſported into England to begge the Queens pardon.
                     The Lord chiefe Iuſtice hearing that Arthur, Lord Gray,
                        
                           Arthur, Lord Gray, Deputie of Ireland.
                         who was appointed Deputy of Ireland, was landed, leaues the command of the Army to George Bourchier, ſecond ſonne to the Earle of Bath, and, by eaſie iourneies, returnes to Dublin, to deliuer vp the gouernement of the Kingdome to his Succeſſor. As ſoone as the Lord Gray was arriued, being informed that ſome Rebels, conducted by Fitz-Euſtat, and Phoog-Mac-Hugh, the moſt renowned of the famous Houſe of the Obrins, who, after their ſpoyles and

robberies, made their retreat to Glandilough, fiue and twenty mile Northward from Dublin, to win reputation; and to breed terrour at his beginning, hee commanded the Captaines,
                           He purſues the Rebels.
                         who were come from all parts, to ſalute him, to gather troupes, and to goe with him, to ſet vpon the Rebels, who were retyred to Glandilough, a Vale full of Graſſe, the moſt part of it fertile, and fit to feede Cattell, ſituated at the foote of a ſteepe Rocke, full of Springs, and ſo enuironed with Trees and thicke buſhes, that the Inhabitants of the Countrey knew not the wayes in it. When they were come to the place, Cosby, the Leader of the light-armed Iriſh, (which they call, Kearnes,) who knew the ſituation well, aduertized the others of the danger in entering into that Valley, being ſo fit a place for ambuſcadoes. Notwithſtanding this aduice, they muſt vndertake it, and hee exhorteth them to behaue themſelues couragiouſly: and himſelfe, being threeſcore and ten yeeres of age, marched in the Front, and the others followed him. But they were no ſooner gone downe, but they were ſhowred vpon with musket-ſhot, like hayle driuen by a tempeſt, from the buſhes where the Rebels were placed, and not a man of them to be diſcerned.
                           They kill the Engliſh.
                         The moſt part of them were ſlaine there, the reſt retyring, and clyming vp the Rockes and ragged wayes, with much adoe came to the Deputie, who ſtood vpon a Hill expecting the euent, with the Earle of Kildare, and Sir Iohn Wingfield, Maſter of the Ordnance, who knowing the danger, would not ſuffer George Carew, one of his Nephewes, to goe thither, reſeruing him for greater honours. Peter Carew the younger, G. More, Audeley, and Cosby himſelfe, were ſlaine there.
                     
                        
                           Italians and Spaniards land in Jreland.
                        Shortly after, ſeuen hundred, or threabout, of Italians and Spaniards, commanded by San-Ioſeph an Italian, ſent by the Pope and the King of Spaine, vnder pretext to eſtabliſh the Romane Religion; but the end of it, was to diuide Queene ELIZABETH's forces, and to call home

thoſe which ſhee had in the Low-Countries, landed at Smerwick, without any reſiſtance, in regard that Winter, who had waited for them in that place, ſeeing the Equinox of Autumne paſt, was returned for England; fortified the place with Bulwarkes, and named it the Fort Del-Or. But as ſoone as they had knowledge that the Earle of Ormond, Gouernour of Mounſter, was comming towards them, they, by the aduice of the Iriſh, quitted the Fort, and went to the Valley of Grauingel, being of difficult acceſſe,
                           They raiſe a Fort.
                         by reaſon of the Mountaines and Woods which enuironed it. The Gouernour tooke ſome of them by the way, who being examined what number they were, and what deſigne they had, confeſſed, that they were ſeuen hundred, that they had brought armes for fiue thouſand, and looked daily for greater numbers from Spaine: That the Pope and the King of Spaine were reſolued to driue the Engliſh out of Ireland, and to effect the ſame, had ſent ſtore of treaſure to Sanders, the Popes Nuncio, to the Earle of Deſmond, and to Iohn his brother. The ſame night, the Italians and Spaniards not knowing which way to turne themſelues, in regard they could not remaine in Caues and Dennes, which were retreats for Cattell,
                           They are beſieged.
                         by the benefit of the darke night returned to the Fort, and Ormond was camped before it; but wanting Cannon, & other things requiſit for battery, was conſtrained to attend the Lord Deputies comming, who was ſpeedily there, and with him, Zouchey, Raleigh, Deny, Mackworth, Achin, and other Captaines. At the ſame time, Winter, being reproued for his comming away, returned from England with his Ships of Warre.
                     The Lord Deputie ſent a Trumpet to the Fort, to aske thoſe that kept it, Who brought them into Ireland?
                        
                           They anſwer to the Deputies demands
                         By whom they were ſent? and wherefore they had built a Fort in Queene ELIZABETH's Kingdome
                           •
                         and to command them preſently to quit it. They anſwered, that they were ſent, ſome from the moſt holy Father the Pope

of Rome; and the reſt, from the moſt Catholique King of Spaine, to whom he had giuen Ireland, Queene ELIZABETH being falne from it, by reaſon of her Hereſie: and therefore would keepe what they had gotten, and get more if they could. Whereupon the Deputie, and Winter, hauing conſulted of the manner how they ſhould beſiege it, cauſed the Sea-Souldiers, by night, and without noyſe, to bring Culuerings from the Ships, and, hauing made a Bulwarke vpon the ſhoare, drawes them eaſily forward, and places them for battery.
                           They diſagree.
                         The Land-Souldiers bent their greateſt Ordnance to the other ſide, and plaid vpon the Fort foure daies together. The Spaniards make many ſallies out, but euer to their loſſe; and the Engliſh loſt but one man, who was Sir Iohn Cheeke, a braue and valiant young Gentleman, ſonne to Sir Iohn Cheeke, a noble Knight, moſt learned and iudicious.
                     
                        
                           Their Generall ſhewed himſelfe a Coward.
                        
                        San-Ioſeph, who commanded the Fort, a very Coward, and vnfit for the warres, being affrighted with this continuall battery, thinkes preſently of rendring it, and ſeeing Hercules Piſan and the other Captaines ſtriuing to diſſwade him from it, (as an vnworthy thing to be done by Souldiers, and inſiſt, that by their faint-heartedneſſe, they ſhould not diminiſh the courage of the Iriſh, who were comming to their ſuccour, and prepared to ſuſtaine the aſſault) with a remarkable cowardlineſſe, ſounds the intentions of the Souldiers, and ſeditiouſly threatning the Captaines, in the end brought them to condiſcend to render it vp. So, ſeeing no ſuccour neither from Spaine, nor from the Earle of Deſmond,
                        
                           They aske a parley.
                         the fifth day of the ſaid ſiege, they put forth a white Flagge, and demanded a Parley. But it was refuſed them, becauſe they tooke part with Rebels, with whom they were not to parley. After, they deſired, that they might goe out with bagge and baggage, which was alſo denied them. Alſo, that it might be permitted to the General, and the chiefe Commanders: but that likewiſe was denied

them, though it was requeſted with much importunitie; and the Deputie ſpeaking outragiouſly againſt the Pope, commands them to yeeld vpon diſcretion. Inſomuch, as not being able to obtaine any thing elſe,
                           They yeeld vpon diſcretion.
                         they put out the white Flagge againe, and all together cry aloud,
Miſericordia, Miſericordia.
And giue themſelues vp to the Deputies mercy: who preſently tooke counſell what courſe hee ſhould take with them. But, in regard they equalled the number of the Engliſh, it was to be feared, ſeeing the Rebels were aboue fifteene hundred; and that, leſt the Engliſh (who were deſtitute of Meat, & Apparell, if they ſhould not be comforted and refreſhed with the ſpoyles of the enemy,) might be moued to reuolt; alſo, there being no ſhipping to carry them into their owne Countrey; it was reſolued (againſt the Deputies will,) who (full of mercy and compaſſion) wept for it, that all ſtrangers, the Commanders excepted,
                           Strangers ſlaine with the Sword, the Subiects hanged.
                         ſhould be put to the Sword; and the Iriſh to be hanged, which was preſently executed. Neuertheleſſe, the Queen, who from her heart deteſted to vſe cruelty to thoſe that yeelded, wiſhed that the ſlaughter had not beene, and was with much difficultie appeaſed and ſatisfied about it. This is all that which paſſed in Ireland, which I was willing to follow, with a continued declaration; to the end, that the order of the Hiſtory might not be interrupted, though many things paſſed amongſt them, which I ſhould haue remembred before, if I had followed the order of the time.
                     Vpon the beginning of this yeere,
                           Exceſse in apparell reformed.
                         the ornaments of the head, which exceeded in dreſſings, and Clokes which came downe almoſt to the heeles, (no leſſe ſeemly than of great expence) were reformed by a Statute, and Swords reduced to three-foot length, Poniards to twelue inches from the

hilt, and Target-Pikes to two. And foraſmuch as the City and Suburbs of London were ſo increaſed in buildings, by reaſon of the multitude of people which flowed thither from all parts, ſo as the other Cities and Townes of the Kingdome were decayed; that if it had not beene looked to in time, the ordinary Magiſtrates would not haue ſufficed to haue gouerned ſuch a multitude; nor the Countries neere about, to haue fed them; and if any Epidemicke infection ſhould haue happened, it would haue infected the ioyning-houſes that were filled with Lodgers & Inmates. The Queen made an Edict, prohibiting any new dwelling-houſe to be built within three thouſand paces of the Gates of London, vpon paine of impriſonment, and loſſe of the materialls which ſhould be brought to the place to build withall; and euery one forbidden to haue more than one Family in a Houſe.
                     
                        
                           The taking of Malines in Brabant.
                        In the Low-Countries, Generall Norris, and Oliuer Temple, with ſome companies of Flemmings, ioyned to their Engliſh forces, at the breake of the day, ſet Ladders againſt the walls of Malines, a rich Towne of Brabant, tooke it, killed a great number of the inhabitants, and religious perſons, the taking whereof got them ſome commendations of valour,
                           The ſacriledge of the Engliſh.
                         but they polluted it with a vile pillage, and rauenous ſacriledge. For they did not onely with great inſolency take away the goods of the Inhabitants, but ſet vpon the Churches, and the holy things, to the violating euen the dead. And we haue ſeene (I am aſhamed to ſay it) many of their Tombe-Stones tranſported into England, and expoſed to ſale; to ſet out publique witneſſes of this impietie.
                     
                        
                           An Earthquake.
                        It wil not be amiſſe to remember the great Earth-quake, which is a thing that very rarely happneth in England. The third of Aprill, about ſixe of the clocke in the euening, the skie being calme and cleare, England ſhooke in a moment from beyond Yorke, and the Low-Countries as farre as

                        Collen; inſomuch, that in ſome places, Stones fell downe from Houſes, and Bels in Steeples were ſo ſhaken, that they were heard to ring, and the Sea it ſelfe, it being a great calme was exceedingly moued. And the night following, the Country of Kent ſhooke; and likewiſe the firſt of May, in the night. Whether this was cauſed by the Windes which were entred into cliffes and hollow places of the earth, or by waters flowing vnder the earth, or otherwiſe, I leaue that to the iudgement of the Naturaliſts. After this,
                           The Papiſts begin to be afflicted.
                         followed a commotion againſt Papiſts throughout England, but themſelues were authors of theſe beginnings.
                     The Engliſh Seminaries, who were fled into Flanders, at the perſwaſion and inſtigation of William Allan, borne at Oxford, (accounted and eſteemed by them a very learned man) aſſembled themſelues together at Douay, where they begun to ſet vp a Schoole,
                           The beginning of Engliſh Seminaries.
                         and the Pope appoynted them an annuall penſion. Since, Flanders beeing moued with troubles, the Engliſh Fugitiues, baniſhed by the command of Requeſens, and the Guizes, allied to the Queene of Scotland, did the like, in eſtabliſhing ſuch other Schooles for Engliſh youths in the City of Reims: and Pope Gregory the Third, in Rome, who as faſt as time depriued England of Prieſts and Seminaries, he furniſhed the Land with new ſupplies of their young ones, who ſowed the ſeedes of the Roman Religion all ouer England,
                        
                           Their Doctrine is then thought.
                         for which cauſe they were called,
Seminaries.
As well as thoſe who were there bred and borne.
                     As among other things, the Eccleſiaſticall and Politicall power, the zeale borne to the Pope the Founder thereof, the hatred of Queene ELIZABETH, and the hope conceiued to reeſtabliſh the Roman Religion by the Q. of Scotlands means, were debated and diſputed of. Diuers ſo perſwaded,

verily beleeued, that the Pope had by diuine right, full power ouer all the Earth, as well in Eccleſiaſticall as Politicall matters, and by this fulneſſe of power, power to excommunicate Kings, and free-Princes, to depriue them of their Crownes and Scepters: after, the abſoluing their ſubiects from all oath of fidelity and obedience to them. This cauſed the grant of Pope Pius the Fifth's Bull declaratory, publiſhed Anno 1569. the Bull of Rebellions kindled in the North parts of England & Irelād (as I haue already ſpoken of) alſo that many deſiſted from Diuine Seruice,
                           The euent proceeding thereof.
                         who before ſeemed to frequent the Church with much zeale and integrity, and that Hans, Nelſon, and Maine, Prieſts, and one Shrood, durſt affirme and maintaine, that Queene ELIZABETH was a Shiſmatique, and that ſhe therefore ought to be depoſed of Regall rule, and ſo degraded; for which they were ſoone after iuſtly put to death.
                     
                        
                           New Seminaries are ſent into England.
                        Such Seminaries were ſent in diuers places, both in England and Ireland; firſt, ſome young men prematurely inueſted in that order, and inſtructed in the ſaid Doctrine; then after, as they increaſed, a greater number, for the adminiſtrating the Sacrament of the Roman Church, and preaching, as they ſeemed to make ſhew of; but indeed, as Queene ELIZABETH her ſelfe, and the Lords of her Maieſties moſt honourable Priuy Councell found out, it was meerely to ſeduce her ſubiects,
                           To what end.
                         to withdraw them from all obedience and loyalty due to their Soueraigne, to oblige them, by reconciliation, to put in practice and truely execute the Sentence of Pope Pius the Fifth, pronounced againſt her Maieſty; and by this meanes to make way to the Pope and Spaniſh deſigne for the inuading of England.
                     
                     And, as it was knowne, that to the infringing and contemning of the Lawes authority, diuers Children & young men of ſundry Callings, were daily vnder-hand ſecretly ſent beyond the Seas, in thoſe Seminaries, where they (hauing

made a vow to returne) were receiued, that from thence new ſupply of others, vnknowne, came priuatly into England, and that ſtill more were expected to come with ſuch Ieſuits,
                           Jeſuites doe ſteale priuately into England.
                         who then made here their firſt entrance and abode; ſo, an Edict was proclaimed in the moneth of Iune, expreſly charging and commanding all ſuch who had children, Wards, kindred, or ſuch others in the Regions beyond the Sea,
                           A Proclamation againſt Seminaries and Ieſuites.
                         to exhibit and giue vp their names to the Ordinary within ten dayes after, to ſend for them to come ouer within the prefixt time of foure moneths; and preſently after the ſaid return, euery one ought to declare and giue notice thereof to the Ordinary; prohibiting likewiſe, to lay out or furniſh with money ſuch as ſhould ſtay or dwell out of England, either directly or indirectly; neither to nouriſh, relieue, or lodge ſuch Prieſt deriued of thoſe Emiſſaries, nor Ieſuits, vpon paine (for them who ſhould doe otherwiſe) to be reputed and held for fautors of Rebels, and ſupporters of ſeditious perſons, to incurre the ſeuerity and rigour expreſt in the Lawes of the ſaid Kingdome.
                     Before this Proclamation was publiſhed, the Papiſts feined to haue too late taken aduice of the incommodities that this Bull produced; they made a ſhew to be extreme ſorry that euer it was ſent ouer; they ſuppreſt Sanders Apology, and prohibited to diſpute any more ſuch queſtion concerning the Popes authority to excommunicate and degrade Princes: But all this,
                           Robert Perſons and Edmond Campian, Engliſh Ieſuits, came into England.
                         moſt cautelouſly and cunningly, as the euent made it euident; for this diſputation increaſed daily amongſt them, (as naturally men are moſt addicted to things prohibited) ſith Robert Perſons and Edmond Campian (Engliſh Ieſuites) being ready to come into England, to ſet Romiſh affaires forward, obtained of Pope Gregory the Thirteenth, power to moderate this ſeuere and ſharpe Bull, in theſe termes:
                           Power granted to the Papiſts.
                        
                        
                           IF it be asked to our Soueraigne Lord, the explication of Pope Pius the Fifth's Bull againſt ELIZABETH and her adherents, the which the Catholikes deſire to be thus vnderſtood; that it may oblige for euer Her and the Heretikes; but no wayes the Catholiques, ſo long as affaires & matters ſhal thus ſtand, as they are at this preſent, but only whē it is ſo as it may be publiquely executed and generally effected. Theſe Graces haue beene granted to Robert Perſon, and to Edmond Campian, vpon their departure and iourney for England, the 14. of Aprill, in preſence of Father Oliuero Manarco.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Who and what haue beene theſe Jeſuits.
                        This Robert Perſon was a Somerſetſhire man, of a vehement and ſauage nature, of moſt vnciuill manners and ill behauiours.
                     
                        Edward Campian was a Londoner, of a contrary carriage, both were Oxford men, and I knew them while I was in the ſame Vniuerſity. Campian, being out of Saint Iohns Colledge, profeſt the place of Atturney in the ſaid Vniuerſity, in the yeere 1568. and beeing eſtabliſhed Arch-Deacon, made a ſhew to affect the Proteſtant faith, vntill that day he left England. Perſon, being out of Balioll Colledge, in which he openly made profeſſion of the Proteſtant Religion, vntill his wicked life, and baſe conuerſation, purchaſing him a ſhamefull exile from thence, hee retyred himſelfe to the Papiſts ſide. Since, both of them returning into England, were diſguized, ſometimes in the habit of Souldiers, ſometimes like Gentlemen, and ſometimes much like vnto our Miniſters; they ſecretly trauelled through England, from houſe to houſe, and places of Popiſh Nobility and Gentry; valiantly executing by words and writings their Commiſſion. Perſon, who was eſtabliſheed chiefe and ſuperiour, being of a ſeditious nature and turbulent ſpirit, armed with audacity, ſpoke ſo boldly to the Papiſts, to depriue

Queene ELIZABETH of her Scepter, that ſome of them were once determined to accuſe, and put him into the hands of iuſtice. Campian, though ſomething more modeſt, preſumed to challenge by a writing the Miniſters of the Church of England, to diſpute with him touching the Romiſh beleefe, which hee maintained; he put forth a Latine Pamphlet, containing tenne Reaſons, indifferently well penned: as did likewiſe Perſon, another ſeditious booke in Engliſh, raging againſt one Charcke, who before had ingeniouſly and mildely written againſt Campians Chalenge. But Whitaker anſwered home to the ſaid Campians pretended Reaſons, who being taken and rackt a yeere after, was produced for the Diſpute, but he neuer had ſo much a doe as to maintaine them, neither anſwered hee to that expectation which himſelfe had formerly giuen.
                     And the Popes faction (for Religion was then turned into faction) wanted not other men,
                           The Engliſh Fugitiues doe moue and excite ſtrangers to war againſt their Prince and Countrey.
                         who vowed and bent their vtmoſt power and endeuours at Rome, and elſe-where in the Courts of forrein Princes, to moue warre, and excite trouble againſt their natiue Countrey; nay, rather than faile, they publiſhed in Print Pamphlets, ſhewing, that the Pope, and the King of Spaine, had conſpired to ſubdue England, and expoſe it as a prey; to no other purpoſe, than to increaſe the affection and courage of their owne people, to affright and terrifie others; and by this meanes, to ſeduce and with-draw them from that loue and loyaltie which they ought to their Soueraigne Princeſſe and Countrey. Queene ELIZABETH perceiuing euidently how much ſhee was offended and threatned by the Armes and ſubtlety of the Pope and Spaniard, after hauing acknowledged the ſingular goodneſſe of God, declared by a Booke printed;
THat ſhee had not attempted any thing againſt any other Prince, but in defence and conſeruation of her owne Kingdome, neither had ſhee

inuaded any others Countrey, although ſhee had beene both by iniuries ſufficiently prouoked, and by ſet opportunity inuited thereunto. That if any Princes ſhould enterprize to inuade her Realmes,Queene Elizabeths declaration againſt them. ſhe doubted not, but to be (by the Diuine aſsiſtance) well able to defend them. That ſhee had to that end taken a ſuruey of her forces, both by Sea and Land, and ſtood readily prepared againſt the attempts of her enemies, exhorted her loyall Subiects, to perſiſt with vnremoueable ſtedfaſtneſſe in faith and duety towards GOD, and her Miniſters. Such as had renounced all loue to their Countrey, and obedience to their Prince, ſhee commanded to carry themſelues moderately, and not prouoke the ſeneritie of iuſtice. Neither would ſhee in pardoning her euill Subiects, ſhew her ſelfe cruell to her ſelfe and her good people.
                     
                     
                        
                           The ſeuerall Sects of Holland.
                        And not onely theſe perfidious Subiects, but Strangers likewiſe out of Holland, (being a fertill Prouince in Heretiques) began at that time not onely to diſturbe the peace of the Church, but alſo of the Common-wealth of England; by inſinuating themſelues, vnder a colour of ſingular integrity and ſincerity, into the opinions of the ignorant vulgar; and with a ſtrange and new manner of preaching, (which men rather wondered at than vnderſtood) they poſſeſt the mindes of many with certaine damnable Hereſies, which were euidently contrary to the Chriſtian faith; they called themſelues of the Family of loue, or Houſe of Charity, and perſwaded ſuch as they had drawne to their Sect, that thoſe only were the Elect, and to be ſaued, which were of that Sect; all others were Reprobates, and ſhould be damned; and that it was lawfull for them to deny by oath what they pleaſed before any Magiſtrate, or any other, which were not of that Family. And of this fantaſticke vanity they diſperſed bookes abroad, which were intituled,

                        The Goſpell of the Kingdome; The Sentences of Inſtruction; The Propheſie of the ſpirit of loue; The publication of the peace vpon Earth, by H. N. They could not be induced to manifeſt the name of the Author;
                           The houſe of LOVE.
                         but it was afterwards found to be one H. Nicholay of Leyden in Hollād; who out of his blaſphemous mouth preached, That he was partaker of Gods Diuinity, and God of his humanity. The Queene,
                           A Proclamation againſt theſe Sects.
                         in good time, to repreſſe theſe Heretiques (knowing that all Princes ought aboue all to haue an eſpeciall care of Religion) by an Edict enioyned the Ciuill Magiſtrates to aſſiſt the Eccleſiaſticall in burning of thoſe Bookes.
                     About this time, Francis Drake returned into England,
                        
                           Francis Drake.
                         abounding with riches, but more illuſtrious and exceeding in glory, hauing ſayled about the terreſtriall Globe with happy ſucceſſe, being (if not the firſt that had aſpired to this glory) yet the firſt next Magellan, who dyed in the middeſt of his courſe. This Drake (that I may report no more than what I haue heard from himſelfe) was borne of meane parentage in the County of Deuonſhire;
                           His originall extraction.
                         at his Baptiſme, Francis Ruſſell, afterwards Earle of Bedford, was his Godfather. Whileſt he was but yet an Infant, his Father embracing the Proteſtant Religion, was by vertue of the Law of Sixe Articles, made by King HENRY the Eighth againſt the Proteſtants, called in queſtion: whereupon he left his natiue ſoyle, and paſſed into Kent. King HENRY the Eighth being deceaſed, hee obtained a place amongſt them of the Fleet-Royall, to reade Prayer; a ſhort time after, he was choſen Deacon, & being made Vicar of Vpnore, vpon the Riuer Medway, (where the Nauy lay at Road) he was conſtrained by pouerty to place his ſonne with a neighbouring Pylote, who, by daily exerciſe,
                           Francis Drakes education.
                         hardened him to the Saylors labours in a little Barke, wherewith hee ſayled vp and downe the Coaſt, guided Ships in and out of Harbours, and ſometimes tranſported Merchandize into France and Zeland. This young man, being diligent and

plyable, gaue ſuch teſtimony of his care and diligence to the old Pylote, that he dying iſſueleſſe, in his Will bequeathed, as a Legacy, the Barke to him, wherewith Drake hauing gathered a pretty ſome of money, and receiuing intelligence that Iohn Hawkins made preparation of certaine Ships at Plimouth, for the voyage of America, which was called the New-World, he made ſale of his Barke, and, accompanied with certaine braue and able Mariners, he left Kent, and ioyned his labours and fortunes with Hawkins, in the yeere 1567. but with vnfortunate ſucceſſe. For the Engliſh being (as is related) ſurprized by the Spaniards, in the Port of Saint Iohn de Vllua, hee, with the loſſe of all his meanes, hardly eſcaped. Fiue yeeres after, (that is to ſay, in the yeere 1572.) hauing gathered together a ſufficient ſumme of money by his traffique and Pyracy, with an intent to recouer his loſſes which he had receiued by the Spaniards, (which a Preacher of the Nauy eaſily perſwaded him to be lawfull) he made a voyage the ſecond time into America,
                        
                           Drakes expedition in America.
                         with a Ship of Warre called the Dragon, with two other ſmall Ships, without the knowledge of any but his Companions, where hee ſurprized a Towne, called Nombre de Dios, in the paſſage to the Ile Dariene, which he preſently loſt. Then, receiuing intelligence by the fugitiue Negro's, (which are called Cimarons) that certaine Mule-driuers were to tranſport a great quantity of Gold and Siluer to Panama) hee ſet vpon them, and pillaged them vpon the way, carrying the Gold into his Ships, but the Siluer, becauſe he could not commodiouſly tranſport it ouer the Mountaines, he left it, and buried part thereof in the ground: after that, hee burned a large Store-houſe of Merchandize, called the CROSSE, vpon the Riuer Chirague: And as he ſometimes made excurſions vpon the neighbouring places, he diſcouered from the top of high mountaines, the South Sea; hereupon, he was ſo inflamed with a deſire of glory and wealth, that hee burned with an

earneſt longing to ſayle into thoſe parts; and in the ſame place, falling vpon his knees, he heartily implored the Diuine aſſiſtance to enable him, that he might one day arriue in thoſe Seas, and diſcouer the ſecrets of them; and to this, he bound himſelfe with a religious vow.
                           A Ʋow.
                         From that time forward, was his minde night and day troubled, and as it were excited and pricked forward with goads, to performe and acquite himſelfe of this Vow.
                     Now, beeing abundantly rich,
                           Iohn Oxenham ſayleth into America.
                         ſilently reuolued theſe thoughts in his minde; Iohn Oxenham, who in the former voyages had beene a Souldier, Mariner, and Cooke vnder him, hauing by his valour obtained the name of Captaine among the Saylors, to tread in the foot-ſteps of his Maſters fortune, in taking the Mules loaden with wealth, and to ſayle the Auſtrale, or Meridian-Sea, he, in the yeere 1563. begun to ſayle in thoſe places, with a Ship onely and equipage of ſeuentie men, where, being arriued, hee communicated his deſigne to the Negro's, and learning out that thoſe Mule-driuers, who vſed to tranſport riches to Panama, were conueyed with armed men, brought his Ship to Land, hiding her vnder thicke bowes in place ſecure, cauſing likewiſe his greateſt Cannons to be brought aſhoare, with victuals and prouiſion; afterwards, he and his people, with tenne Negro's, who were their Guides in that Countrey, came to a Riuer which ends in the Meridian-Sea, and there cut Trees wherewith they built a ſmall Ship, with which he traded in the Iland called Margaret,
                        
                           Jſla de Perlas.
                         which abounds in Pearles, ſituated in the ſame Sea, and not farre off: in which hauing ſtayed tenne daies for the Ships comming from Perou, he tooke one which carried ſixty pound weight of Gold; and another, with an hundred pound weight of Siluer, and in thoſe Ships hee returned into the ſaid Riuer. This Prize being ſoone diuulged by thoſe Spaniards which Iohn Oxenham had releaſed, and ſet on ſhoare, Iohan▪ Ortega, a Spaniard, forthwith purſued him with an

hundred men, and finding that there was three waies to enter the Riuer, hee ſtayed a time, not knowing which to take, but at laſt he plainely diſcouered Oxenhams trace, by reaſon of the number of feathers of ſuch Fowles and Hens as the Engliſh had eaten, which were ſwimming vpon the water; and following them, he found the Gold among the buſhes and thickets, and the Engliſh in diſcord and ſtrife about the bootie; who neuertheleſſe prouiding to their common neceſſity, fell vpon the Spaniards, who were in greater number: for the moſt part of the Engliſh were killed, and the reſt were taken, among which, Iohn Oxenham, who was brought to LIMA, and there examined whether he were entred into the King of Spaines Dominions, with Queene ELIZABETH's leaue and permiſſion,
                           John Oxenham depriued of life, falls from a great and famous enterprize.
                         or no? and not able to ſatisfie them with any anſwere, hee was moſt lamentably put to death, and cruelly executed as a Pyrat and common enemy of humane kinde, with the Pylot, and others: and thus his worthy enterprize was preuented, which was both great and memorable.
                     
                        
                           Drakes ſecond voyage.
                        
                        Drake, not knowing what was become of Oxenham, that he might get into the South Sea, which hee ſtill meditated vpon, and try his fortune there, departs from Plimouth the thirteenth of December 1577. with fiue ſhips, and one hundred ſixtie three men, of which number there were ſcarce two who knew his deſigne, or whither they were bound, and arriued on the fiue and twentieth at Canten, a Cape or Promontory in Barbary: then, hauing refreſhed themſelues at Maio, a very pleaſant Iland, and abounding with ſweet Grapes, at San-Iacobina, they tooke a Portugal laden with Wine, and hauing ſet the Mariners a ſhoare, carryed the veſſell, with N. la Foreſt the Pylote, away with them, to ſerue them for a watch and skout vpon the Coaſts of Braſil, which were well knowne vnto him. From thence he paſſed to the Ile of Folgo, which caſteth out ſulphurous flames: and from thence to la Braue, vnder which the Mariners

aſſure vs that the Sea is very high. And as he came vnder the Equinoctiall, prouiding for the health of his people, cauſeth euery one of them to be let blood, and after hauing bin long becalmed, and endured much Lightening and Thunder, he found he had made very little or no way in three weekes, and been 55. daies without ſeeing any Land, vntill in the end he diſcouered the Countrie of Braſill.
                     
                     The 26. of Aprill, being entered the riuer of Plate,
                        
                           Doughtey beheaded.
                         they ſaw an infinite number of Sea-calues, and from thence being brought to Saint Iulians, they found a Gibbet ſtanding there, which (as it is thought) Magellan ſet vp, when he was forced thereabouts, to puniſh ſome ſedicious perſons. Where Mr. Iohn Doughtey, a wiſe and valiant Gentleman, and of chiefe command vnder Drake, was condemned by the verdict of twelue men, according to the Engliſh cuſtome, and beheaded, after he had receiued the Communion with Drake himſelfe. The moſt impartiall of all the Company, did iudge, that he had indeed carried himſelfe a little ſediciouſly, and that Drake, hauing an eye not ſo much vpon ſuch as might ſurpaſſe him in Sea-faring renowne, as vpon thoſe which were like to equall him, did rid his hands of him as of a Competitor. Others, preſuming to haue more knowledge of his intentions, affirme, that Leiceſter had commanded him to make him away, vnder ſome pretext or other, in reuenge that he did auerre oftentimes, that he had made away my Lord of Eſſex by his deuices.
                     The 20. of Auguſt, hauing no more then three Shippes,
                           Paſſeth the ſtraightes of Magellan.
                         (for he had caſt off the other two at Sea, which were the leſſer, after hee had taken in the men, and what elſe was ought worth) he came to the ſtraight of Magellan, which is a Sea full of Ilands, and circled in with high Mountaines, the Element being full of Snow, and the wether very cold, paſt it, the ſixth of September, and entred into the South

Sea, which is called Peacible, or Still, which he found neuertheleſſe much troubled, and his Fleet through the vehemencie of the Tempeſt, carried about an hundred Leagues into the Ocean and ſeparated: At the ſame time they ſaw an Eclipſe of the Moone,
                           Eclipſe of the Moone.
                         the fifteenth of September, at ſixe of the Clocke at night. I ſpeake this in fauour of Mathematicians, againſt that which others doe report. They ſaw alſo that part of the heauen next the South Pole, adorned with very few ſtarres,
                           South Stars.
                         and of farre leſſer magnitude then thoſe in our Hemiſphere, and not aboue the third part of the greatneſſe of ours. And that the two little Cloudes, which are of the colour of the Milke-way, which we call the little Cloudes of Magellan,
                        
                           Little clouds of Magellan
                         are not farre diſtant from the Pole.
                     Of theſe Ships which the wind had thus hurried away, the one, in which Captaine Iohn Winter cōmanded, plying vp the ſtraights of Magellan againe, returned ſafely into England, and is the firſt that euer paſſed that way. Drake, who was then driuen alone by this tempeſt with his Ship, vnto 55. degrees to the Weſt, and hardly could recouer the breadth of the ſtraights, ran along the Coaſt, and, contrary to that which is figured in the Maps, he found that theſe Lands fetch a great compaſſe about, before they trend vp into the Eaſt.
                     
                        
                           Drake finds booty both by land and ſea.
                        Being come the laſt of Nouember to the Ile of Mouſcha, he ſent his Mariners aſhore for freſh water, two of which were taken and detayned by the Inhabitants. Being departed from thence, he meets with an Indian, who was fiſhing in his Canoe, who thinking that his men had bin Spaniards, told them, that at Villa Parizo, in the Roade, there was a great Spaniſh Ship laden, and brought them thither. The Spaniſh Mariners, which were but eight, and two Negroes, ſeeing the Engliſh ariue, and taking them for Spaniards, began to beate vp their Drummes, and drawing of their Wines of Chillie, to inuite them to drinke. But the Engliſh boording them, put them all vnder hatches, rifle the

next Towne, called Saint Iacobin, and the Chappell alſo, the ſpoile whereof was for Mr. Fletcher, Miniſter to the Fleet: Afterwards they put all the men of their Prize on ſhore, except the Pilot, being a Grecian, and carrying both the Ship and him away, they found therein foure hundred waight of Gold of Baldiue, ſo called by the name of the place, becauſe it is truely refined.
                     After that, Francis Drake landed at Taurapaze, where he found a Spaniard faſt aſleepe vpon the Sea ſide,
                           Meets by chance with great wealth
                         and neere vnto him two great Barres of maſſie Siluer, to the value of foure thouſand Ducats, which hee cauſed to bee carried away, without ſo much as awakening the man. Then being entred into the Hauen of Aricae, he found there three ſhips, without Maſter or Sailors; and within, 57. ingots of ſiluer, each of them weighing twenty pound waight, beſides other marchandiſe. From thence hee ſailed to Lima, and meets with twelue ſhips in the Roade, whoſe Tackling and Armes had beene brought aſhore: There was in them a great deale of Silke, and a little coffer full of coined money, but there was not ſo much as a Boy left to looke to them, ſo great they accounted the ſecurity of that Coaſt, for the diſtance of places, and alſo becauſe the nauigation was vnknowne, no feare they had of Pirates. And indeed, no man from Magellan euer ſailed thoſe Seas before Drake, but onely the Spaniards, who haue built there all ſuch Ships and Nauie as are there. Drake, hauing committed thoſe Ships to the Ocean, hee made haſte with all ſailes ſpred,
                           Sir Francis Drake takes a Spaniſh ſhip called Shite-Fire, which hee made ſhite Siluer.
                         after another ſumptuous Ship, very rich, called The Caco Fogue; whereof he had notice, was departed from Lima, & bound for Panama; but he firſt meeting with a ſmall ſhip, from which he got 80. pound weight of Gold, a Crucifix of pure gold, diuers Emeralds of the length of a finger, and ſome Munition: The firſt day of March he ouertooke this Caco Fogue, and after he had beaten downe with a Cannon ſhot the fore-Maſt, boords her, and takes it, finds therein,

beſides many precious ſtones, 80. pound waight more of gold, 13. coffers full of coyned money, and his ballaſt was pure ſiluer: all which he cauſed to be brought aſhore, and leauing the ſaid Ship, the Pilot, who was within, gaue Drake this pleaſant farewell: We will exchange names of our Ships:
Call yours, Cacofogue; and ours, Cacoplate:
which is to ſay, yours ſhall bee named Shite-fire, and ours Shite-ſiluer. Since that time he met with no rich prize. So omitting the relation of thoſe ſhips of China, of the golden Eagle, of thoſe faire Negroes which the Spaniard gaue him for ſparing his ſhip, and the pillage of a little Village called Aguatulcum; I will ſpeake of his returne.
                     
                        
                           He thinkes of his return.
                        
                        Drake eſteemed himſelfe abundantly rich, and indifferently well ſatisfied of the particular wrong which he had receiued of the Spaniards in S. Iohn of Vllua, thinkes now of his returne, and becauſe it ſeemed to him full of eminent perils, to repaſſe through the ſtraights of Magellan, aſwell by reaſon of the raging Tempeſts vſuall there, as of diuers Shelfs and Rockes vnknowne, and likewiſe fearing leſt the Spaniards ſhould there watch for his comming backe, as indeed Francis of Toledo, Vice-Roy of Peruia, had to that end ſent thither Peter Sermiente with two ſhips of Warre, as alſo to fortifie the ſtraights of that Sea, if any were; Drake then tooke his way toward the North, at the latitude of 42. Degrees, to diſcouer in that part if there were any ſtraight, by which he might find a neerer way to returne; But diſcerning nothing but darke and thicke cloudes, extremity of cold and open Cliffes couered thicke with ſnow, hee landed at the 38. Degree, and hauing found a commodious Rode, remained there a certaine time. The inhabitants of that Countrie were naked, merry, luſty, iumping, leaping, and dancing perpetually, ſacrificing, and ſhowing by ſigne

and words, that they would elect Francis Drake for their King: neither could it be coniectured that euer the Spaniard had bin there, or ſo farre in that Countrie:
                           Drake diſcoueres a land, which hee called the Nouam Albion.
                         
                        Drake named that very countrey, being fat and good, full of Deeres and Conies,
The new Albion;
Cauſing a great Poſte to be there erected, vpon which there was ingrauen an Inſcription, which ſhewed the yeere of our Lord, the name of Queene ELIZABETH, and their landing there, and vnderneath a piece of ſiluer of Queene ELIZABETHS Coine was nailed to the ſaid Poſte.
                     Afterwards hauing weighed Anchor, in the moneth of Nouember, he arriued in the Ilands of the Mollucques,
                        
                           He arriued at the Molucques.
                         where the King of the Ile of Ternata receiued him graciouſly, and from thence, ſayling vpon that ſea full of Rockes and Ilands, his ſhip was, the ninth day of Ianuary, driuen to the top of a Rocke couered with water, where it remained in great danger ſeuen and twenty houres, and was accounted no better then loſt, by all the men of the ſhip, who fell deuoutly vpon their knees, praying hartily vnto the Lord,
                           Falls into a great danger
                         expecting hourely to periſh, with all the aboundance of riches heaped vp together with ſo much paine: But after they had hoyſted their Sprit-Sayle, and caſt into the Sea 8. Peeces of Ordnance, and diuers marchandizes, a fauourable wind roſe, (as ſent of God) which bore the ſhip aſide, and withdrew it from aboue the Rocke.
                     After this, he landed at Iaua major, greatly afflicted with the Poxe, which the Inhabitants doe cure, ſitting in the heate of the ſunne,
                           He paſſeth beyong the Cape of Bona Eſperance.
                         to drie vp the poyſonous and malignant humor. Where hauing tryed the humanity of the little King of the Countrey, he tooke his way towards the Cape of Bona eſperance, which was celebrated as very remarkable, by the Mariners, which had formerly ſeene it. He landed

vpon that coaſt to take in water, but found no fountaine there: if he had not in time prouided of water, when it rained, they had all beene in great diſtreſſe for ſweet water. At laſt, he tooke in ſome at Riogrand, from whence hee finiſhed his iourney into England, with a fauourable wind, which brought his Ship the ninth of Nouember, 1580. ſafe into the Hauen of Plimouth, where he tooke ſhipping, after his being abroad about the ſpace of three yeeres: during which time he worthily ſayled round about the Earth,
                           Returnes into England.
                         to the admiration and laudable applauſe of all people, and without purchaſing blame for any other things, than for his putting to death Doughty, & for leauing at the mercy of the Spaniards, that Portugal Ship by him taken at the mouth of Africa, neere vnto Aquatulqua, and for hauing moſt inhumanely expoſed in an Iland, that Negro or Black-more-Maide, who had beene gotten with Child in his Ship.
                     Queene ELIZABETH receiued him graciouſly, with all clemency, cauſed his riches to be ſequeſtred and in readineſſe, whenſoeuer the Spaniard ſhould re-claime them: Her Maieſty commanded likewiſe, that for a perpetuall memory to haue ſo happily circuited round about the whole Earth, his Ship ſhould be drawne from the water, and put aſide neere Deptford vpon Thames, where to this houre the body thereof is ſeene;
                           Drakes ſhip is conſecrato perpetuall memory.
                         and after the Queenes feaſting therein, ſhee conſecrated it with great ceremonie, pompe, and magnificence, eternally to be remembred; and her Maieſty forthwith honoured Drake with the dignity of Knighthood. As theſe things were performed, a ſlight Bridge, made of Boords, by which people went vp into the Ship,
                           Francis Drake is knighted by Queene Elizabeth.
                         was broken downe by the Multitude, and about a hundred perſons fell with it; they neuertheleſſe receiued no harme at all: inſomuch, that the Ship ſeemed to haue beene built in a happy coniunction of the Planets. That very day, againſt the great Maſt of the ſaid Ship, many verſes, compoſed to the praiſe & honour of Sir Francis Drake,
                        
were faſtned, and fixed; among which, theſe in Latin were written by a Scholler of the Colledge of Wincheſter:
                        
                           
                              PLVS VLTRA, Herculeis inſcribas, Drace, columnis,
                              
                              Et magno, dicas, Hercule maior ero.
                           
                           
                              Eſcri DRAC ces deux mots ſur les piliers du Temple
                              Qui ſut ſacré iadis à Hercule guer
                                    •
                                 ier,
                              PLVS OVLTRE, & quelque grand qu'ait eſté ſon lau
                                    •
                                 ier
                              Di que le tien doibt eſtre & plus grand & plus ample.
                           
                           
                              DRAKE, on the Herculean columnes theſe words write,
                              Thou farther wentſt then any mortall wight.
                              Though Hercules for trauell did excell,
                              From him and others thou didſt beare the bell.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 DRACE, pererrati quem nouit terminus orbis,
                              Quem
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  ſimul mundi vidit vter
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  Polus.
                              Si taceant homines, faciunt te ſydera notum.
                              Sol neſcit comitis non memor eſſe ſui.
                           
                           
                              DRAC qui as parcouru tous les quartiers du monde,
                              Et les Poles as v
                                    •
                                 u, Quand les gens manqueront
                              A chanter tes vertus, les Aſtres le feront,
                              Le Soleil n'oublira celuy qui le ſeconde.
                           
                           
                              Braue DRAKE, that round about the world didſt ſaile,
                              And viewedſt all the Poles, when men ſhall faile
                              Thee to commend, the ſtarres will do't▪ the Sunne
                              Will not forget how with him thou didſt run.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Digna ratis quae ſtet radiantibus inclyta ſtellis,
                              Supremo coeli vertice digna ratis.
                           
                           
                              
                              CE NAVIRE qui rend à tous homines notoire
                              La gloire d'vn grand Chef, merite que les Dieux
                              Mettent autour de luy des Aſtres radieux,
                              Et au plus hault du Ciel eſtre éclatant de gloire.
                           
                           
                              THAT SHIP whoſe good ſucceſſe did make thy name
                              To be reſounded by the trump of Fame:
                              Merits to be beſet with Stars diuine,
                              Inſtead of waues, and the Skie to ſhine.
                           
                        
                     
                     Nothing anger'd worſe Sir Francis Drake, than to ſee the Nobles and the chiefeſt of the Court, refuſe that Gold and Siluer which he preſented them withall, as if hee had not lawfully come by it. The Commons neuertheleſſe applauded him with all praiſe and admiration, eſteeming, he had purchaſed no leſſe glory in aduancing the limits of the Engliſh, their honour and reputation, than of their Empire.
                     
                        
                           The King of Spaine by his Ambaſſadour demandeth Drakes goods which he had pirapirated.
                        
                        Bernard Mendoze, then Ambaſſadour for Spaine, in England, murmuring at it, and, as not well pleaſed, demands vehemently of the Queene the things taken. But he was anſwered:
THat the Spaniards had procured vnto themſelues that euil through their iniuſtice towards the Engliſh, in hindering, againſt the right of Nations,He is anſwered. their Negotiations; That Sir Francis Drake was alwaies ready to anſwere the Law, if by iuſt inditements, and certaine teſtimonies they could conuict him, to haue committed any thing againſt equity. That to no end but to giue ſatisfaction to their King, the riches he brought in were ſequeſtred, though her Maieſty had ſpent (againſt the Rebels which Spaine had moned and inſtigated in Ireland and England againſt her,) more money than Drake was worth. Moreouer, that her Maieſtie could finde no reaſon w
                              •
                           y Spaine ſhould hinder her Subiects, and thoſe of other Princes, from ſayling to the Indies▪ that ſhee could not be

perſwaded that they were his owne, although the Pope had ne'r ſo much giuen them to him▪ that ſhee acknowledged no ſuch Prerogatiue in the Pope, much leſſe the leaſt authority, as to oblige Princes, who owe him no obedience at all, vnder his to power inueſt & put the Spaniard, as in fee and poſſeſsion of that New-World; alſo, that ſhee could not ſee how he could deriue the leaſt right, but by thoſe deſconts and landing here and there of his Subiects, who built there ſmall cottages to inhabit, and named the Promontorie; Things neuertheleſse that can purchaſe no propriety. So that by vertue of ſuch donation of other mens goods▪ which in equitie is nothing worth, and of this proprietie that is meerly imaginary, hee cannot iuſtly hinder other Princes to negotiate in thoſe Regions; but they, without infringing any waies the Lawes of Nations▪ may lawfully bring in Colonies in thoſe parts that are not yet inhabited by the King of Spaines Subiects, ſith Preſcription without poſſeſsion, is of no validity euen as to ſayle vpon the mayne Ocean, that the vſe of the Sea as of the Ayre is common to all, and that publique neceſsitie permits not it ſhould be poſſeſſed; that there is nor people, no particular, that can challenge or pretend any other right therein.
                     
                     Neuertheleſſe, ſince this,
                           The Spaniard hath part of Drakes money deliuered backe.
                         great ſummes of money were pay'd backe to Piedro S
                              •
                           b
                              •
                           re, a Spaniard, who ſtyled himſelfe Attourney, for the recouery of the Gold and Siluer, though hee could ſhew no ſuch Letter of procuration or receits. And it was diſcouered (but too late) that he made no retribution at all to particulars, but ſpent it againſt Queene ELIZABETH, vpon the Spaniards,
                        
                           Iackman and Pets Nauigation to ſeeke away to the Eaſt-Jndies.
                         who maintained the warre of Flanders.
                     
                     While Sir Francis Drake circuited ſo proſperouſly the World, Iacman and Pet, renowned Pylots, ſent by the Merchants of London with two Ships, did ſeeke with leſſe

happy ſucceſſe, a ſhort way or paſſage, to ſayle into the Eaſt Indies, by the Sea of Cronie, but hauing paſt ſome miles beyond the Iles Vaigats, they found ebbing and flowing ſo vncertaine, ſo many ſhelues, and ſo great ſtore of Ice, that they could not poſſible goe any further, hauing much adoe to returne.
                     
                        
                           The death of the Earle of Arundell, who was the firſt that brought the vſe of Coches into England.
                        At the beginning of this yeere, died Henry Fitz-Allen, Earle of Arundell, and with him the name of that moſt noble Houſe, which had flouriſhed in honour aboue three hundred yeeres, ſonne to Richard Fitz-Allen, ſprung from the Albaines ancient Earles of Arundel and Suſsex (in the reigne of EDVVARD the Firſt▪) which title they had without creation, in regard of the poſſeſſion which they had of the Caſtle and Lordſhip of Arundell: This man being heaped with honour, had beene a Priuy-Councellor to all the Kings vnder whom he liued, and performed great offices vnto his end. Vnder HENRY the Eighth, he was Gouernour of Calice, Marſhall of the Army at Bullen, and Lord Chamberlaine: At the inauguration of EDWARD the Sixth, hee was Lord Marſhall of England, in which charge he continued at the Coronation of Queene MARIE; and was after made Lord High-Conſtable, Lord Steward of her houſe, and Preſident of her Councell; Vnder Queene ELIZABETH, hee was made the ſecond time Lord Steward. And when he began to grow old, he ſought to marry her, for which he loſt much of her fauour; afterwards, he intermeddled in the Duke of Norfolkes matters, and openly withſtood the marriage of the Duke of Aniou. He profeſſed himſelfe an open-hearted man, and made it appeare that he loued not the French; and would often ſay, that his father dwelling in Suſſex, neighbour vnto France, would teach him not to beleeue them. He had three Children by Katherine his Wife, daughter to Thomas Gray, Marquis of Dorſet, which children hee ſuruiued; Henry, being young and of great hope, dyed at B
                              •
                           axels;

Iane, who was Wife to the Lord Lumley; and Marie, who married Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolke, and bare vnto him Philip, Earle of Arundel, of whom wee will ſpeake in his owne place.
                     
                        Arthur, Lord Gray, Deputie of Ireland,
                        
                           The Lord Gray repreſſeth the Rebels in Ireland.
                         being gone againſt the O-Conores, who were ſtirring vp new troubles in Ophalia, by Law executes Hugh O-Moloy, a ſeditious man, and pacifies this Countrey, and that of Magohiganores and Ocaroles, and in the very bud cruſhed a great conſpiracie that was a growing and beginning to ſpread. For ſome of the chiefeſt Families in Lemſter, and many others that were originally Engliſh, driuen partly by the affection they bore to the Romiſh Religion, and partly for their hatred to the new-come Engliſh, (who ſince their comming had excluded them, contrary to the Law, from all gouernments and Magiſtracy, as if they had beene naturall Iriſh) had conſpired to kill the Lord Deputie and his Family, to ſurprize the Caſtle of Dublin, wherein was all the prouiſion of war, and to kill all the Engliſh that were in Ireland: and this conſpiracy was ſo cloſely carried, that it was neuer conferred vpon with more than two in a company. Neuertheleſſe, among ſo many complices it came to light, and was extinct with the death of a few men: and amongſt them of chiefeſt note, was I. Nogent, Baron of Fiske, a man ſingular in fame and life, who was (as the Iriſh report) ſeduced by the craft of thoſe that enuyed him, and his conſcience aſſuring himſelfe of his innocency, choſe rather,
                           Innocency is an aſſured comfort.
                         (though the Deputie promiſed to giue him his life, if hee would confeſſe himſelfe guiltie) to dye an innocent by an infamous death, than to liue in infamy for betraying his innocency. And verily, howſoeuer the truth of this buſineſſe was in it ſelfe, the Queene was much offended with the Lord Gray, for the death of thoſe men, whom the Earle of Suſsex, being more offended therewith (for rarely is true loue betweene great Ones) the more ſtirred vp, by reaſon of the

cruelty which before hee had vſed toward the Spaniards which yeelded; and now againſt Subiects, that he had diminiſhed the glory of his Princeſſe, and augmented the number of her enemies. Howbeit, hee forbare not to terrifie Turlough-Leinich, who began to raiſe tumults in Vlſter, and driue him to conditions of peace. Whereby hee likewiſe brought the O-Brins, the O-Mores, and the Cauanaghies,
                        
                           Rebels ſuppreſt.
                         Rebels in Lemſter, humbly to deſire peace, and to offer Hoſtages. Theſe matters of Ireland, though time doth much diſioyne them, for the helpe of memory, I haue thought to put them together.
                     
                        
                           The Earle of Lenox is enuied of the Scots.
                        In Scotland, ſome Miniſters, and ſome of the great Ones, conſidering the Earle of Lenox, of whom I haue ſpoken, to be ſtrong in the Kings fauour, ſtirred vp Iames Stuart, of Ochiltrie, Captaine of the Guard, (who carried the title of Earle of Arran, I know not by what grant, from Iames Hamilton, Earle of Arran, a man of an vnable ſpirit, for which cauſe he was ordained his Tutor) to be his Emulator. But the King quickly reconciled them. When this would not ſucceed, they brought him, as much as in them lay, to be in hatred within the Kingdome, and accuſed him to Qu. ELIZABETH, to be ſent by the Guizes to ouerthrow Religion, to procure the liberty of the captiue Queene, and to diſunite the amitie which was between the Kingdomes of England and Scotland.
                        
                           They accuſe him in England.
                         They are eaſily beleeued, and notwithſtanding that he purged himſelfe by Letters to the Queene, and made profeſſion of the Proteſtants Religion, ſerious deliberation is hereupon taken in England.
                     
                     
                        
                           Conſultation holden againſt him.
                        The Councell of England was afraid that he would oppreſſe thoſe Scots that ſtood beſt affected to the Engliſh, and fauour the incurſions which were made vpon the Borders, and allure the King to marry in France, or elſe-where vnknowne to the Engliſh; and that the King, now in his youth, would moleſt the affaires of England; and beeing

come to more maturitie of age, would aſſume the title of King of England, as his Mother had done. Which if he did, the danger would fall more heauily from him than from his Mother, in regard his birth gaue him an aſſured hope of two Kingdomes, and gaine more friends to fauour his cauſe, and that the Scots trayned vp in the ciuill warres, and the warres of the Low-Countries, were more expert to learne warlike offices. Therefore from hence it is thought good, by ſome meanes or other to infringe the fauour and authoritie that Lenox had with the King, or to driue him out of Scotland, and that without delay;
                           They rayſe falſe reports against him.
                         becauſe rumours were giuen out, that Balfour was ſent for out of France, (who had found, I know not what. Writing of his owne hand, to conuince him of the Murder of the Kings Father) to ruine Morton, and that he had for no other end obtained the gouernement of the Caſtle of Dunbriton, but to ſet in ſtranger-forces into Britaine, or to tranſport the King into France. It was likewiſe ſaid, that he had perſwaded the King, to reſigne the Kingdome to his Mother, who had beene vniuſtly and by a moſt wicked example depoſed by her Subiects; after, hauing taken her faithfull promiſe to reſigne it by and by after vnto him againe by a lawfull reſignation, which would be a ſolid confirmation to him, and a meanes to extinguiſh all factions, and make him knowne to all, to be lawfull King.
                     After this, Sir Robert Bowes, Treaſurer of Barwicke,
                        
                           The Scots will not admit Bowes to accuſe him.
                         is ſent into Scotland, to accuſe Lenox of theſe things before the King and his Councell, and to aduertiſe the King of the eminent dangers thereof. As ſoone as hee had beene admitted, hee demanded that Lenox might for a while be remoued from that place; but the Councell would not agree vnto it, as being a thing new and vnheard of, to cauſe one of the Kings Councell to be put out from the Councell, without ſhewing cauſe. Alſo, they made a doubt whether or no the Queene had giuen him that in charge

expreſly, and therefore willed him to ſhew his inſtructions, which he refuſed to doe, ſaue to the King, and to one or two others; And ſeeing that he could not be heard, hee was preſently called backe, and tooke leaue of the King, when it was little thought on, complayning that the wholeſome admonitions of a well-deſeruing Queene were reiected.
                     
                        
                           Hume excuſeth it.
                        Shortly after, Alexander Hume is ſent from Scotland, to excuſe theſe matters, hee had not admittance to the Queene, but was ſent to the Lord Burghley, Treaſurer, who grauely and ſuccinctly gaue him to vnderſtand:

                           Burghley's admonitions to him.THat it was not any contempt of his perſon, that was cauſe why the Queene would not permit him to ſee her, knowing very well by experience that he was well affected to Religion, to his Prince and Countrie, and moſt ſtudious for the peace of both the Kingdomes, but out of a iuſt ſence and ſorrow for the contempt which was ſhewed towards her Maieſtie, and of the truſt of her Ambaſſadour, who had contained himſelfe within the preſcribed bounds of his Legation: Layes all the blame vpon the new and ill-aduiſed Councellors: excuſeth the King, as not being of age to haue much experience, and wiſhed him to lend an eare to the holy and wholeſome counſels of the Queene, who truely bare him a maternall affection; and not to make leſſe account of them, than of thoſe from a French kinſman, the King of France his ſubiect, who laboured to marry him to a French woman of the Romiſh Religion, and peraduenture goes about (now the Hamiltons exulting) to be deſigned the Kings Lieutenant. Let the King (ſaith he) remember that no paſsion is more feruent than ambition; and let the Scots remember what troubles the French had cauſed in Scotlād, if the Queen by her wiſdome and power had not preuented it.
                     
                     
                        So Hume was ſent backe into Scotland, and all of purpoſe to ſtrike terrour into the King, and to make him beleeue that the Earle of Lenox had ſome pernicious deſigne againſt him and the Kingdome. Neuertheleſſe, within a while after, Morton,
                        
                           Morton impriſoned.
                         who was moſt addicted to the Engliſh, was accuſed by Arran, Laeſa Maieſtatis, and caſt into priſon.
                  
                  
                     The end of the ſecond Booke of the Annals and Hiſtory of that mightie Empreſſe, Queene ELIZABETH, of moſt happy and bleſſed memory.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE HISTORIE OF THE MOST HIGH, MIGHTY, AND Euer-glorious Empreſſe, ELIZABETH, Inuincible Queene of England, Ireland, &c. True Defendreſſe of the Faith, of immortall Renowne, and neuer-dying Fame and Memory.
                  OR, ANNALLES OF ALL SVCH REMARKable things as happened during her bleſt Raigne ouer her Kingdomes of England and Ireland; as alſo, ſuch Acts as paſt betwixt her MAIESTY and Scotland, France, Spaine, Italy, Germany, and the Netherlands.
                  
                  The third Booke.
                  F
                        ••
                     thfully tranſlated out of the French, and 
                        ••••
                     iſht in Engliſh, with the KINGS leaue and Authority, granted by his moſt Excellent Maieſtie, to ABRAHAM DARCIE.
               
               
                  
                  
                  
                     Theſe Noble Knights, for their worth and Vertues, were honoured with the dignity of Knighthood by Qu. Elizabeth; moſt of them in that Honourable & euer-remembred Voyage of C. Howard, Earle of Notinghā, L. high Admirall, and that renowned Souldier, the late Generous Earle of Eſſex, &c. in Spaine, b
                           •
                        fore Cadiz, taken & ran
                           •
                        acked by the Engliſh, Iun. 26. Anno 1
                              •
                           96.
                     To the euery way Noble, and accompliſhed with all vertues,

                        Sir EDVVARD CONVVAY, the Kings Secretary of State.
                        Sir WILLIAM HARVEY, Lord HARVEY, Baron of Roſſe.
                        
                        Sir ORACE VERE.
                        Sir ARTHVR THROCKMORTON.
                        Sir ROBERT MAVNCELL.
                        Sir FRANCIS POPHAM.
                        Sir WILLIAM MOVNSON.
                        Sir RICHARD WESTON.
                     
                  
                  The Right vertuous & generous,

                        Sir THOMAS 
                              Their Honourable Predeceſſours were for their deſerts, aduanced both to Honour & Dignity.
                            HATTON. AND
                        
                        CHRISTOPHER 
                              Sir Ch. Hatton was Lord Chancelor of England vnder Qu. Elizabeth: he dyed in Hatton houſe, the 20. of Nouember, 1590. HATTON.
                        Sir CARIE 
                              Sir Walter Rawleigh Knighted and employed about diuers worthy affaires of waight and conſequence by Queene Elizabeth.
                            RAVVLEIGH.
                        EDVVARD Wray Lord Keeper of the priuy Seale.
                            WRAY, Eſquire.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     I Here preſume to conſecrate to your perpetuall Honour, this Booke, which vnder the Honourable Shield of your Noble protections I haue ſought to ſhelter, 
                        And wherefore?
                        It is that theſe Noble perſons haue by their worthy liues, purchaſed Honour to their noble ſelues, or elſe their Prodeceſſors haue by their Vertues, deſerued both Honour and Dignity from this vnparalel'd Empreſſe; who as ſhe was a true aduancer of Vertue, and deſtroyer of Vice, did liberally beſtowe her Royall gifts of Honour vpon thoſe and their Anceſtors.
                      knowing the Fame of this Heroicke Empreſſe to be no leſſe deare vnto you, then your Illuſtrious Perſons are carefull to propagate to all Poſterities, your cleere and vntainted Names, which by your pious liues, and religious

conuerſations, you haue engrauen in the Temple of Eternity: your vertues cannot but cheriſh this Hiſtory, which containes the life of ſo matchleſſe a Queene, whoſe Diuine perfection the whole world admired, as one who was the perfect Patterne of Princeſſes, and the true Mirour & Honour of Virgin-kinde. I confeſſe, many (far better able then I a Stranger) could haue diſcharged this Enterpriſe with far more skill, and both in ſmoother and more elegant termes, if they had beene willing to honour their Labours and Induſtries with ſo rare and worthy a Subiect. But howſoeuer, I was willing the beſt I was able, to pay this my humble Duty to Her bleſſed Memory, and to your Honorable ſelues, by my poore endeuours to make knowne the deſire I haue to intitle my ſelfe,
                  
                     
                        A true denoted to your reſplendent vertues, ABRAHAM DARCIE.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE HISTORIE OF THAT EVER Moſt bleſſed and Glorious Empreſſe,Booke 3. Queene ELIZABETH of happy renowne and matchleſſe Fame. OR ANNALLS Of all ſuch things of note as hapned during her happy Reigne, as well in England, France, Ireland, as Scotland, Spaine, Italy, Germany, and the Netherlands. The third Booke, and the foure and twentieth yeere of her Raigne, Anno MDLXXXI.
                  
                     HEreupon,
                        Randolphes interceſsion for Morton againſt Lenox.
                      in the beginning of Ianuarie next, was Thomas Randolph Captaine of the Light-horſe, ſent into Scotland, with cōmand that he ſhould attempt nothing that might any way bee preiudiciall to the preſent religion, or the peace of the two Nations: he was alſo to ſollicite in the behalfe of the Lord Morton, that Lenox might be ſent out of Scotland; and ſuch of the Nobility as fauoured the Engliſh faction might

bee encouraged. Randolph the better to effectuate his meſſage for the good of Morton, maketh recitall of his many great merits and good ſervices done to his Maieſty, the inueterate malice of his aduerſaries, the high reſpect and honor they ought to haue of Queene ELIZABETH, who expected nothing leſſe then to haue her ſuit now reiected in ſo honeſt a cauſe.
                        The King of Scots his anſwer.
                      The King anſwered, that by the duty of his royall charge hee was to execute iudgment and iuſtice vpon a perſon ſo conuicted in matter of Maieſty, that he ingeniouſly acknowledged the Queenes manifold fauours; nor would hee act any thing might any way bee iuſtly offenſiue to her Maieſtie.
                  Then after Randolph being admitted into the Aſſembly of the States of the Kingdome, reckoneth vp the well knowne benefits which both the King and Country had earſt receiued from the Queene, namely:

                        Randolph complaineth to the Nobles of Scotland.HOW by the blood of the Engliſh their Country had beene deliuered from the French; and of their King, his Kingdome and Religion ſhe had euer been a chiefe ſupporter: but for any way ſeducing the King (although ſome but moſt falſly did intimate ſo much) or ſeeking to hold one foot of ground in Scotland, ſhee neuer entertained ſuch a thought; yet were they not ignorant that ſhe wanted not opportunity, the King being in his cradle, the Queene-mother in Priſon, and the Nobles in combuſtion. But on the contrary, all her royall care was for the conſeruation of their King, her neere and deare kinſman, and allyed to her in a triple bond of neigborhood, religion and conſanguinity: nor had ſhee euer found him or any of his Regents or Vice-Roies defectiue towards her in their loues before this Aubigny of France came into Scotland: but ſince his ariuall hee wholly vſurped the Regall authority, hee had withdrawne all affection from

the Engliſh, to beſtow it vpon the French, who before his ariuall neuer ſomuch as acknowledged their King, had remoued from his perſon his moſt truſty friends, brought in ſtrangers, had conferred with foraigners by letters (which he ſhew'd) for inuading England, that he had brought the Scotiſh Presbytery into contempt with the King, as a people altogether turbulent & ſeditious, had peruerted the adminiſtration of iuſtice vpon the borders. Nor could her Maieſty endure a Prince ſo vertuous, ſo neerely allyed vnto her, to bee thus abuſed and caried away by ſuch ſiniſter practices.
                  
                  Notwithſtanding this, for the preſent there was nothing done either for Morton, or againſt Lenox, whom the Scots for the moſt part ſuppoſed no way guilty of ſuch aſperſions or calumnies as had beene obiected.
                  
                     Randolph ſeeing that,
                        Endeauoreth to raiſe Rebellion.
                      thought hee would try another concluſion, conſorts himſelfe with the friends of Morton and Lenox aduerſaries, bewaileth the miſerable eſtate of Scotland, repreſenteth to them the imminent perills which hang ouer the heads of the King, the Country and them all: complaineth that the Queens meſſage by way of interceſſiō hath beene ſlieghtly reſpected, ſuggeſteth with them ſecretly to attempt to gaine that by force of Armes, which they cannot get by faire meanes, promiſing to further and furniſh them out of England with men, money and munition. This Oratory of his proued ſo perſwaſible with them, that thereupon the Earles of Argathel, Mont-Roſſe, Angus, Mortons Nephew by the brotherſide, Glencarne, Reuthen, Lindſey & others became all of his ſide. But ſoone after they fell at diſcord amongſt themſelues, and ſeeing the King wholly caried away with the fauour of Lenox, nor no whit danted for the Engliſh forces which were now vpon the borders, and had already encountred theirs: generally reſpecting the kings perſonall preſence with them (though a child) were not affraid

to bend all the powers they could make vpon Lenox, and thought it was enough to haue pity on Morton, notwithſtanding the Earles of Angus and Marre practiſed couertly and cunningly with Randolph in the behalfe of Morton, and againſt Lenox; whereof Whittingham hauing aduertiſed the King, Angus was commanded to retire himſelfe beyond the riuer Spea; & Marre to yeeld vp the Caſtle of Sterlin into the Kings hands:
                        Getteth him out of Scotland.
                      
                     Randolph hauing an apprehenſion of feare, got him priuately into Barwicke; and ſeeing matters proue deſperate, aduiſeth Angus & Marre to prouide for themſelues either in ſubmitting themſelues to the King, or to ſeeke the protection of the Queene of England. The Engliſh forces were no ſooner withdrawne from the borders,
                        Morton beheaded.
                      but Morton conuicted of murthering the King had his head cut off: for he had confeſſed (as the report went) that Bothwel, & Archebauld Douglas had imparted their intent of making away the King, but in ſo tumultuous a time as that was, hee durſt not reueale it. Nor could hee deny but that ſince the Kings death, hee had beene very inwardly conuerſant, and more familiar then before with Douglas the Kings murtherer, and had promiſed by his letters if Bothwel ſhould at any time be accuſed, to defend him the beſt he might. Inſtantly Douglas and others the friends of Morton fled into England.
                     
                        His friends fled for England.
                     
                  
                  In the Low-Countries againſt the Graue Van Reneberg who had there valiantly ſerued the King of Spaine, and now laid ſiege to Stenwicke in Friezland, the States ſent the Engliſh vnder the conduct of their General Norris, who with no leſſe courage then good ſucceſſe after he had twice releeued the beſieged with victuals,
                        Norris victorious in Friezland.
                      cauſed the Enemy to raiſe his ſiege. But after that, comming to fight with Verdugues the Spaniard, & hauing the victory in his hands, his enemies put to flight, (ſuddenly fortune changing) he is beaten off the field,
                        Is diſcomfited.
                      dangerouſly wounded, and many of his men ſlaine, amongſt which (not to nominate the reſt) were theſe men o
                        •
                     
                     
note, Captain Cotton, Fitz-Williams and Biſhop. I know not well whether I ſhould here recite a Combate which was betweene Thomas Chieftaine of the
                        Albanois.
                      Wallons, and Generall Norris; but Norris by the Law militarie being not permitted to admit of, becauſe he was Generall of the Armie, his Lieutenant Roger Fitz-Williams accepted the Challenge,
                        A ridiculous combate.
                      which two after a while trauerſing their ground to and fro without one drop of blood-ſhed, betooke themſelues to drinke freely together, and ſo of enemies became friends and parted. Yet here wee muſt not omit to obſerue,
                        Drunkennes brought out of the Low-Countries into England.
                      that our Engliſhmen who of all the Northerne Nations haue beene moſt commended for ſobrietie, haue learned ſince theſe Low-Country warres ſo well to fill their cups, and to waſh themſelues with Wine, that whileſt they at this day drinke others healths, they little regard their owne. And that this vicious practice of drunkenneſſe hath ſo ouerflowed the Land, that lawes proſcripts of reſtraint, are vſually made for the drying vp of the ſame.
                  But whileſt they were all this while contending in the Low-Countries for Dorppes & Villages,
                        The King of Spaine poſſeſſeth Portugall.
                      the King of Spaine getteth into his hands the rich Kingdome of Portugall. For Henry which was King, hauing paid Natures tribute the yeare before, left the Realm to diuers Competitors, amongſt whom Philip King of Spaine, ſonne of his eldeſt Siſter (puiſſant enough in force, though not in right) by reaſon of his priority in blood and deſcent, comming of the elder line,
                        By what right.
                      and being Male, thought with his friends himſelfe worthieſt to bee preferred to the ſucceſſion of the ſaid Kingdome, before the women, the yonger ſort, and ſuch as did leſſe participate of the blood. The Duke of Sauoy reiected for that he came of the yonger Siſter; Farneſe ſonne to the Prince of Parma, borne of the eldeſt Daughter of EDWARD, brother King HENRY, and KATHERINE of Brabant, ſecond daughter to the ſaid EDWARD, grounding themſelues only vpon the benefit of Repreſentation (a ſimple fiction) could not annihilate

the true Title of Inheritance, nor intercept the King of Spaines lawfull ſucceſſion, and this the Spaniards ſtood to maintaine.
                  And as touching Don Antonio Prior of Crates, ſonne to Lewis the ſecond brother of King HENRY, he was ipſo facto, reiected, for that he was illegitimate. The King of Spaine neuertheleſſe propounded the matter twice to his Clergy and men of Law to decide the cauſe, charging them in the name of God, and vpon their faith and ſaluation, to tell him freely whether hee had rightfull claime or no to that Kingdome. They hauing with vnanimous voice aſſured him that it was proper to him, he quickly (putting forth firſt the Duke of Alua) put to flight Antonio elected of the people, and within 70 dayes brought all Portugall vnder his iuriſdiction.
                  
                     
                        The Queene of France her title to Portugall fetcht farre and reiected.
                     But touching the Right of Katherin de Medicis the Queen of France, who claimed it from Alphonſus, and the Earles of Boulogne for 320 yeares agone, that the Spaniards laughed at, as a Title out of date, and fetcht from the old Propheteſſe the Mother of Euander, a thing iniurious to ſo many of the Kings of Portugal, which had lawfully and lineally ſucceeded one another, and therefore ridiculous to both Spaniards and Portugals. Whereat the Queene incenſed with anger, and conſidering how mightily the Spaniard (now in his aſcendant) enriched himſelfe farre and neare by the acceſſion or ſurcreaſe of this new-got Kingdome, his Ilands, and the Eaſt Indies, breeding a feare within her, to her ſelfe, and the Princes her neighbouring friends, aduiſed them, and amongſt the reſt the Queene of England,
                        Inciteth the Q. of England ſecretly againſt the Spaniard.
                      that it was already high time to ſtay the Spaniards in his mounting, and to ſtop him vp within his owne bounds, before his ambition ſhould extend any further.
                  Queene ELIZABETH who was not to learne what ſhee had to doe in that nature for her ſelfe and her friends; and foreſeeing how dangerous the growing greater of the neighbour Princes would be, lent eare thereto with no light attention:

but with great and Royall kindneſſe entertained Antonio baniſhed out of Portugall,
                     
                        Antonio baniſht Portugall, commeth into England.
                      and recommended to her from France, thinking that Spaine could not take exception thereat, becauſe hee was of her Alliance, iſſued from the Blood Royall of England, and of the Houſe of Lancaſter, as ſhee well knew, nor in any Treaties that euer had paſt betwixt Spaine and England, was any caueat at all inferred, forbidding England to receiue or to haue commerce with the Portugals.
                  At the ſame time,
                        Delegates ſent into England from France about the Duke of Anjous mariage.
                      for the more confirmation of aſſured amitie, the Queene of France and the King her ſonne, proſecuting the mariage of the Duke d' Anjou, addreſt an honourable ambaſſage into England: for the conſummation thereof came ouer François de Bourbon Prince of Daulphiné, Arthur de Coſse, Cont de Secondigny, Marſhal of France, Louis de Luſignan, M. de S. Gelais, Lanſac, Salignac, Mauuiſſer, & Bernarde Briſſon, Preſident of the Parliament of Paris, and one of the learnedeſt men of France: and others, who as they they were of Honorable ranke, were very nobly receiued, and banqueted in a Banquetting-Houſe built on purpoſe neere Weſtminſter, richly adorned with rare and ſumptuous furniture; and Titls and Tournaments proclaimed, which were preſented in a moſt princely manner by Philip Earle of Arundell, Fred: Lord Winſor, Philip Sidney, and Fulk Greuill, Knights, againſt all commers, with ſundry other courtly ſports, and Princely recreations, not neceſſarily coincident to our Hiſtory.
                  To conferre with them concerning theſe Nuptials, were appointed the Baron of Burghley, Lord high Treaſurer of England; the Earles of Suſſex, Lincolne, Bedford and Leiceſter, together with Sir Chriſtopher Hatton, and Secretary Walſingham: Amongſt whom theſe matrimoniall Contracts following were concluded vpon.
                  
                     
                     
                        Couenants of mariage concluded vpon.THe Duke d' Anjou, and the Queene of England, within ſix weekes after the ratification of theſe Articles ſhall perſonally contract mariage here in England. The Duke and his aſſociates, ſeruants, and friends, being no Engliſh ſubiects, ſhall haue libertie to vſe their owne Religion, in a certain place, in their houſes, without moleſtation or impeachment.
                     He ſhall not alter any part of the Religion now receiued in England. Hee ſhall inioy and haue the Title and Dignity of King, after the mariage ſhall bee conſummate; but notwithſtanding ſhall leaue intirely to the Queene the managing of affaires. And whereas his demand was, that immediately after the celebration of the mariage, he ſhould be crowned King inſtantly to inioy the title and dignity during the gouernment of the Kingdome, in the minority of their children: The Queene anſwered, ſhe would propound and further it at the next high Court of Parliament, to be holden within fifteen dayes after the ratification. Letters Patents and other things ſhal be paſſed in both their names, as in the time of Philip and MARIE. The Queene by Act of Parliament ſhall ordaine an Annuall penſion for the Duke, but the valuation thereof ſhall bee left to her pleaſure; ſhe will alſo ordaine the ſaid Penſion to continue if he ſhall ſurviue her. The Duke in Dowry ſhall beſtow on the Queene to the value of forty thouſand Crownes per annum out of his Duchy of Berry, and ſhall forthwith infeofe her therein. As touching their Iſsue, it ſhall likewiſe be enacted by Parliament in England, and regiſtred in the Annals of France as followeth; That the Heires of them as well Males as Females by maternall right of Inheritance ſhould ſucceed to the Crowne of England. And if there bee two males, the elder ſhal ſucceed to the Crown of France, and

the yonger ſhal haue the hereditary Right of his Mother. And if one ſole male, he ſhal come to both the Crownes, and ſhall reſyde in England euery two yeares, eight moneths. And if the Duke ſhall not attaine the Kingdome of France, the children ſhall ſucceed in Appanage. If he ſuruiue the Queene, he ſhall haue the tuition of his children till the ſonnes ſhall accompliſh the age of eighteene yeares, and the daughters fifteene: But if hee die before, the tuition ſhall be left to the Authoritie of the Parliament. Hee ſhall not promote any ſtranger to any Office in England, nor ſhall hee change any ancient Rite or Cuſtome. He ſhall at no time carry the Queene or her Children out of the Realme, without conſent of the Nobilitie. If ſhee dye iſſueleſſe, hee ſhall no longer challenge any right in England, nor carie or conuay any of her Iewels out of the Land: he ſhall ſuffer euery one, and all places of the Kingdomes to bee guarded & kept by the natiue Engliſh; & ſhall not take or cauſe to be taken away any munition of Warre. Hee ſhall not engage England into any foraine warres. Hee ſhall to his power procure the Land peace with other Nations. The Queene ſhall onely enioy the Supremacie, nor ſhall aſſume any Title which may happen to fall vpon the Duke, as it were holding by the cuſtome of England. The Duke by this match intendeth not to preiudice the Right of his ſucceſsion to the Kingdome of France. The preſent Contract ſhall bee read, publiſhed, and kept vnder Record in all the Courts of France and England, within ſix moneths after the Eſpouſals, with the Authoritie of the moſt Chriſtian King, for the ratification of theſe Articles.
                     There ſhall bee made a Treatiſe, Confederation, and League betwixt England and France. Theſe things ſhal be confirmed de bona ſide, with an Oath on the part of the King of France, as well for him as for

his Heires, who ſhall deliuer Letters of the confirmation thereof with all poſsible expedition hee may, carying aſſurance that the Articles in the preſent Treaty contained, ſhall be kept inuiolably alſo.
                     
                        
                           A reſeruation added.
                        A reſeruation apart was added vnder the hands and ſeales of all the Commiſsioners, implying thus much: That ELIZABETH was not bound to the conſummation of the mariage, till the Duke & ſhe ſhould haue commutually ſatisfied and reciprocally ſetled each other in certaine things betwixt themſelues; and concerning theſe points, they were within ſix weekes by writing to certifie the King of France.
                     
                  
                  Before the ſix weekes were expired, Secretarie Somer was ſent into France about this buſineſſe. But the King refuſeth to giue him audience,The King of France vrgeth the mariage. vrging the inſtant celebration of the mariage already concluded; as if there had been nothing elſe remaining to bee done. Somer ſhewing vnder ſigne and ſeale that there was firſt a defenſiue league & offenſiue to bee performed, maintaineth the contrary. To moderate the matter, there was ſent ouer Sir Fran: Walſingham, with Sir Henry Cobham Leiger Ambaſſador in France, and Somer, who deliuered this or the like ſpeech.
                  ALthough the vulgar ſort doth cenſure hardly of the procraſtinating of this contracted mariage, Queene ELIZABETH intendeth nothing more, then to content her people, who are inſtant to haue her marry, that they may be ſecured of a ſucceſsion in her children. Her Maieſtie being ſought to by the Duke of Anjou, by good right hath his loue preferred before all other Princes, by reaſon of his vertues and reſplendent race,
                        The Queen of England deferreth.
                      and ſhee proteſting to beare vnto him moſt ſoueraigne loue, holding off from the conſummation of mariage, onely vntill ſhe could haue

knowledge from her people, how they ſtand affected thereunto, holding it a point of wiſdome in the meane time rather to foreſee, then to repent too late,
                        Wherefore.
                      ſeeming in theſe reſpects to demurre the more, by reaſon of the ciuill warres in France, the vnfortunate Duke of Anjous vndeſeruedly falling out of the Kings fauour, and in England an auerſion of heart in moſt of the beſt of her Subiects, ſince the firſt motion of the mariage, yet all this breeds nor brings no diminution of true loyall loue in her Maieſty towards the ſaid Duke. Alſo it was at this time out of ſeaſon for the French King, to vrge a preſent conſummation, knowing the Duke was newly entred into warre againſt the King of Spaine, the which he might not ſuddenly abandon, or relinquiſh, without great diſhonour to himſelfe, diſcommoditie to the Kingdome of France and England; as alſo the ruine of Flanders, the Spaniard there growing dayly greater and greater. Moreouer, in ſtead of continuing peace at home, (for which the people prayeth) they muſt of neceſsitie bee brought to bloody warres, the Queenes husband being ſo deepely engaged thereinto. For theſe reaſons, from henceforth that Treaty of ſudden mariage is to ſurceaſe, vntill the Duke of Anjou were diſ-intangled out of theſe warres, and that interchangeable conditions of Offenſiue and Defenſiue Alliance bee paſſed betwixt the two Kingdomes of France and England.
                  
                  And aſſuredly the Queene deſired it aboue all things. But the French would promiſe no other thing but to paſſe to couenants of mutuall defenſiue, and as for the offenſiue,Duke d' Anjou returneth againe into England. would heare it no further ſpoken of, vntill the Nuptials were celebrated.
                  Within a ſhort ſpace after, the Duke (whom the States had elected Gouernor of Flanders) comes into England, after

he had happily raiſed the ſiege of Cambray, at the charge and coſt of Queene ELIZABETH, who had ſupplyed him with great ſummes of money by the hands of Henry Seimor, Palauicine an Italian, and Bex a Frenchman. The hope he relyed vpon was this; that if he ſhould not preſently diſpatch the mariage, yet ſhould hee ſo effect, that by the fauour of the Queene (whom the Dutch honoured as an earthly Goddeſſe) he ſhould bee the better welcome to the Low-Countri-men at his returne.
                  He ariued ſafe in England, and was magnificently entertained, and receiued with all royall courteſies could be expected, euident teſtimonies of honour and loue, which her Maieſtie ſhewed apparantly,Queene Elizabeth giueth a Ring vnto the D. of Anjou. inſomuch that on a time on the day of the ſolemnization of her Coronation (he being entred into amorous Diſcourſe with her Maieſtie) the great loue which ſhee bore him, drew a Ring from her finger, which ſhee gaue him vpon certain cond
                        •
                     tions meant and agreed vpon betwixt them. The aſſiſtants tooke that for an argument and aſſurance that a mariage was by reciprocall promiſe contracted betweene them. Amongſt others, Aldegondy Gouernor of the City of Antwerpe, diſpatched meſſengers ſuddenly ouer, into the Low-Countries; where for great ioy at the hearing thereof, both in Antwerpe, and all ouer Flanders were made bonefires, and their great Artillerie ſhot off. But this bred ſundry opinions among the Courtiers:A motion of ſundry conceits in Court. For as ſome reioyced exceedingly, others were aſtoniſht at it, & ſome quite ſtrucke downe with ſadneſſe. The Earle of Leiceſter who had laid a ſecret plot to preuent the mariage, the Vice-Chamberlaine Hatton, and Walſingham, were moſt of all malecontented, as if the Queene, Religion and Kingdome had been vndone. Her women which were about her fell all in ſorrow and ſadneſſe, and the terror they put her into,The Queen greatly diſquieted. ſo troubled her minde, that ſhe paſſed all that night without ſleepe amongſt her houſhold ſeruants, who made a conſort of weeping, and ſighing. The next

morning finding the Duke, and taking him aſide, had ſerious diſcourſe with him. The Duke retiring himſelfe, after hee left her, into his Chamber, plucketh off the Ring, caſteth it on the ground, taketh it vp againe, rayleth on the lightneſſe of women, and inconſtancie of Ilanders.
                  As ſhe was perplexed with theſe paſſions,Her Maieſty thinks what inconueniencies might enſue in contemning and deſpiſing the Match with the Duke of Anjou., ſhee called to minde what once the Lord Burley, and the Earle of Suſſex had told her, that there was no Alliance offenſiue to bee hoped for, without marying with the Duke; nor being alone and without aſſiſtancy, was able to withſtand the greatneſſe of the Spaniard. That the Spaniard offering his daughter in mariage to the King of Scots, hee would eaſily draw the Papiſts in England to be his adherents; and all the Fugitiues, Rebels, diſcontented perſons, and ſuch as were ſine ſpe, & ſine re (whereof the number was great) to be on his ſide. that al good people were now out of hope euer to haue iſſue of her body of the Blood Royall by this mariage; and now hauing their hearts alienated from her, hereby would caſt their eyes and affections vpon ſome other of her Competitors. That alſo ſhee could not but highly diſpleaſe the King of France, and the Duke his Brother, who after the imploiment of ſo much time, the holding of ſo many Counſels, the ſending of ſuch honorable Ambaſſadors, and the expences of ſo much money, could hardly endure to finde himſelfe in fine derided, what colour ſo euer ſhould be caſt ouer the matter: And to raiſe mony for the Duke of Anjou, to imploy him in the warres of Flanders, aſsigning him an annuall Penſion for the time to come. There remained alſo a ſcruple vpon her conſcience, that he ſo deluded of her, might match himſelfe in Spaine, and then ſhee ſhould bee in danger on both ſides, as well from France, as from Flanders, as euery one could breathe into her eares, and her ſelfe preſage.
                  Some thought, that amidſt this anxiety of doubtfull thoughts which troubled her minde about this mariage, the neceſsitie of the time and matter, made her put on a reſolution

that it would ſtand more with her honour, and the good of her Common-weale to liue ſingle, then to be maried;Reaſons diſſwading her from marying. foreſeeing that if ſhe ſhould marry with a ſubiect from ſuch diſparitie would grow diſgrace to her ſelfe, and kindle heart-burnings, ſecret diſpleaſures, and domeſtique troubles and hatred. If with a ſtranger, ſhe ſhould bring her ſelfe and ſubiects vnder a foraine yoake, and Religion in hazard; remembring withall how vnfortunate that match of her Siſter MARIES with King Philip was, and that of her great grandfather EDWARD the fourth, who was the firſt Engliſh King, ſince the Norman conqueſt, which tooke a ſubiect to wife. She feared alſo to transfer vpon a husband that glory, which whilſt ſhe liued vnmarried remained with her entire: withall, ſhe was diuerted in minde from mariage, by reaſon of the great perils ſhe ſhould be ſubiect to, by conception, and child-bearing, as diuers women and Phyſicians bore her in hand.
                  
                     A book publiſhed in print againſt the mariage.Her Maieſtie likewiſe burned with choller that there was a booke publiſhed in print, inueighing ſharply againſt the mariage, as fearing the alteration of Religion, which was intituled, A gaping gulfe to ſwallow vp England by a French mariage. In this Pamphlet the Priuy Councellors which fauoured the Match were taxed of ingratitude to their Prince and Countrey: the Queene as not vnderſtanding well her ſelfe, by the way of flattery is tauntingly touched: the Duke d' Anjou and his country of France in contumelious tearmes ſhamefully reuiled: the mariage condemned, for the diuerſitie of Religions, by poiſonous words and paſſages of Scripture, miſerably wreſted, would ſeeme to proue that the Daughter of God, being to match with the ſonne of Antichriſt, it muſt needs bee the ruine of the Church, and pernicious to the State; neither would Queene ELIZABETH bee perſwaded that the Author of this booke had any other purpoſe, but to bring her into hatred with her ſubiects, and to open a gap to ſome prodigious

innouation: it being ſo that ſhee neuer had reſpected ſo much the power ſhee had ouer her people as the loue they bore to her, and (as Princes are accuſtomed) was neuer more carefull then of her royall reputation: notwithſtanding the writer of that booke neuer once made mention of meanes to eſtabliſh in future ſecuritie her ſelfe or Realme, or for auoiding danger, or how the States of the Land had in former times moſt importunately perſwaded her Maieſtie to mariage, to giue an aſſured remedy againſt imminent euils. And this ſhe publiſhed in writing,The Queens Declaration againſt this pernicious Libell. condemning the Author of the Libell, made knowne the Dukes propenſitie of minde towards her ſelfe, and to the Proteſtants Religion, grieuing to offer iniury to ſo worthy a Prince, who neuer had once motioned to haue any change in State, Common-wealth, or Religion. Shee alſo commended Sir H. Simier, the Duke's Agent for his modeſty, and wiſedome, whom ſome had before in malignant ſpeeches calumniated: intimating to the people alſo that this Libell was a deuice of Traitors to ſtir vp hatred abroad, & ſeditions at home, commanding it ſhould be burnt in the preſence of Magiſtrates.
                  Since that, ſhee begunne to bee the more diſpleaſed with Puritans then ſhe had been before-time,The Author diſcouered and he that had diſperſed the bookes. perſwading her ſelfe that ſuch a thing had not paſſed without their priuitie: and within a few dayes after, Iohn Stubbes of Lincolnes Inne, a zealous profeſſor of Religion, the Author of this Ralatiue Pamphlet (whoſe Siſter Thomas Cartwright the Arch-Puritan had maried) William Page the diſperſer of the Copies, and Singleton the Printer were apprehended: againſt whom ſentence was giuen that their right hands ſhould be cut off by a law in the time of Philip and MARIE, againſt the Authors of Seditious Writings, and thoſe that diſperſe them: Some Lawyers ſtorming hereat, ſaid the iudgement was erroneous, and fetcht from a falſe obſeruation of the time, wherein the Statute was made, that it was onely temporarie, and that (Queene MARIE dying) it dyed

with her. Of the which Lawyers, one Dalton for his clamorous ſpeeches was commited to priſon, and Mouſon a Iudge of the Common-pleas, was ſharply rebuked, and his place taken from him, after that Sir Chr. Wray chiefe Iuſtice of England had made it manifeſt by Law, that in that Statute there was no errour of time, but the Act was made againſt ſuch as ſhould put forth, or divulge any ſeditious writing againſt the King; and that the King of England neuer dyed; yea, that Statute likewiſe in the firſt yeare of Queene ELIZABETH was reuiued againe to the Queene and her Heires for euer. Not long after vpon a Stage ſet vp in the Market-place at Weſtminſter,
                     Right hands cut off. 
                     Stubbes and Page had their right hands cut off by the blow of a Butchers knife, with a Mallet ſtrucke through their wreſts. The Printer had his Pardon. I can remember that ſtanding by Iohn Stubbes, ſo ſoone as his right hand was off, put off his hat with the left, and cryed aloud, God ſaue the Queene. The people round about him ſtood mute, whether ſtricken with feare at the firſt ſight of this ſtrange kinde of puniſhment, or for commiſeration of the man whom they reputed honeſt, or out of a ſecret inward repining they had at this mariage, which they ſuſpected would be dangerous to Religion. Theſe things paſſed within a little after the Dukes ariuall in England: and whileſt hee ſtayed here, the Queene to take away the feare conceiued by many, that Religion ſhould change, and Papiſts ſhould be tolerated by the importunity of Campian the Ieſuite (of whom I haue ſpoken) Ralph Sherwing, Luke Kirby, and Alexander Brian, who were indicted by an Act made in the 25 of Edward the third, for attempting the ruine of the Queene and Kingdome: for adhering to the Biſhop of Rome the Queenes Aduerſarie; for raiſing ſedition in her Realme, and gathering forces together, to the vtter ſubuerſion of her Dominions, of which they were found guilty and ſo condemned: for that they obſtinately defended the Papall Authoritie againſt the Queene, they were put to death.

For Campian then condemned, being demanded whether Queene ELIZABETH were right or lawfull heire?The Ieſuite Edm. Campian with other Prieſts are put to death. anſwered nothing; and againe, If the Pope ſhould inuade the Land whether he would take his part or the Queenes? hee openly ſaid, the Popes, which hee teſtified vnder his hand-writing▪ After theſe, ſome others were executed for the like matters, and for ten whole yeares ſpace together ſince the Rebellion but fiue Papiſts. But I leaue the handling hereof to the Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtory; neuertheleſſe with permiſsion, I will briefely here obſerue and note ſome ſuch occurrences, as are adioyning with thoſe of States. Theſe times were ſuch, as that the Queene (who was neuer of opinion that mens conſciences ſhould bee conſtrained) often complained to haue beene of neceſſitie forced to theſe puniſhments, leſt vnder a pretext of conſcience, and Catholike Religion,The puniſhing of Catholikes needfull. ſhe ſhould endanger her ſelfe, and her louing ſubiects: neuertheleſſe her Maieſty beleeued not that the moſt part of theſe poore and miſerable Prieſts had plotted the deſtruction of her country; but that their Superiors made vſe of them as inſtruments of their miſchiefe: for as much as they which were ſent, were wholly ſubiect to the power and authoritie of them which had ſent them. For when as ſuch as were now and afterwards apprehended, were demanded,Suſpition of them increaſed. 
                     whether by the Authority of the Bull of Pius the fift, the Queene of Englands ſubiects were ſo freed of their Oath of Allegeance that they might take Armes againſt her? whether they eſteemed her a lawfull Queene? whether they approued the opinions of Sanders and Briſtow, touching the Authoritie of this Bul? to which partie they would incline, if the Pope ſhould warre againſt the Queene? Some of them anſwered ſo doubtfully; others with ſuch pertinacy; and ſome with ſuch preuarication,By their tergiuerſation. or keeping ſilence, ſo mocked the queſtions propounded to them, that diuers Papiſts begunne to ſuſpect that they nouriſhed ſome falſhood: and Biſhop although ingenious, moſt zealous for the Roman Religion writ againſt them,

ſhewing that this Cannon which had paſſed vnder the name of the Lateran Councell, vpon which was abſolutely grounded the oath of abſoluing ſubiects from their Obedience and fealty to their Princes, and for the depoſing of them, was nothing elſe, but a Decree of Pope Innocent the 3, which neuer was receiued in England, as alſo that that Counſell was repeal'd and annihilated, wherein nothing was done by the Fathers of the ſame at that time.
                  The more the number of the Prieſts comming by ſtealth into England increaſed, the more increaſed ſuſpitions of them, who ſecretly practiſed to grope the hearts of men, preached that it was lawfull to depoſe Princes excommunicated, muttered and murmured, that ſuch as were not of the Roman religion, were to be depriued of all regall power and Dignity, and that ſuch as had taken religious Orders were exempt from all obedience to Princes, nor were any ſuch held to be ſubiect either to them, or their lawes. That the Pope had ſupreme power ouer the whole world, yea euen in politick affaires. That the Magiſtrates of England had no lawfull inſtitution, and therefore were not to bee obeyed as Magiſtrates.Falſe poſitions ſpread abroad. And that whatſoeuer Queene ELIZABETH had done ſince the publication of the Bull Declaratory of Pius the 5, was by the Lawes of God and Man diſanull'd and to be held for naught. And ſome of them denyed not in publike hearing, that they were ſent for no other cauſes into England, then to abſolue euery one ſeuerally and apart, of all oath of fidelitie and obedience towards the Queene, as the Bull had abſolued all in generall, which they did in taking confeſſions of their reconciliation. And this they ſeemed to doe with more eaſe, in promiſing Abſolution from all mortall ſinne; and with more ſecuritie, becauſe it was done priuately, and vnder the Seale of Confeſsion.
                  
                  
                     
                     THE FIVE AND TWENTIETH YEERE of Her Raigne.Booke 3. Anno Dom. M.D.LXXXII.
                     
                        THeſe and the like things brought vpon Papiſts new and ſharper lawes,New Lawes againſt Papiſts. made by Act of Parliament at Weſtminſter in the moneth of Ianuary, where all ſuch were declared guilty of high Treaſon, which diſſwaded any of her Maieſties ſubiects frō their obedience to their Prince, or from the Religion now profeſt in England, or that ſhould reconcile any to the Church of Rome; or which ſhould haue beene ſo perſwaded, turned, or reconciled. Two hundred markes fine, and a yeares impriſonment inflicted vpon thoſe which ſhould celebrate Maſſe ſo long till they had paid. And ſuch as had willingly beene at any of their Maſſes, one hundred markes, and one yeares impriſonment: and ſuch as were not found to reſort to their owne Pariſh Churches to diuine ſeruice, for

euery moneths omiſſion ten pounds. Which was maliciouſly vnderſtood, and interpreted by the Papiſts of Lunarie months, who before had paid but one ſhilling to the poore for euery Sunday or Holidayes abſence. But I referre it to the Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtorie, to intreat of theſe things more at large.
                     
                        The Duke d' Anjou ſayleth into Flanders.The Duke d' Anjou after ſome three moneths abode in England, tooke his way towards Flanders in the moneth of February. Queene ELIZABETH in perſon accompanied him to Canterbury: and commanded the Earle of Leiceſter, the Lord Charles Howard, the Barons of Hunſdon, Willoughby, Winſor, and Sheffeild; Sir Philip Sidney, Sir Francis Ruſſel, Sir George Bourchier Knights, and diuers other noble Gentlemen,Hee is made there Duke of Brabant, &c. to accompany him to Antwerpe; where he was created Duke of Brabant, of Lymbourg, Lotharing, &c. For the confederated States of Flanders had from thence proclaimed the King of Spaine falne from his Principality for infringing their Lawes; broken his Seales, caſt downe his Armes, and ſo abſolued the people from all oath of Fealtie, ſo that it was lawfull and free for them to elect another Prince. The Duke permitted all thoſe the vſe of the Romiſh Religion, which would ſweare Allegeance to him, and abiure the Spaniard. After this hee betooke himſelfe to the field, where he loſt Aldenard, and tooke in Aloſt. But ſix hundred Engliſh ſouldiers exclaiming of General Norris his imperious ſeueritie ouer them,Certaine Engliſh reuolt from him. forſaking him, fled to the Spaniard, vnder the leading of Captaine T. Norris, Barney, Corniſh, and Gypſon, who expoſing themſelues to all perils, and being baſely reſpected, were paid with ſlow and late repentance and infinite miſeries, the paine of their perfidiouſneſſe.Generall Norris carieth himſelfe generouſly, and behaueth himſelf valorouſly.
                     
                     But notwithſtanding, General Norris with three hundred horſe, and the reſt of his foot-companies, got the renowne of a valorous and moſt iudicious Warriour, for his couragious encountering the Duke of Parma, who fell vpon him

with a farre greater power, the whileſt he warily and wiſely made his retreat into the City of Gand, in ſight of the two Dukes of Anjou and Orleans, admiring his martiall valour from off the Ramparts, where they ſtood to behold him. But why inſiſt I vpon theſe matters? The Duke d' Anjou hauing now without ſucceſſe ſpent huge ſummes of money ſent him out of England, weighing with himſelfe that only apparant Titles were beſtowed vpon him; and conſidering that all the managing of theſe matters were in the power of the States, aſſayed by a precipitate counſell,The Duke d'Anjou departed from Flanders with ſhame. with his Armie to enter by force Antwerpe, and ſome other townes; but all in vaine, and with the loſſe of many of his men; and ſhortly after was conſtrained ſhamefully to quit & leaue Flanders.
                     
                     It ſhall ſuffice to note in a word, in paſſing, that nere vnto CHAPELLE in the month of May, in the 12 degree of Gemini appeared a Comet or blazing ſtarre,A Comet. with bright ſhining beames, ſtreaming ouer the right ſholder of the Dragon. About that time happened a horrible tempeſt in Norfolke, with fearefull flaſhes of lightning and thunder of long continuance, with violent furious winds, and hailſtones of three inches about.
                     Queene ELIZABETH for better ſecurity, and to fortifie her ſelfe the more abroad againſt the Spaniard,
                        Queene Elizabeth beſtoweth the Order of the Garter vpon the King of Denmarke. whom ſhee knew to be infeſt againſt her, for that ſhe had furniſhed the Duke d'Anjou with moneyes, admitted into the fraternity of the order of Saint George, Frederick the ſecond, King of Denmarke, who had alwaies ſhewed himſelfe moſt affectionate towards her Maieſty; and to inueſt him therewith, ſent ouer Sir Peregrin Bertie, whom ſhee (as her Maieſty was euer nice in conferring honors) had with ſome difficulty, honoured with the title of Lord Willoughbey of Eresby, before he had giuen any proofe of his martiall vertue; howſoeuer the Ducheſſe of Suffolke his mother was daughter, and ſole inheritrix to the ancient Baronry of Willoughby of Eresby.
                     
                     
                        The King of Denmark with ioyfulneſſe put the Or, the Coller of Eſſes. chaine of Roſes about his necke, and the Garter about his legge, the other Robes he locked vp in his Cheſt, but refuſed to put them on, becauſe they were exotick, or to take the oath; for that he had taken one afore, when by the French King hee was inſtalled Knight of the Order of Saint Michael. The whileſt the Lord Willoughby was in Denmarke, he propounded to the King a complaint from the Engliſh Merchants, concerning the raiſing of Impoſts and cuſtomes, for that in times paſt for paſſing the Oreſunde, or ſtraits of Denmarke, they vſed to giue for euery ſhip but a Roſe-Noble, which made the fourth part of an ounce of gold, & as much for the fraught, with ſome ſmal peeces of ſiluer for the fire-beacons giuing light by night, vvhich vvere to direct them by their Sea-markes ouer the Shallowes, and by the Shelues, bankes, & Rocks.The Merchants complaint not regarded. He treated alſo for the Merchants, that the tribute vvhich they call their LAST GELT might be remitted, by the vvhich they begunne (vvhen the Warres were ſo hot betwixt the Kings of Denmarke and Sueden) to exact, by vvay of borrowing, the thirtieth part of all manner of Merchandizes, vvith promiſe to repay them, or the value of them againe, the warre once ended. But theſe as matters of importance vvere referred till another time. For Princes doe ſeldome or neuer abate of their Cuſtome, Taxes, or Impoſts, eſteeming that ſuch things as theſe (vvhich they call Royalties) belonging to the rightfull liberty of euery Kingdome, are not things ſubiect to be moderated, or abrogated by any ſtrangers.
                     
                        The Treaty with the Queene of Scots is deferred.Queene ELIZABETH the better to ſecure her ſtate at home, imployed Sir Walter Mildmay to comprimiſe buſineſſe with the Queene of Scots. But finding that the Guiſes had conſulted with certaine Engliſh Fugitiues, about the ſetting her at liberty, and gathering forces together, vnder the pretext of ſending ſupplyes to the Duke of Anjou in Flanders, vvhich in very deed vvere to haue beene paſt ouer

from the Hauens of Aux, or Ew, (obſcure harbours of Normandy) into England, which the French King hauing notice of, out of his loue to Queene ELIZABETH certifieth her thereof, and ſtayed them: hereupon the matter was intermitted, and the Queene of Scots affaires deferred.
                     But by the vvay to meet with the Guiſes attempts in Scotland,
                        Gowry and others begin tumults in Scotland. whither it is ſuppoſed he employed the Earle of Lennox, to diſſolue the League betweene the King of Scots, and the Engliſh, whileſt Will: Ruthen (lately created by the K. Earle of Gowry) begunne to be mutinous. He (for that hee vvould not degenerate frō his Father) bearing a mortall malice to the Kings Mother, together with others of his confederacie were to put in practice the beſt wits they had for the vvorking of the Duke of Lennox and the Earle Arran both out of the Kings fauour and company, vnder a colour of Religion, the Kings ſecuritie, and the league of amity vvith England. Now behold their ſubtilty and crafty proiects. They begin to perſwade Lennox vvho had been eſtabliſhed L. High Chamberlain of Scotland, to exerciſe the rigor of his iuriſdiction, though then out of vſe, for no other purpoſe but to purchaſe his owne diſgrace with the people, vvhileſt the Presbytery out of their Pulpits ſhould declaime againſt him as a Papiſt of the faction of the Guizes, and a rude and ſeuere Executioner of the Law; & ſhould publikely foretell and denounce his ruine and deſtruction. When as therefore Lennox was departed from Perth where the King remained,Gowries conſpiracie. They intercept the King. to execute his office at Edenburgh, and the Earle Arran abſent from the Court, Gowrey, Marre, Lindſey, and others, taking their opportunity, inuited the King to the Caſtle of Ruthen, being there, they held him in ſuch feare that hee durſt not walke abroad: ſuch of his ſeruants as he thought beſt of, they ſent away: the E. of Arran they arreſted and caſt into priſon,The Duke of Lennox driuen out of Scotland and compelled the King by the interceſſion of Queen ELIZABETH, to recal the Earl of Angus out of exile, and to ſends the Duke of Lenox into France, who as he was a Noble

man of milde diſpoſition, and altogether inclin'd to the publike peace and good of the Land, by the Kings perſwaſion, but their impulſion, although he might eaſily haue ſtood vpon his guard, and withſtood them, departed quietly from Dunbriton, where he tooke ſhipping for France. Not content with this, they forced the King by his Letters to ſignifie to Queene ELIZABETH this his interception, and that it was a meeting made by his willing conſent with ſome of his Lords, concerning ſpeciall buſineſſes. But Buchanan they could not poſſibly perſwade to approue this Act, or by compoſing any booke of this ſubiect, nor by perſwaſions of a meſſenger; but he wept bitterly and ſorrowed grieuouſly, that he had to-fore taken the Rebels part againſt the Prince, and ſoone after dyed. A man (as himſelfe ſings in his Poems) though borne in a countrey barren for learning, yet hee attained to the ſoueraigne degree of Poeſie; ſo as by right hee ought to bee accounted the Prince of Poets of our age.
                     
                        An Embaſſie from the French King, ſent to deliuer the King of Scots.The French King hauing had certaine intelligence of the paſſages in Scotland, ſendeth both with one meſſage Monſ: de la Moteff through England, and Monſ: de Manninguille by Sea into Scotland, by all poſſible means to haue the King ſet at liberty, to confirme the French faction, to draw the King into loue & amity with France, and to let him vnderſtand, that his mother to make him be knowne true and legitimate King by Chriſtian Princes, and all Scotland, ſetting aſide all partialitie, out of her motherly piety and indulgence yeelded him freely the title of the Kingdome; and admitted him into the ſociety freely to Raigne. Shee (diſtreſſed Queene) in the meane time, afflicted with many miſeries, the calamities of a priſon, & in indurance, without hope of deliuery, bewayled the diſmall fortunes of the King her ſonne with her owne, in a large Letter written in French to Queene ELIZABETH, which the tender loue of a mother, and the diſquietneſſe of her Spirit, extorted from her,

the which out of the originall Copy of her owne handwriting, I haue more briefely recollected, as followed.
                     
                        
                           
                              AFter I was certainly informed,
                                 Mary Q. of Scotland, her Letter to Quene Elizabeth.
                               that my ſonne was intercepted and detained in captiuitie (as my ſelfe haue beene for ſome yeares) a ſudden feare ſuggeſted into my minde, that hee, and I were to drinke of one cup of ſorrow: I cannot therefore in opening my ſad afflicted heart, but vtter my anguiſh, to imprint them if it may be vpon yours, offer the ſame to your conſcionable commiſeration, that the ages to come may know my innocency, and their tyrannie, by whoſe meanes I endure theſe intolerable indignities. But for that, their ſubtil plots and miſchieuous practices haue all this while been preferd with you before my iuſt complaint, it being in your gracious power to doe equity and iuſtice, where violence treadeth downe vertue, and might ſuppreſſeth right: I doe appeale vnto God immortall, whom alone I know to haue power ouer vs; Princes coequall in right and honour, and him (in whom there is no place for fraud, or falſhood) I will inuoke, that at the laſt day hee will recompence vs according to our demerits, howſoeuer my Aduerſaries the whileſt haue cautelouſly cloaked their treacheries from men (and perhaps from you.
                                 The Q. of Scots deploreth her ſons intercepting, and her owne deſolation.
                              ) I beſeech you now then in the name of God, and by his all-powerfull Maieſtie I adiure you, to call to minde, how cunningly ſome ſent forth in your name to me, could ſtirre vp the Scots my ſubiects, whileſt I liued with them, into open rebellion againſt me, and haue been the firſt mouers of all the miſchiefe, which euer ſince hath hapned in that countrey, as euidently appeareth by ſundry plain teſtimonies

thereof, and Mortons confeſsion from his own mouth, who for ſuch matters gr
                                 •
                              w vp to great honors, whom if I could haue proſecuted, according to his deſert; and if your aſsiſting the Rebels had not b
                                 •
                              en they could neuer haue ſtood vp ſo long againſt mee, and my friends, as they did.
                           When I was detained Priſoner in Lake-Leuin, Sir Nich. Throckmorton, was the first that came to me in your name, who perſwaded me to quit the Kingdome vnd
                                 •
                              r Letters Patents, ſigned with my hand (which he aſſured me ſhould be of no effect, as all the world knoweth them ſo to be) vntill that you had aſsiſted the Authors of theſe Letters, with your fauour and Armes. But ſay in good ſooth, would you acknowledge that your ſubiects ſhould haue ſuch power ouer you? The regall power I had in the meane time, by your aide & aduice, was taken from me, to be conferred on my ſonne, a yong child, by reaſon of his Infant-age vnfit to manage the adminiſtration of a Kingdome. And when as of late, I determined to make him a lawfull reſignation, for the certaine eſtabliſhing of him in the Kingdome, hee was by force of Armes caried violently away by Traitors; who, doubtleſſe had no other intent, then to depriue him (as they did me) of the Crowne, and perhaps of his life. After I got out of Lake-Leuin, and was to raiſe Armes for the ſuppreſsing of the Rebels, I ſent you then the Diamond, which formerly you had giuen me, as a pledge of mutuall loue betwixt vs, when you made me many large promiſes, and faithfull proteſtations to ſuccour and ſupport me againſt the Rebels, when alſo you promiſed, that if I ſhould come towards you, you would meet me in perſon vpon the frontiers, and would aſsiſt me. I relying vpon theſe promiſes ſo often and ſo ſeriouſly iterated (although your meſſengers had many times before deluded me) reſolued to reſort to you, as to

a Sanctuary. And aſſuredly, I had come, had I but found the way as open to me, and as eaſie to paſſe, as it was for thoſe who reuolted againſt me. But before I could come at you, I was arreſted vpon the way, guarded with troops of men, ſhut vp in ſtrong places, and ſince that time haue endured things worſe then death.
                           I know you will obiect ſome intercourſes of buſineſſe haue paſt betwixt the Duke of Norfolke and me; but I aſſure you there hath neuer any thing paſt, preiudiciall to you or your Kingdome, as alſo your chiefe Counſellors haue giuen approbation thereto, as I can proue, who likewiſe promiſed mee by the way of atteſtation to procure your conſent. And how I pray you ſhould theſe ſo great perſons promiſe your conſent to a thing which might deſpoile you of honour, life, and Diadem? And notwithſtanding, you would that euery one ſhould be ſo perſwaded.
                           Beſides, as diuers of the Rebels, by a tardy repentance re-aduiſing themſelues, and by a Commiſsion held betwixt our Deputies at Yorke, vnderſtood how wickedly they had dealt with me, they being beſieged with your Souldiers in Edenburgh-Caſtle,
                                 Lidington and de Grange.
                               two of the principall dyed miſerably; the one by poiſon, the other in a halter. And that came to paſſe, for that twice I had diſmiſt the Armies at your requeſt, in hope of peace, which God knowes, whether euer my Aduerſaries once haue thought on.
                           Since that, I had reſolued to try whether patience can haue power to conquer cruelty, in ſuffering all extremities that can be impoſed on a poore Priſoner. All conference with my ſonne by Letters or Meſſengers, for this yeare, hath been denyed me, renting if it were poſsible the ſonne from the mother by a ſad ſeparation of ſpirits.
                           I haue often propounded Articles of peace and concord

to bee confirmed betwixt vs at Chateſworth by the moſt Chriſtian Kings Ambaſſadors eleuen yeares agone, both to your Deputies, and to your ſelfe, and by my owne the laſt yeare, I dealt ſincerely with Beal. But theſe profers were ſtill reiected, delayes interpos'd, my beſt meaning euer ſuſpected, and the affection of my true-intending heart continually condemned. Nor haue I reaped any other fruit by my long ſuffering, but that by a Preſcription, I am dayly handled worſe and worſe, not indeed as a Priſoner, but as ſome abiect ſeruant of baſe condition. But truely I cannot longer endure theſe indignities, howſoeuer the matter ſhall fall out, if I die, I will manifeſt the Authors of my death; if I liue, I ſhall ſo effect (I hope) that the malicious practices of my Aduerſaries ſhall dye, and paſſe the remainder of my dayes in more tranquilitie.
                           Wherefore, to take away all occaſions of ſcandall betwixt vs, let the teſtimonies of the Spaniards, which were lately taken in Ireland, and all the examinations of the Ieſuites be produced againſt mee. Let mee be arraigned openly, come in who can to accuſe me, prouided withall I may haue the liberty to defend my ſelfe, and not be condemned before I be heard. The malefactors and vileſt Priſoners are permitted to defend themſelues and to confront their accuſers. Why then am I denyed this lawfull libertie, being an anointed Queene, your neareſt Kinſwoman, and the next lawfull heire to your Kingdome? But this laſt is that excruciates my Aduerſaries, whoſe chiefeſt ſtudies are bent to breed debate betwixt vs. Alas, alas! and why ſhould this vex or afflict my enemies, when as I proteſt before God, and on my honour, I haue not thought this long time of any Kingdome but that of heauen. Neuertheleſſe, you are bound by oath, royall duty, and Iuſtice, not to diſturbe or impeach, after my death, my ſonnes moſt certaine

Right, nor to abett, or aide thoſe which ſeriouſly and ſecretly labour his ruine, both in England and Scotland, as is too-too well knowne by the dealings of your Ambaſſadors in Scotland, who haue dealt (no doubt without your priuity) moſt treacherouſly with me, and all by the Earle of Huntingdons ſetting on.
                           Is there any iuſt dealing in this, that a Mother ſhould not be ſuffered to ſuccour her ſonne in diſtreſſe? nay, not ſo much as to be let vnderſtand how he doth? If ſuch as you ſent for my ſonnes good, had taken my aduice by the way, they would haue beene the welcomer to him, and I the more obliged to you; nor was there any reaſon you ſhould ſo long conceale their goings thither, nor then keepe mee ſo ſtraightly ſhut vp: but to ſpeake freely, I beſeech you let no more ſuch be imployed for Scotland. Thus much I dare promiſe my ſelfe, that Hunſdon will doe nothing but that ſtandeth with his honour, nor Huntingdon any thing may tend to my good, for that which he hath already practiſed againſt me.
                           I entreat you therefore by the bond of that conſanguinitie which is betwixt vs, to bee circumſpect for the ſafety of my ſonne, not to intermeddle your ſelfe with the buſineſſes of Scotland, before you haue conſulted with mee and the King of France, and hold all thoſe for Traitors which keepe my ſonne in hold, not ſuffering him to goe any where, but at their pleaſure. In fine, I coniure you by the Croſſe and Paſsion of Chriſt our Redeemer, that after ſo many yeares of deſolation, I hauing libertie, may vpon iuſt tearmes, be ſuffered to retire my poore weake body into ſome quiet place out of England, there to refreſh mee before my death, after the long and loathſome time of my impriſonment. This doing, you ſhall eternally oblige vnto you me and mine, but aboue all my ſonne. Nor wil I euer

ceaſe to craue this, till you haue granted it me, my indiſpoſition enforcing this importunity. Let mee be vſed hereafter a little more gently, otherwiſe I ſhall not be able to endure; nor put mee off, to the diſpoſing of any, but of your ſelfe. What good or euill hereafter ſhall betyde me, I will impute all to you, vouchſafe mee this fauour, to let me know your pleaſure, either by your letter, or by the French Ambaſſador. I can repoſe no confidence in thoſe things, which the Earle of Shrewsbury hath imparted vnto me, they are ſo mutable. I writ of late to your Councell, but you ſent me word, to acquaint none but your ſelfe with my buſineſſe: for there was no equity in it, in giuing them ſo much power to afflict me. And I cannot apprehend it otherwiſe, but that ſome ill-willers of mine, were the occaſioners of it, for feare that others, duly conſidering my iuſt complaints, in regard of your honor, & their duties, ſhould haue oppoſed thē
                              ſelues. And now the laſt thing I am to deſire, is, that I may haue ſome reuerend Catholicke Prieſt to inſtruct me in Religion, for the ſaluation of my ſoule. This is a laſt duty not to be denyed to wretches of meaneſt ranck. You ſuffer the Ambaſſadors of foraigne Princes to vſe their Religion, and my ſelfe ſometimes haue granted toleration of ſeuerall profeſsions to my ſubiects: If this be denyed mee, I hope to bee excuſed before God, and I feare mine Aduerſaries ſhall not paſſe vnpuniſhed. Aſſuredly it will be a preſident to other Chriſtian Princes to exerciſe the like ſeuerity amongſt their ſubiects of different Religions, if this bee offered me, an abſolute Princeſſe, & of your neareſt alliance. As I am, I will euer be affected to you, in deſpight of my Aduerſaries; and ſtomacke they me neuer ſo much. I deſire not to haue my family increaſed, but I vpon neceſsity intreat to retain two of my maid-ſeruants to attend me in my ſickneſſe: let not mine enemies aſſwage their cruelty

vpon me, in cauſing me to bee denied ſo ſmall an office of humanity. Whereas I am taxed by the Earle of Shrewsbury, to haue dealt otherwiſe (then I promiſed Beal) in ſurrendring my title in Scotland to my ſon, without your priuity: Beleeue not Beals ſuggeſtions, for I paſt no promiſe, but vpon certaine conditions, which I am not bound to performe on my part, vnleſſe they be performed on yours: I haue yet receiued no anſwer thereof, and they haue beene long time ſilent; but for all that, in Scotland they haue not ceaſed their trecherous practizes to the ruine both of me, and my ſon; I cannot take this long ſilence, but for a deniall, and ſo I haue certified your Councell by Letters. That which the King of France, and the Queene his mother haue communicated to me, haue I ſincerely communicated to you, and required your aduice, but you haue not vouchſafed me one word in writing, or by word of mouth: I cannot before I ſhall know what it is, ſubmit my ſelfe to your Councell, concerning my affaires and Country; for that were extreame indiſcretion. You know how my Aduerſaries triumph in Scotland both ouer mee, and my impriſoned ſon: I haue attempted nothing in Scotland to your preiudice, but to ſtabliſh a ſolide peace in the Realme, hauing by ſo much the more a greater care then your Councellors, by how much my intereſt there, is more then theirs. I haue deſired to gratifie my ſon with the title of King, to confirme him, and to burie all diſcords. Is that to take the Diadem from him? But the enemies of me, and my family, will not haue it confirmed: It is that that they dread, whilſt they carie in their heart a witneſſe againſt themſelues, & finding themſelues culpable of euills apprehend they ſhould bee dealt with accordingly.
                           Let not theſe, and others my aduerſaries ſo blind your eyes, that during your life, and in your ſight, they ſhall

beare downe your neareſt kindred, and ruinate both the Crownes: as to that end they are plotting villanies againſt me, againſt my ſon, and perhaps againſt you alſo. Can it be any pleaſure, or honor to you, that I and my ſon, that you and we are by their meanes ſo long ſeeluded, and kept aſunder? Reſume your naturall goodneſſe and meekneſſe, oblige your ſelfe to your ſelfe, and ſeeing you are a Princeſſe, be tender hearted to me a Princeſſe, the neareſt of your conſanguinity, that all things being ſet in quiet betwixt vs, I may paſſe the more peacefully out of this life, and that the ſighes and ſobbes of my afflicted ſoule aſcend not to God on high. To whoſe diuine power I preſent my daily prayers, that theſe my iuſt complaints, and ſorrowfull laments my take place with you.
                           
                              
                                 From Sheffield,

                                    8. Nouemb. 1582.
                                 
                              
                              Voſtre treſ-deſolée plus proche parente, & affectionnée ſoeur MARIE R:
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     THE SIXE AND TWENTIETH YEERE of Her Raigne.Booke 3. Anno Dom. M.D.LXXXIII.
                     
                        ELIZABETH Queen of England being ſundry wayes moued with theſe Letters (after ſhe had giuen permiſſion to the French Ambaſſador La Mottef, together with Dauiſon her owne Ambaſſador, to goe into Scotland; and had choſen out a time, wherin he might opportunely meet with the Duke of Lenox vnawares, then returning out of Scotland) ſhe her ſelfe kindely receiued Lenox,
                        The Duke of Lenox's returne through England. yet gently blaming him for being ſomwhat ſlack in the Scottiſh affaires; and forthwith ſent Beale Clerke of her Priuie Councell, for the diſpatch of her Letters, (being indeed a man very auſtere and ſharpe) to the Queene of Scots, to manifeſt the diſcontent

of Queene ELIZABETH at the ſight of her complaining Letters, and by the ſame meanes to treat with the Earle of Shrewsbury concerning her enlargement, becauſe ſhe oftentimes before, with ſundry Letters had ſollicited for it, and intreated that ſhee might yet at laſt (her ſecurity being eſtabliſhed to her) inioy her libertie, and be an aſſociate with her ſonne, in the adminiſtration of Scotland.
                     Vpon theſe things was the Priuy Councell of England aſſembled: where after ſerious debating, and deliberate conſultations, it was at length agreed that the Queene of Scots ſhould be ſet at libertie vnder theſe following conditions:

                           
                              It is conſulted about the deliuery of the Q. of Scots.
                           THat if ſhe and her ſonne would promiſe, not to enterpriſe any thing to the preiudice of Queene ELIZABETH, or the Realme of England. That ſhee would confeſſe, that whatſoeuer Francis the ſecond, King of France her husband, had vndertaken and performed, was altogether againſt her will and liking; and that ſhee would diſproue and diſanull it as vniuſt. That ſhee would confirme the Treaty holden at Edenbourgh. That ſhee would freely and ingenuouſly confeſſe and diſcouer all other complots & intendments which were ſince that time forged; and would vtterly condemne the ſame. That if ſhee would enter into obligation not to plot or doe any thing, directly or indirectly, to the impeachment of the gouernment, or adminiſtration of the Kingdome of England, either in things Eccleſiaſticall or Ciuill; but to reſiſt and hinder all thoſe that ſhould undertake (in what manner ſo euer any thing to the contrary, and to withſtand them as enemies. That ſhe would not during the life of Queene ELIZABETH claime any Right or Title to the Kingdome of England, and after her death to ſubmit and referre the right of ſucceſsion to the iudgement of the Eſtates. If ſhe alſo, to cut off all equiuocations, and mentall

reſeruations, and to foreſtall all pretended excuſes, (that ſhee as a Priſoner accorded and condiſcended to theſe conditions, or being in a manner conſtrained) would confirme all theſe by her aoth, and the publique authoritie of the States of Scotland. If the King likewiſe would ratifie the ſelf-ſame conditions both by oath and writing, and for the more aſſurance would deliuer hoſtages for the performance.
                     
                     As concerning the aſſociation which the Queene of Scots demanded to haue with her ſonne in the gouernment of the Kingdome, it was holden expedient by the Councell, that the Queene of England ſhould not intermeddle therewith. But if they could agree vpon the aſſociation between themſelues, then ſhould the League be ioyntly treated of with them both; but if otherwiſe, then apart with either ſeuerally.
                     Thus theſe things were debated on;The Scots of the Engliſh faction are againſt it. yet without any ſucceſſe. For the Scots which were of the Engliſh faction, altogether reiected them, crying out aloud, that certaine Scots ſworne enemies to England, by the Councell of the Queene of Scots, were recalled out of France, and that Holt an Engliſh Ieſuite was ſecretly ſent into Scotland, there to attend a fit opportunitie to inuade England.
                        The Engliſh and French in emulation, ſtriue to obtaine the fauor of the King of Scotland. Then there aroſe ſtrife betweene Monſieur de La Mottef, and Monſieur de Maninguill Ambaſſadors of France of the one part, and Bowes and Dauiſon Ambaſſadors for England on the other ſide, which of them by inſinuating ſhould induce the King to the greater affectation of their Nation, or purchaſe the greater number to their party, vntill at length that with oblique deſignes they ingenuouſly became Counſellors either to other. The King himſelfe became as it were Mediator, and knowing how to temper things honeſt with things profitable, without prouing any way deficient either to the Church or the Common-wealth, hee wiſely endeuoured rather to calme the raging ſtormes of theſe factions then intermeddle with

them. But the Miniſters of Scotland, being by a certaine zeale prouoked againſt the French; vpon the ſame day that La Mottef was by the Citizens of Edenborough inuited to a Feaſt, appointed a Faſt; and the whole day vvith taunts and mocks, derided and ſcoffed the King of France, the Duke of Guiſe and the Ambaſſadors. And as the Miniſters did this openly; ſo certain of the Scotch Nobilitie, (parties with the Engliſh) ceaſed not to perſecute the French Ambaſſadors ſecretly in ſuch ſort, that firſt La Mottef retired himſelfe, and after him Maninguil; leauing notwithſtanding ſome certaine ſeeds of diſcord amongſt thoſe who had ſeaz'd and kept the Kings Perſon.
                     
                        The King of Scotland ſeekes the loue of the Queene of England.As ſoone as they were departed, the King preſented by Colonell Stuart, and I. Coluil, all affection and ſeruice to the Queene of England, requeſting her counſell for the allaying of troubles, and alſo for the contracting of a mariage. But then thoſe that were keepers or detainers of the Kings perſon, ſeeing that the French Ambaſſadors were departed out of Scotland, began to take courage, which after was increaſed by the death of the Duke of Lenox: who finding ſmall comfort from the French King, that then was intangled with diuers inteſtine troubles, and ſtriuing likewiſe to pleaſe Queene ELIZABETH,The Lord Eſme Stuart Duke of Lenox reputed a Papiſt by ſome malicious ill-willer of his, dyed at Paris a true and ſincere Proteſtant. departed this life at Paris: and by the teſtimonies which he gaue on his death-bed, being at the point of death, in the preſence of all the aſſiſtants, hee declared himſelfe to be truely of the Proteſtants Religion, confuting and conuicting the malice of thoſe that had falſely accuſed him to be a Papiſt.
                     This the death of Lenox, much ſecured thoſe that detained the King, who reioyced for the ſtill retaining of him in their power: whereupon they began to exult. But ſee, they little ſuſpecting any ſuch matter, the King, although he had ſcarce yet attained to the age of eighteene yeares, diſdaining to ſubmit himſelfe any longer to the rule and gouernment of three Earles, being an abſolute King of himſelfe: as he before-times

had giuen way to the time; ſo now finding a time opportune to his purpoſe, he ſet himſelf at liberty,The King of Scotland ſets himſelfe at libertie. and with a few ſelected men retired himſelfe to the Caſtle of Saint Andrewes, taking occaſion by a rumour that was ſpread, that the Nobilitie diſagreeing amongſt themſelues, had brought with them ſeuerall troopes of Souldiers into that part of the Country, there to hold an aſſembly which hee appointed, fearing leſt he amongſt theſe tumultuous iarres ſhould be expoſed to ſome vnexpected danger. And to that effect he diſpatcht Letters to Queene ELIZABETH, wherein hee promiſed to entertaine a conſtant league of amitie with her, and to embrace her counſell in the eſtabliſhment of his affaires; excuſing himſelfe that theſe things fell out ſo ſuddenly, and vnawares to him, that it was not poſſible for him to giue her notice thereof ſooner. Afterwards,His Maieſty vſeth kindly thoſe who formerly had ſeaz'd themſelues of his Royal perſon. vſing gentler ſpeeches, and milde perſwaſions, ſhewing an affable countenance to thoſe that were his guardians, he admoniſhed them, for the better ſhunning of turmoyles, to retire from the Court, promiſing to them his gracious fauour and pardon, if ſo be they would intreat it. Of theſe Gowry onely asked pardon, and ſubmitted himſelfe, vſing this ſmall diſtinction, That he had offended not in matter, but in forme.
                        Cals to the Court all ſuch Nobles as ſtood and were of his ſide. After this, he call'd backe the Earle of Arran to the Court, accepting him for one of his fauourites, much labouring to eſtabliſh the hearts of his Nobilitie in a mutuall peace and amitie, and to purge both the kingdome and the Court from inteſtine iarres and diſcord.
                     Whilſt he was thus buſied continually in theſe matters,Walſingham is ſent into Scotland from Q. Elizabeth there ariued at his Court Sir Francis Walſingham, ſent from the Queene of England, out of her earneſt loue & great care that ſhe alwaies had of him, leſt by ill counſels, being of a flexible age, he ſhould bee diuerted from the amity of England, which would bee to the preiudice of both the Kingdomes. Walſingham at his ariuall found the King accompanied with the chiefe and flower of his Nobility, and the

affaires of Scotland better ſetled then hee expected. Being receiued & admitted, after much diſcourſe he rehearſt thoſe admonitiōs takē out of Iſocrates which the Queen before in her letters had inſtructed him with: That he which commands ought ſo to cheriſh truth, as to giue more credit to its ſimple affirmation then to the oaths of others: That he ſhould take heed of euill counſellours, remaining ſtill conſtant & alway like himſelfe.
                        The King of Scotland anſwers him freely. The King made this free and hearty reply: That what he writ more then his thoughts meaning, was againſt his will, much refuſing, yet inforced by the compulſion of others, that he being a free Prince, ought not to bee reduced to ſuch ſtreights that others ſhould force counſellors vpon him, whom hee altogether miſliked: That he had done nothing but for his owne honour and ſafeguard: That the pledge of his loue, which he before had vowed to his indeared Siſter the Queene of England, hee now freely and deſeruedly offered; and that now hee could produce more fairer fruits of amitie, being obeyed of all his Nobilitie then before when he himſelfe was made obedient to one and to another, and rul'd as it were rather by intreating, then by power or commandement.
                     
                     
                        Walſingham 
                              •
                           emonſtrations to his ſacred Maieſtie.After this, Walſingham requeſted the King not to impute to Queene ELIZABETH any thing that had happened in Scotland, ſhewing him how good & profitable their friendſhip had hitherto been, and how expedient both for himſelfe as alſo for either Kingdome, if ſo bee ſhee ſuffered no neglect, but were firmely aſſured; and if the differences and contentions which happened amongſt the Nobility of Scotland were but for a certaine Amneſtia aboliſhed by the authority of the Parliament: that thoſe that were remoued from the Court ſhould bee taken into grace: that Religion ſhould be conſerued entire in it ſelfe; and a firme league eſtabliſhed betwixt the two Kingdomes. Neither was Walſingham any way defectiue in the diſtribution of his money amongſt the Kings Officers and Attendants, that by their meanes hee might effect theſe things. The King thus modeſtly

replyed: That he willingly embraced the friendſhip of England, and would not be wanting in any obſeruance towards the Queene; but moſt conſtantly defend the Religion receiued.
                        The King anſwered them.
                     
                     With this anſwer he graciouſly diſcharged Walſingham, notwithſtanding he ſuſpected him to be tranſported both againſt himſelfe, and his mother, and with an intentiue prouidence, beyond the expectation of his yeares,The King propounds a Pardon, to thoſe who had ſeaz'd themſelues of his perſon hee managed his affaires, and propoſed to the great praiſe of his clemencie, letters of grace to all thoſe that had ſeized his perſon, if they within a time prefixt would come and intreat pardon. But ſo farre they were from asking it, that they priuatly tooke counſell together, and complotted how they might haue him againe vnder their power; which was the cauſe that he preſently commanded them within a certaine time to leaue the Kingdome:Hee commands ſuch as refus'd it to void the Kingdome. whereupon ſome retired them to one part, and ſome to another; that is to ſay, Marre, Glan, Boide, Zeſter-wemi, and Loch-leuin into Flanders; Dunfermelin into France, and Angus was confined to Angus within certaine preſcribed limits. Onely Gowry hatching in his braines new ſtratagems, remained in the Realme beyond the prefixed day; but to his owne confuſion, as hereafter ſhall be recited.
                     Thus thoſe that before had driuen the Duke of Lenox out of Scotland,
                        His Maieſty re-eſtabliſhed the Reputation and Honor of the Duke of Lenox, cauſing likewiſe his children to returne into Scotland. were within the reuolution of the ſame yeare themſelues expulſt the Land. And the King to whom Lenox in his life time was much indeared, and beloued, after his death cheriſhing the memory of his goodneſſe, he reeſtabliſhed, and vnclouded his reputation, by ſuppreſſing certaine defamatory bookes, which ſome malignant perſons had diſperſed to eclipſe his worth and vertues; he likewiſe recalled his children out of France; confirmes his ſonne Lodowicke in his fathers honors; and his daughters after they were growne to ripe yeares, he preferred them in mariage; one with the Lord Marqueſſe of Huntley; the other, with the Earle of Marre. And that he might ſhew himſelfe a King by

exerciſing in due time his authoritie, whereas thoſe of the conſpiracie had declared in a publike aſſembly, inſtituted by their authoritie, that the arreſt & detaining of his perſon was iuſtly & lawfully performed, and therupon enrolled the ſaid Declaration amongſt the publike Regiſters: the King on the contrary,The Miniſters are againſt the King of Scotlands Authoritie. in a generall aſſembly of the Nobilitie and States, declared that it was traiterouſly done. Notwithſtanding, the Miniſters, as the ſupreme Iudges of the Realme, pronounced in a Synode conuocated by their authoritie, that it was moſt iuſt, and did hold it fit that thoſe which would not approue thereof, ſhould vndergoe the cenſure of Excommunication.
                     
                        Q. Elizabeth obtaineth of the Muſconian Emperor a peace for the King of Sweden.In thoſe dayes the warres betwixt the Emperor of Muſcouia, and the King of Swethland vnder the Artique Circle, muſt not be left to obliuion. Iohn King of Swethland perceiuing his powers farre too weake to reſiſt ſo great an Emperor, ſent in Noble Embaſſie towards Queen ELIZABETH, H. of Wiſſembourg his neere kinſman, and A. Rich his Secretarie, by Letters to requeſt her Maieeſty to intercede by Ambaſſage to the Emperour for the concluſion of a peace betweene them.That Emperor requires an abſolute alliance with England, being a ſuter to her Maieſty, to grant him an Engliſh Lady for his wife. Which ſhe preſently vndertooke, and without delay performed ſo well, that with reaſonable conditions ſhe induc'd the Muſcouit to a compoſition of peace: who forthwith treated with her concerning the alliance, of which I haue often made mention, and that hee might bee allow'd refuge and a retreat into England, if any diſaſtrous aduerſity ſhould fall vpon him: likewiſe he deſired a Wife ſhould be giuen him out of England. But Sir Hierome Bowes, Knight, being ſent Embaſſadour, found it a difficult matter to content the Emperour. For the Muſcouite moſt importunately laboured for an abſolute league in ſuch tearmes as hee himſelfe ſhould ſet downe;Sir Hierome Bowes is ſent Ambaſſador to him from England. neither would hee giue any hearing to any remonſtrances which hee propos'd, that it was not the duty of a Chriſtian, neither would the Law of Nations permit, that hoſtile enmities ſhould bee denounced, and

practiſed; or open warres begunne, before the party from whom the wrong proceeded, were admoniſhed to repaire the iniury, and deſiſt from it.
                     The Queene appointed the Siſter of the Earle of Huntington to be giuen as a Wife to him. But when ſhee was certified, that the Lawes of his Countrey would permit him at his own pleaſure to repudiate and put away his wiues; Shee excuſed the matter by the ſicklineſſe of the maid, and by the loue of her father, that was not able to beare the abſence of his Daughter in a Country ſo farre diſtant. And alſo that it was not in her power to diſpoſe of in mariage, the daughters of any of her ſubiects, without their parents conſents. Neuertheleſſe, the Ambaſſador ſo farre preuailed, that the eſtabliſhing of the Merchants priuiledge, was granted.The Emperor died. But death taking away the Emperour, the yeare following, the affaires of the Engliſh beganne by little and little to returne towards Ruſsia, and the Ambaſſador returning, not without much danger of his life, was with much commendation kindly receiued of the Queene. Hee was the firſt that brought into England, where the like was neuer ſeene (if an Hiſtorian may with good leaue make mention of ſo ſmall a thing) a beaſt called Maclis, which is a creature likeſt to an Alçe,A certaine kind of Deere called Maclis. very ſwift, and without ioynts. And moreouer, certain Deere of wonderfull ſwiftneſſe, which being yoakt and driuen, will with much ſpeed draw men vp and downe in Chariots like horſes.
                     But to returne againe to the affaires of Muſcouia,
                        Theodore the New Emperor of Muſcouia diſallow'd the company or Monopolie of Englands Merchants. 
                        Theodore Iohannide, ſonne to Iohn Baſil, ſucceeded in this great Empire; a Prince by nature of a ſlow capacity, yet he knew well how to follow the aduice of his beſt Counſellors. Hee gaue free paſſage to all Merchants of all Countries into Ruſsia; and being oftentimes ſollicited by the Queene of England to confirm the priuiledges granted by his father to the Muſcouian Company of Engliſh Merchants, importing thus,

that it might not be lawfull but to the Engliſh of the ſaid ſociety, to land vpon the North coaſts of Ruſsia, and there to exerciſe their traffique, without paying of any tribute or cuſtome, becauſe they were the firſt by ſea that found a way to thoſe parts. Hee againe requeſted that all the Engliſh in generall might be ſuffered to traffique in Ruſsia, eſteeming it iniuſtice to giue leaue to ſome, and forbid others, ſaying, that Princes ſhould beare an equall hand amongſt their ſubiects, & not conuert into a Monopoly, or the particular profit of ſome few men that commerce by which the right of Nations ought to be common to all. And as for the cuſtom hee promiſed to take by the halfe leſſe of them of that ſocietie, then of others. Other priuiledges hee added in fauour of the Queene, and not for the deſert (as hee ſaid) of that ſociety, of which, ſome he hath obſerued that haue euilly dealt with his ſubiects. Other anſwer could the Queene by no meanes procure, or obtaine; albeit ſhee afterwards ſent about the ſame affaires Egide Fletcher Doctor of the Law, who ſet forth a booke called, The policy or tyrannie of the Ruſsian, wherein were contained many things worthy obſervation, but it was preſently ſuppreſt, leſt it ſhould breed offence to a princely friend.
                     
                        Alberto Alaſco a Polonian Nobleman came then to England to ſee Queen Elizabeth.The ſame Summer came from Poland, neighbouring vpon Ruſsia, into England, to viſit the Queene, one Albret Alaſco, Count Palatine of Sirad, a man moſt learn'd, of comly ſtature and lineaments, wearing his Beard long, richly cloathed, and of gracefull behauiour: the Queene with much bounty and loue receiued him; the Nobles with great honour and magnificence entertained him; and the Vniuerſitie of Oxford with learned recreations, and diuers paſtimes delighted him; but after a while finding himſelfe ouercharged vvith debt,A wonderfull and fearfull Earthquake in Dorſetſhire. he priuily ſtole away.
                     In this yeare alſo was ſeene in Dorſet-ſhire a thing no leſſe prodigious, then that which was ſeene in the yeare 1571 in Herefordſhire. A field of three Acres ſituated in

                        Blackmore, both with trees and hedges was remoued out of its owne place into another, leauing in its ſtead a huge vaſte gappe, but the high-way leading to Cerne ſhut vp; whether this was by ſome ſubterranean earthquake, ſuch wherewith (as Seneca reporteth) the heads of the gods in the bed of Iupiter were turned into the contrary parts: or out of too much moiſtneſſe, cauſed by the ſprings abundantly flowing in thoſe parts, the field being ſituate in the ſide of a Hill, let others make enquirie.
                     This was the laſt yeare to Thomas Ratcliffe,
                        The death of Thomas Ratcliffe, Earle of Suſſex. being of that Family the third Earle of Suſſex, a man of haughty courage, exquiſit counſell, of a ſingular faith towards his Countrie, and of an illuſtrious Progeny. He had to his Mother the Daughter of the Duke of Norfolke; for his Grandmother, the daughter to the Duke of Buckingham, Conſtable of England. Himſelfe alſo had paſt through many great honorable imploiments. As being ſent Ambaſſador by Queene MARIE into Germany to the Emperor Charles the fifth, to contract a mariage betweene her and Philip. Then againe into Spaine to the ſaid Philip, there to cauſe him to ratifie the conuented Articles. Alſo for Queene ELIZABETH he went Ambaſſador to the Emperour Maximilian, there likewiſe to contract a match betweene her and Charles Duke of Auſtria. Hee was Lord Deputy of Ireland, Gouernor of the Northerne Prouinces of England; alſo the Queenes Chamberlaine, chiefe Iuſtice in Eire of all her Maieſties Foreſts, Parkes and Chaſes beyond the Riuer Trent; famous for the victories hee had obtained againſt the Hebrides and Scots that made ſpoile of the frontiers. Dyed at London, after he had been afflicted with a long diſeaſe, leauing no iſſue behinde him; albeit hee had had two wiues, the Lady Elizabeth Wriotheſly, and the Lady Francis Sidney; and his brother Henry ſucceeded him in the Earledome.
                     
                        Henry Wriotheſly likewiſe, Earle of Southampton, paid

like tribute vnto death, a man much deuoted to the Roman Religion,Likewiſe the deceaſe of Henry Wriotheſly Earle of Southhampton. and to the Queene of Scots, which hee bought with the anger of his Queene, and reſtraint or libertie. He was ſonne to Tho: Wriotheſly (who for his tryed vertues by Henry the 8, from the dignitie of Baron of Wriotheſly of Tichfield, and Knight of the Order of the Garter, was aduanced to that ſoueraigne greatneſſe of being Chancelor of England, and appointed him one of the ſuperviſors of his laſt Will. And by Edward the 6, he was graced with the ſtyle of Earle of Southampton.) Hee left by his Wife, Daughter of Anthony Browne, Viſcount Mountague, Henry his ſonne that ſucceeded him, and a Daughter maried to Thomas Lord Arundel, Baron of Wardour.
                     
                     
                        Sir Humphrey Gilbert, Knight, drowned vpon the Sea by ſhipwracke.About the ſame time Sir Humphrey Gilbert Knight, a man acute and deliberate, eſteemed induſtrious both in Peace and Warre, was by the raging Ocean depriued of life, returning from the North parts of America, which we call New-found-Land: whither he a little before, hauing ſold his patrimonie, made a voyage in hope to build there a Colonie. And there by the ſound of a Trumpet proclaimed the Countrey to be vnder the Engliſh regency.It is a moſt difficult matter, and a very hard thing to bring the Colonies in farre countries. (For Sebaſtian Cabot in the yeare 1497, vnder the Reigne of Henry the 7, made the firſt diſcouery therof.) And then diuided the Land ſeuerally to his companions. But he was taught (too late) by the deuouring ſeas, and default of meanes, which forc'd him to breake off his deſignes, teaching others alſo by his example, that it is a matter of greater difficulty, by the expences of a priuate man to plant a Colony in farre diſtant Countries; then he and others, blind in their owne errors, haue to their vtter ouerthrow perſwaded themſelues.
                     
                        The death of Edmund Grindal, Lord Archbiſhop of CanterburyVpon the ſame inſtant, Edmund Grindal Archbiſhop of Canterbury, Metropolitan and Primate of England, being blind, and aged aboue ſixty yeares breathed his laſt. Who at his returne from exile, which hee endured vnder the Reigne of Queene MARY, was firſt inueſted Biſhop of London, then

Archbiſhop of Yorke, and finally of Canterbury, liuing much honoured with the fauour of Queene ELIZABETH, vntill by the foule deceits and treacheries of his enemies hee was ſuſpected to be a fauourer of the Conuenticles of thoſe turbulent Miniſters, and ſuch as were called Prophets. But the reaſon was indeed, becauſe hee condemned as vnlawfull the mariage of Iulius an Italian Phyſician, with another mans wife, which much diſtaſted the Earle of Leiceſter.
                        A wood called Tamarin firſt brought into England. Such ſmall meanes as he had gathered, he beſtowed in the founding of a Schoole at Saint Bee in Cumberland, where hee was borne, and to the aduancement of Learning on both the Vniuerſities.
                     The Engliſh beſides is bound to him for the bringing in of Tamariske, or Tamarin into England: for hauing found by experience that it was a ſoueraigne remedie againſt the great and indurate paſſion of the Spleene, hee was the firſt that cauſed it to be planted there.
                     
                        Iohn Whitgift was his ſucceſſor,Iohn Whitgift is preferred to the Archbiſhopricke of Canterbury. being aduanced from the Sea of Worceſter, to the Archbiſhopricke of Canterbury, a man of ſingular goodneſſe and learning. He obtained much commendation for his Iuſtice in the precedencie of Wales, and likewiſe for his great doctrine in the defence of the Eccleſiaſticall policy, which by his worth, wiſedome and patience, he dayly increaſed. The Queene, (who held for a maxime, that ſhe ought not to be more remiſſe in Eccleſiaſticall affaires then in politick) aboue all cōmanded him to re-eſtabliſh the diſcipline of the Church of England, that as then lay diſmembred by the conniuency of Prelates, the obſtinacie of innouators, and by the power of ſome great ones, whilſt ſome Miniſters couertly impugned the authoritie of the Queene in things Eccleſiaſticall, ſeparating the adminiſtration of the Sacrament from the preaching of the Word; vſing to their owne fantaſie new rites of ſeruices in their priuate houſes, vtterly condemning the Lethargie, and the appointed manner of adminiſhing the Sacrament, as being

in many things contrarie to the holy Scripture; and therefore many refuſed to goe to Church, but openly became Schiſmaticks: the Papiſts all this while applauding them, and drawing many to their party, as though there had been no vnity in the Church of England. To aboliſh which things, and to reduce them to an vnitie: Hee propounded theſe Articles to the Miniſters, by them to bee ſubſcribed.
                     
                        
                           He endeuored to vnite the Engliſh Church.
                        FIrst, That the Queene had Soueraigne power ouer all thoſe that were borne within her Dominions, of what conditions ſo euer they were; and that no other Stranger, Prince, or Prelate, ought to haue any power, either Ciuill, or Eccleſiaſticall, within her Maieſties Realmes. Secondly, that the Booke of Common Prayers, and that of the ordination of Biſhops and Prieſts, contained not any thing contrarie to the Word of God, but might be lawfully vſed; and that they ſhould vſe that and no other forme of Prayer or adminiſtring of the Sacraments. Thirdly, That they ſhould approue and allow of the Articles of the Synode holden at London, the yeare 1562, publiſhed by royall Authoritie, and ſhould hold them as conformable to the Word of God.
                     But it is incredible what Controuerſies and Diſputations aroſe vpon this: what hatred and reproach hee endured of the factious Miniſters: what troubles and iniuries hee ſuffered of certaine Noblemen; who by placing men vnfit in the Church increaſed their eſtate, or elſe had hopes vpon the goods of the Church. But by his conſtancie, and patience, he ouercame all difficulties, vſing for his Motto this, which he choſe not raſhly:
Vincit qui patitur.
                     
                     
                        Neither was the Church onely toſſed and turmoiled by thoſe people within the Realme: but by others, who had left the Kingdome; as by R. Browne, a Cambridge Diuine, of whom the new Sectaries were called Browniſts:Browniſt Schiſmatiques. and by R. Hariſon, Maſter of an inferiour Schoole. For theſe men preſuming to iudge of Religion, according to their owne imaginations; by certaine books which they ſet forth at that time in the Countrey of Zealand, and diſperſed through many places in England, vtterly condemned the Church of England as no Church. Which bookes, notwithſtanding, were prohibited by Royall Authoritie, and ſtrongly confuted by many learned men, and two of the ſame ſect alſo put to death at Saint Edmundsbury; yet many were intangled in the ſnares of this new Schiſme.
                     On the other ſide, there were certaine bookes, diſperſed by certaine Papiſts againſt the Queene and other Princes, as excommunicate, which cauſed diuers admirers of the Papall power to reuolt from her Maieſtie. Amongſt others Someruille was ſo farre incenſed by it, that without acquainting any, he took his way one day towards the Court, breathing forth threats againſt the blood of Proteſtants, furiouſly ſet vpon two with his naked ſword. And being apprehended, he proteſted he would kill the Queene with his own hands: Whereupon being brought to iudgement, and condemned, he accuſed E. Ardern his father-in-law, a man of ancient nobilitie of Warwicke, with his wife and their daughter Someruille, with Halle a Prieſt, as complices in the fact.One Someruille ſtrangled himſelfe in priſon, and Ardern is hanged. Three dayes after, Someruille was found ſtrangled in the priſon; Ardern being condemned was the day following hanged and quartered: as for the women and the Prieſt, they were pardoned. Euery one imputed the bad euent of this Gentleman (who indeed was allured by the deceits of the Prieſt, and condemned by his owne confeſſion) to the malice of Leiceſter, which he had incurred by raſhly oppoſing him in all things he could, miſterming him as an adulterate; and contemning

him, as a man newly ſprung vp of nothing.
                     
                        The Engliſh betray Aloſt, and doe deliuer it into the hands of the cruell Spaniard.Theſe things were thus caried at home. But it hapned abroad about the laſt moneth of this yeare, that the Engliſh which were in Gariſon in (Aloſt) a towne in the Netherlands, perceiuing they were neglected, wanting of their pay; and being vnfurniſhed of victuals, they were brought into ſuch ſtreights, that Pigot their chiefe Commander with the reſt of the Captaines betrayed the town, and induced by the promiſe of certaine ſummes, they deliuered it ouer into the hands of the Spaniard;A miſerable end of Traitors. and therefore fearing to bee diſgrac'd by their own party, they ioyned themſelues vvith the Duke of Parma; from whom likewiſe by little and little they fell off, after they found his faith failing in euery point. But an vnfortunate end betyded to euery one of thoſe that were authors of this treachery. For Pigot retiring into Spaine in hope of a recompence, was there by them both mocked and derided: ſo returning into the Low-Countries, was by his Country-men apprehended, and ſent into England, where he miſerably dyed in priſon. Datton from a Traitor turned Pyrat,The Earle of Deſmond is killed. and was hanged in England: Vincent likewiſe in Brabant. Taylor was ſtrooke through the body by the Earle of Weſtmerland. And Walſh after hee had beene oppreſſed and beaten with infinite miſeries, was murdered in France. Thus God the reuenger of all Traitors, followeth Treaſon at the heeles. As Ireland the ſame yeere by many notable examples could witneſſe:
                     For that famous Rebell, and Traitor to his Country, Gerard Fitz-Gerard, or Geraldide, the eleuenth of that Family, Earle of Deſmond; after that his men (who had miſerably vowed ſooner to renounce God then forſake him) were conſumed by ſword and famine; hee fled into certaine vnfrequented Caues where he liued; fruſtrating (almoſt by the ſpace of two whole yeares) the hope of the Engliſh that ſought to apprehend him: at length hee was diſcouered by a common ſouldier, who not knowing him, had almoſt cut

off one of his armes: whereupon he diſcloſed himſelfe, and was, after hee had receiued many wounds vpon his bodie, ſlaine; his head was ſent into England, and there placed on a pole vpon London Bridge.
                     The like vnfortunate end hapned to a man of great power in Ireland, extracted of the line of Maurice ſonne to Gerald of Windſor, an Engliſhman, a warrior moſt famous amongſt the chiefe that brought Ireland into ſubiection, in the yeare 1570, poſſeſſing great Lordſhips, euen whole Prouinces, with Kerria which is a County Palatine, and diuers Caſtles, hauing vnder his command many land-holders; beſides 500 Gentlemen at the leaſt of his owne kindred and name. Of all that, & more, of his life alſo, he was depriued, leauing only ſome few of his family behinde him: this his owne and his friends ruine, he himſelfe procured, by violating his faith, which he ought to his Queene by the perſwaſion of certain Prieſts.Nicholas Sanders, an Engliſh Seminarie Prieſt affamiſht himſelfe. Amongſt which one Sanders an Engliſhman was the principall, who dyed for hunger almoſt in the ſame inſtant, being left of all friends, and diſtracted from his ſenſes by reaſon of the croſſe ſucceſſe of the Rebels, contrarie to his expectation, wandring through Woods, Groues and Mountaines, finding no ſuccour or reliefe. After his death were found in his pocket ſundry Orations and Letters written to confirme and harten the Rebels: ſtuffed with large promiſes of the Pope and Spaniard. Thus the diuine Iuſtice of God (if it were lawfull to iudge) cloſed vp his mouth with hunger, which was alwayes open to ſtirre vp and moue rebellions, and to vomit forth ſlanders and lyes. For he was the firſt (to paſſe ouer other things) that raiſed and diſperſed that horrible ſlander of the birth of Queene ELIZABETHS mother; which thing was not to any of thoſe times knowne, onely the hate of the Papiſts beganne to manifeſt it ſelfe againſt her; neither was it heard of in England for the ſpace of forty yeares after, but the circumſtance of time, doth plainely conuict him of falſhood an vanitie,

and himſelfe alſo not agreeing with his owne ſayings (as it behooueth a lyer) doth argue the ſame. Yet there bee ſome diſtempered ſpirits that bluſh not to ſtain their Papers with this moſt impudent lye and ſlander.
                     Iacob Fitz-Euſtace.
                     
                        Vicount of Balting glaſſe fled away out of Ireland.That is to ſay the ſonne of Euſtace, Viſcount of Baltinglas, a man of great eſteeme amongſt the Nobility of Ireland; being terrified with the tragicall ſucceſſes of theſe men, tooke his flight into Spaine; where after a long and languiſhing griefe he yeelded vp his Ghoſt. Hauing before through the zeale which he bore to the Roman Religion taken vp armes with the Rebels againſt his Princeſſe; and in a kinde of obſcure breuity, writ to the Earle of Ormond his neighbour decended from Saint Thomas of Canterbury, inciting him to do the like, in his exhortation amongſt other hee vs'd theſe words. If Saint Thomas of Canterbury had not ſuffered death for the Romane Church, you had neuer beene Earle of Ormond. For Henry the ſecond to expiate the murder of S. Thomas beſtowed large poſſeſſions vpon his Anceſtors.
                     
                        Sir Iohn Perot is made Lord Deputy of Ireland.
                        Sir Iohn Perot,
                     Knight, who to his great praiſe had beene Gouernour of Mounſter; being this yeare created Vice-Roy, or otherwiſe Deputy of Ireland, and preſently after receiued the ſword of Iuſtice; he aſſembled the States of the Land to the holding of a Parliament, in which certaine Lawes were enacted; that the Earle of Deſmond which was ſlaine a ſpace before ſhould be condemned of Laeſae Maieſtatis, and all the poſſeſſions as wel of him and others of the Rebels in Mounſter confiſcate. Which the Queene ſet to ſale at a very low and ſmall price; that ſhe might inuite labourers & husbandmen to them, leſt ſuch fertile grounds ſhould bee vntilled, and altogether waſte (for the rebellion had ſpoiled and deuaſted the ſame.) But ſome of thoſe that had Commiſsion for

the enquiry and ſearching out of the poſſeſsions of the Rebels, and others that were to prize and ſet the ſame to hyre,Labouring men are ſent into Ireland. began to expell and chaſe from their poſſeſsions with ſuch violence thoſe who were true ſubiects, that the Queen was conſtrained to repreſſe them by an Edict, leſt the violent auarice of ſome particular men might kindle and inflame a new rebellion▪ In which the Vice-Roy tooke much laudable paines; although by the Engliſh he was accuſed and blamed, for being too indulgent and fauorable to the Iriſh, and too too rough to them. But he equally diſtributing iuſtice to either part by fauouring as well the Iriſh, as the Engliſh, brought the Prouince into a moſt deſired tranquilitie, and with a milde and gentle command ſubiected to the obedience of the Lawes, the moſt barbarous inhabitants of the ſame: holding the Scotchmen of Hebrides,
                        The geſture and behauiours of Iohn Perot Vice-Roy of Ireland. that from their Ilands did breake into Ireland, to a hard taske. And inforc'd Donel Gormi (that is to ſay blue) with his brother Mac-Conel, who had poſſeſt thēſelues of the little Country of Glinnes, and Surley-boy, (that is to ſay, Red) their Vncle, that had inuaded the Countrey of Rout, neighbouring and adioyning to the Iland Richnee, now called Raclis, to ſuch a point, that after many of their kindred were ouercome and ſlaine by the valorous exploits of Captaine Meriman, they receiued the oath of allegeance to the Queene, accepting from her Maieſty certaine Lands in that corner, vnder conditions that they ſhould ſerue the Kings of England onely in their warres, and not any other whatſoeuer without their permiſſion: that they ſhould furniſh forth vpon any expedition a ſufficient number of horſe and foot; and that a certaine number of Beeues and Hawkes ſhould euery yeare be truely paid. Thus much for what hath paſt in Ireland.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Booke 3.THE SEVEN AND TWENTIETH YEERE of Her Raigne. Anno Dom. M.D.LXXXIV.
                     
                        Troubles in Scotland.
                        DIVERS Scots that had compacted with Gowry, who now againe was plotting of new ſtratagems to get the King of Scots into his power, ſecretly returned from Ireland into Scotland vpon the entrie of the Spring. There they proteſted openly, that their intent was onely for the honour of God, the truth of Religion, and to ſecure the King, the Realme, and the League with England, againſt thoſe that with wicked deuices would ſeduce the King, not being as yet of ſufficient age. The King hauing notice of theſe things, hee forthwith commanded Colonell Stuart to apprehend, before all, Gowry the chiefe Architect of the conſpiracy, who preſently retired himſelf to a Port called Dundey, as though he would haue departed the Kingdome, where he knowing

himſelfe guilty, deſpiſing the Kings authoritie, obſtinately withſtood them, and defended himſelfe in his lodging: but after two houres, he was apprehended, and led to priſon.The Earle of Gowry is taken.
                     
                     In the meane while the Conſpirators ſurpriſing the town of Sterlin, they conſtrained the Caſtle to yeeld. But vnderſtanding that the King was marching towards them in perſon with an armie; and finding themſelues but weakely accompanied, in reſpect of the number, vvhich Gowry had promiſed them; alſo in vaine attending ſuccours out of England, they forſooke their hold. And as euery one being full of feare, ſought to ſhift for himſelfe: the Earles of Marre,
                        The conſpirors are diſperſed. 
                        Glan, and Angus holding together, vvith others took their flight through many by-wayes into England: humbly requeſting the Queene to releeue them in their afflictions, and bee an interceſſor for them to their King,
                           Queene Elizabeth ſuccoureth ſome of them.
                           The King demandeth them by the League,
                         ſeeing that they vvere depriued both of their fortunes, and the Kings fauour, by endeuouring for the good of her and her Kingdome. The King on the contrary accuſed them to the Queene of many hainous things, demanding according to the league of alliance betweene them, that they might bee deliuered into his hands. But there were ſome about the Court that perſwaded the Queene that they were men moſt obedient to their King, and moſt deſirous of his welfare;but in vaine. that hauing him vnder their cuſtody and power, yet neuer attempted any thing againſt his ſtate or perſon; and that law which was vſually expreſſed in leagues concerning the deliuerie and reſtoring backe of Rebels, was long ſince aboliſhed and out of vſe amongſt Princes. Theſe men alſo endeuoured to perſwade the King of Scots that he ſhould deale more mildly and gently with men of ſuch and ſo great ranke, and not to driue them (as it were headlong) through deſpaire to more bad deſignes. Remonſtrating to him, that terrour and violence vvere but feeble and vnhappy props of power, alledging to that end two tragicall examples drawne out of the Scottiſh Hiſtory, attributing great praiſes to his mother, & Francis
                        
her husband, that at the firſt riſing of the French ciuill war, paſt ouer the iniuries and offences of the Nobility without regard.
                     
                        Walſingham fauoureth the fugitiues. Hunſdon againſt thē.
                        Walſingham, that ſtudiouſly fauoured the fugitiues, by letters commanded that they ſhould bee receiued into the Iſland called the holy Iland; but Hunſdon (who ſhewed himſelfe a greater friend to the King of Scots then any other) oppoſed it, becauſe the iuriſdiction of the place appertained to him, as gouernor of the Eaſt frontiers, hee thought it altogether vnfit, that any entrance ſhould be permitted to the Scots in a place of ſtrength, neither would he obey the letters of the Secretary without expreſſe command from the Queene.Controuerſie, or the power of a Secretary argued. From hence aroſe a controuerſie, whether a Secretary could by his authority direct or execute the affaires of his Prince, without receiuing ſpeciall command from him, and without the counſell of the gouernor of the place: What was determined thereupon is not manifeſt, but the Scots were not admitted into the Iſle. Neuertheleſſe it was eſteemed expedient, that they ſhould be in ſome ſort fauored, to oppoſe the contrary faction which aroſe in Scotland, which was that the Miniſters had ſpred & rumored abroad, that the King was about to forſake his religion, but they could not produce or alledge any argument probable (although they had framed many, but onely that he was wholy tranſported with a filiall loue towards his mother, and receiued as a moſt indeered to him, thoſe which he knew were affectionate to her.
                     
                        The arraignment of Gowry.In the meane ſpace Gowry was brought to iudgment before the Peeres at Sterlin. And was accuſed to haue plotted a new conſpiracy againſt the King after he had been confin'd priſoner to his houſe: Notwithſtanding that the King had lifted him vp to great honours, riches, and Commands, and accounted of him as a kinſman. To haue conſulted by night which the ſeruants of Angus for the taking of Perth & Sterlin. To haue reſiſted by force of Armes, the authority royall

at Dundey. To haue concealed the conſpiracy which was complotted to ruine the King, and the Queene his mother. And laſtly, To haue conſulted with the ſorcereſſe Maclene. To all this he pleaded innocency,He defendeth his own cauſe. and an vnſpotted faith towards the King. He acknowledged the benefits which hee had receiued. He complained bitterly of the Earle of Arran as his enemie, and one thirſting for blood, ſaying that hee was apprehended by his cunning policies, being vpon the point of departure out of the Kingdome, and by him was with the hope both of life & grace which he promiſed him, ſo farre allur'd and treacherouſly ouer-reacht that hee confeſſed all that was obiected to him: and therefore thoſe things ought not in right and equity, or any conſequence, be brought againſt him, being by treachery and deceit extorted from him. As for the reſiſtance which he made hee excuſed, becauſe he perſwaded himſelfe that the letters of protection, ſealed with the Kings great Seale, which hee had with him, were of greater conſideration and value, then which the Earle of Arran had written with his owne hand for his apprehending. Hee likewiſe anſwered that hee was not ſo much blame-worthy, in concealing for ſo ſhort a time the conſpiracy againſt the King and his Queene-mother, as hee deſerued praiſe at laſt for diſcloſing of it. And finally, proteſting, that from his heart hee vtterly hated all witches and ſorcerers, he openly ſaid, that if there were any at all, hee verily beleeued that they liu'd in the Courts of Princes. The Peeres, after they had according to the cuſtome ſworne, that they had in no waies moued or incited the Kings Aduocate to accuſe him, they pronounc't him guilty of Laeſae Maieſtatis,
                        He is beheaded. and in the end his head was cut off, which by his friends was preſently taken and ſtiched to the body, and ſo buried.
                     Euen in the ſame time whilſt theſe Scots enterpriſed theſe things againſt their King, in the ſeruice (as they pretended) of Queene ELIZABETH, to their owne ruine. Certaine

Engliſh likewiſe to do ſeruice to the Queene of Scots, began to plot againſt their own Queene things of no leſſe weight, and attended on with the like bad ſucceſſe. Of which was chiefe Francis Throckmorton eldeſt ſon of Iohn Throckmorton Iudge of Cheſter,
                        The treaſon of Francis Throckmorton. but by deuices of Leiceſter hee was degraded, and puniſhed, becauſe that (if I faile not in theſe law matters) hee had ſtuffed and corrected in many places a copie of iudiciall tranſaction taken out of the originall which was corrupted, and did not preſent it with all faults and defects. This Francis became firſt ſuſpected by reaſon of letters which he had written to the Queene of Scots, and were intercepted: and therefore he was clapt into priſon, where hee beginning to confeſſe,The Lord Paget retyreth into France. The complaints of the Catholikes. 
                        Thomas Lord Paget and Charles Arundell a Courtier ſecretly left their Country, and fled into France, where they with others zealous in the Roman Religion bitterly deplored their misfortune; complaining amongſt themſelues that by the means of Leiceſter and Walſingham, they had without any deſert vtterly loſt the fauour of their Queene, that they were vnworthily afflicted with iniuries and opprobries, that many ſtratagems were deuiſed againſt them, and diuers ſnares laid, to force them againſt their owne wills and intentions to runne into the crime of Laeſae Maieſtatis: neither was there any hope of helpe or ſuccour left for them within the Kingdome. And ſurely at that time, that they might with more eaſe ſound the mindes of men, there were put in practice many fraudulent deuices; counterfeit letters were ſuborned, in the name of the Queen of Scots, and the reſt of the fugitiues, with their hands faſly thereto ſubſcribed, and theſe were caſt into the houſes of the Papiſts.Spies are ſuborned. Spies were likewiſe ſent forth to gather the diſperſed rumors, and captate ſcattered ſpeeches. Then reporters of tales and falſities were accepted and welcomed; and many vvere ſuſpected: but amongſt others the Earle of Northumberland, and his ſonne; the Earle of Arondell,
                        Many ſuſpected. vvho vvas cōfined to his houſe, and his vvife vvhich was

giuen in keeping to Shirley; G. Howard brother to the Earle; and H. Howard their Vncle, brother to the Duke of Norfolke; who was oftentimes examined about Letters written from the Queene of Scots; Charles Paget, and a certaine fellow as then vnknowne called Mopus: and notwithſtanding he was wiſe and innocent, yet he had much to doe to defend and warrant himſelfe from their traps. Neither were theſe artificiall policies, and eaſie credulities to bee holden or eſteemed, as things vaine; when the matter lay vpon the ſafeguard of the Queene. For then the deteſtable malice of the Papiſts began to manifeſt it ſelfe,The malice of the Papiſts againſt the Queene. publiquely divulging bookes, wherein they exhorted the ſeruants of the Queene to doe by her as Iudith to her immortall fame dealt with Holofernes. The Author of theſe bookes could not certainly be diſcouered; but the ſuſpition lighted vpon one G. Martine of Oxford, a man well learned in the Greeke and Latine tongues; and one Carter a Booke-binder, becauſe he cauſed them to be imprinted was put to death.
                     And foraſmuch as by theſe books the Queens honour was much diſtained,The clemency of the Queene towards the Papiſts. and ſhe rumoured abroad to bee tyrannous and cruell; She which aboue all things laboured and ſtudied to leaue to the world a happy memory of her goodneſſe; She was much moued and incenſed againſt thoſe that had knowledge of the cauſes which thus prouoked the Papiſts, as barbarouſly cruell, and iniurious to her honour. Inſomuch that they found it needfull for them, to excuſe themſelues by divulged writings, importing theſe proteſtations of their part.
                     THat they had alwayes entreated the Prieſts in a more milder faſhion then they deſerued, neither euer vrged any queſtions to them concerning Religion; but onely of their pernicious machinations againſt their Prince and Countrey; moued by ſtrong ſuſpitions with probable ſignes and arguments

thereto. That Campian was neuer ſo extremely tortured, but that hee was able to walke and ſubſcribe his hand to his confeſsions. But Brian refuſing either to ſpeake or write his name that was author of thoſe myſticall writings which were found about him, was kept from all food, vntill by writing he demanded it.
                     But this yeelding no ſufficient ſatisfaction to the Queene, ſhe commanded the Commiſſaries that were appointed for criminall proceedings, that is to ſay, the examiners, to abſtaine from tormenting, and the Iudges from puniſhing. And a ſhort while after, thoſe ſeuentie Prieſts, whereof ſome were condemned to be put to death, and all of them had incurrred the cenſure of the Law, ſhee cauſed to bee baniſhed out of England;Prieſts are baniſhed. amongſt which, the moſt eminent were G. Heywood, ſonne to that famous Epigrammatiſt, the firſt Ieſuite that entred into England; I. Boſgraue a Ieſuite alſo; I. Hart, of ſingular learning aboue the reſt; and E. Richton that monſter of ingratitude, who preſently after, vomited vp the poiſon of his malice againſt the Queene, to whom hee was indebted for his life, and publiſhed it in open writing.
                     
                        Edward Stafford Ambaſſador for the Queene in France, diligently obſerued,Fugitiues demanded of the King of France. how the Baron of Paget and Arundell were ariued in France: But could not penetrate into their deſignes. Neuertheleſſe he ſollicited the King of France to expell as well them as Morgan and other Engliſh that vvere confederates and complotters againſt their Queene and Country. But his anſwer was:

                           
                              The anſwer of the King of France.
                           THat if they did plot or enterprize ought in France, the King according to equitie would chaſtiſe them; but whatſoeuer they had done in England, the King would neither enquire after, nor execute the Law vpon them. That all Kingdomes were free, and open to fugitiues, and that euery King ſhould labour to defend the liberties of his Kingdome:

That ELIZABETH her ſelfe had not long before receiued into her Realme Montgomerie, the Prince of Conde, and others of the French Nation. And that (at that time) Seguri the King of Nauarre his Ambaſſador, remained in England, plotting new deuices againſt the King of France.
                        
                     
                     Whilſt theſe things paſt on, Bernardin Mendoza Spaines Ambaſſador in England, ſecretly paſt into France, murmuring and raging, as if he, contrarie to the right of Ambaſſie, had beene forc'd out of England; being indeed a man of violent and turbulent nature, and hauing himſelfe abuſed the holy and ſacred rights of Ambaſſadors, did deſerue (according to the opinion of many) after the ancient ſeueritie, to bee purſued with ſword and fire: Hee was commanded to depart the Realm, becauſe he had intermixt himſelfe amongſt thoſe wicked conſpiracies, with Throckmorton, and others,The Spaniſh Ambaſſador ſent out of England. that laboured for the bringing in of Strangers into England, and diſpoſſeſsing of the Queene: for which being gently reproued, he in ſtead of excuſing and purging himſelfe by a modeſt reply, accuſed the Queene and her Councel about the money which was detained from the Geneuois, for the aide and ſuccours which were ſent to the States of the Netherlands, to the Duke of Anjou, and to Antonio King of Portugall, and alſo for the Pyracies of Drake. But leſt the King of Spaine ſhould thinke the rights of Embaſſie vvere violated by this, and not the offence of Mendoza reuenged, W.
                        Waade is ſent into Spaine. 
                        Waade one of the Queenes Councell for the expedition of Letters, was diſpatched into Spaine, there plainely to demonſtrate how miſchieuouſly Mendoza had behaued himſelfe in his Ambaſſage. And to ſignifie likewiſe, leſt the Queene ſhould be thought by returning of Mendoza, to renounce the ancient friendſhip between the Kingdomes, that ſhe was ready to performe all Offices of humanitie towards him, if the King in Mendoza's place would ſend any

other more carefull for the maintaining of friendſhip prouided that the like might be performed to her Ambaſſador in Spaine. 
                        Is not receiued· But the King diſdaining to receiue or conferre with Waade, referred him to his Councell. Whereat Waade ſomewhat incenſed, boldly declared, that it had beene an ancient cuſtome ouer all, that the Ambaſſadors ſhould bee admitted to ſpeake in preſence euen of their enemies, and in time of Warre. And that the Emperor Charles the fifth, father of the King, gaue admittance to the Herald that denounced warre againſt him from the King of France, refuſing to impart to the Councell the tenour of his Ambaſsie. Now Idiac Secretarie to the King of Spaine endeuoured himſelfe much to come to the knowledge of thoſe matters, but his Art and policies failing him, hee was fully inſtructed out of France of the whole paſſage by Mendoza. Whereupon laying aſide the quality of a publike perſon, he familiarly declared to Waade, that to his griefe hee ſaw many men which bent all their ſtudies to breake and ſeuer with miſchieuous deuices the Leagues and amity of Princes and to increaſe their enmities. That the iniury was done to the King of Spaine himſelfe, and not to Ambaſſadors: firſt on the perſon of Diſpez, and then of Mendoza. That there was no reaſon why he ſhould any more accuſe Mendoza to the King, that had receiued for his fault (if hee committed any) ſufficient puniſhment, being ſo ignominiouſly and diſgracefully ſent backe. That the Catholique King had dealt iuſtly in rendering like for like; and as the Queene had diſmiſſed Mendoza without hearing, but appointed him to bee heard by her Councell, the King in like manner had appointed him to the Cardinall Granuellan. To this Waade made anſwer, that there was a large difference between himſelfe that had neuer giuen the leaſt diſtaſte to the Catholike King, and Mendoza who had highly & grieuouſly offended the Queene, hauing inſolently, a great ſpace, diſdained and refuſed to come neere her, and committed many things vnfitting

and vnworthy an Ambaſſador. Notwithſtanding all this, Waade could not bee admitted but returned into England without being heard. All thoſe crimes for the moſt part which were obiected againſt Mendoza were taken out of the confeſsion of Throckmorton.
                     
                     For when Throckmorton ſaw himſelfe at the point of being apprehended; hee ſent vnto Mendoza a little trunke, wherein were contained his ſecrets; neuertheleſſe his other trunkes being diligently ſearched, there were found two Catalogues; in one of which were contained the names of the Ports which were moſt appropriate and conuenient for the landing of their troopes; in the other, the names of ſuch Noblemen in England, as did entertaine and imbrace the Roman Religion. Which Catalogues when hee ſaw produced, he cryed out aloud, that they were things ſuborned, and that he neuer ſaw them before that time; and that they were purpoſely inſerted into his trunke by ſome that plotted his deſtruction: and being tortured to force him confeſſe, hee ſtill perſiſted: but tortures being applyed the ſecond time, he confeſſed all that he knew; and being examined touching the Catalogues to what end they were written, he made this Declaration.
                     THat a few yeares ſince taking his iourney to the waters of Spaw,
                           Throckmortons confeſsion.
                         with one Ieney and Englefield, they conſulted among themſelues of the meanes by which England might bee inuaded of the ſtrangers, and the forme of the gouernment changed, and to that end the names of the Ports and Noblemen were ſet downe in thoſe Catalogues. That Morgan had ſignified to him by Letters out of France, that the Catholique Princes had already deliberated vpon the inuaſion, and by the auſpicious ſuccours of the Duke of Guiſe to ſet at libertie the Queene of Scots, the Guiſe wanting nothing but money and ſome helping hands in

England. That to procure theſe things C. Paget vnder the aſſumed name of Mopus, was ſent into Suſſex, where the Guiſe had determined first to land his troops. That he had communicated the buſineſſe, and ſhewed the names of the Ports and Noblemen, to Mendoza, who was now perfectly inſtructed by the rect of the conſpiracie. Neither doth he deny that hee had promiſed his owne helpe and induſtry. And had alſo aduertiſed Mendoza with what Noblemen being a publique perſonage, he might conferre with; with whom, he himſelfe being but a priuate man, could not without danger hold parley. And with him found the meanes by ſome of the principall Catholiques, to take vp ſouldiers in the Queenes name, then when the ſtranger forces ſhould ariue, to bee ioyned with them. Theſe things he freely confeſſed.
                     
                     
                        He denieth all.Neuertheleſſe being accuſed publikely in the Court at London, hee preciſely denied all, affirming that hee had ſpoken out of his owne inuention and not the truth, onely to free himſelfe from the tortures againe; and openly accuſed the Queene of cruelty,He ſeeketh an evaſion. and thoſe of the Inqueſt of falſhood, framing an euaſion for himſelfe out of the diſtance of time which had paſſed betweene the Commiſſion of the fact, and Iudgement. For in the 13 yeare of Queene ELIZABETH, certaine offences were inſerted into the ranke of thoſe of Laeſae Maieſtatis, for which no man cold be brought to iudgment, if the delinquent were not accuſed within ſixe moneths after hee had offended, and the offence alſo verified by the oath of two witneſſes, or the confeſſion voluntary without conſtraint by force or violence. That the time was long ſince expired, therefore hee ought not to bee produced to iudgement. But the Iudges ſhewed him by ample demonſtrations, that the crimes of which hee was accuſed were of another quality, and therefore by vertue of an

ancient Law enacted vnder the Reigne of EDWARD the 3, he was found culpable and guilty of Laeſae Maieſtatis, which doth not admit any limitation either of time and proofe; wherupon the fatall ſentence was pronounced againſt him. But he perſwading himſelfe of the mercy of the Queene,Being condemned he inlargeth his confeſſion. About to d
                              •
                           e he denyeth all. by writing againe confeſſed all, in more ample manner then hee had done before, all which, through his inconſtancy, comming to the Gibber, he vtterly denyed, but it was all in vaine and to no auaile.
                     
                        William Waad being returned out of Spaine, was about this time ſent to the Queene of Scots, for the holding of a treatie betweene her and Mildmay, which two yeares ſince was propounded, and broken off, as already hath beene ſhewed. She proteſted to him by diuers oaths that ſhe had ſeriouſly laboured to effect it:A new treaty with the Queene of Scots. and alſo deuoted to Queene ELIZABETH, both herſelfe and all her beſt indeauors, promiſing vvholly to depend of her, if ſhe vvould vouchſafe to fauor her with ſuch and ſo great loue and honour: To theſe ſhe faithfully promiſed, that if ſo be this treaty might proceed, ſhe would make interceſſion to her ſonne, and ſo effectually, that he ſhould receiue into his gratious fauor Angus and the reſt of the Scottiſh Nobles, and the Biſhops of Roſſe and Glaſco their agents in France, ſhould not complot or enterprize any thing againſt the Queene or Realme of England, and that they ſhould from thenceforth ceaſe from the faction of the Engliſh rebels and fugitiues.
                     Queene ELIZABETH ioyfully receiued theſe newes, and ſeeing that the Earles of Angus, Marre, I. Hamilton, & Glam, remained at that time fugitiues in England, ſhee made vſe of profered occaſion, and ſent Beal, with the Earle of Shrewſbury to the Queene of Scots, to ſignifie to her, that if ſhe ſtill perſiſted in the ſame opinion which ſhee had declared to Waad, then Mildmay ſhould preſently be with her, to conclude for her inlargement. And that they ſhould worke ſo farre with her, that in the interim ſhe would bee an interceſſor

to her ſonne the King, for the reſtoring of the fugitiues, and to perſwade him that they had not enterpriſed any thing againſt his Maieſty,Propoſitions made to her. but onely againſt certaine raſh Counſellors, that with their wicked and peruerſe Counſels would corrupt his goodneſſe; And finally, that they ſhould ſound her as much as poſſible they could, concerning the practices of the Guiſe, to which (being a woman of a prudent vnderſtanding) ſhe made this anſwer.
                     
                        
                           She anſwereth.
                        THat ſhee deſired nothing more then that the treaty might proceed, and earneſtly requeſted the ſame of the Queene as of her elder ſiſter, to whom ſhe ſhould giue all reſpect and honour. That ſhee had not ſpoken any thing to Waade but vnder certain conditions, and ſhe perſwaded herſelfe that hee was a man freely honeſt and iuſt, and would not ſpeake otherwiſe. As for the reſtoring of the fugitiues, ſhe thought her helpe very behouefull, and would not faile therein, if there would redound or to her, or to her ſon any profit or good, and if they would with all humility ſubmit themſelues to the King, and yeeld obedience to him: but if not, that the Queene would not aſsiſt them, but her ſonne, that they might be reduced into order. Furthermore not to diſſemble, That ſhe when ſhee was in a ſickly eſtate, committed herſelfe and her ſonne, to the faith of their neere kinſman, the Duke of Guiſe: but as for his vndertakings againſt the Queene ſhe was altogether ignorant; neither, if ſhe had full knowledge thereof would ſhe reueale ought, except ſhe might be certainely ſecur'd of her liberty, knowing it to be but a ſmal ſigne of wiſdome to forſake certaine friends for vncertaine hopes. She intreated that ſhe being a free Princeſſe might not be more cruelly dealt withall, then was Queene ELIZABETH being a ſubiect and impriſoned by her ſiſter Queene MARIE: or then the King of

                        France not long before dealt with Nauarre, being his ſubiect and rebelling againſt him. Shee deſired alſo, that the treaty might be brought to ſome end, before any meſſenger were ſent into Scotland about thoſe affaires. And foraſmuch as the moſt Chriſtian King had acknowledged her ordinary Ambaſſador,
                           She demandeth to be aſſociated in the Kingdome with her ſonne.
                         and Seton whom her ſonne ſent into France, to be Ambaſſadors from Princes of equall and the ſame authority, ſhe requeſted the Queene giuing her that honour that ſhe would, without any preiudice, cauſe that aſſociation of her and her ſonne to be publiſhed in Scotland.
                     
                     Theſe things had a good hearing,The treaty diſſolued by ſurmiſes. but ſoone by obiections of feares fruſtrated, which were interpoſed by thoſe that well knew how to increaſe hatred betweene incenſed women: but aboue all, by produced papers, which Chreicton a Scottiſh Ieſuit, ſayling into Scotland, and being apprehended by certaine Pyrates did teare in peeces. But theſe torne Papers being caſt ouer-boord, were by a wind (as Chreicton alſo verified) miraculouſly blowne into the ſhip againe; and by Waad with great labour and artificiall skill were collected and ioyned together, wherein were diſcouered new counſels and plots of the Pope, Spaniard, and Guiſe for the inuading of England.
                     
                     This and the various rumours of imminent dangers that were diſperſed abroad, were the cauſes, that to cut off the way to all wicked deſignes, and ambuſhes of ſedition, and to prouide for the ſafety of the Queene, vpon whom both the Realme and Religion depended; by the deuice of Leiceſter, moſt men of all eſtates and conditions through whole England, which were not poſſeſt with feare of her, but for her, did binde themſelues by a generall loue with their mutuall vowes, ſubſcriptions,An aſſociation begun in England. and ſeales in a certaine aſſociation to perſecute withall their powers euen to the death all ſuch (whatſoeuer they were) as ſhould plot or attempt any thing againſt her.
                     
                        The Queene of Scots eaſily vnderſtood, that in this generall Aſſociation her owne ruine was comprehended: therefore being wearied with her long continued miſery,The Queen of Scots maketh new propoſitions. and fearing yet worſe, She made this propoſition by Naue her Setary, to the Queene and her Councell.
                     THat if ſhee could obtaine her libertie, with an euident teſtimony of loue and ſincere affection of the part of Queene ELIZABETH; Shee would contract and confirme a moſt ſtraight League of amity with her, and moſt officiouſly cheriſh and affect her aboue all Chriſtian Princes, and blot out of her memory all iniury and offences. She would acknowledge her the true and lawfull Queene of England, and neuer pretend or take vpon her any claime or right to the Crowne during her life, neither would ſhee euer enterpriſe any thing either directly or indirectly againſt her; but for euer renounce all intereſt in the title and Armes of England, which by the command of Francis her husband, and the Popes Buls of depoſition, ſhe arrogated vnto her ſelfe. Yea furthermore, would be included in that aſſociation, and defenſiue League for the Queenes ſaueguard, without preiudice to that ancient alliance which hath been betweene France and Scotland. Prouided that nothing be enterpriſed, during the life of Queene ELIZABETH, or after her death, to the preiudice of her, her ſonne, and their heires in the ſucceſsion, before it were firſt declared before the aſſembly of the Eſtates of England. She would for the confirmation of theſe things, remaine in England for a time as a pledge, and if ſo be ſhe might bee permitted to depart out of England, ſhe would leaue other hoſtages. Furthermore, ſhe would not alter any thing in Scotland, onely ſhe deſired that ſhee and thoſe of her Family might be ſuffered to haue the free vſe of

their Religion, in her owne houſe. Shee would forget and forgiue all iniuries, which ſhee had receiued in Scotland (with this condition) that whatſoeuer had beene raiſed to her infamy and diſgrace, might be aboliſhed. Shee would recommend to the King ſuch Counſellors as ſhe knew to be ſtudious of peace with England. She would reconcile the fugitiue Noblemen, if it were poſsible for her: if alſo they would ſubmiſsiuely acknowledge their fault, and if the Queene of England would promiſe to aſsiſt the King againſt them, if after their reconciliation they ſhould fall from obedience. As for the mariage of her ſonne, ſhee would doe nothing without the priuitie of the Queene. Shee deſired that becauſe ſhe would doe nothing without the counſell and conſent of her ſonne, he might be ioyned in this treatie for the more ſolid and firme aſſurance thereof. Shee doubted not, but the King of France would intercede, and conioyntly oblige his faith with the Princes of Loraine to entertaine and effect the conuentions thereof. Shee entreats for a mature and happy anſwer, leſt any diſcommoditie or hindrance ſhould fall betweene. And finally; requeſted that ſhee might bee allowed a little more liberally in her impriſonment, whereby ſhee might clearely perceiue the loue of the Queene towards her.
                     Queene ELIZABETH ſeemed to take a great delight in theſe things, as being full of courteſie and honour, and was then almoſt perſwaded to grant her libertie: but there were ſome in England that with new propoſitions & apprehenſions of ſtrange doubts, did diſſwade her. But the matter being almoſt knowne all ouer,The Scots of the Engliſh faction oppoſe them thoſe Scots of the aduerſe faction did labour to trouble and hinder the ſame, Crying out, that it would be the finall ruine of Queene ELIZABETHS ſafety if ſhee were ſet at liberty, of both the Kingdomes,

if ſhe were admitted to the adminiſtration of Scotland conioyntly with her ſonne: and laſtly of the true Religion through Great Britaine, if ſhe were onely permitted to exerciſe the Roman Religion.
                     
                        The inſolencie of the Scotch Miniſters.Not contented with this, certaine Miniſters in Scotland after they had charged the Queen with ſlanders and calumnies, euen in their Pulpits & common aſſemblies, they vehemently & bitterly exclaimed againſt the King and his Counſell: whereupon being commanded to appeare before them, with diſdaine and contempt they refuſed it. As if the Pulpits were exempt from the authoritie of Kings, and Eccleſiaſticall perſons ſubiect not to the command of the Prince, but of the Presbytery;Againſt the Lawes. contrarie to the Lawes enacted the ſame yeare by the aſſembly of the eſtates, wherein was confirmed the Kings authoritie for euer ouer all his ſubiects, as well Eccleſiaſticall, as Lay-men, that is, the King and his Councell to be fit and competent Iudges in all cauſes; and whoſoeuer denyed or refuſed the ſame, to be holden guilty Laeſae Maieſtatis.
                        Eccleſiaſticall Lawes of Scotland. The aſſemblies of Eccleſiaſticall perſons as well generall as ſpeciall (as alſo thoſe of the Lay-men) wherein they arrogated to themſelues an infinite power of calling of an aſſembly at their owne pleaſure, againſt the Kings conſent, in which they would preſcribe lawes to the King and Kingdome, were vtterly prohibited and aboliſhed. The popular equalitie of Miniſters was abrogate. The authoritie and iuriſdiction of Biſhops (whoſe calling the Preſbyters condemned as Antichriſtian) was eſtabliſhed. And all defamatory writings againſt the King, the Queene his Mother, and the Councell, were interdicted: And namely the Hiſtory of Buchanan,
                        Buchanans writings reproued. and the Dialogue of the right of the Kingdome, as containing many things worthy to bee condemned and extirpate.
                     Some of the Miniſters receiued theſe things with ſuch impatience, that they ſtreight left their Countrey, and powred out their complaints and griefes throughout al England,
                        
as if the True Religion had now beene chaſed out of Scotland. But Queene ELIZABETH with a deafe eare neglected them, deeming of 
                           〈◊〉
                         as authors of 
                           •
                        ouation; neither would ſhe permit them to preach in England: neuertheleſſe ſhe made vſe of them to hinder all preiudice and detriment which the Religion in Scotland might receiue. And likewiſe when the Earle of Arran was with all reſpect imployed for the conſeruation of the amity with England; Shee thought they would opportunely ſerue to the purpoſe, that the fugitiue Scots might not be baniſht from the aſſemblies which were inſtantly to be holden, nor the King diuerted from the friendſhip of the Engliſh.A fained conference. Whereupon a parley was appointed betweene the Earle of Arran and Hunſdon Gouernor of Barwicke. But before it was holden, the fugitiues, and all thoſe which were in the expedition with Sterlin, were baniſhed from the Aſſemblies, which were haſtily to be Conuocated. Whom Arran likewiſe in his Parley which preſently followed, charged with many weighty accuſations; and amongſt the reſt, that they had of new conſpired the ruine of the King. But he deuoutly promiſed, not to pretermit any thing which hee thought would content and pleaſure Queene ELIZABETH; neither would he doe any thing that might endamage her, ſo long as he remained in grace and fauour with the King. Notwithſtanding theſe things, the Scottiſh borderers (by the priuat practices of the Spaniard,The Scots and Engliſh make incurſions one vpon another. who laboured to withhold Queen ELIZABETH from the Flemmiſh warres) being a moneth after brought into Rhediſdale, performed there all the deeds of hoſtilitie; the bordering Engliſh in like manner vvith fire and ſlaughter reuenged themſelues of that iniurie vpon Liddeſdall.
                     
                     Then was ſent Ambaſſador from Scotland Patricke Gray heire of that Family, a complete yong man,The Ambaſſie of Patrick Gray. that thought himſelfe equall, if not exceeding, for the diſpatch of greateſt affaires. The eſpeciall tenour of his Ambaſſie was for the

repreſsing of the incurſions on both ſides, for the reſtoring of goods taken by Pyracie, and for the reconciling (according to the League) of the Scottiſh fugitiues, or elſe remouing of them from the frontiers of Scotland, becauſe they continually inuented new ſtratagems, with other of their confederacie in Scotland, againſt the King. And the better to obtaine theſe demands, and incline the Queenes mind and affection towards the King more fully, hee promiſed to diſcouer hidden enterpriſes that were plotted againſt the Queene. To the firſt and ſecond Article ſhe anſwered as ſhe thought fitting, but as for the ſending backe of the fugitiues ſhe thus replyed:
THat ſhe was verily perſwaded, that thoſe Noblemen had not ſo much as entertained a thought of enterprizing any miſchiefe, & that that vprore which ſo happened in Scotland, proceeded not from any euill intent to the King, but of the mutuall diſcords which dayly ariſe amongst the Nobilitie about the vnder-age of the King, and therefore that belonged to the King to appeaſe, and to tye his ſubiects to him (by ſuppreſsing factions) in one bond of obedience.
                     
                     Yet that ſhee might in ſome ſort yeeld ſatisfaction to the Kings iuſt Petition, and alſo receiue intelligence of thoſe ſecret practices, which hee ſpoke of, ſhee commanded the Scottiſh fugitiues to remoue themſelues farther from the limits.Hee is ſuſpected of bad dealing. But the Queene made ſhew, that what he had reuealed then vnto her, ſhe had knowledge of before. Whereupon aroſe a ſuſpition amongſt many, that the Ambaſſador had beene hyred by ſome, to diſcloſe ſomething to the preiudice of the King and his mother, and had oppos'd againſt the acceptance of theſe moſt iuſt conditions, which the mother of the King had propoſed by her Secretary Naue.
                     
                     
                        Whereupon the patience of the Queene Mother that had ſo oftentimes beene deluded, began now to breake out into flames of griefe and indignation,The patience of the Queene of Scots offended. and the deſire which ſhee had to obtaine her libertie, cauſed her to lay open her eares and minde to all the pernicious counſels of her friends or enemies. And ſo much the rather, becauſe, ſhe perſwaded her ſelfe, that the generall aſſociation was deuiſed to take her life from her, becauſe likewiſe ſhe had intelligence, that by the practices, of ſome ſhee was to be remoued from the cuſtodie of the Earle of Shrewsbury (who was a iuſt man, and one that no wayes fauoured their deſigne) and deliuered into the hands of new guardians. But to bring this more fairely about, leſt the ſingular fidelitie and truſt of the Earle of Shrewsbury might be thought to be ſuſpected, for it was not thought good to offend the reputation of ſo great a perſonage, (albeit it had been diminiſhed with priuate calumnies, by the reproachfull criminations of his importunate wife) certaine ſuſpitions were collected of ſome deſignes for her deliuery, through certaine Emblemes which were ſent vnto her, importing thus. Argus with his many eyes caſt into a ſleepe by Mercury, ſweetly playing vpon his Flute, with this Motto.
                     
                        Eloquium tot lumina clauſit,
                        Vn Beau Diſcours â ferme aultant de Lumieres.
                     
                     
                        Mercurius beheading Argus, keeper or watcher of Io: A yong branch ſet in an old ſtocke, and bound about with cords, whereabout was written:

                           Per vincula creſco,
                           Ie crois Par les liens.
                        
                     
                     
                        A Palme depreſſed, yet riſing againe; with theſe words;

                           Ponderibus virtus innata reſiſtit.
                           La vertu qui vient de Naiſſance reſiſte à l' oppreſsion.
                        
                     
                     That Anagram alſo gaue much diſtaſte;

                           ARMATA VERITAS.
                           MARIA STEVARTA.
                        
                     
                     Beſides all this, Letters were produced, as though intercepted, wherein the friends of the Queen Priſoner did complaine, that they ſhould be depriued of all hope of libertie, if ſhe were deliuered into the cuſtody of Puritans. Vnder this collected pretext, ſhee was withdrawne from the Earle of Shrewsbury (which he had often deſired) and committed to the cuſtody of Drugon Drurey with others:She is committed to new guardians. And that of purpoſe (as ſome ſuppoſed) that thereby being driuen to deſpaire, ſhe might be made the readier to entertaine miſchieuous counſels, and deuices, and ſo brought into the Ambuſhes, which were prepared for her. For the Earle of Shrewsbury had beene her guardian for fifteene yeares with ſuch watchfull and warie prouidence, that hee left no place or ſpace for her to enterpriſe ought againſt others: nor for others to plot any thing againſt her.She earneſtly ſeeketh for liberty. Then ſhee ſollicited with much importunitie the Pope of Rome and the Spaniard, by Inglefield, to finiſh with all mature expedition, what they had begunne,Things plotted againſt her. whatſoeuer betided her. And Leiceſter (who was thought to labour in the peruerting of the lawfull ſucceſſion) priuately ſent murderers (as ſome report) to diſpatch her out of the way. But Drury more reſpecting honeſty, and equity, in his heart hated thoſe trecherous deſignes, would not ſuffer any to haue acceſſe vnto her. Some priuate meſſengers neuertheleſſe conueyed Letters,

ſome true, ſome falſe vnto her, by which ſhe might be tranſported, through the imbecility of her ſex, to a pernicious ruine, as ſhall hereafter be related.
                     That the loue of Queene ELIZABETH might wholy be diuerted from her, it was whiſpered in her eares, how that Alan for the Eccleſiaſticall Catholickes of England; Inglefield for the Lay Catholickes, and the Biſhop of Roſſe for the Queen of Scots, by common ſuffrages,Counſell holden amongſt the Papiſts. and with the conſent of the Pope and Spaniard, had decreed to ſpoile Queene ELIZABETH of her Kingdome; to diſinherite the King of Scotland from the ſame, as manifeſted Hereticks; to giue the Queene of Scots in mariage to a Catholicke Nobleman of England; and by the Engliſh Catholicks to elect him King, which Election ſhould by the Pope bee confirmed, his children by the Queene of Scots to bee openly declared legitimate ſucceſſours to the Crowne of England, and all theſe things by the faith of one Hart a Prieſt. Who this Engliſhman ſhould be, Walſingham ſtudiouſly indeauoured to find, but to no purpoſe: but the ſuſpicion lighted vpon H. Howard brother to the Duke of Norfolke, one of the Nobilitie, not maried, a great Papiſt, and mightily fauoured of the Papiſts.
                     This yeare obſcurely dyed in miſerable exile C. Neuill,
                        The death of the Earle of Weſtmer land. that perfidious rebell againſt his Prince and Country, being the laſt Earle of Weſtmerland out of that family, which hath beene ſo fertile in Nobility, that beſides ſixe Earles of Weſtmerland, haue ſprung of the ſame name, two Earles of Saliſburie and of Warwicke one Earle of Kent,
                        NEVILL a moſt noble
                              •
                            moſt ancient and illuſtrious name. one Marqueſſe of Montague, one D. of Bedford, one Baron Ferrers of Ouſley, diuers Barons of Latimer and Abergauenny, a Queene, fiue Ducheſſes; omitting Counteſſes and Baronneſſes, with the Archbiſhop of Yorke, and a copious off-ſpring of Nobility.
                     In England none dyed more worthy of memory, then Edmund Plowden,
                        The death of Plowden. who as in the knowledge of the Lawes of England, of which he well deſerued in his writings, he was

aboue others excellent, ſo in integrity of liuing amongſt thoſe of his profeſſion he was ſecond to none.
                     
                        Alancon dyeth. The Prince of Orange is ſlaine.But in France, Francis Duke d'Alancon left the world, forced by a malady proceeding of the griefe of mind: and in Holland, William Prince of Orange, who with three bullets from a Piſtoll was ſhot through the body.
                     Queene ELIZABETH much lamented the death of theſe two, and diſpatch into France B. to ſignifie to the King how greiuouſly ſhe bore the death of the Duke whom ſhee had found a deare and faithfull friend; likewiſe to aduertiſe him of the afflicted eſtate of the Netherlands by the loſſe of the Prince of Orange,
                        The power of Spaine growne terrible. and the terrible puiſſance of the Spaniard, hauing all the Princes of Italy at his deuotion, the Pope moſt affected to him, the Cardinalls as it were his vaſſals, and many braue and ſingular men both for peace and warre vnder his pay; that the houſe of Auſtria in Germany was farre and wide extended, hauing all other families allyed to it by mariage, at all times at their ſeruice; that by the late addition of Portugall, and the Eaſt India, his wealth and forces were ſo augmented both by ſea and land; that he was become farre more powerfull and redoubted, then euer Charles his father was; and that he would goe neere, if once hee had brought the Netherlands vnder his power, to ſubiect all the reſt of the Princes of Chriſtendome to his greatneſſe, vnleſſe hee were in time preuented.
                  
                  
                     
                     THE EIGHT AND TWENTIETH YEERE of Her Raigne.Booke 3. Anno Dom. M.D.LXXXV.
                     
                        QVeen ELIZABETH to oblige the King of France in a ſtricter bond of friendſhip vnto her, hauing the precedent yeare adopted him one of the Order of the Garter,The French King inueſted with the order of the Garter. ſhee ſent Henry Earle of Darby into France with the rites belonging to the ſame order, there more ſolemnly to inueſt him. With great honor he receiued them, and at euening prayers was inueſt therewith: but the Engliſh refuſed to be preſent at the Maſſe: and with holy vowes hee promiſed to obſerue the lawes of the Order, in all points wherein they were not oppoſite to the order of the holy Ghoſt, and S
                           •
                        . Michael, to which he was before ſworne.
                     At the ſame time a Court of Parliament was aſſembled and holden, wherein Will. Parry by birth a Welchman, o
                           •
                         obſcure parentage and meane fortunes, by his ſtile a Doctor

of the Law, but indued with little learning, a man puffed vp, and haughty in mind, very ſpruſe and neat, was of the inferiour houſe, where hearing a Law demanded againſt the Ieſuits, he onely oppoſed it, declaiming, that the law was cruell, bloudy, and pernicious to the nation: the reaſons being demanded of him, he obſtinately refuſed, except it were in the preſence of the Councell royall: whereupon hee was committed to cuſtody; but his reaſons being heard, and ſubmiſſion made, hee was againe admitted into the Court. Then preſently after,Is accuſed of treaſon. hee was accuſed of priuate conſpiracy againſt the Queenes life, by Edmond Neuill, who layd claime to the inheritance of the Neuills Earles of Weſtmerland, and the title of Baron of Latimer, as being the next heire male.
                     This Parry (to relate from the depth of the matter) two yeares before, returning from Italy, to inſinuate himſelfe into the Queenes grace, and obtaine credit with her, he ſecretly made knowne vnto her, that Morgan and other fugitiues had miſchieuouſly conſulted vpon her death; feigning that he had dealt amongſt them to no other end, but to diſcouer intents, and prouide for the Queenes ſafety. This was the cauſe that induced her to giue little credit to Neuills accuſation; Neuertheleſſe ſhe cōmanded Walſingham to examine Parry, if that he had (to make proofe hereof) treated with any malecontent or ſuſpected perſō. He plainly denied it, neither (being in other matters of a ſharpe apprehenſion) could he perceiue the euaſion which the lenity of the Queene had laid open to him.He perceiueth not the euaſion. For had he affirmed that he had dealt with Neuill (only to vndermine him) whom before, he had certified the Queene to bee a malecontent and ſuſpected perſon, doubtleſſe he had freed himſelfe from danger. But miſchiefe once conceiued doth dazell the fight of the moſt acute vnderſtanding. Neuill wanting witneſſes was brought face to face with Parry, who after many ſharpe and bitter ſpeeches on both ſides, began to giue way, and was committed

to the Tower of London, where he voluntarily made this confeſſion, which in a few words I will compriſe.
                     IN the yeare (quoth he) 1570 being admitted (after my oath taken) into the number of the Queenes ſeruants,
                           His confeſſion.
                         I remained affectionately deuoted to her Maieſty vntill the yeare 1580, at which time I was with much ignominy brought in queſtion of my life. (For he violently had entred into the Chamber of Hugh Hare to whom he was indebted, & grieuouſly wounded him, for which by law being condemned, by the Queens gratious pardon he was acquitted) From thenceforth I liued much diſcontented in minde, but obtaining licenſe, I paſſed into France, with a reſolution neuer to returne,
                           He conſulteth with Ieſuits about the murthering of the Queene.
                         becauſe I was much addicted to the Catholique religion. At Paris I reconciled my ſelfe to the Romane Church: at Venice I had conference with Benedict Palmy a Ieſuit, concerning the afflicted Catholiques in England; and I affirmed that I had bethought of a meanes to eaſe them, if the Pope, or ſome other Theologians would inſtruct and ſatisfie me whether the deed were lawful or not. Palmy praiſed my intent as a worke of piety, and recommended me to Campege the Popes Nuncio at Venice,
                        
                           With the Popes Nuncio.
                         
                        Campege to the Pope. I demanded Letters to goe to Rome vnder the publique faith. The Cardinall Comeſe deliuered Letters to me; but being ſomewhat too briefe and ſuccinct, I demanded others of more ample contents, which I likewiſe receiued. But then I returned to Paris; where I incountred Morgan; who gaue mee to vnderſtand, that there were ſome that did expect,
                           With Morgan.
                         that I ſhould vndertake ſome not able peece of ſeruice, for God and the Catholique Church. I anſwered, I was ready at any time euen to kill the greateſt ſubiect in England. And (replyeth he) why not the Queene her ſelfe? That

(qd. I) may with eaſe be done: if ſo be it were manifeſted to me a deed lawfull:
                           With Prieſts.
                         becauſe Wiat a Prieſt (with whom concealing the perſons, I had conference hereof) aſſured me that it was not. (And Chreicton a Scot diſſwaded me, teaching mee, that miſchiefe ſhould not bee done that good might come of it; that God was better pleaſed with Aduerbs then with Nownes; that a deed be well and lawfully done, then that the deed is good: Neither if I could redeeme many ſoules by the deſtruction of one, were I to doe it, without the expreſſe commandement of God:) Neuertheleſſe hauing bound my ſelfe and my faith by my Letters and promiſes in Italy, I thought it would be a crime vnpardonable,
                           With the Pope himſelfe.
                         now to deſiſt, if onely the Pope would by his Letters approue the ſame, and grant me a plenary Indulgence, which I with Letters requeſted of the Pope by Rag
                              •
                           ſon his Nuncio in France, who much applauded my deſigne. Being returned into England,
                           He diſcloſeth the matter to the Queene.
                         I obtained acceſſe to the Queene; to whom, in priuate, I vnfolded the whole conſpiracie, yet couered ouer with the beſt Art I could. Shee heard all without any alteration by feare; but I departed with much terrour, neither ſhall I euer forget what then ſhee ſpake; That the Catholikes ſhould not be called in queſtion either about their Religion, or the primacie of the Pope, ſo long as they were obedient and good ſubiects. In the meane time as I dayly laboured in the Court for the gouernment of Saint Katherines: I receiued Letters from the Cardinall Comenſe, wherein I found mine enterprize much commended, and an abſolution in the Popes name. This I likewiſe imparted to the Queen. What effect it wrought with her I know not. But it gaue freſh courage to mee, and remoued all ſcruple. Neuertheleſſe I had no will to offer any violence to the Queene, if ſhe would be perſwaded

to deale more mildly with the Catholiques. But ſo often as I was to come into her preſence, I laid aſide my dagger, leſt I ſhould be tranſported to murder her. And when I conſidered; her perſon,
                           He wauereth in his minde.
                         and her truely royall vertues, I was diſtracted with many doubtfull cares: for my vowes were recorded in heauen, my Letters and promiſes amongst men. Theſe things did I often toſſe ouer in my vnquiet minde; She neuer deſerued well of mee, indeed ſhe ſaued my life, but if in ſuch a cauſe had ſhee taken it away, it had beene tyrannie. Thus being diſcontented with my eſtate and condition, I left the Court.
                           Alans book addeth freſh courage to him.
                         At laſt I happened on a booke of Alans againſt the Iuſtice of Great Britaine, out of which I was taught, That Princes excommunicate for hereſie, might be lawfully depriued both of rule and life: This vehemently incited me to proſecute my purpoſe.
                           Neuil offereth him his helpe.
                         This to Neuil (whom I had inuited to my table) I read ouer, ſix whole moneths before he did accuſe me. After this he came home to me. And let vs heare (quoth hee) ſomewhat, ſince we can obtaine nothing of the Queen, and ſo he propounded ſome things concerning the releaſing of the Queene of Scots. But (quoth I) a matter of more weight, and more aduantagious to the Catholique Church, is now hammered in my head. The next day he likewiſe viſited me, and touching the Bible with his hand he did ſweare, he would conceale and conſtantly purſue all whatſoeuer that might bee profitable to the Catholique Religion; I in the ſame manner took mine oath. So we determined with ten Knights more, to ſet vpon the Queene as ſhee rid through the fields, and there to murder her, which thing till now he hath concealed. But receiuing newes of the Earle of Weſtmerlands death, being tranſported with the hope of ſucceeding him; he forthwith, violating his oath,
                           He diſcloſeth the matter.
                         diſcouered and accuſed me. This was his confeſſion

in the preſence of the Lord of Hunſdon and Fra. Walſingham Priuy Counſellors to the Queene, acknowledging his fault, he craued pardon by his Letters to the Queene, to Burghley the chiefe Treaſurer, and to the Earle of Leiceſter.
                     
                        Parry is arraigned.A few daies after, being brought to iudgement in the Palace of Westminſter, and the Articles of his accuſation being read, he confeſſed himſelf guilty. His confeſſion being recorded in the Acts, Iudgment was demanded to be pronounced againſt him, confeſſing himſelfe guilty. Whereupon Hatton thought it expedient, to ſatisfy the multitude there preſent, that the crime might openly bee declared according to his confeſſion; which Parry of his owne accord confirmed, and deſired the Iudges that he might reade it himſelfe. But the Clerk of the Crowne did read it, with the letters of Cardinall Comeſe, & thoſe which Parry had writ to the Queene, to Burghley & to Leiceſter; which he acknowledged for true; yet he denyed that he euer had any abſolute determination to kill the Queene. But being commanded to ſpeake if he had any thing to hinder iudgement from being pronounced againſt him, hee diſturbedly anſwered, as tormented in his conſcience for the crime which he had vndertaken, and ſaid, I ſee plainely that I muſt dye, becauſe I was not faſt and conſtant in my reſolution. Being commanded to ſpeake his meaning more amply. My blood (quoth he) be vpon you. So the ſentence of death being pronounced, he began to rage, and ſummoned the Queene to Iudgement before God.
                     The fift day after, he was ſet vpon a Slead, and drawne through the middeſt of the Citie to Weſtminſter: being at the place of his execution, after he had vaunted how faithfull a guardian he had beene vnto the Queene, hee ſaid hee neuer had any intention to take her life away. Thus in boaſting manner,Puniſhed with death. not in a word committing himſelfe to God, he was puniſht like a Traytor according to the Law,

in the great Palace yard at Weſtminſter, where the States of the K
                           •
                        ngdome▪ were in great number aſſembled for the holding of the Parliament.
                     I
                           •
                         this Parliament, ſome,Lawes demanded in the Parliament againſt Biſhops. either out of a deſire of nouation, or reformation, earneſtly perſecuted the Eccleſiaſticall eſtat
                           •
                         (although the Queene had forbidden it) demanding lawes to repreſſe the iuriſdiction of Biſhops, in that which conce
                           •
                        ned the gift of Faculties, in the Collation of the holy Orders Eccleſiaſticall Cenſures, and the oath they take in their office: propoſing a new oath to be taken in the Chan
                        
                           •
                        ery, and Kings Bench: that is, they ſhould not counter
                        
                           •
                        and the ciuill Law of England.
                        Againſt Non-reſidents. They required that eue
                        
                           •
                        y Paſtor ſhould be reſident in his owne Church; and dec
                           ••
                        med that the Church of England was deſtitute of learned teachers: when without doubt it could then number vp more learned Diuines, then any former age, or any other reformed Church. But the Queene fauouring aboue all, the Eccleſiaſticall moderation, reproued thoſe Nouators, as changing ſtill to worſe, and reiected their demands and propoſitions, as intended to ſubuert her Prerogatiue, and ſoueraigne power ouer Eccleſiaſticall matters.The aſſociation eſtabliſhed. But as for the Aſſociation (which I haue ſpoken of) it was by the ſuffrages of all confirmed, and eſtabliſhed;
THat foure and twenty or more of the Queenes Priuy Councell, or of the Nobilitie, choſen by the Queenes Letters Patents, ſhould make inqueſt after thoſe, that would inuade the Kingdome, incite rebellion, or attempt to offend or offer violence to the Queenes Perſon, for or by any one whomſoeuer that ſhall lay claime to the Crowne of England. And that he for whom or by whom any ſuch thing is attempted, ſhall be altogether vncapable of the Crowne of England, and depriued of all right, and purſued to the death by all the Queenes ſubiects: if by theſe foure and

twenty Noblemen they ſhall be iudged culpable of inuaſion, rebellion, offence, or violence, and ſo publikely declared.
                     
                     
                        Lawes againſt Ieſuits and Prieſts.Lawes alſo were enacted for the defence of the Queene againſt the Ieſuites and Popiſh Prieſts; which did then inuent by the Ball of Pius Quintus the Pope, many miſchieuous and dangerous matters; That is to ſay:
That they ſhould depart the Realme within fortie dayes. And that thoſe which ſhould after that time come or ſtay in the Kingdome, ſhould bee holden guilty of Laeſae Maieſtatis: And all ſuch as wittingly or willingly did receiue or nouriſh them, ſhould be guilty of Felony.
                              Felony.
                            (For ſo are all capitall Crimes vnder Laeſae Maieſtatis called:) That thoſe which were brought vp amongst the Seminaries, if they returned not within ſixe moneths after the denunciation made, and ſubmitted themſelues to the Queene in the preſence of a Biſhop, or two Iuſtices, ſhould be holden guilty of Laeſae Maieſtatis. But of thoſe that ſubmitted, if within ten yeares after they ſhould approach nearer to the Court of the Queene then ten thouſand paces, their ſubmiſsion ſhould be void. That thoſe that ſhould any manner of way ſend money to the Seminary ſtudents, ſhould bee lyable to the puniſhment of Praemunire (that is perpetual exile,
                           
                              Praemunire.
                            
                           with the loſſe of their goods) if any of the Peeres of the Realme, that is, Dukes, Marqueſſes, Earles and Lords, ſhall tranſgreſſe theſe Lawes, hee ſhall vndergoe the iudgement of the Peeres. Whoſoeuer ſhall haue knowledge that any Ieſuites, and ſuch as haue any ſecret abode within the Kingdome, and not make diſcouery of them within twelue dayes, ſhall be puniſhed according to the Queenes pleaſure, and abide impriſonment. If any one ſhall be ſuſpected of the number

of thoſe Ieſuites or Prieſts, and ſhall not ſubmit himſelfe to examination, he ſhall for his contempt be impriſoned, vntill he ſhall ſubmit. Whoſoeuer ſhall ſend his children or others, to the Seminaries and Colledges of the Popiſh profeſsion, ſhall be amerced a hundred pounds of Engliſh money. All ſuch as ſhall be ſent thither, if they returne not within a yeare, and conforme themſelues to the Church of England, ſhall be depriued of all ſucceſsion, and inioying of goods, in what manner ſoeuer they ſhall fall vnto them. If the Wardens of the Ports ſhall permit any other but Saylors and Merchants to paſſe beyond the Seas, without Licence from the Queene, or ſixe of her Counſell; they ſhall bee depriued of their offices, and the Maſters of ſuch Ships ſhall bee puniſhed with the loſſe of their goods, and of their voyage, beſides impriſonment for a whole yeare.
                     
                     The ſeuerity of theſe lawes (which were thought for thoſe times no more then needfull) did much terifie the Papiſts of England; and amongſt others, Phil.
                        The Earle of Arundel reſolueth with himſelfe to fly out of England. 
                        Howard Earle of Arundell, the eldeſt ſonne to the Duke of Norfolke, was in ſuch ſort affrighted, that he reſolued, leſt hee ſhould offend againſt them, to leaue the Kingdome. Three yeares before, he was by the gracious bounty of the Queene reeſtabliſhed in the Rights and Honours of his father. But a ſhort while after, being ſecretly accuſed by ſome of the Nobility, and men of power, he was depriued of her fauour; ſo being priuately deuoted to the Roman Religion, hee embraced an auſtere courſe of liuing. This was the reaſon that hee was twice called before the Priuy Counſell, and notwithſtanding that he iuſtified himſelfe againſt all obiections, yet was he commanded to confine himſelfe within his owne houſe. Six moneths after, or thereabouts, being eſtabliſhed in his right, he entred in to the aſſembled Parliament; but the firſt day before the ſpeech vvas ended, hee vvithdrew

himſelfe. The Parliament ended, he being as it were certain of his eſcape;He writeth to the Queene. hee writ Letters to the Queene (which hee commanded ſhould be deliuered after his departure) wherein was contained a long and ſorrowfull complaint
OF the malice of his aduerſaries, to which hee was forced of neceſsitie to giue way, becauſe they began to triumph ouer his innocency. A remonſtration of the vnfortunate deaths of his Anceſtors. Firſt of his great Grandfather, who was condemned without anſwering for himſelfe, then of his Grandfather, who loſt his head for matters of ſmall moment; and laſtly of his father, who was circumuented by his enemies; but neuer tranſported with hate to his Queene or Countrey. And a Declaration, that leſt he ſhould proue an heire to his fathers infelicitie, that hee might more freely apply himſelfe to the ſeruice of God, and prouide for his ſoules health, hee had left his countrey, but not his dutifull allegeance to the Queene.
                     
                     
                        Is apprehended.Before theſe Letters were deliuered, he went into Suſſex, where being about to imbarke himſelfe, by the treacherie of his men, and diſcouerie of the Pilot, hee vvas apprehended, and committed to the Tower of London.
                     
                     
                        The Earle of Northumberland is found dead.In the Tower at that time remained priſoner Henry Percy, Earle of Northumberland (brother to Thomas that loſt his head at Yorke) a man full of a quicke vvit, and haughty courage, ſuſpected, priuately to haue conſulted with Throckmorton, the Lord Paget, and the Guiſe, concerning the inuading of England, and freeing of the Queene of Scots, to whom he had alwayes borne great affection. In the moneth of Iune he was found dead in his bed, being ſhot through with three bullets vnder the left pappe, the doore of his chamber being barred to him on the inſide.
                     
                        The next neighbouring Enqueſt ſworne after the manner by the Coroner, hauing ſearched the body,The Coroners Enqueſt. conſidered the place; and finding a Piſtoll in the Chamber with Gunpowder, they examined the ſeruant that bought the Piſtol, with him that ſold the ſame. Whereupon they pronounced the Earle murderer of himſelfe. The third day after, the Nobilitie vvere aſſembled in the Starre-chamber, where Tho. Bromley Chancelor of England ſuccinctly declared, that the Earle had treacherouſly conſulted againſt the Queene and his Countrey; which he perceiuing to be diſcouered, and terified with the guiltineſſe of his conſcience which conuinced him, he became his owne murderer. But to ſatisfie the multitude, which is alwaies credulous of the worſt,The cauſes of his impriſonment manifeſted. he commanded the Queenes Attourney, and her Counſellors at Law, plainely to vnfold the cauſes of his impriſonment, and the manner of his death. Whereupon Popham chiefe Attourney to the Queene beginning from the rebellion raiſed in the North parts ſixteene yeares before, demonſtrated by the publique Acts;
THat hee was arraigned for the rebellion, and for conſulting of the freedome of the Queene of Scots: That he had acknowledged his fault, and ſubmitted himſelfe, and was therefore amerced fiue thouſand Markes. But the Queene (ſuch was her gracious clemencie) exacted not a peny from him: and after that his brother had beene deſeruedly puniſhed for the ſame Crime; the Queene confirmed him in the honour of Earle of Northumberland. Neuertheleſſe, hee vndertooke new counſels for the deliuering of the Queene of Scots, the inuading of England, and ouerthrowing of the Religion and the Queene▪ That Mendoza the Spaniard had giuen intelligence to Throckmorton, that Charles Paget vnder the name of Mopus, had in priuate treated

with him concerning theſe matters in Suſſex: That the Lord Paget had likwiſe ſignified the ſelfe-ſame thing to Throckmorton, and was alſo manifeſted by the Papers of Chreicton a Scottiſh Ieſuite; and that Charles Paget had declared all to Shelley at his returne out of France, After this 
                           
                              •
                           gerton the Queens Sollicitor demonſtrated, that by the circumſtances, & ſuſpitious care which the Earle had to keepe himſelfe ſecret and cloſe, he ſhewed himſelfe guilty of theſe matters, that is to ſay, That the Earle, knowing none of thoſe to bee in England that could accuſe him but the Lord Paget (whom Throckmorton had familiarly entertained) a few dayes after that Throckmorton was intercepted, he prepared by the helpe of Shelley a Ship for Paget to paſſe into France. That ſo ſoone as Throckmorton had begunne to make confeſsion, hee retired from London to Penworth, and forthwith ſent for Shelley to him; ſignifying to him that hee was at that inſtant in danger both of life and fortunes, hee entreated him to conceale the matter, and to cauſe them to retire that were knowing of the departure of the Lord Paget, and the ariuall of Cha: Paget; all which hee preſently diſpatched, and likewiſe remoued a farre off the ſeruant that hee had vſed betweene C. Paget and himſelfe. The Sollicitor further added, That being a Priſoner hee had corrupted his Keepers, and by their meanes gaue Shelley to vnderſtand all what hee had confeſſed. That Shelley alſo, by a woman which was hyred to be a priuate meſſenger betweene them; let him know, that he could no longer abſtaine from confeſsing; that their conditions were farre vnequall, becauſe hee ſhould bee forced by torments; but the Earle by reaſon of his place and order not, therefore ſent him the copie of his confeſſion. Whereat the Earle groaned, and would often

ſay, (as Pantin the ſeruant of his Bed-chamber confeſſed) that by the confeſsion of Shelley he was vndone for euer.
                     
                     After this, the manner of his death was by teſtimony of the Coroners inqueſt, of the Lieutenant of the Tower, and of Pantin, openly declared: and from thence was gathered that he for feare leſt his houſe ſhould bee vtterly ſubuerted, and himſelfe diſhonored, had diſpatched himſelfe.The Earle of Northumberland is lamented of diuers. Certes diuers good men much ſorrowed that ſo great a perſonage ſhould periſh by ſo miſerable a death; being induced thereto partly becauſe they naturally fauoured Nobility, and partly becauſe he had obtained much praiſe by his valor. What the ſuſpicious fugitiues muttered againſt a certaine Bailiffe a ſeruitor of Hatton, who a little before was appointed one of the Earles keepers, I will ouer-paſſe, as not certainely knowne. Neither doe I eſteeme it fit to inſert any vncertaine things, or vaine heare-ſayes.
                     Queene ELIZABETH hauing ſeene the open conſpiracies of the Guiſes, againſt the Proteſtant Religion, the King of France, and her ſelfe, well perceiued whence, and by whom theſe miſchiefes were diſperſed through England. Shee to oppoſe their deſignes, and to contract a league amongſt the Proteſtants, for the defence of the Religion; ſent Thomas Bodley to the King of Denmarke,
                        Queene Elizabeth laboureth to contract a league with the Prince of Germany. the Elector Palatine, the Dukes of Saxony, Wittenbergh, Brunſwicke, Lunbourgh, the Marquis of Brandenburgh, and the Landſgraue of Heſſen. And amongſt other things ſhe commanded him to aduertiſe the King of Denmarke, that it behoued him aboue the reſt to oppoſe the practices of the Guiſe, becauſe they haue made no queſtion to claime the Kingdome of Denmarke as their kinſmans right for the duke of Lorraine, as being ſon to the daughter of Chriſtierne the 2, King of Denmarke, neither did the Duke of Lorraine himſelfe diſſemble the ſame, then when not long before he laboured

to obtaine the Queene in mariage.
                     
                        The like with the King of Scots.And to prouide, leaſt any danger ſhould breake through Scotland as through a backe doore into England, ſhee ſent Edward Wotton to ſignifie to the King, how acceptably ſhe embraced the declaration of his loue to her, by Patricke Gray, and by Iuſtice Cleric. And to draw him to a mutuall League of offence and defence, by propoſing to him the dangers that then threatned and menaced the profeſſion of the Goſpell: And to offer him an annuall penſion the better to maintaine his Royall Dignity, becauſe the reuenues of his Kingdome were much ſhortened by the negligence of the Regents. And to commend vnto him in the vvay of mariage the daughter of the King of Denmark. And earneſtly in her name to make interceſsion for thoſe Noblemen of Scotland that liued baniſhed in England. And to promiſe him that ſhe would ſend them backe if ſhe found the offence againſt the King to haue beene practiſed by them. Wotton found the King affectionately bent to this League (notwithſtanding that the Earle of Arran, and others of the French faction laboured to diuert him) and the Eſtates of Scotland gaue their conſent vnder their hands and ſeales, for the conſeruation of Religion, to embrace this League; prouided that the Queene would promiſe, not to preiudice or hinder the Kings right in the ſucceſſion of England, ſo long as hee remained conſtant in his friendſhip and alliance. But this matter was retarded and hindered by the death of Fra:
                        A relation of the death of Ruſſell. 
                        Ruſſell, ſonne to the Earle of Bedford, who was ſlaine the next day after.
                     For I. Forſter and T. Carre of Fernihurſt gouernors of the middle borders betweene the Kingdomes of England and Scotland, hauing aſſigned an aſſembly vpon the ſeuen and twentieth of Iune, to treat of the receit and emploiment of the Fynances of the Kingdome, after the promiſe of ſafety, made by both parties with their oaths, and Proclamation,The manner of his death. that none ſhould offend either in word, deed, or looke

(for ſo the borderers ſpoke.) The Scots brought with them to the place the number of three thouſand men or thereabout, being armed, and ſet in order of battell, with their enſignes diſplayed, and their drummes beating, contrary to the cuſtome in ſuch affaires, but the Engliſh not ſurpaſſing three hundred. The Gouernours were no ſooner ſeated to heare the complaints, but a tumultuous vproare was raiſed by the occaſion of an Engliſhman taken in theft; the Scots diſcharging a ſhower of bullets, ſlue amongſt others, Ruſſel, and put the Engliſh to flight, and eagerly purſuing them for the ſpace of foure miles within England, they caried ſome back with them as priſoners. The author of this murther was not aſſuredly knowne, but the Engliſh imputed the fault to the Earle of Arran then Chancelor of Scotland, and to Carre of Fernihurſt. The Queene preſently diſpatched Ambaſſadors and Letters, demanding that the murderers might be deliuered into her hands. Becauſe Henry the ſeuenth King of England had long time before deliuered into the hands of Iames the fourth, King of Scots, Will. Heron, and ſeuen other Engliſhmen, for murdering of Ro: Carre of Cesford vpon a day of aſſembly: and not long before Morton the Regent, ſent Carmichel a Scot into England, for the murder of George Heron. The King after proteſtation of his innocency, promiſed to ſend Fernihurst and the Chancelor himſelfe alſo, ſo ſoone as by cleare and lawful proofes they were conuicted, of ſet purpoſe to haue violated the ſafety, or to be guilty of the murder. Fenwick an Engliſhman accuſed Carre before the King, but was refuted by his ſimple deniall, becauſe hee could not produce any Scotchman for a witneſſe. For it hath beene a cuſtome,The proofes amongſt the borderers. and ſo a Law, amongſt the borderers, in their iudgements of cauſes (bred by an inueterate hate) that no witneſſe can be admitted but a Scot againſt a Scot, and an Engliſhmen againſt an Engliſhman: Inſomuch that though euery one of the Engl
                           •
                        ſh which were preſent, had plainely beene beholders of

this murder, yet their teſtimony would preuaile nothing. Arran neuertheleſſe was confined within his owne houſe,The death of Thomas Carre of Fernihurſt. and Carre was kept priſoner at Dundey, where in a ſhort time he dyed. Hauing beene a warlike man, and one prompt and fit to enterpriſe matters of importance, who for his conſtant loue and faith to the Queene of Scots, and the King her ſonne, was twice depriued of his goods, and driuen from his Countrey, and the fight of his children; yet hee patiently ſupported his baniſhment, remaining conſtant againſt all aduerſities, and bearing himſelfe euer like himſelfe.
                     
                        The fugitiue Scots are ſent out of England backe into Scotland.Whileſt the queſtion of this murther was deferred, and a gentle diſputation raiſed, whether the twelue thouſand Crownes penſion offered to the King were to bee accounted according to the Engliſh, or the French account: the Queene being much incenſed for the death of Ruſſel, and the violation of the ſafety; and being perſwaded by ſome Scotchmen which enuyed Arran, that hee was a fauourer of the Ieſuites, and that hee ſtrongly laboured in France and Scotland, to hinder the League, that it might not be contracted, ſhee gaue permiſſion to the fugitiue Scots, as Angus, with Iohn and Claudius Hamilton, Marre, and Glan, which were reconciled to him in their common exile; and to the reſt that liued baniſht in England, to returne into Scotland well furniſhed with money, to worke the ruine of Arran.
                     
                     
                        They haue intelligence of others remaining in the Kings Court.The Earle of Bothwell, and the Lord of Humey, Humey Coldingknoll, and others in Scotland had before promiſed them aide: and aboue all, Maxwell lately created Earle of Morton, out of a certaine hope he had to ſhunne the penalty of the rebellion which he had raiſed in the Country of Annand, if the Earle of Arran were once ſubuerted. In the very Court alſo were Patrick Gray his bitter enemy, Belenden a a Iuſtice of the Church, and Maitland Secretarie, drawne into parties againſt Arran.
                     
                     
                        The fugitiues being entred into Scotland, they commanded all perſons by a long Proclamation in the Kings name to giue them aſsiſtance,They enter into Scotland. for the defence of the Euangelicall truth, to free the King from miſchieuous Counſellors, and to conſerue loue and friendſhip with the Engliſh: they appointed the place for their aſſembly at Fawkirk, where they muſtered 8000 men.
                     
                        Arran (who for ſuſpition of the death of Ruſſell was by the King commanded to keepe within Keneil) hearing of theſe things, he haſtily retired to the King, and accuſed Gray as the author of theſe enterpriſes. Gray ingeniouſly excuſed himſelfe in preſence of the King. But whileſt Arran maketh great preparations for the defence of the towne, the enemies appeared in readineſſe to ſcale the walles. He certainly knowing, that they ſought nothing but his head onely,Sterlin is taken by them. and ſuſpecting the fidelitie of his men (for hee was hated of moſt) he ſecretly withdrew himſelfe by the bridge; the reſt, all abandoning the towne, betooke themſelues to the Caſtle with the King. The fugitiues ſtraight poſſeſt themſelues of the Market-place, and then beſieged the Caſtle. The King demanded by his Meſſenger Gray the cauſe of their comming: they anſwered, To ſubmit our ſelues to the King, and humbly to kiſſe his Highneſſe hand. He offered to reſtore to them all their goods, if they would retire. But they replyed, that they made no eſteeme of their goods, in compariſon of the Kings gracious fauour, deſiring him to admit them to his royall preſence: the King conſented, but vpon theſe conditions; That they ſhould not attempt any thing either againſt his Maieſties Perſon, or their lines whom he ſhould nominate, and that they ſhould not bring in any innouation into the gouernment of the Kingdome. They vowed their liues for the ſafety of their Prince, proteſting that they conceited not ſo much as a thought of bringing in of Nouelties. But they deſired for their better aſſurance that their aduerſaries might be deliuered into their hands, with

the fortified places of the Realme. Of this matter they conſulted the whole day: but neceſsitie compelling, by reaſon of the multitude, wherewith the Caſtle was full ſtuffed,They are reconciled to the King. and the want of prouiſion, they were at laſt admitted to the King. And forthwith the Earles of Montroſh, of Crawford, and of Rotheſe, the Colonell Stuart, Downi, the brother of the Earle of Arran, and others were deliuered into their hands; the Earle of Arran was publiquely accuſed to haue conſpired againſt the eſtate: and as for themſelues, the King indulgently pardoned them, as good and well-deſeruing ſubiects. Hamilton Arbroth was eſtabliſhed Gouernor of Dunbriton, Coldingknol of the Caſtle of Edenborough, Angus of Tomtall, Marre of Sterlin, and Glan Captaine of the Kings guards.
                     After this, hauing by their faithfull duty remoued out of the Kings opinion, all ſuch crimes wherewith their enemies had burdened them, and all ſuſpitions which they had raiſed of them;Amniſtie. by a generall Amniſtie all baniſhments & proſcriptions, which had for what cauſe ſo euer been adiudged and ordained, ſince the Coronation of the King, were aboliſhed; excepting only thoſe which had relation to the murder of the Kings father, & ſuch as were adiudged againſt the Archbiſhop of Glaſco, the Biſhop of Roſſe and of Dunblan. And with a common & moſt conſtant conſent of their minds the Soueraigne Authority of the King, in contracting of a league with the Queen of England, and deputing of Ambaſſadors, was confirmed vnto him. Onely Maxwell abuſed this ſingular clemency of the King. For hauing obtained by the benefit of the Amniſtie free Pardon for the cruell ſlaughter and Pillage committed vpon the Iohnſtons: yet ſuch vvas his audacious pride, that contemning the authoritie of the Lawes,Maxwell eſtabliſheth the Maſſe. he commanded the ſacrifice of the Maſſe to be celebrated at Dunfriſe, which of nineteene yeares before had not been permitted in Scotland. For which deed hee was puniſhed with three moneths impriſonment.
                     
                        Neither was, in theſe turbulent times, Ireland next adioyning free from the tempeſts of rebellion. For when the reſt of the Prouinces of that Iſle were ſetled in a profound peace, a great rebellion broke forth in Connach the weſt part of Ireland, proceeding of the naturall diſpoſition of that nation, impatient of reſt and quiet, and alſo of the hate which they conceiued againſt Rich. Bingham their Gouernor, complaining that his Commands were ſharpe and bitter.The rebellion of the Bourgs in Ireland. The Gouernour ſeeing the great and powerfull men of Ireland exerciſe ſuch grieuous tyranny vpon the poore miſerable peoples, forcing them to acknowledge no other Prince then them; he omitted no meanes to reſtaine them, and confirme the royal authority, although he was often for the ſame odiouſly accuſed of cruelty to the Queene and Deputy. Thomas Roe-Bourk of the moſt noble family of Bourg in England, was the firſt that oppoſed himſelf, & being ſent for to the lawful aſſembly in the County of Maie, he refuſed to come. The Gouernor for a time diſſembled, ſeeming not to make account thereof: but preſently after he commanded him and two others, turbulent ſpirits of the ſame houſe, to be apprehended, leſt they ſhould breake out into a more dangerous rebellion. Thomas was ſlaine in fight ere he could be intercepted. Meiler and Theobald, the other two, were taken and hanged; and thus had the whole rebellion beene at the beginning compreſſed, had not certaine Engliſh, enemies to the Gouernor, aduertiſed the reſt of that family, prouidently to beware of the Gouernor, and by any meanes not to come neere him: They being thus incouraged, they likewiſe perſwaded the Ioies and Clandonels, who were powerfull in the multitude of their tenants, that the Gouernor would handle them with as little lenitie, but by little and little would vtterly ruinate their power. Beſides they ſo much preuailed with the Deputy by their friends, that he commanded the Gouernour not to vndertake any violent act againſt thē of that family, (though they did degenerate)

without his knowledge and aduice.
                     In the meane ſpace whilſt the Gouernour was abſent in the Country of Twomond, where Mahon-Obrean rebelling, ſlew himſelfe, after the Caſtle was taken by the Gouernour; The ſonne of Edmond Bourg of Caſtel-bar, and Richard ſon of another Richard ſurnamed by the Iriſh for his villanies, the Deuils-hooke, hauing gathered together a multitude of lewd fellowes, they ſurpriſed two Caſtels at Lake-Maſci and fortified them: from whence the Gouernour eaſily expulſed them, chaſing them amongſt the foreſts and mountaines; he tooke Richard the brother of Thomas Bourg, who in humble manner came to intreate him, and hanged him as a robber. And hauing ſo far purſued the reſt through the woods that ſcarce any were to be ſeen, the Lo: Deputy commanded him to ſtay his purſuit; and after they had giuen hoſtages, to receiue them into his protection. A ſhort while after, whilſt the Gouernour ſtayed at Dublin, and ſouldiers were raiſed in Ireland for the Low-Country wars; they againe aduanced their Enſignes of rebellion, and many which had refuſed to goe to the wars of the Netherlands, ioyned themſelues in great numbers with Clan-Gibbon, Clan-Donel, and Ioie; and being increaſed in number and ſtrength, they openly declared, that they would after the cuſtome of their Anceſtors,Mac-William. haue for their Gouernor their Mac-William, that is, a Nobleman, by the election of the people out of the houſe of Bourg, or any other whom they ſhould call out of Spaine, but they would not admit of the or Sheriffe. Viſcont, nor be preſent at the Aſſemblies. The Archbiſhop of Tuam, Bermingham, the Lord of Atterith, and Dillon, Deputies for the Gouernor, propoſed to them moſt reaſonable conditions; but they refuſing to ſubmit to order, began to exerciſe their fury vpon the villages of the Champian, with fire and rapines, and by ruining of the fortifications.The Scots of Hebrides called into Ireland. They ſent Iohn Itcleaf, and Walter Kittagh of Bourg to the Scots of Hebride, requeſting them with their auxiliarie troopes to enter vpon the Connach,
                        
in which Prouince, there were then but a ſmall number of Souldiers in Gariſon, promiſing to giue them certain Lordſhips if they would chaſe away the Engliſh, and defend the rebels.
                     The Deputy receiuing aduice of theſe things,The Gouernor laboreth for a peace, but in vaine. commanded the Gouernor, to purſue the rebells, who gathering vp forces, ſent the Earle Clan-Richard chiefe of the family of Bourg with Bermingham, to treat with them of a peace; but they refuſing, hee forthwith cauſed their hoſtages to bee put to death: and knowing that nothing could diſaduantage the Engliſh more then a long warre; and on the contrary, nothing more accommodate the Iriſh: himſelfe and the Earle Clan-Richard with their troops of horſe defēded the champian from the iniuries of the rebells, and Iohn Bingham the Gouernours brother, entred with his Companies of foot amongſt the woods, purſuing their ſteps, and wearying them in ſuch ſort, ſeizing and driuing backe with them 5000 head of cattle (the greateſt part of which according to the cuſtom of the Countrey being diſtributed to the ſouldiers) that about 40 daies after, being in a manner periſhed by a grieuous famine, they left their caues, ſcarce knowing one another by their faces, and demiſſiuely ſubmitting themſelues, they deliuered hoſtages to the Gouernor. Only the ſonnes of Edmund of Bourg of Caſtell-barr (whom they had decreed to create Mac-William) perſiſted in their rebellion,He purſueth the rebels. vntil their father was taken, and by vertue of the law conuicted, to haue incited his ſons to this rebellion, and was therefore puniſhed with death, and all his lands adiudged confiſcate. At the ſame time the Gouernour receiued newes of two thouſand Scots of Hebride vnder the conduct of Kittagh,
                        And he brings them to ſubmiſſion. and Itcleaf of Bourg, that were euen then in readineſſe to breake in vpon Connach. In great haſt he leauied his troopes, and gathered his gariſons together, and with infatigable labor, though ſometimes they were hidden amongſt the woods, foreſts, and paſtures, and ſometimes they waſted the time in making

approaches and retreats, from one ſide to another, and through crooked windings and intricate waies, he diligently purſued their ſteps, obſeruing night and day their turnings and returnings through corners and by-wayes, carefully placing ſpies behind,Next the Scots of Hebride. before, and on either ſide of them, ſtill expecting a commodious time to ſet vpon them. At laſt, counterfeiting a retire, as though hee had thought himſelfe too weake for them, hee left them; wherevpon they preſently with great alacrity marched towards Ardenare vpon the riuer Moine, and proclamed themſelues Lords of the Prouince. He being inſtructed of their iourney by his ſpies, followed them, and found them beſides Ardenare, where hee put his men in battell array, and ſounding a charge with his trumpets, he held them play with skirmiſhes, ſtill retiring backward vntill he had drawne them from a moiſt and moory ground, into a place more ſolide and firme, where all his troops (with great ſilence) ioyned together.Whom he doth aſſault, Then giuing them a freſh and liuely charge, ſlaughtering many, he forced them ſomewhat to recoile, when inſtantly the muskettieres diſcharging vpon their front, and himſelfe with his troops of horſe falling vpon their flanckes, with ſuch fury aſſailed thē, that hee put them all to rout, purſuing them to the riuer, where they were all either ſlaine or drowned, excepting 40 which ſaued themſelues by ſwimming ouer to Tiraule, and thoſe which the day before were departed from the Army to fetch in booty: but after this, they were almoſt all put to the ſword by Iohn Bingham, and the inhabitants of the County Slego.
                        and defeats them, Three thouſand of their party periſhed in this conflict, and amongſt them their principall Commanders, Donel Gormi, and Alexander Carrogh the ſonne of I. Mac-Conel, which of long time had been troubleſome to the Country; and thoſe of the Houſe of Bourg which were cauſers of this miſerable expedition. Of the Engliſh a ſmall number was ſlaine, but many were ſort hurt; and certes this victory was both famous and profitable, for the inſtant and

future times; the title of Mac-William being vtterly aboliſhed in the County of Connach, and the inſolency of the Scotch Iſlanders repreſſed in Ireland,
                        The title of Mac-William aboliſhed. which was not long before ſo great, that it was accoūted amōgſt the Iriſh a crime of Laeſae Maieſtatis to entertaine or lodge any of them; and for the better reſtraining of their wonted rapines, Perot gaue in charge to the chiefe perſonages of Vlſter that they ſhould traine vp in the exerciſe of warlike diſcipline, a certaine number of Souldiers.
                     In the meane time, the States of the Netherlands being afflicted with the deſolate condition of their affaires,The Eſtates of the Netherlands conſult of a Protector. conſulted amongſt themſelues whether they ſhould haue recourſe either to the King of France, or Queene of England for refuge & ſuccors. For they were both at that time diſcōtented with the Spaniard, but ſuſpicious alſo one of the other: The French could not endure that the Engliſh their ancient enemies ſhould encreaſe their power by the addition of the Netherlands, and the Engliſh in like ſort the French. De la Prune the French Ambaſſador for the Low-Countries,Reaſons of the French ſide. that he might diuert the Eſtates from the Engliſh, made this demonſtration:
THat the Sea flowing betwixt England & the Netherlands; the Engliſh were too farre diſtant, and could not at all occaſions be ready to aſsiſt them, their command alſo was intollerable; and for that cauſe were in times paſt driuen out of France, and were like then to hazard the ſame in Ireland: That the ſucceſsion of the Realme was vncertaine, and whether MARIE Queene of Scots or IAMES her ſonne did ſucceed, both hee and ſhee would bee ready to giue vp the Netherlands to the Spaniard for the aſſurance of their owne affaires. But that the French were opportunely adioyning and neighbouring, their command moſt mild, and their ſucceſsion certaine in the

perſon of the King of Nauarre, who was of the ſame profeſsion with them.
                     
                     Such as fauoured the Engliſh, maintained the contrary;

                           
                              For the Engliſh.
                           THat they were not ſo farre diſſeuered, but they could commodiouſly ſend them ayde, without the hindrance of any. That it appeared by the Hiſtories what the French Command had been of yore in the Netherlands, what it now was, by the ſurpriſe of Dixmond, Donkircke, and Dendermond, and the furious and perfidious invaſion of Bruges, Aloſt, New-port, and Antwerpe; and what their faith was hauing beene ſo often obliged by Edicts, and nowithſtanding violated by the cruell Maſſacres which haue beene committed in the townes. That the ſucceſsion of England was aſſured in the perſon of King Iames, who was zealous in the true religion. Beſides the Engliſh were of the ſelfe-ſame religion, and faitfull obſeruers of the ancient League with Burgundie. That their trafficke had brought infinite wealth to the Netherlands, and their ports moſt commodious for them.
                     
                     
                        They are refuſed by the French.The Eſtates neuertheleſſe by Ambaſſadors implored the ayde of the French King, by whom they were receiued with a fearefull ſilence, and a long time deluded with procraſtinations, by reaſon aſwell of their enuy to the Engliſh as of hate to the Spaniard, ſo the Ambaſſadours returned home at the laſt, and conceiuing hope from the former bounty of Queen ELIZABETH, they determined to fly to her for protection.
                     
                        The Engliſh conſult about the protection.Hereupon vvas holden a conſultation in England, vvhether they vvere to be receiued into their protection, or no? Some vvere of aduice, that they ſhold preſently be receiued, and ayde forthvvith ſent them 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
brought them in ſubiection, ſhould become a vexation to the Engliſh on that ſide. Other ſome aduiſed, that they were to bee eſteemed as Rebels, and vnworthy of ſuccours, as being reuolted from the fidelitie which they ought to their Prince.
                     THe Spaniard had not violated any of the Articles of his Ioyfull entrance, which they ſought for as a colour and pretext for their rebellion, and depoſition of their lawfull Prince. But admit that hee had violated them, yet was hee not for that to bee puniſhed with the loſſe of his principalitie. And although ſome ſuppoſe that obedience ſhould bee ſo long denyed him, vntill hee had recompenced his fault; yet others eſteeme that the diuine Lawes, to which humane lawes muſt yeeld, Princes ſhould, as powers ordinated by God, be ſimply and for conſcience obeyed. For God hath giuen them the Soueraigntie of command, and to ſubiects the glory of obedience. And that ſubiects ſhould wiſh for good Princes, but endure all whatſoeuer they be. That theſe Prouinces were falne to the Spaniard, not by the election of the people, but by the hereditary right of their Anceſtors, and the donation of the Emperors. That the Dutchmen had receiued priuiledges from their Princes, but had loſt the ſame by a crime of Laeſae Maieſtatis, in taking vp Armes againſt them. That theſe were not the eſtates of the Netherlands that had demanded protection, but certaine Plebean perſons, that had attributed to them the Title of Eſtates. It was therefore thought by the iudgement of theſe, moſt expedient, that the Queene ſhould not intermeddle with the affaires of the Netherlands, but rather ſtrongly to fortifie her own Kingdomes, indeuouring dayly by her naturall bounty to oblige the hearts of 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
encreaſe her treaſurie, to haue her Nauy alwayes well prepared and furniſhed with neceſſaries, to fortifie with gariſons the frontier townes towards Scotland, to conſerue the ancient militarie diſcipline of England, which was corrupted by the Dutch warres. That in thus doing England would be impregnable, ſecured on all ſides, and a terrour to the enemy. That this would be the moſt commodioas meanes to auoid the warres, which might fall vpon ſuch as are begirt with potent neighbours. That none would offer to prouoke them, ſeeing them ſo well furniſhed of money, and forces, garded with the good-will and loue of their ſubiects, and alwayes ready and prepared to reuenge themſelues. And that it would be prepoſterous wiſedome, to conſume money, and Souldiers, which are the life and ſoule of warre in anothers cauſe, and for Princes or people of no ability, being ſubiects to anothers rule, and by reaſon of their pouerty muſt alwayes bee ſupplyed with freſh ſuccours, or by ingratitude totally prouiding for their owne affaires, will neglect thoſe that had aſsisted them, as the Engliſh had while-ere in France experimented to their loſſe, in the Bourgongnian cauſe; and not long ſince in the defence of the Proteſtants.
                     But ſuch as were of this opinion as men degenerate, ſlothfull, and addicted to the Spaniſh party, moued the men of warre to much indignation.
                     
                        The Dutch offer themſelues to the Queene.So ſoone as the Ambaſſadors of the Eſtates preſented themſelues to the Queene, with earneſt affection they beſeeched her to aſſume the rule of the vnited Prouinces of the Netherlands, and to receiue them into her protection, and perpetuall homage, being vndeſeruedly oppreſſed. She graciouſly gaue them hearing, but refuſed to take vpon her their rule and protection. Neuertheleſſe to raiſe the ſiege

from before Antwerpe, which was then reduced into great neceſſitie, and oppreſſed by the Prince of Parma, ſhe promiſed them, if they would deliuer for a Gage into her hands the towne of Sluce with all the artillery, forthwith to ſend them foure thouſand ſouldiers. But whilſt theſe things were propounded, Antwerpe was yeelded vp,Antwerpe is yeelded vp. becauſe the paſſage of the Riuer Scald by admirable deuices was quite cut off.
                     After that the Queen had ſetled a while her thoughts and cares vpon theſe matters, and perceiued the great cruelty of the Spaniards which they exerciſed vpon the Dutch her neighbours, and the hate which they bore to England, and the Religion which was there maintained: for the Spaniards were verily perſwaded that they could neuer reduce the Netherlands to order, if they firſt ſubdued not England.
                        The Queen deliberateth with her ſelfe.) To hinder warre from comming home to her (Scotland as yet wauering) and that the forces of the Spaniards might not be too farre extended in the adiacent Countries, vvhich would be moſt commodiouſly ſeated for the tranſporting of warres into England; for exerciſing of traffique as well by ſea, as the Riuer of Rhine: And to hinder, that there might not be any prouiſion of Nauigation caried to her enemies, which beſides were well prouided of ſtrong Shipping, and men of valiant ſpirits, that if they ſhould bee ioyned vvith the Engliſh Nauy, it would be an eaſie thing for them to be ſoone Commanders of the Sea, ſo rich and powerfull, that they had long time ſince without any foraine aide, ſuppreſt the inſolencies of their proudeſt enemies: and that they might not commit themſelues to the truſt and faith of the French: She reſolued that ſhe was bound in Chriſtian charitie, to ſuccour the afflicted Dutchmen, being profeſſors of the ſame Religion, and in wiſedome to prouide for the conſeruation of a people, which God had committed vnto her,She takes vpon her the protection. by cutting through the ruinous complots of their enemies, not for any deſire of glory, but for the neceſſitie of goodneſſe. Whereupon ſhee openly tooke vpon her the defence

of the Netherlands. The Chriſtian Princes admiring ſuch a Maſculine valour in a woman, to haue ſuch a magnanimous ſpirit, as to denounce warre (as it were) to ſo potent a Monarch. Inſomuch that the King of Sweden ſpeaking of her, ſaid, that ſhe had taken the Diadem from off her owne head, to expoſe it to the doubtfull and dangerous euent of warre.
                     Theſe were the conditions that were agreed vpon betweene Queene ELIZABETH and the Eſtates of Holland.
                     
                     
                        
                           Vnder what conditions.
                        THe Queene would ſend as ſuccours to the Vnited Prouinces 5000 foot, and a thouſand horſe vnder a generall Commander of famous remarke, and during the warre would pay the ſouldiers; which ſhould after the Peace were made, be paid backe by the Eſtates, that is to ſay, in the firſt yeare of the Peace, ſuch ſummes as had beene disburſed in the firſt yeare of the warres, and the reſt in the foure yeares following. In the meane time they ſhould deliuer into her hands for aſſurance the towne of Fluſhing, the Caſtle of Rameken in Zeland, and the Ile of Breil, with the towne and both the Skances. The Gouernors that ſhould bee appointed, ſhould not haue any command ouer the Inhabitants, but onely of their Gariſon, which ſhould pay the Tributes and Impoſts, as well as the inhabitants. Thoſe places ſhould after the money were repayed, bee deliuered backe not to the Spaniard, but the Eſtates. The Gouernors and two other Engliſh which the Queen would name, ſhould be admitted into the Councell of the Eſtates, and the Eſtates ſhould not entertaine any League without the Queenes aduice; nor ſhe, the Eſtates not acquainted therewith. Ships for their common defence in equall number, and at a common expence ſhould be ſet forth vnder the command of the Admirall of England. The Ports of either ſhould he freely

open to either. With other conditions which were printed and expoſed to all mens view.
                     
                     For the memoriall of this alliance, the Zealanders triumphing with ioy, cauſed new money to be coyned, bearing vpon one ſide the Armes of Zealand, which is a Lyon floating vpon the waues, with this inſcription:

                           Luctor & emergo: Ie comba et me sauue
                           J fight, and I ſaue my ſelfe.
                        
                     
                     On the other ſide the Armes of the townes of Zealand, with this

                           Authore Deo, fauente Regina.
                           God Author, the Queene fauourable.
                        
                     
                     The Queene by a booke ſet forth, gaue all to vnderſtand,The Queen publiſheth the cauſes. that in times paſt Leagues and Societies were contracted betweene the Kings of England, and the Princes of the Netherlands for the mutuall faith and defence one of another. She remonſtrateth the barbarous cruelty of the Spaniard, againſt the miſerable Netherlanders; and the miſchieuous complots which they had wrought againſt her ſelfe: that had with much labour ſought a Peace, and had done this to keepe the Dutch from reuolting. Neither did ſhee propoſe any other thing to her ſelfe in aiding of them, then that the Dutch might inioy peaceably their former liberty; her ſubiects ſafety; and either Nation a ſecure commerce and traffique.
                     And to prouide that warre ſhould not aſſaile her at home,She ſends forth a Nauy to the Weſt Indies to diuert the Spaniard. and ſet the Spaniard to worke abroad. She ſet forth a Nauy to the Weſt Indies, vnder the command of Sir Francis Drake, and Chriſtopher Carlile of one and twenty ſayle, in which beſides Saylors were 2300 voluntary ſouldiers, which

ſurprized in the Ile of Saint Iames, neere to Cap-Verd, the towne of Saint Iames which gaue name to the Iland, where they celebrated with the thunder of the Cannon,The towne of S. Iames taken by the Engliſh frō the Spaniard. the Coronation day of Queene ELIZABETH, which was vpon the fourteenth of Nouember; and pillaging the town they found great ſtore of Meale, Wine and Oyle, but no money at all. The fourteenth day after they ſet ſayle, and many which kept their quarters & guard in the open aire, and ſlept vpon the ground, were taken with grieuous ſickneſſe called Calentura,
                        A diſeaſe called Calentura, whereby many periſh. whereof they dyed; a diſeaſe very familiar in 
                           •
                        hat Iland, and dangerous to ſtrangers which ſleepe in the open fields. The firſt of Ianuary they ariued at Hiſpaniola, where the ſouldiers being landed in a ſecure place, by the direction of a Spaniard, whom they had taken and kept to that purpoſe, they marched in order againſt the towne: and h
                           •
                        uing repulſt a hundred and fifty Spaniſh horſemen which oppoſed their paſſage,The ſurprize of Hiſpaniola, or Saint Dominick by the Engliſh. and putting to flight certaine Musketiers which were placed in Ambuſh, they entered pell-mell into the towne with them by the two weſterne gates, and all the inhabitants, being ſtrucke with feare and terrour fled out at the North gate of the ſaid City. The Engliſh brought their troops into the Market-place neere to the great Temple: and becauſe they were not in number ſufficient to man the towne, they fortified it with rampars of earth, after that they ſeized vpon other conuenient places. So hauing the whole towne in their poſſeſſion and command, they remained a moneth there. And ſeeing the inhabitants offered but a ſmall ſumme of money to redeeme their towne, they began firſt to ſet fire vpon the ſuburbs, and after vpon the faireſt houſe in the towne, vntill the inhabitants had redeemed their towne with 25000 Crowns of gold, which with much paine they gathered. They found there no great ſtore of pillage, excepting ſome pieces of Artillery, with Corne, and Sugar: for they vſed there nought but Copper money, and glaſſe veſſels, with ſome made of earth, which were

brought out of the Eaſt India. Amongſt other things, in the towne Court, were found the Armes of the King of Spaine, with the world vnder placed, from whence a horſe with his foure-feet rampant was figured, leaping out, with this inſcription:

                           Non ſufficit orbis.The proud and audacious Motto of the Spaniards Auarice and Couetouſneſſe.
                           
                           The world doth not ſuffice.
                        
                     
                     Whereat ſome ſcoffing, tooke it for an argument of the infinite auarice and ambition of the Spaniard, as neuer ſatisfied.
                     From thence ſayling vp into the Continent of America,
                        The Engliſh doe aſſault the City of Cartagena. fiue miles from Cartagena they left their ſhips, and vnder the conduct of Carlile they in the ſilence of the night, being ranged in order of battell, marched alongſt the ſhore, whileſt Drake with his armed Shallops in vaine aſſailed the Port of the towne which was fortified with a rampire and a chaine extended in length. To Carlile a troope of horſe ſhewed themſelues, but ſtraight retired: he purſued them, till hee came to a narrow paſſage fortified with a ſtone wall betwixt the inward Hauen of the Port of the Ocean, which was ſo ſtraight that ſcarce a Cart could paſſe: It was defended with Barracadoes full of ſtones, and fiue great Cannon, wherwith they often diſcharged vpon the front of his companies, yet without effect, whileſt Carlile by the benefit of the darkneſſe, being politick in auoiding dangers, taking opportunitie by the ebbing of the Ocean, drew his men down lower by the ſands iuſt to the entrance, which they couragiouſly forced, notwithſtanding two great Ships from the inward Hauen of the Port which caried eleuen great pieces, and three hundred Muſquetiers furiouſly thundered againſt their flanke. This done, they eaſily gained the Barricadoes which were placed at the entrance of euery ſtreet, and chaced the Spaniards and Indians, which caſt poyſoned darts

amongſt them. Being thus Maſters of the towne, they made ſixe weekes aboade there, and receiued for the ranſome of the towne 110000 Crownes, which were paid preſently downe, and diſtributed man by man to the Mariners and Souldiers, and eſpecially to the needieſt. But the pillage was little; for the Inhabitants being forewarned by them of Hiſpaniola, had remoued all their moſt precious and richeſt things in to farre diſtant places. The diſeaſe called Calentura ſtill remaining amongſt them, and much diminiſhing their numbers, they were conſtrained to leaue off their deſigne of ſurpriſing Nombre de Dios, and make ſayle for their returne by the Cape of the Ile Cuba, which is called Saint Anthony, where they tooke in freſh water out of raine pits.
                     
                        They ſet fire vpon the townes of S. Anthony, and S. Helena.Then ſayling along the coaſt of Florida, they ſeized vpon two townes, Saint Anthony and Saint Helena, which were abandoned by the Spaniſh Gariſons, and burned them; and being caried further vpon a ragged and rocky coaſt, they found the Engliſh in the Plantation of Virginia (ſo called in the honour of

                           
                              They come to Virginia.
                           
                           ELIZABETH the Ʋirgin Queene)
which Sir Walter Raleigh (whoſe worth and vertues purchaſed him the honour to be one of the Queenes chiefeſt fauourites) by his neuer enough praiſed labours, in the diſcouerie of remote Countries, and promulgation of the glory of the Engliſh Nauy, had placed there as Colony. Drake offered to Ralph Lan Preſident there, all offices of humanity, two ſhips with prouiſion, and ſome men, if they thought good to remaine there and proſecute what they had begun: if not to tranſport them for England. But whileſt prouiſion was prepared for theſe ſhips,They bring the Colony thence. there aroſe a violent ſtorm, and extraordinary furious tempeſt, which ſeuered and diſperſed the whole Nauy, in ſuch ſort, that it could not be collected together againe, vntill they all ariued in England. Inſomuch

that Lan, and the reſt that were with him, being oppreſſed with penury, and much diminiſhed in their number, they all with one voice requeſted Drake to giue them paſſage for their Country, which he willingly agreed to.
                     Theſe were the firſt (that I know of) that brought at their returne into England, that Indian Plant called Tobacco,Tobacco. or Nicotiana, which they vſed, being inſtructed by the Indians, againſt crudities of the Stomack. And certes ſince that time it is growne ſo frequent in vſe, and of ſuch price, that many, nay, the moſt part, with an inſatiable deſire doe take of it, drawing into their mouth the ſmoke thereof, which is of a ſtrong ſent, through a Pipe made of earth, and venting of it againe through their noſe; ſome for wantonneſſe, or rather faſhion ſake, and other for healths ſake, inſomuch that Tobacco ſhops are ſet vp in greater number then either Alehouſes or Tauernes. And as one ſaid, but falſely, the bodies of ſuch Engliſhmen, as are ſo much delighted with this plant,The booty of the Engliſh voyage and expedition. did ſeeme to degenerate into the nature of the Sauages, becauſe they were caried away with the ſelfe-ſame thing, beleeuing to obtaine and conſerue their health by the ſelfe-ſame meanes, as the barbarians did. In this voyage periſhed ſeuen hundred men, and almoſt all of that diſeaſe, called Calentura. The pillage was eſteemed to be worth 60000 pounds of Engliſh money,Their pillage. beſides two hundred and forty great pieces of artillery, as well Braſſe as Iron, which were taken from the Enemies.
                     Whileſt theſe things thus paſſed in America vnder the torride Zone,
                        A ſearch made for the diſcouerie of a way to the Eaſt India. 
                        Iohn Dauis made ſearch vnder the frigide Zone for a way to the Eaſt India, by the vpper part of America, with two ſhips, at the expences of William Sanderſon, (a man who by ſetting forth Globes hath well deſerued in the ſtudies of Geography) and of other inhabitants of London. He tooke his courſe towards the North; and being fiue hundred miles from the Cape of Not in Ireland, he diſcouered the Coaſts of Greeneland, whoſe Cliffes being white by

reaſon of the ſnow which couered them, might eaſily afarre off be diſcerned, & ſo round begirt with Ice, as with a forewall, for the ſpace of two miles from the ſhore, that it was inacceſſible. The courſe of this coaſt hee followed, which bent firſt towards the Weſt, and then Northward to 64 degrees in Latitude; from thence paſſing the Ice, his courſe brought him amongſt certaine greene flouriſhing Ilands, where he found the Inhabitants of a middle ſtature, little eyes, without beards, and of milder diſpoſition then the moſt part of Northerne people. From whence ſayling to 66 Degrees in Latitude, he encountred a ſhore, which diſcouered it ſelfe by little and little towards the Weſt, with a Or Straits. ſea of equall largeneſſe: into which being entred forty miles, and being full of hopes, hee turned ſayle homeward vpon the end of Auguſt. The following yeare hee entred foureſcore miles into theſe Straights; where hee obſerued this ſea to be on all ſides well ſtored with Ilands, and in his returne found it full of fiſh. The third time he ſet forth, with two ſhips appointed for fiſhing, and a third for the diſcouerie of paſſages, in which hauing ſailed to 83 degrees into this Sea, and diſcouering it to bee forty miles in breadth, hee returned.
                     
                        An Edict againſt Woad.During this, an Edict was publiſhed in England, to repreſſe the auarice of ſome priuate perſons, that had conuerted the fertileſt fields and paſtures, into grounds to ſow Woad in, for the vſe of Dyers, not without much loſſe to the Cloath-workers and Husbandmen, which are commonly fed with Milke, Cheeſe, and ſuch like meats. Whereupon it was forbidden, to ſow that hearbe within eight miles of any of the Kings houſes; and foure miles of Cities, Market-townes, and of other places whereſoeuer Drapery is vſed.
                     
                        The company of the Barbary Merchants.But to the intent that Engliſh Cloathes might be ſold to greater gaines, it was permitted to the Earle of Warwicke and Leiceſter his brother, Tho: Starkey, Gerard Gore, and

other Merchants of London, to recompence their loſſes which they had ſuſtained in Africa, being to all others prohibited, to traffique in Mauritania Ceſarienſe, for the ſpace of ten yeares. Which Mulley Hamet Xeriſi receiued into protection.
                     In the beginning of this yeare dyed Edward Lord Clinton High Admirall,The death of the Earle of Lincolne. who in the yeare 1572 was by Queene ELIZABETH, created Earle of Lincolne. He was honorably interred at Windſor. Henry his ſonne ſucceeded him in his honours: but Charles Howard Lord of Effingham (Chamberlaine to the Queene) in the Admiralty. And to him in his Office ſucceeded the Lord Carie, Baron of Hunſdon, Gouernour of Barwick, who a few yeares before ſupplyed the place of Fra: Ruſſell, Earle of Bedford,
                        Of the Earle of Bedford. the ſecond Earle of that Family, a Nobleman true profeſſor of Religion and vertue: who hauing ouer-liued three of his ſonnes, Edward, Iohn and Francis, and had but one liuing, who was Lord Ruſſell, Baron of Thornaugh, and three daughters, all three Counteſſes: one maried to the Earle of Warwicke; the ſecond to the Earle of Bathe; and the third to the Earle of Cumberland, hee dyed of a Gangrene, the next day after his ſonne Francis was ſlaine vpon the borders of Scotland, (as before is related) and was interred with Iohn his father at Cheney in Buckingham-ſhire: to him ſucceeded Edward ſonne to Francis his third ſonne.
                     About the end of this yeare, the Earle of Leiceſter being out of an itching deſire of rule and glory,The Earle of Leiceſter ſent into Holland. eaſily perſwaded by thoſe which ſtudied more to aſſure their owne fortune and power in the Court, then his Honour; paſſed with great pompe and ſtate into the Netherlands with this Title;
Generall of Her MAIESTIES auxiliary troops:
Hee had alſo ſome command ouer the Nauy-Royall: His

Lordſhip was accompanied with the Earle of Eſſex, the Lord Touchet Baron of Audley, and the Lord North, Baron of Kertling, vvith Sir William Ruſſell, Sir Tho. Sherley, Sir Arthur Baſſet, Sir Walter Waller, Sir Gernaſe Clifton, and many other Knights, attended on by a choſen company of fiue hundred Gentlemen. The Queene at his departure forbade him to entertaine a thought of any thing, which vvould bee vnworthy either of her, or of the place which he vvas ſeated in.His inſtructions. Shee commanded him to learne vvith all poſsible diligence, vvhat Gariſons the Eſtates maintained; how, and by vvhat means. And her Maieſtie ſtill being carefull & good to the Souldiers, charged him to know by vvhat Art they inhaunced, & put down the value of their money (for in that Art they excelled all others) leſt the Souldiers ſhould receiue that at a higher rate then they could put it off for. She admoniſht him to cut off all prouiſion from the enemy, and to his power reſtraine the Dunkerks, vvhich much infeſted the ſeas. Finally, ſhee recommended to his truſt the Nobilitie of that Country; and aboue all the children of the Prince of Orange.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     THE NINE AND TWENTIETH YEERE of Her Raigne.Booke 3. Anno Dom. M.D.LXXXVI.
                     
                        DVDLEY Earle of Leiceſter, landing at Fluſhing, was firſt by his Nephew Sir Philip Sidney Gouernor of that Citie, honorably receiued: and after by all the townes of Zeland and Holland, with all ſorts of honours, acclamations, triumphs, deuoted panegyricks, Banquettings,Abſolute Authoritie is giuen to Leiceſter by the Eſtates. and ſuch like things. And being in the moneth of Iuly come to the Hage, the Court of Holland, the Eſtates generall (ſo they are called) by Letters Patents, gaue to him the ſoueraigne command and abſolute authoritie ouer the Vnited Prouinces, with the Title of

                           Gouernor and Captaine Generall of Holland, Zeland, and the vnited and confederate Prouinces.
Then being ſaluted of all with the attribute of
His Excellence,
and tickled with flatteries, as if hee had beene ſeated in the higheſt and ampleſt degree of honour; he began to aſſume royall and Kingly thoughts of Maieſty.The Queen offended thereat. But the Queen being highly offended, that the Eſtates had impoſed and receiued him with ſuch exceeding honours, with a little letter abated the ſwelling winde wherewith hee was puffed vp, then when he leaſt thought thereof. And theſe were the contents:
YOu ſhall vnderſtand by this meſſenger, which wee haue expreſly ſent vnto you,
                              She expoſtulateth with him.
                            with what contempt you haue behaued your ſelfe againſt our pleaſure. Wee had not thought, that you, a man we haue raiſed from the duſt, and fauoured aboue all others, would haue violated, in ſo great a matter, our command with ſo great contempt, euen in a matter which ſo much and neerely concerneth vs and our honour. But though againſt your duty you haue made ſo little reſpect of our honor, yet thinke not that we are ſo groſly negligent in the repairing thereof, that wee can paſſe ouer ſo great an iniury with ſilence and obliuion. Therefore we command you, that you, ſetting apart all excuſes, incontinently, according to the faith and duty wherein you are bound vnto vs, performe all whatſoeuer Heneage our vnder-Chamberlaine ſhall in our name declare vnto you, except you will draw vpon your head a greater danger.
                     
                     
                        In other Letters which ſhe ſent to the Eſtates generall, ſhe thus reaſoned,
THat they without her aduice or priuity,
                              With the Eſtates alſo.
                            had to her reproach, transferd vpon Leiceſter the abſolute rule of the vnited Prouinces, notwithſtā
                           ding ſhe herſelfe had refuſed the ſame, and had manifeſtly declared to all the world, that ſhe had but onely giuen ayde and ſuccours to her afflicted neighbors, and not in any wiſe taken any command vnto her. And therefore ſhe aduiſed them, To diſpoile Leiceſter of that abſolute authoritie, ſince ſhe had preſcribed to him his limits: not that ſhe thought their cauſe was not to be defended, but that ſhe might keepe ſafe her honour, which then her life ſhe rather eſteemed.
                     
                     The Eſtates anſwered:
THat they were much agrieued,
                              They excuſe themſelues.
                            that in giuing to Leiceſter without her aduice the abſolute rule, they had offended her Maiesty; and requeſted her to mitigate the offence by the neceſsity of matter; remonſtrating to her, that of neceſsity that authority muſt haue been transferd vpon one or other, for the auoyding of troubles; neither was the authority ſuch as that word Abſolute did ſeeme to inferre, ſeeing that principality and ſeueraigne rule, with the dignity of Gouernor, ſtill remained intire amongst the people. But to reuoke the power which had already been transferd, would be a meanes to precipitate the Netherlands into extreame dangers.
                     
                     By theſe letters of the Eſtates, and thoſe of Leiceſter, which hee (as one well skil'd how with feigned teares and griefe to re-obtaine the fauour of ſo gracious and milde a

Princeſſe) had written in a ſorrowfull ſtile this offence, by little and little vaniſhed into obliuion.
                     In the meane ſpace Leiceſter receiued the contributions of of the Prouinces, and eſtabliſhed military lawes; and whilſt he laboured to impoſe new taxes vpon their commerce, hee ſtirred vp the hate of the people againſt him. Now had Charles Earle of Manſueld, by order from the Duke of Parma Gouernor for the Spaniard in Flanders, for the ſpace of ſome few moneths beleagerd Graue a towne in Brabant ſituated vpon the riuer Maſe, and had round intrenched himſelfe.Leiceſter ſendeth ſuccours to releeue the City of Graue beſieged. 
                        Leiceſter to releeue the towne, ſent the Earle Hoenloe a Germane, and Iohn Norris an Engliſh Captain, who hauing begun to raiſe a ſcance neere to the towne, that they might from thence ſend prouiſion & ſuccors to the beſieged, were ſoone aſſailed and repulſt by the Spaniard: but certaine freſh companies of Engliſh ioyning with the other, and falling vpon the Spaniard, repulſed them vvith a great ſlaughter; only Norris receiued a ſmall hurt. But the Duke of Parma comming with freſh ſupplies beganne furiouſly to play vpon the town with his great artillery, whereupon Homart Gouernor of the town; being a yong man, & vnexperienced in martiall affaires, without abiding any aſſault, after hee had conditioned for his owne,But it is yeelded vp. and the Inhabitants liues, he yeelded vp the towne. Whileſt Leicester in the meane ſpace expulſing the Spaniards out of the Betow,
                        The Spaniards expelled out of the Betow. an Iſle ſituated betweene the Rhine and the Waale, and fortified the ſcance neere Telon; Hemart for hauing vnaduiſedly yeelded Graue was (for an example to others) beheaded.
                     
                        An aduentrous enterprize.The Duke of Parma paſſing into Guilderland lodged his army before Venlo, where Skenke of Freezland, and Roger Williams a Welchman, being men of a reſolute courage, put in practice a haughty enterpriſe, breaking through the army of the Duke by night, with intent to enter into the towne, and hauing ſlaughtered many, they had pierced as farre as the Dukes tent. But they were repulſed: and though they

failed of their expectation, yet were they prayſed amongſt the beſt ſouldiers for their aduentrous hardineſſe. Soone after the towne of Venlo was yeelded vp. In the interim,Venlo is loſt. the Lord Willoughby Gouernor of Bergen op Zome intercepted ſtore of Corne which was caried toward the enemy. On another ſide Phillip Sidney, and Maurice ſonne to the Prince of Orange, ſurpriſed Axele a towne in Flanders.
                        Axele is taken. 
                        Sidney ſwelling with courage by reaſon of this ſucceſſe; being allured with hopes from ſome of the gariſon of Graueline,
                        Graueline attempted. hee by night attempted to take the towne, but La Motte the Gouernor, by whom this plot was laid, iſſued out vpon him vnexpected, whereby he perceiued that he was deluded, and retired with the loſſe of ſome few men, ſafe and in perfect health. William Pelham Generall of the Engliſh horſe ſcoured vp and downe Brabant. Parma parting from Venlo, marched to Bergen, where Colonell Morgan with 1200 Engliſh vnder his command lay in Gariſon, which he beleagerd: Leiceſter made haſt to raiſe him, but finding himſelfe vnequall in the number of his men, ſlenderly prouided of munition, not any place for retreat at hand, & the leaguer of his enemy ſtrongly fortified: to draw the enemy from Bergen, he in likewiſe beleag
                           •
                        rd Duisbrough, and after that by the force of his cannon he had made a breach,Duisbourgh beleagerd. preparing to giue an aſſault, the towne vpon compoſition yeelded; ſo hee entred,Which yeelds. and tooke poſſeſſion of the towne before the Duke of Parma had altogether left Bergen to come to releeue it.
                     
                        Parma ſuſpecting, that they would alſo march againſt Zutphen a neighbouring City, he cauſed prouiſion to be caried into the towne but at the ſecond returne of the cariage, the Engliſh by the fauour of the time which was then miſty, encountred the Spaniards which conuoyed the ſame. Then began betwixt them a tumultuous conflict. The Engliſh ſtanding two volleys of ſhot vntoucht, remained firme, putting to flight the troope of horſe ſent forth vnder the conduct of

                        G. Creſsiac a Wallon, who diſmounted from his horſe by the Lord Willoughby, vvas taken; Hannibal Gonzago with many others being ſlaine. Yet few of the Engliſh periſhed: but oh!Sir Philip Sidney is ſlaine. He that countervail'd many men, whoſe valor parallel'd if not exceeded the beſt, Sidney, his horſe being ſlaine, whilſt he aſcended another, was ſhot through the thigh, of which wound fiue and twenty dayes after he dyed, hauing ſcarce out-liued his father foure moneths, and was much lamented of all good men. Leiceſter his vncle returning into England performed his obſequies and funerall duties, in the Church of St. Paul at London with great magnificence, and ſolemnities due to a noble Souldier. Iames the King of Scots honored him with an Epitaph, both the Academies cōſecrated their teares to him, and the new Colledge of Oxford erected a ſtately monument to his laſting memory. And to ſpeake truth, the vertue of this man, his natural magnificent bounty, his adorned literature, and his ſweet and milde behauiour, well deſerued all this, yea and more.
                     
                        Leiceſter, though ſad & ſorrowful, eagerly aſſaulted the forts before Zutphen, and to expugne them with better ſucceſſe, he ſeized vpon the Iland with the places of defence therin; then aſſaulting the leſſer fortreſſe,The valour of Edward Stanley of the houſe of Elford. hee ſubdued it by the valour of Edward Stanley who laying hold of a Spaniards Pike, wherewith he ſtrucke him, kept ſuch faſt hold that hee was by the Pike drawne into the Fort, vvhereat the Spaniards were in ſuch ſort amazed, that they fearefully fled. Leiceſter for this valorous exploit Knighted Stanley, rewarding him with 40 pounds Engliſh preſently paid him down, and a 100 Marks yearely penſion during his life. The night following the Spaniards abandoned the greater fort leauing behind them all their munition, and retyred into Zutphen. Leiceſter thought it not expedient to beleaguer the towne at that time, being then almoſt in the depth of vvinter, and the vveather very ſharpe; beſides, hauing gariſons round about it, he thought it ſufficiently beſieged. For Sir Edward Stanley
                        
remained at Deuentrey, being ſixe Engliſh miles from thence on the North ſide, with 1200 footmen, as well Engliſh as Iriſh. Rowland Yorke kept the fortreſſes of Zutphen neere to Deuentry with 800 foote, and 100 horſe. There were gariſons likewiſe placed towards the Eaſt parts, at Lillo, Sherenbourg, and Douay.
                     
                     
                        Leiceſter hauing placed the reſt of his troopes in gariſon, and ſeeing that the Duke of Parma was farre thence retired, hee returned to the Hage, where the Eſtates receiued him with many complaints:
THat the moneyes were not well diſtributed,
                              The Eſtates complaine to Leiceſter againſt himſelfe.
                            that hee inclined his eares to evill Counſellors, that the numbers of the auxiliary Engliſh were not compleat, that foreigne ſouldiers were inrol'd without their conſent, that militarie diſcipline was neglected, that waggons and pioners were compeld, that the priuiledges of the prouinces were contēned, & that new formes of contribution were deuiſed.
                     
                     They requeſted him to apply a ſpeedy and healthfull remedy to theſe things. He that had his whole intendments buſied about his returne into England, with a courteous anſwer gaue them faire promiſing. But vpon the day wherein he was to depart, he committed the adminiſtration of the Prouinces to the Counſell of the Eſtates, and vpon the ſame day, by letters of reſtraint ſecretly diſpatcht, he reſerued to himſelfe the whole authority ouer the Gouernours of the Prouinces, Townes, and Caſtles, and exempted likewiſe the accuſtomed iuriſdictions from the Counſell of the Eſtates

and Gouernours of the Prouinces, and ſo vpon the third day of December he paſſed ouer into England.
                        He returneth into England. Thus for this whole yeare were the Engliſh affaires caried in the Netherlands.
                     
                     In England, Phillip Earle of Arundel who all the yeare had beene kept cloſe priſoner, was accuſed in the Starre-Chamber.
                     
                        
                           The Earle of Arundell is accuſed of many things
                        THat hee contrary to the Lawes, had ſuccoured the Prieſts, had interchange of letters with Alan and Parſon, Jeſuits and enemies to the Queene: That he had derogated from the Juſtice of the Kingdome by publike writing: and had enterpriſed to depart the Kingdome without licence.
                     
                        He anſwered them well, and is but fyned.But hauing made proteſtation of his obedience to the Queene, and loue to his Country, he modeſtly excuſed himſelfe out of his zeale to the Catholike Religion, and his ignorance of the lawes, and ſubmitted himſelfe to the iudgement of the Aſſembly, who adiudged him to be fined 10000 pounds, and ſo long impriſonment as the Queenes pleaſure ſhould preſcribe. But of theſe things in the yeare 1589 muſt more amply be diſcourſed.
                     
                        The King of Denmarke intercedeth for Peace with the Queene of England.About this time ariued in England frō 
                        Frederick 2. King of Denmarke, Hen. Ramely Chancelor for the German affaires, with a warlike traine & guard of Muskettiers, who at large declared, with what affection the K. of Denmarke was tranſported towards Queene ELIZABETH, and the generall peace of Chriſtendome; to which he promiſed with his beſt indeauors to moue the King of Spaine to condiſcend:

                           THat (as hee ſaid) the common enemie of mankinde, might not any longer with humane blood water thoſe ſeeds of warre which he had ſowne in the Netherlands.
                        
                     
                     The Queene gaue him a gracious hearing; and hauing often graciouſly entertained him with diuers diſcourſes, ſhe highly commended the pious intention of the King of Denmarke. And by the Lord Burghley, Treaſurer; Charles Howard, Lord High Admirall; Henry Lord Carie, Baron of Hunſdon, Chamberlaine; and Sir Francis Walſingham, principall Secretarie, ſhe gaue him this anſwer;
THat ſhe deſired nothing more,
                              Queene Elizabeth anſwereth.
                            then to embrace a League of amity (in which were coucht no treacheries) with her neighbouring Princes. But conſidering the complots of the Spaniard which hee had practiſed againſt her, ſhee could not but prouide for her owne ſafety, the defence of the True Religion of Chriſt, and the conſeruation of the priuiledges of her allyed neighbours in their entier.
                     
                     The ſelfe-ſame anſwer to the ſame purpoſe ſhe gaue to Bodellan, ſent into England by the Duke of Parma to treat of a Peace.
                     
                        In the meane ſpace ſhee furniſhed the King of Nauarre, by the hands of Horatio Pallauicine vvith a large ſumme of money;She furniſheth Henry King of Navarre with money. in whoſe perſon onely, the Guiſes oppugned the reformed Religion in France. But the Queene was to nothing more attentiue, then to confirme a ſolid amity betweene England and Scotland, and to conioyne them in one vnited League of mutuall offence and defence,
                           She deſireth a league with Scotland.
                           By what counſell.
                         vvhereby ſhe might not onely cut off all hope of ayde from Scotland to foraine Nations, but to the Queene of Scots her ſelfe. For Queene ELIZABETH ſuſpected, that ſhee, being greatly incenſed, had imbraced ſome perilous counſell, ſince that the conditions which vvere preſented by her, vvere reiected; the aſſociation agreed vpon, and ſhe (as is before related) deliuered into the cuſtody of Sir Aimé Poulet and Drury. And it was apparantly manifeſt, that the Ieſuites on one ſide, and the fugitiue Nobilitie of the other,The fugitiues and Scottiſh Ieſuits do ſuggeſt diuers things to the Queene of Scots. had ſuggeſted her with diuers deſignes, and abrupt counſels, by their Letters written one againſt the other. For the Ieſuites perceiuing that there was no other hope left for the eſtabliſhing of the Roman Religion, either by her, or by her ſonne, they framed to themſelues new deuices; they beganne to coyne for the Spaniard (whoſe greatneſſe they alwayes laboured to encreaſe) a new and fained right to the ſucceſsion of England. And (as Paſquier reported) they ſent Saumier (if the name be not fained) into England, vvhich vvas one of their owne ſociety, for to draw the Nobility to the Spaniſh faction, and to force her to ſome dangerous matter; denouncing that if ſhe were any way troubleſome, that neither ſhee nor her ſon ſhould raigne at all. And by inciting the Guiſes, her alliance, to new commotions againſt the King of Nauarre and Prince of Conde, to the intent to hinder them from aiding of her and her ſonne.
                     
                        The French labour to hinder the League.But to conclude the League which was begunne by Wotton, and interrupted by the ſlaughter of Francis Ruſſell, which alſo Deſneuall the French Ambaſſador, and Corſelle,
                        
a man of an impatient diſpoſition, who not long before was ignominiouſly driuen out of England; began now to hinder; Thomas Randolph vvas diſpatched, vvhoſe dexteritie in the Scottiſh affaires, was accounted wiſe and fortunate, although to the King hee was ſcarce welcome, by reaſon of the troubles which he formerly moued in Scotland. He propoſed to the King the ſame conditions of the League, which Wotton had before propounded.The King of Scots propoundeth conditions. The King would haue to be added the Articles concerning the yearely penſion aſſigned, and the preiudice not to be offered to his Right to the Crowne of England, and vvould haue them inſerted into the Contract. The Ambaſſador according to his inſtructions promiſed him an aſſurance of theſe things in a writing ſeparate by it ſelfe, prouided that hee conſtantly embraced the League. The King, out of the loue vvhich hee bore to his ſubiects, propounded that the Scots might inioy the ſelfſame immunities in England as the Engliſh themſelues. But the Ambaſſador ſhewing him that it could not be done except by the Parliament authoritie; and the States of England vvould not eaſily accord thereto: the King deliberately propoſing the Articles to himſelfe, agreed vnto them, and commanded them to be imparted to his Nobility, to the entent that they likewiſe ſhould confirme them with their ſubſcriptions. Yet the French Ambaſſador murmuring, firſt, ſaid, that the Queene had deſired this League, not out of any loue to the King, but for the iuſt feare vvhich ſhee had, leſt ſhee ſhould bee ruined by her enemies which were ioyned againſt her: then hee iniected many feares, intermixt with threats, that the amity of France, which is moſt profitable to the Scots, vvould be by this meanes diſſolued: Laſtly, he coniured the King, that hee would not doe any thing without the King of France his counſell.
                     But the King, who wel knew theſe to be but vaine ſpeeches,He is not deterred by the French. could not be retarded or diuerted from his purpoſe. For hee wel knew that the Engliſh forces were much encreaſed by

                        Englands League with the Low-Countries, made this ſerious anſwer.
                     
                        
                           King Iames's anſwer to them.
                        THat he had repoſed his confidence in the diuine bounty, and not in the friendſhip of ſuch as were contrary to the glory of God. Neither was it leſſe lawfull for him to contract a League with the Queene, without the French Kings counſell, then it was of late for the King of France to ioyne in friendſhip with her, without his aduice.
                     And although the Queene, that ſhe might not be thought to buy this alliance, did ſend him leſſe money then he expected, and made leſſe expreſsion of the aſſurance of the ſucceſsion, neuertheleſſe for the zeale which hee bore to Religion, and his ſingular affection to the Queene, hee commanded the League to bee concluded; and further to acquite his promiſe, he determined to ſend into England the Carrs, which were ſuſpected murderers of Francis Ruſſell.
                     
                     
                        The League of faſt friendſhip.A little after, vpon the beginning of Iuly, the Earle of Rutland, the Lord Euers, and Tho: Randolph for the Queene: the Earle of Bothwell, the Lord Boide, and Iames Humy Coldingknoll for the King of Scotland were aſſembled at Barwicke, and there conſummated the League, which was called The League of faſt friendſhip, (becauſe the word of offence was diſpleaſing to the Scots) as followeth.
                     FOraſmuch as the Raignes and Gouernments of of theſe Princes, are falne into theſe doubtful and dangerous times, wherein the neighbouring

Princes, which will be called Catholiques, acknowledging the Papall authoritie, doe contract Leagues, and by mutuall alliances, doe oblige their faiths, to ruine and extirpate, the true, pure, and Euangelicall Religion; not onely out of their owne Territories and Dominions, but alſo out of foraine Kingdomes. To the end, that thoſe which doe embrace the Euangelicall Religion, might not ſeeme leſſe carefull to defend and protect the ſame, then thoſe which at this time doe exerciſe the Roman Religion are for the euerſion & ouerthrow of it: The ſaid Princes for their greater aſſurance, and ſecuritie of their owne perſons, vpon whoſe ſafety dependeth the good and welfare of the people; and for the conſeruation of the true, ancient, and Chriſtian Religion, whereof they at this preſent make profeſsion, haue conſulted and agreed to combine themſelues in a ſtraiter knot of mutuall alliance and friendſhip, then hath beene till now amongst the Predeceſſors of their Maieſties.
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 The firſt ARTICLE.
                                 PRimarily then, to the end that this ſo godly and neceſſary Propoſition of either Prince in this turbulent eſtate of things might come to an effect, for the common good, and propagation of the truth of the Goſpell: it is conuented, agreed and concluded, that the ſaid Princes ſhall by this mutuall and holy League, be eſpecially carefull to defend and conſerue the true, pure, and Euangelicall Religion, which they now profeſſe, againſt all others that for the ruine thereof ſhall enterprize any thing againſt either of them; and ſhall labour and endeuour with all poſsible diligence, that the reſt of thoſe Princes which are profeſſors of the ſame Religion, might accord with them in this

holy propounded League, and conioyning their forces conſerue in their Dominions the true ſeruice of God, and defend and gouerne their ſubiects vnder the ſaid ancient and Apoſtolicall Religion.
                              
                              
                                 The ſecond.
                                 
                                    ITem, it is conuented, accorded, and concluded that this mutuall League for the defending and maintaining of the Chriſtian and Catholique Religion, which at this preſent is holden by either Prince, and by the grace of God obſerued and nouriſhed in their Realmes and Dominions, ſhall bee a League of offence and defence againſt all thoſe that ſhall hinder, or endeuour by any means to hinder the exerciſe of the ſame within their Realmes and Dominions; notwithſtanding all Treaties, Leagues of friendſhip, and Confederations paſt betweene either of them, and all aduerſaries and perſecutors whatſoeuer of the ſame Religion. That if at any time any Prince or State whatſoeuer, of what condition ſo euer he be, ſhal inuade or infeſt, the Realmes, Dominions, or Territories, of either of the ſaid Princes, or any part of them; or indomage or iniure any manner of way their Maieſties perſons, or ſubiects; or ſhall attempt theſe, or any of theſe things,
                              
                              
                                 The third.
                                 IT is conuented, accorded and concluded, that neither of theſe Princes, receiuing intelligence from the perſon inuaded, iniured, or indomaged, ſhall directly, or indirectly; openly, or couertly, aide, counſell, or fauour, at any time, the ſaid inuaders, or infeſtors, in what kinde of inuaſion ſo euer it ſhall bee; or by whomſoeuer it ſhall be attempted,

notwithſtanding all kindred, affinitie, amitie, or 
                                       〈◊〉
                                     before contracted, or after to bee contracted.
                              
                              
                                 The fourth.
                                 THat the ſaid Princes ſhall reciprocally ſend aide either to other, in manner as followeth: If the Kingdome of England ſhall be inuaded or molested by any ſtranger vpon thoſe parts which are farre remote from the Kingdome of Scotland, the King of Scotland after demand made by the Queene of England, ſhall incontinently and without delay ſend two thouſand horſe and fiue thouſand foot▪ or any leſſe number, according to the pleaſure & requeſt of the Queene, to bee conducted at the expence of the Queene, from the frontiers of Scotland next adiacent to the Kingdome of England, into any part of England whatſoeuer.
                              
                              
                                 The fift.
                                 THat if the Kingdome of Scotland ſhall bee inuaded or moleſted by any ſtranger, vpon thoſe parts which are farre remote from the Kingdome of England: the Queene of England after demand made by the King of Scotland, ſhall incontinently, and without delay, ſend three thouſand horſe, and ſixe thouſand foot, or any leſſe number, according to the pleaſure and requeſt of the King▪ to be conducted at the expence of the King from the frontiers of England, next adiacent to the Kingdome of Scotland, into any part of Scotland whatſoeuer.
                              
                              
                                 
                                 The ſixt.
                                 THat if the Kingdome of England ſhall by any one bee inuaded vpon the North parts within threeſcore miles of the borders of Scotland, the moſt illuſtrious King of Scotland being requeſted and demanded by the moſt excellent Queene of England, ſhall aſſemble all his forces and troopes to his poſsibilitie, effectually and without delay; and ioyning them with the Engliſh troops, ſhall purſue in all hoſtile manner thoſe that ſhall inuade the Kingdome of England, their fauourers and aſsiſtants whatſoeuer, for the ſpace of thirty dayes together, or longer, if occaſion and neceſsitie ſhall require, according to the ſpace of time, which the ſubiects of Scotland were anciently accuſtomed, and to this day doe hold, for bringing of ſuccours to the defence of the Kingdome.
                              
                              
                                 The ſeuenth.
                                 THat when the King of Scots ſhall haue notice giuen him from the Queene of England of any inuaſion or deuaſtation happening in Ireland, he ſhall not onely forbid the inhabitants of the County of Argathel, of the Iles, and places adiacent to the ſaid County, and the inhabitants of all other places whatſoeuer in the Kingdome of Scotland, not to enter into the Kingdome of Ireland, and to his power to hinder them from entring: But alſo in what time ſo euer it ſhall happen, that the inhabitants of any part whatſoeuer of the Realme of Scotland, ſhall, contrary to the intent of this Treaty, enter in hoſtile manner into any part of Ireland, with an extraordinary and vnuſuall number of Souldiers: the King himſelfe, after he

had giuen notice to the Queene of the ſaid entry, ſhall, by a publique Edict, denounce the ſaid inuaders, breaking in hoſtile maner into the ſaid Realme, for Rebels, diſturbers of the publique peace, and men guilty of attempt againſt the eſtate, and as ſuch ſhall purſue them.
                              
                              
                                 The eighth.
                                 THat neither of the ſaid Princes ſhall giue (or permit any other in any ſort whatſoeuer to giue) at any time hereafter, any aide, fauour, or aſſiſtance, to any conſpirator, rebell, or one reuolted from either Prince; or ſuffer any ſuch perſon or perſons in publike or in priuate, to make ſtay or aboade in their Dominions. But either of the ſaid Princes, vpon the firſt notice, or requeſt of the Prince (from whom they haue reuolted) offered, ſhall deliuer or cauſe to be deliuered vp the ſaid conſpirators, or Rebels, without any delay or procraſtination, (according to the Conuentions, in our former Treaties betweene our ſelues, and our predeceſſors, expreſſed) or at leaſt ſhal compell them to depart out of the bounds of their Dominions. And furthermore, ſo long as the ſaid Rebels, or conſpirators ſhall remaine in the ſaid Dominions, either of the ſaid Princes ſhall giue reaſonable ſatisfaction for all the wrongs and damages done by the ſaid Rebels.
                              
                              
                                 The ninth.
                                 THat to compound for all and ſingular the iniuries and controuerſies which haue hapned ſince the time that the moſt excellent King of Scots tooke the gouernment of the Kingdome vpon him, and for the ſpace of foure yeares before, by reaſon of the

frontier limits, or amongst the borderers. The Princes ſhall on either ſide, within ſix moneths after this league concluded, ſend capable Commiſsioners, deſirous of peace, well inſtructed, with commands ſufficient and proper for the ſame affaires, to ſome commodious place vpon the frontiers of both Kingdomes, which ſhall determine and end all cauſes & controuerſies by a friendly and honorable compoſition.
                              
                              
                                 The tenth.
                                 THat neither of the ſaid Princes ſhall contract any League or confederation with any other Prince, Common-wealth, or Communalty whatſoeuer, to the preiudice of this preſent League and vnion, without hauing and obtaining an expreſſe conſent from the other, by Letters, either ſubſcribed with his hand, or ſealed with his Priuy Seale.
                                 That both Princes, when either of them ſhall bee duely requeſted by the Ambaſſadors or Commiſsioners of the other, ſhall approue and confirme this holy League of Society, both by Oath, and vnder the Great Seale. And further, for the greater aſſurance and ſtabilitie of the ſame, ſhall deliuer, or cauſe to be deliuered Letters Patents at a certaine time, which by the mutuall conſent of either Prince ſhall be conſtituted.
                              
                              
                                 The eleuenth.
                                 THat all the precedent Treaties of friendſhip, and Conuentions of Leagues betweene the Predeceſſors of the ſaid Princes, their Kingdomes and Dominions (though now ſeeming out of vſe) ſhall

remaine in their vertue, force, and vigour. And likewiſe this preſent treaty of mutuall alliance, and faſt friendſhip ſhall not derogate in any manner from the precedent Treaties, and confederations paſſed by the ſaid Princes, with other their Allies, or diminiſh in any part their waight, and authoritie, (onely excepted the defence of the pure Religion which the ſaid Princes doe defend and exerciſe at this preſent in their Kingdomes) in which manner we vnderstand, that this preſent League of offence and defence, in its owne force ſhall remaine ratified, and inviolable.
                                 That when the King of Scotland ſhall come to the age of fiue and twenty yeares; he ſhall (ſo ſoon as he conueniently may) approue and confirme by a publique aſſembly of his Kingdome this preſent League. Likewiſe the Queenes Maieſtie ſhall doe and accompliſh the ſame thing, and ſhall cauſe to be done and accompliſhed in the Court of Parliament, by the Nobility and other ſtates of the Kingdomes of England and Ireland.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     In the ſame moneth that this League was concluded of,A conſpiracie againſt Queene Elizabeth. a moſt pernicious conſpiracy was diſcouered againſt Queene ELIZABETH; of which (in as few words as may poſſible be) I will expound the originall and progreſſe, according to that which I haue extracted out of the voluntary confeſſions of the conſpirators. Some out of the Engliſh Seminarie at Rheims, admiring as it were with aſtoniſhment, a certaine omnipotency in the Pope of Rome, beleeuing that the Bull of Pius Quintus againſt Queene ELIZABETH was dictated to him by the Holy Ghoſt; perſwaded themſelues, and others alſo that deſired the glory of being Martyrs: that it was a meritorious thing to murder ſuch as were excommunicate; yea, and a martyrdome to dye in ſuch a cauſe. Giffard Doctor in Diuinity, Gilbert Giffard and Hodgeſon Prieſts, ſo farre poſſeſſed the minde of Iohn Sauage
                        
with theſe things (who was reputed to be a baſtard) a man ready at all aſſayes, that hee freely and voluntarily vowed to murder Queene ELIZABETH.How diſcouered. And to make men beleeue, that they deſired to aſſure the Queene and her Counſellors, they publiſhed a booke at the ſame time, wherein they admoniſhed the Papiſts of England not to enterprize any thing againſt their Queene, but with their teares (which are the weapons of Chriſtians) to combate againſt her enemies. And alſo by this meanes they diſperſed a falſe rumor, that George Giffard a Gentleman of the Queenes Guard, had ſworne to murder her, and to that end was by the Guiſe hyred with large ſummes of money.
                     
                        Ballard returneth into France.In Eaſter Holydayes, Iohn Ballard Prieſt of the ſame Seminary, after hee had viſited many Papiſts in England and Scotland, and had ſounded their minds, hee returned into France, accompanied with Maude, Walſinghams Spy, a moſt crafty diſſembler, that had ſeduced his eaſie nature, and treated vvith Barnardino Mendoza then Leidger for the King of Spaine in France, and Charles Paget who was wholly deuoted to the Queene of Scots, about the meanes to inuade England; repreſenting to him, the apt opportunitie of the time which then vvas, becauſe the men of warre were then abſent, and buſied in the Low-Countries: neither was there a fitter time to bee hoped for, becauſe the Pope, Spaniard, Guiſe, and Parma had then determined to inuade England, to diuert the warres from the Netherlands. But Paget clearely demonſtrated, that it would be in vaine, to goe about to inuade England ſo long as the Queene was liuing.Ballard ſent backe into England. 
                        Ballard neuertheleſſe was ſent backe, after hee had ſworne, to procure ſpeedy ſuccours to them that ſhould inuade, and the liberty of the Queene of Scots.
                     
                        Meeteth with Babington.At Whitſontide this Prieſt ariued in England, apparelled in Silks, in the habite of a Souldier, and by a borrowed name called himſelfe Captaine Foſcue. Hee conſulted at London about theſe things with Anthony Babington of Dethicke in

                        Darbyſhire, a yong man of a famous houſe, of a haughty ſpirit, in learning ſurpaſſing his age, and very zealous to the Roman religion; who without leaue, had before paſſed into France vnknowne, and there became familiar with Thomas Morgan a ſeruant to the Queene of Scots, and the Biſhop of Glaſco her Ambaſſador; who continually ſounded in the eares of his ambitious yong man, the heroicall vertues of the great Queene of Scots, in whoſe ſeruice hee might obtaine the meanes to riſe to great Honours. Whereupon the yong man conceiued a certaine hope, and Morgan, without his knowledge, commended him by Letters to the Queene. For after that he was returned into England, the Queene of Scots graciouſly ſaluted him with her Letters; & after that, Morgan made vſe of him for conueyance of Letters to and fro, vntill ſuch time, that ſhe was deliuered into the cuſtody of Poulet: then he, perceiuing the danger which might enſue, deſiſted. Ballard (as I ſaid) conſulted of the aforeſaid things with Babington, hee plainely thought that the inuading of England would be to no purpoſe ſo long as Queene ELIZABETH liued. But Ballard giuing him to vnderſtand,He inſtructs him in the ſtratagem. that ſhe had not long to liue, becauſe Sauage who had vowed to murder her, was then ariued in England; Babington was of another aduice, and thought it not fit, that affaires of ſuch greatneſſe ſhould be committed to him alone, leſt he ſhould faile in the attempt. But to ſixe valiant and Noblemen, of which he would haue Sauage to be one, to the end he might not infringe his vow. And therfore Babington ſought out a new meanes for the inuading of England by the ſtrangers, at what Port they ſhould land, what aſſiſtance ſhould be ioyned with them; how the Queene of Scots ſhould be ſet at liberty: and laſtly, for committing the tragicall murder (as he called it) of the Queene of England.
                     
                     Whilſt hee wholly bent his cogitations vpon theſe matters,Babington receiueth Letters from the Queene of Scots. hee receiued Letters by a boy vnknowne from the Queen of Scots, written in a familiar Character betwixt

them: wherein ſhe gently blamed him for his long ſilence, and commanded him with all ſpeed to ſend the packet of Letters ſent from Morgan, and deliuered to him by the Secretary of the French Ambaſſador, which hee performed, and by the ſame meſſenger ſent her a Letter, by which

                           
                              He writeth back to her.
                           HE excuſed himſelfe of his ſilence, becauſe hee was deſtitute of opportunitie to ſend to her, ſince ſhe was giuen into the cuſtodie of Sir Aimé Poulet that Puritan, wholly deuoted to Leiceſter, and a cruell and bitter enemy to the Catholique faith. He writ of the conference which he had with Ballard. Hee gaue her notice that ſixe Gentle-men were choſen to commit a tragicall murder; and that he with a hundred others at the inſtant would deliuer her. And he deſired her to propound recompences to the heroicall actor of this tragedie (ſo he called it) or to their poſteritie if they dyed in the attempt.
                     
                     
                        She anſwereth him.She anſwered theſe Letters the 27 of Iuly: And
SHe praiſed his ſingular affection to the Catholique religion, and to her ſelfe. But ſhe admoniſhed him to be conſiderate in this enterpriſe,

and that he ſhould conclude an aſſociation amongst the authors and actors in the ſame, for feare of the Puritans; not to attempt any thing before he was ſure of the foraine ſuccors to ſtirre vp ſome combuſtion in Ireland, whileſt the blow was to be giuen here; to draw to his faction the Earle of Arundel and his brothers, with the Earle of Northumberland, and ſecretly to repeale into the Kingdome the Earle of Weſtmerland, Paget, and others.
                     
                     She preſcribeth the meanes of her deliuerie;
EIther by ſubuerting of a Cart in the Port, or ſetting fire vpon Stables, or by intercepting of her when ſhe ſhould ride to take the aire, or recreate her ſelfe betweene Chartle and Stafford. Finally, ſhe requeſted Babington to promiſe recompences to the ſixe Gentle-men, and to all the reſt.
                        
                     
                     He had now aſſociated to him certaine Gentlemen of Noble race burning with zeale toward the Romane Religion;His aſſociates in the conſpiracie. amongſt whom the principall were Edward Windſor, brother to the Lord Windſor, Baron of Bradnam, a yong man

of a pleaſing and milde diſpoſition. Thomas Salisbury iſſued from a houſe of ancient Knighthood in Denbigh-ſhire. Char: Tilney of a remarkable and famous race; who was the onely hope of that houſe; with one of the Gentlemen Penſioners to the Queene, whom Ballard a while before had reconciled to the Romane Church: and Chidiock Tichborn of Hampſhire, and Edward Abington, whoſe father was the vnder-Treaſurer of the Queenes houſhold; two braue yong men; Robert Gadge of Surrey, Iohn Trauerſe, Iohn Charnock of Lancaſhire, I. Iones, whoſe father was keeper of the Wardrop to Queene MARIE: Sauage, of whom I haue ſpoken: Barnwell, of a Noble Houſe in Ireland, and Henry Dunne Clerke for the receipt of firſt fruits and tythes. Into this company Polly inſinuated himſelfe, vvell inſtructed in the affaires of the Queene of Scots, very expert in diſſembling, vvho ſtil from day to day, laid open all their counſels to Walſingham, and by the miſchieuous aduice which he ſuggeſted to theſe yong men, being of themſelues inclined to euill, hee precipitated them to farre vvorſe matters: notwithſtanding Naue the Queene of Scots Secretary, had forwarned them of him.
                     
                        Babington giueth to euery one his taske.To theſe Babington communicateth the matter, but not to euery one, all; he ſhewed to Ballard, Tichborne and Dunne his owne Letters, and the Letters of the Queene of Scots. Alſo he ſoliciteth Tilney, and Tichborne to doe the deed. At the firſt they refuſe to ſtaine their hands in their Princeſſes blood. But Ballard and Babington labouring hard to teach and giue them to vnderſtand how iuſt and lawfull it vvas to kil Kings or Princes excommunicated, and that if right were to be violated, it muſt needs be for the Catholike Religion; yet notwithſtanding they with much adoe are perſwaded to it. Abington, Barnwell, Charnock, and Sauage yeelded their ready conſent vvith alacritie, ſwearing to act the murther. Salisbury they could not poſſibly induce to bee a Regicide, nor draw to any thing more, then to imploy his beſt endeuours for the deliuerance of the Queene of Scotland. Babington
                        
maketh choice of Tichnore to be the odde man ouer and aboue the number of thoſe that ſhould doe the deed; of whoſe ſecrecie, truſt and reſolution he made no doubt; but he was then abroad in trauell. Babington commandeth that before they had taken their oath, they ſhould not impart the buſineſſe to any.
                     After this, they met in Sr. Gyles fields to conferre further;They confer together. in Paules alſo, and in Tauernes, where they feaſted often, puft vp with vaine hopes of preferment to great honors and dignities: whereupon they would often commend the noble courage of thoſe valiant Scots, which had lately ſeized on the Kings royall perſon at Sterlin; and Girard the Bourgonian, who ſlew the Prince of Orange at Delph. Moreouer,Their vanity. they grew to that height of vanity, that thy would needs haue the pictures of them drawne in a table, and Babington in the midſt, with this verſicle or inſcription:
Such be my conſorts, as dare incurre my dangers.
                     
                     But this pleaſed them not ſo well, as being a little too plain, wherefore they exchanged it with this other;
Quorſum haec, aliò properantibus.
                     
                     Some are of opinion that this table was once ſhow'd to Queene ELIZABETH in priuate, of which ſhee could not diſcern or know any other man by his effigies, but Barnwell onely who had had at diuers times acceſſe to her Maieſty from the Earle of Kildare whom hee ſerued; but being inſtructed in the buſineſſe, ſhe knew him to be the man ſhould haue attempted her life; for on a time walking abroad, and eſpying Barnwell, whom ſhe beheld with an vndanted countenance, turning herſelfe ſuddenly towards Sir Chriſtopher Hatton Captaine of her Guard, and others; ſhe ſaid, Am not I fairly guarded now, hauing not one man of my followers, that is prouided of a ſword? This Barnwell reported this to

the reſt of his fellowes, telling thē how eaſily it might then haue beene done, had he had his conſorts with him: and Sauage ſaid the ſame.
                     
                        Babington in care to bring in the forraigne aides, ſends Ballard to worke for him. Inſinuateth with Walſingham.After this, Babington caſt all his care, how he might bring in the forraigne power according to his promiſe. For the more certainty hee reſolued to paſſe himſelfe into France and to ſend Ballard before to the ſame end, for whom in an other name he had procured a licence to trauell. And for the better auoyding of ſuſpition, inſinuateth himſelfe with Sir Francis Walſingham, by meanes of Polly already ſpoken of, whom he earneſtly intreated to procure him a Paſſe from the Queene to goe into France, promiſing him he would be exquiſitely induſtrious to finde out all the hidden plots the Engliſh fugitiues had in hand concerning the Queene of Scots: He commendeth much the yong Gentlemans purpoſe,Deceit by deceit deceiued. promiſing him not only his Paſſe, but greater matters. Neuertheleſſe putting off from time to time both the one and the other, hauing ſerued his turne in the meane time by his owne intelligencers, who had acquainted him beforehand with all things, though they thought themſelues as ſecret as the Sun; he who diſcouered moſt of theſe matters to Walſingham,
                        Giffard diſcouereth all the conſpiracy. was one Gilbert Giffard, deſcended from the noble family of the Chilingtons in Staffordſhire neere Chartley, where the Queene of Scots had lyen, and was then ſent by the fugitiues into England, vnder the name of Luſon, to put Sauage in mind of the vow he had made: and being now to bee their factor, was to keepe himſelfe cloſe, and the Queene of Scots letters ſafe which were to bee ſent ouer, when as they could not in thoſe dangerous times draw in the Counteſſe of Arondel, the Lord Lumley, the Lord H. Howard, nor Sir G. Shirley.
                     
                     The fugitiues to try whether they might ſafely expect letters out of England from Giffard, ſent often empty white papers (which they call blanckes) bound vp in packets like letters, which perceiuing by the anſwers they receiued that

they had beene deliuered, and now beleeuing their cariers better then before, write materially, but in characters. Whether this Giffard was troubled in conſcience, or corrupted with money, before hee carried ouer his letters, or terified with feare, I cannot well tell; but hee went to Walſingham firſt in ſecret, to vvhom hee diſcouered himſelfe, and for vvhat cauſe hee was thus imployed into England, offering his ſeruice for the loue hee bore vnto his Princeſſe and Countrie, vvith promiſe that what Letters ſo euer from the Fugitiues, or the Queene of Scots ſhould come into his hands, hee would acquaint him with. Sir Fran: Walſingham, embracing his offer, entertaineth him kindely, and ſending him into Stafford-ſhire, vvrit to Sir Aimé Poulet, intreating him to giue this Giffard leaue to intice ſome of his ſeruants. He vnwilling that any ſeruant of his (as he ſaid) ſhould by diſsimulation, or otherwiſe, bee brought to turne Traitor, ſeemed not to be pleaſed therewith. Neuertheleſſe ſuffered him to practice vntill hee had brought in a Beare-brewer, and an Oate-meale-man, his neare neighbours, whom he made ſure. Giffard vvith a few crownes had eaſily corrupted the Brewer; who by a hole made artificially in a wall, wherein vvas a ſtone that vvas to be eaſily put in and out, he both deliuered & receiued Letters, the which by Carriers appointed for the purpoſe, viz. relapſed Prieſts, came to Sir F. Walſinghams hands. He opened them, tooke Copies of them, and by the cunning of Tho.
                        Sendeth the Letters he receiued, to Walſingham. 
                        Philips found out the Charactory, and by the deuice of Arthur Gregory, ſo cloſed them vp againe, that it was not to be perceiued that they had been vnſealed, then ſent them to whom they were directed, according to their ſuperſcriptions. In this faſhion were the two firſt Letters intercepted which the Queene of Scots had written to Babington, and his anſwers againe to her (wherein in the ſame Characters was added at the end of the Letter a Poſtſcriptum: in which they found ſixe Noble-mens names, if no more) as alſo other Letters,

which all in one day were vvritten to the Spaniſh Ambaſſador, to the Lord Paget, Char: Paget, the Archbiſhop of Glaſcow, and Sir Francis Inglefield: all which were firſt written out, and ſo ſent away againe.
                     So ſoone as the Queene vnderſtood by theſe Letters, vvhat a horrible ſtorme vvas ready to light on her, as well out of diuers places abroad, as at home; ſhe commanded out of hand,Ballard vpon his departure is taken. to apprehend Ballard, vvho vvas at vnawares taken in Babingtons houſe, being vpon his departure for France. This brought a thouſand doubts and dreadfull thoughts into the perplexed heart of Babington, who hereupon vvent to Tichbourne for his aduice vvhat to doe. Tichbournes counſell vvas that euery man ſhould fly out, to ſaue himſelfe. But Babington vvas of a minde to ſend forth Sauage and Charnocke to performe the murder. But firſt, that he might haue the better acceſſe in Court, to apparell him richly; and to this end, had conference with the reſt in Pauls that day. But changing his opinion, and hauing hidden in his perplexed heart,Babington ſoliciteth for Ballards libertie. the thornes of his ſorrowes, importuneth Walſingham by Letters and intreaties, being then at the Court, without further delay to let him haue his Licence for France, and for that he had ſpeciall vſe for Ballard to ſet him at libertie. Walſingham deferred his ſuit vvith faire promiſes, laying the taking of Ballard vpon Yong the cunning Catcher of the Papiſts,Falleth into the ſame net. and vpon his Purſuiuants, aduiſing him as it were in kindneſſe to keepe him out of the clawes of ſuch as they; and this he eaſily perſwaded him to (being a yong man) and to take his houſe in London for his lodging for a vvhile, till the Queene had ſigned his Paſſe, and till himſelfe returned to London, that they might conferre the more priuately together of ſuch great matters, and that otherwiſe by his often goings vp and downe, which he muſt needs vſe if he be lodged any where elſe, the fugitiues could not but grow ſuſpitious of him vpon his going into France.
                     
                     In the meane time one Scudamore, a ſeruant of Sir Francis

Walſinghams, vvas commanded to haue an eye to him, to accompany him euery where; giuing him to vnderſtand, that this was done to ſaue him from Purſuiuants and Sergeants. This webbe Walſingham had cloſely wouen vvithout the knowledge of the Queenes Councell, and thought to lengthen it a little more. But the Queene would not haue it ſo, leſt in not ſeeking to ſaue her ſelfe whileſt ſhe might, her Maieſtie ſhould ſeeme (as ſhee ſaid) rather to tempt God, then to truſt in him. Hereupon a letter was ſent from Walſingham at Court, to his man at home, to looke a little more narrowly to Babington then hee had done. This vvriting was deliuer'd him vnſealed, ſitting at table next to Babington, who tooke occaſion to read it vvith him. He hauing a guilty conſcience began to ſuſpect that all was diſcouered; ſo that being the night following vvith Scudamore, and two others of Sir Francis Walſinghams ſeruants at ſupper in a Tauerne;Getteth himſelfe out. After they had ſupped, he riſeth from the table, leauing his Cloake and Rapier behind him, as if he had gone to pay the ſhot, taking the benefit of the darke night, ſlipt away to Weſtminſter, where hee changed his cloathes with Gage, which Gage ſoone after put off in Charnocks Chamber, and put on his: being ſo arrayed, they went to ſaue them in Saint Iohns Wood, neare the Citie, vvhere Barnwell and Dun came to them. The meane while, they vvere proclaimed traytors thorow the vvhole countrie.Lyeth in a wood. They lurked in woods and by wayes, after the French Ambaſſador had refuſed to lend them money, and Tichbourne horſes. Babington cut his head-haires, and becauſe he vvas faire of complexion, they beſmeared his face vvith the huskes of greene Wal-nuts. Hunger at the laſt inforced them to retyre themſelues into the houſes of the Bellamis neare Harrow-hill,
                        Harrow-Hill. a people zealouſly affected to the Romane religion, which hid them in barnes, and put them in Ruſticke apparell, and relieued them with meat. But being found ten dayes after,They are found. they vvere conueyed from thence to London, and the Citizens to expreſſe

their great ioy, rung Bels, made bonefires, and ſung Pſalmes; which the Queene much commended, and gaue the City thankes.
                     
                        And all the reſt of the conſpiratorsThe other Conſpirators vvere taken preſently after, the moſt of them in the Suburbs; Salisbury in Cheſhire: his horſe being ſhot through by thoſe vvhich purſued him, and Trauers with him: after they had ſwom ouer the Riuer Weauer: and Iones in Wales, who not vnacquainted with the treaſon, had lodged them in his houſe, after he had heard them proclaimed Traitors, and had changed Cloakes with Salisbury and his man, (who vvas a Prieſt) which fled on horſebacke. Many dayes were ſpent in the examination of theſe, which bewrayed one another,All diſcouered. not concealing any thing of the knowne truth.
                     Now whilſt theſe things paſt thus, the Queene of Scots and her ſeruants were by Sir Aimé Poulet kept with watch and ward, that ſhe might not heare thereof, although it were knowne all the Land thorow. But ſo ſoone as they were all taken, Sir Tho: Gorge vvas ſent to aduertize her briefely hereof, which he did purpoſely, ſhee not dreaming of any ſuch matter, but was now mounted on horſebacke to goe hunt, and vnder a ſhow of honour is conducted vp and down from one Noble mans houſe to another, not ſuffering her to returne home. In the meane time, Sir Iohn Manners, Ed. Aſton, Ri: Bagot, and Wi: Waade (who knew not any thing of this buſineſſe,The Q. of Scots kept with a guard and ſeparated from her ſeruants. hauing beene lately ſent into this Countrey) receiued Letters and Commiſsion from the Queen to execute the ſame, to ſeparate Naune, & Curle, and the reſt of her ſeruants, to be kept ſafe and ſeueral from comming to haue any communication with her, or ſhee with them. And breaking open the doores of her Cloſet, ſent away to the Court all her Desks, or Coffers, wherein were any Letters vnder her owne hand and Seale.Her Cofers with Letters ſent to the Queene. Then Poulet (as it was commanded him) ſeized vpon all her money, that ſhe might haue no meanes, to bribe any, promiſing

to reſtore it to her againe. The Coffers being opened before Queen ELIZABETH, diuers Letters were found written to her by Strangers, copies of ſuch as ſhe had ſent to ſundry; notes, memorials and ſecret Characters 
                           •
                        o the number of threeſcore more or leſſe; with diuers amorous Letters, and Letters of complement from ſome great men of England: ELIZABETH notwithſtanding paſſed all ouer in ſilence, vſing her old Motto.
                     
                        Video, Taceo
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           .
                        J ſee, and ſay nothing.
                     
                     But as they had knowledge of theſe things, thoſe who before had fauoured the Queene of Scots, from thenceforth were her aduerſaries.
                     After this,Giffard ſent into France, dyeth miſerably. 
                        Giffard (hauing firſt playd his part in this Tragedie) was ſent into France, as if he had beene baniſhed, but before he went, he left with the Ambaſſador of France, an indented Paper, willing him not to deliuer the Queene of Scots her Letters, nor thoſe of the Fugitiues to any but him that ſhould ſhow him a Paper ſutable to that, the which he left ſecretly with Walſingham. Hee returning into France within a few moneths after, being committed to priſon for ſome impuritie of life, and ſuſpected of theſe matters, ended his dayes miſerably, confeſsing that the moſt of that which hee had ſaid was true, as was apparant by that which was found in his Deske.
                     The thirteenth day of September ſeuen of the Conſpirators were arraigned, vvho confeſſed themſelues guilty,The Traytors come to Iudgement. and vvere condemned of High treaſon. The ſecond day after, the other ſeuen was likewiſe called to the barre; who pleading not guilty, put themſelues (as the manner is) to be tryed by God and the Countrey, and vvere by their owne confeſsions found guilty and condemned: Onely Polley (though he were guilty of all) ſaying hee had ſomething to

ſpeake to Sir Fran: Walſingham was not brought forth.
                     
                        Are puniſhed.Vpon the 20 day of the moneth, the firſt ſeuen were hanged on a Gibbet, a ſeaffold being ſet vp for that purpoſe, in S. Gyles fields, where they had commonly vſed to meet. They were no ſooner hanged, but preſently cut downe: their priuy members cut off, their bowels ript vp, and quartered (they yet aliue, and looking about them) which was not without ſome note of cruelty. The firſt was Ballard the Arch-traytor, after he had asked God and the Queene forgiueneſſe, if euer he had offended her. Then Babington (who neuer ſeemed diſmayed at Ballards execution) whileſt the other turning aſide, prayed on their knees, confeſſed his faults ingenuouſly; and being cut downe from the gallowes, and lying vpon the blocke to be quartered, cryed aloud in Latine; Parce mihi Domine Ieſu. Sauage (the Rope being crackt) fell from the Gibber, and being preſently ſnatcht vp by the executioner, had his members cut off, and was bowelled aliue. Barnwell excuſed his crime out of a pretext of conſcience and Religion. T
                              ••
                           hbourne moſt penitently confeſsing his offence, was much pitied of the beholders: ſo alſo was Tilney a man of modeſt demeanor, & of comely perſonage. Abington
                        ▪ of a furious and turbulent ſpirit, threatneth, that ſhortly there ſhould bee no little blood-ſhed through England.
                     
                     The next day, the other ſeuen being drawne to the ſame place, ſuffered the ſame puniſhment▪ But with leſſe ſeueritie, by the Queenes commandement, who hated the firſt dayes cruelty after ſhe heard it▪ 
                        
                           •
                        or they hung till they were dead, and then were taken downe, bowelled, and quartered. Salisbury was the firſt, who dyed very penitently, exhorting Catholikes, neuer to attempt the reſtoring of Religion by force of Armes Dunne, who vvas next, ſpoke to the ſame effect Next was Iones, vvho proteſted hee had diuers times diſſwaded Salisbury from the enterprize, nor did euer approue the bringing in of foraine inuaſion. Charnock and Trauers
                        
were earneſt in prayer, commending themſelues to God, and to the Saints. Gage acknowledgeth the bountifull fauours of her Maieſtie towards his father; and his owne deteſtable ingratitude by his treachery. Hierome Bellamie, (who had concealed Babington after hee was proclaimed Traytor) confuſed and ſilent, concluded the Tragedy. For, Babingtons brother, being guilty of the ſame, had ſtrangled himſelfe in priſon.
                     After this execution, M. Nauue a Frenchman▪ and Curle,
                        The Queen of Scots her Secretaries examined. both Secretaries to the Q. of Scots, being examined of the Letters, copies of Letters, Notes, and Characters found in the Queenes Cloſet, preſently confeſt, and ſubſcribed, that they vvere their hand-writings, dictated from her to them in French, taken by Nauue, and tranſlated by Curle into Engliſh, and vvritten out in ſecret Characters. Neither denyed they, that they had receiued Letters from Babington, and that they, by her bidding, had written backe to him againe. I will not ſay, that they were hyred to ſay what they did; yet this was plainely to be ſeene by their Letters, and what Curle challenged at that time by Walſinghams promiſe; but he reproued him as vnmindfull of the gracious fauours hee had receiued, ſaying, that hee had confeſſed nothing, but what his fellow Nauue vrging him to, hee could not deny.
                     Preſently after, Sir Edward Wotton is ſent into France,
                        The King of France is aduertiſed. vvho was to certifie the King of all the Conſpiracy, and to ſhew the Copies of the Letters of the Queene of Scots, and of others of the Nobility of England, to teſtifie the truth of the cauſe, that the King might perceiue in what perill the Queen was, by the practices of Morgan, Charles Paget, and others then reſident in France.
                     
                     The Councell could not determine what ſhould be done vvith the Queene of Scots.Sundry opinions how to diſpoſe of the Scottiſh Queene. Some aduiſed not to deale with her too rigorouſly, but to haue her kept 
                           〈◊〉
                         in Priſon, for that ſhee was not the Author of the conſpiracie: but

conſcious: and becauſe ſhe was ſickly, and not likely to liue long. Others were of opinion to haue her put to death by courſe of Law, for feare of endangering Religion. But the Earle of Leiceſter thought it better to diſpatch her with poiſon, and ſent a Diuine to Sir Francis Walſingham, to tel him, that he thought it might lawfully be done. But Sir Fr. Walſingham proteſted that he was ſo farre from conſenting to haue any violence offered her, as that he had diuerted Mortons purpoſe, which was to haue had her ſent into Scotland, and to haue ſlaine her on the Borders. It was argued againe amongſt them, by what Law ſhe ſhould be iudged. Whether by that of An.
                        By what Law ſhee ſhould be iudged. 25 of Edward the 3, (by which, ſuch were held guilty of Treaſon, as conſpired the death of the King or the Queene, which ſhould bring warre vpon their Kingdom, or take part with their Enemies) or by that of Anno 27 of ELIZABETH, which I ſpoke of. But the aduice of thoſe, which thought better of the latter, preuailed: for it vvas made in the caſe, which vvas now to be handled, and therefore proper.Commiſsioners appointed to heare the cauſe. There vvas choſen by Commiſsion, many of the Priuy Councell, and of the Peeres of the Realme, to proceed, by vertue of the Law aboue-mentioned, and to paſſe iudgement againſt ſuch, as had raiſed rebellion, inuaded the Land, or offered violence to the Queene, &c. And behold the words of the Statute, as they are in the originall.

                           
                              A Commiſſion granted to that end.
                           
                           ELIZABETH by the Grace of God Queene of England, France and Ireland, &c. To the moſt Reuerend Father in Chriſt, Iohn, Archbiſhop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitane of England, and one of our Priuy Councell; and to our beloued

and faithfull Tho: Bromley knight,
                              Booke 6. Chancellor of England, and of our priuy Councell; as alſo to our welbeloued and faithfull William CECILL, Baron of Burghley, Lo: high Treaſurer of England, our Priuy Counſellor, &c. Greeting, &c.
                        
The reſt of the Lords Cōmiſſioners names, for breuities ſake, are 
                           William Poulet Marqueſſe of Wincheſter, Edward de Ʋere Earle of Oxford▪ Lo: high Chamberl
                              •
                           ine of England, George Talbot Earle of Shrew
                              •
                           bury Earl Marſhall, Henry Gr
                                 •
                              y Earle of Kent. Henry St
                                 ••••
                              y Earle of Derby, William Somerſet Earle of Worceſter, Edward Manners E. of Rutland, Ambroſe Du
                                 •
                              ley E. of Warwick, Maſter of our Ordnance, Henry Herbert Earle of Pembroke, Robert Dudley E. of Leiceſter, Maſter of our horſe, Henry E. of Lincoln, Charles L. Howard high Admiral of England, Anthony Viſcount Montagu, Henry Cary Barō of Hunſdon, Lo. Chamberlaine of our houſhold, Henry Neuill Baron of Abergaueny, Edward Lord Zouch, Edward Parker L. Morley, Will. L. Cobham, Lord Warden of the cinque Ports, Edward L. Stafford, Arthur Lord Gray of W
                              •
                           lton, Iohn L. Lumley, Iohn L. Stu
                                 •
                              ton, William L. Sands, Henry L. W
                                 •
                              ntworth, Lodowick L. Mordant, Iohn L. Saint Iohn of Bletſo, T
                                 ••
                              mas Sackvill Baron of Buckhurſt, Henry L. Compten, Henry Lo. Cheney, Sir Francis Knolls knight, Treaſurer, Sir Iacob Crofts knight, Cō
                           troller, Sir Chriſt. Hatton Vice-Chamberlaine, Sir Francis Walſingham our Secretary of State, William Dau
                                 •
                              ſon Eſq. our ſecond Secretary, Sir Ralph Sadler knight, Chancellor of our Dutchy of Lancaſter, Sir Walter Mildmay knight, 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           Aym
                                 •
                               Poulet knight, gouernor of our Iſland of ſarſey (all our tr
                              •
                           ſty & beloued priuy Counſellor,) and Sir Chriſtopher W
                                 •
                              ay knight L. chiefe Iuſtice of the Common plees, Iohn W
                                 ••
                              ſey eſq. our Secretary for the Latin, Sir Edmund Anderſon knight, L. chiefe Iuſt. of our Bench, Sir Roger Manwood chiefe Baron of our Exchequer, Sir Thomas Gawdy, and Sir William Pickering.
                         thus inſerted.
                     Then after the rehearſing of the Law, or Act (as wee tearme it) theſe words follow.
                     FOraſmuch as ſince the last Seſsion of Parliament, to wit, ſince the first of Iune, in the xxvij. yeare of our raigne, diuers things haue beene attempted and conceiued, tending to the hurt of our royall Perſon; aſwell by Mary, daughter & heyre to Iames the fift, late King of Scotland and Dowager of France, pretending a title to the crowne of the Kingdome of England: as alſo by diuers other perſons, with the priuitie of the ſaid Mary, according as it hath beene giuen vs to vnderstand. And whereas we intend and determine, that the ſaid Act ſhould in all and by all be well, duely, and effectually executed, according to the forme and tenour of the ſaid Act. And that all the offences in the aforeſaid Act, and the circumstances of the ſame (aboue mentioned) be duely examined, and ſentence, or iudgement, accordingly be giuen, agreeable to the tenour and effect of that Act: We giue to you, or the maior part of you, full and abſolute power, licence and authority, according to the purport and meaning of the aboue recyted Act, to examine all & euery thing and things, tending to the impeachment of our royall perſon, which haue beene practiſed or conceiued, aſwell

by the aforeſaid Mary, as by any other perſons whatſoeuer, with the knowledge and priuity of her, all circumſtances of the ſame (and other forenamed offences whatſoeuer ſpecified, as hath beene aboueſaid) and all circumstances of the ſaid offences, and euery of them. And moreouer, according to the forenamed Act, to pronounce ſentence, or iudgement, according as the matter ſhall appeare to you, vpon ſufficient proofe: And therefore We command you, that yee proceed diligently vpon the foreſaid matters, in maner aboueſaid, vpon certaine dayes and in certaine places, as you, or the maior part of you, ſhall thinke good.
                     
                        Commiſsioners come to her.Moſt part of theſe Commiſsioners met together the 11. of October, at Fotheringham in the countie of Northampton, vpon the riuer Nen, where the Queene of Scotts was then kept. The next day after, the Commiſsioners ſent to her, Mildmay, Sir Ayme Poulet, and Barker publick Notary, who deliuered vnto her the Queenes Letters; which when ſhe had read, with a bold ſpirit and maieſtick countenance, ſhe thus anſwered:

                           
                              She anſwereth the letters vpon the ſudden.
                           IT grieueth me, that my dearest ſister the Queene hath beene ſo badly informed against me, and that after ſo many yeares as my body hath beene ſhut vp, and kept with watch and ward, the many iust conditions which I haue offered for my liberty, haue been neglected, and my ſelfe abandoned. I haue ſufficiently aduertiſed her of many dangers, yet neuertheleſſe ſhe hath not giuen credite vnto me, but alwayes reiected them, though I be the next of her bloud. When a combination was begunne, and an Act of Parliament thereupon made, I foreſaw that what dangers ſoeuer might happen eyther from forraigne Princes abroad, diſcontented perſons at home, or for Religion, would redound

vpon me, hauing ſo great enemies in Court.
                              Booke 3.
                            I might take it ill, to haue my ſonne contracted without my knowledge; but I omit that. Now as touching this Commiſsion, it ſeemeth ſtrange to me, to be arraigned in iudgement like a ſubiect, being an abſolute Queene, not committing any thing preiudiciall to the Queenes royall Maiesty, to any Princes of mine owne ranke and dignitie, or against my ſonne. Mine heart fayleth me not yet, nor will I faint in aduerſitie: I referre me to my confeſsion made to Bromley now Lo: Chancellor, and Baron Lauar: I am ignorant of the Engliſh lawes and Statutes; I haue no Counſellers at law: Who are my Peeres, I know not. My notes and writings are taken from me, and there's none dares mediate for me. I am free from all treſpaſſe against her Maiestie, I haue animated none against her, neither am I to be called into iudgement, vnleſſe it were for ſome word or writing of mine owne, that could be produced against me, wherein I haue recommended my ſelfe and cauſe to ſome forraigne Princes; which I would not deny.
                     
                     The day following Sir Ayme Poulet and Parker, two of the Commiſsioners, repayred to her, who ſhewed her (in writing) her anſwer, and demanded whether ſhe would perſiſt therein: which after ſhe had heard read diſtinctly and truly vnto her, ſhe commended it, ſaying ſhe would.
                     But this (quoth ſhe) was out of my minde,
                           Addeth the next day to her anſwer,
                         that which I would haue added now; that the Queene wrote vnto me, that I was ſubiect to the lawes of England, and to be iudged by them, becauſe I liued vnder their tuition.
                     To which I anſwer:
That I came into England for ayde; and hauing euer ſince beene detayned priſoner, I could neuer enioy the tuition or benefite of the lawes, nor till this preſent had I any to teach them vnto me.
                     
                     
                        In the afternoone, certaine of the Commiſsioners, with ſome learned Counſellers at the Ciuill and Canon Law, came to her. The Chancellor and Treaſurer ſhewed their authoritie by Commiſsion; telling her, That neyther her detayning in captiuitie, nor her Princely prerogatiue, could priuiledge or exempt her from anſwering in the kingdome; gently intreating her, That ſhe would be pleaſed to heare what was obiected: if not, they were to proceed by courſe of Law againſt her, though abſent. She anſwereth,

                           
                              She refuſeth her tryall.
                           She was no ſubiect, and that ſhe would rather dye a thouſand deathes, than acknowledge her ſelfe to bee one, ſeeing that by ſuch acknowledgement, ſhee ſhould preiudice the ſoueraignty of her royall Maiesty, and become lyable to the Lawes of England, yea, in caſe of Religion: notwithstanding, ſhe was ready to anſwere to all things in open Court of Parliament, though ſhee knewe that this Convention was (for formalities ſake) purpoſely continued for the taking away of her life, already condemned in opinion. She wiſheth them to examine their owne conſciences, and to remember, that the ſpacious Theater of the world, was more than the Kingdome of England.
                        
                     
                     Then ſhe began to complaine of ſome iniuries offered her: but the Treaſurer interrupting her, recited fauours which ſhe had receiued from her Maieſtie, namely, that ſhe had puniſhed ſome for impugning the title of her right to England, ſtayed the State when they would haue condemned her for ſeeking to haue married with the Duke of Norfolke, and for conſenting to the rebellion in the North. But when they ſaw ſhe made no reckoning thereof, they departed from her.
                     After a few houres Sir Aimé Poulet and the Sollicitor, preſented the Commiſsion, and the names of the Commiſſioners to her, that thereby ſhe might ſee, they were to proceed by no fraudulent, but a legall courſe in equity. As for

the Commiſsioners, ſhe tooke no exception; but that ſhee excepted againſt, was the ſeuere new Law,Exception againſt the new-made Law. as vniuſt and purpoſely deuiſed againſt her, and vpon which their Commiſſion depended, whereof they could ſhew no preſident: neither would ſhe euer yeeld vnto it. She demanded by what Law they ſhould proceed, Ciuill or Canon? ſaying, they muſt ſend for Interpreters from Padua, Poytiers, and other outlandiſh Academies, becauſe there were none in England that vnderſtood them: adding further, that by the expreſſe words of the Queenes letters, it appeared ſhe ſtood already conuicted of diuers crimes, and condemned before ſhe was tryed; and therefore had no need to come before them to a ſecond hearing: but deſired to be reſolued of ſome ſcruples ſhe had found in the letters, yet would not deliuer them out in writing, becauſe (ſhee ſaid) it became not a Queene to play the Scribe.
                     For this cauſe the ſelected Commiſsioners went again to her, of whom ſhe deſired to know what theſe words meant;
For that ſhe was vnder the Queenes protection.
                     
                     To which the Chancellor made anſwer:
This was eaſie to be vnderstood by any; yet was it not the ſubiects part, to interprete their Soueraignes meaning, neyther were they come for that cauſe.
She likewiſe required them, that they ſhould ſhew forth the Proteſtation, which once ſhe had made. But it was anſwered, That it had not beene allowed, nor ſhould it be now: becauſe it was preiudiciall to the Realme of England. Then ſhe demanded by what authoritie they were to proceed. To whom it was anſwered, By the authoritie of the Commiſſion, and the Ciuill Law of England.
                        But (ſayth ſhe) you make Lawes as you list, and I am not bound to ſubmit my ſelfe to them, ſeeing the Engliſh long ſince refuſed to be ſubiect to the Law-ſalique of France: and that if they would proceed by the Ciuill law of England, they must produce examples,

for that, that Law conſisteth, for the most part, of preſidents and ancient customes. But if by the Canon Law, none but the founders therof ought to be the expoſitors.
Anſwer was made, They would proceed neyther by the Ciuill, nor Canon, but by the Law of England: yet by the Caeſarian and Canon Law both, it was plaine (if ſhe would heare it) that ſhe ought to appeare. She refuſed not (ſhee ſaid) to heare them, by way of diſcourſe, but not iudiciarily.
                     From this ſhe fell into other ſpeeches: That ſhe neuer had any thought to deſtroy the Queene: That ſhe had been forced to endure many iniuries: That ſhe ſhould become a common ſtone of offence (if ſhe were thus ſtil abuſed:) That ſhe had offered to imploy Nauue, for the repealing of the Popes Bull, and that ſhe would ſundry times haue excuſed her innocencie (by letters) but was not permitted: finally, That all the offers of good-will, which ſhe had offered for twentie yeares ſpace, were ſtill reiected. As ſhe ſlipped aſide by theſe prettie digreſsions, they brought her to the point, and intreated her to ſay plainly, whether ſhe would anſwer the Commiſsioners. She replyed;
Their Commiſsion was grounded vpon the new Law, which was made to entangle her; hauing therefore iust cauſe of ſuſpioion, ſhe could not endure it: and hauing alwayes carried a true heart, ſhe would not now treſpaſſe ſo much against the Kings of Scotland, her ancestors, as to acknowledge her ſelfe a ſubiect to the Crowne of England. For what were that elſe, but to proclaim them rebells and traytors? notwithstanding ſhe refuſed not to anſwer, yet by no meanes in the nature of a ſubiect; for that ſhee had rather periſh, than to anſwer as a malefactor.
                     
                     
                        Sir Chriſtopher Hatton perſwadeth her to appeare.Then anſwered Sir Christ
                              •
                           pher Hatton, Vice-Chamberlaine, ſaying:

                           You are accuſed of conſpiracy against our ſoueraigne La: the Queene (an anointed Queene) but not condemned.

You ſay you are a Queen. Admit it: yet are you not of royall estate, neyther by the Caeſarian, Canon, nor Law of nations or of nature, exempt from anſwering in ſuch a caſe. For all iustice would ſwarue, nay ly dead, if ſuch crimes ſhould eſcape vnpuniſhed. If you be innocent, you diſhonour your ſelfe in your reputation, to refuſe to come to iudgement. You protest your ſelfe to be ſo, but the Queene thinkes otherwiſe, yet not without cauſe, to her great griefe; and hath appointed perſons honourable, wiſe and vpright, to examine your innocency, who must heare you with equity and fauour, and will be very ioyfull that you ſhall cleare your ſelfe of theſe crimes. Beleeue mee, the Queene her ſelfe will greatly reioyce: for ſhe aſſured me at my departure, that no greater griefe had euer befalne her, than this of your accuſation: wherefore ſetting aſide this vaine conceit of ſoueraignety, which at this time ſtandeth you in no ſtead, ſhew your ſelfe blameleſſe, attract no more ſuſpicion to your ſelfe by ſubterfuge, but rather wipe away the ſpot, which elſe will ſticke perpetually vpon your reputation.
                           I refuſe not (ſaid ſhe) to anſwer in open Court of Parliament,
                                 Her tergiuerſation.
                               before the States of the Realme lawfully conuecated ſo I may be declared next heir to the crown; or elſe before the Queene and Councell, ſo my proteſtation be admitted, and I acknowledged the Q
                                 •
                              eenes next kinſwoman.
                        
                     
                     The Chancellor asked her, if ſhe would anſwer when her Proteſtation was admitted.
Neuer will I (quoth ſhe) put my ſelfe vnder this new Law, mentioned in the Commiſsion.
Whereupon the Treaſurer concludeth: We will proceede notwithſtanding in the caſe to morrow, be you abſent or obſtinate.
                     Examine (ſaid ſhe) your owne conſcience: reſpect

your credite, and God reward you and your children as you deale with me in y
                           •
                        ur iudgement.
                     The morrow after, which was the 14. of the moneth, ſhee ſent for ſome of the Commiſsioners to come to her, and deſired them that her Proteſtation might be admitted and approued. The Treaſurer asked her, if ſhe would anſwer the Commiſsion, if it were ſimply admitted and recorded in writing,Shee yeeldeth at laſt to appeare and anſwer. without approbation. At laſt ſhe condeſcended, though very hardly, becauſe ſhe would not ſeeme to derogate from her predeceſſors or ſucceſſors. And then ſhe ſaid, that (being perſwaded by Hattons reaſons, after ſhe had thought of them conſiderately) ſhe deſired to purge her ſelfe of the imputed crime.
                     Inſtantly the Commiſsioners came together in the Chamber of preſence; at the vpper end whereof was placed a Chaire of Eſtate for the Queene of England, and in a remote place below, a Chaire for the Queene of Scotts, oppoſite to the other.The maner of the ſitting. By the wals on the otherſide were ſeats; on the one ſide ſate the Lo: Chancellor of England, the Earles of Oxford, of Kent, Derby, Worceſter, Rutland, Cumberland, Warwick, Pembroke, and Lincolne, and the Viſcount Montagu: on the other ſide, the Barons d'Abergaveny, Zouch, M
                              •
                           rley, Stafford, Gray, Lumley, Sturton, Sands, Wentworth, Mordant, S. Iohn of Bletſo, Compton, and Cheny. After theſe, the Knights that were of the Priuy Councell, Cr
                              •
                           fts, Hatton, Walſingham, Sadler, Mildmay, and Poulet. Right ouer againſt the Earles, ſate the two chiefe Iuſtices, and the chiefe Baron of the Exchequer: on the other ſide, the two Barons, the other Iuſtices, Dale and Ford, Doctors of the Ciuill Law: and at a little table in the midſt of the roome, Popham Atturney, Egerten the Queenes Sollicitor, Gaudy Sergeant at Law, the Clerke of the Crowne, and two other Notaries.
                     When ſhe was come and ſet in her place, Bromley Lord Chancellor turning towards her, ſpake to this effect.

                           THe Queenes most excellent Maiesty of England,
                           
                              The Lord Chancellor ſpeaketh to her.
                            being certified (to her extreame griefe of heart) that you haue practiſed the ſubuerſion and ruine of her, the Kingdome of England, and the Religion establiſhed therein: to diſcharge her ſelfe of her duty towards God, her ſelfe and her ſubiects, without any malice of hart, hath appointed theſe Commiſsioners to vnderstand the things you are accuſed of, how you can diſcharge your ſelfe of them, and demonstrate your innocency.
Vpon this, ſhe roſe vp, and ſaid:
She was come into England to craue the ayde that was promiſed her,
                              Her proteſtation
                            and yet euer ſince ſhe had beene kept a priſoner: protesting withall, that ſhe was no ſubiect to the Qu. of England, but a free and abſolute Queene, and therefore ought not to be brought to appeare (vpon any cauſe whatſoeuer) before any Commiſsioner or Iudge, but God the ſoueraigne Iudge of the World; nor would ſhe derogate ſo much from royall Maiestie, or her ſonne the King of Scotts, her ſucceſſors, or other abſolute Princes. But ſhee was now come in preſence, to anſwer what ſhould be obiected, and deſired her ſeruants to beare witneſſe of the ſame.
                     
                     The Chancellor, taking no notice of her being promiſed ayde, anſwered:
That this protestation was vaine,
                              Recorded.
                            foraſmuch as whoſoeuer in England, of what condition or estate ſoeuer, ſhall offend the law, must be ſubiect to the ſame, and be examined and iudged according to the late establiſhed Act. Therefore this protestation (made as it were in preiudice both of the Queene and her Lawes) was not ſufferable.
The Commiſsioners, notwithſtanding, commanded it to be recorded, with the L. Chancellors anſwer. Then the Commiſſion, which was grounded vpon this Law (whereof I

haue ſo often made mention, being openly read, ſhe with great an imoſitie againe reinforceth her former proteſtation, is a thing directly enacted againſt her, and of ſet purpoſe, whereof ſhe charged them vpon their credites. The Treaſurer (hauing anſwered, that euery one in this Kingdom did hold the Lawes, euen the neweſt of all, not to be contradicted) ſaid, That the Commiſsioners ſhould iudge her accordingly, what proteſtation or interruption ſoeuer ſhee made or interiected. In concluſion, ſhe ſaid ſhe was ready to giue attention, and to anſwere any fact againſt the Queene of England.
                     
                     
                        Proceeding.
                        Gaudy expounded the Law from point to point, affirming that ſhe had offended againſt it; and then entring into an hiſtoricall narration of Babingtons conſpiracie, he concluded,
That ſhee had knowne, approued, and conſented to the ſame, promiſed aſsistance, and had ſhewne the way and maner.
To which ſhe anſwered boldly:

                           
                              She denieth the former allegation.
                           THat ſhe neuer knew Babington, nor had receiued any Letter from him, nor written to him, nor attempted the Queenes death: and to make it good, they must ſhew ſome ſigne vnder her owne hand. That ſhee neuer had heard ſpeech thereof, neyther did ſhe know or aſsist Ballard. But ſhe had learned of ſome, that the Catholicks ſuffered great troubles in England, and that ſhee had writ to the Queene, intreating her to haue compaſsion on them. That many perſons, whom ſhe knew not, had offered her their ſeruice, yet ſhe ſtirred not any vp to commit any crime; and being in priſon, ſhe neyther knew of, nor could hinder their practiſes.
                     
                     Moreouer, they inſiſt vpon Babingtons confeſſion, that there had beene entercourſe of letters betwixt them. She confeſſed, that ſhee had had conference, by letters, with diuers,

yet notwithſtanding it followed not, that therefore ſhe was acceſſary to their wicked deſignes. Shee deſired them to ſhew any thing vnder her owne hand, demanding withall, what hurt any had receiued by any letters which came to her for a whole yeare together. Then were the copies of Babingtons letters produced and read to her,Copies of letters ſhewed. deſcribing the plot of the conſpiracy.
                     AS for theſe letters (ſaid ſhe) it may poſsibly be that Babington writ ſo: but let it be proued that I euer receiued them. If Babington or any haue affirmed it, they haue belyed me. Others crimes are not to be cast vpon me. A whole Packet, that had been detained a yeare together from me, about that time came to my hands, but ſent from whom I know not.
                     To proue the receipt of Babingtons letters, there was read the principall points of the letters out of his confeſſion,Extracts out of Babbingtons confeſsion. wherein he voluntarily granted, that ſhe had receiued them, and had written back againe; in which letters was mention made of the Earle of Arundell and his brethren, and of the Earle of Northumberland: which hearing, ſhe wept, & ſaid:
NOw alas, miſerable woman that I am, how many things hath that noble houſe of the Howards endured for my ſake!
And after that, hauing dryed her cheekes, ſhe ſaid:

                           BAbington might confeſſe what he pleaſed:
                              She denieth them.
                            but to ſay, that ſhe had practiſed to eſcape, was a notorious vntruth. That her aduerſaries might (as well as ſhe) get the ſame characters, and write what falſities they would in the ſame: nor was there any probabilitie, that ſhe ſhould vſe the helpe eyther of Arundell or

                           Northumberland for her eſcape, ſeeing the one was a priſoner, and the other a young man, and vnknowne to her.
                     
                     They read alſo the abſtracts of Sauages and Ballards confeſsion,They vrge her with the confeſsions of Sauage and Ballard.
                         importing, that Babington had ſhewed them letters of hers. But ſhe proteſted,
He had neuer receiued any from her. On the contrary, ſhe was ſo farre from conſenting to the inuading of the Realme of England
                           ▪ or giuing counſaile thereto, that ſhe alwayes perſwaded the contrary.
                     
                     Then they ſhewed her letters, wherein ſhe had commended and approued Babingtons proiects. She demanded the ſight of them: which hauing ſeene, ſhe ſaid,
Theſe neuer came from her, but peraduenture from the Alphabet of the letters ſhe had in France. That ſhee had labourd to recouer her liberty, being a thing we all naturally deſire; and to ſundry which had offered her helpe to that end (whom ſhe would not name) ſhe anſwered not a word: yet notwithstanding ſhe heartily deſired, that the perſecution of Catholicks might ceaſe in England, and that ſhe had begged it in loue of the Q. She would not purchaſe a kingdome with the bloud of the poorest ſubiect, much leſſe of the Queene. That many had practiſed dangerous matters vnknowne to her, and that (by letters) ſome had asked her forgiueneſſe for ſo doing, that neuer had ſpoken to her thereof. That any might eaſily counterfeyt the cyphers or characters: as a yong fellow in France (not long ſince) had done, nominating himſelfe the baſe brother of her ſonne, the King of Scotts:
                           
                              She blames Walſingham. and ſhe ſuſpected, this was Walſinghams doing to haue her life, who, as ſhe heard, had practiſed both against hers and her ſonnes. She protested, ſhe had neuer conceiued any thing hurtfull to the the Queene, and that ſhe would more gladly loſe her life,

than to be a cauſe that the Catholicks ſhould be ſo afflicted and cruelly tormented.
And with that there guſhed from her abundance of teares.
                     BVt (ſaid the Lo: Treaſurer) there hath not any beene put to death for Religion, which would become an obedient ſubiect: onely ſome few, for committing treaſon, in maintayning the Popes Bull and authority, against the Queene. Yet I haue heard, ſaid ſhee, the contrary, and haue read as much in printed bookes. The authors of ſuch bookes, replyed he, write alſo, that the Queene is to be depriued of all regall power.
                     Then Sir Francis Walſingham, who was toucht a little before in words, taking his time, ſtood vp; and, hauing proteſted that he carried no ill will in heart, ſaid: 
                           I Take God to record,Walſingham maketh his Apologie.
                            in the place of a priuate perſon I haue done nothing vnbeſeeming an honest man; nor any thing in publike, but that becomes a perſon of my ranke. I must ſay, that out of my zealous care for the Queene, and the good of the Kingdome, I haue been inquiſitiue in diſcouering conſpiracies against her. If Ballard had offered me his ſeruice, I would not haue refuſed it, but rather recompenced him for his paines. If I conſpired with him, why bewrayed he it not, to ſaue his owne life?
This anſwer, as ſhe ſaid, ſatisfied her. And
She deſired him he would not be offended at that which ſhe had heard by report; and that he would no more beleeue her calumniations, than ſhee did his: for theſe pick-thankes are men of little credite, which pretend one thing, and ſay another; and that he would not by any meanes beleeue, that euer ſhe had conſpired the death of her dearest ſister the Queene.
                     
                     And here ſhe brake forth into teares againe, ſaying:
I will neuer make ſhipwrack of my ſoule, by conſpiring

my dearest ſisters death and ruine.
                     
                     The Lawyers anſwered, That would appeare by euidences. This paſt in the forenoone.
                     In the afternoone, to proue this, they produced the copie of the letters which Charles Paget had written,
                           Charles Pagets letters are produced, and Curle one of her Secretaries, teſtified ſhe had receiued, touching conference had with Mendoza and Ballard, for inuading the Realme, and ſetting her at libertie.
                     This, ſhe ſaid, was nothing to the purpoſe, nor any proof that ſhe had plotted the Queenes destruction.
                     
                        and Babingtons,
                        The Lawyers paſsing further, ſaid, That they could proue ſhe had conſpired the Queenes death, by the confeſsion of Babington, and letters of his; wherein he called her his Lady and moſt excellent Queene: as alſo out of thoſe ſhe had written vnto him; And by the way, put her in minde of conſultation had, how the kingdome of England was to be transferred to the Spaniſh King. She confeſſed, that once a Prieſt had viſited her, and ſaid, That if ſhe interpoſed not her ſelfe, her ſonne and ſhe both would be excluded from their inheritance: but ſhe would not name him. He added, That the Spaniard pretended a title to the crowne of England, and would yeeld to none but her. Then they preſſed her vpon Babingtons confeſsion, from the teſtimonies of her Secretaries Nauue and Curle, and letters written interchangeably betwixt them.and the teſtimonies of her Secretaries. And though all the proofe was grounded vpon their bare aſſertions, yet were they neuer brought forth face to face. She confeſt Curle to be an honeſt fellow, but no fit witneſſe againſt her: That Nauue (ſometimes Secretarie to the Cardinall of Lorraine) had beene commended to her by the King of France, and that he might be eaſily drawne for money,She obiecteth againſt their credites. hope or feare, to depoſe falſly; and had bound himſelfe thereto by a raſh oath, hauing Curle (a fellow of a flexible nature) at his command, to write what hee would. And it may be, they had put things into the letters which ſhe dictated not, & poſſibly ſuch letters might come

to their hands, which notwithſtanding ſhe neuer ſaw. Then ſhe broke into theſe or the like ſpeeches:
THe ſtate of all Princes is at a weake ſtay, if they depend vpon the writings and teſtimonies of their Secretaries: for my part, I deliuered nothing to them, but what nature put into my minde for the recouery of my libertie; nor ought I to be conuicted, vnleſſe it be by mine owne words or writing. If they haue written any thing preiudiciall to the queene my ſister, they did it without my knowledge, and therefore let them be puniſhed for their inconſiderate inſolency. I know for certainty, that if they were preſent, they would cleere me in this caſe: and if I had my manuſcripts here, I could anſwer all this particularly my ſelfe.
                     
                     With that the Treaſurer obiected,Arguing about tranſferring the kingdome. that ſhee had determined to ſend her ſonne into Spaine, and to conuey to the Spaniard the right ſhe challenged to the Kingdome of England. Whereto ſhe anſwered:
That ſhe had no kingdome to bestow, yet was it lawfull for her to giue her own at her pleaſure, neyther was ſhe to be accountable to any therefore.
                     
                     And when they obiected further, out of Curles teſtimony, that ſhe had ſent her Alphabet to D. Lodowick and Fernhurſt, ſhe denied not,
But ſhe had written out many of them: and amongst others, that for D. Lodowick, after ſhe had recōmended him and another to the honour of Cardinal. And without offence, ſhe hoped, it was as lawfull for her to haue entercourſe of letters, for the diſpatch of her affayres with people of her own religion, as it was for the Queen with thoſe of another religion.
                     
                     After this, they vrged her againe vpon the euidences of Nauue and Curle, which agreed together: whereto ſhee eyther

replyed as before, or reiected them with a preciſe deniall: proteſting againe, that ſhe neyther knew Babington nor Ballard. With this, the Treaſurer interrupting her, ſaid, That ſhe knew Morgan very well, who had ſecretly ſent Parry to ſlay the Queene, and that ſhe had giuen him an annuall penſion. She ſaid,
She knew not that Morgan had done ſo, but ſhe knew well,
                              She excuſeth her ſelfe for hauing giuen Morgan an annuall penſion,
                            that he had lost all he had for her ſake, and therefore it ſtood with her honour to relieue him: neyther was ſhe bound to reuenge the wrongs done to the Queen by one who had well deſerued from her; yet had ſhe alwayes done her best to diſſwade him from ſuch wicked enterpriſes: ſaying withall, that out of England likewiſe there were penſions giuen to Patrick Gray, and other Scotts,
                              by penſions giuen to the Scottiſhmen.
                            enemies to her and her ſonne.
                     
                     Whereto the L. Treaſurer anſwered:
Becauſe the treaſure of Scotland had beene much impayred, by the negligence of the Regents or Vice-royes, therefore the Queene had dealt the more bountifully with her neere kinſman your ſonne.
                     
                     Then was ſhewed ſome of the letters, which ſhee had written to Inglefield, to the Lo: Paget, and to Bernard Mendoza, touching the forraigne ſupplies: but when ſhe had anſwered that,
That tended not to the ruine of the Queene, becauſe ſome ſtrangers had a deſire to procure her liberty; and that ſhe had manifested plainly enough to the Queene, that they ſought nothing but her freedome:
the matter was prorogued till the next day.
                     On the day following, ſhe reiterateth her proteſtation before mentioned, requiring to haue it recorded, and a copie thereof to be deliuered her: lamenting,
That the most reaſonable conditions, which ſhe had offered the Queene, were ſtill reiected, eſpecially hauing promiſed to deliuer her ſonne and the Duke of Guiſe
                           
Hostages, that neyther by her, nor by her meanes, the Queene nor kingdome ſhould receiue any detriment.
                              She offereth the Duke of Guiſe and her ſonne pledges for her libertie.
                            That ſhe her ſelfe (altogether excluded from all hope of liberty) was now most vnworthily handled, whoſe honour and reputation was called in question by common Lawyers, who, by their contorted arguments, make ſlender circumstances matters of great conſequence; wheras anointed and conſecrated Princes are not ſubiect to lawes, as priuate perſons. Moreouer, whereas the authoritie of their Commiſsion is to examine matters tending to the hurt of the Queens perſon, yet they ſo handled the matter, and ſo wrested their letters of Commiſsion, that they called in question the Religion ſhe profeſſeth, the immunitie and maiesty of forraigne Princes, and the priuate commerce they haue amongst themſelues by writing, and brought her to be arraigned at a Barre like a malefactor, to the preiudice of Maiestie and ſoueraigne dignitie: And this was done to no other end, but to bring her in diſgrace with the Queene, and to ſeclude her from the right of inheritance to the Kingdome.
She called to mind withall,
How Qu. Elizabeth her ſelfe had bin questioned about Wyats rebellion, though ſhe were most innocent: protesting most deuoutely, that notwithstanding ſhe wiſhed the Catholicks welfare, yet ſhee deſired not the procurement thereof by the ſlaughter or bloud of any one. She had rather play the part of Heſter than Iudith, rather make interceſsion to God for the people, than take away the life of the meanest.
                     
                     Expoſtulating the matter, ſhe complained that her aduerſaries had bruited it abroad, that ſhe was of no religion:
Which was that time, ſhe ſaid, when ſhe deſired to be informed of the Religion of the Protestants, but none would vouchſafe her the fauour; a ſigne they had little

care of the ſafety of her ſoule.
Then concluding:
When you haue done all you can (ſaid ſhe) against me, you ſhall aduance your ſelues nothing in your cauſe or hope.
And ſo inuocating God, and appealing to the Princes of her acquaintance, deſired ſhe might haue another day of hearing, and that ſhe might be allowed an Aduocate to pleade her cauſe; and being a Queene, ſhe might be beleeued vpon her royall word:
For it was extreme imprudence in her, to be arraigned before thoſe whom ſhe perceiued to be armed with preiudice against her.
                     
                     To this the Lo: Treaſurer made anſwer:

                           
                              The Lord Burghley anſwereth.
                           FOraſmuch as I repreſent two perſons, the one of a Counſellor, the other of a Commiſsioner, first heare me ſpeake as a Commiſsioner: Your protestation is registred, and you ſhal haue a copie of it. The power which we beare, hath bin impoſed vpon vs vnder the Queens ſignet, and the great ſeale of England, from the which there is no repeale: Nor are we come with any preiudice, but to cenſure according to the rules of Iustice: Nor doe the Lawyers exaggerate the matter, otherwiſe than to make it plainly appeare, wherein you haue offended against the perſon of the Queene. Our authoritie is to heare and examine the matter in your abſence, yet notwithstanding we haue willed you ſhould be preſent, for that wee would not ſeeme to derogate in any thing from your honour: Nor haue wee any purpoſe to obiect against you any thing, but what your attempts haue beene against the perſon of the Queene, or with thoſe with whom ye haue beene confederate. Your letters were read, only to ſhew your practiſing againſt the queenes perſon, and ſuch other things as concerne the ſame; which are ſo intermixt, they cannot bee ſequeſtred:

therefore the letters were read wholly, and not in parts, to extract the particularities of the things you had intreated of with Babington.
                        
                     
                     As he was thus ſpeaking, ſhe interrupted him, ſaying:

                           That the circumstances indeed were probable,
                                 She interrupteth him
                               but not the thing: That her ſincerity depended not vpon her Secretaries fidelity or memory, though ſhe knew them to be ingenuous. Or if for feare of puniſhment, or hope of profite and eſcape, they had confeſſed any thing, it was not to be admitted, for diuerſe good reaſons which ſhe had alleaged before. That the mindes of men are carried away with many paſsions: for her Secretaries would neuer haue confeſſed ſuch things, if eyther profite or ſome other hope had not induced them thereto. That the letters might be directed to others than them they were written to; and that oftentimes many things had beene inſerted that were not dictated. And if her papers had not beene taken from her, or if ſhe had a Secretary, ſhe could more ſoundly haue confuted their obiections.
                           But, ſaid the Lo: Treaſurer,
                              
                                 He proceedeth.
                               they will obiect nothing but ſince the xix. of Iune; and your papers would ſtand you in no ſtead, ſeeing the Secretaries and Babington himſelfe, vninforced by torture, haue confeſſed that you ſent theſe letters to Babington. But if you ſhall deny this, let the Commiſsioners iudge, whether there be more credite to be giuen to your denyall, or their affirmation. But to returne to the point; marke what I denounce as a Counſellor: You haue mentioned many things for the procuring of your liberty, (which haue had no ſucceſſe) and that hath proceeded from your ſelfe or the Scotts, not from the queene. For your Lords of Scotland haue refuſed to deliuer the King of Scotts in hostage: and when last there was a treaty about your liberty, Parry was ſent from Morgan,
                              
your clyent to ſlay the queene. Ah, ſaid ſhee, you are mine aduerſary. I, replyed he, I am aduerſary to all Q. Elizabeth's enemies. But enough of this. Let vs returne to our proofes.
                        
When ſhe refuſed to heare,
Yet we will heare, ſaid he. And I too, anſwered ſhe, in another place, and will defend myſelfe.
                     
                     
                        Letters ſhewed again.Now they read againe her letters to Charles Paget, wherin ſhe certified him, That there was no way left for the K. of Spaine to bring the Low-countries into his ſubiection▪ but by placing a Prince in England to ſerue his turne: And her letters to the Lo; Paget, to haſten the ayde he ſhould ſend for the inuading of England: And thoſe which Cardinall Allen had ſent her, wherein he ſaluted her by the name of Moſt excellent Lady; and certified her, that the matter was recommended to the Prince of Parma. Whileſt they were reading them▪ ſhe ſaid,

                           
                              She interrupteth their reading.
                           That Babington and her Secretaries had accuſed her to excuſe themſelues: That ſhe neuer heard of ſix murtherers, the rest were nothing to the purpoſe. She held Allen a venerable Prelate, and knew no other head of the Church, but the Pope of Rome; neyther could ſhee tell how he, or other ſtranger kings, did ſtyle her: nor could ſhe hinder them (in their letters) from calling her queene of England.
                           
                              Affirmeth her Secretaries were not to be credited.
                            
                           Affirming, that her Secretaries were not to be trusted, for that they had proceeded against her, contrary to the duety and fidelity which they had ſworne to her. That the periured are not to be credited, though they ſweare neuer ſo much: neyther did ſhee thinke their oathes were to be taken in any C
                              •
                           u
                              •
                           t of conſcience, becauſe formerly they had ſworne fidelity and ſilence; neyther were they any Engliſh ſubiects. That Nauue had often written otherwiſe than ſhe dictated, and Curle alwayes that which he told him. That ſhe could beare with their faults 
                              •
                           n all

things, but ſuch as touched her honour. They might alſo confeſſe theſe things for to ſaue themſelues, thinking that in ſo doing, ſhe could not hurt them, and that being a queene, they would deale more gently with her: And that ſhe had neuer heard of Ballard, but of one Hallard that had offered his ſeruice to her; which notwithstanding ſhe refuſed, becauſe ſhe had heard that he had likewiſe proffered it to Walſingham.
                        
                     
                     After this, when they read certaine notes out of letters,She is accuſed againe for tranſporting the Kingdome. She condemnes her Secretaries as periured. which Curle confeſſed hee had written to Mendoza in her ſecret characters, and preſſed her with them, as hauing had a purpoſe to make ouer the title of the kingdome to the Spaniard, and that Allen and Parſons were reſident now in Rome for that cauſe: ſhee proteſting that they had forſworne themſelues, anſwered;
I being a priſoner, without hope of liberty, languiſhing in griefe, and in diſpayre t
                              •
                            performe that which many expected from me, who am n
                              •
                           w in my declining age, and without my health: ſome were of opinion to ſettle the ſucceſsion of the Engliſh Crowne vpon the Spaniard, or ſome other Engliſh Catholick. A booke was ſent me, to declare the Spaniards right, but becauſe I refuſed to receiue it▪ ſ
                              •
                           me were grieued at me. As for the reſt, being at this instant out of all hope of aide from England, I haue reſolued not to reiect that of the Stranger.
                     
                     Vpon that, Sir Thomas Egerton, the Queenes Sollicitor, opened to the Commiſſioners what would become of them,Sir Thomas Egertons (the Q Sollicitors) demonſtratiō. their honours, goods, and children, if the kingdome were ſo tranſported. But the L. Treaſurer anſwered, That could not be, becauſe by the Law the Crowne was hereditarie. Then ask
                           •
                        d he the Queene of Scotts, if ſhe had any more to ſay.
                     She deſired to be heard in open Parliament,She craueſt a hearing i
                              •
                            open Parliament. or in preſence of Queene Elizabeth and her Councell; not doubting but one Queene would haue conſideration of another. Then

riſing vp, with a bold countenance, ſhe conferred apart with the L. Treaſurer, Hatton and Walſingham, about ſome buſineſſe. That being done, they reiourned their meeting together again vntill the xxv. of October, in the Starre Chamber at Weſtminſter. And this is that which I haue gathered from the memories of Ed. Barker, chief Clerke of the Councell, Tho. Wheeler publique Notary, and Clerke of the Court of Canterbury, and other credible perſons, whoſe aſsiſtance I haue had in this.
                     At the time appointed, all the Cōmiſsioners being aſſembled together, except the Earles of Shrewsbury & Warwick, who then were ſick: & Nauue and Curle hauing voluntarily, without hope of future preferment or preſent reward, affirmed & ratified by oath, that all & euery the letters, & copies of letters to fore produced, were moſt true; ſentence was pronounced againſt the Q of Scotland, ſigned and ſealed by the Commiſsioners, and recorded in theſe words:
WIth one vnanimous accord and conſent of theirs,
                              Sentence pronounced againſt her.
                            they pronounce and giue their ſentence and iudgement, which was read aloud, vpon the laſt day, and in the aſsigned place, ſaying, That ſince the end of the aforeſaid Seſsions of Parliament, ſpecified in the ſaid Commiſsion, to wit, ſince the ſaid first day of Iune, in the yeare xxvij. afore mentioned, and before the date of the ſaid Commiſsion, many things haue bin attempted and conceiued against the Realme of England, by Anth. Babington and others, with the knowledge and priuity of the ſaid Mary (pretending that the Crowne of England appertayneth to her) tending to the hurt, death, and deſtruction of the royall perſon of our ſoueraigne La: the Q. that is to ſay, that ſince the first of Iune, Ann. 27. and before the date of this Commiſsion, the ſaid Mary, pretending as aforeſaid, practiſed and conceiued against this Realm, many things tending to the hurt, death and deſtruction of the royall

perſon of our ſaid Lady Q. Elizabeth, against the forme of the Statute ſpecified in the ſaid Commiſsion.
                     
                     This ſentence bred diuers doubtfull opinions amongſt men,Some ſuſpect the credite of the Secretaries. becauſe it was grounded onely vpon the credite of the Secretaries; and they were neuer brought face to face, as was required by the firſt Statute Anno 13. of Elizab. ſome thinking them men of credite, and ſome not. I ſaw Nauue's Apology, which he wrote to the Kings Maieſty in Scotland, 1605. wherein he greatly laboureth to excuſe him ſelfe, proteſting, that he was neyther author nor perſwader to this matter, nor yet the firſt diſcouerer. And that he had neither by negligence nor ignorance fayled in his Or, duety. devoire, but ſtoutly at his death defended the contrary, to all the accuſations brought againſt the Queene his Miſtreſſe: notwithſtanding there are publicke Acts thereof to be ſeene. Now the ſame day the Commiſſioners and Iudges of the Realme, declared,
                           Declaration that the ſentence againſt the Q. of Scotts did nothing preiudice her ſonne. A Parliament held. The baniſhing of traytors confirmed.
                           The States approue & confirme the ſentence and deſire the publication therof.
                        
                        That this ſentence did derogate nothing from the right or honour of Iames King of Scotland: but that he remained and was in the ſame ranke, estate and right, as if it had neuer beene.
                     
                     A few dayes after, the Parliament ſate at Weſtminſter, commenced by certaine authoritie granted by Qu. Elizabeth to the Archb. of Canterbury, the L. Treaſurer, and the Earle of Derby, as her Lieutenants, and that not without example: wherein was confirmed a Proſcription, that the goods & poſſeſsions of the L. Paget, C. Paget, Sir F. Englefield, E. Iones, Chediock, Tichburne, C. Tilney, & other traytors, were adiudged confiſcate. The States of the Realme alſo, after they had by generall ſuffragie and conſent, approued and confirmed the ſentence pronounced againſt the queene of Scotland: all with one accord (by the Lo. Chancellor) preſented a petition to the queene, wherein they deſired, that for the preſeruation of the true Religion of Chriſt, the tranquillitie of the land, the ſecuritie of her perſon, the good of

them all and their poſteritie, the Sentence againſt Mary Q. of Scotland, might be publickly pronounced, according to the tenour of the Law: alleaging reaſons drawne from the dangers ſtirred and practiſed againſt Religion, her own perſon and the Realme, by her who was a mother-nourſe of the Romane Religion, and had ſworn an inviolable accord to extirpate the Religion now eſtabliſhed, and had long ſince laid claime to the Crowne, Q. Elizabeth yet liuing; eſteeming, that (ſeeing ſhe was excommunicated) it was lawfull to conſpire againſt her, and meritorious to take away her life: She had ruinated ſome noble houſes of the land, and had kindled the fire of rebellion in England: That to pardon her, were to deſtroy the people, who much repined at her impunitie, and that ſhe could not be freed from the oath conſpiracie, otherwiſe than by puniſhment: and laſtly, they recited the example of the horrible vengeance of God againſt K. Saul, for not putting Agag and Benadad to death. And this is that which was preſented by the States of the Parliament.
                     Queene Elizabeth with a moſt graue countenance, and 
                           ••••
                        ſticall ſpeech, anſwered to this effect:

                           
                              The Queen anſwereth.THe benefites which God hath beſtowed vpon me are ſo great, that I doe not only acknowledge them with humilitie, but call them to minde with admiration, wanting wordes ſufficiently to expreſſe them. And although there be no mortall aliue more bound to the Almighty, who hath ſo often and ſo miraculouſly deliuered me from eminent dangers; yet am I moſt of all for this, that after hauing gouerned this kingdome now the ſpace of 28 yeares, I doe finde in my ſubiects the ſame, if not farre greater affection, than

when I came firſt to the Crowne: the which entire loue if I ſhould finde to fayle, I might well perhaps perceiue my ſelfe to breathe, but not to liue. And now my life hath bin attempted to be taken away, it grieueth mee moſt, that it was by ſuch a perſon as was of mine owne ſex, eſtate and ranke; to whom I was ſo farre from bearing ill will, that on the contrary, after ſhe had complotted diuerſe matters againſt me, I wrote to her in priuate, that if in any writing ſecretly ſhe would acknowledge them, I would bury them all in obliuion. Neyther would I haue done this to entrap or circumuent her; for I knew already all ſhe could confeſſe: and although the matter was at that paſſe, yet if ſhe had but ſhewed her ſelfe truely penitent, none ſhould haue taken her cauſe (againſt me) in hand. Neuertheleſſe, if only it had concerned mine owne life, and not the ſafegard of my people (without oſtentation be it ſpoken) I would willingly haue pardoned her. If England by my death might flouriſh the more, or gaine a better Prince, I could bee well content to lay downe my life: for I deſire to liue onely for your good and the peoples. Neyther is there any cauſe (I haue ſo ledde my life) why I ſhould deſire life, or feare death. I am not ignorant of the common ſtate of life; I haue obeyed, I haue commanded: I haue had both good & bad neighbours: I haue found treaſon in truſt▪ I haue beſtowed ſome benefites ill, and where I haue done

good, I haue beene badly requited. When I ponder theſe things in minde, I ſee what the condition of the preſent time is, and I foreſee the future, thinking them the happieſt that ſooneſt depart hence. But againſt theſe, and ſuch like, I haue put on a warlike reſolution, that whatſoeuer ſhall happen, death ſhall not ſurpriſe me vnprouided.
                           As touching theſe late treaſons, I will not ſo much preiudice neither my ſelfe, nor the ancient lawes of my countrey in ſuch faſhion, as not to thinke this arch-treaſon to be ſubiect thereto, although this new had neuer bin made; the which (although ſome fauourers of her haue ſuſpected ſo) was not made againſt her, but was ſo far from entangling her, that rather it was an aduertiſement or preadmonition to her, not to come within the danger of it: neuertheleſſe ſeeing ſhe hath now incurred the lawe, it is thought good to proceede againſt her by vertue thereof. But you, captious Lawyers, you are ſo preciſe, ſo curious in the quercks and quidities of law, & to follow the formalitie of it, in ſtead of interpreting the true ſenſe, that forſooth according to the form of proceeding, ſhe ſhould be called to iudgment within the countie of Staffordſhire, there to appeare holding vp her hand at the Barre, to ſtand to the verdict of twelue men, vpon her fact. And is this a braue faſhion of proceeding againſt a Princeſſe? But I haue thought good rather (auoyding ſuch abſurdities) that it was

more conuenient, to referre a matter of ſuch importance to the Peeres and Iudges of the Realme, to be examined. And yet hardly will that ſerue, becauſe all the world haue their eyes vpon vs Princes, as if we were ſet vpon a Stage, and do marke afarre off the leaſt ſpot or blemiſh that is on vs: ſo that we had neede to be carefull, we do nothing vnbeſeeming vs. But you haue by this new law brought me into ſuch a narrow ſtraite, that I am to determine vpon the puniſhment of a Princeſſe my next kinſwoman; whoſe practiſes haue afflicted mee with ſo great griefe, that, not to augment my ſorrowes in hearing it ſpoken of, I did willingly abſent my ſelfe from this Parliament, & not (as ſome thinke) for feare of treachery. Notwithſtanding I will not leaue (although I vſe few words of it) to put this ſecret out of my heart, which I haue ſeene with mine eyes, and read the oath, by which ſome haue bound themſelues to diſpatch me within one moneth. From hence I foreſee your danger in my perſon; and certainly I ſhall be carefull and diligent to repell it. I haue not forgot the combination you haue made for my ſafety, of which I neuer thought before I ſaw it confirmed vnder the ſignes & ſeales of the moſt part of you: & aſſuredly it hath bound me in ſtrict bonds of loue towards you perpetually, who doe affect no greater comfort, than in the loue of you and the common-wealth. But for as much as the matter now in hand, is an example as

important, as rare; I deeme you expect not, that I ſhould reſolue any thing for the preſent: For My manner is, euen in things of leſſe conſequence, to be long in deliberating, about that I muſt once reſolue vpon. I will pray to God Almightie, that he will illuminate My heart, to fore-ſee what is commodious for the Church, the Common-wealth, & your ſafeties. Notwithſtanding, leſt delay ſhould bring danger, you ſhall (as the oportunitie of time will ſerue) vnderſtand My purpoſe. In the meane time, I would you ſhould expect all the goodneſſe from Me, which good Subiects may look for from a good Princeſſe.
                        
                     
                     
                        She deſireth them to find out ſome other remedie.Twelue daies after, when ſhe had more deeply weighed the matter in her minde, ſeeing her ſelfe with many doubts and difficulties variouſly diſtracted, and vnable to counſell her ſelfe; ſhe ſent the Lord Chancellor to the Noble men, and Pickering to them of the Lower Houſe; intreating them to conſider more ſeriouſly of ſo weighty a matter, and to deuiſe ſome more wholeſome remedy, that the Queene of Scotlands life might be preſerued, and ſhe ſecured.
                     
                        Their Anſwer to her.After they had deliberated a long time, and conſidered, that the good or ill of Princes concerneth the Subiects; with one-according voice, they all put on againe the ſame reſolution, which they had before, grounded vpon theſe Reaſons:
THat ſo long as the Queene of Scotland liued, Queene Elizabeth could not bee ſecure, vnleſſe ſhee would become penitent, and acknowledge her crimes; and that ſhee ſhould be kept more ſtraitly, and bound by oath and writing; or that ſhee ſhould deliuer Hoſtages; or that ſhee ſhould depart the

Kingdome. Of her Repentance they had no hope, for that ſhee had beene vngratefull to Queene Elizabeth, who had ſaued her life; and would not ſo much as acknowledge her faults: As for a ſtraiter Guard, her hand-writing, oath, or Hoſtages, they would be all as nothing; for that Queene Elizabeth being dead, all theſe would vaniſh away inſtantly. As for departing the Land (if ſhee were out of it) they feared ſhee would raiſe Armes againſt it.
                     
                     The L. Chancellor, and Pickering the Speaker of the Lower Houſe, declared theſe things at large to Queene Elizabeth; importuning her earneſtly, that the Sentence ſhould be put in execution; ſhewing her,
That if it were iniuſtice to deny the Execution of the Law to the meaneſt Subiect, much more to refuſe to grant it to the whole Body of the People, who with one voice & will demanded it ſo iuſtly.
To which ſhe anſwered:

                           O how weariſome is that way,Her reply to them. where We find nothing but irkſomneſſe whilſt we are going in it, & when tis paſt, vnquietnes? I am troubled this day (if euer the like) whether to ſpeake, or hold My tongue: if I ſhould ſpeak, and not complaine, I deſemble: if I hold my tongue, the paines you haue taken is in vaine: if I complaine, it will ſeeme ſtrange; notwithſtanding, I confeſſe, that My firſt requeſt was both for your ſecuritie, and mine owne: Some other meanes ſhould haue beene found out, than that you now propound: Inſomuch, that I cannot but complaine to you, though not of you; for that I learne by your demands, that My ſafetie dependeth vpon anothers ruine. If any thinke, that I haue purpoſely prolonged the time,

to purchaſe a counterfeit praiſe of clemencie; vndoubtedly they wrong Mee vnworthily, and he that ſearcheth the depth of all inward thoughts, knoweth it well. And greater wrong they doe Mee, if they thinke that the Commiſsioners durſt pronounce no other ſentence for fear of diſpleaſing Mee, or ſeeming to neglect My ſafetie. For either My Officers haue failed Me in their duties, or elſe certified the Commiſsioners, that My will and Command was, That euery one ſhould proceede freely, according as they thought good; and that they ſhould tell Mee in particular, what they purpoſed to publiſh openly. Out of the great affection I bore her, it was, that I would haue ſome other means inuented, to haue preuented this miſchiefe: But becauſe it now clearly appeareth, that I cannot be ſafe, vnleſſe ſhee die; I am touched with a deepe dolour, to ſee that I, who haue ſhewed fauour to ſo many Rebels, wincked at ſo many treacheries, ſhould at the laſt be ſeene to deale cruelly with ſo great a Princeſſe.
                           Since I tooke in hand the managing of this Kingdome, I haue ſeene infamous Libells caſt out againſt Me, as a Tyrant. Much good may it doe the writers: I thought they would ſignifie ſom ſtrange thing, & indeed it was ſtrange to Me, to be taxed of tyranny; I would it were as ſtrange to heare of their impietie. But now, what is it they will not put forth in their writings, when they ſhall know, that

I haue conſented that an executioner ſhall imbrue his hands in the blood of My neereſt Kinſwoman? And in the mean time, I am ſo farre from cruelty, that I would not to ſaue My life, doe her any violence; nor haue I had ſo much care to prolong it, as (in the preſeruing of it) to preſerue hers, & with intolerable griefe, that it cannot be ſo ſtill. I am not ſo ſenſeleſſe, as not to ſee the perils which lye before Me; ſo vnaduiſed, to whet the knif that ſhal cut My throat; nor ſo careleſſe not to reſpect My life: But I thinke with My Selfe, that there are many; which for the ſafeguard of a Prince's life, aduenture their owne; but I franckly confeſſe, I am none of that number. Theſe things haue I often caſt in My minde: But foraſmuch as diuers haue imployed their tongues and pens againſt me, giue me leaue to defend My Selfe as I may, to the end you may ſee what a woman ſhee is, for whoſe well-fare you haue been ſo circumſpect. Certainly I doe well, and with gratitude of heart call your vigilant care to minde, but neuer ſhall be able to giue you condigne thankes, although I ſhould liue as long as euery one of you.
                           So ſoone as I receiued the Scepter, being not vnmindfull of God, who gaue me his grace, I begun my Raigne in his ſeruice, and the Religion wherein I was borne, and haue beene brought vp, and I hope ſhall die. And although I am not ignorant, how many ieopardies haue encompaſſed Mee at

home; and how great Princes, for changing Religion, haue enuied Me abroad, yet haue I not beene moued thereat: For I know, that God, whom alone I reſpect, will defend both Mee and My cauſe. From thence haue ſprung vp againſt Me, ſo many attempts and conſpiracies, that I wonder I liue; but God hath alwaies beene my ſuccour and ſupport, and ſent me aide beyond My expectation. Since that, to proue My ſelfe a Proficient in the Art of Raigning, I haue of long time bethought Mee, what things were fitting for Kings, and haue found, that nothing is more neceſſary, than to be plentifully furniſhed with the predominant Vertues of Iustice, Temperance, Wiſedome, and Fortitude. For the two laſt, which appertaine more properly to men, My ſexe permits Me not to attribute them to my ſelf: but as for the two precedent, and the more mild, I dare ſay (without glorying) I haue with indifferency, conioyned the higheſt with the loweſt. I haue not preferred any vnworthily: Mine eares haue not beene too credulous; nor haue I (before I heard the cauſe) paſt my iudgement raſhly: yet I will not ſay, but many things perhaps haue bin brought by report to me, by ſom too partially affected to the Parties; For the good and wary Prince is often ſold, for that hee cannot heare euery Cauſe. My iudgement (the beſt it could) hath euermore inclined to the Truth; as he which admoniſhed his Friend to make no anſwer, before

he had repeated the Alphabet; ſo haue I done nothing vnaduiſedly.
                           As concerning therefore your Counſels & Conſultations, I acknowledge them ſo elaborate, prudent, and prouident for My conſeruation, iſſued from hearts ſo ſincere, and ſo well-affected to My ſeruice, that it is My part to endeuour with all My power, not to be vnthankfull to men of ſo great demerit. But as concerning your demand, I intreat and charge you, to hold you content with an Anſwer without Anſwer. I commend your Iudgements, and apprehend the reaſons thereof. But excuſe Me (I pray) for that doubtfull perplexitie of thought which troubleth Me. Let the moſt gracious affection which I beare you be acceptable and pleaſing to you; and withall this Anſwer, if ſo be you eſteeme it an Anſwer. If I ſay I will not do your demand, perhaps I ſhall ſay more than I thinke: If that I will; I (whom you would ſo gladly preſerue) ſhall runne headlong vpon mine owne deſtruction. And I thinke (ſuch is your wiſdome) you would not that, if you obſerue ſeriouſly the times, and manners of perſons. After this the Parliament was prorogued.
                           
                        
                     
                     At that time were ſent to the Queene of Scotland,
                        The Q. of Scotland is certified of her iudgment. the Lord Buckhurſt, and Beal, to certifie her, that Iudgement was giuen againſt her; and that it was approued moſt iuſt by Authoritie of Parliament, and that the States had demanded the execution thereof; for Iuſtice, Securitie, and Neceſsitie: And therefore they perſwaded her, that after

ſhe had acknowledged her offences to God & Queen Elizabeth, ſhe ſhould ſatisfie therefore by repentance before ſhe dyed; and to ſhew, that if ſhe liued, the Religion receiued in England could not ſtand. At which ſhe ſeemed to triumph with extraordinary cheerefulneſſe: giuing thankes to God, and reioycing, that ſhe was held to be a worthy Inſtrument, for the re-eſtabliſhing of her Religion in this Iland. Shee did with great feruour and affection deſire a Catholike Prieſt to direct her Conſcience, and to adminiſter the Sacraments; refuſing (vpon the firſt motion) the Biſhop and the Deane, which they recommended to her to that end: And ſhe greatly blamed the Engliſh Nation, ſaying often:
The Engliſh haue many times murdered their Kings: & it is no ſtrange thing, if they do the like to me, who am deriued of their Royall blood.
                     
                     
                        
                           The Ambaſſador of France ſlayeth the publiſhing of the Sentence.
                           Notwithſtanding, it is publiſhed.
                        
                        L'Aubeſpine the Ambaſſadour of France ſtayed the publiſhing of this Sentence: yet by ſuite and ſoliciting of ſome Courtiers, it was publiſhed in the Month of December, with the ſound of a Trumpet thorow the Citie of London, in the preſence of the Maior, the Sherifes, and certaine ſelected Citizens. And Queene Elizabeth proteſted ſeriouſly in the Preface of this publication, that ſhe had beene drawne to it, with great griefe of heart, by a certaine neceſſitie, and the earneſt requeſt of the States of the Kingdome. Notwithſtanding, there were ſome that thought, it was done by a certaine familiar policie incident to women, who ſeeme to doe by compulſion, the thing they moſt deſire.
                     
                        The Queen of Scotland carrieth herſelf with a reſolute courage.The publiſhing of this Sentence of death being declared to the Q. of Scotland, ſhe was ſo far from fainting in courage, or ſeeming diſanimated, that with alacritie caſting vp her eies & hands towards heauen, ſhe thanked God for it, &

getting leaue of her keeper Sir Ayme Poulet, ſhe wrote to Q. Eliza.
                     
                     
                        That She putteth off all malice of minde towards her; giueth thankes to God for this Condemnation,
                              She moues a requeſt to Queen Elizabeth. ſeeing it was his good pleaſure to adde an end to the irkeſome pilgrimage which ſhe had in this life; and deſired her, for that ſhee could not expect any good from ſome hotſpirited Nouators, which held the chiefeſt ranke in England, that ſhe might be beholden to her alone, and no other, for the benefits following:
                        Firſt, that when her Aduerſaries were glutted in her innocent blood, her Body might be carried from thence by her owne ſeruants to ſome ſacred and hallowed ground, there to be buried; and aboue all, into France, where her Mother lyeth in reſt, ſeeing that in Scotland they had offered violence to the dead bodies of her Anceſtors, profaned or ruinated the Churches: and in England, ſhe could not hope for any buriall according to the Catholike ſolemnities, amongst the ancient Kings, both their Anceſtors: And ſo her Body that neuer had reſt ſo long as it liued with her Soule, may haue ſome at laſt after it is parted from it.
                        Secondly, (for that ſhe feared the cloſe tyrannie of ſome) ſhe may not ſuffer her puniſhment vnknowne to the Queene of England, in ſome ſecret place, but in the ſight of her ſeruants, and other people, which may truly beare witneſſe of the Faith which ſhe ſhewed in Chriſt, of her obedience to the Church, and of the end of her life, againſt the falſe rumors which her Aduerſaries may bruit abroad.
                        Thirdly, that her ſeruants may be ſuffered peaceably to depart whither they will; and to enioy the goods ſhe had bequeathed them by her Will. Shee beſeeched her, in the name of Ieſus Christ, to grant her theſe things, and combined her thereto, by their alliance in Blood, by the Ghost and memorie of Henry the ſeuenth,

Progenitor to them both, and by the Princely honour which ſometimes ſhe had. Then ſhe complained, that all her Princely Robes were taken away by the command of the Counſellors. Shee preſageth; their malice will extend to worſe things. Shee added, that if they had ſhewed without fraude or falſhood the papers which they tooke from her, it would clearely haue appeared by them, that nothing had cauſed her vntimely death, but the doubtfull care which ſome had of Queene Elizabeths ſafetie.
                        Finally, ſhe intreated her, to returne her an Anſwer vnder her Hand, touching theſe things. Whether theſe Letters came to the hands of Queene Elizabeth, I cannot ſay.
                        
                     
                     
                        Opinions of the Q. of Scotl. cauſe.As for the reſt, there paſt, according to the diuerſitie of mens natures, diuerſe ſpeeches vpon this matter; not to ſpeake of the declamations and exclamations made by the Clergie pro & contra, which commonly are very ſharpe.
                     
                        In her behalfe.Some weighing the matters in equitie, thought they had handled her too hardly, becauſe ſhe was an abſolute and free Princeſſe, ouer whom God alone had the command, being very neerely allyed in blood royall to Q. Elizabeth; and that being driuen out of Scotland by the rebells, ſhee was no ſooner arriued in England, but Q. Elizabeth promiſed her vpon her Princely word, by Hen. Mildmore, to ſhew her all courteſie, and to welcome her with all royall deeds of hoſpitalitie; yet neuertheleſſe, contrary to this promiſe, impriſoned her, and violated theſe ſacred rights. That ſhee could not be held but for a priſoner of warre, and to ſuch it was lawful to practiſe any meanes for their libertie and freedome. That ſhe could not commit treaſon, becauſe ſhe was no ſubiect: and that none hath power ouer his equall. That, that had diſanulled the ſentence of the Emperour againſt Rob. King of Sicily, becauſe he was not ſubiect to his Empyre. That if Embaſſadors, which 
                           ••
                        e but Princes ſeruants, ſhal haue conſpired

againſt thoſe to whom they are imployed in Embaſſage, are not culpable of treaſon, much leſſe the Princes themſelues: and that the will ought not to be puniſhed, vnleſſe it take effect. That it was a thing neuer heard of, for a Queene to paſſe vnder the hands of a common executioner. That ſhe was condemned contrary to the law of God, the Romane Ciuill Law, and the Engliſh; yea, euen againſt the Statute of the Parliament Anno 13. of Elizabeth, whereby it was ordained, That no perſon ſhould be called into iudgement for hauing attempted the ruine of the Prince, but vpon the teſtimonie and oath of two lawfull witneſſes, who ſhould be brought face to face before the accuſed; and in her trial no witnes was produced againſt her, but ſhe was condemned from the teſtimony of two Secretaries abſent. They diſcourſed diuerſly alſo of the credite that was to bee giuen to domeſtick ſeruants, being priſoners: They much commended the ſpeech of Adrian the Emperour: Testibus, non testimonijs credendum, That wee ſhould rather truſt the the witneſſors, than the witneſſes. Others priuately complained, that Spyes or Intelligencers had beene ſuborned, who by forgerie, falſe letters, and deceitfull ſleights had deluded this Princeſſe expoſed to iniuries, had preuented her purpoſes, encouraged her to bad matters, of which ſhee had not ſo much as once thought, had ſhe beene kept as was requiſite, and if ſuch fraudulent Machinators had not beene put to her to that purpoſe. That it hath beene a familiar thing in all ages, for thoſe that are enuyed by Courtiers, euen againſt their wills to be brought into treaſon, and to heape more dangers (more treacherouſly▪) vpon the innocent, being once reſtrained of liberty.
                     Others thought that ſhe was not a free and abſolute Qu.Againſt her. but only titulary, becauſe ſhee had forſaken her kingdomes gouernement, and was vnder the protection of the queene of England, ſo ſoone as ſhe was come within the kingdome: and as in doing well ſhe had taſted the benefite of the Law,

ſo in doing ill, ſhe was ſubiect to the rigour thereof; according to the Lawyers Maxime:
He deſerueth no benefite of the Law, which treſpaſſeth againſt the Law.
Otherwiſe the condition of a ſtranger-king, offending within the countrey of another, ſhould be better than of him which raigneth well: That ſhe was a ſubiect temporally, but not originally; becauſe that in reſpect of regall authoritie, there cannot be two abſolute Princes together in one Kingdom: That by the common receiued opinion of Lawyers,
The king out of his Territories is a priuate man, except in expedition of warre: and therefore can neyther conferre nor exerciſe the royall Rights.
Beſides that, that ſhe had loſt her ſoueraignety of Empire by her treſpaſſe: and that thoſe which are ſubiect to a King by reaſon of domicile, may commit treaſon. As touching the parentage, there is no neerer kindred than our country; for that it is a ſecond Diuinity, and our firſt and greateſt parent. As touching the promiſes of the duties of humanitie and hoſpitalitie, theſe are no priuiledges to commit euills vnpuniſhed: That promiſes are to be vnderſtood ſo long as things remain in the ſame eſtate, and are not changed. That he which hath committed a crime, deſerueth not to enioy any promiſed ſecurity, and the rights of hoſpitalitie as ſacred: but our countrey is more ſacred. That the Prince, no more than the Pope, neuer bindeth his hands, and that all Princes are more neerely obliged to their Cōmon-wealths, than to their promiſes. That if they ſhould proceed with her, as with a priſoner in warre, they obiect I know not out of what author,

                           That onely captiues are to be pardoned, from whom we can ſuſpect no disturbance of the peace; and no others.
And that euery one hath power ouer his equall, alwayes and when the equall ſubmitteth himſelfe to his iudgement, eyther expreſſely by word, or ſecretly by contract, or elſe by offending within his iuriſdiction. That the Pope had cut off the ſentence giuen by the Emperour againſt Rob. King of Sicily, becauſe the fact was not committed within the Emperours dominions, but within the Popes. That by the law of Nations, Ambaſſadors haue beene ſo fauoured for the neceſsity of their Ambaſſages, as not to be violated: but Kings which treſpaſſe in the countrey of another, haue no ſuch graunt. Finally, that in matter of treaſon, the will, though wanting effect, is puniſhable: and to practiſe the death of the Prince, nay to know of the practice, & to conceale it, is held for treaſon. That many Kings haue beene condemned and puniſhed, as namely Reſcuporis of Thrace, by Tiberius, Licinius & Maximinianus by Constantine the great, Bernard of Italy, Conrade of Sicily, &c. And that which is the ſumme of all, The ſoueraigne Law is the ſafetie of the people: now no law more ſoueraigne, than the welfare of the Common-wealth. And that Iupiter himſelfe made this law, That whatſoeuer is for the commodious good of the Common-wealth, is lawfull and iuſt. On the contrary, that the Biſhops of Rome haue put to death ſome Eccleſiaſticall Princes, not for the ſafeguard of the Common-wealth ſo much, as for their owne particular: as Boniface the eightth put to death Celestine the fift, depoſed from the Papacy, fearing that he ſhould be called againe, becauſe of his ſingular piety: Vrban the ſixt, who cauſed fiue Cardinalls to be ſewed vp in ſackes, and caſt into the Sea, beheaded ſome, and two others he cauſed to be baked in an Ouen; and for the more terror, commanded they ſhould be laid on Mules, and carried about the countrey. Moreouer that Secretaries are not to be held for ſeruants, and that domeſtick witneſſe is to

be admitted for proofe of ſecret things done in the houſe. And it was argued vpon, whether the accuſers which haue ſworn voluntarily, and thoſe which are ſuſpected of crimes, ought to come face to face in criminall matters, to maintain the accuſation. Laſtly, That there is no ſuch perfect example, but hath ſome thing in it which is not iuſt. Theſe, and ſuch like, are the matters which then were debated.
                     
                        The Q. of Scotland's ſonne intercedeth for her.In the meane time the K. of Scotland, for the remarkeable deare loue he bore his mother, laboured with all his power, by the imploimēt of W. Keith, to ſaue her; omitting nothing beſeeming a good & vertuous ſonne: but without ſucceſſe, becauſe the Scots were diuided into factions amongſt themſelues,Some Scots againſt her. & more fauoured Q. Elizabeth, than their priſoned Q. inſomuch that ſome of them by priuate letters ſollicited Q. Elizabeth to haſten her puniſhment: and that the Miniſters of Scotland, being commanded by the King to pray to God in the Churches for his mother, they obſtinately refuſed ſo to do, for the hate they bore the Religion which ſhe profeſſed.The K. by letters and meſſages. And though the King had formerly beene earneſt (by meſſages and letters) with Q. Elizabeth in his mothers behalfe, yet then he became more inſtant; complayning,
That it was moſt vniust, that the Nobles, the Counſellors and ſubiects of England ſhould giue ſentence against a Queene of Scotland, borne of the Engliſh blood; and as vniust alſo but to thinke, that the States of England can by authority of Parliament exclude the true heyres from the right of ſucceſsion, and their lawfull inheritance.
The which ſome did often threaten, to cauſe the more terrour.
                     He ſent alſo Patrick Gray and Robert Meluin, to delare to Q. Elizabeth,
                        That the great proximitie which was betwixt them, would not let him beleeue, that ſhee would violate that renowned reputation, which ſhee from all parts had purchaſed by her vertues; and eſpecially by her mercifulneſſe,

which ſhee had reſerued vnstained with any ſpot of cruelty; and that ſhe would by no meanes now defile it in his mothers blood, who was of the ſame princely dignity, parentage, and ſexe: whom he (becauſe his mothers blood had ſo great an interest in him) could not forſake, nor leaue to the cruelty of thoſe, who had ſo long breathed after his death, as well as hers.
                     
                     After he had by other letters ſhewed at large, with what heauineſſe of heart, and doubtfull perplexities he was afflicted, by reaſon of this weighty buſineſſe, which touched and bound him in nature and honour, and into what extremities of diſtreſſe and danger his reputation was like to fall among his ſubiects, if any violence were offered to his mother; theſe things he propounded to her ſerious conſideration,And propoundeth ſome things conſiderable. drawne from the inward ſenſe of his ſorrow and filiall affection:
How greatly it concerneth his honour, being a King and ſonne, if his dearest mother (who was alſo an abſolute Princeſſe) ſhould dye an infamous death, and that by her commandement who was the next in league of loue and conſanguinitie. Whether by the word of God any thing may iustly be enacted by law against thoſe, whom God hath establiſhed for the administration of iustice; whom be vouch ſafeth to call gods vpon earth, whom he hath anoynted, whom he hath forbid to touch, becauſe they are his anoynted, and whom he will not permit to ſuffer wrong vnreuenged. How monſtrous a thing were it that an abſolute Prince ſhould be ſubiect to the cenſure of ſubiects: How prodigious, that an entyre Prince ſhould leade the way, to giue ſuch a detestable example, to prophane the diadems of others: What ſhould inforce her to this bloody cruelty? Honour, or profit? If honour, then might ſhe acquire more and greater in pardoning; for ſo (to her eternall glory for her clemency) ſhould ſhe binde to her for this benefite, both Him and

all the Kings of Christendome, whoſe affection otherwiſe ſhe ſhould loſe, together with her reputation, and brand her ſelfe with the marke of cruelty. If profite, it is to be conſidered, whether any thing can be accounted profitable, but that which is iust and honest. And then concluded, in deſiring her to ſend ſuch an anſwer by his Ambaſſadors as ſhould be welbeſeeming ſo pious a Princeſſe, and not vnworthy for ſuch a King as was her most affectionate kinſman.
But theſe Ambaſſadors, intermingling tempeſtiue menaces with their meſſages, were not pleaſing: and ſo taking their leaue, ſome few dayes after returned back, carrying with them as little comfort as hope.
                     
                        As the K. of France did by his Ambaſſadors.
                        Pomponius Bellieure, ſent for this cauſe from the King of France, had acceſſe to the Q. of England, (accompanied with l'Aubeſpine de Chasteauneuf the ordinary Ambaſſador) and hauing giuen her to vnderſtand how many contrary thoughts had troubled the K. of France; on the one ſide, for the ſingular affection which he bore her; on the other, for the neere alliance of kindred which was betwixt him and the Q. of Scotland: propounded to Q Elizabeth at two ſeuerall times in writing, theſe and the like things, viz.
                        
                           
                              Bellieures reaſons for the Qu. of Scotland.
                              That it neerely concerned the K. of France, and other Kings, that a free Queen and abſolute Princeſſe ſhould not be committed to death.
                           That the ſafetie of Queene Elizabeth would be in more danger by the death of Mary, than by her life, and that being ſet at libertie, ſhe could not attempt any thing against the Queene of England, becauſe that her want of health did promiſe no long life.
                           That ſhe had arrogated to her ſelfe the Kingdome of England, was not to be imputed (as a crime) ſo much to

her, as to that ſhe had learned in her youth of naughty Counſellors.
                           That ſhee came into England as a ſuppliant, and therfore ſhe could not be iuſtly detained, but was at the last to be releaſed eyther for money or mercy. And beſides, that an abſolute Prince ought not in any ſort to be brought to arraignement: which made Cicero ſay, that it was a thing neuer heard of, that a K. ſhould bee called in queſtion, of accuſed of any capitall crime.
                           
                           That if ſhe were innocent, ſhe ought not to be puniſhed: if culpable, ſhe ſhould be pardoned, becauſe that would redound to the greater honour and profite, and would remaine an eternall example of the Engliſh clemency. Alledging to this purpoſe the Hiſtory of Porſenna, which drew out of the fire the right hand of M. Sceuola, who had conſpired his death, and let him go.
                           That the firſt precept to raigne well, is to ſpare blood: that blood cryeth for blood, and to be ſeuere vpon her, cannot but ſeeme a thing cruell and bloody.
                           That the K. of France would endeuour ſeriouſly to diſſolue the deſignes of thoſe, which conſpired againſt Queen Elizabeth, and that the Guiſes (the Queen of Scotland's kinſmen) ſhould ſwear and ſubſcribe to do the ſame, who would take it very grieuouſly if ſhe were put to death, and perhaps, would not ſuffer it vnreuenged.
                           Finally, they required ſhe ſhould not be handled with ſuch rigorous and extraordinary iudgement: for if ſhee were, the King of France could not but take it as a moſt grieuous offence, howſoeuer the other Princes tooke it.
                        
                     
                     
                        To euery one of theſe Articles, anſwer was made in the Margent,Anſwers to his Reaſons That the Queene of England hoped, that the moſt Chriſtian king of France made no leſſe reckoning of her, than of the Queene of Scotland, who had practiſed her deſtruction, ſhe being an innocent Princeſſe, her neere Kinſwoman, and in league of Alliance with the King of France: That it is expedient for Kings and their Countries, that wicked actions be not left vnpuniſhed, eſpecially againſt Princes.
                     
                        That the Engliſh, who acknowledge Queen Elizabeth the ſole Supreame Gouerneſſe of England, cannot at once acknowledge two Soueraignes, free and abſolute Princes; nor any other whilſt ſhe liued could participate in equalitie with her: Neither could ſhe perceiue how the Queene of Scotland, and her Sonne, which then raigned, could be held at once for Soueraigne and abſolute Princes.
                     
                     
                        Whether that the ſafetie of Queene Elizabeth be expoſible to greater perils, ſhee being put to death, ſeeing it dependeth vpon future contingencie: That the Eſtates of England, hauing well weighed this point, are otherwiſe conceited: namely, That whilſt ſhee liueth, there will alwaies be new plots of miſchiefe breeding; eſpecially, becauſe it is now come to that iſſue, that there is no hope left for the one, if the other be not extinct: and this ſaying ſhould often preſent it ſelfe to her mind; Either I ſhall diſpatch her, or ſhee me. And the leſſer time her life ſhall laſt, the more celeritie will the Conſpirators vſe, to execute their plots.
                     
                     
                        That hitherto ſhe would neuer renounce her claime and challenge to the Engliſh Crowne, and therefore was for iuſt cauſe to be detained in priſon, and detained muſt be, till ſhe renounce it, although ſhe came to England for ſuccour and ſupport. And for what cauſe ſoeuer ſhe was put in priſon, ſhe is to be puniſhed for the faults ſhe hath cōmitted ſince the time of her impriſonment.
                     
                     
                        That the Queene of England had pardoned her before, when ſhee was condemned of all the Eſtates, for conſenting to the Rebellion in the North; the which was raiſed, to haue made the

Maryage betwixt her and tbe Duke of Norfolke: and to pardon her againe, were imprudent and cruell mercy. That none are ignorant of that Maxime of the Lawyers: An offender found within the Territorie of another, is to be puniſhed, where he is found to haue committed the fault, without reſpect of Dignitie, Honour, or Priuiledge. And that the ſame is permitted as well by the Lawes of England, as alſo by the examples of Licinius, Robert King of Sicilie, Bernard King of Italy, Conradine, Elizabeth Queene of Hungary, Ioan Queene of Naples, and of Deiotarus, for whom Cicero pleading, ſaid: It is not a thing vniuſt, though vnuſuall for a King to be arraigned. His very words are theſe: Primùm dico pro capite, fortuniſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Regis, quod ipſum etſi non iniquum eſt, in tuo duntaxat periculo: tamen eſt ita inuſitatum, Regem capitis reum eſſe, tante hoc tempus non ſit auditum.
                     
                        That ſhee that hath beene found guiltie by a iuſt Iudgement, ought to vndergoe puniſhment; foraſmuch, as that which is Iuſt, is Honeſt; and that which is Honeſt, is alſo profitable.
                     
                     
                        That the Hiſtory of Porſenna hath no alluſion to the matter in queſtion, except it were to be thought, that there are a great number yet behinde, of them, which conſpire againſt Queene Elizabeth; and ſo could perſwade her out of feare and ſome little reſpect of honour, to diſmiſſe the Queene of Scotland, without putting her to any paine; as Porſenna paſt off Mutius, after Mutius had told him, there was yet 300. more of his Fellow-Confederates, which had ſworne his death. Beſides, that Mutius ſet vpon Porſenna in open warre, and aſſured himſelfe, that by ſending Mutius away, he was out of all danger.
                     
                     
                        That blood is to be ſpared, but that is innocent blood: That God hath ſaid, Blood cryeth for blood, it is true; and that France both before the Maſſacre of Paris & ſince cā teſtifie this.
                     
                     
                        That puniſhment by death, iuſtly inflicted, cannot be accounted bloody, no more than a wholſome medicine, can be deem'd hurtfull.
                     
                     
                        Howſoeuer the Guiſes, the Queene of Scotlands Couſens reliſh it, Queene Elizabeth hath more nearer cauſe to reſpect her

ſelfe, her owne ſafetie, her Nobilitie, and the good of her People, on whoſe loue ſhee wholly dependeth, than the diſcontent of any other whoſoeuer: And that the matter was now at that point, that the old Prouerbe of the two Princes, Conradine the King of Sicilie, and Charles the Duke of Anjou, might be vſed, and truly ſaid, of theſe two Queens,
                        THE DEATH OF MARY, THE LIFE OF ELIZABETH: And THE LIFE OF MARY, THE DEATH OF ELIZABETH.
                        
                     
                     
                        The promiſes of the French King, or the Guiſes, cannot ſecure the Queene of England, nor the Realme of aſſured ſafetie: much leſſe make amends for her death, if ſhe be made away.
                     
                     
                        That the French King cannot diſcouer, or keepe in the plots of Treaſon, which are practiſed againſt him in his owne Country; much leſſe this againſt the Queene of England; for that Treaſon is cloſely carryed, and therefore ineuitable. And if the wicked act were once committed, what good would come on it to claime their promiſes? How can the life of an incomparable Prince, after death be repaired? and what redreſſe can be found out for the Common-wealth, (failing with her) in this ſad confuſion of all things?
                     
                     
                        That the hand-writings, or oathes of the Guiſes can be of no great moment; for that they hold it a meritorius matter to put to death the Pope of Romes Aduerſaries, and may eaſily haue a diſpenſation of their oath. And when Queene Elizabeth ſhall be ſlaine, and the Queene of Scotland, which is of the Houſe of the Guiſes, aduanced to the Royaltie, who is he will accuſe them for her death? or if they ſhould be accuſed, that can bring her to life againe?
                     
                     
                        But in that the Ambaſſadours haue ſaid, That the Iudgement was rigorous and extraordinary; they haue ſpoken indiſcreetly (for they ſaw neither the proceedings of the buſineſſe, nor heard the proofes) and haue with too much aſperitie reprehended the

Eſtates of the Realme of England, being Perſonages of chiefeſt note in the Kingdome, for nobleneſſe of Birth, Vertue, Wiſedome, and Pietie. Yea, and that they haue altogether deliuered theſe ſpeeches from the King of France, to terrifie the Queene of England, and the Eſtates of the Land. That the Engliſh are not wont to feare the Frenchmens menaces, nor can theſe diuert them, from prouiding how to ſettle their State in ſecuritie, Foraſmuch as the Ambaſſadours, in the meane time, haue not made any demonſtration or mention, how to preuent the imminent ieopardies, and dangers hanging ouer Englands head.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     THE NINE AND TWENTIETH YEARE OF HER RAIGNE, ANNO DOM. M.D.LXXXVII.
                     
                        AS men thus (according to the varietie of their apprehenſions) diſcourſed buſily, and at large of theſe matters, as they were led either by enuy or affection: D' Aubeſpine the Ambaſſadour for France in England, who was of the Faction of the Guiſes,
                        The Ambaſſadour of France attempteth Queene Elizabeths life. thinking, that if he could not by Arguments or Reaſons deliuer the Queene of Scotland, yet would he by ſome miſchieuous craft: Treateth priuatly, and firſt with one William Stafford, a young Gentleman, and apt to conceiue ſtrange hopes, whoſe Mother was one of the Ladies of Honour, and his Brother Leger in France, about the killing of Queen

                        Elizabeth. At firſt he dealt with him vnder-hand, but afterwards more plainely by his Secretary Trappe, who promiſed him, if he performed it, that he ſhould haue thereby, nor only great glory, and a large ſumme of money; but alſo exceeding fauour from his Holineſſe the Pope of Rome, the Guiſes, and all Catholikes. Stafford, as loathing ſuch a monſtrous miſchiefe, would not be the Actour thereof; but notwithſtanding, notifyed to him one Modey, a fit fellow to be imploed in matter of murther, & one who would diſpatch it though neuer ſo bloody, for money. This Modey was a priſoner in London; to whom Stafford made it knowne, that the French Ambaſſadour deſired to ſpeake with him. He anſwered, that he deſired the ſame, if he were out of Priſon; intreating him in the meane time, to ſpeake with Cordalion, the Ambaſſadours vnder-Secretary, who was his familiar friend. The morrow after, was ſent to him Trappe and Stafford; which Trappe (Stafford going apart) grew into talke with Modey, how and by what meanes they might kill Q
                           •
                        eene Elizabeth. Modey aduiſed to haue it done by poyſon, or by bringing priuately into the Queenes Chamber, a barrell of Gun-powder, to be ſecretly ſet on fire. But this liked not Trappe, who deſired a reſolute fellow, which feared nothing, ſuch a one as the Bourgoignon, which had ſlaine the Prince of Orange.
                     
                     
                        Stafford had quickly reuealed this to the Councell:
                           Stafford diſcouereth the enterpriſe to the Coū
                           cell. And Trappe (now preparing himſelfe for France) is apprehended, and being examined, confeſſeth all the matter. Hereupon, the twelfth of Ianuary following, the Ambaſſadour was ſent for to the Houſe of Cicile, whither he came about euening, where there was preſent at that time, by the commandment of the Queen, Cicile the Baron of Burghley, Lord High Treaſurer of England; the Earle of Leiceſter, Sir Chriſtopher Hatton, Vice-Chamberlaine to the Queens Maieſtie; & Dauiſon, one of her Maieſties Secretaries: who declared, that they had inuited him thither, to acquaint him with the

cauſe, why they had ſtayed his Secretary Trappe, being bound for France; and ſo diſcourſed to him the whole matter, as Stafford, Modey, and Trappe themſelues had confeſſed; and had cauſed them to be brought in, to teſtifie the ſame before his face. The Ambaſſadour (with great impatience) bending his browes, and ſtanding vp, ſaid: That he (being the Kings Ambaſſadour) would not abuſe his Master the King of France, or preiudice other Ambaſſadours in that kinde, to be a hearer of Accuſations, be what they will. But they hauing anſwered him, that theſe things were not produced as accuſations againſt him; but to let him perceiue that they were neither falſe nor faigned: and, to the ende hee might take occaſion to conuince Stafford of Calumnie the more freely; hee became quiet. But ſo ſoone as Stafford came in, and had begun to ſpeake; he interrupting of him, in rayling manner, ſwore: That Stafford had firſt mentioned the matter,
                        The Ambaſſadour denieth it. 
                        and that he had threatned to ſend him bound hand and foote, to the Queene of England, if he would not giue ouer that buſineſſe; and that at that time he forbore him, for the loue and affection he had to his Mother, his Brother, and his Siſter. Stafford falling on his knees, proteſted many times vp on his Saluation, That the Ambaſſadour had firſt broken the matter to him. The Ambaſſadour then more moued than before, Stafford was commanded forth, and Modey not permitted to come in.
                     
                        The Ambaſſadour mildly rebuked.Hereupon the Lord Burghley, out of his owne words, and Trappe his Confeſſion, reproued him, but ſomewhat gently, for this intended miſchiefe. The Ambaſſadour anſwered;Whether an Ambaſſador be to diſcouer the attempts, if he know any to be committed againſt the Prince to whom he is ſent. 
                        If he had beene guiltie, or acquainted with the matter, yet as being an Ambaſſadour, he was not bound to reueale it to any but his owne King. Burghley anſwering, ſaid; Admit it be not the part of an Ambaſſadour (which yet is a matter queſtionable) to diſcouer ſuch matters, but only to their owne King, when the life of a Prince is in hazzard: yet it is the part of a Chriſtian to preuent ſuch enormities, as touch the life of a

Prince; nay, of any priuate Chriſtian. This he ſtoutly denied, and withall recited an example of a French Ambaſſadour, not long agone in Spaine, who knowing of a treacherous practiſe againſt the King of Spaine, although it concerned his life; yet diſcouered it not to him, but to his owne King: for which he receiued great commendation, both of his King and of his Councell. But the Lord Burghley very grauely admoniſhed him, hereafter to haue a care how he offended her Maieſtie, and not to forget his duty, and her Maieſties mercifulneſſe, which was loath to offend the good Ambaſſadours, by puniſhing the bad: neither was he all this while exempt from the fault, though freed from the puniſhment.
                     From this attempt, ſuch as were the ſworne enemies of the Queene of Scotland, and ſought to doe her hurt, tooke occaſion hereby to haſten her death; knowing that in extreame danger of ſafetie, Feare leaueth no place for Mercy, and tooke order (the more to terrifie the Queene of England) to ſpread rumorous ſpeeches daily, and falſe and fearefull exclamations all ouer the Land; to wit:
That the Spaniſh Fleet was already landed at Milford-Hauen; That the Scots were come vpon their borders; That the Guiſe was in Eſſex with a mighty Armie; That the Queene of Scots had broken priſon, rayſed a great troope of Souldiers, and began to make a Rebellion in the North; That there were new plots in hand, for murthering the Queene, and to burne the Citie of London; yea, That the Queene of England was dead,
and ſuch like: which in thoſe that are crafty and fearefull (by a natural deſire) are nouriſhed, and encreaſed; and Princes (credulous by curioſitie) will ſoon lend their eares thereunto.
                     By ſuch divulged horrors, and fearefull arguments, they brought her Maieſtie into ſuch trouble and perplexitie of minde, that ſhe ſigned the Letters of Warrant to her deadly Sentence, and was perſwaded moſt of all to it, by Patricke

Gray Scottiſhman, whom the King of Scotland had ſent to diſſwade the Queene of England, from putting his mother to death:But Gray the Scot, more. who many times put theſe words into her eares; Mortua non mordet: Being dead, ſhe will byte no more.
                     
                     And notwithſtanding, as ſhe was naturally ſlow to anger, ſhe had this cuſtome,She weigheth theſe buſineſſes. that ſhe neuer would enter vnaduiſedly, or without premeditation, into any action: ſo ſhe began to weigh in her minde, whether it were better to put her to death, or to let her liue. From putting her to death, ſhe was diſſwaded,
By her owne naturall clemency, not to vſe cruelty to her who was a Princeſſe and her next kinſwoman; from the feare that ſhe had, Histories ſhould make her infamous to posterities, and from the dangers which might fall vpon her, as from the part of the King of Scotland, who then was the next in ſucceſsion to the Crowne of England: ſo alſo from the Catholick Princes, and from deſperate people, who would attempt any thing.
From pardoning of her likewiſe, ſhe foreſaw no leſſe danger to enſu
                           •
                        ;
That the Nobility which had giuen the ſentence against her, would couertly ſeeke to regaine the fauour of her and her ſonne; and that could not be done without danger to her ſelfe. That her other ſubiects would take it ill, when they perceiue their labour to be lost; and though then they were carefull for her welfare, yet hereafter they might grow careleſſe: and that many would change their religion, and become Popiſh, vpon a ſuppoſition of greater hopes, ſeeing her preſerued, as it were by fatall prouidence, to inherite the Kingdome of England. That the Ieſuites and Seminaries, whoſe eyes were all cast vpon her, ſeeing her ſickly, and not like to liue long, would be ſo much the more buſie to procure the death of Q. Elizabeth, to ſet vp their religion.
                     
                     
                        Her Courtiers alſo ceaſed not to ſuggeſt theſe and the like things, vnto her: The Courtiers perſwade her,
                        Wherefore ſhould you pardon ſo monſtrous a malefactor, being already iuſtly condemned; who, after ſhee had ſubſcribed to the combination made for the preſeruation of your health and ſafety, notwithstanding preſently after attempted the taking away of your life, and thereby to procure the vtter ruine of Religion,
                              By reaſons.
                            the Nobilitie, and commons? Clemency indeed is a Princely vertue, but not to be ſhewed to ſuch as are mercileſſe. Let the vaine ſhew of mercy yeeld to life-preſeruing ſeueritie, and haue regard, that your mercy bring you not to miſery. It is enough to haue the commendation of clemency, in that you haue once giuen pardon: to pardon her againe, were nothing elſe but to pronounce her innocent, to condemne the States of the Kingdome of iniustice, to animate her agents to attempt new miſchiefes, and to diſcourage your faithfull ſubiects from hauing any care for the preſeruation of the weale publick. Religion, the Common-wealth, your own welfare, the loue of your countrey, the oath of aſſociation, the care of posteritie to come, doe all together begge and beſeech you, that ſhe which deſireth the destruction of all theſe, may ſpeedily be brought to destruction her ſelfe. If theſe be not heard, there is no ſafety left for this State, and Historians will leaue it recorded to the ages to come, that the fayre ſunne-ſhine dayes of all proſperity, which were in England vnder Q. Elizabeth, ended in a darke and dreadful euening, nay turned into a diſmall night of eternall obſcurity. Our posterity ſhall find, that we wanted wiſedom; hauing power to foreſee our miſeries, but not to preuent them: the which will thereby become the greater: the groſſeneſſe whereof will be imputed, not ſo much to the malice of our enemies, as the improuident ſtupidity of theſe

times. That the life of a titulary Queene of Scotland, was not ſo much worth, as the ſafety of this whole kingdome: nor is there any place left for lingring; for delayes are dangerous. We ſhould not giue malefactors of that monstrous nature, leaue to breathe, which from their inſolency will take their laſt ſupport, and from the impunity of their crime, expect ſome recompence. He which keepeth not himſelfe out of danger when he may, ſeemeth rather to tempt God, than to trust in him. All the danger that can be from ſtrangers, will ceaſe with the cauſe, and cannot harme England, vnleſſe it be by her. What will or power ſoeuer the Pope can haue to hurt, will ceaſe with her death. The Spaniard can haue no cauſe to finde fault, who for his own ſecurity, put his onely ſonne Charles to death, and doth what he can at this preſent alſo to make away Don Antonio King of Portugale, the more to extend his ambition. The king of France entertayneth an inuiolable league of loue with England, and is aboue all things ſo interested herein, that by the preſent diſpatch of the Q. of Scotland, the hope of the Guiſes ſhall be layd flat vnder foot, ſince it is ſo that (out of the deſperate hope they haue in the long looked-for ayde from their kinſwoman) their inſolency is growne ſo great at this time against him. That the King of Scotland, euen in nature, and out of a true reſpect of his royalty, cannot but be moued to diſpleaſure at his mothers death, yet he will rather (out of better deliberation) wayt wiſely, till time ſhall ripen his hopes with ſecurity, than to attempt, out of ſeaſon, the things which can affoord him nothing but diſturbance and danger. And the neerer he ſhall growe to his great hopes, the farther off will forraigne Princes (who of customary courſe are alwayes oppoſite to the growing greatneſſe of others) eſtrange themſelues from him.
                     
                     
                        They propounded alſo to her domeſticall examples, becauſe that that which is warranted by preſident,And by examples. is the more tolerable: As,
What comportment the Kings of England (for their ſecurities) haue had with their competitors, namely, Henry the first with Robert his elder brother, Edw. the third, or rather his mother, with Edward the ſecond, Henry the fourth with Richard the ſecond, Edward the fourth with Hen. the ſixt, with his ſonne the Prince of Wales, and George of Clarence his owne naturall brother, Henry the ſeuenth with the Earle of Warwick, the yonger ſonne of the Duke of Clarence, and HENRY the eightth with De-la-Poole Earle of Suffolk, with Margaret of Salisbury, and Courtney Marqueſſe of Exeter: all which (in compariſon of their offences) dyed for very ſleight matters.
Neyther did the Courtiers only ſuggeſt theſe, and the like to the Queene; but diuerſe fiery-tongued Preachers alſo, tooke occaſion to exerciſe (with all aſperity of ſpirit) the heate of their deſires, in haſtning on her death. Sundry alſo of the vulgar ſort were of the ſame temper, according as their affections or humours carried them away with hope or feare.
                     Amidſt theſe ſad-afflicting thoughts of minde (which ſo troubled the Queene of England's perplexed heart,
                           She is notwithſtanding ſuſpenſiue & perplexed with doubtfull feares.
                           She commandeth a Warrant to be drawne for the execution.
                         as that ſhe delighted to be all alone, and to ſit ſolitary by her ſelfe, neyther looking vp, nor vttering any ſpeech; yet would ſuddenly many times, breake out into theſe words, and ſighing, ſay, AVT PETERE AVT PERCVTE, and withall, alſo a kinde of Emblem: PREVENT THE STROKE BY STRIKING) ſhee deliuered Secretarie Dauiſon letters vnder her hand and ſeale, wherein hee was commanded to make ready a Warrant, vnder the great ſeale of England, for the execution of the Qu. of Scotland, and to

keepe it priuate, not acquainting any therewith, leſt happely in this turbulent time of feare, ſome ſudden violent danger might happen. But the morrow after (ſome ſudden affright mixing it ſelfe with her penſiue thoughts and meditations of minde) changing her former purpoſe, ſhe recommanded Dauiſon (by Killegray) to diſpatch his Warrant. Dauiſon, going to her, told her it was ready, and ſealed. Whereat ſhe grew very angry, ſaying, He was too haſty. But for all this, he forbore not to publiſh the matter, and to impart it to the Councell;Her Councell ſend ſecretly. who (beleeuing that willingly, which they deſired earneſtly) were eaſily perſwaded, that the Queene had giuen commandement for the execution; and (vnknowne to her) ſent preſently away Beale (who, out of a feruour of zeale which he bore to religion, was more eagerly bent againſt the Queene of Scotland, than any other) and with him two executioners, and letters Patents, whereby authoritie was granted to the Earles of Shrewesbury, Kent, Derby, Cumberland and others, to proceed in this execution. And although the Queene had told Dauiſon at that time, that ſhee had a purpoſe to deale otherwiſe with the Queene of Scotland; yet for all that, he did not ſtay or recall Beale.
                     
                     Now aſſoone as the Earles were arriued at Fotheringham, they found the Q. of Scotland with Sir Ayme Poulet and Sir Drue Drury, to whoſe cuſtody ſhe was committed; and then (reading the Mandate) ſhewed the cauſe of their comming, admoniſhing her, in few words, to prepare her ſelfe to dye againſt the next morrow. Sh, ehearing that, with an vndanted courage and countenance, anſwered them:

                           I Neuer thought, that my ſister, the Queene of England,
                           
                              The Q. of Scotl. prepares herſelf for death.
                            would haue conſented to my death, ſeeing I am not ſubiect to your law: but ſince her pleaſure is ſuch, death to me ſhall be most welcome. And ſurely that ſoule were not worthy the eternall ioyes of heauen, whoſe body cannot endure one ſtroke of a Headſman.
She deſired of them to haue conference with her Almner,

her Confeſſor, and Meluine her Steward. As for her Confeſſor, they flatly denyed her him; and appointed her for comforters, the Biſhop and Deane of Peterborough, whom ſhee refuſed. Thereupon, the Earle of Kent (a zealous profeſſor of Religion) amongſt other his ſpeeches, vttered this:
Your life will be the death; and your death, the life of our Religion.
Then hauing made mention of Babington, ſhee confidently affirmed, ſhe neuer kn
                           •
                        w of his practices. Shee referred the due reuenge of all to God: and hauing inquired what was become of Nauue, and Curle, asked;
If euer it was heard of, in former times, that the Seruants ſhould be ſuborned to betray their Lady and Miſtreſſe to death, and alſo be admitted as Euidencers againſt her.
When the Earles were departed, ſhee called in for ſupper, the better after to diſpoſe of her buſineſſes. Shee ſupped that night (as her manner euer was) very temperately: and noting her ſeruants at ſupper time, both men and women, to weepe and mourne; with cheerefull aſpect, and hearty alacritie, ſhee comforteth them, bidding them to wipe their eyes, and rather to reioice with her, for that ſhee was now to depart this Gulfe of miſeries. Then turning to Burgon her Phyſician, ſhe ſaid:
Haue you not obſerued how powerfull and great the Truth is. For (quoth ſhe) the common report is, That I am to dye for conſpiring the Queene of Englands death; but the Earle of Kent, notwithſtanding, told me euen now, That the feare they haue of their Religion, is the cauſe of my death. Now this is no criminall fact committed againſt the Queene of England, but the feare they haue conceiued of me, which hath brought this ſlaughter vpon me, the whilſt ſome beſides (euery one for himſelfe, ſeeking to ſerue his owne turne) conſpired

vnder a pretext of Religion, and the Commonweale.
                     
                     Supper being almoſt done, ſhe dranke to all her Seruants; who in order, one by one, vpon their knees, tooke her pledge, mingling their teares with the wine, and crauing pardon of her, wherein ſoeuer they had beene negligent in doing their duties: ſo did ſhe likewiſe of them. After ſupper, ſhe peruſed her Will, lookt ouer the Inuentory of her vtenſiles, and Iewels, and ſo ſet downe the names of ſuch to whom ſhee had bequeathed any thing, to euery one their ſhare apart. To ſome of them, ſhee diſtributed money with her owne hands. Shee wrote alſo to her Confeſſor, to pray for her. And to the King of France, and the Duke of Guiſe, by her Letters ſhe recommended her Seruants. This done, ſhe retired herſelf at her ordinary time to her reſt, ſlept a few hours; and awaking, paſt the reſt of the night away in Prayers.
                     The fatall day beginning to appeare, which was the 7. of February, ſhe attired her ſelfe in ſuch garments as ſhe vſually wore vpon Feſtiuall daies; and calling her Seruants about her, cauſed her Will to be read, deſiring them to take in good part the Legacies ſhe had giuen them, ſeeing it was not in her power to make them better. Then wholly fixing her mind vpon God, ſhe betook her ſelf into her Oratory or place of Prayer, where with ſighs, grieuous gronings, and feruent prayers, ſhe called vpon God; till ſuch time as Thomas Andrey, Sherife of the Shire, ſignified to her, that it was now time for her to come forth. Then forth ſhee came, in geſture,Shee is brought to the ſcaffold. carryage, and demeanour, right Princely and majeſticke; cheerefull in countenance, and in attire very modeſt, and Matron-like: ſhee wore a linnen vaile vpon her, and before her face, which ſhee diſcouered: at her girdle hung her Roſarie, or rowe of Beades, and in her hand ſhe held a Crucifix of Iuory.
                     In the Porch or paſſage of her lodging, met her the Earles, and the reſt of the Noblemen, where Meluine (one

of her Seruants) falling on his knees, and pouring forth teares, bewailed his vnlucky fortune, that he was deſign'd the man, that ſhould carry into Scotland the ſad meſſage of the tragicall death of his deareſt Miſtreſſe.
Oh weep not (quoth ſhe) for you ſhall ſhortly ſee Mary Stuart at an end of all her ſorrowes. You ſhall report,
                              Her ſpeeches to Meluine her Steward.
                            that I dye true and conſtant in my Religion, and firme in my loue to Scotland and France. God forgiue them which haue thirſted after my blood, as the Hart doth for the Water-brooke. Thou (oh God) which art Truth it ſelfe, and which ſoundeſt the deepest ſecrets of my inward heart; euen thou knoweſt how earneſtly I haue deſired the vnion of the two Kingdomes of England and Scotland. Recommend me to my Sonne; tell him for certainty I neuer did, or attempted any thing preiudiciall to the Kingdome of Scotland. Counſell him to entertaine amitie with the Queene of England, and be you his true and truſty Seruant.
By this, the teares flowed from her eyes, ſhee repeating againe, and againe, Adieu, Adieu, Meluine: who wept all the while, no leſſe lamentably.To the Earles. Then turning her towards the Earles, ſhe intreated them, that her Seruants might be gently vſed, that they might enioy the things ſhe had giuen them by her Will, that they might be permitted to be with her at her death, and laſtly, might be ſafely conducted and ſent home into their Countries. Her two firſt requeſts they granted, but for the hauing of her Seruants by at her death, the Earle of Kent ſeemed ſcrupulous, fearing there might be ſome ſuperſtition in that. To him ſhe ſaid:
Feare you not, Sir: the poore wretches deſire nothing but to take their last leaues of me. And I know, my Siſter, the Queene of England, would not you ſhould deny me ſo ſmall a requeſt: For, for the honour of my ſex, my Seruants ſhould be in preſence. I am the neareſt of her Parentage and Conſanguinitie, grand-childe to

                           Henry the ſeuenth, Dowager of France, and anointed Queene of Scotland:
Which when ſhee had ſaid, and turned her about, it was granted her, to haue ſuch of her Seruants as ſhee would nominate. Then ſhe named Meluine, Bourgon her Phyſician, her Apothecarie, her Chyrurgion, two of her Maides, and ſome others, of which Meluine carryed vp her traine. Then the Noblemen, the two Earles, and the Sherife of the Shire going before, ſhe came to the Scaffold, the which was built at the vpper end of the Hall, vpon the which was a Chaire, a Cuſhion, and a Blocke, all couered with blacke. So ſoone as ſhe was ſet, and ſilence commanded, Beal read the Warrant or Mandate, to which ſhe liſtened attentiuely, as if it had beene ſome other thing. Then Doctor Fletcher (Deane of Peterborough) made a large diſcourſe of the condition of her life paſt, and preſent, and of the life to come. Twice ſhe interrupted him, intreating him not to importune her:Her laſt words. 
                        Proteſting, that ſhe was ſetled and reſolued in the ancient Romane Catholike Religion, and ready euen now to ſhed her blood for the ſame. He vehemently exhorted her to be repentant, and with an vndoubted Faith to put her whole truſt and confidence in Chriſt: But ſhee anſwered him; That ſhe had beene borne and brought vp in this Religion, and was ready to die in the ſame. Then the Earles ſaying they would pray for her; Shee replied, ſhee would giue them great thankes, if they would pray together with her, but to communicate in Praier with them which are of a different Religion, were a ſcandall, and great ſinne. Then they bade the Deane to pray: with whom, whilſt the Aſſembly about him ioyned in Prayer; Shee falling on her knees, and holding the Crucifix betwixt her hands, prayed in Latine, with her owne people, out of the Office of our bleſſed Lady.
                     
                     After the Deane had ended his Praiers, ſhee prayed in Engliſh for the Church, for her Sonne, and Elizabeth Queene of England, beſeeching God to turne his heauy wrath from

this Iland, and proteſting (as ſhe held vp the Crucifix) that ſhe repoſed her hope of Saluation in the blood of Chriſt Ieſus: ſhee called vpon the holy Company of Saints in Heauen, to make interceſſion for her vnto him. Shee forgaue all her enemies: then kiſſing the Crucifix, and making the ſigne of the Croſſe, ſhe ſaid: As thy armes (ôh Lord Ieſu-Chriſt) were ſpred forth vpon the Croſſe, ſo receiue me into the ſame armes of thy Mercy, and pardon me my treſpaſſes. Then the Executioner asked forgiueneſſe, whom ſhee forgaue: and her ſeruants (ſhe making haſte) tooke off her vpper garments, crying and lamenting aloud: yet neither by her kiſſing or croſſing of them, did ſhe euer change her cheerfull countenance, but bade them forbeare their womaniſh weeping, ſaying; That ſhee was at the end of all her calamities. Likewiſe turning her ſelfe towards her other ſeruants, moſt pitiouſly weeping, ſhe ſigned them with the ſigne of the Croſſe, and ſmilingly bade them all, Adieu. Then hauing a linnen cloth before her face, and laid her head vpon the Blocke, ſhe recited the Pſalme; In thee (O Lord) haue I put my truſt, let mee not be confounded for euer. Then ſtretching forth her body, and many times together ingeminating theſe words; Lord into thy hands I commend my Spirit, her Head at the ſecond blow was cut off; the Deane crying aloud, and ſaying, So periſh all the Enemies of Queene Elizabeth; to which, the Earle of Kent anſwerd, Amen: ſo likewiſe did the people weeping. Afterwards her body being imbalmed, and ſolemnly made ready was with Princely Funerals interred in the Cathedrall Church of Peterborough. And in Paris were her Obſequies in moſt magnificent manner, alſo, celebrated by the Guiſes; who neither in her life omitted any offices of loue or kindred toward her, nor yet after her death, to their great land and glory.
                     Here you haue ſeen what was the lamentable end of the life of Mary Queen of Scotland, daughter to Iames the Fift, King of Scotland, grand-childe to Henry the ſeuenth King of England,
                        
by his elder daughter, of 46. yeares of age, and the 18. yeare of her impriſonment. A woman moſt conſtant in her Religion; of ſingular zeale and ſanctimonie towards God; of inuincible animoſitie and courage; in wiſedome aboue her Sexe; of ſurpaſſing beautie, and worthy to be recorded in the Catalogue of thoſe Princes, who of happy and proſperous, became miſerable and vnfortunate. Being yet an Infant, ſhee was with great ſedulitie ſought for, both by Henry the eighth, King of England, for his ſonne Edward; and by Henry the ſecond, King of France, for Francis the Dolphin. Shee was ſent into France at fiue yeares of age, and at ten marryed to the Dolphine. After the death of her husband, returning into Scotland, and being marryed to Henrie, Lord Darley, ſhe had by him IAMES, the Firſt Monarch of Great Britanne. Shee was perſecuted by Murrey her baſe Brother, and others her diſloyall and ambitious ſubiects depoſed from the Kingdome, driuen into England, circumuented (as ſome worthy perſons haue conceiued) by certaine in England, carefull for the retaining of their Religion, and the preſeruation of Queene Elizabeths life; expoſed into perilous attempts, by others (deſirous of re-eſtabliſhing the Romiſh Religion) and brought to ruine by the intimations or witneſſes of her abſent Secretaries; who (as it is thought) were corrupted with coine. By her Tombe was fixed, and ſoone after taken away, this following Epitaph:
                        
                           
                           
                              MARIA SCOTORVM REGINA,
                                 The Epitaph.
                               REGIS FILIA, REGIS GALLORVM VIDVA, REGINAE ANGLIAE AGNATA, ET HAERES PROXIMA, VIRTVTIEVS REGIIS ET ANIMO REGIO ORNATA. IVRE REGIO FRVSTRA SAEPIVS IMPLORATO, BARBARA ET TYRANNICA CRVDELITATE, ORNAMENTVM NOSTRI SECVLI, ET LVMEN VERE REGIVM EXTINGVITVR: EODEMQVE NEFARIO IVDICIO, ET MARIA SCOTORVM REGINA MORTE NATVRALI, ET OMNES SVPERSTITES REGES, PLEBEII FACTI, MORTE CIVILI MVLCTANTVR.
                           NOVVM ET INAVDITVM TVMVLI GENVS, IN QVO CVM VIVIS MORTVI INCLVDVNTVR, HIC ERAT: CVM SACRIS ENIM DIVAE MARIAE CINERIBVS, OMNIVM REGVM ATQVE PRINCIPVM VIOLATAM, ATQVE PROSTRATAM MAIESTATEM HIC IACERE SCITO; ET QVIA TACITVM REGALE SATIS SVPERQVE REGES SVI OFFICII MONET, PLVRA NON ADDO, VIATOR.
                        
                     
                     
                        IN the lamentable death of this great Princeſſe, manifeſtly appeared (as ſome haue obſerued) the prouidence of God:The prouidence of God plainly ſeen in her death. For the things which Elizabeth and Mary wiſhed from the beginning, and were reſolued vpon in all their deſignes, were hereby effected and conſummate. Queene Mary (as her ſelfe confeſt at her death) deſired nothing more feruently, than that the Kingdomes of England and Scotland (which were diuided) might be vnited and ioyned in one, in her deareſt Sonne; Nor Elizabeth, but that the true Religion, together with the good and ſafety of the People in England might be continued and maintained. And England now with vnſpeakable ioy and gladneſſe, acknowledgeth, that God Almighty hath granted both their deſires, to her vnexpected and euerlaſting felicitie.
                     
                        
                           Elizabeth is ſorry therefore, and grieueth thereat.So ſoone as report (the meſſenger of this death) had brought the newes thereof to Queene. Elizabeth, who not ſo much as thought of any ſuch matter, ſhe tooke it moſt impatiently: her ſpeech, and countenance, at once failed her: through the extremitie of her grieuous diſcontent, ſhee became quite comfortleſſe and diſconſolate; and attired her ſelfe in mourning weedes, bitterly lamenting, and ſheading many briniſh teares from the compaſſionate riuers of her eyes.Is angry with her Councell. Shee ſharply rebuked her Councell, and chaſed them out of her ſight, commanding they ſhould be queſtioned. And as for William Dauiſon, he was brought into the Starre-Chamber to be tryed. And ſo ſoone as her paſſionate anguiſh and exceſſe of ſorrow, ſuffered her to write, ſhee ſuddenly addreſt (by ſir Robert Carey) to the King of Scotland, this Letter following, of her owne hand-writing:

                           
                              
                              Queene ELIZABETH's Letter to King IAMES.
                              
                                 
                                    MOST DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER:
                              
                              Would to God you did know, but not feele, with what incomparable ſorrow my ſad-afflicted heart is troubled, by the late lamentable euent, which hapned contrary to my minde and meaning: but becauſe my Penne abhorreth the recitall thereof, you ſhall vnderſtand it by this my Kinſman. I beſeech you, that (as God and many good men are witneſſes with me of my innocencie) you alſo would belieue, that if I had once commanded it, I would neuer haue denyed the ſame. I am not ſo baſe-minded, nor of ſuch a degenerate or ignoble ſpirit, as that 
                                    •
                                 ither I am affraid to doe the thing that is iuſt, or to diſclaime it being done.
                              But as it is moſt diſhonourable in Princes, to couer or colour the conceptions of their hearts, in diſguiſed words: So will I neuer diſſemble any action of mine, but let it appeare in its owne liuely colours. Know this for certainty, that as I am ſure, it hapned not by any fault of mine; ſo if I had euer intended ſuch a deed, I would not haue imputed it to others. Nor can I aſſume that to my ſelfe which I neuer thought. The reſt, the Deliuerer of theſe lines will impart vnto you.

For my part, I would haue you belieue, that there is none more intirely louing you, nor more ſtudiouſly carefull for the good of you and yours, than my ſelfe. If any haue ſuggeſted to you the contrary, be you perſwaded, that ſuch a one beareth more affection to others, than to you. God keepe you long ſafe and ſound.
                           
                        
                     
                     Whileſt Sir Robert Carey was on the way with theſe letters, William Dauiſon was brought into the Starr-Chamber before certain Commiſſioners, to wit, Sir Christopher Wray Lo▪ chiefe Iuſtice of the K. Bench, who for that time was likewiſe made Lord Keeper of the Priuy Seale; the Arch Biſhops of Canterbury and Yorke, the Earles of Worcester, Cumberland, and Lincolne; the Lords Gray and Lumley, Sir Iames Crofts Comptroller of the Queens houſe, Sir Walter Mildmay Chancellour of the Exchequer, Sir Gilbert Gerard Maſter of the Rolls, Edm. Anderſon chiefe Iuſtice of the Common Pleas, and Sir Roger Manwood chiefe Baron of the Exchequer. In the preſence of theſe, Sir Francis Popham, the Qu. Atturney generall, accuſed William Dauiſon of contempt againſt her Maieſtie, of the breach of his allegeance, the neglect and omiſſion of his dutie; for that the queene of England, out of her royall clemency, being vnwilling that the queene of Scotland (although ſhee ſtood condemned) ſhould be put to death, for certaine cauſes beſt knowne to her ſelfe, ſuch as were not to bee ſounded into by any others, nor could be drawne from her, eyther by the importunate vrging of the States of the land, or by her Councell: notwithſtanding ſhee had commanded the Warrant for her execution to be drawne (for the preuenting of ſome eminent perils) the which ſhe committed to the ſaid William Dauiſons truſt and taciturnitie; he, being a ſworne Secretary, forgetfull of his faith and obedience, (contemning her Maieſties command) had imparted the ſame 
                           •
                        o the Councell, and brought her to execution, without the knowledge or pri
                           •
                        itie of her Maieſtie.
                     
                        William Dauiſon (ſuch was his ſingular modeſty) anſwered temperatly, and yet with audacitie;
                     
                        That he was very ſory, that he ſhould be thus troubleſome to Commiſsioners, concerning the Q. of Scotland and the iudgement giuen againſt her (moſt grieuous, if it were) to the impeachment of his credite, if not to the finall loſſe therof;

which to him was all in all. But this most grieued him, to be taxed of contempt againſt her Maieſtie; to whō for her Princely fauours, he was ſo obliged, that his offence muſt thereby be the more intolerable. That hee confeſſed himſelfe guilty of the crimes obiected against him. That he had made ſhipwrack of his credite, which hee reckoned equiualent with his life. If in making his Apologie, he ſhould conteſt with the Queen, he ſhould do that which were moſt vnbeſeeming the obedience of a ſubiect, the reſpect of a ſeruant, and the fidelity and reputation of a Secretary. He proteſted before God and the Commiſsioners, That he had done nothing therein wittingly and willingly, but what he was perſwaded was the Queenes will and pleaſure; wherein if by ignorance or negligence he had done any thing preiudiciall, he could not but for that be ſory, and ſubmit himſelfe to the cenſure of the Commiſsioners.
                     
                     Now as touching the particulars: Whereas the Queene blamed him for hauing beene ouer-haſty in ſetting the great ſeale to the Mandate, he auouched;
That ſhe had darkely ſignified, but not expreſſely commanded that he ſhould keepe it by him: Neyther, as hee thought, had hee treſpaſſed in matter of ſecrecie; for that he had not imparted it to any but the Councell. As touching that, that he did not reuoke the Warrant, after the Queene had giuen him to vnderſtand that ſhee had altered her minde; he affirmed, That it was agreed vpon by the generall conſent of the Councell, that forthwith it ſhould be ſent away, and the Queene of Scotland executed, for feare the Queene or State might be indangered or damnified.
                     
                     Vpon this confeſſion, Sir Thomas Egerton the Queenes Sollicitor (hauing read ſome part of it) began to preſſe him.They vrge him vpon his owne confeſsion. But he deſired him to reade it all thorow, and not ſelected parcels here and there; though he had rather it ſhould not be read at all, becauſe in it were contayned ſome ſecrets not fit to be reuealed; oftentimes interpoſing theſe words,
That as he was vnwilling to contest against the Qu. ſo was he

loth his modeſty ſhould be preiudiciall to the truth, or his owne reputation.
                     
                     
                        The Queen, Sergeants reproue him.Sir Thomas Gaudy and Sir William Pickering, the Queenes Sergeants at Law, likewiſe in many and ſharpe ſpeeches, rebuked him, for that he had fraudulently abuſed her Maieſties Priuy Councell, as was confeſſed by William Cecill Baron of Burghley, Lo: high Treaſurer: to whom (doubting whether the Queene had granted that they ſhould proceed to the execution of the Queen of Scotland) he affirmed and proteſted ſhe had: as alſo he ſaid the like to the reſt, who had ſubſcribed to the Warrant or Mandate, for the execution of the ſaid Q. of Scotland. Here Dauiſon, ſhedding teares, deſired the Lawyers not to vrge him any further, but that they would remember, That he was not to contest againſt the Queen; wherefore he wholly ſubmitted himſelfe to her Maieſties conſcience, and the Commiſsioners cenſure.
                     
                     
                        The Iudges opinion vpon his fact.Sir Roger Manwood, beginning, made an hiſtoricall relation of the Queene of Scotland; how from her tender age ſhe had vſurped the Armes of England: and ſo continuing his diſcourſe to Babingtons conſpiracie, commended the ſentence pronounced againſt her by vertue of the law, made knowne the clemency of the Queene, and gaue cenſure, that Dauiſon, for his inconſiderate anticipation, ſhould be fined at ten thouſand pounds, and impriſonment during the Qu. pleaſure.
                     Sir Edmund Anderſon argued, that he had done right, but not rightly; otherwiſe the man was honeſt.
                     
                        Gerard was of the ſame opinion.
                     Sir Walter Mildmay, after he had declared with what mature deliberation, and ſetled grauity, they had proceeded in iudgement againſt the Queene of Scotland, and by what great, and how many intreaties and imprecations queene Elizabeth was drawne thereto; produced againſt Dauiſon this paſſage out of the holy Scripture: The heart of the King is in the hands of the Lord; and therefore none, much leſſe a

ſeruant, ought fraudulently or couertly to anticipate the determinate purpoſes of Princes, without whoſe aduice nothing ought to be done, eſpecially in matters of ſo great moment, as is the death of a Prince. But he cleered Dauiſon of malice, yet reproued him, as hauing beene inconſiderate in Princes affaires, and too forward in preuenting the queenes determination. And, for a caueat hereafter to men of his ranke and place, not to commit the like errour; accorded with the reſt concerning his fine and impriſonment.
                     Sir Iacob Croft checkt and chid him, for hauing vnwiſely vttered the things which he ought to haue concealed, for that Princes impart that to ſome one of their Councell, which they conceale from the reſt.
                     
                        Iohn Baron Lumley was of opinion (with the Iudges) that the ſentence againſt the Qu. of Scotland was iuſtly giuen, yet ſeriouſly auerred, That in the memory of the precedent times, it was neuer heard or read, ſo high a contempt to haue beene committed againſt a Prince, that the Lords of the Councell, in the queenes houſe, at the Councell Table where her Maieſtie was (as it were Preſident of the Councell) ſhould haue decreed ſuch a buſineſſe, and that without her priuity, they (and Dauiſon too) hauing free acceſſe vnto her when they pleaſed; proteſting, That if he had but one only ſonne that were faulty in ſuch a fact, he ſhould think him worthy to be very ſeuerely puniſhed. But being perſwaded of the honeſt diſpoſition of the man, he would cenſure him no deeper than others did.
                     
                        Arthur Lord Gray, inflamed with a religious zeale, in a ſet ſpeech, yet ſomewhat exaſperate, excepted againſt him, ſaying:The L. Gray defendeth him. DAVISON is accuſed to haue behaued himſelfe contemptuouſly towards the Queene; and this contempt is vrged to the full: for that he imployed his diligence in diſpatching the Q. of Scotl. That he bewrayed ſecrets, and concealed from the Q. the ſending away of the Warrant. But what was this Qu. he was ſo buſie to make away? Was it not ſhee (I pray you) by whoſe life

our religion the queene, the kingdome, and euery one of vs were in continuall danger? yet it is for her being ſo cut off, that wee haue this dayes buſineſſe in hand. Now my opinion is, That he which hath deliuered our England from ſo great euills, deſerues to be royally recompenced. I do not thinke him to haue reuealed any ſecrets, for hauing imparted the matter onely to the Councell, (and Magiſtrates appointed for matters of State,) whom chiefly it concerned to vnderſtand that and ſuch like, and which the queene her ſelfe before had vttered to two or three. If Dauiſon haue offended in any thing, it is chiefly in this, That the queene meaning to take another courſe, he told her not that the Warrant was already ſent away. But questionleſſe he was driuen into a double doubt: whether to loſe the queenes fauour, in ſending away the Warrant without her knowledge; or by recalling it, to bring new plots and perills to the queene. Who remembreth not how turbulent the time was? what fearfull rumours were euery where diſperſed? If any wrong or violence had then hapned to the queene or religion, whileſt the Mandate was in his hands, had not the fault truly beene in him? Should not we, our wiues, and children, haue falne furiouſly vpon him? Should we not haue imbrued our hands in his blood? haue curſt his imprudence, and haue erected, to his eternall ignominy, a trophee of indiſcretion, engrauen in letters of blood? What mulct or penaltie ſoeuer you impoſe vpon him, ſhall not diſpleaſe me; but ſurely I will alwayes hold him for an honest man. This is the Orator-like ſpeech, which we heard the Lord Gray made, and deliuered with a good grace and manly countenance.
                     The three Earles agreed in opinion with the reſt, concerning the premiſed penaltie inflicted vpon Dauiſon, and with the Lo: Gray, touching his reputation.
                     The Archbiſhop of Yorke diſcourſed of matter of Religion, and ſhewed the blindeneſſe of heart, and naturall corruption, to be the fountaines from whence it ſloweth.
                     The Lords Grace of Canterbury approued the act, and commended the author of it, but diſcōmended withall the

maner or circumſtance of proceeding which he had vſed.
                     Laſtly, Sir Christ Wray (Lord Keeper of the priuy Seale) hauing made a briefe recapitulation of all the Commiſsioners opinions, confirmed the penaltie impoſed by them,Sentence giuen againſt him. and declared, That although the queene (being iuſtly moued to diſpleaſure) had ſubmitted her Counſellors to examination, yet notwithſtanding ſhe did then pardon them; acknowledging, that what they had done, was from a deſire and deſigne tending to the defence of Religion and the State, and the repelling of eminent dangers.
                     
                        Dauiſon became humble Petitioner to the Cōmiſsioners,He maketh requeſt to the Commiſsioners. That they would intreat for him; not to be reſtored to the honourable place of Secretary, which he formerly enioyed, nor to haue his liberty granted him, nor his fine or puniſhment mitigated: but that he might yet be partaker of her Maieſties gracious fauour. The which, for all this, he neuer regained: neuertheleſſe ſhe ſometimes ſupplyed and relieued his wants.
                     And thus this Dauiſon, a man of honeſt diſpoſition and eſteeme, not cunning nor acquainted with Court-tricks, was purpoſely brought vpon the Stage (as diuers haue thought) to be an actor in this Tragedie: and being put out of his part, as being at a non plus in the laſt Act, was for a long time after ſhut vp in priſon, to the great griefe of many. Hitherto hath beene related what was publikely done againſt him: Now obſerue, in briefe, how he excuſeth himſelfe, as I haue collected out of his owne accuſation, and the Apologeticall diſcourſe, which he made thereof to Sir Fr. Walſingham,
                     
                     
                        The queene (ſaid he) after the Ambaſſadors of France and Scotland were departed,
                        
                           Dauiſon his particular Apologie. 
                        wiſhed me to ſhew her the Warrant for the execution of the ſentence, pronounced againſt the queene of Scotland. Hauing ſhewed it, ſhe willingly ſet her hand thereto, and bid me likewiſe affixe the great Seale of England; and iestingly, ſaid, You will ſhew this now to Walſingham, who is ſicke already, but will dye when he ſees it. She added by and by,

That ſhe had put it off ſo long, becauſe ſhee would not ſeeme to be carried away by violence; yet knowing well the neceſsitie thereof. Then blaming Sir Ayme Poulet and Sir Drue D
                           •
                        ury for not hauing eaſed her of that care and trouble; commanded Walſingham to know the cauſe of their ceſſation and delay.
                     
                     
                        The day after I had ſealed the Warrant, ſhe forbade me, by Killegray, to doe it; then telling her, that it was done already, ſhee checkt me for my diligence, ſaying; That by ſome wiſe-mens aduice, another courſe might haue beene taken. I anſwered that iuſt courſes are alwayes good and ſure. But fearing ſhe would caſt ſome blame on me, as ſhe had formerly done vpon the Lo. Burghley about the Duke of Norfolks death: I diſcloſed the whole matter to Sir Chriſt. Hatton; protesting, that I would neuer hereafter be ſo forward in ſo weighty a buſines. Hatton preſently diſcouered it to Burghley, and he to the rest of the Councell, who all concluding vpon the diſpatch of the execution, vowed (as reaſon was) to be faulty alike; and to effect it, ſent Beale inſtantly away with the Warrant and Letters. The third day after (I perceiuing the Queene to be troubled in minde, to haue the precedent night (as her MAIESTY ſayd) dreamed of the Queene of Scotland's death) I asked her, if ſhee had changed her purpoſe. She anſwered me, That ſome other meanes might haue beene vſed; and then inquiring of me, Whether I had receiued any anſwer from Sir Ayme Poulet; I ſhewed her his letters, wherein he refuſed to vndertake the execution, as vniust: to which, in great choler ſhe replyed; He and his confederats are all faithleſſe & periured, in promiſing great matters, and not performing: but ſhe ſhould find ſome, that for her ſake would doe it. As for my ſelfe, I told her how ignominious it was, and into what perills ſhee ſhould bring Poulet and Drury. If ſhe approued the deed being done, her renowne would be blasted with iniuſtice and diſgrace (beſides other dangers:) and in diſallowing it, ſhe ſhould ruinate men of worthy merite, and their poſterity for euer would be vndon. To conclude, the very day that the queene of Scotland dyed, her Maieſty checkt me ieſtingly, for that it was not yet diſpatched.
                     
                     
                        Now ſetting aſide to ſpeake of the anger and ſorrow which the Queene of England conceiued for the death of the Queene of Scotland, and her anger againſt William Dauiſon, the truth is, that the King of Scotland, her onely Sonne, drew thereof extreme anguiſh, bitter and paſsionate torments; ſhewing himſelfe a more pious Son then any that can be heard or read of; he lamented night and day his deare Mothers lamentable end, in weeping, and ſhedding many ſad and briniſh teares in his bitter agony; not thinking that Queene ELIZABETH (in regard of the mutuall loue which was betwixt them, the late and ſtrait contracted league of amity, and the interceſſion of ſo many mighty Princes) would haue ſuffered his Mother to haue beene expoſed into the cruell hands of an Executioner, ſhe beeing a Princeſſe of coequall Maieſtie, of her neereſt alliance and conſanguinity from the Blood Royall: nor could he receiue in Scotland, Sir Robert Carie, Sonne to Henry, Baron of Hunſdon, who was ſent with Letters from ELIZABETH, to excuſe her Maieſtie, and to caſt the fault vpon Dauiſon, and the Councell. He heard him (but hardly) from the mouth of another, and hardly receiued the Letters he brought. He reuok't the authority of his Ambaſſadour in England, and thought of reuenge: For there was no want of folke, which were buſie to egge him on by perſwaſions, that the Chriſtian Princes would not leaue vnreuenged ſo great and grieuous an iniury offered to Royall Maieſty, and to the Royall Name.
                     The Eſtates of Scotland,
                        
                           The indignation of the Nation of Scotland.
                         which were then gathered together in multitudinous numbers, proteſted to his Maieſtie, that they were ready, and preſt to reuenge this death, to defend the rightfull Title which hee had vnto England, and in that to hazzard both life and goods, and that they could not digeſt this iniury, offered not ſo much to his Maieſtie, as to the whole Nation of Scotland. Some perſwaded him to demand Nauall aſſiſtance of the K. of Denmarke,
                        
with whom he had then begun a Treaty, touching marriage with his Daughter. Others (addicted to the Roman Religion) exclaiming againſt the Queene of England, that She which had ſlaine the Mother, would willingly ſlay the Sonne too;
                           Suggestions vſed to the King.
                         put it into his head to ioyne rather with the Kings of France and Spaine, and with the Pope of Rome, and that he might eaſily by this meanes poſſeſſe himſelfe of England. Aboue all, he ſhould not truſt the Proteſtants of England; That they were now at the full height of their power, and ſought ſecretly his ruine. Others admoniſhed him, not to ſhew himſelf openly inclin'd to any party, but to hold both Papiſt and Proteſtant in ſuſpence. Becauſe that if he ſhould openly ranke himſelfe with the Proteſtants, all the Papiſts of Europe in their practices, would make him their marke to ſhoot at, and would prouide them in England ſome other Support then he, to rely vpon, which could not be without danger to him. Others aduiſed him, to continue conſtant in amity with England, not to expoſe or put foorth a certaine hope into the vncertaine hazzard of warre, and to perſeuer in the Religion now receiued; wherein if he ſhould ſeeme to wauer, he could neither purchaſe friends, nor put off enemies. Theſe were the things propounded to him by one and other, as euery mans particular pleaſure or deſire carried him. The King himſelfe, of perſpicuity, and politique apprehenſion aboue his age, beeing ſome times alone by himſelfe, and ſometimes with ſome few others; not with precipitate raſhnes (which is alwayes blind) but with deliberate conſideration, at many times, and for a long ſpace together, caſt theſe things in his mind.
                     
                        
                           Qu. Elizabeth indeuoureth to appeaſe them.
                        But Queene ELIZABETH, after ſhee had laid all the fault vpon Dauiſon, and the raſh credulity of her Councell, ſeeketh by little and little to weare away his griefe, leſt conſolations vntimely applyed, ſhould the more irritate; and attended, till the dolour (being appeaſed by the protraction of time) would ſuffer it ſelfe to be dealt withall.

For, perceiuing then, that the French did ſharpen and incitate the young King to reuenge, and fearing, that through ſuttle ſleights, and eager deſire of reuenge, he might be diuerted from the Proteſtant Religion, and from louing the Engliſh, ſhe imployed all her poſſible induſtry, and Princely meanes, to cure his wounded heart, and alienated from her:
                     And for that cauſe propounded to him, by ſuch Agents as ſhee had in Scotland, as alſo, by the Lord of Hunſdon, Gouernour of Berwicke.
                     
                     FIrſt,By what reaſons. what danger there was in making warre vpon England, for this cauſe, which now to all the Eſtates of England ſeemed neceſſary for the good of the whole Iland, and moſt iuſt. And whether hee were of power to goe thorow withall, England being then neuer more potent in military men, money, and munition, and Scotland neuer weaker, being brought low, and exhauſt by ciuill and inteſtine broyles. If hee would haue the aſsiſtance of forreine powers, let him learne by the experience of his Mother, (who ſo long and often implored that in vaine,) what labour and trouble he would haue to obtaine it. And if he ſhould procure it, what ſucceſſe could he hope for by it, ſeeing that England ioyning with the ſhipping of Holland and Zeland, feared not the moſt puiſſant Princes of Europe. What hope could he put the King of France or the King of Spaine in, ſith his power being once increaſed with the addition of England and Ireland to his Crowne, ought to be contrary to their deſigne, and that his Religion was ſo directly oppoſite to theirs, that they could not ayde and ſuccour him, but to their owne preiudice. That the King of France could not behold, but with griefe, the King of Scotlands Dominion augmented by the Kingdome of England, without feare that

he ſhould purſue the ancient right which the Engliſh haue in France, or giue aſsiſtance to the Guizes his Allies, who at this inſtant gape for the Kingdome of France. That the King of Spaine, who would queſtionleſse giue place to his ambition, becauſe that he brags (though falſly) to be the firſt Catholique King iſſued from the Bloud-Royall of the Engliſh, and of the houſe of Lancaſter. That to this purpoſe ſome Ieſuites and others haue with their vttermoſt power endeuoured, during the life of Queene MARY of Scotland, to enthrone him by election, in the Kingdome of England, as moſt fit to re-eſtabliſh there the Romane authoritie in eiecting from the Crowne both Mother and Sonne. Nay moreouer, they begun to perſwade the Queene of Scotland to make him thereof a legacy by her Teſtament, if King IAMES her Sonne would ſtill perſeuer in the Proteſtant Religion. Let the King conſider whither theſe things doe tend, what ſuccour hee can looke for from Spaine, and to what ignominy hee will precipitate his Soule to his eternall damnation, and all Great-Britaine to his vtter ruine, if hee forſakes the true Religion in which hee hath beene educated. That the Peeres and States who haue giuen ſentence againſt his Mother, ſeeing that hee meditates vpon a reuenge, will not fayle to exclude him from the Crowne of England, by a new Act of the right of Succeſsion. That in giuing place to neceſsity, and keeping in the agitation of his courage, hee will mediate eaſily their loue, ſith that which is done, cannot be vndone. Let him then expect to poſseſſe in his time the most flouriſhing Kingdome of England, and enioy in the meane while a Crowne of ſecuritie, and beleeue that thoſe which can tell well how to weigh and prize things, will iudge, that hee hath ſufficiently fore-ſeene to his honour, in not fayling in due opportunitie to doe his Mother all the dutifull

ſeruices of a moſt pious ſonne. Moreouer, let him likewiſe aſſure himſelfe, that the Queene of England will accounnt, hold, and eſteeme him as her owne ſonne, and will doe him all offices of amity, and vſe him as a Mother her deareſt ſonne.
                     Theſe are the things that Queene ELIZABETH endeuoured with great care to poſſeſſe the King with: and to the end hee ſhould not doubt but that his Mother had beene put to death without Queene ELIZABETHS conſent, ſhee reſolued to ſend him the ſentence pronounced againſt William Dauiſon, ſealed with the broad Seale of England, and all the Commiſſioners hands ſubſcribed therunto: and to appeaſe his Maieſtie the more, another iudgement ſigned by all the Iudges of England, certifying that that ſentence pronounced, could in nothing hinder or bee preiudiciall to his right to the Kingdome of England.
                     
                     In the mean time that Q.
                           Sir Francis Drake is ſent into Spaine, to preuent the comming of the Jnuincible Nauy for the inuaſion of England.
                         ELIZABETH by theſe or ſuch like reaſons endeuoured gently to calme the King of Scotlands agitations, fore-ſeeing the warre wherewith ſhe was furiouſly threatned by the King of Spaine, whoſe hopes to fruſtrate, ſhee ſent Sir Francis Drake with foure Royall Ships well appoynted, to the Coaſt of Spaine, and elſewhere, with command to take, burne, and pillage all ſuch Ships as hee could finde, as well in the Harbours and Port-Townes, as on the Ocean: Drake arriuing in the Streight of Gibraltar, entred the Hauen thereof, where, after he had cauſed ſixe great Ships to flye vnder the Forts protection, hee tooke and burnt a hundred Ships, more or leſſe, in the which there was infinite prouiſion of warlike munitions & victuals, and among others, the Great Gallion of the Marquis of Santa Cruz, called Rageuſa, richly loaden with merchandize. From thence, returning to Cape S. Vincent,
                        
                           His expeditions.
                         hee there burnt all ſuch Ships and Fiſher-boats, which lay in that Rode: And then went to Caſcalet Hauen, which is ſituated at the mouth of Tage: he vrged there the Marquis

                        Santa Cruz to fight: but hee not daring, ſtirr'd not, but let Drake freely ſayle along that Coaſt, and take their Ships without the leaſt impeachment. Then, hauing turned ſaile to the Iles of Azoris, met by chance (which he tooke with eaſe) a great and luſty Ship, moſt rich, and well furniſhed, called Saint Philip,
                        
                           The great Carraque Saint Philip is taken.
                         which was returning from the Eaſt-Indies: This act cauſed the vulgar ſort of Mariners of diuers Countries to take the name of Philip for an ill ſigne or prognoſtication againſt Philip King of Spaine.
                     
                     By this Drakes worthy, though briefe expedition, England was much enriched and; the Spaniards ſuſtayning ſo great a loſſe of munition and warlike preparations, were conſtrayned to giue ouer their deſigne they had to inuade England for that yeere:
                           The profit which the Engliſh receiued thereby.
                         Since which time, the Engliſh begun with alacrity couragiouſly to aſſault thoſe great and huge Ships, moſt like vnto Caſtles, which they before did much dread and feare, and diſcouered ſo plainely the opulent and rich commodities of the Indies, & the meanes how to trade and traffique in thoſe Eaſterne parts, in ſuch ſort,
                           
                              The Eaſt Indies Companie.
                           
                           
                              Thomas Cauendiſh circuits the Earth.
                           
                         that they haue ſince eſtabliſhed an aduantagious trade, and profitable nauigation in thoſe Countries, hauing eſtabliſhed an Eaſt-Indie Company of Merchants.
                     At that very time, Thomas Cauendiſh, a Suffolke man, which two yeeres ſince was gone out of England, with three good Ships was ſayling the Sea in another Climate of the World, and hauing paſt beyond the Streight of Magellan, burnt and ranſacked in the entry of Chile, Peru, and New Spaine, many Townes of the Spaniards, tooke and pillaged neere Calliforma, eighteene rich Ships loaden, and a ſumptuous Ship-Royall of Spaine, with infinite riches, returning happily the ſame yeere into England (by Philippinas, Molaques, the Cape of bona Speranza, and the famous Ile of Saint Helen) with a precious bootie, and memorable glory, as beeing onely the third, who, ſince Magellan, circuited the whole Earth.
                     
                        As Sir Francis Drake, and Maſter Iohn Cauendiſh purchaſed to their perpetuall honors an illuſtrious glory & ſplendent reputation, in doing their Countrey good ſeruice, ſo at that time two other Engliſh men, Sir W. Stanley,
                        
                           Stanley and Yorke, Traitors.
                         and Rowland Yorke, got an ignominious name of Traytors. This Yorke, borne in London, was a man moſt negligent and lazy, but deſperately hardy; he was in his time moſt famous among thoſe who reſpected Fencing, hauing been the firſt that brought into England that wicked and pernicious faſhion to fight in the Field in Duels,
                           New kinde of Duels brought into England.
                         with a Rapier called a Tucke, onely for the thruſt: the Engliſh hauing till that very time, vſed to fight with Backe-ſwords, ſlaſhing and cutting one the other, armed with Targets or Bucklers, with very broad weapons, accounting it not to be a manly action to fight by thruſting and ſtabbing, and chiefly vnder the waſte. This Yorke hauing receiued ſome light iniury by the Earle of Leiceſter in the Low-Countries, ran away, and liued as a Souldier a certaine time on the Spaniſh ſide; and laſtly, being reconciled, was made Gouernour of a ſtrong Fort, ſituated neere the Towne of Sutphen. But as he was not vſed to pardon wrongs, & ſuffer himſelf to be deſpiſed, hee hammered in his head how he might be reuenged: and he being corrupted with money, yeelded vp not onely the ſaid Fort to the Enemy, but alſo many and ſundry times hee proteſted by oath to Sir William Stanley (who had formerly borne Armes in the warres of Ireland, with a ſingular fidelity and generous valiancy) that he was manifeſtly accuſed and conuicted to haue been one of Babingtons conſpiracy, by the aſſertion and confeſſion of the Conſpirators; and that hee looked but for the houre that he ſhould be apprehended and hanged. By theſe or ſuch like perſwaſions hee drew him to be a conſort to his wickedneſſe, and ſecond to his wicked deſignes, cauſing him to yeeld vp the faire, ſtrong, and rich Citie of Dauentry to the Spaniard, againſt the oath and faith hee had giuen both to the Earle

of Leiceſter, and the States. After this perfidious man had committed this deplorable crime, hee conſidered the haynouſneſſe of his offence, and fore-ſaw that hee ſhould be forthwith exclaimed of, and attainted of Treaſon: but hee fortified his affrighted and trembling conſcience vpon this, that hee had reſtored a place detained by Rebels, to him who was the right Lord and owner thereof: and as he was a ranke Papiſt, cauſed incontinently Papiſts to flocke to his Regiment, which conſiſted of one thouſand and three hundred Engliſh and Iriſh, for to inſtruct them in the Romiſh Religion, vanting, hee would make a Seminary of ſouldiers, who would by armes couragiouſly defend the Romane Church, as Seminary Prieſts by words and writings: and to that purpoſe Allen (who ſhortly after was made a Cardinall) ſent him ſuddenly Maſſe-Prieſts, publiſhing withall a little Booke, by which he commended his treaſon in the behalfe of Pope Pius the Fifth his Bull againſt Queene ELIZABETH, exhorting and exciting the reſt to doe the like trechery, as if they had not beene bound to ſerue and obey a Queene excommunicated by the Pope. But behold, marke here the end,
                           With what ſucceſſe.
                         the Spaniard ſet Yorke and Stanley together by the eares; afterward, they poyſoned Yorke, who dyed thereof miſerably, they pillage his goods, and his bodie hauing beene buried in the ground, three moneths after, the States of Holland cauſed it to be taken vp, and hanged on a Gallows in chains. (So much for York). Now for Stanley; they turn'd him and his Regiment out of Dauentry, and expoſed them to danger, leauing them to ſtray and wander vp and downe at the mercy of their Enemies, to their great deſpiſe and diſgrace; ſo that ſome periſhed lamentably with hunger, others fled away, with much adoe to eſcape and ſaue their liues. Sir William himſelfe went into Spaine, hoping to be there queſtionleſſe made much of, and well rewarded: but neyther was he welcome, nor receiued according to his expectation there, but abhorred and deteſted;

neuertheleſſe offered hee his ſeruice to aſſiſt in the inuading of England: but the Spaniards, who neuer truſt a Traytor twice, would not put their confidence in him: for the Spaniards hold ſtill this for a Maxime,
That it is lawfull to honour in ſome ſort a Traytor, but not to put any truſt in him.
                     
                     Sir William then thus learned, (but too late) that he had firſt wronged and betrayed himſelfe.
                     Theſe Treaſons cauſed the Earle of Leiceſter to be greatly hated of the Confederate Netherlanders,
                        
                           The States of the vnited Prouinces doe blame the Earle of Leiceſter.
                         becauſe that theſe Traytors had beene his Fauourites, and likewiſe Engliſhmen borne, which Nation that people free and too licentious in ſpeech, ceaſed not to offend by iniuries, vntill they were reprehended for it, and forbidden by the States. In the meane while, they wrote tedious lines to the Queene, by which they greatly condemned the Earle of Leiceſter, blaming him to haue vnaduiſedly adminiſtrated the Common-wealth in that which concerned their treaſure, the warre, and trading, and imputing the dammage and hindrances cauſed by theſe Traytors, to the reſtraint which he had made of their power, and his credulitie. The Queene, (as euer wiſe) for to examine and accord the buſineſſe, alſo to ſound if they would condiſcend to a peace with Spaine, ſends thither, to that end, the illuſtrious Lord Thomas Sackuile, Baron of Buckhurſt, whom, in Leiceſters abſence, her Maieſtie had newly made one of her Priuy-Councell; together with Norris and Clarke; all which, laboured with no leſſe care than fidelity about it. But the ire and choller of Leiceſter (who was of a minde that the Lord Buckhurſt ſhewed himſelfe ſo officious and diligent, to no other purpoſe but to ſpye and obſerue his actions) and the fauour and power which he had about the Queene, were ſo great,

that the Lord Buckhurſt at his returne was confined to his Houſe the ſpace of many moneths.
                     
                        
                           The States ſend for Leiceſter again, to raiſe the ſiege before Sluce.
                        Afterwards, the States called backe Leiceſter from England for to ſuccour their City of Sluce, which the Duke of Parma had then beleaguered with ſeuenteene thouſand men, battering it ſo ſuriouſly, that hee made a great breach: but Sir Roger Williams, Sir Francis Vere, and Sir N. Baskeruile, with both the Wallownes, and Engliſh Forces of that Garriſon, defended it along time couragiouſly with great praiſe and applauded valiancy; but Leiceſter, which ſhould haue ſuccoured them,
                           Leiceſter is moleſted.
                         being retyred, by reaſon of his weake force, they wery forced to yeeld.
                     And indeed the States hauing truely reſerued that Soueraigne degree and power which they at firſt had giuen him by words, would not furniſh him with a great and ſufficient Army, and hee dained not to ſubiect himſelfe to particulars of ſmall ranke and note, who vnder the name of States, ſtriued to domineere ouer him, notwithſtanding that their Gouernour had the ſame authority that Charles the Fifth had ouer his Commanders of the Low-Countries.
                     From thence deriued open hatred on both ſides, the which diſcouered themſelues yet apparantly, after that he had mentioned to agree vpon with Spaine: for their eares abhorr'd, and their hearts deteſted the very name of peace, as preiudiciall and obnoctious to their affaires.
                     
                        
                           Leiceſter goes about to make himſelfe Lord ouer their Cities.
                        Euen as then he perceiued his authority to diminiſh, hee had recourſe to fraudulous deceit, and reſolued to breede factions with the people there, and to make himſelfe Maſter of the City of Leyden, with other Townes. But being fruſtrated of his hope, of the loſſe of ſome with his men, & to the great diſcontentment that this action prouoked, (Queene ELIZABETH ſending for him) he gaue ouer the gouernement and free adminiſtration of the States of the Vnited Prouinces,
                           He is called home againe.
                         and was derided and laughed at of many, but moſt by thoſe who enuied him, hauing forſaken

the Title of his Excellencie, which neuer any Engliſh-man had taken vpon him before him.
                           
                              The Title of his Excellency.
                           
                           
                              Leiceſter diſtributes Medailles coyned en memory of his perſon, to thoſe of his faction.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Leiceſter, vpon his departure for England, diſtributed, for a perpectuall memory of his perſon, to ſuch as were of his faction, a Medaille or pieces of Gold which he had cauſed to be coyned; on the one ſide, there was his picture; on the other, a Flocke, with ſome loſt Sheepe, a Dogge, who going from them, turned backe his head to looke on them, as if it were for pitty, with this Inſcription;

                           Ie quite malgre moy,
                           J forſake to my griefe,
                        
And neere it this;

                           Non point le troupeau, mais les ingras.
                           Not the Flocke, but the vngratefull.
                        
And queſtionleſſe hee intended to inuade the Netherland Dominions for himſelfe: but thoſe Nations haue not only kept, by their care and diligence, the liberty which they hold by their Anceſtors, wholly to themſelues, againſt the Spaniards might, who warre as well with their art and deceits, as with their goods, as likewiſe againſt the French and Engliſh by craftineſſe & policy, yea, againſt the Prince of Orange himſelfe, who acted the Foxes part; but alſo they haue it maruellouſly increaſed by the fauour of their neighbouring friend; and which is more worthy admiration, is, that whereas other countries are ruinated by the war, theſe vnited Prouinces are inriched thereby.
                     The States eſtabliſhed in his roome,
                           The Estates doe put in Leiceſter; place, Prince Maurice of Naſſau.
                         for Gouernour of the vnited and confederate Prouinces, Prince Maurice of Naſsau, then about twenty yeeres of age, ſon to the Prince of Orange, by his Wife the Lady Anne de Saxe, Daughter

to that Heroick Elector Maurice; and Queene ELIZABETH eſtabliſhed in Leiceſters ſtead, Peregrine Bartue, Lord Willoughby of Eresby, Generall of the Engliſh auxiliary Forces which then were in the Low-Countries, whom thoſe of Leiceſters faction much troubled: for the Garriſons of Geertruiden-Berg, Worcom, Nerden, Heuſden, & aboue all, that of Middlebourgh, being at the Engliſh deuotion, excited troubles, vnder pretext that they had ſworne loyalty and obedience to the Queene. And Sir William Ruſsell, Gouernour of Fluſhing, hauing drawne to his ſide the inhabitants of the Townes of Emuid and of Campe, were miſtruſted by the Eſtates, to haue a determination to reduce the whole Iland of Zeland vnder the Engliſh:
                        
                           Leiceſters faction in the Low-Countries. Ruſſell ſuſpected.
                         and this ſuſpition was increaſed the more, by the comming of Englands Lord High Admirall out of England, who though hee much laboured to pacifie theſe troubles, the States neuertheleſſe poſſeſt with feare, diſſembled not their miſtruſtings, but witneſſed it both openly to the World by certaine pieces of Siluer, which ingeniouſly they cauſed to be coyned and ſtamped with the figure of two earthen Pots ſwimming vpon the Sea (according to the ancient Apologue) with this Inſcription;

                           Si nous nous hurtons, nous nous caſſerons.
                           Jf wee knocke one at another, wee ſhall be broken.
                        
And priuately by Letters which they wrote to the Queene, who (being moſt carefull of them, and yet in nothing forgetfull of her ſelfe, could prudently fore-ſee thoſe infinite dangers then apparant, the Spaniſh Fleete being then imminent,) commanded the Lord Willoughby to bring into ſubmiſſion ſuch Engliſh, as excited or ſtirred vp troubles; to be

puniſhed by the States, which hee moſt happily performed with the Prince Maurice of Naſsau, Leiceſter being then back,
                           Leiceſter auoids his aduerſaries accuſation.
                         and quickly finding out that the Baron of Buckhurſt, and others, prepared themſelues to accuſe him to haue ill adminiſtrated the affaires of Holland, and that therefore he ought to come into iudgement before the Councell Table, wiſely with-drew himſelfe priuately to the Queen, and proſtrating himſelfe humbly at her feet, beſeeched her Maieſtie to teſtifie and ſpeake for him, coniuring her not to receiue ignominiouſly him whom ſhe had ſent magnificently, neither to bury liuing and ſeeing, him, whom ſhee had raiſed from the duſt. He, by theſe ſweet and eloquent ſpeeches, calmed ſo her diſcontents, that moderating the anger of her wrath, ſhee receiued him into her fauour as before.
                     Therefore being called in queſtion, and brought before the Councell Table, he (whereas he ſhould haue appeared in an humble manner according to the cuſtome of others) tooke his place among the Lords of her Maieſties Priuy-Councell, and as the Clerke had begun to reade the chiefe Articles of his accuſation, interrupted him, complayning they had done him wrong to haue reſtrained thoſe publike inſtructions granted vnto him, to priuate ones; and, in appealing to the Queenes iudgement, auoyded and annihilated all accuſations, whereby his aduerſaries were much indignated: but they broke their anger in ſilence.
                     In this yeere, in the moneth of February, died Henry,
                        
                           The death of the Lord Neuill, Baron of Abergauenny.
                         Lord Neuill, Baron of Abergauenny, grand-child of Edward Neuill, who in King HENRY the Sixth's Reigne, enioyed the title of Baron of Abergauenny, by his wife, who was onely Daughter & Heire to R. Lord Beauchamp, Earle of Wigorn, and Baron of Abergauenny, by whoſe right, the Daughter and Heire of this Henry, Lord Neuill, challenging the title and honour of this ancient Barony, had a memorable ſuit in Law about it, with Edward Neuill, the next Heire-male to the ſaid Lordſhip, to whom the Caſtell of Abergauenny
                        
was legacied by Teſtament; and ſince, the honour and title of the ſame Barony was conferred and confirmed vnto him by Act of Parliament, where hee tooke place among the Peeres of that High Court, as the firſt Baron of England.
                     
                     
                        
                           And the Ducheſſe of Somerſet, being very aged;
                        There died alſo in the ſame yeere and moneth, foure Noble perſons, both illuſtrious and famous: the firſt was, the Lady Anne Stanhop, Ducheſſe of Somerſet, about ninetie yeeres of age, wife to Edward Seymor, late Duke of Somerſet, and Protector of England. This Ducheſſe, by meere enuy and hate ſhe bore to the Lady Katherine Parr, Queene of England, and Dowager of King HENRY the Eighth, excited diuers tragedies in the Noble Houſe of the Seymors, at Dudley Earle of Warwickes perſwaſion, during his plotting of the ruine of this puiſſant and princely Houſe; and all, to preuent, leſt ſhee, who was Wife to this Noble Protector, ſhould giue place or precedence to this Queene Dowager, who then was her Husbands Brothers wife. The next was, Sir Ralph Sadler,
                        
                           And Sir Ralph Sadler;
                         Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaſter, a prudent and learned man, whoſe worth and vertue had beene approued in diuers weighty and important affaires of State. He was the laſt Banneret of England: which worthy dignity of Knighthood had bin conferred on him at the famous Battel of Muſſelborough. After him, alſo died Sir Thomas Bromley,
                        
                           Alſo, Sir Thomas Bromley.
                         Lord High Chancellor of England, hauing ſcarce attained to the ſixtieth yere of his age, a man excellently well ſeene in the Law. Six dayes after, he was followed by Edward Manner,
                        
                           The Earle of Rutland dyes;
                         Earle of Rutland (to whom the Queene had choſen and appointed for his Succeſſour, the third of the Noble Houſe of Manner, a Noble man, moſt learned and skilfull in the Law, and humane Arts) hauing but the Lady Elizabeth, one onely Daughter for heire, then but very young, who was married to William Cecill, Baron of Burleigh,
                        
                           And Sir Chriſtopher Hatton
                         Lord High Treaſurer. Sir Chriſtopher Hatton, who was a Noble perſonage, excellently endued

with rare vertues, (flouriſhing at that time illuſtriouſly at the Court, as one whoſe merit had purchaſed him the honour to be dearely affectionate & intimate to her Maieſtie, in whoſe fauour his worth greatly aduanced him) was from a Courtier eſtabliſhed to this high dignity of Lord Chancellour of England,
                        
                           is made Lord High Chancellor.
                         not with little diſcontent of the Iudges and profeſſors of the Law, who ſince Church-men had bin depriued and diſmiſt of that honour, had iudiciouſly diſcharged that place, with no leſſe glory and equity, than prudence and diſcretion, which is the ſupreme magiſtracy of the Law; yet in former times paſt it was oftner prouided for with Eccleſiaſticall men, and Nobles, than of others: Neuertheleſſe, though Sir Chriſtopher Hatton had been aduanced to that place, by the ſubtill art of ſome Courtiers, who hoped, that by his abſence from Court, and the difficulty he ſhould haue to exerciſe duly ſo high and ſo weighty a Magiſtracy, ſhould weare out and diminiſh the great fauour he was in neere Queene ELIZABETH. Neuertheleſſe, hee behaued himſelfe in that high Seat of Iuſtice, diſcreetly and worthily, to the well-liking of the Queene, and admiration of all her Subiects, diſcharging that Dignity with as great magnificence and honour, as any whatſoeuer had done before him, ſtudying to ſupply by equitie, that which he wanted in the knowledge of the Law.
                     Sir Iohn Perot being this yeere ſent for out of Ireland,
                        
                           William Fitz-Williams, Lord Deputie of Ireland for the ſame time.
                         left that Kingdome very peaceable to Sir William Fitz-Williams for he had drawne from thoſe perſons whom hee ſuſpected to be apt to rebell, oathes and hoſtages, which they as ſoone granted vnto him, as hee demanded; for, not ſeeming any way to fauour rebellion, hee impriſoned diuers Iriſh Rebels; and ſuch as were more dangerouſly giuen to rebellion, he hanged them, ſhewing & admoniſhing the reſt of their duety, and the fidelity which they ought to their Soueraigne in ſo doubtfull a time. The Iriſh ſeeing the ſincere loue, reſpect, and affection he bore to them who were

true ſubiects, moſt willingly lent their eares thereunto, and were true obſeruers of his inſtructions.
                     
                        
                           The reaſon why it is a difficult thing to war againſt Jreland.
                        Hitherto (that I may a little ſtray) were the Iriſh warres very eaſie to the Engliſh: and eight hundred foot, with three hundred horſe, were eſteemed an inuincible Army: For Randolph, with ſixe hundred Engliſh, with much facility defeated O-Neale with foure thouſand Iriſh. Collier, in the yeere 1571. with his onely one Company, preuayled likewiſe againſt one thouſand Hebridians in Connach. The Butlers, with a great Company of the Rebels, were ouerthrowne by three hundred Horſe-men. And (to paſſe the reſt ouer) two Companies of foot, ſurprized in one day aboue twenty of the Iriſh Caſtels. But after that the Perots had by command daily exerciſed themſelues at home in their owne Countrey, and were well inſtructed in the diſcipline of Armes, and in the vſe of their Muskets, to reſiſt the Hebridians, and being practized in the wars of the Netherlands, had learned the arts of fortification, they vexed the Engliſh (as wee ſhall finde) with a difficult and dangerous warre.
                  
                  
                     
                     THE THIRTIETH and moſt maruelous yere of her Reigne,
                        Booke 3. 1588. the euer-remembred Yeere of the Lord. Anno Dom. 1588.
                     
                        TO this admirable yeere of Chriſt 1588.
                           A wonderfull and admirable Yeere.
                         are we now arriued: Which by Regiomontanus the Aſtrologian, was foretold about a hundred yeeres before, to be a Yeere of Wonder; and by the Germane Chronologers to be the Climacterical yeere of the World. The rumors of warres, which were before but ſlender relations, began now daily to be augmented, and were now become, not as before, a variable report, but an aſſured

certainty by the generall voice of all men; that the Spaniard had prepared a moſt inuincible Nauy againſt England; and had out of Italy, Sicilie, and alſo America,
                        
                           Great preparations are in hand in Spaine to aſſault and inuade England.
                         gathered into Spaine the old experienced Commanders, ſuch as were moſt famous Captaines, skilfull in military affaires.
                     For the Pope of Rome, with certaine religious and deuout Spaniards, and ſome Engliſh Fugitiues, had long agoe diligently exhorted the Spaniard to inuade and conquer England, but that counſell was by the Portugals warres for tenne yeeres before interrupted; which now they carefully reiterated, and with much inſtigation perſwaded him; that ſince Heauen had heaped vpon him infinite benefits and bleſſings, by ſubiecting to his Empire the Kingdome of Portugall, with the Eaſt-India, and many other wealthy Ilands;
                           By what counſell.
                         that it was now his part, of duety to enterprize ſomething, which might bee agreeable and pleaſing to God. That there could be nothing more acceptable to God, nor ought more worthy himſelfe, than the aduancing of his Church. That the Church could not with more glory and merit be aduanced, than by the conqueſt of England, and there, by the extirpation of Hereſie, to plant the Roman Catholique Religion. That theſe warres would be moſt iuſt, not onely becauſe they were moſt neceſſary, but becauſe they were vndertaken to propagate the Religion of Chriſt, ſeeing that the Queene of England being excommunicated, notwithſtanding obſtinately perſiſted againſt the Church of Rome, had ſuccoured the Rebels in the Netherlands, moleſted the Spaniards with continuall pyracies, had ſurprized and pillaged diuers townes both in Spaine and America, and lately, violating the Maieſty of all Princes, had cauſed the Queene of Scots to be put to death: Therefore ſuch warres ſhould bee no leſſe profitable than iuſt.
                     Becauſe by this meanes the King of Spaine, making addition

to his Empire of the moſt flouriſhing Kingdomes, he might eaſily extinguiſh the Netherlandiſh Rebellion, which was nouriſhed (as it were) by the breath of England, hee ſhould aſſure to himſelf the voyages to both India's in ſafetie, and ſo leſſen the annuall expences, laid out for the conuoying of his Fleetes forward and backward. To prooue this to him with more facility,
                           The reaſon why.
                         they ſuggeſted that the Engliſh Nauy was neither in number, greatneſſe, nor ſtrength, comparable to the Spaniſh, (the Portugall Fleet being then added.) That England was altogether vnfortified, neyther was it furniſhed with Commanders, Souldiers, Horſe, or prouiſion for warres, but deſtitute both of friends and money; beſides, there were many through the Kingdome, which were addicted to Papiſtrie, and would ſoone ioyne themſelues in his ayde. Laſt of all, ſo great were the forces of the King of Spaine, both by Sea and Land, and the vertue of the Spaniards ſuch, that none would dare to oppoſe him, and therefore they promiſed aſſuredly a certaine victory. To this enterpriſe alſo, that God had preſented a fit opportunity: for the Turke hauing then cōcluded a truce with him, and the French beeing intangled with inteſtine warres, were neither to be doubted or feared. That it was more facile to ſubdue England than the Low-Countries; becauſe the paſſage out of Spaine into England, is more ſhort and commodious, and through a vaſt and open Sea, but into the Netherlands of greater length and difficultie, through a narrow Sea, and very neere adiacent to England. That the Netherlands were in a manner continually a ſtrong Bulwarke, being on all parts fortified with Townes and Caſtles, but England not with any; and therefore it would be an eaſie matter euen at the firſt, in an inſtant, for him to penetrate to the very heart of the Land with an Army. Finally, according to that military Axiome: That the Enemy ſhould not be left behinde; therefore it was moſt neceſſary for the Spaniard to ſubdue England, being a mortall

enemy, by whoſe aſſiſtance the Low-Countries had ſo long ſuſtained a great warre; and with whom they could not at all ſtand; So that if England were but once conquered, the Netherlands muſt of neceſſity yeeld to ſubiection.
                     
                        
                           They conſult about the meanes how to aſſault and ſubdue England.
                        Theſe matters thus reſolued, they began ſeriouſly to deliberate vpon ſome meanes for the inuaſion of England. Aluarus Baſſanus, Marqueſſe of Santa Croix, Generall of the Nauy, was of a minde; That before all, ſome Port or other in Holland or Zealand, ſhould by thoſe Land-troupes which the Prince of Parma had, and ſome few Spaniſh Ships ſent before, be vnawares to them ſurprized, where the Spaniſh Fleete might make their retreate, and from thence moſt opportunely begin the inuaſion, becauſe that in the Brittiſh Sea, being tempeſtuous, the windes are ſubiect to often changing, the ebbing and flowing thereof principally to be obſerued, the Fleete could not ſafely ride. Of this aduice likewiſe was the Prince of Parma, who earneſtly vrged this expedition. Others notwithſtanding diſallowed thereof, as being a thing difficult, full of danger, requiring much time, great labour, large expence, yet vncertaine of ſucceſſe; neyther could it be done ſecretly or vnawares, and by the Engliſh would eaſily be hindred and fruſtrated. And theſe were of opinion; That one might at leſſe charges, and with more facilitie, aſſault and ſubdue England, if at the mouth of the Thames a puiſſant Army of Spaniards and Flemmings were placed and conuayed in a powerfull Nauy, to take at the firſt (vnawares) the City of London, the Capitall and Chiefe of the Kingdome. This ſeeming eaſie, was reſolued vpon, and ſpeedily determined to be put in execution; yet ſome, neuertheleſſe, were of a mind, that war ſhould firſt be proclaymed by a Herauld, and that in ſo doing, it would be a ſleight to take away all ſuſpition from all Neighbouring-Princes, and moue the Queene to call to her helpe, forreine

ſouldiers, (who as mercenary, being inſolent and vile) would behaue themſelues rudely, and tumultuouſly, ranſacking and pillaging the Countries in ſuch ſort, that it would take away the loue of her Subiects, and put England in confuſion. But theſe mindes were not ſeconded by thoſe who were obſtinate, as relying vpon the aſſurance of their forces and ſtrength, contenting themſelues to put their cauſe, their Nauy, & Armada's into the Popes hand, and into the interceſſions of the Catholiques to the Saints; and to afright and terrifie England, they ſet out a Libell, printed, containing the particulars of ſo great an equipage, which truely was ſuch, that in Spaine, Italy, and Cicilia, the Spaniards were amazed, & aſtoniſhed at it; and therefore audaciouſly termed it:
The inuincible NAVY.
                        
                     
                     The Duke of Parma cauſed alſo Ships to bee built in Flanders by the commandement of the Spaniard,
                        
                           Preparation in Flanders.
                         and likewiſe a number of Flat-bottom'd Boats, each of them bigge enough to tranſport thirtie Horſes, with Bridges fitting to them; hyred Mariners out of the Eaſt-Land Countries of Germany; prouided Pikes ſharpened at the one end, and ſhod with Iron, with hookes on one ſide; twenty thouſand Veſſels, and an infinite number of Wicker Baskets, and placed in the Sea-Townes of Flanders, one hundred and three Companies of foot, and foure thouſand horſe, amongſt which were ſeuen hundred Engliſh Fugitiues, a moſt contemned and deſpiſed Company;
                           Traytors hated.
                         Neyther were Stanley their Generall, nor Weſtmerland, nor any other who had aſſiſted eyther with purſe or perſon, regarded: but for their impietie againſt their Countrey, prohibited all acceſſe, and deſeruedly, and as ill preſages, not without deteſtation, reiected. And Pope Sixtus the Fifth, leſt hee ſhould ſeeme to be wanting, renewes vnto Cardinall Alane
                        
(an Engliſh man, ſent into the Low-Countries) [The Declaratory Bulls of Pius the Fifth, and Gregorie the Thirteenth,
                        
                           The Popes aſsiſtance.
                        ] excommunicates the Queene, depoſes her from her gouernement, abſolues her Subiects from their allegiance, publiſheth in print the [Cruſado] as againſt Turks and Infidels, whereby out of the Treaſury of the Church, hee beſtowes vpon all aſſiſtants plenarie indulgence: whereupon the Marqueſſe of [Burgaw] of the Houſe of Auſtria, the Duke of Paſtraua, Amadaeus of Sauoy, Veſpaſian Gonzaga, Iohn de Medices, and diuers other noble Gentlemen ſerued in this warre as Volunteers.
                     
                        
                           Preparation in England
                        On the other ſide, Queene ELIZABETH, leſt ſhee ſhould be vnawares oppreſt, with ſingular diligence prepares as many ſhips and warlike neceſſaries as was poſſible. And ſhee her-ſelfe (who was of a piercing iudgement in diſtinguiſhing of diſpoſitions, and when ſhee was at her owne election, without commendation of others, alwaies happy) deſigned by name the principall Officers to the ſeuerall Offices in the Nauie;
                           By Sea,
                         and made Charles Howard of [Effingham] Lord high Admirall of England, Generall; of whoſe good ſucceſſe ſhee was very well perſwaded, as a man whom ſhe knew to be skilfull in Nauigation, prouident, valiant, induſtrious, and of great authority amongſt Sea-men, by reaſon both of his moderation and Nobility. Shee ſends him ſeaſonably enough to the Weſt parts of England; where Drake, whom ſhee made Vice-Admirall, ioyned himſelfe with him; Shee commands Henrie Seimer, the ſecond ſonne of the Duke of Sommerſet, to lye in waite vpon the Belgique ſhores, with fortie Ships, Engliſh and Dutch, to hinder Parma's comming out of the Riuers with his forces; Although there wanted not ſome who earneſtly aduiſed to expect the Enemy, and receiue him in a Land-battel, as it was deliberated in HENRY the Eighth's Reigne, when the French threatned England with a mightie Nauy.
                     
                        For the Land-ſeruice, there were twenty thouſand Souldiers diſperſed vpon the South ſhores: beſides, two Armies of choyce trained Souldiers were leuied and enrolled;
                           And Land.
                         Of the one conſiſting of one thouſand horſe, and two and twenty thouſand foot; Leiceſter was Generall, and had his Campe at Tilbury, not far from the mouth of the Thames; (for the Enemy had certainely determined to approch London firſt.) And of the other which conſiſted of thirtie foure thouſand foote, and two thouſand horſe for the Queenes guard, ſhee made the Baron of Hunſdon Generall.
                     
                        Arthur, Lord Grey, Sir Francis Knollys,
                        
                           Conſultation for defence.
                         Sir Iohn Norris, Sir Richard Bingham, Sir Roger Williams, Knights, great and expert Souldiers, were appointed to conſult about the Land-ſeruice; They aduized, That all thoſe places which were fit for the Enemies approch, eyther from Spaine, or the Low-Countries, as, Milford-Hauen, Falmouth, Plimouth, Portland, the Ile of Wight, Portſmouth, the Downes vpon the Shore of Kent, the Thames mouth, Harwich, Yarmouth, Hull, &c. ſhould be fortified with workes and with Garriſons; that the trayned Souldiers vpon all the Sea-coaſts, ſhould meet, vpon giuing a ſigne, to defend theſe places, they ſhould with all their endeuour hinder the Enemies landing; But if hee ſhould happen to land, that they ſhould waſte the Countrey farre and neere, ſpoyle euery thing that was vſefull, that he might finde no victuals but what he brought vpon his ſhoulders; and to keepe the Enemy continually buſied and diſtracted with aſſiduous alarmes, and crying, [Arme, arme,] day and night; But that they ſhould not fight till other Commanders ſhould ioyne their forces with them; That amongſt the Leaders, they ſhould nominate one which ſhould command the forces of euery ſeuerall Prouince: But it is ſuperfluous to ſet downe in particular what inland Prouinces were appoynted to guard both the ſhores, what number, what armes, and what

manner of fight was preſcribed by them.
                     About this time, there were diuers who made often remonſtrances to the Queene, that the Spaniards were not more dreadfull abroad,
                           And concerning the Papiſts at home.
                         than the Pontificians dangerous at home; for that the Spaniards had not dared to haue entred into hoſtility with England, but vpon confidence of and from them, and therefore that [ſome pretences were to be deuiſed to make them ſhorter by the head;] alledging the example of HENRY the Eighth, when the Emperour and the French King, vpon the Popes inſtigation, were ready to inuade England, Preſently, as ſoone as hee had cauſed the Marqueſſe of Exceter, the Baron Montacute, Edw. Neuill, and others, whom hee ſuſpected to fauor the Enemy, to be executed, the inuaſion fell with them; but ſhee refuſing this counſell, as too cruell, thought it ſufficient to commit to priſon to [Wisbich] in the Fen-Countries, certaine of the Pontificians, and thoſe none of prime note neyther. And hauing an eye and a care of euery place, with frequent Letters excites thoſe of the Nobility and Gentry, which were without them ready enough, giues inſtruction what was to be done in Ireland by [Fitz-Williams] the Deputy; Admoniſheth the King of Scotland, both by his owne Seruants, and her Meſſengers to be vigilant ouer the Papiſts,
                           The King of Scotlands alacrity againſt the Spaniards.
                         and Spaniſh Faction in his Country: But hee well knowing how great a tempeſt and deſtruction threatned him, out of his perpetuall loue to true Religion, and the Queene, of his owne accord, had now before refuſed to giue audience to the Biſhop of Dunblan, ſent to him from the Biſhop of Rome; and had cauſed a League to be made amongſt the Proteſtants in Scotland to reſiſt the Spaniards; And hee himſelfe, marching with his Army into [Annand] hauing taken Maxwels campe, who contrary to his faith giuen, was then lately returned out of Spaine; and enclining to the Spaniſh faction, cauſed him to be caſt into priſon, proclaymed the Spaniards Enemies, and

with great alacrity prouided armes againſt them.Booke 3·
                     
                     Amongſt theſe great preparations of Warre on both ſides, ouertures of peace were neuertheleſſe made.
                           Conference of peace in the meane time.
                         About two yeeres before, when the Prince of Parma had conſidered with himſelfe how difficult a thing it was to end the Low-Countrey warre, while they were daily aided with ſupplies from the Queene, had by Letters (vſing alſo the aſſiſtance of Iames Crofts, a Priuy-Counceller, a man very ſtudious of peace, and of Andrew Loe, and others) ſeriouſly negotiated for a treaty of peace, and that hee had authority from the Spaniard to that purpoſe; Shee fearing that this was but a pretence, whereby to make a breach of friendſhip betwixt her and the Confederate-Prouinces, and ſecretly to draw them to the Spaniard, deferred the matter for a time. But now that the imminent warre might be auerted and auoyded, ſhe reſolued to treat of peace, but with the Sword in her hand, and the Duke of Parma refuſed not the treaty.
                     Therefore, in February, there were ſent into Flanders,
                        
                           Commiſsioners ſent to that end into Flanders.
                         
                        Henrie, Earle of Derby, William Brooke, Lord Cobham, Iames Crofts, Controller of her Houſhold, Valentine Dale, and Iames Rogers, Doctors of the Lawes, who being with all humility receiued in the Dukes name, they forthwith ſent Dale vnto him, to conſult of the place of meeting, and to peruſe his Commiſſion from the Spaniard. Hee appointed a place neere to [Oſtend,] not in [Oſtend] it ſelfe, which was now held againſt the King by the Engliſh; and promiſed to ſhew his Commiſſion at the meeting. He aduized them to be ſpeedy, leſt ſomething might fall out which might diſturbe or interrupt the treaty of peace. Richardot ſaid openly, [That hee knew not what might bee done to England in the meane time.] Not long after, Rogers was ſent to the Prince, by the Queenes expreſſe commandment, to know certainly, if the deſigne for the inuaſion of England were yet enterprized, which both hee and

                        Richardot ſeemed to intend. Hee affirmed, That hee had not ſo much as thought of the inuaſion of England. When he deſired a quicke diſpatch and expedition of that affaire, hee blamed in ſome manner Richardot, who was ſorry to haue vttered any ſuch words concerning Englands inuaſion.
                     
                        
                           Propoſitions of the Engliſh anſwered.
                        The twelfth of Aprill, the Earle of Arenberg, Champigny, Richardot, Doctor Maeſie, and Garnier, Commiſſioner from the Duke of Parma, ſat in Commiſſion with the Engliſh vnder Tents, neere the Towne of Oſtend, to whom they gaue place and precedence; and after their proteſtations that the Duke had full power giuen him to treate and conclude a Peace, the Engliſh propounded to them, that before all things it was requiſite to embrace a truce. But they refuſed it, alledging, that if a Peace was not forthwith concluded, it would be preiudicious to the Spaniard, who ſince ſixe moneths, had to their great charges maintained a puiſſant Army. The Engliſh inſiſting, replyed, that that Peace was promiſed, before thoſe troupes were conueyed into Flanders. They anſwered againe, that it was true, they had promiſed it ſixe moneths agoe, but that it was not then accepted. Moreouer, that it was not in the Queenes power to vndertake it for the Hollanders and Zealanders, who daily acted deeds of hoſtility. But the Engliſh maintained, that it would be generall for all the Queenes Dominions, and likewiſe for the Kingdome of Scotland. Yet they neuertheleſſe would not agree thereunto, but meerely for thoſe foure Cities which the Queen then had in poſſeſſion, as Oſtend, Fluſhing, Bergen vp Zoom, and the Breele, and that during the ſaid Treaty, and twentie dayes after, prouided that in the meane while it was lawfull to the Queene of England to aſſault Spaine, and to the King of Spaine to inuade England, as well out of Spaine, as of Flanders. During that time thus runned in ſpeech about this Truce, and the place appoynted for the conference,

which at laſt was appoynted at Bourbourgh, Sir W. Crofts, who for the great deſire hee had of peace, was gone to Bruxels, without the knowledge of the reſt of the Commiſſioners, propounded in particular ſome Articles, for which hee afterwards was impriſoned vpon the Earle of Leiceſters accuſation (though that to the iudgement of others, hee ought not to haue beene reproued or diſauowed) (yet it is not lawfull to Commiſſioners to exceede the limits of their Commiſſions preſcribed vnto them.) Finally, the Engliſh ſeeing they could not obtaine a full and intyre ceſſation of Armes, nor to ſee at all the Commiſſion containing power for the Duke of Parma to treat of peace, they propounded:
THat the ancient alliances betweene the Kings of England, and the Dukes of Burgundie, might be renewed and confirmed. That the Flemmings might peaceably enioy their priuiledges, and ſerue God with libertie of conſcience. That the Spaniards, and other ſtrangers might be ſent out of Flanders, to ridde the Flemmings, and the neighbouring-Prouinces of all feare▪ And that if they would grant theſe things, the Queene, to ſhew that ſhee had not taken vp Armes for her owne particular intereſt, but for the neceſsary defence both of the Flemmings, and her ſelfe, would willingly hearken vnto any reaſonable conditions touching the Townes which ſhee then poſſeſsed in the Low-Countries, paying the mony which ſhee had laide out about them.
                     
                     Whereunto the Dukes Deputies anſwered:
THat when it would pleaſe them friendly to conferre with them about the renewing of their ancient alliances, there ſhould be no diſagreement

in that regard. That ſtranger Princes had nothing to doe with the Flemmings priuiledges, of grace graunted as well vnto the reconciled Townes and Prouinces, as vnto the reſt which by force of Armes haue beene brought vnto obedience. That their ſtranger-Souldiers were of neceſsitie retained there, becauſe they were vp in armes both in Holland, England, and France. As for Townes taken from the King, and expences of money, the King of Spaine might well demand recompence of the Queene, of many thouſands of Crownes ſpent in the warres of the Low-Countries ſince her aſsiſting and taking into her protection the rebellious Flemmings.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Complaint made vnto the Duke of Parma.About this time, Dr. Dale, by the Queens cōmandement, was ſent vnto the Duke, to make a friendly complaint vnto him of a Booke lately ſet forth by one Allin, an Engliſh Cardinall, by which hee admoniſhed the Nobles and people of England and Ireland, to ioyne with the forces of Spaine vnder the Dukes conduct, for the execution of Pope Sixtus the Fifth his Sentence publiſhed by a Bull againſt the Queene, by which he declared her an Heretique illegitimate, and cruell againſt the Queene of Scots, &c. and commanded her Subiects to aſſiſt the Duke againſt her. Many of thoſe Bulls were printed at Antwerpe, to be diſperſed in England. The Duke made him anſwere, that hee had not ſeene any ſuch Booke or Bull, and that hee would not vndertake any thing in the Popes name, yet that hee was to obey his King. Moreouer, that he honoured and admired ſo much the Queene for her Royall vertues, that next vnto the King, he made more account of her Maieſtie, than of any other Prince. That hee had counſelled the King to treate of that peace which would be more profitable to the Engliſh than to the Spaniards; for, (quoth hee) if the Spaniards be ouercome, they can eaſily recouer their loſſe again:

but if you be once vanquiſhed, your Kingdome is vtterly loſt. Whereupon Doctor Dale replyed, That the Queene was powerfull enough to defend her Kingdome, and that himſelfe might well iudge, according to his graue wiſdome, that ſhee could not eaſily be ouerthrowne by the loſſe of one battell, ſeeing the King of Spaine himſelfe, by ſo long a warre, could not as yet recouer the inheritance of his Anceſtors in the Low-Countries. Well, (ſaid hee) theſe things are in the hands of the Almightie God.
                     Afterwards, the Commiſſioners had many conferences and alterations, and, as it were, weaued the ſame webbe againe. When the Engliſh deſired a toleration of Religion to be granted but for two yeres to the [Vnited Prouinces,] it was anſwered, That [as the Spaniard interceded not in the like kinde for the Engliſh Catholikes: ſo they hoped that the Queene, in her owne wiſedome, would forbeare to requeſt any thing of the Spaniard preiudiciall to his honour, his oath, and his conſcience.] When they required re-payment of the money which the States of Brabant owed the Queene, they anſwered, That [that money was lent without the Kings priuity or authoritie. But all accounts beeing caſt vp, it might appeare both how much that money was, and how much the King had ſpent in this warre, to whom more ought to be paid.] By ſuch kinde of anſweres, they deluded the Engliſh, vntill the Spaniſh ARMADA approched the coaſt of England, and the thunder of their Ordnance was heard from the Sea. Then receiuing a conuoy from the Prince, (who, during this treatie, had brought almoſt all his forces to the ſhore) by his Commiſſioners were honourably conducted to the borders neere Calais. So vaniſhed this treatie into nothing;
                           The conference breakes vp.
                         vndertaken by the Queene (as the wiſeſt ſort of men iudged) to auert the Spaniſh Fleete, continued by the Spaniard, to ſurprize England vnawares, & vnprouided: ſo that both of them ſeemed to ſew the Foxes tale to the Lyone skin.
                     
                        That Spaniſh ARMADA,
                        
                           The Spaniſh Armada
                         the greateſt and beſt furniſhed with men, munition, and all warlike preparations that euer the Ocean did ſee, and arrogantly named Inuincible, conſiſted of one hundred and thirtie ſhips, in which were nineteene thouſand, two hundred and ninety ſouldiers, eight thouſand, three hundred and fiftie Mariners, two thouſand eightie Gally-ſlaues chayned, two thouſand, ſix hundred and thirty peeces of great Ordnance. The Generall was Alphonſus Perez Guzman, Duke of Medina Sidonia. (For Antonius Columna, Duke of Palian, of S. Cruz, or of the holy Croſſe, deſigned Generall, dyed during the preparation) and vnder him was Iohn Martinus Recaldus, a moſt skilfull Nauigator. The third before the Calends of Iune,28. Maij.
                         they looſed from out of the Riuer of Tagus, and bending their courſe towards the Groin in Galicia,
                        
                           Sets forth, and is diſperſed.
                         by a ſtrong tempeſt they were diſperſed, three Gallies with three Oares on a

ſeat, beeing by the induſtry of Dauid Guin, an Engliſh ſlaue, and the perfidiouſneſſe of the Turkiſh Gally-ſlaues, carried to the coaſt of Frāce, after ſome time, with great difficulty met at the Groin, and the Hauens thereabouts. So diſtreſſed and weather-beaten was it, as it was reported, that the Queene was conſtantly reſolued not to expect it that yeere, and Secretary Walſingham wrote to the Lord Admirall, (as if the Warre were at an end) to ſend back foure of the greateſt Ships. Hee (a man not very credulous) excuſing himſelfe fairely, intreated him not to beleeue anything in ſo important a matter, without mature deliberation; and deſired that hee might retaine them, though at his owne charges. And hauing a proſperous winde, ſayled towards Spaine, with hope to ſurprize the Weather-beaten ſhips in the Harbours. When he was almoſt vpon the coaſts of Spaine, the winde became South: and hee, who was commanded to defend the Engliſh
                        
ſhores, fearing leſt they with the ſame wind might arriue in England vneſpied, returned to Plimouth.
                     
                     
                        
                           Sets out againe.
                        With the ſame wind, the twelfth of Iuly, according to the Iulian computation, the Duke of Medina, with his whole Fleet, weighed ancor againe, and ſet forward from the Groin. About two dayes after, he ſent before into the Low-Countries, Roderick Telius, to aduertize the Duke of Parma of the approch of the ARMADA, and to informe him of other needfull buſineſſe. For hee had commandement to ioyne himſelfe with the Forces and Fleete of the Prince of Parma, and to waft them ouer into England, vnder the protection of his Armada, and to ſet on ſhore his landforces at the mouth of the Thames. Now what was done euery ſeuerall day in this Nauigation, according to the moſt credible relations, both of the Spaniards, and our owne Countreymen, that the truth may more cleerely appeare, I wil briefly deliuer.
                     
                        The ſixteenth day, there was a great calme, and a thicke cloud couered the ſea till noone, and then a ſtrong North-winde blew, then a South-winde till mid-night, and then an Eaſt: So that the ARMADA beeing much ſcattered, could hardly re-collect it ſelfe, till it came within ſight of England, which was the nineteenth day of the moneth: which day the Lord High-Admirall of England, being certainely aduertized by Captaine Flemming, that the Spaniſh Fleet was come into the Brittiſh ſea, (vulgarly called the Channell,) and diſcouered not farre from the Lizard, the winde then keeping the Engliſh Nauy in the Port,
                           The Engliſh Nauy ſets out.
                         with great difficulty, and no leſſe induſtry, and alacrity of the mariners, (himſelfe not diſdaining to pull at the hawſer amongſt the common Souldiers) at length brought them into the open Sea.
                     The next day, the Engliſh came within ken of the Spaniſh ARMADA, built high like Towres and Caſtles,

rallied into the forme of a Creſcent, whoſe horns were at leaſt ſeuen miles diſtant, comming ſlowly on, and although vnder full ſayles, yet as though the windes laboured, and the Ocean ſighed vnder the burthen of it, the Engliſh purpoſely ſuffered them to paſſe by them, that they might purſue them with a fauouring gale of winde.
                     The one and twentieth of Iuly, the Lord high Admirall of England, ſending before him a Pinnace called the Defiance,
                        
                           The firſt fight.
                         by diſcharging a peece of Ordnance out of her, prouoked them to the fight, and preſently out of his Ship called the Arke-Royall, the Admirall thundred vpon a Spaniſh Ship, which hee thought to haue beene the Admirall of Spaine, but was the Ship of Alphonſo Leua. At the ſame inſtant, Drake, Hawkins, Furbiſher, peale terribly vpon the Reare which Ricaldus commanded; who performed all the parts of a valiant and diſcreete Commander, to ſtay the Ships vnder

his gouernement from flying, deſiring to ioyn with the body of the Fleet, vntill his owne Ship, extremely battered with ſhot, became vnſeruiceable; and with much difficulty mingled her ſelfe with the reſt of the Fleet: Then did the Duke of Medina re-collect his diſperſed ſhips, and with full ſayle held on his courſe. Neither could he do otherwiſe,
                           The ability of the Engliſh Flees.
                         in regard both that the Winde ſtood faire for the Engliſh, and that their ſhips inuaded, retyred, and re-inuaded them vpon euery quarter with incredible celerity. When they had continued the fight ſharply two houres, the Lord high Admirall of England thought good to retyre, in reſpect that hee wanted forty ſhips which were not yet come out of the Hauen.
                     The night following; a Spaniſh Ship, called the St. Katherine, being very much battered in this conflict, was receiued into the middeſt of the army to bee repayred. And a huge great Cantabrica. 
                        Cataloniā
                         ſhip of Oquenda, in which

was the Treaſurer of the Fleet, was ſet on fire with Gun-powder, by the deuice of a Flemmiſh Gunner. But the fire was ſeaſonably quenched by other ſhippes ſent in for the purpoſe; amongſt which, a Gallion of Peter Valdes, falling foule with another Ship, and her fore-maſt intangled & broken with the others ſayleyard, the Ayre being ſtormy and the night darke, and none able to relieue or ſuccour her, was forſaken, and became a prey to Sir Francis Drake,
                        
                           Peter Valdes taken.
                         who ſent Valdes to Dertmouth, and gaue the Ship to bee rifled and pillaged by the Souldiers. And Drake being that night commanded to carry the Lanthorne in the poope lighted, neglected it: for following certaine Germane Merchants Hulkes, whom hee tooke to be enemies, it was the occaſion that almoſt all the Engliſh Fleet lay ſtill, becauſe they could not ſee the Lanthorne.
                     Neyther could hee and the reſt of the Engliſh ſhipping come neere the Admirall,

till the euening following, who the precedent night, with the ſhips called the Mary, and the Roſe, hotly purſued the Spaniards. All this day, the Duke was ſecurely buſied in ſetting his Fleet in array, and commanded Alphonſo Leua to draw vp, and ioyne the auant-gard and the reare together, and aſſigned euery ſeuerall Ship his ſtation, according to the forme preſcribed in Spaine, with paine of death to euery one that forſooke their ſtations, ſends Enſigne Glich, to the Duke of Parma, to informe him of the eſtate of the Fleete; and committed the Ship of Oquenda in Biſcay,
                        
                           The Ship of Oquenda taken.
                         (hauing firſt remoued into other Ships, the Kings treaſure and the mariners) to the mercy of the Seas. Which the ſame day, with fifty mariners and ſouldiers more or leſſe, miſerably maimed and halfe burnt, fell into the Engliſh mens hands, and ſent to the Port of Weymouth.
                     
                     The three and twentieth day of the moneth, at breake of the day, the Spaniards hauing

a proſperous Northwinde, turned ſayle towards the Engliſh, who to get aduantage of the winde, eaſily turned themſelues towards the Weſt, and after they had contended to preuent each other of the benefit of the winde, both parts prepared themſelues to the fight, and fought confuſedly, and with various ſucceſſe, while in one place the Engliſh valiantly fetched off the London ſhips dangerouſly circled in by the Spaniards, in another, Ricaldus then in danger, with no leſſe reſolution of the Spaniards, was diſingaged. There was neuer more lightning and thundring of the Artillery, then there was on both ſides, moſt of which notwithſtanding went in vaine from the Spaniſh, flying ſheere ouer the Engliſh Ships. Onely Cocke an Engliſh-man, in a ſmall Barke of his owne, dyed gloriouſly in the middeſt of his Enemies. For the Engliſh Ships beeing much leſſe thā the Spaniards, with great dexterity inuaded the enemy, and hauing diſcharged

their Ordnance, retyred preſently into the open Sea, and leuelled all their Shot with a certaine and ſucceſſefull ayme, againſt the great and ſluggiſh Ships of the Spaniards: And yet the Engliſh high Admirall thought not fit to grapple,
                           The Engliſh Admirals prouidence.
                         and ſo try the fortune of a fight hand to hand, as many inconſiderately perſwaded: For the enemy had a ſtrong and wel appointed Army abroad, which hee wanted: their Ships were farre more in number, greater of burden, and ſtronger, and higher of building, and they fighting from aboue, threatned nothing leſſe than certaine deſtructiō to them that fought againſt them vpon the lower Ships: And hee did likewiſe fore-ſee, that the loſſe of his men would be much more preiudiciall to him, than the victory could be profitable; For beeing vanquiſhed, hee ſhould haue brought the Queene into almoſt ineuitable danger; and being Victor, hee ſhould onely haue a little blaze of glory, for the diſſipation and diſcomfiture

of his Enemy, and ſlaughter of his Souldiers.
                     The foure and twentieth day of the Moneth, there was a mutuall intermiſſion of all hoſtile acts. The Admirall ſent diuers ſmall Barkes to the next ſhores of England, for ſupply of ammunition, and diuided his whole Fleet into foure ſquadrons; the firſt of which himſelfe cōmanded; the ſecond, Drake; the third, Hawkins; and the fourth, Forbiſher; and appoynted certain Pinkes or Pinnaces out of euery ſquadron, to make impreſſions vpon the enemy at the dead of night in ſeuerall quarters; but a calme following, that counſel wanted ſucceſſe.
                     The fiue and twentieth, which was Saint Iames his day, a Gallion of Portugall, called the S. Anne, which could not keepe company with the reſt of the Fleete, was ſet vpon by diuers ſmall Engliſh Barkes; In ayde of whom, Laeua and Diego Telles Enriques, with three Galleaſses, made out, whom the Lord Admirall, & the Lord

                        Thomas Howard in the Golden Lyon (which by reaſon of the great calme, were faine to be towed by fiſher-Boats) ſo battered with the canon,
                           The third fight.
                         that not without great difficulty, and with great loſſe of men, they brought off; after which time the Galleaſses neuer offered to fight: The Spaniards report, that that day the Engliſh at a neerer diſtance than euer, with their great Ordnance extremely rent the Spaniſh Admirall, being at that time in the Rere; and hauing ſlaine many of their men, ſhot downe their maine Maſt, but that Mexia and Recaldus came opportunely, and repelled the Engliſh. That then the Spaniſh Admirall, accompanied with Recaldus and others, inuaded the Engliſh Admirall, which eſcaped by the ſudden changing of the Winde; that thereupon the Spaniards left the purſuit, and holding on their courſe, ſent another meſſenger to the Duke of Parma, with all ſpeed to ioine his Fleet with the Kings ARMADA,
                        
and to ſend ſupply of Bullets. Of this the Engliſh were ignorant, who write, that they ſhot off the Lanthorne from one of the Spaniſh Ships, the beake-head from another, and terribly battered a third; that the None-ſuch, and Mary Roſe, hauing had onely a ſhort conflict with the Spaniards, left them, and with other Shippes went to the reſcue of the Triumph then in danger. So that the relations of them that were preſent at the ſame actions, are different for the manner, while euery one remembers that which hee obſerued of his owne ſide.
                     
                        
                           Knights created for their valours, by the Right Honourable Charles Howard, Earle of Notingham, Lord High-Admirall.The day following, the Lord High-Admiral of England, for their valour and fortitude, Knighted Thomas Howard, the Lord Sheffield, Roger Towneſend, Iohn Hawkins, and Martin Furbiſher. And it was concluded, thenceforth not to aſſault the Enemy, till they came to the Streights of Calais, where Henry Seymor, and William Winter expected their comming. So the Spaniſh Fleet
                        
went on with a full Southweſt winde, the Engliſh fleet following them. But ſo far was the title of Inuincible, or their terrible aſpect vnable to affright our Engliſh ſhores; that the Youth of England, (leauing their Parents, Wiues, Children, Kindred, and Friends, out of their dearer loue to their Countrey) with Ships hyred at their owne charges, ioyned themſelues in great numbers with the Fleete, with generous alacrity,
                           Diuers Noble-men and Knights of England, ioyne themſelues with the Engliſh Fleet before Calais.
                         and incredible courage; and amongſt others, the Earles of Oxford, Northumberland, Cumberland, Sir Thomas and Sir Robert Cecill, Sir Henrie Brooke, Sir Charles Blunt, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir William Hatton, Sir Robert Carey, Sir Ambroſe Willoughby, Sir Thomas Gerard, Sir Arthur Gorge, and other worthie Nobles, of great note and account.
                     The ſeuen and twentieth day of the moneth,
                           The Spaniſh Fleet lyes at anchor, and reſts betwixt Calais and Douer.
                         towards euening, the Armada caſt anchor neere Calais, being aduized by the Pylots, that if they went further, it

would bee in danger to be carryed into the North Ocean by the tyde; and ouer againſt them, within cannon ſhot, lay the Admirall, and the Engliſh Fleet at anchor, to whom Seymor and Winter ioyned themſelues. Now was the number of the Engliſh Ships come to bee one hundred and forty, all able for the fight, ſwift of ſayle, & apt to caſt about to take any aduantage, and yet there were not aboue fifteene of them, which bore the weight and burthen of the Warre, and repelled it. The Spaniards preſently (as often before) by frequent meſſengers,
                           The Duke of Parma is ſent for againe by the Spaniards.
                         vrged the Duke of Parma, to ſend forty Fly-boates, without which he could not fitly fight with the Engliſh, by reaſon of the magnitude and ſluggiſhneſſe of the Spaniſh Ships, and the great dexterity and agility of the Engliſh; and earneſtly required him to put forth to ſea with his Fleete, whom the Armada (as was agreed) ſhould protect as it were with wings,
                           He is vnprepared.
                         till their arriuall in England: But he being vnprepared, could not readily come, his flat-bottom'd Boats being withall very broad, were full of leakes, victuall was wanting, and the mariners detayned a long time againſt their wills,
                           The good ſeruice of the Hollanders, who hindred Parma from ioyning his Forces with the Spaniſh Nauy.
                         were ſtolne away. Beſides, the Hollanders, and Zelanders ſhips of Warre which houered about the Ports of Newport and Dunkerke, whence they were to ſet out, were ſo well prouided of great Ordnance, and Harquebuzziers, that he durſt not come from the ſhores, vnleſſe wittingly and willingly hee ſhould caſt himſelfe and his ſouldiers into viſible and manifeſt danger: yet did hee not omit any thing worthy of a diligent, induſtrious, and

valiant Prince, being ſtrongly inflamed with a deſire to ſubdue England.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 The Spaniſh Forces to aſſault England.
                                 
                                 
                                    The number of the Gallions of Portugall.
                                    
                                    THe Gallion S. Martin, as Captaine Generall, and principall of the Fleet, was of the burthen of one thouſand tunne, there were in her three hundred choyce Sould
                                          •
                                       ers, one hundred and ſeuentie Mariners, and ſhe caried fiftie pieces of Ordnance.
                                    S. Iohns Gallion, called the Admirall generall, of the burthen of one thouſand and fiftie tunne, had in her two hundred thirty one ſouldiers, one hundred ſeuentie nine mariners, and fiftie Canons.
                                    S. Markes Gallion, of the burthen of ſeuen hundred ninety two tunne, with two hundred ninety two Souldiers, and one hundred and ſeuenteene mariners.
                                    The Gallion S. Philip, of eight hundred tunne, foure hundred and fifteene ſouldiers, and fortie Canons.
                                    The Gallion S. Lewis, of eight hundred and thirtie tunne, with three hundred ſeuenty ſixe ſouldiers, one hundred and ſixteene mariners, and forty Canons.
                                    S. Matthews Gallion, of ſeuen hundred and fifty tunne, with two hundred ſeuenty ſeuen ſouldiers, two hundred mariners, and fortie Canons.
                                    S. Iames Gallion, of fiue hundred and twenty tunne, with three hundred ſouldiers, one hundred mariners, and thirty Canons.
                                    The Gallion of Florence, of nine hundred ſixty one tunne, with foure hundred ſouldiers, one hundred mariners, and fiftie two canons.
                                    S. Chriſtophers Gallion, of three hundred fiftie two tunne, with three hundred ſouldiers, ninety mariners, and thirty Canons.
                                    S. Bernards Gallion, of three hundred fifty two tunne, and two hundred and eight ſouldiers, one hundred mariners, and thirtie canons.
                                    The Ship called Zabra Auguſta, of one hundred ſixty ſixe tunne, with fifty fiue ſouldiers, fifty ſeuen mariners, and thirteene canons.
                                    The other Zabra, called Iulia, of one hundred

ſixty ſixe tunne, with fifty ſouldiers, and ſeuenty two mariners, and foureteene canons.
                                    The whole body of the Portugall Fleet, conſiſted of twelue Veſſels, viz. tenne Gallions, and two Zabra's, the whole burthen whereof, made vp the number of ſeuen thouſand ſeuen hundred thirty ſeuen tunne, and three thouſand three hundred thirty ſouldiers, one thouſand two hundred thirty three mariners, and three hundred and fifty canons, with all other neceſsaries, as Bullets, Powder, Match, &c.
                                 
                                 
                                    The Fleete of Biſcay, commanded by the Generall, Don Jean Martinez, de Ricalde.
                                    THe Admirall, called Saint Anne, of ſeuen hundred ſixty eight tunne, with three hundred twenty three ſouldiers, one hundred and fourteene mariners, and thirty canons.
                                    The Admirall Grangrina, of one thouſand one hundred ſixtie tunne, with three hundred ſouldiers, one hundred mariners, and thirtie ſixe canons.
                                    S. Iago, of ſixe hundred ſixty ſixe tunne, with two hundred and fifty ſouldiers, one hundred and two mariners, and thirty canons.
                                    The Conception of Zebeleu, of foure hundred ſixty eight tunne, one hundred ſouldiers, ſeuenty Mariners, and twenty canons.
                                    The Conception of Iohn, of foure hundred and eighteene tunne, one hundred ſixtie foure ſouldiers, ſeuenty mariners, and twenty foure canons.
                                    The Magdalen of Iohn Franceſco d' Ayala, of fiue hundred and thirty tunne, two hundred ſouldiers, ſeuen mariners, and twenty two canons.
                                    S. Iohn, of three hundred and fifty tunne, one hundred thirty ſouldiers, one hundred mariners, and twenty foure canons.
                                    The Ship called the Mary, of one hundred ſixtie three tunne, one hundred and eightie ſouldiers, one hundred mariners, and twentie foure canons.
                                    
                                       Another, called the Manuel, of fiue hundred and twenty tunne, one hundred and thirty ſouldiers, forty three mariners, and ſixteene canons.
                                    A Ship called S. Mary of Monte Maior, of ſeuen hundred and ſeuen tunne, two hundred and twenty ſouldiers, fifty mariners, and ſixteene Canons.
                                 
                                 
                                    Other Veſſels belonging to this Fleet, called Pinnaces.
                                    
                                    THe Pinnace, called the Mary of Aguirra, of ſeuenty tunne, thirty ſouldiers, twenty three mariners, and tenne canons.
                                    A Ship named Iſabella, of ſeuentie one tunne, thirty ſouldiers, thirty two mariners, and twelue canons
                                    The Pinnace, called the Miguel de Suſa, of ninety ſixe tunne, thirty ſouldiers, twenty ſixe mariners and twelue canons.
                                    The Pinnace of S. Stephano, of ſeuentie eight tunne, thirty ſouldiers, twenty ſixe mariners, and twelue cannons.
                                    This whole Fleete conſiſted of foureteene Veſſels, tenne great, and foure leſſer, called Pinnaces, their whole burthen amounted to ſixe thouſand fiue hundred ſixty ſeuen tunne, two thouſand thirty ſeuen ſouldiers, eight hundred ſixty three mariners, which make vp two thouſand eight hundred and two. Alſo, two hundred canons, one thouſand one hundred and ninety bullets, foure hundred ſixtie ſeuen quintalls of powder, euery quintall accounted for one hundred twenty fiue weight, one hundred and forty of bullets, and eighty nine of match.
                                 
                                 
                                    The Fleete of Caſtile, whereof Diego Flores de Ʋaldes was Generall.
                                    THe Gallion generall, called the Chriſtopher, of ſeuen hundred tunne, hauing in her two hundred and fiue ſouldiers, one hundred

and two mariners, and thirty canons.
                                    The Gallion S. Iohn Baptiſt, of ſeuen hundred and fifty tunne, with two hundred and fifty ſouldiers, one hundred and fortie mariners, and thirty canons.
                                    The Gallion S. Peter, of fiue hundred and thirty tunne, with one hundred and thirty ſouldiers, one hundred and forty mariners, and forty canons.
                                    S. Iohns Gallion, of fiue hundred and thirty tunne, with one hundred and ſeuenty ſouldiers, and one hundred and twenty mariners, and forty canons.
                                    The Gallion S. Iago el Maior, of fiue hundred and thirty tunne, with two hundred and thirty ſouldiers, one hundred thirty two mariners, and thirty canons.
                                    The Gallion S. Philip and S. Iago, of two hundred and thirty tunne, with one hundred and fifty ſouldiers, one hundred and ſixteene mariners, and thirty canons.
                                    The Gallion S. Medela, and Celedonia, of fiue hundred and thirty tunne, with one hundred and ſeuenty ſouldiers, one hundred and tenne mariners, and thirty canons.
                                    S. Annes Gallion, of two hundred and fifty tunne, with one hundred ſouldiers, eighty nine mariners, and twenty foure canons.
                                    Our Lady of Vigenia, of ſeuen hundred and fifty tunne, with one hundred and ninety ſouldiers, one hundred mariners, and thirty canons.
                                    The Ship called the Trinity, of ſeuen hundred and eighty tunne, with two hundred ſouldiers, one hundred twenty two mariners, and thirty canons.
                                    The S. Katherina, of eight hundred ſixty two tunne, with two hundred ſouldiers, one hundred and ſixty mariners, and thirty canons.
                                    The S. Iohn Baptiſt, of ſixe hundred fifty two tunne, with two hundred ſouldiers, and one hundred and thirty mariners, and thirty canons.
                                    Our Lady of Roſaria, called the Pinnace, with thirty ſouldiers, twenty ſixe mariners, and twenty foure canons.
                                    The Pinnace called S. Anthony of Padua, with three hundred ſouldiers, and fortie ſixe mariners, and ſixteene canons.
                                    
                                       The number of this whole Fleet of Caſtille, conſiſted of foureteene Gallions, and two pinnaces; their entyre burthen amounting to eight thouſand ſeuen hundred thirty foure tunne, hauing in it two thouſand foure hundred eighty fiue ſouldiers, one thouſand ſeuen hundred and nineteene mariners, together amounting to foure thouſand one hundred ſeuenty ſeuen men, and three hundred eightie foure canons, with all other neceſſaries, and bullets, powder, and match.
                                 
                                 
                                    The equipage of the ſhips of Andeluzia, commanded by the Generall D. Pedro Ʋaldes.
                                    THe Admirall Ship, of one thouſand one hundred and fifty tunne, hauing in it fifty ſouldiers, one hundred and eighteene mariners, with fiftie pieces of canons.
                                    The S. Francis, of nine hundred and fifteene tunne, with two hundred and thirty ſouldiers, ſixtie mariners, and thirtie canons.
                                    The Gallion S. Iohn Baptiſt, of one hundred & ten tun, with two hundred and fifty ſouldiers, twenty mariners, and forty canons.
                                    The S. Iohn Gargaren, of fiue hundred and nine tunne, with one hundred and ſeuentie ſouldiers, ſixty mariners, and twentie cannons.
                                    A Ship called the Conception, of eighty tunne, with two hundred ſouldiers, ſixty fiue mariners, and twenty fiue canons.
                                    The Beare, or Ship called S. Anne, of nine hundred tunne, with three hundred ſouldiers, eighty mariners, and thirtie canons.
                                    The S. Katherina, of ſeuen hundred and thirty tun, with two hundred and fifty ſouldiers, eighty mariners, and thirty canons.
                                    The Trinitie, of fiftie tun, with two hundred ſouldiers, twenty mariners, and thirtie canons.
                                    The S. Mary de Iuncar, of ſeuen hundred and thirtie tunne, with two hundred and forty ſouldiers, eighty mariners, and twenty foure canons.
                                    
                                       The S. Bartholomew, of nine hundred ſeuenty ſixe tunne, with twenty fiue ſouldiers, eighty mariners, and thirtie canons.
                                    A Pinnace called the holy Ghoſt, with forty ſouldiers, thirty three mariners, ten cannons, and well ſtored with bullets, powder, and other neceſſaries.
                                    This Fleet conſiſted of ten Gallions, one Pinnace, which in burthen amounted altogether to eight thouſand ſeuen hundred and two tunne, hauing in it two thouſand foure hundred ſouldiers, eight hundred mariners, two hundred and ſixty canons, and all other neceſſaries thereunto belonging.
                                 
                                 
                                    The Fleete of Guypuſcoa, by D. Michell de Quendo.
                                    THe Generalls Ship, called S. Anne, of one thouſand two hundred tunne, hauing in it thirty ſouldiers, ninety mariners, and fifty canons.
                                    The Admirall, called the Lady of Roſes, of nine hundred forty fiue tunne, with two hundred and thirty ſouldiers, ſixty foure mariners, and thirty canons.
                                    The S. Sauiour, of nine hundred fiftie eight tunne, with thirty three ſouldiers, eighty mariners, and thirty canons.
                                    The S. Martha, of fiue hundred fortie eight tunne, with one hundred and eightie ſouldiers, ſeuenty mariners, and twenty fiue canons.
                                    S. Stephen, of nine hundred thirty ſixe tunne, with two hundred ſouldiers, ſeuentie mariners, and thirty canons.
                                    The S. Barba, of fiue hundred twenty fiue tunne, with one hundred and ſixty ſouldiers, fifty mariners, and fifteene canons.
                                    The Mary, of two hundred ninety one tunne, with one hundred and twenty ſouldiers, fortie mariners, and twenty canons.
                                    The S. Croſſe, of ſixe hundred and eighty tunne, with one hundred and fifty ſouldiers, forty mariners, and fifteene canons.
                                    The Vrſadoncella, of fiue hundred tun,

with ſixty ſouldiers, forty mariners, and eighteene canons.
                                    The Pinnace called the Aſcenſion, of ſixe hundred tunne, with thirty ſouldiers, twenty mariners, and twelue canons.
                                    The Pinnace called S. Barnaby, and another named Our Lady of Guadalupa, with the Pinnace called the Magdalen, theſe three in burthen, ſouldiers, mariners, canons, and other neceſſaries, equalled the pinnace of the Aſcenſion.
                                    
                                    There was in this Fleet of Guypuſcoa, foureteene Veſſels, which were in burthen all together ſixe thouſand nine hundred ninety one tunne, had in it two thouſand ninetie two ſouldiers, ſixe hundred and ſeuenty mariners, making vp the number of two thouſand ſeuen hundred and eight men, two hundred ſeuenty ſeuen canons, with all other neceſsaries.
                                 
                                 
                                    The Fleet of Eaſterne ſhips, called, Leuantiſcas, whoſe Generall was Martin de Vertendona.
                                    THe Generals Ship, called Ragazone, of one thouſand two hundred ninety foure tunne, hauing in it three hundred and fifty ſouldiers, ninety mariners, and thirty fiue canons.
                                    The Admirals ſhip, called Ia Laua, of ſeuen hundred twenty eight tunne, with two hundred and tenne ſouldiers, eighty mariners, and thirty canons.
                                    
                                       La Rata S. Mary, the crowned, of eight hundred and twenty tunne, with three hundred and forty ſouldiers, ninety mariners and forty canons.
                                    The S. Iohn of Cicilia, of eight hundred and eighty tunne, with two hundred and ſeuenty ſouldiers, ſeuenty mariners, and thirty canons.
                                    The Trinity Valencera, of one thouſand one hundred tunne, with two hundred and forty ſouldiers, ninety mariners, and forty ſixe canons.
                                    
                                       The Anunciade, of ſeuen hundred and three tunne, with two hundred ſouldiers, ninety mariners, and thirty canons.
                                    The S. Nicholas Predaneli, of eight hundred thirty foure tunne, with two hundred and eighty ſouldiers, eighty foure mariners, and thirty canons.
                                    The Iuliana, of eight hundred tunne, with three hundred and thirty ſouldiers, eighty mariners, and thirty ſixe canons.
                                    The S. Mary of Piſon, of ſixe hundred ſixtie ſixe tunne, with two hundred and fifty ſouldiers, eightie mariners, and twenty two canons.
                                    The Trinity of Eſcala, of ninety tun, with three hundred and two ſouldiers, ninety mariners, and twentie fiue canons.
                                    This whole Fleete conſiſted of ten Ships, whoſe burthen was ſeuen thouſand ſeuen hundred and fiue tunne, and had in it two thouſand eight hundred and eighty ſouldiers, eight hundred and ſeuen mariners, and three hundred and eleuen canons, with all other neceſſaries.
                                 
                                 
                                    The Fleet of Ships called Vrcas, whoſe Generall was Lopas de Medina.
                                    
                                    THe Generals Ship, called the great Griffin, of ſixe hundred and fifty tunne, hauing in it two hundred and fifty ſouldiers, ſixtie mariners, and forty canons.
                                    The Admirall, called S. Sauiour, of ſixe hundred and fiftie tunne with two hundred and thirty ſouldiers, ſixty mariners, and thirty canons.
                                    A Ship called the Pedro Martino, of two hundred tunne, with eighty ſouldiers, thirty mariners, and thirty canons.
                                    The white Falcon, of fiue hundred tun, with one hundred and ſeuenty ſouldiers, forty mariners, and eighteene canons.
                                    The Blacke-Caſtle, of ſeuen hundred and fifty tunne, with two hundred and fiftie ſouldiers, fiftie mariners, and fiue and twenty canons.
                                    
                                       A Barke of Hambourgh, with ſixe hundred ſouldiers, fifty mariners, and twenty fiue canons.
                                    
                                       La Caſſa de Par-grand, together with Sir Pedro el Maior, the Samſon, and S. Pedro el Minor, of as great burthen as the Barke of Hambourgh.
                                    
                                    The Barke of Danske, of foure hundred and fiftie tunne, with two hundred and ten ſouldiers, fiftie mariners, and twentie fiue canons.
                                    The white Falcon Mediana, of three hundred tunne, with eightie ſouldiers, thirtie mariners, and eighteene canons.
                                    The S. Andrew, of foure hundred tunne, with two hundred and fiftie ſouldiers, and fortie mariners.
                                    
                                       La Caſſa de var Chica, of three hundred and fifty tunne, with one hundred and ſeuenty ſouldiers, forty mariners, and fifteene canons.
                                    
                                       La Cuerba Bolante, of foure hundred tunne, with two hundred and tenne ſouldiers, forty mariners, and eighteene canons.
                                    The white Polonia, of two hundred and fifty tunne, with ſixty ſouldiers, thirty mariners, and twelue canons.
                                    The Aduenture, and S. Barba, which were as much in burthen as the S. Iago, of ſixe hundred tunne, with ſixty ſouldiers, forty mariners, and nineteene canons.
                                    The Ship called El gatto, of foure hundred tunne, with fifty ſouldiers, thirty mariners, and nine canons.
                                    The S. Gabriel, of two hundred and eightie tunne, with fifty ſouldiers, and twenty fiue mariners.
                                    The Eſayas of like burthen.
                                    So that theſe twenty fiue Ʋrcas, are in burthen, ten thouſand two hundred ſeuentie one tunne, and carryed three thouſand two hundred twenty one ſouldiers, ſeuen hundred and eight mariners, and foure hundred and tenne canons, with all neceſſaries, as Powder, Lead, and Match.
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    Pinnaces and Zabra's commanded by Don Antonio de Mendoza.
                                    THe Generalls Ship, called our Lady del Pilar de Zaragoſſa, of three hundred tunne, with one hundred and twenty ſouldiers, fiftie foure mariners, and twelue canons.
                                    
                                       La Caridade Ingleſſe, of one hundred and eighty tunne, eighty ſouldiers, thirty mariners, and twelue canons.
                                    S. Andrew d'Eſtoches, of one hundred and thirty tunne, fiftie one ſouldiers, thirtie mariners, and twelue canons.
                                    The Pinnace of the Crucifix, of one hundred and fifty tunne, with fifty ſouldiers, thirty mariners, and eighteene canons.
                                    A Ship called our Lady del puerto, containing as much as the Pinnace of the Crucifix.
                                    
                                    The Conception of Caraffa, and of our Lady de Beguoa.
                                    
                                    The Conception of Capitillo, with the S. Ieronimo, are of ſixtie and ſeuenty tun, with fiftie ſouldiers, and thirty mariners, and eight canons apiece.
                                    
                                       Our Lady of Grace, the conception of Francis Laſtero, our Lady of Guadalupa, the Conception of the Holy-Ghoſt, and our Lady of Freſneda; theſe Ships containe iuſt as much as thoſe aboue-mentioned. Moreouer, a Ship called Zabra la Trinidad, with another Zabra S. Andrew the Conception, together with the conception of Sommarriba, S. Katherine, S. Iohn de Caraffa, and the Aſſumption, containe as much as thoſe that went next before.
                                    The whole number of the twenty two Pinnaces and Zabras, were in burthen, one thouſand one hundred thirty one tunne, and had in them foure hundred ſeuenty nine ſouldiers, fiue hundred ſeuenty foure mariners, and one hundred ninetie three canons, with all other neceſſaries.
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    The foure Galleaſſes of Napler, commanded by D. 
                                          Ʋgo de Mencado.
                                    
                                    THe Generals Galleaſſe, called San Lorenzo, with two hundred and ſeuenty ſouldiers, one hundred and thirty mariners, three hundred ſlaues, and fifty canons.
                                    The Galleaſſe Petrona, with one hundred and eightie ſouldiers, one hundred and twelue mariners, three hundred ſlaues, and fifty Canons.
                                    The Galleaſſe Girona, with one hundred and ſeuenty ſouldiers, one hundred and twenty mariners, three hundred ſlaues, and fifty canons.
                                    The Neopolitan Galleaſſe, with one hundred twenty foure ſouldiers, three hundred ſlaues, and fifty canons.
                                    Theſe foure Galleaſſes carryed altogether, eight hundred and ſeuenty ſouldiers, foure hundred ſixty eight mariners, two hundred canons, and one thouſand two hundred ſlaues.
                                 
                                 
                                    The foure Gallies of Portugall, vnder the command of D. Diego de Medrana.
                                    THe Generals Gallie, with a hundred and tenne ſouldiers, one hundred and ſixe mariners, one hundred ſlaues, and fiftie canons.
                                    The Princeſſe Gallie, the Gally Diana, the Gallie Vazana, contayning as much as the Generalls Gallie.
                                 
                                 
                                    The briefe and generall account of the whole Fleete.
                                    THe whole Fleete together, was compoſed of twelue Gallions of Portugall, in burthen ſeuen thouſand ſeuen hundred thirty

ſeuen tunne, carrying foure thouſand three hundred and thirty ſouldiers, one thouſand two hundred thirty three mariners, foure hundred canons, with ammunition of bullets, powder, and match.
                                    Of foureteene Ships of Biſcay, commanded by Iohn Martinez de Ricaldo: Theſe Ships all together were of burthen, ſixe thouſand fiue hundred ſixty ſeuen tunne, and carryed two thouſand and fifty ſouldiers, nine hundred mariners, and two hundred and ſeuentie canons.
                                    Of ſixteene Gallions of Caſtile, in burthen one thouſand ſeuen hundred tunne, carrying two thouſand fiue hundred and ſixty ſouldiers, and foure hundred and twenty canons.
                                    Of eleuen Ships of Andaluzia, in burthen eight thouſand ſeuen hundred ſixty two tun, two thouſand fiue hundred twenty fiue ſouldiers, nine hundred mariners, and two hundred and ſixty canons.
                                    Of foureteene Ships of Guipuſcoa, in burthen ſixe thouſand nine hundred ninetie one tunne, two thouſand one hundred and two ſouldiers, ſeuen hundred and eighteene mariners, and two hundred and eighty canons.
                                    Of the Eaſterne Fleete, with tenne Ships in burthen, ſeuen thouſand ſeuen hundred and fiue tunne, carrying two thouſand nine hundred ſouldiers, one hundred ſixty ſeuen mariners, and three hundred and tenne canons.
                                    Of the Fleete of Vreas, twenty three in number, in burthen ten thouſand two hundred ſeuentie one tunne; and in them, three thouſand three hundred twenty one ſouldiers, ſeuen hundred and eight mariners, and foure hundred canons.
                                    Of twenty two Pinnaces or Zabras, in burthen one thouſand two hundred twentie one tunne; and in them, three hundred ſeuentie ſixe ſouldiers, fiue hundred ſeuenty foure mariners, and one hundred and tenne canons.
                                    Of foure Galleaſſes of Naples, carrying eight hundred ſixtie foure ſouldiers, fiue hundred mariners, two hundred canons.
                                    Of foure Gallies, which carried foure hundred

ſouldiers, and twenty canons.
                                    In foure Galleaſſes, there were likewiſe, one thouſand two hundred Gally-ſlaues, and in the foure Gallies, eight hundred eightie eight; which together, make vp the number of two thouſand eighty eight perſons.
                                    And beſide the aboue-mentioned Powder, there were, if any danger or neceſſitie ſhould happen, ſixe hundred quintalls of powder.
                                    So as in the whole Fleete, there was one hundred and thirty Ships, twenty fiue Ʋrca's of the burthen of fiue hundred, & ſeuen hundred tunne▪ nineteene Pinnaces, of the burthen of ſeuenty and an hundred tunne; thirteene Zabra's, with two of Portugall, foure Galleaſſes, and as many Gallies, of the burthen of fifty ſeuen thouſand eight hundred ſixty eight tunne; and in them, nineteene thouſand two hundred ninety fiue ſouldiers, and eight thouſand foure hundred and fiftie mariners, with two thouſand ſixe hundred and thirty gally-ſlaues, and two thouſand ſix hundred and thirty pieces of Ordnance of all ſorts; among which, were great and middle Culuerings, and ſome great canons.
                                    There was likewiſe twenty ſmall Veſſels, called Caruels, for the ſeruice of the Fleete, and tenne Falua's, with ſixe Oares apiece.
                                    There were in this Fleete, one hundred twenty foure Voluntaries, attended by foure hundred fifty & ſixe ſeruants bearing armes, and two hundred thirty eight entertayned by the King, with one hundred ſixty three ſeruants.
                                    There was one hundred ſeuenty ſeuen perſons appoynted to wayte vpon the Ordnance, with two Engineers, one Phyſician, one Surgeon, and thirty ſeruants. Foureſcore and fiue both Phyſicians and Surgeons, with one hundred and eighty Church men, all Dominicans, Franciſcans, Flagellans, or Ieſuites.
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    The Collonels Regiments, or Tertois payed by the King in this Fleet, with the number of Men vnder euery Regiment.
                                    
                                       Don Franciſco de Bouadilla, the Kings Camp-maſter generall.
                                    The Regiments of Sicily, commanded by Don Diego Pimentell, vnder whom were twenty foure Captaines.
                                    The Regiment of Tertio, commanded by Don Franciſco de Tolete, vnder whom were twenty fiue Captaines.
                                    The Regiment of Don Alonzo-luzon, vnder whom were twenty ſixe Captaines.
                                    The Regiment of Yeffa comm. by Don Auguſtino Mexia, vnder whom were twenty ſixe Captaines.
                                    Diuers Companies of free bands, ſome of which were drawne from the troupes of Caſtile, by Don Iuan de Guzman; the others, from Portugall, by Gaſper Soſſa.
                                    
                                    So that there were in the aboue-mentioned Regiments, or Tertois, and in the companies of Suelty, one hundred ſeuenty one Enſignes, amounting to the number of eighteene thouſand nine hundred ſeuenty three ſouldiers, with thirty more, to make vp the number of nineteene thouſand two hundred ninety fiue, with diuers miniſters, and officers, as well of iuſtice as of the Dukes Court, one hundred eighty fiue perſons.
                                    To be ſhort, the whole Fleete conſiſted of eighteene thouſand nine hundred thirty ſeuen foot, eight thouſand ſixe hundred and fiftie mariners, two hundred twenty foure Voluntaries, with foure hundred fiftie fiue ſeruants that were allowed; and two hundred thirty eight other ſeruants on one part, one hundred ſixty three on another; one hundred ſixty ſeuen perſons appointed to attend the canons, eighty fiue for the Hoſpitall to ſicke perſons, one hundred and eighty Church-men of all orders, twenty three Gentlemen of the Dukes Court, fifty ſeruants, ſeuenteene ſuperintendants

generall of the Army, one hundred ſeruants more belonging to them or to the offices of iuſtice.
                                    So that in the whole Army there were twenty eight thouſand ſixe hundred eighty ſeuen perſons, beſides two thouſand eight hundred and eight Gally-ſlaues, that tugg'd the Oare in the Galleaſſes and Gallies.
                                    All theſe had good and ſufficient prouiſion, victualls, and things neceſſary for ſo great and inuincible an enterprize, which I for breuity will omit to ſhew at large, praying to God that theirs or others ambitious enterpriſes vpon England, may be ſtill by the Almighty and euer-ſauing hand of God confounded, and ouer-whelmed like Pharao. Amen.
                                    
                                       ABRAHAM DARCIE.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 Forces to defend England, againſt Spaines pretended inuaſion.
                                 
                                    By SEA.
                                    Vnder the command of the Right Honourable Charles Howard, Earle of Nottingham, L. High Admirall of England.
                                    
                                       ROYALL Ships.
                                       SEuenteene Royall Ships, attended by twelue other warlike Ships, and ſixe Pinnaces.
                                    
                                    
                                       LONDON Ships.
                                       Sent out by the City of London, ſixteene tall Ships for warre, and foure Pinnaces.
                                    
                                    
                                       BRISTOW Ships.
                                       From Briſtow, three Ships, and one Pinnace.
                                    
                                    
                                       BARSTABLE Ships.
                                       From Barſtable, three good Ships, and one Pinnace.
                                    
                                    
                                       EXETER Ships.
                                       From Exeter, two Ships and one Pinnace.
                                    
                                    
                                       PLIMMOVTH Ships.
                                       From Plimmouth, ſeuen braue Ships, well appoynted, with a Fly-boat.
                                       Alſo, one Pinnace of the Lord Admirals.
                                       
                                       Another▪ of the Lord Sheffields.
                                       
                                       And one of Sir William Winters.
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       MERCHANTS Ships.
                                       The Merchants Aduenturers of England alſo ſent ten luſty Ships at their owne proper charges.
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                       In the BRITTISH Seas.
                                       There were alſo ſixteene Royall ſhips ſent into the narrow Sea, vnder the command of the Right Honourable Lord Henry Seymor, with many other ſmall Ships, Barkes, and Pinnaces, ſent out of the North and Weſt parts of England, by diuers Noblemen, and other honourable perſons, Gentlemen, and Merchants.
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    By LAND.
                                    
                                       The Land-forces (which were encamped at Tilbury in Eſſex, vnder the command and gouernement of Robert Dudley, Earle of Leiceſter) were theſe following.
                                    
                                    
                                       BEDFORD Shire.
                                       OVt of Bedfordſhire, there were ſeuenteene Lances, forty light horſes, and fiue hundred foote ſent, well appoynted.
                                    
                                    
                                       BVCKINGHAM.
                                       From Buckingham ſhire, eighteene Lances, foureſcore and three Light-horſes, and fiue hundred foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       HARTFORD.
                                       Out of Hartford ſhire, twenty fiue Lances, threeſcore light horſes, and one thouſand foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       KENT.
                                       Out of Kent, fifty Lances, one hundred light horſes, and fiue thouſand foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       SVFFOLKE.
                                       From Suffolke, fifty Lances, two hundred light horſes, three thouſand foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       ESSEX.
                                       Out of Eſſex, fifty Lances, one hundred light horſes, and fiue thouſand footmen.
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                       MIDDLESEX.
                                       
                                          Middleſex, thirty fiue Lances, foureſcore and eight light horſes.
                                    
                                    
                                       SVRREY.
                                       Raized out of Surrey, eight Lances, foureſcore & eighteene light horſes, and a thouſand foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       NORFOLKE.
                                       Raized in Norfolke, three thouſand foote.
                                    
                                    
                                       LONDON.
                                       Out of London, one thouſand foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       BARKESHIRE.
                                       From Barkeſhire, came one thouſand foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       OXFORD.
                                       From Oxford ſhire, one thouſand foot.
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    More by LAND.
                                    
                                    
                                       There was likewiſe rayſed out of theſe Shires following, another ARMY, coſiſting of foure hundred foureſcore & one Lances, one thouſand foure hundred thirty and one light horſes, and thirty foure thouſand and fifty foot, for the ſafegard of her Maieſties Royall Perſon, and were vnder the command of the Lord. Chamberlaine.
                                    
                                    
                                       GLOCESTER Shire.
                                       OVt of Gloceſter ſhire, there were twenty Lances, one hundred light horſe, and two thouſand fiue hundred foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       SOMERSET.
                                       Out of Somerſet ſhire, fifty Lances, one hundred light horſe, and foure thouſand foote.
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                       SVSSEX.
                                       Out of Suſſex, were twenty Lances, one hundred light horſe, & two thouſand fiue hundred foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       WILTSHIRE.
                                       Out of Wiltſhire, were twenty fiue Lances, one hundred light horſe, and two thouſand three hundred foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       BARKESHIRE.
                                       Out of Barkeſhire, ten Lances, foureſcore and fiue light horſe, and fiue hundred foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       OXFORD.
                                       
                                          Oxford, twenty three Lances, one hundred and three light horſe, and one hundred and fifty foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       CAMBRIDGE.
                                       
                                          Cambridge, thirteene Lances, forty light horſe, and ſeuen hundred foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       NORTHAMPTON.
                                       
                                          Northampton, twenty Lances, foureſcore light horſe, and ſixe hundred foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       LEICESTER.
                                       
                                          Leiceſter, nine Lances, threeſcore and tenne light horſe, and fiue hundred foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       WARWICKE.
                                       From Warwicke, ſeuenteene Lances, threeſcore & ſixteene light horſe, and fiue hundred foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       HVNTINGTON.
                                       From Huntington, ſixe Lances, twenty ſixe light horſe, and foure hundred foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       DORSET.
                                       
                                          Dorſet, one hundred and twenty Lances, and one thouſand foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       SVFFOLKE.
                                       Out of Suffolke, were threeſcore and tenne Lances, two hundred and thirty light horſe, and three thouſand foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       NORFOLKE.
                                       
                                          Norfolke, foureſcore Lances, three hundred twenty one light horſe.
                                    
                                    
                                       HARTFORD.
                                       
                                          Hartfordſhire, fiue hundred foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                       SVRREY.
                                       Out of Surrey, fiue hundred foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       WORCESTER.
                                       
                                          Worceſter-ſhire foure hundred foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       SOVTHAMPTON.
                                       
                                          Southampton two thouſand foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       DEVON.
                                       
                                          Deuon, two thouſand foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       LONDON.
                                       
                                          London, nine thouſand foot.
                                    
                                    
                                       MIDDLESEX.
                                       Middleſex, one thouſand foot.
                                       
                                       
                                          This true Deſcription of Englands and Spaines Forces thus particularly ſet downe, was faithfully gathered, for the better ſatisfaction of the Reader, out of ſundry true Engliſh Manuſcripts, and French Bookes, by
                                          
                                             ABRAHAM DARCIE.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        But the induſtry of the Queene preuented both his diligence, and the credulous hope of the Spaniards. For, by her command, the day after the Spaniards had caſt anchor, in the dead of the night, the Admirall ſent eight of his worſt Shippes, dawbed on the out-ſides with Greeke Pitch and Roſin, & filled full of ſulphure, and other materials ſuddenly combuſtible, vnder the conduct of Young & Prowſe, with a full gale of winde directly vpon the Spaniſh Armada; which, as the Spaniards ſaw approch neerer and neerer to them, (the flame ſhining ouer all the Sea) thinking thoſe burning ſhips beſides the danger of the fire, to be filled with ſome deadly Engines;
                           The Spaniards amazed fly confuſedly.
                         with a howling and fearefull outcry, weyed anchor, cut their Cables, hoyſed their ſayles, cried out vpon their rowers, and, ſtrooke with a horrible and a pannique feare, with impetuous haſte betooke themſelues to a confuſed

flight. Amongſt which, the Admirals Galleaſſe had her Rudder broken, and went almoſt adrift, and the day following, making fearefully towards Calais, ranne vpon the ſands, and after a doubtfull fight with Amias Preſton, Thomas Gerard, & Haruey, was taken; Hugh Moncada,
                        
                           Hugh Moncada ſlaine.
                         the Captaine, beeing ſlaine, and the ſouldiers and rowers eyther drowned or ſlaine, they found and carried away a great quantity of Gold. The Ship and Ordnance were ſeyzed by the Gouernour of Calais.
                     
                     The Spaniards affirme, that the Generall ſeeing theſe fiery ſhippes comming, commanded all the Fleete to weigh anchor, that the danger might paſſe them, and to take againe euery one his place. And ſurely, he himſelfe tooke his owne againe, after warning giuen by a ſhot which was notwithſtanding heard but of a very few, becauſe the Ships being on all ſides ſcattered, were ſome of them in that affright carried into the North Sea, & ſome others on the ſhores

and coaſts of Flanders. In the meane time,
                           The fourth combate.
                         
                        Drake and Fenner aſſayle with great noyſe of Cannon-ſhot that part of the Spaniſh Fleete, which were rallying themſelues before Grauelin, and were by and by ioyned by Fenton, Southwell, Beaſton, Croſſe, Raymon, and anon, by the Lord Admirall himſelfe, Thomas Howard, and Sheffield. The Duke, Laeua, Oquende, Ricauld, and others, being come from the ſhore, ſuſtained as well as they could, the charge, which was ſuch, as the moſt part of their Shippes were torne and bruiſed, and the Gallion S. Matthew, commanded by Diego Pymentel, and appointed to aſſiſt Franciſco de Toleda, in the S. Philip, was broken with the continuall batteries of Seymor and Winter, and being driuen towards Oſtend, was againe beaten by the Zelanders, and taken by them of Fluſhing, as was the other called Saint Matthew, and all the reſt of the FLEET grieuouſly afflicted all that day.
                     
                        The laſt day of the Moneth, at the breake of day, the Winde turned Northweſt, and the Spaniards ſtriuing to get into the ſtraight againe, are driuen towards Zeland. The Engliſh, as the Spaniards beleeue, ceaſed their fight, perceiuing ſome of their Ships in great danger, and ready to runne on the ſands and ſhelues on the Coaſt of Zeland, but the winde changing to Southweſt, the Spaniards tooke the benefit thereof, and beeing gotten out from amongſt thoſe ſands, conſulted in the Euening what they were to doe,
                           The Spaniards reſolue to returne home by the North-Sea.
                         and by common conſent, reſolued to returne into Spaine by the North Ocean, becauſe they wanted many neceſſary things, and aboue all, Bullets, that their Ships were broken, and that they had little hope of the Duke of Parma's putting to Sea.
                     Being then already at ſea, they tooke their route towards the North, followed by the Engliſh Fleete, vnto whom they would ſometimes ſhew their proweſſe: and many being of opinion

they would returne, the Queene, with a Kingly courage, mounted on horſebacke, and holding in her hand the trunchion of an ordinary Captaine,
                           The Queene viſits her Campe.
                         made a review of her Army, & campe, which was at Tilbury, walkes vp and downe, ſometimes like a Woman, and anon, with the countenance and pace of a Souldier, and with her preſence and words fortifieth the courages both of the Captaines and Souldiers beyond all beliefe.
                     The very day of the laſt fight, the Duke of Parma hauing paid his vow to our Lady of Halle, came to Dunkerke, but too late, and was there receiued by the Spaniards with reproach, as if to fauour Queene ELIZABETH, hee had willingly cauſed them to loſe ſo faire an occaſion to execute their enterpriſe. Therefore, in ſome ſort to content them, he puniſhed ſome that had charge of the victuals, and mocking notwithſtanding at the Spaniards inſolency and arrogancy, who bragge that in all parts where they beare Armes, they euer draw after them an aſſured victory, and that the Engliſh dared not to looke them in the face, much leſſe endure their countenance. And ſurely, Bernard Mendoza, with great pride and vanity ſung forth in France, by a printed Pamphlet, the triumph before the victory: But the Engliſh Lord Admirall, to keepe the Prince of Parma from comming out of Dunkerke, commanded Seimer and the Hollanders, to keepe the Coaſt of Flanders, and hee himſelfe followed

the Spaniards behinde, vntill they were paſt Edenborough Frith in Scotland. For, ſome feared they would retyre to the King of Scots, at that time much incenſed for the death of his Mother; & that to appeaſe him, Aſhbey, her Maieſties Ambaſſadour there, offered him very good conditions,
                           Conditions offered vnto the King of Scots.
                         
                        to wit, the dignitie of a Duke in England, a yeerely penſion of fiue thouſand pound, and a guard for his perſon, at her Maieſties coſts, and other things. Now whether he did this of himſelfe, or by procurement of others, I cannot well ſay, nor take no pleaſure to enquire thereafter: but ſo it chanced, that the fault was imputed vnto him, and theſe conditions were neuer accompliſhed.
                     The Spaniards then hauing loſt all hope of purſuing their enterprize, and iudging their ſafety to conſiſt meerely in their flight, follow ſtill their route, without ſtaying in any place. Thus did this Fleete returne ſhamefully into their Countrey, which was preparing three whole yeeres with ſo infinite expences, after hauing beene fought withall ſo oftentimes in one Moneth, and then put to flight with the loſſe of many men, (and not of aboue one hundred Engliſh, nor no Ship but Cocks Barke onely loſt) all the ſhot of thoſe great Spaniſh Ships, being ſpent in vaine, flying ouer the Engliſh Ships) hauing alſo gone round about the Iland of Great-Britaine, by Scotland, the Iles of Orchades, and Ireland, and beene furiouſly beaten, and greatly diminiſhed by tempeſts, wrackes, and all ſorts of miſeries.
                     
                        
                           Money coyned in memory of this famous victory.
                        In memoriall of which defeat, there were certaine Medailles coyned, wherein ſome had a Fleete grauen vnderſayle, and haſtning away with all ſpeed, with this Inſcription,

                           
                              
                                 Tout ainſi cōme l'on dit de Caeſar, IL EST VENV, IL A VEV, IL A VINCY. on peu dire de meſme de L'eſpagnol auſſ que IL EST VENV, IL A VEV, mais qui pis eſt IL 
                                       •
                                    'EN EST ENFVY, aulieu que Caeſar eſtoit victorieux.
                              Ileſt venu, il
                                 •
                               veu, il a fuy.
                           Hee came, Hee ſaw, Hee fledde.
                        
And others, in honour of the Queene, with ſome Ships on

fire among a confuſed Fleete, with theſe words;

                           Vne Femme a conduict ceſte action.
                           A Woman conducted this Action.
                        
                     
                     As thus they fled, many of their Ships were loſt vpon the Coaſts of Ireland and Scotland, where ſome ſeuen hundred Souldiers and Mariners were caſt aſhore, who, at the requeſt of the Duke of Parma, vnto the King of Scotland in their behalfe, and by the Queenes permiſſion were paſſed into Flanders a yeere after. But thoſe poore wretches which were caſt away in Ireland,
                        
                           Miſery of the Spaniards in Jreland.
                         were not ſo mercifully dealt withall: for ſome of them were ſlaine by the Iriſh dwelling in the woods; the other, by the commandement of the Deputy, who fearing leſt they ſhould ioyne with the Iriſh Rebels; and ſeeing that Bingham, Gouernour of Connaugh, had refuſed vpon his reiterated commandement to kill thoſe which had yeelded themſelues, hee ſent Fowle the ſecond Marſhall, who, drawing them forth which had hidden themſelues, cut off the heads of about two hundred of them, which the Queen deteſted with all her heart, as a deed full of cruelty. This ſo affrighted the reſt, that ſicke and weake as they were, and halfe ſtarued, they re-embarked themſelues in their broken veſſels, and were for the moſt part ſunke at Sea.
                     The Fleete being returned home,
                           Cauſes of the defeat.
                         imputeth this miſchiefe vnto the Duke of Parma, and vnto their too-much obedient prudence, in taking it for ſo haynous a crime, to diſobey the commandement impoſed vpon them: For they were ſtraitly charged to attempt nothing, vntill the Duke of Parma were ioyned vnto them with his Forces, without reſeruing any liberty vnto themſelues to iudge of occaſions which might happen: a thing very fit to haue bin done: & they boaſted to haue bin able without that, to haue defeated the Engliſh Fleete in their Port; and the men of

warre were in great diſpute, whether it were neceſſary, whatſoeuer hapned, to obſerue religiouſly what is commanded, leſt by the neglect of obedience, the commandement ſhould be loſt: Or if it were fitter to correct things commanded by neceſſity, and apply them to preſent vſe, according to the growth of affaires, that the occaſions and moments of doing expeditions might not be loſt.
                     
                        
                           The Spaniard takes patiently this ouerthrow.
                        The Spaniard did conſtantly beare this loſſe, as comming from aboue, rendring thankes vnto God that it was no greater, and vſed ſingular mercy and charity for the comfort of the Souldiers and Mariners.
                     
                        
                           Queene Elizabeth cauſed a generall thankes-giuing to God for it, and publique reioycing in England.
                        Queene ELIZABETH likewiſe commanded publique prayers and thanks-giuing to be made in all the Churches of England, and went her ſelfe in triumph amongſt the Companies and Societies of London, which marched on both ſides of her Maieſtie, with their Banners, and roade thorow the Streetes (which were richly hung with blue hangings) in a Chariot drawne with two Horſes, (Princes themſelues not vſing foure, as now adayes particular perſons doe) to Saint Pauls Church, were ſhee gaue God humble thankes, heard the Sermon, (which ſhewed the glory due to GOD alone,) and cauſed the Enſignes taken, to be there ſet vp and ſhewed vnto the people. Then ſhee aſſigned ſome reuenewes vnto the Admirall, for the ſeruice which hee had performed with ſo good and happy ſucceſſe;
                           
                              Prayſed thoſe who were of the Engliſh Nauy.
                           
                           
                              The publike ioy is increaſed by the good newes which came out of Scotland.
                           
                         praiſed highly her Sea-Captaines, as men borne for the preſeruation of their Countrey; and as often as ſhee ſaw any of the other, called them by their names, to witneſſe that ſhee tooke note of their deſerts: which they tooke as ſufficient reward for their ſeruices: Shee alſo recompenced the maymed and poorer ſort with honourable penſions.
                     This publique reioycing was increaſed by the arriuall of Sir Robert Sidney, who being come out of Scotland, aſſured her Maieſtie, that the King of Scots, embraced moſt

affectionately the Queenes friendſhip, made ſincere profeſſion of true Religion, and would defend it with all his might: Hee was ſent vnto him before, when Great Britaine was firſt threatned with the Spaniſh Fleete, to acknowledge by his reioycings and thankes-giuing, of the good will which he bore to the Queene, to praiſe his forwardneſſe to defend the common cauſe; to promiſe him reciprocall ſuccours, if the Spaniard made any inuaſion in Scotland; To giue him to vnderſtand with what ambition the Spaniard gapeth after the whole Monarchy of Great Brittaine, ſolliciting the Pope to excommunicate his Royall perſon, both to ſpoyle him of the Kingdome of Scotland, and to exclude him out of the ſucceſſion of the Kingdome of England; To put him in minde of the threatnings which Mendoza, and the Popes Nuntio vttered againſt him, and that therefore hee was to take heed of Papiſts. Whereunto, (that wee may note it by the way) the KING anſwered graciouſly and merrily:
J expect no other courteſie of the Spaniard, then ſuch as Poliphemus promiſed to Vlyſſes, (to wit,) That he would deuoure him the laſt of all his fellowes.
                     
                     About this time, died the Earle of Leiceſter,
                        
                           The death of Robert Dudley, Earle of Leiceſter.
                         on the fourteenth of December, of a continuall burning Feauer, as hee was on his way to goe to Killingworth: which death, although the Queene much grieued at, yet this ioy was neuer a whit diminiſhed thereby. Hee was the fifth ſonne of Iohn, Duke of Northumberland; vnder King EDVVARD, firſt Gentleman of the Kings Chamber, vnder Queene MARIE, who reſtored him to his firſt honours, together

with his Brothers and Siſters, Maſter of the Artillery at the Siege of Saint Quintaines; and vnder Queene ELIZABETH, who affected him, becauſe of a ſimpathy of ſpirits betweene them, occaſioned perhaps by ſome ſecret conſtellation, which the Greeke Aſtrologers call Sinaſtria; he was Maſter of the Horſe,
                           His dignities and titles.
                         Knight of the Royall Orders of the Garter, and of S. Michael, one of the Priuy Councell, Steward of the Queenes Houſe, Chancellor of the Vniuerſity of Oxford, Iuſtice in Eire of all the Forreſts beyond Trent, the Queenes Lieutenant, and Captaine of the Engliſh Forces againſt Spaines, Gouernour, and Captaine generall of the vnited Prouinces of the Netherlands: he began in his latter time to conceit a new hope and title of honour and authority, looking to haue, with Soueraigne power annexed thereunto, a generall Lieutenancy vnder the Queene, both throughout all England and Ireland, of which he had gotten Letters Patents, if that the Right Honourable William Cecill, Lord Burleigh, and Sir Chriſtopher Hatton had not oppoſed themſelues thereunto, and alſo if the Queen had not betimes preuented the danger which might haue inſued, in giuing too-much power to one man alone. Hee was reputed a compleat Courtier,
                           His diſpoſition and manners.
                         magnificent, liberall, a protector and benefactor of Souldiers and Schollers, very skilfull in temporizing, and fitting himſelfe to the times, to ſerue his owne turne, very officious, and cunning towards his ill-willers; for a time much giuen to Women, and finally, a good husband in exceſſe. To conclude, as long as he preferred a power ſubiect vnto enuy before a ſolid vertue, euill ſpeakers tooke occaſion to tugge and teare at him continually, during the beſt of his fortune, by defamatory libels, which contained ſome ſlight vntruths. And to ſay the truth, hee was openly held to be in the ranke of thoſe which were worthy of praiſe, but the things which hee ſecretly plotted, diſpleaſed many. The Queene, who was flexible ynough in all other things, & was hardly euer

ſeene to remit any thing due to her treaſure, cauſed his goods to be ſold to their vttermoſt value,
                           Leiceſters goods are ſold.
                         to pay that which he ought her.
                     The Duke of Parma hauing now broken off his purpoſe of inuading England, to carry away notwithſtanding with this great prepared Army for that end, ſome glory from the Engliſh, and by the ſame meanes to open the way of Zeland, and deliuer Brabant from incurſions, beſiegeth Bergen ap Zoom, a Towne of Brabant,
                        
                           Berghen ap Zoom beſieged by the Duke of Parma.
                         ſtrong by reaſon of the ſituation thereof, and the Forts round about it, and garded by a garriſon the moſt part Engliſh. But his indeuour was fruſtrated by the fore-ſight of the Noble Lord Willoughby, and the valour of the Garriſon Souldiers: For although that during the whotteſt of the ſiege, there aroſe a great diſcord amongſt the beſieged, ſome fauouring Drury, Gouernour of the place, eſtabliſhed by the Lord Willoughby, the Engliſh Generall, and others adhering vnto Morgan, prouided thereof by the Queenes Letters, each of them notwithſtanding hauing a care of the common good, behaued themſelues valiantly, and by ſallies and other military deuices, did all of them ſo finde the Enemy buſied, that after hauing ſlaine, taken, or drowned about foure hundred, which Grimſton and Redhead,
                        
                           Who raiſeth the ſiege.
                         feigning themſelues to be Fugitiues, had drawne into the Fort by great promiſes, proteſtations, and oathes; the Duke hauing loſt all hope of ſhutting vp their Hauen, and to make himſelfe Maſter of the Towne, and ſeeing the Winter at hand, and victuals fayling, rayſed his ſiege two Moneths after. And the Lord Willoughby, to honour with ſome recompence the well-deſeruing, knighted Sir Francis Vere, who then began to ſhew himſelfe, Sir Thomas Knowles, Sir N. Parker, and Sir I. Pooly, for their worthy valours.
                     
                        England being now freed from the preſent feare of a forreine Warre,
                           Innouations in England.
                         found not her ſelfe ſo happily deliuered of

an inward Schiſme; For ſchiſmaticall impiety waxeth alwaies inſolent when any Warres be ſtirring, nor euer did ſhameleſſe and rebellious impudence, and outragious malice more inſolently beard the Eccleſiaſticall Magiſtracie: For whereas the Queene, who was
EVER THE SAME,
was very vnwilling to innouate any thing in Religion, thinking it the way to cut the nerues of the Eccleſiaſticall adminiſtration, and the Royall Prerogatiue; ſome, which onely admired the diſcipline of the Church of Geneua, iudging that there was no better way to eſtabliſh it, than by blazoning the Engliſh Hierarchie, and bringing the Prelates in hatred with the people, did in ſcurrilous maner ſpit out their ſlanderous venome againſt this Hierarchie, by certaine iniurious printed Bookes, which carryed the Titles of,

                           Martin Mar-Prelate, and other ſcandalous Bookes.Martin Mar-Prelate, or A Whip for the Prelates. Minerales Diotrephes demonſtration of Diſcipline, &c.
                     
                     That the Authors of them ſeemed not to be profeſſors of Pietie, but rather Royſters: neuertheleſſe, they were Miniſters, the one was named Penry; and the other, Vuedall, and Iob Throckmorton, a learned man, but a merry conceited fellow, and had for their fautors or ſuppoſts, Sir Richard Knightlie, and Sir R. Wigston, worſhipfull Knights, graue and prudent perſonages (who had beene ſeduced by like Miniſters) & had bin fined deepe in the Starre-Chamber, in caſe the Arch-Biſhop of Canterburie, according

to his accuſtomed goodneſſe and mildeneſſe, had not with much adoe appeaſed the Queene.
                     Whileſt theſe, I ſay,
                           Beginning of a great Rebellion in Jreland.
                         by ſlandering made way to this diſcipline, other companions in this their enterprize, in contempt of the Laws, began to put it in practice, in diuers corners of the Kingdome, holding Synods and Aſſemblies in certaine places, eſtabliſhing to that end Presbyteries, of which number Thomas Cartwright, Edmund Snap, Andrew King, Proudlous, Pain, and other Miniſters beeing committed, ſome turbulent ſpirits thought to haue reſcued them. But I leaue vnto the Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtorian, the deſcription of the petulancy of theſe people, which was ſtayed by the wiſedome and patience of the Lords Archbiſhops, vnto whom the knowledge of that buſineſſe appertained.
                     Although that tempeſt which had thundered ſo loude, and with ſuch threatnings from out of Spaine, was now blowne ouer, yet fell there ſome little guſts, as reliques thereof in Ireland and Scotland, and out of England vpon Spaine, ruſhed out a more grieuous, as anon wee ſhall declare. For, in Ireland, by reaſon that Fitz-Williams, the Lord Deputie, who made ſearch for all Spaniſh goods loſt by wrecke, did exact them with rigour, and by occaſion thereof, impriſoned ſome as fauourers of the Spaniards; amongſt other matters, occaſion was thence giuen & taken of all the troubles ſince hapning.
                     
                        Daniel Rogers ſent into Denmarke to condole the death of Frederick the Second,
                           Ambaſſadour in Denmarke.
                         and confirme the ancient alliances with his Succeſſour, treateth with the Curators of the Kingdome, to procure
THat the Danes ſhould not beare Armes againſt the Queene in the ſeruice of any Enemies of her Kingdome. That they ſhould not grant permiſsion to ſtay Ships for particular faults,

in the ſtraits of Denmarke or Seiland. That the Iland-fiſhing, whereof the libertie was to be renewed euery ſeuen yeeres according to ancient order, might not be hindered by any new deuices. That the Engliſh might not pay any cuſtome in the Sound, but at their returne from the Baltique Sea, nor in other Money than with that of Denmarke. That the proprietaries of the Ships ſhould not be holden by the fraud or deceits of Pilots and Ship-maſters. That the things wherewith Cloth are made vp, were free and exempted from paying any cuſtome; and that the Tribute called Laſt gelt, ſhould be forgiuen to the Engliſh.
                        
                     
                     But theſe things were put off to another time, becauſe of the Kings being vnder age: for the Danes were in ſome faſhion ill pleaſed & diſcontēted with the Engliſh, for not paſſing then by the ſtraits of Denmarke, going into Ruſsia, but along the Coaſt of Norwegue, Finmarck, Lappy, Scrufinic, and Biarmie.
                        
                           The Emperour of Ruſſia moſt fauourable to the Engliſh.
                         But Boris Theodoride elected and choſen Theodore Iahannide's Succeſſor to the Empire of Ruſsia, who dyed vpon the beginning of this yeere, he miſt no occaſion to helpe and ſuccour the Engliſh, purchaſing carefully, by all meanes poſſible, the Royall amity of Queene ELIZABETH.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  To the READER.
                  
                  MAruell not, READER, why I ſhould produce,
                  In the Omega of my Worke, excuſe,
                  And craue remiſſion of my errours paſt,
                  Leſt any Zoylus ſhould aſperſion caſt
                  On this my labours of-ſpring: but doe know,
                  Though I ſuch height of baſeneſſe will not ſhow,
                  To ſay all's bad, ſo my ambition is
                  No wayes ſo great, to ſay that nought's amiſſe:
                  The Sunne, ſometimes eclipſt, denyes his light;
                  So that the Day ſeemes turned into Night:
                  Faire Venus had a Mole vpon her Chinne;
                  The luckieſt Gameſter cannot alwayes winne:
                  The rareſt Man may erre, and tis moſt ſure,
                  There's none but GOD, that ſpotleſſe is and pure.
                  Then farre be ſuch a Philautie from mee,
                  To ſay that none, faults in this Worke can ſee.
                  'Twere ſtrange, if that a Strangers Penne, and Preſſe,
                  Should haue no faults, when beſt Workes haue no leſſe
                  Then ſtay (raſh Cenſurer) and forbeare
                  To condemne all, though ſome miſtake be there.
                  
                     A. D.
                  
               
            
         
      
   