
      
         
            
            
            Camelles Concluſion.
            
               Camelles Concluſion, and laſt farewell then,
               To Churcharde and thoſe, that defende his when.
            
            A Man that hath mo thynges then two, to put hym vnto paines,
            Hath euen ſo many cares the mo to worke hym wery braynes.
            So I, that late haue laboured harde, and plucked at my plowe,
            Am come to towne, where nowe I fynde mo matters then ynowe.
            Mothen I looked for by muche, mo matters to then needes,
            Mo makynges and mo medlynges far, then I haue herbes or wedes.
            And all agaynſt me one alone, a ſory ſymple man,
            That toyles and trauailes for my foode, to earne it as I can.
            And gladly would in quiet be, to ſwinke and liue in reſte,
            But dreamers wyl not ſu
                  •
               er me, they nettle ſo my neſt.
            A ſurreioinder, dreamer bringes, the ſecond a decree,
            A mariner brings in his bore, and he the thirde wil be.
            And ſo they ioyne and 
                  〈◊〉
                in 
                  •
               eaſe, god graunt them well to runne
            For I ſhall ſhewe them if I can, a courſe er I haue done.
            The dreamer firſt full we. I know, I ſhooke hym by the ſleue,
            Whereat the other. ii. I trowe, are angrye and do greue.
            But that no force be as be may, here gothe the beaſt abroade,
            Dreamer awake, maryner rowe, decree man looke abroade.
            The beaſte will turne I laie a grote, and giue you all a tryp,
            Why nowe ſyrs nowe, nowe foote it well, this beaſt begyns to ſkyp.
            And fyrſt to maiſte
                  •
                dreamer tu
                  •
               nes, and his ſurreioyndre to,
            Wherin all thyngs be well he ſaith, that he dooth dreame and doo.
            He dreames he ſaies and truely meanes, to put thynges in good ſtay
            Shorte ſyr dreamer, a bandy ho, that ball muſt nedes away.
            If that your dreame haue ſuche entent, then hath it an effecte,
            And that effect your Weſterne Wyll, would not haue men ſuſpect:
            But take it as a dreame ſaies he, and fanteſy of the head,
            A fyner freke by Roode then you, I haue his workes well read.
            Altho he chop in chorles termes, and carpes in vncouth ſpeeche,
            Yet knowe I with a fynger wet, where wyſe men myght hym ſeeche.
            That if he whyp his whirry ſo, he may chance licke a clowne,
            To whyp it vnder water quite, and craire and cariage drowne.
            But ſens he is become my iudge, and iudgeth me amyſſe,
            In notyng me quite oute of rule, as his wide wyſedome is,
            
               
He ſhall well knowe, and ſo ſhall you, and the decreer too,
            That for my rule, when I was yonge, this was I taught to doo.
            My father put me firſte to ſchoole, where I a maiſter hadde:
            Of whom I had preceptes and ſtrypes as fitted for a ladde.
            He taught me there to feare my god, and loue hym with my might.
            To ſerue the kyng, and pray for hym, and all his counſell ryght.
            Then next to honour thoſe my frendes, that kept me ſo at ſchoole,
            And this whyle I a ſcholar was, was euery day my rule.
            And ſyns that tyme, my vycar hath full lyke a chriſten man,
            Taught me to treade in goddes hygh waie, and kepe it as I can.
            To be obedient to the kyng, and to the lawe alſo,
            And doo my duetie to the powers, and lette their matters go.
            
               Que noſtra ſu
                     •
                  t carare lo, he titled at my doore,
            And bad me printe it on my poſtes, and ſpread it on my floore.
            And leele loue and labour eke, he bad me learne to knowe,
            And kepe my plowe for profite ſake, and thanke god to I trowe.
            And tolde me howe there hanges a bell, within our paryſhe churche,
            whyche he dothe twange eche mornyng rathe, before we go to wurche,
            That tales to me, and others mo, our neighbours there about,
            This terme whiche I ſhall tell you nowe, as I can bryng it out.
            
               Que ſupra nos, nihil ad nos, this bell tynges vs to kenne:
            And this he ſayd the bell warnde me, as it dyd other men.
            And when I ſawe this Dicars when, I was ſo bolde to tell:
            That Dicar in his draffyſhe dreame, had not herd this bell well.
            And then for thy, forſooth and god, my horne and ſcrape I tooke:
            And ſcratched in a fewe feet lynes, for dreamers on to looke:
            And ſo ſir thus I ment no more, but mynded hym to know
            His duetie (as I ment myne owne) and farther not to goe,
            Tyll in his toyes he tickled me, as lofty ladde on lowde,
            And ſhope me ſhares to ſharpe me with, to carpe out of a clowde.
            And if you rolle thus out of tune for raynyng hym this way,
            To kepe hym ſelfe in order ſuche, as he ſhoulde doo I ſaie:
            And take the iudgement to your hande, and terme me oute of rule,
            Then trowe me well, you turne me wide from Camell to a mule.
            Whiche camell can not crouche withall, nor cary with hym home,
            But ſhape and ſhake it to your ſelues, like lumpes of your owne lome.
            But welaway, I wander wide, for Churchyarde ment it well.
            And ſo he ſaies, and ſo ſay you, and ſo your writynges tell,
            So ſometymes houſes fyred are, by meanyng well in lyghtes,
            And then the meanyng is but marde, & they mad meanyng wightes.
            But ſens you will needes haue me ſeke the meanyng of this whan,
            Meane it to thoſe whom it dothe touche, and ſcuſe it as you can.
            
               
And then let wyſe men deme and iudge atwene Dicar and me.
            Whiche of vs two is out of rule, I meane or I or hee.
            And fyrſt let me nowe are you all, what ſignifies this whan?
            That ca
                  ••
               es with hym at his tayle, ſo great a iarryng than.
            Holde is it in hand a preſent tyme, or future tyme to come?
            Or is it admirantis woorde, as ſchoole men call it ſome.
            It muſt needes meane a matter madde, as farre as I can ſee,
            But on go to, your wittes are fyne, meane you it out for me.
            Dreame▪ dothe dreame, and whens vs out, a wondre of theſe whens,
            Wherof ſome whens are wonders well, and meete for whens mens
            But ſome f
                  •
               om gammuth gront and grone aboue ela a note:
            And thoſe wilde whens ar whend to large, I dare you gage my cote,
            what when is this, that he whens out, when iuſtice ioynes to truthe?
            whoſe ſeate is that? howe ioynes iuſtyce? dreamer ſaie on in ſooth.
            And nodde your noddles nowein one, and make a trinitie.
            Full workmanly to worke this when, if that it will ſo be.
            And fyrſt waie well what iuſtice is, to whom it dooth pertayne,
            who ſwaies the ſwoorde, who dooth decree, looke to the matter playn.
            Frō whens he comes, what brāche he beares, & who & which him vſe,
            And anſwere iuſtyce to the wronge, wherwith you hym accuſe.
            And meane your meanyng as you meane, & dreame not in your ſlepe.
            And ſhewe what ioly ordre nowe, in this your when you kepe.
            But ſhorte to make of all your whens, to take the principall,
            This is among the reſt the worſt, and ſtandes the laſt of all.
            when Rex dothe reigne and rule the roſte, lo thus you raunge at laſte,
            A meruailous when that ſuche a when, ſhould out in print be paſte.
            Doth not Rex raign ſir dreamer now? what whennyng term is this?
            If Rex reigne not? who reigneth then? a ſaucy when this is.
            And whend at length and large in deede, beyonde a ſubiectes wit,
            That god defend that I ſhould dreame, or that, or like of it.
            And yet I trowe I haue a byll for cattall that I ſolde:
            That ſaies howe Rex hath raigned vi. yeare almoſt I dare be bolde.
            And eyther is your when full falſe, or my byll is not true,
            And whiche is trueſt of them bothe, let me nowe aſke of you.
            As for my ſelfe I make no doubtes, but that your when is wrong.
            And that Rex raignes as he hath doon, and ſhall I truſt raigne long.
            Which as in ſchoole I was fyrſt taught, to praie that he may doo.
            So euery ſubiect let hym ſeeke to haue that prayer too.
            Thus coulde I touche ſome other whens, wherin you when at large.
            A great deale paſte your compaſſe to, and as muche paſt your charge.
            But thoſe It leaue by lyght of this, for to be ſcande and ſene▪
            
            To thoſe that better iudgementes haue, then you or I. I wene.
            
               
And now wyl take your thē in hand wherwyth you knit your when
            In publyſhing it thus to me, and to all other menne.
            Than balefull barnes be blithe you ſay, that here in England wonne:
            Our ſteyfe ſhal ſtynt you vndertake, our dredful dayes are donne.
            An aſſuraunce here you make, that baleful barnes we be,
            And that in ſtrife we are alſo, and dreadfull daies doo ſe.
            But God defend it ſhould be true, whych your ful ſcantycke hedde:
            Hath publyſht to ſo open eyes, for to be ſeene and redde.
            For once for me I make no doughtes, nor no good ſubiect el
                  •
               es:
            But we a noble ſoueraygne haue, as al our ſtatutes tels.
            And as al orders els beſydes do wyll vs for to know:
            Who gouernes vs and is our head, and rules vs al alſo.
            And vnder hym haue other powers to ſee that lawe be donne:
            To gree and tune vs in accorde, if wee be out of tune.
            Vnder whoſe rule and order eke, al we that ſubiectes be:
            Do lyue and ioyne as fytteth vs, in one for to agree.
            And in the town where I do dwell, I know no ſtryfe or dread:
            But euery man there lyues in tune as ſubiectes to theyr head.
            And meddels not but with theyr plowes, & ſomtime with their bow:
            And prate wyth Peter and wyth Paule, theyr dutyes for to know.
            And learne ſo for to kepe them ſtyll in order as they can:
            Except ſuch wranglers wrangle them, with ſuch large whan & than
            And ſo I truſte they do els where, whiche for my part I pray,
            That longe we may ſo ioyne in one, what ſo your when dothe ſay.
            But yet ſuche dreadfull whans & thens, which doth the matter marre
            Were better quight, pulled out of ſyght, then ſhewed as they are.
            And ſo ſhewe weſterne will from me, and wat and Herman too.
            And wyll them wynde their takle well, not as they wont to doo.
            For if they leane to learne ſuch whens, it will be longe I feare,
            Ere they will channell well their craire, that ſhulde them ſafely beare.
            Domine ſaluum fac regem,
& da pacem in diebus noſtris.
T. Camel.
            
            
               
                  The harteburne I owe you is, yf you come to Lynne,
                  I praie you to take my poore howſe for your ynne.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London by Hary Sutton, dwellyng in Poules
            Churchyarde, at the ſygne of the blacke boye.
            
         
      
   