
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE
DESCRIPTION
of a Maske: ❧ Presented in the
Banqueting roome at Whitehall, on
Saint Stephens night last, At the Mariage of
the Right Honourable the Earle of
Somerset: And the right noble
the Lady FRANCES
Howard.
                  
                  Written by Thomas Campion.
                  
                  Whereunto are annexed diuers choyse Ayres composed
for this Maske that may be sung with a single voyce
to the Lute or Base-Viall.
                  LONDON
Printed by E. A. for Laurence Li'sle, dwelling in Paules
Church-yard, at the signe of the Tygers head.
1614.
               
               
                  
                     
                     Pulchro pulchra datur, sociali faedere amanti
                     Tandem nubit amans; ecquid amabilius?
                  
                  
                     Verae vt super sint nuptiae
                     Praeite duplici face:
                     Praetendat alteram necesse
                     Hymen, alteram par est Amor.
                  
                  
                     Vniego mallemplacuisse docto,
                     Candido, et fastu sine iudicanti,
                     Millium quam millibus imperitorum
                     In
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         iudentûm.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  The description of a Masque, Presented
in the Banqueting roome at Whitehall,
On St. Stephens night last: At the Mariage
of the right Honourable the Earle of
Somerset, & the right noble the
Lady Frances Howard.
                  
                     IN ancient times, whē
any man sought to shadowe or
heighten his Inuention, he had
store of feyned persons readie
for his purpose; As Satyres,
Nymphes & their like: such were
then in request and beliefe among
the vulgar. But in our dayes, although they
haue not vtterly lost their vse, yet finde they so litle
credit, that our moderne writers haue rather transferd
their fictions to the persons of Enchaunters &
Commaunders of Spirits, as that excellent Poet
Torquato Tasso hath done, and many others.
                  In imitation of them (having a presentation in
hand for Persons of high State) I grounded my
whole Inuention vpon Inchauntmens and severall
transformations: The work-manship whereof was

vndertaken by M. Constantine an Italian, Architect to
our late Prince Henry: but he being too much of him
selfe, and no way to be drawne to impart his intentions,
fayled so farre in the assurance he gaue, that
the mayne inuention euen at the last cast, was of
force drawne into a farre narrower compasse then
was from the beginning intended: The description
whereof as it was performed, I will as briefely as I
can deliver. The place wherein the Maske was presented,
being the Banquetting house at White Hall:
the vpper part, where the State is placed, was Theatred
with Pillars, Scaffolds, and all things answerable
to the sides of the Roome. At the lower end of
the Hall before the Sceane was made an Arch Tryvmphall,
passing beautifull, which enclosed the
whole Workes: The Sceane it selfe (the Curtaine
being drawne) was in this manner diuided.
                  On the vpper part there was formed a Skye with
Clowdes very arteficially shadowed. On either side
of the Sceane belowe was set a high Promontory,
and on either of them stood three large pillars of
golde: the one Promontory was bounded with a
Rocke standing in the Sea, the other with a Wood;
In the midst betwene them apeared a Sea in perspectiue
with ships, some cunningly painted, some arteficially
sayling. On the front of the Sceane, on either
side was a beautifull garden, with sixe seates a peece
to receaue the Maskers: behinde them the mayne
Land, and in the middest a paire of stayres made exceeding
curiously in the forme of a Schalop shell.

And in this manner was the eye first of all entertayned.
After the King, Queene, and Prince were placed,
and preparation was made for the beginning
of the Maske, there entred foure Squires, who as
soone as they approached neare the Presence, humbly
bowing themselues, spake as followeth.
                  
                     The first Squire.
                     
                        THat fruite that neither dreads the Syrian heats,
                        Nor the sharp frosts which churlish Boreas threats,
                        The fruite of Peace, and Ioy our wishes bring
                        To this high State, in a Perpetuall Spring.
                        Then pardon (Sacred Maiestie) our griefe
                        Vnseasonably that presseth for reliefe.
                        The ground wherof (if your blest eares can spare
                        A short space of Attention) we'le declare.
                     
                     
                        GReat Honors Herrald Fame hauing Proclaym'd
                        This Nuptiall feast, and with it all enflam'd▪
                        
                        From euery quarter of the earth three Knights
                        In Courtship seene, as well as Martiall fights)
                        Assembled in the Continent, and there
                        Decreed this night A solemne Seruice here.
                        For which, by sixe and sixe embarqu'd they were
                        In seuerall Keeles; their Sayles for Britaine bent.
                        But (they that neuer fauour'd good intent)
                        Deformed Errour that enchaunting fiend,
                        And wing-tongu'd Rumor his infernall freind,
                        With Curiositie and Credulitie,
                        
                        Both Sorceresses, all in hate agree
                        
                           Our purpose to divert, in vaine they striue,
                        For we in spight of them came neere t'ariue,
                        When sodainly (as Heauen and hell had met)
                        A storme confus'd against our Tackle beat,
                        Seuering the Ships: but after what befell
                        Let these relate, my tongu's too weake to tell.
                     
                  
                  
                     The second Squire.
                     A Strange and sad Ostent our Knights distrest,
                     For while the Tempests fierye rage increast,
                     About our Deckes and Hatches, loe, appeare
                     Serpents, as Lerna had beene pour'd out there
                     Crawling about vs, which feare to eschew
                     The Knights the Tackle climb'd, and hung in view,
                     When violently a flash of lighning came,
                     And from our sights did beare them in the flame.
                     Which past, no Serpent there was to be seene,
                     And all was husht, as storme had neuer beene.
                  
                  
                     The third Squire.
                     AT Sea, their mischeifes grewe, but ours at Land,
                     For being by chance arriu'd, while our Knights stand
                     To view their storme-tost friends on two Cliffes neere,
                     Thence loe they vanish'd, and sixe Pillars were
                     Fixt in their footsteps, Pillars all of golde,
                     Faire to our eyes, but wofull to beholde.
                  
                  
                     
                     The fourth Squire.
                     THus with prodigious hate and crueltie,
                     Our good Knights for their loue afflicted be,
                     But, ō protect vs now, Maiesticke Grace,
                     For see, those curst Enchanters presse in place
                     That our past sorrowes wrought: these, these alone
                     Turne all the world into confusion.
                  
                  Towards the end of this speech, two Enchanters,
and two Enchanteresses appeare: Error first, in a
skin coate scaled like a Serpent, and an antick habit
painted with Snakes, a haire of curled Snakes, and
a deformed visard. With him Rumor in a skin coate
full of winged Tongues, and ouer it an antick robe,
on his head a Cap like a tongue, with a large paire
of wings to it.
                  
                     Curiosity in a skin coate full of eyes, and an antick
habit ouer it, a fantastick Cap full of Eyes.
                  
                     Credulity in the like habit painted with eares, and
an antick Cap full of eares.
                  When they had whispered a while as if they had
reioyced at the wrongs which they had done to the
Knights, the Musick and their Daunce began: strait
forth rusht the foure Windes confusedly, the Easterne
winde in a skin coate of the colour of the Sunrising,

with a yellow haire, and wings both on his
shoulders and feete.
                  The Westerne Winde in a skin coate of darke
crimson, with crimson haire and wings.
                  The Southerne Winde in a darke russet skin
coate, haire and wings sutable.
                  The Northern winde in a grisled skin coate, with
haire and wings accordingly.
                  After them in confusion came the foure Elements:
Earth, in a skin coate of grasse greene, a mantle painted
full of trees, plants, and flowers, and on his head
an oke growing.
                  
                     Water, in a skin coate waved, with a mantle full
of fishes, on his head a Dolphin.
                  
                     Ayre, in a skye-coloured skin coate, with a mantle
painted with Fowle, and on his head an Eagle.
                  
                     Fire, in a skin coate, and a mantle painted with
flames: on his head a cap of flames, with a Salamander
in the midst thereof.
                  Then entred the foure parts of the earth in a confused measure.
                  
                     Europe in the habit of an Empresse, with an Emperiall
Crowne on her head.
                  
                     
                     Asia in a Persian Ladies habit with a Crowne on
her head.
                  
                     Africa like a Queene of the Moores, with a crown.
                  
                     America in a skin coate of the colour of the
iuyce of Mulberies, on her head large round brims
of many coloured feathers, and in the midst of it a
small Crowne.
                  All these hauing daunced together in a strange
kinde of confusion; past away, by foure and foure.
                  At which time, Eternity appeared in a long blew
Taffata robe, painted with Starres, and on her head
a Crowne.
                  Next, came the three Destinies, in long robes of
white Taffata like aged women, with Garlands of
Narcissus Flowers on their heads, and in their left
hands they carried distaffes according to the descriptions
of Plato and Catullus, but in their right hands
they carried altogether a Tree of Golde.
                  After them, came Harmony with nine Musitians
more, in long Taffata robes and caps of Tinsell, with
Garlands guilt, playing and singing this Song.
                  
                     
                     Chorus.
                     Vanish, vanish hence confusion,
                     Dimme not Hymens goulden light
                     With false illusion.
                     The Fates shall doe him right,
                     And faire Eternitie,
                     Who passe through all enchantements fre:
                  
                  
                     Eternitie singes alone.
                     Bring away this Sacred Tree,
                     The Tree of Grace, and Bountie,
                     Set it in Bel-Annas eye,
                     For she, she, only she
                     Can all Knotted spels vnty.
                     Pull'd from the Stocke, let her blest Hands conuay
                     To any suppliant Hand, a bough,
                     And let that Hand, aduance it now
                     Against a Charme, that Charme shall fade away.
                  
                  Toward the ende of this Song the three, destinies
set the Tree of Golde before the Queene.
                  
                     Chorus.
                     Since Knightly valour rescues Dames distressed,
                     By Vertuous Dames, let charm'd Knights be released.
                  
                  
                     
                     After this Chorus, one of the
Squires speakes.
                  
                  
                     SInce Knights by valour Rescue Dames distrest,
                     Let them be by the Queene of Dames releast:
                     So sing the Destinyes, who neuer erre,
                     Fixing this Tree of Grace and Bountie heere,
                     From which, for our enchaunted Knights we craue
                     A branche, pull'd by your Sacred Hand, to haue;
                     That we may beare it as the Fates direct,
                     And manifest your glory in the'ffect.
                     In vertues fauour then, and Pittie now,
                     (Great Queene) vouchsafe vs a diuine touch't bough.
                  
                  At the end of this speech, the Queene puld a branch
from the Tree and gaue it to a Nobleman who deliuered
it to one of the Squires.
                  
                     A Song whilè the Squires descend With the bough, toward the Scene.
                     
                        Goe happy man like th'Euening Starre,
                        Whose beames to Bride-groomes well-come are.
                        May neither Hagge, nor Feind withstand
                        The pow're of thy Victorious Hand.
                        The Vncharm'd Knights surrender now,
                        By vertue of thy raised Bough.
                     
                     
                        Away Enchauntements, Vanish quite,
                        No more delay our longing sight:
                        'Tis fruitelesse to contend with Fate,
                        Who giues vs pow're against your hate.
                        Braue Knights, in Courtly pompe appeare,
                        For now are you long look't for heere.
                     
                  
                  
                     
Then out of the ayre a cloude descends, discouering
sixe of the Knights alike, in strange and sumptuous
atires, and withall on either side of the Cloud,
on the two Promontories, the other sixe Maskers
are sodainly transformed our of the pillars of golde,
at which time, while they all come forward to the
dancing place, this Chorus is sung, & on the sodaine
the whole Sceane is changed: for whereas before
all seemed to be done at the sea and sea coast,
now the Promontories are sodainly remooved, and
London with the Thames is very arteficially presented
in their place.
                  The Squire lifts vp the Bough.
                  
                     Chorus.
                     Vertue and Grace, in spight of Charmes,
                     Haue now redeem'd our men at Armes.
                     Ther's no inchauntement can withstand,
                     Where Fate directs the happy hand.
                  
                  
                     The Maskers first Daunce.
                  
                  
                     The third Song of three partes, with a Chorus of fiue
partes, sung after the first Daunce.
                     
                        VVHile dancing rests, fit place to musicke graunting,
                        Good spels the Fates shall breath, al enuy daunting
                        Kind eares with ioy enchaunting, chaunting.
                     
                     
                        
                        Chorus.
                        Io, Io Hymen.
                     
                     
                        Like lookes, like hearts, like loues are linck't together,
                        So must the Fates be pleas'd, so come they hether,
                        To make this Ioy perseuer euer.
                     
                     
                        Chorus.
                        Io, Io Hymen.
                     
                     
                        Loue decks the spring, her buds to th'ayre exposing,
                        Such fire here in these bridall Breasts reposing
                        We leaue with charmes enclosing, closing.
                     
                     
                        Chorus.
                        Io, Io Hymen.
                     
                  
                  
                     The Maskers second Daunce.
                  
                  
                     The fourth Song a Dialogue of three with a Chorus
after the second Daunce.
                     
                        1
                        LEt vs now sing of Loues delight,
                        For he alone is Lord to night.
                     
                     
                        2
                        Some friendship betweene man, and man prefer,
                        But I th'affection betweene man and wife.
                     
                     
                        3
                        What good can be in life,
                        Whereof no fruites appeare?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     1
                     Set is that Tree in ill houre,
                     That yeilds neither fruite nor flowre.
                  
                  
                     2
                     2 How can man Perpetuall be,
                     but in his owne Posteritie?
                  
                  
                     Chorus.
                     That pleasure is of all most bountifull and kinde,
                     That fades not straight, but leaues a liuing Ioy behinde.
                  
                  After this Dialogue the Maskers daunce with the
Ladies, wherein spending as much time as they held
fitting, they returned to the seates prouided for
them.
                  Straight in the Thames appeared foure Barges
with skippers in them, & withall this song was sung.
                  
                     Come a shore, come merrie mates,
                     With your nimble heeles, and pates:
                     Summon eu'ry man his Knight,
                     Enough honour'd is this night.
                     Now, let your Sea-borne Goddesse come.
                     Quench these lights, and make all dombe.
                     Some sleepe, others let her call,
                     And so Godnight to all, godnight to all.
                  
                  At the conclusion of this song arriued twelue
skippers in red capps, with short cassocks and long
slopps wide at the knees, of white canvas striped
with crimson, white gloves and Pomps, and red

stockins: these twelue daunced a brave and lively
daunce, shouting and tryvmphing after their manner.
                  After this followed the Maskers last daunce,
wherewith they retyred.
                  At the Embarking of the Knights, the Squires
approach the state, and speake.
                  
                     The first Squire.
                     ALl that was euer ask't, by vow of Ioue,
                     
                     To blesse a state with, Plentie, Honor Loue,
                     Power, Triumph, priuate pleasure, publique peace,
                     Sweete springs, and Autumn's filld with due increase,
                     All these; and what good els, thought can supplie.
                     Euer attend your Triple Maiestie.
                  
                  
                     The second Squire.
                     ALl blessings which the Fates, Propheticke Sung,
                     At Peleus Nuptialls, and what euer tongue
                     Can figure more, this night, and aye betide,
                     The honour'd Bride-groome, and the honourd Bride.
                  
                  
                     
                     All the Squires together.
                     Thus speakes in vs th'affection of our Knights,
                     Wishing you health, and Miriads of goodnights.
                  
                  The Squires speeches being ended, this Song is
Sung while the Boates passe away.
                  Hast aboord, hast now away,
                  Hymen frownes, at your delay:
                  Hymen doth long nights affect;
                  Yeild him then his due respect.
                  The Sea-borne Goddesse straight will come,
                  Quench these lights, and make all dombe.
                  Some Sleepe, others she will call,
                  And so godnight to all, godnight to all.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  AYRES,
Made by seuerall Authors:
AND
Sung in the Maske at the Marriage of the
Right Honourable ROBERT, Earle of Somerset,
and the Right Noble the Lady FRANCES
HOVVARD. Set forth for the Lute and Base Violl, and may be exprest
by a single voyce, to eyther of those Instruments.
                  
                     LONDON:
Printed for Laurence Lisle, dwelling at the Signe of the
Tigers-head in Pauls Church-yard. 1614.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  CANTO. I.
                  The firrt Song: made and exprest by Mr. Nicholas Laneir.
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     BRing a- way, bring a- way this sacred Tree,
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
the tree of grace and boun-tie, Set it in Bel- Annae's, eye: for shee, she onely
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  she onely, she can all knotted spels vn- tie. Pull'd from this stocke, let her blest
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  hand conuey To any suppliant hand a bough, And let that hand aduance
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  it now Against a charme, that charme shall fade a- way.
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     BASSO. I.
                     
                        
                           〈♫〉
                        
                     
                     
                        BRing away.
                     
                        
                           〈♫〉
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  CANTO. II.
                  These three Songs following were composed by Mr. Coprario,
and sung by Mr. Iohn Allen, and Mr. Laneir.
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     GOe happy man like th'Euening Starre, Whose beams to
                  May neither Hag nor Fiend with- stand, The power of
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  Bride- groomes welcome are. Th'vnchar- med Knights surren- der
                  thy vi- ctorious hand.
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  now, By ver- tue of thy raised Bow.
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     2
                     Away Enchantments; vanish quite:
                     No more delay our longing sight.
                     'Tis fruitlesse to contend with Fate,
                     Who giues vs power against your hate.
                     Braue Knights in Courtly pompe appeare,
                     For now are you long lookt for here.
                  
                  
                     BASSO. II.
                     
                        
                           〈♫〉
                        
                     
                     
                        GOe happy man.
                     
                        
                           〈♫〉
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  CANTO. III.
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     WHile dauncing rests fit place to Mu- sicke graunting,
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  Good spels the Fates shall breathe, all En- uy daunting,
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  Kind eares with ioy en- chan- ting. Io Io Io Io Io
                  
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     Hy- men, Io Hy- men.
                  
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     2
                     Like lookes, like hearts, like loues are linkt together.
                     So must the Fates be pleas'd, so come they hither.
                     To make this ioy perseuer.
                     
                        Io Io Hymen.
                     
                  
                  
                     3
                     Loue decks the Spring, her buds to th'ayre exposing:
                     Such fire here in these Bridall brests reposing,
                     They leaue with Charmes enclosing.
                     
                        Io Io Hymen.
                     
                  
                  
                     BASSO. III.
                     
                        
                           〈♫〉
                        
                     
                     
                        WHile dancing.
                     
                        
                           〈♫〉
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  CANTO. IIII.
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     COme a shore, come merry Mates, With your nim- ble heeles & pates,
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  Summon euery man his Knight, Enough ho-nour'd is this night. Now
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  let your sea-borne Goddesse come, Quench these lights and make all dombe,
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  Some sleepe, others let her call, And so good night, good night to all. go
                        ••
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  night, good night, good night, good night to all.
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     2
                     Hast abourd, hast now away:
                     
                        Hymen frownes at your delay▪
                     
                     
                        Hymen doth long nights affect;
                     Yeeld him then his due respect.
                     The Sea-borne Goddesse straight will come,
                     Quench those lights, and make all dumbe.
                     Some sleepe; others she will call;
                     And so good night to all, good night to all.
                  
                  
                     BASSO. IIII.
                     
                        
                           〈♫〉
                        
                     
                     
                        COme a shore.
                     
                        
                           〈♫〉
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  CANTO. V.
                  A Song, made by Th. Campion, and sung in the Lords Maske at the Count
Palatines Marriage, we haue here added, to fill vp these emptie Pages.
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     WOoe her and win her hee that can, Each wo- man
                  So she must take and leaue a man, Till time more
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  hath two Lo- uers: This doth Ioue to shew that want makes beau- tie
                  grace dis- co- uers. If faire Women were more scant, they would be
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  more respe- cted.
                  more affe- cted.
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     2
                     Courtship and Musicke sute with Loue;
                     They both are workes of passion:
                     Happy is hee whose words can moue,
                     Yet sweet Notes help perswasion.
                     Mixe your words with Musicke then,
                     That they the more may enter:
                     Bold assaults are fit for men,
                     That on strange beauties venter.
                  
                  
                     BASSO. V.
                     
                        
                           〈♫〉
                        
                     
                     
                        WOoe her.
                     
                        
                           〈♫〉
                        
                     
                     FINIS.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     The Names of the Maskers.
                     1 THE Duke of Lennox.
                     
                     2 The Earle of Pembrooke.
                     
                     3 The Earle of Dorset.
                     
                     4 The Earle of Salisburie.
                     
                     5 The Earle of Mountgomerie.
                     
                     6 The Lord Walden.
                     
                     7 The Lord Scroope.
                     
                     8 The Lord North.
                     
                     9 The Lord Hayes.
                     
                     10 Sir Thrmas Howard.
                     
                     11 Sir Henry Howard.
                     
                     12 Sir Charles Howard.
                     
                  
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   