
      
         
            
            
            The Alphabet of Prayers, very fruitefull to be exerciſed and vſed of euerye Chriſtian Man. Newly collected and ſet forth, in the yeare of our Lorde, 1564. ¶Seene and allowed according to the order appointed in the Queenes Maieſties Iniunctions.
            
               
                  Luke. 11.
               Euery one that aſketh receiueth, and he that ſeketh findeth.
            
            IMPRINTED AT LONdon by Henry Denham, dwelling in Paternoster Rowe, at the Signe of the Starre.
         
         
            
            
               The Glory of the Honorable, is, to feare God.
               Eccleſi. 9.
            
            
               
                  HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE
               
            
            
               It is good for euery eſtate
                Theſe fewe lynes to imitate.
            
            
               R Remember thy calling.
               O  Obey thy Prince.
               B  Beware of Ambition.
               A Aduenge not thy cauſe
               R Regarde thine eſtate.
               T Take coūcell of the wiſe
            
            
               D Deſerue no euill reporte.
               V Vſe Iustice.
               D Defende the right.
               L Let wiſedome rule thee.
               E Embrace Honour.
               Y Yelde to Truthe.
            
         
         
            
            To the Right high and Honorable, and my Singuler and very good Lorde, Lorde Robert Dudley, Earle of Leceſter, Baron of Denbigh, and Knight of the moſte Noble order of the Garter.
            
            
               THE chiefe and Principall thing (moſt Noble Earle,) appertaining to euery Honorable Perſonage (which thing it is good to ſee that your Honor doth well conſider) is to walke in the Garden of Humilitie, and the highe or directeEccleſia. 11. waye to the ſame, is to paſſe by the gate of Vertue, whoſe foundation is ancred and linked to the feare and loue of God: for as by the one isEccleſia. 1. couered the multitude of ſinnes, ſo by the other is obtayned bleſſedneſſe, wiſedome, and knowledge. Dauid that noble king and prophet, afterEccleſia. 25. that hee had long trauailed and had paſſed thorowe the gate of vertue, entred the faire and pleaſaunt garden of humilitie, And hys walking and continuaunce therein, ſo much pleaſed God, that God ſaide of him by the mouth of his

Prophet. I will ſet vp thy ſeede after thee, which2. Kings. 7. Pſalme. 89. ſhall proceede out of thy body. Which ſentence moſt worthy Earle (although not ſpoke of your Noble parentage) in your honor may be approued, which I doubt not your honor conſidereth. Knowing therefore moſte honorable, the great loue and effection which your honor euer hath and doth beare to Vertue and good Letters, I was thereby moued the more boldly after I had gathered togither this ſmall handfull of floures (named the Alphabete of Prayers) to dedicate the ſame to your Honor, as the fruites of my labours, nothing doubting, but that it ſhall moſte acceptablye come into your fauourable and ſure protection. And for ſo much as Prayer is the key that openeth to Vertue, I thought good moſte honorable, to ſet forth to the open ſhew of the world and to thencreaſe of Vertue, thys little Volume or Treatiſe, moſt humblye beſeeching your Honor to accept it as my good wil, crauing your pardon if any thing haue eſcaped mee for want of Learning. And I according to my bounden dutie, ſhall call daily (with my moſt humble and hearty Prayers) to Almighty God to finiſhe that he hath begon in you, with proſperous preſeruation of your health, long to liue in Honor, loye and Felicitie. Amen.
            
               Iames Canceller wiſheth continuall health.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               IT is written (gentle Reader,) that in the beginning, in the dayes of Seth the ſonne of Adam, the people firſt beganGeneſis. 4. to inuocate and call on the name of God, which is to ſaye, by deuout Prayer they did require and aſke all things of him, prayſed him, truſted in him, and gaue to him the honour and worſhip that belonged vnto him.
            And this maner of praying, was vſed among the Fathers from Noe, vnto the comming of Chriſte: And they did frequent & vſe the ſame as a ſpecial meane and way to craue of God, his mercy, hys grace and his aſſiſtance.
            By Prayer alſo they did ſet forthe the glory of God, appeaſed hys wrathe and diſpleaſure, and rendred hym thanckes for his benefites receyued. Chriſte oure Sauioure after his comming taught itMath. 6. 7. Iohn. 16. alſo, as a moſte neceſſary and cōfortable doctrine, wherby we might craue of hys

heauenly Father, not onely all thyngs neceſſary and needefull for vs (as appereth in hys Prayer taught to hys Diſciples) but alſo forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, to the attainement of eternall Lyfe. And therefore maye we well ſaye, that as the vſe thereof is worthye prayſe, ſo is the want therof to be lamented. For where as Prayer is not frequented, there God is not called vppon for hys grace and aſſiſtance, neyther is he thancked for hys gracious benefites, the free gyfte of hys mercy is not deſired, neyther is the horrible puniſhement of hys iuſtice feared.
            Right well therefore may we in this our age (wherein ſinne ſo much aboundeth, and the ordinarye vſe and time and place of Prayer ſo muche neglected) lament the lack of the vſe thereof in all degrees, wyth the looſe lyfe of men, whiche is ſo frayle, ſo weake, ſo peruerſe of nature and ſo prone to euill, that almoſte none in manner ſheweth in liuing to feare God. Who is afrayde to offende hym? or who refrayneth to blaſpheme hys holye name? who ſeeketh to ſubdue

the fleſhe to the Spirit? yea rather who ſeeketh not to lay the brydle. of liberty at length, freely and without ſtaye to followe ſinne, the cauſe whereof is (as I haue ſayd) the want of true and vnfayned calling on God in deuout Prayer: For by it is wrought in vs, the hate of ſinne, and by it is driuen from vs, all other occaſions that might prouoke the wrath of God vpon vs. And therefore it may be called oure ſpeedy meſſanger or truſty Embaſſadour, which doth obtain1. Kings. 2. for vs a gratyous audience before the Maieſtie of God, preſenting to him the fruites of our contrite hearts.
            But who may not now troweſt thou (Gentle Reader) rightlye ſaye to the world, as Ionas ſayd to the Niniuetes: There is yet forty dayes, and the worldLuke. 11 ſhall be deſtroyed.
            The Niniuetes, as ſone as the Prophet had proclaimed diſtruction to come on them for their ſinne, they immediatly at the firſt crying of him, with trembling and feare turned to God, beleued him, feared his iuſtice, confeſſed their

ſinnes, and with penitent hearts craued hys mercye. But thou, O Englande, whome it hath pleaſed God to call, not by the mouth of one man, as he did the Niniuets, but he hath called thee by dyuers other and ſundrye meanes: as firſt by giuing thee a moſte vertuous & gracious Queene, who for hir worſhipping of God and ſetting forth hys name and glorye, maye be compared wyth Ioſiah king of Iuda: for hir vertues, pollicie, & wyſedome, with Iudeth: & for the cares toward hir peopte, with humble Heſter.
            He hath not (as I ſaye) called thee, by thys hys good gifte of ſo mercifull and gracious a Queene, but alſo hath called thee by the Preachers of hys Worde, by death and famine, otherwiſe by fyre frō Heauen, by motion of warre, and laſtly by mortallitie of Peſtilence, yet nothing (O Englande) doeſt thou regarde hys calling: wherefore to thee it may be ſaid, the more he ſeeketh thee the more thou ſhunneſt him, the more he loueth thee the leſſe thou regardeſt him, the more thou needeſt him the leſſe thou thinkeſt

on him: ſo that by thy great vnkindneſſe God is compelled to ſay vnto thee, as hee ſayd to the Iſraelites: I am ouerweried with bearing and long ſuffring of thy wycked and ſinfull liuing. If thou therefore, doe deſire to be free from the horrible plagues and threatnings of GOD, thou muſt lyke a true Niniuete, wyth a broken and penitent heart, call on God wyth continuall Prayer, crauing of him hys mercy, grace and aſſiſtaunce, which if thou aſke wyth a ſure Fayth, he wyll graunt it thee. And therefore when thou doeſt praye, thou muſte (after the minde of the Apoſtle) aſke with a ſtedfaſt faith,Iames. 1. not wauering nor doubtfull, and thy requeſt ſhall be graunted thee. He therefore that aſketh as he ought, receiueth: and hee ſeeketh well that ſeeketh wyth continuall deſire: and he knocketh well which dothe prouoke Gods goodneſſe to heare him, as did the Woman of Cananie, vnto whome Chriſte ſayde, after hir peticion made: O Woman greatMath. 15. is thy Fayth, be it vnto thee euen as thou haſt deſired.

Thus (gentle Reader) if thou loue thy health, if thou long to be acceptable to God, if thou deſire to be ſure from the grennes of the Diuell, from the ſtormes of thys Worlde, from the way of thine ennimies, if thou couet to be happye at the laſte, let no daye paſſe thee, but that thou once at the leaſte doe preſent thy ſelfe to GOD by Prayer: And falling downe before hym wyth an humble affecte of deuout minde (not from the extremitie of the lippes onely, but oute of the inwardeneſſe of the heart,) cry with the Prophet: O Lorde, the offences of my Youthe and mine ignoraunce, rememberPſalme. 25. thou not: but after thy mercye and goodneſſe O Lorde remember thou me. And thus the holye ſpirite that prayeth for thee, and eke thine owne neceſſitie, ſhall euery houre put thee in minde what thou ſhalt praye for, and what you ſhall deſire of God.
            Who therefore that will perſiſt and continue in Prayer, ſhall not onely bee vnto God dailye more and more gratefull and acceptable, but ſhall alſo dailye

proceede further and further from vertue to vertue, and ſhall be made lyke vnto the heauenly and Angelicall mindes, which daily behold the preſence of God. And becauſe all the felicitie of the ſoule, ſtandeth in the cleere beholding of the fruition of God, and for that our felicity ſhall be euerlaſting wyth him, let vs reioyce and ſaye with the Prophet: Thou ſhalt (O Lorde) fyll vs full of gladneſſe wyth thee, whiche is no more but that our felicitie is fulfilled in the ſeyng and beholding of God and our nature in Chriſt, ſitting in heauen on the right hande of his Father, ſo that our rewarde is, that we may beholde God and Ieſus Chriſt hys ſonne, whome he hath ſent: to the which rewarde he bring vs that ſitteth there and prayeth for vs, Amen.
         
         
            
            Certayne Sentences ſet forth after the order of the Alphabete, very neceſſary to meditate in minde.
            
               Aſke vvith a ſure Fayth.
               Be feruent in Prayer.
               Confeſſe thy Sinnes.
               Doe vvell to all men.
               Enuie no man.
               Forgiue them that hate thee.
               Giue almes to the Pore,
               Hurt not thy Enimye.
               In aduerſitie be pacient.
               Keepe the Commaundements.
               Loue Vertue, and hate Vice.
               Mourne vvith them that mourne.
               Neuer be aſhamed of vvell doing.
               Obey God and thy Prince.
               Put the feare of God before thee.
               Quicken thy ſelfe vvith Gods promiſes
               Remember the ende, ere thou begin.
               Succour the pore and needye.
               To all men be Indifferent.
               Vſe often and hearty Prayer.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            When you begin to praye, thinke vpon the remiſſion of Sinnes promiſed in Chriſte Ieſu, and let not thys ſweete Sentence ſpoken of oure Sauioure, be left oute of your remembraunce, which is I ſaye vnto you, whatſoeuer you aſke the Father in my name, he will giue it you.
            
               A Prayer for the Morning.
               
                  ALmightye and moſte mercifull God, I heartily thanke thee for the ſleepe and quiet reſt which vnder thy protection I haue receiued this night, and for that it hath pleaſed thee ſafely to bring mee to the beginning of thys daye: I wretched Sinner moſt humbly beſeeche thee to defende, cheriſhe, comforte and gouerne mee, and all my counſayles, ſtudies and labours, in ſuche wyſe, that I may ſpende and beſtowe thys daye according to thy moſte holy wyll, wythout the hurting of my neighbour: and that I may euermore by thy gouernance, doe

that is thy will and pleaſure, hate wrong and loue iuſtice. Alſo I beſeech thee moſt mercifull GOD, ſtrength and keepe me in the Fayth of the Catholike Church, and kindle in mee the loue and lyghte of thy holy ſpirite, that I may walke in the truthe of thy Worde. Graunt thys mercifull God, for thy deare Sonne Ieſus Chriſtes ſake. Amen.
            
            
               ¶ The fyrſt Pſalme, wherein the penitent requireth of God to walke in hys Commaundements.
               BLeſſed are all thoſe that are vndefiled in the wayes of the Lorde: and bleſſed are they that keepe his Teſtimonies, and ſeeke him wyth their whole heart.
               Cauſe mee thy Creature and handyworke therefore (O Lorde) diligentlye to keepe thy Commaundementes: and ſo direct my wayes, that I may keepe thy Statutes.
               
                  Doe ſo vnto thy ſeruaunt (O Lorde) that I may liue and keepe thy moſte holy Worde.
               Euer wyth my lyppes wyll I be telling of the iudgementes of thy mouth, that I maye haue delight in the waye of thy Teſtimonies, as in all manner of ryches.
               For ſo ſhall I not be confounded, while I haue reſpect vnto all thy Commaundementes.
               Giue mee vnderſtanding I beſeeche thee O Lorde) and I ſhall keepe thy law: yea, I ſhal keepe it with my whole heart.
               Heare my voice (O Lorde) according to thy louing kindeneſſe: and quicken thou mee, according as thou art wont.
               O Lorde, ſtabliſhe thy Worde in thy Seruaunt, that I may feare thee: and open thou mine eyes, that I maye ſee the wonderous things of thy lawe.
               Glorye be to the Father, and to the Sonne, and to the holy Ghoſt.
               As it was in the beginning, is now, and euer ſhall bee, Worlde wythoute ende. Amen.
               
                  
                  R D
                  
                     REwarde mee not O Lorde according to my deſeruing, for if thou do then muſt I needes periſh: Wherfore to thee I come moſte mercifull Father, not truſting in mine owne righteouſneſſe, but in thy great mercy and promiſes made in Chriſte Ieſu thy Sonne: For whoſe ſake, O Heauenly Father, I humbly beſeeche thee to pardon and forgiue mee all mine offences. Amen.
                  
                     O God my Refuge and my ſtrength, which art the authour of all Godlineſſe, be readie to heare the deuout Prayers of thy ſeruant, that thoſe thinges which I aſke fayhfully, I maye obtayne effectually, thorowe Ieſu Chriſte our Lorde. Amen.
                  
                     BEholde not good Lord, that which is amiſſe in mee, for if thou doe, I ſhall no more be worthye to be called thy Sonne: yet of thy great goodneſſe (O Lorde) poure downe of the crommes

that fall from thy Childrens table, that I may be the leaſt among them. Amen.
                  
                     ASſiſt mee thy Seruaunt (O Lord) agaynſt this Worlde, with all the vaine pompe, pleaſure and beauty thereof, that it may be vnto mee as vile duſt, fylthyneſſe and aſhes, that I maye vſe it, as though I vſed it not, and that it may ſerue mee, & I not it, that I may take my part therof vnto my neceſſity, yt I do not vſe thy creatures voluptuouſly, but yt I may alwayes liue (in this ſhort lyfe) righteouſly, ſoberly, & iuſtly.  Amen.
                  
                     REmember not O Lord, the number of my ſinnes, but according to the multitude of thy mercies, deliuer mee from the paynes due for them. Graunt this O Father, for thy deare ſonne Ieſus Chriſts ſake:  Amen.
                  
                     TEach me good Lord to number my dayes, that I maye applye my heart to learne thy Wyſedome, and ſo ſtrengthen me with thy Spirite, that I ſwarue not from thy lawe. Amen.
                  
                     
                     DOe not wyth me O lorde, as I haue deſerued, but call to remembraunce (for thy ſonne Ieſus Chriſtes ſake) thy tēder mercies, which haue bene euer of olde: and caſt me not from thee, in thy heauy diſpleaſure, leaſte I be conſumed and brought to noughte. Amen.
                  
                     VNto thee (O thou God of my comfort) I wretched Sinner doe come, crauing of thee thy mercy: Encline therefore thine Eare vnto my calling (O Lorde,) and conſyder the requeſte of my hearte, for Ieſus Chriſtes ſake. Amen.
                  
                     DEare Father, to whome it is more eaſie to doe all things, than for me to thincke any one good thoughte, giue power vnto thy ſeruaunt, that I may with a ſtrong fayth, vanquiſh and ſubdue, whatſoeuer may cauſe me to rebell agaynſt thy bleſſed wyll. Amen.
                  
                     
                     LOrde graunt vnto me thy ſeruaunt the ſtrength of thy holye Spirite, to ſubdue the body of Sinne, with the whole luſts therof, that it may be made obedient in wyl and minde to thy lawes. Amen.
                  
                     EUery one that ſayth Lorde, Lorde, ſhall not enter the kingdome of heauen. Strengthen therfore (O Lord) thy ſeruant with the power of thy right hand, agaynſt all the malignitie of the olde wylie ſerpent: repleniſh my heart with thy wiſedome, comforte my ſoule with thy ſweet promiſes made in Chriſt Ieſu, and let thy mercies couer mine infirmities. Amen.
                  
                     YN all theſe my Meditations (O Lorde,) let thine eares be open, that thou maiſt heare the prayers which I thy ſeruāt haue made before thee this daye. And graunt that I may alwayes aſke of thee in ſuch ſorte as yu requireſt,

to the honor, praiſe & glory of thy name, to the furtherance of thy Worde, to the profit of my neighbor, and to my conſolation and comfort, thorow Ieſu Chriſte my Sauiour and Redeemer. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶ The ſecond Pſalme, of thankes giuing after Aduerſitie.
               AFter that I had long looked for thee O Lorde: at the laſte thou dyddeſt attende vnto mee, and heardeſt my Prayers.
               Bleſſed art thou Lorde, which haſte not holden back thy mercy from thy ſeruant: but haſt taken mee out of the lake of miſeries, and ſet my féete vppon a rocke, and made my ſteppes ſure.
               Conioyne thy ſelfe (O God) vnto my ſoule, & make it ſtrong, leaſt mine Enimies ouercome mee, and the companies of Tirannes ouerwhelme me.
               Dominion, power, & glorye be thine, for thou haſte made all things: and bycauſe

thy will is ſo, they doe ſtyll continue.
               Euen thou (O Lorde) haſte done many thinges, wonderfull and great: and there is none that can bee lyke▪ vnto thee in thy workes.
               For thou helpeſt them, whoſe heartes be broken with ſorrow: and beareſt vp with thy hande, them that be contrite in Spirite.
               Go not from me, O thou God of mercy: for thou art my ſure refuge, and the ſtrength of my hope.
               Haue thou in remembraunce (O Lord) the rebuke that thy ſeruant hath bene put to: and how furiouſly my enimies haue perſecuted me.
               I haue taſted and felt of thy ſwéeteneſſe: truely bleſſed is that man that truſteth in thee.
               Keepe thy mercy for mee (O Lorde) my ſtrength and my prayſe: thou haſte brought downe mine Enimies, which art a Iudge from the beginning.
               Lorde, there ſhall no good thing▪ bee lacking to them that ſeeke thee: and they▪
                  
that feare thee, ſhall not be helpleſſe.
               My ſoule therefore ſhall neuer ceaſſe to ſpeake of thy righteouſneſſe & of thy benefites, which be ſo many that I cannot number them.
               No man may helpe me O Lorde, but thou, who haſt brought my ſoule out of Hell, and haſte holpen me vp from falling into the deepe, from whence no mā retourneth.
               O Lorde, thus haſte thou reuenged the wrongs that mine enimies haue done to me, thus haſt thou bene my cō
                  forte in the time of my trouble, and haſte bene mercifull vnto me.
               Put away from me O Lorde, that which is euill, for thou arte holye, & ſaue thy ſeruant which euer hath truſted in thee.
               Quicken me in thy righteouſneſſe, and ſo ſhal I triumph and reioyce in thy mercy, for that thou haſte looked vppon my neceſſyties, and haſte regarded my ſoule in my great diſtreſſe.
               Remember Lorde, that thou of thy own wil & minde diddeſt giue ſtrength

vnto my ſoule: but when thou hyddeſt thy face from me, I was aſtoniſhed.
               Sende forth therefore (O Lorde) thy light and thy truth: and they ſhall leade me vnto thy holy Hill, and into thy holye Tabernacle.
               Then ſhall I haue ioy for the dayes wherein I was in ſorowe: and ſhall reioyce, that thou haſt remembred the rebuke that thy ſeruaunt hath bene put to.
               Verely, I was afrayde that thou (O Lorde) haddeſt caſte me out of thy preſēce: yet it hath pleaſed thee to heare my Prayers, and according to thy great mercy, haſte taken me agayne vnto thy grace and fauour.
               Wherefore (O Lorde) thy name be bleſſed, prayſed, magnified, both nowe and euer: as it was in the beginning, is nowe and euer ſhall be, world wythout ende. Amen.
               
                  The Prayer.
                  I Giue thee thanks, O God almightye, which not alonely haſt deliuered mee from many dangerous perilles & troubles

of Enimies, but alſo haſte endued me with the gyftes of nature, as reaſon, power, and ſtrength, and with all other needefull things thou haſte poſſeſt mee. I acknowledge therefore (O Lord) and confeſſe with the Apoſtle, that theſe are thy gyftes, and that there is no perfect and good gift, but it commeth from thee (O Father almighty) which giueſt frelye, and caſteth no man in the teeth. I acknowledge wyth the Prophets alſo, that Gold is thine, and Syluer is ſhyne, and thou gyueſt it to whome it pleaſeth thee. Wherefore my moſte mercyfull God, I humbly beſech and deſire of thee that the encreaſe of theſe thy gyfts draw mee not from thee, but that thou wylte frame in me, with thy holy Spirite, a true and faythfull heart and ready hand to good workes, that I laye not vp treaſure here, where Theeues may rob, and Mothes corrupte: but in thy Heauenly Kingdome, where neyther Theefe may ſteale nor Moth corrupte. Graunte this deare Father, for thy ſweete Sonne Ieſus Chriſtes ſake▪ Amen.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ The thirde Pſalme, of Confidence and truſte in God.
               ALthough (O God) neuer ſo ſtrong Enimies ſhall pytche their Tentes agaynſt mee, my heart ſhall not be afrayde: for thys is certayne, that all they which truſte in thee, ſhall not bee confounded.
               Breake not therefore (good Lorde) the couenant that thou haſt made wyth thy Seruaunt: and chaunge not that which hath yſſued out of thy mouth.
               Cauſe that thy holye Aungell may direct and guide me, that my ſoule may truſte in thee: for thou arte the fountayne of Lyfe, and my recreation in aduerſytie.
               Deliuer mee from the ſnares of the hunters, and from the perilles of my perſecuters: and make a ſhaddowe▪ for mee vnder thy ſhoulders, and I ſhall be harmeleſſe.
               
                  Euyl men are riſen vp agaynſte me, yet thy truth ſhall be my ſhield & buckler: and therefore if my enimies come agaynſte me, I will not flye nor turne my backe.
               For who is he that hath truſted in thee, and is confounded: or who hathe called vpon thee, and thou haſte deſpiſed him?
               Go not from me (O Lord,) for like as the Hart when he is chaſed, coueteth to the riuers of water: euen ſo my ſoule deſireth to be with thee.
               Howe great pleaſures haſt thou (O Lorde) prepared for me in heauen: that I ſhuld delight in no earthly thing, but in thee?
               I will therefore acknowledge, that I haue all my ſtrength of thee: for thou art my hope, my protection, my God and my Sauiour.
               Keepe mee O Lorde, for in thee my health and glorye doth conſiſt: thou arte my comfort, my ſtrength and helper, in whome I doe truſt.
               Let all them O Lorde, reioyce and

be glad, which ſeeke thee: and let them whiche loue to haue Saluation of thee, ſay: Magnified be the Lorde for euer. Glory be to the father. &c.
               
                  The Verſycle.
               
               O Lorde heare my Prayer,
               
                  The Aunſwere
               
               And let my cry come vnto thee.
               
                  The Prayer.
               
               O Moſt gratious & moſte wiſe guide, my Sauyour Chriſte, which doeſt leade all them that truely and vnfaynedly truſte in thee, the righte way to immortall bleſſedneſſe: Graunt mee, that like as I am weake and feable, ſo I maye take and repute my ſelfe, that I preſume not as of my ſelfe, to ſee my ſelfe, but ſo farre to ſee, that I maye alwayes truſting in thee, haue thee before my eyes, to follow thee being my guid, to be ready at thy call moſte obediently, & to accompt my ſelfe wholly vnto thee: that thou which only knoweſt the way, mayſt leade me in the ſame waye to thy heauenly ioyes, where thou raygneſt God euerlaſtingly. Amen.
            
            
               
               ¶ The fourth Pſalme, of Mercy. To be ſaid before the receyuing of the Communion.
               
                  ¶ O Mercifull Ieſu,
               
               HAue mercy vpon me, accordinge to thy great mercye: and according to the multitude of thy mercies doe away all mine offences.
               
                  O Sweete Ieſu.
               
               I Haue ſinned agaynſt thee, and done euill in thy ſight: that thou mayſt be iuſtified in thy ſaying, and mayſt ouercome when thou art iudged.
               
                  O Chriſt the Sonne of God,
               
               LOoke on mee with ye eyes of thy mercy, the vnknowne things of thy wiſedome haſte thou reuealed vnto mee: if thou therefore ſprinckle me with yſope, I ſhall be cleanſed, if thou waſh mee, I ſhall be whiter than Snowe.
               
                  O my Sauiour,
               
               MAke thou a pure hearte in mee, and looke no more on my ſynnes: but after thy mercy and great goodneſſe, put out of thy ſight all mine offences.
               
                  
                  O my Redemer.
               
               NO man can helpe mee but thou, caſt me not therefore from thy preſence▪ and thy holy Spirite take not from me.
               
                  O my Maker,
               
               OUt of the bowels of thy mercy giue me comfort, and thy helpe: ſo ſhall I teache thy wayes vnto the wicked, that they may conuert vnto thee.
               
                  O King of Kings.
               
               PUt from mee Bloudgyltyneſſe, thou that arte the hope of my health: and my tong ſhall ſpeake of thy ryghteouſneſſe.
               
                  O Ieſu,
               
               QUenche the deſire of Synne in mee, and open my lippes, that my mouth may ſet forthe the worthy prayſe of thy name.
               
                  O maruellous Creator,
               
               REmember, thou deſyreſt not the Sacryfice of Calues, nor delighteſt in whole burnt Offrings, yet haſte thou pleaſure in a lowly Spirite, and a contrite and humble heart, doeſt thou not deſpiſe.
               
                  
                  O Holy of Holieſt.
               
               SEnde downe thy fauourable beneuolence vpon Sion thy holye habitation, and builde vp the walles and pyllers thereof: then ſhall the acceptable ſacrifice of righteouſneſſe be layde vpon thine altare.
               
                  O Holy Father,
               
               PRaiſe be to thee, and to the Sonne and holye ghoſt: as it was in the beginning is now, and euer ſhalbe worlde without ende. Amen.
               
                  The verſicle.
               
               O Lord Ieſu haue mercye,
               
                  The Aunſwere.
               
               Which came downe & ſuffred for mee.
               
                  The Collect.
               
               O Sorde Ieſus Chriſt Sonne of the liuing God, ſet thy holye Paſſion, Croſſe, and death, betweene thy iudgement and my ſoule, both nowe & at the houre of death. And moreouer vouchſafe to graunt vnto ye liuing mercye and grace, that after thys lyfe they may haue reſt & quietneſſe in thee: And

to thy whole Church graunt peace and concorde, that all the members thereof may liue & ioy in thee for euer, which liueſt and raigneſt with the Father and holy Ghoſt worlde without ende. Amen.
               
                  The Prayer.
                  O Lorde Ieſus Chriſt the onely ſtay and defence of my mortall ſtate, my onely hope, my onely ſaluation, my victorye, my glorye and my triumphe, who in the fleſhe, (which thou haddeſt for my onely cauſe taken vppon thee) didſt ſuffer thy ſelfe to be tempted of Sathan, and who onely and alone diddeſt vtterly ouercome and vanquiſh ſinne, death, the worlde, the Diuel, and all the kingdome of Hell: And whatſoeuer thou haſte ſo ouercome for my behouſe, it is thou yt haſte ouercomed it alone. Giue me therefore I beſech thee (O Lion moſt victorious of ye tribe of Iuda) ſtrength againſt the deceitfull waiting of the moſt ſubtil Serpent, which dailye ſeketh to deuour my ſoule. Thou beyng a Lambe as whyte as Snowe, the

vanquiſher of Sathans tyranny, gyue vnto mee (thy lyttle one,) the ſtrength and vertue of thy Spirite, that being of my ſelfe weake and feable, but in thee ſtrong and valiaunt, I may withſtande and ouercome all aſſaultes of temptation, ſo that my ghoſtly Enimie the Diuel may not glory ouer me, but being a cō
                     querour thorow thee▪ I may giue thankes to thy mercy, which neuer leaueſte him deſtitute that putteth his truſte in thee, who liueſt and raigneſt God for euer without ende. Amen.
               
               
                  When thou ſhalt receyue the Communion, ſay thus.
                  
                     O Lord and Sauiour Ieſu Chriſt, who in thy laſte Supper wyth thine Apoſtles didſt giue vnto them in a Sacrament, thine owne body and Bloud, to be the foode of their ſoules: Graunte mee I beſeech thee, euer ſtedfaſtly to beleeue, and kindelye to acknowledge thy Infinite and Almighty power, and thine incomprehenſible loue

towarde mee, and that I may alwayes worthily receyue the ſame bleſſed Sacrament and memoriall of thy death, according to thy holye ordinaunce, that it may worke in mee increaſe of all Godlineſſe, in vnity of ſpirite, with thee oure head, and by thee and thy ſpirite, with al the company of them yt be truely thine, which be thy ſpirituall and myſticall bodye, and my ſpirituall and Chriſten brethren. Heare mee my Sauiour and my Chriſt, for thy names ſake. Amen.
               
               
                  After the Communion fay thus.
                  O Lorde Ieſu Chriſt, which haſt vouched ſafe Spirituallye to giue vnto mee in theſe holy myſteries, thy bodye and bloud, mortifye whatſoeuer is euil in mee, and garniſhe mee wyth thy merites and vertues, that thou mayſt delyte to abide and dwel in mee. Renue my ſpirite, my ſoule, and my body, with thy excellent grace, that I may be made lyke vnto thy holy humanitie, frame me after thine owne hearts deſyre, knit me

vnto thee moſte neerely, that I maye be chaunged altogither into thee. And graunt that I may doe nothing, ſpeake nothing, nor deſire nothing, but that which maye be acceptable vnto thee, which arte my God, my Sauiour, and Redemer, to whome with the Father & holy Ghoſt, be all honor and glorye for euer and euer. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶ The fift Pſalme, for the Remiſſion of Sinnes.
               ALmighty God, Lorde of Lordes, great and dreadfull is thy name: which by thy Worde haſte made Heauen and Earth, and all things contayned in them.
               All things be vnder thy dominion and rule, both man and beaſt, and all other liuing creatures: and thou haſte mercy on whome thou wylte, and haſte compaſſion on whome it pleaſeth thee.
               Againſt thee holye Father, againſt thee haue I ſinned & done euill: I haue

bene an offender euen from my cradell, and ſince I ſucked my Mothers breſts I haue not ſeaſed to do euill.
               But what am I (Lorde) that I dare ſpeake to thee: I am thy poore creature, and a worme moſt abiect.
               Beholde Lorde, I haue nought, and of my ſelfe I am nought, thou art onely good, righteous and holye, thou ordereſt all things, thou giueſt all things, & thou fulfilleſt all things with goodneſſe.
               Beholde I am thine (O righteous Father,) and one of them whome thy onely deare Sonne hath redemed: and of thee, which arte iudge of all men, I aſke mercye.
               Caſt not away (O Lorde) a contrite and penitent heart, humbly calling vpon thee: but turne the eyes of thy mercy towardes me, and forgiue me the ſinnes of my youth.
               Caſt not thy dartes at me, nor laye not thy heauy hande vpō me (O Lord,) for I haue borne thine anger a longe while, and of the Cuppe of thy diſpleaſure haue I dronke very deepe.
               
                  Caſt me not away from thy preſence, neither take thou thy holye ſpirite from mee: but giue me the comforte of thy helpe, and ſtabliſhe me in thy truthe.
               Deſtroye mee not (O mercifull Father) bicauſe of mine iniquitie: but be thou mercifull vnto mee, for thy Sonne Ieſus Chriſtes ſake.
               Deſtroye me not vtterlye, nor leaue me in my ſinnes: for thou art a God full of mercye, and verye gratious to them which truſt in thee.
               Dailye, ſorrowe ouercommeth mee, and ſadneſſe poſſeſſeth my heart: I looke for a time of health, but my griefe continueth ſtill.
               Enter not Lorde into iudgement wyth thy Seruaunt: for if thou accuſe me, I ſhall neuer be quite, and if thou marke my ſinne and iniquitie, no man ſhall deliuer me.
               Excepte thou helpe me of thy goodneſſe and mercye: howe maye I which haue offended thee, be rayſed vp from my ſinnes.
               Euen of thee therefore (O holy Father)

which arte the God of mercye, I wretched ſinner doe aſke mercy: and for the glorye of thy name, be no longer angrye wyth mee.
               For as thou arte God, ſo arte thou gratious and mercifull, and pacientlye ſuffereſt ſinners, and wouldeſt that no man ſhoulde periſhe: but that all men ſhould turne to penaunce.
               For albeit yt no man is able to beare the punniſhment, which thou doſt threaten againſt Sinners: yet thy mercye which thou haſte promiſed, is great and vnſearcheable.
               Forgiue for thy name ſake (O Lord Almightye) all my ſinnes: and put oute of thy ſight all mine offences
               Giue me a newe heart, and take frō me al wicked deſires, that I may euermore knowe, what thing is acceptable in thy ſight.
               Giue light (O Lorde) to mine eyes, that I ſleepe not in death: and then my ſinnes ſhall not preuayle againſt me.
               Graunt me (holye Father) yt I may euer deſire and wyll that, which is moſt

pleaſaunt and acceptable in thy ſight: and that I haue no deſire to will or not to wyll, but as thou wilt.
               Glory be to the Father. &c.
As it was in the begin. &c.
               
                  The Uerſicle.
               
               Cut Lorde my ſacke of ſorow in peeces,
               
                  The Aunſwere.
               
               And clothe me with gladneſſe.
               
                  The Prayer.
                  ALmighty and moſt mercifull Father, I wretched ſinner moſte humbly beſeeche thee, that thou of thy goodneſſe wylte not remember the offences of my youthe, but that according to the greatneſſe of thy mercye, thou wylt turne fro mee the payne, that I haue iuſtlye deſerued for ſynne, and that by thy grace I maye (while I am in thys vale of miſerye,) euermore be renued in the ſpirite of my mynde, that a pure lyfe maye alwayes appeare in me. Amen.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ The ſixt Pſalme, wherein he deſireth to be hearde of God.
               HOw long (O Lord) ſhall my minde be troubled wyth paynefull ſorrowes and heauye thoughtes: howe long ſhall carefull cares torment my heart?
               How long (O God) wylt thou reiect my prayers which dailye I poure out before thee: wylt thou Lorde heare mee at no time, or wilt thou now ceaſſe to ſhew mercy?
               Haſte thou (O Lorde) caſt me awaye for euer, or wylte thou neuer hereafter be pleaſed wyth mee? Thy hande is not weakened but it maye helpe, and thine rares be not ſtopped, that they refuſe to heare.
               I beſeche thee (O righteous father) for Ieſus Chriſtes ſake, that ye ſighings and inwarde deſires of my heart, maye moue and encline thee to heare mee.
               I haue ben an vntrue and frowarde childe to thee, I haue not feared thee,

nor ſhewed due reuerence vnto thee, but haue bene euer diſobedient & ſtubbourne againſt thee.
               I am in priſon and bound in fetters of ſorrowe: tyll thou with thy gratyous preſence vouchſafe to viſite me, & bring me againe to liberty and ioye.
               Keepe thy mercy therefore for me alwayes O Lorde: and the couenaunte which thou haſte made with me, let it be ſurely perfourmed.
               Kepe me Lord frō ſinne, and I ſhall then dread neyther death nor Hell: and as thou alwayes haſt bene mercifull to penitent ſinners, ſo nowe good Lorde forgiue my ſinnes.
               Kepe my heart in thee, and then ſhall I reioyce in thy mercy: for that thou haſt looked on me and haſt regarded my ſoule in my great diſtreſſe.
               Let me neuer hereafter goe awaye from thy wayes: nor leaue me not now in the depeneſſe of my troubles.
               Loe, nowe be the dayes of health and grace, nowe is the accepted time: for in death who ſhall remēber thee (O Lord)

or in Hell who ſhall prayſe thee?
               Lorde beholde therefore my weakeneſſe and frayleneſſe, beſt knowen vnto thee: and looke downe from Heauen vppon the ſorowe and heauineſſe of me thy poore creature.
               My lyfe is as it were in the middeſt of fierce Lions: whoſe teeth are like vnto ſpeares, and the ſharpeneſſe of them lyke vnto the ſting of Scorpions.
               Mollifie my hearte (O Lorde God) that I may retourne to thee and walke in all thy wayes: for I haue wandred ouerlong in the waye of ſinners.
               Make a perpetuall league and couenant with me, that thou wilt put thy feare into my heart: yt I neuer ſwarue from thée againe.
               No man may ſo hide himſelfe from thee, but that thou mayſte ſee him: who doeſt fulfill both heauen and earth.
               Neuertheleſſe I wyll ſpeake vnto thee, and wil not holde my peace ſo long as the breath is in my mouthe: but ſtyll ſhall call on thee for thy mercy.
               Nothing is able to reſiſt thy power,

thy mercy is aboue all thy workes: and thou art gracious and merciful to them which diligently obſerue and kepe thy lawes.
               O Lorde my Prayers be euer vnto thee, let thine anger be tourned frō me, that I maye fynde fauour in thy ſight.
               O Lorde looke thou not vppon the hardneſſe of my heart: but like as thou haſt many times ſhewed mercy, ſo now be mercifull and forgiue that I haue offended thee.
               O Lorde my God, which tenderly loueſt mankinde, and arte a moſt rightfull Iudge, ſpare me I beſeche thee: and ſhew on me ye abundance of thy mercye
               Glory be to the Father. &c.
As it was in the bigin. &c.
               
                  The Verſicle.
               
               Turne not thine eyes from me O Lorde.
               
                  The Aunſwere.
               
               But teache me to doe that is pleaſaunt in thy ſight.
               
                  
                  The Collect.
               
               O Mercifull God, which by thy ſonne Chriſt haſt taught vs to call on thee in our neceſſitye, giue me grace I beſeche thee, to acknowledge mine own infirmitie and weakeneſſe, that I depending on thy merciful goodneſſe, may (with a ſtrong and ſtedfaſt fayth) continuallye call on thee wyth a true repentant heart, for thy grace, mercie, and pardon, that after thys corruptible lyfe I maye beholde thee in thy euerlaſting glorye, where thou raigneſt God euerlaſting. Amen.
               
                  The Prayer.
                  O Lorde our God, thou that broughteſt thy people oute of the lande of Egipt with a mighty hande, with tokens and wonders, wyth thy great power and ſtretched out arme. Before thee O Lorde my God, haue I ſynned wyth my forefathers, & haue done wickedly, behauing my ſelfe vngodly in all thy righteouſneſſe. Turne thy wrathe

from me O Lorde, and heare my Prayers and Peticions for thine owne ſake; and bring me home againe which long haue bene aſtraye, that they that hate thy name, maye knowe that thou arte the Lorde my GOD, and that I haue called on thy name. O Lorde looke downe vpon me thy poore creature, encline thine eare and heare mee, for the dead yt be gone downe to their graues, and whoſe ſoules are oute of their bodyes, aſcribe vnto thee O Lorde, neyther prayſe nor righteous making, but the ſoule that is vexed for the multitude of hir ſinnes, which goeth on heauilye and weakely, whoſe eyes begin to fayle, yea ſuche a ſoule (O Lorde) aſcribeth prayſe and righteouſneſſe vnto thee. I therefore O Heauenly Father require mercy in thy ſight, not for any goodneſſe that is in me, but for the merites of thy deare Sonne Ieſus Chriſtes ſake, to whome wyth thee and the holye Ghoſt, be laude and prayſe for euermore. Amen.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ The ſeauenth Pſalme, for the obtayning of Godly Wiſedome.
               PReſerue me O God, for in thée doe I truſt: let thy Wiſedome rule and guide my thoughtes, that they may alwayes prayſe thee.
               Put thy worde in my mouthe, and faſten thy wyſedome in my heart: that other alſo may be conuerted vnto thee.
               Plucke mee from mine heynous offences, and heale my ſoule which hath offended (O God:) that I maye be free from the gylt of my tranſgreſſion.
               Quicken me (O Lorde,) as thou art wont to doe thy choſen: and let thy hand direct my wayes, that I may walke in thy ſtatutes.
               Quicken me, that I maye liue and kepe thy wordes: that my ſoule maye prayſe thee, and that thy iudgementes may helpe me.
               Quicken me alſo wyth thy louing

kindeneſſe: and ſo ſhall I keepe the teſtimonies of thy mouth.
               Remember me O Lorde, for thy goodneſſe ſake: and for the great loue that thou beareſt towardes me.
               Remember that thou haſte made me of the earth: and that I ſhall returne into the duſt of Death.
               Remoue me therefore good Lorde from the way of ſinners: & ſtrengthen me with the power of thy right hand.
               Shew me the wayes O Lorde, and ſende forth the hote flames of thy loue, to burne and conſume the fantaſies of my mynde.
               Satiſfye me with thy mercy, & that ſone: ſo ſhall I be glad and reioyce in thee all the dayes of my lyfe.
               Shewe now good Lorde, and declare thy goodneſſe vnto me: ſende downe from Heauen the ſpirite of thy Wiſedome, and repleniſhe my heart wyth knowledge thereof.
               Thou fulfilleſt the deſires of them that feare thee: and heareſt the Prayers of them that call on thee wyth their

whole heart.
               Thou leadeſt ſtraight in thy iudgements, them that be mylde and tractable: and teacheſt them that be meeke, thy wordes and Teſtimonies.
               Thou holdeſt vp all them which elſe ſhould fall: and all that are fallen, thou lyfteſt vp agayne.
               Up Lorde, and helpe thy ſeruaunt, thou art my hope and refuge, thou arte my ſtrong holde and caſtle: for thy names ſake leade and guide me.
               Uerelye if thou ſhewe me thy goodneſſe and manifolde mercies, I ſhall floriſhe as the Oliue tree, that bringeth forth fruite in due ſeaſon.
               Uerely my ſoule hath ſpeciall reſpect vnto thee (O Lord,) for that my health, my ſtrength, and my glorye, commeth from thee.
               Which haſt ſaued my lyfe from deſtruction, and ſhewed me thy grace and mercye.
               Which haſte ſatiſfied my deſyre wyth good things: and ſhalte once reſtore to me my youth againe.
               
                  Wherefore to thee moſt louing Lord and for theſe thy mercies, I offer to thee the Sacrifice of laude and prayſe: Giuing thee thankes nowe and euermore world without ende Amen.
               Lorde haue mercy vpon mee.
               Chriſt haue mercy vpon mee.
               Lorde haue mercy vpon mee.
               
                  OUr Father whiche arte in Heauen, halowed be thy name. Thy kingdome come. Thy wyll be done in earth as it is in Heauen. Giue vs this daye our daylye breade. And forgiue vs our treſpaſſes, as we forgeue thē that treſpaſſe againſt vs. And leade vs not into temptation. But deliuer vs frō euill. For thine is the kingdome, the power, and the glory, foreuer and euer. Amen.
               
                  The Uerſicle.
               
               Deſtroye mee not O Lorde for my Sinnes.
               
                  The Aunſwere
               
               Neyther reſerue eternall puniſhement for them.
               
                  
                  The Prayer.
                  MOſt righteous God, for thy great mercies ſake, hearken to theſe my humble Prayers, which I make before thee: & conſider mercifull Lorde the deſire and thought of my heart. Let my loude cryings come vnto thee, and let my vnfayned Prayers entre into thine eares. Heart mee O Lorde, for I am deſtitute of thy helpe. Take care for my ſoule, ſaue me thy Seruaunt whych wholy muſt in thee. Haue mercye O Lorde haue mercy vpon mee, for I wyll neuer rea
                        •••
                      crying to thee for thy help & mercye. In the daye time I will call on thee, and in the night my crye ſhall not be hydde from thee. O thou God of the Heauens, the maker of the waters, and Lorde of al Creatures, heare me a moſt wretched ſinner calling on thee, & take 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      mee all my ſinnes, and make ſtedfaſt my fayth and confidence in thy mercifull promiſes, that I putting my truſt in them, maye haue as yu haſt promiſed, euerlaſting lyfe, thorow Chriſte Ieſus thy Sonne our Lorde. Amen.
               
               
                  
                  An other Prayer.
                  OLorde and heauenly Father, plant in mee true obedience to thy holye lawes, and to my Soueraigne and Gracions Ladye Queene Elizabeth, whom thou haſt ſet to raigne ouer mee. And lette not the cares of this worlde deceiue mee. Keepe me alſo good Lords, from all vncleane deſires, and graunt mee thy grace, to walke before thee all the dayes of thys my Pilgrimage, with good conſcience and pure minde, that when thou ſhalte appeare to rewarde euerye man according to his deedes, I may receiue at thy hand the rewarde of one that hath not bene aſhamed of thee in this life. O Lorde increaſe my fayth, increaſe my loue, increaſe in me a ſure hope of my ſaluation, O Lorde my Sauiour increaſe ſtrength in mee to ouercome ſinne, & to ſtande againſt all temptations: let thy holy Aungell alwayes keepe & conduct me, yt I may euermore be thankefull vnto thee in Chriſt Ieſu our Lorde, to whom with thee and the holy Ghoſt be all honor and glorye for euer and euer. Amen.
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Here followeth the Letanie with certaine other Godly Prayers.
            
               O God the Father of Heauen, haue mercy vpon vs miſerable ſinners.
            
               O God the Father of Heauen, haue mercie vpon vs miſerable Sinners.
            
            O God the Sonne, Redeemer of the worlde: haue mercy vpon vs miſerable ſinners.
            
               O God the Sonne, redeemer of the worlde: haue mercie vpon vs iniſerable Sinners.
            
            O God the holy Ghoſt, proceding from the Father and the Sonne, haue mercy vpon vs miſerable ſinners.
            
               O God the Holye Ghoſt, proceding from. &c.
            
            O Holy, bleſſed, and glorious Trinitie, three perſones and one God, haue mercye vpon vs miſerable ſinners.
            
               O Holy, bleſſed, and glorious Trinitie. &c.
            
            Remember not Lorde our offences, nor the offences of our forefathers, neyther take thou vengeaunce of oure ſinnes,

ſpare vs good Lord, ſpare ye people whōe thou haſt redemed wt thy moſte precious bloud, & be not angry with vs for euer.
            
               Spare vs good Lorde.
            
            From al euill and miſchiefe, from ſinne, from the craftes and aſſaultes of the diuell, from thy wrath, and from euerlaſting dampnation.
            
               Good Lorde deliuer vs.
            
            From blindeneſſe of heart, from pride, vainglory and hipocriſie, from enuy hatred and malice, & al vncharitableneſſe.
            
               Good Lorde deliuer vs.
            
            From fornication, and all other deadlye ſinne, and from all the deceytes of the world, the fleſhe, and the Diuell.
            
               Good Lorde deliuer vs.
            
            From lightning & tempeſt, frō plague, peſtilence and famine, from battaile and murther, and from ſodayne death.
            
               Good Lorde deliuer vs.
            
            From all ſediction and priuie conſpiracy, from all falſe doctrine and hereſie, from hardneſſe of heart, and contempt of thy worde, and commaundement.
            
               Good Lorde deliuer vs.
            
            
               By the myſtery of thy holy incarnation, by thy holye natiuitie & circumciſion, by thy baptiſme, faſting, and temptation.
            
               Good Lorde deliuer vs.
            
            By thyne agony and bloudy ſweate, by thy Croſſe and Paſſion, by thy precious death and buryall, by thy glorious reſurrection and aſcention, and by the comming of the holy Ghoſt.
            
               Good Lorde deliuer vs.
            
            In all time of oure tribulation, in all time of our welth, in the houre of death and in the day of iudgement.
            
               Good Lorde deliuer vs.
            
            We ſinners doe beſeech thee to heare vs (O Lorde God) and that it maye pleaſe thee to rule and gouerne thy holy church vniuerſally, in the right way.
            
               We beſeeche thee to heare vs good Lorde.
            
            That it maye pleaſe thee to keepe and ſtrengthen in the true worſhipping of thee, in righteouſneſſe and holineſſe of lyfe, thy Seruant Elizabeth, our moſte gracious Queene and gouernour.
            
               We beſeeche thee to heare vs good Lorde.
            
            That it may pleaſe theé to rule hir heart

in thy fayth, feare, and loue, and that ſhe may eucrmore haue affyaunce in thee, & euer ſeeke thy honor and glory.
            
               We beſeeh thee to heare vs good Lord▪
               
            
            That it may pleaſe thee to be hir defender and keper, giuing hir the victorie ouer all hir enimies.
            
               We beſeche thee to heare vs good Lord.
            
            That it may pleaſe thee to illuminate all Byſhops, Paſtours and miniſters of the Church, wyth true knowledge & vnderſtanding of thy worde, and that both by their preaching and liuing they may ſet it forth, and ſhewe it accordingly.
            
               We beſeech thee to heare vs good Lord.
            
            That it may pleaſe thee to endue ye Lordes of the Counſayle, & all the Nobility, with grace, wiſedome, & vnderſtanding.
            
               We beſeech thee to heare vs good Lord.
            
            That it may pleaſe thee to bleſſe & kepe the Magiſtrates, giuing them grace to execute iuſtice, and to maintainetruth.
            
               We beſeech thee to heare vs good Lord.
            
            That it may pleaſe thee to bleſſe & kepe all thy people.
            
               We beſech thee to heare vs good Lord.
            
            
               That it may pleaſe thee to geue to al nations▪ vnitie, peace and concorde.
            
               We beſeech thee to heare vs good Lord.
            
            That it maye pleaſe thee to giue vs an heart to loue & dread thee, and diligently to liue after thy commaundementes.
            
               We beſeech thee to heare vs good Lord.
            
            That it may pleaſe thee to giue to al thy people increaſe of grace, to heare meekely thy word, & to receiue it wt pure affection, & to bring forth ye fruites of ye ſpirit.
            
               We beſeech thee to heare vs good Lord
            
            That it may pleaſe thee to bring into the way of truth, all ſuch as haue erred and are deceyued.
            
               We beeſech thee to heare vs good Lord.
            
            That it may pleaſe thee to ſtrengthen ſuch as doe ſtand, and to comfort & helpe the weake hearted, and to raiſe vp them that fal, and finally to beate downe Sathan vnder our feete.
            
               We beſeech thee to heare vs good Lord.
            
            That it may pleaſe thee to ſuccour, helpe and comfort all that be in daunger, neceſſitie, and tribulation.
            
               We beſeech thee to heare vs good Lord.
            
            
               That it may pleaſe thee to preſerue all that trauayle by lande or by water, all women labouring of childe, all ſick perſones, and yong children, and to ſhewe thy pitie vpō all priſoners and captiues.
            
               We beſeche thee to heare vs good Lord.
            
            That it may pleaſe thee to defende, and prouide for the fatherleſſe children & widowes, & al that be deſolate & oppreſſed.
            
               We beſeche thee to heare vs good Lord.
            
            That it may pleaſe thee to haue mercye vpon all men.
            
               We beſeech thee to heare vs good Lord.
            
            That it may pleaſe thee to forgiue oure enimies, perſecuters and ſclaunderers, and to turne their heartes.
            
               We beſeech thee to heare vs good Lord.
            
            That it may pleaſe thee to giue and preſerue to our vſe the kindely fruits of the earthe ſo as in due time we may enioye them.
            
               We beſech thee to heare vs good Lord.
            
            That it may pleaſe thee to giue▪ vs true repentance, to forgeue vs al our ſynnes, negligences & ignorances & to endue vs with ye grace of thy holy ſpirite, to amend

our liues according to thy holy worde.
            
               We beſeeche thee to heare vs good Lord.
            
            Sōne of god: we beſech thee to heare vs.
            
               Sonne of God▪ we beſeech thee to heare vs.
            
            O Lambe of God, that takeſt away the ſynnes of the worlde.
            
               Graunt vs thy peace.
            
            O Lambe of God, that takeſt away the ſynnes of the worlde.
            
               Haue mercy vpon vs.
            
            O Chriſt heare vs.
            
               O Chriſt heare vs.
            
            Lord haue mercy vpon vs.
            
               Lorde haue mercy vpon vs.
            
            Chriſt haue mercy vpon vs.
            
               Chriſt haue mercy vpon vs.
            
            Lord haue mercy vpon vs.
            
               Lord haue mercy vpon vs.
            
            Our father which art in. &c.
            And lead vs not into temptation.
            
               But deliuer vs from euill.
            
            Amen.
            
               The Verſicle
            
            O Lorde deale not wyth vs after oure ſynnes.
            
               The Aunſwere.
            
            Neither reward vs after oure iniquities.
            
               
               Let vs pray
            
            
               O God mercifull Father, that deſpiſeſte not the ſighing of a contrite heart, nor the deſire of ſuch as be ſorowefull, mercifully aſſyſt our prayers that we make before thee, in all our troubles & aduerſities, whenſoeuer they oppreſſe vs, & graciouſly heare vs, that thoſe euills, which the crafte and ſubtilty of the diuell or man worketh agaynſt vs, be brought to nought, and by the prouidence of thy goodneſſe, they may be diſperſed, that we thy ſeruaunts being hurt by no perſecutiōs may euermore giue thankes vnto thee in thy holy Church, thorow Ieſu Chriſt our Lord.
            
               O Lorde ariſe helpe vs and deliuer vs, for thy name ſake.
            
            O God we haue heard with oure eares, and oure fathers haue declared vnto vs the noble workes thht thou didſt in their dayes, and in the olde time before them.
            
               O Lorde ariſe, helpe vs, and deliuer vs for thine honour.
            
            Glory be to the father, and to the ſonne, and to the holy Ghoſt.
            
               As it was in the beginning, is now, and euer ſhall be, world without ende. Amē.
            From our enimies defend vs, O Chriſt.
            
               Graciouſly looke vpon our afflictions.
            
            Pitifullye beholde the ſorrowes of oure heartes.
            
               Mercifully forgiue the ſinnes of thy people.
            
            Fauourablye wyth mercye heare oure Prayers.
            
               O Sonne of Dauid haue mercy vpon vs.
            
            Both now and euer vouchſafe to heare vs, O Chriſt.
            
               Graciouſly heare vs O Chriſt.
            
            
               Graciouſly heare vs O Lorde Chriſt.
            
            
               The Verſicle
            
            O Lord let thy mercy be ſhewed vpō vs.
            
               The Aunſwere.
            
            As we doe put our truſt in thee.
            
               Let vs Praye.
            
            
               WE humbly beſeeche thee, O Father, mercifullye to looke vpon our infirmities and for the glorie of thy names ſake, tourne from vs all thoſe euils that we moſt righteouſly haue deſerued, and graunt that in all

our troubles we may put oure whole truſte and confidence in thy mercye, and euermore ſerue thee in holineſſe & pureneſſe of liuing, to thy honour and glory, thorowe oure onely Mediatour and Aduocate Ieſus Chriſt our Lorde. Amen.
            
               A Prayer for the Queene.
               O Lorde Ieſu Chriſt, moſt high, moſt mighty, God euerlaſting, King of Kings, Lorde of Lordes, the onely ruler of Princes, the very ſonne of God, on whoſe right hande ſitting doeſt from thy throne beholde all the dwellers vpon earth: wyth moſt lowely heart I beſeeche thee vouchſafe wyth fauourable regarde, to beholde our moſte gratious ſoueraigne Ladye Queene Elizabeth, and ſo repleniſhe hir wyth the grace of thy holy ſpirite, that ſhe alwaye may encline to thy will, and walke in thy way: kepe hir farre of from ignoraunce, & thorowe thy gift let prudence & knowledge alway abounde in hir royal heart: ſo inſtruct hir O Lorde, raygning vppon vs in earth, that hir humaine Maieſtie, alwaye

obey thy Diuine Maieſtie in feare and dread. Indue hir plentifully wyth Heauenly gyftes. Graunt hir in health and wealth long to liue. Heape glorye and honour vpon hir. Glad hir with the ioy of thy countenaunce. So ſtrengthen hir, that ſhee maye vanquiſhe and ouercome all hir enimies, and be dreade and feared of them: and finallye after thys lyfe, I beſeech thee good Lorde, that ſhee may attaine euerlaſting ioy and felicity where thou raigneſt God with the Father and the holy Ghoſt. Amen.
            
            
               A Prayer to be ſayde in the time of extreme Sickneſſe.
               O Lorde Ieſu, which arte the onelye health of all men liuing, and the euerlaſting lyfe of thē which dye in thy fayth, I wretched Sinner giue and ſubmit my ſelfe wholly vnto thy bleſſed wyll. And I being ſure that the thing cannot periſhe which is committed vnto the mercye, willingly therefore beſeeche thee moſte mercifull Lorde Ieſu Chriſt, that thou wilt by thy grace make ſtrong my ſoule agaynſt all temptations, and

that thou wylte couer and defende mee wyth the buckler of thy mercy, againſt all the aſſaultes of the Diuell. I ſee and acknowledge that there is in my ſelfe no hope of ſaluation, but all my hope, confidence & truſt, is in thy mercye: I haue no merits nor good works which I may alledge before thee: of ſinnes and euill workes (alas O Lorde) I ſee a great heape, but yet thorowe thy mercy I truſt to be in the number of them that ſhall be ſaued, to whome thou wylt not impute their ſinnes, but take them to euerlaſting lyfe. Thou Lorde waſt borne for my ſake, thou diddeſt ſuffer hunger and thirſt for my ſake, thou diddeſt praye and faſt for my ſake, finally thou diddeſt all good workes and deedes for my ſake, and gaueſt thy moſte precious bodye to dye, & thy bloud to be ſhead on the croſſe for my ſake. Now therefore moſte mercifull Sauiour, let all theſe good things profit mee, which thou freely haſt giuen me, that haſt giuen thy ſelfe for mee. Let thy bloud waſhe and cleanſe awaye the ſpottes & fowleneſſe of my ſinnes, let thy

righteouſneſſe hide and couer mine vnrighteouſneſſe, let the merits of thy paſſion and bloud be the ſatiſfaction for my ſinnes. Giue me O Lorde thy grace that my fayth and ſaluation in thy bloud wauer not in me, but euer to be firme and conſtant, that the hope of thy mercy neuer decay in me, that charitye waxe not colde in me, finally that the weakeneſſe of my fleſhe be not ouercome with the feare of death. Graunt alſo mercifull father, that when Death hath ſhut vp the eyes of my body, yet that the eyes of my ſoule may ſtill beholde and looke vpon thee, that when death hath taken away the vſe of my tong and ſpeache, yet that my heart may crye and ſaye vnto thee: O Lorde into thy handes I giue and commit my Soule, and wyth thy holye Martir Steuen beholding thee in my ſoule, may ſay: Lorde Ieſu receiue my ſoule vnto thee, which liueſt and raigneſt God euerlaſting, with the Father and Holy Ghoſt. Amen.
            
            
               
               ¶ A Prayer of Chriſoſtome.
               ALmighty God which haſte giuen vs grace at this time, wyth one accorde, to make oure common ſupplications vnto thee, and doeſte promiſe that when two or three be gathered togyther in thy name, thou wylte graunt their requeſtes, fulfyll nowe O Lorde, the deſires and peticions of thy ſeruaunts, as may be moſt expedient for them, graunting vs in thys worlde knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to come, life enerlaſting. Amen.
               
                  ij. Corinth. xiij.
                  THe grace of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, and the loue of God, and the fellowſhippe of the holy ghoſt, be with vs all euermore.
               
               Amen.
            
         
         
            
            Euening Prayer.
            
               The Antheme.
               REmember not O Lorde, mine offences, nor the offences of my forefathers, neyther take thou vengeance of my ſinnes, ſpare me good Lord, whome thou haſte redemed wyth thy moſt precious bloud, and be not angrye wyth me for euer.
            
            
               ¶The fyrſt Pſalme at Euening Prayer.
               
                  AGainſt thee (O Lorde, againſt thee haue I ſinned, & done wyckedly before thee: and thou ſeeſt alſo that mine iniquitie is great.
               Behold good Lorde, I am ſolde vnder ſinne: and in my fleſhe I fynde not that which is good.
               Comforte therefore (O Lorde) the ſoule of thy ſeruaunt: for vnto thee doe I lift vp my heart and minde.
               Do thou ſhew on me thy mercy (O

Lorde:) and graunt vnto me thy ſaluation.
               Earely in the morning doe I cry vnto thee: bicauſe of thy righteous iudgements and mercy.
               For thou Lorde arte good and gracious, and of great mercy: vnto all them that call vpon thee.
               Giue lyghte vnto mine eyes, (O Lorde) for I haue ſlept to long in death: and my ſinnes haue preuayled againſte mee.
               He that liueth (O Lorde) he that liueth ſhall prayſe thee: and ſhall make thy mercy knowen.
               In thy Tabernacle (O Lorde) wyll I dwell for euer: and my defence and couering ſhalt be vnder thy wings.
               Glory be to the Father. &c.
            
            
               ¶The ſeconde Pſalme.
               LOrde deliuer mee from among the wycked: that I maye gyue thankes to thy holye name, and make my boaſt of thy prayſe.
               
                  Make all nations whome thou haſte made, to reioyce and worſhip thee: that they may prayſe and glorifie thy name.
               Now teache thou me O Lorde, that I may walke in thy truth: and knit my heart vnto thee, that I maye feare thy name.
               O Lorde fourne thee vnto me, and haue mercy vpon me: giue thy ſtrength vnto me and ſuccour mee.
               Prayſed be thy name O Lorde my God: for thou haſt ſet thy glorye aboue all the Heauens.
               Quicken my ſoule O God, and all the powers thereof: that it may cleaue faſt and be ioyned to thee in ioyful gladneſſe of Ghoſtly rauiſhings.
               Regarde O Lorde the Prayer of thy ſeruant: and hyde not thy face from me, in the time of my trouble.
               Shewe ſome good token vppon me, that they that hate me may ſee it and be aſhamed: bycauſe thou Lorde haſt holpen and comforted me.
               Thou Lorde art good and gracious: and of great mercy, vnto all them which

call vpon thee.
               Vnto thee therefore O Lorde, wyll I perfourme my vowes: & I wyll giue thee thanks both nowe and euermore, worlde without ende. Amen.
               
                  The Antheme.
               
               SAue me good Lorde waking, and keepe me ſleeping, that I may wake in Chriſt, and reſt in Peace.
               
                  The Verſicle.
               
               Bleſſed be the name of the Lorde
               
                  The Aunſwere.
               
               From this time forth for euermore.
               
                  The Collect.
               
               O Lorde God I beſeeche thee to lighten my darkeneſſe, and deliuer me from all ye daungers of this night, O mercifull Lorde, thorowe thy Sonne Ieſus Chriſt, who liueth and raigneth with thee in vnitie of the holye Ghoſte, world without ende. Amen.
               
                  The Antheme.
               
               O Lorde graunt me thy lyght, that I being deliuered from the darkeneſſe of ſinne, may come to the verye eeight which is Chriſt.
               
                  
                  The Verſicle.
               
               Lord heare my Prayer.
               
                  The Aunſwere.
               
               And let my crye come vnto thee.
               
                  The Collect.
               
               LIghten my darkeneſſe I beſech thee, O Lorde, and by thy great mercye defende me from all the perils and daungers of this night, that after my ſleepe I maye ſafely awake, to the prayſe and glorye of thy name, thorowe Chriſte thy Sonne our Lorde & Sauiour. Amen.
               
                  The Prayer.
                  O Merciful God and Heauenly Father, whether I ſleepe or wake, liue or die, I am alwayes thine. Wherfore I beſech thee hartily that thou wylte vouchſafe to take charge and care of me & not to ſuffer me to periſh in the works of darkneſſe, but to kindle ye light of thy countenaunce in my heart, ye thy Godly knowledge may dailye increaſe in me, thorowe a right & pure faith, and that I maye alwayes be founde to walke and lyue after thy wil and pleaſure, thorow Ieſu Chriſt our Lorde & Sauiour. Amen.
               
               
                  
                  A Prayer for the Queene.
                  O Heauenly Father, God almighty, whoſe Kingdome is euerlaſting & power infinite, which of thy good, neſſe haſte vouchſaued to reſtore vnto vs of the Engliſhe nation the lyght of thy holye Goſpell, by thy choſen ſeruant and Miniſter Elizabeth our moſte gracious ſoueraigne Lady. I beſeech thee O good Lorde ſo to rule hir heart, that ſhe knowing thy will, may alwayes incline to doe the ſame effectually. And graunt that we hir Subiects, duely conſidering hir Regall auctoritye and power, which thou haſt giuen hir, maye truely and faythfully ſerue, honoure, and humbly obey hir, in thee, and for thee, according as thou haſte commaunded vs in thy bleſſed and holy Worde, thorowe Ieſus Chriſt oure Lorde, to whom wyth thee and the Holy Ghoſt be all honor and glory, for euer and euer Amen.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ A Pſalme and Prayer againſt the Enimies of the Catholike Church.
               
                  ARiſe O Lorde, and ſtretch forth thine hande, the Heathen are fallen into thine heritage: thy holy Temple haue they defyled, wherin thou haſte put thy name, and made of it and heape of ſtones,
               Beholde the dead bodyes of thy ſeruants haue they giuen to the Foules of the ayre, to be deuoured: and the bones of thy Sainctes haue they conſumed with fyre.
               Cruellye haue they (on euery ſyde) ſhead like water the bloud of thy Faithfull: and haue deſpiſed to bury them.
               Deceytfullye haue they crept into thine habitation: and wyth ſcorne and deriſion, haue they (O Lorde) ſpoken againſt thee.
               Euen in the middeſt of thy Temple haue they (O Lorde) blaſphemed thy name: and haue not ceaſſed to doe

wickedly.
               Forget not I beſeche thee (O Lord) howe cruelly thys wycked people haue deuoured Iacob thy choſen: and layde waſte thy dwelling place.
               Giue glorye therefore to thy name (O God euerlaſting) and let the vengeaunce of thy ſeruants bloud which is ſhead, be openly ſhewed vpon the wycked in our ſight, that we thy people and ſheepe of thy paſture may ioyfully ſaye: bleſſed be our God Iehoua, for euer and euer. Amen.
               
                  The Uerſicle.
               
               Lorde vtterly deſtroy thine enimye.
               
                  The Aunſwere.
               
               Which hath polluted thy Sanctuarye.
               
                  The Prayer.
                  DEliuer thou vs O Lorde, frō theſe vngodly and ſtiffenecked perſons, for thou ſeeſt, that in their heartes they ymagine miſchiefe, and haue pleaſure to eate vp and deuour thy choſen. Their tongues be more ſharp than the

ſting of Adders, and vnder their lyppes, lurketh poyſon. But O mercifull Lord, let vs not fal into their hands leaſt they handle vs after their owne luſte. Looke downe from Heauen thy habitatiō we beſeche thee, on thy diſpearſed ſheepe, and ſtrengthen our weakeneſſe againſt their furious rages: Abate their pride, aſſwage their malice, confounde their deuiſes, wherewith they lyft vp themſelues againſt Chriſt Ieſus thy Sonne our Lorde.
                  We be not able of our ſelues to ſtand againſt their aſſaultes, except thy vndeſerued grace and mighty arme defende and deliuer vs. Performe therefore thy promiſes made to Iacob thy Seruaunt, and ſtop the mouthes of thy curſed Enimies. Call to repētance thy ſeely ſheepe, and forgiue all thoſe that wilfully & obſtinately rebell not againſt thy holye Worde. Looke alſo we beſeche thee vpon thy poore diſperſed, which for thy truth ſake are compelled to wander frō place to place, and ridde them oute of their daily greuances, that we may all

with one voice and vpright heart, and pleaſant countenance, extolle and magnifie thy holy name. Amen.
               
            
            
               An other Pſalme for the Church, vnder the borowed ſpeache or name, of a Uineyarde.
               HEare O thou Shepeherde of Iſraell, thou that leadeſt Iacob lyke a flocke of ſheepe: howe long wylte thou be angrye ouer the Prayers of thy people.
               In Egipt thou haddeſt a Uineyard, which thou broughteſt among the Heathen, thou plantedſt it there, and it tooke roote: ſo that the whole lande was couered withall.
               Lo the hilles were couered with the ſhaddowe of it: and ſo were the ſtrong Cedre trees wyth the bowes therof.
               Maruellous was the increaſe of it, after it had taken roote: and ſo was the name of it, among all nations.
               Neuertheleſſe thou haſte ſuffred the

hedge thereof to be broken downe, ſo that the wylde Bore oute of the wood hath rowted it vp: and the beaſts of the fielde haue deuoured ye Grapes therof.
               O Lorde, thou God of hoſtes, let them periſhe in thy wrathe, that thus haue deſtroyed and layde waſte this thy pleaſant vine: whoſe braunches ſpreade from ſee to ſee.
               Preuent we beſeeche the O Lorde, the malicious enimies of this thy vine: and ſo ſhall wee wyth voyce and heart, laude and praiſe thy holy name. Amen.
               
                  The Uerſicle.
               
               Turne thee O God, looke downe from Heauen.
               
                  The Aunſwere.
               
               And beholde the Uineyarde whiche thy right hande hath planted.
               
                  The Prayer.
                  A Riſe O Lorde, looke on thy vineyarde, that it be not deuoured of the wicked haters thereof. Let thine enimies be ſcattered, the righteous (O Lorde) make thou pleaſant and mery,

let them blow abrode thy Magnificence let them ſing prayſes & pleaſant ſonges vnto thee, let them moſt highly aduance thy Maieſtye, let thy glory grow, let the Kingdome of Chriſt from Heauen among the choſen be enlarged: be thou (O Holy Father) the Protector of them, namely, whom the world forſaketh and purſueth for Chriſtes ſake. Howe drye O Lorde is the flock of thine heritage? poure downe largely we praye thee therfore, the ſhowers of thy grace, that the Churche thy Spouſe may deale large ſpoiles of the conquered Sathan. In thy houſe O Lorde, let vs dwell in peace & concorde: giue vs all one heart, one minde, and one true interpretation of thy worde, that al that beleue in thee by Chriſt our Lorde, might lifte thee vp wt praiſes. And giue to thy people cunning and power to withſtande ſinne, and to obey thy worde in al things. Graunt it ſo to be moſt mercifull Lorde, for thy Sonne Ieſus Chriſtes ſake. Amen.
               
            
         
         
            
            Here followeth certaine Prayers very profytable to be exerciſed.
            
               ¶ A Prayer to God the Father for the obtayning of mercy for his Sonne Chriſtes ſake.
               
                  O Holy Father, remember not the offences of my youth, but thinke vpon thy great mercies and couenant made vnto mee in Chriſt Ieſus thy Sonne my only Aduocate and Mediator. He it is (O holy Father) whom thou diddeſt ſende to be the obtainer of mercye for my ſinnes. Hee was made weake to make me ſtrong. Hee was wounded for mine offences. He gaue his body to be beaten and his Cheekes to be ſtricken. He turned not away hys face from them that ſcorned him & ſpyt vpon him. He gaue himſelf to death for them which were offenders. Thorowe hys loue and mercye, he hath redemed them that were loſte, and by his bloudſheading on the Croſſe he hath pacifyed all things in Heauen and in Earth.

Behold holy Father therfore, who it is that thus hath ſuffered, and forgiue the ſinne of him that is redeemed. O Heauenly Father, for thys thy Sonne Ieſus Chriſtes ſake, write in my heart, loue to thy lawe, and hate to all ſinne, yt I may be worthy thorow the merites of his death and paſſion, to dwell wyth him and thee euerlaſtingly, to whome with thee and the Holy ghoſt, be all honor prayſe, and glory. Amen.
            
            
               ¶ A Prayer for the obtayning of a good Lyfe.
               O Heauenly Father, God Almightye, maker of Heauen and Earth and all things contayned in them. I beſeche thee, that thou wilt vouchſafe of thy goodneſſe, to directe, ſanctifye and keepe my heart and bodye, my ſenſes, my doings, my talke and cōmunication in thy holy lawes, and in the workes of thy Commaundements: and that thy holy Angell may be with mee, to direct my feete into the way of peace, truthe,

and health, that I maye deſerue to be whole, ſafe, and free, in thee and by thee, bothe here and in the worlde to come. Thou yt art the Sauiour of the worlde, and king of glory, heare me & ſaue mee, which liueſt and raigneſt God in perfect vnitie worlde wythout ende. Amen.
            
            
               A Prayer to the Father, wherein we deſire to doe thoſe thyngs that may pleaſe him.
               O Heauenly Father, haue thou pitie and compaſſion vppon the weakeneſſe of me thy vnworthy Childe, be thou preſt and redy (O holy Father) to helpe me, alwayes ſhewing thy mercye vppon mee, and proſper thou me in whatſoeuer I Godly go aboute, ſo that thou giuing me lyght, I may ſee what things are to be accepted before thee, and thou encoraging me, I may haue an earneſt deſire to doe the ſame, and thou being my guide I may come where to obtayne them: for I hauing nothing

but miſtruſt in my ſelfe, doe yelde and commit my ſelfe full and wholye vnto thee alone, which workeſt all things in all creatures to thy honor and glory. Amen.
            
            
               ¶ A Prayer to Chriſt the Sonne of God.
               O Bountifull Ieſu, O ſweete Sauiour, O Chriſt the Sonne of God haue pitie vppon mee, mercifullye heare me and deſpiſe not my Prayers. Thou haſt created me of nothing, thou haſt redemed me from the bondage of ſinne, death and Hel, neither with gold nor ſyluer, but wyth thy precious bloud, which thou offeredſt vpō the Croſſe for all mankinde. Caſte me not awaye O Lorde, whome thou by thy great wyſedome haſt made, nor let ye wickedneſſe of my youth, deſtroy yt which thy goodneſſe hath builded. Whileſt I am here (O Ieſu) haue thou mercy on mee, and whileſt I haue tyme, giue me thy grace

to repent. Looke vpon mee, O Lorde, wyth thy mercifull eyes, as thou diddeſt vouchſafe to looke vpon Peter thine Apoſtle, that after his example I may bewayle my ſinnefull lyfe, that obtayning thy fauoure, I may dye therein. I acknowledge that of my ſelfe, I haue deſerued euerlaſting death, but yet I appeale to the highe throne of thy mercye, not doubting but that thou wylte haue mercy on mee: Thou haſt O Lorde Ieſu giuen thy ſelfe an acceptable Sacrifice to thy Father to appeaſe hys wrath and to bring al ſinners truely repenting vnto hys fauour. Accept mee therefore ſweete Ieſus, truly repēting my ſinnes▪ among the number of them which ſhall be ſaued, and that I may leade a Godly and innocent lyfe, ſo that after thys lyfe I may attayne lyfe euerlaſting thorow the merits of thy death & Paſſion. Amen.
            
            
               
               ¶ A Prayer to Chriſt our Sauiour.
               O My Sauiour Chriſt Ieſu, which diddeſt ſaye: I will not the death of a ſynner, but that he liue and conuerte. Vouchſafe I: beſeeche thee to looke vppon me moſte wretched ſynner with thoſe mercifull eyes, wyth which thou once diddeſt beholde and looke vpon Peter bytterly weeping in the court of Pilate, wherewith alſo thou diddeſt looke vppon Mary Magdalene the penitente, at the feaſt of Simon, lykewyſe vppon the Theefe hanging on the croſſe: and cauſe me thorowe thy greate goodneſſe, that I maye worthylye bewayle my ſynnes, and weepe wyth Peter, and with Mary to loue, thee wyth a pure and perfecte loue, and with the Theefe that I may beholde and ſee thee, which wyth God the Father and the holy Ghoſt raygneſte GOD, worlde wythout ende. Amen.
            
            
               
               ¶ A Prayer to Chriſt our daily to be ſaide.
               O Mercyfull Lorde Ieſu, I beſeeche thee to bee mercifull vnto mee a wretched ſynner: as for all my iniquitie and my negligences, and all my immortifications, I put them all into thy moſt precious woundes. O Lorde putte awaye all my ſinnes, waſhe mee cleane wyth thy precious bloud, ſanctify me with thy bitter paſſion and death, clenſe me perfectly, reſtore againe vnto me the innocency which thou (O Lord) gaueſt me in baptiſme, that I may truly pleaſe thee. I worſhip, and lande, and glorifye thee, I prayſe and giue thankes vnto thee my Lorde Ieſu Chriſte, for all thy mercies and benefits which yu dayly beſtoweſt on me. I thank thee O ſonne of the liuing God, which for ye exceding great charity that thou diddeſt beare toward me, haſte vouchſaued to be made man. Thou wouldeſt for my ſake be borne in a ſtable, and as an Infante be

wrapped in clothes, to be ſwadled and layde in a manger, to be fedde wyth the lyttle mylke of the Mayden and Virgin thy bleſſed Mother. Thou diddeſt for my ſake ſuffer needyneſſe and pouertie, and many other agonies dyddeſt thou ſuffer (O Lorde) for my ſake: as to be apprehended and taken ſhamefully, and to be bounde vnworthily, and to be condemned vniuſtlye: thus wyth innumerable ſorrowes, waſt thou brought, to y• ſhamefull death of the Croſſe, wherevpon for my ſake thou diddeſt ſhead thy moſt precious bloud. Graunt me therefore moſte mercifull Chriſt, alway to acknowledge thy great loue and kindeneſſe towarde me, which haſt ſuffred for mee, that I may after thys lyfe liue wyth thee euerlaſtingly. Amen.
            
            
               
               ¶ A Prayer to the bleſſed Trinitie.
               
                  O Holy, bleſſed, and glorious Trinitie, the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghoſt, three perſons and one God, haue mercy vppon me. Lorde omnipotent and euerlaſting God, without beginning or ending, whom we doe confeſſe one in Trinitie and thre in vnitie, I prayſe thee I worſhip thee, I glorifie thee, and giue thankes vnto thee, for thy mercifull goodneſſe and clemencye, whiche wouldeſt that I being in the darkeneſſe of all error and ignoraunce, ſhoulde be made partaker of thy grace & mercy. I beſeche thee alſo moſte bleſſed and glorious Trinitie, bring to paſſe the woorke of thy mercifull goodneſſe begonne in mee, and leade me in all pietie and Godlineſſe, and cauſe me alwayes to thinke, ſpeake, and doe thoſe things which ſhall be acceptable in thy ſyght, yt after this lyfe I may haue the fruition of thy deitie, which liueſt and raigneſt God in perfect vnitie, world wtout end.
            
            
               
               ¶ A Prayer vpon the Peticions of the Lordes Prayer.
               
                  O Almighty and Eternall God, whiche vouchſaueſt that we, as it were thy heauenly children, ſhould euery one of vs, call thee oure Heauenlye Father: graunte that among vs by pureneſſe & example of liuing, thy moſt holy name may be ſanctified, that all other nacions, beholding our vertuous deedes that thou workeſt in vs, may be ſtirred to bleſſe and gloryfie thee.
               Graunt O Lorde, that the Kingdome of thy grace and mercy may raigne continually in our heartes, ſo that we may be partakers of the Realme of thy glory and Maieſtie.
               Graunt that vnto the very death wee refuſe not to followe thy Diuine will, and that we (according to the example

of the Celeſtial Citizens, agreeing together quietly) vnited in ſpirite, al controuerſie in opinions layde aparte, the luſts of the fleſh being ſubdued, and all flattering aſſaults of the worlde and the Diuel ouercome, neuer wraſtle againſt thy moſt holy wyll.
               Graunt (O Lord) for our body needefull ſuſtenaunce, that we may the more freely ſerue thee. Giue vs we beſech thee (O mercifull Father,) that Heauenlye bread, the body of thy ſonne Ieſu Chriſt the very foode and health of our ſoules. Giue vs the breade of thy Diuine preceptes, that we may truely walke and liue in them. Giue vs the breade of thy heauenly word, which is the ſtrong fortreſſe & ſure defence of our ſoules, that we being well fed and fylled wyth thys foode, maye worthyly come to the celeſtiall feaſt, where as is no hunger.
               Graunt (O Lorde) that we paciently beare and ſuffer our Enimies and ſuche as hurte vs, and wyllingly forgiue the offences committed agaynſte vs, that ſo we may fynde thee (O Lorde), mylde

and mercifull in forgiuing vs oure treſpaſſes.
               Graunt O Lorde, that we be not vtterly led into temptation, that thereby we ſhould be loſte: but in all perilles of temptation, and in the middſte of the ſtormy tempeſtes of tribulations, let vs thy children perceyue and feele thy Fatherly ſuccoure readye to helpe vs, leaſt that we (ouercome wyth the naughtye craftes and deceytes of the tempters,) ſhoulde be drawen into euerlaſting deſtruction: but when we be well aſſayd, approued, and pourged wyth the fyre of temptation, then let vs finiſhe oure courſe, and ſo well and valiantly fyght, that wee maye for euermore lyue wyth thee in that heauenly Citie, where and agaynſt the which, no manner of temptation can preuayle.
               Finally graunt (moſt mercifull Father) that we thorow thy benigne goodneſſe, may be deliuered from all euilles preſent and to come, bothe of body and ſoule: and that at the laſt the yoke of the fowle fiende being ſhaken of, wee may

poſſeſſe the herytage of thy Heauenlye Kingdome, which thy Sonne wyth hys precious bloud, bought for vs thy Children: and there for euer to haue fruition of Celeſtiall delectations, accompanied wyth Angels and bleſſed Saincts, thorowe the help, benignity and grace of our Sauior Ieſus Chriſt, to whome and to thee our Father, & the holy Ghoſt, be glory and honor now and euer. Amen.
            
            
               
               ¶ A comfortable Meditation of the reconcilation and atonement made by Chriſt, to God the Father,
               
                  OAlmighty God, father of my lorde: behold, the moſt high and precious thing yt I can fynde, the ſame haue I offered vnto thee, the thing of moſte eſtimation that I could fynde, haue I humbly preſented vnto thee, which is thy deare ſōne Chriſt. I haue left nothing, but in him I haue declared it, to thy Diuine Maieſtie. There is nothing remayning that I may adde more, bycauſe I haue committed & betaken my whole hope vnto him. I haue I ſay (O holy Father) ſente vnto thee my aduocate and ſpokeſman, euen thy welbeloued ſonne. I haue ſent thy glorious childe to be a mediator for me: I haue ſēt him as an interceſſor, by whome I truſt to get pardon & forgiueneſſe of my ſynnes. I haue ſent (O mercifull Father) word vnto word, that is,

God vnto God, according to the ſaying of thine Apoſtle: In the beginning was the word & the worde was with God. &c. which worde I beleue was ſent downe from thee for my myſdeedes, and dyd take vpon him my humanitie & nature, in the which he thoughte not ſcorne to ſuffer buffettes, bondes, ſpittings, and mockes. Yea, he toke vpon him to ſuffer the cruell paynes of the Croſſe, nayles, and darte, & after diuers puniſhments, gaue vp his moſte holy ſpirite, and was reckened among the deade. Looke mercifull Father here vppon thy Sonne, whome thou diddeſte beget, and bonde ſeruant whōe he redemed. Behold here a Creator, & doe not refuſe a Creature. Receyue the ſhephearde welcomed with a gentle and louing countenaunce, and mercyfully looke vppon the ſheepe which he hath brought home to the ninety and nine. Beholde (O Lorde) my King and my God, which like a good ſhepherde, rendreth to thee that which thou diddeſt committe to his charge. I was able (O holy father) by my ſelfe to offend thee,

but I was not able of my ſelf to appeaſe and pacifie thee. If thou therefore deſpyſe me (as it were right) for mine iniquitie, yet at the leaſt wyſe, mercifullye looke vppon mee, for the charitie of thy welbeloued Sonne. Looke (O Holye Father vppon the Sacrifice of fleſhe, and pardon the offences of fleſhe: and bycauſe fleſhe hath ſtirred thee to anger, let fleſhe (I beſeeche thee) moue thee to mercy, that lyke as fleſhe hath ſeduced and led mee to ſinne, ſo fleſhe may gette and obtayne for me, remiſſion for ſinne. For certayne it is, muche that mine iniquity hath deſerued, but yet much more it is, that the goodneſſe of my redeemer may euen of ryght require. Mine vnrighteouſneſſe is great, but yet holye Father, hys righteouſneſſe is greater: wherefore moſt noble Creator of lyght, pardon mine offences, for the miſerable trauayles and paynes that thy beloued Sonne did ſuſtayne. Now I beſech thee (O mercifull Father) let hys goodneſſe be ſet againſt my wickedneſſe, hys modeſtye and temperance, agaynſt my vngracious

naughtineſſe, and hys meekeneſſe againſt my fierce crueltie. Let hys humilitie recompence my pride, hys patience, mine impacience, his gentleneſſe mine vnkindeneſſe, hys obedience, my diſobedience, hys quietneſſe, mine vnquietneſſe, hys pleaſaunt towardeneſſe, my bytter frowardneſſe, his ſweete facilitle and gentleneſſe, mine anger and fretting fumes. To conclude, O holy Father, let his charitie make amendes for mine vnmercyfulneſſe.
               To whom with thee and the holy Ghoſt be all honour and glory, both nowe and euer, worlde wythout ende. Amen.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Paternoſter Rowe, at the Signe of the Starre.
            Anno. 1565. Septembris. 3.
         
      
   