
      
         
            
            
            THE DISCRIPTION OF A MASKE, Presented before the Kinges Maiestie at White-Hall, on Twelfth Night last, in honour of the Lord HAYES, and his Bride, Daughter and Heire to the Honourable the Lord DENNYE, their Marriage hauing been the same Day at Court solemnized. To this by occasion other small Poemes are adioyned.
            Inuented and set forth by THOMAS CAMPION Doctor of Phisicke.
            
            LONDON Imprinted by IOHN WIN
                  •
               ET for IOHN BROVVN and are to be solde at his shop in S. Dunstones Churchyeard in Fleetstreet. 1607.
         
         
            
            
               
            
         
         
            
            To the most puisant and Gratious IAMES King of great Britaine.
            THe disvnited Scithians when they sought
            To gather strength by parties, and combine
            That perfect league of freends which once beeing wrought
            No turne of time, or fortune could vntwine,
            This rite they held: a massie bowle was brought,
            And eu'ry right arme shot his seuerall blood
            Into the mazar till 'twas fully fraught,
            Then hauing stird it to an equall floud
            They quaft to th'vnion, which till death should last,
            In spite of priuate foe, or forraine feare,
            And this blood sacrament being knowne t'haue past
            Their names grew dreadfull to all far, and neere.
            O then great Monarch with how wise a care
            Do you these bloods deuided mixe in one,
            And with like consanguinities prepare
            The high, and euerliuing Vnion
            Tweene Scots, and English: who can wonder then
            If he that marries kingdomes, marries men?
            
               An Epigram.
               
                  MErlin, the great King Arthur being slaine,
               Foretould that he should come to life againe,
               And long time after weild great Brittaines state
               More powerfull ten-fould, and more fortunate.
               Prophet 'tis true, and well we find the same,
               Saue onely that thou didst mistake the name.
            
         
         
            
            Ad Inuictissimum, Serenissimumque IACOBVM Magnae Britanniae Regem.
            ANgliae, & vnanimis Scotiae pater, annè maritus
            Sis duhito, an neuter, (Rex) vel vter
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                simul.
            Vxores pariter binas sibi iungat vt vnus,
            Credimus hoc ipso te probibente nephas.
            At
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               , maritali natas violare par entem
            Complexu, quis non cogitat esse scelus?
            At tibi diuinis successibus vtraque nubit,
            Vna tamen coninx, coniugis vnus amor.
            Connubium O mirum? binas qui ducer, & vname
            Possis? tu solus sic Iacobe potes:
            Diuisa, leuiterterras componis in vnam,
            Atque vnam aeternum nomine, reque facis:
            Natisque, & nuptis, pater & vir factus, vtrisque es
            Vnitis ceniux verè, & amore parens.
         
         
            
            To the Right Noble and Vertuous Theophilus Howard, Lorde of Walden, sonne and Heire to the right Honorable the Earle of Suffolke.
            
               IF to be sprong of high and princely blood,
               If to inherite vertue, honour, grace,
               If to be great in all things, and yet good,
               If to be facill, yet t'haue power and place,
               If to be iust, and bountifull may get
               The loue of men, your right may chalenge it.
            
            
               The course of forraine manners far and wide,
               The courts, the countries, Citties, townes and state,
               The blossome of your springing youth hath tried,
               Honourd in eu'ry place and fortunate,
               Which now grown fairer doth adorne our Court
               With princelie reuelling, and timely sport.
            
            
               But if th'admired vertues of your youth
               Breede such despairing to my daunted muse,
               That it can scarsely vtter naked truth,
               How shall it mount as rauisht spirits vse
               Vnder the burden of your riper dayes,
               Or hope to reach the so far distant bayes?
            
            
               My slender Muse shall yet my loue expresse,
               And by the faire Thames side of you sheele sing,
               The double streames shall beare her willing verse
               Far hence with murmur of their ebbe and spring.
               Bnt if you fauour her light tunes, ere long
               Sheele striue to raise you with a loftier song.
            
         
         
            
            To the Right Vertuous, and Honorable, the Lord and Lady HAYES
            SHould I presume to separate you now,
            That were so lately ioyn'de by holy vow?
            For whome this golden dreame which I report,
            Begot so many waking eyes at Court,
            And for whose grace so many nobles chang'd,
            Their names and habites from themselues estrang'd?
            Accept together, and together view
            This little worke which all belongs to you,
            And liue together many blessed dayes,
            To propagate the honour'd name of HAYES.
            
            
               Epigramma.
               Haeredem (vt spes est) pariet noua nupta Scot' Anglū,
               Quem gignet post hac ille, Britannus erit.
               Sicnoua posteritas ex regnis orta duobus,
               Vtrinquè egregios nobilitabit auos.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE Description of a Maske presented before the Kinges Maiestie at White Hall, on twelft night last, in honour of the Lord HAYES, and his Bride, daughter, and heire to the Honourable the Lord DENNYE, their mariage hauing been the same day at Court solemnized.
            
               AS in battailes, so in all other actions that are to bee reported, the first, and most necessary part is the discription of the place, with his oportunities, and properties, whether they be naturall, or artificiall. The greate hall (wherein the Maske was presented) receiued this diuision, and order: The vpper part where the cloth & chaire of State were plac't, had scaffoldes and seates on eyther side continued to the skreene; right before it was made a partition for the dauncing place; on the right hand whereof were consorted ten Musitions, with Basse and Meane Lutes, a Bandora, a double Sack-bott, and an Harpsicord, with two

treble Violins; on the other side somewhat neerer the skreene were plac't 9. Violins and three Lutes, and to answere both the Consorts (as it were in a triangle) sixe Cornets, and sixe Chappell voyces, were seated almost right against them, in a place raised higher in respect of the pearcing sound of those Instruments-eighteen foote from the skreen, an other Stage was raised higher by a yearde then that which was prepared for dancing: This higher Stage was all enclosed with a double vale, so artificially painted, that it seemed as if darke cloudes had hung before it: within that shrowde was concealed a greene valley, with greene trees round about it, and in the midst of them nine golden trees of fifteene foote high, with armes and braunches very glorious to behold: From the which groue toward the State was made a broade descent to the dauncing place, iust in the midst of it; on either hand were two ascents, like the sides of two hilles, drest with shrubbes and trees; that on the right hand leading to the bowre of Flora: the other to the house of Night; which bowre and house were plac't opposite at either end of the skreene, and betweene them both was raised a hill, hanging like a cliffe ouer the groue belowe, and on the top of it a goodly large tree was set, supposed to be the tree of Diana; behind the which toward the window was a small descent, with an other spreading hill that climed vp to the toppe of the window, with many trees on the height of it, whereby those that played on the Hoboyes at the Kings entrance into the hall

were shadowed: The bowre of Flora was very spacious, garnisht with all kind of flowers, and flowrie branches with lights in them; the house of Night ample, and stately, with blacke pillors, whereon many starres of gold were fixt: within it when it was emptie, appeared nothing but cloudes and starres, and on the top of it stood three Turrets vnderpropt with small blacke starred pillers, the middlemost being highest and greatest, the other two of equall proportion: about it were plac't on wyer artificial Battes, and Owles, continually mouing: with many other inuentions, the which for breuitie sake I passe by with silence.
            Thus much for the place, and now from thence let vs come to the persons.
            The Maskers names were these, (whom both for order and honour I mention in the first place.
            
               
                  1 Lord Walden.
               
               
                  2 Sir Thomas Howard
               
               3 Sir Henrie Carey, Master of the Iewell house.
               
               4 Sir Richard Preston, Gent. of the K. priuie Chamber.
               
               
                  5 Sir Iohn Ashley, Gent. of the K. priuie Chamber.
               
               
                  6 Sir Thomas Iarret Pentioner.
               
               7 Sir Iohn Digby, one of the Kings Caruers.
               
               8 Sir Thomas Badger, Master of the Kings Hariers.
               
               
                  9 Maister Goringe.
               
            
            Their number Nine, the best and amplest of numbers, for as in Musicke seuen notes containe all varietie, the eight being in nature the same with the

first, so in nūbring after the ninth we begin againe, the tenth beeing as it were the Diappason in Arithmetick. The number of 9. is famed by the Muses, and Worthies, and it is of all the most apt for chaunge, and diuersitie of proportion. The chiefe habit which the Maskers did vse, is set forth to your view in the first leafe: They presented in their fayned persons the Knights of Apollo, who is the father of heat, and youth, and consequently of amorous affections.
            
               The Speakers were in number foure.
               
                  FLORA the Queene of Flowers, attired in a changeable Taffatie Gowne, with a large vale embrodered with flowers, a Crowne of flowers, and white buskins painted with flowers.
               
                  ZEPHYRVS in a white loose robe of sky coloured Taffatie, with a mantle of white silke prop't with wyre, stil wauing behind him as he moued; on his head hee wore a wreath of Palme deckt with Primmeroses and Violets, the hayre of his head and beard were flaxen, and his buskins white, and painted with flowers.
               
                  NIGHT in a close robe of blacke silke & gold, a blacke mantle embrodered with starres, a crowne of starres on her head, her haire blacke and spangled with gold, her face blacke, her buskins blacke, and painted with starres, in her hand shee bore a blacke wand, wreathed with gold.
               
                  HESPERVS in a close robe of a deep crimson

Taffatie mingled with skye colour, and ouer that a large loose robe of a lighter crimson taffatie, on his head he wore a wreathed band of gold, with a starre in the front thereof, his haire and beard red, and buskins yellow.
            
            These are the principall persons that beare sway in this inuention, others that are but secunders to these, I will describe in their proper places, discoursing the Maske in order as it was performed.
            As soone as the King was entred the great Hall, the Hoboyes (out of the wood on the top of the hil) entertained the time till his Maiestie and his trayne were placed, and then after a little expectation the consort of ten began to play an Ayre, at the sound wherof the vale on the right hand was withdrawne, and the ascent of the hill with the bower of Flora were discouered, where Flora & Zepherus were busily plucking flowers from the Bower, and throwing them into two baskets, which two Siluans held, who were attired in changeable Taffatie, with wreathes of flowers on their heads. As soone as the baskets were filled, they came downe in this order, First Zepherus and Flora, then the two Siluans with baskets after them: Foure Siluans in greene taffatie, and wreathes, two bearing meane Lutes, the third a base Lute, and the fourth a deepe Bandora.
            As soone as they came to the discent toward the dauncing place, the consort of tenne ceac't, and the foure Siluans playd the same Ayre, to which Zepherus and the two other Siluans did sing these words in a base, Tenor, and treble voyce, and going vp and

downe as they song, they strowed flowers all about the place.
            
               
                  
                     Song.
                  
Now hath Flora rob'd her bowers
               To befrend this place with flowers;
               Strowe aboute, strowe aboute,
               The Skye rayn'd neuer kindlyer Showers.
               Flowers with Bridalls well agree,
               Fresh as Brides, and Bridgromes be,
               Strowe aboute, strowe aboute,
               And mixe them with fit melodie.
               Earth hath no Princelier flowers
               Then Roses white, and Roses red,
               But they must still be mingled.
               And as a Rose new pluckt from Venus thorne
               So doth a Bride her Bride groomes bed adorne.
            
            
               Diuers diuers Flowers affect
               For some priuate deare respect,
               Strowe about, strow about,
               Let euery one his owne protect.
               But hees none of Floras friend
               That will not the Rose commend.
               Strow about, strow about,
               Let Princes Princely flowers defend.
               Roses the Gardens pride,
               Are flowers for loue, and flowers for Kinges,
               In courts desir'd, and Weddings.
               And as a Rose in Venus bosome worne,
               So doth a Bridegroome his Brides bed adorne.
            
            
               The Musique ceaseth, and Flora speaks.
            
               Flora
               FLowers and good wishes Flora doth present,
               Sweete flowers, the ceremonious ornament
               Of maiden mariage, Beautie figuring,
               And blooming youth, which though we careles fling
               About this sacred place, let none prophane
               Thinke that these fruits from common hils are tane,
               Or Vulgar vallies which do subiect lie
               To winters wrath, and cold mortalitie.
               But these are hallowed and immortall flowers
               With Floras hands gather'd from Floras bowres.
               Such are her presents, endles, as her loue,
               And such for euer may this nights ioy proue.
            
            
               Zeph.
               FOr euer endles may this nights ioy proue,

                     Zephyrus. The westerne wind, of all the most mild, and pleasant, who with Venus the Queene of loue is said to bring in the spring, when naturall heate and appetite reuiueth & the glad earth begins to be beautified with flowers,
               
               So eccocs Zephyrus the friend of loue.
               Whose aide Venus implores when she doth bring
               Into the naked world the greene leau'd spring.
               When of the Sunnes warme beames the Nets we weaue
               That can the stubborn'st heart with loue deceiue.
               That Queene of beauty, and desire by me
               Breaths gently forth this Bridall prophecie.
               Faithfull and fruitfull shall these Bedmates proue,
               Blest in their fortunes, honoured in their loue.
            
            
               Flor.
               ALL grace this night, & Siluans so must you,
               Offring your mariage song with chāges new
            
            
               The song in forme of a Dialogue.
            
               Can.
               WHO is the happier of the two,
               A maide, or wife?
            
            
               Ten.
               Which is more to be desired
               Peace or strife?
            
            
               Can.
               What strife can be where two are one,
               Or what delight to pine alone?
            
            
               Bas.
               None such true freendes, none so sweet life,
               As that betweene the man and wife.
            
            
               Ten.
               A maide is free, a wife is tyed.
            
            
               Can.
               No maide but faine would be a Bride.
            
            
               Ten.
               Why liue so many single then.
               Tis not I hope for want of men?
            
            
               Can.
               The bow and arrow both may fit,
               And yet tis hard the marke to hit.
            
            
               Bas.
               He leuels faire that by his side
               Laies at night his louely Bride.
            
            
               Cho.
               Sing Io: Hymen, Io: Io: Hymen.
            
            THis song being ended the whole vale is sodainly drawne, the groue and trees of gold, and the hill with Dianas tree are at once discouered.
            Night appeares in her house with her 9. houres, apparrelled in large robes of black taffatie, painted thicke with starres, their haires long, blacke, and spangled with gold, on their heads coronets of stars and their faces blacke, euery houre bore in his hand a blacke torch, painted with starres, and lighted. Night presently descending from her house spake as followeth.
            
               
               Night
               VAnish darke vales, let night in glory shine
               As she doth burn in rage, come leaue our shrine
               You black hair'd hours, and guide vs with your lights,

                     Diana. The Moone and Queen of Virginitie, is saide to be regent & Empresse of Night, and is therefore by Night defended as in her quarrel for the losse of the Bride, her virgin.
               
               
                  Flora hath wakened wide our drowsy sprights
               See where she triumphs, see her flowers are throwne,
               And all about the seedes of malice sowne?
               Despightfull Flora ist not enough of griefe
               That Cynthia's robd, but thou must grace the theefe?
               Or didst not here Nights soueraigne Queen complaine
               
                  Hymen had stolne a Nimph out of her traine.
               And matcht her here plighted henceforth to be
               Loues friend, and stranger to Virginitie
               And mak'st thou sport for this?
            
            
               Flora.
               BEe mild sterne night
               
                  Flora doth honour Cinthia, and her right,
               Virginitie is a voluntary powre,
               Free from constraint, euen like an vntoucht flower
               Meete to be gather'd when tis throughly blowne.
               The Nimph was Cinthias while she was her owne,
               But now another claimes in her a right
               By fate reseru'd thereto, and wise foresight.
            
            
               Zeph.
               CAn Cynthia one kind virgins losse bemone?
               How if perhaps she brings her tenne for one?
               Or can shee misse one in so full a traine?
               Your Goddesse doth of too much store complaine.
               If all her Nimphes would aske aduise of me
               There should be fewer virgins then there be.
               Nature ordaind not Men to liue alone,
               Where there are two, a Woman should be one.
            
            
               
               Night.
               THou breath'st sweet poison wāton Zephyrus
               
               But Cynthia must not be deluded thus.
               Her holy Forrests are by theeues prophan'd,
               Her Virgins frighted, and loe, where they stand
               That late were Phoebus Knights, turnd now to trees
               By Cynthias vengement for their iniuries
               In seeking to seduce her Nymphes with loue:
               Here they are sixt ond neuer may remoue
               But by Dianaes power that stucke them here.
               
                  Apollos loue to them doth yet appeare,
               In that his beames hath guilt them a they grow,
               To make their miserie yeeld the greater show.
               But they shall tremble when sad Night doth speake,
               And at her stormy words their boughes shall breake.
            
            Toward the end of this speech Hesperus begins to de
                  •
               cend by the house of Night, and by that time the speech was finisht he was readie to speake.
            
               Hesp.
               
                  
                     Hesperus. The Fu
                        •
                     ning starre foreshews that the wisht marriage night 
                        〈◊〉
                      hand, and for that cause is supposed to be the friend of Bridegroomes, and Brides.
HAyle reuerend angrie Night, haile Queene of Flowers,
               Mild sprited Zephyrus haile, Siluans and Howers.
               
                  Hesperus brings peace, cease then your needlesse iarres
               Here in this little firmament of starres.
               
                  Cynthia is now by Phoebus pacified,
               And well content her Nymph is made a Bride▪
               
               Since the faire match was by that Phoebus grac't
               Which in this happie Westerne Ile is plac't
               As he in heauen, one lampe enlightning all
               That vnder his benigne aspect doth fall▪
               
               
                  Deepe Oracles he speakes, and he alone
               For artes and wisedomes meete for Phoebus throne.
               The Nymph is honour'd, and Diana pleas'd:
               
                  Night be you then, and your blacke howers appeas'd▪
               
               And friendly listen what your Queene by me
               Farther commaunds, let this my credence be,
               View it, and know it for the highest gemme,
               That hung on her imperiall Diadem.
            
            
               Night.
               
                  I know, and honour it louely Hesperus,
               
               Speake then your message, both are welcome to
            
            
               Hesp
               YOur Soueraigne frō the vertuous gem she sends vs.
               Bids you take power to retransforme the frends
               Of Phoebus, metamorhpos'd here to trees,
               And giue them straight the shapes which they did leese.
            
            This is her pleasure.
            
               Night.
               
                  HEsperus I obey,
               
                  Night must needs yeeld when Phoebus gets the day.
            
            
               Flo.
               Honor'd be Cynthia for this generous deede.
            
            
               Zep.
               Pitie growes onely from celestiall seede.
            
            
               Night.
               IF all seeme glad, why should we onely lowre?
               Since t'expresse gladnes we haue now most power.
               Frolike grac't Captiues, we present you here
               This glasse, wherein your liberties appeare,
               
                  Cynthia is pacified, and now blithe Night
               
               Begins to shake off melancholy quite.
            
            
               
               Ze.
               WHo shold grace mirth, & reuels but the night,
               Next loue she should be goddesse of delight.
            
            
               N.
               TIs now a time when (Zephyrus) all with dancing
               Honor me, aboue day my state aduancing.
               Ile now be frolicke, all is full of hart,
               And eu'n these trees for ioy shall beare a part.
               
                  Zephyrus they shall dance.
            
            
               Zeph.
               Daunce Goddesse? how?
            
            
               Night.
               SEemes that so full of strangenes to you now?
               Did not the Thracian harpe long since the same?
               And (if we ripp the ould records of fame)
               Did not Amphions lyre the deafe stones call,
               When they came dancing to the Theban wall?
               Can musicke then ioye? ioy mountaines moues
               And why not trees? ioyes powerfull when it loues.
               Could the religious Oake speake Oracle
               Like to the Gods? and the tree wounded tell
               T'Aeneas his sad storie? haue trees therefore
               The instruments of speech, and hearing more
               Then th'aue of pacing, and to whom but Night
               Belong enchantments? who can more affright
               The eie with magick wonders? Night alone
               Is fit for miracles, and this shalbe one
               Apt for this Nuptiall dauncing iollitie.
               Earth then be soft and passable to free
               These fettered roots? ioy trees the time drawes neere
               When in your better formes you shall appeare.
               Dauncing, and musicke mnst prepare the way,
               Ther's little tedious time in such delay.
               
                  This spoken, the foure Siluans played on their instruments the first straine of this song following: & at the repetition thereof the voices sell in with the instrumentes which were thus deuided, a treble and a base were placed neere his Maiestie, and an other treble and base neere the groue, that the words of the song might be heard of all, because the trees of gould instantly at the first sound of their voices began to moue, and dance according to the measure of the time which the musitians kept in singing, and the nature of the wordes which they deliuered.
               
                  MOue now with measured sound
                  You charmed groue of gould,

                        Song.
                     
                  
                  Trace forth the sacred ground
                  That shall your formes vnfold.
               
               
                  
                     Diana, and the starry night for your Apollos sake
                  Endue your Siluan shapes with powre this strāge delight to make
                  Much ioy must needs the place betide where trees for gladnes moue,
                  Afairer sight was nere beheld, or more expressing loue.
               
               
                  Yet neerer Phoebus throne
                  Mete on your winding waies,
                  Your Brydall mirth make knowne
                  In your high-graced Hayes.
                  
               
               
                  Let Hymen lead your sliding rounds, & guide thē with his light,
                  While we do Io Hymen sing in honour of this night
                  Ioyne three by three, for so the night by triple spel decrees
                  Now to release Apollos knights from these enchanted trees.
               
            
            
               This dancing song being ended, the goulden trees stood in rankes three by three, and Night ascended vp to the groue, and spake thus, touching the first three seuerally with her wand.
            
               Night
               BY vertue of this wand, and touch deuine,
               These Siluan shadowes back to earth resigne,
               Your natiue formes resume, with habite faire,
               While solemne musick shall enchant the aire
               Presently the Siluans with their foure instrumēts, 
                     Either by the simplicity, negligence, or conspiracy of the painter, the passing away of the trees was somewhat hazarded the patterene of them the same day hauing bene showne with much admiration, and the 9 trees beeing left vnsett together euen to the same night.
                  
and fiue voices, began to play, and sing together the song following at the beginning whereof that part of the stage whereon the first three trees stoode began to yeeld, and the three formost trees gently to sincke, and this was effected, by an Ingin plac't vnder the stage. VVhen the trees had sunke a yarde they cleft in three parts, and the Maskers appeared out of the tops of them, the trees were sodainly conuayed away, and the first three Maskers were raysed againe by the Ingin. They appeared then in a false habit, yet very faire, and in forme not much vnlike their principall, & true robe. It was made of greene taffatie cut into leaues, and layed vpon cloth of siluer, and their hats were sutable to the same.
               
                  
                     Songe of transformation.
                  
NIght, and Diana charge,
               And th'Earth obayes
               Opening large
               Her secret waies,
               While Apollos charmed men
               Their formes receiue againe.
               
                  Giue gratious Phoebus honour then,
               And so fall downe, and rest behinde the traine
               Giue gratious Phoebus honour then and so fall &c.
            
            When those wordes were sung, the three maskers made an honour to the King, and so falling backe the other sixe trees three by three came forward, & when they were in their appointed places Night spake▪ againe thus
            
               Night
               THus can celestials worke in humane fate,
               Transforme, & forme as they do loue or hate.
               Like touch, and change receiue: the Gods agree
               The best of numbers is contained in three.
               The song of transformation againe.
               Night and Diana, &c.
            
            THen Night toucht the second three trees and the stage suncke with them as before. And in breefe the second three did in all points as the first: Then night spake againe.
            
               Night
               THe last, & third of nine, touch magick wand,
               And giue them back their formes at nights command
            
            Night toucht the third 3. trees & the same charme of Night and Diana was sung the third time, the last three trees were transformed, and the Maskers raisd. VVhen presently the first Musique began his full Chorus.
            
            
               
                  Againe this song reuiue and sound it hie,
               Long liue Apollo Brittaines glorious eye.
            
            THis Chorus was in manner of an Eccho, seconded by the Cornets, then by the consort of ten, then by the consort of twelue, and by a double Chorus of voices standing on either side, the one against the other bearing fiue voices a peece, and sometime euery Chorus was heard seuerally, somtime mixt, but in the end altogether: which kinde of harmony so distinguisht by the place, and by the seuerall nature of instruments, and changeable conveyance of the song, and performed by so many excellēt masters, as were actors in that musicke, (their number in all amounting to fortie two voyces and instruments) could not but yeeld great satisfaction to the hearers.
            While this Chorus was repeated twice ouer, the Nine maskers in their greene habitts solemnely descended to the dauncing place, in such order as they were to begin their daunce, and as soone as the Chorus ended, the violins, or consorte of twelue began to play the second new daunce, which was taken in forme of an Eccho by the cornetts, and then cat'cht in like manner by the consort often, sometime they mingled two musickes together; sometime plaid all at once; which kind of ecchoing musicke rarely became their Siluan attire, and was so truely mixed together, that no daunce could euer bee better grac't then that, as (in such distraction of musicke) it was performed by the maskers. After this daunce Night descended from the groue, and addreste her speech to the maskers, as followeth.
            
               
               Night
               
                  PHoebus is pleas'd, and all reioice to see
               His seruants, from their golden prison free,
               But yet since Cinthia hath so freendly smilde,
               And to you tree-borne Knights, is reconcild,
               First ere you any more worke vndertake,
               About her tree solemne procession make,
               
                  Dianas tree, the tree of Chastitie,
               That plac't alone on yonder hill you see.
               These greene leau'drobes wherein disguisde you made
               Stelths to her Nimphes through the thicke forrests shade
               There to the goddesse offer thankfully,
               That she may not in vaine appeased be.
               The night shall guide you, and her howres attend you
               That no ill eyes, or spirits shall offend you.
            
            At the end of this speech Night began to leade the way alone, & after her an Houre with his torch and after the houre a masker, and so in order one by one, a torch-bearer and a masker, they march on towards Dianas tree. VVhen the Maskers came by the house of Night, euery one by his houre receiued his helmet, and had his false robe pluckt off, & bearing it in his hand, with a low honour offred it at the tree of Chastitie, and so in his glorious habit, with his houre before him march't to the bowre of Flora. The shape of their habit the picture before discouers, the stuffe was of Carnation satten layed thicke with broad siluer lace, their helmets beeing made of the same stuffe. So through the bowre of Flora they came, where they ioyned two torch-bearers, and two Maskers, and when they past downe to the groue: the houres parted on either side, and made way betweene them for the Maskers, who descended

to the dauncing place in such order as they were to begin their third new dance. All this time of procession the sixe Cornets, and sixe Chappell voices sung a sollemne motet of sixe parts made vpon these wordes.
            
               WIth spotles mindes now mount we to the tree
               Of single chastitie.
               The roote is temperance grounded deepe
               Which the coldiewc't earth doth steepe:
               Water it desires alone,
               Other drinke it thirsts for none:
               Therewith the sober branches it doth feede,
               Which though they fruitlesse be,
               Yet comely leaues they breede,
               To beautifie the tree,
               
                  Cynthia protectresse is, and for her sake,
               We this graue procession make.
               Chast eies and eares, pure heartes, and voices
               Are graces wherein Phoebe most reioyces.
            
            The motet beeing ended the Violins began the third new dance, which was liuely performed by the Maskers, after which they tooke forth the Ladies, and danc't the measures with them, which being finisht, the Maskers brought the Ladies back againe to their places: and Hesperus with the rest descended from the groue into the dauncing place, & spake to the Maskers as followeth.
            
               Hesperus
               KNights of Apollo proude of your new birth,
               Pursue your triumphs still with ioy and mirth,
               Your changed fortunes, and redeemd estate
               
                  Hesperus to your Soueraigne will relate,
               T'is now high time he were far hence retir'd,
               
                  Th'ould Bridall friend, that vshers Night desir'd
               Through the dimme euening shades, then taking flight
               Giues place and honour to the nuptiall Night.
               I that wish't euening starre must now make way
               To Hymens rights much wrong'd by my delay.
               But on Nights princely state you ought t'attend,
               And t'honour your new reconciled frind.
            
            
               Night
               
                  HEsperus as you with concord came, eu'n so
               T'is meet that you with cōcord hence shold go
               Then ioyne you that in voice, and art excell,
               To giue this starre a musicall farewell.
            
            A Diologue of foure voices two Bases and two trebles.
            
               1
               Of all the starres which is the kindest
               To a louing Bride?
            
            
               2
               
                  Hesperus when in the west
               He doth the day from night deuide.
            
            
               1
               What message can be more respected
               Then that which tells wish't ioyes shalbe effected?
            
            
               2
               Do not Brides watch the euening starre?
            
            
               1
               O they can discerne it farre:
            
            
               2
               Loue Bridegroomes reuels?
            
            
               1
               But for fashion.
            
            
               2
               And why?
            
            
               1
               They hinder wisht occasion.
            
            
               2
               Longing hearts and new delights,
               Loue short dayes, and long nights
            
            
               Chorus.
               
                  HEsperus since you all starres excell
               In Bridall kindnes kindly farewell farewell.
            
            WHile these wordes of the Chorus (kindly farewell farewell) were in singing often repeated Hesperus tooke his leaue seue ally of Night, Flora, & Zephyrus, the Howers, and Siluans, and so while the Chorus was sung ouer the second time, hee was got

vp to the groue, where turning againe to the singers, and they to him. Hesperus tooke a second farwel of them, and so past away by the house of Night: Then Night spake theis two lines, and therewith all retired to the groue where they stoode before.
            
               Night.
               COme Flora let vs now withdraw our traine
               That th'ecclipst reuels maie shine forth againe
            
            Now the Maskers began their lighter daunces as Currantoes, Leualtas and galliards, wherein when they had spēt as much time as they thought fit, night spake thus from the groue, and in her speech descē
               ded a little into the dauncing place.
            
               N.
               HEre stay, Night leaden-eied, and sprighted growes
               And her late houres begin to hang their browes
               
                  Hymen long since the Bridall bed hath drest,
               And longs to bring the turtles to their nest.
               Then with one quick dence sound vp your delight,
               And with one song weele bid you all god-Night.
            
            At the end of these words, the violins began the 4. new dance, which was excellētly discharged by the Maskers, & it ended with a light chāge of musick & mesure: After the dance followed this dialogue of 2 voices, a base & tenor sung by a Siluan, & an Howre.
            
            
               Ten: Siluan.
               TEll me gentle howre of night
               Wherein dost thou most delight?
            
            
               Bas. Howre.
               Not in sleepe,
            
            
               Sil.
               Wherein then?
            
            
               Howre
               In the frolicke vew of men?
            
            
               Sil
               Louest thou musicke?
            
            
               Howre
               O t'is sweet.
            
            
               Sil.
               Whats dauncing?
            
            
               How.
               Eu'n the mirth of feete
            
            
               Sil.
               Ioy you in Fayries and idelues?
            
            
               How.
               We are of that sore our selues,
               But Siluan say whie do you loue
               
                  Onely to frequent the groue?
            
            
               Sil.
               Life is fullest of content
               Where delight is innocent.
            
            
               How.
               Pleasure must varie not be long,
               Come then lets close, and end our song.
            
            
               Chorus
               YEt ere we vanish from this princely sight,
               Let vs bid Phoebus, & his states god-night
            
            This Chorus was performed with seuerall Ecchoes of musicke, and voices, in manner as the great Chous before. At the end whereof the Maskers putting off their visards, & helmets, made a low honour to the King, and attended his Ma: to the banquetting place
            
               To the Reader.
               Neither buskin now, norbayes
               Challenge I, a Ladies prayse
               Shall content my proudest hope,
               Their applause was all my scope
               And to their shrines properly
               Reuels dedicated be:
               Whose soft eares none ought to pierce
               But with smooth and gentle verse,
               Let the tragicke Poeme swell,
               Raysing raging seendes from hell,
               And let Epicke Dactils range
               Swelling seas and Countries strange.
               Little roome small things containes
               Easy praise quites easy paines.
               Suffer them whose browes do sweat
               To gaine honour by the great.
               It s enough if men me name
               A Retailer of such fame.
            
            
               Epigramma.
               Quid tu te numeris immis
                     •
                  es? anne medente
                     •
                  
               
               Metra cathedratum ludicra scripta decent
               Musicus & medicus, celebris quoque Phoebe Poeta e
                     •
                  
               
               Et lepor aegrotos arte rogante i
                     •
                  uat.
               Crede mihi doctum qui carmen non sapit, idem
               Non habet ingentum, nec genium medici.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            These Songes vvere vsed in the Maske, vvhereof the first two Ayres were made by M. Campion, the third and last by M, Lupo, the fourth by M. Tho. Giles, and though the last three Ayres were deuised onely for dauncing, yet they are here set forth with words that they may be sung to the Lute or Violl.
            
               A Tenor part to the first song.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               Now hath Flora robde her bowres to be friend this place with flowers
               Flowers with Bri-dals well agree fresh as Brides and bridegrooms be
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               strow about strow about the skie rainde neuer kindlier showers,
               strow about strow about and mixe them with fitte melodie,
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               earth hath no princelier flowers thē roses white and roses red, but they must
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               still be mingled and as a rose new pluckt from Venus thorne so doth a bride
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               her bridegrooms bed adorne.
            
            
               
               I.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               Now hath Flora robde her bowres to befrend this place with flowres,
               Flowers with bri- dals well agre: fresh as brides and Bridegroomes be.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               strow about strow about the skie rainde neuer kindlier showers,
               strow about strow about and mixe them with sitte melodie,
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               earth hath no princelier flowers thē roses white and roses red,
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               but they must still be mingled and as a rose new pluckt from
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               Venus thorne so doth a bride her bridegrooms bed adorne.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     •
                  he Basse. I.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               II.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               Moue now with measurd sound you charmed groues of golde
               Trace forth the sa-cred ground that shal your formes vn fould
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               Di-a na and the starry night for your Apollos sake
               much ioy must needs the place betide where trees for gladnes moue
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               en- due your siluan shapes with powre this strange delight to make
               a fayrer sight was neere be- helde or more expressing loue.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               Finis.
            
            
               
               The Basse II.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               Moue now with mesur'd sound you charmed groue of gold, Dia na and
               Trace forth the sacred ground that shall your forms vnfold, much ioy must needs
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               the starry night for your Apollos sake endue your Siluan shape with power this
               the place be-tide where trees for gladnes moue, a fayrer fight was neere be-held or
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               strange delight to make,
               more expressing loue.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               Shewes & nightly reuels signes of ioy and peace fill royall
               Faire and princely brāches with strō armes encrease from that deepe
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               Britaines court while cruell warre farre off doth rage for euer hence.
               rooted tree whose sacred strength & glory for-ren malice hath.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               ex-iled Our diuided kingdomes now in frendly kindred meet
               be-guiled Truly recon- ciled griefe appeares at last more sweet
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               and old debate to loue & kindnes turns our power with double force v-
               both to our selues & faithful friends our vn-der-mi- ning foes af-
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               niting.
               frighting.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               The Basse III.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               Triumph now with Ioy and mirth the God of peace hath
               Wee en- ioy the fruites of earth through fa-uour of his
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               blest our land we throgh his most lo uing grace a King & king ly
               bounteous hand Like a son with lesser star
                     •
                   or carefull shepsheard
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               seed be-holde Triumph then and yeelde him praise that giues vs blest &
               to his fold.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               ioyfull dayes.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               The Basse. IIII-
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               V
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               Time that leads the fatall round hath made his center in our ground
               And there at one stay he rests and with the fates keepes holy feasts
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               with swelling seas em- braced Light Cupids there do daunce and
               with pomp & pastime graced Their sōgs are al of ioy no signe
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               Venus sweetly singes with heauenly notes tun'd to sound of
               of sorrow there but all as starres glistring faire and
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               siluer strings,
               blith appeare.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               The Basse V.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
               
            
         
      
   