
      
         
            
            ¶ Camelles Reioindre, to Churchyarde.
            
               To Churchyard or Mānaring, or for lack of a name:
               To Dicar the dreamer, if you knowe the ſame.
            
            
               MAye a man be ſo bolde (an order to kepe:)
               To bid you good morow, now after your ſlepe?
               If I may be ſo ſaucy, and make no miſtaking:
               God ſpeede maſter Dreamer, yf you be wakynge.
               But Dreamer or Dicar, or as you ſaye Dauy:
               Whych ſhal I now cal you▪ as our Lorde ſaue ye?
               Three names are to many▪ for one man alone:He hathe .v. 
                        Dreamer.
                        Dicar.
                        Dauid.
                        Mannaring.
                        Churchyard.
                     
                  
               
               And two mo makes fyue, for faylyng of one.
               If you had twoo other▪ that men myght you ſeeke:
               Then had you a name, for eche daye in the weeke.
               But no man dothe doubte▪ that ſo ſundrye names:
               Shuld haue other loomyng, thē out of good frames.
               And therfore I thyncke, they come euery chone:
               Out of ſome olde houſe▪ tho the poſtes begone.
               Or els kept in memory, for that they were founde:
               In ſome old ſtocke, in ſome noble mans grounde.
               And ſo do remayne▪ for mynde of your aunceſtry:
               As Syb to Sybbel, ſibbes very properly.
               So Jermaines lyps ioynde, & ſo M. Churchyard:
               And Mannaryng met, both in an Orcharde.Aſke him where he named hym ſelf Lorde Mannarynge, and howe he vſed it.
               
               And Dauid the Dicar, came in wyth hys ſpade:
               And dolue vp the Dreamer, tyl the line was made.
               And thus percōſequēce▪ ſins your writing doth gre it:
               Youre name for my parte: Dauid Dreamer be it.
               And good M. dreamer, your reaſō long ſought for
               Hath combred your capax, I ſe very ſore.
               Snap of the caſe, and yong and whot bloude:
               Haue al to be fumed you, and moued your moode
               That daunger it were, in you of a feeuer:
               If heate and coller▪ ſhoulde cuple together.
               But thankes be to God, a vomet hath rydde:
               A culpin of collops, farre inwardly hydde.
               And now yt your reaſon, hath fair brought it fourth
               It is a fayre reaſon▪ and a reaſon well wourth.Parturiunt montes. Naſcetur ridiculus mus.
               
               And fyrſt you reply▪ to myne obieccion:
               Wyth wordes of pleaſure, as a man of correccion.
               Wherby you would ſeeme, a learned man of arte:
               And yet Maſter Mome, you are out of your parte.Churchards aunſware doth but rail.
               
               For as your aunſwere, doth but talke and tomble:
               So you anſwer not me, but rayle out and romble.
               And yet had you markt▪ my then to your when:
               I no more falted you, then I dyd other men.
               I meane mad raungers, that ſo raunge at large:
               To medle with matters, not ioynd to their charge.
               And ſuch men I bad, as then I bad you:
               To ſend ſuch whens home, theyr vycar vnto.
               And leaue dreaming dreames, to buſi mēs braines:
               Wyth nedeles matters, and as thankeles paynes.
               And thys lytle neded, to haue netled your noddye:
               If you were (as you wold be) ſom prety wiſe body.
               But you wyl choplogicke, and be Bee to buſſe:Churcharde will bee the buſſinge be.
               
               But good Maſter Buſſerd, be good yet to vs.
               And tel me in truth, and lye no whyt then:
               Haue not I touched, no parte of your when?
               If you ſtyl dreame not, as you do yet:
               I trowe I haue touched, your when euery whyt.
               I nede not to byd you, turne my text againe:
               But take your owne text, to aunſwer your brayne.
               I touch not one poynte, that you wrote you ſaye:His replica
                     
                        ••
                     on.
               
               And yet you cal me, a Daniell ſtrayghtway.
               Lo how theſe two now, agree in them ſelues:
               They both ſhame their maſter, theſe .ii. eluiſh elues.
               If you gyue me a name wythout an effect:
               your maſterſhyps brayne, is madly infect.
               And foule ouerſhot, to bryng two for wytneſſe:
               Whych are in thēſelues, cleane contraries I geſſe
               But if my fyrſt aunſwer▪ doo ſeeme ſuch a miſtery:
               That you ſee not your whē, ther anſwered alredye.
               Then to awake you, and rayſe you from ſlepe.
               Good Maſter Dreamer, marke thys & take kepe.
               your when hath in it, a meanyng of who ſay,Hys when.
               
               Whych ryghtly to meane, is thus ment I ſay:
               That whē thoſe things be, which theſe dais be not
               Then knit you your thē vp, in ſuch ſort as you wot
               But whome you accuſe▪ in whenning ſo large.
               I meane not to open, nor put to your charge.
               But way with your ſelf, and ſober your braines:
               And defend not a when, mighte put you to paines▪
               
               I coulde perchaunce, make your when larger.
               And ſerue it before you▪ as brode as a charger,
               And point you your when, by lyne and by Leuel.
               Againſte Jupiters ſeate, and Jupiters Counſell.
               But I liſt not ſo narow, to loke to your whanning
               Nor make to your whanning, ſo open a ſkanning
               You bid me not ſlaunder you, I ſlaunder you not.
               If your ſelfe hurte you▪ your owne is the ſpot.
               You aſcribe to me, the manners of Gnato.
               Full clarkelye applyed good maſter Thraſo.
               A tytle as meete, they ſaye that doo knowe me.
               As your title of dreame, to the matter of Dauye.
               But vices in ſtage plaies, whē theyr matter is gon
               They laughe oute the reſte, to the lookers on.
               And ſo wantynge matter, you brynge in my coate.
               In faythe maſter dreamer, I borowed it not.
               Tho I haue hearde, that good fellowes and ſo.
               Not you (goddes forbod) in borrowed geare go,Graculus ornatus eſt Plumis Pauonis
               
               But when euery foule, hathe puld home his fether
               The ſoule and the body▪ may then dwel to gether
               And make a right ſommer man, to let in the heate
               For clothes in whot wether, do but make mē ſweat
               Whiche you ſir perchaunce, er ſommer come out:
               Wyl vle for a medicine, in trauailinge aboute,
               And colloure the matter, wyth a title of ſeaſon:
               As doutles your maſterſhip, hath very good reaſō
               
               By which al yt know you, wil thinke you wel hable
               To thruſt a poore Camel, to lurke in ſome ſtable.
               And doubtles if dreaming, may eny thinge ſpede,
               I knowe Dauid dreamer, wyl do it in dede.
               But tho I haue hearde, a Lion oft rore,
               I neuer hearde aſſe, ſo rore oute before,
               With bitings & bridellings, and raining of necks
               O fine maſter aſſe, howe ſharpe be your checkes.Churchard is a fyne aſſe.
               
               You threaten to bitte me, to trim me and trick me:
               Wehe maſter aſſe, what, wyl you nedes kick me.
               Camelles and aſſes, be bothe mete for burden.
               Then gip fellowe aſſe, then ioſt fellowe lurden.
               No nerer my buttocke, ioſt iade are you winſyng?
               It is mery to ſee, maſter aſſe fal to minſing▪
               
               Did you neuer here tell of the aſſe trapt in golde?De Aſino aureo. The french almes, perchaunce hath altred him.
               
               Lo maſter aſenoll, lo do as you ſhulde.
               you ſaye I knowe you not, and yet as I trowe:
               you caſte your olde coat, a greate whyle a go.
               But if I miſtake you, for that a newe ſpringe,
               Hath wrought as a workmā, to geue you a new ſkī
               
               And that I may not, now know you by eare mark
               Then for a more knowledge▪ to know you in darkThe aſſe wolde haue a Bell to be knowen vp
               
               Tye a Bel at your tayle, to make ſome tinginge.
               And ther goes the aſſe (I ſhal ſay) by the ringing.
               But whether I knowe you, or els do not knowe:
               Thus muche I knowe▪ and am certaine I trowe:
               An aſſe bindes no camels, tho he bray nere ſo loud
               Robin hoode ſo ſhewed me, out of a cloude.Churchards Poetes. Robin hoode Sir Launcelot & Beuis. Qualia vis metere: talia graua ſere▪
                  
               
               And when aſſes forget, to know what they are,
               Sir Launcelot then biddes, to nip them more nar,
               And Beuis of Hampton, whoſe cleargy I knowe:
               Biddes me ſerue you▪ with the ſame ſede you ſow.
               And not to contende▪ for the aſſes ſhadowe.
               Whoſe ſhadowe I leaue you, and bodye alſo.
               And thus▪ M dreamer▪ your folli hath brought me
               To followe you further, then firſt I bethought me
               Beinge muche ſorye▪ my pen ſo to ſpende.
               To anſwere your follyes▪ and thus lo I ende.
            
            
               Domine ſaluum fac Regem & da pacem in diebus noſtris.
               Thomas Camell,
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Hary Sutton, dwellyng in Poules churchyard.
         
      
   