
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ The thre bokes of Cronicles, whyche Iohn Carion (a man ſyngularly well ſene in the Mathematycall ſciences) Gathered wyth great diligence of the beſte Authours that haue written in Hebrue, Greke or Latine. ✚
            
            Whervnto is added an Appendix, conteynyng all ſuch notable thynges as be mentyoned in Cronicles to haue chaunced in ſundry partes of the worlde from the yeare of Chriſt. 1532. To thys preſent yeare of. 1550.
            Gathered by Iohn Funcke of Nurenborough.
            ¶ Whyche was neuer afore prynted in Englyſh.
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Cum Priuilegio ad Imprimendum ſolum.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
            
               
                  •
               o the moſte excellente Prince, Edwarde the ſyxte, by the grace of God, Kyng of England, Fraunce and Irelande, Defendour of the fayth, and in earth, immediatly vnder God, ſupreme head of the church of Englande and Irelande: your graces humble and obeyſaunt ſubiect Gwalter Lynne wyſheth aboundance of all grace and Godlynes wyth a long and proſperous raygne.
            
               COnſyderyng that the knowledge of thynges paſt (moſt excellent prince) is moſt neceſſarye for ſuch as woulde paſſe ouer the tyme to come in a decent and Godly order, and that the greateſt nombre of youre Maieſties people doo not vnderſtande other languages, then theyr naturall tounge:
            I haue thought it my duetye (beynge one that ſpendeth all hys tyme in the ſettynge forth of bokes in the Englyſhe tounge) emongeſt all other to ſet forth thys ſhorte Cronicle.
            Wherein is briefly declared all that is nedefull to be knowen, concernyng thynges done in tymes

paſſed. The learned haue 
                  〈…〉
                the latyne tounge, and therfore my laboure maye ſeme the leſſe profytable vnto them. But yet yf my knowledge would haue ſerued me to haue tranſlated it as eloquētly as it is written in latyne: I doubt not but the learned alſo myghte haue founde ſome ſwetnes in my laboures. And not wythſtandynge my rudenes (moſt excellent Prynce) I truſt your maieſtie wyll (after your accuſtomed clemencye) accept my good wyll, whyche thynge I do not doubte ſhall encourage all faythfull englyſhe men to embrace my laboures and gather the fruytes of the ſame. To prayſe the worcke which being ſet forth to be reade of all men wyll prayſe it ſelf, were but a labour halfe loſte, for ſuch a thing nedeth no prayſe, but is ſo manifeſtly good that all men that reade it ſhalbe forced to prayſe it. Other prayſe therfore I wyll not geue it, but that it is a worcke worthy the name of ſo excellent a prynce as your mayeſtye is, and therfore worthy to be embraced of all your faythfull ſubiectes. Whyche thynge I moſt hartely wyſhe to come to paſſe to the glorye of God, your Maieſtyes honour, and the profyte of all your faythfull ſubiectes. Sobeit.
            
               Your Graces humble ſubiect and dayly Orator
Gwalter Lynne▪
               
            
         
         
            
            The 
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  •
               eadynge hyſtoryes.
            
               ALthough the readyng of Hyſtoryes be profytable to euery man in generall, for many cauſes as we hereafter ſhall declare: yet doth it chyefely belonge to kyngesHiſtories are bokes of kynges and prynces. and great men. And hyſtoryes maye worthely be called theyr bokes, becauſe that the knoweledge of them is profytable and neceſſary for all them, whyche are ordeyned to rule a commune welth. For not onely the Heythen hyſtoryes do make euery where much mentyon of prynces, but alſo the hyſtoryes of holy ſcrypture.
            For beſyde that, the holy ſcryptures do makeHiſtoryes of holy ſcrypture. mentyon of the wyll of God and of hys worde, and alſo of Chriſtes ſpyrytuall kyngdome, they teache alſo of polityke adminiſtration, and ſet forth manye notable examples, whych are neceſſary to be knowen in the gouernaunce of a commune weale, and by the whych, the myndes of Prynces may be ſturred and inflamed to the endeuour of ryght pryncely vertues.
            The hyſtoryes of the Heythen, declare of theHiſtoryes of the Heythen. ofſprynge and begynnynge of great realmes, and for what cauſes alteracyons and great chaunges do befall in realmes: beſides that, they do conteine alſo preceptes of vocatyens and powres, by the whych commune weales be ſtablyſhed and preſerued. And for thys cauſe chefely are hyſtoryes worthy to be called the bokes of great prynces and lordes.
            
               Seinge now, that it is neceſſary that euery man had nede of two maner of powers, namely, the politike or external, and beſide this by the faith and drede toward God, the examples of ether of them are propoundid and ſet before vs in the hiſtories. And that we maye firſt ſpeake of ciuil powres, Princes, and all ſuche as are ſet to gouerne greate thynges, muſt fyrſte and chefelye conſidre and beholde thoſeWhat muſte be marked in the exāmples of princes. examples and hiſtories, by the which they maye be admoniſhed howe they alſo maye faithfully behaue themſelues in gouerning a cōmune weale. In this muſt they ſet befor them the examples of good princes and kinges, and muſt learne of them by what meanes & wyth what vocacions chefely they haue vſed in gouernynge or rulinge empyres, that they haue had reſpect to nothinge ſaue only to the commune profyt, that they haue only conſidered and exerciſed iuſtice and equite, that they haue puniſhed greueouſly ſinne, that they haue not warred for euery cauſe, but that they haue oft kept peace by the polytyque forberynge of iniuryes. Alſo in theyr defence, they were of a doughtye and ſtronge courage, they haue vſed great gentylneſſe and loyalte towarde the goode and peaceable. Fynallye they haue endeuoured to enuyrone their realmes wyth ſtronge fortreſſes and greate powre, beſyedes the anauncemente of Godlyneſſe and goode maners.
            In the examples of tirauntes muſt they marke ye
               What is to marked in ye examples of tirauntes. contrarye, namelye, that theyr endes were full of miſerye, and by reaſon of theyr crueltye, per
                  •
               y
                  •
               yous: and ſoo there happened deadly alterations in

the commune weale. Of thys wyſe is it euident that Pharao peryſhed by reaſon of tyranny, and for lyke cauſe were the Romane kynges dryuen out. Oftymes alſo haue Princes vndone themſelues ech other by reaſon of pryde, enuy or hatred, the whych ſomtyme grew of a thynge of no value. Lyke as Pompeius had no cauſe to oppreſſe Iulius Ceſar, ſaue only enuy. The lawes of ye Graccyans amonge the Romanes do beare wytneſſe, that newe alteracyon or chaunge, doeth oft geue occaſyon of cruell warres. Nother hath the Turkyſh empyre hys ofſprynge by any other occaſyon, ſaue by hereſy and diſſentyon of learnynge and doctryne of the fayth. Daungerous conſpyracyons cauſe oft tymes that kyngdomes are ouerthrowen, the whyche wytneſſeth the example of the Athenians, whyche loſte theyr gouernaunce and goodes by reaſon of ſuch leagues as they had made. To obſerue and marke ſuch thynges in readyng of hyſtoryes, doth greatly auayle them that beare rule, that thereby they maye learne to beware in theyr gouernaunce, leſt any ſuche lyke do befall: For ſuch caſes do dayly befall. Yea though the perſons do ſomtyme chaunge in cōmune welthes, neuertheleſſe ſo much as is concernynge the equalytye of mattiers, the worlde is and alwayes abydeth lyke to hymſelfe.
            Wherfore Thucydydes (whych was excellentThe ſay ſayeng of Then cidides cōcerning hiſtories both in knowledge of Martyall affayres, and had himſelfe endured a great & contynuall warre, the which he him ſelfe wrote, wyth dyuers other thinges) ſaid moſt truely: Hiſtories is a treaſure which

neuer ought to be layde out of our handes: that w
                  •
                beinge holpen by the ſame, may the more commody ouſly in treat of the affaires that for the mooſt part in the commune welth. So noble a treaſure verely are hiſtories, by ye which that they that haue gouernaunce of the commune welche, are aduertyſed of ſundry publyke matters.
            Beſydes theſe alſo are ther founde in hiſtoryesHow hyſtoryes do profy
                     •
                  e prynate 
                     〈…〉
                  . ſuch examples, which do profet euery priuate perſon ſeuerally, ſuch as theſe be: The magiſtrate muſt be obeyed. They, which rebelled againſt the higher powers, were neuer vnpuniſhed, as Abſalon, Catilma, Brutus, Caſſius and ſuch like that were therfore puniſhed. Of faithfulneſſe of frendes, as Ionathas, which ſaued the life of Dauid. Of the puniſhment for aduoutry and ſuche like wicked dedes, as it appeareth by ye example of Dauid. What nedeth many wordes euen as in al ſciences are ſet forth examples to be folowed: ſo are in hiſtories ſet forth & painted examples of al kind of vertues. Yee and in examples and thinges cōmitted is more euidently ſene the worthineſſe of vertues, yea & alſo of what vnclenneſſe and diſhoneſty vices are, than in preceptes or doctrinees: Becauſe that examples being ſet before vs as images, do not only teache openly, but do alſo admoniſh, ſturre, and inflame the myndes yt are honeſtly brought vp, that they maye be kindled toward vertues and honeſty with a certain pleſur and loue. For who could be ſo cruel of minde, which ſhulde not be moued, yf he did reade ſome excellent and laudable dede, or an example of vengeaunces.
            I haue brefely ſhewed, how the examples of politike

vertues and ciuill cauſes muſt be obſerued inA Chriſtenman muſte ſearche the commaundementes of ſayth and feare out of hyſtoryes. readynge of hiſtories: Nowe doth it pertayne to a Chriſtenman, to whome godlyneſſe appertayneth that he maye knowe that out of hiſtoryes are to be gathered inſtructyons of fayth and feare of God. For theſe are the chefeſte vertues of Godlye men, that are allowed before God. And thoughe the hyſtoryes of the Gentyls do not teache vs that God careth for vs, or that God worketh wyth vs: a godlye harte neuertheleſſe ſhall marke thys, namelye, how commune welthes are kept and preſerued in the worlde from heauen, and that it is the workinge and dede of God, to reuenge violence and wronge, and that God doth oftentimes diſtribute hys excellente vertues amonge the Heythen. For princes can not kepe their kingdomes againſt Satan, without the ſingular benefite of god, & the aide or aſſiſtaūce of great vertues. And of this wiſe ſhal the mind of a godly man think by himſelf, that ſuch notable actes & puniſhmentes are the worck of god and ſhal by them learne to fear God, that is to ſaye, that tiraunces are greueouſly puniſhed, according to that ſentence: he that taketh the ſword, (that is, he that taketh vpon hym the authoryte of vengeaunce, without a commaūdement,) the ſame ſhal periſh with y• ſword. Contrary wiſe maie be ſene alſo that good princes are kept and preſerued of God: & the ſame haue the heithen perceued alſo, ye princes do reſt vpon the aid of the goddes. For Homer the poet ſayeth, that God holdeth for the hys ſhyide in battail, to defend princes. He faineth alſo that euerye prince is in ſauegard by the defence of his god,

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
as it appeareth that the goddeſſe Pallas was wyth Achilles in battayll. &c.
            Altheſe thinges are mooſt clerely expreſſed in y• hiſtories of the holy ſcripture, as in Abraham, Dauid, Ezechias and other kinges, whome God hath defended. And their examples are prepounded to euery prince, yt they may be aſſured that god doth of likewiſe defēde the good. For the hiſtories of holyThe diſtrēce of holy and proph
                     •••
                   hiſtories. men and Heithen men do differ in that, that in y• hiſtories of holy men are ſet forth and declared the witneſſes of Gods workes, the which alſo do not only treat of politike matters, but do chefely ſhadowe and declare vnto vs Gods kingdome, that God geueth his worde, that frely and of mercye he will ſaue: the which thing the hiſtories of the Gentiles can not ſpeake of.
            Therfore ought euery Chriſten man chefely to know the holy ſcripture, that out of them they mayWhat holy hiſtories do teache. learne the doctrine and confirmation of faith. Firſt how al thinges are created of God, how ſinne dyd beginne, that Chriſte hath ſet vp his kingdomes againſt ſinne, that he hath geuē his word, that Chriſte was promiſed, and that he is come to abandon ſinne and to ſaue vs. Item how God, whan he had geuen his word, hath alway preſerued and maintened Chriſtes kingdome, and that Chriſtes kingdome, that is the true beleuing, haue alway ben cō
               uerſaunt vnder the croſſe ſence the beginninge of y• worlde, and yet neuertheleſſe are ſaued, that Satan with the greateſt power of the world hath aſſaulted the word of God. Item that God hath wō
               derfully alway kept his promiſe, aboue the vnderſtandynge

and thought of mens wit or wiſedome. Item that God hath ſet before vs bothe the examples of his dredefull vengeaunce, and alſo of grace or fauour. Of this wiſe haue king Dauid and other gotten remiſſion and forgeueneſſe of ſinnes, that by theyr examples we may be comforted, and beleue that God wil forgeue. Nether is y• to be omitted, that God hath geuen vs al maner of prophecyes of exterior kingdomes, to ſtabliſh our mindes, that of the accompliſhment of their chaunce, we myghte haue wytneſſe, that our word is come of God, and that none other faith ſaueours is true. Item that we ſhuld be warned whan Chriſte muſte come, and whan the ende of the worlde is to be loked for. Itē for ſo muche as we knowe that all thynges ſpoken of in the prophetes are come to paſſe, that we may beleue, that thoſe ſhall happen alſo, the which holye ſcripture ſayeth ſhall befal.
            Moreouer to vnderſtande prophecyes arighte, it is greatlye neceſſary to knowe the order of kingdomes, the nombre of the yeares, and many other thynges, whyche in readynge of Heathen hyſtoryes do offer them ſelues: the knowledge whereof is chefelye neceſſarye for Chryſten men, that they may the better vnderſtande the propheties, and haue the better iudgment of them.
            Of all thys truely maye euery man iudge, how muche profyte is taken oute of the readynge of hyſtoryes, and the greate profyte or frute that commyth of them ought dylygently to ſteare and driue euery man to knowe them.
            
               
               After what order hyſtoryes muſt be comprehended and red.
               
                  HE that wyll reade hyſtoryes to profyt, the ſame muſt comprehende all the tymes ſence the foundacyon of the worlde into a certayne order. For there were ſome that diuyded the worlde therfore in ſeuen ages, and haue rekened them diuerſly: but thoſe, where they endeuour to ſett an order, they do nothynge but ſett all thynges wythout order. As for me, I wyll folow the renowmed ſayenge of Ely the prophet, whych hath excellently dyuyded the worldeEly hath dyuyded the wo
                        •
                     lde into 
                        〈…〉
                      ages. into thre ages wyth the whyche he ſheweth the greateſt chaunges of the worlde: alſo what tyme it behoued Chriſt to come, and how longe thys ſtate of the world ought to laſt, and thus it is.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           The ſayenge of Helias houſe.
                           
                              THe worlde ſhall ſtande ſyxe thouſand yeres and after ſhall it falle.
                           Two thouſande yeares wythout the Lawe.
                           Two thouſande yeares in the lawe.
                           Two thouſande yeares the tyme of Chriſt.
                           And yf theſe yeares be not accomplyſhed, oure ſynnes ſhall be the cauſe, whyche are greate and many.
                        
                     
                  
               
               That is to ſaye, the worlde ſhall ſtande two M. yeres without any preſcript admyniſtration, & certayn lawe of the word of God: but whan theſe be gone, there ſhalbe geuen the circumcyſyon and

lawe: beſydes thys ſhall a certayne polytique lawe and ſeruice of God be inſtitute out of Gods worde, and thys ſtate ſhall laſte two thouſande yeares. After thys ſhall Chriſt folowe, and the tyme of the goſpell ſhall lykewyſe ſtande aboute two thouſande yeares: but here ſhall ſome yeares want. For God ſhall wyth the hayſte of hys commynge preuent it, that the yeres of this age ſhal not be accompliſhed, the whiche Chriſte hymſelfe in the, xxiiii. chapiter of. S. Matthewe, ſayeth: Wythoute thoſe dayes had ben ſhortened, all fleſhe ſhulde not be ſaued.
               We ſhall in wrytynge of the hyſtorye vſe thys order,The fyrſt age. and diuide the boke in thre partes, whereof the fyrſt ſhal comprehende thoſe thinges, which are chaunced betwene the tymes of Adam and Abraham. For thoſe are the fyrſte thouſande yeares: Of theſe is not much written, but ſuche thynges as are mooſt worthy of memory, and of theſe times, there is no certainte, but of that which is found wrytten in the Byble.
               The nexte age of two thouſand yeares, ſhalbeThe ſecond age. counted from Abraham, vntill Chriſtis commyng: all though concerninge to the full numbre of the yeares, the tyme is not accomplyſhed. For as we haue ſayde before, God maketh hayſt to the latter day. As for thys age, is the propre and bery age of the worlde, in the which the mooſt myghtye kyngdomes and monarchies haue ſucceded ech other by a certayn order: nether hath the worlde euer ſo declared hys force and myght, as in this age. Wherfore we ſhall deuide thys tyme in foure monarchyes. For it ſemeth, that God wolde the worlde to be

maintened by a certaine gouernaunce in hys place, that a certen means of ſhame and honeſty might be conſeruid, and the wicked mighte be puniſhed, and for that cauſe hath he inſtitute Monarchies. Such Monarchies are kingdomes, where the chefe andWhat Monarchyes 
                        •••
                     , and of 
                        〈…〉
                     hat pupſ
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . vpper power of al thinges pertaineth to one alone for the conſeruation of commune peace and ryght. Such a monarchy was of ſo great puiſſaunce, that the exterior of foren kinges, could not withſtande or oppreſſe it. And by a certain ordinary ſucceſſionThere 
                        •
                     e only 
                        •
                     oure Monarchyes. were only four ſuch monarchies. The fyrſt was of the Aſſirians, y• ſecond of the Perſians, after them the Grekes, at the laſt y• Romanes. And to the honor of ſuch an empire or ſuperiorite, hath God exaltedThe honor of the Em
                     
                        ••
                     re remay
                     
                        〈…〉
                     h by the 
                        〈…〉
                     s. y• Germanes before other nations in theſe latter times. For though the Roman empire be ſome deal miniſhed now a daies:) for as it was prophecyed before it was y• pleaſure of god that y• monarchies ſhuld finally decay) neuertheleſſe the maieſty remaineth by the Romane empire, nether is ther any king, but he hath a reſpect towardes yt kingdome. Moreouer though we haue not alway alyke mighty Emperoures, neuertheleſſe God prouidinge ſo, there happeneth ſomtime an Emperour of ſuch power, yt the maieſty of the empire may be conſerued: and that to hold vp the religion and concorde of al natyons. The Germane princes, and chefely the electors ought to eſtime grearly this their honour, that they haue ſuch high autoritye cōmitted them of God, to preſerue religyon, iuſtice and commune peace. For verely, it is of great force that thys monarchy be preſerued, thoug it be not ſo very great. Therfore ought y• princes to beware, leſt ther ryſe

any ſedes of ſedition & diſcord among them, which might geue occaſion to cauſe this empire to decay. For whan this empire, wyich is the head of al good gouernaunce or adminiſtratiō in the worlde now aThe empyre muſt be ſaued and kept by all meanes. daies, ſhuld be diuided, pulled aſunder or waiſted, it could not be but that ther ſhuld folowe a perturbation of al degrees in euery part of Chriſtendom: the which is gretly to be doubted, without God do preuent ſuch miſery with his laſt cōming. For holy ſcripture doth cōforte vs, & teach openly, that after yt this Germaine empire ſhal decay & faile, yt latter day ſhal ſtraight waye folowe. This is ſufficient to be ſpoken of monarchies, leſt any man be ignoraunt that al hiſtories, and al thinges done in the world, muſt be referred to theſe monarchies. And beſides that y• obſeruing of the order doth ayde y• memory it doth alſo not a litle helpe thervnto, yt one may ſe how & for what cauſes kingdomes are chaunged: wherby is to be learned how al thoſe things are to be eſchued, which cōmunely bring chaūges of kingdomes. The laſt age frō y• natiuite of Chriſt vntyll the worldes ende, doth like wiſe contayne two M.The thyrd age. yeres, although we haue ſaid before, that the yeres of this age ſhulde not be whole, that the two thouſand yeres may be complete. This ſētence of Elias truely conteineth many notable doctrines, & is chefely to be conſidered therfore, becauſe that from the natiuite of Chriſte, it ſpeaketh alſo of that tyme, in the whiche the ende of al thinges is to be loked for, and therefore haue▪ I ſett it in the begynnynge of the boke, that it myghte be commytted to euery mans hearing. But howe that the Rhomane

monarchye dyd begynne after the incarna
                     •
                  yon of Chriſt, and how the ſucceſſion came to the Germanes, alſo how the Mahometyſh or Turkyſh empire beganne, and howe the Popyſhneſſe hath gotten encreaſe offoren power, all theſe thynges ſhall we ſhewe in thys thyrde parte. But thys alſo is chefely to be noted with diligence in readyng of hiſtories,The kyngdome of the worlde and Chriſtes Kyngdome▪
                   that God hath inſtitute two maner of kyngdomes: the one a worldly kingdome the other a kyngdome of Chriſt: and therefore it is neceſſary to marke here▪ howe that the churche hath begonne euen from the begynnynge of the worlde, and by whatt maner God hath alwayes kept her. Therfore that godly myndes maye haue a confyrmation of theyr fayth, we ſhall note by the ſtate the tyme of eche of the kingdomes, where and by whome the kyngdome of Chriſt was, and what ſtate it was in than: the knowledge of whiche thinge, bringeth no ſmall profite to godlye readers.
               
                  Adam is ſett in a Paradyſe of pleaſure, to whome is forbyden the tree of lyfe. Geneſis. ij.
                  
                  Adam and Heua are deceyued by the ſuttelty of the ſerpent. Thence comthe tranſgreſſyon of the commaundement, and Synne.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The firſte boke of the Cronicles, whych conteyneth the fyrſte two thouſande yeares, From Adam vntyll Abrahams tyme.
            
               HOly ſcrypture doeth teache vs,Adam and Heua. that God created heauen and earth, after that man, Adam and Heua, and ſat them in paradyſe, that is, that they beynge ſet oute of daunger of death and ſynne, mighte lyue in the earth happely: but when they forgat the commaundement of God geuen, they fell into the daunger of ſynne and death. But foraſmuch as all this is clearly written in the holy Bible, out of the whiche they oughte to be learned, it is invaine to ſpeake thereof here: it is ſufficient onelye to aduertiſh the reader, that the worlde ſtandeth by theſe beginninges, and that Adam and Heua are created of God, whyche are the ofſpringe of all mankinde.
            Moreouer, about the very time of creation, dydThe inſtitution of ciuill power and of all lawes. God inſtitute the ciuyll adminyſtratyon, when he gaue Adam power ouer all thoſe thynges, that are in the earth and ſea, that he ſhoulde vſe them, and ſhould ſett a good order in all thoſe thinges that are exteriour. That commaundemente of God is the ſpringe and beginninge of all lawes, and whatſoeuer ciuile ordinaunces there are, are begonne of it, the whiche are approued and alowed of God, by reaſon of this commaundemente geuen to Adam.

The churche hath her begynnynge here alſo: ForThe beginninge of the churche. the commaundemente, wherein they ſhoulde exercyſe theyr fayeth, and feare before God, was here geuen: but whan they began to ſynne, hath God diſcloſed the power of Sathan, and againſt it hath promyſed the Goſpell or glad tydynge of the womans ſede, that is of Chriſte, that Chriſte ſhoulde come, and wayſt Sathans kyngdome, and ſhoulde delyuer vs from ſynne and death into liberte.
            Thys was the fyrſt preachinge of the Goſpell, whiche beganne the churche and Chriſtus kyngdome.The fyrſte preaching of the Goſpell. For in the churche muſte not onely be preached the commaundementes of good workes, but alſo the forgeueneſſe of ſynnes by Chriſt: for thereby onelye are we reconciled to God, and endure agaynſt death and all maner of temtation, whan by fayth we take the promyſe of forgeueneſſe of ſynnes: And of thys wyſe toke Adam and Heua conſolacion out of the word that Chriſte was promyſed, and of theſe two perſons is the churche fyrſte begonnne. Beſyde thys was it neceſſary alſo, theyThe begynnyng of temporall afflic
                  
                     •
                  ions. ſhould ſuffer temporall afflictions: for they were dryuen out of paradyſe: that is, they were ſubiecte to death, and all maner of other myſeries, and ſo lyued theyr dayes in laboure and trauayl in that lande, which the Iewes poſſeſſed afterwarde. For it is written, that they were created by the cytye Damaſcus.
            
               Of Cain and Abel.
               
                  
                  SCrypture ſayth that Adam and Heua broughte forth children, and that Cain ſlewe hys brother Abel. And here begynneth the perſecution of the ſayntes of the wicked men, and is and example very dredefull. For thys manſlaughter happened for none other cauſe,Perſecution for the true gods ſeruice than for y• ſeruice of god, the which, whan it is done purely, Sathan can not abyde it: for the whyche cauſe he ſturreth Cain to ſlaye his brother, that the worde of God and ſyncere doctrine maye be quenched. And this dede ſheweth howe vehement is the ire of Sathan and rage: alſo what mannes fraylneſſe and blindneſſe is. There are by the waye rehearſed in this hiſtory weyghty and graue preachinges of the iudgement of Chriſt to come, of the dredefull vengeaunce for ſheddinge of bloude, the whiche to rehearſe here, were to longe.
               Cain after that he fled hys fathers ſight, he beganThe cytye Enoch. to buylde the citye called Enoch. Hys chyldren inuented all maner of handycraftes and ſciences. Finally for the manſlaughter was he puniſhed, for he dyed a lyke kynde of death.
            
            
               Of Seth.
               
                  AFter this was Seth boren to Adam. thys man beynge famous and renomed for his endeuour of honeſt and godlyneſſe enforced after Abel to auaunce and augment Gods kyngdome. Of this Seth were afterward engendred holy fathers, and the remnaunt of

thys kynred remayned: But the poſterytie of Cain was whole drowned in the floude. Ioſephus wytneſſethAdam and Seth finders of ſciences. that Adam and Seth made two tables, the one of braſſe, the other of ſtone, and that in them wer grauen the worde of God and propheſyes, by the whiche the worde of God was kepte. He wryteth moreouer, that they diuided the yeare into twelue monethes, and that they obſerued fyrſte the courſe of ſtarres and taught it. For it had not bene poſſible, that the minde of man coulde haue attayned to the ſearching of ſo high and wounderfull things, without God had opened them the knowledge of them. Wherfore to Adam and Seth we muſt aſcribe the word of god, the figures of the letters and the greateſt ſciences. Ther are alſo many witneſſes among the Grekes, that the writinge and all ſciences are come of the Iewes aunceters. For Herodotus writeth in his fyfte boke, that the Grekes haue receaued theyr ſciences and letters of the Phenices.
               The age of Adam was nyne hundreth and thirty yeares, and reached vntill the time of Noes father: but he dieth hundreth and. 26. yeares before Noe was borne. But in this tyme is written to be happened nothinge worthy of rehearſall, vntyll Noes tyme, ſaue only genealogy: that in the meane whyle we maye know ſurelye, of whom it behoued Chriſt to be borne. But neuertheleſſe by the waye maketh ſcripture mention of the death of Enoch,Enoch is an 
                        •••
                     mple of euerlaſtyng lyfe. that he be taken vp by God: the whiche dede God hath ſett before the worldes eyen, that it mighte know and beleue that there is immortalitie after thys lyfe, and that God ſhall iudge, and ſaue the

good truely, but puniſh the wycked.
            
            
               Of the Floud.
               
                  THE ſcripture maketh mention that the worlde was puniſhed of God, and ioyneth therto the occaſions thereof, namely that it begann to peier: and amonge the chefeſt of the euels are named the deſpiſynge of God, aduoutry and tyranny, in the which is vſed all maner of wylfulneſſe and wantonneſſe. For of this wyſe ſaieth the text: The childeren of holy men beganne to becomeGene. 
                        ••
                     
                     ▪
                   tyrauntes vpon earth, by the which is ſignified, that whan Gods worde was deſpiſed and hys worſhyp, they liued vnmaneredly and an vnbrydeled lyfe, they oppreſſed the weake and poore, accordinge to their pleaſure, and vſed wylfulneſſe of rulinge as they would. For cauſe of theſe thinges did God threaten the worlde wyth the floude: and before the ſame ſhould come, he wylled Noe to preach it an hundreth yeare before, that ſome beynge conuerted, mighte be ſaued.
               Whan Noe was ſixe hundreth yeare olde, came the floude, and accordinge to Goddes commaundement, went he into the arcke with his wyfe and his thre ſonnes Sem, Cham and Iaphet, taking with them their wiues, and was ſaued. The reſidue of men and beaſtes hath the floude taken awaye and deſtroied. And are from the creation of the world, vntyll the tyme of the floude, thouſand, ſixe hundreth and ſixe and fiftye yeares.
            
            
               
               Of the tyme after the Floude.
               
                  WHan Noe had now ben aboue an half yeare in the arcke, and that the floud mynyſhed, the arcke reſted vpon the hygheſthyl of Armenia: and after the yeres ende, whan the earth beganne to drye, Noe was commaunded of God to leaue the arcke, wherein he had now ben a whole yeare. Than dyd God ordeine as it were a new worlde agayne. For fyrſt he gaue hys worde, by the which he promyſed not to drowne the world agayne, and in token of certayntye, he gaue the Raynebowe, which ſhulde admonyſh vs of the promyſe made: and of thys wyſe hath he ſet before vs tokens of beneuolence and mercy, to exercyſe the fayth: He hath alſo than permitted the lybertye to
                     
                        •••
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     e of fleſh 
                        •••
                     ſt 
                        〈…〉
                     ed cate fleſh, the which the holy fathers before the floude dyd neuer vſe. Beſyde thys gaue God a new commaundement of outwarde adminiſtration, and commaunded more playnly that manſleyers ſhoulde lykewyſe be putt to death, by thoſe,The example of vengeaunce. that be lawfullye permittted, that is by the officers. Of thys wyſe than is a new ſtate of the worlde ordeyned agayn.
               All theſe thynges haue I brefely recyted, ſpecially that euery man may call to minde, and waye by hymſelfe, how great Gods wrath is for ſynne. For God would cauſe the worlde to be more ware by this example, becauſe he wyliudge and auenge: it is alſo ſhewed that God ſhall once iudge the whole worlde, for he will not that ſynne be vnreuenged

or vnpuniſhed. Some haue written, that ſeynge the worlde hath fyrſt be drowned with waters, it maye be gathered by naturall reaſons, that it ſhall after thys be conſumed wyth fyre. Yea and this is worthy to be marked, that they whiche belong to god, are kept of him, though they be few, abiect and deſpiſed.
               This is alſo to be noted in thys place, that the ciuyll power is ordeined, and puniſhment for manſlaughter. For that is nerehande the heade of all ciuill exerciſe of iuſtice, after the which all other caſes and treſpaces ought to be iudged.
            
            
               Of the Tower of Babel.
               
                  AFter the floude whan mankynd was now encreaſed, the Tower of Babel, and the citie of Babilon was begon to be buylded by the Chaldees, that they might begyn a kyngdome ther, and ſubdue to them other nations or people. But thys enterpryſe hath God ouerthrowen: For whan they all vſed before one language, it befell that after the commune ſpeche was chaunged,The proprietye of ſpeches. they ſpake one one maner of language, another another, ſo that they vnderſtode not eche other. Wherfore there was a diuiſion of ſpeches, and the worke it ſelfe was left vnperfect. The poſterite of Noe than was ſtrowed here and ther in the world, the which the fygure folowynge ſhall declare.
               Sem the eldeſt ſonne of Noe, of whoſe kynredSem. is Chriſte, hath wyth hys childeren poſſeſſed

that parte of Siria, whiche is towarde the Eaſte. For of Aram hys ſonne, came the Syrians: of Aſſur, came the Aſſyrians: of Arphaxat, came the Chaldeis: of Elam are the Perſyans ſpronge.Cham.
               
               Cham the ſeconde ſonne of Noe, hath optayned that countrye, whyche goeth towarde the South. Of Canaan, are come the Chananeis: of Mizraim, came the Egyptyans: of Chus, came the Ethiopians: of Saba, came the Arabians.Iaphet.
               
               Iaphet the longeſt ſonne of Noe went to the North and Weſt, and this is the father of vs all, and therefore his name founde by the Poetes, whych haue called him Iapetus. Of his ſonne Iauan or Iaon are the Grekes, whiche are called Iones:Iones are 
                        •••
                      fyrſte 
                        〈…〉
                     s. for they be the firſt Grekes. And the voice Ianan or Iaon, is no doute the ſame, whom the Latines do call Ianus.Wherfore Ianus hath 
                        〈…〉
                     lages.
               
               They vſed to paynte him with a double vyſage, before and behinde, becauſe that of hym be ſprouge both the nations, the Grekes and the Latines: and as oft they would begynne any thinge, they worſhipped him wyth a ſpngulare honour, by the whyche they wytneſſed that they countedThe Macedones. Iaon their father. Iaons ſonne was Cethim, of whome are called the Macedones, and thys confyrmeth the fyrſte boke of the Machabees, and the worde Machetim ſygnifyeth in Hebrue of Cethim, of the whiche is ſpronge the worde Macedo. For Stephanus the expounder of Greke wordes, wryteth that the auncient dyd ſaye Macetis.
               
                  Iaon had manye chyldren, Eliſa and Dodanim, of the whiche haue their beginninge the AeolesAeoles. or Hellas and the Dodoneies: all theſe are the firſt of the Grekes. Of Tarſis Iaons ſonne, is Tharſus in Cilicia called.
               Iaphet had other chylderen alſo, Gomer, Magog, Tyras and Meſech. Of Gomer are the Cunerij or Cimbry as witneſſeth Euſebius. Of Aſcanes Gomers ſonne came the Tuiſcones, that is, the Germanes. Of Magog are ſpronge theThe Germanes. Scythe, and of them are begonne the Turkes. Of Thyras come the Thraces. I haue brefelye ſhewed what part of the worlde eche of Noes chylderen hath poſſeſſed, the which doeth greately auayle better to vnderſtande many hyſtoryes.
            
            
               Of the fyrſt Monarchye.
               
                  THat it maye be vnderſtande how the worke of God muſte be knowen and honored in thoſe thynges that the magiſtrate or ſuperiorite doeth: we haue aduertyſed before in the preface, that God willed to entertayne the world by foure Monarchies, to the intent that policye, iuſtice and correction mighte be entertayned amonge men: for this cauſe are many thyngesThe foure Monarchies are propoſed to Daniel. Dan. ij. ſpoken here and there of theſe Monarchies in holy ſcripture God hath propoſed them to Daniel two maner of waye: Firſt vnder the figure of a greate man, whoſe heade was golden, the breſt of ſyluer, the belly of copper, the legges of yron, the fete partely

of earth, partly alſo of yron. And leſt we ſhould not know, that then finally ſhal y• end of the world be, there is added, how that the ſtone Chriſt doeth breake his fete, that the man hymſelf do fall, and ſo do the world ceaſe.
               Daniel hym ſelf hath expounded this viſion of the foure monarchies. For he ſaieth that the head doth ſignifie the firſt kyngdome, that is, the Monarchie of the Aſſyrians. The breſt of ſiluer, ſygnifieth the kyngdome of the Perſians. The belly of copper, ſignifyeth the kyngdome of the Grekes. The legges of yron ſignifyeth the kyngdome of the Romanes. The fete of yron and earth, ſignifyeth the ſtate of the Empire of Rome at this tyme, namely that now a dayes is much leſſe and weaker, than it was wont to be.
               The foure beaſtes ſhewed vnto Daniel do alſo pretende theſe foure kyngdomes. The Lyoneſſe, ſygnifyeth the force of the Aſſyrians. The Beere ſygnifieth the Perſian empyre. The Leoparde ſignifieth Alexander. By the fourth beaſt are the Romanes ſignifyed. And there is added that beſyde the Romaine empyre there ſhall ryſe an other empyre full of cruelneſſe, and ſuche one that ſhall make a new lawe agaynſt Gods worde: And that is the Mahometiſh and Turkyſh empyre now a dayes. God wyll haue vs ſo truely warned, that as we knowe the hiſtories of al the worlde, we ſhould conſyder that the tyme of finiſhyng be not farre of, and that of this wiſe we ſhould haue wherewith to confirme our faith.
               
                  In the Bible it is manifeſt, that the fyrſt kingdome beganne by Nemrod amonge the Babylonians, and the ſcripture calleth him a valyaunt hunter before God, that is, a mighty prynce, which wyth force ſubdued men to obeye. And he isNemroth Gods hunter. called a hunter before the Lorde, as Gods hunter: whereby it is ſignifyed, that the ciuill power is ordeyned of God, as a vengeaunce, and that ſhe be a miniſter of God. Wherfore the fyrſt Monarchye beganne by the Chaldeis, as wytneſſeth alſo Xenophon, and the ſucceſſors of Cham raygned fyrſt, of the whyche dyd Nemroth yſſue. For though Noe had curſed hys ſonne Cham, yet neuertheleſſe dyd God in the meane whyle by a wonderfull deſtiny differ the vengeaunce and promiſe. Howbeit the kyngdome remayned not by the poſteryte of Nembroth. For there roſe a newe kyngdome by the Aſſirians thorough Aſſur, by whome alſo the citye Niniue was buylded. Oute of Niniue went the Aſſyryans, and ſubdued the cytye of Babylon, the whyche Diodorus Siculus doeth wryte: and by thys occaſyon is the Monarchye tranſlated from the Chaldeis to the Aſſyrians.
               Strabo and other dyd make mention of the cityeNiniue. Niniue, that it lyeth in Aſſyria: whereby it may eaſely be gathered, that Niniue and Babilon haue ben two ſeuerall cityes, not one of dyuerſe names. Many kynges are there rehcarſed in thys Monarchye: Howbeit ſeyng ther is nothing notably written of their dedes, it maketh no greate matter to

rehearſe their names onely: onely this behoueth it the reader to remembre, that this Monarchye beganne neare hande before the ende of the fyrſte two thouſande yeares, whiche were accompliſhed before that tyme, whan Abraham was fyftye yeare olde.
               Hetherto haue wee treated of the fyrſte age of the worlde, in the which may be ſene of the creation of the worlde, of the churche, and ciuyll adminiſtration ordeined of God, beſyde that of other wonderfull dedes ſhewed in the world by god. ButThe churche from Noe 
                        ••••
                      Abrahām the churche, came from Noe the patriarche, vntyll Abraham, whiche was eyght and fyftye yeare olde, whan Noe dyed. In the meane whyle whan this Monarchye beganne, vngodlyneſſe and idolatry beganne to ryſe here and there in Babylon, and the true worde of God was in the meane tyme quenched.
            
         
         
            
            ſeconde boke of the Cronicles, of the foure Monarchies, the whiche lykewyſe comprehendeth two thouſand yeares.
            
               FOraſmuche it is before all thynges neceſſary and profytable in hiſtories, to conſider the times and order of thinges that are happened: I willed to parte this Cronicle in moſt greate and certaine nombers, whiche maye eaſely be perceaued and kepte in memorye, in the whiche neuertheleſſe mighte be comprehended the moſt and principall chaunges of the worlde. After than that we haue finiſhed the firſt age, we ſhall vndertake to ſpeake of the two thouſande yeares folowynge, in the whiche alſo appeared the greateſt power of the worlde, and the moſt greateſt monarchies haue folowed in order.
            
               Of the fyrſt Monarchye of the Aſſyrians. Ninus kyng of the Aſſyryans.
               
                  WE haue admoniſhed afore that the Chaldeis haue raigned firſt by the Babylonians, but they remayned not longe in the empyre, but that the Aſſirians the neighboures of the Chalde is obtained the kingedome and they beginne the hiſtory of kyng Ninus: which beynge become moſte puyſſaunt in the Eaſte at theZoroaſtres fynder of witchcrafte▪
                   laſt alſo had warre wyth Zoroaſtres kynge of the Bactrians. It is ſayde that thys Soroaſtres fand

fyrſt wytchcraft, and to haue taughte the courſe of heauen, and the ſtarres wyth great diligence. As the warre was fynyſhed that Ninus had wyth Soroaſtres, he dyed, leauynge hys heyre a yonge ſonne.
               
                  Of quene Semiramis.
                  
                     SEmiramis the mother of the chylde, ruled her ſelfe after the kynges deceaſe. For the feared in ſo newe a kyngdome, and where they were not all yet of their fre wyll ſubdued, that for the chyldes youth, the people mighte haue ſpeded to rebellion, and leſt ſhe ſhoulde be deſpyſed, by reaſon of woman kynde: wherfore ſhe vſed mans garment, and fayned her to be the kynges chyld. She was doughtyeSemiramis vſed mans garment. and excellent in princely affayres, and augmented the borders of the dominion wyth vanquiſhynge countries, and makynge fortreſſes. She raygned happely and with great prayſe xlij. yeres. She fortifyed Babilon with coſtly buyldynges, dyches and walles enuyroned about it. Whan the mother was deade, Ninias the ſonne raygned wyth good quietneſſe: and of this wyſe was the ſuperiorite of the worlde and Monarchye by the Aſſyrians a great ſeaſon, But, foraſmuche as there is not much written of the kynges folowyng, I will paſſe ouer the rehearſall of their names, becauſe the good reader can not well kepe them in mynde. Whoſo wyll knowe them, may ſeke them by manye other wryters.
                  
                     Neuertheleſſe it is no doute, but that manys and ſundry chaunges are befallen in this Monarchye, the which maye eaſely be gathered out of the Bible, which wytneſſeth, that the Aſſyrians poſſeſſed Babylon, longe before the tyme of Cyrus, howbeit they were two kyngdomes: the one of the Niniuites, the other of the Babylonians. But for what cauſes or whan theſe mutations were, that is vtterly vnknowen. Herodotus wryteth that the Aſſyrians kept this Monarchy fyue hundreth yeares, and that after that longe tyme there was no certayne or fyrme kyngdome, but that the Medes vſed a proper kyngdome, and likewyſe the Chaldees by the Babylonians, and the Aſſyrians had their kyngdome at Niniue, and amonge the kynges had nowe the one ouerhande, nowe the other. Finally the Medes beynge become myghty, drewe the vpper Monarchy to them, takynge alſo the citye Babilon. Theſe thinges ſeme mooſt lykeſt, to the whiche agre thoſe that are written of Sardanapalus, not only by Metaſthenes, but alſo Bion, of whom Agathias maketh mention.
               
               
                  Of Sardanapalus.
                  
                     WE muſt ſpeake a lytle of Sardanapalus, how he was depryued of his kingdome, & that afterward the kingdomes were diuided. Whan God wyll punyſhe the worlde, he geueth it lecherous prynces. By the hiſtoriesA lecherous prynce. it is manifeſt, that Sardanapalus nothinge

regardyng the gouernaunce of the kyngdom, ga
                        •
                     
                     Sardanapalus wantonneſſe. hym ſelfe only to pleaſures, in ſo much alſo, that 
                        ••
                      vſed to paynte and coloure him ſelfe, to make h
                        ••
                      beawty, and to clothe him with womens garment. It is ſaid that he ſat in the middes of diſhoneſt women, and vſed all maner of vnclenneſſe. How ſhuld not ſuch an empyre haue had a pyteful ende? Whan nowe the Medes & Babilonians were fallen from hym and rebell, and that he had loſte the battayll againſt hys enemies, neither coulde no where merchandes be more ſalfe, he ſet ye caſtell at Babylon inThe death of Sardanapalus fyre, and burnt him ſelfe in it. Howbeit (as wryteth Duris) he ſent afore his thre ſonnes to Niniue: and hereby it commeth, that after the deceaſe of Sardanapalus, the kyngdomes are diuided. Bolochus reigned at Babilon, whiche fell from Sardanapalus with Arbace. Arbaces kepte the kingdome of the Medes. The poſteryte of the Aſſirians dured a certaine ſpace of yeares by them of Niniue. Many yeares haue theſe thre kyngdomes foughte and ſtryuen for the Monarchye.
               
               
                  Of Egypte.
                  
                     WE haue ſuffycyentlye ſpoken of thys fyrſt Monarchye, but howe many yeares there be, vntyll the tyme of the ſecond monarchye, ſhall we note hereafter. At thys tyme muſt wee ſhewe brefely a few thynges of other kyngdomes, whych are come vp beſyde this monarchy. For theThe kyngdome of the Egyptians. very large empyre of Egypt was in his floure, that whiche was gouerned by the poſteryte of Cham:

which was gouerned by the poſterite of Cham: but as concernyng his power, it was leſſe then the monarchye: as now a dayes the kyngdome of Fraunce is myghty in dede, but yet it is leſſe then the Empyre, concernynge ther power, or the dignite of his maieſtie.
               
               
                  Of Abraham and the ſpyrituall kyngdom.
                  
                     LEſt we be ignorant in what ſtate the word of God and the church was, we muſt alſo ſpeake of the ſpirituall kyngdome. AbrahamAbraham was in Ninus tyme. was in the time of kyng Ninus. For when he was old about fifty yeares, the firſt twoo thouſande yeares had an ende, and the kyngdome of the Aſſyrians was already begonne. And that more is, whan now the true worſhyp of God and his worde began to come out of vſe in the kyngdome of Babylon, There wēt out of Chaldea into Meſopotamia,Thare. with his two ſonnes Abraham and Loth, leſt he alſo myght bee ſtayned with the wickednes of the ſuperſtition that the Chaldees vſed. This idolatryVr of the Chald. es. doth the ſcripture cal Vt Chaldeorum that is, the Chalde fyre. For when in the ſacrifice of the true Godly (the fyre fallyng downe from heauen) kyndled the oblacions: the wicked folowyng their examples, kyndled a fyre, and ſo ſet vp a newe Gods ſeruice, that with ſuche a worke, they might ſerue God, without the expreſſed worde of God, & without the knowledge of the promyſe of Chriſt to come. Hereafter alſo in the hiſtories is the ſame fyre called Orimaſda,
                     
that is, holyfyre, the whiche kynges cauſed alſo to be caried before them vpon a horſe. The firſt occaſiō
                     The firſt occaſion of ydolatry. of ydolatry among men began by this fyre, before Images were vſed. But leſt y• worde of god ſhould vtterly be quenched, God renewed afreſhe the promyſe of Chriſte, and added a new ceremony too the worde, the which as a token, ſhould kepe the remē
                     braunce of the worde in mens myndes. For true doctrine is lightely put out of mens mindes, without it bee beaten into the peoples myndes by outward tokens and ceremonies. To that was Abraham choſen of God, the whiche when he was olde thre ſcore and fyften yeares, he was commaunded of God to go into Chalde, leauyng Meſopotamia, where a new promiſe was made hym, that the ſede of Abraham ſhould poſſeſſe the lande of Canaan, &The true wīg of the promiſe made to Abraham. ſhould beare rule in it: and alſo that the ſede of Abraham, namely Chriſt ſhould come, by the whiche God woulde bleſſe all nacions, that is, that GOD would be appeaſed by that ſede and takyng awaye the power of ſynne and death, geue lyfe euerlaſting To this promyſe hath God added circumciſion, theCircumciſiō is the token of promiſe. whiche ſhould be a ſygne of promiſſion, and a prouocation to beleue. And therfore remayned alway afterward in the churche or congregacion the worde and ſpirituall kyngdome of Chriſt among a certain people, that is, in Abrahams poſterite, amonge the whiche it was neceſſary to haue bene alway ſome, whiche were true beleuers and Godly. As for the whole hiſtory of Abraham, is fully written in the holy Bible. In this place ſuffiſeth it to ſhewe in what tyme Abraham hath bene, and what chaunges

                     
                        〈…〉
                     gion are happened in the meane ſeaſon. But the promyſe was other whyles repeted to Abraham. As for the circumciſion was geuen hymWhen the circūciſion was geuen. when he was foure ſcore yeare olde and nyne, thee yeare from the creation of the world two thouſand and ſeuen and fourty, ſome count it to our Iubile two thouſande and fifty.
                  Abraham had of Agar his handmayden a ſomeAgar. Iſmael. called Iſmael: the ſame began to growe in ſtrength and puiſaunce by the Arabians, and the Agareny in Arabia beare the name of this Agar, of whome we ſhall ſpeake afterwarde.
               
               
                  Of the deſtruction of Sodome.
                  
                     THE foure ſcore and nyntenth yeare of Abrahams age hath GOD for thee abhominable euyll dedes, horrible and vncomly lecheryes, deſtroied fyue cities: Sodome and Gomorre, and the other cities lyeng therby, burnyng them with fyre from heauen. The place where the cityes were is become a great maraſſe, whoſe length and bredth conteyneth the ſpace of certain miles: euen yet at this time as though it were ful of pitche doth burne with cōtinual ſmoke and vapor for a token of Gods indignacion & vengeaunce for ſo greate ſynnes. This happened the thre hundreth and fourſcore & eleuenth yere after the floude, after that Noe was deade the fourtieth and one. Of thys wyſe hath God other whyles wytneſſed to the worlde, that he wyll bee auenged and iudge ſynners.
               
               
                  
                  Of Iſaac.
                  
                     AFter this was a ſonne borne to Abraham, of his wyfe Sa
                        •
                     a, called Iſaac,Iſaac a fygure of 
                           〈…〉
                        ſt. of whoſe ſede is Chriſt. For he dyd beare hys fygure, whan God commaunded that he ſhould be offered of hys father: wherby is ſignifyed, that Chriſt ſhould bee a ſacrifice, with the whiche ſhould ſynne and death be diſamilled. And by this example it is ſignifyed agayne, that God wyl forgeue ſynnes, rayſe the dead, and geue euerlaſtyng lyfe to the beleuyng.
                  Iſaac had two ſonnes Iacob and Eſau. Of EſauIacob Eſau. The Edo
                        
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        fore 
                           〈…〉
                         was called Edom 
                           〈…〉
                         was called Iſrael haue the Edomites in Arabia their begynnyng: for Eſau was called Edom, that is, reddiſh, becauſe he ſolde his brother y• ryght of y• fyrſt borne, the which God hath bleſſed, for a meſſe of potage y• was ſomwhat reed, deſpyſynge the bleſſyng of God and his benefyte for loue of hys belly. But Iacob was ſurnamed Iſrael, that is, prince of God, of whom the people Iſrael haue their of ſprynge. But for al theeſe thynges muſt the Bible be loked.
               
               
                  Of Ioſeph Iacobs ſonne.
                  
                     BEcauſe Ioſeph is reherſed amōg the chiefe and mooſt wyſeſt gouernours, we do worthely here make mencion of hym. For he taught the Egyptians both the religion and ciuyll maners: and aboue all is it worthy to bee marked, that the man whiche was endued with holyneſſe &Ioſeph a man ſage and holy. the holy ghoſt, had ſet vp a very hard and rigorous maner of rulyng, and that where the whole kyngdome

of Egypte was large and wyde, he ioyned them together as members of one body: ſo that we may learne thereby, that rygour is moſt nedeful to entertayn the people in there office or duety, & alowed of God. For the common people is commonly deſtroied by lybertie. But for becauſe he came into Egypte by the conſpiration of his brethren, that he was ſolde of them, and alſo what chaunce he had in Egypte, of all this is there fully wrytten in the Bible. For by thys wonderfull occaſion God wylled hym to come into Egypt, that in the ſame kyngdom alſo myght be taught the true worſhyp of God and that the promyſe of Chriſtes commyng myght bee made manifeſt. For God would euer haue his word preached euen in the greateſt kyngdomes: alſo that by this occaſion God might fede Iacob and his poſterite in the tyme of derth.
               
               
                  Of Moſes, and of the punyſhment of the tyraunt Pharao.
                  
                     ALthough God had promyſed to the poſteriteThe cauſe of affliction. of Abraham the poſſeſſion of the lande of Canaan, yet hath he differred the promyſe a long ſeaſon, that through the word they myght haue in the meane while wherewith to exercyſe their faith: ye he ſuffred them before to be ſore puniſhed in Egypte. For as ſaith the booke of Geneſis, Iacob and his chyldren fled into Egypte in the tyme of derth, where they dwelled a longe ſeaſon, the which we ſhal note hereafter. But when Pharao ouercharged the people without meaſure and remiſſion, and vſed tyranny, inſom uche that he comaunded alſo to ſley in contynently all the mankynde

that were borne: God ſent Moſes, to leade the people of Iſrael out of Egypte, the whiche after many wonders, brought the people to the redd ſee. Pharao folowed them wyth great force, truſtynge to optayne hys mynde that he myght ſ
                        •
                     aye them: for ther was no place to eſcape, ſeynge of the one ſyde they were cloſed in wyth hylles, of the other ſyde wyth the ſee, and Pharao the tyraūte laye vponAn example of grace and goodnes. them behynde. But here declared God, that whan extreme neceſſite lieth vpon them that be hys, he is nere by them, and heareth them. For the water went back, and gaue the people waye a great ſpace, that they myght paſſe wythout any daunger: but the tyraunt folowed into the ſea vnhappely, which was drowned wyth the water that returned into hys fyrſt courſe, and wyth hym the choyſe of the people of Egipt. Here thē hath God ſett forth againAn example of vengeaūce a new example to the worlde, that he wil iudge and be reuenged of wycked tyrauntes, and all that deſpyſe godlyneſſe.
               
               
                  What time the ten commaundementes were geuen.
                  THe fyftyeth daye after that the chylderenWhen y• law was geuen. of Iſrael were gone out of Egypt, whan they iournyed through thee deſert by mount Suiai, were the ten commaundementes geuen, wyth incredible magnificence and maieſtye, namely wyth a voice out of heauen full of feare and drede. Thys worke of God is ſuch, as none higher dyd euer happen to men at any tyme in the worlde. For the

doctrine of the ten cōmaundementes conteygneth the ſūme of the godly wyſedome, and in a brefeneſſe doth comprehende all maner of lawes and conſtitutions that can be any wher. Therfore is it nedefull to know the tyme in the whiche ſuche a wayghtye lawe was geuen of God, namely the yeare from the creation of the worlde two thouſande, foure hundreth and foure and fyfty. Seuen hundreth, foure ſcore and eyghtene after the floude.
                  S. Paull ſayeth, that the lawe was geuen afterThe time frō the promyſe made to Abraham, vntill y• goyng out of Egipt. that the promyſe was made, foure hundreth and thyrtye yeares. For the ſame is the nombre of the yeres ſence the tyme, whan Abraham beynge olde thre ſcore and fyftene yeare receaued the promyſe vntyll that tyme whan Iſrael was brought out of Egypte by Moſes. And theſam that is redde in the xii. chapiter of Exodus that Iſrael dwelt in Egypt foure hundreth and thyrty yeares, the ſame maye not be rekened from the tyme that Iacob wēt into Egypt, ſeynge Ioſeph was than in his floure. And that thys was not the nombre after Iacob only, maye eaſely be gathered here by, that Caath went wyth Iacob. And he begat a ſonne A
                        •
                     ram, whoſe ſonne was Moſes. Now can it not be that betwene Caath and Moſes haue ben foure hundreth yeares. Wherfore the foure hundreth and thyrty yeares, whereof ther is redde in Exodus, are to be coū
                     ted from that tyme, whē Abraham came fyrſt from Meſopotamia into Canaan, and was afterwarde conuerſant hymſelfe in Egypte. And that the mynde of S. Paul may the better be vnderſtād, I ſhall gather the nōber of y• yeares ſōwhat more dilgētly

There are fyue and twenty yeares vntyl the byrth of Iſaac, from the tyme that Abraham came fyrſt in to the lande of Canaan, what tyme he hymſelf was thre ſcore and fyftene yeare olde.
                  Iſaac begat Iacob when he was thre ſcore yeare olde.
                  The foure ſcore and tenth yeare of Iacob was Ioſeph borne.
                  Ioſeph lyued an hundreth and ten yeares.
                  After Ioſeph vntyll Moſes was borne are thre ſcore and fyue yeares. And this nombre of the yeares doth Philo note alſo.
                  Moſes was foure ſcore yeare old when he ledde the people out of Egypt. If theſe yeres be numbred together, they mount to the nombre of foure hundreth and thyrty. So muche tyme was there ſence that the promyſe was firſte made to Abraham, vntyll that tyme that Iſraell came out of Egypte, and after that was the lawe geuen. Now hath God geuen this Iſraelityſh people a certayn policy and a ſeuerall kyngdome, in the whiche can nothyng bee requyred, that pertayneth to Gods ſeruice, to the preſthode, alſo to the ciuyll iuſtice: that finally there myght be a certayn people, whiche ſhould haue the worde of God, and of the whiche Chriſt ſhoulde fynally be borne. By this people than hath alwaye bene the churche, Gods kyngdome and hystrue word, vntil that chriſt had ſuffered: the which muſt be marked, ſo that no man bee ignoraunt that ſhe churche hath alway bene, and that God hath ſence the begynnyng of the worlde reueled his worde, and to haue kept it alway with vs.
               
               
                  
                  Of the princes or rulers of Iſraell.
                  
                     FRom the departyng out of Egypte vntyll the begynnyng of Sauls kyngdome were thre hundreth thre ſcore and nyne, yeres the which the texte of the ſyxt chapiter of y• third boke of kynges doth declare. Now had this people after Moſes deceaſē princes, whiche partely were created by the aucthorite of wyſe men, partely were by a ſingular callynge rayſed vp of God, by the whiche are notable thynges done: and of this wyſe declared God, that he is faithfully with them that be his, and to defend them, though they ſeme ſomtyme to be toſſed with the waues of peryls. Theſe princes by an Hebrue coſtume werePrinces we
                           •
                         called Iudges. called Iudges. Howbeit for ſomuche as their hiſtories be written in the Bible, we ſhall only rehearſe their names, that the order of thee Cronicles, and courſe of the yeares maye the better be obſerued.
                  
                     Moſes raygned .xl. yeares.
                     Ioſue xxvij.
                     Othoniel xl.
                     Ehud lxxx.
                     Barach with Debora the prophetiſſe xl.
                     Gedeon xl.
                     Abimelech iii. The ſame committed murther vpon his owne brother, and gotte thee kyngdome too hymſelfe by ſedition: and therfore was he not long after vnpunyſhed hymſelfe alſo.
                     Chola xxiij.
                     
                        Iair xxi
                           •
                        .
                     Iephthe vi.
                     Abeſſan vij.
                     Abdon viij.
                     Sampſon xx.
                  
                  After theſe gouerned y• people theſe hygh prieſtes:

                        Ely xl. yeares.
                        Samuel xl. yeares.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The Kynges of Iſrael.
                  
                     THe iudges of the people of Iſrael wer not ſuccedyng by enheritaunce: therefore was not the gouernaunce among that people firme or certayne, ſaue only with the hygh prieſtes: but God ordeined ſomtyme wyſe princes amonge thē in ſteade of a garniſon, & thoſe rayſed God now here now there. But the people euell cōtented with this incertaintie of gouernaunce, required of Samuel the hygh prieſt too haue a certayne kyng, the whiche might gouerne the kyngdom. Samuel willyng to do nothyng raſhly, aſked counſayl of God. god ſhewed that he was very wroth with that wilfulneſſe of the people demaundyng a newe kyng & commaunding ye people to bee greuouſly punyſhed therfore. Neuertheleſſe God dyd in the meane ſeaſonThe inſtitution of kyngdomes and kyn
                           •
                        e
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        e of 
                           •••
                        . graunt to the makyng of the kyng and inſtitutyng and continuance of a kyngdome. The power of the kyngdom, and adminiſtration of it, is confirmed here with wordes of no ſmall importaunce: the whiche muſt chefely be conſydered.
                  Moreouer it is to bee marked, that God is not

dyſpleaſed becauſe he doth myſprayſe the gouernaunce of a kyng (for he doth manifeſtly cōfirme it) but hee is diſpleaſed with thee peoples deſyre of newfanglineſſe in chaunging that commune welth,The chaungynges and renewynges of kyngdōs diſpleaſeth God. which he him ſelfe had inſtituted. For God will not ſuffre the chaunge of the kyngdomes, whiche are ordeined by hym. Alſo are we admoniſhed by thys example, that we eſchue any mutacion at all. In this hiſtorie are there many other notable commaundementes, the whiche for ſhortneſſe, I muſtThe confirmacion of ciuyll gouernaunce. ouerpaſſe. This one thyng wyll I only reherſe, that the ciuill gouernaunce, the aucthorite of princes and kynges is here cōfirmed of God, when he ſpeaketh of the ryght and duetie of a kyng.
                  Saul reigned fourty yere, and was deſtroied forSaul. his vngodlyneſſe, & all his kynred was deſtroted.
                  Dauid reigned forty yeare, and God puniſhedDauid. hym for aduoutry committed, and by ſedition was he dryuen out of hys kyngdom by his owne ſonne Abſalon: But God reſtored him into the kyngdom, and punyſhed the ſedition greuouſly. Abſalon died a ſtraunge death.
                  Salomon was forty yeres kynge, but after hisSalmon. deceaſe, was the kyngdom deuided in ſundery partes for the aduoutry of Dauid.
               
               
                  Of the Kynges of Iuda, of Salomons linage and kynred.
                  
                     ROboam kynge raygned ſeuenten yeres.Roboam. And when hee woulde not obey thee Counſayll of the elders, in minyſhynge the charges and exactions of the kyngdome, he cauſed wyth hys rygorouſneſſe, that a

chaunge of the kyngdome is caſued. For he 
                        •••
                     owedThe occaſiō of the kyngdome of Samaria. the counſaill of younge men, nother wolde releaſe ought according to right. Wherfore deciuered from him the mooſt part of the kyngdom, and dyd begynne a new kyngdome in Samaria, the whiche was the occaſion of many greate battayls on both partes. As for the poſteritie of Dauid, retained the kyngdome in Iuda, and the tribe of Beniamin, folowed that kyng.
                  Abia reigned thre yeare, and in battayll vanquiſhedAbia. the kyng of the ten tribes in Iſrael.
                  Aſa reigned fourtene yeare. The ſame obtainedAſa toke away the wicked Gods 
                           〈…〉
                        . great praiſe, becauſe he rooted out the wicked worſhyp of God, which was inſtitute againſt the worde of God: in ſo muche, that he fauoured not his owne mother in this behalfe: for ſhe alſo folowed a ſundery worſhip of God. For this cauſe gaue him God good fortune agaynſt the Arabians, the whiche he vanquiſhed in battayll. At the laſt was he puniſhed alſo of God, for a certayn conſpiration that he had made, leauyng the truſt in God.
               
               
                  The mydde or half part of the worldes age.
                  
                     ABout the twelft yere of this kyng Aſaes raigne, are accomplyſhed there thouſand yeares of the worlde, that is, the mydde or half part of all the worldes age, accordyng to Elias ſaynge, the whiche we haue noted in the beginnyng of the boke. Henceforeward may be marked, that in cōtinently after happened mooſt greateſt and ſodayn chaunges in all kyngdomes, that there dyd aryſe battayles and man ſlaughter, for the laſt tyme of the worlde dyd drawe on.
                  
                     Thys is alſo to be noted, that the publike wellThe Iewes are elder. the Iewes are elder than of the Grekes and Romanes: wherby it maye eaſely be gathered, that all other nacions haue their ſpring of the Iewes auncetry, and that the eldeſt doctrine, yea euen Gods word hath ben by the Iewes fathers or auncetres.
                  Ioſaphat raygned fyue and twenty yeares:Ioſaphat a defender of the religion. he is alowed for hys endeuour of religion, and that he hath exerciſed all kinglye duetyes wyth great diligence. And for that cauſe dyd god▪ geue hym excellent victories. Elias the prophet was in his tyme, which was taken vp quieke into heauen: & ſoElyas was in the mydle age of the worlde. rayſeth God a prophet, euen in the myddes of the worldes age, no leſſe of famous doctrine then miracles, that the word and promiſe of Chriſt might be ſometyme renewed. The reſt than of the thre M. yeares of the worlde, began vnder thys Elias. After Elias, ſucceded Eliſeus the prophet. As for theſe two prophetes, how they haue reproued theEliſeus. wycked ſeruice of God, and what miracles they haue done, is ſufficiently treated in the Bible.
                  Ioram reigned eight yeares: he commaundedIoram a ſetter vp of new Idolatry. to kyll his brethren euen the eldeſt, & was a beginner of a new Idolatry, wherfore he was alſo worthely puniſhed of God: he dyed vanquiſhed of the Philiſtenes. the which caryed away his wiues and chylderen, ſaue Ochoſias, which was the yongeſt.
                  Ochoſias raigned only one yeare, and accordyngeOchoſyas. as his father dyd, he permitted the falſe ſeruice of God to be ſet vp, wherfore he was ſlayne. But whan his mother Athalia ſaw that her ſonneAthalia. was dead, ſhe cauſed to be ſlayn all them that were

a lyue of the kynges bloud, & of this wyſe was the kyngdome tranſlated from Salomons poſterite: that hereby we maye learne how rygorouſly GodExample of 
                           •
                        e
                           •
                        geaunce. doth puniſh ſynne. Before all thinges muſt princes conſider and marke this, that God doeth rout out the kynred of great princes becauſe of wickednes.
                  Athalia the mother of Ochoſias kept the kyngdome with violence, and vſed ſeuē yeares great tyranny. At the laſt ſhe was worthely puniſhed, when through the commaundement of the high prieſt ſhe was ſlayn.
               
               
                  Of Nathan and his poſteritie.
                  
                     IN the reherſall of y• fathers, of the which Chriſt is borne, hath Luke the euangeliſt eſt out Salomon. For Salomons poſte rite was deſtroied: neuertheles Dauids poſteritie ſucceded in the kyngdome, accordyng toNathan Dauids ſonne. the promiſe of God. Dauid had alſo a ſonne Nathā of whom Luke maketh mēcion. Of his kynred wer theſe kynges of Iuda folowyng, namely.
                  Ioas reigned fourty yeres: the ſame was of notableIoas. Ioiada. godlineſſe, ſo long as Ioiada y• high prieſt liued, whom he obeyed: afterward fell he to vngodlineſſe and Idolatry, and cauſed zachary the prophete theZacharias the prophete. ſonne of Ioiada to bee ſlayne before the temple, of whom Chriſt doth alſo make mencion in the .xxiij. chapiter of Mathew. Wherfore God willed to punyſh hym by the Syrians, and finally was he ſlayn by his owne ſeruauntes.
                  Amaſias was kyng nyne and twenty yeares:Amaſias 
                           •
                        uſi 
                           ••
                         godlineſſe. this alſo was conuerſant in Godlyneſſe at the fyrſte, and herkened to the prophetes: whereby he

dyd luckely vanquyſhe thorough God the Id
                        •
                     
                     means. But heyng after become haut and preſumptuous, he made war of pure wilfulneſſe and with out conſtraynt, in the whiche he was taken and fynally dyed.
                  Ozias raygned twoo and fyfty yeares, the ſameOzias which alſo is called Azarias. was alſo called Azarias. The ſame was at the fyrſt alſo Godly, and ouercame the Philiſthines. Afterwarde whan he woulde hymſelfe offre in the temple agaynſt the ordinaunce of God, he was ſtrykenOzias. Amos. Micheas. Ionas. with leproſy. In his tyme lyued Oſeas, Amos and Micheas, whiche prophecied agaynſte either kynges of Samaria and Iuda. Ionas was 
                        •
                     lſo at this tyme, whiche was ſent to preache to the kynge of the Aſſirians.
                  Ioatham reygned lykewyſe ſyxten yeares: theſameIoatham. was Godly, & fought luckely againſt Ammon.
                  Achas reygned lykewyſe ſyxten yeares: hee ſetAchas. vp falſe worſhipping of god & of ouer great ſuperſtition and peruerſe opinion of godlineſſe, he buylded euery where throughout al the lande chappels and altars: wherfore God ſuffered hym and all his royalme to be greuouſly punyſhed and ſpoyled.
                  Ezechias reigned nyne and twenty yeares: HewasEzechias 
                           •
                         godly kyng. a Godly kynge, he reſtored Gods worſhyp, auoidyng Idolatry, he gaue the prieſtes their tenthes agayne. And becauſe theſe are true feates of good princes, therfore hath God geuen hym noble victories. For when the kynge of the Aſſyrians beſyeged Hieruſalē he called vpon God for aide, & the citie was deliuered of the ſyege, by the angel ſlaingEſaye. the enemies. Eſaye the prophete was in the time of

this kynge in great worſhyp, by whome the kynge was inſtructed in ſuche thinges as pertayne to the feare of God. But in the ſyxte yeare of Ezechias,The wayſtynge of Samaria. gat the king of the Aſſyrians the citye of Samaria, and led awaye the ten tribes of Iſrael in bondage. The mooſt parte of thys were the people of God, that were fallen from Iuda, and had ſet vp a propre
                        
                           •
                        he waſting of Samaria. kyngdome. But whan the kynges of Samaria were afrayed leſt the people ſhoulde fall agayne to the kyngdome of Iuda, the which was ordeined of God, yf they ſhuld ſomtyme reſorte to Hieruſalem feaſtly, to do theyr ſacrifyce, and to heare the word of God, accordinge to the ordinaunce of the lawe: they ſet vp a certayne peculiar or propre Gods ſeruice, a propre doctrine, and a ſacrifice agaynſt Gods worde: and ſo haue they abuſed all thinges againſt the worde of God vnder pretence of Gods name, to entertayne the priuate power of their kyngdome.
                  Agaynſte this worſhip of God are ſometyme ſent prophetes, to the ſauegarde and conſeruation of many: in the meane ſeaſon haue the mighty with alThe 
                           〈…〉
                         a w
                           ••
                         
                        
                           ••
                        d worſhip 
                           〈…〉
                        th not 
                           〈…〉
                        ſhed. The example of the feare of God. ſtubbernes kept their falſe gods ſeruice. Wherfore, God hath greuouſly puniſhed theſe kinges wyth warres and vproures, neither laſted the raigne of this empyre longe by any kyndred, in ſo much alſo, that at the laſt God ſuffred the kynges and people to be led away. Duely oughte this example make vs afrayde, that we learne to feare God: For if god ſpared not the poſterite of Abraham, vnto the which happened ſo manifeſt promiſes and ſo great, but hath ſodenlye ouerthrowen theyr kingedome,

and caſt them out: who is ſo ſure minded, which can beleue that we ſhall eſcape fre? But in myne opiniō
                     Samaria i
                           •
                         a figure of the church of the Eaſt. that part of Samaria▪ ſemeth to beare the figure of the churche of the Eaſt and of the Grekes: for lyke as Iſrael caried away by the Aſſyrians into Samaria, came neuer agayne: euen ſo alſo the churche or congregacion of the Eaſt is vtterly deſtroied by the Saracens and Turkes. And as it happened to the tribe of Iuda afterwarde: I feare me leſt it chaunce lykewyſe alſo to the Weſt parte. It is to be feared truely that God ſhal handle vs more rygorouſly, becauſe of the greatneſſe of our myſdedes. Houbeit God woulde in the meane ſeaſon bleſſe the ſede of Abraham before all natiōs. Wherfore ought the godly reader conſider this example by hymſelfe, and pray God, that he wyll chaſten vs with mercy, and not to caſt vs vtterly away. This kyngdom dured only two hundreth and foure and fourty yeares. That tyme verely was very ſhorte, ſpecially ſeyng thys people had ſoo excellent promiſes, euen of outwarde goodes alſo, and in the meane ſeaſon had they warre alſo and vproures. So litle doth God ſuffre the wicked ſeruice of God vnpuniſhed. The waſtyng of the kyngdom of Samaria was done the thre thouſande, two hundreth and fourtieth yere after the creation of the world. Manaſſe the ſonne of Ezechias ſucceded his fatherManaſſe a wicked kyng in the kyngdom of Iuda, and reigned fyue and fifty yeres. The ſame reſtored the falſe Gods ſeruice, & for falſe zele of godlineſſe, he burned in ſacrifice his own childrē. He perſecuted the prophetes. Eſay y•
                     The death of Eſaye. moſt holy prophet hath he cauſed to be cut aſunder

with a ſawe and ſlayne: at the laſt was he taken o
                        •
                      his enemies and caryed awaye. Howbeit whan he knowledged his treſpaſſe, and called hartyly vpon the Lorde, he was taken frely to mercye, and GodManaſſe an example of 
                           ••
                        pe
                           •
                        te
                           •
                        s. hath ſet him for an example to ſynners, that they doute not, but that God ſhall haue mercy, and aſſwage hys wrath & vengeaunce, if they turne from their wyckedneſſe. Amon raigned two yeare: heAmon. was a wycked kynge, wherefore he dyed with the ſwearde of hys ſeruauntes.
                  Ioſias raigned thyrty & one yere: he toke awayIoſias. the wicked worſhip of God. He ouerthrew the chappels and Idols: he cōmaunded to burne the bones of falſe prophetes. In his tyme were the bokes ofThe bokes of Moſes 
                           •••
                         founde. Moſes found again, which had many yeres be loſt. That truely is a notable example, that wickedneſſe & mens traditions doth grow ſo excedingly & preuayle, that holy ſcripture is ſo greatly deſpyſed, y• euen the very bokes be loſt. But God ſo prouiding & for ſeynge, ſhe is neuertheleſſe at the laſt reſtored and brought to lyght. This hiſtory no doute dothThe figure of pure doctryne before the worldes 
                           〈…〉
                        de▪
                      ſhewe the figure of the laſt times in the church, to y• which the true and ſincere knowledge of the word ſhalbe opened, euen before the ende of the worlde. But though Ioſias was a verye godly kynge, yet wanted not he finally his errour. For whan he had now liued in good peace a great whyle, & had done many noble actes, beyng waxen hardy, he thought he might haue no miſfortune by reaſon of his godlyneſſe. Wherfore he warred vpon the kyng of the Egiptians, the whiche neuertheleſſe demaunded condicions of peace. But becauſe he toke that warr by truſt of mans power, he dyed of a gre
                        ••
                      wounde

that he had gotten in y• battayll. Ioachas raignedIoachas. thre monethes: and was caried awaye into Egipt.
                  Ioakim raigned two yeares. In his time inuadedIoakim. Nabuchodonoſor. Daniel Nabuchodonoſor kyng of Babylon all Iewry, whoſe tributary he became: many men were led away, among the which was alſo Dauiel yet yonge. Afterward whan Ioakim kepte not the bonde or treaty, Nabuchodonoſor came againe, and takyng Ioakim, cauſed him to be ſlayne at Hieruſalem, & his body to be caſt amongs y• other dead carcaſes, without the citie, according to y• propheſye of Ieremy which propheſyed that he ſhuld be buried as an aſſe. Ioachim or Ieconias was kyng thre monethes:Ioachim 
                           ••
                         Ieconias Nabuchodonoſor about this tyme beynge come agayn, beſeged the city: Ieconias yelded him ſelfe frely through the counſel of Ieremy the prophet, vnto whom God had reueled, that Hieruſalē ſhuld be deſtroyed, & the people caried away: howbeit he ſhuld not wholy be deſtroied, but y• he ſhulde once come agayn, & Hieruſalem ſhuld be buylded agayn. Ieconias was kept in Babilō by god, becauſe he had obeied y• voice of the prophet, the which we ſhall note hereafter. The beſt of the people were led in captiuite at Babilon with▪ Ieconias, and alſo all the mooſt coſtlye veſſels and ornamentes that were in the temple at Hieruſalem. SedechiasSedechias. raygned eleuen yeres: he fell from the kyng of Babilon, whome he wolde not geue tribute: for which cauſe Nabuchodonoſor came again & beſieged the citie. And though Ieremy counſeled hym, that he ſhuld yelde him ſelf, (for it were ſo foreſeen of god, y• the people▪ ſhuld be led away, and Iuda punyſhed)

ye
                        •
                      would not he obey, 
                        •
                     oldened and truſtynge too Gods promyſe, that the people of Iuda ſhould not periſhe. This did Sedechias boaſte, and the hygh prieſts did interpretate the promyſe of God peruerfly. For God could neuertheleſſe ſaue his people, though he dyd ſuffre them to bee caried awaye and to be puniſhed a certain ſpace. And thus was Ieremias prophecy deſpyſed, ſpecially becauſe it was ſo long differed, nother did it ſo come to paſſe. Beſide this had the king of Babylon bene now thre times in Iewry, & yet had not profited in beſieging the citie of Hieruſalē. Moreouer it was now y• eleuenth yeare, in the which many were fled out of the cytie, the toune yet ſaued. Theſe thinges were the cauſe, that after mās iudgement they ſtifly truſted, that nothyng leſſe ſhoulde be, then that general deſtruction, which Ieremy had prophecied. Alſo wasAn example of greate hū
                        ger. the citie euery where fortified with fortreſſes, againſt the power of the enemies. But Nabuchodonoſor deſtroyed them wyth hunger for whan he beſyeged the citie a yeare and an halfe, it is ſaied that there was ſuche hunger, that many did eate theirAn example of mens ſtony hertes. owne children. So ſtony hart
                        •
                     ed is mans nature in her purpoſe that where ſhe was cōſtrained with ſo great neceſſitie, yet refuſeth ſhe to come and take ſuccoure and conſolacion of God. For if they had yelded themſelues after the prophetes counſayll, though the banyſhement had bene harde to them, yet myght they haue had peace at the leaſt wayeThe death of Sedechias. with the aliens. Finally when Sedechias toke the flyght, he was taken, & after that ſawe he his chyldren ſlayne in his preſence: but his iyes were put

out, the citie of Ieruſalem was deſtroied, the temple that God cauſed to be buylded, was burnt, the beſt of the people of the Iewes, was caried awaye to Babylon into bondage, this example ought earneſtly admonyſhe vs, that God wyl not ſpare other kyngdomes and princes, but that he wyll greueouſly punyſhe ſynne, ſeynge he hath vſed ſo greate rigour agaynſt this kyngdome, the whiche he hym ſelfe dyd ſet vp, for the ſcripture witneſſeth that God hath punyſhed Iuda, with innumerable kyndes of puniſhmentes for his ſynnes: and added thooſe ſynnes whiche were the chefeſt ſynnes, namely, deſpyſyng of Gods worde, the wicked worſhyp of God, tyranny agaynſt the true preachers of Gods worde and prophetes.
                  The deſtruction of the citye happened the threThe deſtruction of Ieruſalem. thouſand thre hundreth and thre ſcore and therten yeare ſence the creation of the worlde.
                  The yeares From Dauid vntyll this ſpoylynge of the citie Ieruſalem are fiue hundreth and ſixten.
                  Hytherto remayned the kyngly name by the poſteritie of Dauid, amongeſt the whiche were many notable and renowmed kynges, as the lyke in none other kyngdome. For that kyngdome of Iuda had God ſpecially created, and gouerned it: but becauſe they were not without ſynne, therfore were theyThe kyngdome of Iuda. punyſhed of God, and the kyngdome was chaunged. For the kyngdome of Iuda was kept in captiuite in Babylon thre ſcore and ten yeares: howbeit in the meane ſeaſon dyd God declare hymſelfe ſo, that it myght bee perceaued that hee cared for hys people and churche, and that he neuer would forſake

her. For he ſent notable prophetes, as Daniel amongeſt the Babilonians, whiche conuerted alſoNabuchodonoſor was conuerted of Daniel. Nabuchodonoſor ye kyng. For whan he was punyſhed by Gods iudgement for his vngodlyneſſe, and was become madde & woodde, ſo that he differred nothinge from a beaſt, Daniel prayed God for him, and he was reſtored: afterward comminge to hys ryght mynde agayn from hys wyckedneſſe, he renounced hys Idolatry, and as he was taughte of Daniell, he toke vpon him Gods true ſeruice.
                  After Nabuchodonoſor, raygned his ſonne Euilmerodach.Euilmerodach The ſame commaunded to entreate Iechonias the kyng honeſtlye, and accordinge to hys kyngly dignitye, the which by the cōmaundemente of Ieremy the prophete, yeldynge him ſelfe frely, went alſo in exyle. And after this wiſe dyd god fortunate this kyng, which beleued the wordes of the prophete: though he was in daunger for a ſeaſon. Of this wyſe verelye was Dauids kynred ſaued from deſtruction by God, through gods prouidence the which we ſhall declare at large hereafter.
                  After Euilmer odach ſucceded Balthaſar in theBalthaſar kingdome. The ſame was a deſpiſer of godlineſſe & Gods word, he reſtored of a new the old & abrogate Idolatry of the Chaldeis: he vſed the veſſels that were caried from the temple of Ieruſalē at his bankettes: he mocked the God of the Iewes, and for a reproche, he cauſed to be ſonge, that the God of the Chaldeis was a true God, & greater than the God of the Iewes. But what happened. Theſe blaſphemousBlaſphemyes are not vnpuniſhed. voices brought the deſtruccion of the whole kyngdome. For ther was clerely ſene a hande that

wrote vpon the wall, that Balthaſar ſhould peryſh with all his kingdome. The ſame happened the very ſame night: for the Medes and Perſians fell ſodenly vpon the Babylonians, and gat the kyngedome, and killed the kynge Balthaſar. This example witneſſeth alſo that the blaſphemies agaynſte God, remayne not vnreuenged.
                  Now hath the tyme of the firſt monarchy an ende,The ende of the fyrſt monarchye. vntyllthe Perſes and kynge Cirus. Betwene the byrth of Abraham and kyng Cirus are a thouſand, foure hundreth and four ſcor and fyften yeares, in the which was y• monarchy firſt by the Chaldeis, after that by the Aſſyrians. But whan it beganne to be alienated, now preuailed the Aſſyrians than the Babilonians, vntill the Medes and Perſes dyd growe, and finally gat Cyrus Babylon, recouering the Monarchy and makyng all one.
                  It is chefely to be conſydered, that the whole kingdome of the Iewes is cōprehended vnder the tyme of this fyrſt monarchy: where by it is euidentThe Iewes are moſt auncient. that the Iewes are moſt auncient people, and that only their hiſtories are certayn and true of the firſt kyngdomes of the worlde.
               
               
                  Of the Grekes.
                  
                     WE ſhall now note brefely the ſtate of the Grekes, in the tymes of the fyrſt Monarchye: where by it ſhalbe eaſelyThe hiſtoryes of the Iewes are elder than of the Grekes. gathered, that the hiſtories of the Iewes are much more auncient, than the Grekes: for all their hiſtories are written after the fyrſt Monarchy. Nether can the

Grekes rehearſe any thyng certayue or of longer ſpace, than that theyr Olympiades do ſhewe. But the Olympiades began the eyght & thertyth yere of kynge Oſias. And if that be diligently rekened,Whan the Olympyades 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      it ſhall appeare to be about two hundreth yeare before the monarchye of the Peries. But becauſe of vnlearned readers I ſhall leaue the Olympiades, and ſhewe brefely what hath happened by the Grekes in the tyme of the fyrſte monarchye.
                  The country of Grece had no certayne kyng,The country 
                           〈…〉
                        . as other nacions, but there were in it partly many prynces, partly alſo mighty cityes, & ſundry greate chaunges happened with the princes. For the cityes encreaſyng in puyſſaunce, coulde not well ſuffre Princes, as we haue ſene in Italy in oure dayes, and as I ſhall afterward ſet ſome examples, which are profytable to know, and haue true wytneſſe of hyſtoryes. For there are fewe hiſtoryes withe the Grekes before the battayl of Troye.
               
               
                  Of the battayl of Troye.
                  
                     THE battayll of Troie happened before the tyme of Dauid, the whiche maye be proued by the wytneſſe of Virgil. For he ſayeth that the kyngdome of Alban, dured thre hundreth yeares. Of thys wyſe ſayeth he of that kingdome of Alban. Thre hundreth yeares wholy, ſhall be the raygne vndoutedly. Before the ende of thys raygne beganne Rome to be buylded, the which we ſhall declare afterward. And if ye reken backward the nomber of the yeres, ye ſhal find that from the tyme of the buylding of Rome, vntyl the begynnynge of Salo mons kyngdome, are thre

C. and thre yeares. And it is euident that the battaill of Troie was not long before. Some hiſtory wryters do differ here, whiche ſaye that thys battayl was of more antique, but I coulde proue the contrary by many argumentes, the whiche I doo now paſſe ouer, becauſe of brefeneſſe. Forſoth thys one thyng is worthy to be marked, that the occaſyon of the Troian battayll is ſpronge of adultery.The occaſpon of the battayl of Troie was aduoutry. For Paris the ſonne of the Troian kyng, led away Helena the wyfe of Menelaus prince of Grece, the hefe of the Grekes and the cytezens takyng this 
                        〈…〉
                      diſpleaſure, making a conſpiracy, went to Troie, 
                        〈…〉
                     nd beſyegyng it ten whole yeares, at the laſt they 
                        〈…〉
                     anne the caſtel Ilium and the cytye Troye, and 
                        〈…〉
                     ayeng kyng Priamus, the kyngdome of Troye 
                        〈…〉
                     as wholy quenceed. From Troye ſayled EneasEneas. 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     to Italy, in ye which he poſſeſſed that part, which 
                        〈…〉
                     as called Latium. He beganne here a new kingdome,Latium. Aſcanius whiche alſo was called. Iulus. and buylded for hys ſonne Aſcanius, whych was alſo called Iulus the citye Alba, in the which 
                        〈…〉
                     he poſteryte of Eneas raigned, vntyll the tyme 
                        〈…〉
                     hat Rome was buylded. In the battayll of Troie 
                        〈…〉
                     ere many doughty and renoumed princes, whoſe 
                        〈…〉
                     ames maye be ſought other wayes. Out of Theſ
                     
                        •
                     aliaAchilles. Hector. was there Achilles, of whom Hector the moſt 
                        〈…〉
                     aliaunt capitaine of the Troianes was ſlayne: 
                        〈…〉
                     nd Achilles him ſelfe at the laſt was ſlayne alſo by 
                        〈…〉
                     yle. For the Troianes had maryed to hym a doughter of Priamus, and as he ſatt knelinge in hys prayer before the altare in the temple, he was ſtrycken through wyth a dart of Parys by a decepte.
               
               
                  
                  Of the battayl of Thebe.
                  
                     NOt long before the battayll of Troie, ther was another of Thebe much more cruel.The occaſyon of the battaill of Thebes. For ſeynge the kyngdome of Thebe was fallen of right by inheritaunce to the two brethren Ethrocles and Polinices, they agreed together vpon this condition, that they ſhuld raigne euery one a yere one after y• other. Howbeit whan Ethrocles had receaued the kingdome, he woulde raigne continually contrary to the appointement.Ethrocles. Polynices. Wherfore hys brother Polynices beyng conſtrayned, fled to Adraſtus king of the Argies, the which as he had geuen him in mariage his doughter, heAdraſtus. woulde ſet him into the kingdome againe by force, but Adraſtus was ſlayne before Thebe with other princes. Ethrocles and Polinices brethren, meting together by chaunce in battayll were ſlayne wyth woundinge eche other. The diſcorde of the bretheren was the cauſe of thys great and dolefull ſlaughter of the brethren. Nother was the warre yet fynyſhed: for other princes beſeged the cytye agayne afterward with a mighty power, and gettinge it, dyd at the laſt ouerthrowe it.
               
               
                  Of Hercules.
                  
                     ALytle before thys tyme, that is, ſhortey before Saul was made kynge by the Iewes, lyued Hercules in Grece, whichHercules of Tyrinthus. before other princes is chiefely prayſed for hys noble vertues. His elders were Amphytryo and Alcmena boren of the cytye Tyrinthus, whych lyeth not farre from Argis. But AmphytrioTyrynthus
                     
fled to Thebe, becauſe that in a diſcorde betwene hys brother and hym, he ſlewe hym: and for thys cauſe fortuned Hercules to be borne at Thebe, and here he ſhewed the fyrſt profe of his power.Minya. For whan they of Minya a toune in Theſſalia, (which at that tyme were of renoumed puyſſance, and raygned in the cytye Orchomenus,) aſſaulted the towne of Thebe, Hercules defended it, driuing the enemies of from it, and toke the citye Orchomenus,Orchonemenus. the dominion whereof began than to fayle. This citye was moſt ryche, whoſe greate prayſes are in Homers worckes, for her plentyfulneſſe. This victory gat Hercules firſt a great name, in ſo much that afterwarde other prynces of Grece cameThe dedes of Hercules. frely to him: therfore was he euery where a maker of peace, he ayded princes and cities, he reuenged and chaſtyſed vnryghteous dedes, and againſt them that he had holpen, vſed he great mekeneſſe, nother layed anye charge vpon them, that they were not able to beare. Theſe are the thynges for the whiche he deſerued ſo greate prayſe, as none other prynce the lyke. Afterwarde toke he hys yourneye into Aſia, where he ouercame kyng Laomedon, and ſlewe hym: but in thys vyctory, vſed he a very kyngly moderacion of mynde. For he ſaued the kyngdome, nother woulde deſtroye it, but gaue the poſſeſſion thereof to Priamus, as to the true heyre. And becauſe he reſtored the kingdome to Priamus, it is eaſye to geſſe what tyme Hercules lyued. Beſyde thys he made the ſea in Italy and Spaine ſafe from robbers, and for

this cauſe, cauſed he to be rayſed two rockes in the vtter coaſtes of Spayne and Aphrica, which ſhuld alwaye beare wytneſſe of this dede. For at thysHercules pillers. time yet are they called Hercules pyllers. Charles the fyfte, the moſt victorious or moſt valiant Emperour, hath theſe at this tyme as a peculiar badge, namely that he may be knowen to be ſent to vs of God, to the intent that in thys troublous ſtate of the worlde, he maye be in whole Europa as an Hercules, to reſtore agayne wyth hys proweſſe and ſtronge victorious hande, peace and inſtyce.
                  Hether to haue we ſpoken of the notable thynges that are happened in Grece in the tyme of the fyrſt monarchye. But I ſhall neuertheleſſe adde a few thynges beſyde theſe: For in reading of hyſtoryes muſt ſpeciallye be conſydered, what ſtate the kyngdomes were of, what religions, what maner of lawes, Fynally what ſciences they had, wherein they floryſhed. Whan the ſonnes of Noe dyed, the
                        
                           〈…〉
                         of 
                           〈…〉
                         after 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      true vnderſtanding of Gods worde peryſhed alſo in Grece: though in the meane whyle they retayned of thepr fathers the maner of ceremonies, and ſentences of godlyneſſe, yet neuertheleſſe was the vngodlyneſſe encreaſed, and otherwyles was one or other Idolatry ſet vp. For enery one ymagyned for him ſelfe an order to worſhyp God, accordynge as hys conſtraint and neceſſite compelled hym. For it is ſpoken of a Poet: The fyrſt feare that came to men mortall. Cauſed gods that be immortall. That is moſt euidente and true in fayninge of the wicked ſeruice of God. For noman is ſo cruel of nature, whyche beynge in neceſſyte, that doeth

not ſeke God: and for ſo muche as he knoweth not that God muſt be ſought by faith only in Chriſt, he falleth to ſome outwarde worke, and faineth ſome new maner of worſhippyng God. Of this commethThe occaſiō of all maner of vngodlyneſſe. the fountayne and ſprynge of all the vngodlyneſſes nere hande that are in the worlde. Nether nedeth any man ſuppoſe, that men erred ſo greatly, that they thought Images and contrefaitures to bee God: for they knewe ryght well, that they were wood and ſtone, but they were of this opinion, that this worke and this ſeruice pleaſed God, and that he would be worſhipped of this maner: where as yet God wil not be worſhypped by vnfaythfulneſſe without onely Chriſte by what maner of worke or faſhion ſoeuer it be. And ſo could thei neuer be ſure, whether God were fauourable to them: for no man can ſurely perſuade hymſelfe the ſame, without the manifeſt promyſe of God, and without Chriſt. TheThe head of Idolatry. heade then of all Idolatry is to truſte in a peculiar and in a forged worſhyp of God, excogitated of hys awne hed and in the meane ſeaſon neuertheleſſe, to doubte in tribulations whether God will be fauourable. This doute I ſaye is the principall parte of Idolatry. And the vngodly, whiche neuertheleſſe eſtemeth hym ſelf good and wiſe, doth in this point much differ from the tren chriſtian & godly. SuchHow muche an vngodly doth differ from a chriſtian. an vngodly man hath goodly vertues & very ſhynyng workes: but his hart doubteth whether God be fauourable to him. As for a godly man and true Chriſtian, may wel be leſſe then he, cōcerning other vertues: but in his hart he is ſurely perſuaded that he is in the fauour of God, according to ye promiſes for

                     
                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     ſitting in a chere vpō the denne, prophecied of thinges to come, out of the whiche denne, in the meane whyle came ſmoke & blaſt of windes. Of this wiſe is it ſayd to haue bene happened at Delphis. After that theſe prophecies were ſuppoſed to be written of the prieſtes, as vndouted ſouth ſaynges: and becauſe they were doutfully written, they might bee taken diuerſly. Theſe were deceates of the deuel, wherewith he begiled the worlde.
               
               
                  Of Homerus and Heſiodus.
                  
                     BY the Grekes only were firſt the beſt learnedWith the Grekes were p
                           ••
                        t
                           ••
                         firſte of renow
                           ••
                        e. poetes, whiche were partly muſicians partly prieſtes: ſome of them alſo were w
                        〈…〉
                      ſene in phiſyck and aſtronomy. Theſe compryſed their wyſdome and learnyng with verſes ſhort ſentences. But among them, whoſe workes are yet manyfeſt, were Homerus and Heſiodus theWhat tyme 
                           〈…〉
                        erus ly
                        
                           〈…〉
                        . chiefe. Caſſius writteth that Homerus liued after the battaill of Troie thre hundreth and thre ſcor
                        〈…〉
                      yeres, and before the fondacion of Rome euen there about whyche maye bee gathered to haue bene about that tyme, when Ioſaphat reigned in Iewry His dwellyng was at Smyrna, whiche lieth in the forth part of Aſia, where the mooſt auncient of the Grekes dwelled, whiche were called Iones and Acolidas. And all though Homerus was not myghtye in gouernaunce of the common wealth, it ſemeth yet that he vſed the cōpany of the greateſt princes of all Greke. For he deſcribed of the beſt m
                        〈…〉
                     
                     ner the kynred and ofſpringe nearehande of a
                        〈…〉
                     
                     
princes: and his bokes are euen a myrour of all ciuyl occupation and princely vertues. For he hath payntedHomers bokes are a myrour of all ciuyl and princely vertues. and ſet forth all thynges, that can befall in gouerning a commune welth. Beſydes this alſo what is the duety of princes and great men in there counſels gathered together, and in other afferes whatſoeuer they be: he hath ſet them forth ſo conningly, that he ſemeth to be moſt exercyſed in parliamentes, and diuiſing of moſt weyghty matters apperteining to kingdomes. Moreouer the ſage wryters dyd neuer prayſe ſo highly no poetes writing, as the poetry of Homer, the whiche Alexander the great would neuer ſuffre to be out of his handes, becauſe he might haue, wherout he might be admoniſhed and taught of the duety and vertues of an excellent kynge.
                  Heſiodus (as wytneſſeth Porphirius) lyueth anHeſiodus a preſt at Helicon. hundreth yeare after Homer. He was a neighbure or prieſt of the mount Helicon, where was a greate and a famous temple. His writinges are for the moſt parte ſermones of good maners. For they are ſhort ſentences, compriſinge the pyth of all kynd of vertues: but they treate nothinge of Chriſte. For thys heauenly doctryne was hydden to the Gentyls. Thys poetes writinges, conteyne alſo as it were a iuſt and perpetuall Kalendar, ordeyned afterHeſiodus bokes. the courſe of the Sonne, and the obſeruation of thoſe ſtarres, whiche ſhewe the difference of the yeare. Thys boke is worthy to be learned by rote of yonge chyldren, and it ſemeth that wyſe men of Grece, haue in tymes paſt apprehend theyr chyldrē here to knowe theſe noble ſciences. But the poet

Heſiodus, a man of notable learnynge and temperaunce at the ende dyed wretchedly by ſome of hys frendes, whych dyd euyl recompence hym for hys good dedes.
               
               
                  Of the buildinge of the citye Rome.
                  
                     PRoca Kynge of Alba had two ſonnes
                        
                           〈…〉
                        . 
                           〈…〉
                        . 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Numitor and Amulius. Nowe had the father determined to geue the kyngdom to hys ſonne Numitor, becauſe he was the elder: but Amulius that was the yonger, droue hym out, and vſurped to hym the kyngdome. And leſt he myght feare any daūger by the yſſue of Numitor, he ſtew hys ſonne Agiſtus by fraude, & hys brothers doughter▪ Rhea Syluia, bounde he wyth
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Syluia. a vowe of perpetual chaſtitye in the company of the virgins Ueſtales. But ſhe beynge made greatwith chylde, brought forth two twynnes, whych afterwarde were called Romulus and Remus. But whan Amulius knew of thys dede, he cauſed the mother to be kept in pryſon, and the chyldren to be trowen into the floude of Tyber, to drowne them. Whan the chyldren were now ſet at the brinke of ye water, by chaunce came a wolfeſſe out of the nexte mountaynes, which gaue thē ſoucke, vntil they were founde of the Kynges ſhepherde, who bringinge them home, toke them hys wyfe to nouryſhe.
                  Wherfore whan they were waxen greate, and herde of the pretended murther in theyre youth, of Amulius, and that the Kyngdome was taken from theyr vncle Numitor by force, they determyned to auenge the tyranny, and by occaſion ſlew kynge

Amulius, reſtorynge theyr vncle Numitor into his Kyngdome. Of thys wyſe doth God not ſuffreAn example of vengeāce. vnrighteouſneſſe to be vnpuniſhed. Romulus and Remus brethren, buylded afterwarde a citye in hat place, where they were founde and layde.
                  Whan ſtryfe was ryſen amonge the brethren, for ſoThe ſtryfe of Romulus and Remus for ye realme. much as they were equal in age & ſtrength, whiche of them ſhulde raygne: they agreed that the Gods ſhould iudge it, ſo that whoſe ſhulde haue the greater flyght or voyces of byrdes, the ſame ſhulde beare rule.
                  To Remus therefore dyd fyrſt flye ſyxe great rauens, afterwarde flew twelue for Romulus. Now whan Remus demaunded the Kyngdome by reaſon of the fyrſt flyght, ther roſe agayne debate betwene the brethren. It is a wonder, how fearcely mens myndes betoſſed wyth couetouſenes to beare rule, nother can it lightelyſuffer and be quiet But what nedeth many wordes? At the laſt rayſe a commotion, Remus was ſlayne, and Romolus raygned alone, of whome alſo hath Rome the name By this appeareth that ye citye of Rome, was buylded by the poſteritye of Eneas. For Syluia the mother of Romulus, had hyr ſprynge of Eneas. But for as muche as Romulus Father was vnknowen, they fayneth that the god Mars was he, becauſe of a more honeſter cloke or pretence of the 
                        •
                     aute. But how Romolus dyd ordeyne hys kyngdom, & what warres he made, doth Titus liuius wryte. I wyll only ſhewe brefely the ordre of the tymes, and what notable chaunges of realmes are happened in the meane whyle that euery man maye knowe,

what is chefely to be marked in readynge of all hyſtoryes: nother ſhall we alſo paſſcouer theſe wonders, that are happened by ſome heauenly prouidē
                     ce, that we may ſe that vnryghteouſnes is punyſhed of God, and for what cauſes cōmune wealthes and Kyngdomes are chaunged.
                  Pomponius Atticus and ſome other, whych reken the nomber of yeares mooſte dyligently, doethWhan Rome was 
                           ••
                        y
                           •
                        deth. affirme that the citye of Rome was begonne to be buyldeth, in the begynnynge of the thyrde yeare of the ſyxte Olympias: that is, the tenth yeare of Ioathan Kynge of Iuda, but after the creation of the worlde, the thre thouſand, two hundreth, and one.
                  Rome was before Chriſtes byrth, ſeuen hundreth and nyne & twētyyeare. I wyl alſo adde, that Varro wryteth, the twelue great rauens, to ſygnifye the tyme and laſtyng of the citye, namely a thouſande and two hundreth yeare. For euery great ra
                     
                        •
                     en ſhulde ſygnifye a Seculum, that is a hundret yeare: and this is no euyll interpretacion. For from the begynnynge of the cityes buyldynge, vntyll the tyme of Honorius and Archadius, whan it was deſtroyed of the Gotes, was a thouſand and thre hundreth yeares.
                  The kynges raygned at Rome two hundreth and foure and forty yeares, as wytneſſeth Liuius.
                  Euſebius addeth alſo two yeares.
                  
                     Romulus xxxviij.
                     Numa xliij
                     Tullius hoſtilius xxxij.Tullius hoſtilius
                     
                  
                  Alha the citye, and punyſhed theyr gouernoure which was a true breaker wyth dew punyſhment.
                  
                     He gaue anotable example to men therin, how traytours ought to be punyſhed.
                  For he cauſed hym to be bounde and ſtretchedThe death of Metius Suffecius. out betwene two wagons, and with horſſes dryuen ſundery wayes, to be pulled inſunder, and toren to peces. The kyngdome of Alba ceaſyd here, and this happened alytle before that tyme, whan Manaſſes raygned in Iewry.
                  Whan Alba was ouerthrowen, the poſteritye of the Troyans, chefely of Iulius the ſonne of Eneas, write to Rome, leauynge Alba the whych after warde became myghty by the Romanes, toke all the monarchy alone, in the tyme of Iulius Ceſar.
                  Therfore was it well prophecyed of Homerus, concernynge Eneas, that hys poſteritye ſhould haue dominion euerlaſtingly: and that is no doubte to be vnderſtande of the Romane dominion: for theyr monarchy is the laſt. But we ſhall ſpeake more larger of theſe thynges hereafter after Tullus Hoſtylius ſucceded in the kyngdome and raygned.
                  
                     Ancus Martius. xxiiij.Ancus Marcius. Tarquinius Priſcus. Seruius. Tullius.
                     
                     Tarquinius Priſcus. xxxviij.
                     Seruius Tullius xliiij.
                  
                  In his tyme began the monarchy of the Perſians and for becauſe I myght be brefe, therfore wylled I alſo to comprehende here the kynges of Rome, becauſe they for the moſte parte all reygned beforeWhan the monarchy of of the Perſians, began. the monarchy of the Perſes: durynge the whiche few thynges worthy of remembraunce are befallen by the Romanes, vndoutedly whoſe puyſſaunce was not great before that tyme.
                  Tarquinius Superbus raygned xxv. yeares

was dryuen out of the kyngdom, for the abhominacion of his ſonne Sextus Tarquinius, the whichTarquinius Superbus. did by violence miſvſe the moſte honeſte wyfe Lucrece, whiche moued with ſhamfaſtnes of ſuch wickednes pearced herſelf with a ſwearde, euē through the hart. Her kynſfolke moued with the wickednesLucrecia. of the dede, droue out the kynge. This example doth alſo witneſſe, for what cauſes God doth ſuffre kyngdomes to be changed, and tyranny to beAn example of vengeaūce puniſhed. This is ynough ſpoken of the beginnyng of the foundacion of the citie, and whence happened the firſt chaunge of the common wealth.
               
            
            
               ¶ Of the ſecond Monarchye.
               
                  WHen the Iewes had bene thre ſcore and ten yeares in exile by the Babylonians, as we haue ſayde before, the kyng of BabylonBalthaſar kyng of Babylon. Balthaſar was punyſhed of God▪ becauſe he blaſphemed the God of Iſrael, and vſed the veſſels that were ordeined for the tempels vſe, in his bankettes. For the Medes and Perſes were fallen into his kyngdome, and toke the citie of Babylon, with the kyngdomes of Chaldee and Aſſyrya. Worthely therfore is this to bee called the ſeconde monarchye: For the greateſt kyngdomes of the worlde, began now to growe together, too the

whiche all Aſianearehande was ioyned afterward by the Perſians. Here ought y• godly mynd before all thynges to conſyder theſe noble benefytes and workes of God, whiche brought agayne all thee worlde in one certayn body and a lawfull empyre, that iuſtice and honeſtie myght be mainteined. For it were neceſſary, that all ciuilitie and good lawes ſhould peryſhe amonge men, without God choſe and ordeined ſomtyme myghty monarchyes, and puyſſaunt princes, the whiche might defende them, and if they were decayed, to reſtore them agayne.
               This monarchy of the Perſians was knowento the Grekes, and for the moſte parte are happened in this monarchies tyme, whatſoeuer notable andThe hiſtories of the Grekes begynne at thee Perſians. greate fetes are done in Grece. And thereby commeth that the Grekes begyn their hiſtories at the Perſians, the whiche it ſemeth to haue litle knowledge, what hath bene done in other kyngdomes, before the Perſians tymes.
               As for the order of the yeres in hiſtories, I muſt here aduertyſe the reader, that I haue hetherto borowed the rekenyng of the yeares out of holy ſcriptures, the whiche ſhewe by order the counte of the yeares, euen from the creation of the worlde, untyll theſe ſeuenty yeares, in the which the Iewes were kept in the Babylonicall bannyſhment. Moreouer, in the holy Bibels are conteyned certayne Cronicles of the yeares, vntyl the tyme of the Perſes: but after that is thee order of the yeres not ſo wel kept, ſaue that Daniel ſaith, that there are four hundreth and ſeuenty yeares, from that tyme that it was

graunted to the Iewes to repare the citye Ieruſalem vntyll Chriſt was borne. And of ſo eaſy a thynge, ſome men maketh a great queſtion, of countinge theſe yeares a ryght, in the which we ſhall ſhewe to be no difficultye. For Daniel hath very well expreſſed and marked the tyme of Chriſtes cōminge.
               
                  The begynnynge of the Monarchye of the Perſians.
                  
                     BUt that the nombers do agre wyth the ſeuenty yeares aforeſayde, we ſhal reken in the Monarchy of the perſyans a hundreth nynety and one yeare. Although the Grekes do reken the nomber of theſe yeares greater in the Monarchy of the perſes. Howbeyt thys is come thereby, that the Grekes, haue not begonne fyrſt to reken whan theſe ſeuenty yeares were expyred, but that about a twenty yeares before. And of this wyſe muſt the rekenynge of PhiloThe rekeninge of the Gre
                        
                           ••••
                         Philo. and other Grecians be made equal. For the Iewes begynne in the yere of Cyrus, after that he had wonne the cytie Babylon. But the Grekes reken thoſe yeares wythal alſo, the which he had reygned before: but they are not to be referred to the yeares enſuynge. Moreouer that the matter maye the better be vnderſtande, accordynge to the order of Philo, we ſhall fyrſt rehearce the high prieſtes, after that, ſhall we alſo adioyne the Perſian kynges, as the Grekes do reken them.
                  But he that vnderſtandeth Cyrus kyngdome to beginne after the conquerynge of Babylon, theſame maye eaſely laye together the nomber of the

Grekes with theſe. CxCi. yeares.
                  
                     Ieſus the high preſt. xxxvi.
                     Ioakin his ſonne in his fathers abſence. viii.
                     Ieſus beynge returned. xx.
                     Ioakin agayne. xlviii.
                     Eliaſib. xxi.
                     Ioiada. xxiiii.
                     Ioathan. xxiiii.
                     Iaddus. x.
                  
                  Summa of the yeares is. CxCi. Ioſephus wytneſſeth, that Iaddus lyued whan Alexander wente into Aſia.
                  
                     The Perſian kynges as the Grekes do reken them.
                     
                        Cyrus xxix.
                        Cambiſes vij. and. v. moneths.
                        Darius Hyſtaſpis ſonne. xxxvi.
                        Xerxes xx.
                        Artaxerxes with the longe hande. xl.
                        Darius the baſtarde. xix.
                        Artaxerxes Mnemon. xl.
                        Ochus. xxvi.
                        Arſames. iij.
                        Darius. vi.
                     
                     The order of the tymes doth for the mooſte parte allowe this nombre. For as the hiſtorye wryters haue lyued at ſundery tymes: euen ſo hath euery one made mencion of hys kynge, that raygned atHerodotus Theuſidides hys tyme: euen as Herodotus maketh mencion of xerxes, Theucydides of Artaxerxes with the longe hande: after theſe made Xenophon mencion ofXenophon.
                        
Darius the baſtarde and his yonger ſonne Cyrus, he wrote alſo of Artaxerxes Mnemon: Xenophon went a warrefare alſo, in thoſe warres, that were vſed at theſe tymes. Therfore the late wryters do greatly erre of the Iewes, they be very dull aſſes, which ſet but four Perſian kinges, leſing more thē an hundreth yeares in this euident counting of the worldes yeares: of the whiche do ſpryng more greueous errours.
                     In Daniel and Eſdras is mencion made of the Perſian kynges, but they varye in ſome names from the Grekes. As for me, (that all thynges may be knowen more manyfeſtly) I wyll brefely ſhewe what my mynde is. Metaſthenes is of ſome reiected,Metaſthenes becauſe he nameth ſome Perſian kynges other wyſe, then the Grekes. But for ſo muche as Eſdras and Philo do not diſceuer from hym, I do not reiect thoſe kynges, whiche Metaſthenes reherſeth. For it is no doubt, but that Eſdras was perfecte of the kyngdome and ſtate of the Perſians, forEſdras was ſ
                              ••••
                           ed and 
                              ••••
                           gh
                              •
                            in the Perſian matt
                              ••
                           s. ſo muche as it is euident that hee was one of the chefe of the realme and of the kynges counſayll. Metaſthenes doth ſet in this order the Perſian kynges, and theſe be the fyrſte wherein they vary: but Philo and Eſdras kepe the ſame order.
                     
                        Darius and Cyrus to gether twoo yeres, and after that Cyrus alone xxij.
                        Artaxerxes Aſſuerus xx.
                        Darius Artaxerxes with the long hand xxxvij.
                        Darius the baſtarde xix.
                        Artaxerxes Mnemon lv.
                        
                           Ochus xxvi.
                        Arſames iiij.
                        Darius vi.Darius reignynge wyth Cyrus.
                        
                     
                     This variaunce after my mynde may eaſely bee iudged. Of the fyrſt Darius, whiche reigned with Cytus, haue the Grekes no certainte (for ſo much as ſaieth Daniel,) he neuer reigned, and therefore was his name all together vnknowen, to men of ſtraunge nacions. And Daniel hath ſeparated this Darius from Cyrus. For he ſayeth that Darius of Media was Cyrus of Perſia. Now do the Grekes reken only the Perſian kynges, nother do they myngle with them the Medians affeirs, whoſe kyngdome was already tranſlated too the Perſians: therfore do the Greke wryters diſſent nothyng from the holy ſcriptvres, though they leaue out Darius, ſeynge they counte onely the Perſian kynges. Ioſephus wryteth that this Darius were Cyaxares, the ſonne of Aſtyages, of whome Xenophen wryteth, the whyche I wyll not ſtryue wythall.
                     The ſeconde Artaxerxes Aſſuerus, is DariusArtaxerxes, Aſſuerus. Hyſtaſpis ſonne, and Cambyſes is paſſed ouer, becauſe hee reigned hys father yet lyuynge, or not long after his fathers death. For the Perſians had this cuſtome, that whan ye kyng went forth on war, they ordeined another before, which ſhuld ſupplie ye
                        Cambyſes. kings rowme being abſēt. And by this occaſiō was Cambyſes ordeined kyng & gouernour of y• realme

of Cyrus hys father, whan he made warre agaynſt the Scythyans, wyth the which he hadde warre ſyxe yeares: and for this ſeaſon dyd Cambiſes raigne, whome the Grekes ſaye to haue raygned ſeuenyeare, the which muſt be vnderſtande of that time wherein, the father was yetlyuing. And the hiſtoryes of Aſſuerus do wytneſſe that he was Darius becauſe Philo wryteth that theſe kyngdomes be recouered of hym agayne by warre, whiche were fallen back and rebelled, whan Cyrus had foughten wyth the Scythes hauing no goodlucke.
                     The thyrde was called Darius ArtaxerxesWherfore Darius Artaxerxes was called with the long hande. wyth the longe hande: the ſame do the Grekes ſimply call Artaxerxes wyth the longe hande: and he had the name thereof, that hys ryght hande was longer than the left, whome Metaſthenes calleth Darius, Eſdras doth call hym Darius and Artaxerxes indifferently: for they vſed theſe names none otherwyſe, than oure Emperours vſe the names of Ceſar and Auguſtus, But that Artaxerxes doth ſtrayght waye folow Darius in order, that is happened for thys cauſe, that Xerxes forthwyth in the begynnynge of hys raygne wente in to Grece and that in the meane ſpace Artaxerxes ruled the kyngdom in the Eaſt. And becauſe Xerxes remayned not at hande in the Eaſt, therfore do not the Iewes make mention of hym, but holde Artaxerxes, for the kynge, ſeynge he beynge made gouernour of the kyngdome ruleth ſo longe as Xerxes was from home. After thys is ther no varyaunce more, and of thys wyſe maye the hyſtoryes of the

Byble and Grekes be made very well to agre. The diſagreynge of the yeres ryſeth therof y• ſome Kynges gouerned the other yet lyuinge: and ther by is it come, that ſome other haue gathered the yeares otherwyſe.
                  
               
               
                  Of Cyrus.Cyrus.
                  
                  
                     CYrus the fyrſt Prince of the Monarch of the parſiansis rekened one amonge the mooſt doughtyeſt Kynges & lordes of the worlde. For beſyde the manyfold excellent and very princely vertues, had God geuē and endued hym wyth ſundery luck and fortune in rulynge, and very excellent vyctoryes of hys enemies: yea he fortuned to be taught and inſtruct alſo by Daniel the prophet in godlynes and in the trew worſhyp of God as holy ſcriptures do wytneſſe, Such kynde of Princes, beinge ſo garnyſhed wythHow great men ought to be folowed. the vertues of God, ought we to honoure, as noble gyftes of God, by the whych God wyll helpe the worlde, retayne men in theyr vocacion, haue modeſtye kept and peace, finally to haue lawes ordeyned. And ſeynge it is ſo, it is a very vngodlyneſſe ether to deſpiſe or to ſet nought by ſuche Princes, as the commune ſort of people do. But this Cyrus is worthtely to be counted among ſuch miniſters of God and very excellent Princes of the worlde. Nother can the nobleneſſe of kynred be requyred in hym. For it ſo pleaſyd God, that the worthyneſſe of gouernaunce be kept and maynteyned and by men auanced wyth mooſt hyghe vertues, and renowme of theyr auncerters. And for ſo much as God

hath preferred with ſo high honors, therfore ought they lykewyſe to be honored of vs, as a moſt excellēt gyfte, of God.
                  The father of Cyrus was a prince, or a gouernourThe father of Cyrus. of Perſia, borne of the ofſprynge of Sem: his mother was borne of the kynges blude of Medes.
                  And Herodotus wryteth, that Aſtyages kynge of the Medes ſawe in a dreame, out of hys doughtersAſtyag
                           •
                        s 
                           〈…〉
                        . wombe to grow a vyne, whoſe ſprynge ſhould ouer ſhadowe whole Aſia.
                  Of this was the coniecture taken, that a mooſt myghty prince ſhoulde be borne of her. Therefore whan Cyrus the chylde was now borne, Aſtyages feared, leſt his kyngdome ſhould be remoued from the Medes, to the Perſians. For the which cauſe he commaundeth his vſher Harpagus, to put forth the chyld to be ſlayne. But whan Harpagus buſied to ſlayne it, he was ſaued by a wonderfull deſtiny: So vayne are mens enterpryſes and ſtudyes to hynder Gods counſels. The chyide was taken to the ſhepeherde to beare it vpon a hyll, that thete it myght dye for honger: the ſhepeherde was alſo cō
                     maunded not to leaue the chyld, vntil it were dead, and to ſhewe this ſame to Harpagus, that he might certifye the kynge the truth of the thinges, and to ſe the chylde buryed accordynge to the dignitie. But what dyd happen? At the ſame tyme by chaunce, whan the ſhepeherde bryngeth this chylde: into his houſe, his wyfe was delyuered of a deade chylde: the which whan ſhe herde of her huſbande that thys chyld ſhoulde be layed abrode to periſhe, whome beſyde the comlyneſſe of bewty, ſhe perceaued

to declare ſome kyngly ſtrength and courage, and alſo becauſe it was borne of the kynges bloude: ſhe counſeleth and prayeth her huſbande to laye hyr deade chylde in his ſteade, and to take it her for to brynge vp for hers. She admony ſheth hym alſo to committe no murther with the kynges chylde, chefely ſeinge no daunger can befall or happen to the realine by this chylde, for aſmuche as it ſhalbe brought vp and taken for the ſhepeherdes chylde.
                  The ſhepeherde foloweth his wyues counſell he ſende worde to Harpagus that the chylde is dead.
                  Who ſendeth ſome to ſee wheter it were ſo, and cauſeth the chylde to be buryed: and all this is ſheweth the kyng for a trueth. In the meane whyle is Cyrus brought vp by the ſhepeherde: and as he grew vp by proceſſe, forth wyth appeareth in him kynggly towardneſſe, and ſharpneſſe of wyt.
                  Moreouer amonge the chyldren (as the chyldrē coſtume is) he ordeyned a kyngdome, and hym that offended, dyd punyſh greueouſly.
                  But it happened by this chaunce, that whan he had beaten a gentlemans chylde very rygorouſly for a tranſgreſſion, he was accuſed to the chyldes elders, the which made complaynt to the kynge.
                  The kynge callynge and demaundynge of the chylde, he maruayleth at his great graue conſtancye and the wyſdome in anſwerynge, than to the chyldes age. Beynge ſtreght waye aſtonyed in hys mynde, he aduyſed hym of the tyme, wherein hys doughter was delyueted, and as he had ſearched out all the circumſtances of hys age the tyme and the bryngynge vp he knewe that it was his coſyn,

his daughters ſonne, the which in tyme paſt he had commaunded to be deſtroyed. Knowynge hym he kept hym in hys court a certayn ſpace: and whan Aſtyages dyd now dout no more of hym, by reaſon of hys ſyngular towardneſſe & honeſty, the whych dyd ſhyne in the chylde, he ſent hym into Perſia to hys elders. Howbeit the kynge was in the meane whyle greatly wroth wyth Harpagus, for the deceate, becauſe he dyd not accomplyſhe the kynges commaundement, in ſlayeng at that tyme the chylde. He commaundeth Harpagus yongeſt ſonne to be brought to the court: the which whā HarpagusThe notable crueltye of Aſtyages had done, the kynge commaunded to ſlaye him and ſeethe him and to ſet it before Harpagus for to eate wythout hys knowledge: but whan he had now eaten ynough, Aſtyages commaunded to brynge the heade, fete and handes of the chylde that were hewen of, and ſhewe them to Harpagus, that he myghte ſe that he had eaten the fleſhe of hys owne chylde.
                  As harpagus ſawe the heade, he knew the kynges dede, & alſo whence the occaſion came: but all grefe ſuppreſſed, he worſhpped the kynge accordynge to hys wonted reuerence and drede, thynkyng in the meane ſeaſon to be once greatly reuenged of thys tyranny of the Kynge. But Harpagus euer after ceaſed not to ſtere vp the chefe of Media & the moſtThe dede of Harpagus 
                           •••
                        pu
                           •
                        t Aſt
                           •
                        yes tyranny. puyſſant nobles to fal to the Perſes, and to make Cyrus Kynge: he ſheweth it to Cyrus alſo, and exhorteth him to inuade the kyngdome, nother ſuffre the tyranny, that the Kynge hath vſed agaynſt other of them to be vnreuenged.
                  
                     And that the enterpryſe be ſecrete, he hydeth a lettre in the belly of a holow hare, and taketh him to a truſtye meſſenger to bringe it into Perſia to Cyrus, and ſendeth no worde els by the meſſenger, but that kynge Cyrus him ſelfe doo flee the hare. Cyrus fyndynge the letter, and knowynge Harpagus counſell, maketh continently ready an hooſt, and goeth agaynſt the Medes. Aſtyages on the other ſyde commaundeth hys army to withſtande the enemy, of the which he maketh Harpagus chefe captayne: but whan the felde ſhulde be fouten, he yelded both hym ſelf and hys army wyllyngly to Cyrus. Wherfore Aſtyages hauyng loſt the kyngdome of Media, was vanquyſhed. Howbeit Cyrus ſaued and kept hym, and cauſed hym to be intreated accordynge to hys royall dignitie. Thys alteration happened in the kyngdome of the Medes, by reaſon of the kynges tyranny, for the which alſo the whole empyre was tranſlated to the Perſes.
                  After thys warred the moſt ryche Creſus vpon Cyrus in the fore parte of Aſia, whome CyrusCreſus king o
                           •
                         Aſia▪
                      metyng wyth an hooſt, ouercame, and toke in the whole kyngdome, and wynnynge the mooſt ſtrongeſt citye Sardis, toke Creſus pryſoner. But whan by the kynges commaundement, Creſus ſhulde be burned, and was nowe vpon the pyle of wood, he cryed wyth verye pytefull waylynge: O Solon, Solon. Cyrus woundred at this noyſe, and cauſed to demaunde for what cauſe he dyd ſo crye nowe and than, wyth ſo greate doulfulnes. Than he ſyghynge from the dep
                        •
                     ſt of hys harte, ſayde: Solon was in tymes paſt a mooſt wyſe man

among y• Athenians, whom I dyd ſomtyme greatly worſhyp, whan he was with me, and I ſhewed him all my power and treaſures, and finally aſked him, whether any miſfortune myght euer happen to me, that were ſo well fortified with ryches and power, againſt all chaunces of fortune, and againſt the power of my enemies? But Solō anſwered toThe graue 
                           ••
                         
                        
                           •••
                        ighty 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        ▪
                      that with a rebuke: That noman is ſo happyin this lyfe, which before his death can be called happye of euery ſyde: nether is anye man ſo mighty or puyſſaunt, whom an vnhappy chaunce can not make feble and ouerthrowe. But that as than he beynge ſafe by reaſon of proſperitye, he ſayde he deſpyſed thoſe wordes, nother coulde he drede this notable fall, the which he had now proued: and becauſe that now firſt he vnderſtode Solons ſayenge, therfore dyd he now name him before his death, and that he wyſhed al men to remembre in proſperity aduerſytyes, which may befall, leſt they become proude for the preſente felicitie, to enterpriſe or vndertake oughte, that by chaunce myghte bringe miſchief to them. Whan Cyrus heard this, he was moued
                        
                           ••
                         trample o
                           •
                         pitye. with pitye toward Creſus, ſayenge: That hereafter he woulde not entreate Creſus ſo cruellye, which had intymes paſt be a mooſt myghty kynge: for he knew that he was a man alſo, and to hym alſo it myght befall, to haue nede of an other mans helpe and mercye. After thys commaunded he Creſus to be brought to him, and had him in greate reuerence, as a great prince, and vſed hys counſel in gouernaunce.
                  
                     Cyrus demaunded of hym alſo, by what cauſe he had taken this warre, whether he were moued, by the anſwer of Apollo, whome he had aſked counſell before? To this anſwered Creſus, ſayenge: That Apollo counſelled him right well with theſe wordes, Knowe thy ſelfe, and all thyng ſhall proſpete. He dyd not refuſe thys counſell of Apollo. For whan his hooſt had gotten the worſthande in aydinge the Aſſyrians, he had purpoſed thenceforth to lyue in reſt and peace, chefely for ſo muche as he ſawe Creſus to haue ſuch proſperitie and power in bringinge all thinges to paſſe. But whan he was prayſed of the cityes that laye rounde aboute, and of his great princes for his power and conning of warrfaringe, he was agayne deceaued by pryde and vaine glory of him ſelfe, and was ſo by the other princes made capitaine of the warre agaynſt Cyrus. And that by theſe praiſes he was brought, to take the anſwer of Apollo otherwyſe, and that he thought he was ſuche a one in dede, as he was praiſed, namely, that he was no leſſe in power, than king Cyrus, and by theſe meanes had he taken the warres in hande. But hetherto is ynough ſpoken of Creſus. Hereof maye notable examples be taken,Example that princes do oft, warre conſtrayned by no neceſſytye. What is to be conſydered in kyng Cyrus. that princes be oft brought to warre by no conſtraynt of neceſſytie, and to theyr greate hynderaunce, by the counſell and flattery of them, which can falſely perſuade and extolle with vaine prayſes theyr power and vertues.
                  In king Cirus is chefely to be conſidered, that in ſo great proſperities of all thynges, he vſed great

moderation of minde, and that in ſo great violence of victories, he ſwaged tyranny wyth mekeneſſe.
                  Cyrus than toke in all the kyngdomes from Perſia, vntyll the fyrſte borders of Ionia: from thence beynge returned, he beſieged the cytye Babylon, which ſemed mooſt ſtrongeſt againſt all forceHow Cyrus 
                           •••
                         Babylō. Euphrates. of mans power. But Cyrus wanne her, and that by this meanes: The floude Euphrates runneth through the citye by ſome ryuers: dyggynge thorough hys caucyes, he ledde the courſe of the water another waye, and as the floud was dryed, men myght ſafely go into the toune on foote. Beſyde that had he hys eſpyals, whych ſhewed what tyme the Babylonians were at reſte, and ſo broughte he hys army into the cytye in the ſtyll of the nyghte, whan they douted nothyng leſſe.
                  But what nedeth here to prayſe and auaunce much the proſperytie of Cyrus? ſeynge it maye eaſely be thought and conſydered, that it is Goddes worke, and not of mans wyſedome or power, that ſo many and ſo ſtronge tounes and kynges be ſubiect to hys kyngdome, vnto whome it ſemeth no mans power nearehande myght wythſtande. For thoſe hygh monarchies are ordeined & conſerued by an heauenly power, for to preſerue the ſtate of a cōmune wealth, agaynſt the will of Satan. Moreouer after that Babylon was wonne, than began that kyngdom of the Perſes fyrſt to be called a monarchy: For the heade citye or ſee of the monarchy,Babylon is the h
                           ••
                        de citye of the monarchye. was Babylon, and the kyngdomes of Chalde, Aſſyria, Medes and Perſians be now brought vnder one empyre. The mooſt parte of Aſia was ioyned

thereto alſo, and other great countries, which border vpon theſe kyngdomes. Cyrus gouerned theſe kyngdomes with great prayſe, inſomuch that no princes prayſes, wherof hiſtoryes do make mencyon, can be compared wyth his commendacions and 
                        •
                     uauncementes.
                  I ſuppoſe that thys monarchy began after that Babylon was wonne in the thre ſcore and tenth yeare after that the Iewes were ledde into captyuyte in Babilon. But ſence the creation of y• world, the yere of thre thouſand, foure hundreth and thre and forty, and before Chriſtus byrth the fyue hundreth and one yeare. Whereby it maye eaſely be gathered, that thoſe hiſtories of the Grekes that begynne at Cyrus, be not very olde.
               
               
                  Of the Iewes delyuered out of the Babylonycall captiuite.
                  
                     HEtherto haue we ſpoken of the ſtate of the commune wealth and empyre of thoſe tymes: nowe reſteth it that we ſpeake alſo of the ſpyritual kingdome of God, and of the churche. After that Cyrus had ſubdued the Babylonians, he ſet the Iewes free and at libertye out of all his kyngdomes, and reſtored them into the kyngdome of Iewry. This exampleHow muche God careth for his churche or congregatiō. wytneſſeth howe muche God doeth care for the church or congregacion of the godly, and howe lytle he doth forget them. For that the church myght be releaſed from the ſeruice & bondage, it was neceſſary that Babilon the citye ſhuld be taken and peryſhe

                     
                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     For a prince muſt not be a cowarde, to repreſſe the force of his enemies. Herodotus wryteth alſo that ſome do ſuppoſe otherwiſe of Cyrus death: and XenophonWhat Xenophon writeth of Cyrus. writeth that he dyed in his bedde, and that before his death, he exhorteth his childeren to the feare of God, to vnitie and loue to eche other, and that with a greate relation and manye wordes he admoniſhed them to remembre that mens ſoules dye not with the bodies, but that they remayne immortall, and that the godlye after thys lyfe enioye
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      an euerlaſtinge reſte wyth God: and that contrary wyſe the wicked ſhalbe greueouſly puniſhed. And to this is it ſaied that he ſhoulde haue added a ſubſtanciall euidence of mans reaſon, concerning euyll doers, the which in this lyfe haue a great inwarde drede in their minde, for the conſcience of theyr wicked dedes: and that therby may be gathered that the ſoule hath a certayne beynge: and that ſeynge this feare is beaten in by God, it is euidente that God will be reuenged of all thynge that is vniuſtly committed. Hetherto is ther ynough ſaide of thys mooſt holy kinge Cyrus.
               
               
                  In what tyme the Philoſophers were fyrſt in Grece.
                  
                     BEfore haue we ſhewed that by the Grekes were the Poetes fyrſt in high reputation, by reaſon of ther learning: afterwardes inThe Philoſophers were 
                           •
                        p
                           •
                        ſt 
                           ••
                         Cyrus tyme. The Philoſophers of Ionia and Italy. Cyrus tyme began another kynd of learned men, whiche were called Philoſophers, & of them were two ſectes at one time: for ſome were philoſophers of Ionia, & ſome were called philoſophers of Italy.

The philoſophers Ionici were in Ionia, they vſed greate diligence in naturall thinges, and ſearchinge out the courſe of ſtarres. The beginner ofThales begynner of philoſophers i
                           •
                         Grece. them was Thales, which diuided firſt for the Grekes the yere in thre hundreth and thre ſcore daies. For though they had before twelue monethes, yet were they conſtrayned to brynge the mouynge of the ſonne to the courſe of the mone. Thales did alſo ſhew firſt of the Eclypſe in Grece, and found the poynte whan the daye and nyghte are equall, the which was no ſmall conning. He had learned theſe thinges of the Egiptians, with whom God had kept this ſcience. Theſe Thales taught alſo that the ſoules are ymmortall: and he is the fyrſte and true begynner of the philoſophers of Grece.
                  The other parte of the philoſophers, whychePythagoras begynner of philoſophers of Italy. are called the Italians, began by Pythagoras: for the ſame lyued alſo aboute the tyme of Cyrus, in that vttermoſt part of Italy, which bendeth to Sicilia, and was ſometyme Grece. In the tyme of Pythagoras raigned at Rome Seruius Tullius: his ſcole was not occupied in Phiſick and Aſtronomy, as the other, but in Arithmetick, Geometry & Muſick. Pythagoras liued a very ſolytary lyfe wyth his diſciples, and vſed ſundry ceremonies, & taught many inconuenient thinges of the ſoules nature, that mens ſoules remoue into beaſtes to be punyſhed. The Pythagorians taughte their doctrines priuatly amonge themſelues: and it was commaunded amonges them that noman ſhoulde publiſhe them, leſt by reaſon of a doctryne not accuſtomed, the commune ſort of men mighte be ſturred ether

to diſcorde, or to a deſpiſynge of good maners. But ſuch kynde of phyloſophers dured not longe: nother is it now neceſſary to ſpeake more of the begynnyng of philoſophers. I would onely ſhewe i
                        •
                      here, leſt any man might be ignoraunt, what tyme the connyng of ſciences began and encreaſed: wee ſhall hereafter in hys due place ſpeake of them, whych haue before all other garnyſhed and had in reuerence Philoſophye, whereof there is not ſo great nomber. For very few are ther that be worthy to be called wyth ſo excellent a name Phyloſopher, and therfore ſhall we not rehearſe ſo many of them.
               
               
                  Of Solon.
                  
                     THough wee ſtudye to be brefe here, yet wyll not I paſſeouer Solon vnrehearſed:Solon 
                           〈…〉
                         and beg
                           〈…〉
                         of the Romane lawes Thales and Solon at one 
                           〈…〉
                        . for of hym hath the ciuyll lawe of the Romanes, whych is yet in vſe his oryginall begynnynge. Thys Solon lyued about thys tyme, and was very familyar wyth Thales. But whan at Athenes were ſpronge great debates, becauſe that the greateſt of the citye, had made bonde men of theyr creditours, that were not able to pay them, euen of pryuate wylfulneſſe, the whole citye of Athenes dyd agree to Solon, that he ſhoulde take order and correcte thys wyllynglye of the greateſtmen, and the other miſvſes of the commune wealth. Solon toke thys wyllynglye vpon hym, and ſet forth manye excellente conſtitutions and lawes, the whych are yet manyfeſt.
                  
                     Now was Draco the law geuer by the Athenians, before, Solons lawes were not ordered with anye mercye at all, for he ordeyned that all tranſgreſſions and treſpaſſes ſhoulde be puniſhed wyth the ſwearde: and for thys cauſe ſayde one, that Dracons lawes were wrytten wyth bloude, andDracons lawes. not wyth y
                        ••
                     k. So hard and cruell conſtitucions were in the worlde at the begynnynge. But nothyng can be durable, that is to extreme, and is not mitigate with the temperaunce of mercy or iuſtice. As for Solon made a difference in theſe thynges or degrees, and ordeined that ſome ſynnes ſhoulde accordynge to reaſon be punyſhed greueouſly, and other more mercyfullye ordeined alſo of geuinge trybute, of weyghtes, and of the ſeaſōs of the whole yeare. And ſpecially is this lawe prayſed, in theSolons law concernynge vagabondes whiche he ordeined, that euery man ſhould certyfy the higher officers once in the yeare how great his ſubſtaunce were, and of what maner crafte he were, where with he gat hys lyuynge: and if there were any ydle fellow or vagabounde, too dryue the ſame out of the cytie.
               
               
                  Of Cambyſes.
                  
                     CAmbyſes began to raygne whan hys father Cyrus went to warre agaynſt theCambyſes▪
                      Scythians. He ioyned the kyngdome of the Egiptians, to his fathers domynion. But he was greatly vnlyke his father in vertues. Whan Prexaſpes one of hys chefe counſelersPrexaſpes. had admonyſhed hym ſomewhat boldelye, and ſayde that the Perſes dyd alow hym greatly,

but that the ſame myſlyked them, that he was geuen to dronkenneſſe. He cauſed the Peeres of hys realme to be called together, and demaunded whether he might worthely be blamed in any thynge. But they anſwered, No, but that he alſo ſurmounted hys father Cyrus in vertue: for by hys actiueneſſe was Egypte alſo ioyned to his kyngdome. But Creſus (to whom Cyrus had chefely commended his ſonne Cambyſes to be taughte & norturedThe 
                           〈…〉
                        . in honeſty) ſayd the cōtrary: Cābyſes (quod he) can not yet be compared to hys father Cyrus, for he hath not left ſuch a ſonne of his begettinge, as Cirus hath left Cambyſes. This delectable ſayenge pleaſed Cambiſes at that tyme. But as the counſel departed, whan none of the princes had blamed ought in him, he commaunded Prexaſpes to be called to him, and bad him bringe his yongeſt ſonne to him: For he woulde declare howe ſobre he myghte ſeme to be, euen whan he were droncken. For he woulde ſhute wyth a bowe at his chylde, whan he was droncken, and if he coulde hyt his harte with the darte, than he might thynke that in drinkynge he were not beſyde the capacite of his reaſon: but if not▪ than he might worthely be ſayde to be geuen to dronkenneſſe.
                  But what nedeth many wordes? Whan CambyſesThe 
                           〈…〉
                         of Cambyſes. had well dronken, he ſhott at the chylde as at a marke, and as the darte was pearced thoroughe, he cauſed it to be rypt vp, and ſhewed to hys father Prexaſpes, that the harte was ſhot thorough a ryght, ſayenge, that thereby he might haue euydence, that he was not dronken.

So barbarous, cruel and tyrannicall maners bringeth dronkenneſſe into mens mindes, though theyDronkenneſſe bryngeth in moſt wycked maners. be well taught before: euen as no doute was that kynge Cambyſes was from hys youth brought vp in mooſt honeſt nourture. And though a dronken man can hytt a right in ſhoutinge, yet in the meane whyle can he not vſe the ryght counſels of reaſon, and wanteth thoſe vertues, whiche communely ſteare men to modeſtye and auancement of glory. Such lyke examples ought to be ſhewed to yonge men, whiche ſometyme be enclyned and geuen to dronkenneſſe: for what ende folowed of theſe, ſhall we ſhewe ſhortely hereafter. He ſlew alſo hys own brother Smerdis, whome he cauſed priuely to be put to death, leſt he ſhuld raygne at any tyme. He maryed alſo hys owne ſyſter, where neuertheleſſe nature doth abhorre ſuch kynde of maryage.
                  It fortuned vpon a tyme, that whan kynge Cambyſes ſat at borde wyth the quene, at y• meale tyme, ſet he a lyons whelpe and a ſtrong dogge together to make a game: and whan the lyon had the ouerhande by reaſon of hys fearceneſſe & ſtrength,The faythfulneſſe of dogges. another dogge of no leſſe fearceneſſe brake wyth great ſtrength the bandes y• he was bounde withal, and holpe his brother the dogge, and ſo was the lyon ouercome. The kyng had great delyte at that game, becauſe of the faythfulneſſe of the dogges. But the quene moued wyth the ſame dede, began to wepe very bytterly, and whan the kynge toke that ſorowfully, and aſked the cauſe of her weping, ſhe anſwered: To my brother happened nothynge leſſe, than ſuch faythfulneſſe, as I haue ſene in theſe

dogges helping eche other. The kyng taking thisThe cruelneſſe of Camb
                           •
                        ſes toward 
                           •
                        is 
                           •••
                        ſter the 
                           〈◊〉
                        . anſwere wrothfully, cauſed her ſtrayght waye t
                        •
                      be had out of hys ſyght, and 
                        •
                     lew her. But ſuch co
                        •
                     
                     dicions can not longe proſper. For God ſayeth in the ſcryptures: The bloud thyrſty and deceatfull ſhall not lyue oute halfe theyr dayes vpon earth. Wherfore God ſtroke hym not longe after wyth a greueous and heauy vengeaunce. For as he ſhould come out of Egypte into Perſia, as he ſat vpon his horſſe, hys 
                        •
                     wearde fell out of hys ſheeth, and wounded hym ſo ſore in the one ſyde, that he dyed. This example ſheweth, that God ſuffreth tyrauntes not
                        
                           〈…〉
                        . very longe. For he lyued not much more than one yeare after Cyrus, nother left he anye heyre after hym: and of thys wyſe is he cleane deade. It is truely a pyteous thynge and greatly to be bewayled, that in ſo lytle a ſpace the kingdome of the Perſes is taken from the poſteritie of Cyrus. The rule of the empyre remayned neuertheleſſe wyth Cyrus bloude. For Darius had wedded Cyrus doughter the whyche neuertheleſſe was alſo of Cyrus bloud.
               
               
                  Of the puniſhment of a wicked iudge.
                  
                     NO prince is of ſo deſperate hope, which doth not at any tyme ſome laudable or honeſt thynge. For God doeth garniſhe the offyce of a gouernour or high officer, and maketh that other whyles notable and neceſſary thynges are done neceſſarely, for the conſeruation of publyke adminiſtration.
                  
                     Cambyſes is alowed in all hiſtoryes for thys one 
                        •
                     ede, for the which he is worthy to be prayſed. HeSi
                           •
                        amnes a wicked iudge. had a gouernour in the fore part of Aſia, called Si
                     
                        •
                     amnes: he heard ſaye that this iudge iudged vniu
                     
                        ••
                     ly, beynge corrupt wyth gyftes of mony: Wherefore he cauſed him to be ſlayne, and the ſkynne 
                        •
                     lain o
                        •
                      from his body commaunded he to be faſtened vpon the iudges ſeate, and ordeined in ſteade of the deade iudge his ſo
                        ••
                     e called Ota
                        •
                     es, and ſat hymOta
                           •
                        es. in the ſeate 
                        ••
                     diciall vpon this maner and condition, that by the beholdyng of his fathers ſkynne he ſhuld beware, leſt he ſhould be puniſhed lykewyſe. This example warneth thoſe that are in authorytye, to remembre that God will not ſuffre wyckedneſſe to be vnreuenged.
               
               
                  Of Darius Kyng of the Perſians.
                  
                     WHan Cambyſes was gone into Egypte, the Magi rebelled agaynſt him at Suſa,An example of a notable inte
                           •
                        p
                           ••
                        āce. Who were called Magi and one of the Magies toke the name of a kyng vpon him by gyle. Magi are called y• wyſe men & prieſtes of thoſe contryes. But whan Cambyſes made him now ready to returne into the kyngdome, that he might puniſh worthely thoſe ſeditious Magies, euen in his yourney by a miſchaunce (as we haue ſayd before) he dyed. A
                        •
                     ter the death of Cambiſes the Magies beyng ſla
                        ••
                     e, y• Peers of the realme toke the kingdome to them: ſelues after that poyntyng a day of aſſembly, they came to treate of reſtoringe one into the kingedome Perſy for a certayn order.
                  The peers or Princes were ſeuen in nomber,

as in the Germ
                        •
                     ne empyre are ſeuen Electors: thoſe doutleſſe were choſen and poynted by greate wyſedome and counſell, as the hygheſt counſellers of the wh
                        •
                     le empyre of Perſia. Whan now theſe ſeuen prynces were come together, to deuiſe for the commune health of the realme, there roſe controuerſy in deuiſynge, and of thre thynges ſpecially.
                  One Othan
                        •
                     s counſelled to choſe no more kynges,
                        
                           •••
                         
                        
                           ••
                        lib
                           •
                        
                        
                        
                           •••••
                         o
                           •
                         ſe
                        
                           •••
                         
                        
                           ••••
                        ces 
                           ••
                         P
                           •
                        r
                           ••
                         of 
                           •••
                         
                        
                           ••••
                        
                        
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . but that the princes bounde by an aliaunce, ſhuld rule a lyke, libertye beynge retayned of etherſyde: for it were euident ynough before and proued by example, that one man lord of ſo many and great thynges, becommeth lyghtely haut and preſumpteous, and to fall to tyranny, as it was euident that Cambyſes had done.
                  The ſeconde Megabyſus refuſynge that counſell ſayde, that ſuch lybertye ſhoulde be worſſe than tyranny: for the princes and cityes, yf they want a Lorde, can not but miſvſe that libertye to priuate wylfulneſſe. But leſt anye ſuche do happen, it were good not to choyſe one onely kynge, but to orde
                        ••
                     e ſome princes, by whome ſhoulde alwaye remayne the full power of a kynge.
                  The thyrd called Darius refelling the ſentence of ether of them, counſelled one kyng to be choſen: for though in thys poynt, as in all other thynges of men myght befall great and many inconueniences, yet is no royalme or dominion more ſurer than
                        
                           ••••
                        rchy 
                           ••
                         
                        
                           •
                        he be
                           •
                        t 
                           ••••
                         
                        
                           ••
                         of 
                           ••
                         
                        
                           ••
                        py
                           ••
                         
                        
                           •
                         
                        
                           ••••
                        l
                           •
                        e. the Monarchy, that is, yf one raygne, in whoſe power and handes the chefe poynt of the raygne do conſiſt. For though theſe thre counſels be a lyke honeſt and verye good: yet if they be conferred, together,

it is moſt euident, there can no fayrer or more profytabler thynge be founde, tha
                        •
                      a Monarchye, namelye, whych goeth nexte to a godly kingdome. Moreouer it can not be that concorde can be kepte longe amonge fre princes, or yf ſome princes be choſen to gouerne ſome myghtye realme in ſteade of a kyng: and that for the diuerſytye of mooſt weighty cauſes, whych myght ſome tyme befall in ſo large a dominion, in the whiche the princes coulde not allwaye agree together. Beſydes thys that there ſhoulde not want amongeſt the princes the endeuour of ſouerayntye and gouernaunce aboue the other, ouer the which he ſhoulde procure to rule, as ouer ſubiectes or inferiors. Theſe were the cauſes which Darius alleged: vnto whom agreed the other foure princes, and ordeyned to choyſe a kyng after the coſtum
                        •
                     ble maner.
                  But leſt any debate myght aryſe amonge the princes of the royalme they determyned to committe the lot of the kynges eleccion to God. They agreed that the princes ſhoulde come together very early on horſes into a certayn place, and whoſe horſſe ſhuld neye fyrſt, the ſame ſhould be kyng. Darius beynge come home, ſhewed thys cou
                        •
                     ſell to the controller of hys court, whych ſayde he would eaſely brynge it to paſſe. For before the euenyng of the appointed daye he dyd lead Darius horſſe and a mare into the place appoynted, and there letteth he go the horſſe to the mare▪ that in the mornynge the horſſe comminge to the place, myghte neye for the mare beyng abſent.
                  And as the princes came together in the appointed

a place at y• ſet houre, Darius horſſe neyen fyrſt: & leſt they might dout whether it were Gods will that Darius ſhould be their kinge, ſodenly at y• ſame very tyme whan the horſſe neyed, was ther a lightening in an open and cleare ayer with thonderinge. Forthwith the other princes lyghtynge from their horſes, dyd to Darius dew reuerence.Darius is made kyng of Perſia. And by this occaſion was Darius ſet vp in the hygh dignitie of the Perſian empyre, the which he gouerned after that with great praiſe. He reſtored with great power the countries that were rebelled whan Cyrus dyed in Scythia, to the empyre. Babilon the citie alſo, refuſynge now the dominion of the Perſes, he recouered after longeſiege, and that by this meanes:
                  One zopyrus the ſonne of Megabyſus, one ofThe notable 
                           •••
                        thfulneſſe 
                           ••
                         Zopyrus 
                           〈…〉
                         Darius. the ſeuen lordes or princes, cauſed willinglye hys noſe, eares and lyppes to be cutt of, maketh the kinge priuy of his counſell, and falleth to the Babilonians as one that were fled: he complayneth of the kinges cruelneſſe, whiche cauſed him to be of this wyſe diſmayde and toren, becauſe he gaue him counſell to forſake the cytie: nother fayned he hymſelfe otherwyſe, than to be the kynges enemy, and that he were fled to the Babilonians for cauſe of counſel taking. The Babilonians did frely receaue him, and as he was made capitaine of them, he ſlew ſome of Darius ſouldiours: for ſo was he agreed with Darius, that therby he might at the firſt augment the confidence of the Babilonians in him. Afterward ye Babilonians truſted him with the whole army, the which he betrayed to Darius: and made

alſo that he recouered the whole citye, the whiche he had nowe beſieged ſyxe monethes and a whole yeare. As for Darius gaue hygh thankes to thys zopyrus for hys faithfulneſſe, for he ſet hym afterwarde before all the princes of his kyngdome. And as a pomgranate was geuen hym, he ſayde: HeA graue ſayenge of Darius. woulde wyſh him no better thinge in this lyfe. than that if he might get ſo many zopyries, as there are graines in this apple. For therby would he ſignifie that a kynge can haue no worthier treaſure, nor no ſtronger fortreſſes, than faythful frendes and counſellers.
               
               
                  Of Darius Warres in Grece.
                  
                     THE Perſians aſſayed to drawe byEmpyres haue theyr boundes. claime to them the kingdomes of Macedony and Grece, becauſe they bordered vpon Perſia. But becauſe God hath prefixed euerye royalme as it were certayne boundes, the whyche it can not paſſe: therfore coulde the Perſian kinges ſubdue nor make ſubiectes to theyr empyre, nother the Macedonians nor the Grekes. Wherfore happened about that tyme in Grece many and greate chaunces: the which as they are many, euen ſo to rehearſe them all ordely, were to longe: but I ſhall rehearſe them all ordely, were to longe: but I ſhall rehearſe ſome of them, howbeit none ſaue the very beſt, and that brefely.
                  The Perſians ſendinge Ambaſſadours toAmyntas kyng of Macedony. Amyntas kynge of Macedouy, deſyred that he woulde yelde hymſelfe to them.
                  
                     Amintas being afrayd becauſe of the Perſians, power, graunted willingly to do their requeſt in a maner proſtrate, & treated meſſengers very courteouſly. And whan a royall banket was ordeined for y• Ambaſſadours after their wil, they deſired to haue brought to them noble women and ladyes, for to garnyſhe the banket. Amyntas which durſt denye them nothynge, commaunded to brynge them.
                  Whan the Perſians were now droncken, they dalyed wyth the gentle women vncourteouſly, inſomuch that theyr vnmanerelyneſſe yrked and diſpleſed kyng Amyntas, and his ſonne Alexander theAlexander 
                           〈…〉
                         Amyntas. yonge king: and by reaſon of the ſhamefulneſſe and reuerence of age, deſyred Alexander his father the kynge Amintas, that departing out of the company, he would go to bed, & he wold remayne with the geſtes. As the father went now away, Alexander faynyng myrth, he ſuffred the Perſians to daly and playe more frelier wyth the women: at the laſt he prayed them all to ryſe, and ſuffre the ladyes to go a lytle apart, for they ſhould ſtrayght way
                        
                           〈…〉
                         of Alexander returne better trymmed. The nobles of the Perſians ſuffred that wyllingly. In the meane ſeaſon cauſed Alexander the fayreſt yongmen apparelled wyth womens garmentes to returne into the banket, and hyde ſweardes vnder theyr garmentes, wherewyth in daylienge they ſhould ſlaye the Perſes, the which was done. For the Perſyans were kylled of euery one of theſe yonge men, and thus was theyr vnſhamefulneſſe greueouſlye puniſhed. This Alexander is rehearſed amonge the greate grauntfathers of Alexander. After this rebelled the Grekes alſo, which were vnder Darius in the

forepart of Aſia, and taking the citye Sardis, burnedSardis. it, and to this dyd the Athenians ayde them.The ſutteltye of Hiſtieus in makinge an vproure. For one Hiſtieus a noble prince ſente a ſeruaunt to their captayne, and leſt the matter ſhould be diſcloſed, polyng his ſeruauntes heade, he prynted vpon hys heade letters conteynynge this ſentence, that they ſhould diſceuer and rebell to the kynge: afterward as the heare was growen agayne, he ſent no letters, but this ſeruaunt to the capitaine wyth this meſſage only, that he ſhould klyppe of his heare, and loke vpon his heade: the whiche whan the capitaine had done, ſtraight waye fell he from Darius. But thys traytour was kylled, and Hiſtieus was hanged, and the commotion beynge ſwaged wyth theſe remedies, went no farther.
                  This and other lyke gaue Darius occaſion toHow great ſettinge forth to warre vpō Grece Darius made. gather a great hooſt, namely a hundreth thouſand footemen, and ten thouſand horſemen, and to ſende them into Grece to be reuenged of the Athenians for the ſedition and vproure. They pytched their tentes two myle from Athenes. Whan nowe ſome counſeled not to wythſtande the enemies, but yf they beſieged the citye, to defende it manly, onely Miltiades counſellinge the contrary, ſhewed that the ſyege ſhould be heauy and verye intolerable for the communalty: but with a ſodayn inuaſyon myght the enemyes be lyghtely vanquyſhed. TheyThe counſell of Miltiades. folowed Miltiades counſell, whom alſo they made captayne of the warre: the Athenians made an army agaynſt the enemies of ten thouſande, nother had they any ſuccourſe out of the other cyties, ſaue of one thouſand men that the city Platea had madePlatea.
                     
out. And wyth thys ſmall army, was that greate and choſen company of the Perſyans diſcomfytedThe re
                           •
                        ow
                        
                           〈…〉
                        d victory 
                           ••
                         Miltiades and layed doun: and thys battayll deſerued a very great prayſe, for it deliuered all Grece from a great and incredible feare, where wyth ſhe was no leſſe taken at that tyme, than yf at oure tyme the turke ſhulde inuade Germany.
                  We muſt not ouerpaſſe here, what recompenſe the Athenians haue made finallye to Miltiades, and how they haue requyted hym, for thys good dede. For beſyde this victory, had he done other great actes for the commune welth. Wyth chyualry had he added other cities and yles, wherewyth he augmented the empire and dominion of the Athenians. But becauſe greate vertues can not want the enuy and detractions of euell men, it was procured by the people and broughte to paſſe,
                        
                           〈…〉
                         the 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      that M
                        •
                     ltiades was caſt into the commun preſon, vntyll he payed to the communalty thre hundreth thouſande crownes. But whan he was not able to paye that ſumme, and beganne nowe to be ſycke of the longe preſonment and ſtenche, his ſonne Cymon
                        
                           〈…〉
                         ſonne 
                           ••
                         M
                           •
                        ltiades went into preſon to delyuer the father: at the laſt whan the father was deade, a very ryche cityſin maryed Myltiades doughter, and diſburſynge out the ſumme of money, he delyuered Cymon out of preſon. Can not good men be duely rewarded of the communaltye on thys wyſe?
               
               
                  Of Kyng Xerxes.
                  
                     DArius had two ſonnes: the elder was begotten ear he had the kingdome offred, but the yonger called Xerxes was in y
                        •
                     
                     Xerxes.
                     
tyme of the kyngdome of hys mother Atoſſa that was Cyrus doughter. The ſame by reaſon he was of both parentes of the kynges bloude▪ he ſucceded his father beyng dead in the royalm, that the kingdome myght remayne by the yſſue of Cyrus. The elder brother ſuffred this wyth a great modeſty of mynde, ſtryuynge in no manere wyth his brother Xerxes. As now the hooſt of y• Perſians was ouer throwen in Grece, Darius aſſembled a new army, but in thys appoyntynge dyed he. Wherfore Xerxes ſtraight before hys raygne accompliſhed the preparation that hys father had begonne, and entred into Grece with a mooſt puyſſaunt army, inſomuch that ſome haue writtē, that neuer was ſo great anHow great Xerxes army was agaynſt the Grekes. army aſſembled before at one tyme, as was kynge Xerxes armie. Iuſtine ſayeth, that of his own kingdomes were ſeuen hundreth thouſand men in armoure, and of the other that were confederat with hym, thre hundreth thouſand men. Though it ſemeth not wel to be beleued, that ther haue ben ſuch a multitude, yet beare hiſtories wytneſſe ynough, and alſo ſunderye battails that were had at that tyme, that Xerxes hooſt was very great. And now at this preſent time do we proue ſufficiently, wyth howe great an hooſt, howbeit lyght armoure, the Turkes and other nations of the Eaſte do make theyr warre.
                  Daniel alſo wytneſſeth, that a kynge ſhall come oute of Perſia againſte the Grekes wyth a very great hooſt of ſouldiours. It is red alſo, that whan thys great multitude was now gathered in one felde, Xerxes weping, ſayd with an h
                        ••
                     y

harte. The cauſe of mans life is very miſerable: for of ſo many thouſand men, can not one lyue ouerThe graue 
                           ••
                        yenge of Xerxes. a hundreth yeare. It is alſo ſayde that whan Xerxes nowe ouerlayed the ſtrayghtes of the ſee wyth brydges, as there roſe a tempeſte, he commaunded to beate the ſee.
                  To thys belongeth it alſo, that it is not vnworthely ſayd, that in goynge forth, hys hooſte dryed vp floudes wyth drynkynge.
                  Wonders were alſo ſene, the which admoniſhed
                        
                           〈…〉
                        . the kyng to deſyſt of his enterpryſe, becauſe of the myſhappe to come. For a 
                        •
                     a
                        ••
                      brought forth an hare in the hooſt, where by was ſignifyed flyght. Ther appeared alſo a comet, called Ceratias, the which is bowed lyke a horne. Ther was alſo an Eclipſe of the ſonne. And as hyſtoryes make mencion, ſuche ſignes are not ſene wythoute ſome vnhappyneſſe or hurt, namely by the which God threateneth hys wrath: and therfore oughte they not to be deſpyſed, but rather a pryck or ſ
                        •
                     ynge for vs that we do feare God: for here maye be ſene what alteracions of commune welthes and all eſtates of the worlde are enſued.
                  Xerxes wolde fyrſte ſet vpon the Grekes wyth
                        
                           〈…〉
                         the Grekes is 
                           〈…〉
                        . battayll by lande. As for Grece is cloſed rounde about, and ther is no entry into it ſaue by ſee, or by ſome ſtrayghtes of the mountaynes, wher certayn thouſands of the Grekes were ſet to kepe the enemyes from entrynge in, of the whyche the greateſt parte fled contynently as the Perſes would entre: only foure hundreth Lacedemonians abode whichThe of the Lacedemonians. vſed greate force to reſiſt the enemies: and though

they were farre leſſe in nombre and weaker, than that they could dryue back ſo great force of the enemies, yet declared they ſuch ſtrength in fyghtynge, that they ſlew about twenty thouſande of the Perſes.
                  For beynge ayded wyth the oportunite of the ſtrayghtneſſe of the mountaynes, they were ſafe of the inuaſion and oppreſſion of the multitude of the enemies, nother coulde they be enuyrouned by waytes layenge. In the ſkyrmiſſe dyed Xerxes two bretheren, but on the other ſyde died the foure hundreth Lacedemonyans, wyth theyr kynge Leonides. The acte is greatly prayſed by reaſon of the courage and ſtrength to defende the country, becauſe that they beynge ſo fewe in nombre, were not afrayed to ſet them ſelues agaynſte ſo great a multitude: and though they had not the victory, yet was the power of the enemies greately abated with thys 
                        •
                     yght, and theyr hardeneſſe mynyſhed.
                  Whan the Perſes had the victory in thys battayll, wounder it is, how greatly all Grece was afrayed, and in that parte of Grece did ſome cities yelde them ſelues frely to Xerxes. At Athenes alſo one Cyrſylus, or as ſayeth Herodotus, LycidasCyrſylus. counſelled, that the Athenians alſo ſhoulde geue themſelues vnder Xerxes power: for in no maner are they able to wythſtande ſo myghty an enemy. Themiſtocles contrary wyſe counſeled to defendeThemiſtocles a defender of the liberty of the countrye. the lyberty of the contrary. For if the Perſes fortune to haue dominion in Grece, all honeſty of maners ſhall be in daunger, all lawe, all good vertues

ſhall peryſhe. The Perſes ſhall vſe all wyllfulneſſe agaynſt their wyues and chylderen, as it were euidente they haue done agaynſt them, whiche were now ſubiect to them: therfore were it more honeſte to dye in the libertye, than willinglye to admitte ſuch lordes.
                  Thys counſell of Themiſtocles was accepted of euerye man wyth a commune conſent, that they ſhoulde defende themſelues manlye agaynſt the enemies. The Athenians beynge wroth wyth Cyrſylus for hys wycked counſell, commaunded
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                        ▪
                      to ſtone hym: and the women lykewyſe ſtoned hys wyfe, becauſe her huſband had put forth ſuch counſell, the whyche if they had folowed, they ſhoulde haue broughte all theyr chylderen to diſhoneſty.
                  Thys dede is prayſed for the vertue, and is worthy of remembraunce, that they woulde rather dye for the lybertye of the contry, than they ſhoulde yelde themſelues to a ſtraunge nacyon, to ouerthrowe the ſtate of theyr citye and all policye and honeſty.
                  As the Athenians aſked counſell at the aunſwere
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                        ▪
                      of Apollo at Delphas, it was aunſwered them: that they ſhould haue victory with walles of wood: the whiche Themiſtocles expounded of the defence of ſhyppes, and he exhorted that leauynge the citye, they ſhould lead their wiues and children into the ſhyppes: for their citie ſhould at length not be able to wythſtande the power and ſo great multitude of the Perſians, beſyde that alſo be not the Perſes very well appointed by ſee.
                  Thys counſell was alowed, and the reſidue

of the cities haue folowed it. Sparta and Corinthus, the whiche with a furnyſhed nauye helde by force the ſtraightes of the ſea, by the yle Salamina, leſt they mighte be compaſſed by the multitude of the ſhyppes that Xerxes had.
                  Whan Xerxes hearde that the Grekes had made a nauy, and vnderſtode that greate daunger ſhoulde come to hym, yf the Grekes vſed the ſea frely, and as they had oportunitie, ſhould falle into the kyngdome: it was counſelled Xerxes, that contrarywiſe he ſhoulde combre the Grekes wyth warre vpon the ſea. The ſame was done. But as the Grekes had the victory, the mooſte part of the Perſes was diſcomfyted, and many ſhyppes were drouned.
                  This victory reſtored a courage to all Grece, and made Xerxes feble. The kynge him ſelfe was not in the battaill, but remaininge with a fewe ſhyppes vpon the coaſt, he dyd onelye beholde it. All the Grecians rendred the renoume of the battaill to Themiſtocles onelye, becauſe that the victory beynge gotten by his counſell, all Grece was ſaued.
                  Amonge the reſte of the traynes, whyche Themiſtocles vſed in thys warre, I thoughte toThemiſtocles ſuttyll deuyſe. rehearſe thys one ſuttyll deuyſe. Whan Xerxes was abaſhed after the battayll, he thought the kynge mighte eaſelye be broughte thereto, that leauinge Grece, he ſhoulde returne for alltogether into Perſia wyth the reſte of hys armye.
                  Therfore faynynge hym ſelfe humbly proſtrate▪ as wyllinge to procure fauoure by the kynge, he

cauſed to ſhew hym by the meſſenger, that the Grekes deuiſed to breake the bridge, the whyche he had cauſed to be layde before vpon the ſea: Wherefore to haue hym ſtrayght waye oute of Grece, before the occaſyon of flyenge were taken him, wythout he woulde caſt him ſelfe in great daunger. As he hearde thys tydynge, he made him ſtrayghte waye readye to flye. But whan in flyenge he fande the bridge broken by the tempeſte, he paſſed ouer wyth a lytle boate, euen wyth vtter daunger of his lyfe, becauſe the ſea was troubled wyth the vehemency of the floudes. Of thys wyſe dyd God turne the fortune of the dice, and punyſhed the
                        
                           〈…〉
                        mple 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        ▪
                      pryde. Great princes haue here an example ſett before them, whereby they muſt learne not to truſte in their puyſſaunce, but that in the feare of God and truſt to God muſt great thynges be taken in hande. That he had thys ſhamefull ende, for becauſe this expedicion made euery man amaſed, and alſo for becauſe Xerxes dyd brynge on to Grece ſuch a great multitude and power none otherwiſe than in oure tyme the Turke was conſtrayned to forſake the city of Vienne with great ſhame, which came into Germany with an hooſt of two hundreth thouſande men.
                  Howbeit Xerxes departynge out of Grece, left Mardonius the capytayne there wyth thre
                        
                           〈…〉
                        ni
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                        ▪
                      thouſande ſouldyours: and that for thys cauſe, becauſe the kynge perſuaded by Mardonius counſell wente into Grece, agaynſte the mynde and wyll of the other Lordes.
                  
                     And becauſe it happened not as Mardonius promyſed, therefore dredinge leſt beynge returned home he might loſe hys heade, becauſe of the miſchaunce of the warre, he deſyred that he might be left in Grece wyth that army, to aſſaye all fortunes of warre, yf by chaunce he coulde make feble the affayres of the Grekes. Xerxes than ſuffred that, and betoke hym to hys fortune.
                  Fyrſt beganne Mardonius frendely to entreate the Grekes, that hauing layde before them tolerable condicions of peace, they woulde willingly yeld themſelues. But the Grekes beynge become more couragious, by reaſon of the victory, refuſed vtterly all dominion of the Perſes, and denyenge the leage, aſked that he ſhoulde defende hym ſelfe with force and fyghtynge hande. Than toke Mardonius and burnt the citye of Athenes, and wente thorough vntyll Thebe: for they of Thebe were fallen to the Perſes. The Athenians and Lacedemonians makyng than agayn a freſh army by land of an hundreth thouſand men, met at ſundry times with Mardonius in battayll: at the laſte Mardonius conſtrayned for faut of vytayls, made an ende. AlexanderAlexander. kyng of Macedony was wyth the Perſes, of whom we made mencion before: the ſame ſhewed the Grekes before the euenynge, that they ſhould make them ready in armes on the next day, for Mardonius was determined to pyche hys laſt felde, and that was ſo done, but the Perſes beyng ouercome, loſt the felde, Mardonius beyng ſlayne alſo, whiche thynge the other counſellers of kyng

Xerxes tolde him before the warre began. But this was the ende of ſo great a ſettyng forth to warre: and whan this warre was ended, the cities of Grece began too encreace in power and enlargynge of their dominion ſubduyng many yles of the Perſes, whiche they adioyned to their dominion. Moreouer the Grekes beyng become puyſſaūt, waxed alſo haut and preſumtuous, and for deſyre of dominion, they procured alſo inwarde ſedicion & warre with in themſelues: and beyng ouercome with mutuall damages that eche had done to the other, they were conſtrayned fynally to yeld themſelues to ſtraunge princes, quenchynge and deſtroyeng all the eſtate of their common wealth and the vertues, whereby they floryſhed before. But of this ſhall we treate a lytle hereafter.
                  It is neceſſarye to knowe Themiſtocles exampleThemiſto
                        
                           〈…〉
                        rded for 
                           〈…〉
                        . before any thyng, the whiche for ſo muche as he was the man, by whoſe prouiſſe and counſail whole Grece was ſaued, for the whiche thynge alſo hys prayſes are auaunced, more then of any valeaunt captaine, whiche Grece had: yet was he euel rewarded of his citeſens: for they droue him out of y• citie. This thanke geueth the commō people for the moſt worthye vertues: yea the deuell hymſelfe blyndeth men, that they do not acknowledge ſo hygh gyftes of God. Wherfore it behoueth the beſt and excelle
                        •
                     t men to haue pacience before all thynges: for it can not bee, but they muſt haue grefes and all vnthankfulneſſe in that ſtate of lyfe. After that fledThemiſtocles fl
                           ••
                        th too Artaxerxes. Themiſtocles to Artaxerxes, by whome he was had in greate honor, in all thynges equall to the

princes and peeres of his royalme. It is wrytten alſo, that Artaxerxes ſhould haue ſayde: he coulde wyſhe his enemies no more euyll, but that they blinded with ſuch madneſſe, dyd put awaye wyſe men from them.
               
               
                  Of Artaxerxes with the longe hande.
                  
                     AS Xerxes was deade, raigned his ſonneLōgimanus▪ that is with the lōg hand. Artaxerxes: whoſe right hande was longer than the left, whereof he gat the ſurrname, wyth the long hand. Thys kynge is chefely prayſed for his ſyngular wyſedome and gentleneſſe of maners and endeuour of peace. Therefore do I rehearſe his hiſtorye here nomore at length, that wee maye finallye returne to the Iewyſh hyſtories, leſt we be ignoraunce what ſtate was in the church and ſpyrytuall kyngdome.
               
               
                  Of Zorobabel the Iewyſh capitayne.
                  
                     WE haue ſhewed before that in the Bible is one of the Perſian kynges called Aſſuerus: but the ſame wasAſſuerus. Darius Hiſtaſpis, and as I ſuppoſe, thys Darius is Aſſuerus, which hadHeſter. quene Heſter. Herodotus doth alſo make mencion of Artiſtona, the whiche Darius had beſyde queneArtiſtona▪ Atoſſa. Atoſſa, and ſayeth that the ſame Artiſtona was very well beloued of Darius: and it appeareth that thys ſame was Heſter. Philo writeth alſo that the hiſtory of Iudith happened in the tyme of this Darius: and that Arphaxad, whereof the hiſtory of Iudith maketh mention, was captayn of y• Aſſyrians,

after that they were now fallen from Cyrus, wh
                        •
                      was ouercome of the Scythyes. I do not diſalow thys meanynge of Philo: but verely as I do ſuppoſe, the hiſtory of Iudith was now already fulfilled, before that Iuda was led into bondage: and alſo before the Perſians monarchy.
                  For Arbaces kynge of the Medes was beforeArbaces. the monarchy of the Perſes: and Ninius was deſtroyed in the tyme of the Perſians kyngdome: and whan the Perſes had the monarchy, nether Ninius, nor the Medes had theyr kynge. Howbeit I graunt here euery man to defende hys meanynge.
                  After Darius Hiſtaſpis ſetteth Philo Artaxerxes wyth the longe hande, paſſynge ouer king Xerxes, but doutleſſe for none other cauſe, ſaue as is ſhewed before namely, than whā Xerxes was gone into Grece, Darius wyth the long hand gouerned the royalme in the Eaſt in the meane ſeaſon. And this is that Darius with the longe hande, whiche
                        
                           〈…〉
                         is, 
                           〈…〉
                         long hand. gaue the Iewes leaue the ſeconde tyme to buylde agayne the temple. For though Cyrus had permitted the Iewes to returne to Ieruſalem, for to tyll theyr lande, and to reſtore the kingdome & the worſhip of God: neuertheleſſe in the meane ſeaſon after Cyrus death▪ were they letted by the borderers, y• the building could not goo forewarde, vntill the ſeconde yere of Artaxerxes with the long hand, whō Philo calleth Darius with the longe hande. Theſame commaunded in the ſecond yeare of his king
                     
                        〈…〉
                      by a commune proclamation & commaundement, that Ieru
                        •
                     al
                        •
                      & the temple ſhuld be repared.

This was the occaſion, by the whiche the Iewyſh natiōs was reſtored to his libertie, inſtituted again the gouernaunce of the royalme, with the Gods ſeruice, and builded agayne the temple and cities. And though Iuda had not hetherto his kynges, yet had they princes of Dauids poſterite, vntil that tyme, that the Machabees began to reigne. Firſte reigned zorobabel, whoſe poſteritie what fortune they had, and how finally the whole kyngdome is tranſlated from Dauids poſteritie, ſhall we ſhewe hereafter. For ſo was it prophecied afore by the prophetes, that Chriſte ſhould be borne about thatChriſtes cō
                        myng. tyme of Dauids bloude, that foren princes ſhoulde vſurpe to them the kyngdome of the Iewes, that was now already alienated.
               
               
                  The rekenynge of the ſeuenty wekes out of Daniel.
                  
                     IT was ſhewed Daniel by heauenly reuelacion of Chriſtus commynge, and howe long the Iewyſh people ſhould laſt. Ther is a notable wytneſſe in this prophecy, to confirme the certaynte of our faith againſt the Iewes, whiche ſtriue and contende that Chriſt is not yet come, and wayte yet for another Meſſias.
                  Verely the rekenyng of the tyme appointed by Daniel, is eaſy, and ſpecially it is pleaſaunt to know thereby, that Chriſte was ſurely come about that tyme, the whiche Daniel hath preſcribed. For though other do count diuerſly, yet if ye go not frō the order of the hiſtories, there ſhall bee found no great diſſention, wherfore ye could doubt. For the diligent rekening of the tyme, is requiſite to repete

out of Ptolome theſe Eclipſes, that are happened, and to gather out of them ordely euery yeare: but that were not one mans laboure. And diligently ought Byſhops to occupie them in theſe thynges, with doyng coſtes, that the vnderſtandynge of ſo notable prophecies, myght bee clerely had in the churche. I truely wyll gather here out of the beſt hiſtories the nombre of the yeares, and endeuoure to make the rekenyng there of very playne.
                  Daniel ſayeth: Seuenty wekes are concludedThe place in Daniel of the ſeuenty wekes. vpon this people, and ſpecially accordynge to the commaundement of buyldyng agayne Ieruſalem, ſhalbe ſyxty and nyne wekes, vntill Chriſtes kyngdome, and than ſhall Chriſt be put to death.
                  Fyrſt muſt it be knowen what that the wekes do yearly ſignifye, ſo that euery weke make ſeuen yeares, the whiche maye eaſely be proued. Wherefore the ſeuenty wekes make foure hundreth and nynety yeares.
                  Secondly ſayeth Daniel: Chriſte ſhalbe put to death after thre ſcore and nyne wekes: but ſo that he teache the half weke, and afterward bee put to death. The tyme and office of Chriſt is notable expreſſed of this maner.
                  Thyrdly muſt the nyne and ſeuenty wekes bee rekened from the ſeconde yeare of Darius Longimanus, that is, wyth the long hande: For then dyd God ſende Zachary and Aggeus the prophetes, that they ſhoulde comforte and certaynely aſſure the people of repairyng Ieruſalem hereafter without any hynderaunce. And of this worde, that is, of this reuelacion are the aungels wordes to be vnderſtande:

Becauſe then was made the ſure promyſe to the people, of the furtheraunce of the temples repayryng.
                  Beſyde that commaunded Longimanus that ſelf ſame yeare by an open commaundement, that 
                        •
                     he Iewes ſhoulde not be hyndered of their purpo
                     
                        ••
                     d worke of buyldynge the citie and temple, as it was done before. But all this is to be red in the bodies of Eldras.
                  And ſurely to this ſame delaye of tyme in repairyng of the temple had ſaint Ihon reſpect in the ſeconde chapter of his goſpell, where the Iewes ſaid, that in buyldyng of the temple, were ſpent ſyx and fourty yeares: for that is the nombre of the yeares, from the ſeconde yeare of Cyrus, vntyll the ſyxte yeare of Longimanus, wherein the worke of the temple was accomplyſhed.
                  But now is it gathered out of the booke of the Machabees, and out of Ioſephus, that from the begynnyng of Alexander, after the death of the laſt Darius vntyll Chriſte was borne, to be thre hundreth and ten yeares.
                  From Chriſtes byrth vntyll hys baptyme thyrty yeares.
                  Summa, from the begynnynge of Alexander vntyll the baptyme of Chriſte, thre hundreth and fourty yeares.
                  To theſe put the tyme from the ſeconde yeare of Longimanus, vntyll Alexander after the death of the laſte Darius, and as Metaſthenes counteth there ſhall be a hundreth and fyue and fourty yeares.
                  
                     Summa, from the ſecond yere of Longimanus vntill, the baptiſme of Chriſte are foure hundreth, foure ſcore and fyue yeare.
                  And therfore thre ſcore and nyne yearly wekes make euen foure hundreth and foure ſcore and two wekes. Whereby it is manifeſt, that when Chriſte was baptyſed, were fulfylled three ſcore and nyne yearly wekes, and in the weke folowynge taught Chriſt, & in the ſame half weke was he put to death: For Chriſte was put to death the fourth yeare after that he was baptiſed. Wherfore when this weke that foloweth is added to the thre ſcore and nine, there ſhalbe ſeuenty wekes: and this is the maner to count the tyme appoynted by Daniel. For after Chriſtes death are the Iewes nomore Gods people, and their temple was afterward an abominacion, the whiche Daniel witneſſed playnly.
                  Beſyde this are other notable doctrines, and conſolacions of troubled cōſciences in this prophecy, of Chriſtes office and kyngdome, that he came to preache forgeueneſſe of ſynnes: but to expounde all this maketh to no purpoſe here, nother is it here taken in hande.
                  I haue truely ſought out with ſo great diligēte as I could, the maner of countyng the ſeuenty wekes of Daniel: nother do I fynde that it can greatly varye, if ye wyll folowe the fourme of hiſtories. For though ye wyll not folowe Metaſthenes, yet doth the rekenyng of the Grekes agre very well here with. For after the countyng of the Grekes are betwene the death of Alexander, and the beginnyng of Auguſtus twoo hundreth and foure ſcore

yeares, the whiche I can proue with very ſtronge reaſons. If ye do now take the yeares of the Perſians, after thee ſeconde yeare of Longimanus by the Grekes, ye ſhall fynde the ſame alſo.
                  After Alexander vntyll Chriſtes byrth, are thre hundreth and two and twenty yeares.
                  After Chriſtes birth vntyl hys baptyſme thyrty yeares.
                  Put therto the nomber of the Perſians from the ſecond yeare of Longimanus an hundreth and two and thyrty yeares after the Grekes.
                  Summa of this is foure hundreth, foure ſcore and foure yeares.
                  So perfectly do the hyſtories of the Grekes agre with the tyme that is founde in Ioſephus and Philo, that ye maye openly perceaue, the tyme of Chriſtes commynge to be moſte fyttly appoynted by Daniel. And truely I doubte not, but wyſe and learned men will alowe and teſtifye, that both theſe rekenynges that we haue ſet here, maye bee very well proued by wytneſſes of hyſtoryes. And without it were to longe, I coulde brynge yet other more rekenynges, whyche ſhoulde agre with theſe alſo: So that it is no doubte, but that Daniel hath moſte ryghtely hytt thee tyme of Chriſtes commynge. It hath alſo no ſmall pyth of conſolacion or comfort, (though the maner of the tyme do not agre ſo iuſtly with euery minute,) that we may be certyfyed, that the tyme prophecyed of Daniel be longe ſence paſt. Wherfore are the Iewes in manifeſt erroure, whiche can by no reaſons proue, that the ſame tyme is not yet paſt, though they wyll vnderſtande

the wekes of dayes or yeares. But her of is ynough.
                  
                     The table of the yeares of the worlde, whiche ſheweth the tyme poynted by Daniel.
                     M De. lvi vntyll the floude.
                     C C xciii. vntyll Abraham was borne.
                     C C C C xxiij. vntyll Moſes was borne.
                     L xxx. vntyll the goyng out of Egipt.
                     C C C C lxxx. vntyll Salomons temple was buylded.
                     C C xxxviii. vntyll kyng Ioas.
                     C C xci. vntil Ieconias was caried into Babylō.
                     Xi. vntyll the waſtyng of Ieruſalem by Nabuchodonoſor.
                     L xx. dured the captiuite of Babylon.
                     C xci. dured the monarchy of the Perſes after the captiuitie of Babylon.
                     Vii. was Alexander after Darius.
                     C xlvi. dured the rule of the Grekes vntyll Iuhas Machabeus.
                     C xxvij. dured the kyngdom of the Machabees as wryteth Ioſephus.
                     XXX. Herodes.
                     In the thyrtyeth yeare of Herode was Chriſte borne.
                     M. D. xxxii. ſence Chriſte our lorde and Sauiour was borne.
                     Our of this table is eaſely gathered the reaſon and maner of the yeares in Daniels wrytynge.
                     But I fynde by the Grekes the tyme after Alexanders

death of this wyſe: In the .cxiiii. Olympias dyed Alexander.
                     Clxxxiiii. Olympias began the rule of Auguſtus after the death of Iulius.
                     The xlii. yeares of Auguſtus was Chriſt borne.
                     Theſe yeares together ſence the death of Alexā
                        der make about cccxx. yeares.
                     This nomber doth not ſo greatly diſagre wyth the other aboue reherſed, and can eaſely be made to gre of learned men.
                  
               
               
                  Of Eſdras.
                  
                     A Certayne ſpace after the cōmaundement publyſhed dyd kynge Artaxerxes let Eſdras the ſcribe returne to Ieruſalem. And duely not without a cauſe ought mē
                     tion to be made of this man in the hiſtories: for theEſdras gathered together the bookes of the Bible. bookes of the holy ſcripture, that were now ſcattered and ſtrowed, dyd he gather agayne and ſet in order. For this worke was worthy to be the duety of a true byſhop. Becauſe that without holy ſcripture, cannot be maynteined the true religion and worſhyp of God.
                  In the tyme of this Artarerxes Longimanus began the great warre of Peloponneſus, whicheThe warre of Peloponneſus. the Grekes had amonge themſelues, in the whiche the citie of Athens at the laſt was vtterly deſtroyed. This warre laſted neare hande vntyl the ende of the Perſian monarchy: and therfore I wyl firſt brefely reherſe in their order the Perſian kyng. s. ſuche as are yet behynde.
               
               
                  Of Darius the baſtarde.
                  
                     
                     DArius the baſtarde reigned after Longimanus, and of truth he was not the ſonne of Lōgimanus, but had his ſiſter to wife and was his brother in lawe. He had two ſonnes, At taxerxes whom they cal Mnemon, and Cyrus the yonger. Artaxerxes ſucceded his fatherArtaxerxes Mnemon, Cyrus. in the empire. Cyrus was made moſt puiſſaunt in Ionia.
               
               
                  Of Artaxerxes Mnemon.
                  
                     AS Darius was deade, Cyrus began to take falſly to hym the kyngdome: for beſyde that he ruled in a moſt puiſſaunt duchy, he was apte alſo for all manner of thing, and delited chefely in warre, and therfore armed he hymſelf with great power againſt his brother.The warre of Cyrus agaiſt 
                           •••
                         brother. Beſide this had his mother more affection to hym, than to his brother, whiche had a modeſt and gentle mother wit. But God did not proſper this wicked enterpriſe of Cyrus: for in a battaill, where he tought againſt his brother, was he ſlaine. Artaxerxes declared hymſelfe not without courage in this battaill: for he was greueouſly wonded of Cyrus, and lept vpon another horſe, that he ſhoulde knowe, that the victory came to hym afterwarde by God only.
               
               
                  Of Ochus.
                  
                     OChus the ſonne of Artaxerxes was moſte gredy of mans bloud: for beſide the great tyranny that he vſed, he ſlew alſo his own brothern. He buylded the citie Sidon, and brought Egypt againe to the Perſian monarchy:

but they kept the loyalte of their yeldyng not very longe. At the laſt was he ſlayn of one of his gouernours.
               
               
                  Of Arſames.
                  
                     ARſames was the ſōne of Ochus: the ſame was made kyng being yet yonge, by the capitain of the hoſt, which flew his father Ochus. But when Arſames began now to wax great, the capitain of the hooſt fearyng, by reaſon of the wycked dede that he had done, he ſlew by a diſceat this Arſames alſo. Afterward makyng a league with Codomanus prince of Armenia, he toke to hym the kyngdome alſo, and called hym, Darius. Thus was the kynred of the noble princeCyrus kynred was quē
                        ſhed. Cyrus quenſhed, and the kyngdome of the Perſians beyng tranſlated from Cyrus poſterite, came to a foren prince. Nether is that onely to be lamented, that ſuche power and honour, and ſo hygh gyftes of God, were deleyed and put out of remembraunce within ſo few yeares: but muche rather, that Cyrus folowers beyng ſtrayght waye vnlyke hym, dyd declare their father to haue no maner of vertue, the whiche appeareth in Ochus, whoſe feates of tyranny gaue occaſion that the whole kynred of Cyrus was abolyſhed.
               
               
                  Of the laſt Darius.
                  
                     The ſame was ſtraunge from Cyrus but heDarius the laſt. was made prince of Armenia by kyng Ochus for his noble actes of chyuairy, for the whiche actes alſo he was choſen kyng by them, that had ſlayne Arſames, left he ſhould be

reuenged of Ochus, that had done hym good. ButAn example of vnkyndneſſe. being blynded by this occaſion, and with the hope of the kyngdome that was offered hym, he forgat all the benefites, that he had receaued of Ochus, and hauyng the kyngdome, he called hymſelfe Darius, that nothyng ſhould be wanting to the royall dignitie. But he was greuouſly puniſhed for his vnkynoneſſe and diſloyaltie. For when he was vanquyſhed of Alexander, loſynge all his landes and kyngdome, he loſt alſo his lyfe & the whole monarchie of Perſia. But we ſhall treate more largely hereof in the begynning of the third monarchie, and when we ſhall ſpeake of Alexander.
               
               
                  The Warres of the cities of Grece.
                  
                     WE haue touched before how the Grekes waxed welthy and preſumptuous when the Perſes were driuen out of their landes: for pride and preſumption do commonly folow after great proſperitie. Wherfore duryng this monarchie, they had great and durable warres among themſelues, by the whiche whole Grece went finally to naught: inſomuche, that after ward it was open for euery man to breake in. And alſo for the moſt honeſt gouernaūce & lawes, which they vſed in their cōmon welth, ſucceded filthineſſe and moſt corrup maner of behaueour. And whome would it not greatly pitie to reade, that ſo many & great commodities or yuels, and ſo durable and wickedMoſt great warres rayſed very lyght cauſes. warres are rayſed of ſo lyght cauſes. They be examples herely not onely to be wondered at, but alſo moſt worthyeſt to be marked, for they may admonyſhe

men, that they take no warre in hand lightely and for euery lyght cauſe, but only conſtrayned by great neceſſitie: ſeing the warre raiſed amonge the Grekes for a ſmall occaſion, could be in no maner nor meanes be ſwaged and layed downe, tyll finally ſtraunge people fallyng into Grece, oppreſſed both partes.
                  It is not my mynde here to deſcribe this whole warre: for Theucidides, Xenophon, and afterward other haue written therof whole bokes. But I wil reherſe one thyng among all other, namely what fall the citie of Athens hath had in this warre, and what miſery ſhe hath ſuffered, when ſhe was taken in. And agayne how ſhe was at the laſt reſtored againe by the vertues, moderation and pacience of ſome good men. For as hautneſſe, hardineſſe & preſumption brought the ſtate of the citie in decay, euen ſo dyd pacience and mekeneſſe of maners reſtore the ſame agayne.
                  The begynnyng of the warre was aforen cauſe,The occaſiōs of the ware of Peloponneſuswere light and how lōg they laſted. the whiche the Athenians myght eaſely haue eſthued. For the Corinthians were enemies to the citie Corcyra, the which required ayde of the Athenians: and optained it the eaſier, becauſe that the Athenians, which were already ſtrong on the ſee, hoped that through the league and confederation of thē of Corcyra, which had alſo great puiſſaūce vpon the ſee, they ſhould become lordes of whole Grece. On the other ſyde y• Corinthiās required aſſiſtaūce of the Lacedemonians, and of this wyſe was Grece diuided. The Lacedemonians did ioyne them ſelfs with the Perſes, of whome they were aſſiſted with

mony and victuals: howbeit the Perſes vſed in the meane ſeaſon diſloyalte or falſhode, leſt the Lacedemoniās ſhould become to mighty. And this warre dured (as ſayth Xenophon) eight & twenty yere, frō the tyme of Longimanus, vntil Axtarerxes Mnemon, and many cities peryſhed myſerably in thys warre. Alſo may be ſene a wonderfull alteration of fortune in the examples of this warre. For when Alcibiades was captayne of the Athenians, were the Lacedemonians greately put to the worſe and ſlayn, and that in the foure and fyue and twentieth yeare: ſo that they deſpayred euer to come to their former abilitie. Howbeit ſhortely after, in the nexteAlcibiades. yere was the worlde turned. For when Alcibiades was driuen out of the citie, though the en
                        ••
                     e of ſome malepart or euel men, were the Athenians ſlayen ofLyſander. Lyſander by the citie Egos of Potanus, where had happened a ſtraunge wonder in the begynnyngeA wōder ſene in the tyme of the Greciās warre. of this warre. For in the ayre was ſene a great fyre the ſpace of thre ſcore and fyftene dayes. Afterward fell a great ſtone from aboue into the cicie. After this battaill was the citie of Athens enuironed with a heuy ſyege. Many died of hunger. Being demaūded to yelde them, vpō this cōdicionThe obſtma
                        
                           ••
                         and malepartneſſe of yt Athenians in time of warre confirmed alſo with a deare. that they ſhould breake downe the towres & fortreſſes of the citie: they refuſed malepartly the cōdictōs of peace, & remained by their purpoſe: geuing alſo a common commaundement, that who ſo ſhould coū
                     ſaill to make a league of agremēt with the enemies, ſhold be put to death. As lately is happened with y• Florentines about .ii. yeres paſt. But after fyue monethes were the Athenians cōſtrained with hūger

to ſende Ambaſſadours into the hooſtes tentes too demaunde peace. Wherevpon when they had taken deliberacion in the counſaill of thoos that had con
                     
                        •
                     ederated themſelues the Corinthians and Thebanes did conſtantly counſail, that the citie of Athens ſhould be ouerthrowen euen out from the foundacion, and that of all their dominion ſhould be made commune paſtures. But the Lacedemonians reproued that, ſuppoſyng to be not honeſt to quenche and caſt it away at once of ſuche wyſe and to forgett the remembraunce of ſuche benefites, wherewyth this citie had holpen whole Greke againſt the Medes and Perſes. Moreouer could not alſo ſo excellent a ſtate of this citie be ouerthrowē, without the incredible hurte of all the Grecians. For they ſayd: that Grece ſeyeth with two eyes, whereof the oneSparta and Athens are two eyes of Grece. was Sparta, the other Athenes: Wherfore hede muſt be taken, leſt Grece haue but one eye. Wherevpon it was concluded finally that Athenes beyng ſaued, onely the towres and walles ſhoulde bee caſt downe, and a certaine gouernaunce ſhould bee preſcribed the Athemans, after the whiche they ſhould lyue, and ſo ſhould peace be made on both parties.The yeldyng of the Athenians. The Athenians yelded themſelues frely vpon theſe condicions, and the walles were caſt downe with great triumphe: for with minſtrelſy dyd they daūſe alſo. Part of their nauy was brent, and part caried they with them. This happened about the ſeuen & twentyeth yeare when this warre had laſted. Neuertheleſſe were the Lacedemonians alrayd of one Alcibiades, whiche was ſled to the Perſes when he was driuen out of Athenes. Wherfore the Lacedemonians

required of the Perſes, that they wouldAlcibiades Ayeng to the Perſes is ſlayn. The Perſes are an example of diſlopal
                           ••
                        . ſlayn Alcibiades, whiche the Perſes did by a trap though the Perſes had receaued Alcibiades according to the office of hoſpitalitie, and that he had put all his truſt in the faith of the Perſes. But it chaū
                     ſeth ſo with men, that were fortune doth incline her ſelf, that waye doth mans fauour loue alſo. Therefore ought he chefely to be ware, euen of the vnfaith fulneſſe offrendes, whiche is out of proſperitie, and he whom men do enuie and yrke, for hatred of hys vertues. This Alcibiades was hyghly furniſhedAlcibiades 
                           •
                        as 
                           ••
                        oble in 
                           •
                        ea
                           •
                        es of war but reſtleſſe & 
                           ••
                        ſ
                           •
                        . with feates of warre or chiualry, but of an vnquiet minde, & he was cauſe of the breche of the peace that was many yeares before concluded betwene the Lacedemonians and Athenians: He had vſed in all Grece ſo many wyles and ſo ſundry craftes, that it was euen commonly ſayde: If there had happened to be borne two Alcibiades in Grece, it muſt nedes haue gone wholy to naught. Howbeit ſuche endeuoure can not proſper, therfore died Alcibiades fynally of this ſorte. And though the warres of the cities were now ſynyſhed, yet began now fyrſt the deſtruccion of men at Athenes. For ſeyng the citie of Athens was full of rebellions, there were ordeyned of the Lacedemonians thirty men, whom they
                        
                           〈…〉
                        yraū 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         were ordeyned at Athens. called Tiranny, to whom was committed aucthoritie, that they ſhould puniſhe the ſedicious rebelles without law or iudgement: and leſt any man ſhould withſtande this aucthoritie with any ſedicion, they layed a great garniſon of ſouldiours in the caſtell.
                  Of the reſtoryng of Athens after the deſtruction of it.
                  
                     
                     THe Lacedemonians vſed this ſharpneſſe, to puniſh the common commotions, and hygh neceſſitie conſtrayned them to do that. The thirty men vſed their aucthorite at the firſt againſt no man, ſaue the ſedicious: afterward did the olde hatred of ſome of them bruſte out againſt ye beſt of the citie, but good men did they put to death: ſemblable examples of ye like we haueTheramenes is put to death. knowen in oure dayes. And whan this diſpleaſed one of them, named Theramenes, a doughty man and iuſt, they ſlew him alſo, to cauſe other to be afrayed: and that more is, thei parted the goodes of thē that were put to death, among their compainions. The beſt of the citeſens fled to Thebe and Argos, where for pitie of ſo vnworthy myſery, the were receaued, euen agaynſt the commaundement of the Lacedemonians, whiche was that no man ſhoulde receaue the Athenians that fled or were banyſhed. Amonge theſe bannyſhed men was one that was doughty and valiaunt in the common wealth, called Thraſybulus: the ſame ioynynge with hym theThraſibulus reſidue of the bannyſhed men, and a preuy ayde or ſubſydy of them of Thebe, taketh in the caſtell by Athens, and afterwarde goyng to Athens, and pychyng a felde, vanquiſheth the thyrty Tyrannos▪ and recouereth the citie. The citeſens that were fled were reſtored by this Thraſybulus: and as cō
                     cernyng gouernaunce of policy, iudgementes and lawes, the ſtate of the whole common wealth was chaunged, after the olde cuſtome. Thraſybulus deſeruedThe prayſe of Thraſibulus. chefely a greate prayſe for his moderation of the mynde, that after ſo notable a victory,

wherein he had alſo taken many of the enemies priſouers, he woulde rather ſpare them, then by good ryght to ſlaye them. And when he conſidered that there ſhould be no ende of puttyng to death, yf thee goodes of the citeſens that were taken away ſhould be reſtored to euery man agayne or to the true heyres, namely, that were already come to the third or
                        
                           ••
                        orget
                           •
                        ulneſſe of i
                           ••
                        uries is ordeined. fourth poſſeſſor: he bande them euery one with ſuch a bande amonge themſelues, that no man ſhoulde thenceforth remembre any vengeaunce or iniury done, but that euery man ſhould kepe that he had, & kepyng the common peace, euery man to be content with his portion or lot. By this meanes and moderation was a quietneſſe ſet in the common wealth. And this is a noble example, that with beneuolēceA notable exāple to main
                        
                           •
                        ame v
                           〈…〉
                        e. and forgenyng is procured a more durable concord in ſuche cinyll commotion, then that euery man wyl go forth with rigour and force.
                  Afterward were the Lacedemonians become proude and haut alſo with this lucky chaunce: For they would dryue Perſes out of Aſia, whiche had
                        
                           •
                        odon capitayn of the Perſes. ſuccoured them. But the Perſes for that tyme made Codon capitaine of their hooſt, whiche was fled from Athens in the ciuill commotion: of hym were the Lacedemonians diſcomfyted. The Lacedemonians takyng greueouſly their miſfortune, layde al the fault vpon them of Thebe, becauſe they had entertained the bannyſhed Athenians: wherfore theyThe Lacedemoniās 
                           •
                        ight with ye Thebanes, and a
                        
                           ••
                         di
                           •
                        con
                           •••
                        ed fell into their contryes of the whiche roſe a new occaſion of warre, in the whiche the Lacedemonians beyng ouercome, were wholy vndone, & the Thebane power encreaſed.
                  
                     Whan this warre was finiſhed, the ThebanesThe Thebanes deſtroye the Phociās. toke another warre againſte the Phocians, the whiche were wholye abolyſhed, and the reſidue were banniſhed. Finally dyd Philippe kyng of MacedonyPhilippe deſtroyed the Thebanes. diſcomfite and tame them of Thebe. And thus were fyrſt Athens, after that Sparta, finally Thebe deſtroyed, and al that power of the Grekes came to naught. Howbeit whan the Athenians and Thebanes dyd not kepe the conditions and appointementes of peace made with kinge Philippe, he was cōſtrained to inuade for to take in al Grece.
                  This is ynough ſpoken in brefe maner of the dolefull warres of Grece, the whiche were an hundreth and thyrtye yeares after Xerxes, durynge which ſpace was lytel peace. Theſe warres are at large written by Thucidides and Xenophon, and ſome other. We haue thought it therfore ſufficient, yf we had opened and declared the example of the Athenians, y• which is the principal in that hiſtory.
               
               
                  Of the Philoſophers.
                  
                     IN the meane tyme that thys befell, dyd learnynge alſo floryſh. Hippocrates theHippocrates Phiſicion lyued from the tyme of Longimanus, vntill Ochus, an hundreth and foure yeares. And beſyde that all Grece had hym in greate eſtimacion, he was alſo muche made of by the kinges of Macedony, by the which alſo he ſpent great part of his lyfe. Soranus wryteth that HippocratesSoranus wrote the life of Hippocrates. was ſent for by kynge Perdicas, becauſe many iudged that the kynge was fallen into a conſumption, and was forſaken of other Phiſitions.

But whan Hippocrates was come, he perceaued that the kynge was not ſycke for febleneſſe of bodely ſtrength, but that he pined for loue and inwarde ſorowe. For he loued out of meaſure the handemayden of his father, & as oft as he ſawe her, chaunged both the mynde and colour in the kynge. Of thysPerdicas was healed of Hippocrates. wyſe perceaued Hyppocrates the cauſe of the ſyckneſſe, and gaue remedy to dryue it awaye. Beſyde this, whan the peſtilence raigned, he cauſed a great☞ woode to be ſett on fyre agaynſte the infect ayer, whence the infection of the ayer came: and of thys wyſe kept he the whole contry Theſſalia ſafe from the peſtilence. He was alſo renoumed of naturall miracles. Vpon his graue were bees a greate ſeaſon, with whoſe hony were ſycke chylderen healed, that were anoynted therewyth.
                  About the tyme of Artaxerxes Mnemon, was Socrates, whych by the enuy of hys aduerſaryesSocrates. was poyſoned and dyed in the preſon. He was accuſed to be a brynger vp of a newe learninge in the citye. But by the prouidence of God, were the aduerſaries not longe after puniſhed worthelye, for they were put to death alſo.
               
               
                  Of Plato, Eudoxus, Ariſtoteles.
                  
                     AFter theſe were Plato and Eudoxus aPlato, Eudoxus, Ariſtoteles. very connynge Aſtrologian, whych alſo brought this ſcience oute of Egypte into Grece. After thys man was Ariſtoteles, I ſuppoſe theſe to be the chefe amonge the Philoſophers, and after my iudgement are the chefe of thē Eudoxus & Ariſtoteles, namely becauſe they were

not only garniſhed with pleaſaunt wordes or reaſons, but ſtudious of the very thynges. For they accuſtomed that kynde of learning, as is moſt profytable, partely to knowe the propertie of naturall thynges, and partly to learne what waye men may lyue honeſtly. It is a mooſt pleaſaunt thyng to beholde, howe God hath ſett all kynde of vertues in oure owne nature. Ariſtotele was borne of parentesAriſtotles elders. Nicomachus▪
                      not of the bafeſt or loweſt condicion. His father was Nicomachus, a man of very great authoritye by Amyntas kynge of Macedony: for he was hys Phiſicion. Hys ofſpring was of Hippocrates kynred, & for thys cauſe had kynge Philippe that was ſonne to Amintas, Ariſtotele in ſuchreputacion, afterwarde he gaue vnto him Alexander hys ſonne to be taught of him his diſcipline: and was taught of Ariſtotle the learninge of Philoſophie, that he might become more ready and wyſer to make a relacion and to geue counſell. Hetherto haue we ſpoken ynough of the Grekes affeares, which happened about the tyme of thys monarchy.
               
               
                  Of Rome.
                  
                     WHan the kynges were dryuen out of theWhan the counſels of Rome began citie, the ſtate of the common welth was chaunged. The Counſuls beganne to beare rule, and yearly were two choſen, whoſe authoritie in that office was one yeare.
                  This chaunge of the commune welth happened in the tyme of Cyrus the fyrſte monarche of the Perſes, the yeare after the worldes foundacyon thre thouſande, foure hundreth and fyftye, and

the ſeuenth yeare after that Babylon was wonne by Cyrus.
                  But beſyde other great and innumerable affeires, that befell at Rome, were alſo horrible ſedityons and chaunges in the commune wealth: in the whych are examples geuen vnto vs, that great cicyties and commune wealthes do endure ſeldome without great alterations. Howbeit in this maner, yt two Counſules wer chefe rulers, laſted perpetually, vntyll the tyme of Iulius, which vſurped the monarchye. There were betwene the beginnyng of the Counſels rulyng vntyl Iulius raigne, foure hundreth and thre ſcore and fyue yeares.
                  It were to long to rehearſe here the Romane hiſtories. I will only recite the tyme of two notable chaunces, that were befallen at Rome in the tyme of thys Monarchye.
                  In the hundreth and ſecond yeare after that the citye was builded, that is, not longe after Xerxes warre, aboute the beginninge of Longimanus raigne, roſe controuerſy and diſſenſion by the Romanes.The occaſion of the Romane lawes. For ſeynge they vſed not yet a certayne iuſtyce or lawes, men were oft vniuſtlye wronged in and out of iudgemente: for noman knewe yet perfectly what was ryght. And whan the multitude dyd for this cauſe murmure, it was ordeined, that a certayne lawe ſhould be written. Wounder it is of what importaunce be written lawes, to entertayne commune peace and concord in the commun welath, the which this example doth witneſſe manifeſtly.The Ten mē were ſent into Grece. For this thing were ten men choſen, whiche beinge ſente into Grece ſearched oute and

eſpyed the maners and lawes of the greateſt cities, and in gathering together the beſte lawes dyd vſe the counſell of Hermodorus of Epheſus and other Philoſophers. Twelue tables were written, theTwelue tables. which were hanged vp openlye before the court of Rome. This is the begynning of the written lawe of the Romanes, the which they haue fyrſt borowed of the Grekes.
                  The Ten men ruled thre yeare: for it behoued that the lawes were euery daye declared. But AppiusAppius. one of the Ten men dyd abuſe hys power, which cauſed one Virginius a cite ſins doughter to be demed for another mans bondewoman, that by that cloke of lawe he might drawe her to hym and deſtore her: The whiche as the father perceaued, and ſawe that by reaſon of Appius power his doughter coulde not be delyuered, he ſlewe her himſelf in the iudgement, leſt his ſtocke ſhoulde be ſtayned with ſuch a reproche. Afterward gathering an army, he made ready an ayde againſt Appius the tyraunt.The Ten mē were depoſed. An example of vengeaūce Than depoſynge the Ten men from their office, a new dignitie was ordeined. Appius beyng taken and caſt into pryſon, ſlew him ſelfe. Thys example ſheweth that tyranny and iniuſtice remayne not vnreuenged.
                  The thre hundreth and thre ſcore yere after theRome was brent of the Frenchemen and Germanes. Camillus. foundacion of the citye, fell into Italy an army gathered of the Frenchmen and Germanes, whyche brent Rome. But Camillus, whom the commune people had before dryuen out of the citye, played y• part of an honeſt man: for coloring wholy the iniury, the which he had ſuffred vnworthely, gathering

an army out of the next contryes, he oppreſſed the Frenche men and Germanes wythin the citye, kepyng the caſtel from beſyegynge, and the reſidue of the citeſins that were eſcaped. The dammage had the citye in the tyme of Artaxerxes Mnemon, and about that tyme nearehande was Athenes taken and ſpoiled.
                  In this hyſtory is the firſt mencion madeThe firſte 
                           〈…〉
                        ion of the Germanes in hiſtoryes. of the Germanes, and this was not wholy four hundreth yeares before Chriſtes byrth. Of theſe Germanes was Milane and other cityes in Italy buylded.
               
            
            
               Of the thyrde Monarchye.
               
                  THe thre thouſand, ſyxe hundreth and foure and thyrtyeth yeare after the worldes creation, whan the dominion of the Perſes had laſted an hundreth and nynety yeares, that is thre hundreth and twenty yeares before ChriſtesThe begynnyng of the thyrd Monarchye. byrth, began the thyrd Monarchy, the whych we call the monarchy of the Grekes: and nowe is the dominion of the worlde tranſlated from the coaſtes of the Eaſt, into the Weſt: and oute of Aſia, into Europa.
               From that time began Aſia by lytle and lytle, more

and more to dekeye, not onelye in thoſe thynges that were concerninge the power of the empyre: but alſo in thoſe thynges that concerned modeſtye of maners, vertues, gouernaunce of cōmune welthes and good learning. And though theſe thyngs are in a maner redreſſed and reſtored by the Romanes, yet at the laſt came by violence the Barbarians into Aſia, and dyd ſpoyle it, in ſo much that theſameThe decaye of Aſia. parte of the worlde, whiche was wont to bee the mooſt excellentes, by reaſon of the pleaſauntneſſe of ſituation, wyſedome, honeſtye of men and puyſſaunce of countryes, is now turned nearehand altogether into a ſynke of fylthineſſe, and murthurous denne. And contrary wyſe thoſe hygheſt giftes are nowe in the Weſte, ſeynge the worlde doth drawe by lytle and lytle to the ende.
               This monarchy beganne at Alexander kyngAlexander the greate. of the Macedonians, whom we do worthelye call the Great. For he was ſo excellent, not only in power of gouernaunce, but alſo in all other princelye vertues, that one woulde ſuppoſe he haue had but few that were equall to him. He is prayſed in Ieremye and Daniel the prophetes, becauſe he was a moſt ſharpe and happy gouernoure. Daniel deſcribeth a buck, of whom is a ramme ouercome & ouer throwen, and doth expounde manifeſtlye, that the buck is the kyng of the Grekes, and the ramme the Perſian kynge. The vertues and notable victoriesAlexander the buck, Darius the rāme wherewyth God had garniſhed kynge Alexander, gaue ſome men occaſyon to falle & fayne muche of hys ofſprynge, but I paſſe them ouer.
               But this is certayne, that great and fortunable

princes are gouerned and kepte of God, and that they are endued only of God wyth thoſe▪ vertues and gyftes. For God wyll haue the maieſtye of gouernaunces to be kept and maynteyned by thoſe, whych are noble by nobleneſſe of aunceters, and floriſhing of kynred: and it is euident, that Alexander was borne of this ſorte. Hys father was kyng Philippe, and hys mother was Olympias. And thatThe parentes of Alexander. Philippes 
                        〈…〉
                     e. nyght whan Alexander was conceaued, it is ſayde that Philippe ſawe in hys ſlepe, that he had a ſeale on Olympias belly, wherin was karued the ymage of a Lyon. It was expounded, that by that dreame was ſignifyed, that Olympias hauynge conceaued of Philippe ſhould brynge forth a mooſt puyſſaunt kynge As for Philippe and Olimpias both of them were borne of the hygheſt and mooſt nobleſt kynred of all Grece at that tyme. For Philippe (if wee maye geue credet to the mooſt true wrytynges of hyſtoryes) came of Hercules, and Olympias of Achylles, the valiaunt captayn before Troye. Theſe are the aunceters, of whoſe ſtocke the renowmed prince Alexander is borne:
               
                  The kynred of Alexanders father,
                  
                     
                        The battail of Troye,
                        Hercules
                        Hyllus
                        Cleodeus
                        Ariſtomachus
                        Temenus
                        Perdicas
                        Argeus
                        
                           Philippus
                        Eropus
                        Alcetas
                        Amyntas
                        Alexander
                        Amintas
                        Philippus
                        Alexander the great.
                     
                  
               
               Thys was the fyrſt kyng of Macedony, whoſe ofſpringe doth Herodotus deſcribe.
               And Alexander the great was borne about eight hundreth yeares after the Troian warre.
               The kynred of Olympias mother to Alexander.
               
                  Achilles
                  Pyrrhus
               
               Moloſſus kynge of Epyrus and Pielus: they were both borne of Andromachus.
               Of Pielus doth Pauſanias in the Atticall wrytinges draw the other kings of Epyrus folowing.
               
                  Tarymbas
                  Alcetas
                  Neoptolemus and Arymbas
                  Olympias Neoptolemus doughter, mother to to Alexander.
               
               This is the genealogy of Alexander, gathered out of mooſt certayn hyſtoryes, the whiche wytneſſeth that the ofſprynge of Alexander was of the poſterytye of very great men.
               Whan Philippe was ſtayne, becauſe he left thePhilippe was ſtayne becauſe he left a wicked dede vnpuniſhed. wicked dede of a great man, that had ſhamfully defloured a noble chylde vnpuniſhed, ſtrayght waye after rebelled the Illyrians and Grekes, and fell from the Macedonians, and the kyngdome of the Macedonians ſtode in greate daunger. For whan his father Philippe was ſlayne, Alexander was

only twenty yeare olde. This was in the beginning of the hundreth and eleuenth Olympias afterThe deedes of Alexander 
                        ••
                     e great. the rekening of the Grekes. But wha
                     •
                   Alexander had takē to him the adminiſtration of the royalme, he fyrſt broughte the Illyrians agayne vnder the yock, after that wente he to Thebe. For they of Thebe beſyeged the garnyſon of men, that his father Philippe had ſet in there caſtell, and alſo made a league wyth the Perſes, the whiche inuaded the kyngdome of Macedony. In the meane ſeaſon that Alexander beſyeged them of Thebe, dyd the Athenians ſende ambaſſadours to hym, for to optayne peace. Alexander receaued them fauourably. They of Thebe in the meane ſeaſon beyng obſtinate, nother ſoughte for grace, nor conditions of peace. And whan it was proclamed by the cōmaundement of Alexander before the aſſaulte, that whoſo of them of Thebe that woulde yelde them frely, and go oute of the cytye, ſhoulde ſaue theyr lyues. They of Thebe cauſed to be proclamed contrarye wyſe, that they that would haue the libertye of the Grekes wyth theirs ſaued, and the kynge of the Perſes, againſt the tyraunte Alexander, ſhoulde drawe to them. Alexanders my
                     •
                  de beynge chafed wyth that reproche, the citye was aſſaulted, and
                     
                        •
                     h
                        •
                     he 
                        〈…〉
                     o
                        ••
                     e 
                        〈…〉
                     , 
                        〈…〉
                     ate 
                        〈…〉
                      o
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     er 
                        〈…〉
                     s. wholy ſpoyled, and was neuer reſtored afterward. Thys was the fyrſte greate citye that Alexander ſubdued. For we ſe moſt communely come to paſſe, that God ordeineth puyſ
                     •
                  aunt monarches for the deſtruction of great cityes.
               Whan Alexander had now made a peace in Grece, he went into Aſia with 
                     •
                  n hooſt of fourty thouſand

                  
                     •
                  oote men, but of horſſemen onelye foure thouſand. The army that was in Aſia, the whiche his father had ſent afore, was but lytle. With this ſmall hooſt falleth he vpon the Perſes, and maketh very great feldes, and taketh many mighty cityes with ſtrong hande, amonge the whyche was Sardis, Miletus and Tyrus. In conquering of the whiche, Alexander was in many ha
                     •
                  ardes. Vanquyſhyng alſo in battaill Darius the kynge, he put him to flighte, and takyng hys mother, hys wyfe the quene, hysAlexanders gentlyneſſe. doughters and ſonne, he entreated them gentely, and as it beſemed there royall kynred. The que
                     •
                  e that was aged, called he mother: he entertayned her ſonne none otherwyſe, than if it had bene hys owne. Wounder it is what prayſe Alexander deſerued for theſe vertues in all Aſia, and with Darius himſelfe, inſomuch that frely he offred hymſelfe to treate of peace, offerynge to be content to delyuer vnto him euen the half of his royalme. To this anſwered Alexander. that this worlde can not be ruled wyth two ſonnes: but yf he were content to yeld frely him ſelfe and hys royalme, he wold gentlyDarius is ouercome of Alexander. take him to grace. But Darius renewynge an hooſt, was vanquyſhed, and was thruſt through in the flight, by his own ſeruaunt and guyde Beſſus. Alexander comming vpon Darius, founde him very greueouſly wounded, and nearehand dead, and had pitye vpon him, & promiſed him that this vnfaythfulneſſe of Beſſus againſt his owne lord, ſhuldThe diſloyal tye of Beſſus is an example of vengeaunce. not be vnpuniſhed. Wherfore Beſſus beyng taken afterward, he cauſed him to be hanged betwen two trees, that were bowed do
                     ••
                  ward, the which

whan they were ſuffred to dreſſe themſelues agayne, wyth a great ſwynge, they tare hym paynfully. Of thys wyſe was Alexander become gouernoure of Aſia, and toke in farther the reſidue of the contryes and cityes, as Babylon, Suſa &c. The beginnyngeThe begyn
                     
                        •
                     yng of Ale
                     
                        •
                     anders monarchye. of thys monarchye of Alexander was after the death of thys laſt Darius, that is, in the begynnyng of the ſeuenth yeare after that Alexander began to raygne.
               Alexander beynge become proude by thys victory, began to be diſſolut in exceſſe of dronkenneſſe. He cauſed ſome of hys frendes and counſellers to be put to death, which was the mooſt excellent and ſage captayne, the aged Parmenion. Beſyde thysParmenion. in hys wrath he ſlew hys valiant captayne Clytus in a banket, becauſe he preferred Philip his father
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . before Alexander his ſonne. But whā his maners were chaunged, fortune chaunged alſo, though the mynde was not peaſable. Ho warred alſo vpon the Iudyans and Scythians, but he liued not long after that. For he dyed the two and thyrtyeth yeare, and eleuenth moneth of hys age. He raygned after hys father Phylyps departure, no lenger than twelue yeare, and ſeuen monethes: and wythyn ſo lytle ſpace had he diſpatched ſo many and great warres, ſo that ſuche a multytude of men coulde ſcarce haue yournyed throughe ſo many contryes and realmes, euen whan it had bene peace and tranquyllyte.
               He raygned at Babylon after Daryus, only fyue yeare, and eleuen monethes. Such hyſtoryes declare that greate kynges and princes are

guyded by a certayne heauenly power or will.
               Alexander was endued with many and excellent princely vertues, the examples whereof to ſet forth here, by rea
                     •
                  on of oure induſtrye to be ſhort, hath no place. I will recite only one amonge ſo many. As oft as the playntyfe in iudgement layde ought againſt any gylty man, the ſame beynge abſent,A noble example of Alexander concerninge a good prince or iudge. he gaue only the one eare to the plaintyfe, and was wont to ſhut y• otherwyth his hand: that he might ſignifie, he would kepe the other for the gylty man, and that both partes oughte to be herde alyke, the which pertaineth to an office of a good prince and true iudge. Alexander gaue here a notable example for greate princes, that not onely the one parte ſhould be admitted to ſpeake, and laye for him ſelfe, but both partes: euen as at Athens they were wont to ſweare, the iudges that were choſen, thatWhat the iudges at Athens dyd ſweare. they ſhould geue ſentence accordinge to the lawe written, and that they ſhoulde heare both partes alyke.
               
                  Of the moderation and godlyneſſe that Alexander dyd vſe agaynſt the Iewes.
                  
                     WHan Ieruſalem was now builded agayne, the Iewes lyued in greate peace vnder thoſe Godlye kinges of the Perſes. But whan Alexander beſieged the citye Tyrus, he requyred ayde of th
                        •
                      Iewes, which anſwered: that they coulde do it by no honeſte meane, becauſe they were ſubiectes to the kynges of Perſia,

whyche alſo had receaued many and great benefytes of them. Whan Alexander had hearde thys excuſation,The ſettynge forth of Alexander againſt the Iewes. Iaddus the hygh prieſt. Alexanders reuerence to the hyghe prieſt. he was wroth, and whan he had wonne Tyrus, he came wyth hys hooſt towarde Ieruſalem. But Iaddus the hygh prieſte, puttinge on the preſtly apparell, and other aged men, went oute of the citye to mete Alexander, for to aſke peace. Whā he ſawe y• hygh preſt in that apparel, he lept incontinently from his horſſe, and fallinge vpon his knees before the preſte, he promyſed hym peace frely. All hys princes maruayled that he vſed ſo greate lowlyneſſe agaynſt a prieſt of a ſtraung nacion, and alſo that he had ſwaged the rage of hys mynd in ſo lytle ſpace. Parmenio which was entierly beloued of the kynge, by reaſon of his age and wyſedome, demaunded of him: what reuerence moued hym, that he fell ſo lowly before the preſt. To the whiche he aunſwered: that in Macedony he ſawe a lykeneſſe in hys ſlepe, ſemblable to thys preſt, that ſtode before him, and admoniſhed hym that he ſhould go into Aſia, and promyſed to ayde him: and that he dyd the honour to the verye ſame God, that than had appeared vnto hym: At that tyme went Alexander peaceably into the citye, hearynge alſo reuerentlye the preſtes reaſonynge of the doctryne of theyr religion, the whych taught hym alſo the propheſy of Daniel, that the kyng of the Grekes ſhuld rule in Aſia, and amonge the Perſes: Whereof was Alexander not a lytle coraged: and geuinge the Iewes great lybertye he enryched the temple alſo wyth great and noble gyftes. He returned to Babylon according to the prophecy of Ieremy.
                  
                     Of thys wyſe ſaued God hys weake churche at that tyme, whan for ſo notable mutation of dominions, was warre nearehande in all countryes.
               
               
                  The diuiſion of the realmes after Alexander.
                  
                     ALexander had maryed Roxane the doughterRoxane wyfe to Alexander of a prince in Perſia, whiche was great wyth chylde whan the kyng dyed. Whan the kynge was deade, and there was none other true heyre of the kyngdome, than the kynges chylde, the princes toke counſel among them, how to gouerne the kyngdome a ryghte. Firſt they thought it good to appoint certayne gouernours, vntyll the quene were delyuered: yf a man chylde were borne, the ſame ſhould be kyng byThe ſtryft amonge the princes after Alexanders death. Perdicas Arideus brother to Alexander. Perdicas crafte. inheritaunce and ſucceſſion. Contrarywyſe dyd ſome (among whom was Perdicas one) choyſe in the kynges ſteade Arideus brother to Alexander, a man fearfull, and ſyckely: and to this agreed the moſte parte. Neuertheleſſe were the princes conſtrayned to choyſe men, by whome the kyngdome ſhould be gouerned: but amonge the gouernoures was Perdicas the chefe, and that in the name of Alexanders brother: vnder which pretenſe he procured in the meane ſeaſon, that he myght by lytle & lytle optaine the whole kyngdome, and than began he to aſſaye fyrſt wyth honcſte engyns, afterwarde with open force alſo.
                  For he wo
                        •
                     d Cleopatra the ſyſter of Alexander,Cleopatra. and truſted by that meanes eaſelye to optayne the kyngdome. But Antipater that wasAntipater.
                     
gouernour in Macedonia feling this gyle of Perdicas, dyd hynder thys weddinge: wherfore dyd Perdicas on the other part his diligence, that Antipater might be taken and caſt into preſon. This is to be brefe nearehande the cauſe of the warre, whych was ryſen amonge Alexanders princes. For Perdicas had hys rebellions: againſte him on the other ſyde conſpyred Antypater, Antigonus &Antigonus. Ptolomeus. Ptolomeus. And Perdicas inuaded Ptolome firſt in Egypte, where he was forth wyth ſlayne of hys owne ſouldiours. This was a worthy puniſhment the which he deſerued, that was fyrſt begynner of the ſedicion amonge Alexanders princes. But ther could be no ende made of this tragedy, nother was there any hope of peace, without the adherentes of Perdicas were fyrſt oppreſſed alſo: yee there coulde no ſtedfaſt peace be hoped for in the worlde, ſeyng whan Alexander was deade, the world was as headleſſe. Nother appeared any thyng els in ſo great a perturbation of all thinges, than that al honeſtye and gouernaunce beynge wholy ouerthrowen, there ſhoulde be a continuall willfulneſſe o
                        •
                      murthuringe amonge men. So lytle can lawful
                        •
                      gouernaunces laſt in this worlde, without they be inſtitute and preſerued of God. But it ſemed toOf Alexanders kyngdome are made foure kyngdomes. God, that oute of Alexanders kyngedome ſhould
                        •
                      ſprynge foure mighty princes. For ſo was it propheſyed of Daniel to come to paſſe, namelye, tha
                        •
                      whan the bucks (whiche ſignified Alexander) on
                        •
                      horne ſhoulde peryſhe, foure other hornes ſhould
                        •
                      growe: the whiche the angell expoundeth of th
                        •
                      foure kyngdomes inſtitute after Alexander. Bu
                        •
                     
                     
it is chefely to be maruayled at, that God woulde the realmes to come to thoſe princes, which by degre of bloude were neare to Philippe and Alexander. Perdicas, which was not of the kinges bloud, was in the meane ſeaſon depryued of this honor. For ſo doth it moſt commonely come to paſſe, that he which coueteth the common gouernaunce withoutLawfull calling muſt be enſued. a lawfull callynge, & putteth himſelfe in greate adminiſtrations of hys owne ſwynge, is reiected of God: as we ſe what happened to Abſalon & ſome other. Moreouer theſe kyngdomes are diuided amonge thoſe princes, which before were made debities in the kyngdome by Alexander.
                  
                     Seleucus was made kynge of Syria.
                     Ptolemeus was made kyng of Egypte.
                     To Antigonus befell the kyngdome of Aſia.
                     Caſſander ruled in Macedonia and Grece.
                  
                  Theſe kynges had cruel warres for the monarchye, the which euery one coueted. But in Macedonia was the greateſt ſlaughter. CaſſanderThe tyranny of Caſſander The mother of Alexāder a rare example of chaſtite is put to death. cauſed to put to death the mooſt honeſt quene, mother to Alexander, the whiche in dyenge ſhewed a very wounderful token of chaſtitye and conſtancy. For meting the hangeman frely wyth a coragious contenaunce, aboue the coſtume of women, ſhe toke hym her heade to cutt of: and whan ſhe fell doune, ſhe couered her ſo wyth her rayment, that her body ſhould no where be diſcloſed diſhoneſtly. As for Roxane Alexanders wyfe, cauſed Caſſander to be taken & kept. But this vnfaythfulneſſe hath God punyſhed ryght well, whā after Caſſanders deathAn example of vengeaunce. hys two ſonnes Antipater & Alexander diſquieted

eche other wyth warres, for the kyngdome of Macedonye. Antipater one of them, drewe to hym Lyſimachus, which raygned by Helleſpontus, whoſe doughter he had wedded alſo. But the other brother Alexander, requyred ayde of Demetrius, the ſonne of Antigonus. But ether of them was ſlayn of hys companyon, of whom they truſted to haue ayde: Antipater of hys father in law, Lyſimachus, and Alexander of Demetrius. Fynallye beſell the kyngdome of Macedonye to Demetrius ſonne to Antigonus: for he was an honeſte and lucky prince in gouernaunce. Of this Demetrius haue all theDemetrius kyng of Macedony other kynges of Macedony theyr ofſpringe, vntyll theſe tymes, whan the laſte of hys kynred was taken of the Romanes, in whom alſo ended the kingdome of Macedony.
                  I ſet forth here the hiſtory brefely, and as it were euē in paſſing away, out of the which theſage reder may eaſely cōſider, that in Grece, whan they deſtroied themſelues, & vſed now the aſſiſtaunce of foren princes, peryſhed all honeſty of good maners wyth the dominion and commone welth. For this Demetrius (of whom we haue now made mencion) whan he was oft conuerſaunt wyth the Athenians, theyThe vnſhamfaſt ſla
                           ••
                        ery of the Athenians. ſlattered him ſo ſhamefullye, that they called hym God, and wyth prayenge dyd hym godly worſhip: yea and in theyr ſacrifice vſed they a ſeuerall ſonge of him, ſayenge: that the other goddes were a ſlepe, only Demetrius was a true God, whych dyd watche for theyr health. Theſe vngodly and dredfull voyces teſtifye that at Athenes was vtterlye quenched and loſt all honeſty and godlyneſſe.
                  
                     Now reſteth it, that paſſinge ouer the kynges of Macedony, I rehearſe the names of ſuche kynges, as haue raygned in Syria and Egypte. For theſe kyngdomes were the mightieſt among thoſe foure, and to knowe the order of theſe kynges, doeth greatly auayle alſo in holy ſcrypture, wherein often tymes is made mencion of them. For the Iewes had great conuerſacion and occupyenge wyth theſe two kyngdomes.
               
               
                  Of the kynges of Syria.
                  
                     SEleucus was a prince borne in Macedonie,Seleucus. on whoſe thingh appeared a naturall token, in maner of an anker, the which had alſo all his poſterity. He toke the citye Babylon by ſtronge hande. AfterwardeAntigonus Demetrius were Antigonus and Demetrius hys ſonnes kynges of Aſia, ouercome of him. Antigonus was pearſed through: Demetrius dyed in preſon. After thisOf whom Seleucus was ſlayne. diſcomfyted Seleuchs Lyſimachus. But in the ſeuenth moneth after thys victory, was Seleucus ſlayne by Ptolome Ceraunus brother to Ptolomeus Philadelphus. Theſe are dredefull examplesAn example of the fea
                           •
                        e of God. of the ſettynge vp and fall of ſo great kynges, which worthely oughte to ſtyrre vs to feare God, leſt we thynke to do great thynges by mans counſell and oure wyſedome.Antiochus Soter. Antiochus Theos. Selencus Callinicus Antiochus Hierax.
                  
                  Antiochus Soter the ſonne of Seleucus, raigned in Syria after the death of his father.
                  Antiochus Theos his ſonne, had fyrſt to wife Laodice, wherof he had two ſonnes, Seleucus, Callinicus, & Antiochus, which was ſurnamed Hierax.

Ptolomeus Philadelphus gaue to the ſame Berenice his doughter afterward to wyfe. But whan Antiochus was deade, Laodice conſtrayned Seleucus her ſonne to take the kyngedome, and to take his ſtepmother Berenice. Seleucus folowed his mothers counſell, beſieged hys ſtepmother, & finally brought her to yelde willyngly wyth great promiſes. But kepynge no promyſe, he cauſed that the quene was put to death very cruelly. For Daniel had propheſyed openlye, that the quene of Egypt ſhould ſuffre ſuch a thynge, and that the kyng of Egypt ſhould reuenge the ſame. For whan thys cruel dede was done, Ptolemeus Euergetes brotherPtolomeus Euergetes. to Berenice went into Syria, droue Seleucus out of the kyngdome, and takynge in many cytyes, returned into Egypte. Afterward whan Seleucus had recouered ſome harte, he woulde recouer the kyngdome agayne, and requyred ayde of hys brother Antiochus Hierax: he was very yong, and truſted by this occaſyon to optayne the whole kyngdome. For whan peace was made betwene Ptolomeus & Seleucus, Hierax inuaded his brother Seleucus kyngdome, to the which thynge he vſed the ayde of ſtraunge ſouldyours. For the Galathians,The Galathians were brought by Brennus 
                           •••
                         of Germany into Grece. which Brennus brought out of Germany into Grece, went farther into Aſia, beynge hyred wyth thoſe kynges wages, which had diuerſe warres agaynſt eche other. Theſe Galathians had thā geuen them thoſe landes in Aſia, that they dwelled in. Of whom they be called Galathians, vnto whom S. Paule the apoſtle preached the Goſpell. Nether is it anye doubte but that they were Germanes.

For the Grekes dyd calle wyth one worde the Germanes and Gallies Celte, & by chaungyng of the worde, was the name Galate ſet for Celte. Finally ouercame Antiochus his brother Seleucus with the ayd of the Galathians, but Antiochus was lykewyſe vanquyſhed of the kyng of Aſia, leſyng a great deale of the kyngdome of Syria: than was he conſtrayned to flye to king Ptolomeus Euergetes: & whan he was ſo receaued of hym, that he ſhould go no wher, he wold haue fled, but whan thys counſell was perceaued, he was put to death. This ende finally gat Antiochus Hierax. AbouteNotable examples of vengeaunce. y• tyme nearehand fell Seleucus his brother from a horſſe, & dyed. This miſerable fortune & end had theſe two bretheren, which had done many wickedAntiochus magnus. Ptolomeus Philopater. dedes. Antiochus the great inuaded the kynge of Egypt Ptolome Philopater wyth warre, but he was dryuen back. Afterwarde whan Philopater was deade, he returned into Egypt with an army: but the Romanes had taken the child Ptolomeus Epiphanes into their wardſhyp, to whom he wasThe occaſiō of the warre of Antiochus wyth y• Romanes. Hannibal. committed as a warde. This was an occaſion of a great warre, which was betwene the Romanes & Antiochus. Hanniball toke part with Antiochus, which was captaine in this warre a certayn ſpace, and many more contries of Grece dyd ſtycke to Antiochus. But beynge weakened by reaſon of ſome miſhappe, he was dryuen to demaunde conditionsAntiochus Epiphanes is ſent to Ro
                           ••
                         for a pledge. of peace. Than left the Romanes hym only y• parte of the royalme, whiche lieth beyond the hyll Taurus: beſyde this was he conſtrayned to ſende his ſonne Antiochus Epiphanes to Rome in hoſtage.

But at the laſt whan Antiochus ſpoyled the rycheThe temple of Belus in Syria. temple of Belus in Siria, he was oppreſſed of the communalty inhabityng there, whych ſlew hym & hys company euery one. This was the ende of Antiochus the great. Hieruſalem had metely goodThe ſtart of Ieruſalē vnder Antiochus. reſt ſence the tyme of Alexander, vntyll Antiochus the great. But whan the warre betwen theſe two kynges was rayſed, by reaſon the Iewes laye betwene them both, they were a lytle oppreſſed & vexed of both parties. And though Ieruſalem dyd hetherto ſtycke more to Egypte, yet was it nether ſubiecte to Syria nor Egypte. Howbeit PtolomeusScopa a captaine of Ptolomeus Epiphanes. Epiphanes ſent a capitayne, one Scopa againſt Antiochus, which toke in certayne townes of Syria, and part of Iewry. Howbeit whan Antiochus had vanquiſhed the ſame by ye Iordane, he went farther tyll he came at Ieruſalē. Than did the Iewes kneling, yelded thēſelues frely to him, makyng alſo a commune league betwene them and the kyng: & for thys cauſe dyd the kyng Antiochus ſuffer them to lyue in peace, & aſyſted them in repayryng ye citye Ieruſalem. And of this wyſe, though they ſemed to be in daunger in the tyme of this warre, by reaſon of the neighburhead▪ yet lyued they quietly vnder this Antiochus. Antiochus the great left afterSeleucus Philopator. him thre ſonnes, Seleucus ſurnamed Philopator, Antiochus Epiphanes, & Demetrius. After ye fathers death raygned Seleucus a few yeres, the other two brethren were kept in hoſtage at Rome. Whan Antiochus Epiphanes knew of his fathers death, he 
                        •
                     led priuely frō Rome, & as he was come againe into Syria, he was made king. For Seleucus

was vnmete to rule, nether liued he long after his fathers death. This Antiochus EpiphanesAntiochus Epiphanes, called Epimanes. truely was a man of much ſubtelty & hardineſſe, & had well learned by the example of the Romanes, to apply himſelſe to the tyme and maners of euery man. For he could eaſely forbeare and ſuffre euery man that he was with: he was a wyſe man wyth ye wyſe▪ & agaynwyth vnbrydeled youth, he folowed ſuch exerciſe, as he knew them to delyte in. He procured the fauour of the comon people with familiaritye & beneuolence: and whan he made any coſtly banket, he cauſed great ſummes of mony to be caſt among ye people. For his vnbrydeled maners was he called Epimanes for Epiphanes. For Epimanes ſignifieth madde, but Epiphanes ſignifieth noble.
                  His raigne began the hundreth & ſeuen and thyrtyeth yeare after Alexanders death. And whan he poſſeſſed now hys kingdomes that came to hym by heretage, he went into Egypte. For about ye tyme dyed Ptolomeus Epiphanes, the ſame had to wyfe Cleopatra the ſyſter of Antiochus Epiphanes, the which vnder that pretence began to vſurpe ye kingdome of Egipt, as if he were tutor of the yong king called Ptolomeus Philometor. Nether ſhewed hePtolomeus Philometor. himſelf otherwyſe, but with all gentleneſſe & beneuolence toward his coſin, & willed that Memphis & other great cities ſhuld yeld them to the kyng, y• vnder ſuche a pretenſe he mighte by lytle and lytle draw to him the whole realme. Whan he had now finiſhed all thinges, he left the kingdome, and went to Ieruſalem, & that at the requeſt of I
                        ••
                     o
                        •
                     , which coueted the dignitye of the hygh preſthode by the meane of Antiochus.
                  
                     For ſo ſtode the caſe thāwith the Iewes, that they myghte optayne the hyghe prieſthode by decepte, by conſpiracion offoren kynges, oppreſſinge & ſlayenge in the meane ſeaſon thoſe, that were the true ſucceſſors. For which cauſe was this people greueouſlyThe yourney of Antiochus to Ieruſalem▪
                      puniſhed agayne of God. This was the fyrſt yourney of Antiochus to Ieruſalem, in the whiche he ordeined a hygh prieſt, and ſpoyled the temple▪ & ſlew many. This happened the ſyxte yeare of Antiochus, the which was the hundreth and thre and fortyeth yeare after Alexanders death.
                  Two yeare after, which was the hundreth and fyue and fortieth yeare after the death of Alexander,The ſeconde yourney of Antiochus into Egypte. made Antiochus ready hys ſeconde yourney into Egypt. For the cities had yelded themſelues agayne to the yonge kynge, the which alſo had ſought for ayde of the Romanes. Nowe whan AntiochusPopilius an Ambaſſadour of Rome ſent to Antiochus. inuaded Egypte, the Romanes ſente an ambaſſador Popilius, which ſhuld ſhew Antiochus in the name of the Romanes, to auoyde out of the coaſtes of Egypte, nether to warre vpon the yonge kynge Philometor. For the Romanes were mynded to retayne him in the kyngdome wyth theyr ayde. Wherevpon anſwered Antiochus, he would deuiſe wyth him ſelfe, what he would do. But PopiliusAn example of Romane ſeueryte. wold graunt hym no ſpace to deuiſe, but makyng a rynge wyth hys ſpeare aboute Antiochus, commaunded hym to ſaye ſtrayght waye, before he went out of the cyrcle, whether he wold auoyd out of Egipt, or no. Antiochus being abaſhed with this ſeuerite & conſtance of Popilius (for he knew & was afeared of the Romane power,) he promiſed frelye to go out of Egipt▪
                  
                  
                     Wherfore he was conſtrayned to leaue Egypt the ſecond tyme with great ſhame. But inflamed withThe ſecond yourney of Antiochus to Ieruſalem The tyranny of Antiochus againſt them of Ieruſalem. The bible is brent. 
                     
                        •
                     re for the impacience of the grefe, he went agayne to Ieruſalem: and this was hys ſeconde yourney to Ieruſalem: for he was there twiſe, and than vſed 
                        •
                     e his tyranny much more cruelly, than before. For he commaunded the Iewes to worſhyp the Idols of the Heythen, he commaunded to burn the bokes of the Bible, and left a great deale of noughtypackes to poſſeſſe the citye Ieruſalem, in ſteade of a garnyſon: the which tormented then very cruelly that wolde not fall from theyr fayth, and to thys thinge dyd they aſſiſt them, that were deceuered from the Iewyſh religion. The temple alſo was turned to a prophane vſe, fore an image was ſett therein of the Gentils ſuperſtition. But what nedeth many wordes? They buſyed to roote out the worde of God, and the whole lawe, and in ſteade thereof to bringe in the maners of the Gentyls, Nether dyd Antiochus vſe that counſel raſhly, but with a great wytt & policye. For he perceaued that the Iewes wythſtode the Heythen kynges, becauſe of theyr religion, and therfore wolde he auoyde the diuerſitye of religion. Of thys wyſe do mens thoughtesAn example of mans wyſdome in thinges concerning God Antiochus fygureth Antichriſte. dalye in matters concernyng God, and wyll ſet vp religion after theyr wyll & iudgement. Moreouer vnder ye example and figure of thys Antiochus, doth Daniel alſo deſcribe Antichriſte, & that ſuch a kyngdom ſhuld be, where in Chriſten men ſhuld be put to diſtreſſe, and Gods word ſhuld be quenched: and lykewyſe ſhuld be ſet vp a religion for a ſhewe, which might be contrary to gods word, by y• which

may be had an occaſyon, to optayne power & great ryches. Euen as it is euident that Mahomet hathWhy Mahometes religion is acceptable. ſet vp a falſe religion, and vnder pretence thereof, haue ordeyned a newe kyngdome. And this religion ſemeth to be folyſh religion, for it doeth greatly flatter mens reaſon. For paſſing ouer nearehande all the hygher ſentences and articles of the fayeth, it hath kept onely that doctryne, whyche teacheth morall vertues. Wonder it is verely howe muche that ſame doth flatter mans reaſon, wherefore alſo it doth vſe to crepe more eaſely into mens mindes, than the doctryne of fayth.
                  As for the tyranny of Antiochus, thereof is written in the bokes of the Machabees: & Danyel wytneſſeth that the people of the Iewes had deſerued thys punyſhment becauſe of theyr ſynnes. And allthoughe God dyd punyſhe hys people, yet for all that he dyd not deſtroye them vtterly.
                  For God rayſed Iudas Machabeus, whych gatheryngIudas Machabeus 
                           〈…〉
                        . a ſmall army, inuaded Antiochus captaynes: and by Gods aſſiſtaunce, ouerthrowynge the enemyes, he recouered the temple the thyrd yeare, after that Antiochus had ſett an Idoll therein.
                  Daniel hath comprehended all this tyme of the Iewyſh affliccion, in two thouſande and thre hundreth dayes, whych make ſyxe yeares and ſyxe monethes, and ſome dayes ouerplus. For the perſecution laſted from the thyrde yeare of Antiochus, vntyll the eyght yere & ſome monethes. Daniel dyd vſe thys diuiſion of the tyme alſo, that the Idoll ſhould ſtande in the temple a thouſande, two hundreth and nynety dayes, whyche make thre yeare, and ſyxe monethes.
                  
                     And y• temple was recouered an hundreth & eyght and forty yeares after Alexanders death. Thys was the thre hundreth and eight and fortieth yere after that the Iewes were delyuered oute of the Babylonicall bondage, and the hundreth and two and fyftyeth yeare before Chriſtes byrth.
                  But Antiochus deſerued wyth hys vngodlineſſeThe puniſhment of Antiochus for his vngodlineſſe. and blaſphemy agaynſt God, not only the vtter extinguiſhment of hys kynred, but alſo the ouerthrowynge of the whole kyngdome of Syria. For after Antiochus death, there was euer warre betwene one or other, and after manye tymes for the ſucceſſion in the kyngdome. That it maye be playnely ſene by thys example, ho we begynneth matters to ſprynge, for the whyche kyngdomes be ouerthrowen: as we ſe nowe a dayes to befall in Hungary.
                  Antiochus Epiphanes dyed in that yourney, whyche made readye agayne to come agaynſt the Iewes, to reuenge the dammage done. After hys death, hys brother Demetrius fled from Rome, & toke in the kingdome, kylling the yong Antiochus,Antiochus Eupator. ſurnamed Eupator, ſonne to Antiochus Epiphanes. Alexander the capitayne rayſyng a ſedition agaynſt Demetrius ſlewe hym. DemetriusDemetrius, Antiochus Sedetes. left two ſonnes after him, Demetrius and Antiochus Sedetes. Of this Demetrius verely was Alexander ſlayne lykewyſe. Afterward was a ſedition rayſed by one Tryphon agaynſt Demetrius, the whych droue him out of the kyngdome: but Demetrius came agayne into the kyngdome, and dyed ſtryken thorough wyth a ſworde.

Antiochus Sedetes was ſlayne of the Parthes.
                  As for this Demetrius had a ſonne Antiochus Gryphus. Antiochus Sedetes left after him a ſonne Antiochus Cyzicenus. Theſe ſtroue for the kyngdome of Syria, and were both ſlayne. Afterward dyd their children warre one agaynſt the other for y• kindome wyth no leſſe ſtryfe, than their elders: and had at the laſt ſo febled eche other, that Syria was conſtrayned to yeld it ſelfe to foren kinges. For it ioyned it ſelfe to Tigranes kyng of Armenia. And of this wyſe is the kyngdome of Syria tranſferred from Seleucus poſterity, to foren princes. But finally whan Tigranes was ſlayne byTigranes is ſlayne by Pompepus. Pompeius, Syria was broughte vnder the Romane power. Hetherto is ynough ſpoken of the kyngdome of Syria.
               
               
                  Of the kynges of Egypt after Alexander.
                  
                     
                        PTolomeus the ſonne of Lagus, wherofPtolomeus the ſonne of Lagus. Pauſanias wryteth, whych calleth hym the baſtarde of Philippe father to Alexander.
                     ij. Ptolomeus Philadelphus. Greate prayſes arePtolomeus Philadelphus an endeuour of peace and ſciences. of thys kynge, by reaſon of his endeuour of peace, and alſo becauſe he delyted in all kynde of ſciences, and dyd inſtitute a very good forme of the common welth. To hym drew wyſe men out of all contryes, the which he maynteyned gently and liberally. He had a library, as there was none better furniſhedThe library of Ptolomeus. in the whole worlde, and for thys cauſe toke he

acquaintaunce of the Iewes. For whan he diligently ſearched for the begynnynge of all nacions, religions and ſciences, he founde that the people of the Iewes to be the eldeſt, and that they onely had the ſureſt hiſtoryes of the worldes begynninge or creation. Wherefore he required to be ſent to hym from Ieruſalem thre ſcore and twelue men, by whoſe diligence the wholy Bible myght be tranſlated oute of the Hebrue into his language: & by this occaſion were the Bibles ſyrſte tranſlated into ſtraungeThe Bible tranſlated. ſpeches. And no doubt it is, but that Ptolome was conuerted to the true fayth by this ſame meane.
                     iii. Ptolomeus Euergetes inuaded Syria, & dydPtolomeus Euergetes. reuenge the death of his ſyſter Berenice.
                     iiij. Ptolomeus Philopater, ouercame AntiochusPtolomeus Philopator. the great: afterwarde beyng become more ſenſuall and diſſolute, he beganne to be enamoured vpon a wenche, inſomuch that he cauſed alſo hys quene to be put to death, for the loue ſhewed to that wench.Ptolomeus Epiphanes.
                     
                     v. Ptolomeus Epiphanes, whom Antiochus the great dyd inuade: the ſame Antiochus gaue to him hys doughter.
                     vi. Ptolomeus Philometor, the ſame dyd hys vnclePtolomeus Philometor. Antiochus Epiphanes inuade: But the Romanes defendyng Ptolome, commaunded Antiochus to auoyde out of Egypt, the which we haue ſhewed before.
                     vii. Ptolomeus Euergetes reſtored Demetrius,Ptolomeus Euergetes. that was dryuen oute of hys realme, into the ſame agayne.
                     viii. Ptolomeus Phyſco, the ſame reſembled morePtolomeus Phiſco a beaſt and no man. a beaſt than a man, by reaſon of hys vylaynous crueltye.

He wedded hys ſyſter, and begatt chylderen of her. Afterwarde ſlayenge hys ſonne, ſet him before hys mother to eate, fynallye was he dryuen out of the realme. The reſidue enſuynge were notable of lyke ſhameful behaueour, as of beaſtly medlynge and of farre more cruell tyranny.
                     ix. Ptolomeus Alexander.
                           
                              〈…〉
                            Alexan. 
                              〈…〉
                            Latyrꝰ 
                              〈…〉
                            Aulet.
                     
                     x Ptolomeus Latyrus.
                     xi. Ptolomeus Auletes, whome Gabinius the Romane captayne reſtored agayne into hys kyngdome.
                     xii. Ptolomeus Dionyſius, which commaundedPtolomeus Dionyſius. to ſlaye Pompeius, and afterwarde was alſo vnfaythfull to Iulius: wherefore Iulius droue hym out of the kyngdome, and gaue it to his ſyſter Cleopatra,Cleopatra ſyſter to Iulius Ceſar. the whiche finally ſlew herſelfe, whan Antonius (whom ſhe entertayned) was ouercome of Auguſtus. After that came Egypte to the Romanes, and ſo was the mooſt noble kynred of Ptolomeus quenched.
                  
               
               
                  Of the Iewes.
                  
                     WE haue ſayde before that the ſuperiorytie of gouernaunce remayned by the poſteritie of Dauid, after the returne of the Iewes oute of Babylon, only that they wanted the dignitie of the kynges name, and were only called Prynces. And the ſame rayned tyll the tyme of Antiochus, S. Luke doeth alſo make mencion of them in the genealogye of Chriſte.
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           i.
                           Zorobabel
                           lviij. yeares.
                        
                        
                           ii.
                           Reſa Miſeolam
                           lxvi
                        
                        
                           iii.
                           Iohanna Ben Reſa
                           liij
                        
                        
                           iiii
                           Iudas the fyrſt Hircanus.
                           xiiij. in the tyme of Alexander.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        After Alexander.
                        
                           v.
                           Ioſeph the fyrſt
                           vij.
                        
                        
                           vi.
                           Abner Semei
                           xi.
                        
                        
                           vii.
                           Eli Matathia
                           xii.
                        
                        
                           viii.
                           Aſer Maath
                           ix.
                        
                        
                           ix.
                           Nagid Artaxat
                           x.
                        
                        
                           x.
                           Hagai Eli
                           viij.
                        
                        
                           xi.
                           Maslot Naum
                           vii
                        
                        
                           xii.
                           Amos Syrah
                           xiiij
                        
                        
                           xiij.
                           Matathia Siloa
                           xviij
                        
                        
                           xiiij
                           Ioſeph the yonger
                           l.
                        
                     
                  
                  The ſame had greate familiarite wyth Ptolomeus Euergetes, and by Euſebius is he called Arſes.
                  xv. Iaanna the ſeconde Hircanus xvi.Ianna .ij. Hircanus.
                  
                  He had greate warres agaynſt the Arabians, and had oft victory. But whan he was beſieged in a caſtell by Antiochus Epiphanes, nether coulde he defend hymſelf any lenger wyth his garnyſon, yet woulde he not yelde him ſelfe, but wythſtode his enemies valiauntly fightynge in battayl, tyll he was ſlayne. This was the laſte prince amonge the Iewes of kyng Dauids bloude. After hym ruled the Machabees, whyche were of the prieſtly kynred.
                  But after theſe was the kyngdome of the Iewes

tranſlated to Herods kynred, whyche was a Gentyle, but he was circumciſed. Thys thynge truely had God prophecyed before, that the ceptre and royall maieſtye ſhoulde be taken from Iuda, and Dauids ſucceſſors before the comminge of the promyſedChriſtes cō
                        minge. Chriſte. Nether was the kyngdome altered from Dauids poſteritye aboue an hundreth & thre ſcore yeare, before Chriſte was borne: ſo that it exceded not mens memory what kinred had raigned. Of this wyſe doeth Lucas rehearſe the princes of the Iewes, vntyll the laſt Ianna Hircanus, and after the ſame doth he counte the reſidue alſo, which ruled not, vntyll Chriſte. Wherefore I wyll brefely adde of the Machabees and Herodes kynred.
               
               
                  Of the Machabees kynred.
                  
                     MAtathias exhorted hys chylderen,Matathias. to reſiſt Antiochus, and theſe raygned in order by ſucceſſiō, as princes.
                  Iudas Machabeus the firſt, vanquyſhedIudas Machabeus. the capytaynes of Antiochus Epiphanes, and recouered the temple wythin thre yeare, and had notable victories. But aſſone as he had conſpyred wyth the Romanes,An example that no truſt is to be ſet in mans helpe. makyng a league wyth them, he was ſlayn, and dyed. For God wyll not haue vs to leane to mans helpe, but that we ſhoulde ſett oure truſte in hym. He raygned v. yeares.
                  Ionathas raygned nyneten yeare: he toke partIonathas. wyth Alexander, which vſurped the kyngdome in Syria. Afterwarde was he ſlayne of Triphon, very vnfaythfully. He had an vnhappye ende, for becauſe

he truſted too the ayde of naughty and ſeditious men.
                  Simon reigned eight yeare: he ouercame AntiochusSimon. Gryphus. He was at the laſt ſlayn by treaſon, of his owne brother in lawe.
                  Ioannes Hircanus was Simons ſonne: the ſameIoannes Hircanus. reigned ſyx and twenty yeare. In his tyme beſieged Antiochus Gryphus Ieruſalem, but by geuyng of mony was he apeaſed, and breakyng vp the ſyege, left the citie. Afterward gat Hircanus Samaria.
               
               
                  The Machabeis kynges.
                  
                     Ariſtobulus the ſonne of Hircanus reignedAriſtobulus. one yeare, and woulde be crowned with a kyngely crowne. He was the firſt kyng in Ieruſalem, after that the Iewes were returned out of Babylon. He ſlew his brother Antigonus, becauſe he feared leſt he woulde couet the kyngdome.
                  Alexander the yonger, ſonne of HircanusreignedAlexander ye yonger ſonne of Hircanus. ſeuen and twenty yeare: his wyfe Alexandra reigned after hym nyne yeare.
                  Alexander left two ſonnes after hym, Hircanus and Ariſtobulus. Though Hircanus were the elder, yet was he dryuen out of the kyngdom, by hys brother Ariſtobulus, whiche by violence caught from his brother the dignitie of the kynges name.Antipater prince of Idumea. Areta king of Arabia. But Antipater prince of Idumea and the father of Herodes, and Areta kyng of Arabia ayded Hircanus againſt Ariſtobulus. Nether was there a leſſe barbarous ſtate at that tyme in Iewry, after the

Heythen maner, then in the kyngdomes of other nations.Pompeus. Afterward when Pompeius toke in Ieruſalem, he made Hircanus high prieſt, and taking Ariſtobulus priſoner with his two ſonnes, Alexander and Antigonus, brought thē to Rome. But by the way as they went to Rome, eſcaped Alexāder, and commyng againe into Iewry, he became mighty againe. But then was he vanquiſhed by Gabinius y•
                     Gabinius. Romane capitaine in Syria, and afterward by the commaundement of Scipio, was he beheaded at Antiochia. Antigonus was releaſed at Rome by Iulius: but longe after was he commaunded to be put to death at Antiochia by Antonius, euen the third yeare when Herode was made kyng. And yf the whole tyme that Hircanus was high prieſt bee wel rekened, it ſhalbe euen foure and thirty yeares: finally was he put to death by Herode: It is a dredful thyng verely, to ſenerehande in al hiſtories that not only the moſte renow medeſt kynreds and families amonge men decay, but that alſo the ſucceſſours of holy men cleane doth degenerate from the honeſtie of there elders, and fall to all fylthyneſſe of miſche ue and ſynne.
               
               
                  What tyme the Phariſeys and the other ſectes began with the Iewes.
                  
                     WHen now the ſoueraintie and prieſthode by the Iewes began to be toren and pulled aſunder by the tyrāny & the warres of Antiochus (I paſſe ouer that the MachabeesThe Machabeys. ioyned them with Heythen kynges, the which ordeined or depoſed princes & high prieſtes at their pleaſure, the whiche cared for nothing leſſe

then the endeuour of the religiō): it could not be 
                        •••
                     t that ſectes and ſundry diſſenſions muſt & yſe in the Iewyſh religion. For uedes muſt it happen ſo, whē
                     ether we want a certain head in the religion, or whē
                     the heades of the churche or congregatiō do not regarde the ſtudies of Godlineſſe, and ſeke onely outward puyſſaunce, as prophane nacions do.
                  The ſectes that were ſprong vp, were of thre ſores:The maner of ſectes riſen in Iewry. The Phariſeps. the firſt wer called Phariſeis, that is Seuered of the word Phares. Theſe vſed (for they were better learned then the other) certain conſtitutions of men aboue the lawe of Moſes, whereby they were ſeuered from the other people. Howbeit their doctrine was a litle better & righter, thē the other. For they taught immortalitie after this life, & that God will punyſh ſynnes: they beleued alſo that Meſſias ſhould come a ſaueour for the faithfull, and a iudge for the ſynnes. To the men of this ſecte alſo was cō
                     mitted the cōmon welth before other, and they wee of more aucthoritie.
                  The ſecond ſecte was of the Sadduceis. TheſeThe Sadduceyes. hidde their wickedneſſe with a very noble & not able callyng thēſelues. For zaddik ſignifieth righteous. Sadducei, they that be righteous or holy. So is it moſte commonly receaued in vſage in this worlde, that thoſe that be moſte wycked of all, do cloke their couetouſneſſes wyth moſte honeſte names. They taught that after death was no lyfe. That God had onely geuen the lawe to the intent we ſhoulde liue honeſtly & quietly, receiuing of God in y• meane ſeaſon in this lyfe the rewarde of righteouſneſſe. They did expounde y• ſcriptures wholy according to mans iudgemēt, nether would they heare ought

els: & as concernyng for the maners that apperta
                        •
                     
                     ned vnto man, very Epicures, (that is to ſaye, ſu
                        •
                      as did put the principall goodneſſe in voluptuo
                        ••
                     
                     tie,The Saduceyes were Epicures. as Epicurus the Philoſopher dyd.) And tha
                        •
                      more is when they at the length had gottē power▪ they troubled not a litle the Phariſeis. It is a fearfull thyng verely to heare, that among the peculiar and choſen people of God, are crept in euen heythenyſh doctrines: inſomuche that cōſtantly they were not aſhamed, euen openly to teache and ſaye, that after this lyfe, was none other lyfe.
                  The thirde were Eſſey, the whiche when theyEſſey. The Anabaptiſtes do r
                           •••
                        
                        ble theſe. perceiued that both the Phariſeyes and Sadduceyes folowed their appetites vnder the coloure of honeſt titles, nether did ought in a maner that were worthy their profeſſion: therfore ſemed it them good, to declare the ſtraitneſſe and ſeueritie of lyfe with the dede, and would be called Eſſey, that is workers or doers. For Aſſa, whence the name Eſſey commeth, ſygnifieth to worke: as in theſe times the Anabaptiſtes do reproue bothe the Lutherians and papiſtes, and endeuour to ſeme more holier then ether of them. For the Eſſey lyued in a maner in all thinges, as the Anabaptiſtes lyue: they maryed not, and woulde haue all thynges common among them. This was an vtter foolyſh and dotiſh ſuperſticion of monkerye, and whiche could not laſtThe Note of the churche at this tyme. long. Of this wyſe nerehand is the church deuided in thre partes alſo now a dates: for becauſe y• ſecond commyng of Chriſte alſo is harde by. The Anabaptiſtes reſemble the Eſſeyes, and on the other parte, ſome be Phariſeyes, ſome are Sadduceyes. For

the thniges that happened amōg the Iewes 
                        ••
                     e a figuce of the Chriſtē religion. Theſe ſectes roſe firſt among the Iewes vnder Ioannes Hircamus the ſonne of Simon before the byrth of Chriſt an hundreth and fyue and twenty yeares.
               
               
                  Of Herodes kynred.
                  
                     WHen Iulius Ceſar had warre in EgyptAntipater is made gonernoure of Iewry by Iulius Ceſar. that was euery where full of daunger, Antipater prince of Idumea ayded him very faithfully, and for a remembraunce of this benefite, made hym Iulius gouernoure of Iewry, the whiche was now conſtrayned to obey foren and ſtraunge princes in her owne royalme. The Iewes ſet themſelues agaynſt it with great force at the firſt, ſufferyng very diſdainfully the rule of the Idumean prince, inſomuche that he was poyſoned at the laſt by a Iewe, called Malchus, and dyed.
                  Herodes reuenged the death of his father Antipater,Herodes toke in Ieruſalem and demaunded the ſucceſſion of the Iewyſh kyngdome of Auguſtus and Antonius in the hundreth foure ſcore and ſeconde Olympias: and this was after Alexander two hūdreth, foure ſcore and twelue yeares. This was the occaſion wherby Iewry receuied foren kynges out of Idumea and afterlong ſiege compelled Herode them of Ieruſalem to yelde thēſelues: nether was there litle bloud ſhedde, before the Iewes yelded themſelues frelyChriſt was borne. to Herodes dominion. As for Chriſt was borne in the thirtieth yeare of Herode. Theſe are nerehand the greateſt and chefeſt mutations of the kyngdom

brefly comprehended, the whiche happened in Iewry in the tyme of this monarchie, vntill the laſt monarchie and the tyme of Chriſtes birth.
                  And though it is euident ynough, that the Iewyſh kynges after Chriſtes birth were of Herodes kynred, yet wyll I ſet them euery one orderly, that the reader may more eaſely knowe, how the one is borne of the other, and haue ruled the kyngdome lawfully by a certayn ſucceſſion, vntyll the deſtruction of the citie Ieruſalem: though as concernyng the iuſt order of the hiſtorie, I am not come ſo farre. For I haue yet to reherſe theſe thynges of the Romanes, which happened in the tyme of the Grecian monarchie.
                  Herode the firſt, whiche was alſo called Aſcalon,Herodes Aſcalon. 
                           ••
                        . had many children, among the whiche he hymſelfe cauſed thre to be ſlame, Ariſtobulus, Alexander and Antipater, by reaſon of a conſpiracy, that they had made againſt their father. But after him remained aliue Archelaus, Herodes, whiche was ſurnamed Antipas, and Philippus. Theſe parted the kyngdome amonges them.
                  Archelaus was choſen by a teſtament to ſuccedeArchelaus. his father Herode in the kyngdome: but Auguſtus the emperour would not confirme or ratifye thys wyl of the father, but made hym prince, howbeit vnder this hope, that he ſhould be made kyng, yf he ruled honeſtly. And ſo ruled he nyne yeares, and vſed great tyranny: he ſet vp and depoſed high prieſtes, and rauyſhed his owne brothers Alexanders wyfeArchelaus was exiledly Auguſtus. Finally he was accuſed before Auguſtus for his wicked dedes, who depriued hym of the dominion, and

in ſteade of a puniſhmēt was he banniſhed into Ga
                     
                        ••
                     le, that he ſhould leade the reſt of his lyfe there in exile: But that parte of Iewry was afterward gouerned by Romane gouernours, firſt by Cyrenius,Herodes Antipas ledde away his brothers wyfe. afterward by Pilate. Herodes ſurnamed Antipas, y• brother of Archelaus, was made prince of Galile by his father Herode. The ſame toke hys brother Philips lawful wife from hym, he being yet aliue, the which happened by this occaſion: Herode went to Rome, & by the way he lodged by chaunce with his brother Philip, who dwelled in y• fore part of Iewry. As Herodes and Herodias had now made acquaintaunce, which Herodias was the daughter of Ariſtobulus, and ſiſter to Herodes Agrippa, they were agreed, that he cōming frō Rome ſhould leade her with him, the which was done afterward.Ihon Baptiſt An example of vengeaūce Ihon Baptiſt rebuketh this wicked dede, who was therfore beheaded. Howbeit Herodes went not vnpunyſhed at the laſt for it: For by Caius Caligula was he ſent in exile at Leonia in Galile with Herodias, the whiche conſtrained hym to go to Rome & require a kyngdome: but commyng home without doyng ought, he loſt that part alſo of the kyngdom, whiche he poſſeſſed before. He reigned foure and twenty yeare in Galile.
                  Herodes Agrippa was the ſonne of Ariſtobulus,Herodes Agrippa. of whom we haue mencioned before: for he was the ſonne of the firſt Herode, & was ſlayn by his father. But Herode Agrippa was priſoner at Rome, in the tyme of Tiberius, afterward was he in high fauour by Caius Caligula the emperour: For he optayned by requeſt of hym fyrſt the parte of Philippe

his brother, and the name of a kyng: afterward
                        •
                      that lande alſo, whiche Herodes Antipas had. He optayned of Claudius Samaria and Iewry, and by this occaſion was whole Iewry ſubiecte agayn
                        •
                      to one mans dominion. The Apoſtle Iames th
                        •
                     
                     Iames the 
                           •
                        ore. greater was put to death by this Herode, the whiche is mēcioned in the twelfe chapter of the Actes. He reigned ſeuen yeares.
                  Agrippa, the ſonne of Herodes Agrippa was yet very yonge whan the father dyed, for the whiche cauſe the Romanes Pretores or debites gouerned Iewry now agayne. But Claudius gaue Agrippa afterward that part of Syria, whiche is called the kyngdome of Chalcis: he gaue hym that part alſo which Philip had poſſeſſed by Iewry. Nero the emperour gaue hym alſo ſome cities of Iewry. In the tyme of this Agrippa was Ieruſalē deſtroyed, andIn Agrippaes tyme was Ieruſalem deſtroied of him is mencion made in the xxi chapter of the Actes. He reigned ſeuen and twenty yeares. Philo the hiſtory Ographer ſayeth, that this Agrippa had a ſonne, whiche reigned with Ben Coſban, who vſurpedBen Coſban a kynges dominion vpon the Iewes and rayſed great vproure in Syria and Iewry in Hadrian the emperours tyme.
                  This is all Herodes kynred, vntil the ouer throwyng of Ieruſalem: the whiche we haue brefely gathered therfore, that it maye clerely bee knowen in what order they haue ſucceded in the kyngdō. And to know this, is very neceſſary in the Bible. Sence the tyme of the firſt Herode, vntyll the deſtruction of Ieruſalem are an hundreth and thre yeares.
               
               
                  Of Rome.
                  
                     
                     IN the thyrd Monarchie haue we made mencion brefely of the decaye of the Perſes, the proſperitie & fall alſo of the Grekes, and alſo the ſundry mutatiōs diſtur
                     
                        •
                     nces of the Iewes. Now remaineth that with yke brefeneſſe we reherſe the tymes of the moſte reateſt battails that the Romanes haue had ſence the great Alexander. For it I woulde reherſe theeWherfore monarchies are chefely ordeined of God. whole hiſtories, it would be to great a worke. We haue noted aboue, that hygh monarchies are ſometyme ordeined to that intent, that great and moſte mighty princes may be tamed, & that ryght ſhould be ſet againſt great tyranny. For this may be ſene in all monarchies, whiche are encreaſed by none other meanes in a maner, then that they haue ſubdued moſte mighty kynges. Euen ſo the Romanes, as ſone as they began to be very mighty in Italy, they inuaded firſt the Spanyardes and Carthaginians, and had moſte cruell and durable warres: althoug they themſelues in the meane tyme were ſomtyme greuouſly vanquiſhed.
               
               
                  Of the Carthaginian Warre.
                  
                     SIcily was cauſe of the Carthaginiā war.Sicilia was cauſe of the Carthaginiā warre. Hieron. For kyng Hieron required helpe and aide of the Romanes againſt them of Carthag the whiche for as muche as they occupied now a great part of Sicily a long ſeaſon, they rayſed many commotions. Wherfore the foure hundreth and foure ſcore yeare ſence the foundacion of Rome, did the Romanes appointe the firſt ſetting forth againſt the Carthaginians: and this warre

laſted twenty yeares continually. As for the fyrſte diſconfiture whiche was very myſerable, ſufferedRegulus is taken by the carthaginiās the Romanes, when Regulus was taken. This Regulus truely was ſent to Rome by them of Carthago, to entreate with the ſenate for the deliuery of the pryſoners: for if he could obtayne it, he ſhould be ſet fre at libertie. If not, according to his promiſe he ſhould returne agayn to Carthago. As ſone as Regulus came to Rome, it was ſayed that he hymſelfe counſailed in the ſenate, that they would not ſuffre the exchaunge of the pryſoners to be done for his ſake, but that they woulde rather conſyder hee were an old man and feble of body, whiche could lyve not muche longer. What nedeth many wordes? The ſenate at the laſt folowed his mynde, and hee went to Carthago agayne, where he was tormentedThe tormentes of Regulꝰ with ſundry and new maners of tormētes. And among the reſt of his tormentes, is this reherſed alſo, that his eye lyddes beyng cut of, he was trauayled with continuall wakyng. Firſt is the principallThe loue and faithfulneſſe of Regulus towarde the comon welth loue of this man toward the commō welth alowed, namely whoſe profite he regarded more, than the health of hym or his. His truſt and faithfulneſſe is prayſed alſo, becauſe he went agayn to Carthago, ſpecially ſeyng he knew that moſte cruel puniſhmē
                     tes were appointed for hym. But at the laſt were the Carthaginians conſtrained to demaunde conditionsThe battayll by Eguſa. of peace of the Romanes. By the Ile Eguſa was a very ſore felde foughten, and the Romanes ſlew thirtene thouſand Cartaginians, and two and thyrty thouſand taken pryſoners. But whan the Carthaginians required peace, the pryſoners were

frely were diſmyſſed without mony. Theſe thynges happened after Alexander, whan Ptolomeus Euergetes ruled in Egipt.
               
               
                  Of Haniball.
                  
                     THe fyue hundreth and .xxxvi. yeare ſenceThe ſeconde warre of Carthago. The occaſion of the ſecond warre of Carthago in Spayne. the foundation of the citie of Rome, began the ſecond warre of Carthago againſt the Romanes. The occaſiō of this warre was begonne by reaſon of Spayne, the which whan the Cartaginians had once loſt, Hannibal had now ſubdued it agayn. Nether truly had ye Romanes euer any greater diſcomfiture, then in this warre. For fortune was ſo contrary to them, that Hannibal beyng come into Italy, dyd thre tymes ouerthrowe them: & though the moſt part of the Romanes wasThe diſcomfiture of the Romanes in the ſeconde warre of Carthago. ſlayn in the two firſt battails, yet was it not to be cō
                     pared to the third battail, wherin were ſlayn about fourty thouſand Romanes, many alſo were taken priſoners. This diſcomfiture made the Romanes ſo ſore afrayd, that many nobles gathered together began to deuiſe to flye into Grece, & leaue the cytie.Scipio the yonger. But whē Scipio the yonger harde of that, he went to them, & exhorted thē to ſted faſtneſſe in defending the contrary, and ſayed: yf he perceiued any man to flye out of the contrey, he would ſtraightway ſtrike him thorow with his ſworde. Wherfore he compelled the young noble men to bynde themſelues with an holy othe, that they ſhoulde not leaue the citie, but that they would frely abyde euery chaunce, for loue of the countrey. As for this ſame Scipio made an end of this warre, when it had laſted ſyxten yeres. For he ouercame Hanibal in Aphrica,

and compelled the Carthaginiās to require peace: and peace was concluded vpon this condition, that they of Carthago ſhould yelde Hannibal to the Romanes.Hannibal fli
                        
                           •
                        th to Antiochus. But he beyng eſcaped, fled to kyng Antiochus the greate, whome he prouoked to ordeine a great and dredefull warre againſt the Romanes. But kyng Antiochus was ſlayne, whiche we haue ſayde before. It may eaſely be gathered out of this, what tyme this ſeconde warre of Carthago was, namely twenty yeare before Iudas Machabeus.
               
               
                  Of the warre of the Romanes in Macedonia.
                  
                     ABout the fyue hundreth and fyue andPhilippus. The occaſiō of the warre of Macebo
                        
                           •••
                        . fortyeth yere roſe firſt the warres in Macedonia. Firſt with Philippe, and that becauſe of the league made with Hanniball againſt the Romanes. For kyng Philippe hated greatly the name of Rome. For he perceaued that the ſame citie crept vp to the deſtruction of all kynges and moſte myghty Monarches: in ſo muche alſo, that he ſhoulde haue ſayed ſomtyme: He feared, leſt a tempeſt ſhoulde once come out of Italy into Grece, whoſe vehemency ſhoulde be ſo greate, that all theſe ſlaughters and diſcomfitures whiche Grece had ſuffered of the Perſes and othet compared to it, might be called but a triful & toie. WherforePerſeus ſōne to kyng Philippe, the laſt kyng of Macedony. when he was inuaded of the Romanes with warre, he required the cōdicions of peace not vnwittingly, & made a treaty of peace & concord with the Rom. But afterward Perſeus his ſonne, as one yt
                     
was more coragious, and of a more vnreſtly minde, gathered an army, and made aliaunce with many kynges, and inuaded thoſe cities of the Romanes, that were in Grece: and the Romanes were alſo greatly vanquyſhed of hym at the firſt. But not lōg after this battayll, he required frely the condicions of peace: howbeit the Romanes refuſed to graunt the ſame, and ſent Paulus Aemilius into Macedony,Paulus Aemilius. of whom Perſeus was ouercome and taken priſoner, with his mother, wyfe, and children. Of this wyſe were kynges tamed by the Romanes & ſubdued. This Perſeus was the laſt of the Macedonian kynges, and with hym is that noble kynred of Demetrius gone to naught, where of we haue ſpoken before. Howbeit the ſonne of this Perſeus became a ſecretary at Rome: and the kyngdom of Macedony, was afterwarde alwaye gouerned by Romane gouernours. This warre with Perſeus began not long before, when Antiochus Epiphanes inuaded the Iewes.
               
               
                  Of the Spoylyng of Carthago.
                  
                     THe ſyxe hundreth and ſeconde yeareThe thirde Carthaginiā warre. after the foūdacion of the citie, began the third & laſt Carthaginian warre, by this occaſion: The citie Carthago was at variaunce with the countreis adioynynge to it, (as ſomtyme ryſe debates betwene cities and princes,) and theſe required ayde of the Romanes, againſte the Carthaginians. After long reaſonyng, it was diſputedDiſputation whether Carthago ſhould be wholy ouerthrowen▪ Scip
                           ••
                         Maſica. in the ſenate, whether Cartago ſhoulde be wholy

ſpoyled, becauſe that it beyng reſtleſſe, could not lyue in peace. For Scipio Naſica counſailed that Ca
                        •
                     
                     chago ſhould not be ouerthrowen: firſt, becauſe it were not honeſt that the Romanes ſhoulde vſe ſo great tyranny, and ſhoulde ſlaye ſo muche people. Beſide this that it wer not profitable alſo: without that citie, could not Aphrica be entertayned too do her duetie, without it were wholy ſpoyled. Thyrdly, that it were mooſt neceſſary for the Romanes, to haue ſuche a citie contrarieng them, by the whiche they ſhould be ſturred to luſtineſſe and courage, or els ſhould they rayſe warre within themſelues, yf they feared no foren enemy. Contrary wiſe did Cato
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      bring this argument among other, as the chefeſt: that the Romanes dyd by lytle and lytle become vn lyke their auncetours in vertues & prowes. Wherfore if the mooſt myghty citie Carthago remaining in her eſtate knewe the cowardneſſe, negligence ſloughtfulneſſe & febleneſſe of the Romanes, there were nothyng more ſurer, but that ſhe would ſtriue againe for the empire and high gouernaunce, and oppreſſe the Romanes, and bryng them vnder her power. Wherfore leſt this ſhoulde be, it were moſte profitable and neceſſary, to deſtroye Carthago.
                  Nether would the ſenate geue any certayn ſentence or verdice vpon this at that tyme: but they ordeined Cato the aged, and certaine other to be ſent with hym to Carthago, to trie out all the matter, whether any daunger were to be feared of the Carthagineans, that then at the laſt they might earneſtly deuiſe what were to be done. But what nedeth muche to be ſayed? Cato beyng returned, ſhewed

that more daunger were to be feared of the Carthaginians, than euer was before. For though they of Carthago were depriued of their dominions, yet could they eaſely perceaue that the citie were both myghty and alſo cruell, whiche coulde not reſt but muſt by proceſſe of tyme aſſay ſome thinge to reuenge her ſelfe. Beſyde this brought Cato with hym grene fygges of exceadyng bygneſſe, the whiche he ſhewed openly in the ſenate. And when he was demaunded, whence he had brought thoſe fygges, he aunſwered: within thre dayes may be ſa
                        ••
                     ed thither. He ſaid moreouer: they growe in the lande of your enemies. So neare dwel your enemies, and they that couet your empire. The ſenate being ſturred with theſe ſo many perſuaſions, ordeined, that Carthago ſhould be aſſaulted with warre, & ſhould be roted out by the ground, that there ſhould be noScipio y• yonger ſonne to Paulus Aemilius. hope of reſtoring it afterward. To accompliſh this warre, was Scipio the yōger the ſonne of Paulus Aemilius made capitaine, and in the fourth yeare, after the cōtinuall aſſault of ſyx daies, was Carthago taken. And though Scipio permitted euery man a ſpace to flye frely, yet was a miſerable ſlaughter in the citie whē it was diſpoiled. Afterward by the cōmaundement of Scipio, was the citie ſet on fyre, and burned ſyxtene dayes continually. ThisCarthago is deſtroyed. is that myſerable decaye of Carthago the moſte noble cytie, in the whiche neare hande alwaye haue ſo many renowmed princes gouerned, of whome to ſpeake by reaſon of their worthineſſe, wyll not the brefeneſſe of writtynge ſuffre at this tyme. Carthago ſtode & continued about ſeuen hūdreth

yeares. The godly reader may aboue all thynges behold here a dredeful example of Gods vengeaūce in ſo truely ouerthrowyng of ſo mighty and very excellent a citie. It is ſayed alſo that after that it was ſet on fyre. Scipio came rydyng to the place of the citie, and ſawe the myſerable caſe of Carthago that was ſpoiled and deſtroyed, and beyng moued with a pitiful affeccion, he did wepe very ſore, & ſaid at the laſt theſe wordes: I pitie the caſe of ſo excellēt a citie, and I ſe before that Rome alſo ſhall once bee ouerthrowen of this wyſe: and that more is, it is playne, that no gouernaunce in this worlde is long laſtyng, and no power can be ſtable.
               
               
                  Of the warre of the Cimbry in Italy.
                  
                     THis is the ſeconde hiſtory of the Germanes,The ſeconde mention of y• 
                        
                           〈…〉
                        es in 
                           〈…〉
                        . & of their proſperitie, that they haue had in Italy. For the Cimbriare properly Germanes, whiche witneſſeth the name Cimbrica Cheroneſus. For ſo are called the countreis of Holſatz and Denmarck. Moreouer by the witneſſe of Strabo are Cimmery and Cimbriboth
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         the 
                           〈…〉
                        es of 
                           〈◊〉
                        . one thyng. The beginnyng of the names is Go
                        ••
                     e
                        •
                      the ſonne of Iaphet, who dwelt in theſe countries beyond Thracia, that he toward vs, wherein dwell the▪ people of Littow. And for this cauſe knew Homer the poet the people Cimery: For the Grecians knew Thracia and the countreis ioynyng to it. Howbeit the name of Cimbri remayneth onley by Denmark and Holſatz▪ But theſe people that lie towardeGoth
                           •
                        
                      the Eaſt of Thracia, are called Gotthi, of whome we ſhall ſpeake hereafter, in the hiſtory of

the Gothyes. There is alſo made playne mencyon of the lowe duchemen, whych went wyth the Cimbre. It is clere that it was an innumerable multytude, about thre hundreth thouſand gathered oute of all quarters of Germany, and ſuch an army, that parted aſunder they intended to take in partly Italy, partly Gallia. But whan they inuaded the Romanes, they were gathered agayne, and the Romanes were fyrſte mooſt greueouſly ſlayne of theThe battayll of the Cimbri with the Romanes. Cimbri, for they had the worſt in foure greate battayls: and in that one battayl, wherein Cepio was captayne, were ſlayne foure ſcore thouſand Romanes: whych thynge made the Romanes and all the people of Italy ſo ſore afrayd, as they neuer were in the time alſo of Hannibal. At that time was MariusMarius was made capytaine againſt the Cimbri. appointed captaine agaynſt thoſe Teutones, For he was to be rekened amongeſt the mooſt valiaunt men of armes, that Rome had. He went to thys warre in the ſyxe hundreth and two and fyftyeth yeare after the foundacion of Rome: and this warre laſted tyll the thyrd yeare, ſo longe tyll the Cimbri were vtterly deſtroyed and oppreſſed.
                  The hiſtories make mencion, that in the laſt fyghteAn example of vehement wrath of god the women vſed ſuche force, that they dyd no leſſe ſlaughter, than the men: and with ſuch a rage, that runninge agaynſt the Romanes wyth theyr chylderen, caſt them into theyr viſages.
                  This truely is an example of ſo greate crueltye, that worthely maye he quake at the wrath of God, whoſo fyndeth lyke miſeryes in readynge of hiſtories. For it muſt be a vehement and ſtrong indignacion, which bryngeth to mens wretched and

oppreſſed caſes ſo great a miſery.
               
               
                  Of Sylla and Marius.
                  
                     THat whiche Scipio Naſica ſayde in theThe conſultation of deſtroyenge Carthago. Senate to be true, dyd the dede proue. For whan ye Romanes could not be weakened, wyth the power of a foren enemy, they were febled with theyr own ſtrengthes, within themſelues. Marius, of whom we haue ſayd before, broughte home notable victories of the foren enemies, but at the laſt was he cauſe
                        •
                      of a moſt cruelMarine cauſe
                           •
                         o
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        n vproure▪ Sylla Mithridates vproure in the citie of Rome. For whan Sylla was ordeined captayne, to warre in Aſia agaynſt kyng Mithridates: Marius toke it diſpleaſauntly, that the yonge Sylla ſhoulde be ſet before him, and he brought much to paſſe by the Tribunes, that they ſhould ſet themſelues agaynſt the Senate, & by the commune voyce of the common people, to choyſe Marius. By thys hatred was the occaſyon ſprong of that great warre betwene Sylla & Marius. For whan Marius had rayſed thys rumoure at Rome, Sylla appointed a ſetting forth of an army into Aſia. But Marius wyth conſente of the people had optayned, that Sylla ſhould not go into Aſia: & ſome frendes of Sylla dyed in this commotion at Rome, amonge the which was the ſonne of Pompeius the conſul the ſonne in law of Sylla. But whan the Tribunes ſent to Sylla them, that ſhoulde ſhewe hym, he ſhould not go into Aſia, he appoynted hys army incontinentlye, and came to Rome, and ſlew the tribune and many other. Marius fled into Aphrica. In the meane ſeaſon ſet
                        •
                      Sylla all thynges in order in the citye, and wente

into Aſia, and brought great thynges to paſſe. He ouercame Mithridates, and toke in wyth ſtronge handes Athenes, and whole Grece, and ſubdued alſo many other contryes of Aſia. Whan SyllaThe tyranny of Marius. brought this to paſſe, in the meane ſeaſon doth Marius returne oute of Aphrica into Italy well appointed, and goynge to Rome, he ſlew the beſt and moſt excellent princes, and chefe of the Romanes, and thys ſlaughter at Rome was very miſerable. Than was Sylla conſtrayned hayſtely to returne out of Aſia, to ayde them that were of his part: but in the meane tyme dyed Marius. Howbeit the ſonne of Marius reſtored the warre agaynſt Sylla,Sylla feareth the inconſtancy of fortune. where wyth Sylla beynge afrayed, he ſayde as it is reported: that whan he was yonge, he had good fortune agaynſt an aged man: but nowe he feared, leſt a yonge man ſhould lykewyſe haue theſame fortune agaynſt him.
                  Thys example wytneſſeth, that wyſe men haue earneſtly ouerlayde, and alſo douted the vnſtableneſſe of fortune, whych happeneth in mennes affaires. But God proſpered the enterpriſe of Sylla, that he triumphed of hys enemyes: for he had a mooſte ryghte cauſe. But yet doo hiſtoryesSylla is more cruell than nede is. make mencion that Sylla was afterwarde more cruel than nede requyred: For he ſpared in a maner noman, than fauored Marius parte, nother was there anye meaſure or ende to vſe tyranny at Rome. Of thys wyſe was the tyranny that Marius vſed agaynſt the princes reuenged by Sylla at the laſt, who reſtored them in the gouernaunce. Thou ſhalt chefely perceaue

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
gentle reader by thys hiſtory, that ſo great miſery and debate in the commune wealth, roſe of a ſmall begynnyng, and by a certaine alteracion or tourne crept it fyrſt in among princes, afterward among y• people. But Sylla vſed great wyſedome, and deſerued great prayſe, that after this commotion, he ſet and confirmed the commune welth in a certaine order, vtterly depoſynge the authoritye of the Tribunes:The Tribunes were depoſed by Silla. The Tribunes are reſtored agayne by Pōpeius. for they were wont euer to inflame y• myndes of the commune people agaynſt the Senate. But Pompeius chaunged thys ſame afterwarde, who reſtored them, to doo the commune people a pleaſure: Howbeit the euyll counſell was worſt to the counſeller. For the Tribunes were alſo the doers in ſturrynge to the ciuyll warre betwene Iulius Ceſar and Pompeius.
               
               
                  Of Pompeius and C. Iulius Ceſar.
                  
                     THE mooſt haynous warre, that was betwene Ceſar and Pompeius, which cauſed an vtter deſtruccyon to the whole commune welth of Rome, toke occaſyon of very lyght cauſes: & that euen of only enuye againſt Ceſar, not ſo much of Pompeius, as of priuate perſones, the whych coueted thoſe prouinces, that Ceſar poſſeſſed. The occaſion of the warre began of thys wyſe:Occaſyon of 
                           •
                         ciuil warre Whan Ceſar was in Gallia, he requyred that regard ſhould be had of hym in his abſence, and to be remembred in choyſynge of counſuls: for it muſt be pertayned to him, that it ſhoulde be ſo broughte to paſſe. For if he had returned to Rome wythout

there ſhould be a conſull, hys enemyes were minded to oppreſſe him, and to brynge to paſſe, that he ſhoulde be exiled from Rome. But Ceſar brought to paſſe wyth the ayde of the Tribunes, that the dignity of Conſulſhyp was promyſed him, the which was done wyth the conſent of Pompeius the conſul alſo. But whan the tyme came to appoynte the conſuls, ſome haue ſtered the Senate, to ſet themſelues agaynſt him, nother ſuffre Ceſar to be made conſul, & the ſame alured Pompeius to be of their ſyde, and droue out the Tribunes, whyche fled to Iulius Ceſar. But whan Iulius perceaued that they woulde oppreſſe and betraye hym, he laye ſore vpon the promyſe that was made hym, and demaunded the conſulſhyppe: beſyde thys would he haue the Tribunes reſtored into theyr place. Duryng this controuerſye, there were diuerſe conſultations. Marcus Cicero brought the mooſt vehementesM. Cicero. reaſon, whiche were to be borne of ether parte. For he wylled that Ceſar and Pompeius ſhould forſake theyr hooſtes, and that Pompeius ſhould goo into Spayne, as he was alſo determined, and Ceſar, ſo ſone as he had forſaken the hooſt, ſhoulde be conſul. Iulius Ceſar agreed to thys, but Pompeius refuſed it. Wherfore dyd Ceſar come to Rome wyth an army appoynted: Pompeius takyng the flyght, doth lykewiſe appoynt an hooſt wyth all hys power. But Ceſar taketh in Italy & Spayne, and perſued Pompeius vntyll Grece. And though Iulius refuſyd not hetherto the condicions of an appointment of peace, but dyd alſo offreIulius a mā ad
                           ••
                        ed & ſouer of peace. them frelye: yet Pompeius ceaſed not to make

aunſwer, that he would graunt nor admitte no condicions of peace, before he ſawe the heade of Iulius cut of and brought to hym. But whan Ceſar heard that, he was greatly moued. Though Pompeius had a more righteous cauſe, yet oughte he to haue vſed more gentleneſſe agaynſte ſo noble a prince, that offred condicions of peace, and ſought onelye that he might haue ben fre, and withoute daunger of feare. Therfore whan Ceſar ſawe that he muſte vſe counſel by conſtraynt, he inuaded Pompeius, and ouercame hym. Pompeius fled into Egypte, where he was ſlaine by an entray of the yong king, whoſe father he hym ſelfe had ſet into the kyngedome. Afterward toke Ceſar Aſia and Aphrica together, inſomuche that he alone had in all the empyre of Rome wyth great puyſſaunce. Thys ſo great alteration and miſery in the commune welth of Rome began of a moſte lyghte thynge: for this warre was dolefull both to hygh and lowe eſtates of men. For hiſtories report that ther were ſlayne aboue thre hundreth thouſand men in thys ciuill warre. ⸪
               
            
            
               
               The fourth and laſte Monarchy, namely of the Romane empyre Iulius Ceſar.
               
                  THre thouſand yeares, eight hundreth and foure ſcore and ſeuentene were ſence the creation of the worlde.
               Seuen hundreth and ſyxe yeares ſence the buyldyng of Rome.
               Seuen and forty yeares beforeThe begynnyng of the Romane monarchy. Chriſt was borne, began fyrſt the Romane monarchy: whan Iulius was made Conſul, and the warr agaynſt Pompeius, whereof we haue euen nowe ſpoken, dyd begynne. That the warre laſted fyue yeares. For whan Pompeius was deade, Iulius had yet much buſyneſſe to do in Egypte, Aſia and Aphrica, where Cato had ſlayne hym ſelfe: and inCato ſlewe hymſelfe. Spayne, where he had alſo ſlayne one of Pompeius ſonnes. But whan all contryes were ſett in peace, returned Iulius to Rome, and that was in the moneth October, and after that in the begynnynge of Marche, was he ſtycked through in the Senate of Caſſius and Brutus wyth their companyons.
               Wherfore raigned Iulius in peace, nomore but fiueThe ordering of the yeare was begonne by Iulius. monethes, and in that ſeaſon cauſed he the yeare to be ordered, throughout all the Romane empyre, according to the courſe of the ſonne. He brought alſo with him out of Egypt a notable and moſt conning man in ſciences, which taught by demonſtracyons,

called a Mathematicus▪ and was the fyrſt autor
                     •
                   cauſe that thoſe ſciences were taughte in Italy. And this ordering of the yeare, which is handſome and that we vſe yet now at this tyme, was begon
                     •
                   fyrſt by Iulius. But how diſhoneſtly and very cruelly thoſe that kylled Iulius, that is playn ynoug
                     •
                   by theyr dedes. For Caſſius & Brutus wyth they companions fauoured Pompeius. But by the mercyfulnes of Ceſar, were they take in agayne into the citye, and reſtored into their former dignitye & poſſeſſion of goodes. For what ſhall I be prolixe? The worlde had neuer a prince ſo mighty, that euerThe 
                        〈…〉
                      gentlyneſſe of Ceſ
                        •••
                     
                   vſed more gentlyneſſe towarde hys enemies, that frely yelded thēſelues. He neuer ſhewed anye notable wrath agaynſt anye man, wythoute it had ben in a battaill, where neceſſitie to fighte dyd requyre: where neuertheleſſe before him Marius & Sylla neuer ceaſſed of murtheringe, euen in tyme of peace. But Iulius did no ſuch thinges, ye he frely toke to mercy euen the beſt of the cōmune welth, that were Pompeius adherentes, nether toke ought from them. He brought agayn alſo the true maner of gouerning the commune welth, whiche was decayed by ſedition, and reſtored it wyth no leſſe wyſedome, than he kept it vp with authoritie. But how great a thinge this is, maye be gathered therby, that in ciuill commotions wee ſe iudgementes, lawes and all modeſtie of maners go to wrack and to nought. Iulius truely was one of the moſt doughtyeſt princes, whiche beynge garniſhed of God with moſt greateſt vertues aboue other men, that haue gouerned very great dominions.
               
                  Beſyde this was it not poſſyble to retayne commune peace long after that Iulius was deade: for there was noman after Iulius that had ether ſuch authoritie or power, that with very force could enterteyn the quyetneſſe of the empyre: for to retaine the ſame in great kingdomes, is requiſite a greate and ſyngular puyſſaunce. Moreouer it is reported that he ſhould haue ſayde: That he feared not for for his lyfe, but that his death ſhould be miſcheueous and deadly to the commone welth & empyre.
               But all this refrained not them from the curſed enterpryſe, of whom by a cōiuracion he was ſlaine. The firſt beginner of this wicked dede, was Caſſius,Caſſius. and that only by enuy, becauſe for Ceſars ſake he could not obtayne thoſe prouinces, which he coueted.Brutus▪
                   Brutus was a man of great wytt, and therfore ſuffred he him lightely to be made a companyon of this wicked dede: cloking it with this colour, that it were not honeſt for the Senate of Rome, to ſuffre a lord greater in the empyre then he. Item, that Ceſar alſo was a tyraunt, and that it was lawfully permitted to ſlaye tyrauntes. With ſuch lyke inconuenient argumentes, whiche are oft wont to begyle yong and vnlearned men in lyke caſes, was Brutus inflamed: for without his helpe had Caſſius brought nothynge to paſſe. This is the ſumme of this hiſtory. But God ſuffred ſo great a miſcheuouſneſſe not longe vnpuniſhed. For as manye as had conſpyred to the death of Iulius, were alſo ſlayne themſelues not longe after.
               Ceſar was olde ſyxe and fyftye yeare whan he was ſlayne, and ruled fyue yeares: and the beginninge

of rulynge was in the conſulſhyppe, in the which he beganne the warre agaynſt Pompeius. This is the begynnynge of the Romane monarchye, the whych God hath paynted very horribly in the prophet Daniell: and wytneſſeth, that the world ſhalbe much more heauely oppreſſed by theſame, than euer it was before. Item that Chriſt ſhall come in the ſame monarchye, and therfore ſhal it be the laſt. For all theſe thynges are propheſyed before by God, to ſtablyſhe the fayth of the godly, concerninge the certayntie of Chriſtes comming. Beſydes thys alſo that it mighte be knowen that the world ſhall not endure foreuer, but ſhall once peryſhe, and that the vngodlye ſhalbe punyſhed, but the Godly ſhall loke at Gods hand for a lyfe euerlaſtynge. I ſuppoſe verely that the prophecy of the Heythen prophetes, and ſayenges of the Sybilles of the durableneſſe of the Romane empyre, are pertaynynge to thys, as is the ſayenge of Virgil: I haue geuen an endleſſe empyre, the whych ſeme to be taken of this, whiche the ſcrypture ſayeth, thatThe Roman monarchy is the laſte on earth. the empyre of Rome ſhalbe the laſte monarchye on earth. Though the ſcripture doth in the meane ſeaſon teache alſo, that thys monarchy ſhall decaye: yet ſhall parte of the ſame laſt euer, wherein ſhall re remayne the name and hygneſſe of an Emperour, vntyll the worldes ende.
               Theſe thynges are to be knowen, that wee maye be aſſured that thys empyre can not be ouerthrowen, whyche the examples of hiſtories wytneſſe alſo. For after that the hyghneſſe of an Emperoure was tranſlated to the Germanes, hath

thys kyngdome ſuffred many aſſaultes, and hath oft bene weakened: but yet coulde it not be abolyſhed by nomans power, but remayned allwaye ſtable, and reſtored it ſelfe otherwyles.
               For it had nowe Emperours of ſmall power, than very puyſſaunt Emperours. To conſydre theſe thynges in hiſtoryes maketh greate matter, chefely to knowe the wyll of God aryghte in ſuche chaunces.
               
                  Auguſtus.
                  
                     WHan Iulius was deade, roſe greate commotions at Rome. Marcus CiceroMarcus Cicero. counſelled to make a peace on thys wyſe: that thence foreward noman ſhould laye handes on the fauourers of Iulius, & that all they lykewyſe, whych had ſlayne Iulius ſhould be wythout daunger or feare: but all diſcorde layde doune on both ſydes, they ſhoulde prouide for common and perpetuall peace: none otherwyſe than of late dyd Thraſybulus make a concorde at Athenes, the whych they called Amniſtia, that is, that▪ ether parte ſhoulde forget the iniury done, and that nether of them ſhoulde inuade the other afterwarde. Thys was very gentely and handſomly counceled and conſydered of Cicero, but thys contynuall peace coulde not endure longe. For whan afterwarde euerye man woulde rule, it was neceſſarye that factions ſhoulde ryſe. The Senate drue Octauius Auguſtus to it, agaynſt Anthonius.
                  
                     For Anthonius coueted y• raygne. But the ſouldioursAnthonius. conſpyryng againſt the Senate, ſlew manye of the chefe men of the citye, among the which wasAnno. 
                           •
                        l. before Chriſtes 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      Cicero beheaded alſo. But the empyre remayned by Octauius Auguſtus only, which was kynſman to Iulius: for Iulia ſyſter of Iulius had ſpouſed Accius Balbus, but theyr doughter was Accia, whoſe huſband was Octauius: of them was borne
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      Octanius Auguſtus, whom Iulius had appointed and choſen hys heyre, whereby he was ſurnamed Ceſar, and that name remayned euer afterwarde by the ſucceſſors, euen as though by ryght of ſucceſſion, they dyd entre into Ceſars kynred: as it was wont to be, whan ſucceſſors were firſt adopted and choſen. Nether was Iulius called Ceſar fyrſte by
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      reaſon of the empyre, but many of his kynred were ſo ſurnamed before. For the old & approued Grammarians do wryte that the name of Ceſar cōmeth of the worde or name Ceſaries, whiche ſignifieth goodly heare or a buſh of fayre heare: and of that gat the Iulies fyrſt that name, becauſe that one or other happelye had a fayre heare in that kynred.
                  As for the name Auguſtus dyd the Senate adde to Octauius, for hys luckyneſſe and proſperitye
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      in hys affayres. Auguſtus commeth of Auguruim, (that is, a diumation or ſoythſayenge by the crye or ſlighte of byrdes) and betokeneth fortunate, and he whom God doeth proſpere by lucky ſygnes or tokens.
                  This addition, is a right geuen to a ſupreme gouernour of y• world: for god is with y• ciuil power, & the

gouernaunce of an empyre, is the gyfte and ordinaunce of God.
                  Auguſtus raygned ſyxe and fyfty yeares, but he gouerned not the empyre alone the twelue fyrſt yeares. For beyng yong, not paſſyng nyneten yeares of age, was he ſet in the gouernaunce: he was made counſul, becauſe he ſtack by the Senate, of of the which he was made conſul, in deſpyte of Antonius. But the ſouldiours agreyng wythin them ſelues, ſet them agaynſt the Senate and his adherentes. But for ſo much as thys concord could not be durable, Auguſtus was fayne afterwarde to be at variaunce and ſtryue alſo wyth hys felowes, and ſo optayned he the whole empyre alone. But whan the gouernaunce was ſtablyſhed with peace, he vſed mooſt hygh moderation in all thinges, and confirmed the whole empyre wyth honeſte lawes and ſtatutes: in ſo much that it is reported, he ſhuld haue ſayd: The kyngdome ſhall laſt for euer, yf theſe ordinaunces be not auoyded and diſanulled. But what ſhall I ſaye much? Auguſtus is ſcaſely counted the fyrſte and chefeſt among the ſage and moderate princes.
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The thyrde boke of the Cronicles, whych conteyneth the tyme ſence Chriſtes byrth.
            
               BEfore, in the begynnynge of thys worke, haue we diuided thys whole Cronicle and tymes of the worlde in thre partes, and that accordinge to the ſayenge of Elias, that both the mooſt alterations of thynges in the world, and order of the tymes myght be knowen more ſurely. Beſydes thys, that we ſhoulde alſo knowe, that the worldes end is nowe not farre of. Howbeit we haue nowe diſpatched allmooſt foure thouſand yeares, and about that time nearehande was Chriſt borne, the whyche Elias had prophecyed. Now in this thyrd boke, ſhall we lyke wyſe treate of the thyrde parte of Elias meanynge, and begynne thys boke wyth the ſame. And how lytle Elias had fayled in the order of the yeares, truely it maye be perceaued verye eaſely: for CHRISTE our LORD, very God and man,Whā Chriſt was borne. was borne into thys lyfe of the virgin Mary euen the two and fortyeth yeare of Auguſtus raygne: and thys was thre thouſande, nyne hundreth and foure and fortyeth yeare ſence the creation of the worlde. But to counte the yeares exactely and narowly, there is ſomewhat requiſite in the nombre of the yeares. For the foure thouſande yeares are not fulfilled.
            
               But the prophete ſayde moreouer: that God wold preuent and come ſpedely before the tyme of hys comminge, becauſe the ende of all thinges myght be more neare. Howbeit the thynges that are concernyng the knowledge of Chriſtes natiuyte, Paſſion and Reſurrection for euerye Godly man, the ſame maye all be ſearched in the Euangeliſtes. But as concerning the tyme whan Chriſt ſuffred, and roſe agayne from death: alſo how the Goſpell is ſpred abroade in the worlde, and by what meanes alſo the holy Goſpell began in the worlde vnyuerſall, we ſhall intreate afterwarde.
            
               Of the Germanes.
               
                  IN the tyme of Auguſtus were theThe Germanes were fyrſt couqueſted by warre. Tiberius Druſius. Germanes firſt attempted of the Romanes. Tiberius and hys brother Druſius were wyth an hooſt in high germany, and inuaded thoſe coaſtes, that are ioyninge to Rhetia and Vindelicia. But they dyd not wholy ſubdue thoſe contryes vnder theyr empyre. The Rheti are thoſeRhetia. that dwell in the valley of the floude Enus or Ihn, they of Tyrol vntyll Bregetium or Rab, Kempte and dounwarde vntyll Nordlingen, where yet remaynethVindelicia. the name Ryes. They of Vindelicia are Augſpurg and vpper Beyerlande. Druſus went doune vntyll Mentz, and there gettynge a diſeaſe he loſt hys lyfe.
               Aboute that tyme made the garnyſon of the Romanes, that was appoynted at Colen an

aſſaulte vpon Weſtphalen and Saxony. But one called Hermannus was captayne of Saxony, whō the hiſtoryeus do call Arminius lord of Cheruſia.Cheruſci. Armnius. As for the Cheruſci are euen the Saxons & Thurynges, dwellynge by the wood called Schwartzwalde, of that ſyde, that ſtretched beneth by the floude Weſurgus vntyll the citye Breme, And by my iudgement is that called Cheruſci, whych now is communely called Hertziſhe. This Arminius oppreſſed the Romanes vnwarres, and ſlew about one and twenty thouſand of them. Beſydes alſo a great army of the ayders and confederates of the Romanes, whych warred wyth them, as Frenchmen do wyth the Scottes.
               Quintilius Varus the captayne of the RomaneQuintilius Varus. hooſt ſlew him ſelf wyth hys ſwearde. Tacitus the hiſtoryographes ſheweth at larg of the battayl that was had, namelye betwene the floudes Lyppia and Amiſia, that is, beneth the toune Caſſel, not farre from the toune Padeborne in Weſtphalen. For thus ſayeth Tacitus: They ployled ſo much as lyeth betwene the floudes Amiſia & Lyppya, not farre from the woode of Teutoburgum, where the reſidue of Varus hooſte and legions is ſayde to lye vnburyed. As for this ſlaughter made the Romanes no leſſe afrayde, that in tymes paſte whan the Cimbriwayſted Italy. For the Romanes were afrayde leſt Arminius wyth force of armes had inuaded the Romane empyre, and come vntyll Rome. Auguſtus was in ſuche diſtreſſe by reaſon of the feare of the greate daunger, that he cauſed euery man to be euery where in armes. It

is alſo ſayed, that he ſayed of wepyng & with great crye: Quintily reſtore the legions. But when the Romanes were dryuen out of Saxony, they brought to paſſe, that Arminius was inuaded with war of his neighbors, there was at that tyme the Swedes and Belhems, dwelling by the ryuer Albis: but Arminius ouercame them alſo, and takyng in their contreis, he had Weſtphalen, Shwartwald, Saxony, Marck, Miſen, and Bohemy. He reigned about twelue yeare, and finally was he ſlayne by the oppreſſion of his. But this is ynough ſayed of Auguſtus tyme.
            
            
               Tiberius the third Emperoure.
               
                  The yeare of the worlde. iii M. ix. C. lx.
                  The yeare of Rome .vii. C. lxix.
                  The yeare of Chriſte .xvi.
               
               
                  THough many excellent Emperours haue benſence the time of Auguſtus, (for when God kepeth the common welthes, he geueth alſo ſuche men, that are mete to do great thynges.) yet haue the in the meane ſeaſō now and than princes diſſolute and wicked: ſo that a mery conceated man ſemeth to haue ſayed very true: that the ymages of al good princes may be grauē in one rynge. It is very profitable to beholde in hiſtories the thynges that are declared and the examples of wycked princes, that we may drede y• wrath of God, by the feare of the puniſhment, wherewith they are punyſhed.
               Tiberius was not the ſonne of Auguſtus, but forTiberiu
                        •
                     .
                  
ſomuche as the true heyres of Auguſtus were deade, he toke in ſteade and choſe for heyre Tiberius the ſonne of Liuia, whiche was already maried to Auguſtus: and becauſe Tiberius was a valiaunt man of armes, Auguſtus vſed hym alway for a captain. This Tiberius was the firſt Emperour, to whome the ſenate of Rome did yelde it ſelfe. He reigned thre and twenty yeares.
               The fyuetenth yeare of Tiberius was ChriſteWhā Chriſt was bapti
                        •
                     ed our Lorde thirty yeare olde, and that yeare was he baptiſed of Ihon Baptiſte, and beganne the preachyng of hys Goſpell, of penaunce, of remiſſion of ſynnes, and lyfe euerlaſting. This was ſence the creation of the worlde the .iiii. M. ix. C. and lxxv. yeares. But after the beginning of Alexanders Monarchie the .CCC. and .xl. yeare. Adde an hundreth and fyue and fourty yeares vntyll the ſecond yeare of Longimanus. Thus haue ye the foure hundreth and foure ſcore and fyue yeares: and theſe are the thre ſcore and nyne wekes of the whiche is ſpoken by Daniel: whiche thynge we haue treated at length before.
               In the eyghtenth yeare of Tiberius was ChriſtWhā Chriſt was crucifyed. oure Sauioure crucified, dyed, and roſe agayn the thyrde daye. But after his reſurrection he commaunded his diſciples, that they ſhould preache the Goſpell thorowe all the worlde, the whiche they began ſtrayght way, when they had receaued the holy ghoſt from heauen vpon Wytſonday, and after the viſible aſcenſion of Chriſt into heauen.
               Therfore is now the worde of God and ſpiritualWhere the Churche or ſpirituall kingdom is kyngdom, and alſo the churche or congregacion of

the faithful or chriſten people not only in the Iewiſh kyngdom: but in the whole worlde, where the Goſpell is preached by the Apoſtles, and where theyr writinges are brought For God promiſed to worke by preaching of his worde. Moreouer where Gods worde is taught, ther is it neceſſary to be ſome that pertaine to Gods kingdom, where Chriſt is ruling and workyng, accordynge to that ſayenge: I ſhalbe with you vntyll the worldes ende. To this oure Lorde Chriſt our ſauiour and true God, be prayſe, glory and thankeſgeuyng for euer. Amen.
               But now it remayneth that we do ſhew further how greate and heuy aſſaultes the churche of chriſtenmen hath ſuffered, both by outwarde perſecutions of enemies, and alſo chefely by heretikes, whiche haue nowe and than toren wretchedly the vnitie of the churche with wicked doctrines: which thynge hath brought a farre more dammage and deſpyſynge to the Churche or congregacion, than any outwarde perſecutions.
               The nyntenth yeare of Tiberius after Chriſtes reſurrection was Steuen the fyrſt martyr ſtonedWhan Steuen was ſtouen. and the ſame yeare was Paule conuerted to the fayth. And this befell.

                     The yeare of the worlde .iii. M. ix. C. lxxviij.
                     The yeare of Rome .vii. C. xcii.
                     The yeare of Chriſte .xxcix.
                  
               
               CAius Caligula the fourth Emperoure reignedCaius Caligula. thre yeare and ten monethes: he was of a veri diſſolute and vmbrideled lyfe, he defyled

all his ſyſters with an vnnamed or an vnnaturall medling: Fynally was he ſlayn by the chefe of hys hooſt through a preuy conſpiracy. This Caligula cauſed his ymage to be ſet in the temple at Ieruſalem, to be worſhipped, whiche thyng was alſo prophecied by Daniel, namely: When Iſraell ſhall ſe anDaniel. ix. Idoll ſet in the temple, then ſhal the ende be at hād. This happened.
               
                  The yeare of the worlde. iii. M. ix. C. lxxxvii.
                  The yeare of Rome. vii. C. lxix.
                  The yeare of Chriſte .xliij.
               
               
                  CLaudius the fyft Emperour reignedClaudius. thyrtene yeare and nyne monethes: he was poyſoned. The ſecōd yeare of Claudius came Peter the Apoſtle to Rome, who had preached before certayn yeares at Antiochia: and here begynneth the Romyſhe churche.
               
                  
                     The yeare .xliiij. After Chriſtes natiuite.
                     The yeare .iii. M. ix. C. lxxxviij. after the worldes creation.
                     The yeare .vii. C. xcvii. after the buyldynge of Rome.
                     The yeare of the worlde. iiii M.
                     The yeare of Rome .viii. C. ix.
                     The yeare of Chriſte.lvi.
                  
               
               
                  NEro the ſyxt. Emperour reigned fourtenNero. yeare. At the begynnyng lyued he honeſtly fyue yeares, afterwarde was he moſte vngratious by reaſon of hys intemperancy of maners and tyranny. He put to death his own mother & his wyfe, and alſo many noble men, amōg whom was alſo Seneca. Finally whan his officers

was gone from hym, whan he was ſought to be put to deaht by the Senate of Rome, he fleing ſlew himſelfe, before he was founde out by the ſouldiours: and this was done the two and thirtyeth yeare of his age. But the kyngdom of the Romanes is now wholy remoued from the poſteritie and kynſmen of Auguſtus and Leuia.When Peter was crucified. Linus byſhoppe. Paul is beheaded.
               
               In the tyme of Nero was ſaint Peter crucifyed at Rome. After hym was Linus made byſhop, and afterwarde was Paule the Apoſtle beheaded alſo. And yf ye counte the yeares of Paule, hee preached the Goſpell about foure and thyrty yeares.
               In the tyme of Nero appeared a comete ſyxeA comete ſene in Nerois tyme. monethes contrary too all cometes, whiche are not wont to be ſene ſo longe. There was alſo a comete ſene before in the tyme of Claudius, and three ſonnes, whiche ſygnyfyeth doutleſſe, that three princes ſhoulde ſhortely ſtriue for the empire. In lyke maner do I ſuppoſe, that their great Comete dyd ſygnifye not onely the ſedicion and vproure, but alſo the mutacion and chaunge in the Romane empire, and ſpecially the lamentable decaye of the Iewyſh kyngdom.
            
            
               Sergius Galba, Otho, and Vitellius.
               
                  AMong theſe thre was a ſtryfe for the empyre,Sergius Galba, Otho. after Neroes death. As for Galba was ſlayn in ye marketplace of Rome by y• layenge wayte of Otho. Afterward was Vitellius choſen Emperoure in Germany of theVitellius. hooſt, and ſent ſome men of armes into Italy. The

whiche metyng Otho, he fought foure feldes with them: thre tymes dyd he ouercome them, but in the fourth was his hooſt ouerthrowen. And though the ſouyldiours drue frely to hym, yet would hee warre no more. For it is reported that he ſhoulde haue ſaid: that he ſet more by the comon peace, then by his owne lyfe or priuate glory: and the fourth moneth after Galbas death, ſlew he hymſelfe with a daggar.
               In the meane ſeaſon was Veſpaſianus choſenVeſpaſianus Emperoure in the Eaſte, by the ſouldiours: theſame ſent an hooſt into Italy, the whiche ouerthrewe Vitellius men of armes. Of that roſe vproures at Rome, and Vitellius was taken his handes bound vpō his backe, and with a halter caſt about his neck, he was drawen through the myer in the ſtretes, and fynally was he ſlayne as he had deſerued. For he was ſuche one, that deſerued rather to bee called a cruell beaſte, than a man. This was the fyrſt vproure that was in the Empyre for the election or choſyng, after Auguſtus.

                     The yeare of the worlde .iiii. M. xvi.
                     The yeare of Rome .viii. C. xxv.
                     The yeare of Chriſt .lxxij.
                  
               
               VEſpaſianus the Seuenth Emperoure reigned nyne yeares. It was a man renowmed in wyſedome and honeſty, and a prince moſte worthy of the Empyre. For where Caligula, Claudius and Nero dyd nott onely ſuffre all intemperancy out of meaſure in other, but dyd it themſelues alſo: this man contrarywyſe reſtored at Rome

the nourture of modeſtie and honeſt lawes. He augmented alſo the Empyre with all maner of victuals, and in the prouinces ordeined he neceſſary aydes. Beſides this ordeined he alſo at Rome common penſions for profeſſers of phiſyck and other ſciences.
            
            
               Of the laſt deſtruction of Ieruſalem.
               
                  IN the ſeconde yeare of Veſpaſianus beganWhen Titꝰ the ſonne of Veſpaſiane beſyeged Ieruſalem. Titus the ſonne of Veſpaſian to beſyege the cytie Ieruſalem, whan Eaſter began to be kept in the moneth of Apryll, and afterwarde in the moneth September dyd he ſpoyle and burne it. But in the meane tyme was ſo great myſery in the cytie for hunger, vproure and inwarde manſlaughter, as neuer was red to haue bene in any cytie. The mothers dyghted their owne chyldren to ſatiſfye their hunger, but inuayne: For the ſouldyours tooke them awaye from them par force, and deuoured them, and the mothers dyed with hunger the whyles. Many ſlew themſelues. Ioſephus wryteth that in the cytyTen hūdreth thouſād men were in the citie whan Ieruſalem was beſyeged. were about ten hundreth thouſand perſons. For becauſe it was Eaſter, a very great multitude came together into the cytie: Beſydes this, they that dwelt here and there in villages, in all Iewry, drue all together to Hieruſalem, for none other cauſe, but that they truſted to bee in ſaue garde by the defence of ſo well afortified citie. In ſo great nō
                  ber of people, the moſte parte nere hande dyed with

hunger, peſtilence and ſworde. Titus ſent ſyxtene thouſand to Alexandria, to do ſeruice, none other wyſe then ſlaues. He brought twoo thouſand with hym, whiche hee ſhewed in a triumphe, and caſte them to wylde beaſtes in common games to be toren in peces. But what ſhall I ſaie muche? nomans oraciō can be ſufficient to expreſſe ſo great a myſery. For God woulde propoſe to men a new and ſyngularAn example of Gods wrath. example, wherein myght be ſene the greatneſſe of Gods wrath againſt deſpiſers of Godlyneſſe. For it muſt be a very ſtony and harde harte, whiche ſhoulde not be ſore afrayed at ſo dredefull an example. And it is aboue all thynges to be ouerloked in this hyſtorye, that yf God vſed no mercy towarde thys people in punyſhynge them for their wyckedneſſe, whome he called hys peculiar people, whyche alſo was come of ſo holy fathers: He ſhall muche leſſe ſpare the Heythen. And God in threatenynge thys, declareth alſo in the ſame example the ſhewe of mercy and Godly beneuolence: namely, that we do not doubt that after that the Iewyſh kyngdom is ouerthrowen, we that are Gentyls, are truely the choſen people and Gods chyldren, yf we do truly beleue in Chriſte.
               This deſtruction of Ieruſalem befell in the ſecōd yeare of Veſpaſtanus: and it was the threſcore and fortene yeare after Chriſtes natiuite, the fortieth yere after that Chriſt had ſuffered his paſſion. But from the creation of the worlde the foure thouſand and eightenth yere. And this temple dyd ſtande after the ſecond yere of Longunanus fyue hundreth and ſyx and twenty yeares.
               
                  Many dredefull tokens ſignifyed this deſtructiō
                  Straung thī
                     ges were ſene before the deſtructiō of Ieruſalem. afore, which for ſhortneſſe we can not here reherſe. A burnyng ſworde was ſene aboue the temple nearehande a whole yeare. I haue added thys therfore, leſt no man do raſhly deſpyſe the tokens, which pretende the euidēces of Gods indignacion, by the which we are called to repentaunce, that the wrath of God maye be ether auoyded, or mitigated: which thynge of mercy happened to the Niniuites.
               
                  The yeare of the worlde
                  iiii. M. xxv.
                  The yeare of Rome.
                  viij. C. xxxii.
                  The yeare of Chriſte.
                  lxxxi.
               
               TItus the eyght Emperoure reigned twoThe gentleneſſe of Titꝰ Veſpaſianꝰ. yeare. He was the ſonne of Veſpaſianus, endued wyth all kynde of princely vertues, wherefore he was prayſed of euery man, and called: The loue and delite of man kynde. But when he perceaued, that ſome went about to optayne the Emperyall dignitie agaynſt hym, he☜ commaunded to admonyſhe them frendly, to abſtayne from ſuche enterpryſes: For all theyr labour was inuayne in ſuche thinges, and that the gouernaunce is a gyft of God, whiche befalleth to hym, whome it pleaſeth hym to geue: He dyd nothynge more rygorouſly to them. Titus (as ſome ſuppoſe) dyed of poyſon.
               After that Linus was deade, was Anacletus made the third byſhop of Rome.
               
                  The yeare of the worlde .iiij. M. xxvij.
                  The yeare of Rome viii. C. xxxvj.
                  The yeare of Chriſte .lxxxiij.
               
               
                  DOmitianus the nynth Emperoure, the brotherDomitianus of Titus reigned fyftene yeares. He had warres in Germany, and ce
                     •
                  ſely agaynſt the Catti, that now a daies are called the Heſſes. HeCatti. vſed incredible intemperancy and great tyranny at Rome, wherfore he was fynally ſlayne. He droueThe Mathematici are 
                        〈…〉
                     en out of Rome. out of Rome the Mathematicos, that is, teachers by demonſtracion and Philoſophers. He perſecuted the Chriſten, and put them to death, lyke as Nero dyd.
               Whan Anacletus was deade, Clemens the fyrſt of that name was made Byſhop of Rome.
               
                  The yeare of the worlde .iiij. M. xliij.
                  The yeare of Rome .viij. C. lij.
                  The yeare of Chriſte .xcix.
               
               NErua the tenth Emperoure reigned one
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . yeare and foure monethes. He adopted and made heyre apparant Traianus, who was as then capitaine in Germany about Collen. Nerua dyed being olde .lxviij. yeare.
               
                  The yeare of the worlde .iiij. M. xliiij.
                  The yeare of Rome .viij. C. liij.
                  The yeare of Chriſte .C.
               
               TRaianus the Emperoure reigned nynetene yeares and ſyxe monethes. This ſame wasTraianꝰ 
                        •
                     as 
                        〈…〉
                     ho 
                        〈◊〉
                     . the fyrſte of the ſtraunge Emperours: For he was no Italian, but a Spanyarde by kynred. He was of ſuche notable honeſtie, that euer afterward, as oft as an Emperoure was electe, he dyd wyſhe☞ with open requeſte, that: he might be lyke to Traianus in honeſtie, & Auguſtus in happeneſſe. When he

had made the principall officers of his court, he gaueThe noble ſayenge of Traianus when he gaue his heade officer the power of the ſworde. hym a ſworde in hys hande, ſayeng theſe wordes: Vſe this ſworde agaynſt myne enemies in iuſte cauſes. If I do not iuſtly, then drawe it vpon myſelfe. The Romane empyre was neuer ſo large, as in the tyme of Traianus: and aboue the examples of other Emperours, poſſeſſed he the realmes of the Eaſt moſt largely. He had very great warres in Hungary and Germany.
               Ihon the euangeliſt that was driuen out by Domitian,Ihon the Apoſtle returneth out of Pathmos. returned agayne to Epheſus out of the yle Pathmos. If ye wyll reken the nōbre of the yeres, it ſhalbe founde that Sainct Ihon hath preached aboue thre ſcore yeares. Good Lorde howe many☜ myſeries hath Sainct Ihon ſene in ſo longe ſpace, among the whiche was euen the greateſt, the deſtruction of Hieruſalem hys countrey: I wyll paſſe ouer how greueouſly hee hath ſtryuen wyth many and euen peruerſet heretikes. For we reade that vpon a tyme Sainct Ihon came into a bath, and founde Cherinthus the Heretike ſittyng with hys company, and diſputynge earneſtly amonge them, and the vnſhamefaſt blaſphemer denyed Chriſte to be man. But Sainct Ihon ryſynge, bad hys frendes that were ſet wyth hym, to departe with hym from thence: For God woulde not ſuffre any lenger ſo vnſhamefaſt blaſphemies. But ſtrayghtwaye as he was gone out, the houſeCherinthus the heretike was killed 
                        〈◊〉
                      the fallyng of an houſe. An example of vengeaūce fallyng downe, ſlewe Cherinthus wyth hys company. It is a dredefull example of Gods wrath agaynſt them whiche blaſpheme the name of GOD, wyth open and manifeſt vngodlyneſſe, howe

litle he wyl ſuffre them to be vnpuniſhed at length.
               Euariſtus the fift. B. of Rome ſucceded Clemēs
               After Euariſtus death ſucceded the .vi. B. of Rome Alexander the firſt of that name.
               Vnder Traianus were many Chriſten men tormented.
                     
                        ••
                     e perſecu
                     
                        〈…〉
                      of Chriſt
                        ••
                      m
                        •
                     n v
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        ••
                     r Traianꝰ But afterwarde was a ſentence ordeined, that they ſhoulde not be brought into iudgement, without they were fyrſt openly accuſed, and then ſhuld they be punyſhed: and this was gotten by the benefite of Plinius. Traianus died of a flyxe in theThe yeares of his age 
                        〈…〉
                     . belly.
               
                  The yeare of the worlde .iiij. M. lxiiij.
                  The yeare of Rome .viii. C. lxxiij.
                  The yeare of Chriſte .C. xx.
               
               ADrianus the .xii. Emperoure, reigned twenty yeares: He was adopted of Traianus. He was a prince of greate wyſdome, he was not geuen too warre after the example of Traianus, but was geuen to common peace by al maner of meanes: and of this wiſe reſtored he the Empyre in moſte beſt faſhion, wherfore he alſo deſerued moſte hygh prayſe with euery man. Ther was neuer a more profytable Emperour to the Romyſh kyngdome, ſence Auguſtus, then this Adrianus. He was excellently learned in aſtronomy, andAdrianus a 
                        〈…〉
                      learned 
                        〈…〉
                     per
                        ••
                     r 
                        〈…〉
                      cō
                     
                        •
                     ing 
                        〈…〉
                     tronomy compoſed euery yeare a pronoſtication for hymſelf. Vnlearned readers of ſciences put he out of wages, howbeit he prouided of hys own coſte for thē, that they had no nede in the meane ſeaſon: and ſet other learned and profitable mē to teache in their ſteade. He furniſhed alſo excellent libraries: for he was reakened to be very well learned in Greke and Latin.
               
                  In the tyme of Adrianus began the Iewes to reſtoreThe Iewes▪ rayſe an vproure through one Meſſias. their kyngdom, fyndyng alſo out one Meſſias among thē: But Adrianus ouercame them, though it was not without great buſyneſſe. Afterwarde commaunded he to repayre Ieruſalem, and called her Elia, after his name Elius.
               At the fyrſt was he ſore againſt the Chriſtians,The clemency of Adrianus towarde Chriſten mē
                   and commaunded to torment them: but afterward, when ſome learned Chriſten men wrote bokes to the Emperoure, the whiche are yet now adayes a brode, he chaunged his mynde, and commaunded that from thence foreward no man ſhould be attached for his religion.
               Xyſtus the fyrſt of that name, and ſeuenth B. of Rome ſucceded Alexander.
               After Xyſtus ſucceded Theleſphorus the eyghtWho ord
                        ••
                     
                     ned 
                        •
                     ent. B. of Rome. He is reported to haue ben the inſtituter of Lent.
               
                  The yeare of Chriſte .i. C. xl.Antonius Pius.
                  
                  
                     ANtonius the Godly the .xiii. Emperour, was adopted by Adrianus: He reigned xxiij. yeres, & that with ſo great modeſty and endeuoure of peace, that he ſhoulde oft haue ſayed, that it were more honeſt to ſaue one citeſyn by an Emperoure, than to ſlaye a thouſand enemies.
                  Hyginius the nyneth B. of Rome ſucceded Theleſphorus.
                  Pius the .x. ſucceded Hyginius. Anicetus the xi. B. of Rome ſucceded Pius.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſte .c. lxiij.
                  
                     MAr
                        ••
                     s Anthonius the philoſopher the .xilij.Mar
                           ••
                        s Anthonius. Emperoure reigned .xix. yeares. The ſame gouerned the Empyre by good ryght with hys brother Lucius Verus: and theſe two wereLucius Verus. the firſt that ruled the Empyre together. But Verus liued not lōg in the gouernaūce. Marcus was lyke excellent, both in vertue and learnynge. He had alſo warre in Germany, agaynſte them that dwelt in Morauia and Sleſia, and alſo againſt the Vandali. He wrote many excellent lawes, the whiche are yet to be red in the Pandectes of the ciuyll lawe. He wrote alſo whole bookes wherof we haue ſene ſome.
                  Moreouer in his tyme lyued Ptolomeus thePtolomeus th
                           •
                         aſtrono
                        
                           〈…〉
                        . aſtronomian, of whom we do worthely make mencion. For it hath pleaſed God, that ſo excellent doctrines ſhould be kept and reſerued vntyll theſe our tymes, through this man. Nether truely was this Ptolomeus a kyng, (for at that tyme had Egypte cea
                        •
                     ſed of hauyng kynges,) but was a philoſopherEgypt was garn
                           ••
                        hed 
                           ••
                         mathematicall ſciences. at Alexandria in Egypte. For God had garnyſhed Egypte with mathematicall ſciences, ſence the tyme of Ioſeph the ſonne of Iacob the patriarke, by whome Egypte had fyrſt receaued them, and kept them vntyll this Ptolomeus: and that is about twoo thouſande yeares. For firſt Alexander, afterwarde the Romanes alſo had Egypte in greate eſtimacion for thys cauſe, and leſt ſo noble ſciences ſhould periſhe, they beſtowed muche coſt to entertayne the Schole, whiche then finally wente tooThe Schole of Alexandria. nought alſo, whan the kyngdome of Egypte was tranſlated from the Romanes, and was myſerably

ſpoyled by Mahomet. But that at the leaſt ſome remnaunt of ſo neceſſary ſciences ſhould remayne, no doubt but God would them to be ſet in an order by this man, that they maye be kept of them that come after▪ for the whiche thyng God is greatly toThe Mahometiſtes. be thanked. But how litle they of Mahomets ſecte are worthy to be called men, ye that they may be rather called beaſtes than men, doth it appeare thereby, that they willed ſo auncient a ſcole to peryſhe & be loſt, whiche had nowſtande and floryſhed aboue two thouſand yeres, being kept by ſo noble princes, in the whiche were taught all maner of wyſdome and learnynge, not wythout the hygh benefite of God.
                  Soter the xij. byſhop of Rome ſucceded Anycetus, who ordeined, that they that were ſpouſed, ſhoulde be wedded openly before the Churche or congregacion.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſte .C. lxxxiij.
                  COmmodus the .xv. Emperoure gouernedCommodus xij. yeare, and was equall euen to Nero in cruelneſſe.
                  Eleuterius ſucceded Soter in the byſhopricke.
                  The yeare of Chriſte .C. xcv.
                  Aelius Pertinax the .xvi. Emperoure reignedAelius Pertinax. ſyxe monethes. He was ſlayne of Iulianus, who had bought the name of an Emperoure of the ſouldiours.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſte .C. xcvi.
                  Didius Iulianus the .xvii. Emperour reignedDidiꝰ Iulianus. vii. monethes. He was very wel learned in y• lawe.

He was ſlayne by Seuerus.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt .C. xcvi.
                  
                     SEuerus the .xviij. Emperoure reigne eightene yeres. The ſame reſtored agai
                        〈…〉
                     
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . the empire that was decaied wyth ſundry perels.
                  Victor the .xiiij. byſhop of Rome ſucceded Ele
                        •
                     
                     therius in the byſhopryke.
                  Zepherinus the .xv. ſucceded victor. In his tyme was Origene, who taught the holy ſcripture atOrigene
                           •
                         a trache
                           •
                         at Ale
                           •
                        a
                           •
                        der. Alexandria. This mans bokes were afterwarde refuſed, becauſe he brought in vnprofitable diſputations and allegoryes. Afterwarde was it the common faſhion to mengle the phyloſophy of Plato with holy ſcripture, whereof the churche had great dammage and inconuenience: For the phyloſophy of Plato is farre from the common trade of lyuing:The philoſophy of Plato The philoſophy of Ariſtotel. and contrary wyſe the philoſophy of Ariſtotel hath a beawtiful and ryght order, and yf ſhe be wel vſed, exerciſed and vnderſtande, ſhe may verely brynge muche profite to Chriſten men that be learned.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſte .cc. xiiij.
                  ANtonius Baſſianus Caracalla the .xix.Antonius Baſſianus. Emperoure reygned ſyxe yeares. He commaunded hys brother Germane Geta to be ſlayne. He was wedded to his ſtepmother. He required of Papinianus the great lawier to excuſe the manſlaughter that he had done with hys brother, to the whiche Papinian aunſwered:
                        
                           〈…〉
                        pinianus the lawier. It were not ſo eaſy to defende a manſlaughter, as to committe or do it. Wherfore dyd Antonius

cauſe to ſlaye Papinianus alſo, which was worthy to be reputed & taken for a lawier: namely becauſe for righteouſneſſe and honeſties ſake he woulde rather yeoparde his lyfe, than to alowe a diſhoneſteAn example of vengeaunce. dede. Not longe after the Emperoure Baſſianus was duely rewarded for his tyranny, whan he lykewyſe was ſlayne.
                  Caliſtus the .xvi. byſhop of Rome ſucceded Zepherinus.Macrinus.
                  
                  Macrinus the .xx. Emperoure wyth hys ſonne Diad
                        ••
                     menus raygned but one yeare and two monethes. They were both ſlayne.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt .CC. xx
                        •
                     
                  
                  VArus Heliogabalus the .xxi. Emperour raignedVarus Heliogabalus. foure yeares. He left no remembraunce of him, ſaue of a mooſt fylthye beaſte: at the laſt was he ſlayne by the ſouldyours.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt, CC. xxv.
                  ALexander Seuerus the .xxij. Emperoure:Alexander Seuerus. his mother was called Mammea. He raigned xi
                        ••
                     . yeares. He was made Emperoure beyng no more than twelue yeare old, ordeined by the ſouldiours, and that dyd the Senate alowe. He is greately prayſed for hys diligence and Godlyneſſe.
                        
                           •
                        lpia
                           〈…〉
                        . In all thinges vſed he the counſell of Vlpianus the lawier only, nether ſpake he wyth anye man alone, ſaue wyth the ſame. But the ſouldiours toke that in euyll worth, and ſpecially becauſe that by thys mans counſel, they were kepte more ſtraytely in their duety by the Emperoure.
                  
                     And whan for thys cauſe vpon a tyme the ſouldyours ruſhynge vpon hym threatened to ſlaye hym, the Emperoure ſtept forth, and ſet his bodye in the daungers of Vlpianus, and couered hym wyth his cloake: that the ſouldiours myghte vnderſtande, that the Emperour cared for Vlpianus health.
                  Thys was a notable example of Emperyall vertue,A notable example of maintenan̄ce of vertu
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                      whereby is euidentlye declared, that greate men ought not to regarde theyr lyfe and body for the mayntenaunce of iuſtice and ryhteouſneſſe.
                  Vrbanus the fyrſt of that name, the .xvij. biſhop of Rome ſucceded Caliſtus.
                  Pontianus the .xviij. ſucceded Vrbanus.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt .CC. xxxviij.
                  MAximinus the .xxiij. Emperoure raygned thre yeares. The ſame whan he was yonge,
                        
                           〈…〉
                        us 
                           〈…〉
                        d 
                           〈…〉
                        y. was a ſhepeherde in Thracia: afterwarde folowed he the warre: and for the vnacuſtomed greatneſſe of hys bodye, wyth the whyche he had a ſyngular boldneſſe ioyned, he mounted by proceſſe of tyme ſo hygh, that he was choſen Emperoure of the army, wythout anye conſent or authoritie of the Senate.
                  He ſubdued Germany vntyll the wood Hercinia, and the vpper parte of it, vntyll the Frankes. He vſed greate tyrannye, wherefore ordeyned the Senate other Emperoures agaynſte hym: and for that cauſe were ſomtyme feldes foughten amongeſt the Romanes, in the which theGordianus. yonger Gordianus was ſlayne, and the elder Gordianus hanged hym ſelfe. But fynally was

Maximinus ſlayne of the ſouldiours wyth hys ſonne by Aquileia.
                  Autherus the xviij. byſhop of Rome ſucceded Pontianus.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſte, CC. xli.
                  GOrdianus the .xxiiij. Emperoure raygnedGordianus. ſyxe yeares. He was ordeyned Emperoure by the Senate wyth Pupienus and Bal
                        ••
                     
                     nus againſt Maximinus.
                  Whan Pupienus and Bal
                        ••
                     nus refuſed to graunt ye ſouldiours all their requeſtes, they were ſlayne of them at Rome: and by thys meanes optayned the yonger Gordianus the empyre alone. He brought home the victory of the Perſes in the Eaſt, and reſtored ſome cityes agayne to the empyre. But whan the hooſt ſuffred hunger, Philippus was made vpper captaine, by whoſe commaundement Gordianus was ſlayne.
                  Whan Gordianus was made Emperoure,An Eclipſe of the Sunne there happened an Eclypſe of the Sunne ſo great, that durynge the ſame, men were fayne to vſe candel lyghte. There were alſo earthquakes, wherewyth ſome cities were euen deſtroyed.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt .CC. xlvij.
                  PHilippus the .xxv. Emperoure raigned fyue yeares. He was an Arabian, and had bene longe tyme captayne of the hooſt. This ſamePhilippus was ye fyrſte Chriſt▪ Emperoure a
                           〈…〉
                         baptyſed. toke vp his ſonn Philippe alſo to the gouernaunce of the Empyre. But they were both ſlayne by the procurement of Decius, for takynge vpon them baptyme and knowledgyng of the name of Chriſt.

For thus raged the Emperours amongeſt themſelues wyth manſlaughter, by the ſufferaunce of God, whyche thyng ought duely cauſe vs to drede and feare God.
                  The yeare of the worlde▪ foure thouſande, one hundreth and two and nynety.
                  The yeare of Chriſte, two hundreth and eighte and fourty.
                  In the tyme of theyr gouernaunce was it a thouſanth yeare ſence Rome was buylded, whych was feaſted and celebrate wyth a mooſt renoumed pompe of playes that wer had once man hundreth yeares, called Ludiſeculares.
                  Fabianus the ninetenth byſhop of Rome ſucceded
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . Antherus. It is ſayde that he baptyſed Philippus the Emperoure, and that Philippus was the fyrſt Emperoure, that acknowledged the Chriſten fayth.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt .CC. L. iij.
                  DEcius the .xxvi. Emperoure raygned two
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . yeares. He was no leſſe a wyſe prince, than a doughty warriour. He ſett vp hys ſonne alſo in the empyre wyth him. They were both ſlayne of the Gotthies, after that they had inuaded Thracia,The begynnyng of the G
                           ••
                        thian 
                           〈…〉
                        y. and after that wended them towarde Hungary. And though the Romanes had to do wyth the Gotthies before alſo, yet wyll I begynne the Gotthian hiſtory here. For at that tyme they had an army of thre hundreth thouſande: and they dyd a renoumed

acte in vanquy ſhynge Decius, ſo valiaunt a prince. But God woulde at the laſte be reuengedAn example of vengeaunce. of that tyrannye, wherein he commaunded by an open commaundemente to putt all them to death, that worſhipped Chriſt. He putt to death FabianusFabian 
                           •••
                         Cyprian martyrs. the byſhop of Rome, and Cyprian in Aphrica, and many other holy men. As for the Gotthies and other ſtraunge nacions, breakynge into the Romiſhe dominion pulled awaye by violence theſame, becauſe of ſheddynge of Chriſten mennes bloude. And this ſame had Sybilla prophecyed for to come. Beſyde that is it clerely expreſſed in the Apocalypſe.
                  Cornelius the .xx. byſhop of Rome ſuccededThe hereſy of Nouatius is co
                           •
                        dē
                        
                           •
                        e
                           •
                        
                      Fabianus, who condempned the hereſye of Nouatius, concernynge the peruerſe doctryne of penaunce. For he taughte, that they whyche had receaued baptyſme, and fell agayne into ſynne▪ coulde not come agayne to ſaluacyon: and wyth thys erroure broughte he manye to deſperacyon, and ſpoyled the concorde of the churche or congregatyon.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt .CC. lv.
                  VIbius Gallus the .xxvij. Emperoure raygnedVibius Gallus, Voluſianus. two yeare wyth hys ſonne Voluſianus. For whan Decius was ſlayne, Gallus was ſaluted Emperoure of the hooſte. Afterwarde were they both ſlayne of the ſouldyours.
                  Lucius the .xxi. byſhop of Rome ſucceded after Cornelius.
               
               
                  
                  The yeare of Chriſt .CC. lv
                        ••
                     .
                  VAlerianus the .xxviii. Emperoure raygned
                        
                           〈…〉
                        an
                           ••
                        s. ſyxe yeares. He was choſen Emperoure of the hooſt in hygh Germany, and the Senate confirmed the ſame. For he was borne of a moſte noble kynred at Rome, and had behaued hymſelfe valiauntly in Germany.
                  At the laſte was he taken of kynge SaporesSapores kyng of the Perſes. An example of great preſumption. by the Perſes, and lyued in mooſt vyle ſeruyce For the barbarus king was ſo haut and preſumptuous, that whan he had taken the Emperoure, he vſed hym for a chayre: and whan he wolde ride, he trode vpon the backe of Valerianus lyenge on hande and fete, and ſo ſtept on hys horſe backe. But Sapores was lykewyſe punyſhed by Odena
                        •
                     us the Romane captayne.
                  GAlienus ſonne to Valerianus the xxix. Emperour,
                        
                           〈…〉
                        e. gouerned ye Empyre with his father▪ & after that the father was taken, he raigned nyne yeares. He was learned in good ſciences, but lyuynge in greate exceſſe and dronkenneſſe, he gouerned but ſlowly the empyre, wherefore it mynyſhed in many contryes. In the meane ſeaſon was Poſthumus made captayne of the hooſte inPoſthumus. Germany, whofor the ſingular endeuour to accomplyſh his duety▪ was made Emperour of the hooſt. But whan Galyenus had ſent hys army agaynſt Poſthumus, he appoynted amonge the reſt the Frankes to be in the hooſte. And by thys occaſyon were the Frankes fyrſt ſteared to warre, the which afterwarde alſo, whan Poſthumus was ſlayne

by ſayenge of wayte and treaſon, remayned ſtylle in harneſſe: the whyche we wyll alſo treate of here after, whan we ſhall treate of Carolus magnus. But we wolde lyghtely ſhew thys, leſt the readerThe Frankes ſettinge themſelues againſt the Romanes. ſhulde be ignorant what was the occaſyon why the Frankes dyd fyrſt ſet them ſelues agaynſt the Romanes: and by the ſame meanes became they myghty in Germany and Fraunce. Of thys maner than beganne the Gotthyes fyrſte to deſtroye the Romane domynyon, afterwarde the Frankes, and ſo forth other nacyons, ſo that I paſſe ouer in the meane ſeaſon that great ſlaughter, that the Perſes in the Eaſt haue done.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſte .CC. lxxij.
                  Flauius Claudius the xxx. Emperoure raignedFlauius Claudius. two yeares. Thyſſame deſerued mooſte greateſt prayſes. For hys notable and very princely vertues. Wherfore was the empire offred vnto hym both by Galyenus before hys death▪ after that of the hooſte and ſenate wyth one conſente of them all. Agaynſt the Gotthyes foughte he in Hungary and Macedonya aboue mans thynkyng, and euer had the victorye. He ouercame alſo the Germanes that were fallen into Italy. He reſtored Egypt to the Empyre. But Claudius deſteny ſuffred hym to lyue no longer, happely becauſe the Romanes were not whorthy of ſuche a prince. For it behoued the empyre of Rome now to begynn to decay, the which was ſomwhat repared &

reſtored by Claudius, and thre or foure of hys ſucceſſors. Conſtantinus the great was of thys ClaudiusConſtantinus y• great. kynred, which we ſhall ſhewe hereafter.
                  Valerianus a debite put Lucius the byſhop of Rome to death by martyrdome, whome ſucceded in the byſhoprycke Stephanus the fyrſte of that name the xxij. byſhop.
                  Xyſtus the ſeconde of that name the .xxiij. byſhop of Rome, ſucceded Stephanus.
                  Dyonyſyus the xxiiij. byſhope of Ro. ſucceded Xyſtus.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt .CC. lx
                        •
                     iiij.
                  AVr
                        •
                     lianus the xxxi. Emperoure raygned fyue
                        
                           ••••
                        lianus▪
                      yeare and 
                        •
                     yxemone thes. He was taken vp to the gouernaunce of the empyre by Claudius for hys excellent prowiſes and feates of chyualry. He ouercame the Frankes in a ſore battayll, not farre from Mentz, afterwarde the Gotthyes alſo
                        
                           ••
                        e 
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           ••
                         b
                           ••
                        
                        
                        
                           •
                        ayll. in Illyrycus. Beſyde thys ouercame he in the Eaſt the quenezenobya, the which did great actes aboue womanly nature, and had great warre with the Romanes.
                  He is worthy no ſmall prayſe alſo, becauſe that inAu
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           ••
                         
                        
                           ••
                        de
                           •
                        o
                           •
                        
                        
                        
                           •••
                         o
                           •
                         the di
                        
                           〈…〉
                         of 
                           〈…〉
                        e▪
                      the hooſt and amonge the ſouldyours he wolde alwaye haue ſtrayhgtly kepte and maynteyned modeſty and diſcipline of warre. For it befel vpon a tyme, that a ſouldiour forced hys hoſteſſe and had to do with her: of which thing whan Aurelianus had knowledge, he wolde haue hym punyſhed wyth a mooſt greueous kind of punyſhment: He commaunded two trees to be bowed do
                        ••
                     e to the earth, and

to binde the my
                        •
                     doer to the boughes of ether of the trees, and than lettynge the trees louſe, dreſſynge themſelues agayne, ſhulde wyth a greate violence teare the yonge man in peces. Thys Aurelianus was alſo a greate perſecutor of the Chriſtians.
               
            
            
               Of the Manicheis the heretykes.
               
                  STrayghte waye after the Goſpell was preached, roſe ſectes and diſſenſyous among Chriſten men. But I am not minded to rehearſe y• erronious opinions of euery one in this treatiſe: I wyll only recyte the mooſt greateſt, which haue infect and troubled many and greate cityes and contryes wyth theyr ven
                     •
                  m: that the reader maye knowe, nothynge to beHeretykes are b
                        •
                     gyn
                     
                        •
                     ers of vproure▪
                   more venimous in this commune lyfe of man, than falſe doctrine: and that all heretikes are deſyrous of vproure, nether couet ought els, but that they maye defende and ſpreade abrode theyr erroure by vprour and commune ryot. For Sathan their chefe doer, is both a lyar and manſlayer. Ether of thē truely is euident in all ſciſmatickes, which both teache falſe, and are wonte to rayſe manſlaughter through ſedyſyon and per
                     •
                  urbatyon of commune welthes.Manichei the heretikes Manes born in Perſia.
               
               In the tyme of Aurelyanus beganne fyrſt the Manycheis, and one Manes borne in Perſya was begynner of them. Thysſame ſpred hys venim abrod largely, fyrſt by y• Arabians, afterward in Africa: the which went ſo ſpedely on, that it coulde notThe doctrine of the Manicheis▪
                   be ſwaged the ſpace of two hundreth yeares afterwarde▪ The chefe of theyr doctryne was: that

ther were two goddes▪ the one good the other euel, and both lyke euerlaſtynge. This doctrine ſemed vnto mans reaſon alowable. For ſeynge God is good by nature, and that in the meane ſeaſon the euell hath ſuch power: it is neceſſary there be alſo a peculiar God▪ which is author and doer of euels, equall to the other God wyth power and euerlaſtyngneſſe. Beſyde theſe had they other opinions that they taught, namely, that Chriſte was no true God: nether receaued they the bokes of the Apoſtles, but fayned there ſeuerall doctrines, the which they called Chriſtes Goſpel alſo: they boaſted alſo of ſeuerall illuminations of heauen, and ſayde they gaue the holy ghoſt. They ordeyned ſundrye ceremonies: they vſed alſo choyſe of meates: they forbadde wedlocke▪ ſayenge that thereby is optayned the holy ghoſt. They taught alſo to reiect ciuil power. For matrimony and gouernaunce of communwelth they ſayde to haue theyr ofſpringe from the euell God, and not to be ordeined of the good God. Thomas Monetarius or mynter at ThuringenThomas Monetarius was playnly fallē into the ſame hereſy in our daies.
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt .CC. lxxx.
                  TAcitus y• .xxxij. Emperour raigned vi. monethes.Tacitus. 
                           •••
                        bus▪
                      Probus y• .xxxiii. Emperour ruled ſyxe☞ yeares and foure monethes. Thisſame is rekened among the moſt worthieſt princes: he was choſen by the ſouldiours and confirmed by the Senate. He was the cauſe that peace was made both in the lower and hygher Germany. He ouercame y• Frankes & them of Thuringen▪ & in the hiſtories of thys Emperour is the fyrſt mencion made of the nacio
                        •
                      of Thuringen.

Felix the .xxv. byſh. of Rome ſucceded Dioniſ
                        •
                     us. Eutichianus the .xxvi. ſucceded Felix.
                  Caius the .xxvij. ſucceded Eutichianus in the byſhopryke.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt .CC. lxxxvii
                  LArus the .xxxiiij. Emperoure raygned twoLarus. yeare. He made hys ſonnes Carinus and Numerianus emperours wyth hym. Numerianus was excellent in honeſtye and learninge. But Carinus was equall wyth Nero for his wickedneſſe.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt .CC. lxxxviij.
                  DIocletianus the .xxxv. Emperoure raygnedDiocletianus. twenty yeare, He was a prince of rype wyſedome, and garniſhed wyth manye noble dedes. He reſtored Egypt to the Empyre. But he was a very fearce enemy to Chriſtes religion. For be endeuoured to reſtore the olde ſtate of the empyre and olde faſhyon of the commune welth: And for as muche as he dyd all thynges by the iudgement of reaſon, he woulde not ſuffre the opinions of religion that were diſagreynge. And whan he perceaued that in ſo greate trouble of warres he coulde not entertayne alone the largeneſſe of ſo great an empyre: beſydes that, that it had oft fortuned, other to couet the empyre by vproure, and to ben made Emperours, he willingly willed MaximianusMaximianus. to raygne wyth hym, and to be of lyke power, and the ſame warred in Gallia.
                  As for theſe two were a lyke called Auguſti in the empire. Theſe two Auguſti choſe other two▪ which

were not egall of power, but were as ſucceſſors: nether were they called Auguſti, but Ceſares. Diocletianus choſe Galerius, Maximianus choſe Conſtantius. But ether of them both Diocletianus and Maximianus were called Auguſtus. Afterwarde layenge aparte the gouernaunce of the empyre, they returned both to the quietneſſe of a pryuate lyfe. But Maximianus woulde fayne haue returned to the gouernaunce, that by theſame occaſion, he myght haue promoted hys ſonne Maxentius to the gouernaunce: and for that cauſeMaxentius Conſtantius dyd Conſtancius hys brother in lawe cauſe hym to be ſlayn. Communely doth it ſo befal, that whan great empyres ſhall decaye, all ſhalbe fyrſte fylled wyth vproures and inwarde debates, the whyche thys example doth wytneſſe. Diocletianus lyued manye yeares priuate or withoute rule: at the laſt dyd he ſlaye hym ſelfe, whan he was afearde for Licinius and Conſtantinus, whyche ſuſpected hym that he woulde take Maxentius theyr enemyes parte.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt .CCC. viij.
                  COnſtantius the .xxxvi. Emperoure wyth Galerius Maximinus, and was ether of them
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      Emperoure wyth greate prayſe. After Diocletianus death, raygned Conſtantius foure yeares. The contryes of Fraunce and Germany were ſubiect to hym, and he ſet them at quiet. He ouercameThe 
                           〈…〉
                        n of Germany the Frankes and Almaynes. For of thys wiſe is Germany diuided: The Frankes toke that part of Germany to them, which is about ye Rene: They that be called Alemanni are ye hygher Germanes.

Conſtantius dyed in England, in whoſe ſtead was ordeined for to rule the empyre Conſtantinus hys ſonne.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt .iij. C. xij.
                  COnſtantinus the .xxxvij. Emperoure raigned thyrty yeares. He reſtored the empyre to hisCōſtantinus former reſt and tranquillitye. For whan Maxentius had cruelly vſed tyranny at Rome, beynge ouercome by Conſtantinus, he was in a flyghte drouned in the ryuer Tybur, and receaued worthy puniſhment for hys tyranny, the whyche he vſed both agaynſt other men, and ſpeciallye agaynſtMaxentius drowned in the Tybur. Chriſten men. And ſo dyd Conſtantinus and Licinius gouerne the empyre together certayne yeres wyth greate concorde, and Conſtantinus wedded hys ſyſter to Licinius. But we ſee ſomtyme to befall in a great empyre ſuch cauſes, wherin two dooThe cauſe of diſagrement betwen Conſtantinus & Licinius. ſeldom agree. It is ſaide, that the cauſe of the diſagremente betwene Conſtantinus and Licinius ſhoulde thence haue ſpronge that Licinius ſhoulde haue ben enemy to the Chriſtians, and to haue oft required Conſtantinus to enterpriſe ſuch thynges nomore.
                  Finallye Conſtantinus beynge compelled wyth great neceſſitye ouercame Licinius: howbeit left him alyue, vpon this condicion, that he layenge awaye the rule of the empyre, ſhould lyue pryuately. Wherfore Conſtantinus gouerned the empyre afterwarde alone, and broughte all thynges into peace and honeſte lawes. The emperour was the fyrſt that openly knowledged the name of Chriſte.

Nether is it to be doubted, but that he was a trueThe e
                           •
                        de
                        
                           •
                        our of Conſtantinus to kepe the Goſpell▪ The duety of a Chriſten prince. The councel of Nicea called 
                           〈…〉
                        i 
                           〈…〉
                         Nice
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                        ▪
                      godly prynce: for he had the holy Goſpell in ſuch reuerence, that to the open wytneſſe of hys fayeth, he cauſed the boke of ye Goſpel to be boren alway openly before hym. He commaunded alſo bokes of the Bible to be written at his owne coſte, and cauſed them to be ſent into all contryes here and ther. He brought to paſſe, that the holy and profytable councell of Nicene was gathered, that ſo in hys tyme, he might ſet the ſtate of the churche in a quietneſſe. Theſe finally are actes worthye for a good prince, which deſerue a farre greater prayſe, than that it is ſayde he haue geuen to the biſhop of Rome many gyftes. Although the good Emperoure is worthy to be prayſed for that, that he gaue almeſſes & benefyces to mainteyn Euangelycall doctryne and miniſters of the churche. But that Conſtantinus ſhould haue be ſo liberall toward the byſhop of Rome, that he ſhoulde haue geuen hym for his vſe the citye of Rome, and the halfe part of the empyre, as ſome do fable: no hiſtoryes that be alowed do wytneſſe the ſame.
                  The city Conſtantinopolis was builded by thisConſtanti
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      Emperour and hath the name of him, whan before the citye of marchaundiſe that was in that place, was called B
                        •
                     zantium. The ſee of the empyre was
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      afterward brought to Conſtantinople, as the hiſtories folowinge do teſtifye.
                  Moreouer ſeing it is▪ no doubt that this prince is one, and that of the chefeſt of thoſe princes, which God hath garniſhed wyth great vertues, we ſhall worthely recyte the ofſpringe of hys kynrede, that

it maye be knowen, thoſe moſt great and noble vertues to be ſyngularly geuen of God to greate and noble families or houſes.
                  Claudius the Emperour of moſt commendable name, had two brethren, Quintilius and Criſpus. Claudia the doughter of Criſpus was wedded to the noble prince Eutropius. And theſe areThe aunceters of Conſtantinus. the ofſpringe of Conſtantinus kynred.

                        Eutropius a chefe gouernour at Rome.
                        Claudia the brothers doughter of Claudius
                     
                  
                  Conſtantius the Emperour had

                        Helena: her ſonne was Conſtantinus ye greate, hys wyfe was Fauſta the doughter of Maximianus, whoſe chylderen were Conſtantius, Conſtantinus and Conſtans.
                        Theodora the ſtepedoughter of Maximianus: her ſonne was Conſtantinus, & theſame had ſonnes, Gallus and Iulianus.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of Arrius the heretyke.
               
                  ARrius lyued in the tyme of Conſtantinus.Arrius an open reader in the ſcole of Alexandria. The doctrine of Arrius. He was an open reader in the ſcole of Alexandria in Egypte. The churches concorde was miſerably ſpoiled wyth hys error and hereſy: For he taught yt Chriſt was not truely and naturallye God. But what practyſe and vicious pleaſauntneſſe of perſuaſyons he dyd vſe to confyrme this error, it were to longe to rehearſe. Howb
                     •
                  it it pleaſed the world ſo wel, that great learned biſhops, and neare hande the whole churche of the Eaſte, wyth manye alſo in the Weſte

dyd embrace hym. Neuertheleſſe in the meane ſeaſon wythſtode heauely this hereſy two biſhops of notable godlyneſſe. The fyrſt was Alexander, whoAlexander & byſhop. optayned of Conſtantinus to gather the councell of Nicene, wherein was condemned the hereſye of Arrius. Wherfore was Arrius forſaken and banniſhed out of the dominion. But whan Conſtantinus was deade, a certayne preſte was in fauoure wyth Conſtantius, whom alſo he committed al his counſels: the ſame broughte to paſſe wyth his perſuaſyon by the Emperoure, that Arrius beyng called agayne, was ſett in hys former office. The fyre that was metely well quenched afore, began nowe agayne to burne more fearcely, inſomuche that the Emperoure Conſtancius beganne alſo to embraceConſtancius 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        ••
                      Arrius. thys erroure of Arrius. Whan at the laſt a daye was appointed by Conſtantius, wherein Alexander and Arrius ſhoulde openly reaſon of the ſcrypture, concerninge this learninge, Alexander ſpent the whole nyghte in prayenge in the temple, prayenge God, that the ſecte of Arrius ſhould crepe no farther. Wherfore in the morninge before the appoynted houre of the diſputation, whan Arrius went to the place, he beganne (as he went) to haue payne in the bellye, and went to a preuye to do hysThe death of Arrius i
                        •
                      an 
                        ••
                     ample of 
                        〈…〉
                     . eaſement, where he aboue all mens eſtimacion, dyed incontinent. Howbeit whan Arrius was of this wyſe deade, yet ceaſed not the ſede of his poyſoned doctrine to be ſowed larger abroade, becauſe that they that were conſpyred together of this ſecte, beganne to ſprede it more vehemently. At the laſte whan Alexander was deade alſo, Athanaſius hys

ſucceſſor diſputed hymſelfe agaynſte the Arryans: but the ſame beynge banyſhede by Conſtantius, heAthanaſius beynge banniſhed, flyeth to Triere out of Egypt. fled from Egypt, vntyl the citye Tryere in Germany. And though thys was a very farre flyghte, yet was the bannyſhed man fayne to hyde hymſelfe ſecretly at Tryere vntyll the eyght yeare. In the meane ſeaſon was that hereſy fearcely growen thorough out in the Eaſt churche, euen ſo muche, that for a ſeaſon a greate part of Chriſten men did leane to the Arrian ſecte, and out of thys ſecte ſprange by lytle and lytle, other ſectes many. Fynally whan the name of Arryans was by the decrees of many councels quenched, yet was it now and than renewed againe in the churche vnder other names. In one citye were ſundery opinions, and diuerſe ſectes perſecuted eche other, inſomuche that the one running vpon the other in theyr temples, made ryots and committed man ſlaughter. At that tyme was the ſtate of the church very wretched and pyteous, the which worthely gaue an occaſiō of ſlaunder, not only to the Gentyls, why they dyd not embrace the word of God: but dyd offende other alſo, that they went from the Chriſtianity to the Idolatry of the Heythen, among the which was alſo Iulianus the Emperoure. In the tyme of this ſo myſcheuousArrius was yc forerunner of Mahomet hereſy, came vp finally Mahomet, to whō by Arrius was as it were a window handſomly opened: & was the forerunner of this moſt cruel Antichriſt. For whan the myndes of men went aſtray in ſo great diſſenſion of opinions, came Mahomet, & inuented very wyſely the thirde way, wherwith he ſhould heale the variete & diuerſyty of errours.

For he toke awaye all diſputacions, whiche thinge men dyd alowe. But hereof ſhall we ſpeake afterwarde. And let thys ſuffiſe to be rehearſed of the Arryans erroure and other lyke hereſyes: of the whiche we haue here made mencyon therfore, that it may be ſene how greate dammages, manſlaughters, ſeditions & ryotous hereſyes do brynge both to the commune welth, and to the churche.
               Marcellynus the .xxviij. byſhop of Rome ſucceded Cains.
               
                  Marcellus the xxix ſucceded Marcellinus.
                  Euſebius the xxx. byſh. ſucceded Marcellus.
                  Melciades the .xxxi. ſucceded Euſebius.
                  Sylueſter the xxxij. ſucceded Melciades.
                  Marcus the xxxii
                        •
                     . was byſh. after Sylueſter.
               
               Not long before Conſtantinus death, was a very
                     
                        •
                      comete was 
                        ••
                     ue. greate comete ſene certayne monethes, whiche ſignifyed the greate warre and commotion, that folowed after Conſtantinus death.
               
                  The yeare of Chriſte .CCC. xli
                        •
                     .
                  COnſtantynus the .xxxviij. Emperoure raygned.Conſtantinus. Thre brether̄ raigned together. xxiiij. yeares. But the father had ſo ordeyned the empyre, that the thre bretheren ſhulde raigne together, Conſtantinus in Fraunce, Spayne and Germany: Conſtantius in the Eaſte, Conſtans in Italy and Illyrieus, But the yonger brother Conſtantinus, was not content wyth the dominion of his empyre, but woulde raygne alone, and wente into Italy agaynſte his brother Conſtans, truſtynge to his puyſſaunce, becauſe he had valyaunt ſouldyours. But God ſuffred not thys raſhneſſe longe vnpuniſhed: for thys Conſtantinus

was ſlayne not longe after.An example of vengeaunce.
                  
                  And by this occaſion optained Conſtans y• whole empyre of the Weſt, the which he gouerned luckely. Moreouer had he a captayne called MagnentiusMagnētius an example of an vnkind vnfaithfull and diſloyal man. at Auſburch, whoſe life he had once ſaued. The ſame ſlewe his moſt gentle mayſter, and made hym ſelfe Emperoure, and made a ſettyng forth of war vpon Conſtantius. Conſtantius made hys nepheu Gallus Emperoure of the Eaſte, and went wyth an army agaynſt the ſeditious captayne, and ouercame hym. The manſlaughter in thys ſtryfe was ſo great, that as it is redde, y• power of the empyre was ſo abated, that many yeares after they coulde not come to theyr former ſtrength: becauſe the beſt and choſen part of the people was ſo ſlayne, that the empire could not a great while reſiſt and withſtand the Barbarians. After that this manſlaughterMagnentius ſlayeth himſelfe. was done the mooſte myſcheuous man Magnentius ſlew himſelfe, and ſo puniſhed God the death of Conſtans the good prince.
                  Iulius the fyrſt of that name the .xxxiiii. byſh. of Rome came after Marcus.
                  But whan this Iulius was deade, was LyberyusLiberius byſhop of Rome Felix biſhop of Rome a diſlembler. the .xxxv. made byſhop who (becauſe he wythſtode the hereſye of Arryus) was dryuen awaye by Conſtantius, and Felix was ordeyned in hys ſteade, who for feare of the Emperoure dyſſembled the erroure of the Arryans. At that tyme was Conuocatyons hadde at Mylane and Arimium playn contrary to the decrees of the councel of Nicene: but theyr mindes were nothing ſet by.

Theſe examples wytneſſe y• the ſtate of the church was piteous and miſerable at that tyme.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt .CCC. lxv.
                  IVlianus the Apoſtata or forſaker of his profeſſionIulianus apoſtata. the .xxxix. Emperoure raygned two yeares. He was the nephew of Conſtantius & brother to Gallus, the which we haue ſpoken of before. He was of ſo greate learnyng, that beynge yong, he taught holy ſcripture openly in the church of Nicomedia: afterwarde goynge to Athenes, he learned philoſophy. But whan hys brother Gallus was ſlayn, Conſtantius ſent hym into Fraunce and Germany, and not farre from Straſburch he vanquyſhed thyrty thouſande Almanes, for whych cauſe he was ſodenly by the fauoure of the ſouldyoursIulianus 
                           ••
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Empe
                        
                           〈…〉
                         at S
                           •
                        raſ
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      made Emperoure at Straſburch. Moreouer whan greate dyſſenſyons were amonge the Chriſtyans, by reaſon of the varyetye of opinyons, for the whyche ſome diſpayred, ſome dyd wholy decyuer from the Chriſten fayth to the worſhyppinge of Idols, Iulianus became an apoſtata alſo: for he was yet yonge, and vſed the company of Rhetoricyans and Phyloſophers, whiche diſputed of God after the vnderſtandynge or meanynge of mans reaſon. Yet dyd he not perſecute Chriſten men by open force, but he thought rather to deſtroye them by ſuttelltye. For openly he forbadde them to haue ſcoles, that they myght not be taughte: thynkynge (as it is in dede) that whan teachyuge were auoyded, the doctrine of relygyon ſhulde eaſely go to nought. He forbadde alſo, that Chriſten men ſhulde

haue no authoritye to vſe warrefaringe wyth theIulianus fo
                           〈…〉
                        
                        badde Chriſten men the authoritie of warrfare. Romanes: that by no occaſyon they might come to the gouernaunce of the commune welth. He toke the goodes of the churches with laughter, ſayenge he dyd Chriſten men a pleaſure, namely that they beynge become poore, might theſooner come to heuen, ſeynge the Goſpell promyſeth heauen to the poore. He dyd aſſault the Chriſtian fayeth fearcely, euen with wrytinges alſo. Agaynſt thoſe hath Cyrillus the biſhop of Alexandria written, whoſe bokeCyrillus & Nazanzenu
                           •
                         haue anſwered Iulianus. is yet founde among the remembraunces or monimentes of Ihon Reuchlin in the toune Pforſa in Germanye: not vnprofytable veryly to be redde. Gregorius Nazanzenus hath anſwered him alſo, but very eaſely: for he was not effectual ynough to put of thoſe reproches, which Iulianus vſed in confutinge the Goſpell. For he intreated mooſt chefeſt vpon that: ſeyng the Goſpel teacheth that man ought not to reuenge, that thereby is taken awaye and forbodden ciuill vengeaunce in iudgementes, and gouernaunce of commune welthes: wythoute the which mans eſtates can by no meanes endure. And this ſame falſe accuſation doth he treate wyth many wordes, where as yet euerye Godlye ſtudyant of true godlyneſſe doeth knowe that the ſameHow vengeaunce is forbodden. vengeaunce, whiche euery office vſeth, is not forbydden in the Goſpell: but only the for
                        •
                     yng of pryuate vengeaunce, which is done withoute officers authoritye. Theſe ſuttyll forged and ſlaunderous reproches of Iulianus were very greueous to Chriſten men, inſomuche that they prayed openly againſt ſo perniſius hoſtilitie of the Goſpell.

And therfore whan he was gone into Perſya, he was ſlayne in a wylderneſſe. It is wrytten thatThe death of Iulianus is an exampl
                           〈…〉
                        o
                           •
                         venge
                        
                           ••
                        nce. whan he was wounded, and laye vpon the ground dyenge, he ſhulde haue taken hys hande fulle of bloude, and caſtynge towarde heauen, to haue ſayde: Thou Galylean haſt vanquyſhed at the laſte▪ Meanynge Chriſte, whome he called a Galylean. Therfore it is come by Iulyanus vngodlyneſſe, that the Empyre is remoued and tranſlated from the mooſte noble ſtocke of Conſtantynus.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſte .CCC. lxvii
                  IOuinyanus the ▪xl. Emperoure raygned ſeuen monethes. It was a noble prince of godlyneſſe.Io
                           〈…〉
                        nus a godly Emperoure. He called agayne the biſhops that were bannyſhed by Conſtanty
                        •
                     us and Iulyanus: he commaunded alſo the tythes to be payed to the churches. He was taken wythan ague gotten by ouermuche weeryneſſe of trauaylle, whereof he dyed.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſte .CCC. lxviii
                  VAlentynianus the .xli. Emperoure raygned twelue yeares. He ordeyned hys brother Valens a companion in the empyre. Valens ruled in the Eaſte, Valentinyanus went into the Weſte, Ether of them was a Chriſtian. Valentinyanus had ben a captayne of the louldyours vnder Iulianus: but he forſoke him, becauſe he wolde notValentinianus 
                           •••
                        eth a 
                           •••
                        then preſt a blow. forſake ye integrity or ſoundneſſe of Chriſten religion: beſide alſo becauſe he had geuen a Heithen preſt a blowe, by whom he was biddē to do ſacrificy with

reachynge hym water of Idolatrye, whan he taryed for the commynge of Iulyanus. But God recompenſed hym afterwarde wyth the honoure where he came to, for the iniurye that Iulyanus dyd hym. He had greate warres in Germany he ſubdued the Saxons and Burgunnyons: ForBurgunnions be S
                           •
                        xo
                           •
                        s. they alſo are counted amonge the Saxons, whiche aboute that tyme went by the floude Rhe
                        •
                     e. And though they were vanquyſhed by Valentinian yet afterwarde recouerynge ſtrenghte, they paſſed the Rhene, and toke in theſe contryes, whych yet hetherto are called Burgundy. But of theſe ſhall we ſpeake hereafter.
                  VAlens raygned after his brothers death twoValens 
                           ••
                         Arria
                           ••
                        . yeare. He was a defender of Arria
                        •
                     s hereſy. But for thys vngodlyneſſe was he puniſhed, whan he was 
                        •
                     layne by the Gotthyes by Conſtantinople. For whan Valens beinge put to flyghteAn example of vengeaunce. gat hym into a lytle towne, the Gotthyes ſet it on fyre, and burnt hym. Whan Valens was deade, the Gotthyes dyd muche harme to them of Conſtantynople: but the quene Valens wedowe, geuynge them large mony refrayned them from the deſtructyon of it.
                  Whan Liberius was dead, Damaſus was made the xxxix. byſhoppe of Rome. By this man was S. Hierome in his youth lyke a notarye.S. Ierome was notarye to Damaſus
                  
                  After Damaſus was Siricius byſh. the xl.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſte .CCC. lxxxiii.
                  GRatyanus the xlii. Emperoure raygnedGratianus. after the deathe of Valens ſyxe yeares. This ſame was the eldeſt ſonne of Valentynianus,

and taken in the felowſhype of the empyre, by hys fathers lyfe. But whan the father was deade, he toke for hys companyon into the empyre hys yonger brother Valentinianus. But ſeynge the empyre was here and there troubled by reaſon of many vproures, nether couldbe gouerned without ſome ſage and fortunable prince, he choſe Theodoſyus for a companion in the empyre, and ſenteTheodoſius 
                           〈…〉
                        ercō
                        
                           〈…〉
                        th 
                           〈…〉
                        th
                           •
                        es. hym into the Eaſte, where he ouercame the Gotthyes by Conſtantynople, and droue them out of Thracya. Gratyanus was ſlayne by intrappe in Fraunce of hys gouernoure Maximus, who made hymſelfe Emperour by tyranny. Gratyanus was a prince excellente both in honeſtye and learnynge, and a true maynteyner of Chriſten relygyon: he ſent the knowledge of his fayth in wrytyng to. S. Ambroſe. Valentinianus hys brother was alſo ſlayne by a trayne of hys gouernoure Arbogaſtes: but Theodoſyus gatheryng a greate army, ouerthrew
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         & 
                           〈…〉
                        tes 
                           〈…〉
                        es of 
                           〈…〉
                        y both Maximus and Arbogaſtes. Maximus beynge taken, was put to execucyon. Arbogaſtes ſlew hymſelfe. Wherfore Theodoſius had the Empyre alone.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſte .CCC. lxxxviij.
                  THeodoſyus the xliij. Emperour raygned afterTheodoſius that Gratianus was ſlayn by Maximus xi. yeares. He was a ſpanyarde, and ſet all the Empyre in quyet, from Germany vntil Egipt. He was fyrſt in Germany, but beynge called into Thracya by Gracyanus, afterwarde was StyllicoStillico. ſent in to Germany by Theodoſyus, who compelled the Frankes and Saxons to kepe peace.
                  
                     Beſides this reſtored he peace alſo to the church:The godlyneſſe of Theodoſius towarde the churche. He gathered commune conuencyous, and willed the doctrine of relygyon to be publyſhed in all contryes. S. Ambroſe bewayled his death, & amonge other wordes he ſayeth: I loued the man whan he☜ dyed: for he was more combred for the ſtate of the churches, than for hys owne daungers. To be combred ſo greatly wyth cares for the relygyon, that be verily true vertues worthy for goode princes.
                  
                     Anaſtaſius the fyrſt of that name the .xli. byſh. of Rome ſucceded Syric
                           •
                        us.
                     Innocentius the fyrſt of that name the xlii byſh. of Rome ſucceded Anaſtaſius.
                  
               
            
            
               Of Pelagius the heretike.
               
                  IN the tyme of thys byſhop of Rome, onePelagius an heretyke in Britanne. Pelagius liued in Britanne. The ſame taughte, that we are not iuſtyfyed and ſaued by the mercy of God for Chriſtes ſake, wythout our deſeruynge: but by oure owne workes and naturall vertues, is true and ſounde ryghteouſneſſe purchaſed by God, and remyſſyon ofſynnes optayned not by the fayth of Chriſte, but by oure workes and procuracyons. AgaynſteS. Auguſtin hath written againſt Pelagius▪
                   thys man hath. S. Auguſtine wrytten mooſt ſubſtancially, and hath bickered fearcely wyth this ſentence, and hath defended it agaynſt hym, that we are ſaued by fayth wythout oure deſeruynge, and that we optayne remyſſyon ofſynnes by the mercy of God only, yf we do truſte to it. For yf remyſſyon or forgeueneſſe of ſynnes came by

oure workes, the conſcience ſhould neuer be in qu
                     •
                  
                  er and aſſured, but ſhould alwaye be in doubte: For mans endeuoure is to weake, than that God beynge diſpleaſed, can be apeaſed therewyth, and the drede of death taken awaye. Neuertheleſſe God requyreth of vs obedience and good worckes and that the conſcyences be ſure, we doo pleaſe God, that he wyll heare them that call vpon hym, and ſaue vs. Howbeit that thys doth not ſtande in the worthyneſſe of oure worckes: but in the promyſe and mercy of God. Thys mynde of S. Auguſtyne whan it is knowen, doth brynge greate comfort to the conſciences of the godlye, and teacheth what the true fayth is, and that God in the meane ſeaſon requireth good workes of vs. The ſame veryly doth he requyre of vs: but by fayeth onely wyll he haue vs to receaue the forgeueneſſe ofſynne, without regarde of oure deſeruynges. The doctryne of Pelagius is condempned in ſome councels of our tyme.
            
            
               The ſpoylyng of the fourth Monarchy.
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt, CCC. x
                        •
                     viij.
                  ARcadius the ſonne of Theodoſius raignedArcadius. thyrtene yeare in the Eaſt at Conſtantinople. Honorius hys brother raygned in the Weſte wyth lyke authoritie nyne and twenty yeares▪
                     Honorius. both whyle hys brother was alyue and whan he was deade: for whan Arcadius was deade, Honorius was yet alyue.
               
            
            
               
               Of the Gotthies.
               
                  
                     The yeare of Chriſte CCCC. v.
                     The yeare of Rome M. C. lvii.
                     The yeare of the worlde MMMM. CCC. xlix.
                  
                  ABout thys tyme came the Gotthy fyrſte intoThe Gotthies▪ came fyrſt into Italy. Italy, wyth a greate and dredeful army. But for aſmuche as euerye where is made muche mencyon of the Gotthyes▪ we ſhall here ſummarely draw the hiſtories of theyr of ſpryng and actes.
                  The Gotthi, Vandali, Rugiani and Hunni be not eſtimed to be one people: but the Gotthi are Dutchmen out of the Ile Godtlande, which dwelt in a parte of Liſlande and Littowe: For ether of theſe contryes lyeth ouer againſt Godtland by the ſeaſyde. And therefore doth Procopius call them aryght Cimme
                        •
                     ij and Gethe. Theſe than in the time of the Romanes were gone into Thracia and Hungary, and the Romyſh Emperours aſſayed to dryue them out agayne, but all was in vayne. In the rehearſall of Decius, haue we touched the begynnyng of their hiſtory: For the fyrſt great battail of the Romanes agaynſt them was vnder Decius, wherein alſo Decius was ſlayne. But afterwarde though the Romane Emperours made the Gotthies haue much ado: yet remayned they in Thracia and Hungary, and in, Aſia about Conſtantynople they toke in certayn contryes. It is ſayde, thatGotthies in the halfe Ile Taurica. yet now adayes dwell Gotthy in the half Ile Taurica, which ſpeake Dutche, and call themſelus Gotthi. Howbeit they lefte Hungarye and alſo Thracia ſo at the laſte, that of theyr free wyll they

went fyrſt into Italy, and afterward into Spayn: Afterwarde were the reſt of the Gotthies deſtroyed by the Vandalyes and Hunmes commyng out of Scythya. The Hunny made theyr dwellinge place in Hungary. But the contryes that lye partly vnder, partly aboute Hungary, haue the Vandaly taken in.
                  But in the tyme of Arcadius and Honorius are the Gotthy come into Italy. The mooſte noble Emperoure Theodoſius ordeined to his ſonnesTheodoſius two capitaines Rufinus and Stillico, and wylled them to care for the Emperours yong ſonnes: but the one was diſloyal to hys lorde. Rufinus was of Gallia: the ſame enticed the Gotthies againſt Arcadius, and hoped to optayne the kyngdome by that meane: but he was fruſtrated of his purpoſe, for he was ſlaine by Stillico. As for Stillico was a Vandale:Stillico. and whan ſome of the Gotthi were come agaynſt Arcadius, Stillico broughte to paſſe, that the Gotthi which Theodoſius hadde taken in wages, were letten go. Beſide that did Stillico ſett the Vandalies againſt the Gotthies: and ſo whan the Gotthies were fyrſte angered thorough Rufinus, and than chafed by Stillico, their kinge Radagaſus brought two hundreth thouſand GotthiesRadagaſus. into Italy the ſame yeare that we haue ſpecified a fore. And as hiſtories do make mencion here, that at Rome wer great cōplaintes againſt Chriſt. becauſe that ſo lamentable decaye of the empyre they ſuppoſed to come of the deſpiſynge of the goddes, and ſmall regarde of the worſhyppe and honour of the former religion. As for Stillico vanquiſhed

and ouercame Radagaſus and hys hooſt in the ſtraytes comminge from the citye Florence, goynge to Apenninum. This is the fyrſt hiſtory of the Gotthies in Italy.Alaricus.
                  
                  After Radagaſus came another hooſte of Gotthies into Italy, whoſe captayne was Alaricus. With the ſame dyd Honorius agree, that he ſhould depart out of Italy, & go into Gallia, the whyche at that tyme was awayſtynge of y• Frankes, Burgundions & Vandales: inſomuche that Honorius miſtruſted he could kepe Gallia no lenger: & therefore thought he to bringe to paſſe, that the Barbarians ſhuld ſtryue among thēſelues for it. But what happened? Whan Alaricus taketh his yourney vpon him, Stillico doth fall vpon him vnwarres, vpon Eaſter daye, whyle the truce did yet laſt. The next day after, doth he lykewiſe wyth an appointed army ouerthrowe and vanquyſhe Stillico, and being angry vpō him, he beſyeged Rome. Honorius was at Rauenna, & cauſed Stillico to be putt to death, as one y• had not done faithfully, & willed ye empyre to be taken frō Honorius & to be geuen ouer to him. Wherfore there was now no captayne mete to delyuer the citye of Rome from the ſyege. TherforeAlaricus wynneth Rome. dyd Alaricus take in Rome after two yeres ſyege: and that was about the xv. yeare of Honorius, the foure hundreth and twelft yeare of Chriſt, and the thouſand, hundreth and thre ſcore and fourth yere after the building of Rome.the .xij. rauens or rauenous beaſtes whiche Romulus ſawe.
                  
                  That Var ro writeth of the xij. rauens, whiche Romulus ſawe, to ſignify, that Rome ſhould laſt a thouſand and two hundreth yeares, though thys

nombre of the yeares be not farre from this rekening: yet I ſuppoſe their interpretation rather toTotilas. pertayne to Totilas, who afterwarde in the tyme of Iuſtinianus dyd ſet Rome in fyre, & wholy ſpoyled it, and that was an hundreth and ſyxe and thyrty yeares after Alaricus. For Alaricus dyd not ſpoyle the citie, but rather gaue a commaundement that they ſhould be ſpared, whyche fled to the temples of the Chriſtians, Alaricus drue back agayne out of the citie and not longe after dyed. Whan heAtaulphus. was deade, Ataulphus was made kyng of the Gotthies: the ſame came agayne to Rome, and takynge to wyfe Placidia Honorius ſyſter, beynge pacified by her, he ſpared Rome, and wente into Fraunce, and afterwarde into Spayne: and of this wyſe did finally the Gotthies leaue Italye, and went into Spayne. For Alaricus had before inuaded y• Spaniardes, & the Gotthies remaining in Spayne afterward, had ye dominion ther. The Vandali came into Spayne, & after that the Suein: but the Gotthies remaining ther, the Vandali came into Aphrica. Of theſe Gotthies are borne the Chriſtē kingesThe kynges of Spayne are ſprong of y• Gotthies. in Spayne, of whom hath his of ſpringe the moſt famous Emperoure that now is, Charles the fyft of y• name. For though y• Sarraceni inuaded Spaine afterward, & became mighty in it, yet could thei not deſtroy the reſidue of the other kinges of y• linage.
                  The yeare of Chriſte .CCCC. lvi.
                  The yeare of Rome. M. CC. vij. came out of Aphrica to Rome Genſerichus the Vandall, and ſpoiled the citye haynouſly. But what was y• cauſeGenſerichus of Genſerichus comminge, ſhall we ſhew, whan we

ſhall haue occaſyon to treate of the Vandalies.
               
            
            
               Dietrichus of Berna.Some call him Theodericus, ſome Titricus of 
                        •
                     erona. Othacarus.
               
               
                  THe Gotthies came nomore into Italy afterward, ſaue in the tyme of Zeno the Emperoure, whan Othacarus was become mighty at Rome. The ſame was a Barbarian, borne in Rugia, & was a ſouldiour vnder Auguſtulus, & being become puiſſaunt by that meanes he vſed great tyranny at Rome: inſomuch ye the Romanes required ayde againſt him: Than was ſentDietrichus of Berna. by Leno into Italy Dietrichus ſurnamed of Berna. The ſame ſlayenge Othacarus, raigned two & thyrty yeares in Italy: he loued peace out of meaſure, and had moſt deſerued to haue the fauoure of Italy, inſomuch, that as hiſtories do make menciō, Italy neuer had a foren prince more frendelier and gentlyer. He gaue alſo much goodes to the churches vſe, to entertayne the miniſters of the word, & to mainteyne the doctrine of religion. But he was infect with the hereſy of Arrius, as alſo the reſte ofThe Gotthies were Arrians. y• Gotthies. For whan y• Gotthies required of Valens ye Emperours preſtes, of whom they might be inſtructed in yt Chriſten religion, he ſent them Arrian doctors. Howbeit y• moſt noble vertues of this Dietrichus deſerued thoſe praiſes, which cōmonly are ſonge in thoſe dityes as are vſed now adayes. In thē is made mencion of giauntes, which ſignifieth the Barbarous, whō Dietrichus hath vanquiſhed & ſlayne. He is ſurnamed of Berna, becauſe he was wonte to be muche at Verone wyth the court. Beſydes this man was alſo another Dietrichus

a Gotthian lykewyſe, by whoſe valiauntneſſe Attila was ſlayne, but he dyed in the ſame felde. HeAttila. was ſo great a man, that beſyde him, noman coulde lyghtely haue enterpryſed oughte againſt Attila. The ſame Dietrichus was not ſurnamed of Berna, but he was his coſyn. He was fyue and forty yeare before the tyme of Dietrichus of Berna.
               
                  
                     Kynges of the Gotthies in the Weſt in Spayne.
                     AlaricusThe Weſte Gotthies.
                     
                     Ataulphus
                     Mallia
                  
                  
                     Kynges of the Gotthies in the Eaſt in Hungary.
                     DietrichusThe Eaſt Gotth
                              〈…〉
                           .
                     
                     Hermerichus
                     Ditmarus
                     Dietrichus of BernaHimelſuita. Adelrichus.
                     
                  
               
               HImelſuitha the doughter of Dietrichus of Berna had a ſonne called Adelrichus: theſame raygned eight yeres at Rome in Italy after the death of Dietrichus of Berna, and the mother ruled with great praiſe. Whan her ſonne was deade, ſhe delyuered the gouernaunce to her nephew Theodatus: but the ſame not remembrynge the benefyte that he had optayned, cauſed by a trayne her to be ſlayn, in the tyme of Iuſtinian the Emperoure. Dietrichus of Berna had mo doughtersAn example of diſtoyalty. beſydes this: he had alſo geuen hys ſyſters doughter in mariage to the kynge of Thuringen: whyche thynge I would not paſſeouer here, without the ſyngular prayſe and commendacyon of the princes of Thuringen.
               THeodatus raigned ii. yeres, & was worthely puniſhed. For whan the mooſt honeſte queneTheodatus.
                  
Himelſuith a had commended herſelfe and her ſōne to. Iuſtinian the Emperoure, Iuſtinian toke an occaſion to reuenge the murther, and ſent Belliſarius into Italy againſt the Gotthies. Now was Theodatus ſuſpected, becauſe he withſtode not Belliſarius, as though he would betray the Gotthies: theAn example of vengeaūce Witichus. whiche Gotthies made Wittichus kyng, by whoſe commaundement was Theodatus ſlayne.
               VVitichus reigned thre yeares. Againſt hym warred Belliſarius with greate policy: For Wittichus had an appoynted army of more then twoo hundreth thouſand men. Belliſarius kept hymſelfe within the walles of Rome, whome Wittichus beſyeged a whole yeare, and there was a great derth, not onely at Rome, but alſo in al Italy. But as the Gotthies fled and ſtrayed here and there without order, by reaſon of the great derth. Belliſarius folowed vpon them and ouerthrue thē and encloſyng in Wittichus by an intrap, toke him. But in y• meane ſeaſō could not the Gotthies be vtterly weded out, but Iuſtinianus making peace wt them, graunted them to dwell in the contreis from the Alpes, vntyll the ryuer Padus, nether ſhoulde paſſe theſe bondes. He called Belliſarius back agayne: for he feared, leſt he being made Emperour, he ſhould take to hym the empyre of Italy: though Belliſarius truſtyd in his affayres, went not about ſuche thynges. Wherfore beyng returned to Conſtantinople, he brought Wittichus and other of the greateſt nobilitie pryſoners with hym in a greate triumphe.
               Totilas was made king of the Gotthies after the depar
                  
                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
               
               
               
                  THus was Rome foure tymes taken of the Gotthies and Vandalies within an hundreth and nyne and thyrty yeres. Firſt by Alaricus, vnder the Emperour Honorius.
               
                  The yere of Chriſt .CCCC. xij.
                  After that by Genſerichus the Vandal in the tyme of Martianus.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſte .CCCC. lvi.
                  THyrdly by Totilas kyng of the Gotthies: and this oppreſſion of the citie was the moſte heuieſt of all. For ſhe was both taken and burnt the .xxi. yeare of Iuſtinianus: the yeare after the buyldyng of her a thouſand, and thre hundreth.
                  The yeare of Chriſt .CCCCC. xlviij.
                  Fourthly, the third yeare after this deſtruction.
                  The yeare of Chriſte .CCCCC. li.
                  After this ſpoylyng beganne Totilas to reſtore agayne the citie of Rome, and ſuffered the cyteſens to returne agayne into her. But what fauoure he ſhewed, and how gently he behaued hymſelfe, wytneſſe the wordes that are written concernyng hys frendlyneſſe, that he bare ſuche an affection toward his ſubiects, and ſpecially the Romanes, as becommeth a father to haue toward his chyldren: and it is ſayde that Totilas learned by ſaynt Benets doctrineTotilas was 
                           〈…〉
                        h
                           •
                         of S. 
                           〈…〉
                        e
                           •
                        . and admonition to beare rule of that ſorte.
                  Afterwarde ſent Iuſtinianus a prince of ſyngulare wyſdom, called Narſes, into Italy againſt Totilas. The ſame called the Lombardes to ayde him.Narſes. The ſame were Saxons, whiche with appoynted armies had brought themſelues to the coaſtes of

Auſtria: the ſame brought Narſes into Italy, and by their ayde ouercame he Totilas, and after ward Teia, whiche was the laſt kyng of the Gotthies inTeia. Italy. And this is the ende of the Gotthies kyngdome by the Italians, whiche had laſt ſence Dietrichus of Berna vntyll Teia thre ſcore yeares. That Dietrichus, Totila and Teia were both very wyſe and doughty princes, teſtifye their dedes and noble actes, inſomuche that if ye wyl eſteme them by their vertues, they ought not to be called Barbarians. When the Gotthies were ouercome the power and rycheſſe of the Lombardes beganne to growe, and gatte one of the kyngdomes of Italy: howbeit they poſſeſſed not whole Italy, but onely that part of Italy that yet is called Lombardy. The kyngdomeLombardy. of Lombardy laſted vntyll the tyme of Carolus magnus. Though the Gotthies were dryuen out of Italy, yet were they myghty in Spayne, and ruled there vntyll this oure tyme. And of this wyſe wasWhē Spain and parte of Fraūce was trāſlated frō the empyre. at the laſt Spayne and part of Fraunce tranſlated from the empyre of Rome vnder Homorius. As for Italy was reſtored to his tranquilitie while Honorius lyued yet. For the Gotthies drue partly into Lombardy, partly into Spayne: beſyde this were the Frankes myghty in Fraunce.
                  After Innocentius was Soſimus made the xliiij. byſhop of Rome.
                  Bonifacius the firſt of that name and xlv. byſhop of Rome ſucceded Soſimus.
                  After Bonifacius death was Celeſtinus the firſt of the name made byſhop of Rome.
               
               
                  The yere of Chriſte .CCCC. xxvij.
                  
                     THeodoſius the yonger the ſonne of ArcadiusTheodoſius the younger. the .xlv. Emperoure reigned at Conſtantinople ſeuen and twenty yeares after the death of Honorius. He made Valentinian the ſonne of Conſtantius and Placidia, whiche was the daughter of Theodoſius, fellow in the Eaſte empyre.
               
            
            
               Of the Vandalies.
               
                  IN the tyme of this Theodoſius the yereWhan the Vandali ca
                     
                        ••
                      into Aphrica. of Chriſt, CCCC. xxxiij. came the Vādali into Aphrica by this occaſion. Thos two capitaines of the Romanes hated eche other, and fought other whiles with playn fielddes. Wherfore the one, called bonifati
                     •
                  s, entyced buſely the Vandalies that were in Spayne at that tyme to come into Aphrica, which thyng they did gladly. For the Gotthi beyng myghty in Spayne, coulde not ſuffre the Vādalies. For (as we ſhewed before) the Vandalies moued by Stillico againſt the Gotthies, toke in the contreis that be about Hungary, namely Walachia & Illyricus, where the Gotthies dwelt afore. Beſyde that were they alſo in Germany, from whence as they went into Fraūce, they did much hurte: howbeit they were driuen out of Fraū
                  ce by the Frankes and Gotthies. Afterward beyng come into Spayne, they vere conſtrayned to fyght agayne with the Gotthies: but in Aphrica beganne the power of the Vandalies to growe and encreaſe S. Auguſtine alſo died about that time, when Genſerichus
                     
                        •
                     . Auguſtin kyng of the Vandalies beſieged the towne Hippo, wherein. S. Auguſtine was byſhop.Hippo.
               
               When Valentintanus was dead, one Maximus

made hymſelfe Emperoure at Rome of his owne mynde. But the quene E
                     •
                  doxia, becauſe ſhe would haue the heires that were left to ſuccede in the empyre, ſought ayde by Genſerichus againſte Maximus, by whoſe helpe the citie of Rome was taken & ſpoyled. But the Vandall vſed a Vandalians faithfulneſſeA Vandaliā faythfulneſſe and ſtedfaſtneſſe with the quene: for he lede her, with her two daughters away with hym intoAn example of dyſtopa
                        •
                     te Aphrica pryſoner. For ſo doth it ſomtyme befall, when we call foren ayde to defende oure goodes. Howbeit afterwarde vnder Iuſtinianus, though the Vandalies were not vtterly roted out in Aphrica: yet were they brought to ſuche ſtrayghtneſſe, that they could neuer floryſhe any more. For Gelimerus the kyng was taken by Belliſarius, & Aphrica beyng ſubdued, obeyed the Empyre agayne. But not lōg after began the Saracens to haue dominiō in Aphrica. Let this ſuffiſe to ſpeke of the Vādalies
            
            
               Of the Boemes.
               
                  IT is alſo to be noted, that about this timeWhan y• Vā
                     dali came firſt into Germany. came fyrſt of all in Germany the Vandali, wherein they haue yet a great part nowe a dayes, namely the kyngdom of Boeme, whiche was in tymes paſt part of Germany: whichThe Boemes are Germanes. the word Boeme, which is a Germane worde doth teſtifie ſufficiently, whiche was before the Vandali came into theſe countreis. The worde hath his ſygnificacion of the Bauaries or Beyers, to whō it was wont to be ſubiect, wherfore it is properly called Boienheim. Nether wyll the Vandali of Boeme be called Boemes, but zeſki, after their capitayne, by

whoſe guyde they were fyrſt brought into Boeme. But theſe auncient Boemes, the Germanes, were in greate admiracion and confederacion with the Romanes, and by Cornelius Tacitus the hiſtory writer they are highly praiſed. By this occaſiō alſo is Germany tranſlated from the Roman empyresGermany is 
                        〈…〉
                     frō 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . monarchy. For in low Germany were the Frankes puyſſaunt, in hygh Germany Alemanni, and in Boeme the Vandali. But what is happened to Boeme afterward, and whan it was ſubdued again by the Germane Emperoures, that ſhall we ſhewe in the hiſtories of the Emperours: for there ſhall we ſhew ſome other thynges of the chaunge of the thynges of Germany.
               
                  The yere of Chriſt .CCCC. liiij.
                  VVhen Theodoſius the younger was deade,
                        
                           〈…〉
                        . reigned Valentimanus the .xlvi. Emperour in the Weſte, fyue yeares, and whyle Theodoſius liued, reigned he fyue and twenty yeres. But after Theodoſius death was the .xlvii. Emperour in the Eaſte Martianus. In his tyme was the horrible ſettyng forth of Attila.
               
            
            
               Of Attila.
               
                  FIrſt of all came into Hungarye the Gotthies afterward the Vandali, laſt of al the Hūni, and theſe laſt kept the lande, of whō it is called Hungary. This cruell peopleThe callyng of Hungary. 
                        •
                      in dedes of Attila. dyd moſte miſchefe nerehand to all Europa. Attila brought an army of three hundreth thouſande into Germany, and toke in many myghty cities, among the whiche was Baſil, Auſborowe, Straſborowe,

Wormes, Coelen, and many other cities. Goynge forth from thence into Fraūce, toke the kyng of the Bourgunyons, he beſieged the citie Aureola, and entended to vſurpe the dominion of whole Europa
               At that tyme was in the hether part of Fraunce whiche the Romane Emperours kept, a Romane captaine, called Aetius: the ſame made a confederacionAetius. with the Frankes and Gotthies, that with lyke hande they ſhould reſiſte the moſte cruell tyraūt. But Attila, becauſe he was afrayed for the power of the Gotthies he procured by Dietrichus theyr kyng, that they ſhould not ayde the Romanes: but after their ſingular conſtance refuſed the Gotthies al maner of frendſhyp or allegeaunce with the Barbarous tyraunt. Wherefore both hoſtes met at TolouſeThe battaill with Attila by Tolouſe. in Fraunce: on the Romane ſyde Aetius, the Gotthi and Frankes, and of the other ſyde Attila. And hiſtories make mencion, that in the Weſt came neuer ſo great an hooſt and multitude together, as at that tyme. The battaill laſted from the Sunne ryſyng, vntyll nyght. At the laſt Attila beyng driuē to the flyght, loſt a hundreth and foure ſcore thouſand men: he himſelfe alſo was driuen to ſuch ſtraitneſſe, that he had nearehande ſlayne hymſelfe. And though Aetius, the Frankes and the Gotthies had the victory, yet dyed Dietrichus kyng of the Gotthies in that battayll. The ſonne would haue reuē
                  ged the fathers death, and entended to gather an army, and perſue Attila, and to deſtroie the reſydue of his hooſt: and would vndoubtedly haue done it had he not chaunged his mynde through the counſaill of Aetius. But that counſaill of Aetius was

nought, for Attila myght at that tyme haue bene ouer come with a ſmall army. But afterward beyng returned into Hungary, reſtoring his hoſt, & recoueryng ſtrength, he inuaded Italy, taking in the cities from the firſt entry of Italy, vntyl the moūtayn Appenninus. Then Leo the byſhop of Rome metyng hym, knelyng beſought hym, that he would go back again. It is reported y• Attila ſhuld haue ſaid, he ſaw the image of a man ſtanding by the byſhop, threatening him with a drawen ſworde, & he being afraied, promiſed to go backe again. Whē he was come again
                     
                        〈…〉
                     ath o
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      The 
                        〈…〉
                      of Au
                        〈…〉
                      The 
                        •••
                     urge of God. into Hungary, he made a great wedding, and being the fyrſt nyght ſore dronken, dyed a certaine death. Of this wyſe died this tyraunt, that was not aſhamed to call hymſelfe theſcourge of God.
            
            
               Venice.
               
                  AT this tyme was Venice the citie builded in the ſea, where the beſt of Italy fled for feare of Attila.
               After Celeſtinus was Xyſtus made the xlvij. byſhop of Rome, the third of that name.
               After Xyſtus ſucceded Leo the .xlviij. byſhop the fyrſt of that name.
               When Leo was deade, Hilarius was made the xlix. byſhop of Rome.
               Valentinianus the Emperoure cauſed Aetius to
                     
                        •
                     h
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . be put to death, becauſe he ſuſpected hym to couet y• empyre. But this is the worldes reward forſoth, for the great valiauntneſſes. Stillico Aetius & afterward Belliſarius were moſt excellēt captaines. Nether were in the empyre any els, which reſēbled the vertues and ſtrength of the auncient Romanes

ſo well, as they: but they were not worthely rewarded for ſuche deſertes. Valentinianus demaunded of a Romane prince, whether Aetius were not worthely punyſhed? who ſaid, he could not tell: but this was he ſure, that the Emperour had with his left hande cut of hys ryght hande.
               After Valētinianus was the empire of Rome nere hand toren in peaces, & many called thē Emperours in Italy. Yet in ye meane ſeaſon remained y• maiſtie of an Emperours name by them of Cōſtantinople, & afterwarde reſtored Iuſtinianus the Weſt empyre by Belliſarius & Narſes. But after that Valētinianus was deade, many were called Emperours at once, & within .xx. yeres had Italy .ix. Emperours, whiche reigned by a ſucceſſion, & the one was ſlayn of the other by occaſion. The laſt was called AuguſtulusAuguſtulus. (that is, litle noble or litle ful of maieſty.) The diminution of the name, was an euidence that the gouernaūce of the Auguſtus▪ ſhould fayle in Italy: for with this Auguſtulus failed finally the empyre. Othacarus droue out the ſame Auguſtulus, agaīſt whom was Dietrichus of Bernaſent into Italy, in the tyme of zeno the Emperoure. Wherefore was the empire of Italy tranſlated to the Gotthi, which afterward were ſuppreſſed vnder Iuſtinianus, as we haue ſayde before.
               
                  The yeare of Chriſte .CCCC. lx.
                  LEo the fyrſt of that name, the .xlviij. EmperourLeo. reigned ſyxten yeares. The ſame made hys ſonne of lyke name Emperour, who becauſe he was to yonge, fet the emperial crowne on zeno his ſtepfathers heade.
               
               
                  
                  The yeare of Chriſte .CCCC. lxxvi.
                  ZEno the .xlix. Emperoure reigned .xvii. yeares.
                        
                           •
                        en
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                      The ſame ſent Dietrichus of Berna into Italy, and made hym a Conſul. For Dietrichus for his noble feates was he more renowmed, then for his own vertues. For he ruled not as an Auguſtus, but lyke a tyraunt.
               
               
                  The yere of Chriſte .CCCC. xcii.
                  Anaſtaſius the .L. Emperoure reigned .xxvi.Anaſtaſius. yeares. He died ſtricken with alyghtenyng.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt .CCCCC. xix.
                  IVſtinus the .li. Emperoure reigned nyne yeres.Iuſtinus. In his young age was he a ſwyneheerde, afterwarde became he a ſouldiour. But when Anaſtaſius was dead, a gelded man that was ryche, gaue Iuſtinus muche mony, that with the conſent of the ſouldiours, the ſame gelded man myght be choſen Emperour. Howbeit Iuſtinus remembryng hymſelfe, brought to paſſe, that he hymſelfe myght be made Emperour.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt .CCCCC. xxv.
                  IVuſtinianus the .lii. Emperour reigned eight
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      and thirty yeares. The ſame ſet his mynde to repaire the Empire. He was the ſyſter ſonne of the former Iuſtine, & by a ſyngular gift of God had
                        
                           〈…〉
                        arius. 
                           〈…〉
                        r
                           •
                        es. he two captains or marſhals, Belliſarius & Narſes by whoſe aide he hath brought to paſſe moſt renowmed thinges. Belliſarius ouercame y• Perſes, & ſaued Syria, & reſtored Aphrica to ye empire: beſide y• had he alſo great victories in Italy againſt the Gotthies, whoſe power was afterwarde vtterly brought to nought by Narſes. Iuſtinianus made peace

and amitie with the Frankes that were in Fraunce and graunted them frely to haue parte of Fraunce, as writeth Procopius the hiſtoryographer.The ciuill lawe is reſt ored by iuſtinianus. The digeſtes.
                  
                  When euery where was peace made, Iuſtinianus cauſed alſo the auncient lawes of the Romans to be gathered in bookes called Digeſta, that is, bokes appoynted in order: but the ſame bookes were darkened not long after Iuſtinianus, through lawes of the Lombardes and Frankes: neuertheleſſe after a good ſeaſon, were they brought too lyght agayne by. Lotharius a Saxon Emperour, of whō we ſhall ſpeake hereafter. Howbeit, it were to long to reherſe here how greatly this wyſdome is to bee prayſed in the Emperoure, who wylled that iuſtice and theſe lawes to be commonly executed, as by the iudgement of all ſage and good men can nothynge be more honeſt, holy and more profitable.
               
            
            
               Of Belliſarius.
               
                  I can not worthely ouerpaſſe that of Belilſarius, which he hath handled moſt faithfully in all thynges: he was a peace and concorde maker in all the worlde. He dyd wholy reſtore the empire of Rome, that was nearehand decaied and altogether weakened: to be ſhort, he ſhewed hys lorde and all the worlde ſuche pleaſure,☜ that none coulde be greater nor more prayſe worthy: and if they were eſtymed aryght, they are hygh and incredible gyftes of God. But what thā
                  kes the worlde geueth agayn for ſo great vertues, and ſuche g
                     •
                  ſtes of God, that doth the example ofBelliſarius was very Belliſarius declare ſufficiently: whom Iuſtinianus

of a very lyght ſuſpicion without cauſe, cauſed to put out his eye
                     ••
                  , and droue him away, that he ſhuld be fayne to ſeke his meate with beggyng: at the laſt dyed he lyke a moſte wretched begger. Of this wyſeThe ende
                     
                        〈…〉
                     f the 
                        〈◊〉
                     . doth the deuel at the laſt ſet hym againſt the greateſt men, whiche vndoubtedly hateth all Gods workes, and moſte hygh vertues in men.
               Beſyde thys dyd Narſes alſo fall in the Emperours indignacion, but he woulde not returne to Conſtantinople: For that he myght be more ſafe for daungers, he remayned all hys lyfe longe at Naples in Italy.
               Simplicius the .l. byſh. of Ro. ſucceded Hilarius.
               Felix the ſecōd of that name ſucceded Simplicius.
               After Felix was Gelaſius the .lij. byſh. of Rome.
               Anaſtaſius the ſeconde of that name was after Gelaſius.
               After Anaſtaſius was Symmachus the .liiij. byſhop of Rome.
               In hys tyme was the fyrſt trouble rayſed for the
                     
                        〈…〉
                      per 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     of y• 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      of R
                        〈…〉
                     
                   choſyng of the byſhop of Rome. For ſome woulde haue had one Laurentu
                     •
                  s, agaynſt Symmachus▪ and thys ſtryfe was the cauſe of a greate ſlaughter at Rome. At the laſt did Dietrichus of Bernaſwag this vproure.
               After Symmachus ſucceded Hormiſda ye lv. byſh.
               Ioannes the firſt ſucceded Hormiſda.
               Felix the thyrd the .lvii. byſh. was after Ioannes.
               Bonifacius the ſecōd the .lviii. byſh. ſucceded Felix
               Ioannes the ſecond ſucceded Bonifacius.
               Agapetus the. l
                     •
                  . byſhop ſucceded Ioannes. This ſame optained of the Emperoure Iuſtinianus that

heretikes ſhuld not be brought to Conſtantinople.
               Syluerius the .lxi. byſh. ſucceded Agapetus.
               Vigilius was byſh. after Syluerius. Thiſſame was taken of Iuſtinianus, and vncourteouſly entreated, becauſe he would not conſent to the reſtitucion of the bannyſhed heretikes.
               Pelagius the firſt ſucceded after Vigelius in the tyme of Totilas.
               Ioānes the third was ye .lxiiij. byſh. after PelagiꝰWonders ſene in Italy before Mahomet.
               
               In theſe tymes were ſene very dredeful wōders in the ſkye, by the Italians. There were ſene burnyng battayls, Cometes. Beſyde this alſo was Rome nearehand drowned wyth the ſurroundyng of the Tyber. Theſe tokens ſignified the decay of the Romane empyre and the Churche, the whiche enſued afterward. For not long after roſe the Mahometicall peſtilence.
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt .CCCCC. lxvi.Iuſtinus. 
                           ••
                        .
                  
                  IUſtinus the ſecond of that name, the .liij. Emperoure reygned ten yeares. He was Iuſtinianus ſyſters ſonne. In his tyme toke in the Lō
                     bardes parte of Italy to dwell in, whyche was the yeare of Chriſte .CCCCC. lxxij.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſte .CCCCC. lxxvi.Tiberius. 
                           ••
                        .
                  
                  TIberius the ſecond of this name, the .liiij. Emperoure reigned ſeuen yeares. He was Iuſtinus marſhall, and was taken of hym for hys ſonne and heyre of the empyre. He vanquyſhed the Perſes: but had no good fortune in Italy agaynſt the Lombardes.
                  Benedictus the .lxv. byſh. of Ro. ſucceded Pelagiꝰ Pelagius the ſecond was byſh. after Benedictus.
                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of Mahomet and of the kyngdome of the Sarracens.
               
                  
                     The yeare of Chriſte vi. C. xxx.
                     The yeare of Heraclius xv.
                     The yeare of the worlde iiij. M. v. C. lxxiiii
                     The yeare of Rome M. iii. C. lxxxii
                  
                  
                     MAhomet auaunted hymſelfe a prophet & alſo a king in Arabia, by the AgareniesMahomet 
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        phet 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪
                      and Saraceus, & that by this occaſion: The Agareny dwellinge in the entryng of Arabia, were alwaye geuen to robbery and exercyſe of warre.
                  Whan they were now enticed with the Perſian
                        
                           〈…〉
                        rō of Maho
                        
                           〈…〉
                         by
                           〈…〉
                        -
                           〈…〉
                        
                      warres, they receyued wages vnder Heraclius. And whan it was ſhewed them by ye Emperoures captaynes, they lokynge for no more wages, rayſed an vproure agaynſt the Romane captayns. By reaſon of thys commune vproure beganne Mahomets power to encreaſe. For ſeynge the commune people coulde want no captayne, they dyd lyghtely ſtycke to Mahomett, who paſſed all other for his greate ryches, and other ſyngular vertues. But that he myghte the more eaſely bryng the peoples maners into ſome certayne order, he purpoſed to make lawes, not only in ciuill matters, but alſo to bind the mindes of the cōmune people to a certaine and new forme of religion, that he might the better kepe them all in their duety, nother might ryſe any occaſion of diſſcucion. For he ſawe that euery wher were ſondry & diſagreing mindes of the doctryn of religion. For ye concord of the Churches was ſpoyled

by ſundery hereſyes, and chefely wyth the wicked learning of Arrius. But whan the conſciences are tangled wyth errour, and the myndes wauer, than do they lightely ſuſpect the doctrine of Chriſt, and be in ſhorte ſpace dryuen hether and thether. Wherfore as mens myndes were thus relyng andThe fourme of Mahomets religiō. vncertayn, Mahomet hauyng gotten oportunitie, preſcribed ſuche a forme of religion, wherein thoſe heade chapters of the fayeth, that ſpake of Chriſte were paſt ouer, and that therefore, leſt the doctrine of the fayth ſhould more be broughte into doutfull diſputatyons: but reſtynge only in the vnderſtandyng or capacyte of reaſon, myghte commaunde of courteſye of maners, and maner to lyue honeſtlye. Thys truely is acceptable to mens nature. Therfore embraced thys doctryne the Gentyls, Iewes, Arrians and ſuch as were deciuered from the Chriſten religion. For thys fayth ſemed to be alowable to euery man: Wherfore men of vnlyke kynred, vnlyke language▪ the one liuynge otherwyſe than the other, it is vnpoſſyble to ſaye how eaſely they grew and increaſed in myght to reſyſt the Romanes valiauntly. For firſt began they to ſubdue Arabia andMahomet ſubdueth fyrſt Arabia. part of Syria. For Damaſcus was Mahomets courte. Afterwarde became they myghty in Egipt alſo. Let thys ſuffyſe brefely ſpoken of the begynnyng of ye dredefull kyngdome of Mahomet, wherin raygned fyrſt the Arabians & Egypcians, which called them Sultan or Souldan, that is, prince:Sultan or Souldan. afterward was the empyre brought to ye Turkes. As for ye kingdome is ye greateſt part of Antichriſt, & in the Prophetes are ye moſt certayne prophecies

of it, wherein voe are earneſtlye warned of GodThe place in Daniel of Maho
                           •
                        et. to eſchue thys peſtylence. In Danyell is he paynted of thys wyſe: In that terryble beaſte, whyche is the figure of the Romyſhe empyre, doth growe a horne, throughe whoſe power are thre hornes pulled out, and hath eyes, and ſpeaketh dredefull blaſphemyes agaynſt God. Thys horne is Mahomet: the eyes and dredeful blaſphemies againſt God is the Alco
                        •
                     an and doctryne of Mahomette, whiche ſpred farther, than the dominio
                        •
                      was. For neare hand all the Eaſt quarter is infect wyth that de
                        •
                     elyſhe doctryne. The thre hornes 
                        •
                     ignifye the 
                        •
                     hre kyngdomes Arabia, Sirya and Egy
                        •
                     t which Mahome
                        •
                     e had taken in. All thoſe thinges ſhewed God before, that we beyng aduertiſed ſhould not be offended at thys tyme. Alſo that we ſhulde not be ignorant, that it is 
                        •
                     he laſte kyngdome, and that the daye of the laſte 
                        ••
                     dgement is to be loked for. The poſteritye of Mahomet, not beynge content wyth the boundes of hys kyngdomes, ſt
                        •
                     oue alſo wyth the Emperours of Conſtantinople, for the kingdome of A
                        ••
                     a.
                  Thys kyngdome of Mahomet was fyrſte called the kyngdome of the Sa
                        •
                     acens. For thoughe
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           ••
                        ng
                        
                           ••••
                         of 
                           •
                        he 
                           〈◊〉
                        . he was an Agarene borne, yet chaunged he that name not wythoute a greate cauſe, for the promiſe made 
                        •
                     o Abraham in ſ
                        •
                     ript
                        •
                     re was made to the▪ ſo
                        •
                     
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      of Sara, and not of Agar. Now were the Agare
                     
                        •
                     y of Agar. But foraſmuche as Mahomet vnderne
                        ••
                      a color pretended that hys people were acceptable to God, ye & to whom perteyned the promeſſe of the bleſſing, that they ſhuld haue dominion of the

world, (for he expounded all the promiſes of y• ſcripture carnally) chaungyng the name of ſet purpoſe, he called his people Sa
                        ••
                     acens, as children of Sara, and not Agarens. Theſe Saracens becameThe pow
                           ••
                         of the Saracens. myghty, not only in Aſia, but alſo in Aphrica. And from thence went they into Spayne alſo, and kep
                        •
                      a greate parte of it a longe ſeaſon. Into Italy haue they made many inuaſyons alſo.
               
            
            
               Of the 
                     •
                  urkes begynnyng.
               
                  THE cauſe of the comming of the TurkesThe Turkes were Tartares. out of Tartary into Aſia was, that whan the Saracens warred againſt y• Perſes, the Perſes required ayde of the Turkes. As for theſe Turkes wer Tartares by the 
                     •
                  yll Caucaſus. Thys happened not longe before Caro
                     •
                  us Caluus, about the yeare of Chriſt eyght hundreth thre ſcore and ten. After thys aſſiſtaunce beganne the Turkes by lytle and 
                     •
                  y
                     •
                  le to remayne in Aſia, euen as it happeneth moſt commonly whan we call for foren helpe. But foraſmuch as the Turkes were chefely geuen to warrefaring, it came to paſſe, that the rule of the royalme came to their handes. And fyrſt began OthomannusOthomannus y• Turk
                        •
                     
                   the Turke to excelle in power and myghte, in the tyme of Albert of Eaſtenriche the fyrſt, whyche was ſonne to Rodu
                     •
                  phus the Emperoure. Thys was about the thouſand and thre hundreth yeare after Thriſtes incarnation. Now ſence thys OthomannusWhan the Turkes began to haue dominion. tyme, was Mahomets kyngdome cha
                     •
                  nged into the name of y• Turkiſh empyre. It is worthy to be noted here, that this preſent nacion of the Turkes began to ſubdue contryes, & to beare rule

in the 
                     •
                  yme of the fyrſt Emperour of the 
                     •
                  aſtry
                     •
                  h
                     •
                   houſe: and it is to be hoped that it ſhalbe lyk
                     •
                  wyſe repreſſed at the 
                     •
                  aſte by an Emperoure of the ſame ſtocke of Eaſtryche.
               The figure of this Turkyſh kyngdome is d
                     •••
                  ribed full of dredefulneſſe in holy ſcripture, that we ſhuld not be ignoraunt that this were the de
                     •
                  els kyngdom, and by whoſe power and proſperity we might not be with drawen, to de
                     •••
                  er from Chriſte to Mahomets vngodlyneſſe. Ezech
                     •
                  e
                     •
                   and▪ S.
                     
                        〈◊◊〉
                     
                   Ihon call the Turkes Gog and Magog.
               Gog, is called a 
                     •
                  ent: Magog▪ is the people with ou
                     •
                   the tentes: for the Tartaryes 
                     •
                  wel in 
                     •
                  entes. And Ezechiel wr
                     ••
                  eth plainly, that God fuffred the power of Gog 
                     •
                  o be augmented, becauſe of peoples ſynnes
               Mahomet ſignifieth rage or indignation.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     •
                  ur
                     •
                  a ſigni
                     •
                  yeth ſou
                     •
                  d your or wayſter. Methodius called thys people Redde Iewes beca
                     •
                  ſe 
                     •
                  h
                     •
                  y haue borowed ſome ceremonyes of y• Iewes▪ Nether were they the very Iewes, but were cal
                  
                     ••
                  d the Re
                     •
                  d Iewes, ether becauſe they were coue 
                     •
                  ous of man ſ
                     •
                  aughter and bloude, or els becauſe
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Mahomet was born of Edom in Arab
                     •
                  a: for Edom ſignifieth reed. Methodius ſayeth that Gog and Magog were cloſed in beyond the hylles Caſpii: that is Caucaſus, and that a 
                     •
                  oxe ſhal make them a paſſage. This 
                     •
                  ox
                     •
                   is Mah
                     •
                  met: for beyng prouok
                     •
                  d by mahomets law, they became mighty and began to beare r
                     •
                  le.
               We haued 
                     •••
                  ared before how the Romane Monarchy came to y• Eaſt▪ But now are y• 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   of Egypte, Syria Aſia and Aphrica 
                     •
                  y 
                     •
                  he Mahometyſtes▪ vntyll finally the Turkes at 
                     •
                  hys 
                     •
                  yme haue taken and wayſted Grece, and what more was reſtynge.
               Deus dedit the, 
                     •
                  xxi. 
                     •
                  iſh. of Rome ſucceded Bo
                  
                     •
                  ifacius▪ in the tyme of Heraclius.
               After him was bonifacius the fyft the lxxii. byſh In hys tyme was. S. Gallus. The ſame taughteWhat 
                        ••
                     me S. Gallus preached in hygh Germany. Chriſtes doctrine in hygh Germany.
               After hym was byſhop Honorius the fyrſte, and in hys tyme was Mahomet.
               After him was Seuerinus y• lxxiiii. 
                     •
                  iſh. of Rom.
               After him. ſucce. Ioannes the▪ iiii. the lxxv. byſh.
               After Ioannes was Theodorus a Greke y• lxxvi
               
                  The yeare of Chriſte .vi. C. xli
                  COnſtantinus the ſonne of Heraclius the▪ lviij.Conſtantinus the ſon
                           ••
                         of Heraclius Emperour▪ raygned four monethes. His ſtep mother Martyna poyſonned hym, that ſhe might make hyr ſonne Emperoure.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſte .vi. C. xli
                        •
                     .
                  HEracleonas the ſon of Heraclius the lix. EmperourHerac
                           •
                        eona
                           •
                        
                      raygned two yeares after that Conſtantinus was poyſoned. But▪ whan y• ſenate and communalty of Cōſtantinople had knowledge of the myſche
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     s dede, riſyng vp agaynſt the mother
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         example of vengea
                           ••
                        ce. and ſon 
                        •
                     eracleonas, cuttynge of his noſe, and hyr and the 
                        •
                     atryarkes tunges, who dyd ayde them to do the dede, bannyſhed them all thre.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt .vi. C. xliii
                  COnſans the ſonne of Conſtantinus the lx.Conſtans. Emperoure raygned xxvii. yeares. He was ouercome in the Eaſt of y• Sara
                        •
                     ens in Italy

of the Lombardes. He was a mooſte couetous manne, and at the laſte was he ſlayne of hys owne men in a bath at Syracuſe.
                  Martinus the firſt ſucceded Theodorus in Conſtans tyme.
                  Eugenius the fyrſt the lxxviii. byſhopp ſucceded Martinus.
                  Vitalianus the lxxix. biſhop. ſucceded Eugenius.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſte .vi. C. lxx.
                  COnſtantinus y• ſonne of Conſtans the lxi. EmperoureConſtantinus. Pogonatus. raygned xvii. yeares. He was called Pogonatus, that is, bearded. He had warre with the Saracens ſeuen yeres, of the which were ſlayn in one feld thyrty thouſande, inſomuche that theyr power beyng weakened, they were conſtrayned to demaund peace with Conſtantyn: the which he graunted them, but vpon this condycyon, that they ſhuld geue to the Emperoure yearly tribute.
                  After Vitalianus was Adrodatus made y• lxxx byſ. of Ro. in y• time of Conſtantinus Pogonatus.
                  Donus was the lxxxi. byſhop after Adrodatus.
                  Agatho ſucceded Donus.
                  Leo the ij. ſucceded Agatho.
                  Benedictus y• ſecōd was y• lxxxiiij biſh. after Leo
                  Ioannes the v. was the lxxxv. byſhop after Benedictus.
               
               
                  Conon the lxxxvi. byſhop ſucceded Ioannes. The yeare of Chriſt. vi C. lxxxvii.
                  IVſtinianus the ſon of Conſtantinus the lxii.Iuſtinianus Emperour raygned xvi. yeres, but not contynually. For whan he had ruled ten yeare, he was put downe and driuen out by Leontius, who

raigned thre yeare after that Iuſtinianus was chaced oute. Leontius was taken priſoner of TiberiusLeontius. Tiberius Apſimarus. Apſimarus, who raigned after him ſeuen yere. But thenceforth was Iuſtinianus reſtored agayn, and dyd tread both vpon Leontius and Tiberius that were priſoners, beyng caſt downe before hym, and cauſed openly to be cried out: Thou ſhalt treadPſal. xi. vpon the ſerpent aſpis and the coccatryce. Afterward were they beheaded.
                  Sergius the lxxxvii. biſhop of Rome was after Conon, and than was great diſſencion for the election.Beda in Englande. In his tyme lyued Beda in England.
                  Ioannes y• vi. was after Sergius y• lxxxviij. biſh
                  Ioannes the vii. was after Ioannes the vi.
                  Zoſimus the xc. byſh. ſucceded Ioannes the vii.
                  Conſtantinus was byſhop after Zoſimus.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſte vij. C. xiii.
                  PHilippus Bardeſanes y• lxv. Emperour raignedPhilippus Bardeſanes. one yeare and ſixe monethes: Beyng taken of his marſhall, was depriued of the Empyre, and hys eyen put out.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſte vii C. xv.
                  ANaſtaſius the lxvi. Emperoure raygned one yeare & thre monethes. The ſame was alſo taken of his captayn Theodoſius, and depriuedAnaſtaſius was thruſt into a monaſtery. of the empyre: and that he mighte lyue ſolitarely, was he putt into a monaſtery.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſte vii. C. xvii.
                  THeodoſius the lxvii Emperour raigned onlyTheodoſius one yeare. He forſoke the empyre, whan he perceaued that he was inuaded of Leo, and myſtruſted he coulde not kepe the Empyre.

He became a monke, and dyed in a priuate lyfe.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt .vij. C. xviij.
                  LEo the .iij. the .lxviij. Emperour raigned twentyLeo y• thyrde ſurnamed Iconomachus. yeares. He was ſurnamed Iconomachus, that is, aſſaulter of ymages, becauſe he had cō
                     maunded to take oute of the tempels the ymages of ſaynctes, and to burne them. The citye Conſtan tinopole was beſyeged viij. yeare longe of the Saracens in his time, yt which ſuffered great miſery in that fyege, by reaſon of the greate hunger and peſtilence. Yee and were alſo ſlayn of the Bulgaries, whych ayded the emperoure. Beſydes that alſo were the Saracens ſhippes burnt, wyth fyre that was craftely made vnder the water.
                  After Conſtantinus was Gregorius the ſecond made the .xcij. byſhop of Rome in the tyme of Leo Iconomachus.
                  Gregorius the .vij. ſucceded Gregorius the .ij.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt .vii. C. xlii.
                  COnſtantinus the ſonne of Leo, the .lxix. Emperoure
                        
                           〈…〉
                         the 
                           〈…〉
                         was 
                           〈…〉
                         Copronymus. raygned thyrty yeare: he was ſurnamed Copronymus, becauſe that at his baptyſynge, he dyd hys caſement in the founte. He alſo was a deſtroyer of ymages.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt .vii. C. lxxvii.
                  LEo the .iiij. the ſonne of Copronymus the lxx.Leo y• fourth Emperour raygned fyue yeare.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt .vii. C. lxxxiii.
                  Conſtantinus Leo the 
                        〈…〉
                     hs ſonn Irene.
                  LOnſtantinus Leo the fourth ſonne the lxxi. Emperoure raygned wyth hys mother Irene ten yeares.
                  She was of Athens, and ruled mooſt ſagely, aboue

the vnderſtandyng of woman kynne, and wyth the alowance of euery man. After her, raygned her ſon fyue yeares, ſhe beynge put from the gouernaunce. But they of Conſtantinople not ſufferyng hys wickedneſſe, called the mother agayne from the aexile, whych raygned after warde thre yeare. Of thys wyſe were Irene and Conſtantinus gouernynge the empyre together xviij. yeares, vntyll the yeare of Chriſt .viij. C. and i.
                  But though the Chriſten Emperours were allwaye at Conſtantinople, whiche called themſelues Emperours of Rome alſo, vntyll at the laſt, the citie was taken in of the Turkes: yet in ye meane ſeaſon whan the power of the empyre began ſo to faid, that the Emperours were notable to defende nother theyr tytle, nor Italy, the Romanes were conſtrayned to ſeke ayde at the Frankes, whoſe power was than the greateſt. Wherefore came the maieſtie of the Emperours name to Carolus. And becauſe oure Emperours haue alwaye maynteyned and defended Italy wyth ſtronge hande, we wyll aduyſedly paſſe ouer here the Greke Emperours, (for ſome were tangled with want on pleaſure, effeminate, and wholy vnapt to haue gouernaunce,) & recite orderly our Emperours, which are worthy to be cōmēded for their notable vertues & proweſſes. Zacharias was the .xciiij. biſh. after Gregoriꝰ. ye iij.
                  This ſame wynkyng at the matter, was the olde Hilderichus kyng of Fraunce pryued of the empirePipinus. and put into a monaſtery, and Pipinus was made kyng in his ſtead. For all the power was come to ye princes, by reaſon the kynges were enpoueryſhed.

In the tyme alſo of thys zachary dyd. S. BonifaciusWhat tyme S. Bonifacius preached in Germany. preache in Germany.
                  Stephanus the ii. ſucceded zachary. The ſame prouoked Pipynus into Italy agaynſte the Lombardes, whoſe kynge he beſyeged, and compelled him to require peace.
                  Paulus the fyrſte was after Stephanus the xcvi. byſhop.
                  Stephanus the thyrde was after Paulus. In
                        
                           〈…〉
                        e for th
                           •
                         eleccion of the biſhop of Rome. hys tyme happened greate ſtryfes and rumors at Rome for the choſynge of theyr byſhop. One Conſtantynus was choſen byſhop by force, and agayne putte downe, and all they that he had conſecrated, were deſtitute and forſaken.
                  Adrianus the fyrſte ſucceded Stephanus. The ſame enticed Carolus the great to come into Italy agaynſte Deſiderius kynge of the Lombardes Leo the thyrde the .xcix. byſhop folowed after Adrianus. Whan a ſeditious vproure was rayſed againſt him at Rome, he fled to Carolus the great or Charlemayne, by whom he was reſtored. And the ſame ordeyned Charlemayne Emperoure, and crowned hym. ⸪
               
            
            
               
               ¶ Of the Germanes
               
                  Emperours.
                  Charles the greate.
                  The yeare of Chriſt viij. C. i.
                  The yere of the worlde .iiij. M. vii. C. xlv
                  The yeare of Rome .M. v. C. li.
               
               
                  CArolus magnus was crowned EmperourCarolus magnus. The begynnyng of the tranſlatyng the empyre to the Germanes. of Leo the iij. the very Chriſtmaſſe daye. Thys was the begynnynge of tranſlatinge the empyre to the Germanes, and by this tranſlatynge happened vnto Italy and the Beſt kyngdome a mooſt mightye heade, and a mooſt ſure fortreſſe. For though the Emperours of Germany were not alway of lyke power, as in no kyngdome the kynges were alwaye of lyke power or lyke fortunate: yet in proweſſe were they ſuch ſomtyme, that they dyd rydde Italy out of daungers, and preſerued not onely in the Weſte quietneſſe in the commune welth: but alſo kept the Chriſten religion ſound in the churche. And if ye wyll ponder the feates dedes, and maners of oure Emperours, ye ſhall iudge them to haue ben excellent wyſe princes, and not barbarous, and in nothing to be eſtimed leſſe, than thoſe excellentand allowable Emperours Auguſtus, Traianus, Adrianus and Conſtantinus: yee yf ye do aduiſedly ponder all thynges, ye ſhall ſaye, that ther hath bene more honeſtye and modeſtye in oure Emperours, than in them. Thys ſhall ye fynde alſo, that ours haue enterpryſed no warre of any ambicion or priuate

profyte: but only of neceſſitie, to mayntayne religion, to defende the liberty of the empyre and the ſauegarde of the ſubiectes.
               As for me, beynge certayne of myne owne vnableneſſe, though I can not iudge nor ſpeake of the vertues of greate men acrording to theyr worthyneſſe: yt is my mynde to praiſe ſome princes aboue the other. For I iudge it to be pertaynynge to the duety of euery hiſtory wryter, that he do nowe and than turne aſyde into the rehearſall of the moſt beſt vertues, and ſhewe them to the reader for a ſhewe as an example to folow. Now in mens aſſaires can nothinge 
                     •
                  e more honeſte nor more pleaſaunt, than the conſyderacion and knowledge of princely vertues in great men. Wherfore I woulde oure Germane Emperours were ſo ſet before the eyes of our Germanes, that they myght know theyr vertues, and wonder at them: wonder it is how greatly the ſame wolde helpe and further to the amendement, and alſo rayſe a flame in the hartes of good men to folowe. In my iudgement are theſe princes douteleſſe ſuche, whyche be worthy farre to be preferred before the auncient Romanes, whether ye wyll regarde wyſedome, or ſtrength, or finally the endeuour of honeſty and modeſtye.
               
                  
                     The rehearſall of the Germane Emperours.
                     Carolus magnus.
                     Ludouicus pius the ſonne of Carolus magnus▪
                        
                           
                           After the ſyxe Saxons.
                           Henricus the fyrſte.
                           Otho the greate.
                           Otho the ſecond.
                           Otho the thyrd.
                           Henricus y• .ij. which is buried at Bamberch.
                           Lotharius the Saxon.
                        
                        
                           Item theſe Frankes.
                           Cunradus.
                           Henricus the ſonne of Cunradus.
                        
                        
                           Item theſe Schwaben.
                           Fridericus Barbaroſſa.
                           Fridericus the ſecond.
                           Afterward Rodolphus.
                           Sigiſmundus.
                           Maximilianus.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of Germany, and occaſyon of the kyngdome of the Frankes.
               
                  ALl Germany was not ſubiecte to the empyre, but had onely thoſe contryes, that are betwene the Rene and the Danow. And much worke had the Emperoures, before oure nacion could be ſubdued and kept.
               For in the tyme of Auguſtus had Druſus warresBy whom Germany was vexed wyth warres, ſence the tyme of Auguſtus. and Germanicus, afterwarde Caius, and after him Vitellius, Domitianus. Traianus had ſubdued the lower Germany vntyll Moganus. Maximinus was come vntyll Schwartzwald. Valerianus was wyth an hooſt in hygh Germany.

After hym vnder Galienus the Frankes beynge ſett in a commotion, began to ryſe: but by the Emperoures folowynge, were theyr violences ſometyme aſſuaged. For Aurelianus vanquyſhed them by Mayntz. Probus had many and noble victoryes in lowe Germany. Conſtantinus buylded the citye Spyre. Iulianus, Valentinianus and Theodoſius dyd lykewyſe ſubdue the Alemans & Frankes, and the contries that lye by the Rhene, and toke in Schwaben land alſo.
               But after that the power of the Frankes and Alemans begonne to encreaſe, the Emperours returnedThe ofſpringe of y• Frankes not into Germany. Some fable diuerſly of the fyrſt begynnynge of the Frankes: but it is certayne, that they were hyghe Germanes in Auguſtus tyme. For we haue no certaynty of the Germanes eſtate out of hiſtories before Auguſtus. But that the Frankes were in ſuche eſtimacion by the hygh Germanes, that it can eaſely be proued out of Strabo, who wrote an hiſtory in the tyme of Auguſte, and warrefared wyth the Romanes. As for Strabo ſayeth that the Frankes were ioynyng to the Vindelici, that is, Bayerlanders, vpon the which they border partly at thys tyme alſo. TheThe dedes of the Frankes, and by what occaſion they de
                     
                        ••
                     iuered frō the empyre. commotion of the Frankes beganne by thys occaſyon: In the tyme of Galianus the Emperoure, was Poſthumus captayne in Germany: the ſame was made Emperoure by the people for hys ſyngular honeſtye, and vertues in gouernynge the empyre, Galienus in the meane ſeaſon lyued in ydelneſſe and pleaſure at Rome. But whan Galienus hearde that Poſthumus was made Emperoure,

he ſent againſt hym an apointed army. Poſthumus likewyſe commaunded his men to be in a readineſſe among the whiche were euen the Frankes the principall. And though Poſthumus was afterwarde ſlayne priuely by an intrap, yet the Frankes once prouoked to weapons, remayned alway in the ſettyng forth to warre, and came downe from Moganus to the Rene, and ouer the Rene toke they firſt the citie Trier from the Romanes, and afterwards went into fraunce. But after that they had foughtē againſt Attila with the Romanes, they were alway in great fauour wyth the Emperours, in ſo muche▪ that Iuſtinianus the Emperoure through a conuenaunt made with the Frankes, ſuffred them to haue and inhabite that parte of Gallia, whiche at this tymeFrancia or Fraunce 
                        ••
                      part of Gallia. is yet called Francia or Fraunce. Wherefore the Frankes toke in both the contreis of the Ryne, and parte of Fraunce and both the contreis were maynteined by one common kyngly gouernaunce. The hiſtories make euery where mencion of great prayſes of the Frankes, partely for their goodly polycy and proſperitie in gouernyng their kyngdome, but ſpecially becauſe they embraced the Chriſten religiō in the begynnyg of the kyngdome, and wylled it to be publyſhed and ſpred abrode. In the meane tymeBy what orcaſion the Almanes decyuered from the emppre. dyd the Alemans decyuer from the Romyſhe empyre alſo. The Alemans were the hygh Germanes, whiche now are called Schwaben, Schweitzer & Baier. Therefore when the Romane Monarchy was ſundered, then was Germany firſt deuyded inGermani is deuided in Almanes and 
                        •
                      Frankes. Alemanes and Frankes. But in the time of Pipine, father to Charles the greate, became the Frankes

lordes of the Almaines: and therfore as the empyre was thus deuided, they called hygh Germany the Eaſte kyngdome, and lowe Germany wyth Fraunce the Weſt kyngdome: And by thys partynge of the kyngdomes remayne the names yett in Germany.
               The elders of Charles the greate were princes of Germany and Lordes of the courte, and that more is, the chefe gouernours by the kynges of theThe elders of 
                        〈…〉
                      y• greate were Grand mayſters. Frankes, and by the commiſſion of their office, were called Grande mayſters. It is alſo ſayed, that theſame was theyr duchy & dominion by enheritaunce, where now is the countyſhyp of Palatine about the Rene ſyde. For certayne it is, that the fyrſt ſprynge
                     
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     t Palatine 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     ha
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     he greate of the ſtocke of the Palatine, commeth of Charles the greates yſſue. But at the laſt, when the kyngly progeny decreaſſed and fayled by proceſſe of tyme more and more, and that theſe princes became more myghtyer, it came topaſſe (by the conſent of the byſhop of Rome) that the gouernaunce of the kyngdomePiping king of Germany and Fraūce. was brought ouer to the princes: and Pipinus beyng made kyng of thys wyſe gouerned both Germany and Fraunce. When Pipinus was deade, Charles ſurnamed the greate was kynge of the Frankes two and thyrty yeares before he was Emperoure, and after that he was made Emperoure he reygned fourtene yeares. Of this wyſe reygned he both in the kingdome and empyre together .xlvi.Charles is borne in Ingelheim. The dedes of Charles the greate. yeares, when they be counted together. He was boren in Ingelheim in the county of Palatine, not farre from the cytie Mentz. In the begynnynge of his reigne warred he agaynſt the Saracens in

Gaſcon: afterward warred he about thirty yeares with the Saxons, the whiche he ſubdued at the laſt and made them to obeye the empyre, & embrace the Chriſtē faith, beſyde other many and great battails, whiche he had in the meane ſeaſon alſo.Deſiderius kyng of the Lombardes.
               
               Deſiderius kyng of the Lombardes coueted the dominion of whole Italy, & goyng to Rome, cauſed ſome of the chefe cyteſens to be put to death. Wherfore Adrianus the byſhop of Rome ſendyng ambaſſadours to Charles, deſyred he woulde come and rydde Italy and Rome out of daunger. (For Pipinus the father of Charles had alſo before delyuered Rome from the tyranny of the Lombardes.) Charles goyng into Italy, beſyeged Deſiderius at Pauye, and conſtrayned hym to yelde hymſelfe. But when Charles perceaued in dede that the vprouryſhnacion of the Lombardes coulde not reſt, (for he had aſſayed the matter with them afore alſo, that they beyng content with their borders, ſhoulde remayne within their owne realme.) and that there myght be a ſure peace thoroweout Italy. CharlesCharles optayueth Lombardy. toke in whole Lombardy, and in the ſame as in hys owne kyngdome ſet he gouernoures and capitaynes. As for Deſidexius with his wyfe the quene & chyldren led he with hym pryſoners, and commaunded them to be kept at Ludick or Liege. Thys was the end of the kyngdome of the Lombardes in Italy, whiche had laſted two hundreth and thre yeres, from the yere of Chriſt .CCCCC. lxxij. when Iaſtinus reigned, vntyll the yeare of Chriſt .vij. C. lxxv. thys was the ſyxte yeare before Charles opteined the empyre. For though Charles was

gone to Rome in this ſettynge forth, and had ſet at quiet not onely Lombardy, but alſo that parte of Italy that is beiond Rome: yet would he not vſurpeThe modeſ
                        •••
                      o
                        •
                      Char
                     
                        ••
                     . for hym the title of Imperiall maieſtie, leſt he ſhould robbe the Grekes of their honoure and this dignitie. He graunteth the Emperours cities in Italy to enioye their former lybertie wythout any hynderaunce: but he kept the kyngdome of the Lombardes as his owne: for long ago was it not ſubiect to the Emperours.
               Taſſilo duke of Baierland rayſed warre againſtTaſſilo duke of Baierland was ouercome of Char
                     
                        •••
                     . Charles, but he was ouercome of Charles the twē
                  tieth yeare of his reigne, and takyng in the duchy. Taſſilo wyth his ſonne was put into a monaſtery. Nether did Charles vſe ſo great rigour againſt his coſyn raſhly: for Taſſilo rayſyng an vprour againſt hym afore, and taken to mercy, kept no promyſe.
               Charles goyng to Rome the two and thirtieth yeare of his reigne, reſtored Leo the byſhop of Rome, againſt whome the Romanes had rayſed vp
                  
                     •
                  ours, inſomuche that the byſhop was compelled to flye. But when now Charles 
                     •
                  erceyued certeynly, that no peace could be ſatteled in Italy, vntyll ſuche cyties in Italy as had fraunchyſes graunted them, dyd ceaſſe to do all thynges accordyng to their appetite, he was conſtrayned by neceſſitie to take to him the dominion of whole Italy. But he betoke to the byſhop of Rome ſome cities and contreis, for the mayntenaunce of miniſters in the churche. In the Chriſtmaſſe nyght cryed the byſhop of Rome: Charles to be Emperoure of Romanes, and alwaye full of maieſtie. And it is ſayde, that Charles ſhuld haue

aunſwered to this: yf I had knowen that any ſuche thyng ſhould haue happened to me, I would not haue entered into the temple. Nether would he accept the title of Emperoure, wythout the conſent and alowaunce of them of Conſtantinople. Wherefore Irēne the mother of Conſtantinus and Nicephorus conſented that Charles ſhould be Emperoure in theCharles was made Empeperoure of the Weſt. Weſt, to that dyd they conſent frely: for theſe countreis dyd not obey to the Emperours of Conſtantinople, any more.
               But as ſone as Charles was made Emperoure,The Hungarians are aſſaulted with warre by Charles the greate. and that the ſtate of Italy was nowe ſatled with great trauaile, he determined to warre vpon the Hungarians. And this warre laſted eight yeares, wherein the Hungarians were in a maner rooted out. He ſet alſo garnyſons of Germanes in Hungary, to kepe the realme: by the whiche occaſion do vntyll this tyme Germanes dwel in the coaſtes of Hū
                  gary, whiche is called Seuenburge. It is mencionedTra
                        •
                     ſ
                        •
                     luania or Sept
                        •
                      caſtra called Seuenburg. in hiſtories, that Charles brought great ryches out of Hungary, and that is lyke ynough: for the Hū
                  garians had bene occupied in warrefarre and robbery aboue two hundreth yeares, they ledde prayes of al nacions nerehande, in the meane ſeaſon was their realme inuaded of no foren naciōs: wherby no doubt were great and precious treaſures founde by them. In the meane tyme dyd Charles, the ſonne of Charles the great, ſubdue Bohemy, vanquyſhyng LechoBohemy was ouercome wt Lecho theyr kynge. their kyng: and thus was charles at the laſt a mooſt myghty prince of all Italy, Fraunce, Germany, Bohemy and Hungary, and brought the whole Weſt empyre in a quiet eſtate, & kept it in the ſame. Wherfore

for theſe vertues, and thys ſtrength of courage, whiche he vſed in all his enterpryſes, is Charles worthy to be counted amonge theſe princes, which God hath now and than geuen to the worlde to repayre common welthes, iuſtice, equitie, ſhamefaſtneſſe, 
                     ••
                  ally to reſtore amonge men the bandes of modeſtie and common peace, as were in tymes paſt Dauid, Hercules, Cyrus, Alexander, Iulius, Auguſtus, Conſtantinus, The odoſi
                     •
                  s. In Charles affaires is chefely worthy to be noted, how kynges and great men make 
                     •
                  umors among them. For GodWh
                        •
                     rfore monarches & 
                        〈…〉
                      of God ſendeth ſometyme the chefe monarches to repreſſe them. Euen as in oure tyme Charles the fyfte hath brydeled the exceſſe and want o
                     •
                  neſſe of the Romanes, and the Venetian power.
               But it is expedient for moſte hygh princes to be excellent, not onely in feates of warre and handlyng of weapon: but alſo to enforme common welthes with honeſt lawes and dectrine of religion. And this was Charles chefe care. He cauſed ſome counſails
                     
                        •••
                      ded
                        〈…〉
                     
                   to be kept at Rome and Franckforde and ſome tyme in Fraunce. He founded alſo thre vniuerſities to ſpreade abrode and maintayne the doctrine of Chriſtenreligion, namely at Bonony in Italy, Paris in Fraunce and at Paduam Italy. In Germany dyd he lyke wyſe founde many monaſteries, for to teache youth in ſteade of ſcoles. Beſyde thys dyd he ſet the lawe of the Frankes morder, and cauſed the bokes of the lawe to be written. For that olde lawe of the Romans was long before put out of 
                     •
                  re throug the Lombardes and Frankes.
               He cauſed alſo to gather together the olde hiſtories

of the Germanes and ſonges, wherein it is ſaid he had ſuche pleaſure, that he learned them by rote.
               He was excellently well ſene in the GermaneCharles the greate was learned in Greke & Latin. toungue and Latine: he coulde alſo ſpeake Greke, for he herde the Greke meſſangers, and aunſwered them in Greke: but in along and durable relaciō did he ſpeake Latine. There are yet verſes that be not greatly vnſemely, whiche is ſayde he dyd make at the death of his couſin Roulande. In his olde age he gaue hymſelfe to Aſtronomy. At diner and ſupper at home delyted he in hearyng reade the bokes of ſaincte Auguſtine.
               In the temple dyd he ſyng the canonicall houres and alſo leſſons with the priſtes, and he woulde other princes to do likewyſe after his example, whō he preſcribed leſſons, which ſemeth to pertain to his and their amendemēt. For he was an exciding louer of chriſten doctrine. In all maners of liuyng dyd be haue hym ſo, as nomā might paſſe him in godlineſſe. Beſide this ſent he ſuccours of mony to the chriſtiās in ſtraunge contreis, and obteined by the Saracen kynges that the chriſtians ſhould be more eaſely entreated.
               He gaue the wyndes and monethes thoſe names, whiche remayne yet now a dayes: ſo that by theſe thynges may eaſely be gathered, that thys prince was garnyſhed of God with greate vertues and hygh happeneſſe by hys ſtudyes, ſo that he may worthely be ſurnamed great. When he was nowrenowmed throughout all the worlde of all theſe vertues, peace ſtablyſhed, y• lawes reſtored, the ſtate of religiō ſet in order, becauſe he might auoyde the occaſion of

great euels, he appoynted hys ſonne Lewis before hys death to be an heyre and ſucceſſour in the empyre, afterward dyed he at Aken the two and ſeuentyeth yeare of his age. Before his death the brydge that was layde ouer the Rene by Mentz, burnt, whiche was made in the ſpace of ten yeres, at Charles
                     
                        •
                     he 
                        〈…〉
                      by 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     ▪
                   greate coſtes. Thys burnynge ſygnyfyed, that Germany ſhoulde not long after be ſeparated from Fraunce.
            
            
               Lewis the gentle, the ſecond Emperoure of the Germanes.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſt .viij. C. xv. began Lewis the gentle to gouerne the empyre, he
                     
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     he 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     ▪
                   reigned ſyx and twenty yeares. Charles had many chyldren, whiche dyed before the fathers deceaſſe. Lewis renewed the peace that his father had made with them of Conſtantinople in the begynnyng of hys reigne, and wylled it to be ſtablyſhed. After 
                     •
                  hoſe he hys ſonne Lotharius for
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . a party ruler in the empyre, that he ſhoulde rule in Italy. Beyng ſent to Rome, he was crowned Emperoure of Paſchalis byſhop of Rome, and was called Auguſtus or full of maieſtie. Sence that tyme kept Lewis a parliament at Aken, for the reformation of the ſtate of the Churche: and he brought to paſ
                     •
                  e wyth greate diligence, that to the miniſters of the Churche ſhoulde bee geuen neceſſary relefe to maynteyne their lyues. An agrement was alſo made betwene hym and the byſhop of Rome, that ſuche as came after them myght be ſure, what part is pertaynyng

to the byſhop, and what to the empyre.
               Thys Godly or gentle Emperoure was takenLewis the gē
                     tle is taken of hys ſonne. priſoner of his ſonne Lotharius, through the counſayll of the Byſhops and ſome princes, becauſe he was afrayed leſt by hys ſtepmothers inſpiracion, hys father would remoue the empyre from hym to hys younger brother. But Lewis beyng delyuered returned to thempyres gouernaunce, and cauſed Lotharius hys ſonne by force to go into Italy: but at the laſt was he reconciled wyth hys father agayne.
               After Leo was Stephanus the fourth madeS
                        •
                     phanus was confirmed of Lewis. the hundreth byſhop of Rome. The ſame demaunded the confirmacion of his byſhopryke of Lewis the Emperoure.
               Paſchalis the hundreth and one byſhop of Ro. ſucceded Stephanus. Thyſſame ſent alſo for hys confirmacion to Lewis.
               Eugenius the .C. i
                     •
                  . byſhop. ſucceded Paſcalis.
               Valentinus the .C. iij. byſhop ſucceded Eugenius.
               Gregorius the .iiij. the .C. iiij. byſhop ſucceded Valentinus. He refuſed to take the byſhoprycke before he were confirmed of the Emperour Lewis.
            
            
               Lotharius the fyrſt of thys name, the thyrde Germane Emperoure.
               
                  THe yere of Chriſt .viij. C. xli. after ye death of Lewis the Godly or gentle reygned Lotharius hys ſonne fyften yeares. But now hath the golden worlde of this progenyThe brethren of Lotharius were th
                        •
                     e, 
                        ••
                     
                   an end. Lotharius had many brethren, Lewis Germanicu
                     •
                   and Charles the balde: amonge the

whiche was debate for the departynge, whereofwis, Germanicus & Charl
                        ••
                      the balde. grewe no leſſe greate then a dolefull warre. For in Fraunce dyd the brethren mete with ſuche a fyghtyng, that, (as hiſtories recorde) the power of the Frākes was ſo febled, that afterward they could neuer wholy recouer it. Lewis, Germanicus & Charles the balde had the ouerhand. After ſo great manſlaughter, when truce was made amōg the princes, they fell to an atonement. Lewis had for his parte Germany, Schwaben, Bayerlande, Boheme, Eaſtē
                  ryche, Eaſt Fraunce, Thuring, Saxen, and all that was vntil y• ryuer Rene. This Lewis is called the Germane kynge, and greate prayſes are ſpoken ofThe dukes of the Frankes 
                        〈…〉
                      of 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     ▪
                   hym. The reſidue of the dukes of the Frankes folowyng are his ſucceſſours in bloude. He brought Bohemy alſo to receaue the Chriſten faith.
               Charles the balde optained by conuenant hereditare the greateſt part of Fraūce or Gallia, & the Frē
                  che kynges folowyng haue their ofſpringe of hym.
               Lotharius kept Italy, and Prouentz, & that part that hetherto is called Lothring or Lorain: and by
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . this man remained the hyghneſſe of the Emperiall maieſtie. By this occaſion thefore was Gallia or
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Fraunce ſeparated from Germany Lotharius toke afterwarde the gouernaunce of the empyre to his ſecond ſonne Lewis, and he beyng aged, went into a religion and became a monke.
               Not few Cometes were ſene this yeare before this diſſencion and warre of the brethren.
               After Gregory the .iiij. was Sergius the ſecond made the .cv. byſhop of Rome. The ſame was the firſt that chaunged his name: for it is ſayde he was

called before Swines mouth. Of hym was LewisSwynes mouth was y• firſt that chaū
                     ged his name Caſtel Angel the ſecond the ſonne of Lotharius crowned at Ro.
               Leo the .iiij. the .cvi. byſhop ſucceded Sergius. The ſame buyldded Caſtel Angel at Rome. He was accuſed by Lotharius that he went about to optain the hyghneſſe of the Emperiall maieſtie from the Frankes, to the Grekes. Wherfore whē Lotharius was come to Rome, the byſhop did declare hymſelfe vngylty.
               After Leo was Iohannes the .viij. The ſame isIohānes. vi
                        ••
                      byſhop of Rome a woman ſaid to be borne at Mentz, & that ſhe was a woman.
               Benedictus the .iij. was made the .cvij. byſhop of Rome after Iohannes the .viij. In his tyme were rayſed greate ſtryfes and rumours for the election of the byſhop of Rome, but Lotharius ſwaged them.
            
            
               Lewis the ſeconde, the fourth Germane Emperoure.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſte .viij. C. lvi. toke Lewis the .ij. the ſonne of Lotharius the empyre: he reigned twenty yeares. He reſtrayned the Saracens cōmyng into ItalyLewis the. 
                        ••
                     . is buried at Milane. with a greate violence, and ouercame them. When he had reſtored peace again in Italy, he died, and is buried at Milane.
               Nicolaus the fyrſte the .cviij. byſhop of Rome ſucceded Benedictus the .iij.
               Adrianus the .ij. choſen of the prieſtes and common people, ſucceded Nicolaus.
               Iohannes the .ix. was made the .cx. byſhop after

Idrianus. The ſame by a conſpiracy made wyth theThe diſloyalte of the byſhop of Ro. in tranſferryng the empyre to Frenchemen. kynges of Gallia or Fraunce, endeuoured to tranſferre the maieſty of the empyre from the Germanes vpon Charles the balde, afterward vpō Lewis the ſtammerer his ſonne: but the Germanes kept the empyre par force, whiche thynge we ſhall ſaye afterwarde. In the meane ſeaſon that the byſhop goeth aboute this, was he taken, but beyng eſcaped, he fled into Fraunce to Lewis the ſtammerer.
            
            
               Charles the bald of Fraunce.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſte, viij. C. lxxvj. cameCharles the balde. Charles the balde at Rome, and by the ayde of the byſhop of Rome Iohannes the .ix. was made Emperoure. Charles the balde was Lotharius brother, ſonne to Lewis the gentle, whoſe part in deuydyng became Fraunce or Gallia. Now went the byſhop of Rome about, to tranſferre the maieſty of the Empyre from the Germanes, vnto the Frenchemen, but that the ſonnes of Lewis woulde not ſuff
                     •
                  e the Germanes. Which thyng when Charles the balde had herde, he threatened to bryng ſo many hooſtes of enemies ouer the Rene, that the horſes drynkyng vp the Rene, the hooſt ſhould go thorow it drye ſhodde. O the ouerfolyſh maners of theThe French 
                        〈…〉
                     nings Frenchemen. But they met hym at Colen with fyfty thouſand, where he was ouerthrowen of the two ſonnes of Lewis the Germane, not farre from A
                     •
                  
                  b
                     •••
                  ach.
               The next yeare after went Charles the balde in to Italy, where the two coſins the ſonnes of Lewis

folowed hym. As he herde this, he was taken with a diſeaſe of a ſoden feare, and died. Yet in the meaneThe death of Charles the balde. ſeaſon perſyſted byſhop Iohannes in tranſferryng of the empyre, and willed the ſonne of Charles the balde to ſuccede in his fathers place. Wherfore he was taken at Rome of the Germane legates, and ſuch as were of their partes: but eſcapyng their handes, he fled to the Frenche kyng, where he made Lewis the ſtammerer the ſonne of Charles the balde Emperoure. This Lewis lyued nomore but twoo yeares after hys fathers deceaſſe. And of this wyſe was this earneſt couetyng come to an euell ende at the laſt for the Frenchemen, and alſo was the byſhop fruſtrate of his falſe engines.
            
            
               Charles the groſſe, the fyft Germane Emperoure.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſte .viij. C. lxxxi. came theCharles the groſſe. empyre agayne to the Germanes. For the Saracens commyng agayne into Italy, and ſpoylyng all thynges, dyd the Romanes call their byſhop agayne out of Fraunce: for the Italians had nede of ſuccourſe agaynſte the Saracens. And when the kyng of Fraunce was deade, ſeyng the kynges heyre was not yet of ful age, there were rayſed euery where great diſſencions and debates in Fraunce, for the gouernaunce of the realme vntyll the kynges ſonne were come to age. Wherefore the byſhop of Rome conſtrayned by this neceſſitie required ayde of the Germanes to reſcue Italy out the brunt of daungers. Then came Charles the groſſe ſonne to Lewis the Germane into Italy, &

driuing out the Saracens, toke the emperial crown the yeare of Chriſte .viii. C. lxxxij. Charles reigned after that he was crowned, ix. yeares. About thisThe Normā
                     des fell into Fraunce. tyme the Normandes fallyng into Fraunce, dyd ſo much harme euery where, that the Frenchmen wer compelled to require ayde of the Germanes: and by conſent of euery man, was Charles made kyng of Fraunce, and by thys occaſion gott Charles the Groſſe the realme both of Germany and Gallia or Fraunce agayne. But theſe kyngdomes were ſeparated againe not long after. Charles beynge wery of the warre in Morauia or Meerhen by reaſon of the greate combraunce and trauail, forſakyng the empire, he made Arnolfus his brothers ſonne Emperour, who pointed Charles out of the empire ſo muche reuenues, ſo long as he lyued, as was ſufficient for a kynges ſtate.
            
            
               Arnolfus the .vi. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  ARnolfus the ſonne of Carolomanus, dukeArnolphus Emperoure. of Baierlande, Schwaben and of the Frā
                  kes y• coſin of Charles the third, was ſubſtitute by hym in the empyre the year
                     •
                   of Chriſte .viij. C. xci. he reigned .xij. yeares. Fyrſt ouercame he the Morauians or Meerhlanders, after that the Normandes, whiche beyng now returned out of Fraunce, came vntyll the Rene, and commyng to Worms, put the byſhop of Mentz to execution. As the Normandes, were vanquyſhed by theThe Normā
                     des are ouercome. Emperours, at the laſt became they Chriſten. Afterwarde when V
                     •
                  ido duke of Spoleta by a rumor was made Emperoure, Arnolfus goyng into Italy, toke in Rome by greate force, and was crowned

of Formoſus the byſhop of Rome. Wherfore whē he had taken in Italy agayne, V
                     •
                  ido was bannyſhed. He reſtored againe alſo the duchy of Bourgondie to the Germane dominion.
               Marinus the .C. xi. byſh. of Ro. ſucceded Ioānes Adrianus the .iij. was byſhop after Marinus.
               Stephanus the fift C. xiij. byſh. ſucceded Adrianꝰ Formoſus ſucceded Stephanus.
               At that tyme was again a great debate at Rome for the election: For Sergius was alſo created byſhop: but the fauoures of Formoſus driuynge out Sergius, Formoſus ſent for the Emperoure into Italy, that he myght kepe ſtyll the byſhopryke by that meanes. For Sergius was fled into Fraunce, and went about to obteine the byſhopryke by the aide of Frenchemen. Howbeit after certaine yeares, when Formoſus was deade, he was made byſhop, & vſed more tyranny and preſumpcion, then he ought to haue done, accordyng to byſhoply mekeneſſe. HeAn example of moſte notable cruelneſſe of a Rompſh byſhop. Sergius vnlearned and a tyraunt. cauſed to digge vp the deade carcas of Formoſus, to degrate it, and beheadyng it caſt it into the floude Tyber with moſte ſhame. It is written that this Sergius was very vnlearned & vnmanered, which thinge his cruell dedes declare plaine ynough.
               Bonifacius the .vi. the .C. xv. byſhop ſucceded Formoſus.
               Stephanꝰ the .vi. folowed Bonifacius. Thiſſame diſanulled & condempned al Formoſus ordinaūces.
               Romanus the .C. xvi. byſhop of Rome ſucceded Stephanus.
               Theodorus the .ij. ſucceded Romanus.
               Ioānes y• .x. the C.xix. byſh. of Ro. ſucceded The
                     •
                  
                  
dorus thiſſame alowed agayne the ordinaunces of Formoſus, whiche Stephanus the ſyxte had diſanulled.
               Benedictus the .iiij. was the .C. xx. byſhop after Iohannes.
               Leo the .v. was after Benedictus the .C. xxi. byſhop of Rome. The ſame was taken pryſoner by Chriſtophorus.
               Chriſtophorus was byſhop after Leo. Thiſſame was taken by Sergius.
               After Chriſtophorus was Sergius the .iij. made the .C. xxiij. byſhop of Rome. The ſame cauſed the deade coarſe of Formoſus be dygged vp agayneThe tyranny of y• byſhops of Rome. and beheaded. It is a thynge full of drede ether to reade or to reherſe byſhops of Rome to haue vſed ſo great tyranny among themſelues. And it could not be that any regarde could be had of Chriſten godlyneſſe: let no man then marueill in the meane ſeaſon, yf any abuſes and wycked opinions be broken into the churche in the meane whyle.
            
            
               Lewis the .iii. the .vii. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſte .ix. C. iij. Lewis theLewis the. iij ſonne of Arnolphus, being ſubſtitute in the empyre of hys father, reygned ten yeares. It is no where redde that he was crowned.The Hungarians way
                        •
                     t Germany & 
                        •••
                     ly. For when Arnolphus was deade, the Hungarians inuaded Germany wyth greate violence. Agaynſt them dyd the good prince Lewis the Emperoure ſet hymſelfe, and dyd greuouſly diſconfite them by the ryuer Lyeus, but he was afterwarde ouercome of them lykewyſe. Then the Hungarians

beynge vanquiſhers, dyd euery where muche myſchefe and harme to the Schwoben, Frankes, Baierlanders and them of Oſtenryche. Slayeng euery one wythoute regarde or mercy, burnynge temples, cityes, tounes, villages, yee euery thynge.
               Afterwarde entrynge into Italy, vſed lyke crueltye.Berengarius prince of Foroiulium. At that tyme was Berengarius prince of Foroiulium, which gatherynge a great army aganyſt the Hungaryans, although ſomtyme he fought vn luckelye: yet gat he hym ſuch a good name by thys ſettynge forth, that afterwarde he wylled to be called Emperoure.
            
            
               Cunradus the .i. the viij Germane Emperoure.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſt .ix. C. xii. was ConradusConrade the fyrſte▪
                   made Emperoure, he raigned ſeuen yeares. But he was not crowned of the Romyſh byſhop. He was Lewis the .iii. brothers ſonne: he was duke of the Frankes, and the laſte of the mooſte noble poſteritye of Charles the great, whiche ye maye geſſe by the order of the genealogye wrytten hereafter: the whych I haue added therfore, yt it maye be knowen, to how great chaunces, and how many alteracions the kingdom of the Germanes hath ben putt, the which thynge can not be red wythoute greate wonderynge at. For that maye be ſene euerye where that greate kyngdomes floryſhe a certayne ſpace in the world, but at the laſte they be weakened, and toſſed wyth troublous commocions: howbeit in the meane ſeaſon be they ſo kept by Godes prouidence, that they

do not wholy peryſh. Lewis the thyrd left no ſo
                     ••
                   after hym: and therefore ſtroue the Frankes and Sacons together, to make Otho duke of SaxonyOtho duke of Saxony. Emperour: but the good prince withſtode the ſame not wylling that to the mooſt noble ſtocke of Charles, ſhulde happen ſuche a reproch. Therefore counſelled he to make Conradus duke of the Frankes Emperoure. Of thys wyſe ſucceded Conradus in the empyre, but Otho was in more greater authority, & whyle Conradus lyued, he diſpatched more buſyneſſes alſo: yet in the meane time ſhewed he great loyalty and honeſtye toward Conradus the Emperoure.
               But in the meane tyme vſurped BerengariusBerengarius duke of Foroiulium the name of the Emperoure in Italy, and enticed the Hungarians, that they ſhuld ſpoyle Germany agayn: but Conradus ouer came thoſe, by the ayde of Otho.
               But whan Otho was deade; Conradus the Emperour fearyng happely, leſt the ſon of Otho HenryHenry the Fouler. The occaſiō of the warre betwene the Frankes & Saxons. the Fouler ſhoulde growe ouermuche in power: therefore wythdrue he parte of thoſe thynges, whyche before he had graunted hys father Otho. And whan Henry toke it greueouſlye, the Empetoure endeuoured to ſlaye him by an intrap, and to bryng thys to paſſe, was ye byſhop of Mentz made out: But the intrap was diſcloſed. Than was Henry very greuouſly moued▪ & went home, and toke from the byſhop of Mentz all that was hys dominion in the land of Turyngen and Heſſe. But hereof roſe a greate warre betwene the Frankes and Saxons.
               
                  But whan Conradus was a dyenge, callyng to him his brother Eberardus, he commaunded hym to brynge the Emperyall croune to Henry duke of Saxony: for him he iudged beſt worthy to gouern the Empyre. He admonyſhed prince Eberarde alſo with al diligence, to make an ende of the warr that he had taken in hande wyth Henry duke of Saxonye,The empyre is tranſlated to the Saxōs leſt the Frankes that were yet alyue, ſhuld vtterly he roated out and peryſh. For he marked wel that God proſpered Henryes affayres. To thys counſell dyd duke Eberardus agre willyngly, and bringyng the crowne to Henry, and makyng peace on both ſydes, he was afterward loyall to Henry. And by thys occaſyon came it to paſſe, that the empyre was remoued from the ſucceſſors of Charles the greate to the Saxons.
               
                  
                     The genealogye of Charles the greate.
                     Charles the great Emperoure.
                     Lewis te Gentle, whoſe ſonnes were theſe thre.

                           Lewis the German he had Almany, & ſubdued y• Bohemes, his ſonnes wer: Lewis, charles y• groſſe, which toke y• empyre frō Charles the bald and Carolomanus the ſonne of Carolomanꝰ was Arnolphus, who raygned after Charles the Groſſe.
                           Lotharius y• Emperoure. He had Loraine & Italy, his ſonn was Lewis the ſeconde the .iiij. Germane Emperoure. He droue y• Saracens out of Italy. After him woulde the biſhop of Rome tranſferre the empyre to the Frenchmen vpon Charles y• balde, but the ſonnes of Lewis y• Germane reſtored the empyre agayn to ye Germanes▪
                           
                           Charles the balde kynge of Gallia or Fraunce: his ſonne was Lewis the ſtammerer kynge of Fraunce.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  The ſonnes of Arnolfus were 

                     Lewis the .iij. Emperoure.
                     Conradus, and hys ſonnes were

                           Eberardus, whoſe ſucceſſors are the princes of ye Frankes.
                           Conradus the laſt emperoure of this linage
                        
                     
                  
               
               Not longe after was the kyngdome of Fraunce alſo tranſlated from the poſteritye of Charles the greate. So lytle doeth anye thynge remayne euer ſted faſt in his eſtate among men, ſo that the generacions of great prynces, do now floriſh in the height, now agayne layde in the duſte to be weakened and diſcouraged.
               Anaſtaſius the .iij. the .cxxiiij. byſhop of Rome, ſucceded Sergius.
               Lando was made the .xxv. byſhop after Anaſtaſius.
               Ioannes the .xi. ſucceded Lando.
            
            
               Henry the .i. ſurnamed the Fouler, the ix. Emperoure of Germany.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſt .ix. C. xx. was Henry the fyrſte, ſurnamed the Fouler,
                     
                        〈…〉
                      the 
                        〈…〉
                     . duke of Saxon made Emperoure, he raygned ſeuenten yeares. He was not crouned of the biſhop of Rome, nether went into Italy, though twayne toke vpon them the name of the Emperoure, and by vproure rayſynge battayll fought now and than a great felde.

For Henry had buſyneſſe more than ynough in Germany, which the good prince apeaced wyth greate diligence, accordinge to hys ſyngular policye, and endeuored to make it more excellent.
               Surely the kyngdome of Germany dyd neuerThe kyngdome of germany neuer wanted vproures. in a maner want vprouriſh commotions, ther was almoſt neuer an Emperour choſen, wythout the ſedition of ſome princes, which went aboute to take vpon them the name of the Emperoure. Yet was God alway wyth thoſe Emperours, that were du
                  
                     •
                  lly called, detended the authoritye of the lawfull empyre, and the ſedicious were puniſhed. Arnolde duke of Bayerlande ſet him ſelfe wyth hurtfull enterpryſe agaynſt Henry, who recountred ye Baiers wyth appointed armyes: but behauynge himſelfe not as an enemy, he requyred to ſpeake wyth duke Arnolde familiarly. He reaſoned wyth hym, & earneſtlyThe reaſonyng of Henry the Emperour wyth Arnold duke of Bayerland. admonyſhed hym, that the maieſty of the empyre, is geuen of God: yf it were ſo, that he wer choſen Emperoure by the conſente of other prynces, than wolde he frely geue place, and be ready y• fyrſt that ſhuld ſubmitte themſelues. Duke Arnold ſhewed theſe thynges to his counſel, which anſwered: That it were euident that Salomons ſayenge of wyſedome were moſt true, which is: By me do kynges rule. And for aſmuch as it appeareth euidently ynough that Henry is endued with wiſedome and gentleneſſe, it is no dout, but God doth aſſiſte him: he ſhuld therfore thenceforth leaue of from his enterpryſe, nether to go about any thing againſt Henry. Wherefore duke Arnolde ceaſed, & obeied frely without ye ſlaughter of any of his men. Who I pray

you wold not ſaye, y• theſe Germane princes were no Barbaryans, and that they excelled in pryncely wiſedome & high gentleneſſe? This is alſo wryttē: that. S. Vdalryck had a viſty on of the duke of Baierland,The viſion of S. Vdalr
                        ••
                     ke. which he obſerued: For it was ſhewed him by God, that the duke had a ſwearde wythout hyltes or handel: wherby was ſignified, that the duke ſhulde not vſe the ſweard, that is, that he ſhuld not retayn the empyre. Wherefore he admonyſhed the duke to do nothyng vnaduiſedly.
               After that dyd Henry take Brandenburge: andThe d
                        ••
                     es 
                        〈…〉
                      by Henry the fyrſte. the Vandales beyng ſubdued, they receaued the Chriſten fayth vntyl the ſee.
               He beſieged the city Praga, and brought the Bohemes to the Empyre.
               After that vanquyſhed he fourty thouſand Hungaryans by Merſburge, whereby he gatte hym a great renowme and drede by the ſtraunge nacions and gat tranquillitye to al Germanye: He reſtored the contry of Lothring or Lorayn to the kingdom of Germany, and gatt the ſpeare that Chriſte was pearſed through of Rudolphe kyng of Burgundy: the ſame was Conſtantinus wont to haue.
               Henry the Fowler beynge now neare to his death, made his ſonn Othe ſucceder in ye empyre after him, leſt any ſtryfe ſhuld happen in the empyre after hys death, concernyng the poſſeſſion of it.
               Leo the .vi. ſucceded the .C. xxvii. byſhop after Ioannes the .xi.
               Stephanus ſucceded Leo.
               After Stephanus was Ioannes the .xii. the. C xxix. byſhop.
               
                  Leo the .vii. ſucceded Ioannes the. xii
               Stephanus the▪ viij. a Germane the .C. xxxi▪ byſhop ſucceded Leo.
            
            
               Otho the .i. the .x. Germane. Emperoure.
               
                  OTho the fyrſt the ſonne of Henry the FowlerOtho the fyrſt. beganne hys domynyon the yeare of Chriſt .ix. C. xxxviii. and raigned .xxxvi. yeares. He toke the emperyall crowne at Aken of the byſhop of Mentz. In the begynnyngeThe vpronres rayſed againſt Otho Eberardus the Palatine Giſelbert prince of Lotharing or Loraine▪
                   of Othes gouernaunce roſe thre greate and daungerous vproures at one tyme.
               The doers of the fyrſte vproure were Eberardus the Palatine, and Giſelbert prince of Lorain. Theſe (becauſe they were of the poſteritie and linage of Charles the greate,) affirmed, that the empyre came from the Saxons to the Frankes by right of ſucceſſion: and that ſuch enterpryſes myght ſeme to be more ryghtfull, they drew on their ſyde Henry the elder brother of Otho, vnder the pretence,Henry brother to Otho that by reaſon of the age, he oughte to gouerne the empyre, and not Otho.
               Thys warre wyth the counte Palatine Eberardus and duke Giſelbert laſted ſyxe yeares, and many feldes were foughtē in the mean ſeaſon. Herman duke of Scwaben, and Conradus duke of theHerman prince of Schwaben▪ Lonradus duke of the Frankes. Frankes toke the Emperours parte. This Conradus of Worms, called the wyſe, was coſyn to Eberardus. Theſe fought the laſt againſt ye enemies by Andernak, with a great camp, wherin Eberardus countye Palatine was ſlayne, and duke Giſelbert

in the flighte, was drowned in the Rene. It is a dreadfull example, wherein we may be aduertiſed,An example of 
                        •
                     eage
                     
                        〈…〉
                      alſo on greate 
                        〈…〉
                     . that the endeuoure of ſedition remayneth not vnreuenged, euen in greate princes alſo. But whether thys Eberardus be he, yt we haue ſayde of before to haue broughte the Emperyall crowne to Henry the Fowler, it is not ſpecifyed for a trueth. For the hyſtorye wryters of the Germanes, were groſſe and vnlearned men, ignoraunt of theſe thinges, whyche are neceſſary to be obſerued in wrytynge of hyſtoryes.
               But after thys victory, was not the ſtryfe yetThe ſeconde vp
                        •
                     ouce was wyth hys brother. alayed which Otho the emperoure had wyth Henry his brother, and beſyde that wyth the byſhop of Mentz: Henry was beſyeged at Merſburg: but he ſeynge that hys interpryſes were inuayne, and that hys defence beganne to be feble, he hymſelfe came knelynge to ye Emperoure, deſyryng pardon for his offence, was receaued to mercy by Otho: and not long after, the duke of Baier deceaſſynge wythout heyre male, Otho the Emperoure gaue hys brother Henry the duchy of Baierland. As for that Henry the Emperoure whyche is buryed at Bamberg, was thys Henryes ſonnes ſonne, as we ſhall ſhewe hereafter.
               Afterwarde was Mentz beſyeged and taken in by the Emperoure, and the byſhop taken alſo: but ſhortly after was he letten louſe agayn.
               The thyrde ryſynge agaynſte Otho was manyThe thyrde 
                        〈…〉
                      was by his owne 
                        〈…〉
                     . yeares after, by his owne ſon Ludolfe, by this occaſion: Otho had fyrſte a quene out of Englande called Edyth or Ide, which is buryed at magdeburg.

Of the ſame had he hys ſonne Ludolphe. After the ſame was deade toke he another quene of the Burgundyon bloud, which thynge Ludolphe dyd not alow. But what happened farther, that is vnknowen. For the Germane hyſtory wryters dyd in maner expreſſe no thynge wholye by theyr occaſyons and circumſtaunces: nether ruely could they do it, ſeyng they were monkes, lyuynge in priuate idelneſſe▪ beynge ſomtyme farre from all thynges, that be done in gouernynge the commune welthe: I paſſe ouer that they were to ſ
                     •
                  outhfull alſo to ſearch & enquyre the cauſes and occaſions of great matters of other men, as ye duety of a true hyſtory wryter is to do. Yet do they make mencion of thisSalfelde 
                        •
                      deadly place for counſels. that Ludolfus kept an aſſemble at Salfelde, & to haue conſpyred agaynſt hys father: and that place Salfeld, is called a deadly place for counſels. Ludolfus had neuertheleſſe in the meane ſeaſon moſt great princes y• were partakers wyth hym in thys conſpiracy and counſel, among the which alſo was Conradus the wiſe duke of the Frankes. But in y• meane tyme that thys was in bruynge, was the father in Italy, who beſieged hys ſonne at Mentz ſoRegenſpurg ſone as he cameinto Germany: Ludolfe eſcapyng, fled vntyl Regenſpurge: but the father folowyng, beſyeged Regenſpurg alſo ſtraytly two moneths. In that ſyege dyed not a few men, among ye which was the chefe, Arnolde the yonger duke of Bayer. After hys deathe Ludolfe requyrynge peace frelye, came barefooted knelynge befoore hys father, and lyenge vpon the grounde, he deſyred pardon for hys treſpaſſe very humblye. Wherfore

the father toke hym to mercy, and a verye ſtronge peace was made.
               No Emperoure in a maner dyd diſpatche euer anye more greater and daungerous buſyneſſes than the Emperour Otho, ſo farr as I can marke. But in all them was he in the meane ſeaſon luckye, not wythout the incredible fauoure of God. For whyle he had theſe warres he ouercame the Bohemes, the Hungarians, and Frankes, beſyde that made he quyet the troublous ſtate of Italy, which thynge we ſhall brefely ſhewe.
               He vanquyſhed the Hungarians by AugſburgeThe Hungarians are vanquiſhed. neare the floude Lycus, and weakened he the ſtrenght of them ſo, that they durſte neuer after come into Germany. In thys battayll dyed Conrade
                     
                        •
                     . 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   the Wyſe, and. S. Udalricke byſhop of Auguſpurg was wyth the Emperoure in the hooſte.
               Moreouer whan Otho enuironned euery wherwith greate peryls, the Frenchmen truſted eaſely to bryng the empyre to them agayn: but here wasAn example that 
                        〈…〉
                      God 
                        〈…〉
                     . it founde in Otho, that it is inuayne for men to ſett themſelues agaynſte him, whome God fauoureth. Innumerable enemyes had compaſſed Otho about, the Bohemes, the Frankes, the Hungarians Italyans, the Frenchemen: but the power of all theſe, coulde not breake and oppreſſe the vertue of thys good prince. The Frenchemen threatened to brynge into Germanye ſo greate an hooſte, as neuer had ben ſene afore. Whereto it is reportedThe aunſwer of Otho to the Frenche
                        ••
                     s threaten 
                        •
                     y
                        •
                     
                     ges. Otho ſhuld haue aunſwered: That ſuch vayn mynaces became not wyſe princes, ſeyng it is euident, that ye victory & fortun of warr is in Goddes hand.

He aunſwered thys alſo: that he wolde brynge ſoStrawe hattes. many couered with ſtrawe hattes into Fraunce, as they neuer had ſene before: and therefore had all they that were in the hooſte ſtrawe hattes, whych hooſte he broughte vntyll parys. For Hugo princeHugo prince of Fraunce of Fraunce had taken the kynge his lorde priſoner, and entended to take to him Fraunce and the dignyty of the empyre. Thyſſame Hugo was taken ofLewis is reſtored agayn to the realme of Fraunce. Otho in the citye of Paris, and delyuerynge Lewis his brother in Lawe, reſtored him to y• realme of Fraunce agayne. For Gerberga the ſyſter of Otho was maryed to Lewys. Otho reſtored than to to the Germane empyre lowe Germanye, Lorain and Burgundye.
               The Hungaryans had many ſkyrmyſhes alſo in Italy, but ſome Emperoures before Othoes tyme were ſo occupied in Germany, that they could'not ayde Italy. Whan now the princes of Italy were dryuen to extreme neceſſity for to reſiſt the Hungarians, it happened that Berengarius prince of Foroiulium, gat hym a great wonderyng at his proweſſe, and afterwarde coueted the gouernaunce of whole Italy. And though other prynces dyd alſo ſtryue for the ſouerayntye of Italye, yet dyd Berengaryus, excellynge in power, kepe Italye tyll the thyrde heyre. The ſame toke vpon hym the tytle of Emperoure, and vſed greate crueltye in Italye. The Italyans requyred ayde and ſuccoureBerengarius peldeth hymſelfe to Otho. of Otho agaynſte hys tyrannye. Wherefore Otho goynge into Italye, he inuaded Lombardye, and gat it. Berengarius wyth yeldynge himſelfe frely, optained of Otho that grace, that he

ſhuld not wholy be dryuen out of Italy, but ſhould retayne a duchy to poſſeſſe. After twelue yeares was Otho called into Italy agayne, to defende or clayme the Italians wyth the clergye and byſhop of Rome, from the tyranny of Berengarius, which thynge he alſo dyd valyauntly. For whan he cameBerēgarius wyth hys ſonne are 
                        •
                     a
                     
                        •••
                      for their diſloyaltye. agayne into Italy, he toke Berengarius and hys ſonne Alberte, and banniſhed them for theyr diſloyaltye: the father wyth hys wyfe to Bamberge in Germany, wher they ſpent theyr liues alſo as outlawes: but the ſonne ſent he to Conſtantinople.
               Otho entrynge into Rome in thys ſettynge forth,Otho y• firſt made the 
                        〈◊〉
                      othe to the biſhop of Rome. was crow
                     •
                  ed of Ioannes the .xii. This Otho was the fyrſte Emperour that made an othe to ye biſhop of Rome, wherof the maner and tenor is in ye canon lawes, begynnynge: Tibidomino Ioanni .iii. & ce. After that is Otho come the ſecond tyme to Rome to rebuke Ioannes biſh. of Rome, becauſe he was accuſed of many fautes. Wherfore the biſhop knowynge himſelfe gyltye, fled for feare of Otho. And therfore was Leo the .viij. made biſhop in his ſteadThe 
                        ••••
                     es of the 
                        〈…〉
                     ppes of 
                        〈…〉
                     . But before that Otho went from Rome, Ioannes commynge to Rome, thruſt Leo out agayne: Leo fled to the Emperoure. But the mooſt wyſe Emperoure vſed greate policy, leſt he ſhoulde geue an occaſion of debate: He ſuffred Ioannes to vſe the biſhopryck, ſo longe as he lyued. But ſo ſone as he was deade, to take Leo as lawfully choſen biſhop: but the Romanes wolde not alowe it, whych refuſyage Leo, choſe another called Benedictus in ſpete of the Emperoure. Otho than returnynge, inuaded the poſſeſſyons of the Romyſhe

byſhops, and dyd much hurte. He beſyeged alſo the citye of Rome, vntyl the citheſins conſtrayned by famine & neceſſity, opened the gates frely to Otho. He than puttynge to death manye Romanes, and banny ſhinge the Conſuls, reſtored Leo: & whan he had apeaſed al thynges, returned into Germany, leadynge wyth hym Benedictus, who was kept at Hamborowe.
               Otho goynge the thyrde tyme to Rome, droue the Saracens and Grekes out of the farther coaſtes of Italy. Than choſynge Otho hys ſonne to be partener in the Empyre, bringyng hym wyth hym, commaunded to crowne hym, and cauſed the Emperour of Conſtantinoples doughter to be geuen hym in mariage. By all theſe thynges maye it eaſely be gathered, that this Otho was one alſo of theſe princes, which God hath now and than geuen to repayre the decayed ſtate of the worlde. For he ſet vp agayne the decayed empyre of Rome, and ſet all Europa in quiet: by hys ſuccour hath he defended whole Italy and Germany. He ſubdued the Hungarians and Frenchmen. To be ſhorte, he hath reſtored the maieſtye of the empyre to hys former bryghtneſſe, and ſet it in order: afterward dyed he at Quedelnburg in great quyetneſſe. It is writtenQuedelnburg. Who fande fyrſt the ſyluer Mines in Miſen. alſo, that he found fyrſt the ſyluer mines in Miſen. He gaue alſo muche good to the churche, to maynteine religion, and to promote the doctryne of godlyneſſe, to which intent he made alſo not a fewe byſhops, as at Magdeburg, Miſen, Brandenburg, Merſburg, and Ceitz.
               Martinus the .iij. was the .cxxxij. byſhop after Stephanus.
               
                  Agapetus the .ii. ſucceded Martinus.
               Ioannes the .xiii. the C. xxxiiij. biſhopp was after Agapetus. The ſame crowned Otho the fyrſt: afterwarde fled he from Rome, fearynge leſte for hys vnclenneſſe of lyfe, he ſhulde be caſte from the offyce by Otho.
               Leo the .viii. was choſen in Ioannes ſteade.
               But whan Ioannes was returned to Rome. Leo fled to the Emperour, but whan Ioānes was deade, was Leo reſtored agayne.
               Ioannes the .xiiii. and .C. xxxvi. biſhop ſucceded. Leo. Of hym was Otho the ſeconde crowned.
            
            
               Otho the ſeconde, the .xi. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſt .ix. C. lxxiiii. raygnedOtho the 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     ▪
                   Otho y• .ii. after hys fathers deceaſſe ten yeares: againſt him was an vprour rayſedHenry du
                        •
                     e of 
                        〈…〉
                     . alſo. For Henry duke of Baier hys coſyn coueted ye empyre. This Henry is not the brother of Otho the firſte, of whome is ſpoken before, which conſpiringe roſe agaynſt his brother Otho, and afterward reconciled again to his brother, gat the duchy of Baier. Thys fyrſt duke of Baier, that was of the Saxons bloude, dyed .xv. yeare before Otho. But thys fyrſte Henryes ſonne is the ſame whyche ſet hymſelfe agaynſte Otho the ſeconde: but Otho had ſoone tamed this newe enterpryſer.
               Afterwarde dyd the Frenchemen fall ſodenlye vpon the Emperoure at Aken, and he dyd ſearcely eſcape theyr intrap. But Otho repayring an army, went into Fraunce, and ſpoyled euery where vntyl

Paris, & conſtrained the Frenchmen to demaunde peace: whyche dyd than bynd them wyth an othe,The French men are ſubdued of Otho the ſecōd that they wold neuer claime Lorain any more.
               Whan he had ſet Germany at quyet, he went into Italy. There did he fight wyth the Grekes and Saracens in Apulia: but hys hooſt beyng vanquyſhed, he was taken by mariners, as he fled. But becauſeOtho the ſecond was taken by mariners. he was vnknowen to the mariners, by reaſon he could the greke language, nether was he taken for a Germane prince, he redemed himſelfe with an eaſy price, and comming to Rome, he gouerned the empyre as he dyd before. It is ſayd that the Italians poiſonned hym, for his rigoure that he vſed in the gouernaunce.
               Benedictus the .v. the .C. xxxvii. byſh of Rome was after Ioannes the .xiiii.
               Donus the .ii. ſucceded after Benedictus
               Bonifacius the .vii. the .C. xxxix. byſh. ſucceded Donus.
               Benedictus the vi. ſucceded Bonifacius. In his tyme became Otho the thyrde Emperour.
            
            
               Otho the .iii. the .xii. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſt .ix. C. lxxxiiij. raygned Otho the thyrd after hys fathers deceaſſe .xix. yeares. He was yonge, ſcarcely paſſed xii. yeres whan hys father dyed: wherefore Henry duke of Bayer, coſyn to thys Otho, cauſed him to be kept at Rome, and beganne agayne to vſurpe the Empyre. Some Italians counſeled to make Creſcentyus Emperoure, that the emperyall maieſtye myghte be broughte agayne to the Italyans.

But the Germane princes beynge loyall to theyrThe endeuoure and faythfulneſſe in keyyng the empyre▪
                   lorde, called the yonge Otho agayne from Henry, and made hym Emperoure wyth commune aſſent, whereto Benedictus the byſhop of Rome gaue his conſent alſo.
               The fyrſte warre that he hadde, was wyth the Frenchmen, whyche forgettynge theyr othe that they had made, inuaded Lorayne agayn, takynge in many cityes: but Otho dryuyng out the French men, kept Lotharyng or Lorayn.
               In the meane tyme a Romane prince, called Creſcentius, takyng vpon hym the name of an Emperoure, vſed great crueltye in Italy. Wherefore Otho commynge to Rome, enuyrouned wyth a greate army, and takyng Creſcentius, cutt of hys noſe and eares, ſet hym arſwarde vpon an aſſe, cauſedThe puniſhment of Creſcentius a Roman
                        •
                      Prynce for 
                        •••••
                     yng y• Emp
                        •••
                     
                   hym to be caryed about the city Rome to wonder at, and at the laſt to be hanged.
            
            
               Of the begynnynge and inſtitution of the Electors in Germany.
               
                  WHan Otho was nowe eyghte and twentye yeares olde he was endued wyth ſo ready wytt, that for hys ſyngularOtho the iij. called the Worldes wonders▪
                   wyſedome, he was called the Worldes wonders. Beſyde that knewe the Saxons readye wytted and valyaunt men, the deceatfull traynes of the Frenchmen. Wherfore whan they perceaued that great and dangerous commotions were rayſed by the. Ro. byſhoppes, bothe agaynſte Emperoures, and alſo in the commune welth, Otho choſe Bruno

a Saxon his coſin to be byſhop of Rome, who wasBruno a Saxon was made byſh. of Ro. called Gregorius the fyft after that he had the byſhopryke. Of hym was Otho the thirde crowned. Beſyde this when the wyſe prince conſydered that the Frenchemen and Italians raged euer to tranſfer the emperiall maieſtie from the Germanes, and that among the aunceters of him was now and thā ſtrife alſo for the election: and that in the meane tyme is ſo greatly requiſite a myghty monarche to the Chriſtiantie, for to defende the biſhop of Rome, and libertie of Italy: yea to maynteyne concorde of religion in whole Europa. But that the ſame monarchy could not laſt long and be ſtable euermore, without the ayde and ſuccourſe of ſome peculiar & moſte mighty nacion. Therfore with the aſſiſtence and ayde of Gregorius the byſhop of Rome (who, becauſe he was a Germane, did lyghtely conſent to ſo neceſſary a thyng,) dyd make the ordinaunce of the princes Electors for to choyſe an Emperoure. And that concorde might be had in the election becauſe of religion, among the prelates ſpirituall and princes temporall the aucthoritie to choſe an Emperoure is committed to ſeuen Germane princes,To what pr
                        •
                     
                     ces the election is committed. the Archebyſhops of Mentz, Colen and Trier. To theſe are ioyned the prince of Boheme: (for at that tyme had Bohemy yet no kynge,) the County Palatine of the Rene, the duke of Saxony, & the Marques of Brandenborowe. I maruayll verely why ſo hygh a dignitie is not bequyethed to other princes, which at that tyme were farre more puyſſaunt, as namely to the dukes of Baier, of Schwaben & of the Frankes, and ſpecially the duke of Baier, who

was nearer of kynred to Otho, than the other, and more greater of domynyon. For he had ſubiect to hym Bayerland and Eaſtenryche, vntyll Aglar or Aquitanya, the whyche Henry brother to Otho the fyrſte had wonne. The duke alſo of Schwaben was neare kynſman to Otho the Emperoure. For whan Herman duke of Schwaben vnder Otho the fyrſte had no heyre male, He gaue his doughter in maryage to Ludolfe ſonne to Otho the fyrſte, agaynſte whome hys father Otho dyd warre for hys rebellyon. Of this Ludolfe come the dukes of Schwaben. Therefore maye it be maruayll, what was the occaſion to orden that inſtitutyon of prynces Electors. The Germane hiſtory wryters ſeme to be ſo voyde of all iudgment, that it may of goodIhon Stabius an aſtronomer. ryght lothe any man to reade them. Ihon Stabius the aſtronomer of Maximylyan ſhewed me oft, that Maximilian was went to complayn vpon the rudeneſſe of the Germane hyſtorye wryters, thatThe Germane hiſtory wryters vnlearned. they dyd not only wryte the dedes of ſo noble and wyſe princes, that God had ſent wythoute order: but dyd alſo corrupte them wyth euell wrytynge. And he had commaunded to compile in a ſhort Cronycle orderly the mooſte notableſte thynges out of all hyſtorye wryters: whych thynge doutleſſe had ben done, yf the mooſte wyſe Emperour had ether lyued longer, or had not left it by reaſon of the care of more weyghty matters.
               As for me, (though I might ſeme to be raſh, yf I allege or ſhewe what me thynketh,) yet wyll I declare what geſſynge I haue, wherewyth I maye ſhewe ſome certayntye of ſo great a thynge. Bohemy

no doute is come in the election for his cōmodyousWhy Bohemy hath the authorytye of eleccion. Saxony. ſytuatyon, & becauſe yt is fenſed round about.
               To the Saxons hath Otho that was a prince of the Saxons bloud worthely geuen that honour: for at that time was the ſame duchy moſt puiſſaunt.
               The princes of Saxony kept Brandenburg atBrandenburg. that time alſo, the Emperours kinſmen: and it may eaſely be gathered, that Otho dyd fauer thoſe contryes more, than other duchyes.
               I ſuppoſe that to y• countyſhyp of Palatyn wasThe countyſhyp of Palatyne. geuen thys prerogatiue, more than other princes dominions, for none other cauſe, than that to Charles the greateſt poſterity myght rebound thys honor, ſo that it ſhuld be not only by the Saxons, but part thereof ſhuld alſo be ſent ouer to the Frankes: for the countyes of Palatine were at that tyme of the kynred of Charles the greate.
               What prayſes thys ordinaunce of the princes ElectorsWhat profite is by the princes Electors. is worthye, that can I not now ſufficiently declare according to the worthyneſſe of it: the dede proueth yt ſelfe what profite it hath broughte. For by thys ordinaunce hath the Empyre remained in Germany aboue fyue hundreth yeares. Beſydes that is nothyng ſo good nor wholſome in mens eſtates, than thoſe counſels and ordinaunces, whereby is auoided the occaſion to alter of tymes the gouernaunce of Empyres: whyche thynge by the goodneſſe of God is done by thys inſtytutyon of the Electors. By thys meanes is yt come to paſſe, that the Empyre is prouyded, that the traynefull and ſecrete conſpiracyons of the byſhoppe of Rome and Frenche kynge dyd not proſpere,

whiche endeuoured oft to tranſferre the hyghneſſe of the Empyre from the Germanes to the Frenchemen. The Emperoure alſo hath more ſauegarde or defence of the princes, when he is choſen by their cō
                  ſent: and leſſe ſtryfe can ryſe for the election, when the deſyres of the chefe princes conſent to one. Beſydes this alſo, forſomuche as the maieſtie of the empyre is remitted to many princes together, it is to be truſted that the ſtate of the empire ſhalbe both ſtronger and more durable, then if it dyd ſtycke by the ſucceſſion of one bloude. All theſe thynges make for that purpoſe, that no great ſtryfe come by reſon of the election or choyſyng: and alſo that the heade of the Weſt empyre be in ſome certayn place, and that becauſe the concorde and tranquillitie of the religion in all this Weſt kyngdome, be maynteined vnder one certayne heade. The Athenians in tymes paſt auaunced their ordinaunce of the Areopagites with great prayſes: lykewyſe dyd the Lacedemonians their ſtatutes of the Ephories: and that worthely, for by them remained their common welthes ſtedfaſte a great while. But forſoth this in ſtituciō of Otho made of the Electors, as it is farre more profitable, ſo it is worthy muche more prayſe and auauncement: as by the whiche ſtableneſſe of the empyre and conſtant religion are mainteyned many yeares, not onely in one or other citie or contrey, but in the whole Weſte. And the princes Electors ought worthely make muche of this their prerogatiue. Firſt becauſe of the whole Chriſtiantie, that by them is this hyghneſſe ſet aparte. For they are as a ſtedfaſt heade, wherewith foreuer all this

Weſte kyngdome is kept and bounde together: for they maye be called the very route, out of the which emperoures muſt euermore growe. Moreouer alſo can no hygher dignitie happen them in this lyfe then that worthyneſſe is geuen them lawfully, whiche paſſeth farre the hyghneſſe of kynges and princes. Then muſt this ordinaunce be eſtemed a hygh gyft and an ordinaunce of God: Wherefore alſo it muſt greatly be made of and kept without blemyſh, leaſt any occaſion bee geuen to diſſolue ſo Godly and wholſome, yee and moſte fayre harmony in this lyfe. For by them ſtandeth the ſumme of the Romane Empyre. And therfore whan the Electours are ſeuered, it is neceſſary that the kyngdome or empyre fayle, and that the laſt iudgement is at hande. For the worlde ſhall ende vnder thys empyre. It is written that the inſtitucion of the Electours was.

                     The yeare of Chriſte .M. ij.
                     The yeare of the worlde .iiij. M. ix. C. xlvi.
                     The yeare of Rome .M. vii. C. lij.
                     The yeare after Charles the greate his coronacion .ij. C. i.
                  
               
               When this ordinaunce was made, the Italians made diuers vproures againſt Otho the .iij. inſomuche that he could not be ſafe at Rome: and when he went towarde Germany, Creſcentius wyfe ſendingOtho the. i
                        •
                     
                     ▪ was poyſoſoned. hym poyſon by an intrap, was kylled the thirtyeth yeare of his age.
               Iohannes the .xv. the cxli. byſhop of Rome ſucceded Bonifacius the .vi. He was taken by Bonifaciꝰ father, becauſe he wold not conſent to Bonifacius election.
               
                  Iohannes the .xvi. ſucceded Iohannes the .xv.
               Iohannes the .xvii. ſucceded Iohannes .xvi. Beynge taken and dryuen out by Creſcentius, he 
                     •
                  ought ayde of Otho.
               After Iohannes the .xvii. was Gregorius the fyft made the .C. xliiij. byſhop of Rome a prince of the Saxons bloude, and that for the ſame cauſe, as we haue declared a lytle before. For the Italians deuiſed now and then newe thynges agaynſte the Emperours, nether dyd they euer want matters of vproures. Therefore ſemed it a neceſſary thyng to maynteyne common quietneſſe that a Germane ſhoulde be made byſhop of Rome. But yet in the meane ſeaſon was Gregorius driuen out by the Italians, ordeinyng in hys ſteade one Iohannes: but Otho returning to Rome with a great power, reſtored Gregorius kynſman againe.Sylueſter byſhop of Ro a w
                        •
                     other with 
                        •••
                     ll ſpectes.
               
               Silueſter the .ij. ſucceded Gregorius the .v. It is ſayde he was an Inchaunter.
               After this ſorcerer was Iohannes the .xviii. made the .C. xlvi. byſhop of Rome. In hys tyme appeared towarde the South a comete of a dredefull ſyght, the whiche folowed no leſſe hunger then peſtilence.
            
            
               Hrnry the .ij. ſurnamed the Haultynge, the. 
                     •
                  iij. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſt .M. iij. was HenryHenry the .ij. the ſecōd of that name duke of Bayer choſen Emperoure. We haue ſayd before that Otho the fyrſt gaue his brother Henry the duchy of Baier. But I reken this Emperoure Henry was

the brothers ſonne of that Henry. For Hēry Otho the firſt brother died .xv. yeares before Otho deceaſed. The Germane hiſtory writers were ſo negligent, that out of their writynges I can not ſaye for a certayne, whether he were that Henries ſonne, or his brothers ſonne. Truely that is wonder that the chanons of Bamberg knewe not certaynly the genealogy of their founder.
               This Henry was the firſt that was choſen Emperoure by the Electors, and raygned .xxii. yeres. He was famous by wyſdome and noble victories, he made many and greate warres with maruaylous luckineſſe. Fyrſt making werry y• Bohemes &The dedes of Henry the .ij. Vandalies wyth warre, he ſubdued and made thē tributaries to hym. He beſyeged Metz and Gaunt: he wanne alſo Lorain and Flaunders. He 
                     •
                  ought in Italy agaynſt the Saracens, and droue them out of Italy. Then was he crouned victoriouſly at Rome by Benedictus the ſeuēth. He brought the Hungaryans to the Chriſten fayth, and gaueSteuen kyng of the Hungarians. to Steuen the Hungarian kyng his ſyſter in mariage. Before his death optayned he of the Electors lawfully, that Cunradus the .ij. of that name a Franke, ſhould ſuccede hym in the empyre. He foū
                  ded the byſhopryck of Bamberge, and is buryed there.
               Iohannes the .xix. the .C.xlvii. byſhop ſucceded Iohannes the .xviii.
               Sergius the .C.xlviii. biſh. of Ro. ſucceded Ioh.
               Benedictus the .vii. folowed Sergius. Of hym was Henry the Emperoure crowned.
               Iohannes the .xx. the .cl. byſhop of Rome ſucceded

Bedictus. Of hym was Cunradus crowned▪
               
            
            
               Cunradus the .ij. the .xiiij. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  THe yere of Chriſte .M. xxv. was CunradusCunradus y• ſecond. a Franck choſen Emperoure, who dwelt in the Limburg caſtell by the citie Spire, and gouerned the empyre fyftene yeares. But in the begynnyng of hys reigne when he perceaued all thynges in a rumour euery where, he brought to paſſe that hys ſonne ſhould be choſen a party ruler with hym, leſt when he were gone in to Italy, the ſubiectes in Germany ſhoulde make a rumour without a certayn heade.
               Erneſtus duke of Schwaben and the Catuli: forErneſtus duke of Schwaben the Catuly were alſo lordes in Schwaben. Theſe (I ſaye) were rebelles to the Emperoure: but he dyd ſo aſſuage them, that they dyd ſtrayghtwaye obeye frely. From thence went he into Hungary, and redreſſed that alſo. He toke Bourgundy and Liege or Ludich, he toke the realme of Orleaunce agayne, and gouerned it vnder his dominion. Afterwarde going into Italy, he beſieged Milan, and commyng to Rome, he was crowned of Iohannes the .xx. The Romanes about that tyme ryſynge agaynſt Cunradus, were fearcely ſlayen of the Emperours men: But the Romane affaires were apeaced. In the meane tyme whyles this was done in Italy, Erneſtus duke of Schwaben, rayſed a newe commotion wherfore Cunradus in hys returne droue hym awaye, and pearſed hym through. Cunradus gaue the duchy to Herman hys brother.

This Cunradus made many lawes, which are yet now a daies. Vnder this Emperoure, was a couuſaill kept at Tribur by Ment
                     •
                  . He builded wyth great coſtes the Churche of Spire, wherein he is buried with his quene Giſela.
               Greate prayſes are of this Giſela. She was aGiſela a quene of Bourgundy. quene of Bourgundy, of Charles the greates poſte ritie. Her firſt huſbande was Erneſtus duke of Schwaben, of whom ſhe had two chyldren: Erneſtus that was driuen out, and Herman: afterward was ſhe wedded to Cunradus the Emperoure.
               Here do the writers make the firſt menciō of theThe firſt mē
                     cion of y• marqueſhyp in Eaſteuriche. marqueſhyp in Eaſtenriche, whiche at that tyme poſſeſſed Albert duke of Schwaben, brother to Erneſtus the elder. Nether was Eaſtenryche yet at that time a duchy, but the Schwaben kept it, which had taken it from the Hungarians by ſtrong hand.The begynnyng of the erldome of Thuryngen and whence y• lordes therof be. Lewis the Bearded.
               
               The Erldome alſo of Thuryngen beganne in the tyme of thys Cunradus: For Lewis the Bearded of the lynage of Charles the greate was coſin to Giſela. The ſame becauſe he had longe bene conuerſaunt in the courte of the Emperoure, and had bene diligent in many thynges, was made Earle of Thuringen. And by this meanes haue the Lordes of Thuringen their ofſprynge of Charles the greates bloude.
               Benedictus the .vij. was made the .C.li. byſhop of Rome after Iohannes the .xx. who beynge driuen out, one Sylueſter bought the byſhoprycke with money. Therefore Benedictus beyng returned, to the intent he myght rayſe factions or commocions agaynſt Sylueſter, he ſolde hys ryght of

the byſhoprycke to one that was the thirde, called Gregorius the .vi. And ſo did Benedictus geue place to hym: but Sylueſter woulde contrarywyſeThre biſhops of Rome ſtronyng for the 
                        〈…〉
                      depoſed defende hys ryght againſt Gregorius. This controuerſye dyd compell the Emperoure Henry the black to come to Rome, who dyd worthely depoſe thoſe thre monſters from the byſhoprycke, and ordeined in ſteade of them one Syndeger byſhop of Bamberg, who was called Clemens the .ii. the .clii byſhop, of whom Henry the blacke was crowned.
               About this time began the name of Cardinals toWhen 
                        •
                      Cardinals began 
                        〈◊〉
                     . be vſed: whereby it may be ſuppoſed, that this ſame dignitie in the church, was not elder.
               But for ſomuche as oftymes happened moſte heuy contencions and ſtryfes, of the diuerſitie of wylles in makynge of the byſhop of Rome, Henry the Blacke made an ordinaunce, that thenceforth no byſhop of Rome ſhould be choſen, without the conſent of the Emperour & alſo his confirmacion. This ordinaunce was afterwarde ſore foughten againſt of the byſhops of Rome, inſomuche alſo, that moſt haynous warres are ryſen thereof in the tymes of Hē
                  ry the fourth and fyfth Emperours.
            
            
               Henry the thyrd ſurnamed the Black, the .xv. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſte .M.xl. beganne toHenry the .iij raygne Henry the third, called the Black, and raygned ſeuentene yeres. Fyrſt inuaded he the Bohemes with warr, but they beyng ayded of the Hungarians, ouercame hym. The yere after were the Bohemes ſo weried with

warres of Henry, that their prince conſtrayned by neceſſitie came to Regenſpurg, and made hymſelfe tributary frely to the Emperour. After that going into Hungaty, warred thre yeares, and takynge in certayne cities, he compelled the Hungarians to demaunde peace. He ſubdued alſo the duke of Lorain, that he obeied the empire.
               At Rome put he down thre byſhops at once, ſtriuing for the ſee, and made a Germane byſhop to be byſhop there, whō they called Clement the .ii. Thē
                  ceforth ouercame he the Saracēs by Capua. Afterward came he again into Germany & kept a cōgregatiō at Mentz, wherein was Leo the byſh. of Ro.
               Cuno duke of Bayer, whiche was after. S. Hē
                  ry,Luno duke of Baier. An euel counſayll. &c. truſtyng to the ayde and conſpiracion of the Hū
                  garians, ſet hym agaiſt the Emperoure: for by that meanes entended he to drawe the poſſeſſion of the kyngdome to hym. But the Hungarians were ouercome, the duke Cuno was driuen out, and liued all his lyfe a bannyſhed man in Hungary. The land of Bayer was in the meane tyme wythout a duke and gouernoure.
               Before Henry the Black dyed, he cauſed hys ſonne Henry, fyue yeare of age to be choſen Emperour, and was crowned at Aken, to the intēt there ſhoulde be a certayne heade of the empyre, nether ſhould any rumour be for the election. Wherefore the ſonne raygned a certayn ſpace vnder the mothers protection. The mother of Honry the .iiij. was called Agnes, borne in the county of Piſto in Fraunce.
               After Clemens was Damaſus the .ij. made the

cliij. byſhop of Rome, whiche optayned the byſhopricke by force.
               Leo the .ix. ſucceded Damaſus. The ſame was in the counſaill kept at Mentz and was conuerſaunt wyth Henry the black a whyle afterwarde.
               In his tyme Berengarius a deacon of AngeweBerengarius 
                        〈…〉
                      of 
                        〈…〉
                     trewe 
                        〈…〉
                     ar 
                        •
                     i the 
                        〈…〉
                      of Chriſtes body and bloud in Fraunce taught, that the true body and bloud of Chriſt were not in the breade and wyne, according to Chriſtes inſtitucion. Leo the byſhop of Rome condempned this in the counſaill of Vercelli: but the ſedes of this doctrine that were left hath cauſed great perſecucion to them that came after.
               Victor the .ij. the .clv. byſhop of Rome ſucceded Leo. The ſame was before byſhop of Eichſtet.
               Stephanus the .ix. ſucceded Victor.
               Benedictus the .ix. the .clvij. byſhop of Rome ſucceded Stephanus.
               Nicolaus the .ij. folowed after Benedictus. The ſame depoſed Benedictus, and is ſayde to haue ordeined fyrſt, that Cardinals ſhall haue aucthoritie to choſe the byſhop of Rome. Berengarius was alſo condempned againe by hym, and was compelled to reuoke that he had taught of the ſacrament.
               Alexander the .ij. the .clix. byſhop of Rome ſucceded Nicolaus, then alſo was greate ſtrife for the delection.
               Gregorius the .vij. before called Hiltebrande was the .clx. byſhop of Rome after Alexander. The ſame dyd excommunicate and perſued Henry the iiij. raiſyng alſo fearce warres, that he myght get & obteyne, that a byſhop of Rome myght be choſen and confirmed wythout the Emperoures conſent

and confirmacion, leſt the Emperours ſhoulde clame any aucthoritie vpon the byſhops of Rome to rule them, whereof we ſhall ſpeake more in Henry the fourth.
            
            
               Henry the .iiij. the .xvi. Germane Emperour.Henry y• .iiij.
               
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſt .M. lvij. began Henry the .iiij. to reigne after that his father was deade, beynge yet a chylde, and raygned fyfty yeares. In this man dyd not onely the vertue of ſuche kynde of Emperours fayle, but the empyre of whole Germany began ſo to decaye, that afterwarde it neuer coulde nether be brought to his olde ſtate, nor recouer his former ſtrength. Hiltebrand byſhop of Rome was cauſer of this lamentableOf how great euell Hiltebrand was occaſion. game, who turned neare hād al Germany vp & down with warres among the princes therof.
               In Henry the Emperours chyldhode, dyd Agnes his mother gouerne the empyre, not without prayſe: ſhe ſet Germany and Italy at peace and trā
                  quilitie. But the byſhop of Colen dyd priuely leade away the chylde beyng now twelue yeares of age, and ready to be gyn to beare rule, and in the meane ſeaſon he hymſelfe ruled afterwarde the empyre. It is ſaide alſo that he cauſed the Imperiall childe to be brought vp vnſemely.
               It were longe to reherſe here all the cauſes and circumſtaunces: I wyll onely reherſe here brefely the moſt worthy of remēbraunce. Henry the BlackThe conſtitution of Henry the blacke of choyſynge the byſhop of Rome. father to this Henry, had made a conſtitucion of making a byſhop of Rome by a moſt wyſe aduiſe, that y• ſame ſhould not be done without the knowledge and conſent of the Emperoure. But now that Hiltebrand

was come into the ſee, he made a decre cōtraryThe tyranny of Hiltebrād in derogati
                        ••
                      the auth
                        •
                     ritie of Emperoure. wyſe, that the confirmacion of a byſhop ſhoulde not be demaunded of the Emperoure. But the Emperoure woulde, that this his fathers conſtitucion ſhould beare effect. Beſydes that alſo had the Emperoure aucthoritie to geue the byſhoprycks of the empyre: but Hiltebrand would not ſuffre that alſo. For it happened oft, that when one byſhop was dead, another was made in his ſtead of the Emperoure, and agayne another of the byſhop of Rome, whiche dyd then excommunicate the other. Finally came the game to this ende, that the Emperoure was not onely excommunicated, but it was alſo cō
                  maunded, that other greate Lordes of Germany, ſhould make another Emperoure. And the maiſter of this game was the byſhop of Halberſtat in Saxony, to do the byſhop of Rome a pleaſure. Wherfore fell from the Emperoure Henry the fourth Otho
                     
                        •
                     ha
                        •
                      the
                        •
                      were that tell 
                        〈…〉
                      Henry the 
                        •
                     ourth 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     iſhops pleaſure. duke of Saxony, Rudolfus duke of Schwaben, to whom was maried the Emperoures ſyſter germane, and certayne byſhops, ſpecially Saxons. On the Emperours ſyde were the Bohemies, and the lordes Catuly, whom the Emperoure gaue Baierlande, driuyng out Otho the duke of Saxony, and ſome byſhops alſo, whiche diſalowed the byſhop of Romes tyranny, in derogatyng and takyng away the aucthoritie of Emperours at his pleaſure. Wherfore they made congregacions alſo, and reiectyng the byſhop of Rome excommunicacion, excommunicated hym lykewyſe. Now went the Emperoure into Italy to treate and finiſh this controuerſy. In the meane ſeaſon was Rudolfus duke of

Schwaben choſen Emperour of y• contrary partyRudolfus is made Emperoure of the biſhops at Phorcen. in the town Phorcen, whych was about the yere of oure lorde .M. lxxvii. The byſhop of Rome ſente Rudolfus a crowne, wherein was wrytten thys verſe. Petra dedit Petro, Petrus dyadema Rudolfo. That is: Chryſt the Stone gaue the crowne to Peter, Peter geueth to Rudolfe both crowne and ſepter.
               Whereby he wolde ſygnyfye, that Chriſte gaue the Empyre to the byſhoppe of Rome, and that he lykewyſe geueth it to princes. Therfore came Henry hayſtely agayn into Germany. & droue Rudolfus out of Schwaben into Saxonye, and foughte ſome battayls wyth hym by the ryuer Vnſtrote, in the which were ſlayne the byſhops of Worms and Magdeburg.
               The yeare .M. lxxx. was foughten the laſte felde agaynſte Rudolfe by Merſburge, and in the ſame battayll was Rudolphus ryghte hande ſtryken of. Whan euerye man nowe fled into the cytye Marſburge, the hande was brought to the new Emperoure, lyenge in hys bedde, where the byſhopsThe complaint of Rudolfus the Emperoure vpon the biſhops. ſtoode aboute. The whyche as he ſawe, he ſayde: Lomy Lordes ye byſhops, thys ys the hande, wherewyth I haue promyſed my lord Henrye ſayeth and loyaltye: iudge ye your ſelues now howe godly ye haue counſeled me to decyner from him. Thys is a very myſerable complaynte, whyche declareth the troubled mind of the prince to haue iudged it ſelf gilty of vprour. Of this wiſe dyed Rudolfus about the .iiij. year of his election.

Whome I praye you would it not moue (wythout he be of yron) this ſo dredefull example to obey hys magiſtrate, & to beware of vproure? Yet were not the byſhops in the meane tyme in reſte, and ſet the ſonne alſo againſt the father. Hiltebrand the byſhop boaſted to haue ſene a viſion in his ſlepe, that an vnlawfull Emperoure ſhould dye that ſame yeare. But thys was Caiphas prophecye: for the puniſhmentHiltebrande the byſhop of Rome was another Cayphas. fell not vpon Henry, but on the byſhop of Romes adherentes.
               After this victory came Henry to Rome, and takyng in the citie by force, he toke Hiltebrand the byſhop and put hym from his office: and in his ſteade was choſen the byſhop of Rauenna, called Clemēs, and of hym was Henry the fourth crowned. As for Hiltebrand died not longe after in exile.
               Sigebertus the hiſtory writer doth not greatlySigebertus 
                        ••
                      hiſtory wryter. prayſe Hiltebrande, and doth reprehende the man
                     •
                   dedes, that he did diſquiet the peaceable ſtate of the churche and empyre without greate cauſe: and writeth alſo, that Hiltebrande when he was dyeng ſhould hymſelfe haue complayned it, and ſhould haue required of Henry by embaſſage forgeueneſſe of hys treſpaſſe. Hiltebrande forbade the prieſtes ofHiltebrande did firſt forbyd the Germane prieſtes to mary. Germany to mary, and many that were maryed, cauſed he to be diuorced.
               The yeare of Chriſte .M. ciij. when Henry had vāquiſhed the Saxons, & the erle of Miſen Erbert was ſlayne, whome the byſhops made to truſte to be Emperoure after Rudolfus. Beſides that when al maters of Germany and Italy were ſet at a ſtay, was Henry the fyft choſen Emperoure by Henry

the fourth hys father. Wherefore dyd the byſhoppes procure by this Henry, that he ſhoulde ryſe againſt his father, and driue hym out of the empyre. But this greued the good prince greatly. WhereforeHenry the .v. ſet to worke by ye byſhops beſyeged hys father. Henry the ſonne makyng a leage the yeare. M C. v. dyd fyrſt beſyege his father at Mentz: but the princes refuſyng to aſſault it, Henry the ſonne was fayne to departe, and leauyng Mentz went with the hooſt to Norinberg, and gat and ſpoyled it inNorinbergh is taken by Henry the, v. the ſpace of two monethes. The father perſued the ſonne, and on both ſydes were they a while in their campes by Regenſburg: but they came neuer to playne felde by reaſon the princes went alwaye betwene. But the ſonne warned the father to beware of hys owne ſeruauntes, wherefore he fled priuely to Ludich, and dyed there that ſame yeare. But when he had lyen vnburied fyue yeares, by reaſon of the excommunicacion or courſe of the Romyſhe byſhop he optayned abſolucion, and was buried at Spire. There are yet wrytynges at thys houre, that were ſent to the kynge of Fraunce by Henry the father, treatyng of the iniury of the ſonne, and their malice, which ſet the ſonne againſt the father. Reade more of this tragedy in the life of Hiltebrād, prynted ſeuerally in Englyſhe.
            
            
               Of the takyng in and poſſeſſyng the citie Hieruſalem.
               
                  IN the tyme of this Henry the fourth began the ſettyng forth to warre into Iewry againſt the Saracens and Turkes. The fyrſt capitayne was Godfre of Bilion,

prince of Lothringe or Lorain. Hym accompaniedGodfre of Bilion. the beſt princes and lordes of Gallia.
               The yere .M. xcix. Godfre wan the citie Ieruſalē, and was ſtraight waye made kyng. But he refuſed to be crowned with a golden crowne there, where Chriſtes was crowned with a crown brayded of thornes. This happened foure hundreth thre ſcore and eight yeres before that Hieruſalem was taken out of the Perſes power by Heraclius. But not muche aboue thirtene yeres after became the Saracens lordes of Hieruſalem. Many yeares after were the Saracens dryuen out of Hieruſalem by the Turkes. About this tyme gat the Chriſtiās Ieruſalem again, and ſubdued many cities & contreis there about. They had the realme of Ieruſalem. lxxxviij. yeares, vntyll the yere of Chriſt a thouſand, one hundreth & foure ſcore & ſeuen. The Souldane wanne Ieruſalem againe in the tyme of Frederick Barbaroſſa.
            
            
               The chaunge of many duchyes in Germany.
               
                  HOw many miſeries the inwarde warreThe 
                        〈…〉
                      rayſed in Germany 
                        ••
                      the biſhop 
                        •
                      Rome. of Germany, whiche was ſturred by the byſhop of Rome wyleneſſe, hath brought with it, may eaſely be gathered thereby, that when the princes and great men were ſlayne, the lord ſhyppes and dominions were chaunged. Henry the fourth gaue to the Catuly Lordes of Schwaben the lande of Baier. After Rudolphus death gaue Henry the fourth the duchy of Schwaben to Frederick of Stauffen hys ſonne in lawe that had maried hys daughter. The auncetry or

kynred of the Frankes dyed in a very ſhorte ſpace. Ecbertus erle of Miſnia was ſlayne. Gebhardus the father of that Lotharius, whiche became afterward Emperoure, was ſlayne alſo in a battaill: and to conclude, the power of Germane is wholy made feble and turned vpſyde downe by this debate of the princes.
               Whan Hiltebrande was deade, a byſhop called Victor the third of that name was choſen out of the citie of Rome by his companions, in ſpete of Clement. But when Victor was deade a litle after, by them was Vrbanus the, ij. choſen byſhop of Rome The ſame returned to Ro. by their ayde that were▪ now appointed to go to Ieruſalem. Being reſtored in the ſee, he droue out Clemens.
               Paſchalis the, ij. ſucceded Vrbanus the .ij. Thiſſame was firſt taken by Henry the fyft. Afterward did he conſtrayne hym to crowne hym Emperoure.
            
            
               Henry the fyft, the xvij. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſte .M. C. vii. beganneHenry the. 
                        •
                     . Henry the fyft to reigne after his fathers deceſſe, and reigned .xx. yeres. Verely he was well rewarded of the byſhops, that folowyng their counſails, he warred vpon his father the good Emperoure. Comminge to Rome, he coulde not obtayne the crowne of the byſhop of Rome, without he dyd fyrſt ordeyne that thenceforth it ſhoulde be alowed that both the byſhop of Rome and other byſhops ſhould be made without the Emperours approbating and conſent. Beſides

that alſo was at that tyme ſo great an vproure made in the citie of Rome by the byſhop of it, that except the Emperoure had defended his lyfe with his owne hande, he had bene loſt. When the Emperour had the ouerhande, many Romanes were put to
                     
                        〈…〉
                     mple 
                        〈…〉
                     graūce death and taken pryſoners. The byſhop was taken alſo, and led out of the citie: And when communication was had wyth hym of the coronation & right of makyng the byſhop of Rome and other byſhops, Paſchalis dyd frely graunt, that Emperours ſhuld take to them that prerogatiue, that no byſhop of Rome nor other ſhould be choſen, without their graūt. From thence are they returned to Rome, and Henry was crowned Emperoure of Paſchalis.
               But after that the Emperoure was departed out of Italy, the byſhop turned hys mynde, and makyng an aſſemble or counſayll dyd not onely reuoke the graunted priuilege, but dyd alſo excōmunicate and accurſe the Emperoure. Whiche thyng when it was ſhewed Henry the fyfte, retourning ſtraight waye to Rome with a greate power, he droue out the byſhop, and ordemed another in his place. In the meane ſeaſon dyd not the byſhops of Germany ſyt ſtyll, whiche dyd againe ſet the Saxons againſt the Emperoure, ſo 
                     •
                  ore alſo, that Germany beynge eftſones ſtyrred with mutuall debates, dyd mete eche other with diſplayde banners, and in the yere M. C. xv. the .xi. daye of February was the battailThe ba
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        ••
                      Mansfeld by Māſfelde, neare by the wood Catula
                     •
                  ia, wherin was ſlayne Hoterus Erle of Manſfelde.
               Wherfore the Emperoure p
                     •
                  rceauynge, that this playe coulde not be aſſuaged without cōtinuall

battail, nether would the Romiſh byſhops leaue of, tyll they had oppreſſed hym as they had done hys father before: the good prince had aduice to the common peace of the empyre, and renounced frely theHenry the .v. renoūced hys ryght of the choyſynge of byſhops. right of his priuilege. Therfore as the peace was made betwene the byſhop of Rome and Emperour by this occaſion, and alſo betwene the other lordes, and was proclaymed not farre from Wormes by the Rhene, where greate armies were together on both parties: greate ioye was made in all Germany for this accorde of common peace.
               This Henry warred alſo in Hollande and Lorayne. As for Lotharius duke of Saxony, who was made Emperour after Henry, came to Mentz in along and vile garment humbly requyryng pardon of the Emperoure. The ſame dyd Henry graūt hym frely of hys ſyngular mercy. This Henry had no manchylde, and therefore came the duchy of the Frankes to Conrade ſonne to Frederick of Stauffen and Henries the fyftes ſyſter.
               Gelaſius the .ij. ſucceded Paſchalis the .ij. Thiſſame was dryuen out of Rome by Henry the fyft, and in hys ſteade was Gregorius made byſhop. Gelaſius died in Fraunce in exile.
               When Gelaſius the .ij. was deade, was choſen in Fraunce byſhop of Rome Caliſtus the .ij. who commyng to Rome, fought ſome battayls wyth Gregorius the falſe byſhop, whome Henry the fyft had made. At the laſt was Gregorius taken, and ſet arſwarde vpon an aſſe, was caried about the citie. Vnder Caliſtus was the peace made with the Emperoure Henry the fyft.
               
                  Honorius the .ij. ſucceded Caliſtꝰ the byſh. of Ro.
               Innocentius the .ij. was made byſhop after Honorius. In ſpite of this man was Petrus Leonis choſen, who called himſelf Anacletus. Of hym was Innocentius driuen out with force. Lotharius aſſwaged this rumour, who was crowned Emperoure of Innocentius.
            
            
               Lotharius the Saxon, the xviij. Germane Emperoure.
               THe yeare of Chriſte .M. cxxvii. was Lotharius
                     
                        〈…〉
                     s 
                        •
                      Saxon. duke of Saxony choſen Emperoure by the Electors. whoſe father Gebhardus was ſlayne by Henry the fourth. Lotharius reigned thyrtene yeares.
               This Germane empire hath oft ben ſhaken with moſte heuy aſſaultes. For now agayne is rayſed a great and durable vproure againſt Lotharius alſo. For the Schwaben and Frankes, which had lōg warred with the Saxons toke in euell worth, that the highneſſe of the empire came to the Saxons. Beſydes that alſo were the ſonnes of the dukes of Schwaben borne of Henry the fyftes ſyſter: & therfore did they pretend, that the empire of right ſhuld be belongyng to them. Henry the .v. (as is ſayd before) gaue to Conradus of Schwaben his ſyſters huſbande the duchy of Franken. Godfry counte of Palatine was with him, who chofe Conradus Emperoure, & to him did leane the cities of the Schwaben and Franckes.
               But Catulus Henry duke of Baierland toke Lotharius parte, for he was Lotharius daughters huſband, wherby alſo the poſſeſſiō of Saxony came

to the Baiers by ſucceſſion hereditare. And thoſeThe princes of brunſ
                        •
                     ig came of the Ca
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •
                     . alſo that now a daies are called princes of Brunſwig, are of the Baiers bloud, of Catulus Henry duke of Baier.
               That Conradus might prenent Lotharius he went into Italy, and toke in Lombardy, where he was alſo crowned with an yron crown. In the meane tyme beſyeged & wan Lotharius the cities Sprre, Vlme and Nurenberg, and after that perſued he Conradus into Italy. For the Saxon Lotharius beyng more ſage and wyly, thought well, that without Germany were well aſſured, Conradus coulde not kepe Italy. Wherfore when Conradus knew that both the cities of Germany were loſt, and that no hope of ſuccoure was to be loked for out of Germany, to retayne Italy: leauyng Italy, he dyd make a conuencion of peace with Lotharius throughS. Bernarde made the peace betwene y• Emperours Conradus & Lotharius. the entreatement of ſainct Bernarde, and left the empyre that he had taken vpon hym. Lotharius went twyſe into Italy. Firſt to aſſuage the commotions that were rayſed at Rome againſt Innocentius the byſhop, for choiſyng another byſhop. After that againſt Roger, which had inuaded Campania and Apulia. He droue hym out of Italy: but when Lotharius was deade, Roger returned.
            
            
               Of the Roman lawes repared and reſtored.
               
                  LOtharius is not onely prayſed for his notable valiaūtneſſe in warres, where with he hath ſet both Germany and Italy at a ſtaye & reſt: but alſo for his endeuoure in ye
                  
religion and good lawes. In his tyme was in Italy by the quene Mectildis a man of great learnyngWernherus 
                        •
                     reſtorer of y• lawes. called Wernherus, whome Accurſius the lawer calleth oft Irnemerius. The ſame founde the bokes of the Romane lawes in the liberaries duſted & vnregarded, and brought them to lyght agayne: Lotharius commaunded to vſe them openly in ſcoles, and to geue ſentence agayne after them in iudgemē
                  tesThe p
                        ••
                     yſe 
                        •
                      profitable
                        ••
                     s of the Rom. lawes. of the empyre. And ſo by this meanes was that treaſure brought to lyght agayn, whiche none can be more profitable, nor more coſtly, namely whereof innumerable profites are flowen. For firſt it is a certaine lawe and conformable to mans reaſon reſtored to whole Europa: by reaſon all nacions, and all other lawes vſe this Romane lawe in ſearchynge right as a certayne line or carpenters rule: for it is moſte neareſt applyed to common honeſtie. Secōdly do thees reſtored Romane lawes not a lytle profyte thereto, that they gyue commaundementes of the common behaue ours of this lyfe and beſt maners, whiche are no where founde better: I paſſe ouer that the pureneſſe of the Latine tungue began to floryſh agayn, by reſtoryng of this lawe as borne again. But when this ſtudy of the lawe was inſtitute, ſtraightwaye were become great and many excellent lawers, whiche buſied both to interprete the lawes, and to ſet them againe in vre. Truely, I can not maruaile ynough, that men became ſo well learned at that tyme, wherein the vſe of the Latine tunge, the hiſtories, finally al the auncient Romane diſciplines were left of for the whyle: ſo that it may eaſely be ſuppoſed, that thoſe fyrſt lawers were not

onely men of greate diligence in ſtudies, but alſo greate and wyſe men exercyſed with muche experience of common matters: For wythout exercyſe, had it bene impoſſible to knowe the Roman lawes. Wherefore are the ſame doctors of the lawe to bee iudged no leſſe, than thoſe auncient lawiers Vlpianus, Seruius and other.
               Azo, whiche is euen the chefe of the expoundersAzo. of the lawe, lyued in the tyme of this Lotharius. After the ſame lyued Accurſius, the ſame alſo lyuedAccurſius. vntil the time of Frederick the ſecond. In the tyme of Henry of Lucelborowe were many and notable doctors, as Bartholus and other. Gratianus, whoBartholus. Gracianus. gathered the Decrees of the common lawe, was alſo in the tyme of Lotharius. But before were ſuche bookes alſo. For of this ſorte was a lytle booke written by a byſhop of Wormes, whiche at that tyme was vſed: we alſo haue ſene it in our daies. But when the ſtudies of the lawe floryſhed now euery where, and that the beſt learned embraced them,By what occaſion the mō
                     kes are brought to wryte. (as it happeneth moſte commonly in a new thing,) the monkes perceauyng that the knowledge of holy ſcripture beganne to coule and be deſpyſed, for ſtudieng the lawe: they alſo beganne a ſtudye of Theology or diuinitie, and ordeyned ſcole diſputations in diuine matters, as the lawers dyd in ciuyll matters. Thus beganne the diuinitie ſcole, wherof we ſhall ſaye more hereafter.
            
            
               Cunradus a Schwabe, the .xix. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  
                  THe yeare of Chriſt .M. cxl. ſucceded ConradusConradus a Schwabe. borne duke of Schwaben Lotharius the Saxon in the empyre, who was made prince of the Frankes by Henry the fyft. He reigned fourten yeres. It is no where red that he was crowned of the Romyſh byſhop. This Cunradus (as we ſaid before) roſe againſt Lotharius, but he was conſtrained to yelde himſelf vnder the Emperours power. But when Lotharius was deade, the ſucceſſion of the empire fell vpon Conradus: though Henry duke of Baier & Saxony that had marted Lotharius daughter coueted the empire, and beſyeged Conradus at Auſpurg. But Conradus the Emperoure miniſhed Henries power, & gaue the duchy of Baier to the Erle of Eaſtenrich. Howbeit this warre was not very long: for not lōg after died Henry in Saxony, and was laide in Lotharius his wiues fathers graue. After that dyd a prince of Catuli warre with the duke & Emperour Cōradus for the duchy of Baier, but inuain. Wherfore he was afterwarde reconciled againe with the Emperoure, through Frederick that became Emperoure afterward. Conradus with many princesConradus went to Ieruſalem againſt the Saracens and a great hooſt went to Hieruſalem, againſte the Saracens Chriſtes enemyes, through the counſail of ſainct Bernarde, againſt the whiche alſo toke wapen Lewis kyng of Fraunce: but many ſouldioursEmanuel Emperour of Cō
                     ſtantinople
                        •
                     s diſloyaltie. dyed thorough the diſloyaltie of Emanuel Emperoure of Conſtantinople. Yet had our men many and great battails in Aſia and at Hieruſalem in the meane ſeaſon. Cunradus returned the fourth yere after into Germany & died, and was buried in

the towne Lorch by Gemund.
               In the warre that Conradus had with the Catulies, he toke the caſtel and town Weinſburg, that lyeth not farre from the riuer Necehar. Then commaundedThe vertue of noble dames in the citie Weinſburg. the Emperour to take al the gentlemen: but the gentle women ſhoulde be letten go with ſo great packe of goodes as they could cary. Thē the gentlewomen forſakyng the goodes would rather cary away their chyldren. Whiche thing when ſom did blame, whiche would haue the yong children be priſoned, ſayeng: the graunt was to cary goodes, & not men. The Emperour delited ſo in the vertue of the noble women, that he gaue them leaue not only to cary away their childrē, but alſo al their goodes.
               Celeſtinus the .ij. was byſhop of Rome after Innocencius the .ij.
               Lucius the .ij. was byſhop after Celeſtinus.
               Eugenius the third was made byſhop after Lucius. Againſt the ſame was another byſhop choſen by the Romanes, of whom Eugenius was driuen out: but gatheryng a Frenche ayde, he returned, ouer came his aduerſary, and was reſtored againe.
               Anaſtaſius the .iiij. ſucceded Eugenius.
               Adrianus the .iiij. was byſhop after Anaſtaſius. Of hym was Frederick Barbaroſſa or with theWilliam of Sicily. reade bearde crowned Emperoure: but afterward ſticked he to William of Sicily, which kept Naples and made the Lombardes obedient to hym, by a mooſt haynous coniuracion againſt the empyre. HeAn example of the Romiſh byſh▪ diſloyaltie & tyranny. did excōmunicate Frederick, & rayſed moſt haynous warres in Italy. It is written yt he ſhuld haue ſaied not long before he died: there is no more wretched

ſtate in earth then the byſhoprick of Rome: and toThe cōplaint of Adrian byſhop of Rom. whē he ſhuld dye. get that byſhopryck by bloude, is not to ſuccede Peter, but Romulus rather, who flew his owne brother, that he myght haue the monarchy and reigne alone. Theſe wordes wytneſſe ſufficiently, that it repented hym of the debate that he had begonne againſt the Emperoure.
               After Adrianus began a greate diuiſion. Some Cardinals choſe Octauianus, who was called Victor. Some choſe Alexander the .iij. Frederick Barbaroſſa helde Octauianus for the true byſhop of Rome. But yet in the meane ſeaſon commaunded he by a counſayll to enquire who ſhoulde abyde byſhop. But Alexander refuſyng the aucthoritie of the counſayll, kepeth hymſelfe in Fraunce, and accurſeth Frederick. At the laſt gat Alexander the by ſhopryck by the ayde of the Italians, and returned to Rome, where Frederick came then alſo. But Alexander beyng afrayed, fled to Venice, where at the laſt, peace was made. But hereof ſhall we ſpeake more in the hiſtory of Frederick.
            
            
               Frederick the .i. called Barbaroſſa, or wyth the red bearde the .xx. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſte .M. C. lij. was FrederickFrederick y• fyrſt. choſen Emperour, the fyrſt of that name, ſurnamed Barbaroſſa. He gouerned the Empyre .xxxvij. yeares. He was a borne duke of the noble houſe of Schwaben, Conradus ye Emperours brothers ſonne, a moſt renovmed prince of hardineſſe, valiauntneſſe and iuſtice.

So farre as I can perceaue by his dedes, it ſemeth that Frederick, as a gentle Schwabe, could not paciently beare theſe iniuries, that the byſhops of Rome dyd hym: and I thynke it came by this, that he was more harde againſte them.
               In the begynnyng of his empyre, ſet he Baierlande and Eaſtenriche at one, and reſtored to Catulus Henry duke of Saxony, and Henry ſonne tooWhen the duchy of Eaſten riche began. Lotarius doughters huſbande, Baierlande. He made his Coſin Henry Erle of Eaſtenryche duke, and ſet boundyng borders to ether duchy. Then began firſt the duchy of Eaſtenriche. But Catulus Henry kept Baierlande not longe: for he forſoke Fredericke in Italy, and raiſed new rebellionsWho are the dukes of Baier and counties of Palatine. in Germany againſt hym. Wherfore Frederick driuyng away Henry afterwarde, the duchy of Baierlande was geuen to Otho of Witelſbach. And of this Othoes bloude are thoſe princes borne, which now a dayes haue Baierlande, and the counties Palatine by the Rene. The right of election on the Saxonies behalfe, gaue he to Bernarde prince of Anhalt. Henry flyenge, went into Englande wyth his wyfe and chyldren: but at the laſt when he returned, compoſition was made, that Catulus HenryLubeck. ſhould poſſeſſe the duchy of Brunſwich. But thē dyd Phillippe byſhop of Colen take the countrey Weſtphalen from the duchy of Saxony withforce.
               Frederick beſyeged Lubeck, and ſubdued it toMilan
                        •
                     . the empyre. He compelled alſo the kyng of Dennemarck to require peace.
               They of Milane rebelled, and went about to brynge the other cities of Italy vnder their ſubiection.

For that maner and wylfulneſſe to haued ominion, doth laſt yet by the Italians: wherfore Frederick goyng into Italy, apeaſed all rumors. But afterwarde did the byſhop of Rome entice the Milaners, and the other cities to a coniuracion againſte Frederick, and dyd excommunicate hym. For whicheFrederick was excommunicate by the byſhop of Rome. cauſe he went nowe the fourth tyme into Italy, he ſubdued and ſpoyled Milane, and aſſayed all the meanes he coulde to alaye the debate betwene the byſhop of Rome and hym: but it was inuayne. For Alexander the third byſhop of Rome could not be brought to that poynte, that he ſhoulde not vexe the moſte gentle prince: wherefore Frederick went to Rome, but Alexander fled to the Venecians. Then was Otho Fredericks ſonne ſent agaynſte the Venecians: who beyng taken in a battayll vpon the water, condicions of peace were accepted. For Frederick the Emperoure ſawe that the byſhops of Rome coulde reſte by no meanes. Moreouer conſydered he alſo, that beſyde that hys ſonne was taken, what was chaunged to the Emperours that were afore hym. Wherefore Frederick vſed ſubmiſſion and moſte lowly humbleneſſe. For he cameThe humilite or lowlyneſſe of Frederick to Venice, and layed hymſelfe downe before the Churche dore afore the Romyſhe byſhop, and ſuffred hymſelfe to be troden with his fete: who commaunded alſo to be cried out: Thou ſhalt treade vpō the adder and coceatrice, and then dyd he abſolue hym at the laſt. Frederick ſayde contrariwyſe, that he dyd not ſhewe that lowlyneſſe to Alexander, but to Peter. Whereto aunſwered Alexander: both to me and to Peter. But what is to be thought of this

dede of the byſhop of Rome, that do I committee the reader to iudge. The byſhops of Rome rayſe warres without any lawfull cauſe. For Alexander ſtriueth for his priuate election, nether woulde he euer admitte any counſaill, nor any other condicions. And beſyde this iniury, dyd he vſe alſo extremeThe extreme tyranny of Alexander the thyrde byſh. of Ro. againſt y• Emperour Frederick. wylfulneſſe and pryde againſte the hygheſt power of Chriſtianitie, when he dyd treade vpon the Emperoure with his fete, whome God commaundeth euen to honoure.
               But when this agremēt was made, he choſe Hē
                  ry his ſonne to be party ruler with hym, the yere of Chriſt .M. C. lxxxvj. leſt the empyre ſhuld be with out a gouernoure, when he toke his yourney into Aſia. He maried his ſonne to Cōſtantia the daughter to Rogerius, by whiche meanes the kyngdome Sicily and Naples came to the empyre & Germanes, and made the young kyng gouernoure of Italy. Not long after went he into Aſia with a greate preparacion of warre & company of many princes, to recouer again the citie Ieruſalem, that was loſtFrederick the fyrſt goynge into Aſia what warres he had. not long before. He toke in many & mighty cities in Cilicia, & vanquyſhed the Saracens & Turkes. He made the Souldane ſo afraide for hym, that he cauſed many of his greate cities to caſt down their walles in Syria, when he did miſtruſt to kepe them, & he himſelf fled into Egypt. For the kynges of England & Fraūce were already arriued into Aſia with a great army. But what fortuned when they had gathered a greate hooſt? Fortune whiche is not alwaye good, beganne to turne. Frederick when he had now takē the cōtrey Armenia, by reaſon of ye
                  
heate, went into a ſwyft water with his horſe, and the doughty prince was drowned the yeare .M.C lxxxix. Nether ought it to be maruayll, that Frederick peryſhed of this wyſe in a ryuer: for hiſtoriesFrederick went oft into waters. do make mencion, that he otherwhyles alſo went into waters. In the ſecond ſetting forth vpon Milane, the Italians pitched their tentes on the other ſyde of the ryuer Abdua, whiche is no leſſe then is the Tems about Sion, and mocked Frederick the Emperoure, who was of this ſyde the ryuer with his hooſt: thynkyng, that by reaſon the ryuer was betwene them both, they myght mocke the Emperoure wythout daunger. Then did the Emperour ſteppe into the ryuer without feare, and commaunded the horſemen to folowe hym. Whiche thynge ſeyng the, Italians thought ſhoulde neuer come to paſſe, (for ether they laye here and there, or vnaduiſedly went vp and downe without order,) they toke the flyght, and were ouercome of a ſmall company of horſemen. This feate witneſſeth that Frederick was a prince of excellent hardineſſe▪ and alſo one that doubted not to put hymſelfe lyghtely into waters.
               The prince of Boheme was made a kyng by Frederick,The prince of Bohem
                        •
                      is made a kyng for his ſundry and excellent faithfulneſſe, that he vſed toward Frederick at Milane.
               Lucius the .iij. was made byſhop of Rome after Alexander.
               
                  Vrbanus the .iij. ſucceded Lucius.
                  Gregorius the .viij. ſucceded Vrbanus.
                  Clemens the .iij. folowed after Gregorius.
                  Celeſtinus the .iij. was after Clemens.
               
               Henry

the .vi. was crowned of hym.
            
            
               Henry the .vi. the xxi. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſt .M.C.xC. began HenryHenrye the ſyxte. the vi. of that name to raigne after his fathers deceaſſe, and raygned ſeuen yeares. He had great warres in Apulia, and finally ſubdued the whole realme. In Germany had he enemyes the byſhop of Colen and Lutich or Liege, beſyd them alſo the Burgundions. In this vproure was the byſhop of Lutich ſlayne, and the other beynge abaſhed by thys myſhappe, left of frō theyr enterpryſe, and obeyed frelye. He made hys ſonne Frederick yet a chylde Emperour wyth the conſent of y• electors. The election was confirmed with ſealed letters of the princes electors. the ſame was afterward called Frederick the .ii. But whanFrederick the ſeconde. Henry was now dyenge▪ he committed the wardeſhyppe of the chylde, and empyres gouernaunce to his brother Philippe, who had the gouernaunce of the empyre, whan Henry was yet alyue.
               Innocentius the .iii. was byſhop of Rome after Celeſtinus.
               The ſame perſued Philippe the Emperour, and it is reported he ſhulde haue ſayde: He wolde takeThe Romiſh byſhops crake. awaye from Philippe the Emperours crowne, or hys thre crowned miter ſhulde be taken from hym. He made Emperoure Otho the Saxon. But thys frendeſhyp was not ſtedfaſt nether: for Otho was excommunicated of the Romyſhe byſhop not longe after.
            
            
               
               Philippe ſonne to Barbaroſſa, the .xxii. Germane Emperour.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſt .M.C.xcviii. was choſenPhilippe Emperour. Emperour Philippe the ſonne of Barbaroſſa, duke of Schwaben, and gouernour of Italy on y• Emperours behalfe, he raygned ten yeares. In hys tyme roſe greate vproures in Germanye. For whan Henrye was deade, hayſtynge out of Italy, Philippe dyd admonyſh the princes electors of the election had of hys yonge coſyn made Emperoure. And that the empyre ſhulde haue no alteracyon, ether they ſhulde cōmitte to hym the admyniſtracyon, or make hym Emperoure, and none other prince. But whan Innocentius the Byſh. of Rome ſmelled that, he dyd earneſtly procure by the princes electors that another Emperour ſhulde be choſen, ſhewyng openly: he coulde not brouke Philippe: for he was diſpleaſed wyth hym, becauſe that whan he was gouernoure in Italye, he had done I wote not what agaynſt the Byſhop of Rome wherefore alſo he was excommunicated of Innocentius. But nowe had alegat abſolued Philippe of the excommunication, wo alſo was punyſhed therefore of the Byſhopp of Rome. But what nede many wordes? The byſhop of Ro. hated all Fredericks kinred, & intended▪ to rout it out. Wherefore was choſen by the electors Emperour Bertholdus duke of zaryngē, who beſyde yt he was riche, was worthy noprayſe in a maner.Bertholdus duke of Ze
                     
                        •
                     ingen. Philipp was in the toune Mulhauſen, where were come alſo many princes, as of Bohemy, Saxony, Baier & Schwaben, of whome he was made

Emperour. But whan the duke of zeryngē knewe that he was weaker than Phlippe of puſſaunce and power, he came frely to him, and yelded himſelfe as to his lyege lord, refuſing to take vpon him the naming of the Emperiall maieſty. But the byſhopp of Ro. ceaſſed nothyng the more of his forepryſe: but broughte to paſſe that the prince of Brunſwich Otho,Otho the fourth. the fourth of that name, ſonne to Henrye that fled, was made Emperoure of the byſh. of Colen, and county af Palatine. The ſame dyd Innocentius confirme and crowne, curſynge and excommunicating Philippe. Wherefore went from hym to Otho not a fewe princes, the prince of Bohemye, the erle of Thuringen Herman and the byſhop of Argentine or Straſburg. But yet dyd God in theGod proſpered the buſineſſes of thē that are lawfully called. meane ſeaſon proſper Philips affaires, inſomuche that he gouerned the empyre all the tyme of hys lyfe. Fyrſt goynge in Alſace, he toke in Straſburg and compelled the byſhop of Straſburge to yelde hymſelfe. In the meane tyme was Otho come tyll Spyre: but he alſo was dryuen backe by Philippe into Saxony, and as Philippe folowed now vpon hym into Thuryngen, thether came the kynge of Bohemy, and ye erle of Thuryngen. But they refuſyng to geue battayl, yelded thēſelues to Philppe. Afterwarde beſyegynge the citye Colen alſo, he compelled the byſh. to yelde himſelfe: who though he had crowned Otho before, yet crowned he Philyppe alſo at Achen wyth the Emperyall crowne. Not longe after Otho ſtrengthened wyth the ſuccourſe of ſome byſhops, he forſoke the byſhoppe of Colen, becauſe he was fallen to Philippe: but than

returned Philippe to Colen, and fought ſome feldes wyth Otho, and gat the victory: but Otho fled into Englande.
               At the laſte whan the princes ſawe that Othoes parte was weakened, and that Phylippe kept the empyre, who alſo made hym ſelfe familiar with the princes. He had to wyfe Irene, doughter to theIrene doughter to the Emperour of Cō
                     ſtantinople. Emperour of Conſtantinople: of the which he had foure doughters, whereof he maryed the one to the kynge of Bohemes ſonne, another gaue he to the prince of Brabant. Than I ſaye, whan the princes ſawe all theſe thinges, they deuiſed to make an accorde. To the biſhop of Rome wer Legates ſent to make an atonement betwene him and Philippe, and alſo that Otho ſhuld be taken in fauoure. Wherefore the Byſh. of Rome ſendyng embaſſiadours into Germany, Phylippe the Emperoure was abſolued of the excommunicatyon. The agrement was made alſo, that Otho ſhulde marye one of the dougdters, to the intent the bande of the concorde and familiaritye made, myght the better be kepte betwene both partees. All thys was done.
               But whan this agrement and leage was made, Philip dwelt afterward at Bamberg. And vpon a day whan he was lettē bloud, and the good prince ſuſpected now no harme, and had in hys chamber no more wyth hym, than the Chaunceler and hys karuer of Walpurch, ther came in to him Otho of Witelſpache, whoſe kynred Friderick the firſt had made honorable & famous, by geuynge him the duchy of Baier. The ſame whan he ſawe that the Emperour was alone without any company or ayde,

he fell ſodenly vpon hym not thinkyng any thing,Philippe the Emperoure was ſlayne of Otho of Witelſpach and ſtroke a greate wounde in the Emperoures necke. The Karuer came runnynge, to helpe hys prince, but the murtherer by reaſon of hys ſwyftneſſe eſcaped. Thys woūd was deadly to Philipp: and as he was deade, he was buryed, at Bamberg. But afterwarde was the bodye dygged vppe, and brought to Spyre by Fridericke the .ii. Vpon the ſtone that lyeth on the graue, is written Philipp of Bamberg. Nether wanted Otho of WytelſpacheAn example of vengeaunce. the murtherer finally his worthy punyſhment: for he hym ſelfe was ſlayne alſo not longe after.
            
            
               Of the inſtitution of the freres beggynge ordres.
               
                  IN the tyme of Philippe founded DominicusDominicus. Franciſcus. and Franciſcus the Orders of beggynge Freres. For the monkes or chanons that were ryche the ſame beynge now become mighty lordes, deſpiſing the ſeruice of teachynge in the Churche or congregacyon, went to warre wyth ye Emperoures and princes. Therfore beganne theſe two men than to preache, and toke to their companions ſobre and peaceable men, as men geuen to learnynge and thus beganne that thinge. After that began more orders after the example of theſe, as it commeth mooſt communely to paſſe, as oft as new thynges begynne to be wondered at. But as nothyng remayneth ſtedfaſt alway, and durable in his degre, in mens affayres: euen ſo do we ſe the orders of Freres and monkes to loſe theyr ſtate and doctrines.
            
            
               
               Otho the fourth, the .xxiii. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  THE yeare of Chriſt, M.CC.ix. afterOtho the fourth. that Philippe was deade, fell the maieſtye of the empyre to Otho prince of Brunſwich, who was choſen Emperoure afore alſo agaynſte Philipp. He raygned after Philips deceaſe foure yeares. But wythin theſe foure yeares went he fyrſt to Rome, and receaued the Imperiall crowne of Innocentius. In Italy vſed he a very kynglye and mooſte coſtly apparelynge, and ſhewed a notable grauitye toward all princes and cityes, inſomuch, that they all dyd humbly worſhyp hym. After hys coronacion toke he ſome imperyall cityes, whyche the Romyſh byſh. dyd poſſede: but thys was an occaſyon of the breche of frendeſhyp with the byſh. of Rome. Wherefore Innocentius dyd accurſe Otho, euen whan he was yet preſent in Italy: and before Otho came agayne into Germany, he ſent ambaſſadours to the princes, that they ſhould choyſe another Emperoure, namely Frederick the ſeconde, ſonne to Henry the vi.
               It was very proudly and cruellye done of theThe pryde and cruellye of the byſhoppes of Rome. Byſh. of Rome, ſo to excommunicate and accurſe the Emperoures, nether to excommunicate them only, but alſo to put them from the empyre, ſo that one can thynke no honeſtye in theſe dedes of the Romyſh byſhoppes, ſpecially yf ye ponder and way all the cauſes and reaſons. All theſe were excommunicated in a rowe, and yet were they myghtye and wyſe Emperoures, that haue brought to paſſe great and notable thinges.
               
                  
                  Henry the fourth a Franke.The Emperours that were excommunicated by the byſhops of Rome.
                  
                  Henry the fyfth a Franke.
                  Friderick the fyrſt a Schwabe.
                  Philippe ſonne to Frederick the fyrſte.
                  Otho the iiii. duke of Brunſwig.
                  Friderick the .ii. Henry the .vi. ſonne.
                  Conradus Fridericks ſonne.
               
               The yeare of Chriſte .M.CC.xii. Otho beyng come agayne into Germany, though he knew that the princes myndes were ſet agaynſt him, yet poynted he a day of parlament at Norinberg, and admonyſhed the princes, that they ſhulde not graunt the biſhops of Ro. that authoritye, that they ſhulde put downe Emperoures at theyr pleaſure: for the empyre pertayneth not to Romyſh byſhops, but to the Germane princes. He brought ſome princes to his mynd with this admonition, and fell vpon HermanHerman county of Thuringen. S. Elizabeth erle of Thuryngen the father of erle Lewys, to whome. S. Elyſabeth was ſpouſed. For erle Herman, to do the Byſhoppe of Rome pleaſure, ſet hymſelfe agaynſt the Emperour, as a man condemned wyth byſhoppe of Romes excommunicatyons and curſes. But afterwarde was Otho forſaken of all the princes, except one erle of March in Miſen. For Fryderycke the yonger, enemy to Otho, was alreadye come into Germany: beſyde that by the byſhoppe of Romes procurynge, was the Frenche kynge in armes agaynſte Otho. But whan tydynges came to Otho of Frideryckes commyng he prepared hym to go agaynſte hym into Alſaſſe, and was wyth hys hooſte at Bryſacke: howe beyte beynge deſtytute of all the ayde of

hys, he was conſtrayned to flye into Saxony. But than repayring an hooſte, and beyng holpen of the kynge of Englande, he went into low Germany, agaynſt the Frenche kynge, of whome he was ouercome, and dyed afterwarde, the yeare .M. CC. xviij. He lyued wythout the tytles of thempyre .v. yeares.
            
            
               Friderick the .ij. the .xxiiij. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſt .M. CC. xiij. was choſenFriderick the ſecond. Emperoure Friderick the .ii. of that name, the ſonne of Barbaroſſa, kinge of Naples and Cicily, and duke of Schwaben, whan Otho was put downe, and was crowned Emperoure at Achen. He raygned ſeuen and twenty yeares. Yet before he dyed, was he depryued fyue yeares of the Empire, by Innocentius the Byſh. of Rome. Noman can pitye ynough the caſe of thys laudable Emperoure, that he was endued wyth many and noble vertues: and yet in the mean ſeaſon ſuffred he mooſt extreme and heuy perſuinges of Romane byſhops. He was verye well learned in many languages. For he knew perfectly the Latine, Greke, Germane and Saracens languages. Beſydes thys ſet he forth alſo the diſciplines of good ſciences. He brought to paſſe that the bokeThe ſcience of Aſtronomye was brought to lyght agayn by Friderik the .ij. of Ptolome, called Almageſtū was tranſlated out of the Saracens language into Latyn, and by that meanes the doctryne of Aſtronomye, whyche noman had taughte many yeares before in Europa, was brought to lighte.
               
                  Hys fyrſte warre had he in Germanye agaynſte Otho the .iiii. by the biſhop of Romes counſel: but he had the ſame rewarde for it, that other Emperours afore him haue had.
               The ſeconde warre had he in Brabant, agaynſte the duke of Brabant and Othoes adherentes, and reſtored Lorain againe to the Germane empyre.
               The yeare of oure lorde .M. CC. xx. was Fridericke crowned of Honorius the .iii. Emperoure. Two erles in Tuſcia had taken in ſome cityes that belonged to the empire, the which whan Friderick had taken agayne, the erles that were driuen out, fled to Honorius byſh. of Ro. who toke them in hys defence and commaunded Friderick, to reſtore thē into the poſſeſſion of the cityes, that he had taken from them. But whan Friderick refuſed that, Honorius excommunicated hym, ſettyng aſyde all the former loue.
               The yeare .M. CC. xxii. came Friderick again into Germany, and holding a parlamēt at Wyrtzpurg, he made Henry his yonger ſon felowgouernoure of the empyre, and was crowned at Achen.Henry the ſonne was taken by Frideryke hys father. But afterwarde was the ſame Henry taken by his father, becauſe he had made a leage with certayn cityes of Lombardy agaynſt the father: & while the father liued yet, died he of ye filthineſſe of the priſon.
               Though the city Hieruſalem, was now loſte, yet poſſeſſed the Chriſtians other great and mighty cytyes in Siria. But whan the power of the Turkes grewe dayly more & more, and the fortune of ye
                  Ioannes kyng of Hie-ruſalem. Chriſtiās went back: Ioannes came to Rome, who had yet the title of ye king of Hieruſalē, and deſyred

ayde of Honorius the byſhop of Rome, and optayned by Honorius, that Friderick who was accurſed, was abſolued. Wherefore Fridericke and the Germane princes conſented frelye to make an armye for the delyueraunce of the cytye Hieruſalem: and the kyng of Hieruſalem gaue Iole hys doughter in maryage to Friderick the Emperoure. WherebyWhy the kynges of Sicyly clayme the 
                        ••
                     tle of Hieruſalem. it commeth, that yet at this houre the kynges of Sicily aſcrybe to them the title of the realme of Hieruſalem. Fridericke the Emperour than went wyth a great army, well furnyſhed to Hieruſalem and wyth hym many princes of Germany, among the which was alſo Lewis y• landtgraue, to whomLewis the Landtgraue S. Eliſabeth was maried, & the ſame dyed in that ſettynge forth at Brunduſium.
               The yeare .M. CC. xxviij. went Fridericke to Hieruſalem, and dyd hys buſyneſſe ſo, that the Souldane gaue hym frely agayne not only Hieruſalem, but many other cytyes there about. Friderick was crowned at Hieruſalem the yeare .M. C C. xxix. He cauſed the citye Hieruſalem to be made ſure agaynſte the power of the enemyes. He made treuce with the Souldane for ten yeres. All thys ſhewed he by a letter to the byſhop of Ro. and requyred abſolucion of the curſe: for by thys Gregorye was he accurſed alſo. I wote not for what title in the kingdome of Sicily. But it was a ſmall matter for the byſhop of Rome to deny to the Emperoure the abſolution: for this gyle alſo or rather iniury had he done to Frederick being abſent. For he ſet y• Italian cities againſt him, & toke in by force ſome cityes in his patrimonial realme Naples. By

thys conſtraynt was Friderick driuē to come back agayn into Sicilye, and to reſcue his realme come by inheritaunce, from feare of daunger. Although the byſh. of Ro. had ben ſore diſſoial againſt the Emperour in his abſence, yet required he abſolution ſo lowly, that he promyſed he wolde holde the kyng dome of Sicily of him by fealtye. Beſydes this alſo cauſed he the princes of Germanye to come into Italy, that at the leaſt by them myght the debate betwen hym and the Emperour be alayed. Therfore dyd Gregorius abſolue the Emperour agayne the yeare of Chriſte .M. CC. xxx.
               After yc came the Emperour Friderick the thyrd time into Italy, and warred in Eaſtenrich agaynſt the Hungarians, & toke the eyty Vienne the which that ſhe ſhuld be & remain an emperial city, he wold haue it confirmed with letters geuen there vpon.
               The yeare .M. CC. xxxviij. Whan Fridericke went agayn into Italy, they of Milan roſe agaynſt him, and many other ſtrong cityes. To Milan dyd Friderick great harme: for the which cauſe the city es makynge an aliance wyth the byſhop. of Ro. conFriderick y• ij. is excom-municated y• thyrd time. ſpired againſt Friderick the Emperour whome for this cauſe Gregorius the Romyſh byſhop doth excommunicate the third time, and condemneth him for an heretike, ſtearing alſo the Venecians to war vpon him. Friderick with opē writynges dyd complain of the iniury done to hym, and in the meane tyme dyd he alſo humbly require abſolution of the byſhop of Ro. Ther were many of the Cardynals, whiche alowed not the byſh. of Romes counſels. But whan Frederick could by no meanes optayne

pardon of Gregorius, neceſſitye compelled Frederyck to defende hymſelfe: he had alſo his faction or diuiſion. For at that tyme was Italy diuyded in Guelphies and Gibelines, the Gibelini were for the Emperoure, and the Guelphi were wyth the Byſhop of Ro. Ether name beynge brought vp in Germany, was tranſlated and brought ouer intoGuelphi. Italy. For the kynred of the Guelphi, had continuall hatred agaynſt Fredericks bloude. Whereof alſo they were called Guelphi, as alwaye hatefullGuelphi. enemyes of Fredericke. As for the ſpring of Fredericks kynred was of the Weiblings, whereof they are called Guiblings, which the Italians (chaunginge the name) do call Gibelini.
               The byſh. of Ro. conſtrayned by great neceſſitie dyd proclayme the croſſe and pardon agaynſt Friderick the Emperoure, as though he were manyfeſtly vngodly, and deſtroyer of the religion. Friderick toke that very euell: he beſyeged Rome, but drue back agayne wythout takyng it, and toke the citye Rauennas.
               The yeare of Chriſt M. CC. xlv. Innocentius the iiij. holding a councel at Lyons in Fraunce, depoſedFrideryk y• Emperoure 
                        ••
                      depoſed of y• empyre by the byth. of 
                        〈…〉
                     . Friderick of the empyre, vſynge therto the Frenchmens ayde: and by letters he ſhewed the princes Electors, to choyſe another Emperoure. But they made Emperoure Henry the Landtgraue of Thuringen. The ſame was ſlayne before the citye Vlme wyth an inſtrument of warre.
               Friderick buylded a new citye in Italy, whiche was called Victoria. Whan he wanted ſyluer, heVictoria 
                        ••
                     yty
                        •
                     . cauſed to make a coyne of lether, y• he mighte haue

where wyth to pay his men of warre: but ſo ſooneFridericke coynet 
                        •
                     ether in tyme of nede. as he had gotten ſyluer, he ſhulde geue them good and lawful mony for the lether coyne, which thing he dyd liberally. But now whā he could loke for no more ayde out of Germany: and that beſydes thys hys ſonne Encius was taken, who alſo dyed in the preſon, he was ſore diſtreſſed, and went into Apulia were he alſo dyed the yeare .M. CC. l. Some wryt that he was poiſonned. Yee ſurely, the mooſt holy fathers coulde not reſt, without they ſawe the good prince clene rydde out of the waye. The kingdome of Naples left he to hys ſonne & heyre Cunradus. As for Italy remayned alwaye after diuyded. For one part helde wyth the empyre, another wyth the byſhop of Rome, vntyl the powers of the Venecians and of them of Mylane beganne after to growe and increaſe.
               Honorius the .iij. ſucceded Innocentius the .iij. of whome Friderick the .ii. was crouned, and after warde excommunicated.
               Gregorius y• .ix. was after Honorius, of whome was Friderick lykewyſe accurſed.
               After Gregorius was Celeſtinus the .iiij. byſh. of Rome.
               After Celeſtinus was Innocentius the .iiij. Theſame depoſed Friderick from the empyre, and accurſed hys ſonne Cunradus.
            
            
               Cunradus the .iiij. the xxv Germane Emperour.
               
                  
                  THe yeare of Chriſt .M. CC. l. raignedC
                        •
                     nradus the fourth. Conradus the ſonne of Fridericke after hys fathers deceaſſe, but he was excommunicated by Inocentius the .iiij. Henry the Landtgraue of Thuryngen ouercame hym by Francoforde, whyle hys father Frederick was yet alyue. Some wryte that thys warre was after hys fathers death, by Wyllyam the Landtgraue. But whan Conradus perceaued that he was deſtitute of the Germane princes ayde he gat him into his hereditary kyngdome Naples, and there he dyed the yeare .M. CC. liij.
            
            
               The ende of the dukes of Schwaben.
               
                  CVnradus, of whome we haue now ſpoken, had a wyfe of the Baiers bloude, of the whiche he had a ſonne Conradinus who was nouryſhed and brought vp in hys hereditary duchy of Schwaben, and after hys fathers deceaſſe wolde go to Naples hys heredytary kyngdome. But Clemens the biſhop of Rome called Charles the Frenche kynges brother into the realme of Naples agaynſt hym. Conradynus for ſo muche as he was duke of Schwaben, had a greate bende and hooſte of Germanes about hym, and at the begynnynge had he greate vyctoryes. But at the laſte were Conradinus the ſonne of Conradus, and Fryderyck duke of Eaſtenriche taken by a trayne. Beſydes thys were they entreated more vnſemelye than was pertaynynge and put to ſhame. At the laſte were they beheaded throughe the counſell of the Romyſhe byſhop.

O notable crueltye. He muſt be euen as harde as aThe notable cruelty of Clemens biſhop of Ro. agaynſt Cū
                     radinus. ſtone verely, whome the examples of ſo great cruelty dyd not moue, namelye ſo noble a kynge, borne ofſo many Emperoures, to be ſo ſhamefullye put to death by Clemens the Romyſh byſhop, without any ryghte or reaſon. Ther are yet euen at thys houre writinges, which were written at that time, in the which the good prince complayneth of the iniury, and rehearſeth at length the whole matter orderly: ſo that it is no doute, the biſhoppes of Rome haue vſed playne tiranny againſt Conradinus.
            
            
               Wiliam, the, xxvi. Germane Emperour.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſt M. C. C. liiij. wasWilliam Emperoure. choſen Emperoure Wylyam counte of Holland. It is ſayde he was an honeſt manered prince, and of notable innocency of life: but he was ſlayn by the Friſelanders the yerre. 1256.
            
            
               Vacation of the Empyre.
               
                  WHan thys Wiliam was dead, the empire ſtode with out a certayne emperoure ſeuentene yeares, and that not wythout great deſtruction of the Germane nacion. Thys miſchaunge grewe by the cyuyl warres, that were rayſed in the empyre by the byſh. of Ro. Now whan the debate was ryſen amonge the ElectorsAlfonſus kynge of Spayne and aſtronomiā. for the choyſe, ſome choſe Alfonſus kyng of Spayne Emperoure, becauſe he was a very wyſe man, and endued with notable vertues. As for thys Alfonſus is he, who not only had hys pleaſure in the ſcience of Aſtronomye, but alſo augmented

and amēded the ſtudy thereof with many bokes wrytten. Thoughe Alfonſus was admonyſhed by the byſhop of Rome to take vpon hym the Emperyall maieſtye: yet refuſed he it earneſtly, becauſe of the vncertayn faythfulneſſe and vnſtable concord of the Romyſh Byſhops wyth the Emperours. The other parte of the Electors choſe Richard, the king of Englandes brother, and brought hym vntyll Baſyll: but he was not accepted of the Empyre.
               Alexander the .iiij. ſucceded after Innocentius. At thys time lyued Albertus the greate. and Thomas Aquinas.
               Vrbanus the .iiij. was after Alexander.
               Clemens the .iiij. ſucceded Vrbanus. Thyſſame cauſed Conradynus Conradus ſonne to be beheaded.
               Whan Clemens was deade, was the ſee voyde two yeares through the diſſenſion of choyſynge a Byſhop at the laſt was Gregorius the .x. choſen. The ſame admonyſhed the Electors in the begynnynge of hys byſhopryck, to choyſe agayne an Emperoure wyth egall conſent, leſte the ſtate of the empyre dyd wholy decaye.
            
            
               Rudolfe the .xxvij. GermaneRudolf erle 
                        ••
                      Habyſburge. Emperoure.
               
                  THe yere of Chriſt .M. CC. lxxiij. was Rudolfe choſen Emperour the erle of Habiſburge, and counte prouincial of Alſace. He raygned .xix. yeares. He was confirmed of the Byſhopp of Ro.

For the Emperoure and byſhop of Rome came together at Lauſana euen accordyng to the ſaieng of theſe two verſes of auncient men.
               Twelue hundreth thre ſcore and thertene yere, dyd ſtande.
               Lauſana, tyll the pope and the kyng came thether into that lande.
               Howbeit Rudolfe went not into Italy, nether receaued he the Imperiall crowne. He was wont to reherſe Eſops fable of the Foxe, which ſaid to the Lion ſicke in his denne: ſhe were afrayd to come in therefore, becauſe ſhe ſawe the footſteppes of beaſtes that were gone in, but not of beaſtes that were come out. That lykewyſe he dyd conſyder, how his aunceters went oft into Italy with greate hooſtes: but mooſte commonly returned home euell intreated. Yet in the meane ſeaſon ſent he a Lieutenaunt into Italy, who was receiued of the beſtpart of the Italian cities.
               The Bohemies and Baier withſtode Rudolfe at the fyrſt, but he ſubdued Baierlande forth with. Othacarus kyng of the Bohemies wold not obey, and beſydes that helde Eaſtenriche, (that was now without heire, & belongyng to the empyre) againſt ryght and reaſon. Wherfore Rudolphe ſent the Burggraue of Norenberg into Bohemy, to ſhewe the kyng on the Emperours behalfe, to obeye, andOthacarus hy
                        •
                     g of the Bohemes. to voyde out of Eaſtenryche: but Othacarus refuſed both. Wherfore after muche reaſonynge vpon the matter, brought Rudolphe armed hoſtes into Eaſtenryche, and toke it in. He beſieged the citie Vienne, & fought a great battaill by Niderſbrug▪
                  
in the yeare .M. cclxxviij. In that battayll was Othacarus ſlayne. Of this wyſe was Eaſtenriche at the laſt brought vnder Rudolphes dominion, and after that made he Albert his ſonne duke there: ſo that henceforth Eaſtenriche by this meanes is holdenAlbert duke 
                        ••
                      Eaſtērich of the empyre by fealtie or benefite. Moreouer the princes of Eaſtenriche haue their offpringe of this Alberte, vntyll the moſte prayſe worthy Charles the Emperoure that now is, & his brother kyng Ferdinande.
               Rudolphe the Emperoure ſhewed high fauour and gentleneſſe towarde Wenceſlaus Othacarus ſonne: for he left hym the kyngdome of Bohemy, and gaue hym his daughter in mariage. ThisWen
                        ••
                     ſlaus 
                        〈…〉
                     g of Bo
                     
                        〈…〉
                      ma
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . Wenceſlaus is canoniſated for a ſaynt, and is worſhypped. Rudolphe ſubdued the Bourgundians alſo. In Alſace dyd he take by violence thoſe cities that rebelled and conſpyred agaynſt hym, and punyſhed them worthely: amonge thoſe were Hageno
                     •
                  , Colmar, Tzurig and Berne.
               The yeare .M. cclxxxvi. dyd he inuade the Erle of Wirtenberg, and beſyeged the citie Studtgard: at the laſte was an accorde made by the byſhop of Mentz.
               The yeare .M. ccxc. had Rudolphe a great parliament at Erfurde▪ and by the aide of the citie ErfurdeErfurde. did he ſpoyle & caſt downe about .iij. ſcore holdes in Thuringe. O
                     •
                   this wyſe fynally dyd Rudolfe bryng the troubled & full of ſedicion eſtate of Germany, whyle it had no certayn Emperours to a peaceableneſſe, and dyd in a maner ſet vp the decayed empyre. He dyed the yere of Chriſt M. ccxcii.
               
                  Innocencius the .v. ſucceded Gregorius the .x.
               Adrianus the .v. ſucceded Innocencius.
               Iohannes the .xxi. a phiſicion ſucceded Adrianꝰ
               When Iohannes was deade, Nicolaus the .iij. was made byſhop of Rome. He went about to geue his two coſins the two kyngdomes of Italy, that the one ſhould be kyng of Hetruria, the other kyng of Lombardy: For the Romyſh byſhop ſawe that Rudolphe had more then ynough to do in Germany, and thought he coulde not therefore come into Italy. But the imperiall cities wythſtode the byſhop of Romes enterpryſes, that they could not proſper, and Rudolphe ſent a Lieutenaunt into Italy alſo.
               
                  Honorius the .iiij. was byſhop after Nicolaus.
                  Nicolaus the .iiij. was byſhop after Honorius.
               
            
            
               Adolfe the .xxviii. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſt .M. ccxcij. was AdolfeAdolfe coūte of Naſſau Emperoure. counte of Naſſau choſen Emperour. The ſame was before in greate eſtimacion by Rudolphe. Beſydes that was his brother byſhop of Mentz, and by his voyce in the election was he holpen to be made Emperoure. He raygned ſyxe yeares, and was depoſed from the empyre by the Electours: For hys ſubſtaunce was not ſufficient to ſuſtayne the coſtes of the Emperyall hyghneſſe: Beſydes that was he very in fortunable in diſpatchynge greate thynges. The warre, worthy of remembraunce that he hath had, was that he brought an army into Thuryngen. For Albert Landtgraue of Thuringen had a

ſtryfe wyth his ſonne Dieterus, and Frederick ſurnamed Gnawed cheke. And the ſame ſolde to Adolfe the Emperoure the prouinciall Erldome of Thuringen. He alſo endeuoured to make his kynreds nobilitie more renowmed, and went into Thurinvan, and dyd much harme to it. He beſyeged Crutzberg, Frankenſtein and Friburg: But Frederick droue him back agayn. Howbeit to apeace ſundry & many perturbacions that were at that tyme in the empyre, it was requiſite to haue a more puyſſaunter heade in Germane. And therefore the princes Electors makyng an aſſembly at Mentz, they choſe Albert duke of Eaſtenrich, ſonne to the Emperour
                     
                        〈…〉
                      du
                        •
                     e 
                        •
                     f 
                        ••
                     ſte
                        •
                     rich Rudolphe. But for aſmuche as Adolfe would kepe the empyre by force, duke Albert went againſt hym with an army, and they fought fearcely together by Worms. In that battayll was Adolfe ſlayne the yeare .M. ccxcviij. as theſe verſes folowynge do witneſſe.
               
                  The yeare thouſand, thre hundreth two leſſe.
                  Was through the ſwearde kynge Adolfes deceaſſe.
               
               After Nicolans the .iiij. was Celeſtinus the .v. made byſhop of Rome. The ſame leauynge the byſhoprycke became an heremite.
               After Celeſtinus became Bonifacius the .viij. Byſhop of Rome. It is ſayde that Celeſtinus was begyled by thys man with a voyce ſpoken to hym through a rede or pype, as though it wer come out of heauen, that he ſhould forſake the byſhopricke, & ordeyne Bonifacius. He rayſed greate warres in Italy. He dyd excommunicate the Frenche kyng,

and gaue the tytle of the Frenche kyngdome to Alberte the Emperoure, that by this meanes at the laſt the Garmanes and frenchemen might come to ſtrokes. At the laſt was Bonifacius taken, and dyed in the pryſon. And hereby commeth that it isA feate ſaieng by Bonifaci
                        •
                      the .viij. ſayde of hym: He entred as a Foxe, he reygned as a Wolfe or Lion, he died as a Dogge.
            
            
               Albert the .i. xxix. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  the .M .cc. xcviij. yere of Chriſt began AlberteAlbert Emperoure duke of Eſtenriche. duke of Eaſtenriche, ſonne to Rudolphe the Emperoure to raygne. He ruled the empire ten yeres: he ouercame in battaill Adolfe the Emperoure. At the firſt would not bonifacius confirme Albertus empyre: afterwarde did he frely cōfirme it, to do the Frenche kyng a ſpite, and geuyng Albert the title of the kyngdome of Fraunce, he ſet hym agaynſt the Frenche kynge. But the kyng of Fraunce geuyng hys daughter to Alberts ſonne, he appeaſed hym, that he ſhould enterpryſe no enimitie agaynſt hym. He made a ſettynge forth agaynſt Bohemy, and made his ſonne kyng of Bohemy. He dyd ſo tame Bohemy and Mentz, whiche made fyndely confederacions together that they obeyed the empyre.
               At the laſt was he ſlayne of his brothers ſonne & ſome erles of Eaſtenryche. It was happely Gods pleaſure ſo, leſt the manſlaughter that he had done againſt Adolfe the Emperoure ſhould be vnpunyſhed. For though he was not of lyke power: yet in the meane ſeaſon ought he to haue worſhipped him as his lorde, ordeyned of God. The kyllers of hym

were punyſhed alſo. For God letteth not manquellers
                     
                        •
                     n example of vengeaūce vnpunyſhed.
               Benedictus the .x. was byſhop of Rome after Bonifacius the .viij.
            
            
               The remouing of the Romyſh byſhops ſe from Rome into Fraunce.
               
                  WHen Benedictus the .x. was deade, Clemens the .v. was made byſhop of Rome. The ſame dwelt at Lions in Fraunce, & abſolued the Frenche kyng of the excommunication. Wherfore ſence that tyme, which was the yeare .M. cccv. was the byſhop of Romes ſee tranſlated from the citie Rome, to Auinion in Prouence a contry of Fraunce .xvii. yeres.
               At this tyme were the Fratri
                     •
                  elli, whiche were
                     
                        〈…〉
                     ricelli. euen of lyke opinion with the Anabaptiſtes, that in oure dayes go aſtraye: their opinion was, that noman ſhould haue ought propre or of hys owne, that Chriſten men ſhould not gouerne cōmon welthes, and ſuche lyke madde opinions had they.
            
            
               Of the Turkes.
               
                  IN the tyme of Albert of Eaſtenriche, began the kynred of Othomanus to growOthomānus among the Turkes in power and eſtimacion: of whoſe bloude are ſpronge thoſe kynges of the Turkes that raygne at this tyme.
               Henry the .vij. called of Lucelburg, the .xxx. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  
                  THhe yere of Chriſt .M. cccix was choſenHenry the vi
                        •
                     
                   Emperoure Henry the prince of Lucelburg. He reigned .vi. yeares. For in the meane tyme that the Romiſh biſhop was in Fraunce, the Frenche kyng deſyred inordinatly the dignitie of the empire, and truſted to obteayne his requeſt. througe the conſent of the Romiſh byſhop. But the cōcorde was not long durable betwene the byſhop & the Frenche kyng. Wherfore the byſhop aduertiſed the princes Electours, whiche had now long diſagreed for the electiō, to hayſte to choyſe an Emperoure with one conſent the prince of Lucelburg, who at that time was demed a moſt renowmed prince, for his wyſdome ioyned with hygh grauitie. As he was choſen, ſtrayght waye dyd the byſhop of Rome cōfirme hym. And thus was the Frē
                  che kyng diſapointed of his requeſt & endeuoure▪ to remooue the dignitie of the Romiſh empire to him.
               Firſt toke he from the duke of Wirtenberg al his goodes, becauſe he was a rebel to the empyre. To his ſonne Iohn gaue he the kyng of Bohemies daughter in mariage: & by this meanes became Iohn prince of Lucelburg, the father of Charles the iiij. kyng of Bohemy.
               Afterward went he into Italy with a great army, and made Italy ſo afrayde of hym, as no Emperoure had done a greate whyle before hym. Some cities woulde not yelde them to hym, without they were compelled by force, namely Cremona and Brixia: the reſidue obeyed frely. At RomeHenry the vij was poiſoned of a black frier in the Sacrament. was he crowned Emperoure. He beſyeged Florence with a heuy and ſtrayght ſyege, at the whiche

tyme (as it is reported) a frere of y• preachers order or Black freres, that was made out of the Florentines, deſtroied Henry with venim, whiche he ſtrake vpon the ſyngynge breade, yea and the byſhop of Rome hymſelfe alſo, beynge now armed with hys weapons, threatened Henry wyth the dart of excommunicacion, as he perceaued that he began to be ſett by in Italy.
            
            
               Ludouicus or Lewis the Baier, the .xxxi. Germane emperoure. And agaynſt hym was choſen Emperour Frederick Duke of Eaſtenriche.
               
                  THe yere of Chriſt M. cccxiiij. were aſſembled together at Franckforde the princes Electors the byſh. of Mentz▪ Trier and Colen, Ihon kyng of Bohe my, Rudolphe counte Palatine of the Rene, Rudolphe duke of Saxony & Volcmarus marques of Brandenburg. On ſaynct Lucies daie was choſen Emperoure Lewis theLewi
                        •
                      the Ba
                     
                        •
                     er Baier by the byſhops of Mentz & Trier, the kyng of Bohemy and Marques of Brandenborowe. And agaynſt hym was choſen Friderick duke ofFrederick duke of Eaſten
                     
                        ••
                     che▪
                   Eaſtenriche be the byſhop of Colen, the cunte Palatine and duke of Saxony. Lewis was crowned Emperoure at Aken, & Frederick at Bonne. This controuerſye in choſynge, brought an occaſion of greate inwarde or ciuyll warre in Germany. The duke of Eaſtenriche had fauourers the byſhop of Rome the kynges of Fraunce and Bohemy, the Schwabes, the counte of Palatine, them of Straſborow

and other cities many. But God proſpered Lewis, who was leſſe of power, & deſtitute of mans ayde. He raygned .xxxiij. yeares.
               The yeare .M. cccxxiij. dyd they ſtryke a felde by the floude Nechare, whereof both ſydes many were ſlayne.
               The yeare .M. cccxxv. on ſaynt Michaels euen gaue Lewis a greate battaill to Frederick. Frederick did ayde Lupoldus hys brother, ioyned wythLupoldus. hym the Schwaben and Switcers, and a greate parte of the Hungarians. As for Lewis dyd folow the kyng of Bohemy, and the erle of Norenberg, and ſome other princes. Now when Lupoldes taried ſo long, that he could not paſſe the water, y• hoſt of Eaſtenriche was ſlayne, and Friderick was takenFriderick duke of Eaſtenriche was taken by a Ebrarde Moſbach. by a Franke, whoſe name was Ebrarde Moſbach: the ſame led hym to the erle of Norenberg, who ſent hym to Lewis. But when Lupoldus ſawe he coulde not helpe hys brother, he was ſo angry and ragious, that he had in a maner vndone hymſelfe, had not hys men refrayned hym: whiche alſo conſayled hym to withdrawe, nether dyd raſhly caſt hymſelfe into the daunger. Afterwarde aſſayed Lupoldus many thynges inuayne both by the byſhop of Rome, and alſo the Frenche kyng, that he myght take his brother awaye by force: for the Frē
                  che kyng made no greate force of a ſtrange matter Friderick was a pryſoner the ſpace of thre yeares in a caſtel in Baierlande: at the laſt when the controuerſy was brought to a poynt, he was let louſe vpon this condicion, that he ſhoulde renounce the empyre: whiche thing when he had frely promiſed

he was reſtored into Eaſtenriche by Lewis. Of this wyſe behaued Lewis hymſelfe very gently toward his enemy: Lupoldus yet in the meane tyme not ceaſſynge of rayſynge commocions, euen after that Frederick was deliuered.
               Afterwarde dyd Iohannes the .xxij. caſt hysLewis is excōmunicated thonder boltes of courſyng agaynſt Lewis the Emperoure, becauſe he vſed the Imperyall aucthoritie and empyres gouernaunce in Italy, before hys coronacion. Thereof roſe an occaſion of a greate diuiſion in Germany, and that laſted about .xxiiij.A diuiſion in Germany. yeares. In the meane tyme roſe here and there greate ſedicions in the empyre and cyties, and one parte buſyed to dryue out and oppreſſe the other by conſpiracion. And though Lewis deſyred abſolution not once, but often of the byſhop of Rome, yet could he not obtayne it wyth any prayers, ſo that both Benedictus that was after Iohannes, and other many and honeſt men dyd refuſe the proceſſe. There are yet now a dayes wrytynges of the controuerſie, wherein the Romyſhe byſhop. Iohannes the .xxii. is not aſhamed to boaſte, thatThe boaſtīg of Iohannes 
                        •
                     he .xxij. byſh. he hath the full power and aucthoritie to make and depoſe, not onely kynges, but alſo all Emperoures at hys pleaſure. By thys it maye be gathered eaſely, that the Romyſhe byſhop vſed ſo greate hatred agaynſte the Emperoure, for no very weyghty cauſe. There were alſo about that tyme ſome learned men, whiche openly blamed the Romyſhe byſhops writynges, amonges theſe was Occam one▪
                  Ocam a re
                     
                        •
                     ouer of the 
                        •
                     om
                        ••
                     h biſh. the princes of Germany euery one, as wel eccleſiaſticall, as of the nobilitie helde with the Emperour:

at the laſt were ſome compelled by the byſhop of Rome to fall back, and alſo to choyſe another Emperoure.
               Lewis had very greate vproures in Italy. GaleaciusGaleacius of Milan. of Milan, and the counſayll of Rome longed for Lewis commyng into Italy. Wherfore he went thether with the Empereſſe, which alſo was delyuered of a chylde at Rome, that was called Lewis the Romane, and was afterwarde by the Emperoure made marques of Brandenborowe. At Milan was Lewis crowned of the byſh. there, and at Rome of the Cardinall de Columna. He made alſo Peter of Corbaria byſhop of Rome, who was not longe after caried bounde to Auinion in Fraunce, to Iohannes the .xxii. who caſt hym into pryſon, wherein he dyed.
               But whyle allthys was adoynge, Lewis by noLewis the Romane. requeſtes coulde optayne to be releaſed of the excō
                  municacion by the byſhop of Rome. But forſoeth the Romyſh byſhop brought that to paſſe wyth his buſy laboure at length, that in an aſſembly or daye holden at Lucelburg, the byſhops of Mentz, Trier and Colen, the kyng of Bohemy and duke of Saxon, dyd choyſe another Emperour. There was choſen Charles the fourth erle prouincial of Morauia, the ſonne of the kyng of Bohemy. The ſame was then confirmed by Clemens the .vi. byſhop of Ro. But for as muche as the cities of Aken and Colen would not knowe hym for an Emperoure, he was crowned at Bon.
            
            
               Of Nicolaus Auguſtus, that is, Nicolas the noble, that was at Rome.
               
                  
                  ABout this tyme happened at Rome anNicolas the noble or ful of maieſtie, an example of notable folye. example of a notable folye: There was at Rome one Nicolas, a towne clarke or recorder of Rome, of ſuche power and aucthoritie, that one would haue ſayde he had the rule of the whole citie: for at that tyme were the Romyſh Byſhoppes yet in Fraunce. This Nicolas called hymſelf Tribunus Auguſtus, that is, the noble hygh officer: and with open ſcriptures wytneſſed, that Rome is yet the true heade of the empyre: and therfore by ye citie of Romes aucthoritie, had he the hygheſt power to handle maters of the empyre. And by reaſon of this aucthoritie called he Lewis and Charles to appeare before hym, and to cōmitte their matter to his arbitremēt or iudgement. Lyke folyſhneſſe vſed he oft agaynſt other cities and kynges ye ſpace of two yeares. At the laſt this pore Auguſtus being driuē out by the byſhop of Romes partie, fled to Charles the fourth. But Charles ſent the raſh man to the byſhop of Rome at Auiniō, of whom he was kept in pryſon.
               The yeare of Chriſt .M. cccxlv. died Lewis the Bayer. And then came Charles with a great hooſt out of Bohemy to Regenſpurg, where he was knowen for an Emperoure. From thence was he alſo receaued at Norenberg: for Charles made thē beleue, he had gotten a fauourable abſolution of the biſhop of Rome to put out the great offences, wherwith they had offended, in that they were adherent to Lewis. When they of Baſyl ſent out their Burgemaiſters to Charles, that he in the name of the citie ſhould aſke abſolution, he anſwered: he thought

they had not done amiſſe, in that they had Lewis for an Emperoure, nether thought he that Lewis was an heritike: yet in the meane tyme if they could be abſolued of their treſpaſſes, he wold be content. And thus were they abſolued.
               The yeare of Chriſt .M. cccxlviij. when Lewis was now deade, there roſe yet a greater diſcorde: the byſhop of Mentz, the counte Palatine, the marques of Brādenburg, and the duke of Saxony, his ſonne that hath choſen Charles Emperoure, aſſembled and refuſyng the election of Charles, they choſeEdward the iij. kynge of Englande, & Fredrick erle of Miſen refuſe the dignitie Emperial
                        •
                     
                   Edward the third, kyng Englande to take vpon hym the maieſtie Emperiall: but he refuſed it, as a thyng ful of cumbraunce. After that choſe they Frederick Erle prouinciall of Miſen. But he alſo forſoke that title of the empyre: for he would not fyght and warre with his neyghbours the Bohemies to vndoe his countrey.
            
            
               Guntherus Erle of Swartzburg is choſen Emperoure.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſte .M. cccl. was choſen Emperoure at Franckforde Gunterus Erle of Schwatzburg, yet not with conſent of all the Electors. Theſame accepted the gouernaunce of the empyre, and garnyſhed with all defence to retayne the empyre, he was armed ynough againſte the force of Charles, who then abode at Mentz. But ſhortly after died Gunterus at Frāckforde ſodenly poyſoned. Wherefore Charles was Emperoure alone. He came to Franckforde, and

was receiued for an Emperoure.
               After Clemens the .v. became Iohannes the xxii. byſhop of Rome who without a iuſte cauſe dyd excommunicate the good Emperoure Lewis.
               Benedictus the .xi. was made byſhop of RomeBenedictus the. 
                        •
                     i. after Iohannes. The ſame neuer alowed the action of Iohannes againſt the Emperoure Lewis, and when he was made byſhop of Rome he had frely abſolued hym, had not the kynges of Fraunce and Naples with their threatenynges withſtande hym. When in the relacion the orators or embaſſadors of the kinges alledged, that Lewis had enterpryſed many haynous thynges againſt the byſhop of Rome. Benedictus anſwered: yea, we haue done againſt hym. He liued not long in the byſhopricke, & therefore dyd al the cauſes hang vndiſpatched.
               Clemens the .vi. was made byſhop after Benedictus. The ſame renewined the thonder boltes caſt againſt Lewis, and perſued hym moſte fearcely: though in the counſayll of Vienne in Fraunce were treated in the meane tyme of the condicions of peace, and that Lewis declared hymſelfe humble. This Clemens bought the citie Auenion of IoannaAuenion a citie p
                        •
                     pall. quene of Sicily, and ſo hath the byſhop of Ro. aucthoritie vpon this citie.
               Moreouer at this tyme went about here & therinThe 
                        •••
                     de
                     
                        ••
                     r
                        •
                      in 
                        •••
                     
                     many & Fraū
                     ce 
                        〈…〉
                     g themſel
                        ••
                     s. in Germany and Fraunce, a great nomber of men, whiche did beate themſelues with roddes. Many of them came to Spire, when the day or parliamēt was holden there pretending great holyneſſe. For their holineſſe ſake were they bidden to the meales of the citeſens. And as the deceate of the erroure

dyd not differ from the Anabaptiſtes ſuperſticious opinion: euen ſo was that ſecte no leſſe daūgerous in thoſe daies. But at the laſt it was condemned.
               Innocentius the .vi. ſucceded Clemens. In his tyme was Charles the .iiij. crowned at Rome.
            
            
               Charles the .iiij. the .xxxij. Germane Emperoure.
               THe yere of Chriſt .M. cccl. began Charles y•
                  Charles y• iiij iiij. to raigne, after ye death of Guntherus of Schwartzburg. He was a prince of ye bloud of Lucelburg, the ſonne of Ihon kyng of Bohemy: for Iohn was ye ſonne of Henry of Lucelburg. Frō this yere of .M. cccl. reigned Charles. xxvii
                     •
                  . yeres
               The yeare .M. ccclv. went Charles downe into Italy, & was gently receaued of the cities. At Ro. the ſenate & all the beſt metyng Charles, did receaue hym with all reuerence. He likewyſe, to declare to the Romanes his gentleneſſe, lyghted from his horſe, & receaued on fote the yelding of the citie. Afterward was he crowned of the cardinal of Hoſtia. The cities of the byſh. of Rome in Italy, that were rebels, ſubdued he to do the Romyſh byſhop a pleaſure, ſo that they repyned nomore. I fynde none other thynges that he dyd in this iourney.
               They yeare .M. ccclx. he ouercame and ſp
                     •
                  yled Ebrardus erle of Wirtenberg with a great army. But at the laſt was the debate layde downe, by the byſhop of Auſburg, Straſburg and Spire.
               The yeare .M. ccclxvi. went Charles agayne in to Italy, in the whiche iourney he aſſuaged and ſubdued ſome cities, deſyrous of vproure.
               
                  Charles beſyeged alſo y• citie Vlme, but I reade no where for what cauſe. For oure Germanes not knowyng the propertie of hiſtories, haue not taken hede to the circumſtaunces and cauſes of thynges.Charles the 
                        ••
                      maker of ye gold
                        •
                      buile
               
               Charles hath deſerued greate thankes for the golden bulle that he made, wherein he hath handſomly compriſed many thynges, that make to entertayne common peace. He did chefely endeuoure & procure the affayres of Bohemy. He ordeined the:The viuerſitie of Praga in Bohempe. vniuerſitie of Praga. Some there are that diſalowe, that he gaue the French kyng ryghtes in the kyngdome of Orleaunce.
               The yeare .M. ccclxx. cauſed Charles his ſonne Wenceſlaus to be made Emperoure. To his other ſonne Sigiſmundus gaue he the Erldome of the marques of Brādenburg, the which he had bought of Lewis the Romane.
               The yere .M. ccclxxvii. fought Vdalricus Erle of Wirtenberg miſhappely, before the citie Rutlingen.The battayll by Rutlingē
                   In that battaill dyed many and noble men.
            
            
               Switzer league.
               
                  ABout this tyme began the Switzer league,The Switzers league. and firſt the citie Lucerna, then Berna, at the laſt Tzurich dyd ioyne themſelues to the Switzers: and the noble prince Lupoldus duke of Eaſtenriche, was ouercomeLupoldus duke of Eaſtenriche was ſlam by the Switzers. and ſlayne by the Switzers the yere .M. ccclxxxv.
               But for as muche as there are in mans handes euery where hiſtories of the Switzers dedes. I reken it neoeleſſe to make longe reherſall of their actes in this lytle boke.
               
                  Vrbanus the v. ſucceded Innocentius the v
                     •
                  .
               Gregorius the x
                     •
                  . was byſhop of Rome after Vrbanus. The ſame remoued y• ſee out of Fraunce to Rome agayne, the yeare MCCCLXXVI.
            
            
               A diuiſion
               
                  AFter Gregorius the xi. roſe a greate diuiſiō
                  A diuiſiō after Gregory us the .xi. in the ſpiritualtye. The Italians made an Italian Byſhoyp of Rome called Vrbanus the vi. and the ſame remayned at Rome. The Frenchmen alſo choſe a Byſhop of Rom. in Italy, whome they called Clemens the vii. The ſame gat hym to Auinion. Thus was Rome diuided, and ther were two byſhoppes of Rome: the one dyd accurſe the other. Truely Italy, Germany and Hungary dyd hange to Vrbanus the byſhops of the Romanes. Thys diuiſion laſted vntyll the councel of Conſtance .xxxix. yeares.
            
            
               Wenceſlaus the .xxxiii. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſte .M. ccc. lxxviij. afterWēceſlaus Emperour. Charles deceaſſe, began Wenceſlaus his ſonne to raygne, and raygned after hys fathers death .xxii. yeares.
               At thys tyme began Ihon Huſſe opēly to teacheIhon Huſſe teacheth opē
                     lye agaynſt pardons. at Praga agaynſt the byſhop of Romes pardones: and by thys occaſion roſe hurteful inſurrections in Bohemy agaynſt preſtes and religious men.
               Wenceſlaus was at the laſte taken by hys brother Sigiſmundus, and kept at Vienne in preſon. Other thinges do I not fynde of this Wenceſlaus that I iudge worthy to be put in writynges.
            
            
               
               Rupertus the xxxiiij. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſt .M. CCCC. was Rupertus the counte Palatine madeRupertus Emperoure. Emperour. He raigned tenne yeares. But ſeynge the Emperours had now ben long from Italy, the power of the kynred of Galeacyus was waxen greate at Milan and the Florentins were become ryche alſo, and warred agaynſt them of Milane. The Florentins aſked ayde of Rupertus the Emperoure, to repreſſe the power of the Galacians. Wherefore Rupertus went vppe into Italy to helpe the Florentius. and toke Galeacins. Howbeit Rupertus beyng deſtitute of the aſſiſtaunce of the duke of Eaſtenriche, and biſhop of Colen, was to weake, than that he coulde haue brought ſo greate thynges to paſſe: and though he had aſſayed many thinges, yet was he conſtrayned to returne agayne into Germanye hys buſſineſſe beyng not diſ
                     •
                  p
                     •
                  rched.
               Bonifacius the .ix. was made biſhop at Rome after Vrbanus.
               And againſt him was made biſh. after Clemens ye .vii. Petrus de Luna called Benedictus the .xii.
               After Bonifacius was Innocentius y•. vii made byſhop at Rome.
               After Innocētius was Gregorius the xii. made byſhop at Rome. The ſame promyſed y• he woulde renounce the byſhoprycke, yf Benedictus lykewiſe dyd not refuſe to renounce alſo. But whā Benedictus fled into Spayne, leauyng Auinion, Gregorius reuoked hys promiſe concernyng to reſigne the

byſhoprycke. Wherefore was a councell gathered at Pyſis, whereyn bothe Gregorius and Benedictus were depoſed of the byſhoprycke, and in theyr ſteade was the thyrde Romyſh byſhop choſen Alexander the .v. Gregorius fled to Ariminum, where he remayned vntill the counſel of Conſtance was. Alexander the .v. dwelt at Bonony, for the Hungarians hauing than taken in Rome, vſed incredible tirāny, & warred with the Frenchmen for Naples.
               After Alexander the .v. was Ioannes the .xxiii.The diuiſion of thre Rom. vyſh. made byſhop of Rome at Bonony. And of this wiſe were a lyue, vntil the general councel of Conſtance thys Ioannes the .xxiii. at Bonony, Gregorius at Ariminum and Benedictus in Spayne. But they were all thre ſet beſyde y• Romyſhe byſhopryck in that councel.
            
            
               Of Tamerlanes the tyraunt of Tartaria.
               
                  IN the time of Rupertus the EmperourTamerlanes a tyraunt. lyued the paſſynge cruell tyraunte Tamerlanes the Tartarian, who by greate ſpoylynge, wente aboute nearehande al y• Eaſt and Aſia, with an armye of tenne hundreth thouſande men. He ſpoyled the Perſeans, Armenians and Syrians. He inuaded alſo the leſſe Aſia and toke Paiaſetus the Turkyſh Emperoure, and caryed hym in a cage as a byrde aboute wyth hym for a wonder and mockage.
            
            
               Sigiſmundus the .xxxv. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſte .M.CCCC. afterSigiſmundus Emperoure. Rupertus the Emperours deceaſſe was Sigyſmundus made Emperoure. He was the ſonne of Charles the fourthe, marques of Brandenburg, kynge of Hungary and Bohemye. He was Emperour ſeuen and twentye yeares. He was a mooſt famous prince in wiſedome, learnyng and honeſtye: ſuche one of ſtature, as was ſemynge a lyke prince. His countrefaytoure very connyngly made, is to be ſene yet this daye, by the erle Hoier of Manſfelde. He had greate warres in Hungary agaynſt the Hungaryans of the whyche he was taken. He fought oft agaynſt the Turkes. But whan he was made Emperoure, he made a greate ſettyng forth agaynſt the Turkes with the ayde of all nacions, whereof we ſhall ſpeake hereafter
            
            
               Of the councell of Conſtance.
               
                  IN the beginnynge of Sigiſmundus raygne he went vp into Italye, and toke counſell with Ioannes the byſh of Ro. of callinge a generall councel for to auoyde the diuiſion. He went alſo to the Frenche kynge, and compelled hym to agre to the callynge a general councell. Wherefore by the conſent of the byſhop of Ro. Ioannes, the Emperoure, and alſo the kynges of Fraunce, Spayne and England, was the councell of Conſtance begonne the yeare .M. C C C C. xiiii. to the whiche came Ioannes the Byſhop of Rome hymſelfe.
               The Emperoure Sigiſmundus came to Conſtance

before Chriſtmaſſe, and at maſſe ſonge he the goſpell as Deacon: Ther went oute a commaundemente from Auguſtus the Emperoure &c.
               Afterwarde was ther treated of Ihon Huſſe,He that wyll knowe the whole hiſtory of Ihon Huſſe & Hierō of Pragga yt were burnt in ye councel at Cōſtāce, let him read Eneas ſiluius ī his boke of yE beginning & dedes of ye Bohemies ye .xxxv. & xxxv. chapy. and hys doctryne beyng condemneth, he was burneth wyth Hieronimus of Praga. After that treated they to a peace the diuiſyon, and depoſyng the byſhoppes of Rome. Ioannes the .xxiij. Gregorius and Benedictus, was choſen in the ſee Othode Columna, who was called Martynus the fyfte.
               But whan it repented Ioannes the .xxiii. that he had conſented frelye to the renouncynge of the Byſhoprycke of Rome, he wente aboute to flye pryuelye, wyth the ayde of Frederyck duke of Eaſtenryche. But in the flyghte Ioannes was had backe agayne, by the Emperoures men. And the duke of Eaſtenryche was bannyſhed by the Emperoure, and ſome of hys townes taken in hys duchye. At the laſt was the debate layed downe of thys wyſe: It was coūſelled Frederyck, that he frely yeldyng to the Emperoure all hys landes, ſhulde humblye requyre forgeueneſſe of hys offence. Wherefore by the Emperoures gentleneſſe and fauoure he was reſtored in the duchy of Eaſtenryche.
               But Ioannes the byſhoppe of Rome, was delyuered to the counte Palatyne to be kepte. Theſame caried him int ye caſtel Māheym, not farre frō the citye Heidelberg: there was he kepte the ſpace of thre yeare. After yt was he receaued to grace by

Martinus the Romiſh biſh. and made a Cardinal. Whan of this wiſe that hurteful diuiſion that was betwene the biſhops of Rome was anoyded, peace and reſte was reſtored to the churche, and that by the endeuoure and procurement of Sigiſmundus the Emperoure, who therefore deſerued greate prayſes.
               The reſidue that were done in that aſſemble or councel, is no nede to rehearſe: for whole bokes are wrytten thereof.
            
            
               Of the prouincial erles of the marqueſhip of Brandenburg.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſt .M. C C C C. xvii. the fyrſte ſondaye after Eaſter, dyd Sigyſmundus the Emperour in the councell geue to the mooſte prayſe worthy prince Fridericke Burgraue of Norinberg, the ryghte of Imperyall election, and the prouincyall marqueſhyp of Branbenburge: and that for hys excellent vertues, and greate truſte, that he had ſhewed in diſpatchinge great cauſes of the empyre. But truely it were long to rechearſe here how noble princes haue ben both before thys dignitye was gotten, & alſo afterward in this progeny of Burgraues: yee and before hath oft ben made mēcion of them. But after that they were made Electors, they were diligente euer in treatynge the greateſte and mooſte weightyeſt matters of the empyre, for the whyche thynges ſake ſhalbe oft made mēcion of thē hereafter. Wherfore in the hiſtories of our time, is Albertus the Marques praiſed before al other, who for

his vertues ſake is ſurnamed y• germane Achilles.
               It is alſo not vnknowen in oure dayes, y• Marques Ioachim of Brandenburg Elector, my mooſt gentle lorde, and his brother Albert Cardinal and Elector, Archebyſhoppe of Mentz and Magdenburge &c. are garnyſhed with hygh wyſedome, and all princely vertues: and that therfore theyr counſel & ayde is requyred before other in hyghe and harde matters, not only concernynge the empyre, but alſo to y• whole Chriſtiantie. Nother cā it other wyſe be in gouernaunces and dominions, y• whych ſo longe as they haue theyr beynge, muſt be deſerued and maynteyned by the wyſedome of men of greate authoritye, whiche thynge the Wyſedome her ſelfe wytneſſeth in holye ſcriptures, ſayenge: By me kynges do raygne.
               Whan the councell was broke vp, many ſettyng forth were appoynted agaynſt the ſeditions and euell diſpoſed men, whiche ſpoyled and robbed both churches & monaſteryes after Ihon Huſſes deathZiſcha captayn of the Huſſites ſect. Theyr captayn was called zyſcha. Greate manſlaughter was of both ſydes, of the Bohemes and Germanes, which went againſt them: yet was notThe ſettyn 
                        •
                      forth of Sygiſmundus agaynſte th
                        •
                      Turkes. that brunt of vproure ſo quenched. Sigiſmundus (as we ſayd before) had prepared & brought vntill Adrianopolis a verye greate army of Germanes, Frenchmē, Italians & Hungarians againſt y• Turkes. In this ſetting forth were moſt greateſt princes y• Emperour Sigiſmundus & Philippe duke of Burgundion. But by reaſon the Frenchemen ſtroue, ſayenge they muſt haue the foreward in the army, y• orders were broken, not without an incredible

loſſe of Chriſten men: for theyr enemyes vanquyſhed them, and the duke of Burgundy was taken. Sigiſmundus the Emperour fled to Conſtan tinople. After longe ſeaſon after, was the duke of Burgundy delyuered.
               A mery ſtory is recited of Sigiſmundus. HeThe hiſtory of Sigiſinū
                     dus with his seruaūt. had a ſeruaunt y• was many yeares familiar wyth him, whom he had not greatly rewarded, (though in the meane ſeaſon he was a liberal & free prince,) which thing Leonardus Aretinus alſo doth write who ſawe Sigiſinūdus the Emperour, & had done many meſſages to him, on the byſh. of Ro. behalfe. It fortuned that whā he was ridden into a water, hys horſe dyd ſtalle. Whyche thinge whan the ſeruaunt, that went ſtrayght before the Emperoure did ſee, he ſayd in ſporte: The horſe was of lyke nature that hys lorde was. The Emperour hearyng it by chaunce, maruayled, & commaunded to ſhewe him what he ſaide. The ſeruaunt aunſwered. The horſe pourech out water into the ryuer, where as is water ynough alredy. Euen ſo is the Emperour lyberall to thoſe, whych haue ryches plenty, & nede them not greatly. Sigiſmundus the Emperoure perceaued that he was aduiſedly touched or taunted, that he had not rewarded hys olde ſeruaunt with ſome peculyar or greate rewarde, and ſayd: He neuer wanted the wyll to recompenſe, but that princes gyftes are not properlye theyrs, that deſerue them: but theyrs that they are appoynted by Goddes prouydence and dyſpoſycyon. The ſame ſayde he that he woulde proue wyth the dede, ſo ſoone as he ſhulde be at leaſure and reſte. Afterwarde

whan the Emperour had gotten leaſure he cauſed to make two boxes of one bygneſſe and faſhion. In the one he put golde, in the other leade of lyke weyght, and callyng the ſeruaunt, he bad hym take one of the boxes. The ſeruaunt being abaſhed weyed now the one boxe, than the other douting y• whiche he myghte rather take: at the laſte he toke y• boxe, wherein the leade was. Which whan he had opened, the Emperour ſayde: It may be ſene openly, that hys wyli was not in the faute, why he was not rewarded hetherto, but hys miſfortune. This dede wythneſſeth verely, that the Emperoure dyd wyſely conſyder, that the fortunable proſperity ofThe proſperity cōmeth of God. Albert duke of Eaſtērich. thynges commeth of God.
               Sigiſmūdus the Emperour had no heyre mankynne, he gaue hys only doughter to Albert duke of Eaſtenryche, who became kyng of Hungary and Bohemy by that meanes.
               The yere .M. CCCC. xxxiiii. whyle Sigiſmundus was yet alyue, began the councel of Baſil. ForThe coſicel Baſil. it was ordeyned in y• councel of Conſtance, that of a newe coūcel ſhulde be gathered after twelue yeares. But after that Sigiſmundus was deade, the byſh. of Ro. holdinge a councell fyrſte at Ferraria, and from thence at Florence, letted y• furtheraūce of the councel of Baſill: and that had he ſo muche the more eaſy a do, becauſe ther was no monarche or noble prince that defended the decree: of y• councel of Baſill.
               After that Martinus was deade, Eugenius the iiii. was made byſh. of Ro. The ſame crowned Sigiſmundus Emperour at Rome.
            
            
               
               Albert the .ii. of that name, the .xxxvi. Germane Emperour.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſte .M. cccc. xxxviii. afterAlbert the .ii. the death of Sigiſmundus, was Alberte, a prince of the bloude of Eaſtenryche, kyng of Hungarye & Bohemye, made Emperoure. He dyed in the ſeconde yeare of hys raygne.
               Parte of Bohemy dyd cleue to the kyng of Polen, & endeuoured to drawe y• kyngdome of Bohemy to Polony. The Poles brought a great army into Bohemy, & drew into their faction the vprouryſh kynde of men called Thaborites. Agaynſt thē ſent Albert y• Emperour Albert marques of Bran denburg. The ſame brought to paſſe wyth manye battayls, that the matter was agreed betwene the Emperoure and the Poles.
               Albert the Emperoure came wyth a greate army into Hungary, agaynſt Amurates the Turke, who at that tyme was fallen into Hungary. Whan Albert the Emperoure came he fled backe, and beſye gynge the cytye Sinderouien, he returned into Grece, and wann the city Theſſalonica. In this ſettynge forth fell Albert into a ſyckneſſe, and beynge broughte agayne to Uyenna, dyed wythyn few dayes.
            
            
               Friderick the .iii. the .xxxviij. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  THe yere of Chriſt .M. CCCC. xl. afterFrederick y• third. Albertus deathe, was Fridericke the thyrd duke of Eſtenrich, made Emperoure. He raygned .liii. yeares.

The doughter of Sigiſmundus, wyfe to Albert the Emperoure was now bygge wyth chylde: but ſome of the Hungaryans deſpayrynge of an heyreIoannes Huniades. of the realme, choſe Vladiſlaus the yonger kynge of Polen for a kyng. The kings gouernour in Hungary was Ioānes Huniades, father to Mathias. The ſame had weakened the power of the Turkes wyth a great battail, and compelled Amurates toVladiſlaus. demande peace. But ſo ſoone as Vladiſlaus was come into the realme, the Hungariās truſted, that yf they & the Poles powers were ioyned together, they ſhuld eaſely gett great prayſe yf they inuaded the Turke. And happely had the yonge kyng Vladiſlaus pleaſure in thys prayſe. Wherfore IulianusIulianus the Cardinal. the Cardinall brake the treuce made wyth the Turke, vnder thys pretence and coloure: that it were not lawfull to make peace wyth the Turkes, wythout the Biſh. of Romes conſente, ſeyng y• caſe is belonging to whole Chriſtendome. Thus Vladiſlaus gathering an hooſt went againſt Amurates vntill Varnam, which is not farr from Cōſtantinople: though Ioannes Humades in y• mean ſeaſon diſſuaded to take warre, becauſe that he knew well the weakeneſſe of his men, & the power of the Turkes, & alſo had he made peace with the Turke, not without neceſſitie. It is alſo ſayd that Vladiſlaus deſyred ayde of Dracoles y• Malache, but heDracoles y• Wlache alſo dyd counſell to leaue y• ſetting forth to warre. Yet dyd he ſend his ſonn with him to aide king Vladiſlaus with two thouſand horſemen, to whom he ſhuld haue ſaid: He gaue hym a couragious andDracoles gaue Vladiſlaus a horſe. ſwyft horſe, ſuche one as he wold geue to his ſonn

alſo for his mynd gaue that they ſhuld loſe the feld, and therefore ſhuld they haue theſe horſes at hand that as nede ſhulde requyre, the myghte troughe theyr ſwyftneſſe eſcape the daunger. As for the Turkes dyd forſe themſelues wyth noleſſe carfulneſſe, than wyſedome, and were euery where appoynted in a readyneſſe, before the Hungaryans were ſet in an order. Wherefore thoughe the HungariāsThe battayl by Wardam. fought fearcely for ye glory of Chriſtes name and ouerthrwe verye great hooſtes of the enemyes: yet dyd the Turkes at the laſt ouercome wyth the multitude, ſtayeng Vladiſlaus the yong kinge, and afterward was Iulianus the Cardinal ſlayen alſo in the flyght. Humades as he was a ware ſoul dioure, toke hede to hymſelfe by tymes, and eſcaped. This felde was the yeare .M. CCCC. xliiii.Amurates be 
                        ••
                     me 
                        •
                      mōke 
                        〈…〉
                     rp man. the tenth daye of Nouember. Amurates became a Mahometyſhe monke after thys vyctorye, ſuppoſynge to haue accomplyſhed hys duetye in the empyre, after ſo greate proſperitye in vanquyſhynge hys enemyes, leſte he raſhely truſtynge ſmylynge fortune farther, dyd ſtayne hys glorye wyth ſome euell. But Hunyades dyd inuade and fell vponHuniades hurteth the Turkes greueouſly. the Turkes agayn, and dyd hurt them ſo ſore, that they called Amurates agayn to the realme, to reſiſt Hunyades their enemy, and ſhuld driue him out of Hūgary. Afterward whā Cōſtantinople was loſt, Huniades ouercame Mahomet ye Turkiſhe Emperour bringing into Hūgari an hurtful army with a great diſcōfitur, & deliuered whole Europa from ye fear of daūger. For yf that ſetting forth had lucked Mahomet ye Turkiſh Emperour, he had now takē
                  
in not only Italy, but other contryes alſo.
               Whan Vladiſlaus was deade, the Hungarians receaued the chylde Ladiſlaus, the heyre of the realme, borne of Sigiſmundus doughter, for theyr kyng. Thys Ladiſlaus whan he was ful growen, dyed at Praga the haed citye of Bohemy.
               The yeare .M. CCCC. xliiij. broughte the DolphinThe Dolphin and Armeniakes go into Germany. with the Armeniakes an army into Elſace, vntyll Baſil, not wythout a greate and horible manſlaughter of the Germanes. Some thynke that Eugenius the byſh. of Ro. ſent hym into Germany to trouble the councel of Baſil. The Dolphyn had aboute fyue and twenty thouſand men. The SwitzersThe power of the Switzers agaynſte the Dolphin. ſent foure thouſand men againſt them, to reſcue the citye Baſel out of theyr handes. They ſett vpon the enemyes wyth ſo greate ſtrengthe and corage, that none of them gaue backe: and thoughe they coulde not ouercome them, by reaſon of the multitude of thē, yet left they theyr enemies a bloudy & dolefull victorye. For the Dolphin loſt in that battayl about ten thouſand men, and was fayne to flye out of Germany, with the reſidue y• remayned
               The yeare .M. CCCC. xlix. dyd Albert marques af Brandenburg warre agaynſt imperial cityes Norinberg and ſome other. Thys was calledWarre of ye cityes. the warre of the cityes. Many princes dyd ioyne themſelues to ether ſyde, and thys warre laſted. ii. yeares. Albert the marques ouerthrue them of Norinberg wyth .viii. battayls.
               The yeare .M. cccc. lii. went Friderick into Italy, and was receaued of euery man wyth ſeaſtly honoure. In the citye Sena dyd he acomplyſhe hys

weddynge wyth Leonora hys ſpouſe, doughter to the kynge of Portingale. Commynge to Rome he was crowned of Nicolaus the fyfte wyth hys quene the .xviij. daye of Marche. Returnyng from Rome at Ferraria made he Borſius of Eſta duke. From thence ſhipped he ouer to Venice, and abode there ten dayes. I haue herde of a man of greate renowme, that it was tolde him of the prince of Venice, who beynge Senator, ſerued the Emperour Fridericke and the prince of Venice at the table, that Frederick ſhulde haue ſayd at the meale: that he truely wold be a frende to the Venecians continually, but they ſhulde haue muche trouble and dā
                  mage of hys ſucceſſours.
            
            
               Of Conſtantinople Wonne by the Turkes.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſte .M. CCCC. liiii ye xxix daye of Maye after longe ſyeggat Mahometes the Turkyſh Emperoure the citye Conſtātinople at ye laſte with a very ſtrong aſſaulte: and vſed thereyn ſo muche cruelneſſe, that it can not be expreſſed wyth no wordes. ConſtantinusConſtātinus Emperoure of Conſtantinople. the Emperoure was ſlayne by the gate of the cytye, in the flyghte, whoſe heade cauſed the Turke to be ſmytten of, & ſtycked vpon a pole to be caryed thorow out the citye. He commaunded alſo
                     
                        〈…〉
                     table 
                        〈…〉
                     of ye 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     whā 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     nn 
                        〈…〉
                     ino pl
                        •
                     . to ſet vp an image of the crucyfyed Chriſte in the citye, and towrytte vpon it: The ſame is the God of the Chriſtians. But he commaunded to moke it, and caſte fylthe vpon it, and all to defyle it. The

Emperours wyfe and doughters wyth other honeſt matrones were drawen to a banket, and there were they fyrſt miſuſed, after that hewed to peces Theſe examples, and other mooſte cruel dedes of ye Turkes, ought duely to rayſe and ſtyrre our mindes, that we ſhulde earneſtly fight agaynſt thoſe enemyes,The Turkes are beaſtes & not tirauntes whyche one nede not to call tyrauntes, but rather cruel beaſtes.
               The yeare .M. CCCC. lxi. dyd the byſh. of Ro. depoſe Dietericke of Iſenburge from hys byſhoprycke, and in hys ſteade was made Adolphe of Naſſau. This chaunce gaue an occaſion of greate warres in the Empyre. Friderick the counte Palatyne toke vpon hym to defende & retayn byſhop Dieterych. Agaynſte the ſame dyd the Emperour ſturre the erles of Wyrtenberg and Baden, and the byſh. of Mentz. Whan theſe ſpoyled ye contry of ye count Palatine, they were taken by Frideryck count Palatine about the yeare .M. CCCC. lxii.
               The ſame yeare dyd contrarye wyſe Adolfe the byſhop take in the citye Mentz.
               The yeare .M. CCCC. lxiij. was Friderick the Emperoure ſtrongly beſieged in the caſtel at Vienna, by hys cityeſins, and the doer of thys was Albert, the Emperours brother: but George kyng of the Bohemes delyuered the Emperoure, driuing awaye the cityeſins.
               The yere .M. CCCC. lxxiiii. dyd Charles prince of the Burgundyons beſyege the towne Nuce a whole yeare, and that becauſe the chapiter chanōs of Colen had dryeuen out Rupert byſhoppe of Colen, whome Charles wold haue reſtored agayne.

But whan he went about to, turne the byſhopryck of Colen from the empyre &, haue gotten it to him, the Emperour appoynteth an army agaynſt hym.
               The captayne of the hooſt was Albert marques of Brandenburg, and the empyres ſtandardebearer Albert duke of Saxony. At the laſt whan diuerſly was treated of alayenge the debate, Charles gaue place: and it is ſayde, that at y• tyme was fyrſt treated of geuyng Maximilian the doughter of Charles of Burgundy.
               The yeare .M. CCCC. lxxvii. was the duke of Burgundy vanquiſhed by Nanſen, by them of Lotayn and the Switzers, and ſlayne. For Charles had taken from them of Lorain Nanſen: & in SwitzerlandNanſen▪ Granſen. had he taken in Granſen, and other ſmall townes: beſides that alſo, cauſed he in the towne of Granſen, to be hanged .v. C. and .xii. Germanes.
               Whan Charles was deade, the Frenchemen enterpriſed to ioyne Flaunders and Brabant to theyr kingdom, & this deſyre of the Frenchmen brought the cauſe of great warres. But whan the Burgundions wold not that theyr duchies ſhuld be ſtraunged or alienated from Charles doughter, they delivered to wedde Charles doughter to MaximilianMaximiliane. ſon to Friderick the Emperour. Wherfore Maximiliane went wel appointed into Brabāt, the yeare M. cccc. lxxvii. and wedded Mary Charles doughter: whereby it came to paſſe, that he augmēted not a litle the glory of the Eaſtenrychs name, and that Maximiliā did many renowmed proweſſes, to defende thoſe countryes agaynſte the aſſaulte of the Frenchemen.
               
                  The yeare .M. cccclxxxvi. was Maximilian made Emperoure: at Aken he was crowned the tenth daie of Apryll. When he was choſen Emperoure at Franckforde, Albert marques of Brandenburg dyed there, whome the Italian hiſtory writers alſo do geue the prayſe of a ſage and wyſe prince, and alſo a doughty man of armes.
               The yeare .M. cccclxxxvii. was MaximilianeMaximilian istakē at Brudgis. taken of his ſubiectes at Brudgis in Flaūders, by a preuy trayne of the Frenchemen. But when Frede rick came downe into lowe Germany, furnyſhed wyth the ayde of the whole empyre, Maximilian was letten fre of them of Brudgis.
               The yeare .M. ccccxc. he aſked agayne and tokeFrederick dyeth. poſſeſſion of his hereditary landes of the duchy of Eaſtenriche, the whiche Mathy kyng of Hungary had taken in.
               The yere M. ccccxciii. dyed Frederick the third Emperonre in the towne Lyntz, and was buried at Vienne. The ſame yeare dyd the Turkes fall in to Croacia: but they were dryuen backe agayne by Maximiliane, that then was in Eaſtenriche, ſurnyſhed wyth an army of fyftenth ou ſaude men.
               When Eugenius the .iiij. was deade, NicolausNicolaus the v. a fauourer of learnedinē
                   the .v. was made by ſhop of Rome. Friderick the Emperoure was crowned of hym, and he entertayned with moſte hygh liberalitie not onely learned men of Italy: but alſo ſuche as were fled from Con ſtantinople to Rome, namely Gaza, Trapezontius, Argyropylos, by whoſe procurement al good ſciences are renewed and amended.
               Caliſtus the .iij. was byſh. of Ro. after Nicolaus.
               
                  Pius the .ij. before called Eneas Syluius ſuccededEneas Siluius. Caliſtus. He was Frederick the Emperoures Chaunceller. He had gathered a greate army of all nacions againſt the Turkes: but while the army is demiſſed without doynge any thyng.
               Paulus the .ij. was after Pius.
               Xyſtus the .iiii. was by ſhop of Rome after Paulus. In his tyme the yeare .M. cccclxxx. dyd MahometesMahometes beſyeged Hydruntum. the Turkyſh Emperour beſyege Hydruntum in Italy, and wanne it, vſyng therein incredible tyranny. Italy was ſo aſrayed, that Xyſtus the Romyſh byſhop made hrm reade to flye into Fraunce. But Mahometes died the ſame time when Hydruntum was a takynge, and that by ſome deſtiny, leſt he ſhould ſtraie farther into Italy. MoreouerAlfonſ
                        •
                      kyng of Naples. whyle this was dayng, Alfonſus kyng of Naples, warred with them of Sena: but when he harde the tydyngs of Hydruntum, he haiſted to returne into his kyngdome, and getteth the beſyeged citye Hydruntū out of the Turkes handes. For whyle Mahometes was deade, and that the Turkes hayſted now to returne home, leſt any variaunce myght ryſe in their kyngdome, Alfonſus obteined the citie eaſely, driuyng the Turkes out of Italy.
               After Xyſtus was Innocētius the .viii. by. of Ro.
               Alexander the the .vi. was made byſhop of Ro.The prince of 
                        •
                     rbinas ſayenge. after Innocentius. The ſame had a ſonne duke of Valencia, whom he made prince of Vrbinas. Hys ſayeng it was: O Ceſar, o nullo. that is: Ether Emperoure, or nothyng. At the laſt was he nothyng. For he was ſlayne for his ſundry craftes, that were mengled with gite and deceate.
               
                  The beginning of the ſcience of printyng, is ſaydThe ſcience o
                        •
                      printyng. to haue bene vnder Frederick the thyrd: and thys ſcience of boke printing they ſaye to haue ben found fyrſt at Mentz, the yeare .M. cccc. xl.
               The craft of the gonnes is much elder, & it is ſuppoſedThe craft of gonnes. that the ſame was alſo founde in Germany, by a frear the yeare .M. ccc. lxxx.
            
            
               Maxi milianus the .xxxviii. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſte .M. ccccxciiii. beganMaximilianus the Emperoure. Maximilianus hys raygne, when his father was deade, with whome he gouerned the empyre his lyfe tyme .viii. yeres. But after hys fathers deceaſſe raygned he .xxv. yeares. Though the begynnynges of the empyre were lowe and weake: yet at the laſt turned they to hygh auauncement and encreaſe of the Germane kyngdome.
               In the begynnynge of Maximilanus raygne,Charles with the bunched back the Frē
                     che kyng. brought Charles wyth the crooked backe an army into Italy, and toke Naples. But a yeare after, when he was returned into Fraunce, gat Ferdinā
                  dus the yonger Naples agayne with ayde of Maximilian dryuynge the Frenchemen out of Italy, whiche the Frenche kynge had left at Naples, for a garryſon.
               Maximilian had many and great battails. Firſt in low Germany. Flaunders and Brabant, in the whiche it is ſayd he dyd many noble actes with his owne hande, where of I haue herde ſome, but I know not the very truth thereof. And would God

there would once come one that is ſure of ſuch thynges, who would writh all thoſe hiſtories in a cōplet boke to the prayſe of ſo greate a prince, and myght auaunce worthely, before the worlde the puyſſaunce and vertues of ſo doughty an Emperoure. I myſelfePyrcamer. haue herde of Pyrcamer of Norenberg, that Maximiliane hymſelfe had written ſome of his dedes for certayne yeares. For he ſayde: He ſayled from Lynda to Conſtance with Maximilian the Emperoure: and when Maximilian was nowe at leaſure in ſaylyng, he called his Scribe to hym, and reherſed to hym in Latine hys dedes of one yeare, in a moſte feate order, with the declaracion of all the circunſtaunces and occaſions. But when Pyrcamer thought the Scribe ſhould note ſome ſecrete thynge, and therefore would auoyde, the Emperoure cōmaunded hym to remayne and lyſten. Yea and at euening he toke it to Pyrcamer that he had reherſed to rede, and aſked: whether that ſouldiours Latine dyd lyke hym? and ſhould haue ſayde moreouer: He were mynded to comprehende thoſe thynges ſo brefely and clerely, that afterwarde learned men might declare them ſo muche the more diligently by their cauſes and circumſtaunces. And Pyrcamer ſayde: that no Germane hiſtory writer had vſed ſo pure a ſtile, as was that of Maximilian: And that after maximilianus death he had aſked after this writynge, but he coulde not obteine it. But let this ſuffyſe to be ſpoken of low Germany.
               The yeare .M. ccccxcv. was in the parliamentWhen the duchy of Wirtē
                     berg began. holden at Worms of the earldome of Wirtenberg made a duchy, and erle Ebrarde was made the

fyrſt duke.
               The yeare .Mccccxcix. toke the Switzers warrThe ſwitzers warre againſt their neighbours them of Eaſtenriche. againſt their neyghbours them of Eaſtenrich, the whiche to reſcue, Maximiliane came hayſtely out of Gelderlande, where at that tyme he had to do al ſo. Wherefore hauing many ſkyrmyſhes of both ſydes, it is certayn that .xx. thouſand mē were ſlayn: at the laſt was an agrement made.
               The yeare .MDi. were euery where figures ofFigures of a croſſe ſene vpon garmēts. croſſes ſene vpon mens garmentes. But ſuche lyke was oft happened before alſo.
               The yeare .MDiiij. was the warre of Baierlande,The warre of Baier. wherein the Emperoure Maximilianus defended the princes of Baier, agaynſt Philip count Palatine of the Rene, and duke Ruperte ſonne to Philippe the Palatine. For the ſame maryeng the daughter of George duke of Baier, woulde haue Landshut and thatſame parte of Baier to be geuē ouer to hym by a tytle of inheritaunce. But Rupertus dyed with his ſpouſe, whyle this warre was in hand, & the count Palatine was put beſyde a great parte of his lordeſhyppe by the Emperoures men and them of Wirtenberg. Yea and a great army of the Bohemyes that came to helpe the count Palatine, were ouerthrowen of the Emperoure. At the laſt neuertheleſſe Maximilian vſyng no leſſe wyſdō than fauoure, toke the count Palatine to mercy, leſt any perturbacion myght be rayſed in the ryght of the election in the empyre, that long ſence was alowed and approued.
               The yeare .MDv. beſyeged the army of the Emperoure the duke of Gelders in the citie Arnheym,

and conſtrayned hym to yelde hymſelfe.
               The yeare .MDvi. died Philippe ſonne to Maximilian,Philip ſonne to Maximilian d
                        〈…〉
                     th Maximilian warreth againſt the Venecians. Lewis kyng of Fraunce. kyng of Spayne and duke of bourgundy, beyng of age .xxviii. yeares.
               The yeare .MDvii. beganne Maximiliane the warre againſte the Venecians, no leſſe greate then durable: in the whiche befell both many bloudy battails, and wonderfull mutacions. Lewis kynge of Fraunce was firſt with the Venecians, afterwarde fell he from them to the Emperour. Contrary wyſe the byſhop of Rome Iulius, was firſt of the Emperoures ſyde, afterwarde toke he parte with the Venecians. The Venecians loſt in this warretheir beſt cities. Verona, Pauy, Teruas & other many. Howbeit when the Romyſh byſhop deciuered and fell to the Venecians, the Frenche kyng began to warre vpon hym alſo, ſeyng he had yet the Emperours ſouldiours in Italy. Now feared the Emperoure, leſt if he had the victory, he ſhuld fall into Naples alſo, and do alſo ſome euell at Rome, to the empyres deſtruction. Wherfore he ſent the Cardinall Matheus Langius biſhop of Saltzburg one of his counſaill to Iulius the byſhop of Ro. to demaunde peace, before the Ro. byſhop and the Frenche kyngIulius the by ſhop of Rom. was diſcomfited in a battaill by the citie Rauennas vpon Eaſter daye. had foughten a felde. Iulius, for aſmuch as he was very well appoynted with the ayde of Spaniardes and Italians, he thought to be ſure of the victory, & therfore refuſed he the peace. The battail was vpō Eaſter daie the yeare .MDxii. by Rauennas. The byſhop of Romes hoſt lay vnder, & there were ſlain in that battaill ſyxtene thouſand. Nether is there red of a more greuous felde to haue ben about this

tyme, wherein men haue fought ſo fearcely. But after this victory loſt, dyd Iulius frely demaūde peace. Howbeit leſt the French kyng enterpriſedought farther in Italy, dyd Maximilian and the byſh. of Rome ſet the kyng of Englande, Germany and the Switzers againſt hym: and of this wyſe was the Frenche kyng at the laſt conſtrained to leaue Italy. The Venecians were afterwarde reconciled to to the Emperoure alſo.
               The yere .MDxix. dyed Maximilian the Emperoure, and thatſame yere the princes ElectorsWhat Electors choſe Charles that now is Emperoure. Albert Cardinall byſhop of Mentz. Herman byſhop of Colen erle of Wida. Richarde byſhop of Trierlorde of Grieffenklau, the deputie of Lewis kyng of Bohemy. Lewis coūt Palatine of the Rene. Frederick duke of Saxony. Ioachim marques of Brandenburg, did choſe lawfull and with great wiſdom at Frāckford Charles duke of Eaſtē ryche and Bourgundy, and kyng of Spayne, the xxviii. daye of Iune.
               Pius the iij. was byſh. of Ro. after alexander the vi. The ſame died ſhortely after.
               Iulius the .ij. ſucceded Pius. Againſt him wrote Bernardinꝰ the Cardinal in the tyme of the Venecian warre of kepyng a counſail. The matter ſhuld haue geuen an occaſion of a diuiſion, had not Maximilian preuented it by his ſyngulare wiſedome.
               Leo the .x. ſonne to Laurence Medices was made byſhop of Rome. after Iulius.
               In the tyme of this Leo y• yere .MDxvii. wroteMartine Luther▪
                   Martin Luther fyrſt againſt the Romyſh byſhops pardons, & from thence roſe many diſputaciōs after ward, whiche thynge cauſed no ſmall alteracionin

the churche by the Germanes.
            
            
               Charles the .v. the .xxxix. Germane Emperoure.
               
                  
                     •
                  He yeare .MD. xix. was Charles the .v.Charles y•. choſen Emperoure the nepheu to Maximilians, kynge of Spayne, prince of Eaſtenryche and Burgundy. The Electors ſent into Spayne to ſhewe Charles of this election Friderick count Palatine. Wherfore the next yeare after he came into Germany, and was crowned Emperoure at Aken.
               The yeare .MDxxv. was Frances the FrencheFrances the French king taken. kyng taken by Pauy in Lombardy, by the Emperoures ſouldiours in a felde, and afterwarde brought into Spayne. Charles vſed a very incredible gentleneſſe & moderacion of mynde in ſo great proſperitie of victory. For he dyd not onely let fre the Frenche kyng, reſtoryng hym to his kyngdom: but alſo bounde hym with affinitie to hym, geuing hym his ſyſter Leonora to wyfe. The capitaines of the battail, whereof we ſaied euen now, were Nicolas coūt of Salma, George of Frūſberg knight, Mark Sittich, duke Burbon, & the marques Piſkerame.
               The ſame yeare were rayſed in Germany horribleThe commotion of vplan
                     
                        •
                     y
                        •
                     h m
                        •
                     n. and neuer afore herde comotions, by vplandiſhe men in Elſace, Schwaben, Frankenlād, Thuringē, and in thoſe contreis that lye by the Rhene. This commotion was alayed by the great force & armes of the princes, ſo that within the ſpace of thre monethes nere hande, were ſlame in battaill aboue hundreth thouſand vplādyſh men, none other wyſe thē
                  
as beaſtes. Moreouer one called Schapler, wroteSchapler. Twelue articles of the ſedicious ruſtikes. xii. artickes of the Chriſtē libertie, among the whiche this was euen the chefeſt: Tribute ought not to be geuen to the magiſtrate or ſuperioritie. By thys doctrine, vpon hope to get libertie, the greteſt part of the ruſtikes beyng enflamed, it is ſaide to haue taken weapons agaynſt their lawfull magiſtrate. In the towne of Thuringen, called Mulhauſen, was aThomas Mynter. preacher, called Thomas Mynter. The ſame preached openly, that he ſhoulde reſtore the decayed ſtate of the churche: and dyd boiſte, that reuelacions were priuely ſhewed him: and that Gedeons ſword was geuen hym, to roote out the tyranny of the vngodly. He led forth by heapes the vplandiſh men, and commaunded the houſes of gentlemen to bee ſpoyled, and the goodes of monaſteries to be polled and waiſted. But when the ruſtical armies ſpoiled euery where without order, the prince of Saxony and Landgraue of Heſſe deſtroied them. Thomas Mynter and ſome of his felowes were takē and beheaded, and were punyſhed for their enterpryſe. This Mynter was the firſt begynner of the madde erroure of the Anabaptiſtes, which yet cauſeth muche ado in Germany.
               The yere .MDxxv. dyd Iohn OecolampadiusIohn Ocal
                        •
                     
                     padius & Huldrich Zwinglius renew the doctrine of Berengarius 
                        •
                     ndreas 
                        •
                     aroleſtadius. at Baſel, and Huldrich zwinglius in zwizerlande fyrſt of all with there writing renewed the doctrine of Berengarius that in the bread and wyne was not really preſent the body and bloude of Chriſte, though the yeare before the learned man Andrew Caroloſtadius had propoſed the ſame argument.
               The yeare .MDxxvi. was Lewis kyng of Hū
                  gary

                  
                     〈…〉
                  ayne by Solyman the Turkyſh Emperour.
               The yere .MDxxvij. dyd duke Burbon bryngeRome taken by Burbon. the Emperoures hooſt to Rome, the citie was beſieged and taken, and alſo ſpoyled. The byſhop of Ro. conſtrayned by neceſſitie into the Caſtell angel, yelded hymſelfe to the Emperoures men: but the Emperoure of his gentleneſſe let hym fre agayne, and reſtored hym to hys former dignitie, that the common peace of Chriſtendome were nothyndered.
               The yere .MDxxix. went Charles into Italy, & was receaued of all princes and cities, with moſte hygh honoures.
               The ſame yeare in the moneth of October theWith what an 
                        ••
                     oſt Sol
                        〈…〉
                     yd be
                     
                        〈…〉
                     ge 
                        •
                     iēn
                        •
                     . Turkyſh Emperoure Solyman brought about a hundreth and fourty thouſand men into Germany whiche nomber they ſhoulde afterward haue boaſted themſelues in the citie Cracowe in Polen: and beſieged the citie Vienne certayn wekes and aſſaulted it greueouſly. But Friderick count Palatine, apointed by the empire captaine of the ſouldiours, gatheryng an army with all ſpede, ſent it to Viēne, thre dayes before the Turke beſieged it. Philippe counte Palatine was with them in the citie Viēne. Wherfore by the gracious fauoure of God was the citie Vienne ſo ſtrongly defended, that the Turkiſh tyraūt was fayne to turne backe agayn with great ſhame, and loſſe of hys hoſt. The meſſaunger of the Poles is reported to haue ſayde: that in the aſſault of Vienne, were ſlayne about foure ſcore Turkes, and partely to haue dyed by the waye, for lacke of 
                     •
                  itayls, and fearceneſſe of the colde.
               The yeare .MDxxx. the .xxij. daye of February,

was Charles crowned Emperoure at Bonony byCharles is crowned Emperour at Bonony by the byſh. of Ro. Clemens the byſhop of Rome with a great ſolemnitie and coſte.
               After that went he agayne into Germany, and came on Corpus Chiſt euen at Auſborow, wherthe parliament was adiourned. The chefe princes of Germany came thether, of whom Charles the Emperoure was receaued with high honour. ThoughThe parliament of 
                        •
                     uſborow. the Emperour aſſaied many waies to appeace y• debates in the religion, & to reſtore them into a quietneſſe, yet could no certayne thynge be brought to paſſe or ordeined, in ſo great diuerſitie of myndes. At the laſt commaunded he by an open commaundement to retaine and kepe the accoſtumed maners of ceremonies, and the doctrine afore vſed.
               The ſame yeare. the eight daye of October, wasAn ouerflowyng at Ro. an ouerflowynge at Rome ſo greate, as no man coulde remembre to haue bene ſene, and the ſame laſted about foure and twenty houres: and when thys ouerflowynge ſtode ſtyll in the place called Campo Flore, the hyght of a longe moryſhpycke, many buildynges, walles, houſes and goodes were deſtroyed.
               When Leo was deade, Adrianus alowe Germane, borne at Vtrecht was made byſhop of Rome.
               After Adrianus was Clemens the .vij. choſenClemens the vij. is taken. by. of Ro. The ſame was taken by the Emperours hooſt at Rome, for makyng a confederacy with the Frenche kynge, whome alſo he ſent ayde agaynſte the Emperor. But the ſame iniury dyd y• very good Emperoure diſſemble with hygh ſoftneſſe: and leſt any occaſion myght ryſe of a greueous debate

in Chriſtendom, he ſet the byſhop of Rome Clemēs the .vij. at libertie, of whome he was afterwarde crowned at Bonony.
            
            
               Ferdinande the .xl. Germane Emperoure.
               THe yeare .MDxxx. was Ferdināde kingFerdinande kyng of Hungary. of Hungary and Bohemy, Archeduke of Eaſtenriche &c. brother to Charles the Emperoure, made kyng of the Romanes: and that after the example of the aūcient Emperours, which were wont to take to them other, that the empyre myght haue a ſucceſſor, and that when the other were deade, no debate or occaſion of warre myght ryſe amonge the princes of the empyre. This election was at Colen the yeare .MDxxx.
               The yeare .MDxxxi. was Ferdinande after the election crowned at Aken in Ianuary.
               The ſame yeare was a Comete ſene in Germany,A Comete ſene. Italy Fraunce and Englande, about the ſyxte daye of Auguſte, and fyrſt appeared it certayne dayes in the morning before Sunne riſing, after that folowed it the Sunne, and was ſene the ſpace of. iij wekes about the euenyng, after Sunne ſett, vntyll the thyrd daye of September. Hys courſe was through the celeſtiall or heauenly ſygnes Cancer. Leo, Virgo and Libra, where it was ſene nomore nether appeared any more after that.
               Not long after in October roſe a warre in SwitzerThe Switzer warre within themſelues. lande. For to they of Tzurich ſtopped the paſſages, that to their neghburs of zugia, Vria. Suicia.

Siluia and Lucerne, noman coulde bryng corne, ſalte and other victuals. Wherfore they armed thē againſt thoſe of Tzurich. They met eche other wt diſplaied banners, & they of Tzurich beyng vanquiſhed with thre fieldes, had the worſt. In the fyrſt battayll was ſlayne the preacher of Tzurich, Huldrich zwinglius. In the meane tyme endeuoured they of Stralborow and Conſtance their neighbours, to make an accorde among the cōfederated. And thus after .viij. monethes and .vi. wekes was the vproure alayed. Of thē of Tzurich died about fyue thouſande, of the other ſyde a fewe.
               The yeare M D. xxxii. came Charles the Emperoure againe out of Brabant into Germany, and came in Marche with his brother kyng Ferdinand to Regenſpurg to kepe a parliament. ThithercameThe parliament holden at Regēſpurg the deputies ſent frō the Imperial cities. There came alſo many princes, or at the leaſte, their Ambaſſadours.
               Not very long before that Conſtantinople was taken by the Turkes, I reade there was a ſolitary man, not farre from the citie Conſtantinople, and he ſhuld haue prophecied: that the Turkes in dedeProphecies of recouering Conſtantinople, and of roting the Turkes out of Europa. ſhould winne Conſtantinople, and ſhould roote out the kyngdom of the Grekes: but anone after foure ſcore yeres, ſhould they loſe Conſtantinople agayn, and that the Turkes ſhould be rooted out of Europa. But that tyme ſence Cōſtantinople was wonne, is expired the laſt yeare.
               A moſt connyng Aſtronomer alſo at Naples, calledLaurentius Miniatenſis an Aſtronomer. Laurētius Miniatenſis, ſcholemaiſter to Pontanus, wrote theſe verſes in his boke .lx. yeres ago,

concernyng the coniunction of Iupiter and Saturnus in the ſygne Cancer, the whiche he ſayeth ſhall be, and was in the yeare thouſande, fyue hundreth and foure laſt paſt.
               
                  That age ſuccedyng oures vpon the heles.
                  Shalbe better, and more prayſe worthy,
                  Lytle of oure lawe ſhall it diſanull ſcarcely:
                  But the greueous and harde to ſuffer thynges.
                  In holy matters, ſhall it auoyde doubtleſſe.
                  All kynd of wickedneſſe, and alſo holy pryde.
                  A kyng alſo ſhall it geue vs harmeleſſe,
                  Who ſhall the worlde ende, and peoples repreſſe:
                  Rebellyng naciōs ſhall he ſubdue to the empyre.
                  And the whole worldes dominiō ſhall he poſſeſſe.
               
               Theſe verſes are moſte worthy to be marked: and I woulde not paſſe them ouer, becauſe of the renowme of the moſte famous Emperour. For what hygher prayſe can be in the Emperour, then that he calleth hym a Harmeleſſe kyng, euen as Iohn Lichteberg ſayde of hym: The ſhamefaſt of viſage ſhall raygne euery where.
               At Magdeburg is founde .C. yere ago a Latine cronicle, wherin are theſe wordes: Of the bloude of Charles the Emperour, and the kynges of Fraūce, ſhalbe borne an Emperoure, called Charles: theſame ſhal haue dominion in all Europa, by whom alſo the decayed eſtate of the church, ſhalbe repared, and the auncient glory of the empyre ſhalbe reſtored. For there ſhall come a people, that ſhalbe called: people without heade, and than we to the prieſtes: Peters lytle ſhyppe ſhall ſuffre greate force, but the waues ſhall craſſe at the laſt, and it ſhall haue victory.

Greate and dredefull mutacions of al kyngdomes, are at hande, and the ſettyng ſtore by monkes, ſhall peryſhe. The Beaſte of the Weſt, and the Lion of the Eaſte ſhall haue dominion of the whole worlde, and the Chriſtians ſhallwander through Aſia in ſauegarde fyftene yeares: but after that ſhal dredeful thynges be herde of Antichriſte.
               Abbas Ioachim ſaieth in the ende of Ieremye: A great Egle ſhall come, whiche ſhall ouercome euery man ſaue one, who at the laſt beynge deſpyſed, ſhalbe for ſaken of the people.
               I fynde alſo another prophecie, whiche is renowmed: The Emperoure ſhalbe awaked, as a man fallen into a ſwete ſlepe. The ſame ſhalbe counted of men as deade, and ſhall go vp vpon the greate ſea, and inuade the Turkes, and ſhall ouercome them: he ſhall leade their wyues and Chyldren captiues. Greate feare and drede ſhall ouerwhelme the Turkes, their wyues and chyldren ſhall wepe and lamente: all the Turkes landes ſhalbe geuen ouer in to the Emperours handes of Rome.
               I haue herde a Portingale ſaye, that an Aſtronomer ſhould haue ſayde to Ferdinandus oure Emperoures greate graundefather: that the Turkyſh empyre ſhoulde be ſubdued and ouerthrowen by a kyng of Spayne, and that the ſame ſhould haue interpretated the kyng to be Ferdinande. But Ferdinande ſhould haue anſwered: That he ſhoulde not do it, but hys heyres that ſhould ſuccede hym.
               Other emdences more that are yet reſtyng, wyl I at this tyme paſſe ouer. God the father of mercy, geue and graunte Chriſtendom victory and grace,

for the glories ſake of his godly name. Amen.
               Moreouer the thinges that ſhal yet happen, ſhal doutleſſe marke greate and wyſe men, whiche are now in this ſettyng forth of warre. As for me, I haue onely reherſed ſuche thynges of this preparacion of the ſettynge forth to warre, as I was ſure of, and therefore do I now make an ende of wrytynge.
               In the moneth of September this yeare, wasA Comete ſene. a Comete ſene agayne certayn wekes, two houres before Sunne ryſyng, and toward the Eaſte. Whē I ſawe it, it was in Virgo to my iudgemen, & ſtretched his brandyſhynge tayll betwene the South & Weſt. But by reaſon of the gloumynge and cloudy ayer in theſe contreis, coulde it not be ſene here. Howbeit, who wil not iudge it to be a fearfullthing, that two Cometes haue bene ſene in the ſpace nerehande of twelue monethes? and ſeyng the Comete of the laſt yere, namely of the yere M D. xxxi. dyd not appeare without the hurte of Eaſte and North: for it ſemed to threaten thoſe partes. For the tyrannyſhe Turke fell into Hungary and Eaſtenryche kyng Chriſtiernus goyng into Dennemarck with a greate nauy, to demaunde againe his kyngdome, yelded hymſelfe into Frederick hys fathers brothers the kyng of Denmarck handes. Chriſtiernus alſo his ſonne, that was brought vp in the Emperours court, dyed. Veryly it is to be feared alſo, that the Comete of this yeare of. M D. xxxij. do ſignifye greate euell to the partes of Italy and the Rene.
               The ende of the Cronicle.
               
                  The cōcluſion of this Cronicle of Iohn Carion.
               A boke of Chronicles ought to cōprehende moſte greateſt thynges in a feate order, ſo that the rekenyng of the yeares, and the chefe alteracions, that befall into the religion and other greate thynges may be ryght obſerued and knowen. For it can not be that all thynges that are done in one realme, can be written in one boke, though it were great, by reaſon of the ſundry circumſtaunces and occaſions of y• buſineſſes, the whiche muſt chefely be conſydered. Of this wyſe truely wrote Herodotus, Theucydi des, Xenophon & Titꝰ Liuius hiſtories. The otherWriters of Hiſtories. Cronicles. are onely to be called Cronicle writers, whiche alſo ought not to take vpon them the name of Hiſtory wryters: For they do brefely ſhewe thynges done, and ſettyng the order of the tyme before, ſeme onely to aduertyſe the wyſe reader, to marke ſome of the notableſt thynges. Whiche thinge we haue done alſo in this Cronicle: we haue only drawen thoſe thinges as it were in a pathwaye, whiche ſemed moſte beſt, and haue other whyles ſhewed their occaſions, to the intent we maye learne to marke and forſe ſo much thenarower ſuche lyke thynges, in like chaū
                  ces, Howbeit what profites otherwiſe beſides this do Cronicles bryng, that ſame haue we declared before in the preface.
               Truely I muſte before the ende of this wryting put the reader agayne in remembraunce of the ſayeng of Elias, the whiche we haue ſet in the begynnyng of this treatyſe, that he may ſo much the more eaſyer marke both the order of the tyme, and alſo the dedes of the hiſtories. Item that he thinke that

alſo, that the ende of mens affaires is at hande, accordynge to the ſayeng of Elias, that the worldes age conteyneth .vi. M. yeares, and that the ſame ſpace ſhall not he fully expyred: for God ſhall preuēt it becauſe of the worldes corrupte maners. Now ſeyeng there are expyred .v. M. and .v. C. yeares ſence the worlde beganne, as may clerely be gathered out of the table folowing: it is no doute but that the worldes age is nerehand come to the ende, that Chriſte our lorde do rayſe vp the death by his commyng, and iudge the whole worlde, and that more is alſo appoynt the deuels and wicked men euerlaſtynge fyre, but take the very godly out of al ſorow, and ſet them into the euerlaſting fruition of God & bleſſe. Beſydes this do the wonderfull mutacions and chaunges of all kyngdomes nearehande wytneſſe that the worlds ende is not farre of. For withWhat the mutacions of kyngdomes de ſignifye. in fewe yeares euen by our remembraunce we haue perceaued the hyghneſſe of the Romiſh byſhop, Fraunce, Hungary and Dennemarckes kingdoms to haue greucouſly fallen, and lyke chaūce are ſhortly to be loked for in other kyngdomes alſo. Daniel witneſſeth that ſhortely after that the Turkes powers be minyſhed, ſhall the ende of all thynges of the worlde be at hande. But the Turkyſh kyngdōs decaye ſhall doutleſſe be ſene wythin few yeares (if Goddes wyll be ſo,) and after that our Emperoure Charles ſhalbe deceaſſed, it can not be, but that the empire alſo ſhalbe miſerably toren of the Germans themſelues. For I feare me two wyll then greatly ſtryue for the monarchye. Almighty God of his infinitie mercy, ſwage ſo horrible commotions & turne the

princes hartes, to concorde and peace.
               The toren tranquillitie and ſpoiled peace in the churche, maye alſo be a ſigne and token, and it is to be feared, leſt the ſame do alſo growe and ſprede farther by warres and negligence of Romiſh by ſhops.
               But ſeyeng Chriſte hymſelfe aduertiſeth vs in the Goſpel of the perils, that ſhalbe at hande in the latter dayes, not only in thoſe thinges that pertayn to the body, but alſo thoſe that belong to the ſprete, yea the heauen itſelfe alſo threateneth with horryble darkeninges and coniunctions: I wil paſſe ouer to ſpeake of thoſe tokēs, that be reherſed in the ſcripture cōcernyng the latter dayes, ſo that at the laſt we maye learne to beware & take hede to our ſelues and doute not to demaunde and loke for ayde and comfort of God onely in ſo greate miſere of al thinges. Wherefore I willed the reader to be admonyſhed in this place, to call to remembraunce, that thoſe tymes full of peryls & wretchedneſſe, are at hand, and that the ſame peryls ought not to be deſpiſed with a recheleſſe mynde. For it is no lyght thynge, and ſuche one as all maner of men do proue wyth their harme and damage, that realmes are chaunged, empires pulled out of their frames, and concorde of religion is ſpoyled. The buyldynge or fabrike of the worlde ſemeth to repreſente a greate and moſte olde buyldynge, whyche oftentymes is more and more ready to fall, when nowe doth one wall fall downe, then the other. Likewiſe doth the world ſeme to be ready to fal at this time, & doth by litle and litle bryng a more greuous fal with it, one and other kyngdomes falling down and decayeng.

Nether let any man thynke that ſo greate a buyldyng ſhall fall without a moſte excedynge commotion. God lyghten oure myndes, that we beyng admonyſhed with the earneſt threatenynges of the Goſpell, maye ſeke at onely Chriſte conſolation and refreſhynge: and that greate princes maye vſe no leſſe wyſedome in the feare of God, then mekeneſſe, to aſſuage the occaſions of all euels. For thereto are they ordeined of God, that with their care and wiſedom, they maye gouerne and defende mankynd that is weake & wretched. And yf they do their duetye in the feare of God. God ſhall lykewyſe be with them, and proſper their enterpryſes.
               Amen.
            
            
               
               A Table of the worldes yeares, out of the Bible and Philo.
               
                  M. vi. C. lvi. vntyll the floude.
                  CC. xcij. vntyll Abraham was borne.
                  CCCC. xxv. vntyll Moſes was borne.
                  Lxxx. vntyll the goyng out of Egipt
                  CCCC. lxxx. vntyll Salomons tempel.
                  C. xxxviij. vntyll Ioas the kyng.
                  CC. xci. vntyll Ieconias was remoued into Babylon.
                  xi. vntyll Ieruſalē was wayſted by Nabuchodonoſor.
                  Lxx laſted the captiuitie of Babilō.
                  C. xci. laſted y• monarchie of the Perſes after that the captiuitie of Babylon was finyſhed.
                  vij. was Alexander after Darius death.
                  C. xlvi. laſted the kyngdō of the Grekes vntil Iudas Machabeus
                  C. xxxvij. dured the kyngdō of the Machabeis. vntyll Herodes the fyrſte tyme after Ioſephus.
                  xxx. raigned Herodes: for Chriſte was borne the thirtieth yeare of Herodes.
                  MD. xxxij. ſence Chriſt our ſaueour was borne.
                  The yeare of the was Chriſt borne. worlde. iii M. ix. C. lxxiiij.
               
               
                  This preſent yeare .MDxxxii. are accompliſhed ſence the worlde was made .v. M. CCCC. lxxvi. yeares.
               The citie Rome (as witneſſeth Eutropius) ſtode before Chriſte was borne .vij. C. liij. yeares: and yf the yeares ſhoulde be counted a ryght, it can in a maner be no better rekened by true hiſtories.
               This preſent yere of oure lorde .MDxxxij. are paſt ſence the citie Rome was builded. ii M. CClxx xv. yeres. Babylon was not ſo olde before Alexander. For from Abraham vntyll Alexanders tyme are .M. vi. C. lxxxvi. yeares. But now ſeyeng Rome is elder then Babylon, it is no doubte but that her ende ſhalbe ſhortely alſo, after the twoo Monarchies.
               Nether doth the nomber of the yeares that is in the Bible greately diſagre from the order of the Monarchies that is in the chefe aucthors of the Greke hiſtories. Herodotus wryteth that the Aſſyrians kept the Monarchie .Dxx. yeares, and ſence that tyme to haue bene no certayne Monarchye, vntyll the tyme of the Medes. He rekeneth the Medes to haue ruled vntyll Cyrus tyme C. xxx. yeares. And the ſame, as it can not ſeme falſe, euen ſo do I greatly alowe it: for yf any man do waye it aryght, the ſame ſhall eaſely perceaue that it doth not diſagre wyth the Bible. That he ſayeth the monarchy of the Aſſyrians to haue ſtand .Dxx. yeares, that wyll he doubtleſſe haue referred to that tyme, when the kyngdome of Babilon and Niniue the citie were not yet diuided, euen when the Aſſyrians reygned only at Babylon.
               
                  Agathias wryteth in the ſeconde booke of theAgathias. Gothian warre, that Cteſias ſet the nomber of the yeares, and the order of the Monarchies of thys wyſe. As for Cteſias was a Grecian, who whenCteſias. Artaxerxes Mnemon and Cyrus the yonger warred with eche other, he was alſo in the army, and was a Phiſician. Beynge taken in warre, he was at the laſt caried to Babylon, where he was honeſtly entreated, and then readynge the hyſtoryes of Babylon, he ſet the nomber of that kyngdome in an order of this wyſe.
               From Ninus vntyll the begynnyng of the Medes kyngdome, wiche did deciuer from the Aſſyryans the fyrſte, are .M. CCC. lx. yeares, and this order do all thoſe obſerue, that wrote afterwarde, Diodorus Siculus and Iuſtinus. Diodorus Siculus wrote of this wyſe in his thyrde booke: Lyke wyſe alſo the reſydue of the kynges thyrty in nomber, helde the kyngdome, vntyll Sardanapulus, by whoſe tyme, the kyngdome of the Aſſyrians, which had laſted .M. CCC. lx. yeares, (as wryteth Cteſias in the ſeconde booke,) fell to the Medes. Iuſtinus ſayeth of this wyſe: The aſſyrians, who afterwarde were called Syria, had the gouernaunce M. CCC. yeres. Herodotus doth paſſe ouer ſomthynge, in the meane tyme that the decayeng kyng dome of the Aſſyrians came to the Medes. I thynke this alſo, that theſe yeares of Cteſias concernyng the begynnyng of Babylon, to be vnderſtand from the tyme of Nembroth, not Ninus.
               The Medes reigned after the fallyng from the Aſſyrians vntil Cyrus, about thre hundreth yeres,

as Agathias gathereth out of Cteſias.
               The kyngdome of the Perſes vntill Alexander, dyd laſt .CCxxviij. yeres, as witneſſeth Agathias and ſome Grecian wryters.
               Alexander and his poſteritie kept Babylon vntyll the tyme, that the power of the Parthians beganne to grow: and Agathias ſetteth CCC. yeres ſeuen leſſe, and that is from Alexander vntyll Auguſtus tyme.
               Afterward raigned the Parthians in the Eaſte hundreth yeares, vntil the tyme of Alexander Seuerus the Emperoures, and then dyd Artaxerxes the Perſian ſtick through and ſlaye Artabanus the laſt kyng of the Parthians. And of this wyſe came the Eaſt kyngdom agayne to the Perſes, which were myghty vntyll Mahomets tyme. For the ſucceſſors of Mahomet inuaded the Perſes, and teke in the empire of whole Arabia. But the Turkes toke from them afterwarde Syria and Aſia the leſſe. And thus were the kyngdomes of the Eaſte toſſed finally with diuerſe mutaciōs, the one people was oftymes remoued to the other. It is greatly neceſſary to ouerlaye all theſe thynges, and often to conſyder them, that the order of all tymes and hiſtories may be knowen aryght.
            
            
               
               An addition vnto the Cronicle of Iohn Carion contaygnyng the actes and hiſtories come to paſſe in dyuers and ſundry partes of the worlde from the yere of our lorde .MDxxxij. vnto the yeare of our lorde .MD. L. excerpted and gathered out of the beſt hiſtoriographers by Iohn Funke of Nourenborough. And cauſed to be tranſlated by Gwalter Lynne.
               
                  AT the entraunce or beginning of the conuocationThe conuocation or counſaill holden at Ramſburgh. holden at Ratiſbone or Rayneſborough in the yere of our lorde .MD. xxxij. in lent, ther lay at Nurrenborough certayn princes electours, with many other nobles of the empire, among whom were as principall Albert Archebyſhop of Mogunce or Mence, Lodowike Palatine of the Rhyne, Iohn Frederike duke of Saxon and electour imperiall, whiche princes & nobles did there treate and conſulte vpon mattersThe duke of Saxon agreeth not to the election of ye kyng of the Romaines. of religion, and about the eſtabliſhing of kyng Ferdinandus (to whoſe election as to be king of the Romains, the ſaid Iohn duke of Saxō & electour imperiall would not accorde nor conſent) and after much intreataunce they obtayned of themperours maieſtie a graunt and promes of a ſure and ſtedfaſt peace vntil the next general coūſail that was to come, yea and is to come yet, euen at this day. Other notable actes cōcerning matters of religiō was there none

concluded in that conuocation. For Soliman EmperoureThe ſeconde breakyng in of Soliman into Germany. of the Turkes was vp with all his power and inuaded the lande of Hungary, wherefore the Chriſtian princes were conſtrained with all ſpede and ſtrenght poſſible to prepare themſelues to reſiſt the ſaid aduerſary. Inſomuche that there was prepared ſuche an armie and hooſt of men of diuers nacions as neuer was ſene before in all Germany, y• beginnyng wherof was about the feaſt of S. Iohn the baptiſt, the warriours of the towne of Nurenburgh beinge the firſte that arryued at Weene in Auſtriche, for there was all the whole hooſt appointed to aſſemble and come together: & the ſame aſſembling continued vntil the feaſt of ſaint Bartholome we next enſuyng. The nombere of Duche pietons or footemen was about foure ſcore thouſande ſtoute and valiaunt fyghting men. And of the horſe men there was about .xxiiij. thouſand. The Bohemes were in the nomber aboue twenty thouſande. All theſe lay about Wyene by the ryuer called the Danube a lycle myle frō the towne, Their chefe capitaine was the right noble and mighty prince, lord Frederick Palatine of the Rene &c. nowe being electour imperiall. About the ſaid towne laye alſo vpon a fifty thouſand Spanyardes, whiche in theſe affayres vſed but ſmall kyndneſſe towardes the germaynes. For in their paſſage from the Countie of Tyroll ouer the Eye and the Danube into Auſtrich they burned certayn ſtrong holdes and townes well inhabited, and ſome they pylled, and with women and maydens they wrought ſuche vylanye and enormitie (whiche is horrible to be ſpoken) that

many of them dyed thorough their ſaid outtragiouſnes. The goodly and pleſaūt Citie of Krembes was vtterly by thē ſubuerted and brent vp except fourtenne houſes wyth certayne walles. After this when they lacked vitualles in their campe for the ſpace of one daye, they ruſſhed with violence before the Cytie of Wyene, wherein the Emperoure and the kyng had theyr beyng, wyth a great nombre of other greate men of armes and warriours whiche were come thether wyth them, and would haue aſſaulted and ouerrunne the ſame towne if the Germaynes had not the ſooner reſyſted them, and letted their enterpryſe.
               In the meane ſeaſon the Turke layde ſyege to aGuns aſſaulted of the Turke by the ſpace of .xij. daies certayne lytle Towne called Guns, whiche lyeth about twelue or thirtene myles from Wyene, in the coaſtes of Hungary, and aſſaulted the ſame moſt fiercely by the ſpace of twelue dayes, during the which tyme he ſought all meanes poſſyble to ſubuerte and ouerthrowe the ſame. But the right noble and worſhypfull Syr Nicolas Iuriſthi knight and Ruler of the ſayed towne dyd ſo manfully and valiauntly behaue hymſelfe in thoſe affayres wyth hys cyteſens or bourgeouſes beyng in nombre about eight hundreth men, and one hundred ſouldiours whiche were layde there in garniſon for the ſauegarde of the ſame towne that the Turke maruayled not a lyttell of it. Wherefore he promiſed vnto the ſayed Ruler fre paſſage and ſaulf conduct, and hauing perſonally himſelf talked wt him, did highly prayſe him for his conſtauncy & faithfulnes which he had vſed towards his prince, in y• he had ſo cōſtantly reſiſted

and repelled his aduerſary: and after that he had endued hym with great giftes, he ſent hym againe to his owne.
               Aſſone nowe as the Turke with his armie was departed from the ſaied towne, and had geuen ouer the ſayed ſyege, the wall of the ſayed Towne fellThe wall of 
                        〈◊〉
                      falleth 
                        〈…〉
                     e by it 
                        •
                     elfe. downe to the grounde by it ſelfe. whereby it may appeare that the ſame was afore preſerued and defended from that violent power of the Turke by the myghty hande and aſſiſtence of God.
               Nowe when the Turke perceiued ſuche a great power of the germayne nation commynge agaynſt hym▪ he retyred backwarde againe with his power whiche all ready entred into Stewermarke as farre forth as Graytes, and made his arryr to marche and paſſe alonge by the ſayed Towne of Graytes euen from the dawnyng in the mornyng vntyll the next morowe folowyng, whereof it maye eaſely be gathered with what power he was come thether. But yet to thyntent he myght not ſeme to haue beſtowed all his laboure in vayne, and to haue 
                     •
                  led without any harme done to the Germayne nation he left behynde hym not farre from the newe towne in Auſtriche, about. xi
                     •
                  . thouſande▪ ſome ſay xvi. thouſand men, to deſtroie the borders of Steyerm
                     •••••
                   and Auſtrych as ſone as the Germayne warriours ſhoulde haue remoued. Howbeit after muche ſearchyng theſaied nomber of men was eſpyed and theyr▪ enterpryſe brought to lyght. For thys cauſe Duke Frederike chief Capitayne

toke vnto hym a certain nomber of launce knightes or Pietons, and a certayn nomber of heauy horſemen with whome he vndertoke and attempted to ſmite the ſaid multitude of Turkes, and compaſſed them on euery ſyde, beſydes the montaynes by a great cawſſy and cauſed certain dubble ſouldiours well armed to folowe them at their hyles & to barre them in, for turnyng backwarde agayne of the whiche dubble ſouldiours was Capitayne one Sebaſtiane Skartell of Auſborongh, inſomuch that the ſaied Turkes were firſt aſſayled with two heapes, againſt whom they defended them ſelues ſtoutely, but yet they loſt ther about a thouſand of their own men, whereupon eftſones they toke their flyght, but as they would haue fled out of the mountaines the other heapes of our men were in their neckes, by whom alſo they were all diſcomfited and ſlaine, ſo that no Turke might eſcape. Some of them they founde afterwarde on the mountaynes and in wodes, and ſome vpon trees, where they were fled to ſaue their lyues, amonge whome ſome were ſhotdown with gonnes lyke byrdes or wyldefoule, and ſome were taken and deliuered to the Troſſe to cut and mangle them at their pleaſures, whiche were very pyteouſly chopped and carued of the younger ſorte of people.
               After that this alarme was ceaſſed and qualified the Emperoure and the kyng roade forth into the campe of the Germaines, and the Emperoures maieſtie beholdyng the people as they ſtode in aray maruayled excidyngly cōcernyng the nombre and multitude of them, inſomuche it was reported that

he ſhould aſke of duke Frederick the vpper capitain whether ſuche an other multititude of men might be founde and aſſembled thoroughout all Duchelande, whereunto theſaide Duke made aunſwere, that it was ſcant perceyued in the townes of Ducheland that any man there was miſſing or lackyng after this (as ſome do affyrme) there ſhould be takē a certayne truce and agrement with the Turke for a certayne tyme, but how, after what ſorte and maner, or on what condition, this hangeth yet within the penne▪ and is lyke alſo there to remayne yet a whyle. Some are of this opiniō, that the cauſe why the Emperoures maieſtie made no haſte to purſue after the Turke was this, that winter was at hād, and that therefore the warriours were diſmiſſed and ſent away, ſo that with the ſaied innumerable multitude of warriours littel good was doneſauig that muche money was vnprofytably waſted and expended. Wherfore I ſuppoſe after myne owne iudgement that in caſe the Emperours and the kinges maieſtie had proceded and gone forward with that armye or multytude whiche was there at that tyme aſſembled and gathered together and had made ſure certayne townes in Hungary which would gladly haue rendred and yelded themſelues again, while the Turkes fled, and had at the going out of winter be gonne agayne to ſeke the Turke at home in his owne lande, the Turkyſh tyraunt woulde no more ſo ſpitefully plage vs in our cōtreis. But thus wold God punyſh vs yet lōger for our wickednes, for the whiche cauſe alſo God did ſuffre the beſt coū ſail to be hindred by one man only: for it is thought, that the Emperours maieſtie was by the only coun

ſayll of Anthony de Leua turned from theſaid purAnthony de Leua. ſewte, ſo that the Turke had a free and ſure paſſage home agayne into his owne dominions, and remained vnharmed in Hungary for ſomuche as he was not there put to any loſſe or hynderaunce by our men, or on our behalf.
               While theſe thynges were a doing in AuſtricheAndrewe de Aurea. and Steirmarke, Andrew de Aurea chief capitain of themperours maieſties nauy vpon the ſeas, wēt at themperours cōmaundement, with an exceding great Armade or navy, vnto the citie of Corona,The citie of Corona takē
                   whiche lieth in the Ilonde of the Grekes ſomtyme called Poloponeſus, and nowe Morea, whiche citie he did ouercome, and expelled from thence all the Turkes. But the Chriſtians did not longe enioye the ſame, for within two yeres after the Turkes obtayned the poſſeſſion of the ſaied towne agayn, ſmal to our reioyſing.
               When the matter was nowe in Auſtriche qualifiedThe Emperourre turned into Italy to the Pope. and all thinges quiet, the Emperour Charles the fift returned thorough the mountaines of Stiermarke namely thorough kerint and Friouleſonttyme called Forum Iuly, and ſo through MantuaThe Pope meteth themperour at Bononia. into Italy agayne to the Pope, Clement by name, who came to mete hym at Bononia with greate pompe and ſolempnitie, in ſo muche that he continued in Italy all the winter of this yere, ſtabliſhing the ſame in order peace and tranquilitie.
               In Englād was alſo in this yere moued a battel.Battell moued in England againſt the Scottes. For kyng Henry the eight ſent men into Scotland againſt Iames the fift, kyng of the Scottes where in cōcluſion they ſlew a great nomber & toke many priſoners, and ſo returned.
               
                  Alſo in the ſame yere dyed the ryght hygh andThe death of Iohn duke of Saxon. myghty prince▪ Iohn duke of Saxon, and electour imperiall &c. and was honorably buried at Wittenborough in the Caſtel churche: whoſe ſonne and heire is the ryght noble and chriſten Prince Iohn Fredericke, whiche after the deceaſſe of his ſaied fatherIohn Frederick duke of Saxon. ſucceded in the gouernaunce of the ſaied dukedome of Saxon as electour imperiall, rulynge the ſame moſte honorably in the feare of God muche to his prayſe and commendacion.
               There was alſo a Comete or blaſyng ſtarre ſeneA Comete or blaſing ſtarre 
                        ••••
                     . this yere in the moneth of September, whiche appeared early in the morning two houres before the riſyng of the Sunne, by the ſpace of certayn wekes, in the ſygne of Virgo, Libra, and Scorpius, at the oriental corner ſtretchyng her blaſyng tayle towardes the ſouthweſt.A great in
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        ••
                     cion of wat
                        ••
                      in Hollād Seeland &c.
               
               The ſecond day of Nouember was there a great inundacion of water brokē in, into Freeſeland, Holland. Seeland, and Flaunders, which was very damageable to the ſaid countreis and to thinhabiters therof.
               Alſo Chriſterne kyng of Norway being retournedChriſterne k
                        •
                     n
                        •
                      of D
                        ••
                     
                     
                     
                        〈…〉
                     ke after h
                        ••
                      retur
                        ••
                     ta 
                        〈…〉
                     oure 
                        〈…〉
                     e 
                        〈…〉
                     l. into his ſaid kyngdome the yeare before, from the parties of lowe Ducheland, where he had kept hym ſelfe by the ſpace of ten yeres, was required, by the counſayll of Denmarke to come to Copmanhauen, otherwyſe called Coppenhagen, againſt kyng Fredericke, whiche was put in there by the helpe of the towne of Lubeke, when the ſaid Chriſterne fled out of the Realme, that he myght there receyue and take in poſſeſſion the kyngdome of Denmarke,

but when he ſuſpected no guyle, relented and put away hys ſouldiours, and came into Denmarke, the Counſayll of the Lande toke hym priſoner, not regardinge the promiſes and ſaulf conduit by them made vnto hym: And ſo they kept hym in the caſtel of Sunderborough, oute of the whiche he came neuer as yet. So that after this kinge Frederick did peaceably enioye his kingdome vntyll he dyed.
               At Lindowe by the ſea coaſte was inA mōſtruous Calfe borne by ye ſea coſte aboute Lindowe. The Emperour Charles retourneth from Genua into Spaine. thys yeare borne a dubble calfe, wyth two heades, foure eares, and eighte feete, hanginge alltogether.
               
                  In the yere of our Lord .M. ccccc. xxxiij. when ye Emperour, namely Charles the fift had ſtablyſhed vnity and concord among the Princes and Cities of Italy and Lumbardy, he departed wyth a competent and wel appointed Armada or Nauye from Genua, and hauynge a proſperous paſſage, arryued within fewe dayes after in Spayne where he was receyued of hys ſubiectes wyth great ioye.
                  After this by the counſayll and inſtigation ofNewe Indes or Ilandes plentyfull of golde and ſiluer founde out by the Spāyardes. themperours Maieſtye, the Shypmaieſters and maryners of Spayne founde oute certayne Indes or Ilandes in the ſea, beynge vnknowen before, whyche do ſo excedynglye abounde in ryches of golde and ſyluer, that it is vnſpeakeable. Theſe toke they in by force of armes and ſubdued them vnder the ſubiection of the emperours Maieſtye.
                  
                     In thys yeare the Pope and FrauncysA ſolēpne cō
                        munycacyon holdē at Maſſilia betwene ye Pope & the French kinge. the Frenche kynge helde a ſolempne communycatyon together at Maſſylya whyche lyeth in the Prouynce of Fraunce, where after manye and dyuers conſultacyons it was concluded that Henry Duke of Orleans, ſonne to the ſayde Frenche kynge ſhuolde marye Pope ClementesThe duke of Orleans marieth the Popes coſyn. coſyne, the doughter of Laurence Medyce Duke of Vrbyne, wyth whome the Pope hadde promyſed a ryche dowrye.
                  Thus hath thys Pope Clemente alwayes endeuoured hym ſelfe to allure and drawe vnto hym the hyghe Potentates and Rulers of the worlde, by the helpe of whome he myghte extyrpate and roote oute the pore Chryſtyans, whome they call Lutheryans and Heretykes: But God woulde not ſuffer it longe: as it is wrytten, There is no deuice nor counſayll agaynſte the Lorde but it ſhall come to naughte.
                  In the ſame yeare the myghtye bond andThe Euangelycal bōd is opened by ye french kyng. confederatyon of the Germayne Natyon, which was called the Euangelycall confederacyon, or the bonde of the Goſpell, beynge kepte ſecrete of manye was at the prouocatyon of the Frenche kynge opened and diſcloſed.
                  There apeared alſo another Comete orAnother Comete or blaſing ſtarre apeared. blaſynge ſtarre from the ende of the moneth of Iune, vnto the begynnynge of Auguſte, in the Northe, and in the ſygnes of Gemyny, Taurus and Aryes, thoroughe the whyche ſygnes ſhe made her courſe in her goynge backewarde,

hauyng her tayle extended towardes the South. And thys was the thyrde Comete or blaſynge ſtarre that hadde appered wethyn thoſe two yeres. What they portended or ſygnyfyed, or what alteracyon of Eſtates and other thynges they broughte wyth them, maye a dyſcreete reader gather and perceyue by the Storyes herafter folowing. For ſuche wonderfull workes of God (althoughe they come by the courſe of nature) yet are they not wythoute theyr ſpecyall workynge.
                  It is ſayde alſo that in this yeare of .M.Shiltagh burned downe to ye ground. CCCCC. xxxiii. the Deuyl burned a lyttell Toune in Germanye called Shyltagh downe to the grounde, by the meanes of a certayne wythche, on maundy thurſdaie.
                  The fyfte daye of October in the nyghte burned at Andwarpe the Churche called our ladye Churche beynge ſodaynly ſette on fyre.
                  At Nurrenboroughe and in manye otherA great Peſtilence in Germany. places of thempyre lyenge there aboute reygned thys yeare a greate Peſtylence, in ſo muche that at Nurrenboroughe onelye from. S. Margretes daye, vntyll. S. Martins day folowinge dyed ten thouſande perſons.
                  The ſixtene day of Nouember was a great earthquake, and an horryble tempeſte of wynde,A great earthquake & tempeſt of wind. whyche plaged and troubled the Townes in hygh Germany verye ſore, namely, Cu
                        •
                      Feldechurche. S. Gall, wyth other townes and vyllages lyenge nyghe vnto them, by the Ryuer called the Rhene.
                  
                     Thys yeare Henrye the eighte, kynge ofKynge henry the .viii was d
                           •
                        uorſed frō hys fyrſte wyfe maried to an other. Englande. &c. for certayne conſyderacyons hym therevnto mouynge was dyuorced from hys wyfe whiche had bene fyrſte maryed to hys brother prynce Arthur, and maryed another, on wytſonday.
                  In the yeare of our Lorde .M. CCCCC.1534. The Anabaptyſtes t
                           •
                        ke the Cytye of Mynſter in Weſtphale. xxxiii. in the moneth of Ianuary, The Anabaptiſtes, whyche had gathered them ſelues together out of Hollande and Freſelande, by preuy ſubteltyes and conſpyracyes whych they had made with certayne burgeouſes of the Cytye of Mynſter in Weſtphale, inuaded the ſame Cytye. toke poſſeſſyon of it, and expelled from thence al the Burgeoules and inhabytauntes therof, that woulde not take parte wyth them and folowe theyr facultye.The Anabaptyſtes make them a kyng. They choſe them alſo a kynge, that was a Taylloure, named Ihon of Leyden, whyche ordeyned for hym ſelfe two ſpecyall Counſayllours, the one called Knypperdullynge, and the other kreghtyngeKnypperdullynge &c. kregh tynge.  and in concluſyon they made ſuche a dyſorder and confuſyon whytin the ſayde Cytye, that not wythoute a cauſe all the people of Weſtephale dyd ryſe agaynſte them.
                  But when the ryghte noble Prynce Philyppe Landgraue of Heſſen toke in hande to accordePhilip Landgraue of Heſſen. the matter betwene the ſayde Anabaptyſtes and the Byſhoppe, whome they had expelled, he coulde nothynge preuayle, ſo ſore hadde the Deuyll blynded that Anabaptyſtycall generatyon. Wherefore the ſayde Byſhoppe compaſſed

the ſayde Cytye wyth a greate power on euerye ſyede to thyntent he myghte ouercome andThe Citie of Minſter beſieged by y• bi
                           •
                        hop. Scarcitye of victualles in Mynſter. The Anabaptiſtes eate lether & couerynges of bookes. ſubdue them ether wyth the ſworde or elles by famyne.
                  And althoughe there was greate ſcarcyte and lacke of vyctualles wythyn the ſaide Cyrye in ſo muche that at the laſte they were ſayne to eate lether and couerynges of bookes yet dyd they ſuſtayne, bearcoute, prolonge and holde oute the ſayde ſyege vntyll the next yeare folowynge, wherof we ſhall ſpeake more in place conuement.
                  In the meane ſeaſon dyd Philip LandgrauePhilip landgraue of Heſſen goeth about to ſet his vncle into his owne land agayn. of Heſſen prepare hymſelfe after the beſt maner, to reſtore hys Vncle Duke Hulderyke of Wyrtenbergh agayne to hys Dukedome, from whence he was expelled fyftene yeares before durynge the whyche tyme kynge Ferdynando had the gouernaunce and vſe therof.
                  But fyrſte becauſe the ſayde prince of Heſſen woulde do nothynge preſumptuouſly nor temeraryouſlye, he ſente worde to themperoures Mayeſtye in Spayne, and to the kynge in Auſtryche, deſyrynge them to reſtore hys ſaid Vncle Duke Hulderyke to hys Landes agayn for ſo muche as he had nowe ſuffered ſufficient punyſhemente for hys offence, and preſumptyon by hym commytted agaynſte the Empyre (for he hadde taken a certayne towne pertaynynge to thempyre called Rutlynge, whyche was the cauſe of hys expulſyon) in that he hadde lacked and forborne the vſe and profytes of his

Landes all that ſpace and ſeaſon.
                  Whyche thynge yf they were not willynge to do he was in a readynes hym ſelfe to ſet hym in agayne parforce, Althoughe he woulde be loth to vſe anye carneſte and rigourous faſhions.
                  But whyle he was not anſwered accordynge to hys expectatyon and requeſte, he wente furthe wyth hys power into the lande of Wyrtenbergh that where bothe Prynces met together ſloutelye, but Philippe the PalatynePhilip y• palatine put to flyght and wounded. Hulderike duke of wi
                           •
                        
                        tēberg reſtored to his o
                           •
                         
                        
                           ••
                         d
                           〈…〉
                        ō. wyth hys men was put to flyghte, and he him ſelfe wounded in hys hele wyth a ſhot, wherfore the ſaid Landgraue was verye ſorye.
                  After thys battel the townes yelded them ſelues one after another, ſo that wythin fewe dayes the ſayd Duke Hulderyk brought all his Landes agayn vnder hys power and ſubiection.
                  But whyle the ſayde Landgraue by reaſon of thys acte hadde nede to feare themperoures and the kynges Maieſtye, leaſte they myghte worke oughte agaynſte hym, he went wyth hys armye towardes Vlmes beſydes the Ryuer of Danube, where he taryed eyther for an agremente and a peaceable retourne, or elles for another anſwere.
                  In ſo muche that a ſure peace on the Emperoures and kynges Mayeſtyes behalfe,A peace graūted vnto y• 
                        
                           •
                        an
                           •
                        g
                           •
                        a 
                           •
                        e on them perours behalf. wyth ſure appendycles and circumſtances, was there promyſed hym by Albert Archebyſhoppe of Mence, Ihon Frederyke Duke of Saxon, bothe Electours imperiall, and George, Duke

of Saxon After the obtaynyng wherof he diſperſed hys armye wythoute delaye, and retourned home agayne into hys owne lande. HereThe lādgraue retourneth into his owne lande. A cōmēdatiō of liberalyty & boldenes in ye landgraue. myghte I take occaſyon to extoll and hyghly to prayſe not onelye the bolde and reaſonable deade or acte of the Landgraue, in that he dyd ſo truelye and faythefullye helpe hys Vncle into hys owne domynyon agayne, wythoute any reſpect hadde to the power of them that hadde the ſame landes of hys Vncle, in poſſeſſyon more by ſufferaunce, then by any ryghte tytell.
                  But alſo the pacience and mekenes both of the Emperoures and the kynges Maieſtye, in thata cōmēdatiō of pacience & mekenes in thēperour & ye kyng of Hungary. they dyd ſo gentlye and wyllyngly renounce the ſayd Dukedome, Whych they myght very eaſely, accordynge to theyr power amonge men, haue ſubdued and brought agayne vnder their ſubiection and dominatiion.
                  But foraſmuch as I am not minded here to deſcribe hole ſtories with al their circūſtances, but onely to touch brefely the principal actes and doinges, I wil commet the ſame to another, or peraduēture intreate of it my ſelfe herafter to my power.The death of Frederike kyng of Dē
                        marke.
                  
                  The ſame yere of. 1534. died Frederick kinge of Denmarke, about whoſe corſe happened a wonderful and ſtraung thing, which doubteles did ſignifie the ſheding of bloud that folowed afterwarde in the ſame kingdome. For when the dead corps of ye ſaid kyng (accordyng to the cuſtome and maner) was enbawmed or anoynted wyth bawme & other ſpyces and wrapped in clene ſeryng clothes, & was incloſed in a ſhrine piched & prepared accordinglye

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
the ſame dead corps (contrarye to nature) beganneA ſtraunge thing or tokē happened about y• dead corps of the kynge. The erle of Oldēboroughe 
                           •
                         y• Lubekes inuade y• dukedom of h
                           •
                        lſa
                           •
                        es. The death of George weuer & markes mayer. to blede in ſuche ſorte, that the bloude was receyued and taken vppe in veſſels, and immedyatelye after the people of the land were vyſyted wyth warres and battayles. For Chryſtophore Counte of Oldenboroughe, accompanyed wyth them of Lubeke, whoſe Capytaynes were George weuer, and Markes Mayer (whyche afterwarde accordynge to their deſeruynges were condemned and put to death) inuaded the lande of Chriſtyans Duke of holſtone, and toke certayne townes and Caſtels, whyche not longeafter the ſayde Duke recouered agayne, puttynge them of Lubeke to great loſſe bothe by water and by lande, vntyll ſuche tyme as the other Sea Townes wyth Henrye Duke of Mekelboroughe toke the matter in hande, and concluded a peace and vnyty betweneA peace concluded betwene the towne of Lubeke and the dukedom of ho ſure. The captaynes of Lubeke deſyrous to inuade dē
                        marcke. the Towne of Lubeke, and the Dukedome of holſtone whyche peace was regiſtred and proclamed the eyghtene daye of Nouember.
                  After thys were the Capytaynes of Lubeke moued towardes Denmarcke, and conſulted wyth the ſayde Counte of Oldenborough howe they myghte conuenyently inuade and entre the ſayde kyngdome of Denmarke and Norwaye, wherof dyd enſue a newe warre, asA newe war 
                           ••
                        . ſhalbe declared in the next yeare.
                  Thys yeare was alſo ſene a wonderfull apparition in Denmarke beſides the towne of

Sleſwyghe lyenge not farre from Lubeke, whych (as a certayne Secretarye of the ſaide placeA wōderfull apparitiō in Dēmarke. by an othe affyrmeth in hys wrytynges to the Quene dyaected) apeared in the ayer the thyrd daye of Iune at after noone, and was ſene of a thouſande perſons or more, as hereafter foloweth.
                  Fyrſte there apeared a greate multytude of Lyons fyghtynge one wyth another.
                  Secondlye there apeared a man armed on horſebacke wyth a iuſtynge ſpeare vnder his arme as thoughe he woulde haue iuſted with an other, hauynge a longe bearde, and many buſſhes of fethers.
                  Thyrdelye, there appeared a man with a crowne imperyall, as lyke vnto themperours Mayeſtie, that the ſayd Secretary and manye of hys ſeruauntes, thoughte none other but that it hadde ben themperoures owne lyuyng perſonne, wherefore ſome of them toke of their cappes and were readye to do reuerence vnto hym.
                  Fourthelye there apeared the ſymylytude or Lykenes of a greate Regyon or Countree, replenyſhed wyth Cytyes, Caſtels and Vyllages, well diſtinct and ſet in order, which were all conſumed thoroughe a ſwyft fyre which went vp in the ſame.
                  Fyftly, there apeared an other Regyon not vnlyke to the fyrſte garnyſhed wyth Cytyes Caſtels and vyllages and ſpecially wyth one

greate and myghtye Cytye, wych Cytye was myghtelye aſſaulted by a greate multytude of warryours wyth gonnes and all manner of artyllerye bothe by lande and by water wyth migh tye ſhyppes vnder ſayle. There appeared alſo amonge the ſayde warryours certayne Capytaynes, whyche in ſwyftnes or agylyty and in length of body exceded the other.
                  Syxtelye, there apeared halfe a blacke Egle, whyche lepte out of the ſayde horſe, out of whoſe clawes or talentes fell ſmall Snakes, among the which was one great Dragon.
                  Seuentlye, there apeared afterward in the place where the greate Cyty hadde ben, a Camell, whyche dranke oute of a tempeſtuous water, as thoughe it hadde ben the ragynge ſea, by the waues wherof the ſayd beaſt was couered.
                  Eyghtlye, there appeared after thys a certayne horſe, wheron noman dyd ryde, but a lion whyche laye vpon hys backe, hauing a crowne hangynge on hys heade, and vpon the ſayde lyon ſate a Cocke, whych by continuall pickynge and bytynge conſumed the hole head of the Lyon, but the ſkull remayned a greate while hanging vpon the horſe.
                  Nyntly, there appeared alſo a great Croſſe of a bloudy colour, which immediately diuyded it ſelſe into many ſmall and black Croſſes.
                  Tentlye and laſt of all there apeared a fyery man wyth a crowne imperiall, all armed, whych helde on eyther ſyde of him a horſe, and vnder this was the for ſayd Croſſe.
                  
                     But vnder al theſe were manye ſortes of Dragons & vnknowen beaſtes, As Lyons, beares, and of other kyndes whych were neuer ſene before for ſome of them hadde heades of wylde ſwyne wyth greate tethe, and yet reſembled not the ſwynes in any other parte. But the mooſt part of them were Lyons.
                  The Croſſe, the Camell, and the Lyon whoſe head the Cocke dyd eate were ſene laſt of all.
                  Henrye the eyghte oft hat name kynge ofHenry king of Ingland excōmunicated by the pope. Englande, whan he was by the Pope excōmunycated for makyng dyuorſe wyth hys wyfe (which was hys brothers wyfe before) called the nobylytye and beſte learned of hys Realme together, and conſulted wyth them, In the whych conſultatyon or parlyamente it was concluded, thatThe Pope hath 
                           ••
                         authority ouer Ingland. the Pope hadde none authorytye nor power ouer hym, nor yet ouer the Churche of hys Realme: but that the kynge hym ſelfe was both kynge of his Royalme, and alſo ſupre me heade and defenderking Hēnry forſaketh yt Pope. A bokt ſett furth vp kinge henry againſte the primacpe of ye Pope. King Henry ioined in cōfederatin̄ with yt Princes & mayntainers of 
                           •
                         goſpel. of the ſame Churche. Werefore he dyd vttterlye forſake the Pope and fell from hym. He dyd alſo ſet furthe a booke of the authority and power of Chriſten Princes ouer their Churches agaynſte the vſurped authorytye of the Pope and hys deteſtable abhomynatyon, and procured afterward to be ioyned in confederatyon wyth the Euangelycall Prynces and townes, agaynſte the Pope and ſpecyally wyth the towne of Lubeke.
                  Whithin a littel whyle after this, his deputye in

Irelande fell from hym, and cauſed the whole IlandeIreland rebe
                           ••
                        eth againſt their prince. Pope Clement dyeth. to rebell agaynſt theyr Prince.
                  In theſayed yeare the fyue and twentieſt daye of September dyed Pope Clement the ſeuenth of that name, beyng old ſyxe and fyftye yeares and foure monethes.
                  After hym was elected and choſen, the twelft daye of October, Paule the thyrde, a veryePaule y•
                        ▪ iii. choſen to be Pope. olde man, whyche before was called Alexander Farneſius, a Romayne borne, and had ben byſhop of Oſtia. What Romyſh touches the ſame hath wrought and vſed, ſhalbe mentioned hereafter in place conuenient.
                  Whyle thys was a doynge in the Weſte, the bloudthurſtye Mars was buſy in the Eaſte: For the mooſt myghty Sophy kynge of the Perſyans, inuaded the Lande of Armenia agaynſtSophi p
                           •
                        in
                        
                           ••
                         of y• Perſians 
                           •••••
                        
                        beth y• Turk. Imbrai baſſa. the Turke wyth a myghty army. Wherefore the Turke ſent hys chyefe Capytayne (called Imbrai Baſſa) wyth a ſtronge hooſt, to defend Armenia from and agaynſt the Perſyans.
                  But whan they met by the Ryuer of Eufrates, Imbrai Baſſa wyth the mooſt parte of hisImbray baſſa with hys hoſt ſlayne. hooſt was ſlayne. Then Soliman the Turky ſhe Emperoure intendyng to reuenge the ſayde loſſe receyued at the handes of the Perſyans, went out of the cytye of Epiphania (whyche lyeth in the ende of the lande of Cilicia, and abutteth vponThe Turke cometh againſte y• ſayde Sophy. Syria) wyth a great nombre of men well appointed, and had a proſperons iorney and a lucky paſpaſſage vntill he approched nygh vnto the coſtes of Armenia.

But as ſoone as he hadde attayned vnto it heThe turke cō
                        paſſed aboute of the Periyans. The Turke eſcapeth 
                           •
                        a ro
                           •
                        e
                           ••
                         with a lewe. was vnwarres enuyronned, compaſſed and beſyeged rounde aboute of the Perſyans in the mountaynes on euerye ſyde, in ſuche wyfe, that theſayd Soliman had muche to do to ſaue hys lyfe, and to eſcape wyth a fewe of hys men into Syria.
                  Whyleſt Solyman was thus peſtered and buſyed wyth the Perſyans, a certayne Pyrate or Sea roauer, whome the Lombardes and theBarbaroſſa inuabeth the kyngdome of Tunyſe. people of Mauritania do call Barbaroſſa, roſe vp in Grece, and gate vnto hym a Turkyſhe Armad a well appoynted, intendynge to inuade and ouertunne the kyngedome of Tuniſe, lyenge in Affrica, where ſometyme Carthago was buylded, and at hys arryuynge he pilfered and ſpoyled ſyrſte the Cytye of Oſtia, lyenge not farre from Roome.
                  After that he kept the ſea aboute Genua aBarbaroſſa ſuodueth Affryca the leſſe good whyle, and whan they of Affrica ſuſpected leaſt of all, they were of hym inuaded. In ſo muche that he ſubdued vnto hym ſelfe all the leſſer Affrica, and expelled kynge Altzachenus from Tuniſe.Kynge Altzachenus expelled from Tunyſe.
                  
                  Thus hath thys Tyraunt ouercome Affrica, wherein he reygned and tryumpheth yet at thys daye wyth greate pryde and arrogancy.
                  The fyfte daye of Iulye in the ſayd yeareThe 
                           〈◊〉
                         of Breda burned. of .M. CCCCC. xxxiiii. were burned at Breda in the lande of Brabant, nyne hundreth and thre ſcore houſes by a ſodayne fyre.
                  
                     In the begynnyng of the Winter aroſe manyeGreat tempeſtes of wind. horryble and tempeſtuous Weſterly and alſo Southerly wyndes, wherby certayne quarters in lowe Duchelande and thinhabitauntes of Sealande dwellynge nygh the ſea ſyde ſuſtayned notable loſſes and dammages.
                  In the lande of Pole were all waters andWaters & ryuers excedingly increaſſed 
                           ••
                         y• 
                        
                           •
                        ande of Pole. ryuers ſo excedingly increaſſed, that they brooke downe at Crakowe and at Caſymyre myghtye ſtonebridges and walles, wyth many other ſtrong buyldynges, notwythſtandynge that in a maner thoroughoute all Europa beſydes all waters were verye ſmall, and partely dryed vp thorough the greate heate of the ſame Sommer.
                  Thys yeare the Duke of Millan maryedThe duke of Millā marieth y• dough
                        
                           ••
                        r 
                           〈…〉
                         y• kyng Denmarke. the doughter of Criſterne captyue kyng of Denmarke, whych was borne vnto hym of Izabell ſyſter to the Emperour Charles.
               
               
                  
                     IN the yeare of our Lorde, 1535.Themperour prepareth an armada towardes Affrica. the Emperoure Charles prepared hym ſelfe wyth greate power, and made out a myghty Armada or nauy, furnyſhed wyth all maner of neceſſaries, and thoroughlye manned wyth Duche, French and Spanyſhe warriours,The kingdō of Tuniſe rec
                           •••
                        red b
                           •
                         the pe
                           •
                        our. Barbaroſſa ex
                           ••
                        lled frō Tuniſe. wherewyth he ſayled fyrſte oute of Spayne into the Ile of Sardinia. From thence into Sicilia, and from thence he ſayled into Affrica in the moneth of Iune, and recouered the cytye and kyngedome of Thuniſe agayne, whyche Barbaroſſa had taken before, whome the Emperoure expelled

agayne from thoſe quarters, and reſtoredKyng Altzachenus reſtored to hys kyngdome of Tuniſe. The caſtell of Golleta reſerued for themperour. the olde kynge Altzachenus agayne to hys kingedome on thys condytyon that he ſhoulde yearelye paye a certayne trybute to the Emperoure. But the Caſtell of Golleta dyd themperoures Mayeſte reſerue to hys owne vſe, whyche he furnyſhed alſo wyth men, retaynynge the ſame onelye from the kyngdome of Tunyſe, All the reſidue of the ſayde kyngdome dyd he delyuerer to the ſayde king.
                  Thys battayll and affayres beynge endedThemperour returneth frō Affrica. themperoures Maieſtye returned agayne wyth hys Nauy into Sicylya, and arryued wyth a proſperous courſe at Palerrno, (whyche ſometyme was called Panormus.
                  Whyle the Emperoure was buſy to ſettBarbaroſſa inuadeth the Ile of Minorca. all thynges in ordre in the kyngdome of Tuniſe, Barbaroſſa inuaded the Ile called Mynorca, whyche is the leaſte amonge the Iles of balearis, deſtroyenge the ſame by ſpoylynge and burning very piteouſly.
                  Alſo the Affrycanes in the kyngdomeThe Affricanes attempte rebellion. of Thunyſe dyd not behaue themſelues verye faithefullye towardes themperoures Mayeſty. For when they woulde ſaue them ſelues from hys power and ſome of them wente aboute to make an inſurrectyon.
                  The Emperoures Maieſtye ſente hysAndrewe 
                           •
                        e Aurea apointed to kepe ye Affricanes in awe. chiefe Capytayne Andrewe de Aurea vpon the ſea towardes Affryca to punyſhe and correcte the rebelles, for the better eſtablyſhemente of all thynges in the kyngdome of Tunyſe.
                  
                     In the loweſt partes of Ducheland dyd theThe ſect of the Anabaptiſtes in creaſ
                           •
                        eth. The Anabaptiſtes 
                           ••
                        kem
                           •
                         
                        
                           ••
                        w
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           •
                         go naked. Secte of the Anabaptiſtes myghtelye increaſe, Wherefore the townes by the ſea ſyde feared a great deſtruction on there behalfe. Among the whych Secte ſome were ſo deuelyſh and ſhameles, that they dyd not onelye wythoute anye conſcyence and ſhame take manye wyues, but alſo went altogether naked euen as they were borne in thys worlde. Suche is the ordre where the Deuell is Capytayne, that neyther nurtour, honeſtye nor yet the feare of God is regarded.
                  But they that were wythin the TowneThe Anabaptiſtes within 
                           〈…〉
                        e 
                           •
                        pp
                           ••
                        lled. of Mynſter, and had ben nowe more then a yeare therein beſyeged, were not very well at eaſe, allthough by the reaſon of theyr foolyſhe Phantaſyes and hardened hartes they coulde not nor yet woulde not perceyue it, vntyll they were vtterlye deſtroyed.
                  For notwythſtandyng that the ſayed ſyege preſſed them, and an horrible and importunate famine (as was mencioned before in the laſt yeare) reygned among them, Yet were they by the comfortable perſuaſyons of theyr falſe Prophetes ſo hardened, that they mynded nothynge leſſe then to yelde by the Towne and ſaue theyr lyues, notwythſtandynge that thereunto they were often tymes requyred wyth lyberall and gracyous promyſes.
                  But contrary wyſe they defended themſelues the longer the fearcer, and ſhot out of the Towne

with ordinaunce as though the deuell had bene among them, to the great auoyaunce of their aduerſaries, in ſo muche that not a fewe valiaunt warriours in the Campe were ſlayne with their ordinaunce. And to declare the madnes of the ſaid AnabaptiſtesThe madnes of the Anabaptiſtes. I haue thought it mete not to omitte a folyſh acte done by a certayne woman among them. Foraſmuche therfore as they within the towne had this opinion of the ſaied towne of Mynſter, that itThe Anabaptiſtes beleued that Minſter was new Ieruſalem. was that new Ieruſalem mencioned in the Apocalipſe, thorough the whiche all the heathen ſhould be deſtroied, ſo that the chriſtians ſhould reigne in peace a thouſand yeres (whiche ſayeng although they muſt be vnderſtande ſpiritually were they expounded by them carnally) the ſaid folyſh woman wouldA woman would conterfet Iudith. counterfette the acte of Iudith which ſlewe holofernes, and deliuered her Citie. Wherefore ſhe made her boaſte that if ſhe myght be coſtely arayed and decked, ſhe woulde go furth (if ſhe were permitted) into the hooſte of her aduerſaries, and eaſely ouercome the byſhop. Whyle nowe the kyng & the other in the town were ſo foolyſh and made not only to beleue her, but alſo to further her in the ſaid affayres, truſtyng that their deliueraunce was at hand, ſhe went out, and behaued her ſelfe in all pointes as though ſhe had bene eſcaped and fled out of the citie. But her diſſimulacion beyng eſpied & perceyued, ſhe was taken and brought before the Byſhop, and after her confeſſion, rewarded wit death, accordyng to her deſeruyng.
                  For aſmuche nowe as the ſaied craft and practiſe bad no good ſucceſſe the Anabaptiſtes within the

citie ought to haue conſydered that there was no fortune in their doyng, ſeyng they were yet oppreſſed to the vttermoſt. But they dyd herein reſemble the Iewes in their laſt deſtructiōat Ieruſalem, for the more God plaged them with famine and diſſention among them ſelues, the more hard harted and ſtifnecked they were, vntill at the laſt one eſcaped priuely out of the ſaied citie, and brought in certaine of the byſhops ſouldiours at the gate called the holy croſſe gate, which ſouldiours after they had ſlain the watchemen opened the gate and ſo made away into the citie for the other. Thus was the citie of Mynſter taken in again and deliuered from the powere of the Anabaptiſtes at the feaſt of S. Iohn the baptiſte in the night. And the next day folowing whatſoeuer would make any reſiſtaūce being ſlayn with the ſworde, the kyng with his chief counſayllours craftyng and knipperdulling were taken priſoners.The kynge 
                           〈…〉
                        ing and knipperdulling taken. The kyng of the 
                           ••
                        baptiſtes with his cōſellers put to death. Theſe three were aftewarders for the ſpace of certayne monethes caryed about in the countrey from place to place for a ſpectacle and example to all men. And at the laſt on S. Vincentes day in the yere of our lorde .MDxxxvi. they were put to death with fyry tonges, and their dead bodies hanged vp in yron baſkettes or grates, out of the ſteple of S. Lamberts Churche, within the ſaied citie of Mynſter, the kyng in the middes ſomewhat hyer then his ſaid two coūſailers, for a perpetual memoriall and warning to all commocioner rayſers of tumulte & rebelles againſt ye lauful magiſtrates ordeined of God. Thus toke this kyngdom of the Anaba priſtes a ſhameful ende, according to their deſertes.
                  In Denmarke raged the duke of Oldenborough

with the capitaines of Lubeke (as he had begonne the yere before) but the moſte part of the germayne counſayll choſe Chriſtiane Duke of Holſton to beChriſtian duke of Holſton choſen to be kyng in Denmarke. kyng in Denmarke, deſyring hym to aſſiſte them againſt the ſaied duke of Oldenborough and them of Lubeke. While nowe the ſaid requeſt was eaſy to be graunted, and the ſaid duke of Holſton had taken Iudland in poſſeſſion all ready (whiche is no ſmall porcion of the kyngdome of Denmarke, abutting vpon the lande of Holſtone) he paſſed with his army into the Ile of Funa▪ otherwyſe called Fion, and ouercame the citie of Aſnites. But when the duke of Oldēborough with them of Lubeke aſſaulted him with an hooſt of men well appointed both on horſebacke and on foote, the ſaid Chriſtian obtayned the victory, ſo that the duke of Oldēborough loſt much people where among other was ſlayne Iohn countThe count of Hoya, and the Erle of Teckelborough ſlayne. of Hoya, and an Erle of Teckelburgh in Weſtphale, and euen the ſame daye (whiche was the .xi. daye of Iune) they of Holſtone toke from them of Lubeke an Armada of ſhippes, and put the men of Lubeke whiche they founde in the ſame, in captiuitie. In ſomuche that the ſaid Chriſtiane had the ouerhande on euery ſyde, whiche was vnto him a witnes from God that he ſhould be kyng in Denmarke.
                  In Hungary and Auſtrich were diuers louedayesLouedayes kept in Hungary. kept betwene Ferdinando and Iohn Weyda kinges of Hungary, and the Turkes imbaſſadour, to wete if Hūgary might be brought to apeaceable eſtate neuer theles there was nothing concluded that was notable and profitable.
                  Alſo in this yere. 1535. there was a mariage cōcludedThe kyng of Poles maried the daughter of 
                           •
                        erd
                           ••
                        anto kyng of Bohemy. betwen ye king of Poles & the king of Boheme.

For Sigiſmonde kyng of Poles maried Sigiſmū
                     de his ſonne to Eliſabeth the daughter of Ferdinando kyng of Bohemy, whiche in the yere of oure Lorde .MDxliij. folowyng was celebrated with great ſolempnitie, as ſhalbe mentioned hereafter in place conuenient.
                  In the moneth of Nouember the ſecond day theThe death of the Duke of Mylan. duke of Mylan departed out of this world. And immediatly, after Frauncis the Frenche kyng prepared hym ſelfe with all his power to recouer the dukedome of Mylan, and entred into the land of Sauoy, whereof enſued great warres the yere next folowyng, in thoſe quarters.
                  Frederike Duke of Baier, Palatine by the ReneThe duke of 
                           •
                        a
                           •
                        er marieth the daughter of Denmarke. (now electour imperiall) toke to wyfe the right excellent princeſſes Dorothee, daughter to Chriſtierne late kyng of Denmarke, whiche he had begotten of Izabel ſyſter to Charles themperour, the ſolempnitie whereof was kept at Bruxelles in Brabant.
                        
                           •
                        ir Thomas more Chauncelour of England and y• byſhop of Rocheſter beheaded.
                  
                  In England, in the moneth of Iune the byſhop of Rocheſter, and Sir Thomas More (which had bene lorde chauncellour of Englande, and in great aucthoritie vnder the kyng) was beheaded for denieng the kyng to be ſupreme heade of the churche of Englande.
                  And in this yeare were there thre monkes of theThe monkes of the charter houſe. Charter houſe executed in Englande for the ſame offence.
                  In the partes of Shleſy about and within theA wonderful tempeſt. the towne of Olſe aroſe the ſame yeare on Sainct Gyles day an horrible tempeſt, in ſuche ſorte, that the bookes whiche were newely prynted, were taken

out of the Iewes houſes and founde in a great corne felde harde packed in belles as though they had bene ſtamped and beaten into them with peſtelles, whiche belles were conueyed thether out of the churche ſteples by the violence and outragiouſnes 
                        •
                     o the ſaied tempeſt. Beſides this there were men and women taken vp in the ſtretes, & caried a great way of into y• feldes. In the houſes were in dyuersNeuer ſuche a tēpeſt ſene. places the dores and wyndowes lifted of from the hynges, the tables ſubuerted, and great holes made and beaten in the walles: So that there was neuer ſuche a tempeſt ſene before.
                  Beſides this there was the ſame yere in the parties of Duchelād in Sommer very many ſodaine & fearfull tempeſtes, with hayle, lightenyng and thō
                     der, more then euer was hard of before, with great colde and muche rayne, which alſo was an occaſion that the wines in many places had no good ſucceſſe
                  This yere the .viij. day of Ianuary. died in Englande the lady Katherine Dowager which had benQuene Katherine dow
                           •
                        
                        ger dieth. diuorſed from the kyng, by due proces of the lawe two yeres before.
                  This yere in England was Anne bulleyne quene of Englande, the lorde Rochiford, Nores, Weſton,Quene Anne Bullyn be headed. Que. Iane Semour maried to the kyng of Enland. Brutō, and Markes beheaded. And the kyng maried lady Iane Seimour.
                  This yere alſo in October began in Englande a foolyſh commotion in Lincolinſhyre and in yorke ſhyre, whiche by the kynges wyſedome and his prudent coūſaill were appeſed without bloud ſheding.
               
               
                  I In the yeare of oure lorde. 1536. The byſhopThe citie of Geneue beſieged. of Geneue & the duke of Sauoy beſieged the

citie of Geneffe, becauſe thinhabiters of the ſame had receiued the Goſpell. And when they of Genneffe admoniſhed thinhabitantes of the towne of Berne of their cōfederaciō, they of Berne ſent their imbaſſadours to the Duke, exhorting and admony ſhyng hym to remembre al loues, faithfulneſſes and confederations that had ben betwene them of a lōg tyme, and requiring hym to departe from the citie of Genneffe. But in as muche as their requeſt dyd not onely take no place, but alſo the ſaied duke main tayned and defended their open enemy and aduerſary called Muſſy Caſtellanus, and in al this nogē
                     tyll exhortacion could ſerue nor preuayle, they of Berne aduertiſed hym that they would viſitie him with warres, and renounced the bonde of cōfederation whiche had bene made betwene them before, in ſo muche that they ſent their capitaine called Iohn Frauncis Clauicula with an hoſt of men wel apointed into the lande of Sauoy, whiche ouercame all the lande within fewe dayes, whiche the ſaid DukePreachers of the Goſpel ordeyned 
                           ••
                         Sa
                        
                           •••
                        . had inpoſſeſſion, euen from the moūtaines of Switzerland, vnto the fortreſſe of Rodani, with the two biſ
                        •
                     oprikes of Genneffe and Lauſan
                        •
                     a: Wherein they cōſtituted and eſtabliſhed miniſters to preache the goſpell, and ordeined rulers and magiſtrates according
                        •
                     y. So that now the Switzers repoſed againe their olde coaſtes which they had in their power many yeres before. But there were within the ſpace of a moneth very many Caſtelles and ſtrongholdes deſtroied by the Switzers, among the wi
                        •
                     hIulius Leſar builded Clauſa Rodani. alſo the olde & ſtrong clauſa Rodani, builded by the Emperour Iulius, otherwiſe called Iulius Ceſar▪
                     
to ſtoppe vp & barre the way of the Switzers for commyng into Fraunce, and had bene hetherto inuincible, was quite ouerthrowen and deſtroied. Of this battaill of y• citeſens of Berren apeared a good ſygne a litle before, where about .iiij. hundreth men of Berne Newebourgh & other quarters of Switzerlande preuely beyng called together were ſent thorough by pathes to ayde and ſtrengthen the citie of Geneue, which helde a notable battaill & conflict with the men of Sauoy. For when they were for lacke of victuals cōſtrained to come forth out of the moūtaines, they were aſſaulted by their aduerſaries being ſtrong about .xv. hundreth men, which moued the ſaid .iiij. hundreth men to battaill & conſtrained them to fyght. Inſomuche that they, as hū
                     gry & faint as they were layde ſo about them & defended themſelues in ſuch ſorte, as they ſlew about iiij. hūdreth of their enemies, & put the reſt to flight, with the hoſte which was not farre of being in nombre about .v. hundreth men: ſo that they obtained a fre and a ſure paſſage to accompliſhe their iourney: hauing loſt on their ſide, ten mē, & one womā which was ſlayne with her ſonne as ſhe was fighting be ſydes her huſbande. Here muſt I make mencion al ſo of the conſtancie that was in the people of Berne▪ in that they coulde neither by power be feared, nor yet by prayers and great giftes be prouoked to leaue the defence of their confederates. For when the Emperour very earneſtly offred them peace, and attempted dyuers and ſundry wayes to brynge them to an vnitie, and by threatenynges and minaces to mollyfie them, they proceded neuertheles

to aſſiſte their frendes and to ſet them at libertie. But when Fraunces the Frenche kyng ſtudied by many giftes to allure them and by great promyſes to prouoke them, to aſſiſte him in his warres be gonne againſt themperoure and the Dukedome of Mylan, they cauſed his imbaſſadours and meſſengers to auoyde out of their citie, declaring vnto thē that the kyng ought to content hymſelfe with the couenaunt and confederation whiche he had with them already, that is, that they ſhould not endamage hym. Theſe thynges paſſed in Swicherlande & Sauoy in the beginning of the ſayd yere.
                  But the Frenche kyng proceded with his army,The French kyng claymeth the ſucceſſion of Mila
                           •
                        e. to recouer the lande of Sauoy, and to take poſſeſſiō of all that he came nygh, for he pretended to clayme the heritage of the ſame Dukedom by his mothers ſyde. Then fled the duke to the Emperour, who at that ſeaſon intended to kepe his Eaſter at Roome with the Pope, as he did. For vpon maundy thurſday he waſſhed the fete of twelue pore mē, (as their coſtume is yet at this day) fed them, and ſerued thē
                     It is the condicion of an ap
                           •
                         to countr
                           •
                        faite all y• is done in his 
                           ••
                        ght. at the boorde in his owne perſon, and in fine gaue them the veſſels and diſſhes, (being of ſyluer) wherwith they were ſerued. Thus do ſuche Lordes and potentates counterfaith the outwarde actes & dedes of our ſauiour Chriſte, after thexample of Apes: But in their hartes where Goddes worde ought to be earneſtly embraced, learned and folowrd (and not the preceptes and tradicions of men) they are vtterly againſt Chriſt, and clene contraryAprai
                           ••
                         of the author. to his doctrine: God graunt them ones to be illumined with the lyght of his Goſpell, that the poore

flocke and congregation of Chriſte may be brought to a perfect vnitie. Amen.
                  Now when the feaſte of Eaſter was paſt the EmperoursThe Emporoures complaynt to the Pope agaīſt the Frenche kyng. maieſtie made his complaint before the Pope and his Cardinalles, concernyng the greate iniuries whiche the Frenche kyng had inferred and committed againſte hym all ready and yet pretended to do, by the reaſon whereof he was vtterly cō
                     ſtrayned againſt his will to defende his quarel and to warre againſt hym: And to moue the Popes moſte holy fatherhoode (God forgeue me that I do hym wronge) to holde on his ſyde, and to take his parte he rehearſed vnto hym all the euilles and wicked feates whiche Fraunce had perpetrated and wrought againſt hym, namely howe that alwayes when the Emperours maieſtie was about to mete and reſiſte the infideles, the ſayd Frenche kyng had ſtirred vp one miſchiefe or other whereby hys godly enterpriſes and purpoſes were either letted and hyndered altogether, or els begonne with ſmal profite, and ended or brought to paſſe to ſmall effecte. Itē howe that he had made cōfederatiō now with the turke, and then with Barbaroſſa, and had alſo hym ſelfe ſtirred vp all the vngracious warres, which had ſo many yeres continued in the borders of his maieſties dominions. In conſideracion wherThe Empeperoures requeſt. of themperours maieſtie beſought the Popes holynes, that he would take his parte, and helpe hym to reſyſt the vngodly enterpryſe of the Frenche kyng, that a generall peace myght be eſtablyſhed, whereby the Turke myght be repelled and ouercome. When the Popes holynes had hearde the Eemperours

oration, accordyng to his kynde (which theyThe Popes aunſwere. haue alwayes vſed ſence the tyme of Adriane the thirde towardes themperour) he made aunſwere openly to themperours requeſt, that he would neyther take parte with themperours, nor yet with them of Fraunce, but that he woulde ſytte ſtyll as neuther, and ſe to whome fortune would leane moſt and hym that ſhould ouercome his aduerſary and get the ouerhande woulde he mete with all his power, and ſuccour hym that ſhoulde haue the worſt. Here myght Emperours learne, what goodnes is to be loked for at the handes of ſuche beaſtes, if they were not altogether blynde. Vpon this aunſwer ofThe Emperoures retourne from Rome. the Pope, themperour toke his iourney the .xviij. day of Aprill (for Eaſter daye was the .xvi. daye of Aprill) from Rome towardes Mylan. In the meane ſeaſon did the Emperours Capitaines aſſemble a great multitude of warriours both on horſebacke and on foote, of the Germayne, Welche, and Spanyſh nations, whome they brought with great feare thorough Piemont, and many ſmall battayles, whiche conſumed no ſmall nomber of men, before Marſilia, whiche is an olde citie lyeng in Fraunce by the ſea ſyde, and is enuironned with the ſea in thre partes or endes, whiche Citie themperoures company beſyeged with al their power both by water, and by lande, but there happened ſuche a contagious diſeaſe and mortallitie in the Emperoures hooſt, that within fewe dayes there dyed aboue twelue thouſande perſones. So that the Emperoure by the meanes of this neceſſite was conſtrained to dyſperſe hys armye.
                  
                     But the Frenche kyng was at that ſeaſon mightyer a great deall, bothe of Money, and of People, and laye with a greate power of hys owne men, with a great company of Swytzers and with ſyxe thouſande duche launceknyghtes, whoſe Capitain was William Counte of Furſtenborough beſydes auinion, about a fyftene duche myles from Marſilia, from thence to occurre and mete themperoure, and to reſcue Marſilia, if the Emperoure had not bene cauſed to retire by the meanes of the ſayde greate death and mortalitie. Neither remayned he in this caſe harmeles, for there dyed in hys hooſt aboue two thouſande Swytzers. And hys eldeſt Sonne Fraunces the Dolphyne was poyſoned, whiche thynge alſo ſhoulde haue lyghted vpon the king himſelf if god had not ſpecially preſerued him.A trap
                           •
                        one put to death at 
                           •
                        po
                           •
                        s.
                  
                  The traytour whiche was an Erle of Montecuculo (as Anſelmus Rid doth call hym) was at Lions by the kynges commaundement miſerably put to death, being drawen and plucked in ſunder with foure horſes tyed ſeuerally to his handes and legges: His head was ſet vpon the Brydge whiche goeth ouer the water of Rodani, and hys foure quarters were hanged before the foure principall gathes of the Cictie. Whyle theſe thynges were inThe Count of Naſſowe. doing. The Counte of Naſſowe marched through Pycardy into Fraunce, and toke certayne ſmall townes lyeng on this ſyde, and alſo on the farther ſyde of the water of Some, by force of armes, AndPerone beſyeged. beſieged the citie of Perone, whiche he preſſed very ſore by ſpoilyng and burnyng rounde about it, by the meanes whereof he made many poore folkes in that countrey, neuertheles he coulde not wynne

the citie, but was fayne to leaue it as he founde it, & ſo retyred from thence the .xi. daye of September, after that he had beſyeged it by the ſpace of a moneth. Thus muche of themperour and the Frenche kyng concernyng their actes and the thynges done betwene them for this preſent yere.
                  In Germany aſſembled the princes and nobles of the Empyre, whiche as then had receyued the Goſpell, at Smalkalde, whiche lyeth beſydes the woode of Duringe, and thither came alſo thambaſſadours of the kynges of Denmarke Fraunche and Englande: Where the nobles and princes of theThe Euangelical bond Goſpell made a bonde and confederacion together, wherein alſo Chriſtiane kynge of Denmarke was bounde, that they ſhoulde truely and faythfully holde together and take one an others part, yf they ſhould at any time be aſſaulted by an enemy of Goddes worde. And thys bonde or confederation is called the bonde of Smalkalde, whiche yerely increaſeth more and more: And many Potentates are dayly added to the congregacion of Chriſte, in ſo muche that greate Monarchies may ſtande in awe of them, and feare them. And yf they do truely cleaue to Goddes worde, and be thankefull vnto hym that gaue them that greate benefyte, no doubte there ſhalbe no power ſo myghty that ſhalbe able to preuayle agaynſte thys bonde, and to ſuppreſſe it. For yf GOD be on theyr ſyde and they put theyr truſte and confidence in hym vnfaynedly, they ſhalbe ſtronger and myghtyer then all worldely power whyche they haue

nowe in a maner throughout all Germany, God graunt them to conſydre it, and to be thankeful vnto God for it, and for all other benefites which they haue receaued at his hande hitherto.
                  There was alſo a Synode and cōuocation keptThe Synode or conuocatiō of Wittenborough. at Wittenbourgh in Germanye in the moneth of May betwene them that cleaued vnto the doctrine of Huldrike zwynglius, concernyng the Sacrament of Chriſtes body and bloud, on the one partie, and them that folowed the mynde of Martine Luter on the other partie, where after long diſputacion had betwene theſayed parties, there was a certeyne determinacion and agrement taken betwene them as touchyng the controuerſy of the Sacrament, albeit that the moſte parte of the PreachersSwinglius cōſenteth not with Luter in the opinion of the Sacramēt on zwinglius ſyde would not conſent thereunto. But what controuerſy there was betwene the ſaid parties as touchyng the Sacrament, may be gathered eaſe out of the bokes of both parties, for the rehearſall thereof here in order would be to long.
                  Betwene the ſea Townes, Homborough, Lubeke,A new peace concluded betwene the ſea townes of Eaſtlande & Denmarke. Suno, and Chriſtiane choſen kyng of Denmarke, was this yere a newe peace cōcluded, whervnto they of Roſtocke and of Wiſmare woulde not agree. For their Duke Albert of Mekelborough, at Coppenhaghe (whiche is the chief citie of al Denmarke, and of the Iland called Seeland. Then the townes whiche were accorded and agreed vpō the ſayed peace ſent their imbaſſadours to Coppenhaghe, aduertyſyng the ſayd Duke Albert, and count Chriſtopher of their agreement, requiring them to yelde vp the cytye to the choſen kyng Chriſtiane.

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
But when the ſaid two lordes and thinhabitances of theſayd contry of Coppenhagen denyed themThe citie of Copenhage beſeged by y• kyng. their requsſt: kyng Chriſtiane beſeged the ſayd citye wyth ſuch power, and troubled them ſo ſore on euery ſyde, that no victualles might come at them by no maner of meanes. In ſo muche that wythin ſhort ſpace victualles waxed ſo ſcant and famme ſo increa
                        •
                     led wythin the cyty, that they were glad to vſe dogges fleſhe for theyr meate, and alſo cattes.D
                           •
                        g
                           •
                        es and 
                           〈…〉
                        . And when thys prouiſyon dyd alſo fayle them, and no deliueraunce eppeared of no part (for they hoped that Frederike the Palatine, who had taken to wyfe the doughter of kyng Chriſtierne, as before is mentioned, ſhould haue moued battayll agaynſt the Duke of Holſtone, whyche came not to paſſe) they yelded vp the cyty to the choſen kyngeCoppenhagh yelded vp to
                           •
                         kyng. Warborough taken Markes mayer taken and quartered. Chriſtian aboue mencyoned. Durynge theſayed ſiege the kynges ſouldiours ouercame Warborough, and toke that falſe Capytayne of the Lubekes, called Markes Mayer pryſoner who wyth hys brother Gerard Mayer and a Danyſh pryeſte was quartered ſhortly after.
                  After that theſayd Chriſtian had ouercome and ſubdued the hole kyngdome of Denmarke (accordyngAg
                           ••
                        ly e
                           ••
                        
                        ple for all kynges and conquerours. to the duety of all godlye kynges and prynces) he directed all hys doynges and procedynges to thys ende, that the worde of God myghte be purely and ſyncerely preached and taughte to hys pore ſubiectes in all partes of hys dominions.The practiſe of papiſtes. But when he perceyued the preuy practiſes, which the Biſhoppes of that lande (for they were in a maner the mightyeſt of both the kyngdomes of

Denmarke and Norway) imagined and purpoſed to worke againſt hym, to hyndre his godly enterpriſe, and to mayntayne their Idolary, he toke themAll the byſhoys of Dē
                        marck depoſed. all ſeuen (for ſo many were they in nombre) and depoſed them from their power and dignitie, ſo that they were not able any more to make diuiſion, ſedicion or commotion within his kyngdome, as they were wonte to do.
                  When this was done, he ſent meſſengers to WitIohn Bugen hagh. tenbourgh, and called for the right honorable and well learned doctor Iohn Bugenhaghe, borne in the dominion of Pomerlande, who is yet at thys daye preacher of Goddes worde and miniſter or curate at the paryſh Churche at Wittenbourgh, as he was then. This godly man came at the kyngesThepreachig of the goſpell inſtituted in Denmarke. xxiiij thouſād pariſhes in Denmarch & Norway furnyſhed with preachers. requeſt and by the helpe of God eſtablyſhed in bothe the kyngdomes the preaching of the Goſpell and the true miniſtracion of the Sacramentes very frutefully, ſo that within the ſpace of thre yeres (for ſo long was he by & about the kyng) all the paryſhes of the lande (which were aboue .xxiiii. thonſande in nombre) were prouided and furnyſhed with preachers and miniſters, hauing Super attendenres ordeyned and appointed ouer them to haue the ouerſyght of them and to haue an earneſt reſpecte and a watchefull eye to their doctrine and conuerſationThe coronation of Lhriſtiane ſiyng of Denmarck. The vntuerſitie of Luppenhaghe furnyſhed with mē
                        learned in y• ſcripturs. of lyuing. He crowned alſo kyng Chriſtian at Coppenhaghe in the preſence of all his nobles with the kyngly crowne of the land, & of both the kyngdomes. And after this at the kinges requeſt he prouided and furnyſhed the high Scole or vniuerſitie of Coppenhaghe with Lecures and Reders of holy ſcripture, and of all other laudable ſciences.

For the better increaſe and furnyſhyng whereof he called for certayne learned men frō Wittenbourgh although the lande was not all voyde of ſuche men before. To the mayntenaunce of whiche Godly order and inſtitucion of doctrine, as wel in the ChurcheLiuinges appointed for preachers & 
                           ••
                        d
                           ••
                        s in Dē
                        
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      as in the vniuerſytie, the kyng gaue large gyftes, and appoynted great liuynges. And he ſet ſuch an order in both the kyngdomes, that his ſubiectes may be glad, and geue God hygh thankes, that of his goodnes he woulde ſende them ſuche a kyng, God ſende hym longe to reigne among them, and ſtyrre vp the like in many other regions, to the praiſe and ſanctifycacion of hys moſte holy name. Amen.
                  Henry the eyght kyng of Englande had his imbaſſadoursThimbaſſadours of England at Wittenbourgh. certayne monethes at Wittenbourgh, whiche accordynge to the kynges requeſt, caryed wyth them in Englande certayne wel learned doctours, to preache the Goſpell of Chriſt within hys Realme and dominions, whereof the hole congregacion of Chriſt thoroughout all Germany conceiuedDoctour 
                           ••
                        n
                           ••
                        . a ſpeciall reioyſynge, and comforte: But alas their ioye was not longe permanent, for the ſaied kyng within two yeares after repelled them and cauſed ſome of them to be put to death, as here tikes: And Englyſhe men haue had a certayne prophecyAn olde prophecy of Enland. of great antiquitie, that when ſaynt Georges daye ſhould fall on good frydaye (whiche is in the yeare of oure lorde .MD. xlvi.) the worde of God ſhoulde myghtely increaſſe and taken place among them, which I praye God graunt vnto thē, to his prayſe and glory.
                  
                     This yere in England alſo the lorde Darcy, ſyrThe Lorde Darcy with other. Fraunces Bygot, Syr Robert Conſtable & other began a newe conſpyracy, whiche were attaynted and put to death in Iune.
                  This yere in October in England alſo on ſayntEdwarde the ſy
                           •
                        t borne. Edowardes euen was Prince Edowarde borne at Hampton Court, whiche was proclaimed & anoynted kyng of Englande the .ix. yere of his age as ſhal be declared hereafter in due place.
                  This yere the .xiiij. daye of October alſo dyedThe death of Quene Iane Quene Iane mother to the ſaied Prince Edward, and was buried at Winſor.
                  This yere did Iames the kyng of ScotlandeThe kyng of Scottes, marieth the daughter of Fraunce. The cōqueſt of the kyng of Portingals Indes. puyſſaunt kyng Iohn of Portingale, Sonne to the excellent kyng Emanuell had a great conflicte and victory agaynſt the infideles in the Realme of Cambaia or Guzuratum, lyeng in the Indes. For after that he had by his capitaines, & ſpecially by Nonne a Cugria, who was ruler and gouernour of the kinges army, in the Indes, deſtroyed the coaſtes lieng towardes the Indyſh ſea, ſubiecte to the kyng of Cambaia, and when the ſame kyng was not able to reſyſte hym, although he was of power to brynge foure hundred thouſand men in Campe, he made a gentle agrement with the Portyngalles, and delyuered them two mighty cities with all their abilyties, priuiledges, liberties and dominions, whereof the one is called Bazaim, and the other Dium, this

the ſtronger and the other the rycher. Whiche haue both vnder them about a ſyx hundreth Villages with certayn ſmal townes and ſruteſul landes contayning in length about a .lxxx. myles or leaques. wherof the king hath yerely an .C. thouſand crewnes at the leaſt in bare tribute, beſydes the woode whence for the mooſte part all the prouiſion is takē that is occupied for the ſhyppes in the Indes, with other aduauntages. In thoſe partes cauſed the kyng of Portingall the Chriſtian fayth to be planted,The Chriſtē faith planted in the kyngdome of Cā
                        baia. and at the laſt kyng Badur of Cambaia (for ſo was he called) when he was inuaded by kyng Dey (who was kynge of the Scythians and of the Tartares) fled with all his treaſure, mother, wyfe and chyldren into the Cytie of Dyum, whiche he had geuen vp before, deſyrynge ſuccour and defence againſt his enemy. So that by this meanes the king of Portyngall had obtayned the moſte parte of all the lande of the Indes vnder his tuition and defence without any notable ſhedyng of bloude. Theſe actes are deſcribed at large by the ſayed kyng in a certayne letter by hym to Pope Paule directed.
                  Alſo this yeare in the Moneth of Iuly dyed atThe heath of Eraſmus. Baſill that excellent Clarke Eraſmus of Roterdame beyng about the age of .lxx. yeares who was a ſpecial inſtrument of God, to reſtore the Greke and Latine tonges agayne to their puritie: Whiche alſo hath done no ſmall ſeruice with his writinges towardes the ſettyng furth of the Goſpell, the true lyght of our ſoules, as euery wyſe man may right well perceyue and gather by his wrytynges, wherof he hath left behynde hym a greate ſorte, and in a

maner innumerable bookes.
               
               
                  IN the yeare of our lorde .MDxxxvij. euen inA preuy conſpiracy in Germany againſt the Goſpell. the begynning of the yere began certayne preuy practyſes and conſpiracies to be wrought agaynſt the Euangelicall Princes and their confederates. For the Pope ſought all the meanes poſſible to ſtirre vp ſome commotion and diſſention in Germany, and had procured all ready, by the meanes of the Duke of Brounſwike called Henry the younger, and brought to paſſe by certayne byſhops, namely the byſhippe of Mence with other that the Duke George of Saxon ſhoulde aſſiſte the Duke of Brunſwyke with money, to inuade Iohn FrederikeHenry the younger duke of Brunſwyke. Duke of Saxon and electour imperiall, and Philippe Land graue of Heſſene: whiche Practiſe and conſpiracy was begonne ſo preuely, and kept ſo cloſe, that if God had not ſpecially preſerued the fauoures of hys worde, it myght haue turned them to muche wo and trouble. For the Duke of Brunſwyke had all ready aſſembled a competent nombre of men within his lande, and that ſo preuely, that many dyd afterwarde wonder at it. But when he thought with hys adherentes that the matter had bene ſure, almyghty God red their treaſurer DukeThe death of George duke of Saxon. George out of the way by death, ſodaynely or euer any man ſuſpected hys infirmitie. And ſo ſucceded Duke Henry into his brothers heritage, whiche had kept hys Court poorely many yeares at Fryburgh in the lande of Myſſene, beyng a good laudable and Euangelicall Prince. And albeit

that Duke George brother to the ſayed Duke Henry, was alſo in his actes and gouernaunce a very wyſe and circumſpecte Prince, and experte in cyuyle policies, as his buyldynges and townes which he hath left behynde hym beare wytnes, yet had he this faulte, that he (as it happeneth commonly to ſuche as are worldly wyſe) had his prudence and hipocriticall conuayaunce ſo blynded▪ that he would not cleaue vnto the Goſpel, where of neuertheles he was not ignoraunt, for none other cauſe then that ſome Pope or ſome Cardinall had not ſet it furth and brought it to lyght, but apore frere (as was doctor Luther) yea he was ſuche an enemy to the Goſpell that he dyd not onely perſecute and banyſhe hys ſubiectes that embraced and fauoured the ſame, but alſo woulde depriue his ſaied brother Henry of his heritage, whyle he cleaued ſted faſtly to Goddes worde. But God tourneth all thynges to the prophite of his b
                        •
                     leuers. For when Duke George was in this minde, & had ſought al meanes poſſible to diſherite and diſpoſſeſſe his brother, all was ſodaynely turned vpſyde downe. For after that Iohn his ſonne was departed out of this worlde leauyng no bodely heyre behynde hym (in as muche as it was not well poſſyble for hym to procreate chyldren, beyng continually geuen to ſuperfluitie and dronkennes) he had yet an other ſonne (not being endued with to muche witte) called Henry, vnto whome, not withſtanding that by the reaſon of his 
                        •
                     oolyſh behaueour he was vnmete to haue the rule & gouernaūce of the lande, he gaue hym a wyfe of a baſſe ſtocke and lowe degree, to thende that by

this meanes he myght (if it were poſſible) obtayne an heire for the lande, and defraude his brother of his heritage, commaundyng his Phiſicians to geue his ſayd Sonne good prouiſions whereby hys luſt myght be the better ſtirred and prouoked towardes his wyfe. But what was the ende? Thys hope and expectation continued but a ſmall tyme, for within the ſpace of two monethes theſaed yong maried man died. Many wyll ſay and affirme that the Phiſicians kylled hym with their confortatiues: But it was the worke of God, who would haue the Goſpell to reigne in the ſayed Duchye by the adminiſtracion of the ſayed Duke Henry: For the ſaied Duke George dyed alſo ſhortely after the deceaſſe of his ſaied ſonne as before is mencioned. When nowe the Papiſtes were thus deſtitute of their comforte, hauyng loſt all their hope and expectaciō, in that the land and the treaſures wherwith they intended and truſted to haue reſyſted the Goſpell, was nowe fallen into the handes of hym that would therewith auaunce and promote the ſame, their capitayne Duke Henry of Brunſwycke was faine to geue ouer and diſperſe his army for the money wherwith the ſouldiours ſhould haue bene paied was now withdrawen. Wherfore (as it was reported) the ſaied Duke ſhould ſay, that he had rather loſt God in heauen, then this man: Wherby euery Chriſten man may eaſely perceyue, wheron the hope of the Papiſtes is grounded. But let vs learne here that a Chriſtian may not truſte in any man, nor feare any mans threatenyng nor yet dyſpayre in pouertie and tribulation, but muſt onely

put al his truſt and confidence in God, who is able to breake and ouerthrowe the imaginacions of the proude, and to exalte the pore, according to the ſong of Mary, he truſteth downe the proude from their ſeates, and lifteth vp the lowely.
                  When God had on this wyſe deliuered his littel flocke in the lande of Saxon and of Heſſen, from the craftes and enterpryſes of their enemy, the ſaid duke Henry ſucceding in the rowme of his brother deceaſſed, abolyſhed the abhominacion of PopyſhPop
                           •
                        r
                           •
                         abolyſſed in the 
                           ••
                        nde of 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Idolatry thoroughout all his iuriſdiction and dominion, and cōmaunded Goddes worde to be preached in all places ſincerely and purely, for the maintenaunce whereof he ſought all about for learned men to geue dilygent attendaunce to the ſettynge furth of the ſame. After this he dyd alſo erecte andThe 
                           ••
                        oole 
                           〈…〉
                        gh reſt
                           •••
                        d. reſtore the Scoole of Lipſigh whiche was ſore decayed before, to the mayntenaunce whereof he dyd inſtitute and appointe ſpeciall priuileges and newe ſtipendes, and ordeined the excellently learned man Ioachim Camerary of Bambery, reder in liberall ſciences, and prouided for other faculties alſo ſage men & well learned, ſo that both gods worde & alſo learnyng dyd myghtely increaſe and floryſh agayn in thys lande, God graunt it may long continue to the prayſe of his mooſte holy name.
                  In Fraunce was not the warres yet ceaſed whiche was begonne the yere before. For the king was yet mightely armed, and came furth in the moneth of Marche towardes the weſt into the Duchye of Artois, whiche is called Picardy, where he dyd great harm
                        •
                     , and about the .xviij. daye of the ſame

moneth he beſeged y• towne of Hedin, which wasHeding beſeged & taken. yelded vp vnto hym the .xiij. day of Aprill next folowing. When he had ouercome the ſayde towne, he furnyſhed it, and other places lyeng there about with mē and ſo retourned home again. In the meaneThe lady regēt inuadeth Picardy. ſeaſon Mary quene of Hungary, ſyſter vnto the Emperours maieſtie, and lady Regēt of the lower partes of his dominiōs prepared her ſelfe, and whē ſhe had aſſembled a mighty company of pietons or footemen, as well of the partes of hygh Germany, as of the lower partes of Duchelande, with an army of horſemen well appointed, ſhe marched with power into Picardy, and hauyng deſtroyed that whiche was left in the lande, ſhe went and beſeged the towne called S. Paule, whiche lyeth in theS. Paule beſeged and deſtroyed. borders, and was alſo furnyſhed by the kyng at his departyng from thence, with foure thouſand ſouldiours, and certayne hundredes of horſemen. And when they that were within ye towne made reſiſtaū
                     ce againſt her, ſhe ouercame it with a ſtrong aſſault, and cauſed to be deſtroied whatſoeuer was a lyue within the towne, except two of the chefe Capitaines, which were caried away captiues. But as touchyng the towne after it was ſpoyled by the ſouldiours it was ſet on fyre, and burned downe to the grounde. The ſeuen and twenty daye of Iune theyTurwyne beſeged. went to the citie of Turwyne, & beſeged the ſame. But when the Frenche men dyd pryuely brynge into the Towne certayne Souldiours for the ſanegarde of the ſame Towne, and the Capitayne of the ſame retourned agayn (by lyke to fetche more helpe) they were takē by y• lady Maries warrious. Anone
                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                     
violently deſtroyenge all that made reſiſtaunce againſte them, murtheryng the men, and viciatyng the women and the virgines, whom alſo they caried away captiues with them. After that, they
                        
                           〈…〉
                         Iohn Criſp
                           •
                        
                      came alſo to the Ilande called Naxus, wherein dwelled a Prince called Iohn Criſpus, who alſo wrote the ſayde affaires to oure Potentates in Europa, wyth a certayne exhortacion and warning there unto annexed, whenche I alſo haue taken thys ſtory. But when the Turke offered peace vnto the ſayde Prince, promiſyng not to hurte nor trouble hys ſubiectes, in caſe he woulde gentely and wyllyngly yelde hym ſelfe vnder the obedience of the Turke, the ſayde Prince conſideryng that he was to weake and notable to reſyſte ſuche great power, not knowyng any helpe or aſſiſtaunce to bee loked for, yelded hymſelfe and hys ſubiectes to the
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      Turke the eleuenth daye of Nouember, on thys condition that he ſhoulde yearely paye vnto the Turke a tribute of fyue thouſand guldens of gold. When this was done, the Turkyſhe Armada retourned homewarde with a greate ſpoyle and abreption of Golde, Syluer, and many poore impryſoned Chriſtians.A
                           •
                         ho
                           •••
                        ble 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                  
                  There was alſo the ſayde yere of our lord God a thouſand fyue hundreth thyrty and ſeuen an horrible and fearefull tempeſt, at Heydelbery on the Necker lyeng in the Lower partes of the Palatines iuriſdiction, where the Electour by the Rhene kept his Courte. For on Sainct Markes daye when euenſonge was done, roſe a ſodayne darkenyng

of cloudes with an horrible noyſe of wynde, and immediately folowed a wether of Thonder and Lyghtenyng, whiche lyghted within a Tower lyeng by the olde Caſtell of Heydelbergh, wherein was muche gon poulder kept, inſomuche that the ſayde poulder beyng ſet on fyre by the power of the ſayde Thonder and Lyghtening, the ſayd Tower and Caſtell braſt in ſunder in ye twinkling of an eye, and made ſuche an earthquake, that within the Towne the dores and wyndowes were moued and flewe from the hinges, ſo that the people thought none other, but that the daye of dome had bene come. And the ſtones of the walles were throwen here and there in the Towne by the reaſon whereof dyuerſe perſones runnynge out into the ſtretes and forſakynge theyr houſes for feare, leaſt they ſhoulde fall downe on theyr heades, were ſore hurte and harmed. There dwelled alſo in the olde Caſtell a couple of folkes, wyth ſeven chyldren,Miſfortunes happened & harmes done by the meanes of the tē
                        peſt. whereof fyue were hurte and two ſlayne out of hande. And not farre from the newe Caſtell came a ſtone of the wall flyeng and ſlewe a man, and cut awaye a foote of another man that was by hym.
                  In Englande was thys yeare begonne a collectionA collection for the pore. for the poore, and a greate nombre cured of many greuous diſeaſes thorough the charitie thereof.
                  There was alſo in Englande a certayne frereFrere Foreſt called frere foreſt hanged and burned for treaſon and hereſy.
               
               
                  
                     IN the yeare of ourelorde .MDxxxviij. TheA couſi
                           •
                        lta
                        
                           ••
                        on holden at Rome againſt the Turke. eight day of February, aſſembled at Rome Pope Paule, with certayne Cardinalles, Syr Iohn Mantry Marquys of Angilaria Oratour of themperous maieſtie, and atturnay for the ſame, & the kynges maieſtie of the Romaines, Syr Markes Anthomus Contarenus knight, the imbaſſadours and attournays of the Duke and rulers of Venice, in the name and power of their ſuperiours, whiche there cōſulted together, howe and by what meanes the Turke who did mightely enlarge hys empyre by his power myght be reſiſted. Whereit was agreed and concluded, that they would altogether prepare a great power both by lande and by water out of Italy, whereof the Pope ſhould main tayne and laye the ſyxt part, the Emperours maieſtie the ene half, the Venetians the other third part and that there ſhould by water be armed foure hundreth ſhyppes and gallees. And to thintent that the Turke myght be ſo muche the eaſier ouercome, kyng Ferdinando ſhould with a ſtrong army inuade hym in Hungary. Beſydes this ſhould the Pope moue and exhorte Sigiſmonde kyng of the Poles, to do his parte likewyſe. But as theſayde contracte and agreement was made with great pretē
                     ce 
                        •
                     o proceded it to ſmall effect, for it went forwarde very ſlenderly & ſlowely as ye ſhall heare herafter.
                  The ſame yere when the Counſails betwene the Emperours maieſtie & the French kyng departedThe Emperours 
                           •••
                        raun
                           ••
                         
                        
                           ••
                        to 
                           •
                        ic
                           •
                        . and could not agree of any durable & ſtedfaſt peace, the Pope himſelf toke ye matter in hand, & apointed both parties to mete in ye coaſtes of Italy orlōbardy

at the Citie of Nice. Into the which themperours maieſtie made his entraunce with great triumphe the .xv. day o
                        •
                      May. The next day entred the Pope into the ſaied citie alſo, whoſe entraunce I do hereThe entraunce of the Pope into Nice deſcribed. gladly deſcrybe, that al men may ſee and knowe, howe that holy father folowed the ſteppes of hys predeceſſour Peter, and of his maiſter Chriſt. Fyrſt there rode before hym two hundred men vpon the goodlieſt mules that migt be founde, very gorgiouſly apparelled. Then folowed .lx. Trompetters in yackettes of veluette coſtly ſylkes and ſcarlette. After them folowed hys garde and footemen with pertiſanes, apparailled in yelowe, hauyng on their heades black veluer cappes with goodly Eaſtryche fethers. After this folowed the Lorde great Maiſter of the Popes moſte holy houſholde, very coſtely apparelled. Then came the ryght ſwarme andthe religious rabl
                           •
                        . rable in a long proceſſion, that is to ſay, a great nombre of Monkes, Freres and prieſtes, with many relyques of dead ſainctes. And the laſt of them bare a lx. burnyng candels of white waxe, to lyghte before the blynde Idoll of Rome, the Pope, whiche was borne of many men, in a Chayre garnyſhed with fine golde, and the Sacrament (as they cal it in their abuſe) was borne before hym. On both ſydes of the borne Pope were ſeuen Cardinalles with .xlij. Prelates. Then folowed an hundred valiaunt launceknyghtes for his defence. With this army entred the ſhepehearde of Chriſtes ſhepe (if I do hym no wrong) at that tyme into Nice, after thexample of Chriſte on Palmeſondaye, and according to hys cō
                     maundement in the twenty Chapiter of Mathew.

After this 
                        •
                     ode the Pope in the ſame ordre to the chiefe Miniſter of the citie, to make his prayer whiche beyng ended, he cauſed hymſelfe to be borne in to his Palice: where themperoures maieſtie came vnto hym, and kiſſed hys fete: whome the Pope liftedThe Emperoure kiſſeth the Popes 
                           〈…〉
                        e. vp, embraced hym, and kyſſyng hym on the toppe of his heade (by lyke for a witnes that he is lorde ouer the Emperours head) And after they had ben a good whyle together, themperoure retourned agayne to his lodgyng. Not long after this arryued the Frenche kyng at Villa Noua, whiche is a place of his owne dominion lyeng not farre from Nice, and ſhortely after repayred towarde the Pope,A peace concluded betwene the Emperour & Fraū
                        ce▪
                      where in fine a ſted faſt peace was concluded betwene both the parties, that is to ſaye betwene themperours maieſtie and the Frenche kyng, to continue for the ſpace of tenne yeres, accordyng to the promyſe made betwene them, (although it laſted ſcant two yeres as ſhalbe ſayde hereafter) whiche peace was reſtored the .xviij. day of the moneth of Iune, and afterwarde at the commaundement of bothe theſaide heades, all the pointes and articles of the ſame were deſcribed and publiſhed, as yet apeareth by the copies thereof remainyng in printe.
                  In the meane ſeaſon Leonora the Frenche quene▪
                     Leonora. Syſter to themperours maieſtie prepared her ſelfe very ſumpteouſly to come towardes Nice▪ where ſhe commoned many wordes with her brother themperours maieſtie, abidyng there certayne dayes. But when the peace was made and concluded, ſhe came the ther agayn, and was receyued bery

honourable of the Emperours maieſtie: And afterwarde on Corpus Chriſt day ſhe retourned agayne, with great ſolace. The ſame daye at nyght the Pope and the Emperoures maieſtie toke ſhippynge towardes Genua: Where the Emperoures Counſayls remained with the kynge, and the kynges with the Emperour, intreating of matters concernyng the ſayde peace. But when the Emperoure coulde not tary long in Italy by the meanes of his ha
                        •
                     t whiche he made to retourne into Spayne, it came to paſſe, that both the high Potentates, the Emperoure and the Frenche kyng dyd lonyngly agree and come together. For when the Emperoure arryued at the Porte and Citie called, the dead waters, lyeng not farre from Marſilia, which was the fourtenne daye of Iuly, the Frenche kyng came thyther alſo with hys wyfe and with his ſonnes. And when the Emperonr abode in his Gallee, the king went vnto him in his owne perſon, & after they had embraced and kiſſed eche other (according to the maner and cuſtome of noble men) they talked louyngly together. The next daye folowynge the Emperoure went a lande, and rode into the ſayde Citie, where he was receyued of the kyng, the Quene and the kyngs Sonnes very ioyfully. And whē muche honoure and greate triumphe was declared and ſhewed towardes hym, he abode there vntyll the teweſdaye at nyght, and then takynghys leaue of the kynge and his affinitie, he commended them to God and returned to hys ſhyppe, wherewith he ſayled luckely towarde Spayne, truſting aſſuredly

that theſaied peace ſhould be firme and ſtable, and alſo durable to the profite and furtheraunce of the Chriſten common welth.
                  After this alſo the lady Mary regent of the lower partes of themperoures maieſties dominions accompanied with the kynge came into Camerike the viij. day of October. And the next day folowing they went to the Citie of S. Quintine, where the ſayed Quene Mary was receiued with great pompe, and intreated very honorably. But when ſhe had remayned there .vi. dayes ſhe retourned again to her owne dominiō. So that this yere there was thre honorable aſſembles of the mightieſt in Europa: But what folowed thereof ſhalbe mēcioned her after, in place conuement.
                  While theſe thynges were in doinge the aboue named Eſtates of confederation prepared their naures againſt the Turke, and firſt inuaded Caſtell
                        
                           〈…〉
                         N
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        ded. Nouo, (whiche is a Caſtell lyeng in the Duchye of Sabe▪ ſometyme pertaynyng to the crowne of Hū
                     gary) and ouercame it by violent aſſaulte, deſtroyeng aboue .iiij. hundred, and about .viij. hundred on horſebacke, whiche were come to reſcue them. But when Barbaroſſa hearde of this, he ſayled outBarbaroſſa. of the ſea Ambra
                        •
                     ike, where he had kept hymſelf a longe tyme, intendyng to preſerue the Cities and Townes of the Turke lyeng in the Coaſtes of Sla uony and Macedony from the aſſaultes and inuaſions of the Chriſtianes. For he feared leaſt they ſhould be ſerued as Caſtell Noua was ſerued. In the meane ſeaſon was alſo the Citie of Biſana ouercomeBiſana ta
                           •
                        en of our men in lyke maner. But when they lacked

aud prouander, they were conſtreined of neceſſitey to ſeparate them ſelues, In ſuche ſort, as ye Prince of Aurea wyth the ſhippes pertayning to themperoures Maieſtye was conſtrayned to runne into Brundyſh, which is a port and City in Apulia, Lyeng ouer agaynſte Grece, and the Popes Legate into Ancona (which is a port and Citie lyeng ouer agaynſte the coaſtes of Slauony) So that onelye the Venetianes remained and kept ye Seas. And as touchynge Caſtello Nouo they dyd fortifye it with. foure thuſande. ſpanyardes &. ſixe hundreth light horſemen, whiche dailye put the Turke to muche loſſe in the Lande of Boſen. When Barbaroſſa had knoweledge of his ſeperatyon and diuiſion of our ſhippes, he toke his waye towardes Duracho (ſomtime called Durachium, and lyeng in Albany which was ſomtime called Epyrus) to encourage thinhabitaūtes of the ſame Citie, and to make them harty, that he might the better ouercome the Venetianes in the ſea of Riſana. But when he ſayled towardes Duracho with a Southeaſt wyndeThe ſhipwrach of Barbaroſſa. (which bloweth from the ryſynge of the Sunne in winter) the ſame winde (accordinge to his nature and property) chaunged ſodaynely into a ful eaſterly winde, & blewe ſo outragiouſly, ye Barbaroſſa loſt aboue fyftye ſhippes and about a two .c. thouſand men, with his beſt mariners. After the which naufrage and ſhipwracke when he ſayled back agayne eaſtwarde with the remnaunt of his ſhippes wich for the mooſt parte were lecke and wether
                        •
                     ea ten, there came ſuche a mortalitye and peſtilence amonge them that were remayning and left in the

ſhippes that euen in the greateſte ſhippes, were ſcant left, tenne men able to rule the helme, and as many apt for the voarres: So ye God dyd ſpecially declare his helpe to our men.
                  Whyle theſe thinges paſſed betwene themperour, the Pope, Fraunce, Venice, and Barbaroſſa (as is before mencyoned) they of NurremboroughThe Caſtell N
                           〈…〉
                        urg 
                           ••
                        ylord. began theyr ſtrong holde or Caſtell wyche lyeth in the vpper parte of the Toune vpō a mighty rocke, and is a lodging for themperour and the king of the Romaynes defenced with a ſtrong Bul warke, and amyghty wyde dyche: which buylding as concerning the walles was finiſhed in the yeare of our Lord .M. D. xlv. nexte folowynge. When George Marquys of Brandenburghe perceynedTh
                           •
                         Marquea of Brā
                        denburg. theyr ſayde enterpryſe and intent, he thought that they dyd hym great iniury, for he aſſcribed vnto hymſelfe certayne ground▪ and laude wythout the towne of Nurremborough (which is neuer theles pertayning to the Empyre) and claymed it as hys owne heritage, wherfore he marched ſomtime by▪ day as farre as the Landmark, and by night vnto the towne, euen hard by the forſayd buylding. But when they of the towne feared ſome great malice and miſchief, they fenced theyr building with much ordenaunce and artillery, & kept great watch vpon the walles and in theyr turrettes.
                  When thys hyndered the people of the Marquys of theyr purpoſe, ſome of them went & toke certayne inhabytauntes of Nurremborough as they went a fowlynge or byrdyng in the woode and ſtopped certayne of theyr wagens or cartes

commyng from Lipſwyke and other places, laden with goodes and marchaundyſes, and broughte them to the Caſtell of Bayerthorp: Wherfore they of Nurremburgh, being occaſyoned and moued to diſpleaſure▪ and indignatyon by the reaſon of the ſayde cruelues, aſſembled a certaine nombre of 
                        •
                     oul dyours, and layde them in the countree rounde about the town, and furniſhed the ſmal townes and vyllages about them after the beſt mauer, purpoſyng, in caſe the ſayd Marquys or hys men would perſiſte in theyrfrowardenes (as they had begon) to be in a readynes to defend themſelues from ſuch iniuris, But yet thorough intreataunce of certaine Potentates and Princes of the Empyre the matter was qualified, & put in arbitrement, ſo ye in concluſion the ſayde Marquys ſuffered them of Nurrenburgh, wythout contradiction and moleſtation accordynge to the tenoureof theyr lybertyes and priuyledges (to buylde on the grounde of the Empyree.
                  This yeare dyed Charles Duke of GeldresThe death of ye duke of Gelders. & in his place ſucceded William Duke of Cleue, although he did not long enioye it, as ſhalbe declared in place conuenient.
                  Thys yeare dyd Godde ſo punyſhe the auaryceAuarice punyſhed. of marchauntes whyche occupye by the ſcaſyede, whyle they do ſo enhaunce the goode creatures of God in pryces that the poore are not able to bye them, that thoroughe oute all the coaſtes of Denmarcke, in harueſte (whyche is the beſt time of the yeare, no hering could be taken. In the kingdom of Naples ye .xxviii. day of Septemb.

The Sea decreaſſed and fell away about the ſpace of eight Italyan myles, ſo that al the grounde was drye, which afterwarde dyd caſt certayn holes, out of the which for the ſpace of many dayes continually aſcended fyre wyth aſhes, which dyd great hurt in many places there about at the falling do wne therof. For the ſayde aſhes fell downe lyke ſnowe rounde about Naples for the ſpace of thenne Itali an myles, vntyll they lay on the grounde the thickenes of thre fingers. Which is a fearful argument of Goddes wrath towardes vs, wherby we ought al to be warned, and ſpecyally Italy, to forſake our ſinfull liuynge, yf any warning would helpe. But it is not regarded, vntill Gods wrath lighteth vpon vs by heapes, and then men would fayne repente, but it is to late: Wherfore let vs repente in time, and lyue according to our profeſſyon.
                  In Inglande, thys yeare in December wasThe lorde marquiſh of ex
                           •
                        ter 
                           •
                         the 
                           ••
                        rd mōtacute beheaded. the Lorde Marques of exceter, the Lorde Montacute, and Syr Edwarde Neuell beheaded for high treaſon duely proued.
               
               
                  
                     IN ye yeare of our lord. 1539. Thecōfede rat of ye Romane league prepared thēſel ues wyth all theyr power to warre agaynſt the Turcke by water, but they profyted not muche. For ther was greate lacke of vyctual, & a great dearth in Italy and at Venice▪
                     Barbaroſſa robbeth ye 
                        
                           •
                        e 
                           •
                        e
                           ••
                        ās & Italians goodes vpō ye ſee. For Barbaroſſa came wyth a great army and robbed vpon the ſca and toke all that he might laye hand on, ſo that ther myght no coarne be ſhypped vnto Venyce, nether out of Cypers nor out of Can dye, And there was alſo nomore prouiſyon in Italy. That done, he ſhipped with a great power vnto

the ſtrong newe Caſtell (which oure Chriſten menBarbaroſſa b
                           〈…〉
                        th C
                           •
                        
                        ▪ ſtel
                           •
                        ou
                           •
                        . had wonne in the yeare before, fortified it after the beſt facyon (there vnto he layed ſeage in thre places, and ſhot daye and night ther at wythoute ceaſſynge and yet wanne nothyng, tyl certen of the dalThe dalmacians flye to ye Turckes, & betrai their felowe ſoudiars & ye Caſtel. Barbaroſſa wynneth Caſtel nouo. macyans fell to fliyng awaye and ranne oute vnto the Turkes, and tolde them where they myghte beſt and 
                        •
                     oneſt hurt our Chriſten men. Then the enemye dyd accordyng to theyr councell, and ſhotte both for treſſes and walles doune, ſo that the could aſſaulte them on euen grounde. And although the ſpanyardes and the Italyans that were in the Caſtell defended themſelues manfullye and couragy ouſly, and ſlewe at the leaſt ſyxtene thouſand of the enemyes, yet at the laſt, becauſe they werewery, &The ſpaniat des & Italyans feight māfully. the enemyes gat euer freſch men, they forſoke the Caſtell, and loſte bothe the Caſtell and the aſſault: and althoughe they were ouer manned, yet they fought and defended them ſelues ſo longe tyll they were all mooſte all ſlayene. Thys was done in Auguſt.
                  In the meane whyle Iſabel the EmperouresTheēperoures wi
                           •
                        dieth. Mayeſtyes wyfe, the kynge of Portugalles doughter, dyed of chylde, the fyrſte daye of maye, the chylde was a ſonne whyche lyued not longe. She leaft behynde her lyuynge a ſonne called Philyppe, and two doughters, whyche ſhe hadde by the Emperour.
                  A none after ther was an inſurreccyon rayAn inſurrecciōat Gent▪
                      ſed at Gent amonge the commens of the Cytye, ſo that it apeared that the cytye ſhulde haue bene deſtroyed. By occaſion wherof the Emperoures

Mayeſtye was compelled to come oute of Spayn into Flaunders, to appeaſe that diſſencion. And as he was mynded to take his iorney toward Italy,Embaſſadoures out of Fraunce into Spayne. the Frenche kyng Fraunches ſent an embaſſage to hym, deſyrynge hym amyably to come thoroughe Fraunce, promyſing that all that was in his kyngdome ſhulde be at his pleaſure. But the cauſe was for that they had concluded a peace to gethers, as is aboue remembred, the one ſhulde haue ſuſpected the other, if they hadde not kept frendſhippe to gether. And for as moche as the Frenche kyng had often broken the leaghe, hys myſſedoyng myghte theſoner be for gotten, if the Emperoures mayeſty woulde ſeke frendſhyp at hys hande. Thys thinge could by nomeanes be better or eaſelier done, than that his maieſty for this once ſhuld iorney through hys lande. By thys mocyon was the Emperours maieſtye wyllyng to iorney thoroue Fraunce, and ſent hys chefe Counſeller Granduel in Nouembre oute of Spayne into Fraunce to ſignyfye hys commyng, and folowed ſhortlye after.
                  And when he came to. S. Sebaſtians, therThe 
                           •
                        perour cōmeth into Flaūderstho 
                           •
                        ou Fraunce the Duke of Orliens the kynges youngeſt Sonne reaceaued hym. And not farre from the city of. S. Iohn was alſo the dolphyn wyth the chefe of y• nobles of Fraunce, whyche receaued the Emperoures maieſty wyth al due reuerence, and dyd leadde him thorowe the lande, till he came to Lochias the tenneth day of December. There was the kynge in hys awne perſonne, and Helenour hys wyfe, tarynge for the Emperoure, and receaued hym (as it appeared, for it was not all golde that

glyttered cleare, as here after wyll appeare) wyth all ioye and reuerence, and were to gether tyll the ende of the xxxix yeare.
                  The inhabytoures of the nether parte ofAn ābaſſage out of oſtēricke into beam. Auſteryche of the erldome of Goertz, hadde ſente forth theyr ambaſſadours the laſte daye of December from Vyenne wyth a pityfull and humble requeſte and petycyon to the ſtates and degrees of the kingdome of Behame which were at that time aſſembled at Preſlowe, that they woulde voucheſafeLatine Wr
                           •
                        
                        tiſlauya. to helpe them agaynſte the turcke, whych had two yere before taken in the marqueſhip of Woendon. and that preſent yeare manned it, and cariedThe Turcke carieth away lxxx thouſād chriſtē mē into turckye. from thence foureſkore thouſande chryſten men in to his lande, and laie at that tyme hard vpon their neckes, the chefe ambaſſadours of thys ambaſſage were .M. Vlryche of boſkawyts and. M Tſcher nafor, whyche were of the kynge of the Romaynes councell. But what they obtayned wyth theyr peticion, I can not tell (at thys tyme) but I ſuppoſe that they obtayned an honeſte promeſſe and helpe. For ſo pytyfullye as they made theyr petycyon it woulde haue made a ſtonye herte to meltte: ſpecially if men conſider that yf they be ſuffred to be deſtroyed wythoute helpe, that then theyr aduerſity will be at the next time our awne.
                  In the ſomer, in Iuly, ther was a blaſingA blaſynge ſterre. ſter in the eauening in y• Northweſt in the ſigne of the virgin. It was elles a metely good yere as touching wether & other thinges y• happened therin: but in the winter euery full mone ther was muche raine ſpeciallye about the elue and other waters that ronne therinto.
                  
                     Here I muſt ſett to, new tidynges that are counted true of many, whych I take to be a ſpeeyall myracle (if it be ſo). It is ſayde, and it is openly putt oute in prynte, That the Emperour of Turckye in Iune cauſed all hys chefe and beſt learned prieſtes to come before hym, and commaunded them vpon a great payne, to tell hym, whyche is the ryght true and beſt belefe vpon earth. And when they had for feare excuſed themſelues, they had a tyme appoynted to remembre them, and after were called before hymagayne. Now when they were agayne moniſhed to ſaye the trueth, ofThe laerned in Turcky acknowledg our Chriſten relligiō to be y• beſt. theyr conſcyence, and heard the commaundement of the Tyrant, they anſwered one after another wyth one aſſent that the Chriſten beliefe is the beſt, and that it is a ryght and a true belefe, albeit it is very much miſuſed of the Chriſten. For it teacheth the beſte poyntes that can be, as to wytte, loue toward God and man, whych is not ſo well taught in any other belefe. And forther that they haue wytneſſe in their lawe and alkorane, that Mahomet muſt go to Chriſt for grace, &c. And that Chriſte is therefore better than Mahomet. Whē they now had thus anſwered wythout feare,The 
                           •
                        urch headeth▪ prieſtes. the Tyrant waxed angrye, and cauſed them all (which were aboue fyfiye) to beheaded. And in the ſame place was there a ſyght ſene, as though all the headed prieſtes had bene together, and lighted clearer than manye candellyghtes in theA miracle. nyght: through which miracle manye of the other prieſtes of Mahomet folowed theyr confeſſyon & belefe, & alſo many of y• Lay people, which acknowledged

openly and wythout feare, that thoſe prieſtes were vniuſtly kylled for the truethes ſake. All thynges are poſſible to God, ſo that it may well be. For God cā raiſe vp a Daniel or an Ezechiel amōg the Babilonians. Howbeit no man ſhall be compelled to beleue this, but at his pleaſure.
               
               
                  
                     IN the yeare of our lord .M. D. XL. in the beginning of the yeare dyd the Emperoures Maieſtye ryde to Paris, andThe Emperour at paris as he rode in, was excedyng royally conducted and receaued, and afterwarde great and pryncely Banckettes made, wyth great momeryes and daunces. And the ſecond daye after, there were great Iuſtynges and fyghtynges made `to do hym pleaſure and honour, wyth all. There his Maieſty abode tyll the ſecond day after the twelueth daye. Then he departeth into Flaunders wyth al his company and was conducted vnto Camerick of bothe the kynges ſonnes: and there with great royalty receaued of the Biſhop of Camerick From thens they iorneyed to Valencyne, there taryed the ladye Marye Quene of hungarye for them. There alſo toke the kynges ſonnes theyr leaue of the Emperoures mayeſtye and tourned home agayn.
                  But as the Emperoures Mayeſtye wasThe frēch kyng craftily ſeketh ye e
                           •
                        
                        perour d
                           ••
                        t * or be rowed. in all places royallye receaued, ſo was ther wayte layde falſlye pryuelye and craftelye to kyll hym. For as the Emperoure ſhulde ſayell from corbe to Paryſe, and hadde wyth hym a Cardynall the Duke of Albuge and the kynges Marſchalle to

beare hym companye the water men rowed or boote the ſhyppe vpon a pyele, ſo that the ſhyp turned round aboute, and he ſtp
                           ••
                        an. that hylde the rother fell oute of the or ſhippe. The 
                           •
                        p r
                           •
                        rs cōplaint to y• 
                        
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        h. of Ro. boot (what that meant it is eaſy to geſſe) wherof the Emperour complayneth in a letter written to Paule the thyrde byſhoppe of Rome (whereyn he ſheweth the cauſe why he could not come to the councell appointed to be holden at Trente) that he had perfect knowledge that the kynge of Fraunce was mynded at that tyme to take hym preſoner and kepe hym in holde, as it alſo afterwarde ſufficyently appeared by the affaires of the ſayde king.
                  But after the Emperours mayeſtye was comenThe Emperoure cōmeth to Gent. in to hys awne lande he wente ſtreyghtwayes vnto Gent, and after he was ſuffred to come in to the cytye, he fyrſte earneſtlye punyſhed the inſurrecty on rayſers, and cauſed a great parte of the citye to be broken downe, and a ſtronge Caſtell to be buylded
                        
                           •
                         caſtel builded in Gent. Ferdinādus cometh to y• Emperoure in to flaūders 
                           〈…〉
                        . in the ſame place.
                  A none after cam Ferdinādus in to Flaūders to y• Emperours maieſty to conſult with him after whatt maner they myghte wythſtande the turcke and howe hys greate tyrannye agaynſte vs poor Chryſtyans myghte be reſyſted and auoyded.
                  Euen whyle theſe thynges were done inA cōmunicacion at Wor Flaunders, ther was a communycacyon holden at Wormes at the Emperours commaundement, concernynge Relygyon, and the ſpeakers of both ſydes were, maſter Philip Melanthon myne enterelyePhil. Melā. beloued maſter of the Goſpellers ſyde, and Doctor Iohn Ecke of Ingolſtadt whyche woldeIoh. Ecke. haue defended the Byſhoppe of Romes parte,

Thys communycacion beganne the fourtenne day of Ianuarye, there the Artycle of orygynall ſynneWheter ther remain ſines in yt ſaintes & Chriſtiās after baptiſme. was ſpecyallye intreated of, whether the ſame ſyn abyde and remayne in Chryſten and holy men after baptyme. And was concluded that ther yet abyede remnauntes of ſynne in the ſaynctes, althoughe they raygne nott or haue the ouerhande (As. S. Paule ſayth, let not ſynne raygne in yourRom. viii. mortall bodyes) But ſuche ſynnes are not imputed to the ſaynctes for Chriſtes merytes ſake, as the Apoſtle forther ſaythe, ther is nowe no condemnacyon to them that are in Chryſte Ieſu. &c.
                  After thys treatye was that communycacyon ſo ended, and dyffered tyl the Emperoures and the kynges mayeſtyes of the Romaynes were perſonallye preſente. But what ſutteltye and craft Eccyus vſed in dyſputacyon, to adourne and garnyſh hys cauſe, maye euerye wyttye manſe by the treaty it ſelfe, whych is whollye wrytten and put out in prynte
                  Nowe when that communicacion was ended, ther was another appoynted by the Emperoures and the kinges maieſty at Spiers. But in as much as ther was at that tyme a great peſtylence there, that day was appointed to be holdē at HaganouwA day at haganouwe. to entreate of matters of relligyon, whether thoſe myghte be ended and vtterlye finyſhedde and concluded or nott▪ And thoughe manye greate lordes oute of all the cooſtes of dutchelande were come in wyth the kynge Ferdynandus, partely in theyr awne perſonnes, partelye throughe their

embaſſadours, yet ther was no ſpecyall thynge concluded, but that ther ſhulde a nother aſſembly beholden the next yeare at Regenſburg, at which the Emperoures maieſtye hym ſelfe ſhulde be, where all matters, concernynge Rellygyon and alſo concernynge warre agaynſt the Turcke ſhulde be agreed of.
                  Afterward vpon the .xx. daye of SeptembreThe Emperour
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        ly forbedeth good bokes to be readde. the Emperoure cauſed a commaundemence to be putt oute wher in beſyde other ſtatutes concernynge hys inheretable landes in the netherlande, he forbodde all his ſubiectes vpon payn of great punyſhemente, that they ſhulde not reade theyr bokes that haue nowe in theſe laſte dayes brought vnto lyghte the truethe of the Goſpell.But what is wōne 
                           ••
                         perſecutyon.
                  
                  But what he wanne wyth hys commaundemente, dayely experience teacheth, as to wytte, that ther be many goode Chriſten men found, that rather leſe their lyues than to forſake the woord of God, that the perſecutoures of Chryſte, pryeſtes and monckes, myght ſtill betray and ſhedde Chriſten bloude, whyche thyng God wyll fynde a time horrybly to puyſh.
                  But in aſmoche as Gods woorde was ſoThe marque ſ
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           ••
                        ādā
                        
                        
                           〈…〉
                         recea
                        
                           〈…〉
                         y• word 
                           ••
                         God. ouerpreſſed in netherland God raiſed it vp ſo moch the moar in another place. For Ioachim the Marqueſſe of Brandenburge elector after hys father was ded, which cared not much for any relligion, and he knewe that it was neadefull to leade hys ſubiectes the ryghte waye to ſaluacyon, and alſo to kepe them thereyne, receaued the doctryne of the Goſpell: had ordeyned in all Cytyes and

pariſhes good preachers, to preache the woord of God with diligence vnto the ſympel people. He alſo redreſſed the vniuerſity of Franckford vpon the Odder, and ſent for learned Men in all Sciences which when they came he augmented and amended theyr wages. He alſo ordeyned Newe ſtipendes for poare Scolers of the lyuings of the vnprofytable Maſſynge prieſtes to thintent that ſuche lyuinges might from hence forth be beſtowed to y• true ſeruyce of God.
                  But in what an horrible blindneſſe that Lande was before, and how euel it was prouided for with the word and doctryn of God, wytneſſeth an hiſtory, which I (although it appeare but ſimple) wyll therfore tell, that it may be ſo knowen what maner of teachers the popedome coulde ſuffre, and what they yet haue.
                  As I at that tyme came by chaunce with the viſiters to Stēdel in y• old marquiſhip, to enquere after a ſeruice for me, it chaunſed that the admiſſion into al the offices of the Church was differred the ſpace of ſyxe wekes. In the meane whyle were the parſons and the paryſhenars enquired after what facyon they hadde taughte and had bene taught.
                  Then came ther forthe a Parſon wyth his Congregation, whyche beynge demaunded of my goode Frynde Thomas Mathyas the Mayeres ſonne of Brandenburge, to whome that office was committed by the Vyſytours, what he had preached to his Pariſhners, He anſwered, y• belefe And being aſked again, what y• belefe is, begā to rehearce

                     
                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     Thys I could not choſe but tel, to the counfort of the Chriſten, that they ſhulde learne, that God defendethGod befenheth his flock & preſerueth his, thorough his holy aungels, and that although the deuell and his ſoart be neuer ſo woode, that they yet be able to do nothing if we but abyde in the confeſſyon and acknowledging of Chriſt, and in the obedience of his woorde.
                  Theſe burning mortherers that were taken inThe 
                           〈…〉
                        : of y• burning mortherers. the Electours dukedome of Saxon and in other places ſuffred an horrible death. For ther was a thing made muche lyke a croſſe, therupon was the gyltye faſtned aboute the necke wyth an yron coller or rynge, and aboute the body with yron Chaynes, and then a fyer made wyth ſtrawe and other glowing matter, a farre of, and ſo the Gylty roaſted tyll he dyed.
                  In thys fourtyeſt yeare alſo vpon the vii. daye of Aprill ther was an horryble Eclipſe of
                        
                           〈…〉
                         clipſe 
                           〈…〉
                        . the ſonne, in the mornynge at the ſonne ryſynge, whyche endured two goode houres longe. After thys Eclypſe, and the blaſynge ſterre that appeared in the yeare before, folowed ther an excydyng drye and a hoate ſomer, wherin corne was yet meately well taken, but hey and fother for beaſtes was cleane burnt vp. Wyne was ſo well taken y•
                     Wyne both 
                           〈…〉
                         & good cheape. yeare and ſo good in all places, y• many dronck them ſelues to deeth therwith, and was therto verye good cheape. Thys yeare in Iune the TurckeVnderſtand The true king of Hungary, kynge Iohn. ſygnyfyed vnto the kynge of Hungarye, that he ſhuld pay him tribute for y• kingdō, or elles loke for warr. The Emperouer therfor ſent Cornelius ſceperus & conſailed thē to pay no tribut, promeſing

that he would ſhortely bring an armye againſt the Turke wherewith he would defende the Hungars and the other princes their neighbours.
                  But the kyng of Hungary being vnpaciēt, could not tary ſo long, but required a tribute of his ſubiectes, by the meanes whereof many of the chief of the nobilitie fell from hym, whome he perſequited with warre. At the laſt when he had geuen the tribute to a tertayne Moncke to beare it to the Turke, he ſodenly dyed. But the Moncke retourned quicklyThe kyng of Hungary dyed. agayne as whiche beyng a loyterer was not farre proceaded in his iourney, ſending the Chaunſelour and a certain byſhop on the forwarde Embaſſage a foreſayde to the Turke, where they dyed.
                  The Monck diſſemblyng the deeth of the kyng made a leaghe with thoſe princes that had ryſen agaynſt the kyng, and when they had al ſworne to be true to the Quene and her Sonne went and toke Latine. B
                           •
                        da. Offen, and laye there.
                  When Ferdinandus the kyng of the RomainesFerdinandꝰ would take in the kyngdome of Hū
                        gary. hearde, that he ſet all other thynges aſyde and got hym into Oſtenrike to take in the kyngdome of Hū
                     gary. He toke in Weiſſenburg, Peſt, and other cities of Hungary, and afterwarde beſeaged Offen. At the laſt when helpe came out of dutcheland agaynſt the Turck to helpe the kyng of Hungaries ſonne, he was compelled to returne home agayne into Oſtenrick, not without the great loſſe and dammage of his ſubiectes.
               
               
                  IN the yeare .MDxli. came the EmperouresThe Emperour comith to Norenberg. maieſtie firſt to Norenberg, and was receiued with great honoure, and leadde into the citie

and into the Caſtell rydyng vnder a hyghe cannape of Veluet, whiche foure of the Alder men bare. In all the ſtreates where through he roade, were hys cogniſaunces and badges ſett vp and other goodly triumphant thynges, and on both ſydes of the ſtreates the Cyteſens ſtandyng one by another, all Iolyly arayed in their harneſſe from the Spitell Gate vnto the Caſtell: betwene them rode the Emperoure. And aboue by the Caſtell there was a Gate of triumphe ſett full of goodly ſayenges and Latyne verſes, made for the Emperoures pleaſure, and to his honoure. And aboue vppon the toppe of the Gatether was aſplayed Eegell made, whiche a man gouerned, and when the Emperoures maieſtie came to the Gate, the Egell plucked in his Whynges, and bowed hymſelfe to the Emperoure reuerently with his body. And dyd lykewiſe on the other ſyde, when the Emperoure was ridden through the Gate. The day folowyng did the Emperour ride to the counſail houſe. There was a royal ſeate & cloth of eſtate ſet vp in the ſtreate ouer againſt the ſhewing place, whereūto the Emperour was leadde by certen of the Aldermen. Thether came the comens of the citie before the councell houſe, whiche after the priueledges & liberties of the citie were cōfirmed & made better, did there ſweare vnto ye Emperour. After that y• Emperours maieſtie. toke his iourney to Regenſburg, where the parliament was appointed. Thither came many dukes &The parliament holden at Regenſburg. lordes both ſpirituall & temporall, & the kyng Ferdinandus. And when the moſt part was come together, the Emperours maieſtie deliuered vnto the

ſtates & degrees of thempire a boke, wherein ye articles of our chriſten beleue were contained, willing thē to ſhewe it to their learned mē, that they might agree in all theſe Articles, but with this condicion, that all that was ſaid & done on both ſydes ſhould againe be deliuered vnto the Emperour in writing. And after the ſtates & degrees of the Empire had willingli agreed thereūto, werther learned mē choſen to cōmen together & to agree therein. On oure ſyde were choſen Phillipe Melanthon, Marten, Bucer, Iohan Baker ſuperintendent of Nidda.
                  And on the other ſyde Doctor Eckius. Doctor Iulius p
                        ••
                     ng, and Iohan Groepper.
                  Theſe after muche and long diſputacion agreed concernyng the moſt part and chefe of the Articles of the Boke, as of theſe folowing.
                  The firſt, of the power of the fre wil of man, both before and after the regeneration & newe birth.
                  The ſecond, of the byrth ſynne or Original ſinne.
                  The thrid, of Iuſtificacion and righteous making before God, which is the ſumme and the chefe and principall pointe.
                  The fourth, of the new birth and of the working of the holy ghoſt, in them that be newe borne.
                  The fyfth, of belefe, of the grace of God, and of the merytes of Chriſt.
                  The ſyxth, of good woorkes, and their merites.
                  The ſeuenth, of the churche of Chriſt, and of the tookens thereof, and alſo of the falſſe membres of the churche.
                  The eigth, of the Cannonical ſcripture, and their aucthoritie.
                  
                     The nyneth, of the aucthoritie of the churche, and of the counſayls, that is to ſaye, that they muſt alwayes agree with the holy ſcripture.
                  The tenth, of the power and vſe of the Sacramentes.
                  The leuenth, of Repentaunce.
                  The twelueth of the miniſters of the churche & their aucthoritie.
                  The thirtēneth, of the Ceremonies of y• church.
                  The fourtenneth, of the commemoraciō and remembraunce of the Sainctes.
                  The fyftenneth, of Images.
                  The ſyxtenneth, of the Maſſe.
                  The ſeuētenneth, that the Sacramēt of the ſupper ought to be deliuered vnder both the kindes to the laye people.
                  The eightēneth, of the diſcipline and Nourtour of the churche, both of the ſpirituail and temporall.
                  the .xix. Of the viſitacion of the Chriſten.
                  The twētyeth, that euery nacion ſhould holde a counſayll among them ſelues euery yeare to the cō
                     ſeruacton of relligion, and condempnacion of Errowers.
                  Of all theſe Articles they agreed on both parties, as appeareth by the 
                        •
                     reatie thereof, whiche is put out in prynte. And when the treatie and conſul tacion of both partes was deſiuered to the Empetours maieſtie, he ſhe wed it to Gaſpar Contarenus Cardinall S. Apolinaris the byſhop of Romes Ambaſſadour, and deſyred hym to cōſent therunto.
                        
                           〈…〉
                         D
                           •••
                        s i
                           ••
                        ter 
                           〈…〉
                         The Pope 
                           〈…〉
                        hall
                  
                  But foraſmuche as it is not the byſhop of Romes incanyng, to haue any agrement made accordyng

to the ſcripture, the Cardinal wold no notherOne of his croked pi
                           •
                        
                        pes hyndereth all that thegodly had go
                           •
                        e about 
                           •
                         greate while before, and thoſe me
                           •
                         of greate nobilitie beſydes the excelent learned. wyſe conſent▪ but ſo that the Articles ſhould be ſent vnto the Byſhop of Rome, that he myght conclude therein what ſhould pleaſe him at the next general Counſaill that ſhould be holden.
                  And in as muche as many of the States and de grees of the Empyre were diſcontent there wyth (for they knewe that the Pope woulde neuer be contented wyth that Agreement, ſeyng it woulde do no ſmall barme and dammage too hys kyngdome) they deſyred the Emperoures Maieſtie to geue them leaue that they myght haue thoſe Articles that were agreed of, to bee openly taught in their Churches, whiche thynge alſo was graciouſly graunted them, to do, as the diſſolycyon of theſame Parliament declared.
                  Whereupon alſo the Princes hereafter namedThe prince
                           •
                         that receaue the worde of God after ye parliament holden at Regenſburg. cauſed the ſayd Articles to be preached in their landes and dominions.
                  Fyrſt Duke Otho Henrick of Bayer, Countie Palatine on the Rene.
                  Phillip his brother.
                  The Citie of Regenſburg.
                  The Citie of Swyneforth.
                  Whom the Cytie of Rottenburg on the Tawber folowed in the yeare of oure lorde a thouſande fyue hundreth fourty and foure. And there wouldeDoctor Eckius vſe▪ h
                           •
                        he 
                           •
                        cuel his maſters conning that is, lying▪
                      vndoubtedly moa haue folowed, if the deuell had not hyndered them thorou hys membre Doctour Eckius. For he, after he had, all the whyle the diſputacion

laſted) done all hys diligence to diſanulle the whole booke that the Emperoure gaue theim to agree of as Erroneouſe, but coulde not brynge his purpoſe aboute: and yet muſte bee affraied of the Emperoures Maieſtie, whiche had cauſed the Booke to be diligently wrytten thorowe the counſall of hys learned men, or muſte elles hane bene proued a lyer wyth the playne truthe thoroughe the wytneſſe of the diſputers of oure ſyde, and of his awne felowes: wrote vnto thoſe ſtates and degrees that leyned to the Byſhoppe of Rome after this ſoarte.
                  That vnmeete Booke neuer lyked me, ner yet dothe, nor euer ſhall, wherein I haue founde ſo manyThe beu
                           •
                        ls 
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           ••
                         
                        
                           •
                        al 
                           〈…〉
                        , 
                           •
                        owes 
                           〈…〉
                        es 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      errours and fawtes. Wherefore I wyll geue this ſentence, that it ſhall not bee receaued of the Catholikes, as whiche diſpyſeth the veyne of the old fathers, and ſmelleth vtterly of Melancthon. And I Eccius haue not agreed thereunto, nor haue alſo ſeene the Booke that was delyuered to the Emperours maieſtie, but that certer: of the Lutherians Articles were read vnto me, much leſſe haue I agreed vnto the wrytyng that was (as I heare ſaye) delyuered to the Emperoures Maieſtie with the Booke, whiche I neuer ſawe.
                  This wrote Eccius, as is mencioned, but howe
                        
                           •••••
                         is pro
                        
                           ••
                        d
                           •
                         
                        
                           ••
                        r▪
                      vntruely, his awne companions in a ſupplication wrytten vnto the Vmpeeres and preſidentes of the diſputacion, wyt neſſe: wherein they complayne of Eccius, and of hy sfalſheede, excuſyng them ſelues: beſydes that the preſydentes alſo, as the

Lorde Frederick Countie Palatyne Electour on the Rhene, and the Lord Granuell one of the Emperoures Maieſties counſayll, and the Emperoures Maieſtie hym ſelfe, excuſed Eccius companyons and prayſed them: that they had done truely and honeſtly, and confeſſed that Eccius had agreed and conſented to that that they dyd, as then all theſe thynges maye ſuffyciently be ſene in the treatye it ſelfe.
                  Nowe the whyle the matter ſtoode thus as touchyng Rellygion, and by the hynderaunce of the Popes Ambaſſadoure and Eccius coulde proceade no forther, was the Turkes matter taken in hande to ſende an Armye againſt him, and to withſtande hym, and to bee ſhorte all the States and degrees of the Empyre agreed and conſented to helpe agaynſte the Turke with men and money, and there was a taxe leuyed the wholle Empyre thorowe, in all the Lordeſhyppes thereof, bothe ſpyrituall and temporall, that euery man ſhoulde geue accordynge to hys ſubſtaunce of an hundrethMoney is geuen to ſēd an armye againſt the Turke. guldens one gulden. And he that was but a poore man and not worth and hundreth guldens, ſhould paye ſyxtene pence for his Body.
                  This taxe was counted to be of ſuche valure, that it was able to kepe an hundreth thouſande men, bothe footemen▪ and horſſemen three yeares longe. And the Marques of Brādeburg Electour was choſen to be the hyghe and chefe Capitayne ouer all that wholl multytude in the fyelde: And thys Armye ſhoulde goo forwarde in the Somer

folowyng in the twoo and fourty yeare. Theſe thinges beyng ended and cōcluded, the ſtates & degrees of the Empyre departed and went home, and beganne to make preparacion for the money and Armye aboue mencioned.
                  As the Emperoures Maieſtie and the ſtates and degrees of the Empyre were aſſembled and conſulted together at Regenſburg, the Turke alſo in the meane while conſydered what was meeteſt for hym to do. For when kynge Iohn Weyda of Hungary was deed, and left a Sonne after hym,Iohn Weyda kynge of Hungary dy
                        
                           •••
                        . a Monke, called Brother George Ordinis paulinor at Offen, behaued hymſelfe ſo that he was choſen of the Hungars to be the tutor of the Iunge kynge and admitted to be Regent. He beynge promoted to ſuche an hygth, and beyng affeared of the Turke, whiche came wyth a greate power towarde Offen, ſought all the wayes that he coulde, to kepe Offen and to abyde in the gouernaunce whereunto he was choſen, and that on thys wyſe, He made as thoughe he woulde haue holpen theThe Turke
                           •
                         Baſſa 
                           •
                        eſegeth Peſt. Turcke, And when the Turkes Baſſa, called Mahometwerck, Lieutenaunt of 
                        
                           •••
                        . Alb
                           •
                        
                        ▪ greca▪
                      Grekeweiſſenbourg, came before Peſt with a greate Armye of the Turkes to wynne it, the Moncke ſent hym a greate ſoorte of Sowdiars oute of Offen to helpe hym to take in Peſt, whiche full ſhrewdly heard the confeſſyon of thoſe ſely Sowdiars that were layde in Peſt by Ferdinandus. For it was done in the Lente, betwene the twenty daye of Martche and the fourth of Aprill.
                  
                     But after the Turkes Baſſa was compelled to departe from thence, the Moncke ſo fenced and fortifyed hys Gouernaunce and the Cytye, that he truſted to 
                        〈…〉
                      the ſame againſte all the power of the Turke.
                  Shortely after, at the Emperoures and the kynges Maieſties requeſt, there was a meetely good Armye ſent into Hungary by the Empyre, to thyntent to haue brought Offen out of the Monckes power agayne vnder Ferdinandus. But as ſone as thoſe Sowdiars were come together, there beganne an horrible Syckneſſe among them, ſo that there died many of them euery daye, and all that were ſent thether to ſtrengthen them and to fulfyll their nombre was in vayne. For they dyed more dayly than coulde be ſent vnto them. And thereto the Turke hymſelfe came downe wyth a greate and a myghtie power to take in Offen, and to dryue oure Company back agayne: Whiche ſeyng that they were to weake to fyght agaynſte ſo greate a multytude, and were alſo plaged wyth the peſtylence, went vp a lyttell aboue Offen and pytched their tentes and made them a Trenche by Sainct Gertrudes hyll. But for as muche as there dyed euery daye many of them, and the Turkes encreaſed dayly more and more: They fel vpon oure men the twenty daye of Auguſt in the mornyng wyth an horrible ſhoute and oute crye, but oure men defended them ſelues manfully, and compelled the Turckes to flye back agayne into their their Tentes. The daye after our men ſeyng themſelues

to weake, beganne to conſult that it was beſt to flye, and in the nyght after the horſemen went ouer the Tonaw. And thereuppon the Capitaynes that kept the watche the ſame nyght▪ toke with thē the other watchemen before the tyme that they ſhould haue left the watche, and gat ouer the water in Shyppes. When the Commen ſoarte of the ſowdiars perceaued that they were forſaken of the horſemen, they fledde in all the haſt, and as many as could obtaine the Shyppes eſkaped, many were drouned that woulde haue Swymmed ouer the water, all the reaſte, whiche were well eight thouſandeA notable 
                           〈…〉
                         ordi
                        
                           〈…〉
                         loſt 
                           〈…〉
                         Hungary. were pitifully kylled of the Turkes. And the Turkes obtayned ſuche a notable ſoorte of Gonnes and Inſtrumentes of warre, as had not bene before ſene in Hungary. And it was the Commen ſayeng of all the Soudiars, that that miſerable worke was begonne by the treaſon of WillyamWillyam of Rogendorpe 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        ▪
                      of Rogendorpe, whiche at that tyme was chefe capitaine of the Armie. Whereuppon they alſo haue made a Ballett, whiche they openly ſynge, wherein they exhorte all other Capitaynes to be warre that they do no ſuche ſhamefull deade. And let no Sowdiar whether he be of hyghe or lowe degree, that hath a mynde to honeſtye, ſet ſo muche ether by money or rewardes, that he woulde therfore be a ſhamed to all the worlde, ſo that ſhame ſhould be ſpoken and ſongen of hym for euer of all them that ſhall lyue after hym all chriſtendom ouer.
                  But we wyll come agayne to the Turkes matters. That Tyrrant cauſed foure ſcore pryſoners

of the Chriſten to be brought ſtarck naked beforeThe Turke▪ 
                        
                           •
                        eweth. lxxx Chriſtians in peeces for a paſtyme. his Sonne, and for hys pleaſure and paſtyme hewed them into ſmall peeces. Certenne of the nobilitye that were taken pryſoners, were caried into Turkye and there compelled with greate and paynefull myſery to be ſlaues.
                  After this victory, he Imagyned howe he myght take Offen in. And therefore called vnto hym the chefe Lordes of Hungary, as Valentyne Tereck, Peter Petroreyck, Vrban Vath
                        •
                     niani, and other that folowed hys ordinaunce and ſtuffe, thoroughe whoſe counſayll he brought his Armye in to Hungarye: and ſayde vnto them, that if they coulde fynde the meanes to delyuer Offen into his handes, he woulde make them the Rulers ouer Hungarye. Vppon this promeſſe they allured the Monck, and the Quene and her Sonne and the other lordes that were within Offen to agree to their requeſt ſayeng the beſt that they coulde of the Turke, that he woulde be good and graciouſe vnto them, if they woulde yelde vp the Cytye into his handes, and 
                        •••
                     re vnto hym in to hys tentes, ſhewynge them on the other ſyde that they were not able to reſyſte and wythſtande hys power.
                  Nowe when they vppon this coumfort came out
                        •
                      of the Cytye, to receaue and take the Turke for theThe Turke breaketh hys promeſſe, and excercyſeth tyranny. ruler & father of their Coūtrey, was that promeſſe not kept vnto them, but they were ſtreight wayes taken pryſoners, and Offen was taken inne by force. And there was ſuche a ſurie and woodneſſe excerciſed out of hād againſt y• indwellers both citizēs & ſoudiars, & againſt wiues & maidens, that a ſtony

hart woulde haue pytyed it. For after they had moſte ſhamefully miſuſed them, they were ether kylled, or caried awaye into a ſtraūge countrey into extreame myſery and wretchedneſſe.
                  After this the Turke cauſed the Quene and her Sonne, and the Moncke, and many other of the Courtyers to bee ſent vnto Lyppa, whyche is a ſtronge Caſtell. And then ſent oute three Companies into thre coaſtes of Hungerlande to robbe and ſteale, in euery companye twelue thouſande men of whiche the fyrſte coulde do no great harme, for they coulde not come into Mehrer lande by the meanes of the Water, where their purpoſe was to haue made hauock. The ſecond Company came all moſte as farre as Vienne. The third made hauock in the landes of the lordes of Balaſſa, and kylled many poore men, and caried many awaye for pryſoners.
                  In the meane whyle ſent kyng Ferdinādus his Ambaſſadours the Lorde Nicolas the Earle of Salme, and the lorde Sigiſmundt of Harmonſtone to Offen to the Turke, to Take a Truce. And
                        
                           〈…〉
                        an 
                           〈…〉
                        l yeare. when they had obtayned the ſame for an half yeare▪ and made it ſure on both the ſydes, the Ambaſſadours toke their way home againe to the kyng.
                  And the Turke when he had furnyſhed OffenThe turcke 
                           •••
                        eth▪ 
                        
                           •
                        xx. thouſand mē
                        
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      wyth twenty thouſand men, tooke his Iourney to Conſtantinople. But the Turkes that were left in the Cytye of Offen kept not the Truce longe, but fell often oute, and toke the Chriſten pryſoners at Vnwares, whyche thynge cauſed oure men alſo

to do the ſame with them, whereupon there folowed a cōtinuall Robbing and Roauing on both the ſydes, the whole wynter ouer, ſo that ſome tyme the Turkes ſomtyme our men had the victory.The Turke geueth 
                           •
                        alē tyne Te
                           •
                        eck his reward.
                  
                  The Turke, as he departed, toke valētyne Tereck, thorou whoſe helpe he gatt Offen, and cauſed an yeron chayne to be put about his necke, and caſt him in to the Tonaw by Grekes weiſſenburg, and ſo rewarded hym for his true ſeruice.The Turke taketh certayn Caſtels in▪ The Turke aſſaulteth the citie of fyuechurches.
                  
                  He alſo ſodenly fell vpon theſe Caſtels and toke them in, zeckzaart, zeckehen, Baranianara, and other that laye by them. He alſo toke his pleaſure vpon the citie of Fyuechurches, and aſſaulted it, but founde lytel pleaſure there. For the Indwellers de fended themſelues well.
                  But they that were left within Offen fell twyſe out at vnwares vpon Grane, and the towne Kakat that lieth ouer againſt Grane, on this ſyde the Tonaw they pitifully cleane robbed and pulled doune: ſo that there was an excidyng myſerable worke in Hungary this yere.
                  Beſyde this Armie in Hungary had the TurckThe Turck hatha
                           •
                        arm
                           •
                         in Pelopo
                           •
                        e ſo. an other myghtie armie at this time both by water and by lande in the Ile Peloponeſus, nowe called Morea, wherewith he droue the Venecians from all the Cities that they had there, and tooke them in. The whyle the Turck was thus woode dyd the Emperoure Charles prepare hym ſelfe in Italy, Spayne, Sycyll and other of hys landes and Iles with a notable great Nauye, wherein he had a good armye, well foure and twenty thouſand men, of whiche ſyxe thouſande were dutchemen, whoſe

chefe Capitaine was Maſter George of Regenſburg, and ſayled into Affrica vnto the Citie of Algier, whiche Barbaroſſa had in. And although the Poape diſſwaded the Emperoure that he ſhoulde not take ſuche an vntymely ſhyppyng, as to wytt, in Wynter, at Luke, where they were both together▪
                     The Emperour and the Pope to gether at Luke. yet muſt the Emperoures purpoſe forward. For he hoped to haue dryuen Barbaroſſa oute of that hauen, and ſo to haue had none Enemy whom he ſhould haue neaded to feare the ſomer folowing, by the meanes whereof he coulde the better haue withſtandeth the Turke by Sea. Nowe when he hauyng a proſperouſe wynde, was come with the aforeſayde Armie to Algier, and brought his SowdiarsThe Emperoures paſſage to Algier. oute of the Shyppes, and gotten them on lande, than beganne ſodenly ſuche an horryble tempeſt to aryſe vppon Sea, with wynde and rainne, and laſted three dayes longe wythout ceaſſyng: that not onely the Sowdiars wackſed douſſye in the heed and ſyck, but alſo through the violence of the Storme there were more than an hundreth and thyrtye Spyppes beaten ſhaken to geather, and peryſhed, wherein many men, and ſpecially all their packes and baggage, and all their vyttalles, and the ordinaunce to beſeaghe the Cytie wythall was loſt, of whiche thynges our men had no great Ioye.
                  Nowe when they of Algier ſawe that oure men were in ſuche greate neceſſitie, they fell oute of the Cytie, and kylled them that kept the watche, and

fell vppon them that were in the Tentes with ſha
                        •
                     
                     tes and hagbuſhes, but were yet dryuen back agayne into the Cytie of the Spanyardes. Afterwarde they laye in the waye to hynder certayne knightes of the Rodes in a ſtrayte waye (of whome and hundreth folowed the Emperoure agaynſie the vnfaythfull) tyll the Emperoure came and helped them with the doutch Sowdiars. But when the Enemies had ſhott ſeuen thouſand of the Itatalians thorou wyth hagbuſhes, and the reaſt were dryuen to flye, than the Emperoure exhorted the dutchemen to withſtande, and ſaide, ye beloued dutchemen helpe your Emperoure thys daye, or elles neuer, And euen as he ſpake thoſe woordes, were they that ſtoode next by hym in order kylled with a gonne whiche thynge yet nether feared nor Amaſed hym any thynge at all. When the dutche ſowdiars perceaued that, they gat a Courage, and althoughe they coulde not ſhote for the greatnes of the raynue, yet they droue the Enemies backe agayne into the Cytie wyth Speare and ſworde.
                  But for as muche as all their victualles were ſpente, and (as is before ſayde) deſtroyed wyth the violence of the Storme, the Emperoures Maieſtie made prouiſion to departe, and to the entent that the ſowdiars myght haue ſome what to eate, the whyle they ſhoulde ſayle, they toke the horſſes oute of the Shyppes, kylled them and ate them, and afterward brought the ſowdiars into the ſhyppes

that were left, and ſayled from thence. And in the ſaylyng homewarde they were alſo in greate. Ieopardy and perel vpon the ſea, and many of the ſhippes and men were drowned. Let this muche bee ynough of this viage. He that wyll knowe further thereof, may reade the whole hiſtory, whiche Nicolas Villagagnome a knyght of the Rhodes hath diligently written, which alſo was preſent thereby hymſelfe.
                  In the meane whyle dyed the Godly ChriſtenDuke Henry of Saxon dieth. prince Duke Henry of Saxon, Duke Georges brother, and his ſonne Maurice, whiche after maryed the Landgraue of Heſſes daughter, ſucceded in the gouernaunce.
                  The peſtilence reigned greuouſly in many places this .xli. yeare, and ſpecially at Vien in Oſtenrick. there dyed well .xviij. thouſande the whole ſomer all moſte was weete and rayne. by the meanes whereof alſo the wyne could not come at his due ſea ſon, and was very ſower. And yet was this yeare
                        
                           〈…〉
                        s 
                           〈…〉
                        r 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      more wyne wackſen, then in the three yeares folowyng: Wherein the grapes were all dryed vp and wythered, vndoubtedly for oure vnthanckfulneſſe ſake, and for the myſuſe thereof.
               
               
                  
                     THe yeare .MDxlij. in the beginning of the yeare there came certayn ſouldiours, Italians borne into a towne in Hiſtria called Maran, not farre from Tryeſt, belonging
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         in Hiſtr
                           ••
                         is taken in. to Ferdinandus. There were about thre hundreth of them, and the ſecond mornyng after they came into the towne, they cried Frantza, Frantza and kept them together with their wordes and other weapons.
                  
                     Nowe in the towne was very fewe people, and vnape to warr, by the meanes wherof they yelded them ſelues. This towne (as men ſuppoſe) dyd the Frenche kynge therfore cauſe to be taken in, to let the turck in ther in to ſtyrmarcke, kernton and the other landes nyghe: ther vnto, for it was a goode hauen, and meate for that purpoſe: whyche thyng yet God hath thus longe graciouſly preſerued vs from.
                  In the meane whyle ther was preparacion madeAn armye againſt the Turck. the whole Empyre thorow, and a myghtye greate armye gathered to ſend in to vngary (as was concluded at Regenſburge) agaynſte the turcke: and ther were men ſent out of all the coaſtes of Dutche lande, whyche came to geather harde by Vyenne. Nowe euen when they ſhulde goforwarde wyth the wholl multytude togeather, whyche were aboue an hundreth thouſande, yet was therby the meanes of hyndraunce, no greate thynge brought to paſſe for it was in the later ende of harueſte, ſo that it wolde be ſhortely tyme to prepare for theyr wynter Campe. Yet the chefe and hyghe captayn for that he woulde nott be counted to haue gone forth in vayne, went forwarde and beſeged Peſte,Peſt is beſeaged of our men. whyche the turcke hadde wonne the yeare before in wynter, and aſſaulted it wyth the greatloſſe of our men.
                  And as they in the citye fell often oute to feyghtDuke Maurice in Ieoperdy of takynge. wyth oure men, duke Mauryce of Saxon played the man, and folowed after the enemyes ſo farre from hys awne company that he was compaſſed rounde aboute of the turckes and taken,

But becauſe they coulde get nothyng of hym in his complete harneſſe, they woulde leuer haue taken
                        
                           ••
                        e of Duke Maurice Ie
                           〈…〉
                        en 
                           〈…〉
                        eth mā
                        fully to delyuer his maſter. hym therout alyue, the whyle the Turckes were aboute hym to haue ſhyfted hym oute of his harneſſe, one of hys Ientellmen ſoughte ſo manfully to delyuer hys maſter, tyll the reaſte of the horſe men myſſed theyr maſter and came to help hym, and vtterlie delyuered hym from the Enemyes. But the Ientylman that fought ſo manfullye for him was kylled of the turckes.
                  In the meane ceaſon ther came a great horribleA ſickneſſe in the Camp ſyckneſſe amonge the ſoudyars, whyche wackſed greater and greater, by the meanes wherof they were compelled to brekeup the Campe and gyue the ſoudyars leaue to departe. So that haply thorou the handyworck of God, whyche wyll moare punyſhe vs wyth the Turcke, as we then daly wel deſerue with vnthanckfulneſſe and with the perſequntynge of his woorde, ther was no moare done, but that we loſte bothe our men and monye and all oure labour, and made our ſelues mockyng ſtockes to the Turcke.
                  At the departynge from thence they ſo dyed ofThe grenouſ
                        
                           •
                        ie
                           •
                         of ye ſicknes in. Duga 
                           ••
                        . the afforſayde ſyckneſſe, that ſkant the tenth man came home agayne. Thys ſyckneſſe was ſo contagyouſe, that yf one butt blewe vpon a nother he muſte dye, and the whyle they laye, they were full of fanteſyes as though they had bene madde, and as 
                        •
                     on
                        •
                      as that madneſſe was gonne from them, they dyed by and by. Very fewe recouered that had this ſyckeneſſe, but they that dyed not of it, lay wounderouſe long ſyck.
                  
                     Whyle the Marqueſſe of Brandenburge, as is 
                        •
                     for ſayde, laye wych thys multitude in Vngary,Warre betwene ye Duke of Saxon & Brunſwick in the meane whyle the famouſe prynce Ihon Fryderycke Duke of Saxon. Electour. &c. and Philyppe Landgraue of Heſſe and they that were in leaghe wyth them toke in to waghes a reaſonable goode ſorte of horſſe men and fote men, agaynſte Duke Henrye of Brunſwycke. The occaſyon of thys warre was, that the Duke of Brunſwycke, after he hadde of ſhamefully and hyghly ſlaundred bothe the Electoure and the Landgraue wyth openlye prynted bokes, dyd them of Goſlar and Brunſwycke whyche bothe weare in leaghe wyth the afforſayd prynces, manye and greate iniuryes, as that he belayed the wayes to theſe twoo cytyes, toke theyr cytezens preſoners, toke raunſome for them, & yet killed them. And although he were often commaunded to leaue thoſe proude poyntes, by the Emperoure and the kynge of the Romaynes, yet woulde he not leaue hys euell purpoſe: & ſayd, that it ſhoulde coſte hym hys wholle Dukedome, yet he woulde leue it.
                  Nouwe in as muche as ther coulde no meane, be founde to helpe the matter, the aboue mencyoned Noble Prynces and they that were in leaghe wyth them, were dryuen to defende ther felowes, membres of the ſame leaghe.
                  Therefore wente they forwarde in Iuly with their ſoudyars (whiche were aboute two and twenty thouſand) in to the land of Brunſwick. There the cities and caſtelles were yelde vppe one

after a nother, and were wyth frenſhyppe gracyouſlye receaued and defended, and euery man ſuffred to kepe hys awne goodes wyth out any loſſe or hynderaunce. But ſuche as wolde wyth ſtande, were compelled to be obedyente.
                  When he of Brunſwyke ſawe that, he mannedThe duke of Brunſwyke flyeth. hys beſte and ſtrongeſte houſe, called Woluenbutell, whych lyeth in a flatte euenfelde wyth ſtrong walles and water ditches, wyth hys awne ſubiectes, and wente hys waye, as thoughe he woulde fetchemo men and ſhortely come agayne and helpe them, commaund ynge them to playe the men, and kepe the houſe tyll he came agayne. They hadde alſo all thynges ynoughe in the Caſtel that was neadefull ther to, yf they ſhoulde haue bene long beſeaged.Woluenbutel is beſeged
                  
                  Nowe when the princes came before the Caſtel, they ſent word thyther that they ſhuld haue peace and a ſafe conduyte to come oute wyth all that they hadde, yf they woulde yelde vppe the Caſtell. Ther vnto anſwered the captaines that were with in the Caſtell, that they ſhulde come agayne threWoluenbutel is vntapled for .iii. peares. yeare after, and then woulde they geue them an Anſwer to that queſtion. For they truſted to kepe that Caſtell ſo longe, they thoughte that it was nott poſſyble to wynne it, if it were nott hungred oute, and they hadde made prouiſion for thre yeares, wherefore they woulde not yelde it vp.
                  Vpon thys prowde Anſwere, the prynces and the cytye of Brunſwyke treuched in thre

places, and pytched theyr tentes. And the Land graue came ſo nyghe wyth hys ordynaunce, that a man myghte caſte a ſtoane in to the Caſtell dytche oute of hys trenche.
                  And when they hadde begonne to ſhote the ordynaunce, the trompettoure of the Caſtell ſyttynge aboue in the tower, beganne to playe thys ballatte to anger the Prynces wyth all.
                  If thy paſtime repent ye, than get ye home again. &c.The mening was, y• they ſhuld at the length repēt them of their ioznep, and go hom, and winue no thing. Therwyth all was the Land graue ſo angrye, that he leuelled al his ordinaunce againſt the tower, and ſo ſhott ther at, that the tower, and the trompetter wyth all hys pypynge fell downe.
                  Thys fallynge downe of the tower made them that were in the Caſtell ſo affearde, that they that dwellte in the countreye harde by the Caſtell beganne ſtreyght wayes to come oute oneThey fly out of the Caſtel ouer the walles & ditches after a nother ſwymmynge ouer the dytche by a duffhouſe. And when ye other mercked that many of theyr men were gonne, and were to weeke to wythſtande the greate power that was there agaynſt: them, they yelded vppe both them ſelues and the Caſtell vnto the Prynces.
                  Afterward was the Caſtel and the wholleThe Goſpel is preached in the land of Brunſwick. lande ſett in an order, and the Goſpell (whyche before was kepte from it throughe that tyranne the Duke of Brunſwycke) ordeyned to be preached therinne. And when they hadde ordeyned all thynges after the beſte facyon, and the Duke of Brunſwycke appeared no where wyth any ſowdyars

and the Empyre requyred. But the Emperoure coulde ſmell what the Pope meante. Wherefore he vtterlye refuſed that councell, and exhorted hym by wrytyng, that he woulde rather ſee thatt the Frentch kyng kepte peace, to thynthent that the Turcke myghte be wythſtanded: than to call a councel at ſuche an Vnmeete time, which might be an hynderaunce to the other purpooſe to make peace.
                  Afterwarde the Emperoures Mayeſtye prepared hymſelfe after the beſte facyon to wyth ſtand the Frentche kynge and hys partetakers.
                  Aboute thys tyme dyd the a boue mencyoned Prynces, Duke Otho Henrycke, and Phylyppe
                        
                           〈…〉
                         pr
                           •
                        nces and 
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         the Goſpell hys brother bothe countye palatynes on the rhyne, and the cytyes Regenſburgh and Swyneforthe, receaue the Goſpell: for whyche thynge they were compelled to take muche harme, and ſpecyallye they of Regenſburge, to whome Duke Wyllyam of Bayer did al the hurte that the could:Duke William 
                           ••
                         Baier 
                           〈…〉
                        th to v
                           〈…〉
                        . and forbadde all hys ſuby
                        •
                     ctes, that none of them ſhulde carye anye thynge to Regenſburge or by or ſell wyth them, or yf anye man dyd, he muſte nott come agayne in to hys lande, and muſt leeſe all hys goodes.
                  Thys was a greate hyndraunce to the cytye, of Regenſburge. For it lyeth in the myddes of the lande of Bayer, Yeth hath God gracyouſly preſerued it.
                  In the begynnynge of the herueſte therGraſſehoppers. came oute of Ly
                        •
                     towe, thorou the land of pole and

through ſchleſye and vnto the land of myſſen great multytudes of Graſſehoppers flyinge, and layed them downe in the aboue mencyoned landes by greate multytudes, an hundreth dutch myle long and a
                        •
                     e vppe all that was grene in the felde and lo we medowes. They were as greate as a mannes fynger, and ſome of them greater, they hadde ſcales as it hadde bene harneſſe vpon them, and as it were an hatte vpon theyr heades lyke an olde rowſtye year on ſallet, and were harde lyke an horne, ſo that a man coulde ſkante treade them in ſonder. They had four winges as it wer, which wereread ſpeckelde, ſome of them were yellowe and gray and of other ſpeckelde coloures.
                  And where ſo euer they layed them downe in the felde, there they laye well a foate thycke from the grounde. And ſpecyallye in the lande of Pole they ſaye that they laye an halfe elne thick from the grounde.
                  When the ſunne beganne to ſchyne then they flewe vppe by greate heapes, in battell order ſo thycke to gether, that they ſhadowed the ſonne lyke a clowde. They flewe alſo as ſwyſtlye as other birdes, a wholl dutche myl befor they reaſted. In the lande of myſſen they came as farre as to the water Mylda, for ther they came nott. Euerye man thoughte that then ſhoulde a greate deathe haue folowed in the ſame landes, where as yet hyther to ther hath none bene hearde of.
                  Haplye it was a warnynge (as certen learned men wryte) that we ſhould take hiede that

we myght be able to withſtande, if the Turck came in wyth ſuche a multitude of people, from whyche thynge God gracyouſly defende vs.
                  In Italye vpon the .xiii. daye of Iune therA earth
                           ••
                        a
                        
                           •
                        e in 
                           〈◊〉
                        . was a fearfull and an horryble Earthquake by Florence, whyche threwe downe manye Chymneyes in Florence, and almooſte a wholle lytell towne lyinge not farre from it called Scharbarya, and deſtroyed many men.
                  They wryte alſo that in Turckye a lytellAn earthqua
                           •
                        e in 
                           〈…〉
                        ye towne lyinge not farre from Solonychyo, from whence the Saffren cometh, was deſtroyed wyth men and women and all that was ther in wyth an Earthquake.
                  They ſaye alſo that ther ſtode ouer Conſtantynople
                        
                           ••
                         
                        
                           〈◊◊〉
                         
                        
                           ••
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        ple an horryble blaſynge ſterre .xl. dayes longe, and that in the ſame dayes, in Iune and Iulye, there was there an horryble weether, and an Earthquake. They ſaye alſo that a Dragon burnt the Turckes Caſtell and treaſure, and that ther came a greate multitude of wolues rennynge into the cyty, whyche dyd men muche harme. And many ſuche wounders done at that tyme were wrytten oute of Conſtantynople, wherof, as me ſemeth ſome be but lyes. Howe beit I lett euerye man thynck ther in as ſhal pleaſe hym, and beleue what he wyll. Let thys be ynoughe of thys yeare.
                  The Brabanters beyng prouoked of Marten van Roſheyme ruſch et in to the lande of Gulyck▪
                     The Bra
                        
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        ll 
                           ••
                        to the land of Gulick. and burne certen Caſtels & lytel townes, or robbe and make hauocke of them. They manne Duren, Gulycke, 
                        •
                     yttard, Suſtern and Hynſberg, which

were yelded vp vnto them. On the other ſyde the Duke of Cleue, after he hath gathered an armye round aboute oure all places wythſtandeth the power of the Brabanders: Whyche after they had made Henſburg ſtronge & entended alſo to Fence Duren, entred into fyght wyth hys Enemyes, Wherein when there were many kylled on both partyes the fyght was ended.
                  Syttard and Gulyck, becauſe the walles were ouerthrowen of the Brabanders, the Duke of Cleue cauſeth to be ſtrongly walled agayne, and beſeaged Duren and compelleth them to yelde vp the towne in the ende of December.
                  Thys yeare Iames the fyft kynge of Scottland,The kyng of Scotland dyeth. beyng .xxxiij. yeare of age dyed in December, leauyng but one onely doughter alyue of two yeare of age, borne of hys ſecond wyfe, ouer whom he ordeyned tutors and gouerners of the Realme the Cardynall of S. Andrewes, and the lorde Hamelton.
               
               
                  
                     IN the yeare of our Lord, 1543. euenA Councell kept at Nure
                           •
                        burg. in the begynnynge of the yeare was a conuocation or Counſell kept at Nuremburgh, at the whyche conuocation was preſent kyng Ferdinandus wyth hys two eldeſt ſonnes, and beſydes them the mooſt parte of the Ambaſſadours and deputies of the other princesAnother counſel appoynted at Spyer. of the Empyre. And when all theyr actes and doynges were prolonged vntyll after Eaſter, ther was another day appoynted to be kept at Spyer, where the Emperours Mayeſtye ſhoulde perſonally appeare hym ſelfe.
                  
                     In the moneth of Ianuary the Emperours maieſtyAn army ſent by them p
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           〈◊◊〉
                         land. ſent out of ſpain a mighty army bothe on horſback & on foot wherof the erle of Aultete was capitaine, into ye land of the Mores called Mauritania, 
                        ••
                     enge in the coaſtes and borders of Afryca, ouer agaynſte Spayne, to inuade the kynge of the cytye of tremetz, wherof alſo the kyngdome hath hys name: becauſe that by the helpe of the Moores he hadde proflygated and expelled hys brother, vnto whome the gouernaunce of the kingdome by right dyd appertayne whyche ſoughte redreſſe and ſuccour at the handes of themperours maieſty. This armye arryued the .xxvii. daye of Ianuary at the cytye of Tybyda lyenge by the ſea ſyde, where
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      they founde a greate multytude of Mores, which ſoone auoyded, and lefte ye cyty vnto the Spanyardes. After thys they marched from Tybyda towardes tremetz, and endamaged the Mores by the waye whyche were departed from Tybyda: vntyll at the laſte they tourned them ſelues again and made a conflycte and ſkyrmyſſynge wyth the Spanyardes, whyche dyd ſoone beate them of and putt them to flyght agayne.
                  In the meane ſeaſon departed the kynge
                        
                           〈…〉
                        of 
                           〈…〉
                        . oute of the cytye of tremetz wyth hys fyghtynge men, and the beſte treaſures that was wyth in the cyty, and camped on a hyll next vnto the cyty.
                  And when he perceyued the Mores to be ſmytten and putt to flyghte, he haſted incontinently to ſuccour thē: but he wā
                     
                        •
                     e euen as much as they whome he came to ſuccour had wanne before.

Nowe when the kynge was departed out of the citye,The city of Tremetz taken. the Spanyardes went and toke it wyth all theyr armye, whervpon the chyef Ruler that was yet left in the cytye cauſed themperoure to be acceptet and proclamed for theyr ſouereygne. Which cytye was wonne on teweſdaye the .vi. daye of February.
                  The Frenche kynge proceded in the lande of LuxeeburgheThe French king and the Duke of 
                           〈…〉
                        le
                        
                           •
                        e pro
                           〈…〉
                         their marſhial affaires. as he hadde begonne the yeare before, to waſte to deſtroye to ouerthrowe, and to take in poſſeſſyon al that euer he might ouercome, neither was their any to reſiſt hym, ſauing that ye townes which were able to abide a blowe, were furnyſhed with ſouldiours. In like maner did alſo william duke of Cleue in the land lieng by the Maze, againſteThe Ladye Mary ſendeth an army againſte the Duke of Cleue. whom the Lady Mary ſiſter vnto themperoures maieſty, and regent of the Lower partes of Ducheland, prepared and aſſembled an hoſt of Launce knightes being in nombre about ten thouſand, and aboue a thouſand horſes, by the which ſhe cauſed ye towne of Sytterd pertaining to the duke of Cleue and lieng about thre miles from Maſetright, to be beſeged. But when the ſaid army had martched in haſte vntyll the thyrde daye, and came to the ſayd towne on eaſter euen whyche was the .xxiiii. daye of Marche, pytchynge there theyr Campe, and intendynge to refreſhe them ſelues with foode andThe Cleueuers approche towardes▪ the Brabanders. reſte after theyr hungre, and paynfull iourneye ſuſtayned: The Duke of Cleue approched wyth hys armye, whyche by eſtymacyon exceded nott the nombre of them that were ſente by the ſayde ladye Marye (as I am infourmed of waryours

that hadde ben in and amonge the ſayde company) whyche nombre beynge eſpyed a farre of, cauſed the Brabanders to make an alarme, thynkynge none other but that the Prynce of Orenge, Renatus counte of Naſſowe, who hadde the yere before for the mooſte parte hyndered the enterpryſe of Martyne van Roſſem agaynſte Brabante, was come to ayde them. Wherefore manye of them ran oute before the Campe nott halfe beynge armed. Neuertheles they brought them ſelues in battayl aray at all aduentures, to prouyde in caſe the ſaid companye were theyr frendes, that they myghte honorablye and tryumphauntly receyue them: yf nott, that they myghte take the leſſe hurte. But when the hooſt of Cleue approched near in hys battell raye, the Brabanders eſpyed the whyte Croſſes in theyr banners, whereby they knewe aſſuredlye that they were enemyes. Wherefore they dyd alſo marche forwarde in theyr ordre and araye agaynſte theyr enemyes. And when they hadde wel vewed and beholden one another on bothe ſyedes, the horſemen of bothe partyes cauſed theyr trompettes
                        
                           〈…〉
                        nflict 
                           〈…〉
                        e the C
                           •
                        eue
                           •
                        ers & 
                           〈…〉
                        ders to blowe, and theyr companye to ſtande by valyauntly.
                  Vpon thys dyd alſo the pyetons inuade one another, wyth theſe woordes. Whatt countre man, do we fynde one another here? and furth wyth ruſhed to gether lyke valyaunte ſouldyours: I
                        •
                      ſo muche thatt the horſemen of the Cleueners. after harde byckerynge were ſoone put to flyghte by the Brabanders.
                  Butt theyr pyetons defended them ſelues

ſo muche the more manfullye, and preſſed vpon the Brabanders after ſuche ſorte as they were conſtrayened to flee backwarde. And whan they that were formooſt beganne to drawe backwardes, the hole hoſte, fled to gether in ſuche wyſe as theyThe victory of the Cleueners. coulde nott be ſtopped: Whereupon the Cleueners haſted after them, and ſmote downe all that euer they myghte ouertake. And yf the horſemen of the Brabanders hadde nott ſmytten the horſemen of the Cleueners, and turned them from the ſayde purſuete, of all the pyetons of the Brabanders ſhoulde nott one haue eſcaped on lyue: Butt by the meanes of the ſayde horſemen there were not myſſed manye more then two thouſande and thre hundreth at the nexte muſterynge after.
                  In thys conflycte gate the Duke of Cleue beſydes the boutye of them that were ſlayene aboute ſyxe tenne or ſeuen tenne peaces of ordynaunce, wyth theyr munycyons and appurtenaunces.
                  Wherefore he became ſo hyghemynded that he aſſured hym ſelfe to be able to reſyſte all the power of themperoure, but howe thys matter ſucceded wyth hym ſhalbe ſayde hereafter in the next yeare.
                  Durynge theſe affayres, there was noThe ſlepe of themperour. cettayntye knowen, concernyng the Emperours Mayeſtye thoroughout all Dutchlande, where or in what condytyon he was. Manye ſayed he was dead▪ wherevpon there was muche money & great waghers laid betwen marchaunt and marchaunt.

Some ſayde he warred before Argyeres, and in ſumme, all mens ſayenges were vncertayne, in ſo muche that the practyſes of certayn Aſtronomers were partelye veryfyed vpon hym. For they hadde prophecyed, that themperoure ſhoulde ſlepe thys yere, in ſuche ſorte as thoroughout al Ducheland but fewe men ſhoulde knowe howe or where he was, or whatt he toke in hande. But the nexte yeare folowing it was perceiued that he had prepared himſelf in ſpayn againſt Fraunce and the duke of Cleue, with a great power. And leaſte Spayne ſhould be left without a head and Gouernour, he had made and eſtablyſhed his ſonne Philip kynge therof.
                  After that the conuocacion or Councell of No
                     
                        ••
                     nburghThe ſ
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        f the 
                           〈…〉
                        e
                        
                           〈…〉
                        he 
                           〈…〉
                        e 
                           〈…〉
                        nd 
                           〈…〉
                        th
                        
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        d
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        de. was diſperſed king Ferdinandus prepared hymſelfe wyth hys affynytye, towardes the ſolemnyſatyon of the maryage of hys doughter whyche was betroughted to Sygyſmunde the younge kynge of Poles. Whyche feaſte was kept and celebrated wyth great pompe and ſolemnytye in the cytye of Cracowe, whyche is the chyefe cytye of the Lande of Poles, called Polonya▪ begynnyng the .iiii. daye of maye, and contynuyng manye dayes after.
                  But when the tyme was come wherein they hadde appoynted to ſhewe paſtymes and to vſe iuſtynges, there chaunced ſuche a coulde and raynye whether contynuynge manye dayes that manye became vnluſtye, and had no delyte in paſtymys and myrth.
                  
                     While there was ſuche myrth and paſtime vſedHungary inuaded by the Turke. in the Lande of Poles, the Turke prepared hym ſelfe in Hungary, to bryng a preſent vnto kyng Ferdinando at that feaſte, in ſo muche that the .xxiiij. day of Iuly next folowyng he beſeged the ſtronge Caſtell of Grane, with a great power, and brought with hym about a fyfty great peces of ordinaunce, all wall breakers, wherewith he ſhott both nyght & day very 
                        •
                     uttragiouſly, and caſt downe the walles in many places ſo that they of oure ſyde within the Caſtell could not occupie their great ordinaunce by the ſpace of two dayes. And when this ſhutyng of the Turke had continued vntill the eight daye of Auguſt he cauſed theſayd Caſtell the next morowe after to bee aſſaulted with an excedyng greate power: And when the ſame aſſault had cōtinued about fyue houres, the Turkes were fayne to drawe backwardes againe with greate loſſe. But whatſoeuer God by the adminiſtracion of the Germaynes had preſerued in Ferdinandus kyngdom, the ſame was by his owne Capitaynes and ſeruauntes betrayed and deliuered. For many Launceknyghtes of the Germayne nation ſawe with their eyes, that the chief Capitaine of the Caſtell called Salamancko deliuered letters to the Turke with his owne handes ouer the walles, at the tyme of the ſaid aſſault. Whereupon the Turkes came by heapes the .xix. day of Auguſt next folowyng, to take the Caſtell in poſſeſſion, accordyng to the promiſe whiche the vpper Capitayne had made them: whiche notwithſtā
                     dyng were put of agayn by the violence and power of the Germaines that knewe not of the ſayde conſpiracy

commaunded the ſame ſincerely and purely to bee preached thoroughout all his dioceſe and iuriſdiction. But this greued the Chapiter and the Citie of Collyn very ſore, wherfore they haue alſo hither to endeuoured them ſelues to worke vnto hym muche wo, ſorowe and perſecution, here and there by the hier powers. God vouchſafe to preuente their bloudy counſailes and deuices, and graunte them to be taken in their owne ſnares, that his name in them may be ſanctified. Amen.
                  This yere alſo dyed at Ingolſtade doctor IohnThe death of doctor 
                           〈…〉
                        . Eckius a faithfull ſeruaunt and chāpion of the Pope, and a defender of the abhominable Papacy. But as his lyfe was full of all vngodlynes, vnclennes & blaſphemy, ſo was his ende myſerable harde and pitifull: inſomuche that his laſte worde (as it is noted of many credible perſones) was this, in caſe the foure thouſand guldens were ready the matter were diſpatched. Some ſay that the Pope had graūted hym a certaine Deanerych, whiche he ſhoulde haue redemed from the courte of Rome with the ſaied ſumme. And although ſome of his adherentes would fayne haue extolled hym into heauen, wherfore alſo the ſayde rumour was myghtely reſiſted with vayne excuſes, yet haue they not preuayled, but opened his ſhame ſo muche the more.
                  the .xxvi. day of Nouember a certayn womanA wōderfull birth beſides Baſell▪
                      beſydes Baſell in a village called Renach, brought furth a wonderfull burthen namely twoo chyldren faſt together and double from the nauell vpwarde, ſo that both their bellyes and breſtes were growen together vnto their neckes, their heades beyng parted

lokinge one vpon an other, and embraſing eche other with their armes. Frō the nauel downeward it was but one childe wyth one arſe, membres of a manchilde▪ two legges and two fete, & the one was alyue when it came into the worlde, but it lyued not paſt an houre.
                  Alſo the fourth day of Iune were ſene at Whitē
                     Wonderfull viſions ſen
                           •
                        . dall not far frō S. Ioachinis valley many & ſundry viſions. As .ii. cities, againſt whō 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      many Lyōs with gonnes, & the reapeared many viſages & figures of men wt wonderful beardes, one prayeng after the ſhape of Chriſt, an other ſtriking of a mās head, & an other ſitting vpon a Camell was deſtroied of a lyon. There apeared alſo .ij. maidens, the one of thē playeng on a lute, with other like wonderfull fantaſies: whiche altogether (after my iudgement) may repreſent vnto vs the pore flock of Chriſt ſcatteredThe interpretacion o
                           •
                         the viſion. through out Germany & Duchlād, which is aſſaulted & perſecuted of many lyons, that ſhede much in nocēt bloud, & yet is alwaies preſerued & enlarged through the earneſt prayer of faithfull Chriſtians, according to the ſignificacion of the leſſer citie of thē both, which increaſſed & became larger & larger the more ſhe was aſſaulted of the lyons.
               
               
                  IN the yere of our lord. 1544. the EmperoureThe councel of 
                           •
                        p
                           •
                        re. Charles came againe into Germany, & helo
                        •
                      a councell at Spier, as it was apointed at Nurrenburg the yere before: but what was there done & concluded, may all men perceiue by the breakyng vp of the ſame councell. In the meane ſeaſon dyed y• right & peaceable prince Lodowike Palatine by y• Rene, electour imperial &c. who as touchīg his peaceable behaueours, might be called the father of the

Empire: For the celebration of whoſe buriall themperour & the kyng went to Heidelbergh. And after this was the election by the Rene graunted by the
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      Emperours mai. to duke Frederike palati
                        •
                     e, which had the daughter of Chriſtierne king of Dēmark, & had hitherto kept his court at Newemarke. This 
                        •
                     andable prince after y• he had aſpired to this digni
                     
                        •••
                     , endeuoured himſelfe to y• vtermoſt of his power to ſolowe the ſteppes of his brother of laudable memory. Almighty God vouchſaue of his grace to preſerue & increaſe hym & all lyke peaceable princes to the welfare of the chriſten common welth.
                  While this paſſed about the Rene, themperoure
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      cauſed his capitaines to take vp a great multitude of mē in the cōtreis of Germany, Burgūdy, & Spaine, a ſent firſt. 7600. Germayns. 4800. Spanyardes. 12800. Italians, with. 1500. horſes of whō was chief capitain markes de quaſſ
                        •
                      to inuaded the Frenche kyng through Piemont. And where the ſaid army came within a duche myle of Carniol (for ſo it is called of the warriours) they were aſſaulted of the kynges hoſte, whiche was but litell ſtronger then themperours hoſte. Wherfore they brought themſelues bothe at once in battellraye, & ſtode on two hilles, whence the one might well beholde the other, & betwene them beneth was a depe muddy valley, with dyches full of foul water. Nowe when neither part would geue ouer his holde, & auēture through the mudde, & the dyches, there was many a ſhot made betwene them, vntyll at the laſt the ſaid Markes put furward the Spanyardes, promiſing them comfortably to aſſiſte them, with the Italians and with the horſemen, inſomuch that they attempted

with their armures and artillery to wade thorough the mudde and myre againſt their enemies, whereupon the ſayde enemies ſtoode ſtyll vntyll they ſawe the Emperours hooſte troubled and peſtered in the myre, in ſuche ſorte as they could kepe none ordre, for euery man had ynough to do to ſaue hymſelfe out of the mudde. Then went theyWith their ordinaunce. downe eaſely with their ordinaunce & fell vpon thē that were entangled, & toke certaine horſemē whiche had brokē the aray that was made agayn. And vpon this they ruſſhed among them without violence. Nowe when the Duchemen and the Spanyardes truſted that theyr ſuperiours woulde ſuccour them wyth the Italians and the horſmen, the ſayde bolde and ſtoute champion turned hys backe with them and fled, ſufferyng theſayde poore men to peryſh without any ſuccour. So that in this battayll were ſlayne about .viij. M. Dutchemen and Spanyardes, among whom were many olde & expert warriours, and .ij. M. of them were taken pryſoners,The kyndnes of Switchers. whiche were well intreated of the Swychers, as pryſoners, & by them cōducted out of the kynges dominions, vntill they came within a littell dayes yourney of Geneue. And if the Swychers had not ſhewed them ſuche kyndnes they had bene all kylled of the Frenchemen, beſides that they were ſo taken & ſpoyled of all thinges euen to their ſhertes. Wherfore they be herein muche bounde to thanke the Swytchers. After this, when the conuocatiō or counſaill was cōcluded at Spyers, &A counſe
                           •
                        
                        lour o
                           •
                         Nurrenburgh taken. euery prince departed homeward to his owne, ſyr Ierome Bomegardener, a learned mā y• feared god being ſent to the ſaid coūſail frō the towne of Nurrē
                     
myght haue ouercome & ſubdued all Fraunce with out any notable loſſe of his men. For the warriours of the Frenche kyng were become ſo faintharted yt they durſt in no place reſiſt their enemies. To the which act themperour might haue ben greatly aduaunced, by the meanes that the kyng of Englande ſaye alſo in Fraunce with a great power. Howbeit through great intreataunce & mediation of ye chiefe lordes of the parliamen at Paris, & the duke of Orleans, the kinges ſonne, who did ſpecially fauoure ye Emperour, the matter was brought to a ſtaye, but on what cōdicion I haue no certaintie of knowledge as yet, for ſomuch as ſome ſay one thing & ſome another. Wherfore I wil rather write nothing, thē I ſhuld therof affirme any thing vncertaine.
                  In this yere chaunced foure horrible Eclpſes or
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      darkenings. The firſt of the Moone. the .x. daye of Ianuary about .vi. of the clock in ye morning, which laſted .iii. houres & .xxviii. minutes, & the Moone was hidden .xii. pointes, & .xlvi. minutes. The ſecond of the Sūne the .xxiiii. day of Ianuary, about ix. of the clock before noone, laſting .ii. houres, & .vi. minutes▪ & the Sūne was darkened about .xi. pointes & .xvii. minutes, & when this darkenes was at the hieſt, it was ſo darke euerywhere, as it is cōmonly at night whē the Sunne is newely ſet, inſomuch that all fowles & cattaile whiche were mery before, became ſtill & ſad, as though they had mourned & had compaſſion with the Sunne being darkened. The third Eclipſe was of the Moone, the .xiiii. day of Iuly about half an houre after eight, whiche laſted .iii. houres & .xlii. minutes, & the Moone was darkened▪ xvii▪ pointes and .xxv. minutes.
                  
                     The fourth was of the Moone the .xxix. day of december in the morning about half an houre befor ſeuen, & laſted .iii. houres & .xxxvi. minutes, the mone being depriued of her light by the ſhadowe of ye earth about .xiiii. pointes and .xviii. minutes.
                  But what effecte and operation the ſayde Eclipſes and darkenynges brought with them, maye euery wyſe man partely perceyue by the contentes of the Story of the yere next folowyng, and partely by the dayly diſcourſe, and exercyſe bothe of magiſtrates and of ſubiectes. For without ſpecial alteration of earthely creatures, ſuche conſtellacions are not wont to paſſe, as experience doth ſufficiently teache and declare.
                  This yere henry the eight, king of England ſentScotland 
                           ••
                        
                        uaded by 
                           ••
                        
                        g
                           ••
                        thmen. an armye into Scotlande in the moneth of May, whiche landed at Lyth in Scotlande, and ſo went burnyng and deſtroyeng the countrey about, ſparyng nether caſtel, towne, pyle nor vyllage, vntyll they had ouerthrowen and deſtroyed many of thē, as the borough and towne of Edenborough with the Abbey called Holy Rodehouſe, and the kynges Palice adioyned to the ſame. The towne of Lyth alſo with the hauen and peyre. The caſtell and vyllage of Cragmyller, the Abbay of Newbottell, and parte of Muſkelborowe towne, the Chappel of our lady of Lawret. Preſton towne, and the caſtell Harintowne wyth the Freres and Nunery, and caſtell of Oliuer Sancklers, the towne of Dunbar, Laureſtone wyth the Graunge, with many other townes caſtels, vyllages and pyles.
                  
                     Alſo this yere theſayd kynges maieſtie prepared an army into Fraunce, & thither he went his owne perſonBullyn beſeged & beſeged the ſtrōg towne of Bullen in Fraunce, and there wanne the watch toure otherwyſe called the olde man the .xxviij. day of Iuly. And the .xxix. day of the ſame moneth Baſſe Bullyn was wonne.
                  the .xiij. day of September the towne of hygh
                        
                           〈…〉
                        . Bullyn was victoriouſly cōquered by the ſaid kyng of England, whiche after the entreaty & humble peticion made of the French men gaue them licence to take bag & bagage with them & ſo departe.
                  the .xiiij. day of Septēber at .iii. of the clocke at
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      after none, ye towne gate was opened, & the people began to come out, & they helde on vntill .vij. of the clocke at night. And there were in nombre of men, women & children. iii
                        •
                     . M. & of them .xv. C. able mē of warre, & they had with them as muche as they could cary, both men women & children, that was able to beare any thing: and their horſes & kine were loded with as much ſtuffe as they could beare away And they had .lxxv. wagens laden with them.
               
               
                  IN the yere of our lord. 1545. was another coū
                     cell
                        
                           〈…〉
                        . kept at Wormes, where many thinges were diſcuſſed & entreated, as the breakyng vp of the ſame publyſhed maketh mencion. There was alſo cōcluded as touching matters of religion, that a cōmunication & diſputacion ſhuld be kept at Rainſburgh the next yere, whereunto ye eſtates of the Goſpel, or Euangelical princes ſhoulde appointe. vii
                        •
                     . learned men on their partie, and likewiſe the Papiſtes eyght men on theyr ſyde, whoſe mutuall agreementes and concluſyons ſhoulde bee

propounded and declared vnto the Emperoure: That afterwarde he might cōſulte vpon ſuche thinges as ſhuld ſeme to make for an vnitie & concorde.
                  Whyle theſe and ſuche other matters were debated and determined at Wormes, in the preſence of the Emperoure and the kyng of the Romaines, the ryght high and myghty Prince, and lorde FrederikeThe Palatine a fauorer of Goddes worde. Palatine and Electour Imperiall by the Rene, cōſideryng & pondring the neceſſitie of his princely graces poore ſubiectes, wherein they lay miſerably captiuated and clogged vnder the yoke of that wicked and deteſtable Papacy: and how many ſoules might be loſt and brought to dampnacion or euer ſuch vnitie as ſhould be made at Raynſburgh could be brought to paſſe: And alſo howe many conſultacions and diſputacions had bene kept before this tyme, wherein alwaies the papiſticall ſecte had bene conuinced and ouercome▪ and yet neuertheles had alwayes perſiſted in their Idolatry, and defended it the longer the more violently, whereby it myght be eaſely perceiued and concluded, what hope of amendement or agreement there was to be loked for: He determined and cōcluded with hymſelfe furth with to forſake all popyſh abhomination, and not to tarye the yſſue or ende of the ſayde conuocacion and diſputacion, but in aſmuche as thorough the grace and mercy of God he had obtained knowledgePopery pa
                           ••
                         downe & the Goſpel preached in the palatines iuriſdiction. of the truthe and lyght of the Goſpell, to canſe the ſame without delay to be miniſtred and declared to his poore ſubiectes. Wherefore he ordeyned and conſtituted in all his iuriſdictions, that the Popiſh abhominacion ſhould be put downe, and that in

ſtede of the ſame the Goſpell of Chriſt ſhould be frely preached, that his pore cōmons might be taught and brought into the right and true way of ſaluacion. Our Lorde and ſauiour Ieſus Chriſte preſer
                     
                        •
                     e hym and all the fauourers of his worde to procede and go forwarde in the ſettyng furth of hys wyll to the glory of his bleſſed name. Amen.
                  This yere alſo died the doughter of kyng Ferdinando,
                        
                           〈…〉
                        g 
                           〈…〉
                         Poles 
                           〈◊〉
                        . whiche was maried to Sigiſmunde the younge king of Pooles, whiche was no ſmall grefe to the kyng her father. But of what death ſhe dyed I could neuer heare no certayntie as yet, only this is manifeſt that ſhe was not very well entertayned of the kyng her huſbande, although it was a ſynguler grefe to the olde kyng his father.
                  When the Emperour (the conuocation at Wormes
                        
                           〈…〉
                        p 
                           〈…〉
                        o 
                           〈◊〉
                        . beyng expired) came downe into the lower partes of Duchlande, he proued the good byſhop of Collyn diuers maner of wayes, yf he myght by any meanes haue cauſed hym to forſake and renoū
                     ce the Goſpell, and haue brought hym agayn to the obedience of the Pope. But the good chriſtē father remained vnmouable hitherto as a rock ſurely couched vpon Chriſt the true fundacion. God preſerue hym to the ende, & vouch ſaue alſo to illuminate the Emperours maieſtie, that he may knowe the truth and be deliuered from the ſnares of Antichriſt.
                  After this themperour toke in hand to make peace
                        
                           〈…〉
                        pro
                        
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        d and 
                           〈…〉
                        e. betwene the kyng of Englande and the Frenche kyng. For the king of Englande lay yet ſtrongly in campe againſt the Frenche kyng, but to what effect the ſaid matter was brought ſhall appeare in tyme conuenient.
                  
                     In the meane ſeaſon Henry of Brunſwike whichHenry duke of Brunſwike goeth about to recouer his land before thre yeres had bene expelled out of the land, gathered an hoſte of men, as preuely as he coulde. And when he had aſſembled a competent nombre of men in the biſhopriche of Werden, he marched with xv .C. horſes or more, and .viij. M. Laūceknightes towardes Rottenburgh into the byſhoprike of Breme, truſtyng there to obtaine the byſhoppes greate ordinaunce. But when they of the citie of Breme had knowledge of his cōming they ſent a certayne nōbre of ſouldiours for the defence of Rottēburgh, which hindred the duke of brūſwike of his purpoſe. When he perceiued that his enterpriſe toke no better ſucceſſe, he went with all his power into the lād of Lunēbourgh, where he dyd ſore endamage the poore people, and ſo proceded to recouer his lande from whence he was expelled. Firſt he recouered Stonebridge, which yelded vnto him without any great nede. From thence he toke his way towards Wolueſbutell, & in his going he wrought much wo to the citie of Brunſwike roauing and burnyng in her ſuburbes, villages land markes & inriſdictions, wherupon he wrote to diuers townes, to make an agrement with him: he did alſo require money of one of Electours, & of certain byſhops, attempting partely as it were by threatenings & minaces to cō
                     pell thē to do hym this pleaſure. And while the dukeThe 
                           •
                        ount
                           •
                         of Deckelenbourgh inu
                           •
                        
                        ded for the Golpell. raged thus about Brūſwike, his miniſters Otho counte of Rithberg, Alhard of Hoord with other brought at their Lordes commaundemēt, into the Countie of Deckelenburg about .viij. C. ſome ſaye M. horſes, & about .iii. M. launceknightes which inuaded the ſaid counte in his dominions, becauſe he fauoured the Goſpel,

troublyng and ſpoylyng the poore people with burnyng and raunſaking to piteouſly. After this the ſayd hoſte marched towardes the water called the Weſer, where they endamaged certayne gentelmē and fermers of the Lādgraue: And after that they had conſtrained a certayne officer belonging to the Byſhop of Minſter and of Minden, whiche dwelled in the place vpon the hyll, to diſburſe vnto them a certayn ſumme of money, they departed from thē
                     ce to Duke Henry before Wolueſbutell. In the meane ſeaſon had the ſaid Duke Henry cauſed the countrey
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           ••
                        ll beſeged. to receiue hym agayne as their Lorde, with due ſolempnities according to the cuſtome and maner in that behalfe done accordingly, the towne of Shennigen whiche was garnyſſhed wyth ſouldiours by the confederates of Smalcalde onely except. After this he beſeged the towne of Wolueſbutell with both the ſayde armyes, and cauſed the water to be conuayed out of the diche that compaſſeth the Caſtell, whiche lytell preuayled hym. For they that kept the Caſtell defended them ſelues manfully, and with ſkyrmyſſhing and ſhutyng they vexed and harmed their enemies very ſore, ſtoppyng alſo and fyllyng the diches and ſluſes, whiche their aduerſary had digged to let out the water. Beſydes this God ſent a rayne whereby their for ſaide dyche was ſoone fylled with water againe.
                  Whyle nowe Duke Henry was troubled in hisPhilip Landgraue of Heſſen Capitaine of the Euangelicall confederation. affaires, Philip Lādgraue of Heſſen as a Capitain of the Euangelicall confederacion eſtablyſhed at Smalcalde, prepared hymſelfe, hauyng alſo men ſent hym from the Electour of Saxō, whoſe Capitayne

was Duke Erneſt of Brunſwike, Duke Philippes Sonne, and alſo from all the Eſtates of the ſayde confederacion. To hym came alſo duke MauriceDuke Maurice of Saxō. of Saxon with a 1000 horſes, &. 4000. &. 500. laūceknightes, & a competent tyre of ordinaūce, at hys owne charges to helpe the ſayde Electour and the Landgraue. When the ſayde Landgraue therfore had a competent nombre of warriours in a readynes, he went furth and pytched hys Campe by the towne of Northeim, where bothe the aboue named princes came vnto hym. But when the ſayde Duke of Brunſwyke had knowledge of thys commyng of the Landgraue, he lefte Wolueſbutell and went to mete the Landgraue, pitching hys Campe beſydes Bierbergh, in a vyllage called Calfelde, a good duche myle from the Landgraues Campe. And on Saturdaye the .xvij. daye of October, certayne horſemen wyth certayne launceknyghtes of the Brunſwykers ſhewed them ſelues vpon the hil of Northeim, and ſchirmyſſhed with the Landgraues men, whiche were ſoone repelled with the ſmal ordinaunce, and turned backe agayne to their Campe.Duke Maurice ſeketh 
                           •
                        
                        ▪ meanes to make a peace. In the meane ſeaſon Duke Maurice at the requeſt of Marquis Iohn, who had a daughter of Brunſwyke to wyfe, and of certayne other Princecely perſons ſought meanes to make a peace and agreemēt betwene the Duke of Brunſwyke and the Landgraue. But whyle the Landgraue durſt conclude nothyng wythout the counſayll and conſent of the other confederates, the matter was delayed. vpon this the ſonday next folowyng whyche was the .xviij. daye of October, Duke Henry brake vp

with his army to take and recouer a certayne hyll, and a Cloyſter, from whence he myght haue done notable hurt to the Landgraue with his ordinaunce. But when the Landgraue perceyued this, he cauſed that hole to be ſtopped. For the thre princes with all their power (except a ſmall quantitie of horſemen and a certaine nombre of launce knyghtes whiche were left in the Campe to kepe the ordinaū
                     ce) toke in the ſayde hyll before hym. In ſo muche that there was muche ſhutyng on both parties, in whiche conflycte many good men and horſes were endamaged and hurted on both ſydes. And whyle this ſkyrmyſhing and ſhutyng endured duke Maurice proceded (to auoyde muche ſheding of bloude if it were poſſible) to ſet a ſtay in the matter, by the whiche his earneſt labour he brought to paſſe, that
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      a truce was taken frō that ho
                        •
                     re vntyl the monday at nyght. In the meane whyle dyd Maurice cōmen wt the duke of Brunſwike howbeit there coulde no certainte be gottē at his hand, but he went without any reſpect of the ſaid truce, & cauſed his horſmen to
                        
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         by 
                           〈…〉
                        i 
                           〈◊〉
                        . ſpoyle and take. x
                        •
                     iij. wagens ſent for prouand
                        •
                     r with horſes and all their appurtenaunces belongyng to the Landgraue, whiche alſo kylled certain huſbandmen at the takyng of them. But the Landgraue and his men were quiete and peaceable vntyll the teweſday the .xx. daye of October within night. And then about midnight the watche worde was geuen that euery man ſhoulde be ready with his weapon, and ſo the hole hoſte, which after the common ſayeng of warriours contained an hū
                     dreth thouſand men (a great nōbre to be aſſembled

within the ſpace of one moneth) marched ouer a certain water called the Rume, which the Landgraue had cauſed to be furniſhed ouer with brydges accordingly. (For what Henry of Brunſwike had cauſed to be concluded and determined in the meane ſeaſon, was refuſed for diuers good cauſes) and early in the mornyng they came to an hill not farre from the Brunſwykers Campe by a landmarke, whiche the Landgraue cauſed haſtely to be dygged vp and caſt downe in many places, that he myght brynge thorough his armye without ſtoppe or let. For the Brunſwykers intended there to ſtoppe thē of their paſſage whome the Landgraue at the laſt was fayne to beate away with his ordinaunce. Nowe whē the armis of ye Landgraue & of the other were both brought through ye Lādmarkes vpō the plaine of ye hil, ther were alſo brought through into ye felde thre great ſlynges, & certain Canons, whiche, as ſone as the enemies were eſpied, were diſcharged & ſhot among the thickeſt of them. But as ſoone as the Brunſwykers ſawe this they dyd furthe withſeke meanes to flee and turned thē ſelues towardes an hyll lyeng by a wood, whome the horſemen folowed without delay. When duke Henry ſawe thys, that there was ſuche ſhuting towardes his hooſte, and that they were put to flyght▪ all his bolde courage was done, and his proude harte fainted, wherfore he ſent incontinently to Duke Maurice, deſyryng to impetrate ſome grace & fauour for hym at ye handes of the Landgraue. And although the Lād graue ſhewed hymſelfe gentyll & ready, yet would he not truſt hym (for he ſuſpected y• Duke Henry &

hys Sonne ſought wayes to eſcape) but marched ſtrayghtwayes wyth his hooſte and artyllery towardes hys enemies, and ſhot among them fearcely, vntyl ſuche tyme as Duke Henry and his ſunne
                        
                           〈…〉
                        . Charles victor thorough the Counſayll of Duke Maurice, yelded and ſubmitted them ſelues into the handes of the Landgraue. At whiche tyme the Landgraue made vnto Duke Henry this ſharpe oration. Yf thou myghteſt haue ſomuche power
                        
                           〈…〉
                        . ouer me, as I haue nowe ouer the, ſurely thou wouldeſt not ſaue my lyfe. But I wyll vſe my ſelfe better towardes the then thou haſt deſerued at my hande. Why haſt thou preſumed to diſobeythe Emperoures maieſtie, and to refuſe ſequeſ
                        •
                     racion? For if thou haddeſt obeyed, thou ſhouldeſt not haue brought thy ſelfe into thys trouble, neyther ſhould ſo many poore men haue bene endamaged, vndone and deſtroyed. And furth with he committed hym and hys Sonne to the kepynge of certayne of hys chyef gētylmen, which toke them both into their cuſtody. Whyle theſe thynges were a doyng betwene theſe two prynces, the Landgraues company both on horſeback and on fote preſſed in among the company of Duke Henry in ſuche ſort that but fewe of them ſhould haue bene left on lyue, yf Duke Maurice had not the ſooner aduertyſed the Landgraue thereof, who as then rode haſtely among them, and with much a do ſtylled and pacifyed hys men, and turned them backe from fyghtyngThe Landgraue 
                           〈…〉
                        qui
                        
                           •
                        eth an othe of duke Hen
                        
                           〈…〉
                         cōpany. and ſhutyng.
                  Nowe when the people was qualifyed and pacified the Landgraue called Duke Henryes company

before hym, and required thē to ſweare, that within the ſpace of thre moneths next enſuing they ſhould worke nor pretende nothyng agaynſt the Euangelicall confederation. Whiche ſome of them promyſed without delay, but the horſemen departed by heapes with opē banners without any othe or promyſe made: whom the Landgraue purſued in haſte, and ouertoke the next day, wherefore they attempted to make reſiſtaunce, but when they ſawe that they were ouermached, they layed downe their banners, and made an othe not to enterpryſe ought agaynſt the ſayde confederacion within the ſpace of ſyxe monethes. When this was done both the father and the ſonne of Brunſwyke was with a ſtrong garde caried to Caſſell, and the father from thence into the Caſtell of Zigenheim. After thys dyd the Landgraue take in agayne the lande of the ſayde Duke Henry, and cauſed thinhabitauntes ofThe lande of Brunſwike taken in againe and ſworne of newe to ye confederatiō
                      the ſame to ſweare agayne of newe to the confederation of the Goſpell, and conſequētly turned hym ſelfe agaynſt the Erles, Ihon of Shauenburgh, & Otto of Rithbergh whiche are both lonemen to the Landgraue, and yet had ſuccoured them of Brunſwyke with men, artillery, and other neceſſaryes, inſomuche that Iohn Erle of Shauenburgh wasThe Erle of Shauēburgh depoſed. depoſed from his ſtronghold Buckēbourgh, which was geuen to his brother and other of the ſtocke, to enioye, on this conditiō that they ſhould not ſuffre hym to come in agayne oneles he were before ſufficiently agreed with the ſayde confederation for all hys offences committed againſt them. But RitberghRithbergh geuen vp. was geuen vp to the Landgraue by the poſſeſſours

thereof. When all this was done, and by Goddes grace finyſſhed without greate bloudſhedyng, the warriours being honeſtly contented and payde, were licenſed to departe euery man home to his owne. All theſe actes haue I drawen and extracted out of the Copie of the Land graue, & therfore deſcribed them ſo muche the more at large while ſuche writynges, whiche are called newes are cō
                     monly ſoone dilated. Neuertheles conſideryng that thereby the common ſorte of people and our poſteritie may haue a ſhorte and ſure information and declaration of theſe marciall affayres, I truſte that no wyſe man will miſlyke this my labour and diligence.
                  About Migh
                        •
                     lmas dyed Albert Archebyſhop
                        
                           〈…〉
                        th of 
                           〈…〉
                        che 
                           〈…〉
                        of 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      of Mentz, whiche was Marquis of the Marke, brother to the olde Marquis Ioachim. In whoſe rowme was elected by the chapiter ſir Sebaſtiane of Houſenſtone, a Doctor of a notable ſtock, whoſe dwelling and manſion was betwene Aſchaburgh and Franckeforde.
                  Alſo not long after this Albert the ſonne of CaſimireThe Ruler of 
                           〈…〉
                        har
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        ed by ye Marquis of Brandenburgh lorde Marquis of Brandenburgh aſſaulted Onoldeſback which is cōmonly called Oneſback wt 600. horſes in the name of one of knobelſthorp who was the chefe amōg the rulers of the land, which ye lord Marquis George (deaceaſſed a littell before) had left to his young ſonne, whome he had by the daughter of Duke Henry, ſiſter to Duke Maurice of Saron, and requyred the ſame to be deliuered vnto hym. But the Ruler of Knobelſthorpe beyng warned of thys, gate hym out of the way. So that

theſayd Lord Marquis was fayne to departe not hauing his purpoſe.
                  In Hungary raged the Turke with roauyng &The fury o the Turke. ſpoylyng of the pore ſubiectes of Ferdinando, whō he put to muche loſſe and hynderaunce.
                  This yere alſo dyed the younge Duke of OrleansThe death of the Duke of Orleans. the Frenche kynges Sonne.
                  Of wondres and ſygnes happened this yere, one in eſpecial to be noted is come to my knowledge, whiche chaunced in the lande of Poles, and myght be ſene of all thinhabitauntes of the ſame on ſonday the .xxix. day of Marche which was on PalmeſondayWonderfull apparitions and viſions. about .viii. of the clocke in the mornyng. At what tyme there was heard ſuche a fearefull thonderclappe, that the hole lande trembled. After that, there apeared in the eaſt thre red croſſes, twoo of them aboue, and the third vnder them both. In the middes whereof apeared a man armed, with a fyry ſworde. agaynſt whom came a great multitude of warriours on horſeback and on fote, which fought with hym vntyll one of the clocke at after none, and were in fine ouercome of hym that they al peryſhed and vanyſhed awaye, he remaynynge alone in the fielde betwene the croſſes. Immediately after this came a terrible Dragon behynde the man, and deuoured hymwith the ſworde. When this viſiōwas paſt, the ſkye waxed all red and of a fyry coloure, whiche laſted about an houre, euen vntyll twoo of the clocke or there about, then aroſe there ſuche blacke cloudes vnder the ſkye, that it was as darke as though it had bene nyght, whiche continued ſo vntyll the next daye, the thyrty daye

of Marche in the mornyng about .ix. of the clocke. And then the ſkye wyth the day appeare dagayne. There appeared alſo thre goodly & well fauoured Raynebowes one aboue another whereon ſate an holy Aungell, whiche appeared by the ſpace of an houre and a half. And after this it was fayre wether for the ſpace of certayne dayes. Theſe thyngs were written out of the Lande of Pooles, and afterward ſet furth in printe openly, but the interpretacion thereof wyll I committe to the iudgement of other.
                  The reſt of the Sommer of this yere was very propice and warme, the frutes of the earthe were competent, and the wynes had good ſucceſſe and chaunced very good, ſo that they cauſed muche diſſentiō and debate, and alſo manſlaughter betwene ſuche as abuſed them.
                  This yere in the lande of Bullenois there camped in Iannuary on the Weſt ſyde of Bullyn beyōd the hauen an army of Frenchemen to the nombre of. 18000. & lay there the ſpace of .x. dayes, & the .vi. day of Febru. they were all put to flight by the erle of Harforde & the lorde Admirall, with a ſmall company of men and without any bloudſhedyng on the Englyſhe ſyde, but diuers of the other were ſlayne, they left al their ordinaunce with bagge and baggage behynde them.
                  This yere about the .xx. day of Iuly the Frenchmē with a greate nauy of ſhyppes muaded the Ile of wight in England, where as they were driuen back and a great nomber ſlayne.
                  In the yere of our Lorde. 1546. euen in the beginning

of the yere was a conuocation of the EuangelicallA conuocatiō at Franke forth. confederation kept at Francke ſorde on the mayne, & the diſputacion to be kept at Raynſburgh was alſo begonne. &c.
                  This yere was doctor Martyn Luter and doctorThe death of Ma
                           •
                        ten Luter. Iuſtus Ionas called too Iſleven of the Erle of Manſfelde, to caſte of and accorde certayne debates and diſſentions that were happened betwene them. Where doctor Martyn Luter was ouercome with the olde impedimentes and diſeaſes of his body, whiche renewed vpon hym whereby he felt and perceiued his ende to be at hande. Wherfore he called hartely vpon the name of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, and with open confeſſion commended his ſoule into the handes of God oure heauenly father. In ſo muche that the eighten daye of February he departed out of this miſerable worlde into the handes of God with Chriſt whome he had boldely confeſſed before the worlde all moſte thyrty yeares aſwell by his paynfull preachyng and teachyng as by continuall wrytyng.
                  Hys body was at the commaundement of the Princely Electour caried from Iſleven, by the Erle of Manſfelde accompanied with fyfty horſes to Wittenburgh, and of all eſtates of the Princely Electours Court bothe of high and lowe degrees, &The buriall of doctor Martine Luter. of the vniuerſitie of the citie he was ſorowfully but yet honorably brought into the Caſtell, and reuerently buried beſydes the burials of the Electours of Saxon the .xxii. day of February. the .lxij. yere of his age.
                  This man ſo highly endued with knowledge

from God, was apointed and ordeined of our heauenly father to be a miniſter and teacher of his churche and a preacher of his Goſpell, euen as in al ages he hath raiſed and ordeined ſome to be Prophetes, ſome to be Apoſtles, and ſome to be teachers of hys congregacion. For he opened and declared vnto the worlde (by Gods grace) the neceſſary and holſome doctrine of the Goſpell, and taught the true repentaunce and comfort of the harte, whiche is feared with the knowledge of Goddes wrath. He hath godly ſet furth the doctrine of Paule, whiche ſaith: That a man is iuſtified and made ryghteous by the faith in Chriſte. He hath alſo declared the difference betwene the Lawe and the Goſpel, betwene the rightouſnes of y• ſpirite, & of the outward workes. He brought to light agayne the true worſhypping of God, whiche had bene vnknowen to the mooſt parte of the worlde by the ſpace of a thouſand yeres. And brought the vniuerſall Church from that fonde opinion, whiche imagineth, that God is worſhypped although y• minde of man being ſuppreſſed with perpetual doubting, abhorreth to come to god
                  He taught alſo howe we ought to pray in faith & with a good concience, and ledevs to the only mediatour Chriſt the ſonne of God▪ whiche ſytteth at the right hand of the father euerlaſtyng, and maketh interceſſion for vs: And not to the ſoules of dead men as the vngodly Papiſtes haue taught with fyre and fagot. He declared alſo what good workes were acceptable to God. He hath ſo garniſſhed and eſtablyſhed the temporal lawes and gouernaūce, that ſence the Apoſtles tyme it was neuer ſo confirmed by Scriptures. He dyd alſo abolyſh the

chyldyſh cuſtome and ceremonies of mans tradicion, whiche hyndered true prayer, and ſeperated them from the neceſſary workes. To thyntent alſo that the heauenly doctrine ſhould extende to hys poſteritie, and that the people whiche ſhall come after myght haue knowledge, he tranſlated the Propheticall and Apoſtolicall Scriptures into Dutch with ſuche lyght and clarite, that the reder maye haue more knowledge thereby, then by ſome mens expoſitions.
                  He made alſo many expoſitions, whiche do farre excell many other, as Eraſmus of Roterdame witneſſeth in his writynges. And as it is writen of them whiche repayred Ieruſalem, that they buylded wyth one hande and helde the ſwoorde in the other: Euen ſo warred Doctor Martine Luter with the enemies of the true doctrine and buylded neuertheles the heauenly doctrine. Beſydes thys he dyd helpe many mens conciences, with good coū
                     ſayll. And whyleſt a greate parte of his doctrine is aboue mans reaſon, (as the doctrine of remiſſion of ſynnes, and of faith) it muſt nedes be graunted that he was taught of God. In prayer for the vniuerſall Churche of Chriſte was he very earneſt and dilygent. He dyd alſo eueryday choſe a certaine houre to recite certayne Pſalmes, wherin alſo he mixed his prayer with great deuotion. He taught alſo that it is not ynough to praye only with the minde and with ſighing, but that the maner & fourme of prayeng is preſcribed vnto vs by the Counſaill of God, that the hartes by the reding may be ſtirred, and moued, yea that the voyce alſo may knowledge

and confeſſe what God we worſhyppe.
                  He was alſo in the aſſault and reſiſtaūce of the enemies of Gods truthe of a conſtant mynde and of a bolde courage, neyther was he abaſſhed for their threatenynges. He was alſo in difycult matters of a ſharpe and hygh wytte, and well ſpoken, as his famous do ſufficiently declare.
                  For aſmuche therefore as this man was garnyſhed with ſuche a great witte and other godly vertues, and was ſpecially ordeyned of God to repayre his temple agayn, wherin he hath not bene negligent, we ought not to ſuffre his vertues and benefites to peryſhe among vs, and whyleſt he was an inſtrument of God, we ought gladly to folowe hys Doctrine, and therein to learne the vertues neceſſary for vs, as the feare of God, fayth and feruentnes in prayer, diligence in the office of the worde, Chaſtite, abſtinence and abhorryng from ſedition or tumulte, diligence and deſyrous to ſtudy. &c. whiche God graunt vnto vs all. Amen.
                  In the moneth of Marche anone after that the conuocatiō at Rayneſburgh was ended, there was an horrible act committed at Neweburgh beſides the Danube, in the iuriſdiction of the Palatine, betwene two brethren being Spanyardes, of whom the one was called Iohn Diaſy, well learned in the Lar
                        •
                     e, Greke and Hebrue tonges, a man that feared God, and loued the ſincere doctrine of Chriſte and his holy Goſpell, and was at that ſeaſon ſent from Rayneſbourgh by the Dyſputers of the Goſpell, wyth whome he had greate acquayntaunce,

towards Newburgh, to correcte and fynyſhe certayne bookes to be imprinted.
                  But when his brother Alphonſe Diaſy, a DoctourAlphonſe dia ſi a trayterousmurther of the lawe and at Rome in hygh office, a ſeruaunt of the Pope, and an enemy to the Goſpell of Chriſte, was come from Rome to Rayneſburgh, & there had knowledge, that hys brother Iohn was at Newburgh, he haſted hym ſelfe thyther with all ſpede, to ſee his brother, where he attempted in certayne dayes with many diſputacions to drawe and turne hys brother from the pure doctrine of the Goſpell to the wicked doctrine of the Pope wyth many checkes.
                  
                  
                     But Iohn remayned conſtaunt in the doctrine whiche he had learned and ſearched to the bottom, and inſtructed his brother wyth inuincible argumē
                        tes and teſtymonyes of the doctrine out of the Prophetes and Apoſtles, in all the Articles of the Chriſten fayth, endeuouryng hym ſelfe wyth all diligēce to conuerte hys brother to the ſincere doctrine of Chriſte.
                  
                  
                     When Alphonſe ſawe the conſtauncy and perſeueraunce of hys brother, and that he could not reſiſt nor confute his doctrine, nor yet bryng hym to the Popes way, he diſſembled & behaued hym ſelfe as thoug he had gladly and earneſtly embraced the Euangelicall doctrine, and gentely ſuffered hys brothers charitable and Godly inſtructions and exhortacions, abiding wyth hym almoſte thre dayes. In ſo muche that he ſayd vnto hym: whyle he ſawe and perceiued that hys doctrine of the Goſpel was the very ſounde and true doctrine of God, and

knewe that there were many honeſt men at Rome, and alſo in other cities and townes of thoſe parties whiche were very dyſyrous to be inſtructed in the true and ſincere doctrine of Chriſt ſo that they lacked nothyng but men of good learnyng, that were expert in ſettyng forth of the ſame doctrine accordyngly: wherfore he beſought hym of Brotherly loue, to goo with hym to Rome, where he myght by his godly doctrine do muche good, and a dede acceptable to Chriſte.
                  
                  
                     But what happened? This good mā Iohn Diaſy, being ſymple and ſuſpecting no gyle, ſuffered his brothers perſwaſion to take place, & graunted hym his requeſt, howbeit he wrote back vnto the Diſputers and Auditours of the Euangelicall doctrine, deſyrynge to haue their counſayll in this matter: who perceyuyng the crafte and papiſticall murderyſh harte of his brother, gaue hym counſayl not to go to Rome with his brother.
                  
                  
                     Nowe when Iohn Diaſius folewed their counſayll, and gaue hys brother an aunſwere that he could not at that tyme go with hym to Rome, the ſayde Alphonſe behaued himſelfe frendely towardes hym, and gaue hym certayne crownes and ducates for his farewell, takyng hys leaue and departure of his brother very louyngly and frendely, as though he would haue gone ſtrayghtwaye towardes Rome.
                  
                  But within fewe dayes after, he came to Newe burgh agayne from Auſburgh, where he had prepared good poſt horſes to be in a readynes to flee

when he ſhould ſe cauſe. And when he came to the ſayde towne of Newburgh early in the mornyng at the openyng of the gates, he taryed hymſelfe before the gate with the horſes, and ſent his ſeruaunt (beyng a murtherer, whome he had hyred at Rome for ſuche affayres, and brought hym forth with hym) into the towne with a lettre, who whan he came to the ſayde Iohn, delyuered hym the ſayde lettre, and whyle he red the ſame, the MurthererThe good doctor Iohn Diaſy murthered. ſmote hym with a greate ſharpe halbarde and cleft his hed in twayne, that he fell downe dead, but the Murtherer ranne out of the towne, to hys Maiſter, ſo that both the Murtherers gate themſelues awaye.
                  
                     Whan thys horrible acte was knowen in the towne, ſouldiours were prepared and appoynted out of hande to purſue them, whyche at laſt caught and apprehended bothe the ſayde Murtherers at Iſebredge, where they were brought to pryſon.
                  
                  
                     And although there was muche ſuet made to the Iudges ordeyned and appointed by kyng Ferdinando and the officers there, for due puniſhment, by the ſubiectes of the Palatine, whiche had ſpent about the ſame aboue foure hundreth guidens, yet coulde they obtayne no iuſtice agaynſt the ſayde Murtherers. But manye exceptions were made and propounded, namely that whyle the Brother was a Spanyarde, the matter ought not too bee pleated in Dutche language,

but in Spanyſh, and before Spanyſhe Iudges. Yea when the Emperoure came to Rayneſburgh he was alſo moſte humbly deſyred and beſought to ſe iuſtice miniſtred concernyng the ſayde matter. But anſwere was made, that whyle the offenders were taken within the Iuriſdiction of the kynges maieſtie the Emperours maieſtie had nothyng to do with the matter.
                  
                  
                     But in concluſion thys was the laſt ſentence & Iudgement geuen, that for ſo muche as the ſayde Iohn was an heretike, he had deſerued death: And forſomuche as his brother Alphonſus was conſecrated, and a ſpirituall perſone, the temporall lawe had nothyng to do wyth hym, wherfore they were letten go free, and ſet at libertie.
                  
                  
                     This horryble murther of Cayn was doubteles a forgaine of the deteſtable warres whiche the Pope & hys Churche of Cayn hath moued againſt Abell and the fauorers & teachers of the holy Goſpell in Germany, where ſo muche innocent & Chriſten bloude hath beneſhed, all the whiche thynges the Lorde God wyll punyſh in tyme conuenient, ſeyng there is no more iudgement in earth.The Emp
                        
                           〈…〉
                         com
                        
                           〈…〉
                         Rai
                        
                           〈…〉
                        ſburgh.
                  
                  In the moneth of Aprill came the Emperoures maieſtie to Rayneſburgh on Saturday after mydlent Sonday: where he founde but fewe princes of the Empyre, beſydes a ſmall nombre of certaine byſhoppes.
                  Conſequentely after Eaſter when certayn princes,The 
                           〈…〉
                        ion beg
                           〈…〉
                         at Rainſburgh. and Ambaſſadours, or Legates of other were come thither, the conuocation was begonne, and the propoſitions were of the agreement of the Articles

in controuerſy in religion, of the ordre and eſtablyſhment of the chamber court and of the Coyne, Item howe the Turke myght be reſiſted.
                  But in the meane ſeaſon, when there was great prouiſion and preparation made to take vp men &The begynnyng of the emperours warres agaynſt the Germanes. warriours in the name of themperours Maieſtie thoroughout all Duchelande, the Electours princes and eſtates of the confeſſion of Auſbourgh deſyred moſte humbly at Whitſontyde to knowe of the Emperours Maieſtie, againſt whome ſuche preparation of warre was intended, whereupon they receiued this darke aunſwere, that the Emperoures Maieſtie woulde puniſhe certayne rebelles of the Empire.
                  
                  
                     After this darke aunſwere when many thyngs were feared, and the ſayde warriours were in a redynes, the conuocacion toke an ende, and another was inſtituted and appointed againſt the next yere to begynne the fyrſt day of February.
                  
                  
                     Foraſmuche therfore as Duke Iohn Frederike Electour in Saxon, and Lorde Phylyppe Landgraue of Heſſen with the other Princes, Lordes, eſtates and townes of the confeſſion and confederation of Auſburgh perceiued that the ſaide great preparacion of warres was enterpriſed and intended againſt no man, but againſt them, they prepared alſo an hoſte of men for their neceſſary defence, for the mayntenaunce and preſeruacion of the pure and ſincere doctrine of the Goſpell, for the defence alſo of their Landes, dominions and ſubiectes, and for the continuacion of the liberties and priuiledges of the Germaine nacion, and went furth in the moneth of Iune

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈3 pages missing〉
                        ouerthrowen and deſtroyed.
                  
                  Fyftely, the Poſtmayſters houſe, where themperour was wont to haue hys poſthorſes, when he had nede of them, wyth the ſtables and the horſes in the ſame at that tyme, was quyte ſtryken awaye by the thonder, and burned vp.
                  
                  
                     Syxtely, Saynt Barnardes place, wherin the Abbot of S. Barnarde had hys lodgyng when he came to Meghlyne, was vtterly deſtroyed by the thonder, and the cloyſter of the Auguſtyne freers was a great parte ouerthrowen and deſtroyed.
                  
                  
                     Seuently, The Voogſtrete, which was a fayre large ſtrete was alſo in lyke maner ouerthrowen, that there remayned neuer a houſe ſtandyng, nor yet, as they ſayd, block nor ſtone.
                  
                  
                     Eightely, The Palace of Hyghſtrete, whyche was an excedyng fayre and ſtrong buyldynge, belongyng to a certayn great lorde, was quyte and clene ouerthrowen and deſtroyed: And as the inhabitauntes of the ſayd towne of Meghlyne do affyrme, yf the ſayd Palayce of Hyghſtrete wyth other places and greate buyldynges had not bene there ſtandynd, The hole towne of Meghlyn muſt nedes haue ben vtterly ouerthrowen and deſtroyed, ſo that nether houſe, ſtycke nor ſtone ſhuld haue remayned in the ſame: For the ſayd hygh and ſtrong buyldynges were a greate defence to the towne: Beſydes thys there were alſo other places and great buyldinges, whoſe names (to auoyd prolyxite) are not here rehearſed, whych were in lyke maner ouerthrowen & deſtroyed of the thonder as the other together with ſeuen hundred houſes.
                     
Inſumme, almooſt all the houſes of the towne were endamaged, fewe or none excepte that hadde not ſome hurte done by the thonder.
                  
                     Nyntly, the nexte daye after, when the ſayde piteous calamite was done, whiche was the. 8. day of Auguſt, when they beganne to make rowme, there were founde about thre hundred perſons men, women, and children which were ſlaine by the meanes of the thondre, whome they loded in wagens & cartes and buryed them in great holes that were digged for the ſame purpoſe. There were alſo founde aboue, 150. perſons ſore wounded and harmed.
                  
                  
                     And there happened one thing in the ſayd toune ſpecyally to be meruayled at, which is, that certayn geſtes ſate in theyr hoſtes hous drynkynge to gether and plaieng at the cardes, and while they called for drynke, and theyr hoſteſſe went doune into the ſeller to drawe them a pot of byre, in the meane ſeaſon was the houſe ſtryken awaye by the thonder, and the players found dead wyth the cardes in theyr handes, as though they had ben ſtyll playeng, but the hoſteſſe ſaued her lyfe by the meanes, y• ſhe was in the ſeller whan the ſayd hurt was done.
                  
                  
                     Tenthly, There was alſo a man founde in a corner the thyrd daye after that the ſayde hurte was done, hauyng no harme whych aſked whether the world were yet ſtandyng or not.
                  
                  
                     There was alſo a woman founde dead, beynge great wyth chylde, whych was afterwarde cut opē and the chylde taken out of her belly, was baptiſed
                  
                  
                     Muche harme was there done beſydes, not onely within the towne of Meghline, but alſo without

the towne, as in the townes, villages, caſtels, and boroughes lyeng there about, where theſaide wether hath done much harme, and there were many, innumerable, fearfull and wonderful ſygnes and to kens ſene, ſo that bothe the Emperoure and the lady Mary had nede to remembre them ſelues, for it is to be feared that God will beginne to reuenge the innocent bloude, whiche is very piteouſly ſhed in the lower partes of Duchelande, for the Goſpels ſake, for it crieth into heauen and ſo fylleth the boſo me of Gods high mateſtie that he can ſuffre it no lō
                        ger, yea he wyll laye on yet greater loades, oneles they repente and amende in tyme, for he hath ſuffered them long ynough.
                  
                  
                     When this warre betwene themperour, & the electour of Saxon, & the Landgraue of Heſſen had continued into the firſt moneth, & themperour had declared hymſelf an open enemy both to the forſaid princes, onely of his owne mynde, without either right, reaſon, or warnyng, and without the knowledge & conſent of the eſtates & membres of thempire:Duke Maurice prepareth 
                           〈…〉
                         to 
                           〈…〉
                        . In the meane ſeaſō did Maurice duke of Sax on with great feruentnes prepare a great nōbre of horſemen & pietons, wherefore al men ſtode in great feare, not knowing againſt whom he made the ſame preparation.
                  
                     And foraſmuche as the electour of Saxon was out of his lande, & duke Maurice was next of hys bloude, and his nere kiſman bothe on the fathers & the mothers ſyde, & was alſo by bym brought vp, & had receiued many benefites at his hand, many were of this hope & iudgemēt, that theſaid preparatiō
                        
was made for the defence & ſuccour of the landes & ſubiectes of the electour, ſo that fewe or none ſuſpected any gyle in duke Maurice.
                  
                  
                     In the meane ſeaſon did kyng Ferdinando alſo endenour hymſelfe to ſtirre vp the Luſenitianes & Bohemianes againſt the lande of the Electour of Saxon, but with honeſt & vertuous men coulde he litle preuayle, notwithſtāding by the meanes of his importunate labour and inſtaunt intreataūce he aſſembled a ſorte of Pietons in Boheme being in nō
                        bre about eyght thouſand men, & in Hungary aboue a thouſand huſbandmen, a wicked & raueniſh generation, to deſtory & waſte the landes & dominiōs of theſaid Electour, which mē did firſt inuade Voyt land, & there toke the townes vilages and liberties pertaining tothe Electour, piteouſly ſpoyling, roauingburning & deſtroieng many men young & olde.
                     A cruel murther. 
                     And ſpecially therwas an execrable madnes & murther cōmitted vpō an honeſt Curate & miniſter that feared God at Newechurche, whom when theſaid huſbād mē had moſtcruelly martyred & murthered and ſawe that he was fatte, they cut him in peces after the maner of a fatte Swyne, caſting the peces from one to another and ſayeng, Lo brother, there haſt thou a good roaſtyng pece of an hogge.
                  
                  
                     Of whiche innocent bloud are gilty all they that do helpe or conſent to the ſayde murtheryſhe and inteſtine warres, whereof doutles God wyll take vengeaunce in tyme conuenient.
                  
                  
                     Nowe when the matter as it was fyrſt begonne and purpoſed againſt the Electour & his dominiōs (for Duke Maurice had bene firſt with the kynge

in. Bohemy) toke effect, and apeared euidently as though the kyng woulde ouercome and take in, all the Landes and dominions of the Electour, Duke
                     Duke Maurice 
                           ••
                        gm
                        
                           ••••
                         to 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      
                     Maurice exalted hymſelfe with his army, and firſt toke the townes lyeng to warde the mountaynes, and then he went with theſayde Bohemians and huſband men to beſege the towne of Zwickowe.
                  
                  
                     But leaſt I be demed to ſtande to muche in myne owne conceite, and to take vpon me to Iudge other wiſe than it becometh me in this matter. I will ſet hereafter the true Copye of his lettres whereby he required and admonyſhed the towne of the Electour to yelde them ſelues vnto hym, by the cō
                     ſentes whereof men of honeſtie and vnderſtanding may eaſely perceyue what good grounde and ſure foundacion he pretended in theſe affaires.
                        
                           〈…〉
                         of 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                  
                  
                     By the grace of God we Maurice duke of Saxō Land graue of During, and Marquis of Myſſene, aduertyſe you our welbeloued and truſty counſayl and commons of Saron. &c. That foraſmuche as the myghty Prince our Coſyn Duke Iohn Frederike the Elder, hath ben founde negligent in doing of hys dutie and it is manifeſt that men are about to bryng you from the houſe of Saxon, into the power of ſtraungers, and we beyng a borne prince of Saxon hauing alſo parte in the lande wyth our for ſayd Coſyn, and be charged by earneſt commaundement of the Emperoures Maieſtie our moſte gracious lorde, for the auoydyng of greuous penalties and corrections, and alſo by the loſſe of our Regaltie and preeminēce, our ſeiues to take the ſame land in poſſeſſion, or elles to permitte and ſuffre other to

do the ſame, whereby oure owne Landes and dominions muſt nedes come in daunger and deſtruction. Wherfore we require you to ſutmitte your ſelues vnto vs as Prince of Saxon, and to receyue vs accordingly with due ſolempuiſation.
                  
                  
                     And we are prone & graciouſly inclined to deſen de you in the Chriſten religion wherein ye bee, and lyke mayer your bodyes, goodes and poſſeſſions, and to leaue you by youre olde liberties and priuiledges. And when the matter or controuerſy betwene the Emperoures Maieſtie, the Romyſhe kynges Maieſtie, and our forſayde Coſyn ſhall come to an agreement, we ſhalbe ready, as touchynge the landes whiche we ſhall haue taken in poſſeſſion of hys, by the knowledge and wyll of their Maieſties, and as muche as maye be done without their preiudice, thorough our owne dominions to be intreated & ordered accordyng to ryght and reaſon.
                  
                  
                     But yf ye ſhould refuſe ſo to do, it ſhould apeare vnto vs, as though ye would wylfully be put from the houſe of Saxon, whiche may not be ſuffered of vs. Wherefore we require herein your directe aunſwere by the bearer of the letter in haſt, whyle oure enemy is at hande, that we may auoyde the daunger. Geuen in our Towne of zwickowe the ſyxt daye of Nouēber. Anno a thouſand fyue hundreth fourty and ſyxe. Duke Maurice, of Saxon. Manu propria.
                  
                  
                     When zwickowe had yelded vnto him, the ſyxt day of Nouember, he toke alſo the townes lyeng there about, and conſequētly, Aldenbourgh, Ilenbourgh, Grymme, Torgawe. &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     the .xvi. day of Nouember duke Maurice ſent a Trompetter with two lettres, the one to the Deputie, and the other to the Communaltie of Witten bourgh directed, betwene thre & foure of the clocke at after none, before the Elue gate, but before the lettres were receyued, the ſuburbes were ſet on fyre whereby was ſygnifyed that they intended to ſtande to their defence.
                  
                  
                     The ſame daye dyd he alſo aduertiſe thinhabitauntes of Torgawe whiche lay in gareſon for the defence of Wittenburgh, that oneles they woulde come home by the next daye before Sunne ſet, he would ſende their wyues and chyldren after them, and beſydes that depriue them of all their goodes.
                  
               
               The ende of the Appendix or addition compyled by Maiſter Iohn Funke.
            
            
               Brefe Annotations added vnto the premiſſes gathered out of dyuers hiſtoriographers.
               
                  IN the ſayd yere of our lorde .MD. xlvi. apeace was concluded betwene EnglādA peace betwene Englande and Fraunce. and Fraunce, whiche on Whitſondaye was proclaimed. For concluſion whereof the Viſcount Liſſe high Admiral of England with the Byſhop of Dureſine and a goodly company of Gentylmen went out of Englande into Fraunce, after whoſe retourne Monſure Denball high Admirall of Fraunce, the Byſhop of Eureux and two Erles came into Englande with the Sacre of Depe, and .xij. galleyes, and were honorably receiued.
               
                  The ſaide yere alſo in lent before, was the StewesThe ſtewes put downe in London. ☝ ☝ Anne Aſkewe Iohn Laſſels burned. at London put downe and abolyſſhed by the kynges commaundement.
               the .ix. daye of Iuly was burned at London in ſmithfielde. Anne Aſkew a gentill woman, Iohn laſſels, of the kynges preuy chambre, Iohn Adlam tayler of Suffolke, and Nicolas Belenyam prieſt, for opinions conſonaunt to the trueth, and contrary to the acte of the ſyx Articles: At whiche tyme alShaxton recanted. ſo Doctour Nicolas Schaxton ſomtime Byſhop of Saliſbury recanted and denied the trueth whiche before he had profeſſed. Whiche thing alſo one Doctour Crome (whiche had bene a great and famous preacher) had done at Paules Croſſe the xxvij. daye of Iune before, affirming openly that he had bene ſeduced by noughty bookes. &c.
               In England, alſo in Nouember was the duke ofThomas duke of Northfolke & Henry his ſodne attainted. Northfolke and his ſonne the Erle of Surrey, attaincted of treaſon, for the which his ſonne was put to execution in Ianuary after, and hym ſelfe cōmitted to the Towre, where he doeth yet remayne.
               
                  IN the yere of our lord God .MD. xlvij. there were in Germany dyuers and wonderfull innouacions of thinges chaūces of warres chaū
                     ges of fortune, yeldynges of Princes, ouerthrowinges and ſubuerſions of townes and caſtelles, fallinges of great men, & conuocatiōs of Synodes, and counſayles, which I do here omitte partely to auoyde prolixite, and partely for that the certaintie of ſuche thinges taken by heare ſay onely is oftentimes deceiuable. Truſting to haue occcaſion and oportunitie hereafter to declare and ſet furth the ſame matter at large.
                  
                     The inhabitauntes of the countie of Tiroll and Iſebredge were this yere ſore plaghed with wonderfullA plague of locuſtes and graſhoppers locuſtes and graſhoppers both creping and flyeng, whiche were there in ſuche aboundaunce that the creping ſorte couered all their lande, & the flyeng ſorte couered that lyght of the Sune, in ſo muche that thinhabiters of the lande were cōmaunded to go furth and to take & gather thē that crept on the grounde which they did continually during the ſpace of thre wekes, gatheringe euery daye about. 2400. quarters, in a quarter of a myle, for in euery quarter of a myle were appointed thre hundreth perſons, men and womē, and euery hundreth perſons gathered euery day 800 quarters. during the ſpace of. 3. wekes. And they came into Iſebredge ouer the brydge with ſuch a power as though they had ben an hoſte of warriours that woulde haue entred into the towne In ſo much that the Mageſtrates commanded the inhabitauntes of the ſame towne to make reſiſtaunce agaynſt them before the gate with beſomes and bromes and to ſwype them into the water as they came whiche they ded in ſuche ſorte as they couered all the water with graſherppers that no water coulde be ſene: Thus did they reſiſte them & kept them alſo from the brydge by the ſpace of .iii. wekes after this the ſaid locuſtes or graſhoppers turned into. the fieldes and there deſtroyed and waſted the corne and the graſſe, vndoynge in a maner all the people of the lande: ſo that after thys the peopel reſyſted them no moore, butt onelye truſted to the mercy of god with inſtaunt & feruēt prayer.

The ſayde Locuſtes or graſhoppers were littell at the begynnyng and krepyng, but afterwarde they grewe and began to flye, doyng great hurte throughout the ſayde lande.
                  In the meane ſeaſon the Emperoures maieſtie,A godly commaundement and the kyng of the Romaynes ſet furth a commaū
                     dement that noman ſhuld be founde in dronkenes, horedome, aduoutery, vſury, and blaſphemy but he ſhould be punyſhed by death, and forfayte all hys goodes.
                  In a littell towne called Albers lyeng beſydes Lyndawe in the Dukedome of Zweyburgh wasA prodigious grape. this yere founde two cluſters of grapes growynge vpon one braunce hauyng a long read bearde, whiche was a wonderfull ſyght.
                  The ſame yere in flaunders and the countreesA wonderful miracle. there about was a great ſcacitie of corne, ſo that there was a great dearth in the lande. And there dwelled beſydes Beke aboue Gand a certayne farmer well prouided and ſtored with corne, vnto whome his neyghbours came lamentyng and intreatyng hym to ſel them ſome of his corne, who refuſed ſo to do, neuertheles he ſent none away comfortles that had nede: for he lent and delyuered vnto euery man accordyng to their neceſſite on this condicion that they ſhould rendre and repaye hym agayne at the next harueſt, on this condicion did he lende corne to dyuers nedy perſons. After whiche tyme it chaunced that his corned fyelde beyng ſowed was by Gods grace ſo multiplied and increaſſed that on euery ſtalke grewe an exceding nombre of eares laden with corne, ſo that thorough the bleſſyng of

God he was well rewarded. By this may we ſee that the ſayeng of Salomon is an vndoubted verite, namely, he that taketh pitie on the pore lendeth vnto the Lorde vpon vſury, and loke whatſoeuer he layeth out it ſhalbe payd hym agayne.
                  There was alſo this yere a wonderfull viſion ſeneA wonderful 
                           •
                        iſion. and heard of many within the towne of Wittenbourgh, in the Lande of Saron the .xviii. daye of September early in the mornyng betwene foure & fyue of y• clocke. For there appeareth in the ayre a figure and lykenes of a dead corſe or beere couered ouer with blacke cloth, and a read ribband auer the ſame, and there went before the coarſe ſix men with trompettes, and a greate multitude of people folowed with croked inſtrumentes and trompettes blowyng, whyche made a greate noyſe in the ayre, inſomuche that many in the towne whiche laye yet in their beddes were thereby awaked out of theyr ſlepe, thynkyng that the ſayde trimblyng had bene in the towne. After this the black cloth vanyſhed awaye from the boere, whiche then was couered ouer with awhyte cloth, then appeared beſydes the beare a man armed in harnas ſhewyng hym ſelfe very angry, and pullyng the whyte clothe from the beere, he rent it in twaine, wynding the one half about hys arme and ſo preſſyng it harde to hys body: Wyth this the coarſe vanyſhed away. The man armed dyd alſo apeare a lyttell whyle after & ſo in lyke maner baniſhed away. After this were althynges quiet as before. God graunte euery Chriſten man to remembre thys wonderfull ſygne with feare, for it is to be feared that it is a fearefull warnyng

ſent vs of God.
                  In Englande the nyntene day of Ianuary wasThe Erle of Surrey beheaded. the Erle of Surrey beheaded, as was mencioned the yere before.
                  The ſeuen and twenty daye of the ſame monethThe death of kyng Henry the eight of England▪ &c. Edward the ſyxt byng of England. Henry the eyght kyng of Englande &c. ended hys lyfe, and was buried at Windſore.
                  Edwarde the ſyxt kyng of Englande &c. ſucceded his father in the gouernaunce of his royalmes and dominions, and was crowned the nintene day of February, in the nyneth yere of hys age.
                  Vnder the ſayde kyng in the tyme of his minorite his vncle Edwarde Duke of Somerſet was made lorde Protectour of all hys Royaulmes dominions and ſubiectes, and Gouernour of his maieſties perſone, who with the reſidue of his maieſties Counſayll gouerned the realme with great mercy and gentilneſſe, by whome to the ſurtheraunce of goddes worde and true religion, cōmiſſioners were ſent into al partes of the Realme, with commaū
                     dementImages and beades put downe & abolyſſhed in England. to cauſe all Images to be taken out of churches, for auoydyng of Idolatry, and to wyll men & women to leaue the vſe of beades, hauyng with thē alſo godly and learned preachers aſſigned, whiche do exorted them to geue them ſelf to true and vnfained worſhippyng of God in the hart and minde, with due obedience to their prince.
                  Richard Smith a doctour of diuinite recāted opē
                     lyA recantaciō of Doctor Smith. at Paules croſſe within ye citie of Lōdon diuers articles cōtained in two bokes which he had made,

one for the defence of the ſacrifice of the Maſſe: an other to proue vnwritten verities to be beleued vnder payne of damnacion.
                  This yere alſo in Enland commaundement wasProceſſions l
                           ••
                        t in Englande. An hooſt of men ſent out of Englande into Scotlād geuen that proceſſions ſhould be no more vſed.
                  This yere alſo in England the duke of Somerſet then Lorde Protectour and the Erle of Warwyke went into Scotlande with a ſtrong army, requiring the Scottes to fulfyll their promyſe, made before to kyng Henry, concernyng the mariage of their younge Quene with the younge kynge of Englande, but the Scottes ſtubbournely came agaynſt them, with great puiſſaunce. And not longe after the two armyes encountred in the fieldes of Muſcleborough, at a place called Pinker ſlough. The Englyſhe part not thynkyng as than to haue battayle, at whiche tyme becauſe the front of the Scottyſhe armie was ſo terrybly ſet wyth pykes, the Englyſhe horſemen (which gaue the fyrſt onſet) were fayne to recule backe, with loſſe of certayn gē
                     tylmen: whiche reculing much abaſſhed the Engliſh footemen: but yet by the great wyſedome and dilygence of the Lord Protectours grace, and the valiaunt hart and courage of the Earle of Warwike they gaue a newe onſet, and without any notable fyght diſcomfited the Scottes, and obtayned the victory. At this tyme were ſlayne of the Scottes betwene thirtene and fourtene thouſand, and not paſſyng an hundred Englyſhemen.Chaunteries geuen to the 
                           ••
                        ng of England.
                  
                  After Mich
                        •
                     lmas a Parliament was holden in England wherein chaunteries were geuen into the kynges handes, to be altered and diſpoſed at

hys pleaſure.
                  It was alſo ordeined that the ſacrament or communionThe Cōmumō ordeined to be receiued in both kindes. Latimer ſet at libertie. ſhould be receiued of all men vnder bothe kyndes of breade and wyne.
                  This yere alſo anone after the kynges coronatiō Maiſter Hughe Latimer a famous preacher, who had bene long detayned in miſerable captiuite for ye Goſpels ſake by the procurement of the Popiſhe by ſhoppes, was deliuered and ſet at lybertie.
                  In this yere the laſt day of Marche Fraūcis theThe death of the 
                           •
                        renche King. Frenche kyng ended his lyfe in the .xxxiii. yeare of his reigne, after that he had admonyſhed his onely ſonne Henry of the thynges pertaining to his kingdome and commended hym to true officers and ſeruauntes. After whome ſucceded the ſame Henry being the ſeconde of that name. His body was caried after .x. dayes to the brydge of S. Clodoalde, and from thence to the ſuburbes of Paris, into the Churche called the virgine of the fieldes: where by the commaundement of the kyng were brough the bodyes, of Frauncis the Dolphyne Duke of Britaigne, who dyed in the yere of. 1536. before, in the moneth of Auguſt: And of Charles his brother, Duke of Orleans, whiche dyed in the yere of our lorde. 15 45. in the moneth of September, that they myght accompany the body of their father to his buriall: And ſo were the ſayde thre bodyes brought with great pompe and ſolempnitie into the Churche of the bleſſed virgin at Parys, and from thence to S. Denis, where they were buried, the body of the father being layde betwene his ſonnes.
                  This Frauncis the Frenche kyng was hyghly

commended for diuers ſingular giftes bothe of the mynde and of the body wherewith he was endued, but chiefly for his humanite and clemencie whiche he vſed towardes all men. He was beneficiall to mē endued with vertue, and liberall to men of lernyng. For by his benefite were the Latine, Greke and He brue tonges reſtored agayn to their puritie in Fraū
                     ce, whereof he entertained & noriſhed publike profeſſours, ordeining for them moſt ample ſtipendes▪ his other actes are here omitted to auoide prolix
                        ••
                     e
                  In the moneth of December at Paris was S. Michaels bridge broken by the great power & violence of the waters ſo that the Eaſt part thereof fel downe quite, & the houſes which were built theron were ouer throwen with a great parte of them that were annexed vnto them.
               
               
                  IN the yere of our Lorde. 1548. in the moneth
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                        ▪
                      of Iuly themperour ſent an army of Spanyardes priuely to inuade the citie of Conitaunce▪ while the legates of Conſtaunce that were ſent to Auguſt vnto themperour to intreate for peace were not yet retourned homewarde. For he intended quite to extinguiſh the citie becauſe they profeſſed y• Goſpell. Wherfore the ſixt day of Auguſt early in y• mornyng the ſaid army inuaded y• citie, & ouercame the baſſe towne which ioyneth to y• great bredge cō
                     monly called Peter houſen. When this was obtayned, and ouercome at their firſt aſſaulte, ſome fell to ſpoiling and rouing, ſome to deflouring of virgin
                        •
                     s and honeſt matrones, & ſome gat thē to the bridge, and there made a bartaill with the citeſens, whiche were conſtrained to re
                        •
                     ule back into the citie being

ouerpreſſed with the multitude of their enemies vnto whō they barred y• gates of the bredge. The bridge was ful of Spaniſh warriours, againſt whō the citeſens could nothing preuayle vntil many peces of artillery whiche kept the bridge being loſed by chaunce, but yet not without the will of God per ſed the gate & ouerthrewe the enemies, & put thē in ſuch feare yt they fled euerychone, ſetting the bridge on fyre & alſo Peterhouſen, leaſt the citeſens ſhould haue folowed & purſued after them. So that Conſtaunce ſawe in one daye y• iuſte puniſhmēt of pride, & the ſingular benefite of God towardes his electe, would to God they had not vnthankefully forgotten this great benefite.
                  Themperour after that he had in Germany ſetThe Emperour retourneth out of Germany into Flaūders The Duke of Saxon captiue. Leonora retourned to themperoure The ſonne of Ferdinando marieth them perours daughter. all thinges in ordre, & propounded a certain fourme in religion after the preſcripte whereof they ſhould liue while a counſaille were decreed, & hauing committed the Landgraue of Heſſen in ſafe cuſtody, re retourned into Flaunders bringing with hym the Duke of Saxon captiue.
                  Thither came Leonora Themperours ſiſter & late Quene to the Frenche king departed.
                  This yere Maximiliane the firſt ſonne of Ferdinandus king of the Romaines toke to wife themperours daughter. This yere alſo y• king of Spayne leauing his brother Maximiliane as gouernour in his abſence, departed out of Spayn into Italy, & went frō thence to Trident & into Germany, & ſoThe eldeſt ſonne of the Turke 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        keth inſurr
                           ••
                        
                        tion ag
                           •
                        ynſt his father. at y• laſt came into Flaūders to his father thēperour
                  The ſame yere towardes the ſpring time the firſt begottē ſonne of y• Turke, which was gone ouer to y• king of y• Perſiās, becauſe he thought his brother

ſhould be by his father promoted before hym to the Empyre, aſſembled an army of Perſianes, and made inſurrection againſt his father, and inuaded the borders of Turkie nere vnto the lande of Perſia, and had ouercome many places, vntyll his father beyng armed with fyue hundred thouſande ſouldiours came thither and cauſed the Perſianes, being ſtriken with feare, to recule. But they hauyng ſet on fyre all the townes and villages by the whiche they fled the ſpace of fyue dayes, brought their enemy whiche folowed and purſued after them, too greate pennury, in ſo muche that an hundred thouſande of his men being dead thorough pouertie famine and peſtilence, he was conſtrained of neceſſitie to returne thither agayne from whence he came▪
                  
                  A certayne king in Aphrica toke Argieres andArgiers takē 
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      the other places there about, with certayne caſtels and ſtrong holdes whiche themperoure vſed for the defence of Spayne: and alſo certaine ſtrong holdes in the coaſtes of Portingall towardes the ſea occeane.
                  In Englande at Eaſter was there a great coniunctionA 
                           ••
                        m
                           ••
                        ociō 
                        
                           ••
                         cor
                           •••
                        all. The maſſe & Images put downe in Englande. of ruſtikes in Cornuall, by p
                        •
                     pyſh prieſtes.
                  There was alſo great diſputation in the Parliamēt that yere for putting downe of the maſſe. And Images were put downe in al churches thorough out Englande to auoyde Idolatry.
                  This yere the laſt daye of Iuly Stephen GardinerThe byſhop of Wincheſter committed to thei our of 
                           •
                        o
                           〈…〉
                        . byſhop of Wincheſter in Englande, was committed to the Towre of London for papiſme, and this ſedicious opinion, that the kynges maieſtie in his minoritie or none age coulde not make or ordeine

any lawes in his Realme, as did Ioſias & other godly & vertues princes, and gouernours in their dominions.
                  This yere the mariage of prieſtes was grauntedThe mariage of prieſtes graunted lawfull. An inſurrection at Norwiche. lawfull in England by the Lawes of God, to the vtter abolyſhement of all Papiſticall ſodomitry.
                  This yere in auguſt was a great inſurrection of ruſtikes at Norwiche, one kite (a ruſtike) beyng their Capitayne▪ and the .xxvij. daye of Auguſt it was ended, foure thouſand beyng ſlayne, the victory geuen (through goddes grace) by the handes of Iohn the noble Erle of Warwyke.
                  At the ſame tyme the Cornyſh and DeuonſhyreThe rebelles in Cornwal 
                           〈◊〉
                         Deuonſhere ſubdued. The byſhop of London depoſed and cō
                        mitted to priſon. The duke of Somerſet cō
                        mitted to the tour of Lōdō. The death of the Pope. A wonderful viſion ſene beſydes Brunſwyke. men were ouercome, and very many of them ſlayn, beſydes many of their gentilmen taken.
                  This yere alſo Bonner byſhop of London was put from his byſhoprike for his ſtubborne Popyſhnes the firſt day of October, and for certainte obſtinate articles cōmitted to the Marſhalſee, the people muche reioyſyng at it.
                  In this moneth the Duke of Somerſet was cō
                     mitted to the toure, to the great lamentacion of very many.
                  In this moneth alſo died the Pope of Rome called Paule the thyrde.
                  This yere the weke before Whitſontide, thre honeſt marchauntes and a younge lad, beinge honeſt mens ſonnes of Brunſwyke yourneyed from Andwarpe to Brunſwyke, there to heare at that feaſt goddes word preached. And as they rode on Whitſon euen after midnight halfway betwene Celle & Brunſwyke on a heath ouer gainſt a certayn farme, they
                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                     
nor yet Chriſt hymſelfe dyd knowe, namely, howe a man can ſerue twoo maiſters at ones, God and the wicked worlde. Item howe we can be good Chriſtianes & yet knowledge not Chriſt, nor helpe hym to beare his croſſe, yea rather perſecute hys poore membres, God geue vs grace to knowledge his ſon ne a ryght, ſuffre paciently all miuries and endure to the ende, that he may alſo at the great and fearefull day of the lorde knowledge vs before hys heauenly father, and hys vniuerſal churche, and before all hys aungels. Amen.
               
               
                  IN the yere of oure Lorde. 1550. the xix. dayeCapitayne Gambold ſlayne. of Ianuary Capitayne Gambolde, who was Capitayne of the Spanyardes that ſerued the kyng of Englande in his warres, and an other Capitaine was ſlayne without Newe gate in an euenyng, by a Spanyarde, whiche was taken and hanged the. xxiii
                        •
                     . daye of Ianuary, and thre more with hym.
                        
                           〈…〉
                         in 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                  
                  the .xxviij. day of the ſame moneth was Humfrey arundell and Bury with two other mo drawne hanged and quartered, for becauſe they were the theſe capitaynes and mayntayners of the rebellion among the Cornyſhe and Deuonſhyre men.The duke of Somerſet delyuered out of 
                           〈…〉
                         A generall p
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           •
                        etmene Englande 
                           •
                         Frannce.
                  
                  The ſixt day of February came the Duke of Somerſet out of the Tower, with greate reioyiyng of muche people.
                  In the ſame moneth went out of Englande certayne lordes of the counſaill to Buileine, where certayne of the Frenche counſayll met with them and after long conſultacion had and dyuers metynges betwene them, there was a generall peace conciuded,

whiche peace was proclaimed the .xxix. daye of Marche folowyng.
                  Alſo about the .xxv. day of Apryll folowyng theBullayne delyuered. towne of Bullayne with the fortreſſes thereto belongyng was delyuered by the Englyſhemen, into the Frenchemens handes.
                  The ſecond daye of May was brent at London30 one Boocher in ſmythfielde a certayne woman called Ione Boocher otherwyſe called Ione of Barkyng for the horrible hereſy of the Apellites, Cerdonians, proclianites, Valentinians, Manichees, Timotheans, Apolinarianes, Neſtorianes, & ſedicious Anabaptiſtes of our tyme, whiche ſhe helth commen with all them, of a ſet wilfulneſſe, for all thoſe hereticall patriarkes was ſhe ſure to haue as maiſters and doctours of her pernicious errour, that Chriſt toke no fleſhe of the virgine, as largely apeareth in the cronicles.
                  About this tyme there were certayne lyght perſones pretendyng a newe commotion in Kent, but they were apprehēded and dyuers of them for that treſpas hanged.
                  It is ſayde that this yere the .xxi. daye of MarcheA wonderful miracle oftor ue fallyng downe from the element. in the countie of Carinte beſydes the Lande of Bauariam Auſtryche by and aboute a lyttel towne called Claghenforth, it rayned corne out of the element by the ſpace of two houres, which rayne ſtretched in lenght .vi. Germayn myles, and in breedth halfe a Germayne myle in ſome places: ſo that the ſayd corne beyng ſome white and ſome browne lay in ſome places the thickenes of an hand broade vpō the groūde. Whereupō the people of the lande came

and gathered of the ſayde corne, and brought it to the mylles, and baked thereof good & ſauery bread. the ſignificacion of whiche miſtery is reſerued to God alone, to whome be honoure glory and prayſe in all thynges for euer and euer. Amen.
                  This yere the kyng of Spayne went home agayne out of Flaunders.
                  This yere alſo there was a cruel proclamatiō ſetA moſte 
                           •••
                        nnicall perſecution. furth by the vniuerſitie of Louayne in the name of the Emperoures Maieſtie, for the perſecution of the faithfull Chriſtianes, condempning al maner of ſcripture bookes as well Bibles as other in what tonge ſo euer they were written or tranſlated that had bene printed within the ſpace of .xxx. yeres before, with moſte extreme death proſecutinge all the fauourours of the doctrine ſet furth by Martine Luther. Iohn Ecolampadius, Hulderike zwinglius, Iohn Caluine, or their ad herentes and condempning them for heretikes and their doctrine for moſte pernicious and peſtilent hereſy without any probable argumentes or good reaſons.
                  
                     After this themperoure went vp agayne into Germany.
                  
               
            
            The ende of this cronicle.
         
         
            The concluſion,
            
               
               THus haue I, Chriſten reader, brefe
                  ••
                comprehended the principall Storie 
                  •
                whiche I haue founde and thought neceſſary, as they haue bene done here & there thoroughout Chriſtendom theſe. xviij yeres laſt paſt. Howe be it if ought ſeme to be omitted and left out (whiche is a thyng that may lyghtely chaunce to any man) I beſeche you that it be not interpretated in the worſt parte, cōſideryng that I haue done my diligence to ſet furth y• truthe. Wherfore yf I haue bene truely infourmed it is wel. Alſo if it fortuned y• in the ſayd Story were made mēcion of any man, vnto whō it might apeare, that iniury were done vnto hym, in that he is not ſo muche cōmended as ſome other, & woulde therefore be angry, let hym remembre i
                  •
               , at the faulte is not in me but in hymſelfe. For it becometh an hiſtoriographer or Story writer to declare the truthe in all thynges. Wherfore if men vſe honeſtie, their prayſe ſhalbe the more, but if they walke inordinately, they deſerue no prayſe at all. For the actes and hiſtories that are written ought to edifye and profyte them that come after, that they maye thereby learne what ought to bee eſchued, and what to be folowed, whiche thynge without ſure and certayne declaracion of the truth can not be done. Therefore let ſuche men be angry wyth them ſelues, yf they bee greued at the matter, conſideryng that they haue done nothyng

and 
                  •
               thy of commendacion: And let them from henthe 
                  •
               rth endeuoure them ſelues by honeſt conuerſathe ſi
                  •
                and Chriſten behaueour to couer their ſhame. God
                  •
                then ſhall all thynges be counted vnto them cō
               u
                  ••
               endable, for ſomuche as euery thynge that is paſt, is rather imputed to the tyme and to fortune, then to the will of the perſon, when the ſame is perceiued and knowen to haue forſaken the euyll whiche heA moſte T
                     •
                  annicall perſecution. vſed in tymes paſt and to folowe honeſtie and goodnes. And although I haue abſtayned from all that myght be tedious and bitter, as muche as the truth myght ſuffre, yet hath the common courſe of the worlde moued me to make he re this exceptiō: For y• Deuil alwayes wil be praiſed in his wicked dedes, but the diſcrete Chriſtianes nede no ſuche commendations. Wherfore alſo I commende me ſelfe next vnder God to the defence and prayer of all the fauourers of the truthe byndyng me ſelfe to do the lyke for them to my power. Dated the twenty day of Auguſt. 1550. ⸫
         
         
            
            
               BReuely to cloſe vp this preſent chronicle. This yere is the ful .xxxi. Iubilie from chriſtes incarnacion, declaring vnto vs chriſtianes here in Englande, by many moſt graciouſe and godly argumētes, the glad iubilie of the lord, what though not to the pagane Papiſtes, arrogaūt Ana baptiſtes, licenciouſe lybertines, cruell coueters, excedyng extorcioners, fre wyll men, new Iuſticiaries, and ſprete ſpeakers, with other ſediciouſe ſectaries, all ſekyng to take the glory from Chriſt and to deminyſh the frutes of his helthful ſufferinges. To make this to you more familiar, the kynges moſte excellent maieſtie, by aſſent of his noble counſel, and fre vtteraunce of faithful miniſters by them apointed, haue this yeare proclaymed a godly chriſten fredome to the longe captiued conſciences of his natural and obedient ſubiectes (I ſpeake nothing of the forenamed obſtinates) none otherwiſe than dyd Moyſes to the children of Iſraell, Leuit. 25. and noble kyng Ioſias to their poſteritie vnder hym. 2. Paralip. 34. the temples and aulters in ſundry places deſtroied, and the true chriſtiante in many pointes reſtored. Conſidre the lent preachynges that were this yeare afore the kyng, the delyueraunce of the duke of Somerſet, the change in London dyoceſe, the neceſſary ſequeſtracion of Gardyner, Bonner, Hethe, and other proude popiſh Babylonians, the godly diſcourſe of Peter Martir the inexpugnable defence of the Archebyſhop of Caunterbury for ye full ouerthrowe of Idolatry, with other good chaunces more whiche are apparaunt though they be not named, are manifeſt tokens of the premyſſes,

and ſpeciall good argumentes of this Iubylie of grace. Let vs therefore with our noble yonge Ioſias be thankefull vnto God in the latter parte of this yeare holdyng holy in ſoule the perfyght paſſeouer of the lorde. And let vs ſtyll valiauntly fight with the two edged ſworde againſt the maliciouſe kyng of Egypte or blaſphemouſe Byſhop of Rome and all his trayterouſe trayne, after the Godly example of the firſt Ioſias. 2. Paralip. 35. So be it.
         
      
      
         
            
            A table of thoſe thynges that be conteyned in thys boke worthy of memory.
            
               A
               
                  ABbas Ioachyms prophecy, cxci
               Abel kylled for the trewe worſhyp of God, fol. ij
               Abia fo. xiiij.
               Abraham was in Ninus tyme, ix. the tyme of ye promiſe made to hym vntyll the goyng oute of Egypt. xij. the renuyng of the promyſe to him, fo. ix
               Abſalon the wycked. fo. xiiii
               Achas fo. xvi
               Achilles fo. xxi
               Accurſius the man of law. clvij
               Adam and Eue, fo. i. He and Seth the ſetters forth of Aſtrology Fo. ij
               Adelricus fo. cxij
               Adoulfus County of Naſſau is made Emperour fo. clxx
               Adrianus a well learned Emperour, was connyng in Aſtronomy, fo. xciiij. and mercyfull toward Chriſtian men, fo. xcv
               Adrianus byſhop of Rome complayneth when he ſhould dye, fo. clviij
               Adultery punyſhed, xxi. xxvij. c the occaſyon of the battel of Troye. fo. xxi
               Aetius fo. cxvij
               Afflictyon temporall and the begynnyng therof .i. the cauſe of them fo. xi
               Agar fo. x
               Agarenes, cxxi. why Mahomet dyd channge the name to Saracens fo. cxxij
               Aggeus fo. xlix
               Agrippa vnder whom Ieruſalem was ſpoyled fo. lxxvi
               Alaricus xi. wynneth Rome. cxi
               Albany was ouerthrowen, fo. xxvij
               Alberte duke of Eaſtenryche, clxix. cxcix. clxxx. Is Empeperoure, clxx. called Marques Achylles, clxxix. the ſeconde fo. clxxx
               Alcibiades, liiij. is dryuen from the Athenians. liiij. is ſlayne agaynſt all ryght, lv. was noble in feates of warre. fo. lv
               Alexander ſonne to Amintas xlii. xlvij. The greate, lx. the begynnyng of his monarchy. lxij. hys elders, lx. hys deedes, lxi. Ariſtoteles Scoler lviij. he maketh greate battels

in Aſia wyth ſmal power. lx. hys gentellues. lxij. lyttel ſett by for ſyghte matters. lxi. he kepeth an eare for the gyltye. lxiij. his ſetting forth againſt ye Iewes. lxiij. howe greate hys hooſt was. lxi. hys reuerence toward the hygh prieſtes of the Iewes. lxiij. hys kyngdome is made foure kyngdomes. liiiij the yonger ſonne of Hircanus. lxxiij. he is called the Goote. lx. Seuerus. xcvij. a byſhop of Rome. ciii
                     •
                  . hys extreme tyranny agaynſt the emperoure Frederycke. clx
               Altonſus kyng of Spayne, and an Aſtronomer. clxviij. kynge of Naples. fo. clxxxiiij
               Alphonſe diaſye a traytours 
                     •••
                  rtherer. fo. cclxij.
               Allegories of Origene nothyng ſett by. fo. xcvi
               Alzachenus kyng fo ccvi.
               A
                     ••
                  aſyas kyng geuen to Godlynes. fo. xv.
               Ambiſion punyſhed. xxi. xxxix. lxiiij. cxxiiij. cxxxv. cxlv 
               Ambroſe ſprakyng of Theodoſius fo cxc
               Amon the wycked. fo. xvij
               Am
                     •
                  s fo. xvi
               Amu
                     •
                  us fo▪ xxv
               A
                     •
                  aſtaſius. cxviij. was put into a monaſtery. fo. cxxv.
               Amurates became a mouche, fo. clxxxi
               Amyntas kyng of Macedony fo. xlii.
               Ancus Marlius. fo. xxvij
               Anabaptiſtes do reſemble the Eſſ
                     •
                  is. lxxiiij. They take the cytye of Mynſter in Weſtphalen, and they make themſelfe a kyng. fo. cci. ccvij
                ccviij
               Andrewe Caroloſtade. clxxxviij
               Andrew de Aurea. cxcix. ccvij.
               Anthony de Lena. fo. cxcix
               Anthony. fo. lxxxvi. Pi
                     •
                  s. xcv. Baſſianua. fo. xcvi
               Anne Bollen behedded. fo. ccx
               Anne Aſkew burned fo. cclxx
               AntiChriſte .lxix. Mahomet a a part of hym. fo. cxxij
               Antigonus lxiiii. lxvi
               Antiochus the great. lxvi. lxvij. the occaſyon of the warre wyth the Romaynes. lxvij. Epiphanes is lent to Rome for a pledge. lxvij. Wherefore called Epiphanes. ibidem. his iorney into Egypt. lxviij. to Ieruſalem. ibidem. his ſeconde iorney to Ieruſalem. lxix. the tyranny of hym in the cytye, ibid Danyel reſembleth hym to Antichriſt. ibid. his vnpunyſhemente for hys vngodlyneſſe. lxx. Hierax. lxvi. Eupater. lxxvi. Sedetes. lxx. Soter. lxvi. Theos. lxvi. Epimates. fo. lxvij
               Antipater. lxix. prince of Ioumea. lxxiii. Is made gouerner of Iurp by Iulius. Ceſar. fo. lxxv▪
               
               Anſwer at Delphis. fo. xxiiij.
               
                  Appius vnſhamefaſt and a Tyrant folix.
               An apparition wounderfull in Denmarke fo. cciiij
               Apſymarus 
                     •
                  o. cxxv
               Arboces fo. xlviij
               Arbogaſtes fo. cviij
               Arcadins fo. cix
               Archelaus was exyled of Auguſtus fo. lxxv
               Areta kyng of Arabia. lxxiij
               Argires fo. cclxxviij
               Arideus brother to Alexander. fo. lxiiij
               Ariſtobulus fo. lxxiij
               Ariſtoteles. lvij. his elders, lviij his philoſophi. fo. xcvi
               Arminius fo. lxxxviij.
               Arſames fo. liij
               Arnoldus, Duke of Banary fo. cxxxix
               Arnolfus Emperoure. cxxxv
               Arrius an open reader in the ſchole of Alexandria. ciiij. his death. ibid. he was the forerunner of Mahomet. cv. his doctryne. fo. ciiij
               Artaxarxſes wyth the long hād mnemon. lij. wherfore he was called with the long hand. xxx
               Artycles of the ſeditious Ruſtikes fo. clxxxviij.
               Ariſtona fo. xlviij.
               Aſſuerus fo. xxx. xlviij.
               Aſatoke away y• wycked ſeruice of god. fo. xiiij.
               Aſcanius Iulius fo. xxi
               Aſia decayed fo. lx
               Aſtronomy was renewed by Frederyke the ſeconde. clxiiij.
               Aſtyages dreame. xxxi. hys crueltye fo. xxxij.
               Ataulphus king of the Gooths fo. cxi.
               Athalia. fo. xv
               Athanaſius beynge banyſhed out of Egypt flyeth to Tryer fo. cv.
               Athens burned, xlvij. the vnſhamfaſt flattery of them. lxv. the obſtynacy and malipartneſſe of them in tyme of warre confirmed alſo wyth a decre, liiij. The yeldynge of them. fo. lv.
               Atoſſa. fo. xlviij.
               Attila. cxij. the death of hym, cxvij. his battel at Toulhouſe ibidem. he called hym ſelfe the ſcourge of God, ibidem. hys deedes fo. cxvi
               Auenion a cytye papall. clxxiiij
               Auguſt an parliament lxxxvi
               S. Auguſtine of hippo. cxv. his wrytynge agaynſt Pelagius. fo. cix
               Auguſtulus. lxxxvi▪ fo. cxviij.
               Auguſtus. ibid. Whence commeth the callyng of Auguſtus fo. lxxxvi
               Aurelianus. c. ſtudious in the diſcipline of warre. ibidem
               Auſborough parlyamēt. clxxxix
               Azo a lawer. fo. clvij
            
            
               B
               Babylon the head cytye of the Monarchy fo. xxxiiij
               Bayre who are the Dukes

clix. the warre of Baperland fo. clxxxvi
               Balthazar kyng of Babylon. fo. xix
               Bartholdus Gracianus, clvij. Duke of Re
                     •
                  y
                     •
                  ge
                     •
                  . fo. clxi
               Barbaroſſa in
                     •
                  adeth the kyngdome of T
                     •
                  neſſe. ccvi. ccxxiij. ſhypwrake. ccxxiiij. he beſeged caſtell no
                     •
                  a, ccxxvi. He wynneth it fo. ccxxvi
               D. Barnes burned, fo. ccxv
               Battell by r
                     •
                  ttlyng. fo. clxiv
               Beggyng orders, fo. clxiij
               Belliſari
                     •
                  s very euyll rewarded of Iuſt
                     ••
                  us. fo. cxviij. cxix
               Benedictus the xi. fo. clxxiiij
               S. Barnard made the peace betwene the Emperour Lo
                     •
                  radus and Lotharius. fo. clvi
               Beringar
                     ••
                  s prince of Foroi
                     •
                  
                  i
                     •
                  lium. cxxxvn. he yeldeth himſelfe to Otho, fo. cxlij.
               Beringar
                     ••
                  s of the ſacrament fo. cl.
               Bedam England. fo. cxxv
               Ben Lo
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  an. fo. lxxvi
               Beſ
                     •
                  us diſtoyaltye is an example of vengeaunce. fo. lxij
               Beſus temple in Syria, fo. lxvij
               Bible burnt, lxix is tranſlated, lxxi. ſent into all countries, fo. ciij
               Biſhop, hys cracke. clxi. the payde and crueltye of the byſhop of Rome, clxiij. an example of the Rom. byſhops diſloyaltye and tyranny, clviij. Example of moſt notable cruelneſſe, of a Rom. byſh. cxxxvi the cyuyll warre rayſed in Germany by the B. of Rom. cliij. Thre byſhops of Rome ſtrynyng for the Byſhoprpcke were put donne, cxlij. cxlix. the diſloyaltye of the byſhop of Rome, in transferrynge the empyre to Frenchmē, cxxxiiij the tyranny of the byſhop of Rom, cxxxvi. St
                     •
                  y
                     •
                  e for the election of the biſh. of Rome cxix. the fyrſte perturbatyon for the choſynge of the byſhop of Rome. cxix. Whether an vnyuerſal byſhop ought to be, cxx. all the byſhops of Denmarke depoſed, ccxv. the diuiſion of the Rom. byſhops, fo. clxxvij
               Bizantium, fo. ciij
               Blaſphemyes neuer vnpunyſhed fo. xix
               Bohemes the prynce is made a kyng, clx. they were vanq
                     •
                  yſhed wyth there kyng Lecho, cxxxi. they are Germanies, cxvi. the ryſynge agaynſt the prieſtes and monckes, clxvi. Why it hath the an
                     •
                  thoritye of the election, fo. cxlvi
               Bolen wonne fo. cliij.
               Bolē geuē vp to the Englyſhmen. cliij. delyuered. cclxxvij.
               Boneſacius, cxxi. What tyme he preached in Germanye, cxxvi. the feat ſayeng of Bone facius the eyght fo. clxx
               Bouer byſh. of London, depoſed. fo. cclxx
                     •
                  
               
               Brabanders fo. cxliiij.
               
                  Brandenborow. cxxxix. Lxliij
               Breda towne, burnt, ccxv
               Brethren thre in nombre raygned together, fo. cxv
               Bridge burnynge by Mentz, what it ſignifyeth. fo. cxxxij.
               Bruno a Saxon was made B. of Rome, fo. cxlv
               Brutus fo. lxxxv
               Burgundyons were Saxons, fo. cviij
            
            
               C
               CAin fo. ij
               Caius caligula, fo. xc
               Calfe monſtreous borne by the ſea coaſt about Lindow fo. cc.
               Callinicus fo. lxvi
               Chriſten fayth planted in the kyngdom of Cambia. ccxvi.
               Cambiſes. xxx. xxxvii
                     •
                  . hys cruell deede, hys cruel
                     •
                  es towarde hys ſyſter the quene xxxix. an example in hym of vengeaunce. fo. xxxix
               Camillus fo. lix
               Captayne Gambolde ſlayne. fo. cclxxvi
               Cardinals beganne. cxlix. why they had aucthoritye geuen vnto them to choyſe the Popes. fo. clij
               Carinus fo. cij
               Catholykes fo. ccxxxiiij
               Charles the greate. cxxvij. hys elders were graunde mayſters. cxxix. is borne in Ingelheim, ibidem. hys deedes ibidem. He optayneth Lombardy. cxxx. Hys modeſtye ibidem. he was made Emperoure ouer the Weſte. cxxxi. hys diligence in the tyme of peace, ibidem. he founded thre vniuerſytyes. ibidem. he was learned in Greke and Latin. cxxxij. hys genealogy he readeth Saynt Auguſtyn. ibidem. the groſſe. cxxxv. the balde. cxxxiiij. the death. cxxxv the fourth. clv. made the golden boul
                     •
                  e. clxxv. wyth the bunched backe. clxxxij. what Electors chooſe Charles the fyft, that now is Emperoure clxxxvij. he is crowned Emperoure. fo. clxxxix
               Carthago, the ſeconde ware of Carthago. lxxviij. the occaſion of it in Spayne, ibidem. the thyrde warre of it. lxxix. Diſputatyon whether it ſhuld be wholy ſpoyled and ouerthrowen▪ ibidem▪ it is deſtroyed. lxxx. the conſultatyon of deſtroyeng it. lxxxi.
               Cato. lxxix. he ſlewe hym ſelfe fo. lxxxiiij
               Caſſius fo. lxxxv
               Caſſanders tyranny. fo. lxv
               Caſtell Angell. fo. cxxxiiij
               Catti. fo. xciij.
               Caldees vr fo. ix.
               Ceſar beynge full of Clemency and gentelneſſe lxxxiii
                     •
                  .
               Cham fo. iiij.
               Chaunteres geuen to the kyng 
                  
                     •
                  o. CCixxij.
               Cheruſa. fo. lxxxviij
               Ch
                     ••••••
                  s the heretycke was kylled wyth the fallyng of an houſe. fo. x
                     •
                  iiij.
               C
                     •
                  riſten men were perſecuted vnder 
                     •
                  r
                     ••
                  anus. x
                     •
                  v. vnder 
                     •
                  iberius. xc. vnder Do
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  ia
                     •
                  . xciij. xciiij. vnder Adria
                     •
                  . xcv. vnder Decian. xc
                     •
                  x. vnder A
                     •
                  relia
                     •
                  , C. vnder Diocl
                     •
                  ti
                     •
                  n. fo. Cij
               Chriſt
                     •
                  s kyngedome allwaye troubled *v. Meruelouſlye preſ
                     •
                  rued. *▪ ibid
                     •
                  m. hys commynge. xlix. whan he was borne. lx
                     •
                  v. lxxxvij. baptyzed lxxxix. crucyſy
                     •
                  d. ibidem.
               Ch
                     •
                  rche begynn
                     •
                  th▪ i. from 
                     •
                  oe tyll Abraham. vi. the 
                     ••
                  ate of it in thys tyme. 
                     •
                  xxi
                     ••
                  j. how much God careth for his churche and congregation. xxv. where it is▪ lxxxix. 
                     •••
                  o was be
                     •••
                  ycyall to it. fo. Cxliij.
               Chriſt
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  e kyng of Denmarke after hys returne taken pryſoner of hys owne councell. CCx
                     •
                  ix. CCix
               Cicero fo. lxxxiij
               Cy
                     ••
                  o
                     •
                   ſonne to Mil
                     ••
                  ad
                     •
                  s. fo▪ x
                     •
                  iij
               C
                     ••
                  bri the Germaines of Go
                  
                     ••
                  er. v. the bat
                     ••
                  ll o
                     •
                   
                  
                     ••••
                  ri wyth the Romayns. lxxxi.
               Cir
                     •
                  umciſion is the token of promyſe. ix. when the circumciſion was geuen 
                     •
                  o▪ x
               Clauſe Roda
                     •
                  i was buylded of Iulius Ceſar. fo. C
                     •
                  x.
               Cland
                     ••
                  s. fo. xc
               Clemens the ſeuenth is taken C
                     •
                  xxxix. the notable cru
                     •
                  ltye of Clewence wy
                     •
                  h. of Rome agaynſt 
                     •
                  ouradus. Clxviij. 
                     ••••••
                  t dy
                     •
                  th. CCv
               Clemency after victory. Cxiij
               Cleopatra. lxiiij▪ ſy
                     ••
                  er to Iulius. fo. lxxi.
               Cle
                     •
                  e. CCxlvi. CC
                     •
                  ij.
               C
                     •••
                  s fo. 
                     •
                  xij
               Collection for the poore. CCxxi lv
                     •
                  .
               Co
                     ••
                  etes ſe
                     •
                  e. Cv▪ Cxci clxxxix in the tyme of Nero. x
                     •
                  i▪ before peſtylence and fa
                     •
                  yn, 
                     〈…〉
                   Iohn Frederikes ty
                     •
                  e duke of Saxony Cxc
                     ••
                  
               
               Comod
                     •
                  s fo. xcvi
               Co
                     •••
                  otious of vpla
                     •
                  dy
                     ••
                  e 
                     ••
                  en fo. Clxxxvij
               Commotion in Cornewall. fo. CC
                     •
                  xxviij.
               Councell of Nice. C
                     ••
                  . Baſell Cixxx. Raiueſborough. Cxcvi. Ma
                     ••••
                  a. CC. Witteborough CCxiiij. Rome. CCxxi. lviij.
               Co
                     •
                  cyra the Turke 
                     •••
                  adeth, fo. CCxc fo. Cx
                     •
                  iiij.
               Conſt
                     •
                  ns pry
                     •
                  ely inuadeth. CClxxiij.
               Con
                     〈…〉
                  s. Ci
                     •
                  . Cv. he becommeth an A
                     •••
                  an. fo Ciii
                     •
                  .
               Co
                     •••••
                  t
                     •••
                  s. 
                     •
                  . Ciij. hys dilig
                     •
                  nce to hepe the Goſpell. Ciij. the aunceters of hym, Ciii
                     •
                  
                  ▪ the ſo
                     ••
                  e of Hera
                     •
                  lius, Cxxiiij. Pogonatus 
                     •••
                  . y• 
                  
                     •
                  o
                     •••
                  
                  
of Leo was 
                     •
                  urnamed Copro
                  
                     •
                  ius. Cxxv. Leo the fourth ſo
                     ••
                  e. ibidem. Emperoure of Conſtantinople. fo. Clxxxij.
               Conſtantinople. Ciij. a notable crueltye of the Turke, whan he had wonne it. Clxxxij. Propheſyes of recoueryng of it. fo. Cxc.
               Conrad the fyrſt. Cxxxvij. duke of Frankes. C
                     •
                  l. the ſeconde vproure was wyth hys brother. ibidem. the thyrde was hys owne ſonne. ibidem. the ſecond. cxlviij. a Swabe
                     •
                  . cl
                     •
                  ij he went to Ieruſalem againſt the Sarace
                     •
                  s. ibidem. The fourth. fo. Clxvij
               Cop
                     •
                  nhagen beſyeged by the kyng. ccxiiij. the vniuerſyte furnyſhed. fo. ccxiij.
               Corona taken. Cxcix.
               Coſdroa kyng of the Perſyans fo Cxxi.
               Creſcenti
                     •
                  s a Romayne punyſhed for couetyng the empyre fo. Cxliiij.
               Creſus kyng of Aſia. xxxiij. his ſayeng. ibidem. a 
                     •
                  ery ſayeng fo. xxx
                     •
                  iij
               Cruelltye. xxxij. xxxiij xxxvi
               C
                     ••
                  o duke of Bayre. fo. Cl
               Cyprianus the marter. xcix
               Cyrillus made anſwere to Iulia
                     •
                  us Apoſtata cvij
               Cyrus. xxxi. lij. hys kinred extinguiſhed. liij. hys father xxxi. what is to be conſydered in hym. xxxiiij. howe he gatt Babylon. ibidem. he was taught of Da
                     •
                  iell. xxxv. hys ſayeng, ibid. the battel of the S
                     ••
                  
                  thia
                     •
                  s agaynſt him. xxxvi.
               Cyrſylus▪ xlv. he and hys 
                     •
                  yfe are ſtoned. fo. xlv
            
            
               D
               Dalmacyans flye to the Turkes. CCxxvi.
               Damaſ
                     •
                  us the kyngdome of Mahomet. fo. Cxxij.
               Danyell a youngman. xviij. xc. a councelar of kynge Cyrus. xxxvi. of y• Pe
                     •
                  ſeis. xxxvi his place of the vij weekes. xli
                     •
                  . a place of Mahomet is expounded. fo. cxiij.
               Darius raygneth wyth Cyrus xxx. how great a ſettyng forth he made into Grece. xlii
                     •
                  . the laſt. lii
                     •
                  . is ouercome of Alexander. lxij. is made kynge of Perſia. xli. hys graue ſayenge. fo. xlij
               Dauid fo. xiiij.
               Decius Ceſar fo. xcviij
               De
                     •
                  etrius kyng of Macedonia. lxv. lxvi. lxx. Deſiderius kyng of 
                     •
                  ombardy. Cxxx.
               Diethricus of Ber
                     •
                  a. ſome call him Theodorus. cxiij Cxiij.
               Didius Iulius. fo. xcvi.
               Digeſtes. fo. cxix.
               Diocletianus. fo. Cij.
               Diuiſion after Gregorius the eleuenth. fo. clxxvi
               Doctrine before the worldes 
                     ••
                  de. fo. xvij.
               
                  Dogges & cattes eaten. ccxiiij.
               Dogges beyng f
                     ••
                  thfull. xxxix
               Dolphyn and Armeniackes go into Germany. fo. clxxxij
               Domiti
                     •
                  n. fo. xciij
               Dominick and Franciſ. clxiij
               
                  
                     •••
                  col
                     ••
                   the wal
                     •
                  che. clxxx. he gaue Dladiſtaus an horſſe, ibidem
               Dronkennes 
                     •
                  ringeth in moſt wy
                     •
                  ked ma
                     •
                  ers. fo. xxxix
               Dr
                     •
                  ſ
                     ••
                  s. fo. lxxxviij
            
            
               E
               Earthquake. fo. ccxliiij
               Ebr
                     •
                  rous duke, cxxxviij. the Palat
                     ••
                  e fo. cxl.
               E
                     •
                  ki
                     •
                  s. ccxxxiiij. hys death fo. ccxlix
               Eclips of the ſo
                     ••
                  e. xcviij
               Eclips. fo. cclij
               Edo
                     •
                   fo. cxxiij
               Edo
                     ••
                  tes fo. x
               Edward du
                     •
                  e of Some
                     •
                  ſ
                     •
                  t and lorde protector, committ
                     •
                  d to the Tower. ccl
                     •
                  xv. delyuered out agayne. cclx
                     •
                  vi
               Edward the thyrd kyng of England and Frederyke ea
                     •
                  le of Miſ
                     •
                  n refuſeth the dignitye Emperiall. fo. clxxiiij
               Egypte was garnyſhed wyth Mathematycall ſcyences, x
                     •
                  v. from whence they come and there kyngdome. viij.
               Eguſa the battel there. lxxvij
               Elyas was in the myddell part of the world fo. xv
               Elye hath diuided the world i
                     •
                   thre ages, * xij. he was taken vp in to heauen in the myddel age of the worlde. fo. xv
               Elizens ibidem
               S. Elizabeth. fo. clxiiij.
               Emanuel Emperoure of Conſtantynople fo. clvij
               Emperoure, he muſte be ſaued & kept by al meanes, * xv
               Emperoure haue there boundes. x
                     •
                  ij. the empyre is tranſlated to the Saxons, cxxxviij. the endeuour and faythfulnes in kepynge of the empyre, cxliiij. a rehearſall of the Emperoures o
                     •
                   Rome that was excommunicated. clxiiij. the Emperoure turneth into Italy. cxcix. cc. ccx
                     •
                  . ccxxij. by what occaſion the All
                     •
                  ain
                     •
                  s deceyuer from the empyre. cxxi
                     •
                  
               
               he commeth into Flaunders thorough Fraunce. ccxxvi. to Paris. ccxxviij▪ he forbyddeth good bokes to be redde. ccxxx. ccxxxij. ccxxxviij. ccxlviij. ccxlv ccl. ccliij. cclxiiij. cclxxiiij
               E
                     ••
                  as. xxi. Sil
                     •••
                  s. clxxviij.
               Enoch is an example of euerlaſtyng lyfe. ij. hys cyte. ij.
               Eloes fo. v.
               Eraſmus death. fo. ccxvi.
               Erforde fo. clxi
                     •
                  
               
               Erneſtus duke of Swaben fo. cxlviij
               Eſay. xvi. hys death. xvij.
               Eſau. 
                     •
                  . wherfore he was called Edome. fo. x
               
                  Eſdras was learned in the parſian toung. xxi
                     •
                  . he gathered together the bokes of the byble. fo l
                     •
                  j
               Eſſeis. fo. lxxiiij
               Eaſten ryche the fyrſte mencion cxlix. when there dukedome began fo. clix
               E
                     •
                  il
                     •
                  erodach fo. xix.
               Euphrates xxxiiij.
               Euangelycall bound is opened by the French kynge. fo. cc ccxiij.
               Example for all kynges. ccxiiij
               Examples of 
                     •
                  engeaūce. iij. xi. xv. xxvi. xxvij. lix. lxv. lxvij. lxxvi. xcvij. xcix. cvi. cviij. cxiij cxxi. cxxiiij. cxl. cliiij. clxx
               Example of grace and good
                  
                     •
                  eſſe fo. x. clxiij
               Example of the feare of God. fo. xvi. lxvi
               Example of pytie. xxxiij.
               Example of greate crueltye fo. xxxvi.
               Example of notable intemperaunce fo. xl.
               Example of vnkyndnes. liij.
               Example 
                     •
                  o maynteyne vnitye fo. 
                     •
                  vi
               Example of mans wyſedome, fo. lxix
               Example of the vehemēt wrath of god. fo. lxxxi. xcij
               Exāple of diſloyaltye. cxij. cxvi
               Example of maintenance of vertue fo. xcvij.
               Example of great preſumption fo. xcix
               Example that noman can hurte hym whome God wylleth good. fo. cxlv
               Ezechias. xvi. a godly king. i
                     •
                  i.
            
            
               F
               Fabian and Cyprian martyres fo. xcix. xcviij.
               Felix byſhop of Rome, a diſſembler fo. cvi
               Ferdynand kyng of Hungary fo. clcxxix. ccxxxij.
               Figures of croſſes ſene vpon garmentes. fo. clxxxvi.
               Flauius Claudius fo. c
               Fleſhe eaten and fyrſt permitted fo. iij
               Focas dyd graunte the fyrſte prymacy to the byſhop of Ro. fo. cxxi.
               Forgettfulnes of iniu
                     •
                  yes is ordeyned. fo. lvi.
               Frankes are ouercome in battayll. c. they ſett them ſelues agaynſt the Romaines, ibid. there of ſprynge. cxxviij. there deedes and by what occaſion they deceyuered from the empyre. ibidem. the dukes of Frankes come of 
                     •
                  ewes the gentell. cxxxiij. the occaſion of battel betwene the Frankes and Saxons. fo. 
                     •
                  xx
                     ••
                  ij.
               Francia or Fraunce is part of Gallia, cxxix. by what occaſion Gallia or Fraunce was dyuyded from Germanye. cxxxiij. French threatenynges fo. cxxxiiij
               Fraunces the french kynge taken▪ fo. clxxxvij
               
                  
                     〈1… pages missing〉
                  
                  holy and prophane *x What they doo teache* x. the Germaines hyſtorye wryters wer vnlearned. cxlv. the hiſtories of the Iewes are elder then the Greekes. fo. xx. the hiſtoryes of the grekes begyune at the Perſians. fo. xxviij
               Himelſuita. fo. cxij.
               Hipocrates fo. lvij
               Hiſtius ſubteltye in makyng an vproure. fo. xliij
               Hollande and Sealande, there was a greate inundatyon of water. cxcix
               Homerus when he lyued. xxiiij his bokes are a mirror. xxv
               Honorius fo. cix
               Hungaryans are called. cxvi they are aſſalted wyth warre by Charles the greate, cxxxi. they ſpoyle Germany and Italy. cxxxvi. they be vanquiſhed. cxli. they becoome contrybutaryes to the Turke CCxxxi. CCxxxij
               Hungarye a greate example. xviij
               Hugo: prynce of Frauce, cxlij Hulderych Zuinglius▪ fo. Clxxxviij. CCxiiij
               Huldryke duke of Wyrtenberg reſtored to hys d
                     •
                  my
                     •
                  yon. ccij
               Hunyades hurteth the Turkes greueouſly. clxxxi.
               Huſſe in Bohem ryſeth agaynſt the pope. Clxxvi. Clxxviij
            
            
               I
               Iacob. x. he was called Iſrael. x
               Iaddus the hyghe prieſte▪ lxiij.
               Wherfore Ianus hath two viſages fo. iiij
               Ianna the ſecōd Hyrcanus. lxxij
               Iames the moor lxxvi
               Iames the kyng of Scottes ma ryeth the Freinch kynges daughter. ccxvi
               Iaphet iiij
               Iaſon monynge Antiochus to take Hieruſalem lxviij
               Idolatry the fyrſt occaſyon, ix. the hedde thereof .xxiij. the kyndes of it by the Grekes. xxiij. the puniſhment of idolaters. xvi. howe muche it differeth from Chriſtianyte xxiij. and Idoll in the temple of God fo. lxix. xc
               Ieconias hauynge a truſte to gods promyſes is kept, xviij. The Iewes are eldar. xv. the rayſe an vproure thorough one Meſſias. xcv. are mooſte auncient. xx.
               Ieruſalem the ſtate of it vnder Antiochus. lxvij. the deſtruction. xix. xcij. ſtraunge thinges ſeen before the deſtruction of her. xciij
               Ieſus the hygh prieſt, fo. xxxv.
               Ioachas. xviij. Ioachim or Ieconias. ibid. Ioakim. ibidem.
               Ioachim the yong marques of Branden borough. CCxxix
               Ioiada. xv. Ioachim. xv.
               Ioas. xv. Ioathain. xvi.
               Ihon Hercanus. lxxiij.
               Iohn Baptiſt. lxxvi
               Iohn the Apoſtle returneth out

of Pathmos fo. xciiij
               Ihon Stabius an Aſtronomer fo. cxlv
               Ihon the eyght byſhop of Ro. a woman fo. cxxxiiij
               Ihon Chriſpus fo. ccxx
               Ihon the twelfth byſhop of Ro me boſtede fo. clxxiij
               Ihon kynge of Hieruſalē. clxv.
               Ihon Huſſe teacheth openly agayuſt pardons, fo. clxxvi clxxviij
               Ihon Caſſels burned cclxx.
               Ihon Humyades fo. clxxxi
               Ihon Oecolāpadius. clxxxviij
               The death of Iohn duke of Saxon. fo. cxcix
               Ihon Wida kyng of Hungary fo. ccxxxij
               Ihon Diaſy fo. cclxiij
               Ihon Ecke fo. ccxxviij
               Iohaune bocher fo. cclxxvij
               Ihon Frederike duke of Saxon taken captyue, fo. cclxxiiij
               Images and beades put doune in England fo. cclxxij
               Iuſurrectiou at Gent, ccxxvi
               Ionas fo. xvi
               Iona has fo. lxxij
               Ioram a ſetter vp of new idolatry fo. xv.
               Ioſaphat ſtudioſe in religion fo. xv
               Ioſeph a man ſage and holy. x.
               Ioſias fo. xvij
               Iones are the fyrſt Grekes. iiij
               Ioui
                     •
                  ianus a godly Emperour fo. cvij
               Irene daughter to the Emperour of Conſtahtynople. clxij
               Iren cxxv
               Irnerius the reſtorar of the lawes clvi
               Iſake a figur of Chriſt fo. x
               Iſmael fo. x
               Iuda a kyngdom fo. xix
               Iudges at Athens dyd ſweare fo. lxiij
               Iudas Machabeus power. lxix lxxij
               Iudyth xlviij
               Iulianus Apoſtata. cvi▪ he is made Emperour, ibidem▪ at Straſborough. cvi. he forbad Chriſten men the authorytye of warrfare. cvij. hys death is an exāple of veugeauuce. cvij
               Iulyau the Cardynal. fo. clxxxi
               Iulius a man aduyſed, and a louer of peace. lxxxiij. he is called Ceſar, lxxxvi The orderyng of the yeare was begoen lxxxiiij
               Iulius byſhop of Rome was diſcomfyted in a battayl by the cyte Raueunas vpon Eaſter day fo. clxxxvi
               Iupiter called vpou agayuſt tempeſts. xxiij
               Iuſtmus, cxviij. the ſecond. cxx.
               Iuſtinianus, cxviij. cxxiiij. he reſtored the lawes. fo. cxix
            
            
               K
               The kyngdome of the worlde and Chriſtes kyngdome * xvi
               Que
                     •
                   Katheryn dowager dyeth, fo. ccx
               The inſtitution of kyngdomes

and of kynges is of God. xiij
               The chaunſyng and re
                     ••
                  ynge of kyngedomes diſpleaſeth God. riiij. What the mutations of them do ſignifie. cxcij
               Kyng of Anabaptilles Knypperdullynge & Crafting fo. CCviij
            
            
               L
               Lacedemonians valiauntnes, xlv. they fyght with the Thebaus: and are diſco
                     •
                  ſyted. lvi
               Landerſey Landtgraue fo. CClvij.
               Lati
                     •
                  er at libertye fo. cclxxiij
               Latium fo. Cxxi
               The inſtitution of cyup
                     •
                   power and of all lawes i. clvi
               Lawes cyuyll reſtored by Iuſtinianus fo. Cxix
               Law was geuen fo. xi
               Lawes of Solou concernyng vagabounds. fo. xxxviij
               Lawes of the Romaynes. lviij the occaſion of them. lviij
               Lawes of Draco. xxxviij
               Lawfull callyng muſt be enſued fo. lxv
               Le
                     •
                  t fo. xcv
               Leo the thyrde named Leouomachus fo. Cxxv
               Leo the fourth Cxxv.
               Leo
                     •
                  t
                     ••
                  s ibidem
               Lewes the gentyll. cxxxij. he is taken by hys ſonne. Cxxxiij
               Lewes the ſeconde buryed at Mylan. Cxxxiiij
               Lewes the thyrd. Cxxxvi. he is reſtored to ye realme of fraūce Cxlij.
               Lewes the berdyd. Cxli
                     •
                  
               
               Lewes the Landtgraue. Clxv
               Lewes the Bayer. fo. Clxxi
               Lewes is excōmunicated. clxxij
               Lewes the Romayn. Clxxiij
               Lewes king of Fraūce. clxxxvi
               Liberius byſh▪ of Rom. cvi.
               Linus byſh▪ of Rom. xci
               Lombardy. fo. Cxv
               Longimanus, wyth the long haud fo. xlviij
               Lotho
                     •
                  ius. Cxxxij. the Saxon, Cxv. the brethren of hym were theſe: Lewes, Germanicus, & Charles the bolde. Cxxxiij.
               Lothring. ibidem
               Laurentius Miniatenſis, an aſtronomer fo. Cxc
               Lub
                     •
                  cke fo. Clix
               Lucius Warrus. fo. xcv
               Lucrece xxvij.
               Lupoldus▪ Clxxij. duke of Eaſtenryche. Clxxv. was ſlayne by the Swytzers. ibid▪
               
               Luxſborough parliamente. fo
                     •
                   fo. CCxlij.
               Lyſander fo. liiij
            
            
               M
               The Macedonians. iiij. the occaſyon of the warre of Macedonia. lxxviij
               Machabees. lxxiij. the power of them. lxix. ther kyngs. lxxiij
               Macrinus fo. xcvij
               Magi fo. iiij
               Magog fo. Cxxiij
               Magnentius an example of vn kyndnes. Cvi. he ſlayeth hym ſelfe fo. cvi.
               
                  Mahomete. xcvi. wounders ſeen in Italy before hys commyng. Cxx. the occaſions of hys kyngdome. Cxxi. why his religion is accepted. lxix. the form of his relygiō. Cxxij. an Arabiā prophet. Cxxi. he ſubdued Arabia. Cxxij. Why he wold be called a Sara
                     •
                  en for an Agaren, ibidem. they beſieged Hadriantum. Clxxxiiij. the place of Danyel, of Mahomet. Cxxij. what he ſygnifyeth. fo. Cxxiij
               Manfyld battayll C
                     ••
                  iij
               Manaſſe a wycked kyng. xvij. an example of repentaunce, fo. xv
                     ••
                  .
               Manes begynner of the Manache
                     •
                  s ſect borne in Perſia, Ci. hys doctryne. ibidem
               Manichei ibidem
               Mantua fo. cxcix
               Marcus Cicero fo. lxxxvi
               Marcus Antonius fo. xcv
               Mardonius a capitayne. xlvij
               Mariages of prieſtes. CClxxv
               Maran. fo. CCxxxix
               Mary lady Regent. fo. Cxivi
               Marques of Brandenborough receaueth the goſpell. CCxxx
               Marius was made captayn agaynſt the Cimbry. lxxxi. he was cauſſer of an vproure lxxxi hys tyranny. lxxxij.
               Martyn Luther. Clxxxvij. dyeth. fo. CCix.
               Marten of Roſheim. CCxliij
               Mary Lady Regent enuadeth Picardy. fo. CCxix
               Mathath
                     ••
                  s fo. 
                     •
                  xx
                     •
                  j
               Mathematica ars dryuen oute of Rome. fo. xciij
               Maurice duke. fo. CCxl. cclvi. cclxviij.
               Mauritius Emperour. Cxx.
               Maximianus fo. Cii
               Maxentius. ibid. he was drowued in the Tybur fo. Ciij
               Maximilian. Clxxxiij. is taken at Brudges. Clxxxiiij. he war r
                     •
                  eth agaynſt the Venetians, fo. Clxxxvi
               Maximinus ſubdued Germany. fo. xcvij
               Maximinus and Arbogaſtes are examples of diſ
                     •
                  oyalte, Cviij. he warreth agaynſt the Venetians fo. cviij
               Meghlyne burned. fo. cclxv
               Mo
                     •
                  ta
                     ••
                  te behedded. ccxxv.
               Melanthon & Eckius. ccxxxiij the reaſon concernyng religion. ccxxviij
               Men tenne in nomber were ſent to Grece. lviij. they were depoſed fo. lix
               Metaſthenes fo. xxix
               Meſius ſuffeſius death. xxvij
               Micheas fo. xvi.
               Melciades counſell. xliij. He was yll entreated of the Athenians. xliij. hys renowmed victory ibidem
               Mylane. Clix. ccxi. the duke maryeth y• kyng of Denmarkes daughter. CCvi. ccxi.
               Minia. fo. xxij
               Myns of ſyluer in Miſia, who found them fyrſt. cxliij
               
                  Mithridates. fo. lxxxi.
               Monarchies what they are and of what puiſſance* xiiij. there be onely foure Monarchyes, xiiij. they are propoued to Dauyell. v. the ende of the fyrſte Monarchy. xx. a monarchye is the beſt forme of an empyre or realme. xl. the begynnynge of the thyrde Monarchy. lix. Wherefore Monarchyes are chefly ordeyned of God. cxx
                     •
                  i Wherfore Monarchyes and princes are ſent of God. lxxvij
               Monaſteryes were ſcholes in tyme paſt fo. cxxxi
               Syr Thomas Moore Chauncelor of England: and the byſhop of Rocheſter, behedded fo. ccix
               The b
                     ••
                  es of Moſes are found fo. xvij
               Moonkes are brought to wryte clvij
               Maurus duke. fo. ccxl. cclvi. cclxviij.
            
            
               N
               Nabuchodoneſor. xviij. He was conuerted by Danyell, fo. xix
               Narſes, fo. cxiiij. cxviij
               Nathan Dauid ſonne▪ fo. xv.
               Nau
                     ••
                  u fo. clxxxiij
               The Counte of Naſowe ccxiii Naxus ccxx
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  oth gods hoo
                     •
                  ter. vi.
               Nero fo. xc
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   fo. xciij
               Nyce Counſell fo. ciij
               The Emperour enterteyned at Nyce. fo. ccxxij
               Nicolaus the noble. fo. clxxiij
               Nicolaus the fyft a fauourer of learnyng fo. clxxxiiij
               Nichomachus fo. lviij
               Ninine fo. vi
               Ninus kyng of Spria fo. vij.
               Norynbergh is taken by Henry the fyft. cliij. ccxxxv. the Caſtel buylded. fo. ccxxiiij.
               Normandys fell into Frannce cxxxv. they are ouercome, fo. cxxxv
               Norwych inſurrectyon. cclxxv Nouacyaus hereſy is condemned fo. xcix
               Caſtel nona cunaded. fo. ccxxiij
               Numitor fo. xxv
               Nuce clxxxiii
            
            
               O
               Occan a reprouer of the byſh. of Rom. fo. clxxij
               Ochoſias fo. xv
               Octanius Auguſtus. fo. lxxxvi
               Oecolampadius l
                     •
                  xxxviij
               Olympians began. fo. xx.
               Oldenborough Erle, and the Lubycks innaded the Dukedome of Holſats fo. cciij.
               Onedeluburgh Orchomenus. fo. xxij
               Origen a reacher of Alexandri fo. xcvi.
               Oſeas. fo. xvi.
               Otanes fo. xl.
               Othacarus. cxij. kynge of the Bohems. fo. clxix
               
                  Othomannus. Cxxiij. Clxx.
               Otho the tyr
                     •
                  t. xci. Cxl. the vpcoures rayſed agaynſt hym, cxl. the aunſwere of hym to the Frēchmens threatenyngs cxli. duke of Saxon. cxxxvij. he made the firſte an othe to to the byſhop of Rome. cxliij. the ſecond. cxliij. he was taken by Maryners. cxliiij. The Frenche men are ſubdued of hym. ibidem. the thyrd, called the wounders of the worlde. ibid. he was poyſoned. cxlvi. the fourth. clxij. clxiij. of Wytelſpach. clxiij.
               Ochyas whyche is called 
                     ••
                  aries. fo. xvi.
            
            
               P
               Padua an vninerſyte cxxxi.
               Paiaſetus a Turkyſhe Emperour was ſubdued and brought low clxxvij.
               Palatyne the Countyes. cxlvi. cl
                     ••
                  . ye annceters of Palatyne came of Charles the greate. fo. cxxix. ccliiij
               Papinianus a lawyar. xcvi.
               Peafable ſtudyes. lxx. xciiij
               Parmenian fo. lcij
               The Perſyans inuade Meſopotamia fo. ccxix
               Paul the thyrde choſen to be pope. fo. ccv
               Paul is behedded fo. xci
               Paulus Eemilius lxxix
               S. Paul beſyeged fo ccxix
               Peace graūted. ccij. cciij. ccxiiij fo. ccxxij
               Peace procured betwene Englande and Fraunce. ccliiij. cclxix
               Pelagius an heretique. cix. was byſhop of Rome. cxiiij.
               Peron beſeged. ccxiij.
               Perdicus was healed of Hypocrates. lvij. lxiiij. hys art. lxiiij
               Perſys are example of diſlopalte, lv. when the monarchye of the Perſyans begaun. xxvij the delyberation of them xl. of Perſia of the kyngdom fo. xl.
               Perſequntion for the true ſeruyce of God. fo. ij
               Perſecutyon moſt tyrannycall, fo. lxxvij.
               Perſeus the laſt kyng of Mace donia, ſonne to Philip. lxxviij
               Peſtes fo. ccxl
               Philip. lxxviij. Philip deſtroyeth the Thebans. lvij. his dreames. lx. he was ſlayne becauſe he left a wycked dede vnpuniſhed. fo. lxi.
               Philip Bardeſanes. cxxv. ſonne to Maximiliane clxxxvi
               Peter was crucifyed xci.
               Phariſees fo. lxxiiij.
               Philip was the fyrſte Chriſten Emperour & baptyſed. xcviij
               Philip Emperour. clxi. he was ſlayne of Otho at Wytelſpach by entrape. clxiij.
               Philip ſonne to Maximilian, dyeth fo. clxxxvi
               Philip Landtgraue cci.
               Phylyp ye Palatyn put to flyght

and wounded. CCij
               Philip Melanthon. ccxxviij
               Philoſophy wyth the Grekes. fo. xxxvi
               Philoſophers of Ionia and Italy. ibidem
               Pipinus. Cxxvi. kyng of Germany and Gallia. fo. Cxxix
               Platea fo. xliij.
               Plato: Endoxus: Ariſto. lvij the philoſophy of Plato. xcvi
               Ply
                     •
                  y benefycyall to the Chriſtians. fo. xciiij
               Poets fyrſt of great renoumes, fo. xxiiij
               Polmices fo. xxii.
               The pope meteth the Emperoure at Bonony, fo. cxcix
               Popery abolyſhed in the lande of Saxon. fo. CCxviij
               Pope fo. CCxxxiij. Clxiiij.
               Poperye put donne. CCliiij.
               Popilius an Ambaſſadoure of Rome ſent to Antiochus. lxviij The conqueſt of the kynge of Portugals Iudes. CCxvi
               Poſthumus xcix.
               Praga
                     •
                  an vninerſytye in Bohemy fo. Clxxii
               Preraſpis fo. xxxviij
               Prince, an exāple that princes do oft warre not conſtrayned by neceſſyte. xxxiiij. prynces were called iudges. xi
                     •
                  i. what muſt be marked in the examples of prynces *. vi. to what prynces the electyon is committed. Cxlv. what profet is by the prynces electors. Cxlvi The prynces of Brunſwycke came of Catnly. Clvl.
               Pryntyng fo. Clxxxv.
               Preachyng fyrſt of the Goſpel fo. i.
               Preachars of the Goſpell. i. ordeyned in Sauoy. CCix. ccxv.
               Probus fo. Ci
               Proca fo. xxv
               Proſperytye commeth of God clxxx
               Prolemeus. lxiiij. Euergetes. lxvi. lxxi. Philometor. lxviij. lxxi. the ſonne of Lagus. lxx. Philadelphus. lxx. both louyng peace and ſeyence. ibid. hys lybrary. ibid. Anletes. lxxi Aſtronomer. xcv.
               Phiſopater. lxvij. lxxi. Epiphanes. fo. lxxi
               Phiſco. lxxi. Alexander. ibi. Latyrus. ibi. Diomſius. ibidem
               Puiſſance of men ought not to be truſt in. fo. xl
               Pyrcamer. fo. clxxxv
               Pythagoras begynnar of Philoſophars in Italy. xxxvij.
            
            
               Q
               Quedeluburgh Cxliij
               Quintilius Varus. lxxxviij.
            
            
               R
               Radagaſus fo. Cx
               Rainſborough. CCxxxij. cclxxij
               Rauens or Ranenoſe beaſts. xij in nombre that Romulus ſaw fo. Cxi
               Rea Siluia xxv
               Recantation of Doctor Smyth fo. CClxxij
               Regenſpurg. Cxli. parliament fo. Cxc.
               Rekenynge of the Grekes and

Philo xxviij.
               Regulus is taken by the Carthagmians. lxxvij. Hys torments. ibidem. hys lone and faythfullnes towarde the common wealth ibidem
               Rhecia lxxxviij
               Remus xxvi.
               Rigour in gouernāce is allowed of God. *
               Riſaua taken fo. CCxxiij.
               Roboam fo. xiiij
               Romulus. xxvi. the ſtryfe of Romulus and Remus. xxvi. whā Rome was buylded. ibidem. It was burned of the French men. lix. The diſcomfytynge of the Romaynes in the ſeconde warre of Carthago. lxxviij. The Romayn Monarchy is the laſte on the yearth fo. lxxxv.
               Rome taken by duke Burbon. clxxxviij. an ouerflowenge at Rome. Clxxxix. An example of Romayn ſeneryte. lxviij
               The begynnyng of the Monarchy. lxxxiiij.
               Rome is waſted by Totylas. Cxiiij. The prayſes and profy tablenes of the Romayn lawes. fo. Cliii
               Roxan wyſe to Alexander. lxiiij
               Rudolphus is made emperoure of the biſhops at Phorcen ch
                     •
                   The complaynt of the Emperour vpon the biſhops ibid.
               Rudolfe of Habiſburge. clxviij
               Rupertus fo. clxxvi
            
            
               S
               Saducees. lxxiiij. they were epicures. ibidem
               Salfelde a dead place for councell. fo. Cxli.
               Salomon. fo. xiiij.
               Samaria is a fygure of the eaſt church. xvii. the occaſiō of the kyngdome of it. xiiij. The waiſtyng of Samaria. xvi.
               Saraceus kyngdome. there power. Cxxij. Cxxi
                     •
                  j
               Sapores kyng of the Perſyans xcix.
               Sardanapalus fo. viij
               Sardes fo. xliij
               Saul fo. xiiij
               Saxon CCxl.
               Saronye the duke of Saxon, wherfore he was made woun of ye electors. Cxlvi.
               Schapler a ſeditions man. clxxxviij
               Scotland inuaded. fo. CClij.
               Scipio ye yonger. lxxviij. Nauſica. lxxix. ſonne to Paulus Aemilius. lxxx. Sicilia was ye cauſe of the warre of Carthago. lxxvij. Why the kynges of it doo clayme the tytel of Hieruſalem. Clcv. The battail of the Scythians agaynſt Cyra, xxxvi. Scopa a captayne of Ptolomens by the ſchole of Alexandry. xcv.
               Se
                     •
                  ts ryſen in Iury. lxxiiij
               Sedechias deceaued by ye high prieſtes. xviij. hys death. ibid.
               Sedicious puniſhed. l
                     •
                  iiij. xci. cxxxix c
                     •
                  l. xiiij xliij. clv.
               Sel
                     •
                  n
                     •
                  ns lxvi. of w
                     •
                  ō he was ſtayn. lxvi. Philopater. lxvij.
               Sem. fo. iiij
               
                  S
                     •
                  miramis did were mens garmentes fo. vij.
               Se
                     •
                  eca. fo. xc.
               Sergius Galba. xci. vul
                     •
                  arned and a tyraunt fo. cxxxvi
               Ser
                     •••
                  s T
                     •
                  llius. xxvij.
               S
                     •
                  th
                     •
                   ij
               Shaue
                     •
                  burgh cclviij
               Shyltage 
                     •••
                  ned doune to the ground. cci.
               Shartou recauted cclxx
               S
                     •••
                  r
                     •
                  s fo. x
                     •
                  vi
               Sigebertus an hiſtory wryter. fo. clij.
               Sigiſ
                     ••
                  ū
                  
                     •
                  us emperour. cixxvij hys 
                     •
                  rp
                     •
                  d
                     ••
                   you agaynſte the Tu
                     •
                  k
                     •
                  . clxxix. the hiſtor
                     •
                  e of hym, wyth hys ſer
                     •
                  auntes, fo. clxxix.
               Simon. fo. lxxiij.
               Siſannes a wycked i
                     •
                  dge. xl.
               Socrates fo. lvij
               So dome is become a maryſh, x. Thr
                     •
                  e ſ
                     ••
                  ns ſeen together, x
                     ••
                  .
               Solon the gra
                     •
                  e and wryghte se
                     •••
                  nce of hym to Creſus. 
                     •
                  o. xxxii
                     •
                  . the author and begy
                     ••
                  ar of common lawes, fo. xxxvij
               Solituan wyth hys great hoſte be ſeged Uir
                     ••
                  a. clxxxviij. the 
                     •
                  econd breakyng of hym into Germany fo. cx
                     •
                  vi
               Sophi prince of the Perſpa
                     ••
                  s, 
                     ••
                  adeth the Turke. ccv.
               Sora
                     ••
                  s wrote the lyfe of Hypocrates. fo. ivij
               Soter. fo. lxvi.
               Sparta and Athens two 
                     •
                  yes of Grece iv
               Spa
                     •
                  yards found new I
                     •
                  des pl
                     ••
                  ty
                     •
                  ull of gold and ſyluer CC. When Spayn and part of Gallia was tra
                     •
                  ſlated 
                     •
                  rō the empyre. cxv. the 
                     •
                  ynges of Spayn 
                     •
                  o come of the Gothes fo. cxi
               Sp
                     •
                  ches fo. iiij
               Spyre fo. ccxxxv. ccl
               Stephen Gardener byſhop of Wincheſter cclxxviij
               Stewes put donne at London. fo. lxx
               Stephan was confirmed of Lewes fo. c
                     ••
                  xiij.
               S
                     ••
                  phan was ſtoned. xc. kynge of the Hungaayans. cxlviij
               Still
                     ••
                  o fo. cviij. cx
               Straw ha
                     •
                  s. cxlij
               Sultan or Soldan cxxij
               Swedeners rebell agaynſt ther kyng c
                     •
                  xlix
               Swines mo
                     •
                  th was the fyrſte 
                     •
                  yſhop of Rome, that chaunged hys 
                     ••
                  me. cxxxiiij. The Swytzers and there league clxxv. the power of them agay
                     ••
                  t the Dolphin. clxxxij. the warre agaynſt there neyghbours: them of Eaſtenriche. clxxxvi. the warre within themſelues, clxxxix
               Sibilla is not the proper name of a woman. xxiiij. they were worſhyppars of Idols. ibid.
               Silla. lxxxi. he feareth the inconſtancye of fortu
                     •
                  e. lxxxij. he was more cruell, than nede re
                     •
                  uyred ibidem.
               
                  Splueſter Byſhop of Rome a worker wyth euyll ſpirites, fo. cxlix
            
            
               T
               Twelf tables of the law. lix. a table of the worlds end. cxciiij
               Tacitus fo. x
               Tamerlanes a tyraunt of Tartary fo. clxxvij.
               Tarquinius Priſcus. xxvij
               Superbus ibid.
               Taſſilo duke of Bayerlande, was ouercome of Charles, fo. cxxx.
               Teia the laſt kynge of the Gothes. fo. xv.
               Theleſporus xcv
               An example of temperance xl.
               An horrible tempeſt CCxx
               Thales a begynner of philoſophi in Grece. xxxvij. he and Solon were both at one tyme xxxvij
               Thare. fo. ix.
               Thebes the occaſion of the battayll. xxi. the Thebanes deſtroye the Phocyans. lvij. the The warre ouercome & ſpoyled nether were reſtored agay
                     •
                   fo. l vij.
               Thefe taken. ccxxxi.
               Themiſ
                     •
                  ocles a defendor of the liberte of the country▪ xlv. his ſubtyl denyce. xlvi. he flieth t
                     •
                   Artaxerxes. xlvij. he is euyll rewarded. xlvij.
               Theodotius ouercometh the Gothyans. cviij. cx. cxxv. hys godlynes toward the church cix. the yonger. cxv.
               Theodatus fo. cxij
               Theramenes is putt to death, fo. lvi.
               Theos fo. lxvi
               Thomas Aqiunas. clxviij. Mi
                     •
                  
                  ter. ci. clxxxviij. moor. ccix. author of Anabaptiſtes. clxxxviij
               Thomas duke of Norfolk, committed to the Tower. cclxx
               Thraſibulus and hys prayre, fo. lvi.
               Thuryngen the begynnynge of the Erldome: a
                     •
                  d whence the lords therof fo. cxlix.
               Th
                     ••
                  ydydes. xxix. hys ſage 
                     •
                  ayenges con
                     •
                  ernyng hyſtoryes * iiij.
               Tyberius Arimarus. lxxxviij. lxxxix. cxx. cxxv
               Tigranes is ſlayn by Pompeius. fo. lxx.
               Titus ſonne to Veſpaſian befeged Hieruſalem. xcij. tenne hundreth thouſande perſones were in the cytie, when Ieruſalem was beſyeged. xcij. hys gentelnes. fo. xciij
               Tyraunts are to be marked * vi
               Thyrty ty rannts were ordeyned at A
                     •
                  h
                     •
                  us. lv.
               Totilas. cxi. he was taught by Be
                     •
                  et called the Say
                     •
                  t. cxiiij. he fyghteth 
                     ••
                  ckely. cxiij
               Traianus was of greate honeſty. xciij. hys ſage ſayng: whē he gaue hys head offycer t
                     •
                  e power of the ſworde. xciiij. Perſequ
                     •
                  tion of Chriſten men vnderneth hym. xciiij.
               
                  
hys age. xciiij.
               Tranſiluania called Seuenburgh fo. Cxxxi.
               Trem
                     •
                  tes fo. CCxlvi
               Tribunes were depoſed by Sylla. lxxxij. they are reſtored agayne by Pompeius. lxxxij.
               Truce taken. CCxcvi.
               Tullus Hoſtilius fo. xxvi.
               Th
                     ••
                  eſſe CCvi. CCvij
               Turck what it ſygnyfyed. cxxiij the Turkes were Cartarians Cxxiij. when they beganne to haue dominion. ibid. he prepareth an ar
                     ••
                  ye to in
                     •
                  ade the the Chriſtians. CCxix. they are beaſtes and not tyrauntes Clxxxiij. Turke car
                     •
                  eth away eight thouſand Chriſtians, in to Turky. CCxxvij. Turkes paſt
                     •••
                  e wyth Chriſtians. ccxxxvij. they in Turkey acknowledge our Chriſtian religion to be the beſte. CCxxvij. CCxxxv. CCxl. CCxlviij. CClix. the Turks eld
                     •
                  ſt ſonne maketh inſurrection agaynſt hys father. CClxxiiij.
               Truſt is not to be put in the h
                     •
                  lp of man. fo. lxxij.
               Tyri
                     •
                  th
                     •
                  s xxi.
               Twelue artycles of ſedicions r
                     •
                  ſtickes. Clxxxviij
            
            
               V
               Valens an Arr
                     •
                  an. Cviij
               Val
                     •
                  otinian
                     •
                  s. Cvij. Cxvi.
               Val
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  a
                     ••
                  s xcix
               Vandall
                     •
                  s came into Affrica. Cxv th
                     •
                  re fayth
                     •
                  ullu
                     •
                  s. Cxvi wh
                     •
                   they came 
                     •
                  yrſt into Germany fo. Cxvi.
               Varius Hehiogabalus. xcvij.
               Vardam battel. Clxxxi.
               Viſion of S. Vdalryke. Cxxxix
               Venece buylded fo. Cxvij
               Vengeaunce how it is forbydden. fo. Cvij
               Vertue of noble Dames in the cytie of Weniſburg. clviij.
               Veſpaſianus fo. xci.
               Vibius Gallus Cxcix
               Victoria a cyte. Clxvi
               Vindelicia fo. lxxxviij.
               Vitellius fo. xcvi.
               Vngodlyneſſe. xxiij. how much an vngodly doth differ from a Chriſtian. ibid.
               Vnkyndneſſe toward God and doughty perſons Clxxvij
               Vladiſlaus ky
                     •
                  g of Poole, xcvij.
               Vlpianus ibidem
               V
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  ſia
                     ••
                  s fo. x
                     ••
                  x
               Vrof the Caldeis. fo. ix.
               Vrbinas ſayeng. Clxxxiiij.
            
            
               W
               Wanderers in Germany and Gallia ſcourgyng themſelues fo. clxxiiij.
               Waalles of wood anſwere. xlv
               Warre of the Peloponneſes. lij the occaſion of it was lyghte and how long it laſted. 
                     •••
                  . of Cyr
                     •
                  s agay
                     •
                  ſt hys grandſather. xxx
                     ••
                  . of the 
                     •
                  y
                     •
                  pes. Clxxxij of lyght matters. liij. the occaſion of cyuyl warr
                     •
                  s. lxxxij.
               Willyā of Rogendorp. ccxxxvi
               William duke of Bayre. ccxliij
               
                  Wencelaus kyng of Bohemies made a ſainct. Clxix. Emperoure. Clxxvi
               We
                     •
                  uherus, a reſtorer of the lawes fo. Clvi
               Wertenberge Duchy when it beganne. Clxxxv
               Willyam of Sicilie. Clviij.
               Emperour fo. Clxviij.
               Wittichus fo. Cxiij.
               Wonders ſene in the tyme of ye Germaines warre. liiij.
               Wolfenb
                     •
                  tel. CCxli. CClv
               Wonderfull vicious. CCl. CClxxi. CClxxv.
               Wormes CClxxiij
               Wryters of Hiſtories. and Cronicles cxcij
            
         
         
            
               Seke peace and enſue it.
               Pſál. xxxiij. i. 
               Pet. iij.
            
            
               WL
               printer's device of Walter Lynne
            
            
               The feare of the lord is the beginnyng of Wyſedome.
               Pſalm. cxi. b. 
               Prou. ix. b. 
               Iob. xxviij. c 
               Eccle. i. c
            
            
               Imprynted at London for Gwalter Lynne, dwellynge on Somers Keye, by Byllinges gate.
            In the yeare of our Lord M. D. L.
            ¶ And they are to be ſolde in Paules church yarde, nexte the great Schole, at the ſygne of the ſprede Egle.
            Cum Priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
         
      
   