
      
         
            
            
            CARDAnus Comforte tranſlated into Engliſhe.
            ¶And publiſhed by commaundement of the right honourable the Earle of Oxenford.
            Anno Domini. 1573.
            Jmprinted at London in Fleeteſtreate, neare to S. Dunſtones Churche by Thomas Marſhe.
            ¶Cum Priuilegio.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT Honourable and my good Lorde the Earle of Oxeforde, Lorde great Chamberlaine of Englande.
            
               MY GOOD LORD, I can geeue nothinge moore agreable to your minde, and my fortune, then the willinge performance of ſuch ſeruice as it ſhall pleaſe you to cō
               maunde mee vnto. And therefore rather to obeye then boaſte of my cunninge, and as a newe ſigne of myne olde deuocion, I doe preſente the booke your Lordeſhip ſo longe deſired. VVith aſſured hope that how ſo euer you miſlike or allowe ther of, you will fauourably conſeale myne imperfections which to your Lordſhippe alone I dare diſcouer, becauſe moſt faithfully I honor and loue you. My long diſcontinuance of ſtudy, or rather the lacke of groū
               ded knowledge did many times diſcorage me, yet the pleaſure I tooke in the matter did counteruaile all diſpayre, and the rather by encouragement of you
                  •
                L. who (as you wel remember) vnwares to me foūd
                  •
                ſome parte of this worke, and willed me in any wy
                  ••
                to procede therin. My meaning was not to haue imparted my trauayle to any, but your honour hath 
                  〈◊〉
                to countermaund myne intencion. Yet I 
                  〈◊〉
                hūbly beſeech you either not to make any pertakers
 therof, or at the leaſt wiſe thoſe, whoe for reuerence to your L. or loue to mee, will willingly beare with myne errors. A nedeleſſe thinge I know it is to cō
               forte you, whom nature and fortune hath not onelye not iniured, but rather vpon whom they haue bountifully beſtowed their grace: notwithſtandinge ſith you delighte to ſee others acquited of cares, your L. ſhall not doe amiſſe to reade ſome part of Cardanus counſell: wherein conſideringe the manyfolde miſeries of others, you may the rather eſteeme your owne happye eſtate with encreaſe of thoſe noble and rare vertues which I know and reioyſe to be in you. Sure I am it would haue better beſeemed me to haue takē this trauaile in ſome diſcourſe of Armes (being your L. chiefe profeſſiō & mine alſo) thē in Philoſophers ſkill to haue thus buſied my ſelfe: yet ſith your pleaſure was ſuch, and your knowledge in eyther great, I do (as I will euer) most willinglye obeye you. And if anye either through ſkill or curioſity do find fault with mee, I trust notwithſtāding for the reſpects a
               
                  •••
               eſaide to be houlden excuſed. From my lodginge 
                  〈◊〉
                first of Ianuarye. 1571.
            
               Your L. alvvayes to commaunde Thomas Bedingfeld.
            
         
         
            
            To my louinge frende Thomas Bedingfeld Eſquyer, one of her Maieſties gentlemen Pentioners.
            
               
                  AFter I had peruſed youre letters good maiſter Bedingfeld, findinge in thē your requeſt farre differing from the deſert of your labour, I could not choſe but greatly doubt, whether it were better for me to yelde you your deſyre, or execute myne owne intention towardes the publiſhinge of youre Booke. For I do confeſſe the affections that I haue alwayes borne towardes you coulde moue mee not a little. But whē I had throughlye conſidered in my mynde of ſondrye and diuers argumentes, whether it were beſt to obeye myne affections or the merites of your ſtudyes. At the length I determined it better to denye your vnlawfull requeſt, then to graunte or condiſcende to the concealment of ſo worthy a worke. VVhereby as you haue bene profited in the tranſlatinge, ſo many may reape knowledge by the reading of the ſame, that ſhall comfort the afflicted, cōfirme the doubtful, encourage the cowarde, and lift vp the baſe minded man, to atchiefe to any true ſūme or grade of vertue, wherto ought onely the noble thoughtes of men to be enclyned. And becauſe next to the ſacred letters of Diuinitye, nothinge doth perſwade the ſame more then Philoſophye, of whiche youre booke is plentifully ſtored. I thought my ſelfe to cōmit an vnpardonable errour, to haue murthered the ſame in y• waſt bottomes of my cheſtes, and better I thought it were to diſpleaſe one, then to diſpleaſe many: further conſideringe ſo little a trifle cannot procure ſo great a breach of our amity, as may not with a little perſwaſiōs of reaſon be repayred agayne. And herein I am forced like a good and politicke Captaine, oftētimes to ſpoile & burne the corne of his owne coūtrey, leaſt his ennemyes therof do take aduaūtage. For rather then ſo many of your countreye men ſhoulde be de
               
                  •
               ided through my ſeniſter meanes of your induſtry in ſtudyes,
 (wherof you are bound in conſcience to yelde them an accōpte) I am content to make ſpoyle and hauocke of your requeſt, and that that might haue wrought greatly in me in this former reſpect, vtterlye to be of no effect or operation, and when you examine your ſelfe what doth auaile a maſſe of goulde to be continuallye impriſoned in your bags, and neuer to be employed to your vſe. I do not doubte euen ſo you thinke of your ſtudyes and delightfull Muſes. VVhat do they auaile, if you do not participate tbem to others? VVherfore we haue this latine Prouerbe. Scire tuū nihil est niſi te ſcire hoc ſciat alter. VVhat doth auaile the tree vnleſſe it yeld fruite vnto an other, vvhat doth auaile the Vyne vnleſſe an other delighteth in the Grape? Vvhat doth auaile the Roſe vnleſſe an other toke pleaſure in the ſmell? VVhye ſhould this tree be accompted better thē that tree, but for the goodnes of his fruite? VVhye ſhould this Vyne be better then that Vyne, vnleſſe it brought forth a better Grape then the other? VVhye ſhould this Roſe be better eſteemed thē that Roſe, vnleſſe in pleaſantnes of ſmel it farre ſurpaſſed the other Roſe? And ſo is it in al other thinges as well as in man. VVhye ſhould this man, be more eſteemed then that man, but for his vertue, throughe vvhich euerye man deſireth to be accompted of. Then you amongeſt men I do not doubt, but vvill aſpyre to followe that vertuous pathe, to illuſter your ſelfe vvyth the ornamentes of vertue. And in myne opynion as it beutifyeth a fayre vvoman to be decked with pearles and precious ſtones, ſo much more it ornifyeth a gē
               tleman to be furniſhed in mynde wyth glittering vertues. VVherefore conſidering the ſmall harme I do to you, the great good I do to others I prefer myne ovvne intention to diſcouer your volume, before your requeſt to ſecrete ye ſame: VVherein I may ſeeme to you to playe the part of the cunninge and experte Medeciner or Phiſition, vvho althoughe his pacient in the extremitye of his burninge Feuer, is deſirous of colde liccour or drincke to qualefye his ſore thirſt, or rather kill his languiſhinge bodye. Yet for the daunger hee doth euidentlye knowe by his ſcience to enſue, denyeth
 hym the ſame. So you beinge ſicke of to much doubte in your owne procedinges, throughe which infirmitye you are deſirous to burye and inſeuill your workes in the graue of obliuion. Yet I knovvinge the diſcommodityes that ſhal redounde to your ſelfe thereby (and whiche is more vnto your Coūtreyemen) as one that is vvilling to ſalue ſo great an incōuenience, am nothing dainty to denye your requeſt. Againe we ſee, if our frendes be deade, vve cannot ſhewe or declare our affection more then by erectinge them of Tombes: vvhereby vvhen they be deade in deede, yet make vvee them liue as it vvere againe through theyr monument, but vvyth me behold it happeneth farre better, for in your lyfe time I ſhal erect you ſuch a monumēt, that as I ſaye in your life time you ſhall ſee hovve noble a ſhadowe of your vertuous life, ſhal hereafter remaine vvhen you are deade and gone. And in your life time againe I ſay, I ſhall giue you that monument and remembraunce of your lyfe, vvhereby I may declare my good vvill thoughe vvith your ill vvill as yet that I do beare you in your life. Thus earneſtlye deſyringe you in this one requeſt of myne, as I vvould yelde to you in a great manye, not to repugne the ſettinge forth of your ovvne proper ſtudyes. I bid you farevvel.
            ¶From my newe countrye Muſes at VViuenghole, wiſhing you as you haue begunne, to proceede in theſe vertuous actions. For when all things ſhall els forſake vs, vertue yet wil euer abide wyth vs, and when our bodies falles into the bowels of the earth, yet that ſhall mounte with our mindes into the higheſt Heauens.
            
               By your louinge and aſſured frende. E. Oxenford.
            
         
         
            
            The Earle of Oxenforde to the Reader.
            THe labouring man, that tilles the fertile ſoyle,
            And reapes the harueſt fruite, hath not in deede
            The gaine but payne, and if for all hys toyle
            He gets the ſtrawe, the Lord wyll haue the ſeede.
            The Manchet fyne, falles not vnto his ſhare
            On courſeſt cheat, his hungrye ſtomacke feedes
            The Landlord doth, poſſeſſe the fyneſt fare
            He pulles the flowers, the other pluckes but weedes.
            The Maſon poore that buildes the Lordlye halles
            Dwelles not in them, they are for hye degree
            His Cotage is, compact in paper walles
            And not with bricke, or ſtone as others bee.
            The idle Drone, that labours not at all
            Suckes vp the ſweete, of honnye from the Bee
            Who worketh moſt, to their ſhare leaſt doth fall,
            Wyth due deſert, reward will neuer bee.
            The ſwifteſt Hare, vnto the Maſtiue ſlowe
            Oft times doth fall, to him as for a praye:
            The Greyhounde thereby, doth miſſe his game we know
            For which he made, ſuch ſpeedy haſt awaye.
            So hee that takes, the payne to penne the booke
            Reapes not the giftes, of goodlye golden Muſe
            But thoſe gayne that, who on the worke ſhal looke
            And from the ſoure, the ſweete by ſkill doth chuſe.
            For hee that beates the buſhe the byrde not gets.
            But who ſittes ſtill, and holdeth faſt the nets.
         
         
            
            Thomas Churchyarde gentleman, to the Reader.
            
               IF I had (gentle Reader) as greate Art to perſwade as deſyre to do the good, the force of my wrytinge and truthe of the matter ſhoulde bee a ſufficiente meane, to make thee delight in the deuine diſcourſes of this booke: whereon as Cardanus hath beſtowed great ſtudye, ſo maiſter Bedingefelde hath ſhewed no litle labour. And ſetting forth to ſale the hiddē treaſures of the minde (that long might haue lurked in the latine) hee biddeth euery man bie ſomewhat of the ware (or cheapen at the leaſt) thoſe things that ſerueth beſt for their purpoſe, & peraduenture by touching of tryfles, they may be attempted wyth noble Iewels, & ſo fall to beate a price of more mighty matter. For ſure in this ſhoppe of ſecrets, are ſondrye ſorts of farre fetched marchandiſe, the goodnes whereof maye as well content the inwarde iudgement, as the gayeſt riches of the worlde doth pleaſe the gazinge eyes, but if wyth handlinge alone and careleſſe lokinge of the ſame you laye it a ſyde (refuſing that is offered) I ſkarce thincke you worthye of ſo worthye a benefite, and miſdoubt ye wante a ſtorehouſe for ſo ſtately a treaſure. O who could hold you from gadding after Maye games, runninge vnto tryumphes, ſtaring on ſtrangers, wondring on Maſkes, waytinge for Piayes, & blaſinge of your owne braueryes. Whoſe beggery beauties in generall, are all as vayne, as the ſhadow of the Sunne: & Ioe beinge ſo vnbrydled in ſuche baggage, ſo readye to wretchednes, ſo apte for apiſhe paſtimes, ſo gredy of vaine glory, and ſoe glad to gaze on games whereon no gayne groweth, but loſſe of witte wealth and time. Mee thincke you ſhoulde bluſhe to forgoe the bleſſednes this booke may bring you and bleſſe the beginner of the ſame and ſetter forth of the worke. But I feare as the horſe waxeth whot when his ryder takes him vp from ſtombling, or as a churliſh childe waxeth worſe for the checke of a wyſe father, you wil fling away the glaſſe, that ſhal bewraye your blotted browes, and ſo followe your
 follyes ſo farre, that neither Cardanus Comfortes nor no other yt cals you backe againe (to ſee through your ſelues) ſhal anye whit preuaile, if ſo you be bewitched and rather yeld to Cyrſes charmes then Vlyſſes coūſell, I lacke Apollos pype to pleaſe your eares, and leaue you in a labourinth of endles trauaile, me thincks the hard nut being cracked and preſented vnto you with clouen ſhell, argues of it ſelfe, if you ſcorne to pill awaye the ſkin of the kyrnel, ye ought not to taſt anye peece or part of the fruite: ſo if you but reade your ſences a ſleepe, and wyth ſlacke ſearche of knowledge ſlomber oute a ſentence conninglye ſhaped for the ſafetye of man, you gaine little by this woorke, and looſe but labour with ſlobberinge handes or head to blot or blemiſhe the beauty of this booke. For neyther ye miſlyking of your head, nor tryfling with your handes, can hinder the fame of ſo famous a ſtudye. And I pray you conſider how hardlye it comes to your hands. The tranſlatour therof (as many others the more pitty do y• like) ſent the coppye to a noble man to be reade and lapt vp in ſylence, hee groping the grounde and bowels of the booke, ſets incontinent openlye abroad the body, ye euery good imagination might make a noble notamy of the matter, yet making courtſye (in any cauſe) to offende his frend, he ſhewed me the booke, and the tranſlatours deſyre (alwayes eger to pleaſer good people as I coniectured by his countenaunce) & I who founde mine owne infirmityes finely healed (or fauourablye handled by this good happe) perſwaded as I durſt the publiſhing of this precious preſent, hoping that ſome as ſicke as my ſelfe ſhalbe cured or eaſed by this good counſell. The perſon yt puts it out, I tel you may a little (yea & very much) leade you to good lykinge: My Verſes thoughe ſimple they are, ſomewhat ſhall tel you of the nature of the booke. Giue credite as you pleaſe, diſdaine no good meaninge, doe ſomewhat your ſelues eare you finde fault with others, cloke not your ſlouth with the barenes of barraine braynes, yeld fruit as you flouriſhe, and beare wyth the bloſſoms that buddeth from this tree. So fare you vvell.
            
         
         
            
            Thomas Churchyarde in the behalfe of the Booke.
            
               YOu troubled mindes with tormentes toſte,
            that ſighes and ſobs conſumes:
            (Who breathes and puffes from burning breaſt,
            both ſmothring ſmoke and fumes.)
            Come reade this booke that freelye bringes, a boxe of balme full ſwete,
            An oyle to noynt the bruſed partes, of euerye heauye ſpriete.
            A ſouplinge ſalue for euerye ſore, a medcine for the ſicke,
            A ſeede that eates vp cankred fleſhe, and ſearcheth neare the quicke.
            Eche griefe y• growes by error blinde (that makes mās iudgemēt iarre)
            May here a precious plaſter finde, eare corſye creepe to farre.
            The blinde that mournes for want of ſight, coulde he but heare this red,
            Would take his blindnes in good part, and beare a quiet hed.
            The lame whoſe lacke of legges is death, vnto a loftye mynde,
            Wyll kiſſe his crotche and creepe on knees, Cardanus woorkes to fynde.
            The begger bare bedeckt in brats, and patched rotten rags,
            In budget if he bare this booke, would ſcorne the royſters brags.
            The ſhepehearde that in ſkortchinge ſunne, ſits ſkowling on the ſkyes,
            Would leaue the wolfe his flocke of ſheepe, to ſee this booke wyth eyes.
            The ſurlye ſnodge that ſweepes vp golde, and makes his God thereon,
            Would ſure cōfeſſe this pearle ſhold ſhyne, whē gliſtring gold were gon.
            The wyldeſt man or monſter ſtrange, whoſe natures naughtye are,
            Would ſtand a ma
                  •
               de as bucke at baye, vppon this booke to ſtare,
            This is no fable finelye fylde, as cutlare workes the blade,
            This is a ſubſtance of it ſelfe, this is no ſillye ſhade.
            This ſpeakes out of the braſen heade, full many a golden word,
            This ſtrykes the ſtordye ſtomackes dead, and yet it drawes no ſworde.
            This threatens thonderboltes for fooles, yet weather fayre it ſhowes,
            So ſuch as can beare of a ſtorme, and calmye weather knowes.
            This teacheth mē to tune theyr ſtrings, who would ſweete muſicke make
            This ſhowes who faynes, or ſweetely ſings: & where the tune we take.
            The poore that playnes on pinching plagues, by this doth ſtand content,
            And yeldinge thankes for foode and cloth, takes well y• God hath ſent.
            The rich whoſe raging reach would reape, the ſweete of euery ſoyle,
            Shall learne to ſinge a mixrye meane, and leaue the poore the ſpoyle.
            The hye or hautye hart ſhal here, a liuelye leſſon learne,
            How wyſedome holdes himſelfe vpright, and halting heades deſerne.
            The lowe that lours at lothſome locke, and lingers out his tyme,
            Shal ſee how ſafe the ſimple ſi
                  •
               s, and how they fall that clyme.
            The ſtrong that ſtriues to winne the goale, by ſtrength & ſtoutnes vaine,
            Shall ſhunne the ſhouldring croked play, and walke the path full plaine.
            
                The weake whoſe wits wyth woes are worne (which breedes in breſt debare)
            Shal laughe y• giants ſtrength to ſcorne, & prayſe the feeble ſtate,
            The ſicke that ſeekes a ſyrope ſweete, for ſoure diſeaſe wythin,
            Shal helpe the heapes of harmes in hart, eare bliſter riſe on ſkin.
            The proude y• poultes and pickes his plumes, & prunes his fethers gay,
            Shal meekenes ſhowe and forthwyth fling, his painted ſheath away.
            The priſner that in fetters lyes, ſhal thincke his fredome more,
            In cloſed walles than al his ſcoope, that he hath had before,
            The baniſht wight that beates his braynes, wyth many buſy broyles,
            Shal ſee what gaine exile doth bringe, by ſight of ſondrye ſoyles.
            The ſeruaunt that in ſeruage lyues, ſhall fee hee hath more eaſe,
            Than hath his maiſter who of force, muſt many people pleaſe.
            The fearefull man that hateth death, ſhall ſee that death is beſt,
            And death is moſt to be deſyrde, where life can breede no reſt.
            The dronken dolt that doth delite, in ſoſſe, in ſwaſhe, and ſwill,
            Shall ſee ſome ſnib or ſoure rebuke, to breake him of his will.
            The foole that all ſound counſell hates, perhaps in reading this,
            Maye waxe more wyſe and fondnes leaue, and ſo amende the mis.
            The flatterer here may finde his faults, and fall to better frame,
            The curriſhe earle may ciuill be, in noting of the ſame.
            The cowarde ſhall win courage great, as he this booke ſhall vewe,
            And he that is not ſhaped right, may here be made a newe.
            The plowman that wyth ſweat of browes, doth dearely win his bred.
            Shall ſee what daunger dwell they in, that are wyth daintyes fed.
            There is no ſtate that beareth lyfe, of hye or lowe degree,
            But for the ſickenes of his minde, a medſine here may ſee.
            This booke bewrayes what wretched wracke, belongs to life of man,
            What burthens bore he on hys backe, ſince firſt this world began.
            This is a glaſſe to gaze vpon, where man himſelfe may finde,
            A ſhyning ſunne that plainlye ſhewes, A man is but his minde,
            
            And who that reads and marks a right, the reaſons couched here,
            Shal win ſuch treaſures by the ſame, as he ſhall hold ful dere.
            Paſſe on plaine booke of peareleſſe price, and preace in worthye place,
            Dread no diſdaine of froward heads, nor feare the frowning face.
            A worthye worke doth iuſtly craue, a worthye patrone ſtill,
            Whoſe noble bucklar ſhall defende, this worthye worke from in.
            And he that made thee Engliſhe ſpeake, his tongue and penne be bleſt,
            Wyth happye hope of vertues hye, from heauen, here poſſeſt.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            Of Comforte the fyrst Booke
            AMonge ſuche and ſo manye auncient monuments as periſhed in ye 
               Barbarian warres: would God (that at leaſt Marcus Tullius bokes of comforte, written at the deathe of his daughter, had beene tyll this day preſerued. For as in all other matters hee declared him ſelfe more then a man, ſo may it be thought that herein he had written moſt excellently: the matter being neyther cō
               mon, fayned or touchinge others, but procedinge from his own naturall affection and extreme perturbation of mynde. And ſuche is the condicion and qualitie of comfortinge, as al be it no perſuation or eloquence were there in vſed, yet wanteth it not reaſon and ſufficiente proofe to trye it ſelfe: wherein ſo excellente, wiſe, and eloquente a man as Marcus Tullius hauing trauailed: it muſte be preſumed he framed a worke not only worthy prayſe, but alſo aboue all expectacion.
            And albeit theſe auncient warres haue among many other noble workes depriued vs of ſo learned a boke, yet haue we thought mete to entreate thereof (not becauſe it is ſo praiſeable as amiſſe it cannot be prayſed) but alſo ſo neceſſary (as in all thinges whiche of neceſſitie muſt be had) better it is to haue the worſt, then none at all. For examemple we ſee, that houſes are nedefull, ſuch as can
 not poſſeſſe yt ſtately pallaces of ſtone, do perſuade themſelues to dwell in houſes of timber and clay, and wanting theim, are contented to inhabite the ſimple cotage, yea rather then not to be houſed at all refuſe not the pore cabbon, and moſt beggerly caue. So neceſſarie is this gifte of conſolacion, as there liueth no man, but that hathe cauſe to embrace it. For in theſe things better it is to haue any then none at al. And wel we ſee ther is none aliue that in euery reſpect may be accompted happie, yea though mortall men were free from all calamities, yet the torments & feare of death ſhould ſtil offend them. But beſides them, behold, what, and how manye euilles there bee, that vnleſſe the cloude of error bee remoued, impoſſible it is to ſee the truth, or receiue allay of our earthly woes.
            And aboue the greues that all other neceſſities do bring with them, this hath ſomwhat more greveous, and intollerable: for they ſatiſfied withe that they deſire, forthwith they ceaſe to offend: as honger is eaſed with meate, thirſte is appeaſed to drinke, labour contented with reſte. But the memory, of euils is ſo ſetled and manifolde, as wanting good perſuaſion doth neuer ceaſe to torment the minde, but from one diſcontented imaginaciō to an other, from one calamitie or miſerie to an other, cōtinually leadeth on our diſpleaſīg thoughts And for yt cauſe we haue framed this boke, which although it profiteth nothinge to driue awaye the cares and anxietie of minde in others, yet ſhall I therein not a litle content my ſelf, for which reſpect thiefly I toke the matter in hand. And as menne
 ſaye, that Aſclepiodorus without colours did right cunningly paint: ſo ſhall we voyd of all craft and ſkil, with true reaſon declare how much each man erreth in life, iudgement, opinion, and will. Yea, ſomethinges there are that ſo wel do proue themſelues, as beſides nature nede no profe at all.
            Of which kinde in this our incertaine lyfe, vain glory, and in nature of thinges, great plenty was euermore to be found, and in al ſuch the more cunninge and eloquence is vſed, the leſſe wee ſee oftetimes they receiue credite and beliefe. Who is ſo much miſaduiſed as wold paint the pillers of perfite marble or Porfery? or who dothe coloure the veſſels of Allabaſter? When the naturall gloſſe doth geue chiefeſt grace and reputation to ye work we plaiſter and painte the ragged walles of morter and claye, to the ende that arte ſhould ſupplye, that nature hathe lefte vnſemelye. Neither do I think our worke here in ſo great as at the beginninge we thought to bee. For albeit we knowe ye nomber of miſeries and cares to be many, yet diuers of them be of ſuche kinde as being wel conſidered do nede no medicine at all. As thoſe whyche men willingly and vnconſtrained do force thē ſelues to beare: for who would take in hande to comfort Marcus Regulus, amids his miſeries? whō neyther the pitie of his children, nor the prayers of his kinſfolkes, could perſwade to remain in Rome and not to retourne to the handes of the Carthaginiences. Of the ſame greatnes of minde were the holy martirs, Paule, George, Laurence, with almoſte innumerable others. Some other ſortes of payns
 and trauaile there are which the fainteſt harts do not refuſe to abyde, either in reſpecte of y• glory or gaine that groweth thereof. As ſome we ſee vncōpelled do ſerue princes, others do labour to pleaſe their louers, ſome cōſume their time in ſtudies ſome follow trafficke, and ſome ſeeke aucthoritie and rule. So litle trouble they fynde in theſe trauailes as being remoued from them, they are greately greued. Some led on with onely hope, doe voluntarily take vpon them a life with patience & trauaile to bee endured: as thoſe that paſſe their daies in ſolitary places, as they that liue in citties continually, as they that obſerue religion ſtraight lye, praying & faſting, who being aſked for what ende they ſo do: anſwere, for hope that after death they ſhall receiue eternall felicitie. Some there are that take greate paines and willinglye ſuffer in reſpect of ſwetenes and delight (as they think) that is ioyned there vnto. As harueſt labourers, who after longe toyle and ſweat in ſommers ſon, do not withſtandinge daunce when the pype doth ſound. Others with colde feete doe leaue the fyer to caſt the dyce: for though the cold do pinche, yet the pleaſure of the play is more. But far greater incoueniences doe Cupides knightes with aduenture of life abide and yet, withe all their hartes they hazarde all, that in the ende all their deſyres may be obteined. Some there are that although they ſeme euell eyther in reſpect of natures neceſſytie, as old age▪ or of compariſon, as breaking of priſon, yet are they more paciently borne: becauſe before they came they were deſyred, and beinge
 com may not therfore be vnwelcome. Wherfore if in perticuler I ſhould entreat of euery of theſe, beſydes yt no fruit ſhould grow therof, I might alſo ſeme comberſome & tedious. I do therfore thinke beſt to ſpeake of thoſe which men do condempne & flee as euyll. Among which nomber ſomewhat I wyl ſay of the euils aboueſaide, for y• one thinge is not to euery man alyke pleaſant or diſconting, but of them old age ſemeth y• chiefe, whiche though no calamity, but a gift of nature (& yet in ſome reſpect may be ſo called) becauſe we ſe it vnwillingly born of many, & therefore Cicero hath thereof curiouſlye written, & though it cānot be iuſtly nombred amōg y• euils of mans life, yet of vs ſhall not be omitted.
            We ſay therefore that among thinges wee accompte euyll, there be three ſortes. That is to ſaye, Comon calamityes, priuat calamities ſimple, and priuat calamities manifold: comon calamities we cal thoſe that happen to al men, or the greateſt nō
               ber of our acquaintance: as honger, peſtilence, ſubuerſion of coūtries, and ſuch lyke. Priuat calamities ſimple, be of two ſortes, the one diſcōmendable, as if a thief lamenteth that hee loſeth the oportunitie for murder: or diſhoneſt as the weping of Vrſus in Papinius. The other honeſt and in no wiſe worthy greate diſcommendacion: as the deſtruction of houſes, the loſſe of children, & death of frendes. Priuat calamities manifold we accōpt thoſe when a man by many miſhaps at one inſtāt is moleſted: as ye holy ſcripture telleth of Iob, who depryued of his houſe, children, cattel, & ſubſtaunce, was alſo tormented with moſt pitiful diſeaſes & ſores.
            
                Some men do hold for true opinion that albeit, a mā may ſuſtaine one kind of calamity, yet ye ſufferance of ſo ſondrye myſeries is not to be foūd in any. Wherfore of priuate & ſimple euils in general we wyl firſt take in hand to wryte, next we ſhall entreate of ſorrow and death eyther of our ſelues or nere frendes: In the ſeconde booke, and in the laſt, we wyl not omit to ſpeake of tormente, bondage, impriſonment, exile, iniury of old age, pouertye, & in general of many miſeries aſſembled togethers. But fyrſt let vs begin at priuate euils, declaringe y• the good or euill fortune, importeth nothing to bleſſed life, and y• the fruit of al felicity (as Plato ſayth) reſteth in vertue, or as the Poet ſayth.
            VVhoſe conſcience giltles is, doth not grovve pale for feare.
            And yet (as at yt beginning I ſaid) who ſo would conſider how many diſcontentatiōs do happen & diligently marke euery one of thē, ſhould finde to what ſmal purpoſe in aduerſitye a mā tormenteth himſelfe, conſidering how ſhort, frayle, incertain, & myſerable the life of man is. So as if at any time for yt miſery it is to be lamented, then after the maner of Heraclites, is continually to be bewailed, & as Palladas ſayth. Al vveeping vvas I borne, all vveeping muſt I dye: my vvhole life in vveeping haue bene conſumed. O lamentable life of man remayninge on earth in ſicknes, ſorrovv, and continuall miſerye. Therefore if at any time we muſt take leaue of lamenting, thē ought y• ſame either euer or neuer to be done, for life is eyther euer to bee lamented or neuer.
            Among other myſeries what I pray you cā be greater then whē a man riſeth frō bed in the morning, to be incertaine of his returne to reſt againe?
 or being in bed, whether his life ſhall continue tyll he ryſe? beſydes that, what labour, what hazard & care, are men conſtrained to abyde with theſe our brittle bodies, our feeble force, and incertayne lyfe: ſo as of no nacion I thinke a man better or more fytlye named then of the Spaniard, who in their language do terme a man, ſhadow. And ſure ther is nothing to be found of leſſe aſſurance or ſoner paſſed then the lyfe of man, no, nor y• may more rightlye be reſembled to a ſhadow. Somtime I conſider with my ſelfe, and thinke (yf the chryſtian lawe were therunto conſentyng) that the ſoules of ſom wicked deuils were entred into the bodies of men as torments for ſynnes, and ſo after death none other hell or punyſhment to folow. So greate is ye maſſe of worldly miſeries, as this lyfe is eyther for wicked folke, or by ſome wicked god appoynted. But when I duly conſyder al, I leaue this cōmon opynion as altogether vntrue: & perceiue that in this lyfe ther is nothing found y• may iuſtly be called good or euyll, & do allow of thoſe phyloſophers as wyſe, who thought that al thinges conſyſted in opynion. For what cuſtome, what law, or what iudgement, is ſo certein, as is not encoūtred with contrary opinions? and ſurely beleue me, y• the philoſophers wold not ſo long haue contended amōg themſelues, if the matters of theyr contentiō had not reſted only in opynyon: what man is ſo mad as wyl ſay the ſwan is blacke? or that the rauen is in colour whyte, when the matter is otherwiſe to be iudged by cōmon ſence. But what is good or euyl (O lord) how much ſpeach, how great diſputation,
 and howe longe contencion hath beene. The blynd man ſekes a mote. How can it be other thē diſcention, when the thing dyffreth from it ſelfe, & the philoſophers do diſagre among themſelues as of that, that no wher is to be found. And here vpon cōmeth to my memory a certayn fable written by an aūcient poet, whych doth lyuely in my iudgement ſet forth mans lyfe. It is told that when myghty Iupiter had made the heauens, the earthe the ſeas, the beaſtes, and men, he ſoberly conſydered that vnleſſe he allotted both puniſhment & reward for mens deſertes, it ſhould ſo come to paſſe as they would not only approue al kynd of dyſorder but alſo dyſdayne the gods theym ſelues, for whych conſyderation the greate Ioue cōmaunded Vulcan to frame two braſen tunnes, the one to receyue all that was good, the other to conteyn the euyl, and made both good & euyl thinges wynged, to thende they myght more fytlye be ſent amonge mortall men, accordinge to the quality of theyr deſertes. But Pandora being a buſy goddes and gredie to loke into the veſſels, dyd open them, & ſodēly both the good & the euyl brake forth & flewe theyr wayes, the good houered vp to heauen, the euyll made ſpeee to the hel, and in y• barel of euyl remayned only hope: & in the veſſell of good was founde ſuſpycion as that wherwt they were maynteyned, which newes when Iupiter hard (as he is an angry god) toke the empty veſſells, and in a rage threwe them down, whych mortal men ſeing, deſyrous of newes drew nere & embraced the emptye barrels, ſome of the good and ſome of the euyll But they
 that layd hold of the empty tonnes dyd neuertheleſſe perſuade thē ſelues to haue gotten both good and euyl, and yet in dede neyther good nor euyl fel to any mortal man, ſauing that they y• hapned vpon the better barrel found in themſelues opiniō of good with ſuſpicion, & the other opinion of euill wt ſome hope. And ſo it came to paſſe, not vnlyke as when men in darke nyghts walkyng in Arabia do happelye treade vppon ſome piece of yron or other cold thing, are ſodenly affrighted with feare leaſte they haue hapned vpon a venemous ſerpent, & yet haue not: euen ſo the only ſuſpicion of good and evyll is that, that perplexeth al mortal creatures, becauſe al that is good is aſcended to heauen, and al that is euyl, gone down to the infernall ſprytes.
            And therfore euer ſynce the great Iupiter haue diſdained to take acompt of mortal mens deſeruings Truly although this be a fayned fable, yet doth yt aſwel declare the originall both of good and euyll as yf it had bene ſet forth in the learned ſcholes. But as theſe earthly ioyes are vayne and inſtable, ſo in the world to come al thyngs are certain, aſſured, & euerlaſting, whether throughe ſufferance of theſe afflictiōs whych we call euyls, the godly loue doth cal vs: according to the ſayinge of y• prophet, becauſe thou were accepted by god, it was expedient y• temptacion ſhould try the: for the almighty God not vnlyke a father that entierly loueth hys chyldren doth bring them vp in all contynencye & ſober lyfe, reſtrayning their pleaſures, not ſuffring them without chaſtiſement to exerciſe any euyl or vngodly lyfe. And contrary wyſe ſuch as hee eſtemeth
 not, and that lyue lyke chyldren deſtened to perdiciō, wythout regard he doth ſuffer to purſue their dronken and diſolute maner of lyuing. Shal we therfore ſay the life of ſuch ſeruauntes is more happy, or more to be wiſhed for then thoſe ſonnes. For none are admitted to heauēly ioyes, but thoſe that in all good lyfe and perfection do deſerue the ſame: for as gold is fyned in the fornace ſo the life of a iuſt man, by aduerſity in this world is tryed. And yet if al eyther good or euyl ſhould be compared to y• heauenly hope, yt were no more then one grayn to a hole heape. S. Paule therfore ſayd that al we ſuffer in this worlde was not meritorious enough to gayn the glory of y• world to come, who ſo euer then that fyrmely embraceth thys faythe, ſhould he not in aduerſyty reioyſe & in proſperitye lament? and amids his miſeries perſuade himſelfe that god doth make tryal of hys fayth, after tryall to cal him among the number of his choſen? If in getting worldly glory thou doeſt ſo much reioyſe, the reward therof being ſmal, the cōtinuance ſhort and mortal: what ſhould we do for this heauenly glory, which is euerlaſting, great, & aſſured? So great is this comfort, y• if ther were not manye y• ſwerued in fayth, the holy office of cōforting were al ready finiſhed, who wold not chaūge this ſhort life, with that life euerlaſting? this frayl with that fyrme? this vnhappy, wt that moſt happy this troubleſome, withe that moſte quiet? but in wante of beleefe is ſynne, and in ſynne is wante of beliefe: where by the condicion of man is berefte bothe of hope & faith, For what can be vnto man either more profytable after deathe, or more to be wiſhed
 in this life, then the hope of the life to come? And though ye ſame were not, yet ought a mā no whit to be diſcouraged, becauſe there is almoſt no myſery ſo great but may be conuerted to better hap. Neyther is there among mortal men any opinion ſo aſſured, as that nothing is ſure. For as aduerſitye and miſfortune hath bene to ſome men a way to good chaunce: ſo hath proſperity bene to others the occaſion of miſerye. But it is not our determination to diſcourſe hereof, though by often profe it is to be tryed. Our care onely is to entreate of calamityes: for if I ſhould write of all ſuch as miſfortune hath aduaunced, this booke could ſcantly containe them. Neither do I beleue ye holy Scripture to meane other by the hiſtory of Iob, thē therby in one example to ſhew the varietye of fortune which ye 
               Gentiles by dyuers examples were taught to beleue. For Iob being firſt happy, hauing health, children, abundance, land, poſſeſſion, & cattel, was bereft of all hys worldly goodes, & ſuch as in proſperity were his greateſt frends, became in aduerſitye his moſt cruell foes, yet afterwardes in more aboundance then before, he receyued the goodnes and liberalitye of fortune. Such and ſo many be the occaſions both of good and euil fortune, as nothing is more incertaine.
            The ſeruitude of Ventidius was cauſe that after he became Conſul and gayned great glorye, which he without decaye of the Romaine fortune could neuer haue loked for. But by his bondage hee had occaſion to ſhew his vertue which was the waye to felicity. The profe thereof is dayly ſeene among
 the barbarouſe nacions, as y• 
               Turkes, & thoſe people which were called Mamaluchi, Among mortal creatures what can be more intollerable then ſickneſſe? yet did the ſame greatly profyte the Emperoure Auguſtus being in armes againſt Brutus.
            
            For hee, warned by his phiſicion to remoue from his pauilion by ſleape he recouered health, whyche yf for other reſpect he had done, the ſame had beene to his great diſhonour, or if he had abydden he had bene ſlayne or forced to flee. Plotinus a philoſopher of Platoes ſect, had amonge others a ſcholer named Ornucius Marcellus who was greatly diſeaſed wt the gout & palſey, through diligent hearing his maſter (who diſputed & red with great ſwetenes & facilitye) he forgot ofte times to eate: and ſo withe attentiue hearing became a ſinguler philoſopher, and with muche abſtinence recouered his healthe. So throughe ſickenes hee gayned bothe learninge and good recouery.
            The euill diſpoſition of the bodye doth ofte tymes profyte the vertue of mynde, for ſicknes make the the ſurfyter to become of good dyet, ye proud more couetous, the wicked religious, yea other whiles it profiteth the body alſo, for more men of ſickly body then healthe doe attayne to old age. Suche is the chaunge of worldlye thinges. For as wyth in the tayle of a Stagge lyethe mooſte preſente poyſon, and all the reſte of his bodye is holſome Fleſhe: So the Serpent Tyrus whoſe venom is vncurable, hathe fleſhe ſo holſome, as it is medicinable againſt all other poyſons.
            
               Paulus tertius thoughe hee was learned and not
 vnlike to aſpire to the papacye, yet the opinion of his olde age, and ſyckelye bodye did, greatlye enforce to his aduauncemente. The great aduerſitie of Sparticus condemnned to dye in combat was the occaſiō he became glorious and while he 
                  〈◊〉
                to the Romaines terrible. When the memory of many kinges is wor
                  •
               e away. Among the reſte of ſuch commodities as aduerſitie bringeth withall, this benefyte it hathe, that a mans miſfortunate dayes once paſte, hee lyuethe the reſte of hys lyfe with greater delighte. Who eſteemeth his health that hathe not taſted of ſickeneſſe? Who knoweth the ſwetenes of his countrie that neuer hath bent baniſhed? Or who can bee happie or take pleaſure in riches, that neuer hathe liued in pouertie? Or whye doe childleſſe olde men take 
                  〈…〉
                in children? But becauſe they haue bene 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . We reade that Agiſſolaus kinge of the 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                was a wiſe and ſeuere man, yet in hys age hie ſo muche loued children, as hee ſeemed to 
                  〈◊〉
               . As falte 
                  〈…〉
                aduerſitie by paſte, maketh 
                  〈…〉
               , and the more if it be not long. And 
                  〈…〉
                verye well 
                  〈◊〉
                the example of 
                  〈◊〉
                comfortinge his felowes ſayinge.
            
               O mates (quod he) that many a 
                     〈◊〉
                  , haue bid and borne or this,
               VVorſe haue we ſeene, and this alſo shal end when Gods wil is.
               Through Scilla rage you wot and throug he the roring rockes we paſt,
               Though Ciclops shore were ful of fear yet came we through at laſt
               Pluck vp your harts and driue from thence, both dread and feare away
               To thinke on this may pleaſure be perhappes another daye.
            
            
                Among the reſte of Marcus 
                     〈◊〉
                   Cicero his oratious of life and proceding what was more to hys auayle, then the baniſhmente from his countrye: when his goods was ſolde, his houſe ſubuerted, & he him ſelfe confyned only, then hee learned howe welcome he was to the cittizens, how neceſſarye to his country, how deare to his frendes, and (had he modeſtly vſed his glory) nothing that euer happened to him in lyfe was more to his reputacion: for after his reuokement, he became more glorious then before. And in all miſfortunes of mans lyfe, this reaſon is of no ſmall importance, that neceſſitie driueth vs to comfort oure ſelues: as whether we patiently or with impacience beare oure aduerſities, yet nedely in the end we muſt beare them.
            Neither is ſorowe or ſadnes to other ende, then to encrea
                  •
               e care, and make our mindes more vnmeete to receiue good counſell: and therby bothe hope and helpe are clearly taken away, and what good or allay of griefe 
                  〈◊〉
                continuall teares or deſperacion procure? Trulye ſyth in thy power it is to aggrauate or decreaſe thyne owne care, it is the parte of a wiſe and wel aduiſed man to diſburden himſelfe of ſorow, and with pacient mind to beare all aduerſitie, calling to memory.
            A giltleſſe mynde all ſclauhders do dyſdayne.
            Alas, what ſhall thy languiſhing life auayle the or what can thy penſyue thoughtes preuayle. It hath bene ſene oftimes that patience or ſufferance of aduerſitie hath helped valiauntemen. For wee
 ſoneſt take pitty of thoſe that couragiouſly do ſuffer miſerye, and preſume more of their innocencye and vertue, then of thoſe that impacientlye inlike fortune abandon all courage of mynde. Agis the Lacedemonian kinge; beinge by certayne officers of aucthoritie condemned to dye was drawen with a corde towardes the place of execution: it hapned he eſpied a ſeruaunt of his ſtandinge by wepinge to whome he ſayde theſe wordes. I praye the my frende forbeare to lamente my deathe▪ for beinge vniuſtly condempned to dye, I am become more worthy lyfe, then they that enforce me to it. And hauinge ſpoken thus, wyllingly ſtrangled himſelf:
            We reade alſo that a noble minde do moue men to cōpaſſion▪ When Sceuola had determined to kyl the king Porſenna, for his valiant & voluntary confeſſion receiued pardon, which if he had not done, but with deniall craued mercy, beſydes diſhonour he ſhould haue ſuffred moſt cruell deathe. 
                  〈◊〉
                taken for M. Brutus, Seruius Terentius, for D. Bru. & fallinge into Antonius handes gayned both perdō and the frendſhip of their enemies, more throughe nobility of mynd then ſubmiſſiō. What nede more wordes? patience in captiuitie, & magnanimity in aduerſe fortune haue euer bene prayſed and helped moſt. And thus 
                  〈…〉
                I ſaye, that ſeinge the gilty conſcience doth only 
                  〈◊〉
                a man vnhappie, he is to euil aduiſed that 
                  〈◊〉
                his mynde to miſfortune when wholly hee might remaine in lybertie. A man is nothinge but his mynde: if the mynde he diſcontēted y• man is al diſquiet though al the 
                  〈◊〉
                well, and if the minde be contented
 thoughe all the reſt miſdoe it forſeeth little. I remember a certayne rich man growing mad, ſnatched at his ſtrawe and complained that he ſhould dye for Honger becauſe there was no Corne within the emptye eares, did not (I pray you) his diſcontented mynde only make him vnhappy.
            An other one there was that ymagined himſelf te be made of glaſſe, and euer feared to be broken: was not this goode foole without all miſerie the moſte miſerable man aliue? But ſome there bee that through imperfection of mynde or errour are cauſers of their owne euill, who ought therefore withe more patience beare it. As chyldren who though they byte their own hands neuer ſo much do not complaine, yet if neuer ſo little they be hurt by others do crye out. But it were vnfyt for vs to follow the manner of children & vnſeemelye to be more fooliſhe and of leſſe courage then they. What can bee more fond then a man to hurte him ſelfe and then complayne, better it were to folow the counſell of the Poet.
            
               Thyne owne deſerued woes beare thou with patient mynde.
               Such pay
                     •
                  es are 
                     〈◊〉
                   with greateſt grief, as cauſles men do finde.
            
            What can be ſaide more deſeruingly to chaunce vnto vs, then that, where 
                  〈…〉
                feare, haſte or (which is 
                  〈◊〉
                of all) diſorder, geue occaſion of oure owne griefe. Why woulde they complaine? ſythe there is none other cauſe of thy ſorow? againſt whome ſeing 
                  〈…〉
               ? vpon whom would thou be reuenged? 
                  〈◊〉
               
                thine owne ſelfe. Who ſo doth marke it wel, ſhall fynde that for the moſt part we are cauſes of oure owne euill. And though it is playnlye declared in the boke De Arcanis eternitatis, yet being here requiſite, we wil againe ſpeake therof. And yet were ye ſame nedeleſſe, if men were not ſo far in loue with themſelues, For euerye one be hee neuer ſo ſimple perſwadeth himſelfe to knowe moſte, imputinge the good ſucceſſe of thinges to their owne wiſedome, and the euill to the default of fortune. Neither doth it ſuffiſe them to accuſe the follye of fortune, but alſo fynde fault with ſome euil ſpirite & lurking deuill. In whych error princes do more often fall then others, not only becauſe they are pertakers of all kynd of imperfections, but alſo for yt their eares are alwayes open to all ſortes of paraſites and flatterers, who make them beleue they wante no vertue, wiſedome or other perfection y• man or god can be endued with al. And theſe faire ſpoken people do ſtudy nothing more then to practiſe that princes may knowe nothinge, for otherwiſe they would not entertayne ſuche Gnatoes as they be. How muche more comely were it in mortall men, to impute al good ſucceſſe to God (or yf they thought not ſo good) to fortune: and al euyll ſucceſſe to their lewdneſſe, vilety, and lacke of iudgemēt. But wouldſt thou know why thou art a foole? becauſe thou doeſt accompt thy ſelfe wiſe.
            
               Socrates who by ſentence of Apolloes oracle was iudged the wiſeſt, confeſſed himſelfe to knowe but one thinge, and that was he knewe nothing But thou that in dede knoweſt nothing at all, wil womanlyke
 take vpon the to ſpeake of Mazageta India and rather then fayle, of thinges aboue the ſkyes.
            
               Ptolomeus the noble aſtronomer was wonte to ſay that a man y• pleaſed himſelf was hated of god And he pleaſeth himſelfe that imagineth himſelfe wiſe or prouidente, and imputeth all to his owne glory and profyt. Such kinde of people be yt moſte part of mortal men, and therfore ſubiect to ſo many euils and miſfortune. But now we haue a lyttle diſgreſſed frō our determined purpoſe: becauſe we ſhould rather haue proued then diſproued that men be cauſers of their own euyl. And if we reſpect all ſortes of euils, the matter wil ſo fall oute. What tyrant is ſo terrible, as perſecuteth the ſimple and innocente ſoules? who is ſo vnſkylful an artiſane as can not earne his owne lyuing? what man ſo cruell as murdereth the humble and wyſe people? for it is the part of a wyſe mā to obſerue y• time the perſōs & their aucthority among whō we lyue. Nero was a cruel Emperor yet in his time Veſpaſianus did not only lyue vnoffended but alſo bare office. So was Tiberius to his own ſubiectes accōpted ſeuere, yet Thraſilus yt mathimatrician cōtynued in fauour, & ſo did dyuers grāmarians. But who ſo hapneth to lyue in ye gouernment of theſe vnmerciful mōſters, the ſureſte waye is to lurke & lyue vnknowē. A moſt aſſured rule it is yt without a mans own folly, he cānot become miſerable. And although al other vertues wer baniſhed frō men, yet wiſdome ſhould euer retayne her place and reputacion. As for iuſtice, fidelity, liberality, and curteſy, are hondred but as certain ſtrange wandring
 byrdes: but fortitude moore often, becauſe it encountreth wyth all kynd of perrilles, and yet ſomtimes occaſyoneth rather hynderaunce then good fortune: yea learning it ſelfe, is nothing but mockerye, and ſubiecte to all iniuries. But wiſedome is an heauenlye gyfte, and dwelleth amonge men in greate reputacion and reuerence.
            Wyſedome I ſaye, is that whiche Kinges doe ſeeke for, whyche people haue in admyracion, and on euerye ſyde is neceſſarye. Therefore who ſo wante the wiſedome, hathe none other cauſe to complayne.
            As a mans health is dyuers wayes empeached euen ſo is wiſedome: as wythe anger, pleaſure, cowerdyce, dulneſſe, ambition, couetiſe, and fynallye euerye vyce of mynde offendeth wyſedome in man. A Follye I do thinke it to comfort thoſe that through debilitye of mynde doe caſte themſelues into miſerye: as foule delyghte, and deſperate reuenges.
            Some there be who not vnlyke to gudgines, knowinge the hooke lyeth hydden within y• bayt, doth not withſtandynge, drawen on with gredynes of Venus ioyes, or ſuche lyke fonde delighte caſt themſelues into apparant miſaduentures, Men ſay that the gudgine, craftelye (and yet fooliſhely) doth firſte withe her tayle beate the bayte from the hooke, but if that auayleth not, do forthwith aſſay to byte it. To what purpoſe ſhoulde a man wt ſuch peryl playe the paraſyte, when otherwiſe hee mighte ſafelye lyue? But wee moore wytteleſſe then theſe bruyte Beaſtes doe not
 abyde the beating of the hurtefull baite. And yet what bitternes doth this ſorow bring withall, being bred with ſuch delightinge pleaſure, yet happely thou ſay, I would haue pleaſure without paine If this difficultie doth offend thee, then good fole thou ſeekeſt a thing impoſſibly to be atteyned: becauſe euery ioy is accompanied with his diſcomodity. Glory is folowed with enuy, wiſedome not gotten without labour, wealth is won with care children are kept with trouble, banketting is backed wt ſicknes, eaſe bredeth pouertye, ambition begetteth hate, auctority hath folowing feare, quietnes engēdreth diſdain. So I pray you wherunto tendeth the end of al mortal thinges? And this in allayinge of mens diſcontentations is moſt cōfortable, that euery mā is afflicted wt one miſfortune or other, or as men ſay, ech man feleth his own priuate offence. Some are afflycted wt pouerty, ſome with want of children, ſome with ſycknes, ſome wt feare, ſome with wrong, ſome with children, ſome with wiues, ſome with craft, ſom wyth foes: and that whych is greateſt, & moſt to be meruayled at (ſuch is the condicion of man) to be moſte happy & ſubiect to no gryef, is alſo a calamity. It is therefore ſayd that Polycrates beinge lothed wyth abundance of fortunes grace, did greatly deſyre to feele ſome offence, & therfore caſt into the ſea a ringe of merueylous priſe, of purpoſe to haue ſome cauſe to complain But fortune (as it ſemed) hauing ſworn his happynes in a fyſhe reſtored it again. But leſt I ſeeme altogether to perſwade wt fables I praye you what pleaſure do princes take at their diners?
 when continual eating of delycate diſhes haue taken away the taſte of theyr mouthes. The phyſytions affirme that delicacye, is when a man from euyl releſte recouereth his perfyte nature. Then I pray you what iudgement haue they in delicacy yt neuer taſted any groſſe or dyſpleaſant meate? Or how can he be happy that neuer felt of gryef? doeſt thou not ſe how happy pore men accompt theymſelues, when they are inuited to rich mens tables what is the cauſe? ſeing pore men haue no better fare then the rich? ſurely nothing but the noueltye of the dyet. Wherfore yt is moſt aſſured that with out aduerſitye a man may not be happy▪ nor take delyght in myrth wythout 
                  〈◊〉
                ſorowe. The
                  •
                is it not a comforte in theſe calamityes to haue not only one man for a companiō, but alſo al mankind and as it is commonly ſaide. Conſors eſt miſeris 
                     〈…〉
                  .
            
            But of how much more force ſhal thy comforthe knowyng that myſeries do not happen at al aduē
               tures, but rather in reſpect of felicitie: and that y• greatnes of euell is accompanied wyth the greatnes of good. And to begyn in generall: there ys nothynge more noble then a common weale well gouerned: yet what can be more hard, thē to liue there? at the beginninge ſuche a one was the Romaine gouerment, and by that meane conquered the whole worlde. But what can be more hardlie born, then a lyfe vnder ſuch lawes, when ſubiects are exercyſed only in laboure, conſtreined to maryage, education of children, and chyeflye to followe warres? And amonge theſe thinges that laboure
 whych huſbandmen do vſe, ſeemeth to our eares moſt intollerable. The bringing vp of chyldren (& ſpecially manye) to a pore man, ſemeth to ſurpaſſe all ſorowes, for as a few children are great delightes ſo many to a pore man is cauſe of the greateſt care that can happen.
            What can for trauaile and peryll bee compared to the warres? where men do labour, dygginge, & deluinge, ſleaping in the wynters ſnow, and marchinge in the ſommers ſonne, watching, and warding, day and night, clyming the mountaines and ſayling the ſeas: ſomtimes afflicted with hunger, ſomtymes with thyrſt: yea and in the end, eyther to kyl or to be kylled. So as no meruayle it is, to ſee how willingly ſouldiers do behold the dyſplaied enſygnes, and receyue knowledge of battayle, when either by happy victory they ſhalbe diſcharged of trauaile, or by death receiue ende of painful lyfe. The Lacedemonians therfore led ſo harde a lyfe at home, as it neuer greued them to ſerue abroade in the wars. Then is it manifeſt that in a cōmon weale wel gouerned, men be moſte vnhappy, and happyeſte bee thoſe Citizens, that lyue in mooſte diſorderly countries. And kinges (whom men beguiled with falſe ymaginacion do thinke equall to gods) are alſo folowed withe their afflictions. As fynely the tragicall poetes haue fayned the tragedies and furies to be only in kinges courtes, & the comodies & pleaſant playes in priuat houſes. The pallaces of princes are euer open to great euils, neither are theſe monſters at any time from thēce: as enuy, hate, grudge, poyſon, & perſecution. Yea the
 princes mynde is the ſeat of al theſe, wherby it is neither ſuffered to ſleepe quietly by night, nor reſte by day. Nowe aſſayleth him the memorye of wickednes, now the ſuſpition of familiers, now y• myſtruſt of people, now feare of other princes, withe care day and night to preuent their practiſes. But be it, the prince, be neuer ſo iuſt, neuer ſo holy? yet feare and ſuſpicion doth neuer wante, and as the poet fayneth of Ixion and Lapithis.
            
            VVhome ouer hanges a ſtone that euermore, doth ſeme to fall.
            
               The bride beds fayre are ſpred, and golden carpets shine full bright
               And precious princely fare, before, their face is ſet in ſight.
               Then coms the fouleſt feend, and al their dainties ouerbroodes.
               Forbidding them to touch, and frō, their hands do ſnatch the foods and beates vvith burning brondes.
            
            Such is the eſtate and condicion of courtes, as Virgilius liuing in the happy houſe of Auguſtus was wel acquainted withal, But let vs a whyle omyt to ſpeake of princes, and turne our talke to priuate perſons. I can not with care or diligence fynd any, that in euery reſpect can accompt himſelfe free from miſfortune, ſuche a one I thinke as hardlye founde as are thoſe beaſtes called Rinocerotes, of whyche kynde Plynius confeſſed hee coulde neuer fynde any, though long tyme he hunted throughe the whole worlde.
            Therfore ſeynge all mortall men bee ſubiecte to ſome kynd of miſfortune: who art thou y• ſekeſt to liue fre frō y• law which al others are ſubiect vnto? why doeſt thou not complayne, that thou art not made mortall, winged, and king of the hole world free from al miſfortunes?
            
                But yf thou can beare that lacke whiche nature could not help, why ſhouldſt thou not alſo be content with the other whych is no leſſe vniuerſal? & according to the fable, thinke thy calamities ye leſſe that thou ſeeſt the aduerſities of other to be greater. Men ſaye that in olde tyme, the hares beinge caſte into deſperation, for that of all other beaſtes they were moſt perſecuted, conſulted together and determined to drowne themſelues in the next ryuer: being aſſembled on they went to execute their determination, the frogs that hapned to be vppon the banke, hearinge the hares comminge for feare caſt themſelues into the water: whych noyſe whē the hares hard, they ſtudyed to know the cauſe, & fynding that for feare of them the frogs were fled chaunged their entent: becauſe the frogs more vnhappy than they, ſought notwithſtandinge to preſerue theyr lyues: and by y• meanes the hares haue tyl thys day bene preſerued. Surely the aduerſity of others, did neuer make my miſeries ſeme ye leſſe, but the neceſſyty of euyl whyche is knowen by other mens miſaduentures, hath geeuen me greate allay of my pryuate greues. For when a man ſhal truly conſyder hys myſhaps to procede of natures neceſſytye, and not iniuriouſlye, then wyl he yelde himſelfe to ſuffer al, vnleſſe that altogether he bee voyde of iudgement, ſymple and foolyſhe. A wyſe man therfore foreſeinge the neceſſyty of many my ſeryes, and wel remembring, the frailtye and inſtabilitye of euery condition of mankynde, doth paciently loke for al ſortes of myſaduentures, & when they come, it is therfore mete he ſhew himſelfe armed
 with fortitude, leaſt changed by reaſō of their comming he may ſeme to forſake his honeſt determinacion, or els be vnprouided. It is alſo to be cō
               ſydered that time is a medicine to all ſorowes, yt taketh away mourning, it bredeth forgetfulnes of iniuries, yt remoueth ye memory of miſaduentures and fynally bringeth forgetfulnes and diſdaine of al ſortes of calamities. What man hath beene ſo impacient in fatherlye affection, as doth take care for the death of his ſon, thirty yeares ſynce departed? or his goodes loſt ſo long agoe? Such is the condicion of tyme, as fyrſt it deminiſheth ſom part of extreame ſorow or ioye, next it weareth awaye al feruency of affection, and laſtly doth clerely rote it out of memorye. Therfore ſith y• couetiſe of time doth in the moſte ſymple worke this effecte, whye ſhouldſt not thou do the ſame to thy ſelf? and loke what benefyte time in ſhort ſpace ſhould geue the, the ſame may thou throughe fortitude, learninge, modeſty, and good example geue vnto thy ſelfe. Perſwade thy ſelfe, that thy diſpleaſant dayes bee neare paſſed, and hope that better hap is at hande. Call to memory how many worthy men haue vndeſeruingly & cruelly by fortune bene caſt downe, and patiently ſuffered her moſt extreme diſgrace.
            There is nothing more requiſite in a wyſe man, then modeſty to ſuffer both fortunes. For who ſo knoweth not how to do in proſperitye, forgetteth hee is mortall: there is no greater argumente of wiſedome, then when a man doth that preſentlye which others by benefyte of time haue learned.
            Be not therfore burdenouſe to thy ſelfe & though
 thou art chaunced into this ſhadow of calamitye yet caſt not thy ſelfe downe into very miſfortune.
            Thinke aſſuredlye that ſome bee free frome euerye euyl, and that tyme bringethe wyth all the moſte certayne and ſure conſolacion.
            Not that we haue all ready ſpoken of, but that which Auerroes & other philoſophers haue written.
            When ſoberlye thou conſyder that the lyfe of manne compared to the eternall worlde, is not a moment, and in that ſhort tyme al to be vayne, incertaine and by aſſured lawe of nature ſhorte, ſo as it makethe no matter at all, what a one thou haſte beene or ſhalte bee. And when wythe my ſelfe I ymagine of this matter, I remember that whiche in bookes of common fables wee reade, where ſome are fayned riche men, ſome mightye kinges, and ſome ſo ſtronge, as for ſtrengthe ſurpaſſed Hercules, what difference there ſhould be betwixte theſe fayned men and Caeſar or Pompey, tyll this daye I coulde neuer learne, vnleſſe that eyther for oure learninge an hiſtorye is made differente from a fable. or that we haue conſideration of ſoules that lyue for euer.
            For otherwiſe when thou ſhalte no more bee, it ſkillethe not at all what thou haſte beene. Onlye Follie of man hathe founde oute this inuention that we ſhould perſwade oure ſelues to be happy or vnhappye, not onelye in this worlde, but alſo after in the opinion of others.
            Some I ſee mooſte carefull that after deathe they maye leaue behynde theim riches or fame.
            And entyſed withe ſuche deſire Heroſtratus burned
 the Temple of Diana▪, that thereby (thoughe for wicked doinge) hee might gaine eternal fame.
            But who was this Heroſtratus? by what father begotten? or of what mother was hee borne? In what countrye dyd hee dwell? what was hys parſon, or whiche waies did hee lyue? what doe we knowe hereby, other, then either to knowe nothinge or a fayned man? And admitte thou gayne this deſired glorie? what ſhall it auaile thee after three hundrethe yeares whether thou were happie or vnhappie?
            And if no glorie bee, within fiftie yeares after deathe what difference ſhalbee betwixte a kinge and a Carle. Betwixte Lucullus and Irus betwixte Xenophon and Cleon, betwixte flaues and fremen, betwixte happie and vnhappie. But leaſt perhappes thou lyue in doubte that time doth ſtyll abyde, and the courſe of heauens be ſtaide, or that the lyfe of man dothe not of neceſſitie and ſpeedelye decaie, beholde that one ſtone where in was graued three Faces, a Childes, a Mans and an Olde mans. So ſodeine are the chaunges and ſo nere as the Poet doth not vnfytlie call our age, Fleinge. Conſider what nomber of yeares ſince the beginninge of the worlde, and thyne age haue paſſed, ſo ſhalte thou learne, that no ſhaddowe more ſwiftelye fadethe awaie.
            Imagine aſſuredlye that all tyme were paſſed, and ſo ſhall perceiue that all wyll retourne to nothynge. Not vnlike to theym that wythe certayne Hope of deliuerye remayne in Priſon, whoe thoughe in miſfortune, yet doe but lyttle
 lament, chieflye if they be of valiant mynde. So men that in this troubleſome lyfe, ſyth they looke for and abyde one equality in reſpect of death, I cā not conceiue why happy folke ſhould not bee more ſorowful then thoſe that be vnhappye.
            For if euen now it were proclaymed as it was in the time of Licurgus that al lands & goods ſhould equalye amonge al ſortes of men be deuided, whether doeſt thou thinke that beggers or riche men, would be moſte ſory? Surelye I thinke no man thinketh the rich men would reioyce; and the porer ſort be ſorye. If therfore law of lyfe is ſo equalye made as there is none that can auoyde, I ſee no cauſe but that euery man here lyuing in miſery, ought willyngly to embrace the benefite of ſo iuſt a decree. What care I praye thee ſhalt thou haue two hundred yeares hence, whether thou dyed hauinge children or childeleſſe? olde or younge, rich or pore, & bounde man or free, in thy bed or on the gallowes, or whether in aucthority, or without honor thou lyued or dyed? But follye hath broughte in theſe opinions, by which we onely become happye or vnhappy. Becauſe follye enduſeth forgetfulnes of reaſon: it maketh Pigmeans to ſeeme Gyantes: ſomtimes oure euyls, ſomtimes oure good it cloketh, it multiplyeth it maketh them obſcure, it cloketh it, encreaſeth, darkneth, hideth, euen as it pleaſeth of vs determineth. But if in this lyfe ther be any thing good or euill: or any differēte of pleaſure or ſadneſſe, the ſame reſteth only in conſcience and vertue of the mynde. For the memorye of wicked and ſinful doinges excedeth al other tormentes.
            
                The harte of the wicked (as ſayth the prophet) fometh lyke the ſwellynge ſeas: and their myndes are euer vexed with feareful viſions: becauſe ther is no greater affliction then when their gyltye thoughtes do continually accuſe their conſciences As the poet ſayth.
            
               VVhoſe mynde moſt giltye is, and harboreth cruell thought
               A ſecret ſcourge vvithin himſelfe, ſuch ſinful dedes haue vvrought
               And paynes more great he taſtes, vvhom vvhyp of conſcience beates
               Then did Seditius euer fele, or Radamantus freates
               VVithin thy breaſte to beare, thy griefe both night and day,
               Thou haſt at hand, that vvytt to obtayn, thy hidden vvoes bevvray
            
         
         
            
            Of Comforte the ſecond Booke
            
               BEcauſe in the former booke wee haue diſcourſed copiouſlye, (as coulde bee generallie) of the comfortinge of all miſeries, the conſideracion of euerye ſeuerall euyll, ſeemed ſcantlye needefull: ſeinge right reaſon, wiſe counſel, & then our talke might ſuffice to remoue al ſadnes out of the mynde of eeuerye wiſe man, but for that it was oure purpoſe at the beginninge, to conſyder withoute affection, and with righte iudgemente to ſpeake diligentlye of euerye aduerſitie that maye happen to men: it ſeemed alſo more neceſſary for vs to doe the ſame, becauſe ſome woulde thinke, thoſe thinges which ſhould be let paſſe, to be left vntouched of purpoſe, rather becauſe they coulde not bee proued, then becauſe they were ſuperfluous. Moreouer this hiſtorye of euils hath both for varietie and for example no ſmal pleaſure, wherwith it may waſhe awaye from the readers, that ſpotte of ſadnes whiche is wont to be lefte of the ſenſible minde, and alſo of nature it ſelfe in greate miſhappes. For oftentimes, though reaſon comforte vs and teache vs that neitter mourninge is meete, neither that ther is anye cauſe of mourninge, yet the ſad mynde of it ſelfe can not be merie: whiche thinge where yf
 hapneth not ſeldome with out any aduerſitie at al how muche moore lyke is it to be lefte behinde in them that pine with long wearynes, not withſtā
               ding the verye wounde to bee cured.
            Therfore that now we maye returne to oure purpoſed talke: of al thinges that happen in mannes lyfe, ſorrowe, and deathe, bee moſte bytter. For to be bereft of the companye of oure moſte dearlie beloued for euer, and withoute hope, is wonte to ſeeme a mooſte cruell thinge vnto all men. And deathe it ſelfe (as ſaith the Philoſopher) of al terrible thinges is mooſte extreame, wherefore if anie thinge be able to ſhake a valiaunte and wiſe man, doubtles that oughte to be the deathe of hym ſelfe and his moſte neare frendes.
            For whiche cauſe I perceiue excellente Poetes to haue mourned bothe for theirs and theimſelues and alſo to haue fayned others mourninge for their freendes. Amonge whome Papinius bewayleth his father ſayinge.
            
               Gyue vvyt and vvoful voyce, O Syre, let me my vvoes complayne.
               For this the moone hath hyd her face, and thriſe come backe agayn.
               Syth firſt I ſet me dovvne, in ſlouth and ſobbinge cheare
               No muſe to comfort care.
            
            An other in the ſame cauſe.

                  VVhat man can make a ſpring of teares, to feede my gulfe of griefe
                  Or vvho hath ſtore of teares ſo great: and far from al reliefe.
                  Pitye hath bereft my ſight, and hart hath cleft in tvvayne,
                  VVhich ſuffereth not my vvoes to ſound, my tong cannot complayn
                  Such is my griefe.
               
                But would to God this complaint, were not that which is commonlye ſpoken of. The weping of y• heire is the weepinge is of one that laugheth vnder a vizer: for ſo rarely is the tender loue toward the parentes wont to be found, that none is leſſe, Yet admit it were ſuch as theſe verſes expreſſe. Surely this booke ſhalbe thought leſſe nedeful in no parte, then in comfortinge the ſorrowe whiche chaunceth by the death of parentes. For ſome examples ther be of brothers which haue ſlaine them ſelues for their brothers, of parents for their children, and of huſbandes for their wiues: but yt loue of chyldren toward their parentes hath bene confyrmed almoſte by no experience. Where by it hapneth that the complaint of Catullus maye ſeeme rather (as they ſay) to come frome the hart. For thus he bewayles his brother.
            
               Loe novv my ſtudy ſtayde is, for cruell death haue ſlaine.
               My brother deare: shal I pore vvretch in vvretched life remayne?
               The only hope of all our houſe, O death thou haſt bereft me
               Myne earthly ioy this brother vvas, none other ioy is left me.
            
            
               Virgil counterfayteth a more bitter lamentatiō not without wrath and indignacion of the mynd, in Mezentius lamenting his ſlayne ſonne ſaying.
            
               My countrye vvrought my vvoe, my frendes dyd hate me all,
               If death had tane my giltles ſoule, no griefe had made me thrall.
               Lo yet among you men I liue, and ſtyll enioy this lyght
               But long I may not ſo.
            
            Yet how much more cruell ſorow is fayned of the ſame poet in the mother bewayling her onlye
 ſonne Eurialus, for that ſhee both a widowe and an olde woman, ſawe him ſlaine cruellye in his ennemyes handes. There truly he contayneth the womanly tendernes of harte in theſe wordes.
            
               Your deadly darts (O foes) for pittye caſt in mee:
               VVith cruell ſvvorde before the reſt, let me deſtroyed bee.
               Els thou Almightye God, on me ſuch mercye haue,
               As that my vvretched head may reſt, vvithin myne earthly graue.
            
            The ſlaughter of the ſonne bewayled of y• mother, in my iudgemente coulde not be better deſcribed of ye Poet. And Homer bringes in Achilles, ſorrowinge ſore at the buriall of his frende Patroclus, when he ſaide.
            
               But him a carefull cloud, did compaſſe rounde about,
               And on his head vvith heauy hand, the duſt he poured out.
            
            And after horriblye he cryed oute. Yea ſo farre forth is the vehemencye of his ſorrowe declared, that his familiar frendes feared leſt he ſhould kill himſelfe. But another more moderately mourneth for his death, and complayneth of deſtines, when no fayned feare in others, but his owne enforced him ſayinge.
            
               And in my greeneſt yeares, vvhen youth hath hyeſt povver,
               Shal this my ſpirite depart avvaye, and death my corps deuoure?
               The Gods I cannot guide, their vvill vvee muſt obay,
               VVhere deſtny dryues I yeld my ſelfe: vvith vvilling mind alvvay.
            
            But while I ſet forth the follies of others, me thincke. I haue framed a mourninge dittye: and haue not only deſcribed, but rather encreaſed heauye
 mourning. Notwithſtanding the very matter could not be vnfolded vnles I had alſo put to the iudgement of Poetes, for that is the common peoples opinion, not onelye becauſe the Poets be carefull to ſpeake thoſe thinges which be populer and liked of the common ſorte, but alſo for that if otherwyſe they would ſpeake they could not, whē they be ſo farre wyde from all ſtudye of Philoſophye. For which cauſe alſo they be ſhut out of Plato his common weale. And herein we muſt either condempne Plato if he baniſh them vniuſtly: or the Poets if he do it iuſtlye. Therefore ſurely the better opinion is that they be baniſhed worthilye: for agreing wyth the people, they ſpake thoſe thinges which be in the opinion of the ignoraunte. For no man denyes that wyſe men be few: and the common people contayneth ye moſt part of men: thopinions therefore of the Poets and the common people, in which they diſagree wyth the Philoſophers be all falſe, and vnprofitable. Certes it is of neceſſitye, that the opynion of the common ſort is falſe: it the iudgemēt of wiſe mē be true: but who doubteth whether wyſe mens ſayings be true? otherwyſe trulye they ſhould be no wyſe men. But if in any thinge at al the Poets deſerue ſmall credite, no wher leſſe then in thoſe thinges which cō
               ſerne maners and vertues.
            Neyther is it any maruayle though Archilochus a paſſing good Poet (but ſo much worſe Philoſopher) was compelled of the Lacedemonians the very ſame houre that hee came into towne, to be packinge awaye agayne, for wrytinge this ſentence.
 
               Better it is to want armes, then ſuffer death. Verilye manye tymes lewde talke corrupteth honeſt maners.
            Therefore ſeinge wee wyll ſpeake of ſorrowe and death, it ſeemeth neceſſarye firſte to examine whether in our owne death, or in the death of our frendes there be any euil: and if there be, whether the euil maye bee ouercome by good, or rather the loſſe by gaine. That ſhalbe eaſye to diſcerne if 
                  •
               irſt we diſtinguiſhe and diligentlye vnderſtande this: whether after wee be deade, there remaine anye thinge of vs beſyde the bodye. Or all the whole dye awaye together wyth the bodye. In whiche cauſe althoughe wee haue alreadye ſpoken many thinges in the booke De Areanis aeternitis, & minds to ſpeake in the bookes of Deathe, yet is not this queſtion, in this place meete to be ſhadowed wholye wyth ſylence. But as in this Booke chiefelye we followe the truth, and euery where briefenes, ſo one onelye reaſon of the reaſonable ſoule ſhall ſuffyce vs for the knowing of his nature. For ſeinge man hath vnderſtanding, hee is endued with many habites of knowledge. That is to ſay Science, as Geometrye, Philoſophye, and Logicke. Artes, as Saylinge, Huſbandrye, Phiſicke. Intelligence which is of principles, as that the whole is greater then any part thereof alone, and equal to all his partes together. Prudence, whereby hee conſydereth and diſpoſeth all thinges that he hath to doe. And Sapience wyth theſe, by which hee knoweth GOD and embraceth Religion. And ſome menne do more excel in ſome one or other of theſe or in manye of them, whereby it comes to
 paſſe that man doth ſo vſe his vnderſtanding and reaſon in his owne arte, as though in other thinges he may ſeeme rude, yet in that one thing he exceedeth right notable men. Some though they haue neyther learninge nor arte, yet by reaſon of exerciſe proue very wyſe. That it may plainly appeare, that mans vnderſtāding is in all men alike, and differeth onelye in exerciſe, we perceiue in the barbarous & vplandiſhe men: Wherefore I wō
               der at the doltiſhnes of ſome which profeſſe wyſedome, who thincke that onely learned men be reaſonable, & others differ little from beaſtes. Worthelye therefore it commeth (as they ſay commonlye) that the cleane contrary falleth out, that is to ſaye, that theſe learned men beſyde their Booke, knowe nothing at all, and may eaſely be beguiled of any vnlearned ſoule.
            For if they would waye wyth themſelues, that all men (vnleſſe they bee hindered with ſome diſeaſe) haue the vſe of reaſon and vnderſtandinge, and that ſo muche the more in one kinde of exercyſe, howe muche further they bee from another, they ſhoulde well perceyue themſelues to be ouercome of them. What a nomber leauing theyr vile occupations, haue proued famous Philoſophers? Simon Coriarius when Socrates came often vnto his ſhoppe, hauing talke wyth his prentices became a perfit Philoſopher, and left vnto his poſteritye no ſmall nomber of monumentes. So he that was a curryer, onely by exerciſe is ſtertt vp to be a Philoſopher. The cunning therefore of artiſanes and others that want learning is not to be deſpiſed as
 boyde of vnderſtanding. But as it is wont to be ſayde, Howe farre Megara is from Athens: ſo farre is Athens from Megara. So, howe farre a learned man paſſeth an artyſan in ſpeakinge, ſo farre doth an artiſan paſſe a learned man in his facultye. Of both then the reaſon is alike, the vnderſtandinge a like, and nature all one, differinge onely in endes and vſe. But ſeing there is in other lyuing creatures an excellencye aboue that is in man, as memorye in horſes: ſtrength and life as in the Elephant, power of ſight, as in the Eagle: hearing as in the boare, touchinge as in the ſpider, ſwiftnes as in the hare: and yet of thoſe habites of knowledge no other lyuing creature is any whit partaker, much leſſe able to go beyonde man in anye of them. It is then moſt apparant that mans minde is ſeuered from all corporal or bodelye matter. Verilye whereas man in all thoſe thinges, which depende of the bodye maye be ouercome of ſome lyuinge creature, and in theſe vertues of the minde no lyuinge creature is partener, no not of the leſt part, it is not poſſible at all that the vertue of vnderſtandinge ſhoulde not be both ſeperable, and vnmixt and euerlaſting. Neyther yet remayneth it naked and bare.
            For whereas of all other lyuinge thinges, the Dogge, the Marmyſet, and the Elephant be with out controuerſye endued wyth moſt wit, though a man would ſpende his whole life, he ſhal neuer teach them ye leaſt rule of any Arte or wyſedome, beſydes that which of nature is bred in them. And ſurelye to ſpeake of the eaſyeſt thinge, if you trauayle
 to learne them to vndoe a knot, they keepe in memorye how they maye drawe and ſlake, and ſo fynallye looſe the knot: but if you chaunge the knot neuer ſo little, they ſhal neuer know how to vndoe it, vnleſſe it be mere chaunce, ſo as you may well perceyue they be vtterlye deuoyde of reaſon. Likewiſe foules learne to ſpeake, and (as the Poet ſayth) ſo well, that the Pye wyth him braggeth ſaying: If thou ſhouldeſt not ſee mee, thou wouldeſt denye that I am a fowle. Neuer yet ſhal you plainly teach her what ſhe ſhould ſaye, or any coupled ſentence, to make a ſhowe of any printe of reaſon. And the nerer they ſeeme to attayne vnto man in ſpeakinge, ſo much ſurelye is it well knowen that they be able to conceaue no vnderſtanding. In like maner alſo dogges know theyr owne names, & are by teachinge learned to hunt fowles: but all theſe things they keepe by memorye, and trulye cannot tell how to put or chaūge any thing more then they be taught, what occaſion ſoeuer they haue. Neyther is it to be ſuppoſed they knowe moe thinges whiche for want of ſpeache they cannot vtter: ſeinge the apteſt foules to learne (among which is the Popingeye) althoughe they can learne well to ſpeake as men, be neuer more fit to any vſe of reaſon. Brute beaſtes therefore be able for one onelye arte by nature, and for all thinges vniuerſallye onlye by memorye, not conceyuinge reaſon at anye time, neyther by continuall teachinge theyr race, neyther by proceſſe of tyme, neyther by endeuoure and dilligence. Therefore as Ariſtotle hath taughte, memory is no part of reaſon: but in deede wyth Plato,
                remembring is the ſame that vnderſtanding is wyth Ariſtotle. Trulye theſe two differre onlye in this, becauſe Ariſtotle beleeueth the conceyued formes of thinges come newly into the minde, he giueth them the name of vnderſtandinge: but Plato thinketh they be borne in our minde, wherfore he termeth it memorye Of neither of theſe two, therfore ſeing they be the powers of reaſon, alone can anye brute beaſte be partaker, but onelye of that which Ariſtotle calleth memorye, Plato opinion. But becauſe Plato in euerye place vſeth names of thinges confuſely, he attributeth vnto men, recording or euerlaſting memorye, being part of reaſon: vnto other lyuinge creatures opinion and memorye, latelye conceyued of the fences. And it appeareth plainlye that that arte proper vnto beaſtes is ſimple of nature, not of any ſkill, in that it is moſt excellent in Swallowes and piſmiers, and other vile and baſe creatures far wyde of al perceyuing. For if it were wroughte by diſcretion as artes be in men, it ſhoulde be ſo muche more fine, by howe much ye liuing beaſt were more excellent in ſence & memorye. But it happeneth otherwiſe whē dogges, horſes, & Elephants know not how to do any ſuch thing as either the ſwallow, the pyſmyer, or the worme. Ther ſhould be alſo in them as in mē, imperfections and diuerſityes aboute the ſame Arte, yea and paſſing ouer into the like works as ther is in mē, of which foraſmuch as there is none, it cannot be doubted that this is wholy the inſtitution of nature. And to ſpeake generallye, if any
 brute thinge could haue euen the ſhadowe of reaſon, it were ſimplye neceſſarye that a reaſon framed of two particuler propoſitions ſhould inferre a concluſion, which no waye can be. Therefore be brute creatures gouerned onlye by nature, not by reaſon. But certainly ſeing nature it ſelfe the miſtres and teacher of the lyuing creature, is doubtles immortall, though the lyuing creature be mortall. Howe muche more neceſſarye is it, that mās vnderſtandinge, which knoweth all the Artes of all lyuing thinges, and more and more excellente, beſydes alſo the diſciplines and principles, God & all the furniture of Heauen and the Elementes, beſides theſe to bee immortall and vncorruptible? For as nature it ſelfe is not the lyuing thinge, but that whiche doth teache the lyuinge thinge, and therefore remayneth when the lyuinge thinge dyeth: So contrariwyſe whereas vnderſtandinge is the whole man, and it ſelfe knoweth the ſame, as longe as the vnderſtandinge remayneth, the whole man is alſo vncorruptible, thoughe the bodye vaniſhe awaye. Wherefore mee thincke Crito was rightlye reproued of Socrates. For when Crito for good wyll aſked of him where he woulde be buryed (for nowe had Socrates in priſonne dronken his poyſon readye to dye) Hee aunſweared, alas what laboure haue I loſte, that coulde not perſwade Crito, that I ſhall flye awaye from hence all whole. For the ſoule thoughe it be moſt ſimple, yet comprehendeth it al vertue in manne, not receyuinge manye vertues becauſe it hath diuers partes, but accordinge to the nature and qualitye
 of thoſe things which be handled of it, it is called Intelligence and Iudgement, and witte, and deliberation, and will, and prudence, and ſapience, & Arte. Alſo brute beaſtes muſt needes clearelye wante all theſe thinges. For neyther doth anye of them vſe eyther iudgement, or deliberation, or wil (properly called) or intelligence, or counſell, but are all equallye and vniuerſallye voyde of all theſe, like as on the contrary part all men are furniſhed wyth theſe. Forſothe becauſe theyr nature, which is vnderſtanding or ſoule, or reaſonable minde, cō
               taineth and is by poſſibilitye all theſe. And therfore is tranſformed into euerye one of theim, euen as it lyſteth. Wherefore I wonder not a little at theyr vanitye, who eſteeme men onely of temperate Regions for reaſonable: and imagine the inhabitauntes of the furtheſt Elementes of the earth like wilde beaſtes, and to haue the monſterous ſhapes that Solinus the Coſmographer deſcribeth. But ſure they be much deceyued in iudgemente. A fewe yeares ſince Leonarde Apiſan when he trauayled into India and Ethiopia, broughte oute of India Arithmeticke, and oute of Ethiopia, Algebras Arte of reckeninge: Argumentes of moſte fine wittes. No man almoſt denyeth the Aegipſians to be inuenters of all Artes, but chiefely of Aſtronomy. Latelye Iohn Mounteregio of Germany, and Gulihelmus a Zelander a manne of excellente witte, Eraſmus of Roterdame an Hollander, and nowe all the Northe Countryes floweth in good learninge. What an impudent matter is it, that they will compare theyr wittes wyth beaſtes, and
 preferre ours more dull to them: from whom out of Affricke and Sarmatia be brought artes of greate ſubtiltye, as we Italians are no way able to imitate the ſame. The temperate countrye hath neyther better wittes nor quicker mindes, but onelye more gentle maners, and more moderate affections, wherein the plentye of all thinges holpen wt the clemencye of the ayre, laboureth to challeng to it ſelfe the chiefe partes. But if the armyes of y• Romaynes had not beene, Italye for fine wittes had lyen ſtill, and geuen place to a great manye of prouinces. So Greece paſſed the Barbarians, in ſtudye, not in witte. What makes it matter that the Barbarians are more enclyned vnto ſome affections of the minde, that therefore they ſhoulde be ſayde to haue leſſe reaſon? wheras wee maye ſee for the moſt parte famous menne to haue ben naturallye prone vnto anger, by reaſon of the ſubtill humour ſo plentifullye feedinge thoſe partes of the ſence which ſerue vnto y• reaſonable minde. Neyther for all that, oughte angrye perſonnes to be called vnreaſonable, vnleſſe it be in this ſence, that they ſuffer the reaſonable power of the ſoule to muche, to be ouercome of the affections of the bodye. In which ſence if it like them to call the inhabitauntes of the furtheſt clymates vnreaſonable, I agree that they be more ready to yelde vnto vices. Not for that they want anye thinge at all of the reaſonable power of the mynde, when commonlye they exceede vs in witte, and counſel, and ſubtiltye of artes. For I aſke this queſtion, if two men be equallye riche, and the one vſeth
 his riches, the other will not, ſhall wee therefore call him the poorer who vſeth them not. All the noble Philoſophers therefore ſeinge this, and beinge enforced to define the ſoule immortall, and neuer fading, were fayne to flye wyth lye and all to the vnitye of it▪ ſeinge in deede our vnderſtandinge to be vnfadeable, but neuertheleſſe to be all one in all menne. Marye this they affirme, ſome one waye and ſome another. For ſome (as Auerr
                     •
                  es) make both the paſſiue and agent all one, eche one of theym ſeperable, but the one the forme of a man, the other a certaine accidentall thinge, and vtterlye ſeperate from the man. Some other more reaſonable of theſe opinions, holde that the agent onely commeth from without yet not ſo to be coupled vnto man that it maye be ſimplye hys forme and part of him: But as for that that Auerroes affyrmeth of the double vnderſtanding, I neuer founde it wyth Ariſtotle. Forſothe it is all one whiche commeth from withoute, and is not vnſeperable, all the reſte proceede of the matter and vertue of the ſeede. But to make in manne two vnderſtandinges, and both euerlaſting is a maruelous abſurditye. But this at this time is nothinge to vs, let vs nowe ſhowe that vnderſtandinge whiche is not mixte, and commeth from withoute, that it cannot poſſiblye be all one onelye. For if it were ſuche a one, and alſo the forme of manne, howe could it afore it were exerciſed in vs, bee compared to a bare ſhauen table, beinge already imprinted wyth all manner of diſcipline in
 others. All men ſhoulde alſo a like continue, yea than (that is more) all men ſhould be one man, becauſe theyr forme ſhoulde bee one in nomber, and one thinge that vnderſtandeth. And if it be not ye forme, what is more fonde then to ſaye man vnderſtandeth, when vnderſtandinge it ſelfe is no parte of man. Althoughe theſe thinges be verye trifles, yet let vs beſtow them on theſe good fellowes, and fetche vppe againe the foundation from the bottome. Eyther this onelye and euerlaſting vnderſtandinge is onlye in men: or els as it were a Sonne beinge ſeperate in ſubſtance, it aſſiſteth all men wyth the light. If it be in men onely, how is it ſeuered? howe commeth it from withoute? howe doth it not flowe from the power of the ſeedes? yea what more excellency hath man then other lyuinge thinges? ſeinge they haue both euerlaſtinge matter, and nature of whom they be gouerned vnfadable: for ſoe to continue, is no otherwyſe to remayne the ſame thing, then in likenes, not in nomber. For the ſame power ſhoulde be nature in an other lyuing creature, and vnderſtandinge in manne. But herefore is the lyuing creature gouerned of an other thinge, becauſe nature cannot be the ſame that the lyuinge creature is, becauſe that, of which it is gouerned, continueth ſtil when the lyuinge creature is deade. If therefore man be ruled of himſelfe and that be immortal which ruleth it cannot be one in diuers, for nature which ruleth is ſeuered from ye lyuinge thinges, that it beinge one mighte ſerue manye▪
                but the power of vnderſtandynge is coupled in man. Wherefore one power of vnderſtandinge, cannot ſerue many men, but euerye man hath his owne vnderſtandyng aſſigned him by himſelfe. But it doth not as it were a ſonne, ſhyne vnto vs wythout vs, firſt for that we perceiue our ſelues to vnderſtand, none otherwyſe thē to haue ſenſe. But ſenſe is proper vnto vs, and all the foūdatiō therof is part of vs, ergo our vnderſtandinge alſo. Then moreuer and if it ſhould ſhine without, wee ſhould be gouerned of an other thing, as the brute beaſtes be, which for no other cauſe are gouerned of an other thinge, then that ſame of whiche they are gouerned without them. But this is a thing moſt proper vnto vs men, that wee ſhoulde commaunde oure ſelues. For the vertue within vs, moueth oure lymmes, becauſe it commeth from vnderſtandinge (is ruled wyth a ſtraunge and forraine rule, doth alwayes obaye after one ſorte, and is not oure owne ſimplye, nor knowen vnto vs, but we vſe it not knowinge, howe we vſe it. And ſo of thoſe thinges whiche come from other where, we be not full mayſters of them. So beaſtes becauſe they be gouerned by the motion of the natural power, and ſence, which hath an outward or foraine cauſe, in like ſort be quite voyde of libertye, and vtterly ſubiecte to an others gouernment, nothing differing in theyr affections from ye ſence and ſeruice which the members in man are wont to do vnto the wil. For if thoſe members be hurt, of theyr owne accorde, & without the commaundement of wyll, they ſhrinke backe, although they
 know not wherfore they ſo doe. Moreouer and if vnderſtandinge were without vs, we ſhoulde no more differ from other lyuing creatures, then they do one from an other, and nedes it muſte folow, y• bruite beaſtes ſhould not want vnderſtandinge. Foraſmuch as in the ſame maner the nature both of bruite beaſtes and men ſhould be illumined in ye ſame ſort, & of the ſame eternal cauſes. And nowe is it ſhewed how brutiſhe lyuing creatures are for euer, by no kinde of meanes able to attain vnto euē the leaſt ſhadow of that part which is reaſonable, but by memory, or els nature ſomtime to haue geuen a certain ſhow of ſome conceiued reaſon. Wherfore it is manifeſt the mynd of mē to be heauenlye and deuided according to the nūber of men neither fading nor waxeing olde at any time. But like as ye beames of the ſon, if they fal vpon a thick ſhadowed place or cloude do not ſhine bright, but if they light vpon glaſſe, or water, or chriſtall, ſhine ſo much the brighter, how much clearer the matter is: and yet theſe beames be no purer nor more laſtinge then the other, but be a lyke perpetuall: So the mindes of men when the partes in which thei chiefly ſhine▪ be decayd either by age or by ſicknes, do ceaſſe to vſe their proper gliſtring, and faculties ſo that vnto ſom men they ſeme to fade, when for al that in no parte they are made eyther faulty, or faynt, or ſickly, but continue, ſound & vntouched euen to death: & flitting from thence geue vnto vs a probable opinion of thē, for otherwiſe how could any man iudge the myndes of goode men for euer bleſſed and happye, the mindes of euyll men wretched
 and vnhappy. Hereupon groweth the opiniō of Plato, that after the worldes ende mens ſoules ſhould returne to their bodies. Other thinke they dye not tyl the worlde be conſumed with fyre, whyche after long tyme they loke for, and of that mind be the Stoikes. By eyther of which Phyloſophers, ſeing nothing we haue aſſuredly cōfirmed I meaned not to ſay much, ſuppoſinge it ſhould ſuffice to haue ſhewed y• the ſoules of al men do remayn after with thoſe faculties which bee moſte properlye theirs, As wil, vnderſtandinge, wiſdome, knowledge, deliberacion, reaſon, the knowledge of artes and ſuch like vertues. But now let vs returne to our determined purpoſe. It was agreed y• deathe could be neither euill, nor worthye to be lamented, for profe wherof, the diſputacion of the immortality of the ſoule was no more neceſſarye, then as men ſay to light a candle at mydnoneday, for death did neuer ſeme leſſe greuous to any, then to thoſe that afterdeathe belieued no lyfe at all. Neuertheleſſe ſyth we haue fallen into this talke, and nowe doe aſſuredly know, it is alſo our determinacion to inſtruct others. Let vs therefore ſhow that death is neither euil nor to be bewailed, and moſt diſhoneſt of al it is, a mā either to lament or feare his own departing, frō life, which no pitie nor mercy can preuent. But feare, imperfection of nature, & to much deſyre of life muſte nedelye be the cauſe, yet hereof whye is thy care ſo greate, or what happines haſte thou, that mighteſt make thy lyfe ſo deſyred? doeſt thou alone poſſeſſe anye delight that we haue not taſted of, whyche mighte make thee wyſhe for
 longer life? For euery of vs haue ſeene yt ſtarres, the Heauen, mountaynes, ſeas, ryuers, lakes, fieldes gardeines, Cittyes and townes, we haue alſo had ſport, dalliaūce, muſicke, ſonges, banquets, venerye, loue, maſkerye, & finally euery ſort of earthlye folly, neyther haue we wanted commendable exerciſe and indifferent ſkill of ſcience, and beſydes that, we know the manner of contentions, diſputacions, publicke Orations. Yea for our condition we haue borne dignitye and office, we haue ſatiſfyed the honeſt deſyres of our children, frends & kinſefolkes, and together wyth them liued in glorye, moneye, apparell, and other neceſſaryes of life, we haue enioyed: and in euery of them find greater offence then pleaſure, ſo as we maye ſay with the Prophete Vanitas vanitatem & omnia vanitas.
            
            Yet if any man hath founde a more noble felicitye, or can teache a waye more ſtraight to happines or newe delight, I know not, but for my part in euerye thinge haue felte more griefe then pleaſure. But I thincke it happeneth to theſe men y• luſte ſo muche after life, as it doth to thoſe that laboureth alteration of mettals, who fynde euerye thinge ſoner then that they ſeeke, for beſydes that they make neyther goulde nor ſiluer, y• little which they haue is alſo conſumed. Euenſo, ſuch as with greateſt care do ſeeke for felicitye, not findinge it, do wyth loſſe of theyr laboure, alſo departe wyth quietnes of minde, and become moſt vnhappye. Wherefore ſith this exceding deſire of lyfe helpeth nothinge, yea though life were good, yet were it better without trouble to laye by his maſſe of cares
 and lyke a faithfull man reſtore that thou haddeſt borowed. But if perhapps thou in vayne torment thy ſelfe, what, doeſt thou win thereby, other then to conſume in dyinge that lytle lyfe which is remayning: ſeinge what ſoeuer time is ſpente in thinking of death, may iuſtlye be ſo called. Howe much were it better to follow the counſel of. Agathius who right wel commēded death ſaying, that it did not onlye remoue ſicknes & al other grieues but alſo when al other diſcommodities of lyfe did happen to man often, it neuer woulde come more then once. Neither can death bee accompted anye extreme euil conſidering it commeth of moſt light occaſions and is on euery ſide at hand. Such thinges as we take for hurtful be alſo rare & not lightlye founde, but ther is nothing more commonnor more quickly had then death. For death is takē by ayre, wynd, thonder, water, fire, earthquakes, wild beaſtes, fiſhes, foules, duſt, ſmoke, ſerpents, meate, drinke, bed, trees, ſleape, ſorowe, ioy, laughter, company, anger, diſcorde, and fynallye of innumerable other occaſions death doth procede. Philomenes ſeing his Aſſe eating rayſons ſaid vnto his boy, ſeeing thou haſt lefte the Aſſe rayſons to eate, geeue him alſo wine to drinke, fell into a great laughter and not being able to ſtay him ſelfe, coughing hee dyed. Coma the brother of Diogines y• notable thief, beinge by Rutilius the Conſul taken and examined touching outlawes fled, he required time to think of his anſwere, & putting down his head betwixt his knees he ſtopped his owne breathe, and in the handes of his keeper dyed ſo quietlye, as none of
 them perceiued when he toke the laſt leaue of lyfe.
            Seing therfore with ſuch eaſe men dye, what ſhould we accompt of death to be reſembled to any thyng better than ſleape, for as in ſleape and wakyng be we neuer ſo hedeful, yet fele we not when yt cometh: euen ſo when frō lyfe we paſſe towardes death, our ſences declyning wtout all ſence, at laſt we dye. When Socrates had drunk poyſon & delyuered hys garment to hys ſeruant ready to dye dyd notwtſtanding ieſt wt 
               Crito: ſaying. I pray the remēber to ſacrifyce a cocke to Aſculapius, for that was the auncient cuſtome when anye man hadde drunke a holſome potion. Doeſt thou then think he felte any extreame gryefe? ſurelye no, for in extreame pangues ieaſtynge is neuer ſeene nor the mynd knoweth not it ſelfe. Thys is alſo greatly to be meruayled at, that though euery man ſemeth to feare and flye death: yet ſeke they to eſchewe nothing leſſe, but rather follow euery thyng that bryngeth death withall. Neither ſeme they leſſe carefull to ſeke death then to ſhun yt. The lecherouſe man wythout regarde of lyfe preferreth hys pleaſure, the irefull reuenge, the eater hys glotony the ambycious honour, the couetous ryches: the ſouldier ſpoyle: the mother chyldren, the marchāt traffycke: the ſtudient learninge, and in ſomme: there is nothyng that doth not occaſion forgetfulnes of death. So we plainly ſee that we both ſhō and ſeeke for death, but not wythout good cauſe, for that there is nothynge that hathe in yt leſſe euyll, and they are therfore worthy prayſe that do diſdayne to dye, yf thoſe thynges for whych they
 neglect lyfe be eyther honeſt or neceſſarye, and yet, for lyght cauſes to ſeeke death is no token of courage, but rather a ſure ſygne of an abiecte mynd.
            Therefore the contempte of lyfe ys not ſo commendable, as intemperancye is reprochfull, and yet as the feare of death is not to be prayſed, ſo not to dye chyeflye at neceſſarye occaſyons and tymes, is mooſt reprochefull cowerdly and exceadeth all other vylety of mynde. But ſome percaſe do allow the ſayinge of Epicarinus. Dye I would not, but to be dead I care not. As though that which followeth death is neither pleaſaunt, or not greatlye euyll. Alas what euyll can it be to want honger, thyrſt, gryefe, labor▪ ſadneſſe, feare, and fynallye the whoole heape of euylles, whych the ſoule beynge parted from the bodye we muſt of neceſſitye want, and ſeinge it dyeth not, but in ſtede of theſe troubles, enio
                  •
               eth heauenly ioyes: why ſhould we not acoumpte thys chaunge good and moſt delectable?
            Therefore Socrates was wont to ſay, that death might be reſembled eyther to ſound ſleape, a longe iorney, or deſtruccion, as is the death of bruit beaſtes: If the ſoule doth lyue and after death feeleth nothinge, then is it lyke vnto a ſound ſleape, becauſe therein we reſt without eyther felinge or vnderſtanding, and after a whyle return to the ſame exercyſes. Mooſte aſſured it is that ſuch ſleapes are moſte ſweete as be moſt ſound. For thoſe are the beſt where in lyke vnto dead men we dreame nothinge. The broken ſleapes, the ſlomber, and dreames ful of viſions, are commonly in them
 that haue weake and ſickly bodies. Whereupon Horacius ſayth.
            Vayne are the dreames, of ſickly folkes.
            But quiet and ſound ſlepes and ſuch as weary men commonly haue, are accompted ſweeteſt.
            So Homer 
               
                  •
               doth cal thoſe ſleepes the beſte, that be moſte lyke to deathe. And Virgil.
            
            The ſvvete and ſoundly ſlepe, vvhich death reſembleth moſt.
            I remember my father Faucius Cardanus while he lyued was wont to ſay that he euer deſired death, becauſe whyle he ſoundly ſlepte hee taſted the pleaſanteſt part of life, (meaning as I thinke) that euery pleaſure, that we take by our ſences hathe in it more diſpleaſure, then ſweetenes. And therefore there could be nothing better, then to lack y• knowledge of theym. But common opinion hath compared death to ſlepe, rather thē trauayle or deſtruction (therfore Homer doth call it braſen ſlepe. Virgil yron ſlepe, either of which importeth forgetfulnes of al thinges, the allay of cares, dulnes of ſences, & careles mynde of hap to come. Betwixt ſlepe and death this only difference there is, that in death, y• time of quiet is longer. Diogenes beinge ſicke, & ſleaping, was aſked of his phiſicion how hee fared, to whom he anſwered wel, for (quod he) one brother enuieth an other, Such was the ſecuritye of hys mynde: as euen at point of death he feared not to ieſt. In like maner did Coſmas Medices, a wiſe man
 in our age who being nerse death, cloſed hys eyes, whiche his wife ſeinge, aſked whye hee ſo dyd, hee anſwered that hee did it to bringe his eyes in cuſtome. For in dede the eyes of dead men, are neither broade open, nor cloſe ſhutte. And ſo I thinke the Poet did wel knowe ſayinge.
            
               Is not our ſleape (O foole) of death, an Image playne?
               For fatall courſe shal bring a reſt, that euer vvill remayne.
            
            But if thou compare death to long trauayl and that the ſoule beinge let loſe from priſon of the bodye ſeeth al thinges and walketh euerye where.
            Than what can be conſydered more happye. For the ſoule being burdened with the body, is neither free, nor rightly knoweth any thinge, but beyng ouerladen with cares, doth beholde, only the fygure of thinges, and as it were throughe a webbe or clothe, geſſeth a ſyghte, and certainlye knoweth nothing, but beinge free, doth not only caſt of all hyndraunce, but alſo beholdeth all thinges without interruption, whiche beinge true, who is hee that willingly woulde eſchewe deathe? yea who is hee that woulde not rather doe as Theombrotus Ambrociota did? who hauinge red Platoes booke of the immortalitye of ſoules, caſt himſelfe headlong downe from a wall not feelinge any offence or other naturall ſickenes, but onely for deſyre of ſuch heauenlye happyneſſe as ſpirites were partakers of. Therfore men ſaye that Socrates being by Crito perſwaded to flye frome priſon, aſwel for ſauinge hymſelfe, as his frendes and kinſfolkes refuſed to doe it, anſwerynge wiſelye. O Crito my chyldren
 ſhalbe left in charge to God, which gaue them. As for friendes I am going into thoſe partes where I am aſſured to fynd as good or haply better then they be. And at length I doubt not but you wil alſo offer me your company meaninge thereby, that the lyfe of man was of ſmall continuance.
            Such were the wordes of Socrates thynking that death neceſſarilye myght be compared to one of theſe three, and moſt lyke of al to trauayle, whych may alſo be coniectured by dreames.
            For there is nothing that doth better or moore truely prophecy the ende of lyfe, then when a man dreameth, that he doth trauayle and wander into farre countries, and chiefly, if he imagineth hym ſelfe to ryde vppon a whyte horſe, that is ſwyfte, and that he trauayleth in countries vnknowen wythout hope of retourne, in ſuch ſort naturallye de
                  •
               yninge of that ſhortlye wyll come to paſſe in dede. But if death be reſembled to deſtruction, which as is all ready proued is mooſt impoſſible, yet can it no wayes bee accompted euyll: Becauſe what ſo euer is not, can not be euyll, els we ſhould lament for them that neuer were born, nor neuer were at all, and they that are not can nothinge ſuffer.
            But if thou bewayleſt thy chaunge, ſure it is that Death dooth take away more euylles, then it bringeth, and thoſe more certayn. And although Death were euyll, and brought wyth it but one onely commodity whyche Epicharinus ſpake of, becauſe the partinge from Lyfe was painfull: yet by death art therof delyuered, for in all euilles, to
 haue eſcaped is a greate comforte. If then death be euyll, to be dead is to eſcape, but if it bee good, thou haſte no cauſe to lament. And that, the one, or the other is, who doubteth?
            I remember nowe that, longe ſynce happened to my ſelfe (neither do I thinke to digreſſe from the purpoſe) that albeit the twentye and ſeuenth yeare of myne age, I became ſore ſicke of a ſyngle Tercian, after Seuen fyttes I 
                  •
               ounded, and lay for dead. In whych tyme althoughe euery member was almoſte depriued of his vertue, yet felt I neither griefe nor payn, other then a certayn ticklinge throughout my whole bodye, euen ſuch as we feele in vſing venery.
            Therfore as I ſayde beynge in ſuche eſtate I feeled nothinge worſe then that this tickelinge where in was not ſo greate pleaſure as in Venus Sporte. And there with all a certayne Feare, leaſte in deede I ſhoulde dye, and truely as touchinge Sence or Strength I founde ſmall dyfference thoughe the peryll were greate.
            Afterwardes aſkinge of manye that hadde beene neare Death, whether therein they felte any greate euill or not, who aunſweared that in the Headeache, and in euerye other ſickneſſe of the Bodye was greater Griefe.
            I founde that in myne opinion of Death conceyued, I dyd not erre at all.
            That proofe maye alſo bee had, that althoughe Children and women be moſte fearfull to receiue all ſortes of Medecines, and yelde to Cuttinge
 of vaynes, yet being ready to dye do neither complayn nor lamente, but rather are offended if wee ſeeke to preſerue their liues. Who cannot therfore coniecture, that in death there is either none euyll at al, or very litle, ſeynge thoſe paynes whiche we feare moſt are in dyinge not regarded. Thys is alſo worthy to bee noted that they that hope of no lyfe to come, do no leſſe valiantly dye thē they that beleue the ſoule immortal. As Caſſius who hauing killed Caeſar, with the ſame dagger that Caeſar was ſlayne, aſpecting no meſſenger of death ſlewe himſelfe, ſo dyd Marcus Antonius, and Sardanapalus king of the Aſſyrians did caſt into the fyre not only hym ſelfe but alſo, his bed and his concubines, but that he belieued no lyfe after death is knowen by theſe verſes.
            
               Novve eate, novve drinke, novve make good ſport:
               For ſith thy felfe on earthe, a mortall man do ſee
               Take here thy fill of earthly ioyes, no ioyes hereafter be.
            
            Therfore albeit it were that with the body y• ſoule did periſhe: yet death could not be eyther euyl greuous, or any wayes to be feared, yea ſuch as ſo beleue are in greateſt ſecurity for not beinge ſubiect, to iudgement and free from all ſuſpicion of mynde either of puniſhment or reward, which thing doth moſt torment men that are ready to take leaue of lyfe. But thou ſhalt beleue al rather then this, that the ſoule peryſheth with the body. For as it is not altogether certaine what dothe preſentlye folowe death: ſo is it moſte aſſured that the ſoule of man, doth neuer dye wherof althoughe none other profe
 were then the conſideracion of lyfe, and death, yet death is paciently to bee ſuffered: becauſe there is nothing more hard or miſerable then this life. Beſydes yt by warning of god we are therof aſſured. Alſo al wiſe men haue ſo thought, and in thinges ineuitable the beſt is euer to be choſen. To return therfore to the beginninge, what is our lyfe? other then a continual toyle, euermore bound to abyde y• diſcommoditie of ſo many neceſſities, ſo muche labour, ſo many ſuſpicions and peril. There is no delight in man, that repentance foloweth not. I am reuenged, then beware: I haue eaten my fyll: fulneſſe doth offend me. I haue lightlye dyned, myne appetite is not ſatiſfyed: I followe Venus ſporte: manifold repentance, ſadnes and in the ende ſyckneſſe doth enſue. And finallye eyther thy deſyre is not ſatiſfyed and there by thou ſtyll diſcontented: or els with ſaciety, repentance, and diſcomoditye doth torment thee. So the only way is to keepe yt meane. For what cauſe haue all the Godds of the gentiles preferred death before the lyfe of man?
            Vnleſſe it were the worldlye miſerye was to thē moſt apparantly knowen. Pindarus telleth y• when Agamedes and Trophonius had builded the tēple of Apollo, they deſired of the Gods, this reward, that where as Apollo, had willinglye promyſed to returne within ſeuen dayes, that they in the meane tyme mighte continue in banquetinge, and ioyfull lyfe: but in the end of thoſe days, in a ſound ſlepe they dyed, wherby Apollo playnly taught that for mortall men there was no greater reward then death: after that time the ſame▪ God confyrmed y•
                meaninge vpon Pindarus who being by the Bo
                     •
                  tian Ambaſſadour aſked what thinge it was that beſt coulde happen to man? Pithius aunſwered, that Pindarus do prooue true whyche alreadye he hathe wrytten of Agamedes and Trophonius whiche if hee doeth, he hymſelfe muſte ſhortlye followe.
            In whiche aunſwere the Poete did meane that he ſhoulde looke for Death: where in hee was not deceiued for within a few dayes he dyed in deede.
            
               Plutarchus in an Epiſtle of Comforte written to Apollon
                     •
                  us, telleth this hiſtorye: When Midas had in Huntinge taken Silenus (this Silenus was of the Satyres ſtocke, nouriſhed by Bacchus, who was alſo called Silenus, Surnamed Satyrus) of whome manye diſcended hee wrote (as Plyny tellethe) of wantonneſſe and there in fayned thre Sileni. Hee aſked of him what was mooſte to bee deſyred of man? Whereunto hee aunſweared not, but at length enforced by the importunacie of the Kinge, brake forthe in this ſorte.
            O you tormented Deuils the ſeede of one daye why conſtrain you me to ſpeake, that which were better for you if you neuer knewe it? That is, that the ignoraunce of your owne euyls, is the onelye pleaſure of mannes lyfe. But ſeinge you knowe your own euils, the beſte were not to be born, and nexte to that, not to lyue longe.
            And your condicion is ſuch as you are partakers of no part of thoſe goode thinges whiche nature hathe made, this ſpake Silenus. The ſentence of the Philoſophers doe alſo here vnto agree and Ariſtotle prince of the Peripatetian ſecte, doth call thoſe
 mooſte effeminate that murder theim ſelues, and thoſe valiaunt which can abyde Trauaile, Payne, Miſfortune, and all ſortes of myſerie which opinion the Poet folowed ſayinge.
            
               In fortunes high diſgrace: each man may death diſdayne.
               But he moſt valiaunt is, that can, in vvretched ſtate remayne.
            
            But Plato chiefe of the Academian Sect, ſaythe that a man ought not to yelde to Death, becauſe we are ignoraunt whether it be good or euil, meaninge that in reſpecte of puniſhment or Ioye, that folowed it was euill or good, becauſe deathe was the end both of good and euill.
            Therfore euen in the whole ſcripture death is not accompted other then ſleape, and to dye is ſaide to ſleape. What maruayle is it then though for Hope of Life to come, we ought not to ſhunne to dye. We finde that Sainct Paule wiſhed to dye and goe to God, which deſyre ought to be not only in Holy men, but alſo in all good men.
            For three ſorts of euills there be that may happen to men. The firſte within vs and our mindes, with which temperancy do mete.
            The ſecond without vs, and they by wiſedome are preuented. The thirde are thoſe, that al be it they be in deede without vs, yet are they vneuitable, and againſt them none other defence we haue then fortitude. And I pray you, to what purpoſe ſhould fortitude ſerue, if to feare death were either goode or neceſſarye? As therfore temporaunce and Wyſedome are proffytable for Man: So
 is alſo fortitude, yet what profite coulde proceede therof, if neceſſarily we feared death? or if that feare were eyther good or honeſt, ſyth of neceſſitye, death muſt come to man one tyme or an other, one of theſe three muſt neceſſarilie folowe, eyther that lyke vnto beaſtes we ſhould be ignorant of death, which cannot be, eyther that with willyng minde we will dye: or els that we torment our ſelues.
            Were it not more naturall to man (and the rather ſeing that bruit beaſtes with ignorance eſcheweth the feare of death) that he wiſelye in place of ignorance ſhuld vſe fortitude, geuē him by God againſt the neceſſitie of death. Neither can wee thinke yt God hath more fauourablye forſene for bruite beaſtes then men, yet they, without al care do yelde to dye. So we armed withe fortitude oughte not to feare any death. What profyte can we procure to our country or friendes? or what good can vertue bringe, if we dyſdayne to dye? Callicratides the Lacedemonian captain hearing the Soothſayer pronounce victorye to the Lacedemonians and death to himſelfe, aunſwered: Sparta by loſſe of me ſhall nothing at al be weakened. How noble were the dedes of men that feared no death, how happy was their liues, how comme
                  •
               dable were their endes? how glorious was their fame? and in briefe, wh
                  •
                refuſe we to yelde to that equality, wherin a common parſon is like a kyng, a monſter lyke a moſt ſemely man, a tyrant like the ſymple & moſt harmleſſe ſoule. The huge armye of Xerſes, neyther the treaſure of Tyberius, nor the crueltye of Antonius, agaynſt death did any thyng preuayle. All men are
 ſubiecte to one equallitye (exceptinge true vertue) there ſhalbe no difference, and thereinto without diſdayne, hate, enuye, or wronge, to nature, by deſtenye we ſhalbe all called, thoughe no man is expert in that iorneye. Onelye falſe opinion of man hath made death to be accōpted a feareful thing, not vnlike as thoſe that haue not the experience of trauayle, ſtudye, or concurſe of kinges do make of them great admiratiō: when others that are acquainted wyth ſuch things, do know them without maruaile at all. And ſome we ſee without experience haue diſdayned death, & for lighte cauſes killed themſelues. Of which nomber was Dioxippus the Champion, who through enuye of the Macedonians falſely accuſed of thefte before Alexander, & proteſting the iniurye, wt his owne ſworde ſlewe himſelfe: we haue alſo ſeene a ſcholler a coūtry mā of ours, for not beinge requited in loue at the handes of a gentlewoman in Padoa, wyth poyſon procured his owne death: One other in oure Cittye, hauinge ſuſtayned loſſe by the pryce of corne, willinglye hanged himſelfe. One other (and hee alſo of our Nation:) finding he could not with commoditye paye his dettes, threw himſelfe into a water and ſo drowned: I my ſelfe did ſee a womā who for verye ſorrow that ſhe had committed adultrye (aſkinge God forgiuenes for her offence) ſodenlye dranke poyſon. Cleopatra although ſhe might haue liued in honor, yet becauſe ſhe would not be caried about in tryumphe, cauſed a Serpent to bite her bodye, & thereof willingly dyed: Porcia the daughter of Cato and wyfe to Brutus (in honeſt life farre
 e
                  •
               celling Cleopatra) hearing that her huſband was ſlayne didde eate burninge Coales and thereof died. For cauſe more iuſt dyed Democles a Boy of notable beauty in Athens. He being by the king watched when he ſhould enter naked into a bath, (and knowing the king ment to abuſe him) caſte himſelfe into the bottome of the whot water and ſo preſently dyed. The death of Lucretia is wel knowen, who violently bereft of hir honor, ſticked hir ſelfe: The wante of ſucceſſe and not will, was cauſe that Alexander the greate eſcaped voluntarie death: for hauing in dronken mode ſtain his frend Clitus, he would preſently in the houſe haue murdered himſelfe, from whiche doinge in ſpace of three daies both by force & ſute he could ſcātly be entreated to refrayn, and afterwards being at y• ſiege of Sudracarus a citie in India, he leaped from the wall into the towne of purpoſe to dye. For by meane therof he did both fal farre, and alone among his enemies, but fortune woulde not permit that ſucceſſe he deſired. This booke would not receiue ye nūber of enſamples of ſuch, as for feare loue, griefe, anger & other occaſions of no waight haue ſought theyr owne deathes: Beſides whom we reade of hole legions that haue offered themſelues to apparant deſtruction. As they did that were wt 
               Leonida againſt the Perſiās and fought nere vnto Thermopile.
            
            What woulde theſe people haue aduentured for great cauſe, or if death were a great euyl, that vpon ſo light occaſion did not refuſe to dye. From whiche determinacion no reſpect of age, ſexe, or honor, could feare them: But I ſe what thou wilt ſay?
 death I doe not feare, for as it is not euill, ſo is it neceſſarye, and to feare that is of neceſſitye, were vaine, cowerdlye and hurtefull. Yet woulde I dye eaſelye, and olde, ſuche a death as Auguſtus deſired and did obtaine. For by lyuinge olde I ſhall not onelye gaine a longer life, but alſo a more eaſyer death. Ariſtoteles in his Booke De Reſpiratione thincketh that verye olde men dyed not onelye withoute payne, but alſo withoute anye feelinge of deathe, becauſe the heate of their bodyes was quenched, whiche maye appeare by this example: If thou goe aboute to drawe a tothe, that is not looſe, thou feeleſt great paine, but if of it ſelfe it were looſe before, withoute anye griefe at all it commeth awaye. Euen ſo greene youthe wyth extreeme paine do yelde to death: but olde folke in dying feele no griefe almoſt at al: As the tragicall Poet ſayth.
            In ſlomber ſvveete, the aged ſprite departeth.
            How can it be other thē that death is greuous to yonge men, when as ſleepe againſt nature is offenſiue. Oft times it happeneth that ſuch as vppon cuſtome ſeeke ſleepe at vntimelye houres become thereby drye, pyned, and ſlouthfull, ſo as in ſteede of delight they get diſeaſe. Theophraſtus beinge readye to dye (thoughe he were an olde mā) complayned of Nature: becauſe ſhe had ordayned ſo longe life in Staggs & Rauens (al moſt vnprofitable beaſtes) and to mā, being the moſt noble &
 wyſeſt creature allowed ſo ſhorte a terme to 
                  〈◊〉
                in. What may they ſay then that dye in y• flower of theyr youth, haue they not iuſt cauſe to lament? Surely no. But here the reaſon why nature hath not: among other creatures made man of longeſt lyfe, and then that he that dyeth in youth doth ſuffer nothing more greuous then they that lyue old. For fyrſt it is doubted of manye, (and chiefelye of Ariſtotle, whether anye creature (the Elephant excepte) doth liue more longe then man. Becauſe he maketh no mentiō either of the Phenixe, ye Crow, the Rauen or the Stagge: nor affirmeth them to be of longeſt life. But let vs confeſſe that whiche is imputed in Virgill, though it doth little importe to the matter, where he ſpeaking of men ſayth.
            A life more longe nyne times, the cacklinge Crovve doth lyue.
            But confeſſing with Ariſtotle that y• Elephante doth liue more longe then man: why neede we cō
               tende whether man be of one or more creatures in longe lyuinge excelled? Omittinge alſo that the holye Scripture affyrmeth lyfe more long to man then other lyuinge creatures: let vs now diſpute that yt alreadye is taken in hande, that is to ſay, for what cauſe ſome beaſts be of longer life then mā? The reaſon is this: ſeinge all creatures are made eyther for the vſe or honour of man▪ they were framed accordinge to the deſcretion of Nature: at which time ſhe made theyr minds, as wel for their bodyes, as theyr bodyes for their mindes: & were therefore made ſimple with fewe inſtruments, as
 plaine thinges to enduer longe. But the bodye of man being made onely for his minde, neded many more inſtrumentes, to thende that the vnderſtanding might the more fitlye do his office. Therfore although Nature hath made for man the beſt proportion of bodye, yet could ſhe not geue therevnto the longeſt lyfe, by reaſon of exceeding concauities, and ſubtilnes of the members: which if they were great (beſides that we ſhould be al Giants) they woulde bee troubleſome eche one to other. Which is wel proued in y• no creature hath ſo infinite members or part of mēbers, which were of neceſſity made ſmal & ſlender, to y• end they might the rather be fit to yeld: & ſo the breath (an inſtrumēt of the ſoule) became y• more ſubtil. Wherfore nature hath not in this behalfe omitted any parte of her duty▪ but rather wt ſuch dilligence helped our life, as for the length thereof wee haue no cauſe to complaine, which is nowe wel proued in y• people of India lateſt founde, where men liue commonlye a hundreth and thirty yeres, becauſe there the ayre is good, and the people without cares. But wee cōtinuing incares, riot, & vntimely labour, choſing ayre for profit & not health, yea altogether forgetting the length of life, wee caſt oure ſelues into extreame ſickenes, diſcōmodities of body and preſēt death, without cauſe accuſing nature, for the ſhortnes of oure liues: Howe muche better were it to know which way to vſe the benefit of nature? if ſo deare & pleaſāt a thing thou doeſt accompt this life? what is y• cauſe that Philoſophers and Hermits haue liued ſo verye long? & yet theyr to great
 ſtinens and earneſt contemplacion hindered their health? vnleſſe it were becauſe they liued voide of care and temperatly. How much were this rule of lyuinge to attaine long life more delicate, then to feede vppon fleſhe and honye? But in this age mē continue carefully in labours and care, watching the halfe night baſkinge in Venus bathe, abyding in cloudye Regions, and not in good ayre, & drinkinge boyled wynes: do notwithſtandinge complaine of ſhort life. And howſoeuer in deede oure liues be ſhort, it is opinion that doth make it ſo to appeare. The people called Garamantes do not liue aboue fortye yeares. I omit to ſpeake of the Pigmeians as people rather fayned then in deede, but wee if we dye before fyftye or threſcore, do thincke that iuſtlye we lament: and yet who ſo dwelleth in thoſe countryes do highly thanke God if he attayneth fortye yeares, and thou lyuinge muche elder do neuertheleſſe complayne. Surelye euerye lyfe is long that is continued till death ſith at the beginning the terme is deſtined, and as ſayth the Poet.
            In birth vvee breede our death, our ende, on firſt beginning hangeth.
            Reade we not in holye Scripture, that y• nomber of dayes and monthes is appointed by God? he hath ſet the terme which cannot be paſſed. The lyfe of man therefore is ended wyth olde age: for old age is the laſt part of life. Olde age is alſo the neceſſitye of death: whereſoeuer therefore death is neceſſary, old age draweth neare Whoſo dyeth
 in youth in this onelye is the more happye, that he eſcapeth the diſcommoditye of old age, will thou make life to ſeme long or ſhort by compariſon? A kinde of beaſtes ther be called, Ephemera which are made in the morning, and before ſonne ſettinge do dye. If happelye they dye at noone, theyr lyfe is called ſhorte: but if they continue till nighte, they accompte it longe, and yet it exceedeth not twelue houres. Wee maruaile at flees for theyr long life, if they liue two Sommers, and at flees that continue three monethes. Yet whiche of theſe is thoughte any thinge towardes mans life? we call dogges olde that paſſe a leuen yeares of age: but a man paſſeth all theſe in longe lyuinge thoughe hee dyeth in youth. But the life of mā muſt not be accompted longe or ſhorte: in reſpecte of his yeares. The life of all mortall men is but ſhorte: becauſe wyth death it ſhalbe moſt certainlye ended: It is vertue & worthy actes that maketh the life longe, and idlenes that ſhortneth thy dayes. Alexander, thoughe hee liued not aboue thirtye three yeares, dyed an old man, through the greatnes and nomber of his noble exploytes. Argantonius hauinge lyued a hundreth and twentye yeares, maye bee ſayde to haue dyed in youth, becauſe (beſydes the rarenes of his age) in all his life he neuer did anye thing that deſerued memorye. It ought alſo worthelye to be noted that for the moſt parte, all notable men haue dyed in theyr youth. Amonge the kinges none almoſte continued to olde age, Hercules, Athilles, Caſtor, Pollux, Aiax, Iaſon. Amonge the Poetes Lucanus, Catullus, Tibullus, neyther
 was Vigill long liued, neyther Demoſtenes nor Cicero: howe true, yea to true is the ſayinge of the Poet.
            Their liues are ſhort, and age is rare: vvhere life doth lacke good rule.
            
               IVLIVS CAESAR Seuerus, Alexander, Probus, Aurelianus, Claudius the ſeconde of that name dyed in youth: which men a I thincke liued the leſſe, the more honeſt they were, becauſe being deare to the Gods were the ſouer called vnto them. Whervppon grew that ſaying from the Poetes, whom Iupiter and Apollo do loue, do neuer attaine to old age. This is alſo to be noted, yt choiſe is to be loked for, wher wil may anye wayes auayle: but in thy power it is not to make thy life, eyther more long or more ſhorte. Yet if thou cā do it, there is none offence at al, but if thou cānot, thou lamenteſt thy ſhortnes of life for no greater reaſon, then thou may thy mortality. And yt care of thinges impoſſible is vayne, & onelye proper to fooles. But admit thou maye continue thy life and become olde, arte thou not therby the more vnhappye? becauſe thou loſeſt that ſinguler commodity which by God almightye is gauen to men for the allaye of ſorrow: which is ignorance of time. While wee continue yonge, wee liue meerelye, becauſe wee imagine death is not at hande: But how can olde menne thincke that death is farre awaye? when alreadye they are entred the laſte ende of life. Howe true and worthye memorye is that ſayinge of S. Auſten, A yonge manne maye ſoone dye, but an olde manne cannot liue longe. And yet no couſe there
 is why thou ſhould not be ſorrye, ſeing a yong mā maye alſo dye ſone. Syth thende of life is vnknowē, a yong man neuer ought to diſpayre whether he laboureth of deadly diſeaſes, or be caſt into cruell tormentes and priſon. The chaunces of mortal creatures, do ſhew that men are ſubiect to law of nature and fortune: ſo as withoute cauſe they loue certainties for moſt incertēties of al. But admit thou doeſt attaine to old age it ſelfe? how manye euils commeth therby? labour, griefe▪ ſadnes, loſſe of ſences, diſdaine: & (y• which is almoſt worſt of all) as Caecilius doth well diſcribe, therby thou ſhalte ſee they companye of all men eſchewed: vnwelcome are olde menne to their children, vnwelcome to frendes, diſdayned of yonge men, and odious to their owne familiars. Theyr ſences ſerue not theyr bodyes, theyr bodyes obeye not theyr mindes, they paſſe the nighte withoute ſleepe, and eate without all taſt. They lothe themſelues, how ſhoulde they be pleaſant to others? We reade that when Zeno Citieus could not dye with age, he ſtrā
               gled himſelfe. What dilligence and trauayle did Cicero take to perſwade olde age to be pacientlye borne? but if of it ſelfe it had beene good, or as riches, frends, children, and learning had apparance of good: there ſhoulde haue beene not cauſe for him to haue taken ſuch trauayle. A mockerye it were to perſwade that health or honour were pacientlye to be ſuffered: and wee agree that olde age is ſufferable, but not to be wiſhed for. Howe manye olde men haue beene, for whom it had beene better to haue died in youth? Priamus for example, not
 for myracle in hiſtorye is reſited. Not longe ſince Baccus Valor being olde and readye to take leaue of life, before his eyes behelde his owne ſonne beheaded, a yonge man of ſinguler hope. The next yeare before, two other olde men I ſawe that behelde the like fortune in theyr owne children. Wherefore I wonder muche at the greate wyſedome of Theramenes, woo onelye eſcapinge when his houſe fell downe, ſayde before his frendes that reioyſed for his life: O fortune to what ende haſt thou me preſerued? neyther did he aſke in vaine, for within fewe dayes after by the malyce of tyrantes, he was taken and put to death. Therfore ſuch is the condition of men, as althoughe beinge olde thou mighte returne to youth againe & as the fable telleth of Aeſon ſayinge.
            
               And as tvviſe tvventye yeares bypaſt, ſo novve my force I finde
               Myne aged yeares are vvorne avvay, I feele my youthful minde.
            
            Yet who art thou ſo madde or greedye of lyfe, as would take vpon thee ſuch a condition? wherin there is nothinge but ſicknes, cares, contempte, peril, lothſomnes and ſorrow. So as I ſee not for what reaſon thou ſeekeſt to liue. And if in luſtye youth when ſtrengthe, ſences, beautye, wit, & auctoritye, were all in thee, thou were notwtſtanding oftentimes wearye of life, what ſhalt thou doe at this age when thou heareſt thy ſelfe called olde wretche, and dootinge olde foole? death doth neuer come ſo muche to ſone to a yonge man, as to late to them that be olde. But if feare of deadlye paines do offende thee, ſicknes reſembleth death,
 and in ſicknes by little and little the life is taken awaye. Or art thou loth to dye alone? Be of good cheare, thou ſhalt finde more deade then are left aliue: and thoſe alſo ſhall or longe followe. As the Poet ſayth.
            
               For eyther ſoone or late, in order as men ſaye,
               The vvretched flocke of vvordly folke, to death do take their vvay.
            
            Neyther doth GOD ſuffer any to deferre his deſtined tune. The deſtines do driue all men, and remayne as lawe for euer: they are y• happyer ſort that are ſoneſt diſpatched of paynes. And as amonge condempned folke the Lawe executeth thoſe firſt that haue leaſt offended, to thende that the greate offenders ſhoulde beholde the terror of death: Euen ſo, God doth firſt take thoſe away, whom hee loueth, becauſe they ſhall not be lokers on, but meſſengers ſente before: (vnleſſe in conſideration of profitte eyther to theyr frendes, or the worlde) hee ſuffereth ſuch menne to tarrye more longe. To conclude then ſeing in thinges that be euil, there is nothinge more greuous then dailye and certaine expectatiō, old age when it commeth, hauinge in it both the one and the other, doth force a manne to wyſhe that in his youth hee had dyed. I my ſelfe beinge a childe, doe remember mine owne mother Clara Michera then a yonge woman was notwithſtanding wonte to wiſhe that in her infancye ſhe dyed: beinge growen to greater age (for euer more ſhe continued y• ſpeach) I aſked the cauſe whye ſhee ſoe ſayde? where vnto this
 ſhe aunſweared: Loe, now I know I ſhall dye and yt with greater perill, beſydes that in ye meane time (who ſo doth marke it well) ſhall ſee there is nothing that doth not bring with it greater griefe then pleaſure: becauſe pleaſure beinge paſſed, doe chaunge to ſorrowe. And that deſeruingly. What is it in this life that can delighte? dailye trouble to apparell and vnapparell thy ſelfe, hunger, thyrſte, ſleepe not ſo plentiful nor quiet as dead mē haue, heate in Sommer, colde in Winter, diſorder of time, terrour of warres, controlemente of parentes, cares of wedlocke, ſtudye for children, ſlouthe of ſeruaunts, contention of ſutes, and that (whiche is moſte of all) the condition of time, wherein honeſtye is diſdayned as follye, and crafte is honoured as Wyſedome. Artiſans for theyr cunning not accompted of: but for apparaūce and opinion of people preferred. So as it is neceſſarye eyther to diſpleaſe God, or els to liue amonge men in miſerye oppreſſed and diſdayned. I omitte all euils, onely yt which is cōmon to dead men is not euil, all other thinges which wee do not accompte euil are worſe then thoſe which deade men ſuffer. It is nowe requiſite that ſomewhat be ſayde of the diuerſityes of death, hytherto it hath beene deferred becauſe they are many, & of diuers men, thoughte worthy conſideration. For death doth ſeeme greuous to yong men, both for that it is painful for yt minde to leaue the body, diſhonourable, and certen, al which in common iudgement are ioyned to gethers. And ſome cowardlye yonge men haue beene compelled to dye a knowen death, but ſyth
 I ſee diuers of the common people pacientlye enough do take their deaths. I know no cauſe why other ſhould be greatly comforted, conſidering that not the maner of death, but the qualitye of the offence maketh death diſhonorable. For if thou reſpect only the maner of death, thou ſhalt find that the greateſt nomber of men put to vile death, were thoſe that antiquity prayſeth, and our age doe honour, notwithſtanding they fel into the handes of Tirantes in whoſe power it was to appointe the time and maner of death, though innocencye be in them that ſuffer. Neither can a publike death bee diſhonorable: if his life ſo dyinge be voide of foule vice becauſe publike death without offence, is not onely a ſigne but alſo a triall of vertue. We fynde in the new law how Chriſt did firſt gayne the glorye of innocent death, and after him followed innumerable martirs and prophets, and the moore good and holy they were, the more cruelly forced to dye. Eſayas cut with yron by commaundement of king Manaſſes, Hieremias by ye people ſtoned to death Iohn Baptiſt beheaded, and fynally manie other cruelly murdered, neither was the fortune of other Good menne muche better at the handes of heathen Kinges and in their Citties: for Zeno Eleates, when quietly he might haue liued in his houſe, he conſpired againſt the Tirant Nearcluis, but his entent was diſcouered and he hanged, yet at his deathe he perſwaded ye people to ſtone the Tyraunt to death. When Lyſymachus, the kinge threatned Theodorus Cyreneus to hang him, he anſwered thus what matter is it, whether on ye earth or hanging
 high, my carkcas do ſtinke. When Socrates myghte with ſylence haue eſcaped death, being condēpned only in a pecuniall paine, did prouoke them y• dyd condempne him to procure his death. And when his wife Zantippe complained that vniuſtly he ſuffered, he aunſwered, An mallet iuſte ſenciens non eſſe malum preter culpam. The diſhonour therfore is not in dyinge, but in the cauſe of death: which procedeth of thine own euill doinge. But as for paines: youth and certaine knowledge, of dying, they add none encreaſe of grief, to death, nor make it moore greuous, becauſe the knowledge of that is not euill, cannot be euil after, and onely death after torments is moſt pleaſant. And torments either they can not be great, or not long. Chriſte for enſample to al men died, that for enſample it might remaine Beſides this ſeldome ſhalt thou finde any innocēt to dye of great torment, no, ſcantly once, vnleſſe it be at chaunge of lawes, when innocentes are forced to ſuffer the inſolency of nocentes: as in hyſtories it appeareth moſt rarely is alſo founde example of violency in giltleſſe men, yf wilfulnes be not the cauſe for ſuch as ſo murder good men, do ſeme to do it of very will. But how eaſy a thinge death is eyther publike, or by ſword, examples do beare witnes. When Iulius Caeſar was in the murdering and felte the daggers of diuers men ſtubbed into his body, he ſought neither to ſaue himſelfe nor cryed for helpe, but falling kept hidden his ſecrete partes. Such memory hee had of comlines notwithſtanding his woundes, and readynes to yeld vppe his ghoſt. And as Lucanus ſaith his ſonne in lawe
 in ſuch ſort dyed. He diſcribeth Pompeius deathe in this wiſe.
            
               In haſt he ſtayde his vvofull voyce, and vvould no vvord complayn,
               Leaſt vveping teares might ſo vnvvares, his heauenly fame diſdain.
               And vvh
                     ••
                   
                  
                     •
                  is noble ſide vvas pearſt, vvith fearce Achilles blade
               No ſig
                     •
                  , no ſob, no careful cheare, no ſorovving ſound he made but in diſdaine of crueltye.
            
            
               Cato Vticēſis determined to dye, ordered his goods wiſelye: forſeinge the good of others, though he neglected his owne, which done reading Plato of ye immortality of ſoules, layd himſelfe down & ſlepte ſo ſoūdly, as he ſnored after being awaked ſticked himſelfe. And when throughe weakenes of his hand the wounde was not mortal, ſuche as were by ſaued him, tyl at length violently he brake loſe & dyed. Such was his gredy deſyre of death. Otho themperoure a yong man of thirtye ſeuen yeares, of al men accompted ſoft and effeminate, after hee had won thre battels of the Vitelli for the ſorow of one loſt, gaue his mony and ſubſtance to his frendes and willed his familiar companion to ſhewe himſelfe to the ſouldiers, leſt that after he ſhould be ſuſpected, and in the night with two daggers murdered himſelfe. And yet neither diſpayred hee of ye holding of the Empire, nor wanted the loue of the Senate or his ſouldiers, but onlye for that nether in victory or victored he would hinder the commō wealth, Caius Iulius by Caius themperour condempned to dye▪ obteyned ten dayes pardon: all whiche time careles he conſumed in ſleape, and table play, and when the hangeman came in to warne him y• his tyme was euen at hande, hee tolde what aduauntage
 he had in the game, and willed his play felow that after his death he ſhould not boaſt of winning, and called the hangman to record: who led him towardes death accompanied with a philoſopher Vpon the way, being aſked wha
                  •
                he muſed of? He aunſwered I determined to obſerue what at the laſt inſtant my ſoule ſhal feele, when it parteth away to the ende that after I may aduertiſe my frends. Aratus knowing he had taken a lingering poyſon at the handes of Philippus the Macedonian kinge, ſpeaking one ſecrete worde to his familier frend, paſſed the reſt of his life ſo pleaſantly as ſemed not to haue any ſuch griefe or aſſurance to dye. The ſeuen brothers called Machabei, al yōg men and ſonnes of one mother by the commaundement of king Antigouns one after an other, and in ſondry ſorte together, with their Mother killed themſelues. Tectamenes condempned to dye, went his way laughinge, and being aſked whether hee diſdayned the lawes, anſwered no: but by dyinge I muſt pay that I neither aſked nor borrowed of any. Which example although vnder the perſon of one vnknowen, was much prayſed of Cicero, yet in wiſe iudgements, ſuch behauiour argueth: In Tectamenes, rather vanity, thē fortitude, for a man condempned ſpecially for wicked doing, naturally can not loue death, neither was it our entente to proue that death ſhould be deſired or ſought for.
            But as it is the condicion of a faithleſſe man, not to reſtore y• he boroweth: ſo is it alſo an vnfrēdly and vnthankefull parte, not to kepe that hee boroweth. As therfore death is not to be fled or lamē
               ted
 
               
                  •
               o ought it not to be ſought for. But as y• Poete ſayth.
            
               Do neyther ſeke nor shonne: the ende of thine ovvne lyfe.
            
            Yet happely Craton may holde ſuch opinion, and though it be not mainteined by reaſon, yet for the meruaile gaineth reputation among the common ſort, The example therfore of Theramon is more honeſt and more couragious. For he beinge vniuſtly by thirty Tyrantes condempned tooke the poyſon ſaying according to the auncient maner of Athens, Critus I drinke to the, for ſo was the greateſt Tyrant and worſe then: Theramines called, that done whatſoeuer remayned in the cuppe, he threw vpon the ground. The death of Phocion was more noble he ſeing his frend deſyrous to drinke poiſon didde ſtay him, after findinge that which was not left to ſuffiſe did buy more, ſaying yt in Athens a man was forced to buy his own death. But why do I labor to enduce more enſamples of men, when whoole Nacions may be called to recorde? As the Galathians, did ſo little regarde Deathe, as they feared not to fighte Naked. So did alſo manye noble Romaines and Germaines that nedeleſſe it wer to reſyte their names. I do therfore thinke beſt in fewe words to declare that men were made mortall for three cauſes. Firſt becauſe there ſhoulde be ſome ende of their offences.
            This life is diſpleaſant and the nerer age ye moore troubleſome, and therefore the Gimniophiſta, (as men ſay) anſwered Alexander well, aſkinge whether death or life wer ſtronger? (Li
                  •
               e quod hee)
 becauſe it beareth ſo many calamities. The ſecond cauſe is, that goodmen without enuy might be honoured, and euil Men without feare cōdempned, and that riches and aucthority (for whiche menne commit greate wickedneſſe) might not be regarded. Yf thoſe thinges whiche mortall men haue were iuſtly wayed, they ſhoulde as Cares and Euilles be reputed. Yet if death were not, Menne would muſe onlye vppon Thefte, and Violence, while in this ſhort ſpace that now they lyue, they thinke ſo much thereof. The third reaſon is for that men might receiue rewarde of good and euil, according to the quality of their deſerts. For after death, ſuch as haue paſſed a godly life, ſhall liue not only with their brethren & kinſfolke, but alſo accō
               panied wtal honeſt and learned men, and aboue y• ſtarres receiue ioy and euerlaſting felicitye. So contrary wiſe the wicked in darkeneſſe and ſolitarye places ſhalbe tormented. Therfore for wicked folke only death can bee thought euill, and yet is not, but Good men not vnlike the Swanne who only at his death do ſynge may boldly reioyſe and be gladde. Some there are ſo ambicious that the care of their funeralles doth trouble them muche, who are not to bee comforted, but for their follye to be reprehended, what is the body of man, when the Spirite is paſſed awaye? It is no moore accompted as parte or member of him, but rather a Carckcaſſe vnprofytable, ſtinckinge and horryble. Seneca therfore didde well deuiſe that the ſame ſhould be buried, not in reſpect of the Dead, but the liuinge, leaſt they by ſauour and ſight therof,
 might be offended. Where vppon in ſundrye nacions hath growne ſundrie cuſtomes of buryinge the Deade. The Grecians were wonte to wrye them in the earthe. The Romaines dyd burne them in fyre. The Nathabeians did burye them in their dungehilles. Yea their Kinges had none other Sepulchre. The Ethiopians do caſt them into the ryuers to be deuoured of Fiſhes.
            The Magi did geeue them to wilde Beaſtes Hercani to Doggs. But the Maſſageti moſt meruailouſlye do eate them. The Egiptians with their owne Nayles doe burie them.
            The Perſians doe wrappe theym in Waxe. So incertayne is the reaſon, where is no reaſon at all. Alas good Foole doeſt thou not heare the Poete ſayinge.
            To vvant a tombe, the lacke is neuer great.
            What doth it preuayle the to lye in marble, aboue the ground, or in the bowelles of the earthe? doeſt thou take care for want of a workeman. There is no cauſe of feare at all. The Heauen doth hide hys bones, that can no coffyn fynde, as ſayth the Poet. Who ſo were wiſe would not with one hafepeny ſpence, buy this felicitie. The fyrſte inuentoure of names for theſe ſtately building, for buriall of ſtinkynge bodies: what did hee other then make tryall of an inſolente, and vayne ambicious mynde, that euen in deathe woulde declare the ſame?
            But this care caughte beginninge at Silla, that Deade Menne ſhould bee buryed.
            Hee was the fyrſte that at the Deathe of
 
               Cornelia cauſed burninge and not burying to be vſed, becauſe he feared to be digged vppe and ſuffer ſhame which he had care of in the buryinge of Marius. But howe much better did Diogenes Cenicus, lyinge vnder a tree ſicke and readye to dye, aunſweared them that aſked where he woulde be buryed? ſayinge, I praye you let me alone: whereto they replyed that then the beaſtes woulde teare him in peeces (whye then quoth hee) geeue me a ſtaffe, naye (ſayde his frendes) that were to none vſe when the life is gone. Then Diogenes not vnwiſelye reproued them ſaying: what harme can I haue when I ſhalbe ſenceles and feele nothinge? it maketh alſo to purpoſe to knowe that it is incertaine what doth become of mens carcaſes caſt awaye: ſometimes it was thoughte they gayned an opinion of deuinitye as it came to paſſe of Cleo ye 
               Lacedemonian kinge, whoſe body hanging whole vppon the gallouſe, ther appeared in it a Serpent that broughte forth deuouringe byrdes. Whereof grewe a religion, as though the Gods were keepers of innocent mens bodyes, which fooliſhly the people honoured, It is ſayd that Cteſias found the carcaſſe of Clearchus not vnlike to the other, out of which grew a woode, and became to be honoured for a God. Yea at this daye this ſuperſtitious opinion remayneth of them that lye vnburyed, that theyr ſprites ſhould walke: So great force hath y• memorye of aunciente error, and the feare which men haue in walkinge alone. But nowe let vs leaue theſe vnprofitable matters, and (as at ye beginninge was determined) turne out talke to ſorrowe.
 And fyrſte let vs ſpeake of Parentes becauſe not only Loue, but alſo Pitye was wonte for them to moue teares. Neyther can we with moore honeſty lament any then theym of whome we came into the Worlde. This is the dutye of Loue, Charity, and Pitie: and if any whitte the teares of Children can preuayle to their good, ſure lye then ought we weepe: But ſeing no weping, or Sorrowe doth helpe, let vs conſider, whether honeſtly or reaſonably we ought to do it.
            VVherein firſt commeth to memory the vniuerſall reaſon of all theym, that by Deathe haue bene called awaye. For either we muſte lament in fauour of theym that be deadde, or ells in reſpect of our ſelues. But if in conſideracion of thē we Lament, eyther we beleue that their Soules doe liue, or ells together with their Bodies they are perriſhed. And if thou thincke that booth the Soule and Bodye be perriſhed, then ſo thincking and lamenting the Death of an other, thus thou Complayneſt.
            Alas alas hencefoorthe thou ſhalt not be Thirſſty, Hongry, Colde, Not, Painfull, Sicke, ſubiect to iniuries, and Calamity, yea (that is mooſt of all) hencefoorth thou ſhalt not dye, as I ſhall, but I know thou wilt ſaye, I were to bee laughed at, i
                  •
                ſo I ſhould lamente, neuertheleſſe all this thou doeſt, and though thou confeſſe it not, yet wylte thou know that ſo it is. Surely there is no doubt that dye we muſte (Death) as thou thinckeſte, is Euill: Whie art thou then ſorry for him that is paſte it, and not for thy ſelfe that by no meanes
 can auoide it? But if it be ſuperfluous to lam
                  •
               t thyne owne Condition (becauſe in caſes neceſſarye, wepinge helpeth not) To what purpoſe doeſt thou be wayle his Death whiche is the moore neceſſarye: that he is already deadde?
            But if thou beleeue his Spirite doth lyue, then of neceſſitie thus muſt thou lament. Alas alas frō a mortall man thou arte become immortall frome Paynefull Quiet, from Miſerable Happie, from Sadde pleaſaunt, and from obſcure noble.
            VVho is hee that heareth the in this ſorte complayne (though he were of the dead mans bloud) but ſhould fal vnto laughinge? Neither doe then thinke I tel the an vntrothe (and therfore whiche I had almoſt forgottē) though thou alledge y• for his cauſe thou mourneſt. Seinge then there is almooſt no manne ſo vnwiſe as dare ſaye hee complayneth in reſpect of him that is deadde whether his Soule dooth remaine or not, ſo euery manne ſayth he doth lament the want of his fryend, whiche if thou acknowledge the eternitie of his ſoule, cannot ſo be, becauſe (for ſo much as is 
                  〈◊〉
               ) he is not with the, and thou ſhalt ſhortly 
                  〈◊〉
                to him. But take thou heede to 
                  〈◊〉
                that thou bewayleſt thine owne Calamitye, thoughe he 
                  〈◊〉
                not with thee.
            To vayne and Enuious thou 
                  〈…〉
                thy ſelfe, if for thy proffite thou can not 
                  〈…〉
                this benefite, for as with 
                  〈…〉
                to preferre their Children to Seruice of Kinges, in hope of Fauour and Reward, that will come therof notwithſtanding the mindes of Princes, 
                  〈◊〉
               
                times inconſtante, the 
                  〈…〉
                faithfull, and generallye, 
                  〈◊〉
                Good 
                  〈…〉
                as ſerue little 
                  〈…〉
                will ought we 
                  〈…〉
                we 
                  〈…〉
                uſe Hate, Ambition not Diſdayne.
            The mynde of that Prince is neither 
                  〈…〉
                nor ignoraunt of any thinge. There is place with out perryll. Felowſhippe without 
                  〈…〉
                without doubte, and 
                  〈…〉
                And would thou for thine owne commodi
                  •
               te denye him of theſe Ioyes? God forbidde. But beſydes this thou maye perhappes ſeeme iuſtlye to complayne 
                  〈◊〉
                thy Commodities by 
                  〈◊〉
                of 
                  〈…〉
                which 
                  〈…〉
                reaſon, yet of thou conſider at 
                  〈…〉
                to 
                  〈…〉
                enduce reaſon worthye thy conſideration. And firſt ſeinge in reſpect of thy ſelfe 
                  〈…〉
                thinke that one other may be found euer 
                  〈◊〉
                to him for Frendſhippe, Conuerſacion; or neceſſitye. But admitte that coulde not bee, or that ſuch a man were not redely founde: yet withe all remember what paynes thou haddeſt taken for thy deadde frende, howe often for him thou were called in queſtion, how often than 
                  〈◊〉
                leſſe, how burdenous he was to thee, and fynally, how hee hadde bene towardes thee thou cannot certainly knowe, and what hereafter he would haue beue, 
                  〈…〉
               . Alas how often haue ſome men beue 
                  〈◊〉
                by their owne Kinſfolke, 
                  〈◊〉
                Children and Frendes, of whome
 in times paſte they were helped.
            
               Caſſius and Brutus didde aide Iulius Caeſar in fighte againſt his countrye, but beinge made Emperour they ſlewe him. Full fooliſhly didde Antoni
                     •
                  s committe his counſell to Octauius, where in hee diſcouered his freendes, truſtinge to him whome oftetimes in doubtful Fortune he hadde receiued help, yet then throughe his feare he was enforced to voluntary Deathe. Alexander while hee liued was faithfull ſerued of his Souldiers, but being dead, his Children, Kinſfolkes, and Friendes, were all by theym diſtroyed, and yet at the deathe of one of theym, hee felte ſo great Sorrowe, as ſearce, lye he could euer after leaue to lament.
            The pitye of Parentes, Brethren and Children, both beginne and is as it were borne with theym▪ Yet how many haue bene thereby hindered, hereafter ſhalbe declared, But now to the matter: what I praye you canne be moore vnprofitable among mortall Men or leſſe certaine of ende, then Sorrow: whiche proffiteth not others, and hurteth him that doeth lament. I maruaile not therfore at the Thraſians, and Caſions, though at the deathe of their Neighboure, they reioyſe and make good Cheare, becauſe they knowe theym deliuered of all worldlye woe, and hope they are g
                  •
               one to Felicitie. So cōtrary wiſe they waile and wepe when any childe is born, for that from moſt pleaſaunt Quiet, it is come into this troubleſome Life: whiche Cuſtome a Cittizen of oures (as I haue harde) didde folowe, who dying deſyred that wt muſicke & 
                  〈◊〉
                he might be 
                  〈…〉
               
                burial. Yet know I not whether his deſyre was performed. But as touching ſorow, it can not be reproued ſyth men do lamente that, that can not be eſchewed, and that which doth ſaue them from al other inconuenients, yea while they bewayle ye good of others, they forget their owne miſeries.
            What is ſo vayne, as either to lament nothinge, if after Death be no Sence, or if any bee to make them ſorye that loue theym, or be laughed to ſcorn if they contempne theym. Truelye if we fynde faulte withe theym that doe weepe befoore theyr Louers, not being beloued agayn, wherby growethe no good but the declaration of their Follye, how muche moore art thou to be blamed, if thou thincke no Sence remayneth, or doeſt thou accordinge to the faſhion of Fablers, (and yet they beleeued there were Spirites) by weping hope to call backe any to Lyfe as Orpheus did Euridice.
            
            Alas doeſt thou thinke that if ſorrow had bene eyther of neceſſitye or proffite, that Nature whyche hathe geeuen to liuinge creatures Knowledge of ſo manie artes, ſo manifolde circumſpection, (and ſo ſundrye cuſtomes, as to fyghte for their younge, to cheriſhe the olde in venerye, to obſerue affinitie, wedlocke, and reuenge, that amonge the reſt ſhe would haue forgotten Sorrow. Beſides man, there is no Creature after it bee broughte foorth, that dothe lament the Deathe of an other, thoughe we ſee one Pyſmyre doth burye another, yet Nature lefte nothinge vndone that for the neceſſitye of anye Creature was to be required, but in education Sorrowe was neceſſarye, leaſte the
 youge ſhould forget their Parentes, and diſtroye their kinde, The wiſe and diſcrete makers of Lawes, haue lykewiſe wythe a certayne Godlye meane reſpectinge popular Follye, and proffite, appoynted ſhorte termes for men to mourne in.
            
               Lycurgus commaunded that aboue eleuen days, no man ſhoulde lament or ſeeme to mourne.
            
               Solon did clearly take away all Solempnities of Sorrowe, as wepinge, Cryinge, and Tearinge. Who doubteth but if Lawes had bene made only for common people, and not wiſemen: But that mourninge ſhould haue bene clearly taken awaye yea rather thereof no mencion made at al, becauſe they woulde haue imagined Wyſe men to haue needed none admonition, as diuers of themſelues we haue ſeene to doe.
            But now perticularlye let vs proceede whenſoeuer one Kinſeman, bewaylethe the Deathe of an other, let hym tell me truely, whether he had rather haue dyed himſelfe, or not?
            For thus it muſt needes come to paſſe, that the Children doe dye before the Parentes, or the Parentes before the Chyldren, or els altogethers: as though they were all deſtroyed by ſubuerſyon of one Houſe. But to perriſhe all together is holden for mooſte Calamitye and greateſte Myſfortune. If thou deſyre to haue dyed fyrſte, thereby thou doeſt not onlye peruert the courſe of Nature, but alſo incurre one of theſe two that eyther Death is euyll, and therefore offendeth leſſe in thy Parentes then thy ſelfe, or els good: And therefore for Pittyes ſake to bee wiſhed fyrſte, to fall
 vppon theym. For euery man ſtudieth to eſchew Euyll chiefly to him ſelfe. And Good is moſt commonly wiſhed to thoſe we accompte deareſt, or to thoſe that for Pitties ſake we honoure and reuerence. What is that thou mourneſt for in theym? becauſe they are deliuered of Old age? Or doeſte thou lament that in others, which in thy ſelfe thou thinckeſt ought paciently to be ſuffered?
            Or wilt thou weepe not vnlyke the Old woman that complayued her barren Lyfe. Vpon a time there happened a certayne Olde Woman to come beggine to the Gate aſkinge almoſe and therewithall alledged ſhe was without Father, or mother, with which tale at the firſt ſomewhat amaſed one good felow ſtandinge by, aſked what age ſhe was of. Wherunto ſhe anſwered an olde woman of moore then ſeuenty yeares, foorthwith we changed our cheare to laughter, although we toke great pity of the olde woman beinge of ſo greate age, yet no meruail was her loſſe of parents. Therfore haue good regard leſt while thou wepe thou moue not others to laugh, what wouldſt thou do if according to an old cuſtome vſed by the citizens of India in the yſland of Coius, yt old men being paſt Threeſcoore yeares of age ſhoulde of the Citty bee caried in Triumphe, and ſo in ſight be ſlayne? Becauſe after that age they beynge vnprofitable their Deathes in reſpecte of the wante of Corne, maye greatly proffyte the common wealth.
            This Lawe all be it, it be in deede cruell, yet euerye Lawe dooth promyſe ſome commoditie to
 the common weale. Which I ſee the Claſpians haue doone: For that Region beinge plentifull of Menne, and of Corne ſcarſe. Their cuſtome is, after their Parentes be paſſed Threeſcore and ten yeares, to ſhutte theym vppe and ſo wythe Honger to kyll theym, whiche vſe as it is to cruell, Barbarouſe, and of no brutiſhe Beaſte vſed: So Deathe naturall beinge come to oure Parentes oughte pacientlye to bee borne, and thincke them to haue paſſed the whoole courſe of Miſerye, and vs to remayne and abyde the Troubleſome aſſaulte of Earthely cares: Yea and the rather, for that they dyed when Olde age made theym comberſome to the Common weale, and to theymſelues by Lyfe diſpleaſaunte.
            Doeſt thou thincke the olde menne of Babilon were wonte willinglye to yelde theymſelues to Deathe, but becauſe they acknowledged, that Death of olde folkes, was moore proffitable to the Common weale then Lyfe. And admytte thyne Aunceſtoure be not olde (becauſe to lamēt Death in Olde age were woorſe then the Follye of Melitides) but Younge, Strong, Proffitable for his Familye, neceſſary for counſayle, and ſo in his beſte luſte taken away? Thou wilt not lewdlye ſaye within thy ſelfe, Why taryed he ſo longe? as one dydde who boaſted himſelfe to be of our houſe of Cardani. This young Man his Father then dyinge, in the preſence of all Men Daunced, and beinge tolde by his familyer Frendes that he was dead, ſayd, al to late: but the wicked wretch or one yeare paſſed, was iuſtly plagued, for after a longe
 conſumption he dyed, and fulfilled that ſayinge of Moyſes: Honour, thy father and thy mother that thou mayeſt liue long vppon the earth: which I ſee the Gentiles alſo do. For Homer in his Eliades doth affirme thoſe to liue ſhort liues that do not render their parentes yt due rewarde of education. Such is the counſell of true dealing: and ſurelye theſe vnnatural mindes, procedes from ſome deuill, otherwyſe they coulde not be giltye of ſo greate a miſchiefe. The nature of man is diueliſhe: and ſo wicked, as it woulde deſtroye all parentes, neyther can it gouerne it ſelfe, neyther doth it contayne in it ſelfe any curteſye, by meane whereof neceſſarilye in ſhorte ſpace it muſt be conſumed. But as it is the part of an vngracious ſonne to hate the lyfe of his parentes, ſo it is y• part of a wiſe ſonne paciētly to take theyr deathes, and to turne the ſame to his cōmoditye, according to then ſample of ye good Phiſitions, who hauinge medecins wil not vſe poyſon: yet hauing venome at hande after longe tryall of other thinges, will rather then faile by venome cure diſeaſes: So the wyſe man by well and diſcrete vſing of euill, doth make the ſame good. As firſt commeth to memorye the gouernment of houſehold, the enſample of wyſedome, and the deſyre of glorye: in all which ye reuerence and reſpecte towardes the father doth chiefely hinder thee, or altogether let thee. The authoritye of fathers contayneth in it ſomewhat more then ſeruice, and hindereth the execution of great thinges, be it in warres, learning or adminiſtration of the common wealth: for all thinges hauinge euil ſucceſſe, are imputed to the ſonne, and al
 good to the father, whom if hee loueth he cannot diſſemble it, though he deſerued it not, or if he loue him not, it ſhalbe called his default or want of dutye. And ye examples of them that willingly haue geuen place to their ſonnes, in glorye are ſo fewe, as the honour that Antiocus did to his ſonne Demetrius maye be taken as a myracle. The euente of worldly procedings haue alſo made proofe of this opynion: becauſe al ſuch as haue become excellent, eyther in armes, learninge, or ciuil gouernmente, were of thoſe whoſe fathers in youth were taken awaye, as Iulius Caeſar, Octauius, Auguſtus, Alcibiades, Cicero, Galenus, Ariſtoteles, yea what had Alexander beene if Phillippus had liued but one foure yeares longer? for had Phillippus ended the warres wyth Darius: being victorious he had gayned the whole glorye, or if he had been victoryed, hee coulde not haue left to Alexander meane and power of happye procedinge. As therefore to cowards and men of no vertue, the timelye death of the father hath euer brought hinderaunce. So to noble minds: it is occaſion whereby to ſhewe themſelues as they be. This muſte alſo be ſet before oure eyes, that both life and death be the giftes of God, and do euermore depende vppon his prouidence. Therefore whoſoeuer reproueth lyfe or death, doth in ſylence diſalowe & complayne of the deuine Iudgement, becauſe both the one and the other is meete and profitable. And chiefelye if thou offende or did not loue them, thou ought not to lamente for hauinge loſt them thou hated: Or if thou lamente, otherwiſe it muſt be becauſe towardes them thou
 were vnnatural. But nowe thou arte ſafe ſo as thou can neyther be appeached of impiety (if thou haſt not before procured their harmes) nor after be thought vnfrendly, ſith againſt thy wil or by miſhap thou cannot offend. How much better had it beene for Priamus yt 
               Hector and Politus had dyed before him? who founde himſelfe ſo greuouſlye perplexed wt theyr miſerable chaūces as he diſdayned his owne lyfe. Was not Hector more happye in death for Aſtianax thē 
               Priamus? becauſe to auoyde ye ſight of Priamꝰ miſery, he ſought his owne death, and ſo by dying left hym miſerable. All theſe were the actes of good parentes: but of thother, howe many haue bene? whom though to hate were vngodlye, yet to loue them is not neceſſarye. Some haue taken away the common parent, as did Clitemneſtra, who hauing killed Agamemnon was herſelfe betrayed by Oreſtes her cōmon ſonne. So Almenon murdered his mother Eryphiles for hauinge cōſented to y• death of his father Amphiarus. Theſe examples are common, neither is it neceſſarye to loue ſuch parents: for notwtſtanding by them wee haue our being, yet againſt their willes (as it ſeemeth) we kepe it: becauſe they ſought the deſtructiō of them of whō wee came. Therfore Licophron killed Periandrus his father, for beinge chiefe auctor of his mothers death, & would neither take regard of his fame, neither ſpeake vnto him nor ſuffer him ſelfe to be ſpoken vnto. But how much more wicked be they ye ſeeke ye death of theyr owne ſonnes? of whom the enſamples are not ſo few as happelye thou thinkeſt. Mithridates murthered ſome of his
 owne ſonnes, and had hee not wanted power, hee woulde not haue lefte one of his children on liue. Theſeus was alſo cauſeleſſe the cauſe of Hippolitus death, and as they ſaye Medea cut her owne childrē in peeces. Of more certentye ye ſame is tolde of Catelina, who to thende he might be maryed a new, with poyſon killed his owne ſonne, almoſt a mā. Matheus Duke of yt 
               Carthaginenſes hāged his owne ſonne Carthalus returning frō victory, only becauſe meetinge his father thē in exile, he was appareled in purple wyth the badge of victorye. Should any other ſonne of hys ſuruiuing him, weepe or lament ye death of ſo cruel a father? nay rather a malicious beaſt. Yet how muche more vile was the acte of Laodices wyfe of Axioratus kinge of Capodacia? who hauing by that huſband ſixe ſonnes with poyſon murthered fiue, intendinge alſo to kill the ſixt yongeſt of all, had it not by the pollicy of kinſefolke bene preuēted. What beaſt doth liue ſo hard harted, as can beare the crueltye of ſuch a mother? Cattes and Connyes by reaſon of theyr excedyng great luſt, do deuoure theyr yong newly brought forth, but other mothers among al ye brutiſh kinde to deſtroye theyr owne yonge, I neuer redde, nor thoughe written it were, hardlye I durſt beleue. Wyth like beſtialitye of minde did Euergetes Ptolomeus murther the two children he gotte vpon hys ſiſter Cleopatra the one of good yeares, thother verye yonge. Of theſe and ſuch lyke parentes to bewayle the death, how great a folly were it? I my ſelfe haue ſeene, and ſo haue manye others, a gentlewomen, that to enioye vnlawfull loue wythin
 xv. dayes wyth a ſword ſlewe her owne huſband, poyſoned her owne ſonne, and before theyr buriall was maryed to her newe loue. But nowe I ſee what thou wouldeſt ſaye. I mourne not for the death of ſuchan auncetor, but for one yt was iuſte, good, godlye, and that dearelye did loue mee: but howe doeſt thou know whether hereafter he wilbe ſuch a one ſtil? for all ſuch as killed theyr wyues or children, were at the firſt alſo good: yet grewe to this madneſſe after many yeares, which ſheweth that theyr wickednes eyther came with time, or els thoccaſion grewe by time. Therefore there is nothinge ſo vniuerſallye incertaine, as the loue towardes children, brethren, wyues, kinſefolke, frendes & maiſters. Craft couereth many things, ſo doth baſe fortune, occaſion and wyſedome: all which when age groweth on like vnto ſtares in the tree, are encreaſed and detected. So olde age beinge come, ſometimes in reſpecte of power, but more often in regarde of follye and vtilitye, olde men do for neceſſitye vſe the helpe & counſel of thē they loue not, and onlye becauſe of theyr owne debilitye, which ſaueth the giltles children from many miſaduentures at theyr hands, for whom they liue continuallye a moſt miſerable lyfe: Others do diſherit theyr children, others conſume theyr patrimonye, and ſome ſeeke newe wyues, breeding the ſorrowe that ſtepmothers moſt cōmonlye make. The iniurye of euerye of whiche ioyned wyth the comberſomnes and ſeueritye of age, is encreaſed. And to conclude with one example of a wiſe man amonge all thoſe fooles: let that of Cato C
                     •
                  nſorinus
                a man of excellent witre, ſuffice thee, he hauing a ſonne of good yeares, fell firſt to aduoutry, and after marying a moſte defamed woman, thereby clearlye diſcredited the reputation of wiſedome, and former life, yea beſydes all this, ordayned the Nephewe of Clieus to be Coheyre wyth his ſonne, at that tyme Preator in Rome.
            Why ſhould I then neede to reſyte Lyſander, Tiberius, and the reſte of thoſe olde Monſters, that in age were not onelye wicked but alſo withoute Mercye, when the integritie and Romaine wiſedome, through defaulte of age was worne away
            Therfore ſeinge the number of manye brethren breedeth pouertye, where great abundaunce w
                  •
               
               teth, impoſſible it is that any of theym canne doe great things. It muſt then be confeſſes, that y• 
               
                  ••
               
               athe of the father ought much to be lament 
                  〈…〉
                ſorrowed not at all. Much leſſe ought the death of Brothers to make a man ſorrowfull, it menne woulde rightly waye thinges as they are. And fyrſt it muſt be conſidered (which is alſo to be thoughte of in the loſſe of children) when alone, & without brethren thou be born, whether thou wilt lamente becauſe they were not borne? Truly ſyth I ſee no man ſo to do, I hardly thinke that any will ſaye it is worthye weepinge, to bee borne with brethren▪ or if being a childe 
                  〈…〉
                dyuers brethren, wilt thou now renew the ſorow of their death? which I know alſo thou wi
                  •
               t not becauſe we loue not y• we know not, but we lamēt for them we loue. If then thou think neither thoſe that are not borne, nor thoſe that are worthy to be
 mourned for, how much leſſe the other that were borne and lyued a good tyme. For if to haue brethren it be euyll, then to looſe them is a pleaſure: But if it bee good (ſeinge in all good thinges it is better to haue hadde ſome thinge then nothinge who doubteth. But theſe that liued ſome reaſonable yeares, if they dye, are leſſe to bee ſorowed for, then thoſe that neuer were borne nor knowen. Such is the condicion of euilles, that what ſoeuer is euerlaſting, is moſt diſpleaſaunt, and in al ſuch ſome reſt is thought pleaſaunt. In a tyme of famine, is it not better to haue two Loaues then no bread at all? After long labour is not reſt (he it neuer ſo little) better then none? Dothe not one dayes libertie refreſhe a man well that lyeth continually in priſon? Are not ſuche as liue in miſerie ſomewhat comforted, when they remember that ſome parte of their lyfe was pleaſauntly paſſed? Seinge then it is better to haue had bretheren, to haue lyued in their company, to haue ſorrowed & reioyſed with theym, and therfore art more happy then they that vttterlye haue had none at all, who for all that do neither weepe nor lament.
            But falſe imaginacion and opinion, is the faulte hereof whereby thou thinckeſt that not onelye he, but alſo thy ſelfe ſhould for euer liue togethers: of which hope worthylye deceiued, vnworthilye thou mourneſt for thy brother what if in thy choyſe, yf were to liue brotherleſſe, or wtout one only brother who after fortie yeares ſhould ſuruiue the? Whether would thou haue a brother with ſuch condicion or liue without? Surely thou would haue him
 vnleſſe to haue brethren thou thinke it euill. But if to choſe the brotherleſſe lyfe: then wouldſt thou not complaine. Yet hauing the better choyſe thou doeſt. What is the cauſe? other then that now thou art vnprepared to diſgeſte thy brothers death, but when the choyſe was made thou were prepared. Thus deathe therfore is not to bee blamed but in opiniō only it ſemeth intollerable, and therein thou lamenteſt the commodities receiued, (as there is no neceſſety) thou neuer thinkeſt. But (be it for the purpoſe) that this thy Brother was good and loued the much which (as men ſaye) is not common.
            In Brethren hard it is: to fynde vnfayned loue.
            Truely if thou haue regarde to dayly experience the moſt brothers be cōberſome quarrelous, 
                  ••••
               
               ous, diſcencious, captious, and diſdaynefull. The Poet was wonte therfore verye well to reſemble brethren to the windes, becauſe they euer diſagreed among them ſelues, and lyued not lyke frends or fellowes, but as thoſe whom diſcorde did beſte become. Chain did fyrſt ſhewe to Abel what brotherly loue would after be. Then Iacob deceiued Eſau: committing his eleuen children into the ſeruitude of Ioſeph his brother: yea ſome of theim they ment to haue ſlayne, forgetting not only pitty, but alſo their common parentes, and the innocency of their age. After their daies Abſolon killed Amnon, his brother. Abimelech the ſonne of Gedeon murdered his threſcore and ten brethren, one only except.
            
                No godlye lawe, no holye Religion, no feare of GOD, from ſo wicked a deede could withholde hym. Neyther are the examples of the Gentiles more mercifull, Atreus hauinge murdered the three ſonnes of Thieſtes hys brother, gaue hym theyr fleſhe to eate, ſpoyled hym of hys Kyngdome, and rauiſhed his wyfe. Etheocles and Polynues, Oedipi. Simulus and Rheſus did likewyſe one murther the other, ſo did alſo Romulus and Remus, Iugurtha was not contented onelye to kill his brethren Adherbales and Hiempſales: but alſo before they dyed, cutte all theyr fleſhe from theyr bones. Cambiſes hauinge one onelye brother called Smerdis a ſimple man and lyuinge in priuate lyfe, by reaſon of a dreame was by him ſlaine. So lighte a cauſe, can cauſe a brother to ſeeke the life of a brother. What did Antonius to G
                     •
                  ta? or Antipater the Macedonian Kynge? Phrahates who wythoute cauſe ſlewe hys thyrtye bretherne, and wyth theym Herodes hys father by whom in the place of Pacorus latelye deade, hee was Crowned kinge. The Queene of Tilaea toke for huſband her brother Hiperio by whom ſhe conceyued two children, the one called Sol, the other Luna, throughe enuye killed Hiperio, then caſte Sol into the ryuer Eridanus, and wyth ſorrowe thereof dyed Luna. Cleopatra alſo (for women are not free from ſuch wickednes) to thende ſhe mighte more ſafely aſpyre to the kingdome of Egipte, flewe hee ſiſter Arſinoes and her yonge brother of the age of fiftene yeares. If I reſighted euery miſchiefe that brothers haue committed to brothers, this booke coulde not contayne theym. My ſelfe haue knowen
 one man twiſe giltye of his bretherns death: another the yeare before, was beheaded for hauinge murdered thre of his brethren, but the death of two was apparauntlye knowen. There is no thruſte for Falernus more greate, then the deſyre of wicked folke to committe crueltye in their owne kinſefolke. Yea ſometimes this wicked violence is put in proofe amonge kinſefolke of one name. But amonge this ſinnefull ſorte, thy brother is none. Admitte hee be good, of honeſt conditions, modeſt, and vertuous: yet what canſt thou loke for more at him, then others? for if thou ſeeke good will? a frende can doe it: if neceſſitye? thy ſonne muſt be preferred: if pittye? thy parentes are better: if dutye? thy fellowes are morefitte: if flatterye? thy ſeruauntes do it beſt. Of all which nomber ſeinge thou paciently ſuffereſt death, the loſſe of thy brethren oughte not more impaciently to be borne. And hereof a moſt euidente token maye be the greate conſtancye of the parentes, at the death of theyr children: the like loue of whom is neuer ſeene, neyther amonge brethren, nor amonge children towardes theyr parentes. But thus thou doeſt ſaye, I loued my brother dearelye, & honoured him trulye: but did he likewyſe loue thee? Alexius was brother to Iſaac king of Germanye, and by him receyued as a companion in gouernment: taken of ye Turkes: he redeemed him wyth great ſummes of money, notwythſtanding al which at his returne hee depoſed Iſaac from his kingdome, put out his eyes, and kepte him in continuall pryſon. Thou mayſt boldlye ſweare by GOD that
 thou loued, and not be deceyued, but how thou art beloued is harde to knowe. Titus honoured Domitianus, yet howe manye iniuryes did Domitianus do, vnto Titus? and (as it is thought) in the ende, wyth poyſon hee killed him. What can be more perillous (chiefelye where is greate inheritaunce) thenne to commit the children to thy brothers tuition: a thing almoſt impoſſible, it is to loue trulye both the brother and his children, or woulde thou haue thy brothers ſhoulde loue ſoe, as they ſhould forgette theyr children? Who knoweth whether euill fortune ſhall rather take thy children, or thy good brother from thee? For hee lyuinge, eyther wythoute perill thy children mighte not bee lefte voyde of angouerour, or not without iniurye committed to others.
            Call to memorye the example of Childebertus the Frenche kinge, who by practiſe gotte from theyr mother Clothilda, the two ſonnes of hys brother and ſlewe them, becauſe (the lawfull heyres of his brother lyuinge) hee thoughte that quietlye hee could not poſſeſſe the whole kingdome.
            Many there haue beene ſeene, to commit more crueltye vppon theyr nephewes then this: and common it is to take theyr patrimonyes from them, but the occaſions both of perill and iniurye are all at once remoued. Laſtlye this is to be noted, that nature as it deuideth inheritance, ſo doth it departe conditions, amonge brethren, If one be honeſt, an other diſhoneſt, If one be noble of mind an other of baſe courage, if one be induſtrious, another is ſlouthfull. If thou hate thy brother,
 why lokeſt thou to be loued? if thou loue him, loue bindeth thy iudgemente. And verye like it is, that as in thee there is ſinguler honeſtye, ſo in thy brother is no leſſe diſhoneſtye, but thou ſeeſt it not, occaſion wanteth. Thy brothers inheritaunce was well gotten, howe well gotten? naye rather wonne by deceit: But admitte it be (as be it cannot) that thou knowe thy brother doth trulye loue thee, thou arte childleſſe, hee hath children lefte behinde him, accompte of them, and let them bee in place of a brother, in educatiō of them ſhalbe greater charity, and in keeping greater reuerence. But if neyther thou nor he haue children, and hee that dyed is thy onelye brother, if thou adopt children, they ſhall better ſerue then thy brothers. Siluer is loſt and gould is found. But if this thou cannot do ſooner then thou woulde, yea againſt thy wyll thou thy ſelfe ſhal or long followe him: and had he ſuruiued woulde percaſe ſkantlye haue wept one teare for thee: and if ſo hee had done, was hee not by ſo muche wyſer then thy ſelfe? If before him thou would not haue dyed, why doeſt thou lamēt that he is fyrſt deade? Other frendes do liue, other kinſfolke, and other companions. Howe manye brothers and kinſfolke in Chriſt do liue, as mortal men and do dailye pray for thee. And thyne owne brother is alreadye gone to GOD, arte thou ſorrye that he hath gayned libertye and euerlaſtinge lyfe? Tho
                  •
               cation of euerye ſorrowe is pacientlye to be borne notwithſtādinge, the neceſſitye of nanature, the cuſtome of others, and the variable condition of worldlye thinges do woorke the contrarye
 Neyther can there come any greater griefe to men by death, then to be berefte of children, yet although the ſame doth happen to ye whole nomber of any mans ofſpringe and therewith all hope of other be remoued, yet is his condition not ſuch as deſerueth eyther weeping, ſadnes, or ſorrowe. And nowe let vs more deplye conſider whether ye life of him that is barren, or of him that hath children is more happye? The childles man hath onelye to lament that he hath no child to leaue behind him, which if in reſpect of perpetuitie thou fooliſhlye hopeſt: amonge ſo manye thouſandes of men, doeſt thou thincke thy poſteritye ſhould remayne, though the world were neuer to ende? But that ye worlde doth ende, beſydes that the lawes haue ſo determined, alſo al famous Philoſophers, (Ariſtotle except) haue ſo agreed. And if thy life be not cō
               tinued for euer, what is that to thee? or if thy poſteritye do alwayes remayne art thou for that reſpecte the happyer? when the Paripatetians conclude that ye ſeede of the father is no porcion of ye childrē, but y• they are whollye ingendred of the mothers bloud. Galenus thincketh y• the vaynes, ye ſynowes, and artires, are onely made of the fathers ſeede, al the reſt of ye mothers bloude: howſoeuer it be, no graund child is porcion of his graundfather. So ſubtill is this pleaſure of poſteritye, as in deede it maye be called nothing after a few yeares all memorye of great graundfathers is worne out: who is he almoſt that euer knewe his great graundfather? But on the contrary part, to ſo ſmal a pleaſure how great a care is ioyned, hereof commeth
 perill of life, charge in education, feare of honger, care in learning, wantonnes in childhoode, raſhenes in youth, contumacy, diſobedience & diſdaine. All which in riche men and happye times, are ſoe common, as are accompted for neceſſarye euils.
            Now what hope can be in poſteritye, when onely charge and feare commeth thereby? People are oppreſt, kinges make warres, the Prince of Turkes with fyre and ſwoorde waſteth all, vile ſeruitude of all euill the worſt draweth on, ſome yelde, ſome are hidden in hookes, on euery ſyde diſorder, euill men are not allowed, good ſubiectes perſecuted. Doſt thou then thinke that in times of ſuch calamitye, it is not care enoughe for thee to prouide for thy ſelfe? but wil alſo be charged wyth an encreaſed burden of neceſſarye cares? what cā bee more wicked then this oure age? When Cicero loſt his daughter Tulliola, being to him moſt dere, did repoſe the chiefeſt parte of his conſolation in ye affayres of Caeſar, yet he liued vnder a milde prince in a Cittye plentifull, Cicero himſelfe of Caeſar beloued, frended of ye greateſt, & wāted neither wealth, honour nor reputacion. Then cōpare time wt time, that ſecurity with this priuate peril, the goodnes & authoritye of Cicero with thine, the lenitye of Caeſar with the ſeuerity of other Princes? and then conſider whether thou ought to wiſhe for childrē, whē 
               Cicero did not much ſorrow ye loſſe of his? The life of men wythout childrē is ful of pleaſure, ful of lybertye, & ful of ſecurity, they haue no cauſe to frare eyther iniuryes, ſeruitude, diſdaine or daunger of others, in peace they are free, in warres not carefull.
 And beleue mee, yt in common calamities ther is no greater care, then to thinke vppon thy kinſefolke. In time of plague, no place thou haſt to flee to, in time of war thou mayeſt not remoue: in time of famine thou art vnprouided, whither to go. Cō
               ſider wel theſe diſcōmodityes, & ſee whether they are comparable to the want of children. But now let vs returne to our principall propoſition: Why complayneſt thou thy want of children? when for thy child thou ought neither to lamēt, who eyther feleth nothīg, or is in ioy: neither for thy ſelf whoſe condition is beſt, in reſpect thou arte childleſſe, ſyth thereby thou haſt chaunged peril for ſecurity, toyle for quiet, bondage for libertye, and yet complayneſt? This other day I harde certaine poore olde womē complayning, & wyſhing the death of theyr childrē, and had it not bene better for them to haue beene childleſſe then to become in ſuch myſerye as to wiſhe the death of theyr owne children? Marke well the prayers of poore people, conſider howe careleſſe they are of theyr children, and ſo ſhalt thou finde, I tell none vntrothe. But thou art riche? no ſure, they are onelye riche that do dwel in common weales. And thoughe thou liueſt nowe vnder a king, his ſucceſſour maye be a tyrante, one onely night may make this chaunge. And in a cō
               mon weale whyle thou feareſt not one, thou muſt lye in wayghte and take heede of manye. If thou want riches, there can be no comforte in children. Euerye man moſt aſſuredlye is poore, and no mā rich: wher is no ſecurity, how canſt yu be happy? yet this is one moſt certaine condition of mortal men.
 That as ſome are ſubiect to the warres of diuers: vnder one all is wholye at his deuotion. Remember Heliogabalus themperour, yt ſought togethers ye children of al Italy: what did Aſtiages commit vppon Harpagus? or what did Cambiſes to the Perſians
                     •
                  
                and chiefelye to Prexaſpes: Suche is the condition of men, as better it were to liue in feare of warre by ſondrye Princes, then of one that maye at his will commaunde all. One Octauius Auguſtus was a good Prince, becauſe in ciuil warres mercifullye enough he ſhedde the Romayne bloud, but what beaſtes did continuallye ſuccede him? As Tiberius, Caligula, Nero, Claudius? What miſchiefe coulde be more hardlye ſuffered then theſe monſters? But admit thou liue in happye tymes, yet of them do I receiue no proofe, conſidering I wrote this booke, to ſerue my ſelfe in harde chaunces, not onelye in reſpect of the vayne opynion of ſome mortal men, touchinge priuate aduentures: but alſo that vnloked for euentes mighte more paciently be borne: which thoughe they be not worſe then other that are priuate, yet by reaſon of theyr ſodennes do cō
               monly trouble men moſt. Yet ſith wythout mine aſſente this Booke maye come to handes of poſteritye, I maye happelye be reproued for hauinge attributed to muche blame to ſome one time, and diſpayred of better, wherefore let the blame of tymes be left to theyr place, and (as meete it is) oure talke be turned to comforte. Thy ſonne is dead: what can more eaſelye be recouered? none age but the laſte, no ſicknes excepte the conſumption that hindereth child getting: which being ſo we ought
 not to be ſo careful of children as of our ſelues. Ariſtotle concludeth that at threſcore yeares of age or threſcore & ten a mā liueth to get children, yet is it manifeſt, that ſome haue gotten children after fowerſcore yeares, and though fauoure and force were decayde. And among diſeaſes both the gout and conſumption do ſuffer generation. Theſe only are thought inſufficient to get children, y• wants their ſtones, or are depriued of their vertue? Or els thoſe whoſe vaynes behinde their eares be cut. For ſuch men as ſaith Hipocrates be all barren.
            How wel therfore dooth Nature prouide y• what a man moſt diſpaireth of, the ſame by quicke occaſion is ſupplied. There is nothing that can moore eaſlye or ſoner come or happen to man then the ryches gotten of thy father: becauſe thy winninge of Glorye and Freendes aſketh longe time: but a childe is gotten in a moment. What loſſe can then the death of thy Sonne be? and though it were the greateſt, yet becauſe ſo eaſlie and of euery mā may be ſupplied, it ought not to be accompted of. But beinge poore to get riches is very hard, For as the ſayinge is.
            Novv riches are not geeuen, but vvhere, as riches do habound.
            But thou ſhalt ſee a man now childles and olde, yet or thou ſee him next he is become riche: If anye member be cut of, it groweth not againe, yf the father dye, or borther, their liues are neuer called back, if thy fame be periſhed, harde is thy reputation recouered: but the loſſe of children is ſo eaſlye,
 
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
                
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
                ſhortly, and fully ſupplied: as in this reſpecte onlye is not worthy any comfort, no though thou were aſſured he were thy ſonne in dede. And how incertaine that is (O Lorde) who knoweth not, thy beliefe muſt do it, beliefe is therein nedefull.
            Only ye fidelitie of thy wife, doth make him thine, other aſſurance haſt thou none. But if a man doe happen to mourne for the death of an other mans childe, for by coniecture, Baſtardes dye ſoneſt, by reaſon they were gotten with feare, and moſt vnquietnes of mynde, then looke what Laughter yt prouoketh? But now thine owne Chylde (a thing vnknowē but only to his mother) is taken away what part of him was thine? his ſoule? I neuer found any ſo wicked as would be of that mynde, his body? howe can that bee when he is made of his fathers ſeede? which is the ſuperfluous noryture of the thirde concocktion: as the donge fyrſt, the vrine ſecond, yf whatſoeuer commeth of ſuperfluitie be ours, then ſo ſhall wormes and Lyce bee ours and worthy our loue Remember how much ſeede in tymes paſt thou haſt conſumed in waſte, eyther vpon harlots or vpon thy wife being withe childe: all that is loſte and thou complayneſt not, what is more in thy ſonne then the effuſion of thy ſeede? wilt thou then ſo muche lament a vyle and diſdained thinge, wherof is no reaſon. If thou reſpect the beginninge thou ſhalt fynde that thou lamenteſt none other then a litle vnhappy excremēt, which being loſt in dreames (as often it hapneth) thou careſt not at all, but what matter is it howe it be loſt? I meruayle the leſſe of Ariſtippus, that
 diſdayned his ſonne ſo much as he caſt him away. Other likewiſe I heare diſtroyed them, as Lauis did Oedipus: Priamus, Paris, Neither do thou thinke this cuſtome only of kinges obſerued, but alſo of priuat men: which lawe by Romulus of infamous memorye and happy ſucceſſe in Italy fyrſt was ad nulled. Hereupon were erected almoſe houſes, y• children ſhoulde no more bee brought vp by wilde beaſtes. But this perhappes thou wilt ſaye: My ſonne was now become lyke vnto me, I had ſpēt much mony care, and payn vpon him, and ſo was likely to haue ben noble, but theſe cōplaints were more meete for mothers: becauſe if thou lamenteſt thy loſſe of mony, thē hadſt thou more nede to be cured of thy couetiſe, then comforted for loſſe of thy ſonne: And hereof be moſt aſſured that children do not take three maners and condicions of their Parentes, and they will follow the condicions of none leſſe then of theym: which is the reaſon why the children of pore men are more lyke to their parents, then the children of the rich, becauſe pore men are both fathers & maiſters of their childrens lyfe: but rich men not ſo. Whye ſhouldeſte not thou then make an other mans childe thine?
            For hee is moſte lyke the in condicions that is of thine owne bringinge vp: Quintilianus telleth how Alexander had certain imperfections of Lionida his Tutor, which he kept ſtyll beinge come to mans eſtate. For though we eſchewe the immitation of vices, yet in vertues we ſeeke to folow them.
            Therfore if he that is dead was loued for vertue, we commend thy meaninge, but yet (O Lorde)
 how pleaſant, how happy is that life where vnto from this obſcure darckeneſſe thy ſonne is gone, yea how ſwete was that trauayle? Neither do I thinke it nedeful to declare thoſe ioyes & pleaſures which our ſoules hauing forſakē theſe earthly pleaſures do poſſeſſe: for while the ſoule is loden with that heauy burden it cōprehendeth immortall thinges with the mortall. Scantly it can be expreſſed how much force, dignitie, and glorye the ſoule beinge at libertie hath. For the conceiuyng (and not the teachinge wherof) all be it a man in this lyfe, be neuer ſo excellent, he is notwithſtanding imperfect, becauſe he is onely a man complete that vnderſtandeth which the ſoule beinge cloſed within the bodye cannot doe. Therefore what meruaile is it yt the ſoule, ſo ſlowly and painfullye departeth frō the bodye? Lykewiſe with greate labour and much difficulty a man is from his mother brought forth to thys vale of miſery. In conſyderacion of all theſe the bitternes of ſorowe for thy ſonnes deathe ſhould be the leſſe, wayinge the glory whych he now hath and the reputacion of his youth together with the weary abode hee made in hys mothers wombe. Nature hath ordained, that al greate encreaſe of felicitye is attayned through harde labour. With the ſame reaſon ſhalt thou be cōforted, yf thy ſonne be an infant and thyne only ſonn (I omytte to tel what hee maye hereafter be) but now he hath hit ye marke for which he was borne. For is there any other end whereto we were born then death? as the body for the ſoule, and as ſleaping for watching, ſo was lyfe geuen vnto vs for
 death, wherefore as ſleape is neceſary for all men, ſome more and ſome leſſe, ſo is life for the Soules wherfore if thou want meane to get an other ſon, then chooſe thou ſome other one of thine affinitie, and bringe him vp in learning, & honeſt diſciplyne & hardly ſhalt thou fynd ſuch a ſonne made by hys parents. If ſuch a one by education thou makeſt, thou gaineſt thanks of God, whoſe children we al be & of thy coūtry which is mother to al men. Neither in dutye ſhalt thou fynde him inferior to other children. It is not my meaning to wiſh the death of children, but that paciently men ſhould beare it, neyther will I that the childe of an other ſhoulde be preferred before our owne: but rather that thy ſonne be ſo brought vp as he may deſerue to be preferred before others, yet if we conſider ſucceſſion, we ſhall fynde that excellent Maiſters haue hadd notable ſcholers, noble fathers, vyle children. And to omit all others. Socrates was not eſtemed of his ſonnes, but by Plato his ſcholer was prayſed to the ſkies. Did not Theophraſtus commende Ariſtotle more then Nichomachus. The auncient examples do ſhowe that the ſcholars haue proued not only more worthy then ſonnes, but alſo more thankful what ſonne was euer ſo fauourably to his father, as would yelde him the glorye due to himſelfe, as Plato woulde haue done to Socrates. Beſydes that men of notable vertue haue not only wanted children but alſo neuer ſought for any. As Thales, Zeno Plato, Ape
                     •
                  les, Diogenes, Galenus, Virgilius, and Homer and to ſome they haue come as it were againſte their willes as to Alexander and Iulius Caeſar. And
 no meruaile y• noble men haue ſeldome vertuous children. Surely I think for ſome great reſpects it commeth to paſſe, that of ſome noble parents, vile children ſhould diſcend, which was very well and pleaſantlye witneſſed of Spartianus, whoſe wordes are theſe, Remembring vvith my ſelfe O Diocleſian Auguſtus, that almoſt none of theſe great men, haue lefte any ſonne very good or proffytable. It appeareth then ſuffyciently that worthye men, haue either died without children or haue bene without. And fyrſt let vs begin at Romulus he left no children. Neither hadd Numa Pompilius any that could proffit the common weale, What had Camillus? were his children lyke him? What had Scipio. What had the two Catoes that were called the great? Then what ſhould I ſpeake of Homer, Demoſthenes, Virgilius, Criſpo, T
                     •
                  rentius, Plautus, with diuers others? What of Caeſar or Tullius, to whome alone it had bene better to haue bene childeleſſe. What of Auguſtus? who though he had the choiſe of all, could not adopt one good,
            
               Traianus was alſo deceiued in the election of hys heyre. But omitting adopted childrē let vs ſpeake of babes begotten by Antonius pius, and Marcus the goddes of the common wealth. What man hadd bene more bleſſed then Marcus had hee not lefte behynde hym his heire Commodus? Or who had ben more happy then Seuerus Septimius, had he not gotten Baſſianus? What doe we learne other by theſe enſamples, then that Children do not take theyr myndes of their Parentes, but of God, otherwiſe they ſhould be like to theim, Nor in dede we cannot call theym oures, but children of God the
 common father, and they ought to be imbraced for their vertue, not vertue for theym, which if men in worldly procedinges did marke, they ſhould be like to Gods and leade a bleſſed lyfe. But nature hath labored ſomewhat to deceiue vs in the Loue of children: that is to ſay, y• euery man do ſo much care of that, as for that, we fail not to forget y• loue of our ſelues our coūtry, of god and that (which is moſt) our childrē & al. So dotingly we do loue our children: as we ſeme rather to hate thē
               ▪ We bring thē vp not in vertue, but in iniury not in learning but in luſting, not in feare of god, but in deſire of ryches, not to liue long, but to ye performance of foule delites, yet was it not nature y• made this default, of foliſh care, & of imoderate loue, to whō ſhe gaue a certain modeſt deſire of honger & thirſt to euery creature, ſo far as was nedeful. Yet though imperfection of mynd, only man wtout honger eateth, & drinketh without thirſt, & without neceſſity doth vſe euery ſorte of delighte. And in like ſort doth he loue his children ſo much, as not only he ſuffereth them, but for them the fathers wil alſo do euil, and attempt al wickednes, and thincketh them of his owne makinge. But aſſuredly they are not, but 
                  •
               ee the woorkes of God, who gaue them minde, lyfe, forme, force, maners, wit, and encreaſe,
            And of theſe the Father made nothinge. Then leaue I ſaye to lament for that is none of thyne, hee that made yt hath called it agayne vnto hym, to whoſe Commaundemente yt is boothe iuſte and Godlye it ſhoulde obaye. And if thou deſyre to knowe whether this Loue bee Naturall,
 or like vnto other deſires, an imperfection of mind Beholde other lyuing thinges, who after education do neuer knowe their owne, no nor loue them. But if this were a gift of Nature, it ſhold by reaſon of pitye, and neceſſity, rather be in children towardes their parents, then in parentes towardes their children, which example Nature as it ſemeth did not forget in brute beaſtes: for among birdes, ye Stork. Among four foted beaſts, ye Dormouſe, doth feede his aged parents. But after the firſt educatiō, of loue borne to their parents no ſinne is extant, but men (by ſtudy as it were) doth paſſe other liuing things, through the imperfectiō of mind eſteming himſelfe to much. The pitie of brute beaſtes cometh altogether, when both of education & loue thend is one, duringe which time the old beaſtes be weaker, laberſome, leane, careful, and miſeſerable, as to all men it doth appeare. Surelye it ſeemeth a great madnes to torment thy mind cō
               tinually with this nedeles care of poſteritie, for beſydes that, this deſyre is neither reaſonable nor neceſſary, ſome man may iuſtlye meruaile, why it is ſo common, but the anſwere there vnto is not douted of. If fyrſt thou doeſt ſhow me the cauſe why ſo many men became couetous, ireful, and ſubiecte to deſyres of luſt. And all theſe beſides they be vices, not naturall nor reaſonable; are alſo diſhoneſt. Yet thonly loue of children after educatiō though it procedeth neither of nature nor reaſon: yet is yt honeſt. But I haue perhaps in ſo apparāt & firme matter for wiſe men ſpoken more then was requiſite. And haue vſed reaſons true, though ſubtil and
 ſhorte. Therfore let vs come to longer ſpeache, & arguments more playne, leſt I ſeme not ſo muche to proue, as to deceiue, thy ſon therfore being dead: conſider fyrſte, whether hee was well reported or accompted wicked? For manye times the ſon of a good father, is ſeene to proue an euil man, by reaſō the homely vices are hardlier diſcouered then y• externall: beſydes that, loue byndeth iudgemente. Wherof a fable is come forth, how the Cuckovv in old tyme, for her young birdes, contended in ſinginge with the Nightingale and hers: appointing the aſſe to be their Iudge, whoſe ſentence was y• he knew not which of them did ſynge moſt ſwetly, but wel he was aſſured the Cuckovves did moſt playnlye and diſtinctly pronounce their notes. So ye children of euery one are not only beſt loued, but alſo the euyll by the euyll are moſt allowed of. In which caſes, as we haue alſo ſene mē of right good iudgement, mete it is yt we ſhould not only lamēt but alſo reioyſe. And in aūciēt time they did much more then this, for both Manlius Torquatus agaynſt his ſon Deciꝰ Silanꝰ, pronoūced ſo cruel a ſētence as wt a cord he hanged himſelf. And M. Scaurus finding his ſonne among others fleinge, being only giltye of feare, did force him to returne to his enemies & be ſlaine. Lykewiſe a woman of Lacedemon, killed her ſon for his ſlouth, and returning from ye wars, of whom this noble verſe was written.
            
               Thou daſtard knight, Damatrion, thy mother here haue ſlayne.
               That doeſt both her, and Spartayn bloud: vvith covverdice diſtayne
            
            Such and more wicked ſonnes being bereft of lyfe do thereby ſeaſe to offend their parents & kinſfolke,
 yea are alſo themſelues ſaued frō greater infamy. Some ſonnes haue not forborne to cōſpyre ye death of their fathers. As Blandenius Zeſides, who ſlewe his mother, and Euander that at the perſwaſion of his mother Nicoſtrata murdered his owne father, and for that cauſe was baniſhed Italye. Such mōſters, as they are being left aliue, are cauſes of many euils: ſo Paris was ye ſubuerſiō of both Priamus houſe & country: notwithſtāding, whē he dyed, Priamus weped. So foliſh are mens cares, yt they wiſhe they wot not what, excellinge (as they think) ye Gods in wiſdome, & reproue thoſe that in their ignorance ſhall procure their good. For if thy ſon were wiſe, honeſt, godly, & noblye mynded, hauing hope of children yt may ſupport thyne vnweldiage. What is wanting in the graund children? & if none be, a fond thyng it was to hope yt he would not, nor could not do. But how ſoeuer it be, greater is y• daūger of them that are worſe then death, then hope of thoſe he hath, to proue better. And miſery, vilety, ſhame, continuall griefe and diſdain are al more euyl then death: deathe is common to all men, but theſe to fewe, who alſo are all ſubiect to death. Were it not better by dyinge to preuent all theſe iniuries, then to haue thy deſyre ſo dearlye bought? For neceſſarye it is that who ſo wyll lyue old muſt ſuffer many euils. Ther is almoſt no mortal creature liuing long, but at ſomtimes before he dieth, doth hate his life wherto put the ſaying of y• Poet.
            
               Although vnvveldyage, vvhen lyfe doth vveare avvay,
               None other ill did bring vvithall, but that, (as men do ſay)
               By liuinge long ful oft vve ſee: vvich vvee vvould not behold.
            
            
                Truly if ſuch deſyre thou haue of children, if thy ſonne died thou beinge olde, thy time to follow is next: if in thy youth then haſt thou hope enoughe to haue more. Finally Sorowe is a womaniſhe thinge, and not fytte for men. Therfore the Licians were wont to conſtrayne mourners to weare womens garmentes, to thende their garment might agree with the mynd, And ſurely not wtout occaſion, becauſe among all people, the more vile they be the more beaſtly they lament. As women fyrſte, next children, & then barrennous men, the greateſt nomber of whom be effeminate. Contrariwiſe mē the more valiaunt they bee, the more they oppreſſe their griefe and ſo
                  •
               er driue their Sorow away.
            This ſort of Sorrowe goeth to the infernall God and as it is his cuſtome in many others, ſo dothe hee vſe to call theym neareſt to hym, that mooſte do honour him. But if at the beginning thou driue him away, and ſuffer not thy mynde to be infected full farre ſhall he be from thee: But beholde howe comelye and honeſte a thinge yt is that a man of good yeares, beinge well counſayled by others, ſhoulde in womens weede, beaſtely weepe, wayl, crye out, and lament.
            O gentle wit. But thoughe he doth none of all theſe, yet inwardly to torment himſelfe with ſadneſſe is the parte neyther of a wyſe nor valiaunte man: but of one that ſearcheth rather the reprehē
               cion of others, then knoweth what is ſeemely.
            Howe muche better were it for hym often to remember Vmbreſomnum Homo?
            
            What could haue bene better ſayde? So ſubtylle
 and fugitiue is the lyfe of man, as of al other thinges, ſeing ſhadow is moſt ſubtil and ſleepe moſte deceiueable and incertaine, what ſhal the ſhadow of ſleape be? And yet notwithſtanding this is the lyfe and glorye of man. One other wrote thus.
            As the generacion of leaues is, ſo is alſo mans: for in dede what diſſimilitude is there? leaues doe fall by force of Sonne, ſhowers, wynd, hayle, yea (and if all fayle) by themſelues: Euenſo the lyfe of man, beleeue me thou haſte receiued none iniurye at all, Death is the gift of God, and God doothe wrong to no man. If condempned by voices of aſſente thou bee depoſed from Aucthoritye, thou wouldeſt thincke that it were meete to beare it with pacient mynde, thoughe that iniurye cannot want ſuſpicion, reproche, and falſhode.
            And now when thou feareſt none of theſe, dare thou diſalowe the Sentence of God? And doeſt thou not remember that whiche Leontius Neapoles, the Biſhoppe, telleth to haue happened in the lyfe of Iohn, Patriarche of Alexandria. To whome when a certayn man hadde offered ſeuen pounds of Golde to praye for his onely Sonne who a moneth paſte, was with a Shyppe and great riches drowned, after a few dayes obteyned of y• Patriarke his deſyre. And while in y• meane ſpace he cō
               tinued in ſadnes, he dreamed one nighte y• the Pattriark appeared vnto him ſaying. Lo according to thy prayer y• thy ſon might be ſaued ſo hee now is, becauſe he is dead, but if he had liued, from wicked life & dāpnaciō after deth he could not haue ben preſerued, god only knoweth what is expediēt for vs
 when we are ignoraunt our ſelues and know not what is to be deſyred. Wherfore it is conuenient that we do not onely receyue comfort, but alſo reioyſe at the death of our neighbours, of whome yf thou deſyreſt to continue any memory though often times alſo thou wanteſt their company, it ſhal be both to the and thy poſteritie continued by hys noble tombes, pictures, ſtatues, verſes, orations, dedications, inſtitutions of eternitye and Sacryfyces. Is yt not more honeſt and pleaſant to confyrme thy ſelfe to theſe comforts▪ to commend hys glory to mortall men? then with wepinge & wailynge to kyl thy ſelfe? Yet as to them that are endewed with vertue, and acknowledge the felytitye of ſoules theſe are ſuperfluous, ſo to theym of maners more frayle, ſuch kinde of comfortes are not vnſeemelye. For Auguſtus hanged in his bedde chamber the picture of his graundſonne beinge a childe of him dearlye beloued, and ſo often as hee came vnto that chamber hee neuer fayled to kyſſe the picture. Alexander did ſet vp certayne ymages to Fabius Quintilianus not withe teares but withe a ſolempne oracion (conteyning the commendation of his ſonne) dyd burye him. What dyd Iohn Meſue who in his fathers name falſely turned the tytle of his booke? So did alſo Zoar & Ariſtotle wryte bookes to their ſonnes. So did Cicero and Plato in their diſputacions call vpon their brothers & frendes, not in mourning garments and weping, but wyth monuments euerlaſtinge honored the ſame to their poſterity. But now wt reaſons (I thinke) ſufficiently it is proued, that the deathe of children
 is neither to be ſo lamented nor euyl. Let vs now procede to tel how manfully our elders were wōt to beare ſuch miſhaps. Octauianus Auguſtus hauing within twenty moneths loſt .ij. of his nephewes was not moued ſo much as he refrayned to ſytte dayly in ye Senate. Demoſthenes the .vii. day after ye death of his only daughter put on his whyte garment, was crowned, & ſacrifyced an oxe, More valiantly did Dion, he being in counſel of the common weale, and enformed that his onlye ſon had fallen from the houſe toppe and broken his necke, gaue order to his frendes for his buryall, & notwithſtā
               dinge proceded in his buſynes begonne. Like herevnto did Antigonus, he ſeinge his ſon ſlayne in battayle, gaue none other ſigne of ſorow but ſayde. O Alcionen later then thou ought thou art now dead, for ſo manfully aſſayling thy enemies, thou doeſte not greatly eſteeme my warnings nor thine own weldoinge. The conſtancy of Pericles can be inferyor to none of theſe, for when within eight dayes, he had loſt his two ſonnes. Paralus, & Xantippus, yonge men of ſinguler witte did notwithſtandinge put vpon him his white garmēt, was crowned, made oracions to the Athe
                     •
                  encians, & comming from hys houſe when his children were dead, wt merueilous conſtancy of mynd gaue counſel & vttered reaſons of ye diſciplyne of war. So vpon a time Anaxagoras his ſcholemaiſter being in diſputacion, woorde was brought of his ſonnes death, wherat he pauſed a little, but by and by confeſſing hee had begotten a mortall creature, proceded in diſputacion.
            When Paulus Emylius, had taken in hand the Percian
                warre, he prayed the Gods that if any calamity were comminge to the Cittye of Rome, that they would rather lay the ſame vpon his houſe, whyche either through his prayer or hap was perfourmed And when of his four ſonnes he had adopted two into the family of Scipio, within few dayes after he loſt thother, neither did he with leſſe pacience bere this, then valiantly he wiſhed the other. Tynnichus alſo a Spartayn left his poſterity, a monumēt of worthy enſample. When Trasibulus his ſon in the warres againſt the Argini, was ſlayn, in this epigram, is declared the nobility of his mynde.

                  It ſeemeth vvel that covverds vvepe, vvhen they be brought to graue
                  But thou my ſon a Spartayn true, no vveping teares shalt haue.
                He hath as me thinketh folowed the ſaying of Papimus.
            
            
               A noble death doth parentes pleaſe, and God ſuch ſoules do loue.
               The valiant myndes do gayn encreaſe, vvhen lyfe do ſo remoue
            
            We ſee that ſome haue not onlye in the death of their children witneſſed their greatnes of mynde, but alſo did procure it, and thereof proceded greate proffyte, When Brutus openlye puniſhed his two ſonnes, what terror think you was it to his Cittizens? what deſperation to his enemies? what admiracion to his neighbours? So as the example of that valiant dede, was not onlye the occaſyon of great encreaſe to the empyre, but alſo, for fortye yeares after it continued in libertye not ſo muche for feare of the payns, as for emulacion in vertue.
            What is by thenſample of Abraham vppon Iſaa
                     •
                  
               
                ſhewed other then that men ſhoulde ſo loue their children, as in them to put no truſte at all: but euer to honour God ſo, as we may forget oure chyldren, and ſuch are worthy great reward: For whiche his carefull obedience he is made father of many nacions, neither ſhall his ſeede at any time decay. This was a greater argumente of courage then that of Brutus, for hee murdered the gyltleſſe & lefte the children of others his heires, the other in ſleinge, became childles. Hee by the handes of an other commaunded his enemies to be ſlayne, thys man murdered thoſe that obeyed. But let vs returne to enſamples of ſufferaunce, and a ſhame (it were) that Women ſhoulde for fortitude exceede men. Among whom what may be ſayd of Tomyris queene of Meſageta. who hauing her ſonne ſlayne in battayle, (where in her enemye Cirus alſo dyed) without teares made great feaſtes, the hole army lykewiſe ſlayn▪ Alſo Cornelia mother to the Gracchi of a great number of ſonnes, hauing onlye C. and T. lefte, yet when they were in a time of ſedicion, moſt cruelly ſlayn (beſides calling only to memory their father, & their own worthy actes) did not otherwiſe make any ſhew of ſorow. Argilion y• mother of Braſidas the Lacedemonian kyng, hearinge her ſon was ſlayn, dyd neither mourn nor lament but aſked if nobly & worthely he dyed. Gyrtias likewiſe a womā of Lacedemon when her ſon was broughte home almoſt dead, and his frendes lamented ſhe ſayd. Non Silebitis inquā, declaring of what bloud he was deſcēded, ſhe ſaid one body hath ouerthrowē other in fight, yet after being recouered & growen
 to mans ſtate was ſlayne in battayl, which being told vnto his mother, ſhe anſwered ſaying, was it not expedient y• goinge to the wars he ſhould 
                  ••
               ea others, or be ſlaine himſelfe? but more wyllinglye I receyue knowledge of a death worthy of mee & his predeceſſours, then if in ſlouth and idlenes hee had liued. One other womā more valiantly bare the death of her ſonne, promiſſing in the fyeld ſayinge, let cowardes complayne, for I wyll wythoute teares and meerelye burye my ſonne. And a nother, a woman alſo of Lacedemon, hauing loſt in warres her fyue ſonnes, ſtanding vppon the walles of Sparta and liſtinge for the euente of the battayle, when ſhe ſawe a man comming aſked what was done? (he thinking ſhe had aſked of her ſonnes) aunſweared, they are all deade: whereat the woman offended, ſayde, it is not (that) ill lucke I aſke, but how ſpeedes our coūtry, then he telling y• the victorye was gotten by the Lacedemonians, the woman ſayd wyth al good wyl I receyue knowledge of my ſonnes ſlaughter. In olde time ſuch was the nobilitye of minde, both in men and women, aſwell for courage as counſell. But now enoughe or rather as I thinke to much haue bene ſayd aſwel of them, as alſo appertayneth to deth. It is not therefore needefull to ſpeake of frendes, kinſefolke, or wyues, ſeinge of them the plentye is greate, the conditions vncerteyne, and the neceſſitye little: yea the cares and diſquiet of wyues, doe almoſt counteruayle the ſorrow of theyr deathes. And though wyues were not ſhrewed nor comberſome, yet can no man at anye time long want
 a wyfe, ſyth one may be taken after an other. And albeit yt wyues were all good, all frends faythfull, and all kinſefolke kynde, yet ſeinge the death of a brother, a ſonne and a father is pacientlye to bee borne, a follye it were to lament them, or call ſuche doubtles matters in queſtion. But rather reſolue wyth thy ſelfe, that death is the end of euill to fooles, and to wyſe men the beginning of all good. And as ſayth Menander.
            
            VVhom God doth loue: in youth he dyes.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Of Comforte the thirde Booke.
            
               MVche longer then was determined, & more at large haue I diſcourſed that kynde of comforte which to ſorrowe & death doth appertayne: not onlye becauſe I thincke y• occaſion of griefe whiche groweth eyther of pryua
                  •
               e death or loſſe of frendes is little, or lightlye borne: but alſo that in theſe dayes men do ſo much deſyre riches & auctoritye, as till death doth euen at hand drawe on, they take no care at all. Eche man in imagination alloweth himſelfe longe tyme of life, diſdayning death as a thing not knowen in this, but an other worlde. But ryches, and preſent authoritye, are on euerye ſyde ſoughte for, as ioyes which hee euerlaſtynge▪ Yet not contented with▪ this, they alſo reproue, condemne, and deſpyſe the quyet lyfe of ſuch as are not with like madnes delighted. For the chiefeſt care ſuche men do take, is that of al other moſt wyſe and happye: neyther of which (in iudgement of thoſe that diſdayne them) can be allowed. Then when theſe wealthy men perceiue that the others are not greatly greeued, forthwith they fal to hate and perſecution. So as although men could willinglye ſuffer theyr bace eſtate: yet beinge driuen into any kinde of neceſſity or calamity, ſtraight wayes they lament and complaine: ſo as by confeſſion of them, for great deſyre
 of riches, the rich men are allowed of and prayſed for the wyſeſt ſort of men. But ſeinge the eſtate of tyme and worldly procedinges are not euer alike, wee meane not to ſpeake muche of that calamitye which theſe ambicious men do thincke y• greateſt, but of that miſerye whych may ſo trulye be called: for ſuche kinde of men do labour to continue after death, and glorye in theyr owne happines. As the Poet wryting vpon the tombe of a certayne happye man ſayde.
            
               Vpon my corps poure forth thy vvyne, O frend that comes this vvay,
               And on my tombe vvith pleaſant hand, thy precious ſpices laye.
               No gulfe of griefe my graue ſhalbe, but ſpringe of laſting blis,
               I am not dead but changd my life, lo ſuch my fortune is,
               My former ioyes are not decayd, but as they vvere before,
               If ought or nought I beare in minde, yet bleſt for euermore.
            
            O merye man, howe aptlye hath hee nothinge ſayde, for this preſumption to continue felicitye after death, is a thinge altogether vaine, and forſaken of the very authors thereof. For well we ſee that after death, the glorye of ryches doth in ſhort ſpace decay. Not onely becauſe great nombers do daylye aſpyre to this prayſe: but alſo riches it ſelfe deſerueth no glorye at all. And amonge ſo manye thouſād thouſands as in theyr time was famouſlye rich, yet few of them haue come to our knowledge. Gilias, Creſſus, Mydas, Pythius, Meander, Erictonius, Syſiphus Tantalus. Of the Romaynes that had beene bonde men, Amphion, Menecrates, Heron, Demetrius, Pallas, Caliſtus, Narciſus. Of Frenchmen, Druſus, Caecilius, Sylla, Lucullus, Liuius, M, Craſſus. Of Kinges, Salamon and Ptolomeus, were all reported
 for notable ryche. But Gylias became famous for liberalitye, Creſus and Craſſus, for theyr miſfortune, Sylla & Lucullus for theyr victoryes, Mydas through Silenus. The Romaynes that had bene bonde men by the abuſe and riot of Rome: Salamon for wyſedome, Tantalus for wicked lyfe, Meander and Pythius for theyr bountye to the Perſian kinges. C. Caelius for his Teſtament: Ptolomeus for princely maieſty, Erictonius and Syſiphus throughe Poets libertye L. Druſus for hys magnificence. So as none almoſt for onely riches gayned glory: although they were ſuch mē as might eaſylier attaine to fame for vertue, then ſo greate riches. To what vſe that after death riches ſhould ſerue no manne knoweth, nor can imagine. And although that after death they did yelde glorye to thee, and vſe to others, yet the ſame is to thee nothing at all. Rather ought thou remember to paſſe in to thoſe partyes, whether thou can carrye nothinge beſydes thy vertue and vyces of mynde, When ſoeuer therefore thou ſhal dye, wyll come to memory not thy ryches, but thy ſinnefull offences, not thine honour or auctoritye, but thy hope and fayth of Saluation. For at that inſtant (I omit thy former myſeryes) all thinges ſhalbe ſubuerted, and to thy ſighte the hole worlde ſhalbe turned to the firſt Chaos. And as ye land doth ſeeme to moue in y• ſight of ſuch as ſayle in the ſhip (& yet in deede doth not) but it is the ſhippe yt remoueth and not ye land: ſo in the houre of death ſhal the whole world ſeeme to be ſubuerted, whē thou ſhalte for euer take leaue of earthlye life, neuer againe to ſee thy worldlye frendes, nor thy riches
 wherein thou ſo much delighted. Therefore if after death thou hopeſt of anye lyfe, why doeſt thou not cōſume thy tyme in vertue? or if none? yet why ſeekeſt thou not thyne owne quyet? ſyth for other lyfe thou lokeſt not, nor hopeſt to returne againe to this. But happilye it maye be ſayde that this ſorrow is ſweete (as it is to rubbe a ſoore) A pleaſure it is to be riche, to gouerne, to be prayſed and to oppreſſe others, & this is ye vttermoſt marke of mans felicitye. O fooliſhe imagination: but let that paſſe, ſo thou diſproue not others of ſounder opynion. Yet (if wythout offence I maye ſo do) let me aſke why men lyke vnto children do builde houſes that wil by and by fall downe? whye doe they vainlye trauayle, not onely in bodye, but alſo in minde? Yet let vs a whyle conuert our ſpeach to other matter (for I am enforced many wayes to degreſſe from our purpoſe) and let vs fyrſt declare why my former booke became ſo longe: and therewythall ſhewe that for all calamityes (if any ſeeme intollerable) there is one remedye. It was therefore wyth greate diligence approued y• death is not to be nombred amonge the euils: for ſeynge the meane to come therevnto is open to all men, none (but ſuch as willinglye are) can iuſtlye be called vnhappye. Tiberius ſuruayinge his pryſo
                  •
               ers, was aſked by one of them howe ſone hee ſhoulde dye? aunſwered▪ I am not as yet reconſyled vnto thee. A true aunſwere ſurely in reſpect of the matter, but tyrānous if y• conſyder the meaning. And this was one other cauſe why my laſt booke was ye lōger. For againſt al ſortes of myſeryes thre ſpecial
 remedyes we haue, Death, Wyſedome, and Fortune. They are cōmonly conſtrayned to vſe y• helpe of death, that cannot take commoditye of ye other too, being fallen into thoſe calamities which ſeeme the greateſt. Wherefore Damidas the Lacedemonian ſeemed diſcretelye to aunſweare one ſaying vnto hym, that vnleſſe the Lacedemonians were reconſyled to Philippus, they ſhoulde be in greate hazarde (for at that tyme the Lacedemonians were the kinges ennemyes, who had wonne Peloponeſus:) O cowardly man quoth Damidas what can be intollerable to vs if we feare not to die? In lyke maner a boye of Lacedemon being taken by Antigonus, and ſolde in ſeruices meeete for free men, did willinglye yelde himſelfe to take paines, but when he was employed to vile works (and amonge y• reſt, to emptye vrinals) he refuſed to do it. For which, whē his maſter did ſore threatē him, he forthwt climed vppon the toppe of the houſe, and ſayde, now ſhalte thou knowe whom thou haſt boughte, and therewithall caſt himſelfe downe headlonge. So Craſſus beynge taken pryſoner and fearinge diſhonour, with his ryding rod he ſtrake oute the eye of a barbarous ſouldiour, who moued wt ire forthwyth did ſlea hym. A common experience it was in ye old time, by willing death to eſchewe long or ſhamefull kinds of dyinge. And if I ſhould write the names onelye of ſuch as in the raignes of Nero, Caligula, and T
                     •
                  berius, did willingly kill themſelues, the hiſtorye would be to longe, or if I reherſed the nomber, no manne woulde beleue mee. Nowe whilſt wee ſpeake of theſe voluntarye deathes, it
 commeth to memorye, that not longe ſince in the Cittye of Venis there lyued a certayne Apoticarye, he for ſome great offence being cōdempned to dye, deſyred to ſpeake wyth his brother, who in kiſſing hym deliuered certaine poyſon which he broughte in his mouth cloſed wtin a nut ſhel, by force whereof, after a fewe houres he dyed: whereby he ſaued himſelfe from longer ſorrow, and eſchewed the reproche of diſhonourable death. We reade y• ſome men to auoyde extreame ſickenes, haue voluntarily ended their liues: of which nomber was Pomponius Atticus, a famous man extremelye tormēted wyth a greuous diſeaſe, & at length fynding ſome reſt, pyned himſelfe for not falling into his former paynes. In lyke maner dyed Corellius Rufus to auoyde the paynes of the goute. But oure Lawes do not permit any mā to procure his owne death: and for good reaſon: For that nothing ſhoulde be intollerable to a Chriſtian man (onelye extreame tormente) which the Lawe doth not allowe, yet by law is permitted. Now let vs proue y• beſydes this intollerable ſorrow (and y• not altogether except) there is nothing that can make a mā diſcouraged, and that all men beinge wyſe, are equallye happie and vnhappy. So as I may thincke with Socrates, yt if all mens cares and euilles were by one aſſente layde togethers on one heape, and equallye deuided to euerye man alike, after wee had ſeene the greatnes of others greeues, we would chooſe to take vppon vs our owne, rather then to abyde the chaunce in deuiſion: becauſe eche man knoweth his owne euils, and is ignorant how great the
 greeues of others be, which is the reaſon why ech mā thinketh himſelfe moſt vnhappy. In diſcourſe whereof two thinges may be obiected: the one, y• this booke can onely profite thoſe that be learned: and alſo withoute this, the learned by readinge of Cicero, chiefelye his bookes, De Finibus bonorum, his Tuſculane queſtions, his Paradox, and De Senectute, Plutarchus, Petrarchus & Boetius, with diuers others, ſhal finde no ſmall remedye in all calamities. And how ſhal the ſimple and vnlearned ſorte (as is the moſt part of the people and many gentlemen alſo) take profite of this booke? So as in comfortinge the learned I ſhal ſeeme preſumptuous, and for y• vnlearned ſuperfluous. But I neede not feare to be herein accuſed, becauſe (as at the beginninge. I 
                  〈…〉
                other bookes were made for others 
                  •
               ſe, but this onelye for my ſelfe, which thoughe it cannot compare with the eloquente of Cicero, the grauitye of Plutark, the ſubtiltye of Petrark, or Philoſophye of Boetius, yet is wel lyked of my ſelfe, for that reaſon I alledged at the beginninge in children, y• euerye one loueth his owne worke. Yet haue we erred? who knoweth it not? but thoſe errors are tollerable which harme not others, and procedeth of nature. The other whereof I muſt accuſe my ſelfe, is, that ſome will happilye ſaye, that when a man enioyeth health, he maye eaſelye counſell the ſicke: which is as muche as to perſwade wyth vaine words, that in works we do not performe, and therefore in ſpeache onelye doe make a ſhowe of vertue. Of which blame Cicero, Plutarchus, Petrarcha & Ariſtotle himſelfe do excuſe mee, becauſe they
 extolled magnanimity & yet in aduerſitye did not ſhewe it, and chiefelye Cicero, who of all others declared himſelfe moſt bace and abiect of minde. The others endured no great aduerſitye, for beſydes a little tyme in baniſhmente they liued riche and fauoured wyth Princes, and that worthilye. Alſo it is not requiſite that all good men, though they be 
                  •
               aliaūt of minde, with peril of their perſons ſhold put theyr valure in proofe, the one is a tryal of fortune, the other of vertue. Neyther is it euer neceſſarye that ſuch as ſaye well, ſhoulde alſo 
                  〈…〉
                for truth ſomtimes is maintayned by wicked 
                  〈◊〉
               . But although by diſſembling I might eſcape theſe reprehenſions: yet where I ſaye that for allaye of myne owne griefe this laboure is taken in hande, hardlye it is allowed in reaſon that they that 
                  〈◊〉
                alwayes liued in proſperity, can 
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  •
               
               thers comfort in aduerſitye. For if a man woulde ſo do, yet were there ſmall good liekly to followe. This booke ſhal therefore gayne the more 
                  〈◊〉
                wyth others, that I my ſelfe haue bene in my 
                  〈◊〉
               . And although (as erſt I ſaid) euery mā may praiſe vertue, yet is it not the parte of thoſe y• bee 
                  〈◊〉
                to directe a life contrarye to theyr owne wordes. How can we leade the like life, eyther in fortitude or pacience, or declare y• ſame to others, if we haue alwayes liued in proſperity? Therfore ſhould I omit y• greateſt & moſt neceſſary part of this booke, If I leaue vntold, y• (as I thincke by deuine de
                  ••
               
               nye) I was begotten, borne, & brought vp, in great miſery, & ſo haue almoſt til this day liued. For ſuch as do perſwade others to ſuſtayne greate payne, if
 they themſelues haue done the like, thereby they procure their words both credit & auctoritye to be the rather beleued of others. So did 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , Pho
                  
                     •
                  ion, Socrates, Plato, Cato, all the Prophetes and holy men, yea y• author of al good IESVS CHRIST. Yet haue I not mdured theſe worthye men becauſe I would
                  •
                ſeeme to contende wyth them is vertue, but rather followe theyr order of lyfe. And the more barely I was borne, y• more maye others (if they wil) hope to excell my 
                  〈◊〉
                in aduerſitye. You ſhal therefore firſt vnderſtand, that in y• time of peſtilence I was conceyued, my mother as (I thinke) vndeliuered became partaker of my miſery & was forced to flye. The 8. daye of the 
                  〈◊〉
                of October, in the yeare of Gra
                  ••
               . 1501. halfe deade came▪ I into this world, when all men diſpayrīg of lyfe by vertue of a bath made of vyne I was recey
                  ••
               d: within thre monthes next after I loſt two of my brethren & one ſiſter, the plague continuing in our Cittye. The ſicknes ſpreadinge more abrode in Pa
                     ••
                  a, ſodeinly of y• ſame death died my foſter father. Afterwards I was bouldly and charitably r
                  •
               c
                  •
               yued into y• hands of Iſiodo
                     •••
                   Reſta 
               
                  〈…〉
                man & frende to my father, where 
                  〈…〉
                few dayes I fel ſicke diſeaſed with the drop
               
                  ••
               e 
                  〈…〉
                of the lyuer, yet neuertheleſſe preſerued eyther through the ire or merryed of GOD, I know not on
                  •
                kinde of 
                  〈◊〉
                was afterwardes vnapproued, 
                  〈◊〉
                I attayned eyghte yeares of age. At whiche tyme I became ſeruaunte to my father till I 
                  〈…〉
                the age of ninetene. O Lord euen thus I paſſed the flower of my youth both wythout
 delight and ſtudye. At length perceuinge that by force I might not compell my father, entreate him I could not, and to deceyue him I thought it diſhoneſtye: for loue of learninge I intended to haue entred into Religion. My mother then ſeinge her want of children, entreated my father to put me to ſchole, where I remēbringe my time alreadye loſt, and the ſhortnes of mans life, earneſtly applyed my ſelfe to ſtudye, euer in feare leſt my father hearinge ſome euil reporte ſhoulde take me awaye. And there as one neuer in ſchole before, I was not a little troubled wyth hardnes of the latine tongue. Yet amonge all theſe labours my father did graunt me leaue to ſtudye the Science of Geometrie & Logick, wherin although hee helped me onlye with a few good leſſons, bookes & libertye, yet through ſtudy at ſpare times I did attaine vnto them. Then abſence encreaſing my fathers good opinion, the plague beinge great he dyed, hauing newlye begonne to loue mee. At that time y• cruel warres began in oure countrey, being poore and voyde of all other helpe, throughe great care & dilligence of my mother I was ſuſtayned, when my ſmall patrimonye ſuffiſed not. For ſuche as it was, I did conſume it in the office of 
                  〈…〉
                Vniuerſitye. Neyther had I anye other 
                  〈◊〉
                then Cheſſe playe to procure my ſelfe a lyuinge. So being from one miſfortune to another tranſported, I ſettled my ſelfe in ye towne of PAVIA▪
                where by practiſe of Phiſicke (thoughe poore lye) I ſuſtayned my ſelfe and my familye, as one (that beſydes I had nothinge) was indebted by reaſon
 of my vaine office. Then by my mothers letters was I called home to my coūtrey, wher I found nothinge well ordered, nor no frende, my coſ
                  ••
               s ſued in lawe againſt mee, and in oure Colledge of Phiſitians I was repulſed, being ſuſpected a baſtarde becauſe my father did ſo euill entreate mee. Neyther can I boaſt of any fauour founde in the Phiſitions of Padoa, where hauing twiſe deſerued to haue beene made Doctoure, I was notwithſtandinge iniuſtlye denyed my grace, and at laſte through the earneſt ſuite of the Podeſtate, ſcantly graunted. A ſhamefull acte, if mine owne euil fortune, and not theyr leudenes did offer me ſo great iniurye. Then diſpayring of all good, I fel into y• ſicknes which we call Conſumption, a ſickeneſſe (as the Phiſitions ſaye) incurable. And yet (whether through good prayer or for other purpoſe preſerued) after ſeuen monethes, wtout helpe of Phiſicke and beyonde al expectation I eſcaped Conſider now what cares, what ſorrow & vexation my minde endured: when on the one ſyde mine owne great pouerty, & on y• other my mothers vnwildy age was conſidered. Beſides this, y• frowardnes of my frendes, the wronge as I thought of Phyſitions, the threatning of a great man, the diſpayre of health, lacke of frendes, and wante of abydinge place, did altogether moleſt me. I wanted wherwt to liue: labour I could not, & to begge I thoughte it ſhameful, Amids ſo many calamityes whereinto vnfrendlye fortune, the hardnes of my father, y• miſlyking of kinſefolke, and the myſery of the time had caſt me, through good counſel I eſchewed (at
 leaſt wiſe) y• preſence of my myſeries by returning to the Citty, where many frends did comfort and helpe mee, and throughe Gods grace ſodeinlye I eſcaped my ſickenes. Afterwardes to meete with myſorder of ſickenes I vſed abſtinēce, againſt the affliction of fortune, pacience, againſt pouerty, ſparing, againſt ſuite, dilligence, againſt repulſes, y• ſtudie of learning. And alwayes from the beginning till this time, this booke (though not then wryttē yet conceyued did greatly comfort mee. Thus returned to my countrye I founde my mother in health. Before which time, euē til this day hauing ſuffered many myſeryes (perhappes to others intollerable) by diſdayne I ouercame them al. Firſt I was releued and defended by my good Patron the reuerend biſhoppe Phillippus Archintus both for vertue and learninge, a wyſe and worthye man. After, throughe commendacion of that excellente Prince Alphonſus Auolus, (to whom I dedicated my booke De eternitatis Archanis) I was by procuremente and ſinguler fauoure of Franciſcus S
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  
                  dratus the noble Senator, choſen into the order wt  the good lyking of euerye honeſt man, beinge then almoſt fortye yeares of age. Such hath beene y• courſe of my lyfe, craſed wyth continuall & greate calamityes. Wherevnto what my ſtudye hath helped you may coniecture. As for greater giftes of fortune I did contemne them, wyth like minde that I ſuffered all offered iniuryes. Wherefore to the continuance of my lyfe and recouery of quiet, I haue not obtayned of God any thing more profitable,
 then pacience: for by vertue therof amids my greateſt myſeries, I founde fauour and helpe in theym of whom I neuer had anye good deſerued. For Franciſcus Bonafidus a good and faythful Phiſition, ſo ſtoutlye defended my cauſe agaynſt the wronge of the Phiſitions of PADOA, as no brother for a brother woulde haue done more.
            Greate aſſiſtaunce did I alſo finde in Franciſcus Cruceius a moſt vprighte Lawyer, my ſuite dependinge in the Cittye of Mylan: Who was alſo the occaſion whye in diuers ſayinges, teachinge, wrytinge, and inuentinge, I beſtowed much trauaile. And albeit a minde vnmoleſt maye beſte doe all other thinges: yet haue I found that inuention requyreth a quiet mynde, which may appeare by diuers and ſondrye my Bookes. &c.
            But of my ſelfe perhappes I haue to muche ſpoken, not in myne owne commendation, but for examples ſake. For what prayſe canne baſe parentage bee, the diſpleaſe of my father, frendes, and Countreye, my healthe hindered, my fortune vnfrendlye, myne eſtate poore, and nexte to beggerye: who ſo therefore doth thincke mee to haue ſpoken all this for glorye, whiche tendeth rather to ſhame, muſt needes condempne mee of greate follye. And hee wyll thincke mee vtterlye vnwyſe, who ſo euer iudgeth me to haue ſpoken theſe thinges for oſtentation, which are rather matters to be aſhamed of it (leauing oure purpoſe) wee yelde to the common opynion of others. But it was myne intente by one example to teache theſe three thinges.
 Firſt y• without a conſcience gilty of euil, no mā is miſerable. Secondly, y• the valiency of minde doth greatlye helpe, not onlye to contentacion, but alſo to procure the mutacion of fortune. Laſtlye y• the reading of this booke was profitable both to perſwade vnhappye men wyth pacient minde to ſuffer aduerſity, & thoſe that be happye in their owne opynion, to be modeſt and continent. Beſydes yt (as is already ſaid) though mē do wāt this or ſuch like bookes to read, yet ſhall they in theyr myſerye be depriued of all comfort? ſurely no. For ſo ſhould we take vpon vs a thing almoſt deuine. Becauſe this onelye is neceſſarye to ſaue thee from myſery, y• thou perſwade thy ſelfe thou art not myſerable. Which rule in one worde may be taughte and learned of euery man. And whoſoeuer ſhal not cō
               ceiue this reaſon which is auaylable to perſwade ye wiſe, then let them read this or ſome ſuch booke as neceſſary. But the ſimple ſort, & cōmon people, beleuing this rule, neede not theſe reaſons which our law of life doth alſo approue. But ſuch as woulde inſtruct others, maye receiue of this Booke ſome profit, though I vntaught haue writtē it onely to my ſelfe, & being vſed to demonſtrations, haue beleued what followeth death: yet yt here on earth ſhould be neither felicitye nor miſery, onlye by reaſon of aunciente writers I coulde not proue. I thought therfore expediēt not only to reduce their ſayings together, but alſo to adde thervnto what ſoeuer I could. Wherfore to begin at the diſcommodityes of pouertye, ſeing the burden of them ſemeth to ſome intollerable, and as Menander affyrmeth.
 No burden is more heauye then pouertye, And on the contrarye part Riches haue alwayes bene had in price. The ſaying of the Poet is yet vnchaunged.
            
               Novv vvealth doth vvield the vvorld, and vvealth doth vvorship gayn
               Yea vvealth doth vvyn the frends at vvyl, the pore ech vvher cōplayn
            
            But nowe let vs not at all aduentures, but orderly as we can (becauſe it conteineth many pointes) enter into our matter. Firſt we muſt proue that the pore man is no leſſe happy then the rich. Secondly that pouertie is no impediment to glorye. Thirdly that there is nothinge more hurtfull to a pore man then to deſyre to become riche. Fourthly that after death ryches doth neither profyte the dead man nor his poſterity. And to y• fyrſt part this I ſay, that in a poore common weale the felicity is more then in the rich, there is euer foūd leſſe hate, leſſe ambicion. and leſſe diſorder. Titus Liuius telleth that albeit the cōmon weale of Rome, was at the begynning afflicted with ſundry ſedicions, yet among ſo furious a people beſydes wordes nothing was done, ſo as without iudgemente was executed. Tiberius Gracchus was the fyrſt mā that without lawe was put to death, ſyxe hūdred twenty and one yeare, after the buildinge of that Citty, euen then newly attayned to ſome ryches. Plinius witneſſeth how great commendacions the ambaſſadors of the Carthaginences (being enemies to the people of Rome) did geue vnto the Romains for their mutual loue. But after that riches grew to eſtimacion in Rome, nothing continued in aſſurance,
 nothing vndiſquieted the people withoute concorde, the Senate without aucthority, ſlaughter without reſpect, gouernement without lawe, wicked lyfe without controlment, cōmon perſons without reuerence, youth without baſhfulnes, old men without grauity. Al things were prophaned and mixte, with the dregs of ſlaues and ſtrangers From hence ſprong vp y• fruit of al miſchief, wherby it appeareth playne, that miſerye followeth the footſteps of rich common weales, and quietneſſe procedeth from pouerty. The Lacedemonians lykewiſe while they lyued almoſt in beggery were glorious and happye.
            In witnes whereof we fynd that when the king of Perſia did ſend certain ambaſſadors to Lacedemō, they were there through fury of the people robbed and ſlayne. There was in Lacedemon a temple of Talthibius, Agamemnons cryer, a ſanctuary for ambaſſadors, which vpon a tyme not yelding to the ſacrifycers any lucky propheſies (for that was taken for a religeon) it moued the penitente Lacedemonians that in ſtede of the ambaſſadors ſlayne, as many (that is to ſay too) ſhould offer themſelues, to death. Then Sparthius and Bulis offered theymſelues departing thence to Lacedemon, before they ſhould come to Xerſes ſonne of Darius, (who before had ſent the ambaſſadors) they came to Hidernes y• kinges Liutenant, who entertayning them courteouſly, after he knew the cauſe of their comming, and the greateneſſe of theyr myndes, perſwaded theym rather to chooſe the Kinges fauoure, then deathe, for Xerſes would make theym rulers ouer
 all Greece, and that he him ſelfe was one of hys Lordes, whoſe State he willed them to conſider and if they would follow his counſell, they ſhould not refuſe the kinges frendſhippe.
            Then aunſweared they, Thou knoweſte not Hidernes howe ioyful a thinge the pleaſure of liberty is, where of thou euer ſeruinge a kinge hadde neuer proofe, but if once thou mighteſt taſte thereof, thou wouldſt preferre it before all the kingedomes of Percia. Such felicitye hadd theſe men in their Common weales, eyther of pouerty, or at the leſt wiſe with pouerty. And yet was the lyfe of the Lacedemonians (as before I ſayde) hard, by reaſon of theyr vſe in warres, notwithſtandinge, by the benefyte of pouertye (hauinge no monie at all) ſo deare to theym was liberty, as they eſteemed it aboue a kingedome.
            But omyttinge to ſpeake of Common weales let vs inquyre of priuate Lyfe, where in is greater Pleaſure, greater Quiet, then in kingdomes, neither can a Kinge bee aſſured of freendes, neyther can he feele the chiefeſt ſweete of Venus ioyes, beinge in dout of deſembled loue. For wel you know the chief and greateſt delight of that pleaſure is, to loue and be loued. And how can he know himſelf beloued, whē feare of power or hope of reward do make the willinge ſuſpected. It is no meruayle th
                  •
               rfore that ſo many doe declare themſelues vnthanckfull to princes, for they cannot be accompted as frendes, that eyther for hope, feare, or daylye rewarde, bee entertayned. Therefore Philippus reproued his ſonne Alexander, becauſe wyth
 geuing he thought to gayne the good will of people. Albeit the lyfe of princes is moſt noble, yet wā
               ting loue and friendſhip, by no meanes can be accompted happy, becauſe they are to ſeke of ſuch benifyts as do neareſt approch the happines of mortall men. But let vs now conſyder that although in theſe thinges they were equal to pore men, whether then the lyfe of Princes, or common perſons, were more pleaſant. The pore man ryſing earlye, after his handes be waſhed, reſorteth to his labor, where hauing a while exerciſed him ſelfe (beſydes the helpe of his hongry ſupper the night before) wt his felow in labour, where, with hongrye Sauce they ſauour all ſortes of meate, what ſoeuer commeth to hand ſemeth pleaſant, delicate, and precious. In dyning time, they common of pleaſaunt matters, and tell what hope hee hathe of tyme to come. This company breedeth no diſcention, this dyet cauſeth no ſacietye, no diſdayn, no ſuſpicion. The diner ended, after pawſinge a while, they returne to accuſtomed labor, wherein they get good appetite to ſupper. There being met, they want no mirth, gentill ieaſtes, and pleaſante tales according to the quality of the gueſts, Then to bed thei goe, whereunto preparing themſelues, the ſhining ſtarres doe ſtirre them vp to looke to heauen, and remember that at length they ſhal come into that moſt bleſſed country, promiſing in mynde (if anye thinge were ſinfully done) thamendment of theyr offences. Thus wearied with long labor by daye ſo ſone as he commeth in bed, ſodenly he falleth in to ſound ſleape. In ſuch a ſorte lyuinge, the ſimple
 man gayneth healthy and long lyfe, neither troubled with repentaunce of paſſed time, nor feare of that wil after follow. When holy dayes do happen he reſteth his weary bones. Then wandreth he at will, and if ought therebe in towne pleaſant or worthy ſight, he may without offence ſee it.
            He veweth the ſuburbes, the greene fieldes & men dowes, he meeteth his companions & taketh each where his diſport. He mindeth no diſpleaſing immaginacions, he ioyeth in lyfe, and liueth prepared for death. And if happely he be learned, maye bee ſom what the more accompted happy.
            But the Princes life is cleare contrary. He hauing ſhaken of his yeſterdayes ſurfyte ryſeth vppe, hys mouth not well in taſte, but on the one ſyde offended with vnſweete ſauour of his owne ſtomack, on the other diſtempered with euyll relleſſe, Then aſſemble on euery hand his Garde, ſouldiers, ſeruantes, paraſytes flatterers, and ſuters, hys men 
                  〈◊〉
                about him, they exclaime, crye out, & complayne, becauſe all thinges are out of good order. The porters kepe backe the importunate people, & ſome perhaps they promiſe liberty to paſſe in.
            And if the prince be of good diſpoſicion ſecretly he examineth his affayres, which fynding to be infynite in nomber, he lotheth his owne lyfe. For ſome thinges he diſpayreth to bringe to paſſe: and ſome thinges he hath great care of. Now he blameth y• infidelity of ſome perſons. Now hee accuſeth the ſlouth of others, now he fyndeth fault with ſome mens couetiſe.. Now he forecaſteth ſome neceſſarye matters. Now he heareth prayers. Now hee
 harkneth to ſuytes wherin y• more attentiue he is, the moore is his trouble, and care of mynde, ſo at laſt he referreth all to his Counſayle. Thus you ſe that as to a prince nothing is diſpleaſaunt, ſo doth he nothinge with pleaſure. When diner time commeth, then is he ſolemplye ſerued wythe Diſhes, Platters, Cuppes, Carpets, Wyne Sallets, Sauce, meat, bread, Dainties of ſtrange deuiſe and all ſortes of princely prouiſion, But beinge thus ſetled at meate, either he hath no company at all or hauinge, they be commonly inferiours, and forced therfore to be placed farre beneath him, who though outwardly merrelye diſpoſed, yet inwardely loden with many cares. And as the Poet ſaythe.
VVythin vvhoſe fearefull face the palenes dyd appeare, of great and greuous loue. But now to returne to a kinge who fed withe delicate daynties and clothed in rich 
                  〈…〉
                glutted with yeſterdayes cheare) doth neyther 
                  〈◊〉
                his meate, nor take pleaſure in ſyght of any thing
                  •
                he can beholde. But clothed with all delicacye, he leaneth backe looking round about, and at 
                  〈◊〉
                chooſeth ſome one meate that leaſte doth offende him. And admitte he could take delight in eating or drinkinge, ſhould that much pleaſure him? ſurelye no: Becauſe all hee doeth is ioyned wythe ſuſpicion. He feareth his meate, his drynke, his ſtole his Chayre, his Trenchour, his napkin, and knife for in euery of theym may 
                  〈◊〉
                ſecret 
                  •
               oyſon What pleaſure can eatinge be, beſet with ſo many ſuſpycions?
 Were it not better to Suppe withe ſimple ſallets, rootes, and fruite, then with all theſe rich diſhes and daungerous delicates? what can bee worſe then ſuſpicion, where perill may alſo lurke and feare is neuer away? which Dioniſius by good enſample proued, For when Damocles had longe flattered him (as paraſites doe alwayes followes Tirantes) for proofe of ſuch felicitye he cauſed Damocles to put on his princely apparell placed him in his owne princely chayre, and ſet before him all the pompe, ioyes, and ryches of Sira
                     •
                  uſa: whiche done by a ſmal threde he hanged ouer his head a ſharpe ſworde naked, which Damocles ſeinge, he durſt not ſtretch out his arme, nor make any mociō to 
                  〈◊〉
                himſelfe of thoſe delicates which were ſet befoo
                  ••
                him but finding himſelfe on euery ſyde beſet wyth feare, hee prayed Dioniſius to deliuer him from thys royal feaſt, where he learned ſo much as neuer after hee deſyred to become a kinge. Moreouer to ſpeake of a princes life when he hath royally & ſūptuouſly di
                  •
               ed, and all his diſhes with greate ceremony taken away, incommeth ieaſters, iuglers & minſtrels: ſome they craftely flatter, ſom thei back bite, & ſom they ſeke to diſgrace: ſome fal to laughinge, & ſome to mopping & mowing, while others do ſound the inſtruments. In euery of which actions, y• more kyndly a man plaieth the para
                  ••
               te, the more he is alowed of. Duringe theſe doinges the prince wt fayned cheare, muſeth on other matters, more waightye: and happelye occaſioned by ſome aduertiſementes wrytten 
                  •
               nto him, to counſell be goeth: where 
                  〈◊〉
                matters be called in 
                  〈◊〉
               
                Neither pleaſaunt to be hard nor good in the execution. Becauſe ſome are vniuſt, ſome euill, & ſome perilous. Such diſpleaſant imaginacions a kyng hath, now he fyndeth offence, now he diſcouerethe treaſons, now feeleth ingratitude, nowe he reuealeth ſuſpicion now he diſcouereth errour, and euill procedynge of miniſters, and now hee fyndeth y• in fydelity of princes. Hys mynd thus moleſted, hee ſigheth and ſoroweth hoping to remoue the memorye of ſuch imaginations, perhaps he hunteth, rydeth, or beholdeth others ryding. Whither forth
                  ••
                the people run, and bring that to mynd which hee would willingly haue left vnthought of. Then after ſpeach of ſundrye matters, to ſupper hee goeth, wherof he fyndethe the lyke annoye that his 
                  〈◊〉
                did offer him. At length to bed, where before ſleape he muſeth of many diſpleaſant matters, howe many men are▪ or muſt be executed, though not altogether iuſtly, yet neceſſarily, What practiſes are made, what feare, what enuy, what iniury, what warre, what ſpoyle, what ſubuerſion of Citties, what ſuſpicion of death, and laſt of all deſyreth eyther not to be, or els to enioy a more quiet life.
            And thus from one fancy to an other, he turneth & toſſeth his mynde, yet in the ende findeth all thinges ſo confuſe, as nothing is aſſured or parmanēt & thus he deſyreth to ſleape, whiche is not eaſlye had his ſtomacke beinge ouercharged wyth a ſurfytinge ſupper. And admitte he doth ſleape, in ſleapynge he meeteth vnquiet ymaginacyons, fearfull dreames & viſyons. Though hys bed be rych, ſoft & delycate, yet hys reſt oft tymes hard & ſhorte.
 What life is this then ſinfull of cares and anxitye of mynde. And as Antigonus anſwered his ſonne Demetrius telling him, that more mildely hee behaued him ſelfe towardes his ſubiectes then ſtoode with his honoure? O ſonne (quod hee) thou knoweſte not that a kingedome is nothinge ells then a glorious ſeruitude. So Tymo
                     •
                  ion the moſt happye of all the Grecian Dukes, ſayde that princes were the miniſters and ſeruauntes of many. Beſydes all theſe cares which kinges are combred wt
               all, ſuch as are Tyrantes bee occupied with inceſt rape, murder of innocentes, poyſon, threatninges, violence, tormentes, and ſacrilege, yea feare and ſuſpicion are on euery ſide at hand. As many there be whom a tirante feareth as are thoſe that liue in fear of him, whiche the verſe of Laberianus againſte Caeſar the Dictator doth well ſet foorth, ſayinge.
Of force he muſt feare many: vvhom dayly many feare. What gard is ſo vigilāt as can defend him: He ſuſpecteth his wife, his childrē, his paramour, his cupbearer, his barber. A miſery ſure to great to be wiſhed to enemies, or y• mooſte wicked perſons. But now I ſee much hath bene ſaid of felicity thoughe confuſely. Let vs therfore at length more inperticuler touch euery on. And firſt I ſay y• life of a pore man is longer, more healthy, & ſtrong, then y• whiche rich mē haue, neither do I think y• and do dout thereof. Only thre men I do remēber ye haue paſſed the age of a hundred yeares, & all they almoſte beggers, one was a Carpenter, the other Apothicarye,
 and the thirde a ploweman. How can hys lyfe belong that lyueth in luſt, ydleneſſe, and ſurfytyng, wherof richmen do ſcarcely eſchewe any one How diffring therfore be the orders of mens lyues the one in abſtinence and exerciſe, the other in banquetting and euyll rule. Euer continuinge in ydlenes or prepoſterous labour, watching by night & ſlepinge the day? Hereof commeth dropſies, conſumptions, and goutes to richemen: But what poreman almooſt doth complayne of theym? The complexion of their faces doothe often tymes alſo ſhew what lyfe they leade. A poore man other whyles hathe moore beautifull Chlydren then hath the rich man, & in hauing them as fortunate. They many times are barren or haue children verye weake and ſicklye: but poremen neuer want, yea rather are ouerburdened. And the reaſon ther of apparāt. For children are made of their parents feede, whiche beinge plentifull geueth the childe a liuely ſpyryte and ſtrong body, both which are encreaſed by labour. In noble perſonages it is far otherwiſe: if they mete ſeldome they make manye children, but weake ones: if they mete often none at all. But poore people haue manye children, or not, yet ſom, & thoſe ſtrong. For which cauſe Licurgus ordeined a good law, y• when women were wt  chylde, they ſhould be enforced to labor. Beſydes al this pore men haue liberty, wherof princes poſſeſſe little. Poremen do viſit euery place, but princes may not, and wher they go, great preparacion is made. So nothing is done ſodenlye, but longe thought vpō. A prince is enforced, to tary y• leiſure
 and flouth of his ſeruantes, to beare with their errours. In ſommer notwithſtanding all prouiſion he is annoyed with duſte. In winter he ſhonneth the colde, and yet do feele it. But the pore man in ſommer exerſiſeth him ſelfe in the ſhadow: and in winter with laboure driueth the colde away, and that with pleaſure. The richman carefully defendeth his own Lands, but the pore man beholdeth all, and the ſeldomer he hath liberty to ſe the greater pleaſure he hath in ſeinge. Neyther do thou ymagin I ſaye otherwiſe then I thincke: my ſelfe haue neuer wiſhed any thing leſſe then to haue gardens in the ſuburbes, for the reaſon aboueſayde, that other mens for their rarenes do more delight and to haue them myne owne were nothing profytable, All men do ſtudy to lyue, whiche lyuinge the pore man by labour doth gette, his Nature is ſtronge, hys bodye vncorrupt. But happelye thou wylt prefer arte before nature. I yelde to thine opinion. We ſee that arte though not exquiſyte, doth alſo helpe pore men, but to rychmen arte is an hynderaunce. And ſome things whych pore men accompt vyle and bace, are wyth rych men hadde in greate pryce. As lettyſe, apples, grapes, and radiſh And contrary wyſe rych men make none accompt of partrydge, hares, peacockes, and plouers, which pore men eſteeme for excellente delycatees. What choyſe is there in thinges, when it is only change, that breedeth the dyfference? Cicero telleth that Suppynge wythe Lentulus hee ſurfyted of ſweete Beetes. The lyke reaſon there is to proue that a pore man
 ſleapeth more ſoundly then the rich. And as men ſaye.
            
               The graſſy flag, the ſilke more ſoft
               doth yeld the ſleapes vvith great delight:
               But ſtately beds in tovvers alofte,
               the richmans reſt vvith feares, affright.
            
            The rich man troubleth his minde with cares. The pore mā careth only by labor to get his liuing The richmans cares are earneſt & manifold, howe to kepe his welth, how to beſtow it, & which way to accompt with his receiuers. The pore mā careth only for himſelf, The rich man is enforced to kepe others, wherof groweth ſo great ſorow as ſomtymes we reade y• they haue not only lāguiſhed, but alſo killed themſelues. The pore man with loſſe of goods is neither ſo tormented as he killeth himſelf nor ſo deſperate as to occaſion others to lay hande vpon him. One only feare the poreman hath, whyche is, leſt he lack wherwith to lyue. And yet what a nomber of helpes hath hee? Freendes, aliaunce, kinſ
                  •
               olke, good men, and hoſpitalles, Neither ſhalt thou almoſt fynde any (vnles they be diſhoneſt) y• can want any thinge. For whoſo getteth by arte any thing, ought not from day to day ſpende all, but euer keepe ſomewhat in ſtore, whiche rule obſerued, there is no daunger of beggery.
            Thus wee ſee the wantes of pore men manye wayes ſupplied. And among the reſt a pore man in time of famine maye liue by ſeruinge the riche, whoe are ſubiecte to ſuche inconuenients as can not bee eſchewed as Impoſicion of Princes, ſubtilty of ſeruants, craft of heyres, deceite of enemies
 and men vnknowen. Whereof came the Satyre.
            
            
               Som hourding vp great heapes of gold, not knovving hovv to vſe thē,
               Lyke ſacred ſtuffe doth ſtore vp vvealth: ſo folly doth abuſe them,
            
            But who needeth to meruayle or thinke I haue alledged a fayned reaſon, whē I my ſelfe haue ſene an hundred men by ſundry meanes through their riches to periſh wtout fault. Others haue ben poiſoned by their familiers, others ſlayn wt the ſword others hanged, ſome robbed by the waye, as was Curtius in our citty, and Aluisius Donatus in yt town of Saccensi. But of ſuch as haue perriſhed throughe honger, in my lyfe I haue ſcarcely ſeene four, and they not with out fault. For enſample wherof yt were ſuperfluous to reſite any hiſtories, the proofe therof being dayly ſene. Therfore among ſo fewe richmen, ſeing ſo many for riches do miſcary, and among ſo many poore men ſo fewe do perriſhe for honger: is not in that reſpect the condicion of rich men much worſe then y• ſtate of the pore? The rich man prouideth ſhift of apparel & houſhold ſtuf, not only nedefull, but alſo burdenous, whiche aſketh care, kepinge, and dayly reparacion. And yet god knoweth no gold is more holſome to drinck in thē glaſſe, neither is Siluer more cleanly then ſtone, nor braſſe more mete to boyle in then the pitchers of earth. Garmentes the more ſymple they be, y• more holſome & leſſe burdenous. A man comethe into this world naked, hee needeth a garment but no burden. The Romaynes, and Lacedemonians, were at the beginning ſo baſely appareled, as that kinges had them in admiracion.
 As touchinge nedeles garmentes what ſhould I ſaye other then as Socrates ſaid, beholdinge the wares to be ſolde in the fayre: How many things are there I neede not? Hee accompted theim nexte to the Gods that wanted feweſt thinges. The gods haue no want to be ſupplied, and all thinges ſuper fluous is troubleſome, chieflye in apparell. Duſte doe decaye it, water dothe rot it, the thief dothe ſteale it, thy freend do weare it, the walles do rub it, wearinge doth make it threede bare, thy neighbour doth borow it and ſeldome reſtore it ſo good as it was lent. What is this apparell, other thē a troubleſome and burdenous brauerye: If thou regarde their beautye, paynted clothes be beſt, or if thou reſpect the ambicion. that ſhal hereafter be declared.
            But let vs conſider whether loue be more towardes the poore or the riche. A pore man is ſimple and truly loued, the richman is either feared or honoured. And if happely he be loued none aſſurance he can haue thereof. But percaſe it may be ſayde that a richman is more ſure from iniury? ſurely no A pore man may beſt be reuenged, for nothing hee hath to loſe, nor that he feareth to forgoe. The rich man carefull both of life and liuinge ſuffereth manye iniuries. It is magnanimity of minde and no worldly goods yt maketh a man to liue in ſecurity, yet perchaunce you ſaye: A rich man may mooſte ſafely offend others. But how? A pore man perfourmeth his offence alone in perſon: but the rich man hauing cōmitted offence (though none other perill were) hath felowes in offendinge and euer
 feareth to be by them detected. He hath alſo champio
                  •
               s & miniſters to whome hee is indebted whyche I thinck the Poet knewe ſpeakynge of Domitianus whome for his cruelty he called Nero ſayinge in this wyſe.

                  But vvould to God hee rather had, his time conſumde in toyes.
                  Then caſt ſuch care on cruell dedes, or ſought ſuch vvicked ioyes,
                  VVhen noble ſtates he pluct a dovvne, and men of vvorthy fame,
                  His ſubiects loue forthvvith he loſt, and gaynd eternall blame.
                  But vvhen in bloud of ſimple ſoules, he bathde his bloudy hand,
                  VVithout renenge he felt the ſmart, and could no longer ſtand.
                  Such guerdon God doth geue, to men of cruel mynde
                  that ſeeke the liues of harmeleſſe folke.
                Then I pray you what hath a rich man better thē a poore? Lyfe, health, chyldren, meate, ſleape, frendes, liberty, ſecurity, delight, quiet. garments, vtē
               ſiles, loue, reſt, with all other thinges more deſyred. It is therfore no meruayle that Horacius ſayde.

                  Happy is he vvhome God hath prouided ſuffycientlye vvhervvith to lyue.
                He lyueth in beſt eſtate that poſſeſſeth ſo muche as maye mainteyne him to lyue, whiche as Ariſtoteles ſayth is ſo much as is needefull, for a mans owne perſon and his womans. The Prophet doth witneſſe the ſame ſayinge: O Lord geeue me neither riches nor pouertye. And if nedely I muſt decline from the meane, Riches are moore peryllous then pouerty. For pouerty is relieued by induſtrye and arte, but there is no remedye againſte the diſcommodityes of Riches.
 
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
                
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
                Alſo the fall from riches is greate and without recouery, but pouerty diffreth litle from ſufficiency where of to lyue. In pouertye a man hazardeth only his body, but in vſyng riches both bodye and Soule is aduentured. Finally if pouertye be remoued all inconueniences that it dothe bringe bee alſo taken awaye. But ſuche as loue riches, they fallinge doe notwithſtandinge keepe ſtyll theyr imperfections both of body and mynde. Pouerty therfore vndoubtedly is more happye & more aſſured then riches, yea and more fyt to attayn to glorye. For who but pouertie dyd firſt finde oute the arts as ſaythe. Theocritus, O Diophante
                     •
                  , Pouertye is the only miſtris and inuenter of labor and arte. Surelie vnleſſe I be deceiued riche men were neuer partakers of this praiſe. And when theſe Artes were inuented, ſuch as had bene in eſtimacion were alſo pore. And firſt to begyn with Philoſophy ye flower of all knowledge, the Princes therof were pore men. Socrates, Plato, Ariſtoteles, and Cleantes, who all night drew water, and al day ſtudied Philoſophy But this is the leſſe to be meruayled at y• 
               Socrates (as Seneca ſayth) beinge in the market and ſeing a cloake to be ſolde, taking leaue of his frendes ſaid: fayne would I buye that cloake, if I had monye wherewith to do it. The prayſe of his death and alſo all they that enuyed his glorye do witnes hee was almoſt a begger. Plato became riche by his ſecond voiage into Sicilia, Ariſtoteles longe tyme liued pore, and almoſt an old man was enriched by Alexander.
            
            I thincke it Needeleſſe to tell others as
 
               Homerus and Virgilius the Lanternes of Poetrye, the one a begger, the other a poore mā. The whole route of Gramarians and Oratours were ſuche kinde of men, Pompilius, Andromicus, Orbilaus, Valerius, Cato, Laenius, Iulius Higinius. The Epiſtle of Plinius Caecelius reporteth that Quintilianꝰ was meanelye furniſhed wyth wealth. Iuuenalis mocking Statius the Poet ſayth he begged.
            Vnles perhappes ſome tragedye, he hath in ſtore to tell for honger let him pyne.
            But now a dayes that rich men can gayne glorye in ſcholes I doubt not. Let vs therefore talke of armes wherin they are no more happye then in learninge: What ſaye you to Paulus Aem
                     •
                  lius, who being dead had not left wherof to make his wyfe a dowrye. Alſo Marius and Sextorius were Romaynes of baſe condition, yet on the one depended the ſafetye of Rome, on the other ſome whiles greate perill. What riches had Camillus the terror of the warre? Or Scipio Affricanus that for debte had lyen in priſon, if Gracchus had not helped. Arator Cincinatus, Calatinus Fabritius that fought wyth Pirus, Valerius Publicola, Menenius Agrippa, Q. Aemilius, Ariſtides, Photion, Meltiades, Cimon, Spartacus, Viriatus, all y• Dukes of Lacedemonia, and as chiefe of them Liſander were all called from baſe condition. And whom can you alledge againſt theſe? the deſperat Alexander or Caeſar the ſubuerter of his countrey, or rather Sylla wyth his proſcriptions. There is no doubte therefore but that in the iudgement of the diſcrete, poore men are to be preferred. But nowe a dayes
 throughe perſwaſion of paraſites, princes doe not traine vp Captaynes, but rather bye them. Men are not aduaunced for vertue but ryches and parentage. Wherof it groweth that gouerners, maieſtrates and chiefetaynes, are not appointed for deſert, but through fauor of nobility. And though therof they gette no good, yet this cōmoditye they gaine, y• through cuſtome and ye ſmalnes of y• nomber that is aduaunced, rich men onelye do poſſeſſe all dignities. But counſellers cannot erre? And would to God that Princes we no more deceyued. For trulye they do well in preferringe nobilitie, yet therwithal to conſyder that thoſe are worthyeſt honour, whom vertue commendeth. The one is ſufferable, but the other intollerable: when neyther vertue nor good parentage, but falſe flatterye is the onely waye to aduauncement. And ſuche kinde of men commonlye are voyde both of vertue, learninge and honeſtye. But nowe I confeſſe wee haue a little to farre digreſſed from oure purpoſe. For more ſpeedye ende of this Booke let vs conſider what is the occaſion of glorye, ſeinge poore menne in diſcipline of warre, learninge, and inuention of artes, do gaine reputation: whether rich men are admitted to glorye in the artes them ſelues? when in deede they neuer knewe theim. But admit that riches are more precious then pouertye? Alas what myſerye can come from the gods greater then the deſyre to haue them: which the more we gette, the more it increaſeth. It is labour wythout ende and not vnlike the turning of Syſiphus ſtone. Who (as Poets fayne) for reueling
 the ſecretes of heauen is forced to remayne in hell, and there continuallye to carrye a heauye ſtone to the toppe of a ſteepe hill, which forthwith falleth downe, but he without ceaſinge doth follow, and on his ſhoulders doth bringe it vp againe: Euen ſo to get riches is nothing els then to toyle they bodye in continuall trauayle, and exerciſe thy minde in innumerable cares. But admit thy lucke bee good: what happines can it be in thy lyfe if thou cannot vſe the wealth thou doeſt poſſeſſe? as Horatius wryteth.
            
               Excedinge care of coyne, doth mortall men begile,
               and loue of vvordly pelfe, all other ioyes exile.
            
            And if liberallye and bountifullye thou wil vſe them, what a madnes were that with ſo long laboure to become riche, and ſo ſodenlye to conſume all. The womē called Danaides being condempned to hell for their deteſtable murther, do ſuffer there none other tormente, then continuallye to drawe water. And admit goodes were wyth labour to be gottē? whether doeſt thou deſyre them for thine owne vſe, or thy poſteritye? when in the meane tyme thou neglecteſt thy quiet, & pleaſure of thine owne lyfe. Thou ſhortneſt thy dayes, and hinder thy health. Some mē I haue ſeene liue a nigardlye life, onelye to the ende to make theymſelues aſumptuous tombe, and honourable buriall. Which folly and ſuperfluous care Socrates laughed to ſcorne, when lying at the pointe of death he refuſed a riche cloake whiche Apollodorus did offer
 vnto him. For ſurely there is among mortal men no vayner care, then the pompe of funerals, which I thincke thou will confeſſe and flee to the cōmodityes of inheritaunce. Thou ſeekeſt to leaue thy ſonne riche, what heyre can bee better? yet in the meane ſpace thou laboureſt, thou careſt, thou watcheſt, thou hazardeſt infamy, thou offereſt wrong, & chargeſt thy conſcience, to thende thy ſonne may ſpende, conſume, deuoute, & keepe hauock. Whereby he becommeth proude, ſlouthful, madde, and in euery reſpect for his riches the worſe. But beſides theſe euilles (alas) how manye ennemyes are gotten by ſeekinge of riches? oftentimes alſo men do want a ſonne, or hauing one, he proueth ſuch and of ſuch cōditions, as they repent that euer they begot him. And ſometimes we ſee that great inheritaunce is cauſe of their deſtruction, whiche happeneth moſt often to the children of Princes, who committed to the gouernmente of others are by theim berefte both of kingdome and life: as was Tryphon appoynted to the tuition of Antiochus, by whom it was by practiſe reported, that the childe was greatly diſeaſed wyth the ſtone, and that hee muſt in any wyſe for his onelye remedye be cutte: which done Tryphon not paſſinge the age of tenne yeares, through the onely griefe of his wounde, & not otherwyſe greeued dyed, Cicero in his Oration for Sextus & Roſcius, doth ſhew what diſcōmodityes his great riches did bring wtal: & among the reſt (thoughe the greateſt) he was accuſed of murther. But ſeing among men of meane poſſeſſions, wee ſee theſe practiſes dailye put in vre: it is no
 maruaile to heare that fathers haue ſpoyled theyr ſonnes, ſonnes haue ſlaine theyr fathers, and brothers haue ſought the life of brothers, onlye to inherite worldlye kingdomes. So as the ſayinge of the Poet is well verifyed.
            That fayth did neuer long in Princes court abide.
            But to what ende ſerueth the power of mens riches, yea though it be well gotten? what pleaſure doeſt thou take to haue aboute the nomber of ſeruauntes and companions? what ſecrete foes arte thou forced to keepe, chaunging libertye for ambition? For a rich man in deede is none other then a Peripatitian god, that is to ſay confyned by lawes: a ſeruaunt, yea an improfitable ſeruaunt. O fooliſhe imagination of man, to yelde hymſelfe to ſo manye labours, to muſe on ſo manye cares, to attempte ſo manye miſchiefes, that looſeth ſo manye pleaſant dayes, onelye to make his ſon riche. Not vnlike the Moyles which fatte and fayre, are wt
               out vſe of ſence, conſtrayned to ſerue in yoakes, & obeye the bitte, yea ſometimes do ſuffer iniurye of the poore flees. But the children of poore men beinge wyſe, vertuous and ſtronge, haue libertye to walke at will, diſbordened of all kindes of care. Being attayned to rype yeres they hunt, they fiſh, they hauke, they play & wander wher they thincke beſt. Is not this liberty to be preferred before K. Creſus riches? But among ſuch as haue by inheritance come to great riches, the moſt of them haue conſumed all. Neyther can I thincke y• couetiſe fathers on theyr death beddes, do feele greater tortormente,
 then to remember y• thoſe riches: which wyth long labour they haue gottē, ſhalbe by theyr prodigall ſonnes in ſhort ſpace cōſumed, on ſtrompets, dycinge, paracites, and flatterers of court. I my ſelfe haue ſeene a man whoſe father and grādfather in fiftye yeares had gotten to the value of a thouſande poundes, all whiche hee conſumed in leſſe then three yeares. The ſonne of Ruinus hauinge receyued from his father a rich inheritance, fel into ſuch a franſye as he loſt both lyfe and gooddes. Howe manye wayes are lawes offended? howe manye rebellions happen? how many treaſons? whereinto ſuch as liue in meane fortune do ſeldome fall. Beſydes this, who hath not a greedy heyre, a ſonne, a brother, or a brothers ſonne y• wyll not wyth one farthinge redeeme thee? Yet ſuche is the madnes of men as wyth loſſe of theyr owne quiete they labour to make them riche. Therefore ſeinge riches doth procure neyther glorye nor felicitye to oure ſelues or oure poſteritye: there is nothinge worſe thenne not hauinge riches to deſyre them, or go about to gette them. But ſeinge we
                  •
                meane not to perſwade any thing Rethoricallye, but rather according to the Philoſophers examine whatſoeuer maye on eyther ſyde be obiected: mee thinckes it may be ſayde that euerye man ſeeketh riches, but no man wyſheth for pouertye. Which reaſon albeit by diuers argumentes maye be refuted, and happly truly, yet in this worke ther is nothing more allowed of, then y• ſimplicity of minde, ſo as reaſon ſhoulde not proceede of will, but rather that Will ſhould follow Reaſon. To returne
 therefore to oure purpoſe I ſay y• whatſoeuer is by any creature required either for cōmodity or neceſſity, y• ſame creatures do naturally deſyre them. In which deſyres brute beaſtes directed onelye by naturall ſence, do not tranſgreſſe the lawe of neceſſitye: But man hauinge libertye of ſence & reaſon to perſwade with himſelfe, doth eate, drinke, & ſleepe, more then eyther commoditye or neceſſity doth requyre. So as though eating, drinking & ſleeping, be things natural, yet ſuperfluouſly takē, do work effects cōtrary to nature. In like maner are riches to be deſired, not in abundance, but ſo much as ſuffyceth to liue: whatſoeuer is requyred more, is not onely not good, but alſo contrarye to nature. And how can yt be good which is contrary to nature? This exceding deſyre of riches doth not therefore procede of imperfection of nature. Al men naturally do deſyre riches, as meate or drinke, not becauſe exceſſe of them is naturall, but becauſe in them ſomwhat is natural, yt is to ſaye, ſo muche as ſuffiſeth wherewt to liue. Which ſufficiently we get, either by induſtrie, as thoſe yt are learned in artes: or by reuenue as gentlemē: or by conſent as fryers: or by deuotion of others as Courtiers & beggers: As therfore wtout eating & drinking we cannot liue, ſo is it lawful to deſyre riches. For to haue nothing, nor know which way to get, is cōtrary to nature. And yet as ſaciety & dronkennes be not onely euil, but alſo vnpleaſant, ſo is alſo riches and auctority. But notwtſtanding it may be obiected that thoſe cōmodityes which poore men are partakers of, as labor, exerciſe, induſtry, pacience & abſtinence, may
 be enioyed by them that be rich: and the choyſe of both being in the riche man, he ſhoulld be the more happye. For if willinglye wee wante pleaſures, in wanting them is eyther none euill, or iuſtly cannot ſo be called. Yet whoſoeuer thus thincketh doth greatlye erre. Becauſe a man being brought vppe in delicacye, his minde becommeth effeminate, his bodye tender, and vnfit to ſuffer trauaile. Nature accuſtomed to ſondry meates, do make dilicate digeſtion. And if any man ſo brought vp do chaunge his diet to poore mens fare, he ſhortly becommeth diſeaſed, full of obſtructions, and ſubiecte to conſumption. Or if they fall to trauaile, eyther by cō
               pulſion, or for ambitiō, they grow vnhealthy, ſicke of agewes, and in ſhort ſpace die. If any of theſe fine eaters do applye themſelues to earneſt ſtudye, they commonly dye in youth: as did Ioannes Picus Mirandola. A thinge impoſſible it is, that a man borne to great riches ſhould become in learninge excellent: vnleſſe at the firſt he liued a poore life, or in his youth fell into ſome frenſye. But contrarywyſe in the prayſe of pouertye it may be ſayde as Dioniſius ſayd to Ariſtippus, y• poore men did begge of the riche, ſeeke theyr houſes, and liue of theyr lyberalitye. Yet if thou reſpecte the neceſſity of thinges, it ſhall appeare that the neceſſitye of poore mē is greater for the riche, then the neceſſity of y• riche for the poore. The rich man needeth a Phiſitian, a barbar, a mulyte
                  ••
                a plowman, a cooke: & which of them needeth a riche man? Notwythſtanding the ambitious mindes of men doe make ſuche to ſeeme to gouerne ouer poore men. Alſo the emulation
 in worldly glory, do make poore men ſeeme to haue more neede of the rich, thenne the riche of them. Yet if wee reſpected onelye neceſſitye, then ſhoulde the riche haue more occaſion to ſeeke oute the poore, then they to ſeeke for theim. Neyther can anye man doubte, but that riche men do dailye for neceſſitye vſe the induſtrye of the poore: And if the riche mans goodes be needeful for the poore mans vſe, it is ſcarcelye once in they care. Alſo the riche onelye for riches do gaine reputacion, and in that reſpect onelye thought meete for honour and auctoritye. But farre otherwyſe it is in the common weale of Venis, and was in Rome while it remayned in glorye: farre otherwyſe it was in Lacedemon, where pouertye was accompted a praiſe. Farre otherwyſe in Athens, where Photion, Ariſtides, Cimon and Miltiades: continued longe tyme in glorye and aucthoritye. But in Cittyes euill gouerned where mighte is holden for lawe, vertue for ſimplicitye, and ryches for decree: ryche mē are preferred before the wyſe and vertuous. Neyther do I thincke meete y• any poore man (be he neuer ſo good) ſhoulde deſyre auctoritye. For as Socrates ſayd, haſt thou nothing wherof to repēt thee? But if I woulde reherſe the diſcommodityes of auctoritye, I mighte eaſilye proue that the felicitye of pouertye were a ſinguler vertue. Yet meane I not to perſwade y• ryches well vſed in a good cō
               mon weale were hurtful: for that were to abſurd. Hitherto by true (though ſubtill reaſons) we haue taughte the diſcommodityes whiche riches dothe bringe wythall. But remembringe that at the beginning
 I determined not to proue any thynge by ſhorte and ſubtill argumentes, I wyll proceede in playner ſpeache. And therefore I ſaye that nature lyke vnto fyer iſſuinge out of the ground, hath aduaunced al thinges ſome more and ſome leſſe, and ſome moſt of all, and being at the hyeſt, vaniſheth and decayeth awaye: ſo the race and dignitye of man, being growen to the greateſt honoure & glorye, a whyle ſtayinge there, doth declyne, and at length is clearely quenched. For where is now anye braunche of Alexander, of Darius, Antiochus, Ptolomeus, Dauid, Caeſar, Antigonus, Maethridates: or anye other of theſe auncient kinges? who ſo attayneth to that highe eſtate of glorye, let hym not forget himſelfe, but ſay: Lo now y• ende of humaine glory is at hand. Then who forcaſteth not what cares and ſorrow are likely to follow? what ſay you to Charles the fifte, though he gouerned mightely & happilye from Ethiopia Hiſpania and Italia, to the cō
               fynes of Dalmatia and other Nations vnknowen, (wherein he ſhewed more vertue then mighte be hoped for in any man) in conſulting dailye how to gouerne ſo many nations, in trauaylinge to holde them in obedience, what man would ſay he was happye? when ſometimes he remembred how Solimanus did threaten the confynes of the Empyre, ſomtimes he muſeth how the Iſlands of Beleares & the kingdom of Spayne were perturbed. Some times he doubted the inconſtancye of the Italian Princes. Sometimes he feared the weakenes of Cycillia and Pulia, againſt the Turkes. Sometymes he bethought hym of the Princes of Germanye,
 and howe his Nauye ſente to ſee was toſſed wyth Neptuns ire: Some fledde to Hongaria, and ſome to Illerico: And wyll you call this man moſt happye? whom ſo great cares, and ſo manye feares did dailye tormente? Surelye for my parte I wiſhe my ſelfe rather a Religious manne of Carthuſia, thoughe theyr lybertye doth not farre differ from priſonners. If then Charles beinge ſo great and mighty a Prince was alwayes accompanied wyth cares, and ſo farre from felicitye: wilt thou ſaye that Fraunces the Frenche kynge mighte be called happye, or rather Solymanus? which of theim lyued not in feare? whiche of theim taſted not of euill fortune? And though perhappes tyll this day they neuer felte anye thinge greatelye euill, yet by enſample of others haue they feared the worſt.
            
               Polycrates that in hys whole lyfe neuer feeled anye myſfortune, before hee dyed, by the Perſian Kynge was brought to the gallowſe and hanged. Darius the Kynge (whoſe Empyre was thoughte equall to Gods) before death was depryued, and lyued in myſerye. Loke vppon Syphax, Perſeus, Mithridates, Pyrrhus and Cambyſes. To greate a follye it were to nomber all Kynges whom Fortune hath laughed to ſcorne.
            In oure age wee haue ſeene the ſubuertion of foure kingdomes, Pannonia, Egipte, Gallia Sicalpania, and Pulia. Suche is the alteration of tymes, that Princes are conſtrayned to become eyther infortunate, or myſerable, in keepynge theyr Kyngdomes they liue in myſerye, infortunate if they leaue them.
            
                O Lorde howe liuelye did Lucanus deſcribe the lyfe of Kynges ſayinge.
            
               O ſafe eſtate of life,
               The pleaſant dayes vvhich poore men paſſe, a bliſſe aboue the reſt,
               to Gods almoſt vnknovven.
            
            But thou not beholding what is wyth in Princes, lyke vnto men that gaze vppon the outward pictures and monuments of Tombes, doeſt iudge them onely happye, who in deede of all other mortall creatures are moſt vnhappye. This muſt alſo be cōſydered when yu cōplaineſt onlye of pouertye, howe many there are ſo vnhappye, as in reſpect to them, thou mayeſt be accompted happye. Howe manye be ſicke? howe many deafe? howe manye blinde? howe many in priſon? how many in exile? how many condempned? how many enforced to aduenture theyr liues? then all which no doubte thou art more happye. Beſydes all this, if thou cō
               playne onelye of pouertye (vnleſſe thou would become a kyng) there is no cauſe to complayne. Behold how many do liue miſerablie in Citties: how many beg in the Subberbes: how many in vyllages do paſſe theyr liues almoſt wtout any thing, yet burdened wt children and familye. And neuertheleſſe conſtrayned to paye 
                  •
               ribute of y• little, which wyth extreame laboure they haue earned. But (alas poore Chriſtian people) nowe am I fallen into that ſpeache which neuer earſt I thought. So as in ſeeking to acquite others of care, I am my ſelfe caſte ther into. But doeſt thou deſyre to vnderſtande plainlye that in riches is no felicitye? then behoulde thoſe people which inhabite the country,
 and glorye in theyr ſmall riches, thinckinge themſelues happie, becauſe they ſee none of theyr neighbours to poſſeſſe more then themſelues, who are not riche. But if the ſelfe ſame men do reſorte to the Cittye, where they ſee others that for ryches do excell them, then they lamente, complayne and accompte themſelues poore. But is this pouerty? ſurelye no: naye rather maye be called enuye. Who is hee that poſſeſſeth a thouſande. Crownes, that maye iuſtlye be called poore? and dwellinge in the countrye wyth that wealthe, wyll not accompte himſelfe a Prince? yet if hee happeneth to come to the Courte, where no man almoſte hath fyue hundreth Crownes, forthwyth hee beleeueth and calleth himſelfe poore. But if it ſhould come to paſſe (as it did in the time of Noie) that all moneye, prouiſion, cattel, and other commodityes were drowned wyth water, I thincke then that no manne woulde perſwade himſelfe to be iniured by pouertye. Howe is it then, that now hauing ſomewhat thou complayneſt? which declareth plainlye, that no pouertye but enuye doth moleſte thee▪ And what can be worſe then this? why doeſt thou not deſyre the treaſures of Kynges and the riches of India? vnleſſe it bee in reſpecte they are farre from thee▪ But howe manye Countryes and people hath pouertye preſerued and gouerned, as Sythia, Aſia, the Aſſyrians, the Medians and Parthians. Alſo Alexander poſſeſſing nothing but bodies and weapon, conquered all Aſia. Likewyſe the poore common weale of Rome, ſubdued the proude Frenchmen, the valiaunt Italians, the pitifull Gretians,
 the riche Aſia, the crafty Carthaginenſes, and the diſdainfull Iewes. All which was done by pouerty. The Perſians, the Perthians and Germaynes, beinge lyke vnto the poore Romaynes, did in deſpite of theyr power defende & keepe theyr libertye. But ſo ſone as Sylla grewe to greatnes, & by him riches ſet in reputacion, lyke vnto yſe againſt the Sunne, al libertye and glorye decayed away. Thē began ſedition, ciuil warres, wt slaughter of familiars and frendes. So as in ſhorte ſpace throughe enuy of barbarous nations, yt whole empyre came to vtter deſtruction. Neyther do I thincke y• priuate riches be better or more profitable, for by thē oftentimes men become ambitious, ſlouthful and ful of cares, which the Poet pleaſantly deſcribeth in Mydas, when he had obtayned of Bacchus that all he touched ſhould be goulde. Sayinge.
            
               Amazed at this miſchiefe nevve, novve riche and yet in vvo,
               His vvished vvealth lo novv he lothes, that erſt he loued ſo,
               No ſtore can honger ſtanch, drye thurſt his throte tormentes,
               Thus vvorthilye amids his gould, his former vviſhe repentes.
            
            So great is the myſery of rich men, that amids the deſyre of riches they periſhe. There is nothing contenting to the rich man, but that which accordeth wyth hys couetyſe mynd. For he to encreaſe hys ryches hazardeth hys ſoule, his reputacion & frendes. Who can thincke that either lyfe or fame is gotten by riches, and for the moſt parte riches do not longe remayne wyth anye man, and neuer deſcende to the thyrd degree? And ſeldome ſhalte thou ſee the grandchylde of a ryche man, dye in abundance. I marueyle not therfore why ſo many
 worthy men diſdained to become rich. And fyrſt of al (omitting al Chriſtians) let vs begin at Crates the Theban, who y• more fitlye to ſtudy Phyloſophye, ſould his goods & caſt the money into y• ſea. More diſcretely did Apollonius & Tyaniꝰ, who ſelling theyr goods which were in deede great, did giue y• ſame to theyr Cittizēs, reſeruing to themſelues nothing at all. Zeno Citticus being rych, was impoueryſhed by ſhypwrak, & afterwards ſtudying Philoſophy, ſayd y• when hys ſhippe peryſhed his voyage was moſt fortunate. But Diogines deſerued double glory becauſe he dyd not only paciētly ſuffer pouerty, but alſo therein lyued a glorious lyfe. For beinge aſked by Alexander what hee wanted, aunſwered nothinge: though by bountye of that noble kinge, he myght haue receyued great ryches. Therefore Alexander was wont to ſay, if I were not Alexander, thē would I be Diogenes. So wel did this noble king know the felicitye that grewe vppon the diſdayne of riches. Likewyſe Photion after he had receyued one hundred talentes, would neuermore be releued by Alexander, thoughe in deede▪ he were ſo poore as for want of a ſeruaūt, was forced himſelfe to drawe the water wherein he waſhed. Socrates refuſed the great rewards of Alcibiades. And Artaxerſis ſeeking the frendſhip of Hipocrates and Epaminundas, y• one for his excellencye in Phiſicke, y• other for his companye, did preſente theym wyth great giftes: and yet by that meane could not win them. For the liberalitye of the kinge, did not ſyrmount the diſdayne they had of riches. The treaſure of Pyrrhus coulde not corrupte the fidelitye of
 
               Fabritius, who preferred honeſt pouertye before the riches of kinges. Such was the nobilitye of theſe mens mindes (though for wante of Chriſtianitye not to be nombred amonge others) yet in reſpecte of generoſitye, meete examples for oure conſolation. Do not therefore lament for thy pouerty, 
                  〈◊〉
                call to minde that ſaying of Plato. VVho ſo vvould become riche, muſt leaue the deſyre of riches.
            
            A man encreaſeth his riches, by y• decay of others, and ſo a riche man is either wicked or the heyre of one that was wicked, as S. Hierome wryteth.
            The next calamitye to pouertye, is exile. Wherin aſſuredlye it is imagination onely that maketh a man myſerable. For who ſo marketh the liues of manye, ſhall fynde that they haue ſpente ſome parte of theyr lyues in ſtraung Countryes, as Plato, Beroſius, Galenus and Dioſcorides. Some others their whole liues, as Zeno, Citticus & Crautor, who thoughte theyr forraine habitation pleaſante, becauſe it was volūtary. The like deſyer had a Cittizen of oures: hee in threſcore yeares not further trauailed then the Subberbes of ye Towne, was for a myracle ſhewed to the Prince, who did commaund him that neuer after he ſhould paſſe thoſe bounds. The poore olde man miſliking this commaundement, deſyred leaue to trauaile in his age, which in youth he had forgottē to do: Which ſuite beinge denyed, the ſelye old fellow of very ſorrow fel ſicke & dyed. What can be greater follye then to neglect yt is good, or wiſhe that is euil. And ſurely trauaile cānot be euil which ſo many princes, kinges & Emperors haue takē in hand. Who wil thē
                lamēt ther of, whē it is perforce. For what ſo euer is well done though by enforcemēt, yet is it not euyll. But call to thy conſideracion how many cō
               modities commethe of trauayle. As experience of forrayne cuſtomes knowledge to eſchewe miſaduentures, ſight of Cities, Seas, Mountaines, Ryuers, woods, variety of ayres, and ye nature of ſō
               dry living Creatures. Alſo the practiſe of artes, & ſciences, the difference of mens wits with manye other miracles by trauayle are dayly learned. So as I nothinge meruaile at diuers excellent Philoſophers that conſumed their Lyues in continuall trauayle. And amonge the reſt I call to minde ye great Alexander that trauayled more to excell Traianus who enuied his glorye, then for the deſyre hee had to conquer the whole world or keepe the ſame in ſubiection. Antonius, as he was ſoft of ſprite, ſo did he trauaile countries rather for experience, thē for deſyre to conquere. But to returne to priuate perſons. I ſay that all ſuch as haue inuented anye excellent knowledge, were thoſe that lyued in traualye Homer commended his frende Vlixes for nothing more, then for hauing trauayled ſondry coū
               tries. And haue not al excellent men beene driuen to exile? Demoſthenes, Cicero, Ariſtides, Thuſidides, The miſtocles, Alcibiades Codrus, Theſeus, Eumolpus, Trax, Ariſtoteles, Camillus, Corialanus, Marius, Datanus, Trisibulus, Dion, Anniball, Demetrius Phalerius. And ſome other that willingly baniſhed themſelues as Conō
                the Athenian into Cyprus. Iphicartes into Thracia, Chares into Bigeo, Timotheus into Lesbia, Zenephon in to Eleus. What nedes more wordes? Say then
 as Socrates ſaide that the whoole worlde, is a wiſe mans country, and a wiſe man while he is in the worlde is neuer from his country, and not to bee in the worlde cannot bee. It is the part of euery wiſe man to eſchewe death, impriſonment, & exile and yet of theſe three, is not exile the leaſt?
            And yf death be not euyll, what euyl can it bee to lacke our country? When it was tolde Diogenes y• the Synopenſes had condempned him to exile, he anſwered ſayinge, euen ſo do I condempne them to dwel for euer in Pontus, & wtin the confines of Euxinus. Did not Camillus of ſuch hard fortune receiue the occaſyon of his noble victorye.
            And where were ye bokes of wiſe men made more often then in baniſhmente? Ouidius Naſo beinge in exile wrote his bookes De triſtibus, De ponto, in Ibin Triumphus Caeſaris and De piſcibus. So as it ſeemeth that in eight yeares exile, he performed more then in thoſe fyftye and foure, which before he had liued in Rome. Plato wrote the greateſt parte of his bookes, whyle he lyued from his owne countrye: For when Socrates dyed, hee was aboute the age of twenty and ſeuen yeares. Truly whoſoeuer lyueth in his owne naturall countrye an induſtrious lyfe, doth gayne greate enuye, and y• more if he be baſely borne. Where was Chryſte worſe entreated then in Nazereth beinge there borne, yet hated, diſdayned, afflicted, and at length in Ieruſalem ſlayn. So it ſeemeth true and that no mā can be a Prophete in his owne countrye.
            Thus we ſee that exile is not onely good, but alſo glorious, chieflie to a wiſe and learned manne.
 Neyther ought any to miſlyke of that which hath forthered many. Would God all men knew how profytable a thinge it is to trauayle, and chieflye for ſuch as dwell in thoſe countries where riches do rule as Lawe, power take place of Order, or Tyrannye in any ſort is put in practyſe.
            Wherfore I ſaye that exile is neyther euyll nor to be nombred amonge thoſe thinges which haue of euyll any reſemblance. But exile doth not ſo much offend theſe, as iniuryes do torment others, affirmynge withe the Lacedemonians, that who ſo receiueth one iniury doth occaſion an other, But who euer thincketh iniuries ought to be reuenged doth greatlye erre. For in ſo doinge no ende of iniuryinge can be taken, when one iniury reuengeth another. Who ſo offereth the fyrſt muſt he not reuēge the ſeconde? Hee therefore doth mooſte well, that offereth the fyrſte iniury, and nexte to hym, he that ſeketh reuenge, deſerueth blame, becauſe the third iniurye, of neceſſity muſt folowe.
            And how can he paciently ſuffer wronge, that vnprouoked willingly offered the fyrſt iniury. What can therfore be bette, then to refrayne from doing iniuries, and call to memorye the ſayinges of Plato, that a wiſe man, dyfferethe as far from a common perſon, as a common perſon from a chylde.
            For children do reuenge euery iniury yea thoughe againſt the iniuryous wyll it be offered, moſt lyke vnto Beaſtes, vppon whoſe tayles yf (thoughe vnwares thou treade) ſodenly they byte without conſydering whether wyllingly thou did it or not. But farre otherwyſe oughte Menne to reuenge
 thoſe iniuries which willingly are offred. If then a wiſe mā do not reuenge thoſe wrongs which by miſhap do happen vnto him: is he not therin more worthy then the common perſon voyde of all wiſedome? how muche were it better to obſerue that deuine precept. Michi vindictam et ego retribuam.
            
            That wiſe men haue ſo done, no man doubteth. Amongs whom we reade that Socrates beinge ſtricken vppon the Shynnes and aduiſed by his frendes to ſeeke reuenge aunſwered. If an aſſe haue ſtricken me ſhal I therfore be ſo fooliſhe as to call him in queſtion? And when Xantippe hys wyfe in a rage toke his cloake from his ſhoulders, hys frē
               des perſwadinge him to reuenge he ſayde, thys is done only to occaſyon you to looke vpon vs, & ſaye here is Xantippe and here is Socrates.
            
            
               Diogenes receyuinge a blowe ſayde. Neſciebam quā
                  do michi cum galea è domo sit pro deundum. Crates alſo beinge ſtriken on the face by Nicodromo Citaredo, made none other reuenge, but wrote Nicodromo his name vpon the place he was ſtricken, and in that ſorte ſhewed to the hole cittye the iniury offred vnto him: becauſe to offer iniury without cauſe is a greater reproche, then to receiue it. The one by offringe wronge ſheweth himſelfe plainly wicked, & an euylle man, the other is giltye of nothinge myſdone. When it was tolde to Antiſtines that Plato had ſpoken euyll of him he made this anſwere.
            It is the parte of a prince to heare euyll when hee doth beſt. But Plato beinge tolde that Zenocrates, did ſlaunder him, ſaid fyrſt, he could not beleue it: and after better proofe aunſwered ſayinge. I can
 not thinke he would haue thus ſpoken withoute cauſe. What could haue beene ſayde more wiſelye or more ſafelye. A chriſtian kinge ſtricken on the right cheke, ought to turn the left. And S. Paule ſayth, that if thou do good, to thoſe that ſpeake euyll of the: thou heapeſt burning coales vpon their heades. There is nothinge more wicked then ingratitude, nor more cruel then to oppreſſe innocentes: either of which faults he committeth that offereth iniury to his benefactors. Let vs now follow the law of Nature, and conſider when anye iniury is offered, whether ſafely, or withe perill the came may be doone.
            For what can bee moore fooliſhe then to ſeeke reuenge, when ſafelye it can not bee perfourmed.
            So did Pauſanias reuenge himſelfe vpon Philippus, but for his laboure was hanged. So did Andreas Lampugnanus wreake his ire vpon Galeazeus Sforſa: but thereby he wrought the diſtruction of himſelf his ſon, & his brother, beſydes many diſcomodities of his country. But how many haue bene puniſhed & put to death, before they, had performed their intent to reuenge? as were thoſe that conſpyred ye murder of Phaleris, & that wrought treaſon againſt Nero. The multitude of enſamples doe make mee leaue them vntouched. Who doth therfore beinge neuer ſo ſymple cōmend ye peryl that reuenge bringeth? which though performed doth more hynder thee. then him to whom it is offered, and ſomtime before performance doth vndoe both the and thine Is then reuenge good when ſafely it maye bee executed? Surely at no time.
 Becauſe the pleaſure of reuenge is when there in a man may declare courage and magnanimity of mynde. And as the Poet ſayth.
Shevve not thy force on yeldinge foes, let proud men be oppreſt. Me thinckes therfore that Ariſtides deſerued praiſe For when Cleomines had ſayd a man muſt do good to frendes, and euyll to Foes: Ariſtides turned the wordes, ſayinge. A man muſt do good to his frendes and ſeeke the reconſiliacion of his foes. The glory gotten by forgeuing of foes, whō thou may oppreſſe is greater, then the pleaſure of reuenge. The man y• doth good for euyll is lyke vnto God. For he that defendeth and doth well to all menne doth moſt nearelye folowe God. And howe great a ſygne of noble mynde it is to forbeare reuenge y• auncient examples doe beare witnes, wherein Iulius Caeſar gayned ſo great prayſe, as no man more. Hee hauing ouerthrowen Pompeius and his army Commaunded that none ſhoulde bee hurte that were not preſent in the fyelde agaynſt him.
            He ſpared M, Mercellus his mortall enemy. He ſett at lyberty Petreius the chieftaine of his foes. Afranius, Vero, Korfinius, L. Lentulus, L. Domitius. He tooke mercye vppon the Sonne of Cato a notable Enemye. Hee touched not Sextus Pompeius. the younger Sonne of the great Pompeius, at whoſe death hee weeped
            He pardoned Ligarius at the ſuite of hys Freendes and Bretheren, thoughe hee were an apparaunte offender, and many waies gyltie. He ſpared Cicero
                and freely pardoned al other Princes that were in the battayle Pharſalica. He ſette vppe the Pictures of Pompeius and fynallye gaue ſo manye ſygnes and Monumentes of mercy as Cicero both before the victorye, and after his deathe affirmed his Quarell the better: ſayinge that Pompeius defendoure of his country might more iuſtlye be condēpned for his crueltye to Enemies, then Caeſar in reſpect of the greate Mercie he vſed. In lyke maner didde Octauius his ſucceſſor procede.
            For when Liuius the Hiſtoriographer had percyally written againſt him, hee vſed none other Reuenge but called him a Pompeian, Lykewiſe when Asinius Pollio, had in his Booke prayſed Caſsius Brutus, Affranius and Scipio, he ſought no reuēge againſte him. Beſydes all thys, he receiued into hys Houſe Tymagines whoe in wrytinge hadde defamed Octauius, Liuia and her daughter. For all whiche doinge hee vſed none other Reuenge then theſe wordes. Fruere mihi Pollio fruere.
            
            But beholde howe nobly Andrianus Caeſar did mytigate his ire? Hee beinge made Emperoure and meetinge his Enemy ſayde. Thou haſt eſcaped. Declaringe that as befoore hee wanted power to be Reuenged, ſo nowe in aucthoritye he woulde wante will, and therefore did acquite him of feare It is alſo to bee conſydered that there is nothinge that encreaſeth aucthoritye more then to forgeue.
            And therefore PELECRVS the Lacedemonian, Complayninge to hys Brother that hee was not ſo Beloued amonge the Cyttyzens as hee was: hee aunſweared Pelecrus, ſayinge the cauſe
 thereof is that thou can not ſuffer iniuries. It is lykewiſe greatly to be noted that who ſo euer hath aſpired to authority or greatnes, they haue born wt many iniuries, becauſe they ye reuenge might be reſembled to the fable of Praxitelis. Who beinge (as men ſaye) of Nature angry, and beholdinge hymſelfe in a glaſſe, eſpied there a viſage euyl fauoured and deformed: and therewithall more moued, increaſed his collerick & angry countenaunce which plainly appeared wtin the glaſſe, but in the end hee brake the glaſſe, in euery piece where of he found a face much deformed. Wherby Praxitelis had experience that in ſeeking to reuenge himſelfe of one diſcontentacion, he occaſioned many: Euen ſo if thou murder one man, thou makeſt his frendes and familye all thine enemies. Thus in ſeeking to acquit thy ſelfe of one foe thou getteſt manye, yea ſometymes for ſo doinge thy name groweth odious, and thou condempned for an euyll man. Fynallye who ſo is accuſtomed to reuenge, mindeth none other thinge, which reaſon and experience doth wel declare. Alexander the greate (in whoſe chamber whyle he lyued, good fortune ſlepte) knowing the vnfriendly hartes of the Athenienſes and other people of Grecia, who vnder the enſigne of Darius made warre againſte him, did notwithſtandinge ſeeke any reuenge: which greatnes of mynde, Darius, & other vnderſtanding, of enemies they became ſubiectes and faythfull freendes. But if contrarywiſe hee had vſed reuenge, the whoole number of the Grecian youth yea all India and Peloponeſſo had reuolted and bene deſtroyed: ſo as of Alexander he
 had in ſhorte ſpace become a poore obſcure Prince. Farre vnlyke to hym dydde kinge Pirrus proceede, who beinge a famous Capitayne, yet folowinge Reuenge, lefte his doinges imperfyte and dyed in myſecye. IVLIVS CAESAR in priuate lyfe and towardes reconciliacion to hys Ennemyes, beinge greatlye ſlaundered by Caius Caluus and Catullus dyd, notwithſtandinge wryte fyrſt vnto Caluus and pardonned Catullus.
            
            What greater Ennemy hadde he then Clodius that defyled the honoure of wedlocke? Beinge apprehended he woulde not onely not condempne him, but alſo ſaue him from periury. But Marius dydde far otherwiſe, hee thyrſtinge for the bloud of enemies and followinge Reuenge hadde euyll ende, and was the diſtruction of himſelfe and all hys.
            What hath bene ſeene more worthely done then that acte of Fabius? who contrary to al right, was forced by the people to receiue Minutius mayſter of his horſe, as his companion in the empyre, whoe doinge dyuers thinges contrary to Fabius deſygne, dyd (notwithſtandinge forgetting the iniury) ioyn with Minutius agaynſt Hanniball, and to ſaue hym from peril vſed al care & cunning, which afterwardes wrought ſuch effect as the people cōfeſſed how vnworthelye they had abled Minutius to bee his equal, which Minutius alſo vpō his knees confirmed prayinge Fabius to take into his handes y• hole authority and Empire. Such be the rewards of noble myndes, that can forget al iniuryes. So dydd not Cicero when with ſtaunderous ſpeach he perſecuted Clodius, but for ſo doinge was himſelfe bannyſhed.
 And in ſeekinge to baniſhe Antonius oute of the common wealth, he there by hindred himſelf his friendes, his countrye, and all good men.
            But is it not a thing worthy to be noted, that we diſdayne the iniuries of brute beaſtes, and reuēge the wronges offered by men? Alſo we pacientlye ſuffer the diſpleaſure of tyme, and can not beate, the offences of men? But in the one Ambicion wanteth: in the other is meane to Reuenge whiche I graunte: and yet in the Iniuryes of men, it is to be conſydered, that man is, wyll thou, Nyll thou, thy Companion in lyfe: And manye times (thoughe thou marcke it not) by the prouoked.
            What doth it then moue thee to ſuffer iniurye? Is it Harme or Loſſe, by reuenge it cannot be recouered. If Harme, thou ſeemeſt to Sorrowe that thou arte honeſte, or that thou would be ſo thought. Seing it is the propertie of an euyl man to do iniury: & the property of a good man to dyſdayne it. Alſo when any man doth ſclander thee, diſdayne thee, ſtryke thee, or hurte thee, conſyder whether the ſame be wyllinglie done or not? Be: cauſe an vnwyllinge offence may hurt, and yet be none Iniurie at all. Creſus was commended for pardoning Adraſtus when he had killed his ſonne▪ becauſe Adraſtus meaninge was to haue ſhotte at the Bore, and not to haue ſlaine the Chylde. But if wyllinglye the offence bee offered, examine thy ſelfe if thou haue geeuen cauſe, for then is it none iniurye, but deſerued puniſhmente.
            And if thyne ennemye hathe hurte thee, thincke withe thy ſelfe whether thou woulde haue doone
 the lyke to him if thou might, for then it was none Iniurye but contencion.
            The ende of all ſtryfe is when ye one yeldeth. And therfore a boye of Lacedemon beinge deadly wounded and Comforted by his Freendes, ſaying that or long they would reuenge the iniury done vnto him, aunſwearede, that in no wyſe they ſhould ſo doe, becauſe the hurte he receiued. he entended to his Enemye, if his entent hadde taken place.
            But let thy mynde be voyde of euyll, free from hate and diſpleaſure, then conſyder the qualitye of the offence and the ſtate of the offender, whether it be ſo ſmall as is not to be regarded, or the man ſo mad or vyle as is to be diſdayned: becauſe to be reuenged vpon anye ſuche Iniurious occaſyons, or men, is both diſhonourable and wicked. But admitte the offence be not ſuch, doeſt thou not remember that it is the propertye of a good man paciently to ſuffer iniuries, not for feare, but through Fortitude. So Phocion beinge by the Athenienſes, condempned to death, his Friendes aſkinge what he woulde haue ſayde to his ſonne? aunſwered, tell him that in any wiſe he forget this iniury here offered vnto me. Ariſtides alſo vniuſtly remayning in exile, prayd the Gods that the Athenienſes might bee ſo happye as neuer after to thinke vppon him. Alſo calle to thy conſyderacion that againſt all Iniuries three Remedyes there are, that is to ſaye, Reuenge, Oblyuion, and diſdayne.
            Of whiche three who doubteth but Dyſdayne, is bothe the beſte, and mooſte aſſured? Becauſe diſdayne through the courage of mynd wherwith
 it is accompanied, is not lyke vnto obliuiō ioyned with reproche, neither perilous in reſpect of new iniuries, as is a reuenge, which bringeth therwith boothe peryll and repentaunce, and in the meane tyme, the deſyre of offending doth not moleſt thee but arte there in moſte lyke vnto God. For ſuche as contempne iniuryes are mooſte happye and lykeſte to God, and ſuche men they are, or muſt bee that would become happye. For ſeeinge no man lyueth free from iniuries, and the greater in auctoritye he be, the more followed with ſlaunder euyll report, & iniury, it is expedient that euery man doe determyne himſelfe to beare them.
            Neyther is it lawfull for anye mortall man to vſe reuenge. Who hath bene more ſlaundred thē kinges, and emperours, whoſe power is greateſt?
            Whoe, or what is of greater force then God and Nature? and yet they delighte not in Reuenge. Shall man then be lyke vnto Beares, purſuynge the Bees, ſeeke for reuenge? God forbydde. For although we might in lyfe reuenge all Iniuryes: what good were that after Deathe, or what care ſhould wee then haue of iniuryes? It is all one whether with ſufferance of Iniurye, or not after Death wee be remembred. Who ſo therfore liuing ſeemed to contempne iniuryes, by death he is free from the peryll whych Reuenge might caſt hym in to. Wherfore there is nothynge better then an inuyſyble mynde, whyche lyke vnto a man placed on the toppe of an highe Tower, in dyſdayne caſtynge downe ſtones vpon the heades of hys Ennemyes, doth make lyght of all Iniuryes (and as yt were)
 dyſdayne them. For as women, for lacke of magnanimity can not beare offences: ſo men (as they are men) may take what Reuenge they thinke beſt Then make thy choyſe whych of them thou wilte bee lyke, But happely thou wilt ſaye ſome worthy men haue bene reuenged. For Caeſar commaunded Fauſtus Silla and Affranius, to be ſlaine.
            Lykewiſe Antonius reuenged him ſelfe vpon Cicero and Alexander & vpō 
               Caliſtines, carying him abrode when his Eyes were putte oute, and in the end ſhutte him vppe into a caue with a Dogge. But alas (good manne) thys was no Reuenge, though ſome ſaye that Antonius beinge of Mynde moore abiecte then a Woman didde lyke vnto his other doinges committe this acte, and therefore had an ende aunſwerable to his deſeruinge. But as for the other they mynded nothinge leſſe then Reuenge, for the reſpecte of their doinges was ſecuritye, whiche in lyke caſe by oure Lawes is ſufferable. For if Afframus had gotten libertye, hee woulde neyther haue kepte Promiſe nor lyued in quiet, Alſo Fauſtus Silla, was by Lawe giltie. Pompeius freende and for his fathers Tyrannye odious to the people of Rome.
            So as beinge a neceſſary Friende for Pompeius, he could not haue lyued in quiet. But if he had, for the Mallice borne to his Father beene ſlayne, the ſame ſhoulde rather haue beene doone vppon Cato, who (as was well knowen) after that Caeſar conquered the Germaines, did perſwade y• Senate to haue him deliuered into the Enemies Handes, becauſe hee had foughte contrarye to the
 truce taken. But Sylla when eaſly he mighte haue ſlayne him, he woulde not.
            So Alexander beinge ſetled in his Empyre amonge the barbarous People, did not condempne Caliſtines, for Mallyce, but Securitye becauſe throughe hys woordes hee coulde hardelye keepe the Perſians. And the Macedonians beganne to diſdayne hym.
            Full well knewe Antonius that if Cicero hadde eſcaped, hee woulde neuer haue lyued in quyet, becauſe beinge all readye once Pardoned, hee notwithſtandinge didde followe hym wyth Hate vnreconſiliable, and if the Death of CICERO had beene ſoughte for Reuenge, eyther a lyue he might haue beene tormented and kepte, or elles executed wyth more crueltye. It commeth alſo to mynd, that Iniuries haue not a little proffyted Some menne and therfore Ouidius ſaythe.
            A vvronge ſomvvhiles vve ſee: doth helpe the vvronged vvight.
            It happeneth ofte tymes that wee take Compaſſion of theym wee loue not: eyther for the malice wee beare theym that offered the Iniurye, or throughe beliefe that the Iniured is condempned, rather by power of hys Enemye then his own offence. And by ſuche meanes it is well knowen that many haue eſcaped great peryll.
            Amonge whiche nomber Valerius Maximus tellethe howe Gabinius throughe the Sclaunder of Siſenna, and Flauius, for the Iniurie of Valerius were delyuered, and Cotta onelye for ſuſpicion of wronge founde the ſame fauoure. In which caſes
 if none iniurye had beene, no hope had remayned. It is alſo to be conſydered, that the occaſions of Sclaunders are ſo common, as nothynge more. The People doe backebyte the learned, the Learned dyſdayne the vnlearned, the Iuſte doe condempne the wicked, the Wycked do laugh to Scorne thoſe that bee good, the Mightye doe Enuye the Mightye, agaynſte whome they prouoke Seruaunts and Subiects by ſclaunderous Speache, Robberye, Practiſe, and vntrewe dealynge. Were it not better with noble mynde to diſdayne all Iniuries, then thus continuallye to liue tormented in minde. Lucius Murena was prayſed, becauſe he tooke Cato vnder his Gowne and ſaued him from Deathe, that not longe before had accuſed him.
            
               Publius Pulcher beinge by the three Lentuli accuſed of inceſte did notwithſtandinge afterwardes ſaue one of them from perrill. Marcellus being haynouſly accuſed by the Siculi did not only forgeue them, but alſo receiued theim into his owne tuition. So Menedemus beſtowed manye Benefytes vppon Alexinus of whome he had bene great lye iniured. How wiſely ſayd S. Gregorius, that who ſo can not beare iniurye, dothe ſhewe by hys impacience that he is not good. The kinge Archelaus, when vpon a time one caſte water vpon him, beinge perſwaded by his frendes to reuenge: anſwered, ſaying, I know he would not haue caſt yt vpon me, but ſome other. By which anſwer he ſaued y• offender frō hurt, & him ſelf from the importunity of his friendes.
            
                A notable example remayneth in memorye of the ſeruaunte of Antius Reſtio, who beinge longe time kepte in priſon, and by his maiſters commaundemente ofte times burned with hot yrons, yet afterwards folowing him in ye triūphe triumuiral did notwithſtanding all their iniuries ſaue himſelf frō peryl, when comodiouſly he might haue bene reuē
               ged & alſo rewarded. Such wiſdome hath not only bene performed by priuate men, but alſo by hole Citties. For Dioniſius the yonger bothe at the playes of Corinthus and alſo before hee was ſente into exile might haue beene by them of Syracuſa ſlayne, whome befoore tyme hee hadde mooſte Tyrannouſlye vſed. But they with diſdayne didde lette him paſſe. Likewiſe didde the Romaines, when Silla hadde reſigned the Offyce of Dictator, and liued in priuate ſtate: notwithſtandinge hee had greuouſly offended the people, yet did they ſuffer him to paſſe without hurt, thinking that reuenge is to be vſed vpon mighty men, & thoſe that beare rule, & vpon thoſe yt were by law or aſſent diſmoū
               ted from authority courteouſly & cōpaſſionately to entreate thē, was a ſigne of a good man.
            Therfore there is no greater argument of felicity, no redier waye to glorie, nor better meane to quiet, then to diſdayne iniuries.
            Beholde the dogs which be of many other beaſts the moſt improfytable, yet are much more made of then eyther Oxen or Horſe, onlie becauſe they ſuffer all iniuries their mayſters do offer vnto them.
            If thou Stryke theym, they fawne. If thou dryue theym awaye frome thee, they retourne
 vnto thee: if thou chide them they flatter. Finallye he is much worſe then any beaſt, that cannot diſdayne iniuryes. No brutiſhe beaſt is mindefull of offence done vnto him. Therefore that man that ſeeketh reueng is not wyſe, loued of God, nor lōge happye. If thou ſuffer a whyle thou ſhalt ſee thy wronges reuenged by nature, by chaunce, or by ſome other meane. And him whom wyth extreme care, trauayle, and hazard of thy ſelfe thou ſought to offende, ſhalbe wythout thyne euill or myſerye deſtroyed. The liues of all euill men that do perturbe the quiet of ye good, are ſhort: or at leaſt wiſe that happines of ſmall continuance. If therefore forbearing iniurye no man is myſerable, then is it better for all men whether they can or not, not to be reuenged: becauſe it is manifeſt that before reuenge of iniurye no mā is in myſery. The offence that men in theſe dayes do thincke the greateſt, is the infidelity of wyues. But in ſo diſhoneſt a matter not to trouble the eares of good men I meane nothing to ſpeake, notwithſtandinge I call to remembrance yt 
               Pompeius for adultry caſt of his wife Metia, and for the like faulte did P. Caeſar put awaye Pompeia, both excellente men, and amonge the Romaynes inferiour to none for auctoritye, deſerte & wyſedome. All which notwithſtanding eyther ye importunacy
                  •
                of adulterous, or the wantonnes of women, did make theyr beddes defiled. Septimius Seuerus, and Antonius the Philoſopher had diſhoneſt wyues, yet canſt thou not fynd any better, or more worthye men in that common weale When a frende of Antonius did wyſhe hym to put away
 his diſhoneſt wyfe, he aunſweared ſaying: euen ſo I may do and therewtall looſe her dowrye: which dowyre was the Romaine Empyre, becauſe Fauſtina was daughter of Pius Antonius the Emperor. Therfore though Antonius wittīgly, or Seuerus vnwittingly kept theyr aduoulterous wiues, I cannot thincke it was preiudiciall to theyr reputatiō, vertue or felicitye. Neyther do thou thincke that this blot doth blemiſh the reputation of common perſons more thē theſe moſt noble perſonages: for ſeing the fault is in others, the diſhonoure cannot appertayne vnto thee. Therefore a Cittizē of Sparta finding an adulterer a bed wyth his euil fauoured wyfe ſayd, alas vnhappy man what neceſſity hath driuen the to do this deede? To cruel it were to impute that to thine owne follye, whiche by no pollicye can be preuented, as though thy vertue & eſtimation were ſtayned by y• default of another. Yet nowe a dayes this reproche is caſt vppon the man. So did not Salethus Prynce of Crotona, who made an ordinaunce more harde then the Lawe Iulia, which was that cockould makers ſhould be burned quicke. Suppoſyng that none offēce was more wicked. Yet when afterwards hee hymſelfe had defyled hys brothers wyfe and was taken, he made ſo wyſe an Oration, as he people were cō
               tent to puniſhe his offence wyth exile onelye. Notwythſtanding, knowing the greatnes of the fault, willinglye he caſt himſelfe into the fyer, and was burned. Thus we fynde hee deſyred not pardon (though his words were to ſuch effect) but rather ſought to ſhew yt none offence could be ſo greate
 but might deſerue to be pardoned. Therfore this iniurye cōmeth not of the wyues defaulte, but the imperfection of tyme: wherin we being vxorious, the reproch is caſt vppon men, & the periury vppō God: neither ſhal this plague ceaſe till yt (as men ſay) Polipus haue eaten out himſelf, & the power of Mahumet hath ſtayed theyr ſlaunder.
            But of iniuryes we haue now enoughe ſayde, let vs therfore ſpeake of other calamityes, among which impriſonment ſeemeth the chiefe.
            In priſon is darckenes, vncleaneneſſe, lacke of companye, fetters, and fynallye (as it ſeemeth) all ſortes of myſerye: which prouoked Boetius to crye out ſayinge.
            
               You mourning Muſes reache, vvherof I ſhould endight,
               And bathe▪ my face in bitter teares, vvhervvith my vvoes I vvright.
            
            Alas (good frende) what is this lyfe other then an impriſonment of mynde, much worſe then that of the body, & would God this quiet might chaūce to me, which ſo manye worthy men haue deſyred. Amongeſt whom Demoſtenes yt excellent Oratour to the end he might be enforced to kepe the houſe, cut of the one ſyde of his bearde. Where is truer contemplacion then in ſolitary life? what place is more fit for ſtudye, then wher is quietnes? neither did Boetius write any worke better, then y• he inuented in priſon, did not Aeſopus long time lurke wtin a tub? & Democritus willingly inhabite the dennes of dead men? ſtudying & wrytinge? And ye more their eyes were darckened the more theyr mindes were lightned, Plato telleth y• 
               Anaxagoras while he remayned
 in priſon wrote the booke De Circuli quadratura, To whom could impriſonment be more greuous, then to Socrates when the end was death, the time long and incertaine? yet neuertheleſſe he ſlept ſwetely, ſtudyed Philoſophye, and wrote Verſes. So as Socrates gaue more light to the pryſon, then the priſon gaue darcknes to Socrates. PAVLVS the Doctoure of the worlde ſent the greater parte of his epiſtles from pryſon, as to the Epheſians, to Timothe and Philemon. For like reaſō is ſeruitude pacientlye to be borne, ſeynge nature hath not more liberally beſtowed her gyftes on the mayſter, then the ſeruaunte: They are equallye wyſe, equallye beutifull, equallye healthfull, and finally in body & minde therin excelleth his ſeruaunt. And for quietnes of mynde the ſeruaunt hath the aduauntage. For he ſeeketh onelye to content one, whych is his mayſter, for whiche doinge hee is prouided for, of meate, drincke, apparell, and all other neceſſaryes. But a mayſter muſt not onelye be careful of himſelfe, but alſo of others. Euerye loſſe is hinderance to the mayſter, but to the ſeruaunt not ſo. Therefore if it were lawfull, more men woulde commit themſelues to ſeruitude, thē deſyre to become free. Who ſo doth conſyder well, ſhal ſee, that when we thincke oure ſelues moſt free, wee ſerue mayſters more ſeuere: as Princes, God, neceſſities, lawes, and pleaſure, which bee alſo common to ſeruauntes, yet there withall they haue foode, apparel, and houſes, which ye mayſters haue not. It is the leſſe maruayle why ſome bondmen haue refuſed to be made free, as did Meliſſus a Gramarian of Spoleta.
            
            
                Surelye it is a goodlye pleaſure to eate at other mens tables. Would God it were as honeſt. And doeſt thou thincke the fauorites of Princes are other then ſeruauntes whom ambition hath deceiued? beſydes which, theyr eſtate is more perillous and more vnhappye. Neyther is ſeruitude anye hinderaunce to glorye, for Plato, Xenocrates, Calcedonius, Diogenes, Phedrus, Epitetus, and Eſopus the fabler, did al liue in ſeruitude. Beſides them diuers Gramarians, Sibonius, Aphroditius, Taberius, Crotes, Antonius Gnipho, Phoſius ye excellent player, and Manlius in Aſtronomye, a ſinguler Poet. What ſhoulde I ſaye of riches? and ſhall I agayne reſight tho
                  •
               e monſters of the Romayne pleaſure Druſilanus and Menecrates, yea the ſeates of Kinges haue beene by bondemen poſſeſſed. Tullius one of the aunciente kinges, was a bondman. And ſo was Oedipus and other. The kinges of Syria and Paleſtina in our age choſen out of this ſorte of men. But let riches rule and beare the ſway, yet let vs reſight knowen examples of manye ſuch as ſeruitude and the patronage of a good maiſter haue aduaunſed, for ye vertue of the maiſter dependeth much vppon ye wyſedome of the ſeruaunt. And ſome ſeruauntes haue not onlye gayned libertye, but alſo deſerued to become heyres to theyr maſters. Neyther ſhalt thou finde vppon the aunciente monumentes, more recordes of loue of wyues, children, and brethrene, then enſamples of ſeruauntes deuotion towards mayſters, and maiſters towardes them.
            The lyke perſwatiō may make for thy comfort, if thou liue wythout glorye: which kinde of life is
 
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
                
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
                
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
                
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
                the more tollerable if thou remayne in ſeruitude, whereinto Vlyſſes (as Plato ſayth) being werye of hys former life did willingly caſt himſelfe. Ther is no happines y• can happē to mā greater, thē eyther not to deſyre glorye, or not to haue it. Who ſo doth ye one, liueth in great quietnes of mynd, ye other enioyeth gret ſecurity. For is y• glory of this world other thē a ſwete poyſō for mē? wherof if thou taſte, thou becomeſt blinde & ſenceles. Herevpon groweth vain labour, peril & care, which way to kepe & get frends, authority & riches. Enuye alſo like vnto a ſhadow inſeperable doth follow glory, which in a moment fadeth awaye, and the reſt of thy life the more vnpleaſant. How many worthy mē haue geuen the glorye of theyr owne deſerts to others? Socrates being victorious in battaile, gaue al the honour prayſe and rewarde to Alchibiades. But who can therein excell Plato? he commēded for his learning, did yelde all the prayſe to thoſe y• had taught him: as Socrates, Tymeus, and Permenides. Surelye there is no greater glorye then the contempte of honour. Who ſo is not ambitious getteth no glorye: why ſeekeſt thou that, y• to haue thou ought not? if thou be ambitious, thou accuſeſt thy ſelfe: and yet ambition were no vyce, if glorye myghte lawfully be deſyred. I cannot reſight the nomber of all ſuche as haue honoured vertue, and yet contempned the prayſe. And yet in deede euen at this daye alſo, who ſo lyuinge vertuouſlye doth lurke, may be called good & happye. What doth the ambitious man gayne other then ſet to ſale al▪ his imperfections. And whoſo euer doth marke it well,
 ſhal finde that euery man hath more defects, then cuſtomes worthy commendation. To preuent the peril of this condēpnation there is no way ſo ſure as to lurke and liue vnknowen.
            The like cōmodity bringeth ignoraunce wherof notwythſtanding many do complaine. Who ſo ſeeketh knowledge, findeth care and laboure, as the Prophete ſayth. I tell not that Paule hath preached, that this worldly wyſedom is ennemye to God. Let vs conſider what is commonly gayned by learning, profite is diſdayned, the ſoule hazarded, the body conſumed, thy children & ſubſtāce neglected. The learned do get great enuy & ſhortneth his lyfe, and all for knowledge, or rather to be thoughte to knowe. For arte thou more wyſe then Socrates, Plato, or Ariſtoteles? Socrates did glorye that hee knewe nothinge. Plato doubted of manye thinges. Ariſtotiles ſpeaketh ſo obſcurelye, as one woulde thincke he knewe little. Alaſſe how many haue bene hindered wt being thought learned? Amonge the reſt, y• ſmall knowledge of myne, haue bene to my diſaduantage, for thereby I haue bene oftentimes reiected, euill handled & oppreſſed, and would God that eyther I had bene ſuch a one as they thought me, or yt they had thought me ſuch a one as in deede I was. Hereof grew againſt me ſo many vndeſerued euill reportes, al which I diſdayned, perſwading my ſelfe that one mā excelled an other, in that he was better. Like vnto al other things doth yt opinion of learning brede ſlaūder & diuers other incōuenients: as we ſee by Alexāder, Achillino, Tiberio of Bononia, Petrus Leo, & Marcus Antonius
                of Verona. For Achillinus was poyſoned, Petrus Leo caſt hedlonge into a ponde. Tiberius & Antonius occaſioned to ſhortē theyr owne lyues. So we finde that this wyſedome is accompanyed wt many diſcommodityes. Howe much better had it beene for theſe learned men to haue liued by ſome craft or induſtrye? what man haue thou knowen both learned and fortunate, yea whom hath not learninge hindered? Socrates was ſlayne, Anaxagoras kept in pryſon. Plato ſoulde, and put in perill of hys heade, Ariſtotiles ſente into exile, where eyther willingly or not greatlye againſt his wyl he dyed. Demetrius Phalerius baniſhed and condempned. Demoſtenes poiſoned himſelfe, Eaſimes ſent to exile, and ſo was Solon. Licurgus depryued of hys eyes, and after baniſhed wyth manye perils of lyfe. Ioannes Scotus ſtabbed in wyth daggers by y• handes of his companions, Cicero betrayed and ſlayne, Varro cō
               fyned, and who was not moleſted and diſdained? Budeus a notable man of oure age, did alſo iuſtlye complaine, what and how many perſecutions did Eraſmus ſuffer? were the Prophetes and wyſe mē in the lawe of Moyſes more happye? ſurelye no. The cauſe is learning, which who ſo hath not, let him not deſyre it: who already hath it, muſt thinke to haue boughte a iewell of great pryſe, and kepte wyth more care and perill. But to much haue we ſpoken of theſe matters, for fewe or none ſhalte thou finde that complayne of ignoraunce, ſeinge willingly they deceyue themſelues.
            Now as touching ſorrowe it ſelfe, which worthely ſeemeth intollerable, Let vs conſider it commeth
 chiefely of three cauſes, that is to ſay of ſicknes, folly, or enforcemēt. How ſoeuer it be, or whatſoeuer griefe we feele, eyther it is not great, or not long, and ſeldome it happeneth to honeſt men: but if it doe, muſt of neceſſitye be endured. Whoſoeuer falleth into ſicknes either willingly or agaynſt his will, would he not be aſhamed that womē ſhould excell hym in pacience and ſufferaunce of griefe? for women in bearing of children do endure moſt extreeme paynes, yet notwithſtanding do not refrayne the company of men, & ſuche as be barren, do not deſyre any thinge ſo muche as to haue children. The griefe which women ſuffer in childing, is of all other the greateſt, and neareſt to death: yea many of ſuch griefe do dye in deede. No gout, no ache, no collicke or other tormente is comparable to this paynes. Notwithſtandinge how great ſoeuer they be, they leaue not to liue in delight, and (as wonte they were) approue the ioyes of Venus ſhort wythout the deſyre of well doinge. There is no griefe ſo great, that a reſolute minde will yelde vnto. Poſſidonius the Philoſopher extremely ſicke, ſayde vnto Pompeius beinge come to viſite hym, y• the greatnes of pains ſhould neuer make him cō
               feſſe that ſickenes was euill. Neyther in deede can that be euyll which is wythoute vs, therefore the griefe of the body if it do not ouercomour minde, cannot be ſayd to be ours. How wel did that ſeruaunt whych 
                  ••
               ue Aſdruball declare it: For hee beinge greuouſlye tormented for the murder of hys maiſter, did notwythſtandinge in countenaunce ſhewe the ioye he felt for hauing reuenged the iniurye
 of his maiſter. I remember that when Antonius Cribellus was condempned by publike aſſent to be torne in peeces, in preparinge himſelfe to bee executed, ſayde, yt there was no torment ſo greate as coulde cauſe him cōfeſſe the companions of his offence, yet affyrminge there were ſuche, but hee would neuer bewray them. What marueile was it then though Pompeius ſo manfully helde hys finger to be burned in the candell before the kynge Genthius, ſeyng that thereby the kyng myghte perceyue there was no hope to wreſte out any intelligence at the Embaſſadours hands. With like pacience did Sceuola burne his hande before the kinge Porcenna. Neyther haue there wanted women, y• haue deſerued ſuch glorye. The mother of Hircanus the Iewe beinge offended by Ptolomeus her ſonne in lawe, wylled Hircanus not to leaue of his enterpryſe: but rather reuenge the death of hys father whom Ptolomeus had ſlayne. Epicharis Liberta more noble then many men, for no torment could be cō
               ſtrayned to confeſſe her offences or her companiōs in offendinge. Quintilia a little perſonage ſuſpected for the conſpiracye agaynſt Caligula, being racked wyth great torment, confeſſed nothinge, whereby ſhe was ſet at libertye as giltleſſe, and receyued reward as innocent. What ſhoulde I ſpeake of Barbara Agatha a Chriſtian, wyth dyuers other vyrgins? ye nomber of whom is hardly to be beleued, and theyr conſtancye ſo marueylous, as they ſeemed not onelye paciently to haue ſuffered tormentes, but alſo to haue wyſhed for theim. But this vertue procedeth of oure Chriſtianitye. Let vs returne
 to naturall reaſons. Ther is no reſt ſo welcome, as that which followeth great trauayle, nor death ſoe muche deſyred, as where ſickenes hath beene moſte extreame. The ende therefore of all griefe, eyther by recouerye, or death is pleaſaunte. It is alſo to be conſydered, that all ſuche as ſuffer great tormentes, being perſwaded of the immortalitye of ſoules, oughte thereby (thoughe none other reaſon were) to be comforted. And ſuche as beleeue of none other lyfe, are ſure that death is y• ende of all myſeryes. Therefore if thy griefe groweth vppon deſerte, deſeruinglye thou oughte to beare it, for thereby thou doeſt decreaſe thy griefe, and ſaue thy minde from due tormente, neyther oughteſt thou to puniſh thy body and minde both at one time, ſeinge thy ſoule is afterwardes to receyue his chaſtiſemente.
            The ſame or more profytable reaſon maye bee made for ſickenes, then ſorrowe: for what can be intollerable in ſickenes, if ſorrowe be awaye? yea hardlye it can be thought howe manye commodityes it bringeth. In ſicknes wee learne howe we bee, howe frayle the condition of life is: howe incertayne, and ſubiecte to the power of others. Thereby wee are taughte to be mindefull of an other lyfe, and that we oughte not to doe that to an other, which we wold not haue don to our ſelues. Therefore wee become more temperate and continente, yea to ſome ſicknes haue beene cauſe of longe lyfe, amendemente of fame, and encreaſe of vertue. If ſickenes were not, a man ſhoulde become more harde harted then the Tiger, and more
 cruell then the Lioneſſe. Macrobius thincketh that ſickenes doth more often happen to thoſe whom God loueth, then thoſe whom hee hateth. Seneca ſuppoſed that hee is moſt vnhappy that neuer feeleth aduerſity, and that hee is moſt myſerable that is moſt happye. Saint Paule ſayth, whom God loueth him hee chaſteneth. The nature of man is vnbridled, and were it not like wheate well ſifted, woulde become as ſauage as the wilde beaſtes. When the ſoule loueth the bodye then is it more noble and perfite, becauſe then it commeth to hys owne nature beinge vnbourdened of the bodye, which hindered the ſight and perfite knowledge. It is therfore the leſſe maruaile that thoſe that be moſt weake of body and of ſhorteſt lyfe, be of beſt indgemente, and moſte apte to knowe. No man hath all giftes, if thou haue ſtoore of vertues of y• mynde, thou arte of neceſſity the more ſicke of bodye. Then whether wouldeſt thou rather haue a ſtronge bodye and a witte lyke vnto beaſtes, or a weake bodye wyth an excellente ſprighte? Some brutiſhe beaſtes there are alſo as muche or more ſubiecte to ſickenes as menne, as the Lyon and Goate: for whiche cauſe thoſe that doe vſe to ſell Goates, do not warrant them for ſound, as they doe other cattell, but as Varro ſayth, this daye hee is well and drincketh, and lyke enoughe hee maye ſo continue. And albeit theſe beaſtes be neuer but ſicke, yet wantinge reaſon, doe playe and take diſporte: But man to hys owne ſorrowe is partaker of reaſon, whereby hee calleth to conſyderation his myſeryes. Yet is it worthely to be noted,
 that ſeeldome times we ſee honeſt men troubled with outward greeues, and thoſe that be temperate are not often offended with inward miſeries But ſome men do thincke deafnes and blyndnes more intollerable then Sicknes, though the ſame ſeemeth lyttle to hinder the felicitye of man.
            
               Homerus beinge blynde, excelled all the Poetes both Latyne and Greeke. Tymolion beinge blynd, gouerned the people of Syracuſa. Appius Claudius brake the diſhonorable peace, whiche the Romaynes had taken with Pirrus, and therin declared he ſawe more then all others hauinge eyes. Hannibal hauinge one only eye, conquered almoſt all Italy, and excelled all captaynes both Carthaginences & Romaines (Scipio onlye reſerued) Iohn kinge of Beemia was alſo blynde, yet a valiant and wiſe captayne. He knowinge him ſelfe ouermatched wyth the power of his enemies, manfully didde charge them, to the ende that if he could not get the vyctorye, yet he would not be accompted cowardlye. One blynde man not long before our age, was ſo cunninge in muſicke as excelled all other in thoſe dayes, and was therfore greatly eſteemed, and by princes enriched. The blinde man hathe alſo hys delightes, as banquettinge, venery, muſicke, and learning: and (if he were not ſo borne) he is blind but ſome part of his lyfe. He may alſo ſe dreaming and therfore Ariſtoteles ſayth, that the vertue of ſeinge reſteth not in the eyes, but in the brayne, becauſe if the ſight were in the eye, then the eyes beinge put out, the man in dreame ſhould ſe nothing as doth he that was blinde borne. But if a manne
 from his birth did neuer ſee, then hath he 
                  〈◊〉
                to complayne according to the common ſaying.
That the eye ſeeth not, the hart rueth not. For in that we knowe not, we neyther delight nor fynd offence. Al be it we ſee many things we take pleaſure in, yet of theym that doe diſcontent vs the nomber is greate.
            One only perfyte eye we haue, whiche is the ſpyryte and that more liuely is in the blynde, then in them that can ſee, by reaſon the outwarde eyes is there vnto a hynderaunce. For which reaſon wee fynde that the blinde men, both in wit and memorye excell all others. And as they ſay of Tyreſia.
            
            For God 
                  •
               ris face did hyde, and 
                  〈◊〉
                vvithin the breaſt he ſet.
            Meaninge that the blynde man did in mynde ſee the moſte. And therfore in olde tyme ſuche menne were honoured for prophecyinge thinges to come When Antonius the holye, comforted Didimus the Philoſopher, he ſayde vnto him, let it ſuffiſe, that ſtyll thou enioyeſte thy celeſtiall eyes, thoughe the other be loſt. Diodorus the Stoike a companion to Cicero was blynde, yet in Philoſophye, Muſicke, and Geomatrys, excellent.
            
               Caius Druſus was ſo cunninge in the Lawes Ciuil althoughe he were hymſelfe blynde yet helped hee many that could ſee. Some ſay Democrites for the enuy his Cittizens did bear him, put our his own eyes. Aſc
                     •
                  epiades the Philoſopher in his blindenes, was wont to playe, ſayinge the wante of ſyghte was nothinge els but as thoughe a chylde ſhould
 doe ſome thynge to an other whereby hee mighte fynde a wante.
            But amonge other commodities blyndenes doth make death the moore tollerable. Becauſe deathe is feared for nothinge ſo muche as that wee looſe the comforte of lighte and come into darckenes, when if thou be blinde before thou ſhalte feele the leſſe alteracion, & that whiche tormenteth others moſte in dyinge, thou ſhalt as it were dye vnwares. Some perhappes there are ſo groſſe as will diſcommonde olde age, forgettinge that who ſo is now olde, hath beene in tymes paſte younge. But for tryall here of let Sephalus or Spurinna be called in queſtion, of whome we may enquire, whether old age not abuſed be better then luſtye youth. The vertue and ſtrength of Iacobus Philippꝰ Sacchi whō 
               Franciſcus Sforza did thoſe to be prince of the Senate doth ſufficiently ſhewe.
            Wherfore ſyth in all theſe Calamities aforeſaid nothinge is euyll, let vs conſyder whether in common miſeries we ought to lament? as in plagues famine, and deſtruction of countries, which becauſe they are common, doe ſeeme the moore pacientlye to bee ſuffered. But if they were euyll, woulde be of all other moſte intollerable, becauſe they are moſt hardlye amended. Wee ſee therfore that the diſcontentacion of men, growethe rather vppon opinion then cauſe. And ſeeinge it is vniuerſall, let vs followe the golden age, in whyche tyme was more fidelitye, more frendly conuerſacion, more eaſy lyfe, y• men better mynded, and their maners the leſſe corrupte; that their fortune was
 ſo euyll. In that age they lyued only vpon frute, if they had gotten bread▪ they accompted themſelues happy: but thou that wanteſt neither bread, wyne, bedde nor other prouiſion, doeſte notwithſtandinge complayne. It is enuy therefore no pleaſure, ſuperfluity, no neceſſity that doth torment vs For if our deſires were reaſonable, wee ſhould at all tymes haue lyke wiſhes. And knowinge with howe fewe bace thinges nature is contented, we ſhoulde not fynde ſo infortunate ende of our doinges. But ſeinge in that miſerable tyme men lyued ſo contented, this can not be ſayde any myſerye at all. For he is onely in miſery, y• is enforced to hate his own lyfe, yet in cōmon calamities no man hateth his owne lyfe but moſte paciently beareth all aduerſityes. For nothinge ſeemeth diſhonourable, that is common. Euerye euylle of mannes lyfe dothe conſyſte in reproche, death except: And euery thing that is good, in glorye. The reaſon thereof is, that (as at the beginninge I ſayd) verye good or euyl was not to be found among mortall men. But to return to the purpoſe, our countrye periſheth, and there in our frendes, kinred, reputacion and ſubſtance. I graunt, but doſt thou accompt thoſe only thy neighboures that inhabite thy coūtry? Surely we are al diſcēded of one line, and if we loke backe to our grandfathers & great great grandfathers oure affinitye is muche. It is good maners y• getteth frends, & vertue y• wīneth reputacion, which if thou want, it is not reputation but rather ambicion and crafte. In pouertye thou haſte manye Companions, ſo as for thyne
 error thou nede not be aſhamed, for want of company thou cannot bee weary. And in pouertye as erſt I ſayde, there are many wayes to reliefe: as hoſpitalles, kinſfolke, charitable perſons, & all good men. Alſo the vniuerſalitye of the miſery taketh away al reproch. And though many through ſlouth and lothenes to labour, do fall into beggery, yet a mynde induſtrious and armed with vertue, is ſeldome ſubiecte thereunto. Albe it the hole cittye of Siracuſa was taken, ſpoyled and ſacked, yet Marcellus preſerued Archimedes. Alſo when Megara was taken by Ptolomeus, & after by Demetrius ſon of Antiochus, yet Stilpho the Philoſopher was ſaued, and at the kinges handes receiued both honour, and rewarde, for the one deſyred his company, the other became his ſcholer. When Rhodus was beſieged by Demetrius, Protogenes the painter, being found in ye ſuburbes, was by him honored, though the other cittezens remained ſcant in ſurety. Vertue is alwayes accompanied with Nemeſis, who ſufferethe none to beg, ſauing men from cōmon calamities. Socrates remayned in Athens healthy, when y• plage was there at the greateſt. Crates eſcaped harme at the ſaccage of Thebes. A man of greate vertue ought not to hazarde himſelf in common calamyties. Now remayneth it onely ſomwhat to ſay of manye miſeries aſſembled togethers. And as Diogenes ſaid, I am hee vpon whom all miſfortune is caſt: no houſe I haue, no towne, in exile, a vagabond, and begger. Yet to counteruayle all theſe miſeries, he thought the vertue of minde, of force enough. If therfore being olde, thou art ſicke, pore,
 and baniſhed, whether doth ye encreaſe or, deuide thy miſeries. Calamities are not according to this number, but the greatnes to be meaſured. It commeth to paſſe in theſe as it doth in greifes of y• bodie, one Calamity driue than other awaye. Exile taketh awaye the diſhonor of miſery, when thou liueſt amōg people vnknowen. And as erſt I ſayd ther is nothing (ſaue death) that a man deſyreth more to eſchewe. Whether had thou rather be Philota when he was perſecuted of Alexander, hauinge youth, beauty, ſtrength, grete, byrth, & ryches, then in ſeruitude, ſicke, and in thine old eſtate? Truely
                  •
                the condicion of man is lyke vnto a garment whiche the more rich & beautifull it be, the more a ſport doth diſgrace it, and the leſſe beauty it hath, y• leſſe hurt the garment ther by receiueth. It is alſo to be conſidered that no man is al his lyfe in miſerye for ſleape cauſeth forgetfulnes of ſorow, and is as pleaſant to men in ſorow, as to thoſe that be moſt happie. Alſo the delights of our ſences be to al mē almoſt alyke comon, as taſt, venery, ſight, hearīg, and ſmellinge. So all things that be delectable to man, do not togethers decay. If therfore at one inſtant all mortall men did ſleape, then for that time none ſhould be more happye then other. But wee are moſt aſſured not onely to ſleape, but alſo dye: and as long to lyue we cannot, ſo how far we are from death is to vs vnknowen. Wherfore to bear euery thinge reſolutely, is not onely the parte of a wiſe man, but alſo of a man wel aduiſed, ſeinge y• there is nothing in this life, that may iuſtly be ſaid to be againſt vs. Therefore Homerus fayned Aten
                the Goddes of Calamitye, to barefooted, as one that could not touch any thing ſharpe or hard, but walked lightly vpon the heades of mortall men. Meaninge that Calamity durſt not come nere anye, but ſuch as were of baſe minde, ſimple, & ſubiecte to effeminacy. But among ſuch as were valiant and armed with vertue, ſhee durſt not come. Wherfore lift vp thy mynde to heauen where an euerlaſtinge and moſt pleaſaunt life is prepared for thee. Men in this worlde are lyke trees, ſome ſlender, ſome great, ſome floriſhing, ſome bearing frute ſome witheringe, ſome growinge, ſome blowen downe, and ſome frutefull, which in one harueſte time are brought togeathers and laide vppon one ſtacke. Neither is there afterwardes ſene any difference among them, what they be or haue bene, al at one time be cut downe neuer more to growe agayne. Euen ſo al pryde, ambicion, ryches, aucthoritye, children, frendes, and glory doe in ſhorte ſpace grow olde, and periſhe, neither dothe it make matter whether thou were Irus or vile Galba, Antaxerles or noble Hercules. Onelye honeſtye and vertue of mynde doth make a man happy, and onely a cowerdlie and corrupt conſcience, do cauſe thine vnhappines. Becauſe the worſte that the good man can feare, is the beſt that the euyll can wiſhe for: whyche is the deſtruction of the Soule in death. But as he ought not to hope thereof, ſo ſhould not the other feare it. For God the eternal father hath ſent vs into this worlde as children and heyres of hys kingdome, and ſecretly beholdeth how wee fighte and defend our ſelues, againſt our ſences, y• world
 
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
                
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
                and the Deuyll. And who ſo in this battell, valyantly fighteth, ſhalbee called and placed, amonge the Princes of heauenlye kingedome. And who ſo ſlothfully or cowerdly behaueth himſelf, as a ſlaue in featnes, ſhall for euermore be bounde.
            This worldly ſtage was purpoſely prepared, that God the father might ſecretly beholde vs. Such fooliſhe children then, as in his ſighte wantonlye, ſlouthfully, and ſediciouſlye, lyue, ſhoulde they not thinke he doth beholde them? Whenſo euer therefore thou haſte taken that laſte leaue of Life, thy ſoule like vnto a louer embracinge his death, ſhall enioye that ſwetenes and ſecurity, whiche we can neither wryte of, nor conceiue. For ſith theſe worldlye louers (amongeſt whom be many miſlykings without aſſurāce or eternity) can ſcarcely expreſſe their ioyes in loue: Happy, yea thriſe happy is this heauenly louer, who forgettinge all others, wythe his one loue is vnited. For within this kingdome he loueth and liueth in the ſight of him, that can do all thinges, and therefore lyke a good ſonne to his father is euer readye to do his pleaſure.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   