
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  A.
THANKFVLL
REMEMBRANCE
OF GODS MERCIE.
by
G. C.
                  London Printed for Robert M.
                   Robinson
               
            
         
         
            
               
               
A
THANKFVLL
REMEMBRANCE
OF GODS MERCY. In an Historicall Collection of the
great and mercifull Deliverances of the
Church and State of England, since the Gospell
began here to flourish, from the beginning
of Queene ELIZABETH.
            Collected by GEO: CARLETON,
Doctor of Divinitie, and Bishop
of CHICHESTER.
            
               
                  PSALM. III. 2.
               The workes of the Lord are great, and ought to be
sought out of all them that loue Him.
            
            
               LONDON
Printed by I. D. for Robert Mylbourne, and
Humphrey Robinson, and are to be sold at
the great South doore of PAVLS.
1624.
         
         
            
            
            TO
THE HIGH, NOBLE,
AND MOST VERTVOVS,
CHARLES;
PRINCE OF GREAT
Britain, Duke of Cornwall,
and of YORKE, &c.
the spirit of wisedome, with
increase of honour.
            
               SIR;
            
            
               AS the great Workes
of God ought to be
had in remembrance
of all men, so this dutie
is more required
of Princes then of other
men. Because
their charge is greater then the charge of

               other men: for they must answer both
for the government of themselues, and of
others vnder them. Wherefore having
observed the Workes of God in delivering
this Church and State from the cruell
plots of the Adversaries, from the beginning
of Queene Elizabeth to this time:
I found my selfe most obliged to present
this to your Highness; both because my
service, next to his Maiestie is most due to
your Highness; and because the remembrance
of the great Workes of God is a
Glasse fit for a Prince to looke on. For your
Highness may be assured that the Adversaries
will not change their disposition,
vnlesse either we were reduced to their
blindness, or they drawne to imbrace the
truth with vs. I haue made this Collection
that by examples of things past, We may
better iudge of things to come. My labour
herein is nothing. For I make not the
Story, but take it of others. And when I
light vpon the best Narration, as that of
the Gun-powder treason, I haue set it downe
as I find it without alteration. Because as
that cannot be mended, so to set a worse

Narration in the place thereof, were no
lesse then to abuse the Reader. I leaue
the honor entire to them that haue made
the Story, I take no part thereof to mee.
Onely my care hath beene to obserue vpon
those great deliverances the Workes of
God, that God may be glorified, and the
cause iustified which God hath maintained
from Heaven. SIR, I suppose it is
hard to finde a Narration containing
more miraculous Protection of Gods
Church, since that time wherein God
shewed his Miracles in protecting the
people of Israel. Which consideration
may serue to fasten your Highness to the
loue and service of that great God, that
doth so strongly maintain his servants. That
as hitherto you haue had a gracious experience
of his grace and goodnesse towards
you, so your noble heart may
grow every day more and more in the
loue and obedience of the truth. We are
all charged by Gods Word to pray for
Kings and Princes. That charge which
God hath layd vpon vs all, no man can
put off: But when your Highness hath

effectually made knowne your singular
care and loue to the common good, to
the rejoycing of all faithfull men; this
must needs draw the hearts of all faithfull
men nearer to your Highness. And
this is a part of your happiness; for the
feare of God and loue of Subiects is able
to make Kings and Princes strong against
all their enemies God giue his iudgements to
the King, and his righteousness to the Kings sonne,
and therewith, all blessings; grace and honour
here, and glory hereafter.
            
               Your HIGHNES ancient Chaplain,
and most humble Servant
GEO: CICESTRIENSIS.
               
            
         
         
            
            ΑΝΑΚΕΦΑΛΑΙΩΣΙS
OR
RECAPITVLATION
of the chiefe Passages in
this Booke.
            
               CHAPTER I.
               
                  THE weake estate of this Kingdome
at Queene Elizabeths entrance.
Her government blessed with
might and money beyond expectation
all on a suddaine, to the terrour
of the enemies of the Gospell, and
comfort of the Professors thereof. The ancient government
of the Low-Countries, what it was. The treason
of Arthur Pool discovered and defeated. The
Popes Excommunication and curse against Queene
Elizabeth turned by Christ (whose Gospell shee
maintained) into a blessing.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               The rebellion of the Earles of Westmerland and
Northumberland related distinctly by Hieronym.

Cat
                        ••
                     a, so strongly plotted, so secretly carried, by the
hand of God disappointed and broken into pieces.
Leon: Dacres his over throw by it. This is the fruit
of Popery, and the first effect of the Popes Bull.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               A Commotion in Ireland inflamed by Io: Mendoza,
extinguished by the Earle of Ormond▪
                   The King
of Spaine pretends the enlargement of the Scots
Queene, but intends the enlargement of his owne Dominion.
Don Iohn of Austria goeth about to deliver
and marry the Scots Queene. He sends out a perpetuall
edict of peace and presently breaketh out into
warre. He dieth on a sudden and so his purpose disappointed.
            
            
               CHAP. IV.
               
                  Stucley his attempt and practise with the Pope
and Spanyard for the subduing of Ireland and England
with Italian souldiers by Gods providence annulled.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Nich: Sanders setteth on the rebells in Ireland,
animateth them in their bloudy practises, getteth 
                     •
                  
consecrated Banner from the Pope for them. San-Io
                        •
                     ephus
with 700 Italians and Spanyards sent
from the Pope and King of Spaine over into Ireland
to helpe the rebells, yeeldeth the Fort. The Earle Desmond
a great maintainer of this rebellion, killed by a
common souldier in his wandring. Sanders the firebrand
of the rebellion falleth mad and dieth miserably
of famine. Observations herevpon. The explication of
that place 2 Thes. 2. 10. appliable to the Papists in
respect both of their doctrines and doings.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VI.
               The Institution of the Colledges of seminary Priests
to be the incendiaries of England; different from the
foundation of ancient Colle
                     •
                  ges. The feates of Father
Parsons and Edm: Campian and others to draw the
alleagiance of the English from their Queene. This
drew vpon them sevetitie of Lawes, established in
Parliament against Papists and approved by the paralell
example of the Lawes made against the Donatists
in S. Augustines time.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               The Priests seditious Bookes against the Queene
brings on Somervills furious attempt to kill her.
They moue with the Ladies of honour to doe it. The
Queenes mildnesse and wonderfull mercy towardes
this vermine. Mendoza, the Spanish Ambassadour
for practising against the Queene is thrust out of England.
Throgmortons confe
                     •
                  ion and condemnation
for treason.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               New practises of our enemies discovered not without
a miracle by Creightons torne papers. The mischievous
but vnsuccesfull conclusions of Alan, Inglefield,
and Ross against Queene Elizabeth and King
Iames. Parries treason opened; his confession, and
execution. Lawes in Parliament enacted against
Priests and Recusants. Philip Howards intention,
to leaue the Land, discovered before it could be effected.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               The lamentable end of Henry Percy Earle of Northumberland
in the Tower. A pretended title of

the King of Spaine to the Crowne of England. Savage,
a barbarous fellow, vpon the instigation o
                     •
                  
                  Rhemish Priests voweth to kill Queene Elizabeth.
Babingtons treasonable practise to take away the
Queenes life vpon a motion from Ballard the Priest,
defeated; and he with his Complices deservedly punished.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               The French Ambassadours plot with Stafford to
take away the life of the Queene detected by Stafford
himselfe. The end of Yorke and Stanl
                     •
                  y, traytors to
their Count
                        ••
                     y.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               The Spanish preparations for the Invincible Navie.
The Duke of Parma treateth of a peace. Delegates
sent over about it. The conference of the Delegates
broke off without fruit.
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               The Invincible Armie described. At the first setting
out shaken sore with a tempest. The gests of each
day related particularly and punctually. The trusted
in their strength, we in the name of our God; They are
fallen, and we stand vpright.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               Trouble from Ireland by Tyrone lurking in Spaine.
His many dissembling submissions to the Queene of
England. A treatie of peace concluded.
            
            
               CHAP. XIV.
               Vpon the comming of the Earle of Essex into England
from Ireland, Tyrone contrary to his promise
stirreth and rebelleth afresh, and is incouraged by the
Pope and ayded by 
                     •
                  he King of Spaine. These forces

are vanquished by the Lord Deputie. Herevpon Don
Iohn de Aq
                        •
                     ila, a Spanish Captaine, who was sent
to ay
                     ••
                  e the rebells and kept Kinsale, capitulates for
peace. Tyrone forsaken of his followers submits himselfe
to the Lord Deputie and is pardoned. Plotting
a new rebellion when he was called by Processe to answer
a suit of the B. of Derry, thinking the treason to
be discovered by O cane who inforced the Bishop in
his suit, sted out of Ireland. In 
                     •
                  hese troubles and
treasons see the Machinations of Satans seed against
the seed of the Woman, that is, the Church, and
the miraculous deliverances and victories of the
Church, according to that, The Womans seed shall
breake the serpents head, spoken of Christ, appliable
to the Church, and particularly to our Church of
England, which that B
                        •
                     laam of Rome seeks now by
all meanes to draw from God, because he knowes he
cannot prevaile against vs till we for sake God.
            
            
               CHAP. XV.
               A great mischiefe intended to the Kings Maiestie
at his first entrance into the Kingdome of England,
before his Coronation; Watson and Clark, Priests
administring oaths of secresie and applauding the proiect.
It came to nothing by Gods mercie. The Kings
Maiesties clemency towards the Conspiratours after
iudgement pa
                     •
                  t vpon them. No treason in England
attempted but had a Romish Priest in the practise.
            
            
               CHAP. XVI.
               A horrible treason was a hatching and breeding in
the last yeare of Queene Elizabeth. By Garnetts
                  
meanes and others, the King of Spaine is delt withall
for an invasion; he entertaines the motion, but vpon
the entrance of King Iames did not proceed to any
forcible enterprise. The Gun-powder treason takes
ground and life from the doctri
                     •
                  e of Parsons and the
Iesuites. It was first propounded by Catesby to
Winter. The oath of secres
                     •
                  e taken by the Conspiratours.
Provision of Powder and Wood for the mine.
Their consultation what to doe after the blow was given.
The letter sent to the Lord Mounteagle, scanned
by the Earle of Salisbury and other Pr
                     •
                  vy Councellers,
but truely interpreted by the King, in whose
mouth there was a divine sentence at that time,
so that he did not erre in iudgement. The Examination
of Fawks. The apprehension and confusion of
the Powder-traytors. God from heaven both by his
Word and protection hath manifestly showne our
Church to be the true Church, and the Popish Church
to be the malignant Church, and degenerate from
the auncient Romane Church both in manners and
doctrines.
            
            
               Coronis.
               The Conclusion containes diverse Considerations
proposed to such as are not well affected to
Religion.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A
THANKFVLL
REMEMBRANCE
OF GODS MERCY.
            CHAPTER I.
            
               HAving a purpose to obserue
Gods great and
merciful deliuerāces of
the Church of England,
and Gods holy protectiō
of the same, against
the manifolde, most
dangerous, most desperate
practises of the adversaries,
that haue with strange malice and crueltie,
sought the destruction thereof, and intending
to fetch the beginning of this search from
the beginning of the Raigne of Queene ELIZABETH,
of blessed memory: I knew no better way
how to enter into this Narration, then to begin
with the consideration of the State of Queene

ELIZABETH, at her first entrance; for therein
will appeare a wonderfull Worke of God, and my
intention is to obserue the great Workes of God,
that God may be glorified.
            When this famous Queene first entred,She entred Anno. 1558. shee
found the State much afflicted, and weakned.
All the great States about her, were enemies.
Friends none. King Philip, who offred his loue
and kindnesse to her, and would haue married
her, offering to obteine the Popes dispensation
for him to marry two Sisters; as the like dispensation
was obteined by Ferdinand his great
Grand-father, for h
                  •
               s daughter Katharine to marry
two Brothers, he offering this kindnesse, and
being refused and reiected, grew first into dislike
and discontent, afterwardes into hatred, and at
last brake out into open Warres. The French
King Henry the 2. with whom she sought peace,
fell off also into open Warres. His sonne Francis
having married Mary, Queene of Scotland, was
moved by the Guysians to cause the Armes of England
to be ioyned to the Armes of Scotland, & to
professe the Queene of Scots the heire of England,
and because Elizabeth was accounted by them an
Heretike, therefore they sought to put her by, to
set the Queene of Scots in her place, so should the
French King haue England also. For the effecting
of this, they sent their Armies into Scotland, purposing
f
                  •
               om thence to haue subdued England.
In so much that Sebastianus Martignius, a young
Noble man of the family of Luxenburg, who was
sent into Scotland with a thousand 
                  •
               oote, and

some Companies of horse, could hardly be disswaded
from entring England presently. So that
Spaine, France, and Scotland were enemies. The
State was then much troubled and oppressed
with great debt, contracted partly by Henry 8.
partly by Edward 6. in his minoritie. The treasure
was exhausted; Calis was lost. Nothing seemed
to be left to her, but a weake, and poore
State, destitute of meanes and friends. If shee
would haue admitted the Popish Religion, then
might all these difficulties haue beene removed
But establishing the Gospell, shee vnderstood well
that shee drew all these troubles vpon her owne
head. Yet she gaue the glory to God, and in hope
of Gods holy protection, she established Gods
holy truth. And verily she did not serue God in
vaine. For it is a thing to be wondred at, that
the Land being then without strength, without
Forces, without Souldiers, yea, without Armour;
all things necessary should be so suddenly furnished.
She had provided Armour at Antwerpe,
but King Philip caused that to be stayed. Yet was
she not discouraged, but layd out much money
vpon Armour, though she found the Treasury
but poore. She procured Armour and weapons
out of Germany. She caused many great Gunnes
to be cast, of Brasse and Iron. And Gods providence
and favour appeared in her protectio
                  •
               .
For new Mines of Brasse were found at Keswike,
that had long beene neglected. From Whence
there was not onely sufficient matter to supply
her wants, but abundance thereof to be transported

to other Countries. The stone called Lapis
Calaminaris, whose vse is needfull for working
in Brasse, was also at the same time first found in
England. There was provision made at home also
for the making of Gunne-powder. Which was
done first here by her Commandement. For before
it was bought and imported. Berwick before
her time, was weake, and had but fiue hundred
Souldiers: She fortified the Towne, made
the new inner Wall, and increased the number
of Souldiers, and their stipends, that provision
might be made for the training vp of experienced
Souldiers and martiall men. She provided a
Navie, the best furnished that euer England sawe.
Neither needed she to doe as her Father and Ancestours
were wont to doe, when they wanted
Shippes, to send for Shippes and hire them from
Hamburg, Lubeck, Dantisk, Genua, and Veni
                     •
                  e; for
she had them ready at home to serue her. Yea all
the good Townes vpon the Sea-coast, beholding
this incredible alacritie, and forwardnes in their
Prince, strived also to imitate the same, and therefore
with great chearfulnesse and readinesse built
Shippes for Warre. So that in a short time, the
Queenes Shippes and those of the Subiects ioyned
together, rose to such a number, that they
were able to imploy twentie thousand men in
Sea-fight at once. The Noble-men, the Gentlemen,
and Yeomen, did all striue to answer so noble
a resolution of their Prince. And therefore
great store of Armour and Weapons were every
where provided. And braue spirits were bred

and inabled to service, whereby they became an
helpe and ornament to their Countrey. So that
Queene Elizabeth was quickly growne so strong,
that all her adversaries were not able to hurt her.
And was not this a great worke of God? That so
weake a Woman should be able to defend her
selfe against so many, so potent enemies? Yea,
and not onely to match them, but to master
them? This was Gods doing. Behold what it is
to trust in God, and not in an arme of Flesh. God
will haue his great Workes to be had in remembrance,
that all men, especially Princes may be
taught to know that their safetie is not in worldly
policie, but in God which never forsaketh
them that trust in him. Here then we haue a
Worke, for which we are bound to glorifie God.
Elizabeth, a Prince, at the beginning weake, destitute
of friends, vnfurnished of treasure, vnprepared
of all things, had in no other accompt of
her great neighbours round about her, but as one
left as a prey to the strongest that would inuade
her and her kingdome: yet preparing her heart
to God, giuing God the glory, establishing his
truth in her Land, trusting in him: She was in a
few yeares made strong against her enemies; they
feared her more then she feared them. This is an
example can hardly be paralleled. It was a worke
o
                  •
                God in defence of his Church here, and we
yeeld all glory and prayse vnto God for his mercies
shewed herein. From this example, Princes
may take a worthy instruction to rest vpon God,
and to seeke his glory, and know assuredly, that

when they are at the weakest state, if they giue
their hearts to God, and their service to his true
Religion, God will raise them to greatnes, who
hath promised to honor them that honor him,
               1 Sam. 2. 30. and
threatned, that they that dishonor him, shall be despised.
Before I leaue this example of Gods protectiō
of this noble Queene in her first entrance: Let
this be remembred, that as all the great Princes
adioyning, with the Pope and all, were her great
enemies, so there were no friends able to helpe
her: for they that were friends, and would haue
helped if they could, stood all need of her help.
The Scots were sore troubled with the French
Armies procured by the Guysians, but shee helped
them, and protected the King in his minoritie,
and freed that State from the tyranny of
the French governement. The Low-Countries,
were tyrannised by the Duke D' Alva who changed
their governement, and inhibited their meetings
in councell. For to speake somewhat of
the ancient governement of that people, to stop
the common imputations cast vpon them by
such as are not well affected to them: Their governement
was by a generall assembly of the
States: Their governours were such as were
borne within the 17. Provinces, no strangers.
These were anciently the Clergie, the Nobility,
and the Deputies of the Provinces, and of good
Townes, meeting together in their generall Assemblies.
These so meeting made lawes and orders
whereby that State was governed. The Deputies
were sent to the generall Assemblies, by

the Suffrages of the people, and vpon cause they
were recalled by the people, and other sent in
their roomes. This manner of governement,
some of the Dukes of Burgundy, and some others
disliked, as giving too much power to the people,
and to little to their Dukes: and therefore
laboured to change it, but could not. Charles the
fift Emperour would gladly haue changed their
governement, but when he saw that it could not
be done without the commotion of the whole
State, he left it vndone. Philip 2. Anno 1549.
Iuly 8. tooke his oath, which he made and renued
againe Anno 
               
                  •
               555. to keepe, maintaine,
and preserue these Countries in their ancient
rights, priviledges, and customes, without breaking
them or suffering them to be broken, in any
sort or manner. But when the Duke D' Alva
was governour there vnder the King, he practised
the contrary, and professed that the King
was not to governe them, as his ancient inheritance,
but as vpon a new conquest, making what
lawes he would, and setting what governement
best pleased him. Whereupon his whole drift
and practise was for a newe conquest of all the
Provinces and Townes. The pretence of religion
was sought: but it was resolved by the Counsell
of Spaine, to change the whole governement,
and to erect a new. This appeared aswell by the
Dukes open profession, as by those designes
which he practised vpon the persons of some of
the Nobility, and vpon the good Townes. For
when the Earles of Egmont and Horne, were apprehended

and putto death, mistrusting nothing
because they knew no cause to mistrust: they that
did this, could not pretend religion, because
these Earles were of the Popish religion. they
could not pretend any disloyalty against them,
for their firme loyalty and their great services to
the King, made them so confident; onely it was
thought that these Noble men would neuer
yeeld to the change of the government of that
State, therefore they were cut off. The like appeared
in the strange surprises and cruelty practised
against many Townes, which were of the popish
religion. For divers townes that were firme
to the Spaniard in the point of religion, and in
obedience to the King, when armies were sent
to them, intertaining the armies in all obedience,
opening their gates, shewing all loue and friendship
to the Spanish armies: were of a suddaine
surprised, and brought to vtter ruine. The Spaniards,
killing and massackring all, taking their
goods, abusing their wiues and daughters, as the
manner of such barbarous men is in a new conquest,
ex
                  •
               rcising more cruelties against their professed
friends, then they could doe to their enemies.
Such barbarous cruelties were practised
against the Townes of Machlin, Maestrich, Zutphen,
Naerden, Antwerp, and others, who were
their friends, agreeing in the same religion with
them, holding as then, their obedience firme to
the King: yet were they spoyled, killed, ransacked,
and overthrowne like enemies. Which
strange cruelty declared that it was not religion

that moved this cruelty, but that which the
Duke D'Alva did openly professe, that the King
must hold all the Low-Countries by a new conquest,
that so he might change the governement,
and impose what lawes he would.
            It may seeme a strange vse of the Popes Authority
which King Philip made, when from the
Pope he got a dispensation of that oath, which
he had taken at his entrance into the Low-Countries.
This is an vse of a Pope fit indeede for
them that would doe whatsoever they list without
conscience, or the feare of Gods lawes or
mans. If such an vse may be made of the Popes
power, then Popish Princes must needes in the
sight of the world, seeme to haue a great advantage
over others. But if they may so dispense at
their pleasure with oathes and promises, then
may all those of their religion see plainely that
there are neither humane nor divine bands or
securitie that can binde Papists: for when they
please, the Pope will free them from all bands
of conscience, from the lawes of God, of man,
of nature, of nations. But God will not be thus
served. And therefore by Gods iust iudgements
they that rely vpon such vngodly practises, loose
more in the ende, then they gaine by such profane
dealings. This was the cause of their troubles
in the Low Countries. That state being then
so tro
                  •
               bled, could yeelde no helpe to Queene
Elizabeth, yet did shee yeelde helpe to them.
            The King of Denmarke, and the Protestants
in Fraunce, were not able to helpe her, nor to

helpe themselues without her meanes. This
must needes be acknowledged an extraordinary
blessing of God, to make her able to withstand
the greatest enemies, and to helpe all that were
distressed for Religion.
            This famous Queene though troubled by
forraine states in the beginning of her Raigne,
yet had great peace and quietnes at home. This
was the fruit of true religion: her Subiects lived
in peace, and tranquilitie; no motions then attempted.
Only in the fourth yeare of her Raign,
Arthur Poole, and his brethren comming of the
race of George Duke of Clarence, who was brother
to Edward the fourth, and Antony Fortiskue,
who married their sister, with some other of that
conspiracie, were brought to their tryall, for
that they had conspired to flie to the G
                     •
                  ise into
France, and thence to come with an Armie
into Wales, and there to declare the Scottish
Queene, to be Queene of England, and Arthur
Poole Duke of Clarence. All which they freely
confessed at their tryall: yet protesting that it
was not their purpose to execute this designe,
as long as Queene Elizabeth lived: who as they
supposed should dye within a yeare; for so some
cosening Astrologians had told them. Whereupon
they were condemned, yet their liues were
spared in respect of their blood. Wherein wee
may acknowledge the goodnes of God in discovering
such a plot, before it tooke strength, and
the noble nature of the Queene, that dealt so
nobly with her owne blood.
            
               Thus the Land within rested in great quietnes,
for some yeares. The Church was established,
and increased, learning flourished, godlines and
true pietie prevailed, Popish ignorance was driven
into corners. The Papists that then were,
were content to keepe themselues quiet. Either
they kept their Religion private to themselues,
or els they came to our Churches, as most of
them did. But the enemy of all goodnesse envying
this peaceable state of England, stirred vp the
Pope to giue occasion to new troubles, and to
wrap the Kingdome into dangers. Whereby as
the Church hath beene more troubled, then it
was before, so the Papists haue got nothing by
the bargain, but lost much, by stirring vp the
peaceable inclinatiō of the Prince against them,
and by provoking the State to make severe lawes
to curb
                  •
                them. Who might haue liued quietly,
if they had not procured their owne trouble.
            
               Paulus IIII. was Pope when Queene Elizabeth
began to Raigne, this Pope was not troublesome
against her. His successor was, Pius IIII.
who seemed to be a moderate man. For he was
moved by the Count of Feria, who served the
King of Spaine, to excommunicate Queene Elizabeth,
but he thought it not good to proceed to
such extremities. For seeing the Popes authority
is a thing consisting rather in the conceits of
some men, then in any truth and substance: If it
should once appeare that this thunderbolt of excommunicate,
whereby he hath so much terrified
the world, should proue idle, ineffectuall

without all po
                  •
               er, then might this great authoritie
fall into contempt, and so be made ridiculous.
Whether for this cause or what other, he
would not be perswaded to vse this extremitie
against the Queene,An. Dō. 1560. but sent Letters, shewing
some loue and kindnesse, by an Abbot Parpalia,
by whom also he sent certaine secret Mandates.
Which what they were was not openly knowne.
But some acquainted well with State affayres
then, reported that the Pope offred to recall and
disanull the sentence as vniust which was given
against her Mothers marriage, and to confirme
the English Liturgie by his authoritie, granting
also the vse of the Sacrament vnder both kindes,
so that she would ioyne her selfe to the Romane
Church, & acknowledge the Popes supremacy.
And for the effecting hereof, a great sum of gold
was promised to some that should be vsed as instruments
for this purpose. But Queene Elizabeth
remaining SEMPER EADEM, ever like her
selfe, vtterly denied to haue any thing to do with
the Pope.
            But the next Pope, Pius V. that succeeded,
tooke another course, whether a better or worse,
let the event declare. For in the yeare 1569. he
sent out an excommunication against her, and all
adhering to her,This Bull was dated Anno Dom. 1569. Quinto Cal: Mar
                        •
                     .
                wherein her subiects were absolved
from the Oath of their Alleagance, and
from all other offices and duties, and that all that
should obey her were accursed. Which thing
brought more trouble vpon the Papists, then vpon
the Queene, or any of her obedient subiects.

And hath openly declared to all the world, that
the Popes curse is a thing proceeding from private
splene and malice, and now nothing feared
but contemned, when all men may see that the
Popes curse is turned by the favour of God into
an extraordinary blessing, and that the Pope is
not Christs V
                  •
               car in these ministeries, because he
is contrary to Christ, and Christ contrary to him.
The Pope cursing, and Christ blessing, the Pope
seeking thereby to destroy the Queene, Christ
maintaining her, made her stronger after this
cu
                  •
               se then ever she was before. Yet it is true that
many troubles did rise thereby, but God turned
them all vnto her good, that men may vnderstand
the fruit of true Religion established, which
bringeth the protection of God with it.
         
         
            CHAPTER II.
            
               THE first poysoned fruit of this excommunication
was rotten before it
could ripen. There was an intention
of a great and terrible Rebellion.
The Duke of Norfolke was excited to stirre what
Forces he could, and to ioyne with the Earles of
Westmerland and Northumberland: at the same
time an Armie was to come out of Ireland, and
another Armie to be sent from Duke Dalva in
the Low-Countries. If all these had ioyned together,
as the intention was, God knoweth what

might haue in
                  •
               ued. But there is no counsell can
prevaile against God. All the plot was broken
in peeces without any other trouble, saving that
which fell vpon the plotters themselues, & their
instruments. The King of Spaine, who watched
all opportunities to doe mischiefe, wrote one
Letter to the Duke of Norfolke, exciting him to
raise a power within England, and wrote another
to the Earle of Ormond, to raise a tumult in Ireland.
But both the Duke and the Earle shewed
the Letters to the Queene, declaring thereby a
purpose to be loyall. The Duke suffred himselfe
to be wrought vpon too much by pernicious instruments.
The instruments were the Bishop of
Ross, who lay in London vnder pretence of being
Ambassadour for the Queene of Scots, and one
Robert Rido
                     •
                  f, a Noble-man of Florence, who lay
in London, in the habit and pretence of a Factor.
These pestif
                  •
               rous instruments laboured to perswade
the Duke to marry the Queene of Scots, who
being next heire to the Crowne of England,
would bring great hopes with her and by subtill
and pernicious counsell drew the Duke so farre,
that against his promise made to the Queene, he
began to thinke of that marriage, and the hopes
that might follow the same, and entred in
                  •
               o a secret
course of writing and receiving Letters from
the Queene of Scots, by 
                  〈◊〉
                Characters. All
which together with a Commentary sent to him
by the Scots Queene, the Duke commanded his
Secretary Higfo
                     •
                  d to burne. But he laid them vnder
the Matt in the Dukes Chamber. And being

apprehended, declared where they were. At the
Dukes arraig
                  •
               ment a Letter was produced written
to him from the Scots Queene, signifying her
griefe for that the Earles of Westmerland and Northumberland
were vp in Armes before the Duke
had raised his powers. For Queene Elizabeth,
finding wherevnto things tended, apprehended
the Duke, & sent for the Earles to come to Court,
but because they had once excused their absence,
she sent peremptorily for them, all excuse laid aside,
vpon their alleagance to come vp. Supposing
that if they were innocent, they would
come, but if guiltie, then should their purpose
sooner breake out into open sight. As it fell out.
For they supposing by this, the plot to be betrayed,
brake out into open rebellion, before the
helpe which they looked for from other parts
could come to them. This rebellion was plotted
by the Pope, Pius V. and by the King of Spaine,
and was so cunningly handled, and carried with
such secresie, that it was well knowne to strangers
before it was knowne to vs whom most the
matter concerned. And no marvaile, seeing
strangers were the devisers and first authors of it.
I will therefore declare it in the words of a stranger,
who set it forth in Print at Rome, before it
was well knowne in England. Hieronymus Caten
                     •
                  
               
in the life of Pius V. w
                  •
               iteth thus.
            
               When Pius V. was inflamed with a zeale to restore
the Romane Religion in England, and to
displace Queene Elizabeth out of that Kingdome;
and yet could not haue his Nuntio Apostolicall,

nor any other publique person fit to
effect this thing: he ordered the matter so, that
Robert Ridolf, a Gentleman of Florence (who

                     •
                  tayed in England vnder colour of merchandise)
should stirre vp the mindes of men vpon the destruction
of Elizabeth. Which thing he diligently
executed, not onely among the Catholikes,
but also among some Protestants, who conspired
together herein; some out of private hatred
against them that aspired to the Kingdome,
others out of a desire of a change. Whilst these
things were secretly carried, a contention rose
betweene the Spaniard and Elizabeth, vpon the
occasion of a sum of money going to the Duke
Dalva, but intercepted by Elizabeth.
               
               This occasion the Pope apprehended to perswade
the Spaniard, that he would helpe the
conspiratours in England against Elizabeth, that
so he might haue his affaires in the Netherlands
in greater securitie, and the Romane Religion
might be restored in B
                        •
                     itaigne. The Pope also
perswaded the French, shewing him that this
he ought to the Scots Queene, affianced to him,
and worthily to the Scots, who by their incursions
had withdrawne the forces of England,
that they could do lesse helpe to the Protestants
of France, neither did the noble conspiratours
of England deserue lesse favour of him, who by
their cunning haue hindered the Queene of
England, to giue any helpe openly to the Protestants
of France. In this respect the French King
promised them ayd for the deliverance of the

                  Scots Queene, but failed of performance of any
thing. In the meane time, Ridolphus effected
thus much, that the conspiratours should draw
the Duke of Norfolke into their societie, and
make him chiefe therein, to whom they promised
marriage with the Scots Queene, whereto
she consented. The Pope to set these things forward,
by his Bull published, deposed Elizabeth
from her Kingdome, and absolued her subiects
from all oath and alleagance, sending the printed
Coppies to Ridolphus, which might be dispersed
ouer England. Whereupon the Earles of
Northumberland and Westmerland, tooke Armes
against their Prince, who presently, money and
meanes failing, withdrew themselues into
Scotland. The Duke of Norfolke, with others,
were committed to prison. Among them was
Ridolphus, whom the Pope had appointed to
helpe the conspiratours with an hundreth and
fiftie thousand Crownes, which thing he could
not doe being clapt vp in prison. But when the
Queene could not pierce into the secrets of the
conspiracy, he was sent out of prison with others,
and then he distributed those Crownes
to the conspirators. Who sent him to the Pope
to informe him that all things were prepared in
a readines, and ordered against Elizabeth: and
to intreat the Spanish King, to ioyne his Forces
from the Netherlands as soone as may be: the
Pope commended the enterprise, albeit, the
Duke Dalva did not like it, as being full of difficulties,
when as Ridolphus in his iourney told

him the matter. The Pope sent Ridolfe to the
Spaniard, vnder another pretence, and to the
King of Portugall with ins
                     •
                  ructions; and at the
same time writing to the Duke of Norfolk, promised
him ayde. He did much vrge the Spaniard
to helpe the conspiratours, and to the end
he might the more vehemently stirre him vp,
he promised if need were himselfe would goe
for to helpe them, and would ingage all the
goods of the Sea Apostolike, Chalices, Crosses,
and holy Vestments. Declaring that there was
no difficultie in it, if he would send Chapinus
Vitellius with an Army into England from the
Low-Countries. Which thing the King of Spaine
commanded to be done with great alacritie.
And the Pope provided money in the Netherlands.
These things were not pleasing to the
Duke Dalva, both because he enuied Vitellius
this glory, wherein he rather wished his owne
sonne to be imployed, and because he feared
some hostile invasion out of France, and proposed
it to be considered, whether England being
overcome would fall to the Spaniard, whether
the French would not resist that proiect, and
whether the Pope were able to bring helpe enough
to effect so great a matter. Notwithstanding
the Spanish King expressely commanded
him to set vpon England. Ridolf was sent backe
with money to the Netherlands. But see how
God would haue it: All the matter was opened
to Elizabeth by a stranger without the Kingdome.
The Duke of Norfolke was apprehended

and put to death. Which thing the Pope tooke
heavily, the Spaniard condoled, who before the
Cardinall of Alexandria, the Popes Nephew,
sayd, that never any conspiracy was more advisedly
begun, nor concealed with more constancy
and consent of minds, which in all that
time was not opened by any of the conspiratours:
that an Army might easily be sent out of
the Low-Countries in the space of 24. houres,
which might suddenly haue taken the Queene
and the Citie of London vnprovided, restored
Religion, and set the Scots Queene in the
Throne. Especially when as Stukley an English
fugitiue had vndertaken at the same time with
the helpe of 3000. Spaniards to reduce all Ireland
vnto the obedience of the King of Spaine,
and with one or two shippes to burne all the
English Navy.
            
             Thus farre Catena writeth of
these things, opening some things that before
were not knowne to the English. The Booke
was Printed at Rome An: Dom: 1588. by the priviledge
of Pope Pius V.
            This is the Narration of a Papist, published at
Rome, by the authoritie of the Pope. It may
seeme strange to men that haue any feeling of the
feare of God, that a Pope should so boldly publish
his owne shame to all the world. The Pope
doth practise treason against States, sets his instruments
to raise rebellions, stirreth vp Princes
against Princes, one Kingdome against another,
and when he doth this, he will not vnderstand
that he is, in this doing, the instrument and servant

of the Devill, to disorder the world. If any
would excuse this, as being done against an
Heretike: that excuse will not serue here; for I
speake not of excommunicating supposed Heretikes,
but of raising rebellions against Princes, to
set the subiects to murther the Prince, or to stirre
vp one Prince to murther another, these things
be wicked and vngracious practises, but the Papists
are growne to such an o
                  •
               duration in these
sinnes, that they iudge these no sinnes, to murther,
or secretly to poyson, or by any horrible
mischiefe to compasse their owne endes. The
things that are by the Lawes of God, of Nature,
of Nations, wicked and abominable, against the
ordinances which God hath set in the world,
must forsooth change their nature, if the Pope
command them, nay, if any of their superiours
command such things, their doctrine of blind obedience,
sets them vpon any mischiefe, and so
they doe not onely teach for doctrines mens traditions,
but make doctrines for mens destructions.
If the Popes presume that they haue such a priviledge,
that the things which are horrible sinnes
in other men are no sinnes in them: this were in
effect as much as for the Pope to proclaime himselfe
the Man of sinne, that runneth into all sinfull
courses with greedinesse, with an open profession
of the same. For what can any man of sin
doe more, then to command sinne, to warrant sin,
to commit sin, to glory in sin; If all this be done by
the Pope, who can iustly deny him this title of the
Man of sinne?
            
            
               But blessed be the name of God, that alwayes
delivered his Church here from such wicked
practises, and hath brought the mischiefe that
these wicked men haue deuised, vpon their owne
head. Now let all vnderstanding men iudge
where God is, where godlinesse is, where Religion
and the feare o
                  •
                God is. Whether with them
that by bloudy, vniust, vnlawfull practises seeke
their owne endes, or with them that are persecuted
by this bloudy Nation, and in patience suffer
all their mischievous and cruell practises,
committing the matter to God the revenger of
bloud, and trufting in God, reioyce vnder his holy
protection, being kept in safety by him that
commandeth all the world? For what power
could be able to keepe his Church from being
swallowed vp by such cruell adversaries, but
onely the hand and holy protection of our God?
Must not we then glorifi
                  •
                his name that hath
done so great things for vs? And for our adversaries
they haue their power limited, and they
haue their time limited, and set forth vnto them,
beyond which they cannot passe. But the soules
of them that rest vnder the Altar, whose bloud
hath beene shed on euery side, by this bloudy
generation, for the testimony of Christ; these
cry out with a lowd voyce,Apoc. 6. 10. 
               Vsquequo Domine?
How long Lord, holy and true? Doest thou not iudge
and revenge our bloud on them that dwell on the
earth? Yet so blind are these bloud-suckers, that
they labour still to increase this cry; but GOD
will giue patience to his Saints, and in his time

cut off this wicked Nation.Psal. 59. 5. 
               Be not merciful O Lord
to them that sin of malicious wickednesse.
            
            Thus then this rebellion that was so 
                  ••
               rongly
plotted, so secretly carried, was by the hand of
God disappointed, and broken into peices. We
haue cause to blesse the name of God therefore:
Praysed be the Lord,
               Psal. 124. 6. 
               that hath not given vs as a prey
to their teeth. Thus can we comfort our selues in
God. but can our adversaries comfort themselues
in their owne mischeifes? The issue was, the
Pope and the Spanyard were disappointed, the
World wondered how this State was so soone
quieted.An. Dō. 1569. The Earles Northumberland and Westmerland
seduced by a Priest that the Pope had
sent, one Nicolas Morton, came to Durham where
they had the Masse set vp. From thence they
marched to Clifford Moore not far from Wetherbie,
where hearing that the Scots Queene (for
whose deliverance they tooke armes) was carried
from T
                     •
                  tbery to Coventry, vnder the custodie
of the Earles of Shewsbury and Huntingdon,
and that the Earle of Sussex on the one side had
gathered a strong army against them, that Sir
George Bowes was behind them, having fortefied
Bernard Castle, that the Lord Scroop and the Earle
of Cumberland had fortified Carliell, & gathered
an armie there in readines: that the Souldiers of
Berwick with the power of Northumberland were
in New-castle, they turned backe againe and besieged
Bernard Castle. Sir George Bowes and his
brother Mr. Robert, being driven by an hard
siege, and wanting provision yeelded the Castle▪
               
and they and the souldiers were dismissed, carrying
their armes with them as it was covenanted,
vpon the first newes of the feares, which the
Earle of Sussex brought against them, the Earles
fled to Hexham, from thence seeking by-wayes
to Naworth Castle. Whence the two Earles fl
                  •
               d
into Scotland, the Earle of Northumberland hid
himselfe in the house of Hector of Harlaw an
Armstrang, having confidence in him that he
would be true to him, who notwithstanding for
money betrayed him to the Regent of Scotland.
It was observed, that Hector being before a rich
man, fell poore of a sudden, and so hated generally
that he never durst goe abroad, in so much,
that the Proverb to take Hectors cloake, is continued
to this day among them, when they would
expresse a man that betrayeth his friend who
trusted him: The Earle was afterward delivered
into England, and condemned of high treason
and beheaded. Westmerland found meanes to
hide him a while with Fernihurst and Bucklough,
and escaped into the Low-Countries, where being
susteined by a poore pension of the King of Spain,
he liued a poore life all his time.
            This is the fruit of Popery. It bringeth Noble
houses to destruction. It pittied their hearts, against
whom the rebellion was raised, to see such
Noble persons brought to such a destruction.
But the Pope is without pitty and mercy, the
Priests and Iesuites that bring such noble men into
such snares, haue no pitty nor mercy, therefore
it behooveth all noble persons to be wise, and to

avoyd pestiferous waies, that is, to shut their eares
against Priests and Iesuites. These be pernicious
instruments, that secretly convey themselues into
great mens favour, to bring them to ruine,
they tell them of the Religion of their Fathers,
but true Religion bringeth a blessing, and Religion
that bringeth alwayes a curse is to be suspected.
And to say truth the Religion of Rome
as now, is not the Religion of our Fathers. For
Religion was changed in the T
                     •
                  ent Councell, and
therefore they cannot say they haue now that
Religion which their Fathers had. And that Religion
was changed in the Trent Synod, is by learned
men sufficiently proued; and we are readie
to maintaine it: for where the rule of faith is changed,
there must needs follow a change of Religion,
and a change of the Church. But in the Trent
Councell the rule of faith is changed. And therefore
men may obserue a great difference between
these men that are now called Papists, and their
forefathers. God blessed their Fathers, because
they serued God in sinceritie, according to that
measure of knowledge which was reuealed to
them; for he that serueth God truely, according
to that measure of knowledge which he hath,
and holdeth the rule of faith: is without doubt
accepted of God, and God doth blesse such.
But after that God hath reuealed a greater measure
of knowledge, by the spreading of the savour
of his Gospell, they who then forsake the
truth offred, are followed with great curses. And
therefore we may plainly obserue the curses of

God vpon them that forsake God and his truth;
Where the Pope curseth, we see that God doth
blesse, and no 
                  〈◊〉
                followeth: where God doth
cur
                  •
               e, we see destruction followeth.
            This rebellion was scarce extinguished, when
another little flame rose from this greater combustion.
Leonard Dacres the second sonne of William
Lord Dacres of Gillestand (whose eldest brothers
sonne was killed with a Valting horse) was
much grieued to see so great a patrimony to goe
from him to the daughters of the Baro
                     •
                  
                whom
the Duke of Norfolk their Father in law had ioyned
in marriage with his sonnes. This so troubled
Leonard Dacres, that having no other way to
revenge himselfe, he tooke the course of impatient
and discontented men,An. Dō. 1569. to revenge all vpon
himselfe, and ioyning himselfe to the rebells,
striued but in vaine, to deliver the Scots Queene.
When they were in armes then was Leonard Dacres
at Court, and offred the Queene all his helpe
against them, and for that service was sent home.
But (as it came to light afterward) in his iourney
by messengers with the rebels he had communication,
and incouraging them, vndertooke to
kill the Lord Scroop, and the Bishop of Carliell.
Which when he could not effect, he tooke Grastocke
Castle, and other houses of the Lord Dacres,
and fortified Naworth Castle, holding it as in his
owne right, and gathered souldiers about him.
Against him came the Lord H
                     •
                  nsdon, with the
trained souldiers of Berwick. Leonard not trusting
to his fortified places, came to meet the Lord

               Hunsdon, and meeting him when he passed the
Riuer Gelt, after a sharpe battell, finding himselfe
put to the worse, his men killed, he fled into
Scotland. And so went into the Low-Countries,
and in a poore estate died at Louaine. The Queene
by Proclamation pardoned the multitude which
he had drawne to take his part.
            This man run a strange course. When he might
haue beene out of danger, he run into a quarrell
which he might evidently see to be lost before he
came to it. But he was drunke with the cup of
Rome; for who would run such courses but
drunken men? It may teach others to beware of
those that bring such poysoned and intoxicating
cuppes from Rome.
            
         
         
            CHAPTER III.
            
               TO proceed and to declare the pestilent
fruit of the Popes excommunication,
which wrought still to the
confusion of them that served it.
At this time in Ireland,
               An▪ Dō. 1569. 
               Edmond and Peter Botlers,
brethren to the Earle of Ormond, ioyning with
Iames fitz Morice of Desmondes family, and with
others, 
                  •
               ought to doe service to the Pope and Spanyard
against Religion, and with a purpose to
draw Ireland away from the obedience of Queene
Elizabeth. To this end they made a league among
themselues. To inflame this rebellion Iohannes

Mendoza came secretly out of Spaine: and to extinguish
the flame the Earle of Ormond went out
of England into Ireland, who laboured so effectually
that he perswaded his brethren to submit
themselues. They were put in prison, but that
they might not be brought to iudgement, the
Earles daily intercession prevailed with the
Queene. It grieued the Earle exceedingly to see
such a blot vpon so noble a family; And the
Queene was willing to preserue the honor of
the house: as for the reliques of that rebellion,
they were in short time dissipared by the wisedome
of the Lord Deputy, and the industry of Sir
Humphrey Gilbert.
            
            This was but a small motion: but it sheweth
the restles spirits of the Pope and Spanyard against
our Church and State. And we render thankes to
God, for breaking the purposes of our adversaries
before they grew great. This is his goodnes
toward his Church; and his iudgement vpon the
adversaries.
            The King of Spaine never rested to stirre vp
troubles to Queene Elizabeth, pretending the
deliverance of the Scots Queene, but it appeareth
that his intention was for himselfe, as the Duke
Dalva vnderstood it. This is evident by that
which we haue mentioned out of Catena. For
Duke Dalva was in some feare that if Queene Elizabeth
were overthrowne, yet the Kingdome of
England might not fall to the Spanyard, but to the
French. So that it was in their intention certainly
to be cast vpon the French or Spanyard, and

here was no reckoning made of the Queene of
Scots. So that howsoever the pretence was for
her deliverance, yet there was another thing intended.
For seeing Queene Elizabeth was excommunicated
and deposed, if she could once be ouerthrowne,
then they made no other reckoning
but that England would fall to the strongest. Now
the Spanyard thinking himselfe the stronger,
sought this prerogatiue for himselfe, and therefore
he ceased not to raise troubles to the Queene,
and the rather, because he held it a thing impossible
for him to recover the Low-Countries, vnlesse
he had England. But because he found it a matter
of great difficultie to set vpon England, his first
enterprise was to set vpon Ireland. But when that
succeeded not, at last with all Forces that might
be raised, with many yeares preparations he set
openly vpon England. But these things are to be
spoken in order. Onely this I premise, that we
may know from whom all our troubles haue
proceeded.
            Many conspiracies brake out one after another,
vnder pretence of delivering the Queene of
Scots.
               An: Dō. 1570. To effect this thing, Thomas Stanly and Edward,
his brother, the yonger sonnes of the Earle
of Darby, Thomas Gerard, Rolston, Hall, and other
in Dar
                     •
                  yshire conspired. But the sonne of R
                     •
                  lston
which was Pensioner to the Queene, disclosed the
conspiracy. And they were imprisoned all except
Hall, who escaped into the 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   of Man. From
whence by the commendation of the Bishop of
Ross, he was sent to Dumbr
                     •
                  to
                     •
                  . Where when afterward

the Castle was wonne, he was taken, and
brought to London, where he suffred death.
            Before the Duke of Norfolk was beheaded, there
were that conspired to deliver him out of Prison.
The Bishop of Ross at this time a dangerous instrument
against England,
               An: Dō 1571. and as dangerous against
the Scots Queene, for whom he laboured,
gaue desperate counsell to the Duke, that with a
choice company of Gentlemen, he should intercept
the Queene of a suddain, and 
                  •
               rouble the
Parliament. To shew that this was 
                  •
               as
                  •
               e, he gaue
some reasons. But the Duke abhorred to heare of
that counsell as pernicious and dangerous: Sir
Henry Percy at that time offred to the Bishop of
Ross his helpe to free the Scots Queene, so that
Grange, and Carr of 
                  
                     •
                  ernihurst would receiue her
at the borders, and his brother the Earle of Northumberland
might be delivered out of Scotland.
But when he was suspected for the inward fa
                  •
               iliaritie
which he had with Burghly, and de
                  •
               er
                  •
               ed
the matter a longer time, this counsell came to no
effect. As did also that of Powell of Samford, one
of the Gentlem
                  •
               n Pencio
                  •
               ari
                  •
               s, and of Owen one
that belonged to 
                  •
               he Earle of Arūdell. These two
vndertooke the same busines also for the Scots
Queenes deliverance, but the Bishop of Ross stay'd
that, because he tooke them for men of a meaner
ranke, then to be 
                  •
               it for 
                  •
               hat busines. After the
Duke was the second time imprisoned, many
were for this matter imprisoned also. The Earles
of Arundell & Southampton, the Lord Lu
                     •
                  ly, the
Lord Cobham, Thomas, his brother, Sir Henry Percy,

Banister, Lowther, Godier, Powell, and others
were committed, who in hope of pardon, told
that they knew.
            
               Barnes and Muthers,
               An▪ Dō. 1572. ioyned with Herle in a
bloudy practise to deliver the Duke, and kill certaine
of the Privy Councellers. But Herle being
the ch
                  •
               efe in the villany opened the Proiect.
When B
                     •
                  rnes was brought before him, & found
Herle to be the accuser, he smiling vpon him,
said, Herle, thou hast prevented me, if thou hadst stayed
but one houre longer, I should then haue stood in thy
place the accuser, and thou in my place to be hanged.
            
            When Iohn Duke of Austria came into government
of the Low-Countries,
               An: Dō. 1576. he found the States
strong. The cruelty that the Duke of Dalva and
others had vsed, was so farre from bringing them
into a servile subiection, that it rather armed
them with resolution to defend their liberties,
their lawes, their religion, and their liues. Which
may admonish great Princes to vse moderation
in government; for much hath beene lost by
crueltie, nothing gotten by it; but nothing can
serue to moderate restlesse spirits; such a spirit
brought Don Iohn with him into the Low-Countries,
who beholding the vnlucky ends of them
that stroue to deliver the Queene of Scots, he notwithstanding
sought to worke her deliverance,
and to marry her, and so to enioy both England
and Scotland. But to hide his purpose the better,
he made show of a perpetuall Edict for Peace, as
he called it: and for that purpose sent Gastellus to
Elizabeth: Who throughly vnderstanding the

               Dukes meaning, yet as if she had beene ignorant,
sent Daniel Rogers to Don Iohn to congratulate
for his perpetuall Edict of Peace. Albeit she certainly
knew, that he had resolved to deliver and
marry the Scots Queene, and in his conceit had
devoured the Kingdomes of England and Scotland,
by the perswasion of the Earle of Westmerland,
and of other 
                  •
               ugitiues, and by favour and
countenance of the Pope and the Guyses. And
that Don Iohn had a purpose out of hand to surprise
the 
                  
                     •
                  le of Man in the 
                  
                     •
                  rish Seas, that he might
haue a fitter opportunitie to invade England out
of Ireland, and the North coast of Scotland, where
the Scots Queene had many at her deuotion, and
the opposite parts of England, as Cumberland, Lankyshire,
Cheshire, Northwales, had many that as he
was informed favoured Popery.
            The truth is, Don Iohn of Austria (as it was
knowne from Peresius Secretary to the King of
Spaine,) being before this carried away with ambition,
when he was disappointed of the hope
which he had of the Kingdome of Tunis, practised
secretly with the Pope, for the ouerthrow of
Queene Elizabeth, marrying of the Scots Queene,
and subduing of England. That the Pope might
excite the King of Spain to warre against England,
as out of a desire of the publique good. Don Iohn
before he came out of Spain to goe to the Netherlands,
did f
                  •
               rward this motion in Spaine what he
could, and afterward sending Esconedus out of
the Netherlands to Spaine, did desire to haue the
havens in Bis
                     •
                  ay, whence a Navie might invade

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               England. But King Philip (happily reserving England
as a morsell for his owne mouth) neglected
Don Iohn as a man too ambitious. Queene Elizabeth
vnderstood not these things vntill the Prince
of Orange opened them to her. Don Iohn in the
meane time, prosecuteth the matter of the marriage
with secresie.An: Dō. 1577. And to dissemble the matter
sent messengers to Que
                  •
               ne Elizabeth, to hold her
with a tale of perpetuall peace; but of a sudden
brake out into warre, and tooke divers Townes
and Castles by sleight and trechery, and wrote to
Spaine, that the best course is to take Zealand before
the more inner Provinces. And being prone
to beleeue that which he desired, he wrote that
England might be had with greater ease then Zealand;
and he laboured by Escouedus to perswade
the Spanish King. But the Queene seeing all tend
to warre in the Netherlands, entred a league with
the States for mutuall helpe, and sent Thomas
Wilkes into Spaine to complaine of the headdy
courses of the Duke of Austria. And in the meane
time prepared for warre. But behold when Don
Iohn was in the height of his pride and ambition,
in the flower of his age, in the middest of busines
and preparations,He died Anno Dom. 1578. he died on a suddain, as
some thought of the Plague. Some thought that
vpon griefe, that he was not so respected of the
King his brother, he ended his foolish ambition
with his life, afterthat he had embraced in his
ambitious desire the Kingdome of Tunis, wherevpon
Guleta was lost in Africa, and after that the
Kingdome of England; and had confirmed a

league with the Guysians, without the knowledge
of the French and Spanish Kings, for defence of
both Crownes. Thus was the enemy disappointed,
the Queene, the Land, the Church preserved;
And haue we not cause to remember these
Workes of God, and to giue God the glory of
his own worke, that is, of delivering his Church?
England was as a Stage, wherevpon diverse entred
to play their parts, one after another. The
part that they played was alwayes treason; some
was kept farther off by Gods providence, to doe
lesse harme; some brought the danger nearer
home. But GOD taking the protection of his
Church in England, none prevailed. And could
any other power but the power and protection
of God preserue a Land from so many, so deadly
dangers? Let all mouthes be stopped, and let this
continuall course of deliverance be acknowledged
the worke of God.
         
         
            CHAPTER IIII.
            
               THE next man that came vpon this
Stage, was Thomas Stucley, but the
malice that he and the Pope by his
employment intended against England,
was turned cleane another way by GODS providence.
            
               Thomas Stucley an English-man borne, when he
had spent his estate in ryot, prodigality, and base

meanes, went into Ireland An: 1570. And gaping
for the Stewardship of Wexford, and missing the
same, began to vtter contumel
                  •
               ous words against
the best deserving Prince, but he was contemned
as one that could doe no hurt. From Ireland he
went into Italy to Pius V. Pope. It is a thing incredible
what favour he got with the old Pope,
that breathed nothing but the destruction of Elizabeth.
Stucley with magnificent ostentation,
(as he was a man singular in ostentation) made
the Pope beleeue, that with three thousand Italians,
he would driue the English out of Ireland,
and b
                  •
               rne the Queenes Navy. And indeed these
things he most wickedly attempted afterward,
but to his owne destruction.
            
               Pius V. having procured all the troubles that
possibly he could against Queene Elizabeth, seemed
to die for spite that he could not hurt her.
After him suceeded Gregory 13.An: Dō. 1572. This Pope had
secret consultations with the King of Spaine for
the invading of Ireland and England both together.
Meaning vnder the maske of Religion, to
serue their owne ambitious endes. The Popes end
was to make his sonne Iames Boncampagno, whom
he had lately made Marquesse of Vineola, now
King of Ireland. The Spanyardes end was, secretly
to helpe the Rebells of Ireland, as Elizabeth
did the Dutch, and in faire words intertaine a
shew of friendship on both sides. The King of
Spaine had a farther reach, even to get the Kingdome
of England by the Popes authoritie, that
from thence he might with 
                  ••
               ore ease tam
                  •
                the

               Dutch that were confederate against him. This
he found hard for him to doe, vnlesse he were
Lord of the Seas, which he saw he could not be,
vnlesse he had England. And there was no doubt
but as he owed the Kingdomes of Naples, Sicily,
Navarre to the beneficence of the Pope, so with
all his heart he would haue held England by the
like fauour.
            They knowing that the greatest strength of
England stood in the navy of the Queenes shippes,
and Merchants shippes, which were also built
and framed for the vse of warre, thought that the
best way to lessen the Navi
                  •
               , was to set on the
Merchants of Italy and Netherlands, to hire many
of the Merchants shippes, seeking diverse seuerall
pretenses, and hauing hired them, to send them
vnto the farthest Navigations, that whilst these
are absent, the Queenes Navy might be overthrowne
with a greater Navy: And then at the
same instant Thomas Stucley the English fugitiue,
might ioyne his forces with the rebels of Ireland.
Stucley a bare-worne deceiver, did no lesse cousin
this next succeeding Pope, then he had done his
predecessor,Gregor. 13. with admirable bragges. He promised
the Kingdome of Ireland to the Popes bastard
sonne, and got such favour with the old ambitious
Pope, that he honored him with the titles of
Marquesse of Lagen, Earle of Wexford and Caterloghe,
Vicount of Morough, and Baron of Ross. These
be famous places in Ireland. And made him generall
of DCCC. Italian Souldiers, the King of
Spaine paying their stipends, and so sent him into

the Irish warre. Stucley came with these to Portingale,
to the mouth of Tagus, purposing to subdue
Ireland. But the purpose of God was otherwise.
And that which the Pope and Spanyard had with
such deliberation proiected, was by the councell
of God dissipated and brought to nothing. For
Seba
                     •
                  tian King of Portugall, to whom the chiefe
conduct of the forces against England was committed;
(for this Prince puffed vp with a heat of
youth and ambition, had long before offred all
his power to the Pope, to be imployed against
Mahumetanes and Prote
                     •
                  tants) was then intised
and drawne by many great promises of Mahomet
sonne of Abdalla King of 
                  
                     •
                  ess, vnto the African
warre. Sebastian being thus drawne from the
English Warres another way, dealt with Stucley,
that first of all he would carry his Italian souldiers
into Mauritania; Stucley finding the Spanish
King not against this proiect, (for the Spanyard
disdeined that the Popes. Bastard should be King
of Ireland) went with Sebastian into Mauritania,
and was killed in that memorable battell,An: Dō. 1578. wherein
three Kings, Sebastian, Mahomet, and Abdall-Melech
were all slaine. And so Stucley had too
honorable an end of a dishonorable life.
            By the death of Sebastian the Spanyard was
cleane drawn away from thinking of the English
invasion for a time, and set all his forces vpon the
invasion of Portugall. If this occasion had not
drawne away the Spanyard, a great tempest of
Warre should haue fallen vpon England (if any
credit may be given to the English fugitiues) for

they declared that those hug▪. Armies which the
Spanyard had provided against England out of Italy,
were now all to be imployed vpon the subduing
of Portuga
                     •
                  l: neither would he be by any
meanes pe
                  •
               swaded then, to thinke of the English
invasion, albeit, the English fugitiues did much
vrge him, and the Pope promise a Cruciata in this
Warre, as in the holy Warre was vsed. The King
of Spaine was so wholly defixed vpon Portugall,
that nothing could remoue him from that resolution.
Now when it was knowne that Stucley,
and all his Italians in Mauritania were slaine, and
that the Spanyard thought of nothing but Portugall,
the English Navy that watched for Stucley
vpon the Irish Seas, was called home, and all was
quiet in England and Ireland.
            
            By this Pageant we may obserue how zealous
these holy Fathers of Rome are, not to win soules
to Christ, but to winne Kingdomes to their Bastards.
Two Popes proceed in the same course of
malice and malediction against Queene Elizabeth,
& one English fugitiue makes them both fooles.
But our part is to remember who governeth the
world, and turneth the wise and politike counsells
of all the enemies of his Church into foolishnes.
We giue God the prayse, and remember
these things for no other end but to giue the glory
to him.
         
         
            
            CHAPTER V.
            
               IN the next place comes vp Nicholas
S
                     •
                  nders, that in the defence of the Roman
visible Monarchy ecclesiasticall had
written. But finding that he could
doe no good by writing, he falleth now vnto another
course; to be the firebrand of a Rebellion
in Ireland. Iames fitz Morice being pardoned for
a former Rebellion, withdrew himselfe into
France, promising the French King, that if he
would send helpe, he would ioyne all Ireland to
the French Scepter, and restore the Romane Religion
in the Ile. But being wearied with delayes,
and finding himselfe derided, from France he
went to Spaine, and promised the same to the
Spanyard. Who sent him to the Pope. From the
Pope at the earnest su
                  •
               e of Nicholas Sanders an English
Priest, and one Alan an Irish Priest, he obtained
a little money. And to Sanders authoritie Legatine
was granted, he got forsooth a consecracrated
Banner, and Letters of commendation to
the Spanyard, and so returned into Spaine. From
Spaine he came into Ireland, with those Priests,
three shippes, and a small company of souldiers.
He landed at Smerwick in Kirria a Chersones in
Ireland,
               An: Dō 1579. about the first of Iuly. An. 1579. Where,
when the place was first orderly consecrated, he
raised a fort, and withdrew his shippes. Which
shippes were presently surprised and carried away
by Thomas Courtney an English Gentleman,

who with a warre ship stayed by chance in a neare
haven, and so excluded the Spanyards from the
benefit of the Sea. Iohn Desmond and Iames, brethren
to the Earle of Desmond, speedily ioyne
themselues to their cousin fitz Morice. The Earle
himselfe, who heartily favoured the cause, counterfeiting
the contrary, called his men together,
in shew to resist them, but craftily caused the
Earle of Clanri
                     •
                  ket to withdraw himselfe, who
was comming to helpe him against the rebells.
            The Lord Deputy vnderstanding by certaine
messengers that the enemies were landed: sent
Henry Dauil, an English Gentleman, a man of valour,
and who had good acquaintance with the
Desmonds, to the Earle of Desmond, and to his
brethren, commanding them presently to set vpon
the fort, which the enemies had raised. But
that they re
                  •
               used to doe, as a thing full of dangers.
And as Dauil returned, Iohn Desmond followeth
him; and overtaketh him at Trally in an
Inne. And in the night time, having corrupted
the host, came into his chamber, with some other
cut-throats, having drawn
                  •
                swords in their
hands; where Dauilus slept in securitie with Arthur
Carter an old souldier, a man of worth, Deputy-governour
of Monmuth. But being awaked
with the tumult, when he saw Iohn Desmond with
a naked sword rushing towards him, What is the
matter my 
                  •
               onne quoth he, (for so was he wont
familiarly to call him) nay, said, Desmond, I am
no more thy sonne, nor thou my father; for thou shalt
die. And presently thrust him and Carter which

lay with him through with many woundes, and
killed them both. Dauilus his foot-boy defended
his Master, with his naked body, receiving many
wounds to saue his Master if he could. Then he
killed all Dauils servants, which lay scattered in
diverse places. And returning to the Spanyards
all imbrued in bloud, he gloried of the slaughter
which he had made. Let this, said he, be to you
a pledge of my faith to you and to the cause. Doctor
Sanders commended this action, as a sweet sacrifice
before God. Iames fitz Morice blamed the
manner of the slaughter, he would haue had it
rather in the way, then in their bed. The Earle,
when he heard of it, vtterly detested it.
            When the Spanyards saw but a few Irish ioyne
themselues with them, and they poore and vnarmed,
farre otherwise then fitz Morice had promised,
they began to distrust, to cry out they
were vndone, to bewaile their fortunes, seeing
all wayes was shut vp so, that they saw no meanes
to escape by Sea or Land. Fitz Morice exhorts
them to expect with patience a while; he told
them great forces were comming to helpe them.
And himselfe tooke a iourney to the holy crosse
of Tippararia, pretending to performe a Vow
which he made in Spaine, but in truth, to gather
together the seditious of Conach and Vlster.
            
            Whilst he was thus in iourney with a few horse
and twelue foot, as he passed by the land of William
á Burg his kinsman, and taking some horses
from the Plow, because his horses tyred
                  •
               : the husbandmen
made Hue and Cry, and raised the

neighbourhood to recover the horses. Amongst
these that went to recover the horses, were the
sonnes of William á Burg, forward young men,
who pursued them so sharply, that they overtooke
them. Fitz Morice seeing Theobald á Burg,
and his brethren, who had indeed in a former rebellion
taken part with fitz Morice: Cosins, quoth
he, let vs not striue for two or three paltry lades. I
doubt not, but if you knew the cause why I am returned
into Ireland, you would ioyne your selues with me.
Theobald answered, It repenteth me, my Father, and
all our friends of the last rebellion. But now we haue
sworne our fealtie to our most gracious Princesse, who
hath granted to vs our liues, and we will keepe our
faith and alleagance: and therefore restore the horses,
or I will make thee restore them. And withall, he
ran vpon him with his Speare. They sought a
while together. Theobaldus and another of his
brethren, with some other were slaine. Fitz Morice
also himselfe being runne through with a
Sp
                  •
               are, and his head shot through with a Buller,
was slaine with divers of his men. Queene Elizabeth
hearing of this chance, wrote Letters full of
sorrow and loue to William á Burg, comforting
him for the death of his sonnes. She honored
him with the title of Baron of Conell Castle, and rewarded
him with a yearely Pension. The old
man being over-
                  •
               oyed with such vnexspected fauours,
dyed not long after.
            Sir William Drury then Lord Deputy, came neare
to Kilmaloch and sent for the Earle of Desmond:
who comming to him promised his faith and alleagance

to his Prince, and sweare that himselfe
and his men should fight against the rebells.
Wherevpon he was dismissed to gather his companies,
and to returne to the Lord Deputy. Iohn
Desmond the Earles brother, who was by the rebells
put in the place of Fi
                     •
                  z Morice; lying in ambush,
did intrap Herbert, & Prise, with the bandes
which they led, and killed them. Himselfe being
hurt in the face. Some supplyes came out of
England, and Perrot was sent with six warre-ships
to defend the coast: the Lord Deputy grew so
sicke that he was forced to withdraw to Waterford
for his healths sake; and appointed Nicholas
Malbey governour of Connach, a famous and approued
Souldier, to follow the Warres. And
worthy Sir William Drury soone after died. Malbey
sent to the Earle of Desmond, and often admonished
him of his dutie and promise: and seeing
it not good to linger in such a businesse, he
brought his forces into Conil, a woody Country,
against the rebells. There was Iohn Desmond,
who in battell array, and with the Popes consecrated
banner displayed, received the forces of
Malbey. It was sharply fought on both sides. But
the vertue of the English prevailed; Iohn Desmond
fled first away and left his men to the slaughter.
Among them was found Alan the Irish Priest,
who exhorting them to the battell, had promised
them the Victory. Malbey by a messenger sent
for the Earle to come and his forces with him:
and when he in vaine expected him foure dayes,
he came to Rekell a towne of Desmond. Here the

               Earle began to shew himselfe plainly for the rebells,
after that he had a long time vsed dissimulation
in his wordes and countenance. The same
night the rebells set vpon Malbey his tents in the
darke, but finding them well fortified, they went
away and did no harme. After the death of Sir
William Drury, William Pelh
                     •
                  m was sent Lo
                  •
               ch
                  •
               e
                  •
               e
Instice into Ireland, with the authoritie of a Deputy,
vntill a Deputy should be sent; & the Earle
of Ormond was made goue
                  •
               nour of Munster, who
sent Desmonds sonne (which he had with him as
a pledge) to be kept at Dublin, Pelham, chiefe Iustice
commeth to Munster, sends for Desmond;
but he sending Letters by his wife excuseth himselfe.
Wherevpon the Earle of Ormond was sent to
him, to admonish him to deliver into the handes
of the Lord chiefe Iustice, Sanders the Priest, the
forrain souldiers, and the Castles of Carigofoil, and
Asketten, and to submit himselfe absolutely, and
turne his forces against his brother and the other
rebells. Which thing if he would doe, he might
obtaine pardon of his rebellion, otherwise he
was to be declared a traytor and enemy to his
Country. Whilst he held off with delayes and
delusions, he was declared a traytor in the beginning
of December An:
               An. Dō. 1579. 1579. That he had dealt
with forrain Princes for invading and subverting
his Countrey: That he had retained Sanders and
fitz Morice, rebells: That he had helped the Spanyards
after they were gone out of the fort at
Smerwick: That he had hanged the Queenes
faithfull subiects; had advanced the banner of

the Pope against the Queene, that he had brought
strangers into the kingdome. After this proclamation,
the chiefe Iustice appointed the warres
against Desmond, to be prosecuted by the
Ea
                  •
               le of Orm
                     •
                  nd. The Earle of Ormond with his
forces destroyed Conilo, the onely refuge which
the rebells had; he draue away their Cattell, and
gaue them a prey to be devided among his sould
                  •
               ers.
He hanged the Balife of Yonghall before hi
                  •
               
dore, because he had re
                  •
               used to take a band of
English into the Towne. And then began to besiege
the Spanyards in Strangi
                     •
                  all; but they fearing
such a thing had conveyed themselues out
of danger. Yet the English followed them, and
killed them all. And every way through Munster
pressed the rebells most sharply. Desmond and his
brethren were so hard driven, hiding themselues
in their lurking holes, that they wrote to the
chiefe Iustice, signifying that they had taken vpon
them the patronage of the Catholike faith in
Irelan
                     •
                  , and prayed him to take part with them.
This shewed their cause was desperate, they had
no hope, vnlesse he that was come purposely against
them would helpe them. The Chiefe Iustice
laughing pleasantly at the motion, went to
Munster, and called the Nobles to him, and kept
them, neither would dismisse them, vntill they
had given pledges, and promised their helpe against
the rebels to ioyne with him and the Earle
of Ormond. They therevpon deviding their
bandes, sought out the rebells. They forced the
Baron of Lixnaw to yeeld himselfe: they besiege
                  •
               
               
               Carigo
                     •
                  oil-Castle, which Iulius an Italian with a
few Spanyards maintained, and breaking the
walls by the force of great Ordnance, they entred
and killed or hanged all that kept the place, with
Iulius also.
            At this time came Arthur Lord Grey Lord Deputy
into Ireland.
               An: Dō. 1580. 
               An: 1580. Soone after his comming,
about seaven hundred Italians and Spanyards
sent from the Pope and King of Spaine, vnder
the gouernment of San-Iosephus, an Italian, came
into Ireland, vnder the pretence of restoring the
Roman Religion, but the purpose was to divert
the Queenes forces, and call her from other cares
to Ireland onely. They tooke land without any
trouble, at Smerwick in Kirria; for Winter, that
had a good while stayed in that coast with ships,
waiting for them, was now returned to England,
thinking they would not come in winter. They
made the place strong, and called it fort del or.
But as soone as they heard that the Earle of Ormond
was comming towards them, by the perswasion
of the Irish they left the fort, and betooke
themselues into the valley Glamingell, which was
compassed about with high mountaines and
woods. The Earle tooke some of them, who being
questioned of their number, and purpose:
they confessed that 700. were come, that so much
armour is brought that may serue 5000. that mo
are daily expected out o
                  •
                
               Spaine, that the Pope
and King of Spaine are resolved to draw the English
out of Ireland, that for that end they haue sent
an huge s
                  •
               m of money, which they haue delivered

into the handes of Sanders the Popes Nuntio,
of the Earle of Desmond, and Iohn his brother.
That night the Italians & Spanyards were much
to seeke, not knowing what way to turne themselues,
not knowing to hide themselues as the Irish
doe, in dens and bogs, and therefore in the
darke they went backe to their Fort; neare to
which the E
                  •
               rle of Ormond had pitched: but being
vnprovided of Ordnance and other things
needfull for oppugnation, he stayed for the comming
of the Lord Deputy. Who soone after came,
accompanied with Zouch, Ralegh, Denie, Ma
                     •
                  
                  worth,
Achin, and other Captaines. At that time
came Winter out of Englan
                     •
                  
                with warre shippes,
much blamed for withdrawing himselfe when
there was need of his service.
            The Lord Deputy sent a trumpetter to the 
                  •
               ort
to demand what they were? What businesse they
had in Ireland? Who sent them? Why they had
fortified a place in the Queenes Kingdome? And
withall to command them presently to depart.
Their answer was, that of them some were sent
from the most holy Father the Pope of Rome,
some from the Catholike King of Spaine, to whom
the Pope had given Ireland; for as much as Queene
Elizabeth had lost her right in Ireland by reason
of heresie. And therefore that which they had
taken, they would hold, and get more if they
could. When the Lord Deputy and Winter had
consulted of the maner of the siege, they brought
some Culverings out of the Shippes in the darke
of the night; and digging through the banke,

they drew them the nearest way, & placed them.
The souldiers also mounted their great O
                  •
               dnāce
against the wall, and did beat vpon the Fort continually
foure dayes together. The Spanyard
once or twice made Sallyes out, but still to their
losse. Of the English none was killed, saving
onely Iohn Cheke, a goodly yong man and val
                  •
               
               ant,
the sonne of that learned Knight Sir Iohn
Ch
                     •
                  ke.
            
            
               San-Iosephus who was governour within the
Fort, a weake man, and terrified with the daily
shot, began quickly to thinke of yeelding. And
when as Hercules Pisanus, and other Captaines,
disswaded him earnestly from that, as a thing vnworthy
of military men, vrging that all should
prepare for a defence, least by their negligence
they might withdraw the courage of the Irish,
which were comming to helpe them. But he being
a man of singular cowardise, assayed the
mindes of the souldiers, and wrought so, that the
souldiers sedi
                  ••
               ously offred force to the other
Captaines, that at last they consented to yeeld.
Wherevpon the fift day, when they saw no hope
of helpe, neither from Spaine, nor Desmond, they
put out a white flagge and demaunded parley.
Which thing was denied them because they had
ioyned themselues with the rebells, with whom
it was not lawfull to haue any parley. Then they
demanded that with bag & baggage they might
depart, but neither was this granted. Then they
intreat
                  •
               d that this favour might be granted at
least to the governour and some few besides, but

that though they much besought it, could not
be granted. But the Lord Deputy, inveighing against
the Pope, commanded that without any
condition they should simply yeeld themselues.
And when they could obtaine no more, they put
out their white flagge againe, and cryed misericordia,
misericordia. And so submitted themselues
simply to the Lord Deputy his mercy. Who presently
fell into consultatiō, what were best to do.
The adversaries were in number as many as the
English, and danger was feared of the Irish rebells,
who were moe then 1500▪ at hand. The
English wanted vittails and apparell, so that they
were ready to make a tumult, v
                  •
               lesse they might
be relieued by the spoiles of the enemies out of
the fort, and shippes were wanting to carry away
the enemies. At last they came to this conclusion,
(the Lord Deputy being much vnwilling & weeping)
that the Captaines should be preserued, the
rest should all be slaine promiscuously in terror of
others that might attempt so hereafter. The Irish
should be hanged, which was presently executed.
The Queene was not pleased at the maner
of this execution, and wished it had beene vndone,
hating crueltie, though necessary, against
such as haue once yeelded, and was hardly after
drawne to admit any excuse of the slaughter
committed. This was done An: 1580. Some
three yeares after the Earle of Desmond, of a noble
house, but of a barbarous nature, who barbarously
had sworne that He would rather forsake God,
then forsake his men, wandring from place to place,

was at last found of a commō souldier in a poore
cottage. The Earle was in a poore estate, vnknowne,
till the souldier had almost struck off his
arme. Then he descryed himselfe, and was killed.
Nicholas Sanders that had drawne the Earle into
this rebellion, was at the same time spent with famine,
and forsaken of all succour: and being
impatiently grieued at the evill successe of this
rebellion, proceeding so much against his desires,
seeing neither the Popes blessing, nor the
consecrated Banner, nor the authoritie by the
Pope committed to him, could do him any helpe,
he lost himselfe, and ran starke mad, wandring
vp and downe in the mountaines and woods,
and finding no comfort died miserably. When
he was dead, there were found in his scrip some
Orations and Epistles written to confirme the
rebells, filled with great promises of the Pope
and Spanyard. Thus Gods justice met with a restles
and wretched man, and that foule mouth was
stopped vp with famine, that was ever open to stirre
vp rebellions against the State that had vttered
so many blasphemies against God, and his holy
truth, and inuented so many strange lyes against
men. This man first of all men, devised a notorious
lye against the birth of the Queenes mother;
which none of her enemies ever heard or knew,
she being in the hatred of so many Papists, that
would not haue spared to haue spoken evill, yet
was it never heard or knowne for forty yeares after.
And the accompt of the time doth proue it
false, & himselfe like a forgetfull lyer, doth plainly
refute himselfe.
            
               This Pageant of the Pope and his Legat Sanders,
we may not let passe without some observations.
Seeing there is no way to exsatiate their
crueltie, we pray that it may please God to remoue
their coec
                     ••
                  ie and obduration if it be his
good pleasure, that they may once truely see
themselues and their vngracious actions, whereof
the sight is now taken from them by reason of
their blindnesse. For we hold this to proceed rather
from their blindnesse, then from a wilfull
and obstinate striuing against the knowne truth;
but this we warne them, to labour to know the
truth, and to set their hearts to seeke it, least they
be wrapped farther and farther into that great
iudgement, wherein as yet they are vnder his
power which worketh with all power and signes and
lying wonders, in all deceivablenesse of vnrighteousnesse,
               2 Thes. 2.
               among them that perish, because they receiue not
the loue of the truth, that they might be saued. And
therfore God shall send them strong illusions, that they
should beleeue lyes, that all they might be damned.
which beleeved not the truth, but had pleasure in vnrighteousnesse.
Two things are here conteined in
these words, which iump with these Priests and
Seminaries which the Pope sendeth forth; the doctrine
which they teach, and the actions which
they practise. Their doctrines which they teach
are lyes: the Apostle warned vs they should beleeue
lyes; this is a iust judgement vpon such as
loue not the truth; Their vsuall practise is vnrighteousnesse.
What greater lyes can be invented, then
to say, that Whatsoever the Pope will allow for a tradition

of his Church, that is the Word of God. A lye
with a witnes, and withall a blasphemy against
the most High. What greater vnright
                     •
                  ousnesse,
then to giue away other mens possessions to strangers
that haue no right to them; to aispossesse Kings; to
giue Kingdomes which is none of yours to giue; to kill,
to murther, to massacre, to aoe any act of vnrighteousnesse
at the commandement of the Pope or any superior:
These I am sure are the practises of vnrighteousnesse;
would to God these men would once
looke backe vpon themselues and their owne actions,
and consider what a difference is betweene
ancient Bishops of Rome and these of late; betweene
godly Divines and the Popes Clergie. The
ancient Bishops did never draw the sword to propagate
the faith; the Apostles left no such example
to them, but by their labours in Preaching,
and their patience in suffring, they gathered a
Church and established the faith; but behold
how vnrighteousnes, and villany is now come in
place. An vngracious bloudy wretch kills a man
in his bed, a man that was his friend; such a thing
chancing in the Warres may be borne with, but
in bed to murther his friend, is an extraordinary
signe of barbarous crueltie: And yet that Sanders
the Popes Legat should pronounce this thing to
be a sweet sacrifice to God? this passeth all imagination.
Can any either practise these things,
or commend these practises, but onely such men
as the Apostle describeth, that are given vp to
beleeue lyes, and to worke vnrighteousnesse? If
any man shall answer me here with that old worn

Cuckow long, that these things are not vnderstood
by them to be vnrighteo
                     •
                  s which the Pope
commandeth, that they doe these things in obedience
to Christ his Vicar. I answer, they that
would make such an answer, are either such as
are men of conscience, or altogether without conscience.
If they be men without conscience, I haue nothing
to say to such, but wish them better then
they doe to themselues, that they had some fecling
of conscience. If these men haue any sparke
of conscience, then would I intr
                  •
               at them seriously
to consider what is that which the Apostle in
the place before cited, calleth the deceivablenes
of vnrighteousnes; For this word sheweth that
there is some plaine and down-right vnrighteousnesse,
and also some deceivablenesse of vnrighteousnesse.
What is that deceivablenesse of vnrighteousnesse?
Surely there is something herein for them
to study, that are so ready at the Popes command
to doe vnrighteous things; and make not Gods
Word, but the Popes word to be the rule to know
what is righteous, what vnrighteous. When the
law of God, the law of nature, the law of nations,
the law of our Land; when I say all lawes forbid
a thing, and onely the Pope commands it, and
commands it against all lawes; then if a man obey
the Pope in such things, he is deceived and he
doth vnrighteously. Here is the deceivablenesse of
vnrighteousnesse. But you must vnderstand that
these men are thus deceived by him whose cōming
is by the working of Satan, with all power and signes
and lying wonders, and in all deceivablenesse of vnrighteousnesse

in them that perish, because they receiue
not the loue of the truth. Let men that haue any
care to saue their soules, learne to loue the truth,
the truth will deliver them. And let them obserue
that maintaining of false doctrines and of
vnrighteous actions, are things ioyned together,
one followeth the other. Now because we see
false doctrines or lyes maintained by Papists, and
vnrighteous and vngracious actions by them ordinarily
attempted; therefore we hold them vndoubtedly
to be the servants of Antichrist, who
are given vp to beleeue lyes, because they lou
                  •
               
not the truth. But for our selues, we know that
the Scriptures are the Word of God. We beleeue
the Scriptures. We trust in God. We worship him
as himselfe hath revealed and commanded. If
our enemies wrong vs, we haue recourse to God
by prayer; we haue found by continuall experience,
that God taketh the protection of them
that thus trust in him. We haue trusted in him,
we haue found his protectiō. We rest in patience
and commit the vengeance to God. Is there any
man in the world that knoweth any thing of religion,
that can denie that we are in a good state,
and our enemies in a desperate state? we haue
comfort, but they can haue none. Consider this
you that forget God, least he plucke you vp, and there
be none to deliver you. Now, which is our chiefe
end in these collections, for our deliverance we
blesse the name of God; and we doe acknowledge
with all humilitie and thankesgiving, that
all our deliverances come from the vndeserved

loue and favour of our most gracious God and
Father. And we finde our selues most sirictly o
                  •
               
               liged
vnto this dutie, because we see God hath
made our enemies his enemies: they cannot
fight against vs, but they must fight against God;
how much then are we bound to honor & serue
this great. God of heaven and 
                  •
               arth, that hath
shewed such favour to his Church in England?
            
         
         
            CHAPTER VI.
            
               AT this time, An: 1580. the seminary
Priests and 
                  
                     •
                  esuites increasing in England,
necessary lawes were provided
against them. These in truth were
maintained by the adversaries of England as a seminary
of rebellion; for so still they proued.
Their first foundation was at Doway in the Low-Countries,
where by the procuring of William Alan
an Oxford-man, afterward Cardinall, there was a
Colledge provided for them, in the yeare 1568.
Where fugitiue Priests were brought vp, not so
much in Religion, as in new and strange practises
of treason. The Pope assigned them a yearely stipend.
Thus they stood for some yeares. But
when the Low-Countries began to be troubled
with Warres, Requesenius, who was governour
there vnder the Spanish King, did thrust out all
English fugitiues out of the Low-Countries.
Wherevpon they that were willing to make vse

of such instruments to trouble England, thought
good to giue entertainment to them. And therefore
two Colledges were set vp for the English sugitiues,
the one at Rhemes by the Guises, another
at Rome by Pope Gregory 13. From these Colledges
they were sent into England vnder pretence of
Religion, but indeed to withdraw subiects from
obedience to their Prince, and to draw the Land
vnto the subiection of strangers: they called
themselues Seminaries, because they were to sowe
the seed of the Roman Religion in England. And
what is that seed of Roman religion, but the seed of
Rebellion? Certainly so it hath euer proued.
These men to shew their zeale to their new
founders, and their hatred to their Country, disputed
and defined the Popes authoritie by Gods
law, to haue the plenitude of power ouer the
whole world in all things Ecclesiasticall and Politicall:
out of which plenitude he might excommunicate
Kings, and after excommunication depose
them from their thrones, and absolue their
subiects from all oaths of alleagance. Thus was
the Bull of Pius V. published, An: 1569. From
whence rose the rebellion in the north of England,
and those rebellions of Ireland, of which we
haue spoken. Hanse, Nelson, Main, Sherwod,
Prie
                  •
               ts, then taught that Queene Elizabeth was a
schismatike and an heretike, and therefore worthily
to be deposed; for which they suffred deservedly;
but still others were sent into their places;
and though they came in vpon desperate
points, as souldiers vpon a breach, yet others followed

lowed as desperate as the first. And would not vnderstand
that they ventured both soule and body
in the cause of the Pope against Christ; for such is
the cause of treason being commanded by the
Pope, and forbidden by Christ.
            
            The Priests and Iesuites at this time spent all
their learning and skill to stirre vp rebellion in
England, giving out in corners, and in publique,
Printing Bookes, to declare that the Pope and
King of Spain had conspired, that England should
be overthrowne, & left as a prey. This was done
of purpose to confirme their owne side, and to
deterre others from their obedience to their
Prince.An: Dō. 1580. Wherevpon the Queene set out a Proclamation,
signifying that she had never made attempt
vpon any Prince, onely defended her own,
not invading the Provinces of other Princes,
though she had beene provoked with wrongs,
and invited by opportunitie. If any Princes
should oppugne her, she doubted not but by
Gods favour, she should defend her owne, and
had therefore Mustered her Forces by Land and
Sea, and was readie against any hostile incursion.
She exhorteth her faithfull subiects to hold their
faith & alleagance firme to God, & their Prince,
Gods Minister. For others that had shaken off the
loue of their Countrey, and obedience to their
Prince, She commandeth them to carry themselues
modestly, and not to provoke the severitie
of iustice; for she would no longer indure sparing
of evill men, least so she might be cruell against
the good.
            
               Among the Iesuites that came then into England,
Robert Parsons and Edmond Campian were
chiefe; they had procured a temper or qualification
of the Bull of Pius V. obtained of Greg. 13.
in these words; Let petition be made to our holy Father,
that the Bull declaratory of Pius V. against Elizabeth
and her adherents be interpreted: which the
Catholikes desire to be vnderstood so, that it binde her
and heretiques alwayes, but not Catholiques, things
standing as they doe; But onely then when the publike
execution of the Bull may be had. These foresaid
favours the Pope granted to Robert Parsons and
Edmond Campian, now ready to goe into England
the 13. day of Aprill 1580. in the presence of Oliver
Manarcus assisting. This was procured to giue
some content to the Recusants that were offended
at the publication of the Bull, and found that
it did them more harme then good. Parsons and
Campian came secretly into England, and changed
their exterior habit and apparel, that they might
the better passe vnknowne. Somtimes they went
like ruffians, somtimes like ministers, somtimes
like noble men, somtimes like souldiers, somtimes
like apparitours; they walked secretly from Recusants
houses to Recusants houses, and did in
words and writings roundly set forward the businesse
for which they came. Parsons was the superior,
a man of a seditious and turbulent spirit,
armed with audaciousnesse, he brake out so farre
among the Papists, against the Queene, as to propose
the pro
                  •
               ect of deposing of her. In so much,
that some Papists themselues (as they themselues

hau
                  •
                said) did thinke to haue delivered him into
the hands of the Magistrate. Campian was somewhat
more modest, yet by a Booke which he had
much laboured and brought with him, which as
himselfe sayth, might be taken with him, if he
were apprehended; did provoke the Ministers of
the Church of England to disputation; the Booke
was Intituled, A Booke of ten Reasons, or Arguments
written politely in Latin to confirme the
doctrines of the Church of Rome. Parsons wrote
more virulently against Mr 
               Charke, who had written
soberly against Campians prouocation: but
Campians ten reasons were throughly and solidly
answered by Dr 
               Whittaker. Campian was taken,
and brought to disputation, where it was found
that in learning and knowledge he came farre
short of that expectation which himselfe had raised
of himselfe; the whole disputation was afterward
set forth in Print. In the meane time many
threatnings were published against the Church
and State of England, and much speech was of
the Pope and the Spanyards preparations to subdue
England.
            
            By which manner of proceedings it may appeare
that the end why these & other such were
sent into England, was not to draw men to God,
but to betray the Land to strangers; for these men
cared not what became of England, so the Church
of England might be displanted, and Popery set vp
againe. For which purpose we may obserue the
Colledges for Seminaries, set vp at Rhemes and
Rome. These Colledges did strangely swarue

from the end and foundation of the ancient Colledges.
The ancient Colledges were founded for
learning and Religion; these for meere faction: the
ancient Colledges were for the furtherance of
godlinesse and pi
                  •
               tie; these for the practises of

                  
                     •
                  ngodliness
                     •
                  , and vngracious treasons▪ Let no man
tell me that the ancient Colledges were founded
by Papists, & so were these Seminaries, and therefore
for the maintenance of the same Religion:
for this is nothing but colouring and daubing
of their new practises from the sight of the ignorant;
for all their hope is in the ignorance of men,
hoping that they shall haue the greatest part, because
the greatest part are ignorant. But now
God in his mercy hath so plentifully revealed the
truth, the ignorance of men is not so great as the
Pap
                     •
                  sts would haue it; for men are taught to know
that in the Councell of Trent, there hath beene hatched
a new birth of Popery. Where they haue
changed the rule of faith, which was ever maintained
in the Church of Rome before that time.
Wherevpon there followeth a change of the
Church, a change of Religion. They that founded
the ancient colledges, knew not this new Church,
this new Religion, which is newly hatched in the
Trent Councell. Therefore these late Colledges
of Seminaries are founded vpon a new Religion.
This new R
                  •
               ligion of Rome is nothing but the
pract
                  •
               se of Treasons against States. Surely it
must be a s
                  •
               rang
                  •
                Religion that must be maintained
by vngodly practises. There was never any
Religion that allowed such practises. And herein

the Papists exceed the Heathen, who being guided
onely by the light of nature, yet haue disallowed
such vngodly and vngracious practises
which the Papists vse. Let all men consider
whence this new Religion of Rome proceedeth,
that in vngodly practises is founded and maintained;
that all such practises proceed from the
devill, no man can doubt: that God hath preserved
this Church of England from all these practises,
this is that which causeth vs to trust in God,
and to giue all the glory of our deliverance to his
holy name.
            
               Edmond Campian, Ralfe Sherwin, Luke Kirby,
Alexander Briant were taken in the yeare 1581.
and being brought to iudgement, were accused
of treason against the Queene and State; that they
were directed by the Pope, came into England to
stirre vp sedition, and to make a strong partie;
and herevpon they were condemned as offending
against the lawes. Campian was demanded
whether he tooke Queene Elizabeth to be Queene
of England by right and law? to that he refused to
answer. Then he was demanded, if the Pope
should send an Armie into England against the
Queene, whether he would take the Popes part, or
the Queenes? To this he protested openly, that he
would take the Popes part, and confirmed it by
his hand-writing; he was put to death and some
others for the same cause. When as yet from the
time of the rebellion, there was but fiue put to
death in this cause. The Queene thinking that
mens consciences should not be forced, did often

compla
                  •
               ne, that she was necessarily driven to
these courses, vnl
                  •
               s she would suffer a mischiefe
to fall vpon her selfe and her subiects, by them
that sought to colour their treasons vnder a pretence
of conscienc
                  •
                and Catholike Religion.
And yet she thought that some of the poore
Priests, that were sent, were not acquainted with
the secret plots of treason: but found that their
superiors vsed these as instruments of their wicked
intentions; and they yeelded the whole disposing
of themselues to the iudgement of their
superiors; for they that were then and afterward
apprehended, being demanded, whether by the
authoritie of the Bull of Pius V. the subiects were
so absolved from their oath and alleagance, that
they might take Armes against the Prince? Whether
they held her for a lawfull Queene? Whether
they yeelded their cōsent to the opiniōs of Sanders
& Bristow, concerning the authoritie of that
Bull? Whether, if the Pope should warre against
the Queene, they would take his part or hers?
To these things they answered, some so ambiguously,
some so fiercely, some by preuarication or
by silence shifting: that diverse other Papists who
were not acquainted with the secrets of their
villanies, began to suspect, that surely they nourished
some secret mischiefe: and Iohn Bishop, otherwise
much addicted to their Religion, wrote
and soundly proued that the constitution ob
                  •
               ruded
in the name of the Councell of Lateran, from
which they founded all their authoritie to absolue
subiects from their alleagance, and to depose

Princes, was indeed nothing but a decree of
Innocentius III. nor was ever admitted in England.
Yea, that Councell was no Councell, and
that nothing was decreed there by the Fathers.
            Suspitions were still increased, by reason of the
number of Priests daily comming into England,
and creeping in corners, who secretly sought out
the minds of men, and taught that Princes excommunicated
were to be throwne out of their
Kingdomes, that Princes that professed not the
Roman Religion, were fallen from the title and
Kingly authoritie, that they who had taken orders,
were by the libertie of the Church freed
from all iurisdiction of Princes, neither were
bound to their lawes, or bound to reverence
their Maiestie: that the Magistrates of England
were not lawfull, and therefore not to be accounted
as Magistrates. Yea, and moreover, that what
things soever had bin established by the Queenes
authoritie, after the publishing of the Bull of
Pius V. were voyd altogether by Gods law and
mans law, and to be respected as things of no account.
Neither did they dissemble their purpose,
that they were come into England for this end,
that this Bull might be effected, and that they
might in private confessions reconcile men, and
so absolue them from all faith and alleagance toward
the Queene. This thing seemed to be more
easily effected, when men were absolved from all
mortall sinne, as the Priests perswaded them, and
this way was the safest, because the most secret,
and vnder the seale of Confession.
            
               These practi
                  •
               es extorted of the Parliament
held then 
                  •
               n 
                  
                     •
                  anuary,
               An: Dō. 1582. 
               An: 1582▪ new lawes and
more severe against these Popish practises. By
which lawes it was made treason to disswade any
subiect from their alleagance to their Prince, and
from the Religion which was then established in
England or to reconcile any to the Romish Church;
the same punishment was to be inflicted vpon
them which were so perswaded, or reconciled.
To say Masse, was punished with two hundreth
markes, and a yeares imprisonment, and to be farther
punished vntill they had payed. To be present
at Masse willingly, was punished with an
hundreth marke fine, and a yeares imprisonment:
They that refused to come to their Parish Churches,
were to pay twentie pound a moneth.
            
            This manner of punishing refractary men, that
in matters touching the Church were troublesome
and seditious, was taken from an ancient
manner of punishing such men in the time of St
               Augus
                     •
                  in, for he speaketh diverse times of the
Pecuniary mulct of the Emperours, which was inflicted
vpon the Dona
                     •
                  ists. And because the seminary
Priests and Iesuites who haue bin punished,
not for Religion, but for Treasons in the execution
of civill Iustice, for offending against the lawes
of the Land, haue given out, that they haue bin
perfecuted for Religion, and some of them haue
beene made Martyrs, (these be a new kinde of
Martyrs, not for Christs cause, but for the Popes
cause against Christ, and against his Word and
Commandement.) It shall not be amisse to obserue

the State of the Church in S. Augustines
time, and the iudgement of the Church then,
which in diverse resemblances doth answer to
our times; for then the Emperour had that power
and authoritie, which we now giue to our Kings.
The Pope had no more authoritie then, then we
would yeeld him now, if he would maintaine
the doctrine that the Popes then did. The Pope
was then vnder the Emperour; the Emperour
punished both Pope and others if they offended
his lawes. Parmenianus, a Donatist, complained
they were punished by the Emperour, and persecuted,
and called their persecution Martyrdome,
as did the Papists that were punished. S. Augustin
answering the Donatists, saith: Si quis quis ab Imperatore,
&c. 
               If every man that is punished by the
Emperour, or by the Iudges which he sendeth,
must presently be accompted a Martyr, then
shall we haue all Prisons full of Mart
                     •
                  rs, &c.
And after he sayth:
                  Lib. 1. cap. 9. contr. Epist. Parmen. Therefore not every one
that in some question of Religion is punished
by the Emperour, must presently be accompted
a Martyr; for he is iustly punished for superstition,
which he thought to be religion. No
man verily that in any respect is a Christian,
dare avouch this; for such men proceeding
like blind men, see not, that they who thus
thinke, proceed so farre, as to proue that the
very devils may thus chalenge to themselues
the glory of Martyrs, because they suffer this
persecution by the Christian Emperours; for
as much as their temples are destroyed over all

the world in a manner; their ldols are broken
in peeces, their sacrifices are forbidden, they
who honor them are punished if they be found.
Which if it be madnesse to m
                     •
                  intaine, then it
followeth that righteousnesse is not proued by
suffering, but by righteousnesse, suffering is made
glorious:Math. 5. therefore the Lord said not blessea are
they that suffer persecution, but he addeth that
which maketh the difference betweene pietie
and sacriledge, blessed are they which suffer persecution
for righ
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     ousnesse, &c. And after he sayth:
If these men being convicted of their wicked
practises,Ibid. t
                        •
                     p. 10. shall acknowledge that they who are
thus punished 
                     •
                  or their mad tricks, may not be
accompted Martyrs, but yet they will say, that
these things ought not to belong to the Emperour
to punish. (Iust as the Papists say, the punishment
of their Clergie belongeth not to the Magistrate.)
I demand then, sayth Augustin: Whether
they thinke, that the superior powers
ought not to haue care of Religion, & of punishing
false religion?Gal. 5. 19. The Apostle saith, The works
of the flesh are manifest, which are adaltery, fornicatiō,
vncleannes, wantonnes, idolatry, witch-craft, hatred,
debate, emulation, wrath, contentions, seditions,
heresies, envie, murthers, drunkennesse, gluttony,
and such like. What reason can these men
render, why it should be justice for the Empeperours
to punish Idolaters, Murtherers, and
such, and not by the same reason to be like justice
in them, to punish heretiques. When as
they are accompted in the same fruits of iniquitie,
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
               Someruill was found strangled in the prison. (For
feare belike that he might haue discovered moe)
Ardern being condemned, was hanged the next
day. This is the common end that Priests bring
such Gentlemen vnto, who are willing to heare
them and be perswaded by them.
            The next yeare after, (for seldome did any
yeare passe without some treason) some English
Gentlemen began to practise the deliverance of
the Queene of Scots.
               An: Dō. 1584. 
               Francis Throgmorton fell first
into suspition, by certaine Letters intercepted,
written to the Queene of Scots. As soone as he was
committed to prison, and beganne to confesse
something, presently Thomas Lord Paget, and
Charles Arundell, a Courtier, secretly fled the land,
and went into France. These men meeting with
other devoted to the Roman Religion, did much
complaine, recounting their sorrowes among
themselues, that the Queene was estranged from
them without their fault, by the cunning of Leicester,
and Walsingham, that them selues were exposed
to vnworthy contumelies & ignominies,
that singular tricks were found out, and secret
snares laid so cunningly, that improvident men,
will they nill they, must needs be intangled in
such snares; that to remaine at home there could
be no safety for them. It was thought at this
time, that some cunning was practised to feele
mens affections; and that counterfeit Letters
were written vnder the name of the Scots Queene,
and of some fugitiues, knowne traytors to the
State; which Letters might be left in the houses

of Recusans, and that spies were sent abroad to
gather rumors, and to catch suspitions. Diverse
were drawne into snares. Among others, Henry
Earle of Northumberland, and his sonne Philip
Earle of Arundell, was commanded to keepe his
house, his wife was committed to Sr 
               Thomas Shirly
to be kept; and Henry Howard the Dukes brother
was often examined of Letters sent from the
Scots Queene, from Charles Paget, and from one
Mope, then vnknowne. Some blamed the narrow
searching of things, and the manner of drawing
men into danger. Others thought that all the
means that might be vsed to prevent the Queenes
danger, and to saue her life, was but necessary.
And indeed the outragious maliciousnes of the
Papists against the Queene, brake out daily; for
by Bookes imprinted, they exhorted the Queenes
maides and Ladies of honor to doe the same against
the Queene, which Iudith did against Holofernes.
The Author of that Booke was not found, Gregory
Martin was suspected, a man learned in the
Greeke and Latin tongues, and chosen by the
Duke to be the bringer vp of his children.
Carter the Stationer that caused the Books to be
Printed, was punished for it.
            The Queene, that was much traduced for crueltie,
knowing her owne mildnes, and desirous
to leaue a good remembrance of her name behinde
her, was much offended with the Iudges
of the Papists apprehended, if they passed any
cruell sentences against them, which might be
iniurious to her honor. Insomuch that they were

forced to excuse themselues by publike writings,
wherein they protested, that the Priests were
much more mildly vsed then they deserved: that
no question of Religion was moued to them, but
onely of such pernicious machinations against
their Country, against their Prince, whereof they
were either found guiltie, or by the discovery of
others, suspected. That Campian was never so
racked, but that presently he was able to walke,
or to subscribe to his confessions. But for Briant,
who stubbornly denied to vtter by speech or by
writing, who was the man that wrote these secret
things which were found about him; to this man
meat was denied, vntill by writing he would aske
it. For all this the Queene was not satisfied, and
therefore she commanded the Examiners to abstaine
from tormenting men, and the Iudges from
punishing. And short after, she commanded seventie
Priests to be sent out of England, whereof
some were condemned to die, all of them were
intangled within the danger of the lawes. The
chiefe of these were Gasper Haywod, the sonne of
Haywod the Epigrammatist, who of all the Iesuites
first entred England: Iames Bosgraue, which
was also a Iesuit, Iohn Hart, the most learned among
them, with whom Doct: Reinolds had conference,
and Edward Rishton, a wicked and vngrateful
man, who wrote a Booke presently after,
shewing forth the poyson of a cankred heart against
the Queene, to whom he owed his life.
            The Lord Paget and Arundell who went into
France, were narrowly observed there, by Edward

Stafford, the Ambassadour Leiger there for
Queene Elizabeth; but he could not find out
what they practised; yet he dealt with the French
King, that they, Morgan, and some other English
fugitiues, who were knowne to be practisers against
their Prince, and their Country, might be
thrust out of France. But it was answered, that if
they practised any thing in France, the King
would by law punish them, but if they had practised
any thing in England, that of such things
the King could take no notice, nor by law punish
them: that all Kingdomes were free for fugitiues,
that it behooued Kings to maintaine their owne
liberties: That Elizabeth not long before had
admitted into her Kingdome Montgomery, the
Prince of Condie, and others of the French Nation,
and that Segneres Ambassadour of the King
of Navarre was in England, practising of some
things that concerned the French state.
            In the meane time Bernardinus Mendoza the
King of Spaine his Ambassadour for England,
stole fecretly into France, fretting and fuming,
that he was thrust out of England by a violation
of the right of an Ambassadour: When as indeed
he was a man of a troublesome spirit, and had abused
the reuerend right of Ambassadours, by
the practises of treason against this State wherein
he was. He was commanded to depart out of the
realme, whereas many thought fit that he should
haue beene with some severity censured for violating
the office of an Ambassadour. For he had
practised with Throgmorton, and others, to bring

in strangers into England, to invade the land, and
to remoue the Queene. And being gently reprooued
for these things, he was so far from offering
to excuse these things with a modest answer, that
he began to accuse the Queene and the Councell,
for the money taken from the Merchants of Genua,
and for helping the States of the Netherlands,
of the Count Antow, of Antony of Portugall, and
charged them with the spoyles that Sr 
               Francis
Drake had taken from the Spany trds in the west
Indies. But that the Spanyard might the better
vnderstand, that this which Queene Elizabeth
had done in sending away Mendoza, was no violating
of an Ambassadour, but a censure of Mendoza
his wicked practises, Sr 
               William Wade was
sent to Spaine, who might plainly informe the
King, how vnworthily he had behaved himselfe
in his Ambassage: and might also signifie, that
the Queene would not haue this sending away of
him to be interpreted a renuntiation of friendship,
but that she would maintaine all offices of
humanitie, if he would send any other, that were
carefull to conserue friendship betweene them,
so that the like offices were performed to her
Ambassadour in Spaine. The Spanish King would
not admit Wade to his presence, but referred him
to his Councell: Wade herevpon declared boldly,
that the custome was received among Nations,
that even in burning warre, Ambassadours were
admitted into presence of their enemies: & that
Charles the fift Emperour, Father to the King of
Spaine, admitted into his presence an Herald

who denounced to him warres from the French
King, and denied to communicate the instructions
of his ambassage to his Councellers. I diacius
the Kings secretary could by no cunning fish out
of Wade what were his instructions, vntill he vnderstood
the whole matter from Mendoza, then
lurking in France. Then the Secretary laying aside
his publike person, did familiarly declare to
Sr 
               William Wade, that he was sorry that some men
did labour craftily to dissolue friendship among
Princes, and to nourish hatred betweene them;
The iniury that was done, was not done to the
Ambassadours but to the Catholike King: that
there was no cause for him to accuse Mendoza to
the King, who was sufficiently punished with an
ignominious extrusion out of England, for the
fault, if there were any, which he committed.
Neither might he complaine if he were not admitted;
for the Catholike King did nothing herein
but quit like with like, seeing Mendoza was dismissed
from the Queene, vnheard. And as she referred
Mendoza to her Councell, so the King had
referred him to the Cardinall Granuillanus. Wade
answered, there was great difference in their cases;
for himselfe he had never offended the Catholike
King: but Mendoza had grievously offended
against the Queene, and for a long time through
his owne insolency disdained to come, and had
committed many things vnworthy the office of
an Ambassadour; yet he could not be admitted,
but returned vnheard. The crimes that he would
haue obiected against Mendoza, were taken our

of the confession of Throgmorton.
               Throgmorton. An: Dō. 1584. For Fran
                     •
                  is
Throgmorton, when he was apprehended, sent
priuily one packet of letters to Mendoza. His other
packets being sought and opened, there
were two Catalogues found; In the one of them
were the names of all the havens of England, that
were for forces to land in: In the other were contained
the names of the Noble-men, which here
and there throughout England favoured the Roman
Religion. These papers when Throgmorton
saw produced, he cryed out that they were counterfeited,
that he had never seene them before,
that they were devised for his destruction. But
when he was againe brought to the racke, he denied
not to answer what he knew to the questiōs
proposed. Being therefore demanded of those
Catalogues, to what purpose they had beene written,
he made this narration; that not many yeares
since he went to the Spaw water, where, with Ieney
and Fr: Inglefeld, he had counsell and communication,
how England might be taken by strangers,
and the forme of the government changed. For
that purpose he described the names of the havens,
and of Noble-men; that Morgan had certified
him by Letters out of France, that the Catholike
Princes were resolved to invade England, that
the Queene of Scots should be set at libertie by the
forces of the Guises. To this proiect there was
nothing wanting but money, and the helpe that
was expected out of England. To effect this the
better, Charles Paget, vnder the name of Mope, was
secretly sent into Sussex, where the Guise purposed

to take land: that he had communicated the
matter to Mendoza, and told him the names of
the noble-men, who knew all these things before
fully of the conspirators: Neither denied he that
himselfe had promised his help to Mendoza, and
withall that he admonished Mendoza of those
Nobles that were fit for him being a publike person
to deale withall, which himselfe being a private
man could not doe without danger. And
that he had taken order with him, and concluded
of the meanes to be vsed, namely, that the
chiefe Catholikes, as soone as ever the forraine
forces drew neare, should muster souldiers in the
Queenes name, who should ioyn themselues with
the forraine forces. Thus much he confessed willingly.
            Yet when he came to iudgement in the Guild
Hall at London, he denied all, & said that all these
were fained devises to saue him from the racke,
and openly accus
                  •
               d the Queene of crueltie, the
examiners of falshood; seeking a starting hole from
the space of time which passed between the time
of the committing his crime, and the time of his
iudgement; for in the XIII. of Elizabeth, certaine
crimes are made treason, for which no man
should be called in question, vnles the delinquent
were accused within six moneths after the crime
committed, and the crime were proued by witnesse
and oath of two, or by the partie his owne
free confession. Now he pleaded that this time
was past, and therefore that he was not to be called
into iudgment. But the Iudges answered and

shewed that the crimes obiected against him, were
of another kind; for he had offended against an
old law of treason made in the time of Edward 3.
which admitteth no circumscription of time, or
proofe. And from that law he was condemned.
Afterward being perswaded and better thinking
on the matter, he craued the Queenes mercy, and
by writing confessed all at full againe, which he
had done before: and as a man vnconstant, began
to deny againe at the gallowes.
         
         
            CHAPTER VIII.
            
               QVeene ELIZABETH at this time,
sought a faire opportunitie and
meanes to set the Queene of Scots
free: and for that purpose had sent
Sr 
               William Wade, that was now returned
out of Spaine, to conferre with her of the
meanes, and was about to send Sr 
               Walter Mildmay
to bring that matter to a farther end. But some
terrors and feares broke in between them which
disturbed that proiect. Especially by a discovery
of papers which Creighton, a Scots Iesuit sayling
into Scotland, did tare then when he was taken by
Dutch pyrats. Creighton tore the papers, & threw
them into the Sea; but they were by the force of
the winde blowne backe againe into the ship, not
without a miracle, as Creighton himselfe said; the
papers being brought to Sr 
               William Wade, with

much la
                  •
               our and singular skill he ioyned them
together againe; and found that they contained
new practises of the Pope, the Spanyard, the Guises
resolution to invade England.
            
            Whereupon, and because many other rumors
of dangers were increased; to the end that the
wicked and treasonable practises might be in
time prevented, and the Queenes life and safetie
might be procured, vpon whose safety both the
estate of the Kingdome, and of Religion depended:
A great number throughout all England, of all
sorts of men out of common charity, whilst they
shewed their loue and care of the Queene: bound
themselues by an association (as then it was called)
by their mutuall promises, subscriptions of their
hands and seales, to prosecute all such by all their
force even to death, whosoever should attempt any
thing against the life of the Queene: the Earle
of Leicester was supposed to be the author of this
association. Surely it was vsefull, and held many
in order. The Queene of Scots tooke this as devised
to bring her into danger, and was so continually
set on by seditious spirits, that if they may
haue accesse are able to draw the greatest Princes
to destruction. And what hath beene their practise,
but to bring great personages and great houses
to ruine? Lamentable experience sheweth openly
the fruit of their malice, and wicked plots
for treason; which they call religion. The Scots
Queene led on by her blind guids, dealt somwhat
rashly, but with importunity to the Pope and Spanyard,
by Sr 
               Francis Inglefeld, that by all meanes

they would with speed, vndertake their intended
busines. There were some also that laboured to
draw Queene Elizabeths affections altogether
from the Scots Queene; They told her that Cardinall
Alan for the English Catholikes ecclesiasticall,
Inglefeld for the Laiks, and for the Queene of Scots,
the Bishop of Ross had vndertaken, & were among
themselues agreed, and with the consent also of
the Pope and Spanyard, had fully resolved vpon
these points: That Queene Elizabeth should be deprived
of her Kingdome; the King of Scots as a manifest
favourer of heresie, should vtterly be disinherited
of the Kingdome of England; that the Scots Queene
shall marry some noble-man of England, which is a Catholike;
that this man must be chosen King of England
by the Catholikes of England; that the choice so made
must be confirmed by the Pope; that the children of him
so chosen begotten of the Scots Queene, must be declared
successours in the Kingdome. All these things
were confirmed to be true by testimony of Hart
the Priest. Who was this noble English man, that
should marry the Scots Queene, was now much inquired
after; Sir Francis Wal
                     •
                  ingham sought it out
with all diligence, yet found it not out. There
was suspition of Henry Howard, brother to the
Duke of Norfolke, who was noble by birth, vnmarried,
and a favourer of that Religion, and in
great grace and favour with them.
            These things that were discovered by Throgmorton,
by Creightons papers, and other mens, were
matters which bred suspitions and feares though
they were never so effected as they were intended.

But we find by these things, that France and
Spaine, and the strength of the Pope, were here all
combined against Queene Elizabeth, and King
Iames, for no other cause, but for their religion;
because both Queene Elizabeth and King Iames,
had established the same religion. Against which
religion all the great powers of the world were
combined, and were therefore ready with their
vtmost indevours to root out these two Princes
from England and Scotland. If a man shall consider
the Councels, the Pollicies, the strength of
these great powers which were set against these
two Princes, it is a matter to be wondred at, how
they should stand against so deepe and desperate
dangers. Here I wish that a Papist of any vnderstanding
would take this matter into his consideration.
And looke but a little further to the end
and event of things. What man purposed, What
God wrought. What became of these two Princes,
Queene Elizabeth & King Iames, against whom
the world thus conspired? Queene Elizabeth after
so many malicious proiects against her, by open
warres, by secret conspiracies, yet lived to see all
the malicious practises against her, defeated and
overthrowne, the practisers themselues ruinated,
her people and Kingdome defended, Gods truth
maintained, her service for the truth rewarded, and
after all, dyed quietly in her bed, and hath left a
blessed memory behinde her. King IAMES that
was in the same cause with her, in the same manner
threatned for his Religion, to be made incapable
of the inheritance of England, and then neither

could he haue holden Scotland, for he must
either haue all his right, or loose all; for there is
no middle-way in the inheritance of Kings: yet
after all these threatned dangers by the great
powers of the world, after a number of dangerous
and devilish practises against him at home;
he hath not onely quietly possessed that which
he had, but is in the peaceable possession of England,
with such loue, such gladnesse of heart and
common reioycing, that the like hath not beene
knowne in former times. And which was never
done by any before, though much wished, and
attempted: he hath in his royall person knit
England and Scotland together; he hath not onely
maintained the truth of Religion by his authoritie,
as all Christian Princes are bound to do;
but also by his wisedome, by his learning confirmed
the truth, drawne many to the knowledge
of it by his learned Labours. Wherein he hath
not onely farre exceeded all his progenitours in
this Kingdome, but hath left all the Kings and
Emperours in the world farre behind him in this
honour; so that since the beginning of the time
of grace, to this day, the world never saw a King
so furnished and inabled to maintaine the truth,
and to discover the blindnesse and superstition
of false Religion. And therefore hath God blessed
him with extraordinary blessings; the loue of his
subiects, the peaceable estate of Ireland, which before
his time was never governed in peace, especially
the fruit of Religion, and the reward of
Religion maintained, is the greatest blessing that

Kings can looke for. This hath beene, and is the
state of these religious Provinces; so that men
shall say,Psal. 58. 11. 
               Doubtl
                     •
                  sse there is a reward for the righteous,
verily there is a God that iudgeth the earth. And
because my purpose in writing this Booke, is to
declare the great Workes of God, in the defence
of this Church of England since Religion planted
here by Queene Elizabeth; and to giue God all
the glory, both of the planting and maintaining
thereof: We therefore remember these things
with great gladnesse and ioy of heart to Gods
glory, giving thankes to his holy name, for the
favours that he hath exhibited to his Church
here, by the faithfull service of these two royall
servants of God, in whom is truely verified that
which the Prophet Esay foretold, speaking of
Gods favour to his Church: Kings shall be thy
nurcing Fathers, and Queenes shall be thy Nurces.
In these things we can lift vp our hearts to God,
and giue him the glory and thankes for all his
goodnesse. But can our adversaries doe the like,
whose practises against these noble Princes, were
wicked and malicious, and by God confounded?
Let men see and confesse the hand of God in
maintaining them that maintaine his truth, and
dishonouring them that dishonour him.
            The next yeare,An: Dō. 1585. that is An: 1585. there was a
Parliament held, wherein there was in the lower
house a Law proposed against Iesuites: Which
was iudged needfull and accepted of all without
contradiction, saving only William Parry, a welch
man, obscure, of meane fortunes, yet a Doctor

of the civill Law, he spake against that law which
then was exhibited, and said it was a cruell bloudy
law, and desperate, and pernicious to the English
Nation: Being required to shew his reasons
for that strange opinion of his, he obstinately refused
so to doe, vnlesse it were before the Queenes
councell: Wherevpon he was committed to prison.
But after his reasons were heard and his submission
made, he was againe admitted into the
assembly. Presently after, he was accused by Edward
Neu
                     •
                  l (who chalenged the inheritance of
the Neuils, and the title of the Lord Latimer, as
next heire male.) Edward Neuil charged him for
practising the Queenes death.
            This Parry some two yeares before returning
out of Italy, to the end that he might win favour
and credit with the Queene, declared secretly to
her what Morgan, and other fugitiues had practised
to her destruction. Making semblance to the
Queene, that he was conversant with them for no
other end, but onely to search out their secret
purposes, that so he might the better be a meanes
to provide for the Queenes safety. Wherevpon
the Queene did not easily giue credit to Neuil the
accuser Yet she commanded Sr 
               Fancis Walsingham
to aske Parry, whether he had not dealt with
some person discontented and suspected of that
matter, onely to try the man. Which thing being
demanded, he vtterly denied. The foole saw
not, that by this meanes the Queenes lenity opened
a way for him to escape the danger; for surely
if he had signified, that onely for to try the

man he dealt with Neuil, whom he knew to be a
man discontented and suspected, as he had foretold
the Queene, he might haue avoyded the
danger; but they who in their heart once haue
given intertainment to wickednesse and treason,
though otherwise they be of wit and sharpe vnderstanding,
are made blind, by a iust iudgement
of God. Now when as Neuil had no witnesse against
Parry: there was no great difference betweene
Parry his word and his. But Parry, after
some sharpe wordes had passed betweene them;
was imprisoned in the Tower. Where he freely
confessed thus much.
            In the yeare 1570. (said he) I was admitted a
sworn servant to the Queene, I remained devoted
to her Maiestie till the yeare 1580. At what time
I fell into great danger of my life, with great ignominy,
(for he had broken into the chamber
of Hugh Hare, in whose debt he was, and wounded
him, wherevpon being condemned by law,
his life was saved by the Queenes pardon) after
that, I liued much vexed in my minde, and getting
leaue to trauell, I went into France; and had
no purpose to returne, because I had given my
selfe to the Catholike Religion. At Paris I was reconciled;
At Venice I had communication with
Benedict Palmius a Iesuit, touching the afflicted
Catholikes in England, and I signified that I had
found out a way to helpe them, if the Pope, or
some learned Divines would avouch it to be a
lawfull course. He commended this thing as pious:
He commended me to Campegius the Popes

               Nuntio at Ven
                     •
                  ce, and Campegius to the Pope. I
moued that I might come to Rome with safeti
                  •
               .
Wherevpon Letters of publike credence were
sent to me by the Cardinall of Come: but these
were not large enough, and therefore other more
large were sent. But then was I returned into
France. Where meeting with Morgan, he signified,
that there was an expectation, that I should
performe some especiall service to God, and to
the Catholike Church. I answered, that I was
most ready to kill, if it were the greatest subiect
of England. O but (said he) and why not the
Queene her selfe? I said that this also might be
easily done, so that it might appeare to be lawfull.
For Watt a Priest, whose advise I asked in this
matter, suppressing the names, told me plainly,
that it was not lawfull, (and Creighton the Iesuit
is of the same opinion, teaching that evill must
not be done, that good may come: that God is more
delighted with aduerbs than nounes, and the thing
that is done well and lawfully pleaseth him better
then a thing good: and that by the destruction of
one, many soules are not to be redeemed, without
an expresse commandement of God.) Yet
for all this seeing I had in Italy bound my selfe
by Letters and promise, I could not goe backe,
if the Pope did approue it, and would grant me a
plenary indulgence. Which I requested in my
Letters to the Pope, by Ragazonius the Popes
Nuntio in France. Who commended the interprise,
and sent my Letters to Rome. Being returned
into England, I gat accesse to the Queene.
               
And all being remoued, I opened the whole conspiracy,
yet hiding many things, with as great
art as possibly I could. She heard it vndaunted,
vnterrified. I departed daunted and terrified Neither
can I forget that which she said, that no Catholikes
were to be brought into question for Religion,
or for the Popes supremacy, so that they
carry themselues as good subiects. In this time
whilst I stayed daily in Court, seeking to be preferred
with the mastership of S. Katharines, I received
Letters from the Cardinall of Come,
wherein the attempt was commended, and I was
absolved in the Popes name. These Letters I
shewed the Queene; how they did worke with her
I know not: but with me they wrought so farre,
that they set a new courage in me to attempt the
interprise, and tooke all scruple out of my mind;
yet it was not my minde to offer any force, if by
any reasons she might be perswaded to deale
more gently with Catholikes. And to the end I
should not commit slaughter, alwayes when I
had accesse to her I layd aside my dagger. So oft
as I considered her and her Princely vertues, I
was distracted by an ambiguous care, for my
vowes were in heaven, my letters and promises
with men. And to my selfe I revolved these
things in my minde. She never deserved well of
me. It is true she pardoned my life; but for such
a cause to take away my life, were tyrannicall.
Thus not content with my state, I departed from
Court; and I light vpon Doct. Alans Booke,
written against the iustice of England. Who teacheth

that Princes being excommunicate for
heresie, are to be despoiled of their Kingdomes
and liues: that Booke did very sharply stirre me
vp to finish mine attempt; I read this Booke to
Neuil, whom I entertained at my table; and this
was done full six moneths before he accused me.
After this he came to me, And let vs dare, said
he, to doe something, seeing of the Queene we
can obtaine nothing. And he proposed some
things of the delivery of the Scots Queene. I did
here interpose; O but I haue a greater matter in
my head, and more profitable for the Catholike
Church. The next day he came, and swearing
vpon the Bible, that he would keepe my counsell,
and constantly prosecute whatsoever was
vsefull for the Catholike Religion. And I sware in
like sort. Our determination was to set vpon the
Queene with ten horsemen as she was riding in the
fields, and so to kill her. Which thing Neuil concealed
all this while. But when the newes came,
that the Earle of Westmerland was dead, whose inheritance
he hoped to haue presently, not respecting
his oath, he opened these things against
me. These things Parry confessed, in the presence
of the Lord Hunsdon, Sir Christopher Harton, and
Sir Francis Walsingham, privie Councellers, and
farther by his Letters to the Queene, to Burghley
Lord Treasurer, and to the Earle of Leicester, he
acknowledged his fault and craued pardon.
            Some few dayes after he was brought to VVestminster
hall to iudgement. Where the heads of
his accusation being read, he confessed himselfe

guiltie. Sir Christohper Hatton, to satisfie the mult
                  ••
               de
present, thought it fit, that the crime
should punctually be opened out of his own confession.
Which Parry himselfe acknowledged to
be free, not extorted: and the Iudges intreated
that he would reade them. But the Clarke of the
Crowne read them: and the Letters of the Cardinall
of Come, & Parry his Letters to the Queene,
to the Lord Burghley, and the Earle of Leicester,
all which he granted to be true. Yet he denied
that he was at any time resolved to kill the
Queene. He was therefore commanded to speake,
if he had any thing to say why iudgement should
not passe. Here he answered with perturbation,
as one troubled with the conscience of the crime,
I see I must die, because I was not resolved. And being
desired to speake more plainly, if he would
say any thing; My bloud, said he, be among you.
When sentence of death was pronounced against
him, he ragingly cited the Queene to the tribunall
seat of God. Being brought to the gallowes,
he bragged much that he had beene a faithfull
keeper of the Queene, because he had not killed
her. Thus like a glorious Roman Catholike, never
once in one word cōmending himselfe to God,
he died like a traytor in the court before VVestminster
Hall, where the Lords and Commons
were then assembled in Parliament.
            In this Parliament some lawes were enacted for
the Queenes safety against the Iesuites and Priests,
who attempted daily horrible treasons from the
Bull of Pius V.
            
            
               
                  It was therefore enacted that within forty daies
they should all depart the Land. If any came in
againe after that, and stayed here, they should
be guilty of treason: that if any received them
wittingly and willingly, or interteined them,
nourished, or helped them, such should be guiltie
of fellony: that they who are brought vp in
the seminaries, if they returne not within sixe
monethes after warning given, and should not
submit themselues to the Queene, before a Bishop,
or two Iustices of peace, they should be
guiltie of treason. And they who had submitted,
if they should within ten yeares come to
the Court, or nearer then ten miles of the
Court, that then their submission should be
voyd. They who sent any money by any means
to the Students of the seminaries, should be guiltie
of Praemunire. If any of the Peeres of the
Realme, that is, Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, Vicounts,
Barons of the Parliament, should offend
against these lawes, he should be tryed by his
Peeres. They who know any Iesuites and Priests
to lye lurking in the Realme, and within twelue
dayes doe not detect them, shall be fined at the
Queenes pleasure, and put in prison. If any be
suspected to be one of those Iesuites or Priests,
and shall not submit himselfe to examination,
for his contempt he shall be imprisoned, vntill
he submit. He that shall send any Christian, or
any other to the Seminaries and Colledges of
the Popish profession, shall be fined an hundreth
pounds. They that are so sent, shall not succeed

in inheritance, nor inioy any goods what way
soever they may chance. And so shall it be to
them that within a yeare returne not from
those seminaries; vnlesse they conforme themselues
to the Church of England. If the keepers
of havens permit any to passe the seas without
the Queenes licence, or the licence of six Councellers,
except Mariners and Merchants, they
shall be remoued from their places; the Shipmaster
that carries them shall loose the Shipp
and all the goods in her, and be imprisoned a
whole yeare.
            
            The severitie of these lawes (which were no
lesse then necessary for such times and such mischiefes)
made the Papists in England afeard, and among
others, Philip Howard, Earle of Arundell;
in so much as fearing least he might offend against
those lawes, he purposed to leaue his countrey.
He had his bloud restored by the Queenes
favour three yeares before. And after that being
dis-favoured by reason of some secret suggestions
of certaine great personages against him, he
secretly gaue himselfe to the Popish Religion, and
made choice of an austere life. Surely if good instructours
might haue beene admitted to him, he
might haue beene easily and happily confirmed
in the truth. He was once or twice called before
the Councell table, and refuted the things obi
                  •
               cted
to him. Yet was he commanded to keepe his
house. Six moneths after he was set at libertie,
and came to the Parliament; but the first day,
whilst the Sermon was preached he withdrew

himselfe out of the company. The Parliament
being ended, being as then resolved to depart,
he wrote to the Queene a long and a mournfull
complaint, which Letters he commanded should
be delivered after his departure: he complained
of the envie of his potent adversaries, wherevnto
he was forced to yeeld; seeing they triumphed
over his innocency. He recounted the vnfortunate
destinies of his ancestors, of his great grandfather,
condemned his cause not being heard: of
his grand-father, who for matters of small moment
was beheaded; and of his father, whom he
affirmed to be circumvented by his adversaries,
who yet never had an evill minde against his
Prince nor Countrey. As for himselfe, least he
should succeed the heire of his fathers infelicitie,
said he, to the end that he might serue God, and
provide for the health of his soule, he had forsaken
his Countrey, but not his alleagance to his
Prince. After these Letters were delivered, he
went into Sussex, and having provided a shippe,
in an obscure corner, and now being ready to
take ship, he was apprehended by the mean
                  •
               s of
those whom he trusted, and by the master of the
ship discovered, and was sent into the Tower as
a prisoner.
         
         
            
            CHAPTER IX.
            
               AT that time was Henry Percy Earle of
Northumberland in the Tower, suspected
to be of councell with Throgmorton,
and the Lord Paget, and the
Guises, to invade England, and to free the Scots
Queene. He was found dead in his bed, shot with
three Bullets vnder his left pap: the chamber
doore bolted on the inside. The Crowners enquest
found a dagge, and gun powder in the chamber,
and examining the man that bought the dagge,
and him that sold it, they found that the Earle
had beene the cause of his owne death. Three
dayes after the Lords met in the Starre-chamber.
The Lord Chancelour Broumley, briefly declared
that the Earle had entred into treasonable councels
against his Prince and Countrey, which now
when he perceived that they were come to light,
troubled in conscience for the thing, hath offred
force to himselfe. And to satisfie the multitude
then present, he willed the Queenes Atturney generall,
and the rest of the Queenes Councell,
plainly to open the causes why he was kept in
prison, and the manner of his death. Wherevpon
Popham then Atturney, beginning from the rebellion
of the North sixteene yeares before, he
declared, that for this rebellion and for a purpose
to deliver the Scots Queene, that he was called into
question, acknowledged his fault, submitted
himselfe to the Queenes mercy, was fined fiue

thousand markes. That the Queene of her clemencie
tooke not of that fine so much as a farthing,
and after his brothers death confirmed
him in the honor of the Earledome. Notwithstanding
all this, he had entred into pernicious
counsel to deliver the Scots Queene, to overthrow
the English Queene, with the State and Religion:
that Mendoza the Spaniard had told Throgmorton
that Charles Paget vnder the name of Mope, had
secretly dealt with him in Sussex of these things:
that the Lord Paget had signified the same to
Throgmorton, as appeared from Creighton the
Scots Iesuites papers. And that Charles Paget had
shewed the same things to William Shelley when
he returned out of France. After that, Egerton
the Queenes Sollicitour, inferred the same from
circumstances, and a care of concealing the matter.
That when as there was none in England that
could accuse the Earle of this crime, except the
Lord Paget; (with whom Throgmorton had familiaritie)
he had provided a shippe for the Lord
Paget, by Shelley, a few dayes after Throgmorton
was apprehended. So was the Lord Paget sent away
into France. And when Throgmorton began
to confesse some things, the Earle departed from
London to Petworth, and sending for Shelley, told
him that he was in danger of his life and fortunes,
he intreated him to keepe counsell, and to
put away those that knew of the departure of the
Lord Paget, and of the comming of Charles Paget.
Which was presently done, and himselfe sent far
off that servant which he vsed to send to Charles

Paget. The Sollicitour addeth, that when he was
in prison, he dealt often with Shelley, the keepers
being corrupted, to vnderstand what those
things were which he had confessed. But when
by a poore woman secretly sent betweene them,
Shelley had signified, that he could keepe counsell
no longer, that there was great differēce between
their two conditions; that he must come vnder
the racke, which the Earle in respect of his place
and order was freed from, and had written to him
what he had confessed: The Earle therevpon
sighed and said, as Pantin his Chamberlain hath
confessed, that Shelley his confession had vndone
him. After the manner of his death was declared
by the testimony of the Enquest, and by Pantins
testimony. Many good men were very sorrowfull,
that a man of such nobility, wisdome, and valour
was so lost.
            My purpose is in this Narration, to obserue the
great and manifold deliverances of this Church.
When I am drawne by the course of the History
to open these practises, in which noblemen haue
beene misled: this I confesse I relate with great
commiseration; for seeing that Noble houses are
the honor of the King, the ornament of the Kingdome,
there is no man that loueth the honor of
his owne Country, that can write or speake of
the fall of such men, but with griefe and sorrow.
Of such I will make no other observations, but
onely the testification of mine owne sorrow But
yet here I must obserue one thing for the good
and instruction of their posteritie, or the like, that

they may take heed of these pernicious instruments,
Priests, Iesuites, and those that are infected,
yea and poysoned with the infection of
them. These gracelesse merchants haue vtterly
vndone many noble persons, which without
their restlesse suggestions and councels, might
and doubtlesse would haue bin great ornaments
of their Countries both in peace and warres.
Was there ever any noble house in these times
ruinated, without the practise of these wicked
miscreants? Let all the bloud that hath bin shed
in this Land in the Northern rebellion, & at other
times, be laid vpon these wicked instruments of
bloud. And let the world consider the outragious
wickednesse of this generation, that having
in formertimes sucked the bloud of the Saints
as greedy instruments of the great Whore, that is
drunke with the bloud of the Saints: now by a iust,
but strange iudgement of God, they are fallen into
such practises, as shed their owne bloud and
the bloud of such as are misled by them. God is
to be reverenced in all his iudgements, and let
not men striue against God to maintaine a cause
which God will overthrow, with all the maintainers
thereof.
            And it is not much to be marveiled, if these
cunning stirrers haue deceiued some of our Nobles,
for we see that they haue cousened great
Kings and Princes. For soone after this in the
yeare 1586.An: Dō. 1586. these pernicious medlers, these Iesuites
shewed themselues in other colours, for when
these bloudy instruments that had so long laboured

the ruine of England, & were out of hope
to restore the Romish Religion to England, either
by the Scots Queene, which was now more strictly
kept, or by the King then of Scotland, who had
plainly professed and established the Gospell in
his Kingdome: they fell now to a new and a
strange practise, which might make the world to
wonder: they began out of their false and lying
forgeries, to set a foot an imaginary title of the
King of Spaine, to the right and succession of the
English Crowne. To this purpose, as Pasquirus
discovered, they sent into England one Shamiers,
(if it be not a counterfeit name) a lesuit, which
might draw the discontented Nobles vnto the
Spanish side, & throw the Scots Queene headlong
into dangers and despayre, signifying to her, that
if she should be trouble some to hinder their designes,
that neither she nor her sonne should
raigne here. And stirred vp new troubles in
France to withdraw her cousens the Guises from
hindering their devises, by wrapping them in
new garboiles against the King of Navarre and
the Prince of Condy. In which the King of Spaine
had a hand, to set France in troubles, that he in
the meane time might the better proceed in his
intentions for England. These desperate courses
drew the Scots Queene into more danger.
            At this time a most desperate and pernicious
conspiracy brake out, which as by the free confessions
of the conspirators appeareth, was thus.
Some English Divines of the Rhemish seminary,
whilst they seemed to admire as men astonished

or rather doting, an omnipotency in the Pope,
did labour to perswade themselues, that Pius V.
his bull against Queene Elizabeth was ind
                  •
               ted by
the Holy Ghost: and that it was a thing meritorious
to kill excommunicated Princes, yea, and
that it was martyrdome to loose their liues in
that quarrell. Giffard a Doctor of Theologie, Gilbert
Giffard, and Hodgeson, Priests, did so hammer
these devises into the corrupt head of Iohn Sauage
(who they say was a Bastard) that he being heady
and bloudy (a fit instrument for 
                  
                     •
                  esuites) made a
vow to kill Queene Elizabeth. At the same time
they set out a Book (for no other purpose, but
with great cunning to draw the Queene and
Councell into securitie, and to lay their vngracious
plots more deeply, and so with more ease
to come to that mischievous end they shot at).
In which Booke they admonish the Papists in
England, that they practise no hurt to the Queene,
for that they were onely to vse such weapons as
are lawfull for Christians to vse, that is, 
                  
                     •
                  eares, spirituall
armour, daily prayers, watchings, fastings against
their adversaries, this was their 
                  •
               ox craft.
And withall they spred a false rumour by their
whisperers, that George Giffard one of the Queenes
Gentlemen Pencionaries had sworne to kill the
Queene, and for that cause had wiped the Guise
of a great summe of money.
            At Easter following, Iohn Ballard, a Priest of the
Remish seminary, who had assayed the mindes of
many Papists, to whom he travelled to conferre
with, through England and Scotland, was now returned

into England. This man had dealt with
Bernardin Mendoza, now the ordinary Spanish
Ambassadour in France, and with Charles Paget
for an invasion of England. Declaring that now
was the fittest opportunitie for that service,
whilst the military men were absent, being then
imployed in the Low-Countries. A fitter time
could never be hoped, for as much as the Pope,
the Spanyard, the Guise, the Duke of Parma, had
resolved to invade England, to turne the Warres
from the Netherlands. And albeit Paget had made
it evident, that as long as the Queene liued, the
invasion of England would be in vaine, yet was
Ballard sworne, and sent into England, to procure
all the helpe that might be to the conspiratours,
and the liberty of the Scots Queene.
            
            At Pentecost following, that silken Priest came
into England, in a Souldiers habit, with a feigned
name, called Captaine Foscue. This man had
conference in London with Antony Babington, a
Gentleman of Darbyshire, yong, rich, wittie, and
learned aboue the expectation of his yeares, and
being addicted to the Romish Religion, had a little
before got into France without leaue. Where he
had familiar conversation with Thomas Morgan,
and with the Bishop of Glasco the Scots Queenes
Ambassadour. These men extolling the heroick
vertues of the Scots Queene, made to him great
ostentation of assured hopes of honor by her
meanes to be obtained. The ambitious yong
man was easily drawne to take hold of that faire
glistering estate proposed by them. And they

were as ready cunningly to set him forward;
and before he had well thought of the matter,
they commended him by Letters to the Scots
Queene. For when he was returned into England,
she saluted him favourably with her Letters;
from that time Morgan vsed his helpe in sending
Letters to her, vntill she was committed to the
custodie of Amice Paulet. For after that, the yong
man finding the danger, ceased. With this Babington,
Ballard had conference of the things aforesaid.
But he thought assuredly so long as
Queene Elizabeth liued, that the invasion of England
would come to nothing. But when Ballard
signified to him, that Queene Elizabeth would
not long be aliue; for Sauage who had vowed to
kill her, was now come into England; Babington
thought not good that so great a matter should
be committ
                  •
               d to Sauage onely, least he might be
stopped from the enterprise. But rather to sixe
valiant and resolute Gentlemen, in which number
Sauage should be one, that he might not be
condemned for not performing his vow. Wherevpon
Babington tooke a new course, for the invasion,
touching the ports where the strangers
might land, and the forces that should be ioyned
with them, and the delivering the Scots
Queene, and the Tragick slaughter of Queene Elizabeth,
as he called it.
            Whilst he was fixed in these cogitations, he
received Letters by an vnknowne boy; written
from the Queene of Scots, in that familiar character
which was vsed betweene them. She blamed

him, but mildly, for his long silence; and
willed him to send her the Packet of Letters
sent from Morgan, and delivered by the French
Ambassadors Secretary. Which he did accordingly.
And by the same messenger sent to her
a Letter, wherein he excused his silence, for that
he wanted opportunitie of sending since that
she was in the custodie of Amice Paulet, a puritan,
a meere Leicestrian, and a most bitter enemy of
the Catholike faith. He declared what he had resolved
with Ballard, that sixe Gentlemen were
chosen to performe the tragicke slaughter, and
that himselfe with an hundreth other, would deliver
her. He intreated that to these Heroick
Actors (so he called them) rewards might be
proposed, or to their posteritie, if they should
faile in the action. The twentie-seventh of Iuly,
answer was made to these Letters. Babington
his forward desire of promoting the Catholike
Religion was commended. He was warned that
it might be vndertaken considerately, and that
nothing be moued before they were sure of externall
forces: that an association among them
might be made, as if they feared the Puritanes:
that some trouble might be stirred in Ireland,
whilst the stroke might be given here at home:
that Arundell, and his brethren, and Northumberland,
should be drawne to the side, VVestmerland,
Paget, and others, might be secretly called home.
The way to deliver her was also prescribed; either
to overturne a Coach in the gate, or to set
the Stables on fire, or to intercept her whilst

she rode to take the ayre betweene Chartley and
Stafford. Last of all Babington was warranted to
vndertake for rewards, and to pawne his credit
to the six Gentlemen, and others.
            Now had he gathered about him certaine
Gentlemen, inflamed with a fiery zeale of the
Romish Religion. Of whom the chiefe were,
Edward Windsore, brother to the Lord Windsore,
a yong Gentleman of a soft disposition, Thomas
Salisbury, of a Knights house in Denbigh-shire,
Charles Tilney, an ancient Gentleman, the onely
hope of the Familie, one of the Queenes Pencionaries,
whom Ballard had reconciled to the Roman
Church; both proper yong men: Chidioc
Tychburn, of Hampshire, Edward Abington, whose
father was the Queenes Cofferer: Robert Gage of
Surrey, Iohn Traverse, and Iohn Charnok of Lanchishire,
Iohn Iones, whose father was Queene
Maries taylour, Sauage, Barnwell, a Gentleman of
Ireland, Henry Dun, Clarke of the first fruit office.
Into this societie Polly also insinuated himselfe:
a man well acquainted with the affayres
of the Scots Queene: a man well skilled in the
art of simulation and dissimulation. Who was
thought daily to reveile all their councells to
Sir Francis Walsingham, and to thrust them headlong
into mischiefe, who were forward enough
of themselues to evill. Albeit, Navus the Scots
Queenes Secretary warned them to beware of
him.
            To these did Babington communicate the matter,
but not all to each one: his owne Letters

and the Scots Queenes Letters he shewed to Ballard,
to Tychburn, and Dun. He dealt with Tilney
and Tychburn, to be the strikers. They at first
denied to dehle their hands with the bloud of
their Prince. Ballard and Babington labour to
proue it lawfull to kill Princes excommunicated:
and if right should be violated, then for the
Catholike Religion it is to be violated. Herevpon
hardly perswaded, they yeeld their consent in a
sort. Abington, Barnwell, Charnok, and Sauage
readily and roundly without scruple sware to
kill her. Salisbury could by no meanes be perswaded
to be a Queene-killer, but to deliver the
Scots Queene, he offred his service willingly.
Babington designeth Ty
                     •
                  hburn aboue the number,
to helpe the percussors, of whose fidelitie
and courage he had perswaded himselfe much.
But he was now absent, travailing abroad. Babington
commandes that they impart the matter
to none, except first an oath be taken to keepe
silence. These conspiratours now and then conferred
of these matters in Saint Giles fields, in
Pauls-Church, in Tavernes, in which they
had their daily feasts, being now puffed vp with
the hopes of great matters. Sometimes commending
the valour of the Nobles of Scotland,
who lately had intercepted the King at Sterling:
and of Gerard the Burgonian, who killed the
Prince of Orange. And so farre they proceeded
in their foolish vanitie, so strangly infatuated,
that those that should strike the Queene,
they had portraied in liuely pictures, and

in the midst of them Babington, with this
Verse.
Hi mihi sunt comites, quos ipsa pericula ducunt.
            
            But when this Verse was disliked, as seeming
too plaine: for it, they set in place these wordes:
Quorsum haec alió properantibus? These pictures
were taken, as it was said, and brought to the
Queene; who knew none of their countenances
but onely Barnwells, who vsed often to come in
her presence, following the causes of the Earle
of Kildare, whom he served: and she tooke notice
of him by other markes. Verily one day as
she was walking abroad she saw Barnwell, she
looked sharply and vndauntedly vpon the man,
and turning to Sr 
               Christopher Hatton, Captaine of
the Guard, and to some others: Am not I, quoth
she, well guarded, who haue not so much as one man
in my company that hath a sword? For Barnwell
told this to the other conspiratours, and declared
how easily she might haue beene killed, if
the conspiratours had then beene present. Sauage
in like sort reported the same.
            Now there was nothing that so much troubled
Babington, as the feare least the promise of externall
forces might faile. And therefore to make
that good, he resolved to goe into France, and to
send Ballard secretly before, for whose passage he
had procured licence for money vnder a counterfeit
name. And to remoue all suspition from
himselfe by Polly he in
                  •
               inuateth himselfe into

Sir Francis Walsingham, and dealeth earnestly
with him, to intreat of the Queene license for his
passage into France, promising to doe some especially
seruice, in searching and discovering the
secret attempts of the fugitiues for the Scots
Queene. He commended the purpose of the
yong man, and promised not onely to obtaine
him licence to travell, but he promised withall
great and goodly rewardes to him, if he would
doe such a service, yet holding him in suspence,
he delayed the matter, and knew his purpose
and drift well, having fished all out by an especiall
skill he had in discovering treasons, but especially
by the discovery of Gilbert Giffard, a Priest,
he was made acquainted with their intentions,
which they thought were kept so secret that the
Sunne had not knowne any thing thereof.
            This Giffard was borne at Chellington, where
the Scots Queene was kept, and sent by the fugitiues
into England, vnder the name of Luson, to
put Sauage in minde of his vow vndertaken, and
to lurke as a fit meanes to transmit Letters betweene
them, and the Scots Queene, because in so
dangerous a businesse, they could not draw in
to serue their turne herein neither the Countesse
of Arundell, nor the Lord Lumley, nor Henry Howard,
nor Sr 
               George Shirly.
            
            The fugitiues, to try whether the way was
safe by Giffard to transmit Letters, first sent
blankes many times sealed like Letters and packeted,
which when by the answers they perceived
to be truely delivered, now growne more

confident, wrote often of their affaires intended,
in secret Characters. But Giffard before this,
whether vexed in his conscience, or corrupted
before with money, or terrified with feare, had
opened himselfe to Sir Francis Walsingham, and
declared with what purpose he was sent into
England, and offered all his service, as from the
loue to his Countrey and his Prince, and promised
to communicate to him all the Letters
that he received either from the fugitiues, or
from the Scots Queene. Sir Francis imbracing the
opportunitie offerd, intertained him courteously,
and sent him into Staffordshire, and wrote to
Sir Amice Pawlet, willingly to suffer some of his
servants to be corrupted by Giffard, and to winke
at it. But he being vnwilling, as he said, to suffer
any of his houshold servants, by simulation to
become a traytor, yet though vnwillingly, he
suffred that the brewer, or the man that provided
Provender for his horse, who dwelt neare him,
might be corrupted by Giffard. Giffard easily
corrupted the brewer with some peeces of gold,
who by a hole in the wall, where a stone was set
which might be remoued, sent Letters secretly,
and received others, which alwayes by messengers
provided for the purpose, came to the hands
of Sr 
               Francis Walsingham. Who opened the seales,
coppied out the Letters, and by the singular
cunning of Thomas Philipps found the secret
Character, and by the skill of Arthur Gregory
sealed them vp againe so cunningly, that no
man could suspect that they were opened, and

then sent them to the parties to whom they were
directed. Thus were disclosed those former Letters
from the Scots Queene to Babington, and his
answers, and others againe from her to him,
(in which there was a Postscript cunningly added
in the same Character, to write the names of
the six Gentlemen, and happily some other
things.) Moreover, the same day, the Letters to
Mendoza the Spanish Ambassadour, to Charles
Paget, to the Lord Paget, to the Archbishop of
Glasco, and to Sr 
               Francis Inglefeld, were all coppied
out, and transmitted.
            The Queene, as soone as she vnderstood so
rough a tempest hanging over her head, both
from inward traytors and forraine enemies, she
commanded to the end that the conspiracy
might the sooner be quelled, that Ballard should
be apprehended. Wherevpon he was suddenly
taken, in the very nick, when he was ready to
depart into France. Being taken in Babingtons
house. Herevpon Babington was afraid and sore
troubled, and vexed with a thousand cogitations
he came to Tychburn, and with him adviseth
what is best to doe. His advise was that the conspiratours
should presently disperse themselues
and fly, yet Babington thought it best to send Sauage
and Charnok presently to kill the Queene.
But first to put Sauage in brauer and more courtly
apparell, that so he might haue a more easie
passage. And of this proiect he had the same day
speech with him, in Pauls-Church. But presently
changing his minde, and concealing his secret

cares and feares, he wrote Letters to Sir Francis
Walsingham, being then in Court, wherein
with great earnestnes he intreated that now at
last he might haue license to depart into France;
and withall he made suit for Ballards deliverance,
who might be of great vse to him in his proposed
busin
                  •
               sse. Sir Francis with faire promises
keepes him from day to day in hope. That Ballard
was taken, he layeth all the fault vpon Yong,
that cunning hunter of Papists, and vpon some
other Catch-poles; and warneth Babington to take
heed to such kinde of men, as friendly admonishing
him, and easily perswadeth the yong man,
that vntill the Queene might be at leasure to
signe the Bill for his passage, he would returne
to London, and lodge in his house at London, to
the end that they might conferre more secretly
of so great matters. And that by his often comming,
the fugitiues might not haue any suspition,
when he came into France. In the meane
time, Skidmor, Sir Francis Walsingham his servant
was commanded to obserue him most strictly,
and should be with him whither soever he went;
in shew that so he might be safer from messengers
that otherwise might apprehend him.
Thus farre Sr 
               Francis Walsingham had closely carried
this businesse without the knowledge of other
of the privy Councell, and would haue
proceeded farther. But the Queene would not;
least (as she said) by not preventing the danger
when shee might, shee might seeme rather to tempt
God, then to trust in God. Wherevpon Sir Francis
               
from Court wrote to his man, that he should obserue
Babington with an especiall care. This Letter
was not sealed, but so delivered that as the
man read it, Babington sitting at Table with him
did also reade it. Wherevpon finding himselfe
guiltie, and suspecting that all was disclosed,
the next night when he, and Skidmor, and one or
two of Sir Francis his servants, had supped somwhat
freely in a Taverne, he rose as going to pay
the reckoning, and leaving his cloak and rapier,
fled away in the darke to Westminster. Where
Gage changed apparell with him, who presently
put off the same againe in Charnoks chamber, and
put on Charnoks. And conveyed themselues both
into S. Iohns Wood neare to the Cittie. Whither
Barnwell and Dun came to them. In the meane
time they were declared traytors throughout
England. They hiding themselues in Woods and
by-wayes after they had in vaine expected money
from the French Ambassadour, and horse
from Tychburn, they cut off Babingtons hayre, and
defaced his natiue beautie with rubbing his face
over with the greene huskes of Walnuts. And
being forced by hunger they came to Bellamyes
house, neare to Harrow on the Hill, who was a
great favourer of the Romish Religion. Where they
were hid in Barnes, and fed, and cloathed with
rusticall apparell. After ten dayes they were
found and brought to London. Herevpon the
Cittie witnessed their publike ioy by ringing of
bells, by bonefires in the streets, by singing of
Psalmes, in so much that the Citizens had great

thankes given them from the QVEENE.
            The other conspiratours were soone caught,
many of them neare the Cittie; Salisbury in Staffordshire,
his horse being killed vnder him by
them who followed him, and Trauerse was taken
with him, after they had swimmed over the river
Weuer. And Iones in Wales, who was not acquainted
with the inuasion intended, but onely receiued
them into his house, after he knew them to
be proclaimed rebells, and hid them. And had
furnished Salisbury as he fled, and his man (who
was a Priest) with a changed Cloake. Onely
Windsore was not found. Many dayes were spent
in examining of them, who by their confessions
betrayed one another, concealing nothing.
            All this time the Scots Queene and her servants
were kept by such a diligent watch of Sir Amice
Pawlet, that those things were altogether hid
from her, though now well knowne over all England.
But after that these were apprehended,
Sir Thomas Gorge was sent to acquaint her with
these things in few words. Which he did purposely
when she thought least of the matter, as she
was taking horse to ride a hunting. Neither was
she permitted to returne, but in shew of honor she
was carried about to Noble mens houses. In the
meane time, Iohn Maners, Edward Ashton, Richard
Bagot, and William Wade (who ignorant of the
whole matter had beene sent into these parts)
receiving authoritie from the Queene, did commit
Navus, and Curle, Secretaries, and other servants,
to such as might keepe them asunder, that

they might not conferre together among themselues,
nor with the Scets Queene. And breaking
vp the Chamber-doores, they tooke all Chesies
and Boxes, wherein they found Letters, and sent
them sealed with their seales to the Court. After
that Sir Amice Pawlet, being commanded, tooke
all the money, least she might corrupt some for
money, and gaue his promise to restore all again.
When the packets of Letters were opened before
the Queene, the Letters of many forrainers
were found, and Coppies of many Letters to others;
and about sixtie Tables of secret Characters.
And some Letters from certaine Noble
men of England, with a full declaration of their
loue and services. Which thing notwithstanding,
Queene Elizabeth dissembled that matter in silence,
and accordingly vsed that word: Video,
taceo; I see and say nothing. But they smelling
the matter, least they might seeme to favour the
Scots Queene, after that, began to show themselues
enemies against her.
            Now Giffard, after he had played his part in
this play, was sent away as a banished man into
France; leaving before he went an indented paper
with the French Ambassadour Leiger in England,
with this instruction, that he should deliver
Letters which he might receiue from the
Scots Queene, or from the fugitiues, to none other
but onely to him, who exhibited a paper an swering
to that indented paper. Which paper was by
him sent secretly to Sir Francis Walsingham. Giffard
returning into France, after a few moneths

was imprisoned for his filthy life: and suspected
of these things, died miserably; confessing many
of the foresaid matters, which was also found
in his papers.
            The XIII. of September, seven of the conspiratours
being brought to iudgement, confessed
themselues guiltie, and were condemned of treason.
Other seven came the next day, who denied
that they were guiltie; and cōmitted themselues
to God and their Country: yet were they condemned
by their former confessions. Onely Polly,
though guiltie of all, yet when he affirmed that
he disclosed some of those matters to Sir Francis
Walsingham, was not called to iudgement. The
twentieth of that month, the first seven were hanged
and quattered in S. Giles fields, where they
vsed to meet. Ballard, the contriver of all the
mischief, asked pardon of God, and of the Queene
conditionally, if he had sinned against her. Babington
(who without feare beheld Ballards death,
whilst the rest were vpon their knees in prayer)
freely confessed his sinnes, and after he was taken
downe from the Gallowes, cryed out in Latin,
Parce mihi Iesu: the rest in their order likewise
were hanged and quartered.
            After the punishment of these, Navus a French
man, and Curlus a Scot, Secretaries to the Scots
Queene were called into question vpon the Letters
that were taken in the lodging of the Scots
Queene, and freely confessed that those Letters
were of their owne writing, dictated by her in
French, and so taken by Navus, turned into English
               
by Curle, and written in secret Characters,
whereby she was at last brought into question,
which brought her also to her end.
            The thing which we obserue vpon this Narration,
is to continue our complaint of these gracelesse
instruments the Priests and Iesuites, that by
their wicked suggestions bring Princes, Nobles,
Gentlemen of good place, which might haue
done good service to their Prince and Country,
such I say doe these wicked instruments bring to
ruine; and seeme to take a pleasure in the destruction
of men. May we not see how they come
in secretly, and scraule in corners like Serpents?
It is true the enmity is of old set betweene the Womans
seed and the Serpents seed: and the Church
which is the Womans seed haue felt the experience
hereof at all times. But never had any
Church in the world a more liuely experience
hereof, then this Church of England, against whom
all this hath beene wrought. The Church is the
house of God, and this Church of England is here
with vs Gods house. It is apparant that this house
was built not vpon the sand, but vpon a rocke;
for the windes haue blowne fiercely vpon it, the waters
haue risen against it, the great and huge tempests
haue beaten vpon it, and yet it standeth. And
for this we prayse Gods name, that it standeth
still. And for this purpose is this small Worke
vndertaken, to giue the watch-word to all them
that feare God, and loue the comming of our Lord,
to giue most humble and most hearty thankes vnto
God for this inestimable favour of God, that after

all these assaults which haue beene greater in
danger, mo
                  •
               e in number then any Nation in the
world at this day can number: that after all, I say,
our Church standeth and flourisheth: this is our
reioycing in God, in his goodnesse and mercy.
But now consider who oppugne vs? the serpents
seed; for can any man with any reason deny these
men to be the seed of the serpent? I meane the
seminary Priests & lesuites. Are not these the seed
of the serpent? They plot, and practise treasons,
they raise rebellions, their heads and hands are
full of bloud and murther. And what can the serpent
his seed doe more? They are men acquainted
with the deepenes of Satan, they lay snares and
wicked plots for des
                  •
               ructions of States, and least
men should descry their mischiefe, they set a
cleane contrary countenance vpon their actions,
giving out that their weapons are Preces & lachrymae,
Prayers and teares, and that it is vnlawfull
for them to vse any other weapons; even then
when they are about their most bloudy designes:
and what can the serpents seed doe more? Can
the seed of the serpent proceed more maliciously,
more cruelly, more deeply in bloud then these
haue done? Then let them be knowne to be the
seed of the serpent. As for vs, we reioyce to be the
seed of the Woman, the true Church of God: we
suffer, we are reviled, standered, called Heretikes:
We learne of our Master to indure the crosse, to despise
the shame: We run with patience the race which
he hath set before vs. And we serue God not in
vaine; for we see that there is a reward for them
that serue Him.
         
         
            
            CHAPTER X.
            
               THE a next yeare following, which was
the yeare 1587. the Scots Queene being
before condemned,An: Dō. 1587. but yet reserved
aliue, discontented persons, like
evill spirits did continually haunt her; though
she her selfe would haue beene quiet, yet would
not they let her rest, vntill their busie and pernicious
working brought her to her graue; for l. Au
                  
                     ••
                  spinaeus
the French Ambassadour Leiger in England,
a man wholly devoted to the Guysian faction,
went about to helpe the captived Queene, not
by faire meanes, but by treason. First he conferred
secretly to kill the Queene, with William Stafford,
a yong Gentleman, easie to be drawn to new
hopes: whose mother was of the Queenes bedchamber;
his brother was the English Leiger in
France at this time. Afterward he dealt more
plainly with him, touching this proiect, by his
secretary Trappius. Who promised to Stafford,
if he would vndertake that matter, not onely
great glory, great store of money, but especiall
grace and favour with the Pope, with the Guises,
and with all the Catholikes. Stafford his conscience
grudging at so great a wickednesse, refused
to vndertake it. Yet he commended one Moody,
a cut-throat▪ a man fit for such a businesse, that if
money were given him, would vndoubtedly vndertake
and dispatch the businesse. To him
went Stafford, where he found him kept in prison

in London, and told him that the French Ambassadour
would gladly speake with him. He
answered that he was willing, so that he might
be freed out of prison. In the meane time, he intreated
that Cordali
                     •
                  n another of the Ambassadours
secretaries might be sent to him: with
whom he had familiar acquaintance. The next
day Trappius was sent to him with Stafford. Who,
when Stafford was remoued, conferred with
Moody of the manner of killing the Queene.
Moody proposed a course to doe it by poison,
or by a sacke of twentie pound of Gun-powder
to be laid vnder the Queenes chamber, and to be
fired secretly. These courses pleased not Trappius,
but he wished that a man of such courage
might be sound, as was that Burgonian who killed
the Prince of Orange.
            
            These things were presently revealed to the
Queenes Councell by Stafford. Wherevpon Trappius
now purposing to goe into France, was intercepted,
and examined of these things. Afterward
the Ambassadour himselfe, the twelfth of
Ianuary was sent for vnto the house of Secretary
Cecill, and came in the evening; where were together
by the Queenes command, Cecill, Lord
Burghley, Secretary, the Earle of Leicester, Sir
Christopher Hatton, and Dauison another secretary:
These signifie to the French Ambassadour,
that they sent for him, to let him know the cause
why they intercepted Trappius, his Secretary,
when he was ready to goe into France; and they
did open every thing which Stafford, Moody, and

               Trappius himselfe had confessed. And that they
might testifie the same in his presence, they commanded
them to be called in. The Ambassadour
who bending his brows, heard these things with
much impatience; rising vp, said, that himselfe
being an Ambassadour would not heare any accusations
to wrong his King, or in the preiudice
of Ambassadours. But when they answered, that
these men should not be produced as accusers,
but onely that he might be satisfied that these
things were not fained, nor false: then he rested.
As soone as Stafford was produced, and began to
speake, he presently interrupted him, and railing
vpon him, affirmed that Stafford first proposed
the matter to him, and that himselfe had threatned
to send him bound hand and foot to the
Queene, if he would not desist from so wicked
an enterprise: yet that he spared him for the singular
affection which he bare to the mother, the
brother, and sister of Stafford. Stafford falling
vpon his knees protested in many wordes vpon
his salvation▪ that the Ambassadour proposed
the matter first to him. But when the Ambassador
seemed to be extraordinarily moued, Stafford
was commanded to depart; and Moody was not
produced.
            Herevpon when Burghly had mildly charged
the Ambassadour to be guiltie of such a conceived
wickednes, both from his owne words, and
out of the confession of Trappius: he answered,
that if he had beene conscious, yet being an Ambassadour,
he ought not to disclose it, but to his

owne King. But Burghl
                     •
                  y interposing told him,
that if that were not the office of an Ambassadour
(which thing is yet in question) to disclose such
a mischievous practise which bringeth the life
of a Prince in danger: yet was it the office of a
Christian, to represse such notorious iniuries, not
onely for the safety of a Prince, but for the safety
of any Christian. But the other stoutly denyed
that; and withall said, that not long since, the
French Ambassadour being in Spaine, and having
notice of a conspiracy to take away the Spanish
Kings life, yet disclosed it not to the Spanish king,
but to his owne King, and was therefore commended
of the King and of his Councellers.
The Lord Burghley gaue him a graue admonition,
to take heed that hereafter he offended not
in such a point of treason against the Prince, and
not to forget the office of an Ambassadour, nor
the Prince her clemency, who would not wrong
good Ambassadours by the punishment of an evill
one, and though he were not punished, yet was
he not iustified, but did carry with him the guilt,
though not the punishment of such an offence.
            Though this intended evill came to no effect,
as all the other bloudy practises haue bin without
effect: yet may we make good vse of it to
blesse Gods name for all his great and manifold
deliverances. That it was disappointed, it was his
goodnes: for against those Kings that had not given
their service to God for the maintenance of
true Religion, great and bloudy practises haue
bin committed by lesse and more contemptible

meanes. And as we haue iust cause to blesse God
for all his deliverances, so the adversaries of our
peace, haue iust cause to feare, to examine their
owne doings, and seriously to consider, whether
they haue not all this while striven against God,
in striving so long against those whom God doth
so miraculously defend
            Not long after this followed the ignominious
prodition of William Stanly, and Rowland York.
This York was a Londoner, a man of loose conversation,
and actions, and desperate. He was famous
among the Cutters of his time, for bringing in a
new kind of fight, to run the point of a rapier into
a mans body; this manner of fight he brought
first into England, with great admiration of his
audaciousnes. When in England before that time
the vse was with little buckl
                  •
               rs, and with broad
swords to strike, and not to thrust, and it was accounted
vnmanly to strike vnder the girdle. This
man provoked as he tooke it by some iniury of
the Earle of Leicester, fled to the Spanyards, and
for some time after served among the Spanyards.
Afterward being reconciled, was made Captaine
of a Sconce neare to Zutphen. After all this he was
so set vpon revenge, that being corrupted with
money, he did not onely betray the place to the
enemy; but drew also Stanly with him, being a
man that had served with great fidelitie and valour
in the Irish warres. Stanly was not easily perswaded
to be false, but this desperate fellow never
ceased to draw him into the fellowship of wickednesse
with him, by many asseverations and

oaths often repeated; telling him that it was certainly
knowne in England, that he was of Babingtons
conspiracy; that he was already discovered
by their confessions, & that out of hand he should
be sent for to the gallowes. Thus he perswaded
Stanly to betray the rich and well fenced Towne
of Deventer to the Spanyards, against his oath given
to Leicester and to the States. And seeking
some pretence of honesty against a fact so dishonest
and disloyall, he seemed to please himselfe
in this, that he had restored a place to the true
Lord, which was held from him by rebells. And
being extreame Popish, he sent for Priests to his
company, which consisted of 1300 English and
Irish, to instruct them in the Popish Religion; boasting
that this should be the seminary legion, which
should defend the Roman Religion with Armes, as
the seminary Priests defend it with writings. To
this purpose Alan, who a little after was Cardinall,
sent Priests presently to him, and wrote a Booke
also, wherein he commended this proditorious
act, from the authoritie of the Bull of Pius V against
Queene Elizabeth, and stirred vp others to
such perfidiousnes, as if they were not bound to
serue and obey a Queene excommunicated. But
looke I pray to the end.
            The Spanyards set York and Stanly together in
contention one against the other; and soone after
they poyson York, and take his goods: his body
after three yeares was digged vp by the commandement
of the States, and hanged till it rotted.
They drew Stanly and his companies out of Deventer,
               
and tossing them from place to place they
make them the obiect of all dangers, and so vsed
them with all con
                  •
               umelies, that some of them died
for hunger, others secretly fled away. Stanly
himselfe went into Spaine in hope of reward, and
offred his helpe to invade Ireland: but neither
found he entertainment according to his expectation,
neither could he be trusted; for the Spanyards
vsed to say, that some honor might be given to a
traytor, but no trust: It was now too late for him
to learne, but yet he learned, that he had most of
all betrayed himselfe.
         
         
            CHAPTER XI.
            
               WE are now come to that
fatall yeare,A. D. 1588. which the Astrologers
called the Marveilous yeare;
               Octogesimus octavus mirabilis annus.
some said it was the Climactericall
yeere of the world. And they
that trust not in the liuing God, but in superstitions
tooke the opportunitie of this fatall yeare as they
supposed, now vtterly to overthrow the Church
of England and State. Which before they could
not doe. The Pope and Spanyard layd vp all their
hopes vpon this yeares destiny.
            
            The rumors of warre daily increased, at last it
was certainly cōfirmed by the newes on all sides,
that in Spaine there was an invincible navy preparing
against England; that the most famous Captaines

in military knowledge, and the best souldiers
were sent for into Spaine, from Italy, Scicily,
yea from America. For the Pope, and some religious
Spanyards, and English fugitiues, now recalled
the Spanyard to the cogitation of surprising of
England, which purpose was interrupted by the
Portugall warres. They exhorted him earnestly to
doe God this service, that had done so much for
him: now that he inioyed Portugall, with the west
Indies, & many rich Ilands: to adde England to all,
were an especiall service of God, fit for his Catholike
Maiestie. By this meanes he might adde these
flourishing Kingdomes to his Empire, & so keepe
the Low-countries in peace, secure the navigatiō
to both Indies. That the preparations of Spaine
were so great that no power was able to resist it.
They made him belieue that it was an easier matter
to overcome England, then to overcome the
Dutch-land, because the navigation from Spain to
England was much shorter, then to the Netherlands.
And by surprising of England, the other
would easily follow.
            Herevpon the consultation began to be had,
of the best way and meanes to oppresse England.
Alvarus Ba
                     ••
                  anus, the Marquess of S. Crosse, who
was chiefe commander in the Navy, advised first
to make sure some part of Holland or Zealand, by
the land-forces of the Duke of Parma, and by sending
before some Spanish shippes, so to take some
place on a suddain, where the Spanish navy might
haue a receptacle, and from whence the invasion
might with cōvenience begin. For in the English
               
Sea, which is troublesome, the windes oft changing,
the tydes vnknown, the Navy could not be
in safety. With him agreed Parma, who much vrged
this expedition. Yet others disliked this
counsell, as a matter of great difficultie and danger,
of long time, of much labor, of great expence,
of vncertaine successe. And that neither secretly
nor openly it could be performed, and easily hindered
by the English. These thought that with
the same labour and expenses England might be
wonne: and the victory would be sure, if a well
prepared army from Spaine, might with a strong
navy be landed on Thames side, and of a suddain
surprise London the chiefe Citty by an vnexspected
assault. This seemed a thing most easie to be
effected. And therefore all agreed vpon it. Yet
some among them thought good that a denuntiation
of the warre should be made by an Herald,
which they held a politik devise, both to remoue
suspition out of the minds of neighbour Princes,
and to force the Queene as they supposed, to call
to her helpe 
                  •
               orrain mercenary souldiers, concelving,
that according to the vsuall insolency of
mercenaries, they would tumult and spoyle the
country; and so might the Queene be brought into
hatred of her owne people: that so all things
in England would be brought into a confusion,
which might be helped by the English Catholikes.
But neither could this advise be heard. For they
being confident of their owne strength, thought
it was sufficient to commend the invincible Navy
to the prayers of the Pope, and of their other Catholikes,
               
and to the intercession of Saints: and to set
out a Booke in Print, to the terror of the English,
in which Booke, all the preparation was particularly
related. Which was so great through Spain,
Italy, and Scicily, that the Spanyards themselues
were in admiration of their owne forces, and
therefore named it the Invincible Fleet.
            
            The Duke of Parma also in Flanders, by the
commandement of the Spanyard, built ships, and
a great company of small broad vessels, each one
able to transport thirty horse, with bridges fitted
for them severally. And hired Mariners from the
east part of Germany. And provided long peeces
of wood, sharpned at the end, and covered with iron,
with 
                  •
               ookes on the side. And twentie thousand
vessels, with an huge number of fagots; and
placed an Army ready in Flanders, of 103 companies
of foot, and 4000 horsemen. Among these
were 700 English fugitiues, which were had of all
other in most contempt. Neither was Stanly respected
or heard, who was set over the English,
nor Westmerland, nor any other who offered their
helpe: but for their impiety towards their owne
Countrey, were shut out from all consultations,
and as men vnominous reiected, not without detestation.
And Pope Sixtus V. that in such a purpose
would not be wanting, sent Cardinall Alan
into Flanders, and ren
                  •
               ed the bulls declaratory of
Pius V. and 
                  
                     •
                  rep XIII. He excommunicateth the
Queene, deposeth her, absolveth her subi
                  •
               cts from
all alleagance, and as if it had beene against the
Turks and Inf
                     •
                  dels, he set forth in Print a 
                  
                     •
                  ruceat,
               
wherein he bestowed plenary indulgences, out of
the treasure of the Church, vpon all that would
ioyn their help against England. By which means
the Marquess a Burgaw of the house of Austria,
the Duke of Pastrana, Amady Duke of Sauoy, Vespasian
Gonzaga, Iohn Medices, and divers other noble
men were drawne into these Warres.
            Queene Elizabeth, that she might not be surprised
at vnawares, prepareth as great a Navy as she
could, and with singular care & providence maketh
ready all things necessary for warre. And she
her selfe, which was ever most i
                     •
                  dicious in discerning
of mens wits, and aptnes, and most happy in
making choise, when she made it out of her own
iudgement, and not at the commandement of others,
designed the best and most serviceable to
each severall imployment. Over the whole Navy
she appointed the Lo: Admirall Charles Howard.
In whom she reposed much trust; and sent him to
the west parts of England, where Captaine Drake,
whom she made Viceadmirall, ioyned with him.
She commanded Henry Seimor the second sonne
to the Duke of Somerset, to watch vpon the Belgick
shore with 40 English and Dutch shippes, that
the Duke of Parma might not come out with his
forces. Albeit some were of opinion, that the enemy
was to be expected, and set vpon by land forces,
according as it was vpon deliberation resolved,
in the time of Henry the 8. when the French
brought a great Navy vpon the English shore.
            By Land there was placed on the South shores,
twenty thousand. And two Armies besides were

mustered of the choisest men for warre. The one
of these which consisted of a thousand horse,
twenty-two thousand foot, was the Earle of Leicester
set over. And camped at Tilbury on the side
of Thames. For the enemy was resolved first to set
vpon London. The other Army was governed by
the Lo: Hunsdon, consisting of 34 thousand foot,
and two thousand horse, to guard the Queene.
            
            The Lord Grey, Sr 
               Francis Knolles, Sr 
               Iohn Norrice,
Sr 
               Richard Bingham, Sr 
               Roger Williams, men famously
knowne for Military experience, were
chosen to confer of the land fight. These thought
fit that all those places should be fortified, with
men & mu
                     •
                  ition, which were commodious to land
in, either out of Spaine, or out of Flanders▪
                as Milford
hauen, Falmouth, Plimmouth, Portland, the Ile of
Wight, Portsmouth, the open side of Kent called the
Downs, the mouth of Thames, Harwich, Yarmouth,
Hull, &c. That trained souldiers through all the
maritim Provinces should meet vpon warning given,
to defend these places: that they should by
their best means and power hinder the enemy to
take land; if he should take land, then should they
wast the country all about, and spoile every thing
that might be of any vse to the enemy, that so he
might find no more vittals then what he brought
vpon his shoulders with him. And that by continuall
Alarums the enemy should finde no rest day
or night. But they should not try any battell, vntill
divers Captaines were mett together with
their Companies. That one Captaine might be
named in every Shire which might command.
            
               At this time divers told the Queene, that the
Spaniards were not so much to be feared without,
as the Papists within; for the Spaniards durst make
no attempt vpon England, but vpon confidence
of their helpe within. And therefore for the securitie
of the whole, their heads were vpon some
pretenses to be cut off. Producing for this thing,
the example of Henry 8. For when the Emperour
& French King at the Popes instigation, were combined
and ready to invade England, King Henry
presently executed the Marquess of Exceter, the
Lord Montacute, Edward Neuil, and others, whom
he suspected to favour the enemies, which thing
as soone as he had done, the intended invasion
was stopped, and proceeded no further. But this
advise the Queene vtterly disliked, as being cruell,
she thought it enough to commit some of the
Papists to Wisbich Castle in cu
                  •
               tody; and casting
her eyes and mind on every side, she stirred vp her
Nobles with Letters often, though they were
carefull & watchfull of themselues. She certified
Fitz Williams, Lord Deputy of Ireland, what she
would haue done there. She sent to the King of
Scots to warne him to take good heed of Papists,
and the Spanish faction. But he knowing well
what a tempest and desolation was hanging, and
threatning both alike, having already set his
heart vpon the maintenance of true religion, and
resolving to take part with the truth in prosperitie
and adversitie, which is onely able to saue and
deliver her maintainers; had a little before refused
to heare the Bishop of Dumblan, sent th
                  •
               ther

from the Pope: and had caused a league to be
made among the Protestants of Scotland, for resistance
of the Spanyards: and himselfe comming
to Anandale with an army, besieged Maxwell and
tooke him, and committed him to prison, who
was lately returned out of Spaine against his faith
and alleagance, and came with an intent to favor
the Spanish side; he declared the Spanyards should
be held as enemies, and against them caused all
with great alacritie to be ready in Armes.
            Among these preparations for warre, which were
great on both sides, the councels of peace were not
vtterly cast away.
            Two yeares before, the Duke of Parma considering
how hard a matter it was to end the Belgick
warre, so long as it was continually nourished and
supported with ayd from the Queene, he moued
for a treaty of peace, by the meanes of Sir Iames
Croft one of the privy councell, a man desirous of
peace, & Andrew Loe a Dutch man, and professed
that the Spaniard had delegated authority to him
for this purpose. But the Queen fearing that there
was some cunning in this seeking of peace, that
the friendship betweene her and the confederate
Provinces might be dissolved, and that so they
might secretly be drawne to the Spanyard; she deferred
that treaty for some time. But now, that the
Warres on both sides prepared, might be turned
away, she was content to treat of Peace, but so as
still holding the weapons in her hand.
            For this purpose in February delegates were sent
into Flanders, the Earle of Derby, the Lo: Cobham,
               
Sr 
               Iames Croft, Dr 
               Dale, and Dr 
               Rogers. These were
received with all humanity on the Dukes behalfe,
& they presently sent Dr 
               Dale to him, that a place
might be appointed for the treating, & that they
might see the authoritie to him delegated from
the Spanish King. He appointed the place neare
to Ostend, not in Ostend which then was holden
of English against the King: his authority delegated,
he promised then to shew when they were
once met together. He wished them to make
good speed in the businesse, least somwhat might
fall out in the meane time, which might trouble
the motions of peace. Richardotus spake somewhat
more plainly, that he knew not what in this
interim should be done against England. Not long
after D. Rogers was sent to the Prince by an express
commandement from the Queene, to know
the truth, whether the Spanyard had resolved to
invade England, which he and Richardotus did
seeme to signifie. He affirmed that he did not so
much as thinke of the invasion of England, when
he wished that the businesse might proceed with
speed. And was in a maner offended with Richardotus,
who denied that such words fell from him.
The 12 of April, the Count Aremberg, Champigny,
Richardotus, D. Mae
                     •
                  ius, & Garnier, Delegated from
the Prince of Parma mett with the English, and
yeelded to them the honor, both in walking and
sitting. And when they affirmed that the Duke
had full authority to treat of Peace: the English
moued that first a truce might be made. Which
they denied, alledging that that thing must needs

be hurtfull to the Spanyard, who had for six
moneths maintained great Army, which might
not be dismissed vpon a truce, but vpon an absolute
peace. The English vrged that a truce was promised
before they came into Flanders. The Spanyard
against that held, that six moneths since a
truce was promised; which they granted, but was
not admitted. Neither was it in the Queenes power
to vndertake a truce for Holland and Zealand,
who daily attempted hostility. The English mooued
instantly that the truce might be generall, for
all the Queenes territories, and for the Kingdome
of Scotland: but they would haue it but for foure
Dutch townes which were in the Queenes hands,
that is, Ostend, Flushing, Bergen vp zom, & the Briel;
and these onely during the treating, and twenty
dayes after, and that in the meane time, it might
be lawfull for the Queene to invade Spaine, or for
the Spanyard to invade England, either from Spain
or Flanders. Whilst these delayes were made concerning
the truce and place, which at last was appointed
at Bourburg; Cr
                     •
                  ft vpon an earnest desire
to peace, went privatly to Bruxells without the
knowledge of the other Delegates, and privatly
proposed some Articles. For which afterward by
Leicesters motion, he was imprisoned: albeit those
articles proposed by him were in the iudgement
of the other commissioners not to be disallowed.
But Delegates haue their limits circumscribed,
which they are not to passe. At last, when the English
could not obtain an abstinence from armes,
& could by no meanes see the Charter by which

the Duke of Parma had this authority granted to
treat of peace: they proposed these things; that
the ancient leagues betweene the Kings of England
and the Dukes of Burgundy might be renued
and confirmed; that all the Dutch might fully inioy
their own priviledges; that with freedome of
cōscience they might serue God; that the Spanish
and forrain souldiers might be put out of Dutchland;
that neither the Dutch, nor their neighbouring
Nations might feare them. If these things
might be granted, the Queene would come to equall
conditions concerning the Townes which
now she held, (that all might know that she tooke
vp armes not for her own gain, but for the necessary
defence both of the Dutch, and of her selfe) so
that the money which is owing therefore be repayed.
They answered: that for renuing the old
leagues there should be no difficulty, when they
might haue a friendly conference of that thing.
That concerning the priviledges of the Dutch,
there was no cause why forrain Princes should
take care, which priviledges were most favourably
granted, not onely to Provinces and Townes
reconciled, but even to such as by force of armes
are brought into subiection. That forrain souldiers
were held vpon vrgent necessity, when as Holland,
England, and France, were all in armes. Touching
those Townes taken from the King of
Spaine, and the repaying of the money, they answered
that the Spaniard might demand so many
myriads of crowns to be from the Queene repayed
him, as the Belgick warre hath cost him, since the

time that she hath favoured and protected the
Dutch against him.
            At this time D. Dale by the Queenes command
going to the Duke of Parma, did gently expostulate
with him touching a Booke Printed there,
set out lately by Cardinall Allen, wherin he exhorteth
the Nobles, and people of England & Ireland
to ioyne themselues to the King of Spaines forces
vnder the conduct of the Prince of Parma, for the
execution of the sentence of Sixtus V Pope against
the Queene, declared by his bull. In which
she is declared an heretick, illegitimate, cruel against
Mary the Scots Queene, & her subiects were commanded
to helpe Parma against her: (for at that
time a great number of those bulls & bookes were
printed at Antwerp to be dispersed through England.
The Duke denied that he had seene such a
bull or booke, neither would he doe any thing by
the Popes authoritie, as for his owne King, him he
must obey. Yet he said that he so observed the
Queene for her Princely vertues, that after the
King of Spaine, he offred all service to her. That
he had perswaded the King of Spaine to yeeld to
this treaty of peace, which is more profitable for
English, then Spanish. For if they should be overcome,
they would easily repaire their losse: But if
you be overcome, the kingdome is lost. To whom
Dale replied: that our Queene was sufficiently furnished
with forces to defend the Kingdom. That
a Kingdome will not easily be gotten by the fortune
of one battell, seeing the King of Spaine in so
long a warre, is not yet able to recover his anciant

patrimony in the Netherlands. Well, quoth the
Duke, be it so. These things are in Gods hands.
            After this the Delegates contended among
themselues by mutuall replications, weauing and
vnweauing the same webb. The English were earnest
in this, a toleration of Religion might be
granted at least for two yeares to the confederate
Provinces. They answered, that as the King of
Spaine had not intreated that for English Catholicks:
so they hoped that the Queene in her wisedome
would not intreat any thing of the King
of Spaine which might stand against his honor,
his oath, & his conscience. When they demanded
the money due from the States of Brabant, it
was answered, that the money was lent without
the Kings authoritie or privitie. But let the accompt
be taken, how much that money was, and
how much the King hath spent in these Warres,
and then it may appeare, who should looke for
repayment. By such answers they driue off the
English of purpose, vntill the Spanish fleet was
come neare the English shore, & the noise of guns
were heard from sea. Then had they leaue to depart,
& were by the Delegates honorably brought
to the borders neare to Calis. The Duke of Parma
had in the meane time brought all his forces to
the sea shore: Thus this conference came to nothing;
vndertaken by the Queene, as the wiser
then thought to avert the Spanish fleet; continued
by the Spaniard, that he might oppress the Queen,
being as he supposed vnprovided, and not expecting
the danger. So both of them tried to sow the
Fox-skin to the Lyons.
            
         
         
            
            CHAPTER XII.
            
               THE Spanish fleet the best furnished
with men, munition, engines, and
all warlike preparation, that was ever
seen vpon the Ocean, and by that
arrogant Title, called invincible, did consist of 130
shippes, wherein there were 19 thousand, two
hundreth ninety; mariners 8350: chain
                  •
               d rowers
11080. great ordnance 11630. The chiefe
commander was Per
                     •
                  zius Gusmannus, Duke of
Medina Sidonia. (For Antonius Columna Duke of
Palian, and Marquess of S. Crosse, to whom the
chiefe governmēt was allotted, died whilst things
were preparing). And vnder him Iohannes Martinus
Recaldus, a man of great experience in sea affaires.
The 30 of May they loosed out of the 
                  •
               iver
Tagus, and purposing to hold their course to
the 
                  
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  in in G
                     •
                  llitia, they were beaten and scattered
by a tempest▪ three gallies by the helpe of Da
                  
                     •
                  d
C
                     •
                  in an English servant, and by the perfidiousnesse
of the Turks which rowed, were carried
away into France. The Fleet with much adoe
after some dayes came to the Groin and other
harbours neare adioyning. The report was that
the Fleet was so shaken with this tempest, that
the Queene was perswaded, that she was not to
expect that Fleet, this yeare. And Sir Francis
Walsi
                     •
                  gham, Secretary, wrote to the Lord Admirall,
that he might send back foure of the greatest
shippes, as if the Warre had beene ended.

But he did not easily giue credit to that report,
but with a gentle answer intreated him to beleiue
nothing hastily in so important a matter, that he
might keep those ships with him, though it were
vpon his owne charges. And finding a favourable
winde turned sailes toward Spaine, to surprise the
enemies shaken shippes in their harbours. When
he was not farre from the shore of Spaine, the
winde turned, & he being charged to defend the
English shore, fearing that the enemies vnseene
might by the same winde be drivē to England, he
returned to Plimmouth.
            
            With the same winde the 12 of Iuly, the Duke
of Medina with his fleet departed from the Groin.
And after one day or two, he sent Rhodericus Telius
into Flanders, to admonish the Duke of Parma,
giving him notice that the fleet was approching,
that he might be ready▪ For Medina his commission
was to ioyne himselfe with the Shippes and
Souldiers of Parma, and vnder the protection of
his Fleet, to bring them into England, and to land
his land forces vpon Thames side. Now as the relator
of this story hath taken paines to declare
what was done each day, I will follow him
herein.
            The 16 day there was a great calme, and a thick
cloud was vpon the sea till noon: then the North
winde blowing roughly, & again the Westwinde
till midnight, and after that the East: the Spanish
Navy was scattered, and hardly gathered together
vntill they came within the sight of England
the 19 day of Iuly. Vpon which day the Lord

Admirall was certified by Flemming (who had
beene a Pyrat) that the Spanish Fleet was entred
into the English sea, which the Mariners call the
Channell. And was descried neare to the Lizard.
The Lord Admirall brought forth the English
Fleet into the Sea, but not without great difficultie,
by the skill, labour, and alacritie of the souldiers
and mariners, every one labouring; yea the
Lord Admirall himselfe had his hand at the
worke.
            The next day the English fleet viewed the Spanish
fleet comming along with Towers like Castles
in height, her front crooked like the fashion
of the Moone, the hornes of the front were extended
one from the other about seaven miles asunder,
sailing with the labour of the windes, the Ocean
as it were groaning vnder it; their saile was
but slow, and yet at full saile before the winde.
The English gaue them leaue to hold on their
course, and when they were passed by, came behinde
them and got the helpe of the winde.
            The 21. of Iuly, the Lord Admirall of England
sent a Pinnace before, called the Defiance, to denounce
the Battell by shooting off some peeces.
And being himselfe in the Arch-royall, (the English
Praetorian Shippe or Admirall, he set vpon
a shippe which he tooke to be the Spanish Admirall,
but it was the shippe of Alfonsus Leua. Vpon
that he bestowed much shot. Presently Drake,
Hawkins, Forbisher, came in vpon the Spanish
hindmost shippes which Recaldus governed. Vpon
these they thundred. Recaldus laboured what

he could to stay his men, who fled to their navy,
vntill his shippe beaten and pearced with many
shot, did hardly recover the Fleet. At which time
the Duke Medina gathered together his dissipated
Fleet, and setting vp more saile, they held
their course. Indeede they could doe no other,
for the English had gotten the advantage of
winde, and their shippes were much more nimble,
and ready with incredible celeritie to come
vpon the enemie with a full course, and then to
turne, and returne, and be on every side at their
pleasure. When they had fought two houres,
and taken some triall of their owne courage
and of the Spanyards: The Lord Admirall thought
good not to continue the fight any longer then,
seeing that fortie ships were absent which were
scarce drawne out of Plimmouth haven. The
night following S. Catharin a Spanish shippe being
sore torne with the fight, was received into
the midst of the Navie to be mended. Here a
great Cantabrian shippe of Oquenda, wherein was
the treasurer of the Campe, by force of Gunnepowder
that had taken fire, was set on fire; yet
was the fire quenched in time by the Shippes
that came to helpe her. Of these that came to
helpe the fired shippe, one was a Galeon, in which
was Petrus Waldez; the foremast of the Galeon was
caught in the tackling of another shippe, and
broken. This was taken by Drake, who sent Waldez
to Dertmouth, the money fiftie-fiue thousand
D
                     •
                  cats, he distributed among his souldiers. That
night he was appointed to set forth light, but

neglected it, and some German Merchants ships
comming by that night, he thinking them to be
enemies, followed them so farre, that the English
navy rested all night when they could see no light
set forth. Neither did he nor the rest of the navy
finde the Admirall vntill the next day at even.
The Admirall all the night preceding with the
Beare, and Mary Rose did follow the Spanyardes
with watchfulnesse. The Duke was busied in ordering
his Navy. 
                  
                     •
                  lfonsus Leua was commanded
to ioyne the first and last companies, Every Ship
had his station assigned according to that prescribed
forme which was appointed in Spaine,
it was present death to forsake his station. This
done he sent Gliclius an Anceant to Parma, which
might declare to him in what case they w
                  •
               re, and
left that Cantabrian ship of Oquenda to the winde
and sea, having taken out the money and mariners
and put them in other shippes. Yet it seemeth
that he had not care of all: for that shippe
the same day with fifty mariners and souldiers
lamed, and hal
                  •
               e burnt, fell into the hands of the
English, and was carried to Weimuth.
            
            The 23. of the same moneth, the Spanyards
having a favourable North winde turned sailes
vpon the English; the English being much readier
in the vse of their ships, fett about a compasse for
the winde, and having gotten advantage of the
winde, they came to the fight on both sides.
They fought a while confusedly with variable
fortune: whilst on the one side the English with
great courage delivered the London ships which

were inclosed about by the Spanyards; on the other
side the Spanyards by valour freed Recaldus
from the extreame danger he was in: there was
not greater effulminations by beating of ordnances
at any time, then was this day. Yet the losse
fell vpon the Spanish side, because their shippes
were so high that the shot went over the English
shippes, but the English having a faire marke at
their great shippes, shot never in vaine. Onely
Cock and English man b
                  •
               ing caught in the midst of
the Spanish shippes, could not be recovered, he
perished but with great honor revenged himself.
Thus a long time the English shippes with great
agilitie, were somtimes vpon the Spanyardes giving
them the one side, and then the other, and
presently were off againe, and tooke the sea to
make themselues ready to come in againe.
Whereas the Spanish heavie shippes were troubled,
and hindred, and stood to be markes for
the English bullets. For all that, the Admirall
would not admit the English to come to grapple
and to boord their shippes, because they had a
full armie in their shippes, which he had not;
their shippes were many in number, and greater,
and higher, that if they had come to grapple, as
some would haue had it, the English that were
much lower then the Spanish shippes must needes
haue had the worse of them that fought from
the higher shippes. And if the English had beene
overcome, the losse would haue beene greater
then the victory could haue beene; for ours being
overcome, would haue put the kingdome in
hazard.
            
               The 24 day, they rested from fight on both
sides. The Admirall sent some small Barkes to the
next English shore, to supply the provision. And
deuided all his Navy into foure squadrons. The
first was vnder his owne government; the second
Drake governed; the third, Hawkins; the fourth,
Forbisher. And he appointed out of every squadron
certaine little shippes, which on divers sides
might set vpon the Spanyards in the night, but a
suddain calme tooke them, and so that advise
was without effect.
            The 25 day, being S. Iames day, S. Anne the
Galeon of Portugall, not being able to hold course
with the rest, was set vpon by some small English
shippes. For whose ayd came in Leua, and Didacus
Telles Enriques with three Galeasses.: which
the Admirall and the Lord Thomas Howard espying,
made in against the Galeasses (the calme was
so great, that they were drawne in by boates
with cordes) and did so beat vpon the Galeasses
with great shot, that with much adoe, and not
without great losse, they hardly recouered the
Galeon. The Spanyardes reported that the Admirall
of Spaine was that day in the hindmost company,
and being nearer the English shippes then
before, was sore beaten with the English great
ordinance, many men sla
                  •
               e in her, her great
mast overthrowne. And after that, the Admirall
of Spaine, accompanied with R
                     •
                  caldus, & others,
did set vpon the English Admirall, who by the
benefit of the winde turning, escaped. The Spanyardes
hold on their course againe, and send to
the Duke of Parma, that with all speed he should

ioyne his shippes with the Kings Fleet. These
things the English knew not, who write that they
had i
                  •
               ricken the L
                     •
                  ntern from one of the Spanish
shippes, the stemme from another, and had sore
beaten a third, doing much harme to her. That
the non Parigly, and the Mary Rose fought a good
while with the Spanyards, and the Triumph being
in danger, other shippes came in good time to
helpe her. Thus it is in battell, they who are present
and actors report not alwayes the same of
the same things; each reporting what himselfe
observed.
            The next day the Lord Admirall knighted the
Lord Thomas Howard, the Lord Sheffield, Roger
Townsend, Iohn Hawkins, and Martin Forbisher,
for their valour well imployed in the last fight.
After this they resolued not to set vpon the enemy
vntill they came into the straight of Calis,
where Henry Seimor and William Winter stayed for
their comming Thus with a faire gale the Spanish
Flee
                  •
                goeth forward, and the English followed.
This great Spanish A mado was so farre from
being 
                  〈◊〉
                
               invincible in the opinions of the
English that many yong noble men and gentlemen▪
in hope to be partakers of a famous victory
against the Sp
                     •
                  nyards, provided ships of their
owne ch
                  •
               rges, and ioyned themselues to the
Engl
                     •
                  sh F
                     •
                  eet, among whom was the Earles of
Essex, of Northumberland, of Cumberland, Thomas
and Robert C
                     •
                  cilles, H
                     •
                   Brookes, Charles Blunt, Walter
Raleigh, William Hatton, Robert Cary, Ambrose

                     〈◊〉
                  , Thomas Gerard, Arthur Gorge, and other
Gentlemen of name.
            
               The 27 day at even, the Spanyardes cast anchors
neare to Calis, being admonished of their
skilfull sea-men, that if they went any farther,
they might be indangered by the force of the
tyde to be driven into the North Ocean. Neare
to them stood the English Admirall with his fleet
within a great guns shot. To the Admirall Seimor
and Winter now ioyne their shippes; so that
now there were 140 shippes in the English Fleet,
able and well furnished for fight, for saile, and to
turne which way was needfull: and yet there
were but 15 of these which bore the burden of
the battell and repulsed the enemie. The Spanyard,
as often he had done before, so now with
great earnes
                  •
               nesse sent to the Duke of Parma to
send fortie Flie-boats without the which they
could not fight with the English because of the
greatnesse and slownesse of their owne shippes,
and the agilitie of the English shippes. And intreating
him by all meanes now to come to sea with
his army, which army was now to be protected
as it were vnder the wings of the Spanish Armado,
vntill they tooke land in England. But the Duke
was vnprovided, and could not come out at an
ins
                  •
               ant. The broad ships with flat bottoms being
then full of 
                  •
               hinks must be mended. Vittails wanted
and must be provided, the mariners being
long kept against their wills began to shrink away.
The portes of Du
                     •
                  kerke and Newport, by
which he must bring his army to the sea, were
now so beset with the strong shippes of Holland
and Zealand, which were furnished with great
and small Munition, that he was not able to

come to sea, vnlesse he would come vpon his
own apparant destruction, and cast himselfe and
his men wilfully into a headlong danger. Yet he
omitted nothing that might be done, being a
man eager and industrious, and inflamed with a
desire of over-comming England.
            
            But Queene E
                     •
                  izabeth her providence and care
prevented both the diligence of this man, and
the credulous hope of the Spanyard. For by her
commandement the next day the Admirall took
eight of their worst shippes, and dressed them
with wild-fire, pitch, and rosen, and filled them
full of brims
                  •
               on, & some other matter fit for fire,
and these being set on fire, by the ministery and
guiding of Yong and Prowse were secretly in the
night, by the helpe of the winde set full vpon the
Spanish fleet, as they lay at anchor. When the
Spaniards saw them come neare, the flame shining
and giving light over all the sea: they supposing
those ships, besides the danger of the fire, to haue
bin also furnished with deadly engines, to make
horrible destruction among them; lifting vp a
most hiddeous woefull cry, some pull vp anchors,
some for ha
                  ••
                cut their cables, they set vp their
sailes, they apply their ores, and stricken with a
pannick terror, in great hast they fled most con
                  •
               usedly.
Among them the Praetorian Galeas floating
vpon the seas▪ her rudder being broken, in great
danger of feare drew towards Calis, and sticking
in the sand, was taken by A
                     •
                  ias Pres
                     •
                  on, Thomas
Gerard, and Ha
                     •
                  ue
                     ••
                   Hugh Moncada the governour
was killed, the souldiers and mariners were either
killed or drowned, in her there was found

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
great store of gold, which fell to be the prey of
the English. The ship and ordnance fell to the
share of the governour of Calis.
            
            The Spanyards report, that the Duke when he
saw the fiery shippes comming, commanded all
the fleet to pull vp their anc
                  •
               ors, but so as the
danger being past, every shippe might returne againe
to his station. And he himselfe returned,
giving a signe to the rest by shooting off a gun.
Which was heard but of a few, for they were farre
off scattered, some into the open Ocean, some
through feare were driven vpon the shallowes of
the shore of Flanders.
            
            Over against Graueling the Spanish 
                     •
                  leet began
to gather themselues together. But vpon them
came Drake and Fenner, and battered them with
great Ordnance: to these Fenton, Southwell, Beeston,
Crosse, Riman, and presently a
                  •
               ter, the Lord
Admirall, Thomas Howard, and Sheffi
                     •
                  ld came in
and all ioyned together. The Duke Medina, Leua,
Oquenda, Recaldus, and others with much adoe getting
themselues our of the shallowes, susteined
the English force, aswell as they might, vntill most
of their ships were pearced and to
                  •
               ne. The Galeon
S. Mathew, governed by Diego 
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  entellus, comming
to ayd Francis Toletan being in the S. Philip,
was pearced and shaken with the r
                  •
               iterated shots
of Seimor and Winter, and driven to Ostend, & was
at last taken by the Flushi
                     •
                  gers. The S. Philip came
to the like end. So did the Galeo
                     •
                  
                of Biscay, and diverse
other. The last day of this moneth, the Spanish
sleet striving to recover the straights againe,
were driven toward Zealand. The English lest of

pursuing of them, as the Spaniards thought, because
they saw them in a manner cast away. For
they could not avoyd to be cast vpon the shallowes
of Zealand. But the winde turning, they got
out of the shallowes, and then began to consult
what were best for them to do. By common consent
they resolved to returne into Spaine by the
Northern seas, for they wanted many necessaries,
especially shot, their ships were torne, & they had
no hope that the Duke of Parma could bring
forth his forces. And so they tooke the Sea and
followed the course towards the North. The English
navy followed, & somtimes the Spanish turned
vpon the English, insomuch that it was thought by
many that they would return back againe. Vpon
which report the Queene came into the Campe at
Tilbury, and mustered the Army, riding among
them with a Leaders Staffe in her hand, and did by
her presence and speech animate both Captains
and souldiers with incredible courage.
            That day, wherein the last fight was, the Duke of
Parma after his vowes offred to the Lady of Halla,
came somewhat late to Dunkerk, and was received
with some opprobrious words of the Spanyards,
as if in favour of Queen Elizabeth he had slipped
the fairest opportunitie that could be to doe
the service. He to make some satisfaction, punished
the purveiours that had not made provision
ready: secretly smiling at the insolēcy of the Spanyards,
when he heard them glorying, that what
way soever they came vpon England, they would
haue an vndoubted victory; that the English were
not able to indure the sight of them. Bernardinus

Mendoza did indeed by Bookes in France, sing a
foolish & lying triumphant song before the Victory.
The English Admirall appointed Seimor and the
H
                     •
                  llanders to watch vpon the coasts of Flanders,
that the Duke of Parma should not come out;
himselfe followed the Spanyards vpon their
backes, vntill they were past Edenborough frith.
            
            The Spaniards seeing all hopes faile, & finding
no other helpe for themselues but by flight, fled
amaine and never made stay. And so this great
Navy being three yeares preparing with great
cost, was within a moneth overthrown, and, after
many were killed, being chased away: (of English
there were not one hundreth lost, nor one shippe
lost, saving that of C
                     ••
                  ks) was driven about all
Britain by Scotland, Orcades, Ireland, tossed and
shaken with tempests, and much lessened, & came
home without glory. Wherevpon some money
was coyned with a Navy slying away at full saile,
and this inscription; Venit, vidit, Fugit. Other
were coyned with the Ships fired, the Navy confounded,
in honor of the Queene, inscribed; Dux
faeminafacti. As they fled, it is certain that many of
their ships were c
                  •
               st away vpō the shores of Scotland
& Irelād. Moe then 700 souldiers & mariners
were cast vpō the Scottish shore, who at the Du:
of Parma his intercession with the Scots King, the
Queene of England consenting, were af
                  •
               er a yeare
sent into Fla
                     •
                  ders. But they that were cast vp vpō
the Irish shore by tempests, came to more miserable
fortunes; for some were killed by the wild Irish;
others by the Deputies cōmād; for he searing
that they might ioyne thēselues to the wild Irish, &

Bingham the Gouernour of Connach being
once or twice commanded to slay them hauing
yeelded, but refusing to doe it: Fowle the vnder-Marshall
was sent, and killed them; which
cruelty the Queene much condemned, wherevpon
the rest being afraid, sicke and hungry,
with their torne shippes committed themselues
to the sea, and many were drowned.
            Queene Elizabeth came in publike thankesgiuing
to Pauls Church, her Nobles accompanying
her, the Citizens were in their colours,
the Banners that were taken from the enemies
were spred: she heard the Sermon, and publike
thankes were rendred vnto God with great ioy.
This publike ioy was augmented when Sir Robert
Sidney returning out of Scotland, brought
from the King assurance of his Noble minde
and affection to the Queene, and to Religion:
Which as in sincerity he had established, so he
purposed to maintaine, with all his power. Sir
Robert was sent to him when the Spanish Fleet
was comming to congratulate and to giue him
thankes, for his propense affection towards the
maintenance of the common cause; and to declare
how ready shee would be to helpe him, if
the Spaniards should land in Scotland, and
that hee might recall to memory with what
strange ambition the Spaniard had gaped for
all Britain, vrging the Pope to excommunicate
him, to the end that hee might be thrust from
the Kingdome of Scotland, and from the succession
in England: and to giue him notice of

the threatning of Mendoza and the Popes Nuntio,
who had threatned his ruine if they could
worke it; and therefore warned him, to take
especiall heed to the Scottish Papists. The
King pleasantly answered, that he looked for no
other benefit of the Spaniard, then that which
Polyphaemus promised to Vlisses, to d
                     •
                  uoure him
last after all his fellowes were deuoured.
            
            Now these things be such, as whensoeuer we
thinke vpon them, wee cannot choose but lift
vp our hearts to God; for he hath put a song of
ioy and thankesgiuing in our mouthes, and
taught vs to lift vp our eyes to him from whence
commeth our helpe, our helpe commeth from the
Lord which hath made the heauen and the earth,
               Psal. 121.
               he will not suffer thy foote to slip, for he that keepeth
thee will not slumber; behold, he that keepeth
Israel, will neither slumber nor sleepe, the
Lord is thy keeper, the Lord is thy defence at thy
right 
                     •
                  and. Then let others boast of their
strength
               
                  〈…〉
               
               
power of God, to be for vs against them. Now
this being a thing confessed on all sides, that
God was with vs against the Spaniard, why
will not our aduersaries that are men of vnderstanding,
enter into the consideration of this
cause which God hath so often, so mightily
maintained? The workes of the Lord are great,
               Psal. III.
               and ought to bee had in remembrance of them
that feare him. And this dutie is required of vs
that haue seene the great workes of God, to declare
them to other: for one generation shall
praise thy workes to another generation, and declare
thy power. The workes of God must bee
sought out, had in remembrance, and declared
to other. The word of God is the rule of our
faith, a direction to vs, a Lanterne to our feet, and
a light to our pathes, but the word of God, being
confirmed to vs by his workes is made more
sweet to vs. This must needes be comfortable
to vs that haue the word of God among vs, sent
vnto vs, planted among vs by his owne hand;
we were as farre from deseruing this fauour, as
they that sit in darkenesse and in the shadow of
death; for so wee sate in 
                     •
                  arkenesse, and in the
shadow of death: so long as we fate in the ignorance
of Popery, but when it pleased God of his
owne free mercy to send his light among vs, the
truth of his Gospell, and out of the same fountaine
of his goodnesse and mercy raised beleeuing
Princes among vs which haue established
his true religion in our Land, a Queene of such
Piety, a King of so great Knowledge, and Learning,
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
and Piety as knoweth the truth, and is so
able to maintaine it: God I say hauing of his
goodnesse raised such blessings to vs, hath ne
                  •
               uer
ceased to maintaine his owne worke. Let vs
neuer cease to giue him the glory. But can our
aduersaries take any comfort in their doings?
The King of Spaine may once enter into the
consideration of things, he may remember how
hee and his predecessours haue beene so many
times beguiled by the Pope, how often hath the
Pope and his Iesuites consecrated his banners,
promised him victory against vs, as against Heretikes
forsaken of God and man; let them
know that there is a God that ruleth the world,
and not the Pope. If they would haue their designes
to prosper, they must follow the examples
of our godly Princes, who are blessed for
the sincerity of Religion which they imbrace.
They must giue ouer iniustice and cruelty, for
the cruelty of the Spaniards haue lost them all
that they lost in the Netherlands: Their pride
and cruelty was highly raised against vs, but to
their owne hurt and dishonour, not to ours, because
we trust in God. They would haue extinguished
the true lights of Britain, (which then
did shine like two glorious. Candles put in their
sockets and held vp in the hand of Christ, and
as now, to the comfort of both nations, ioyned
in one great light) these they laboured to extinguish,
and to tread down the soule of the Turtle;
but our Prayer is,Psal. 74. 19. 
               Giue not the soule of thy Turtle
Doue vnto the Beast, and 
                     •
                  orget not the

congregation of the poore for euer. Consider thy
couenant, for the darke places of the earth are
full of the Habitation of the cruell: Arise O
Lord and maintaine thine owne cause, remember
the daily reproach of the foolish: forget not the
voice of the enemie, for the tumult of them that
rise against thee ascendeth continually. God
saued the soule of his Turtle, he remembred the
congregation of the poore that trusted in him:
he considered his couenant, hee maintained his
owne cause, and of this we reioyce. But where
are those darke places of the earth which are full
of the habitation of the cruell, as the Prophet
saith? Surely let the Iesuites looke to that, and
let them expound those word
                  •
                if they be able,
for surely no man can expound those words,
but he shall finde superstition and cruelty inseparably
ioyned together; their superstition maketh
the places of their habitations darke places;
their superstition breedeth cruelty; for greater
cruelty the world hath not seene, then hath
proceeded from them: truely then may wee
sing with the Psalmist, the the darke pla
                     •
                  es of
the earth, are full of the habitations of the cruell.
There is no hope to make these Iesuites that
haue giuen themselues ouer to the seruice of the
man of sinne, and to the practise of impiety, of
such I say there is no hope to perswade them,
because they loue not the truth. But the Kings
and Princes that haue beene so long abused and
beguiled by them, may in time vnderstand the
difference betweene truth and falshood, and

may ioyne with our religious Kings, against the
great Deceiuer, and our hope is, that they will
vnderstand his deceits and illusions, and forsake
him: for otherwise they must perish with
him. They that are wise will vnderstand and
consider the cause which God hath so long, so
strongly maintained, they will consider the power,
the fury, and rage of our aduersaries haue
beene continually frustrated by Gods power,
they may consider that these extraordinary
blessings vpon Gods Church among vs, and
the memorable iudgements of the aduersaries,
are but forerunners of some greater stroakes,
and heauier iudgements of God against them, if
they will not turne, and forsake superstitious
vanities, and serue God with vs. Which God
grant, that the Kingdome of Christ may be inlarged,
his true Religion strongly maintained,
his name glorified, his people comforted, and
let all that worship not the Lord IESVS, and
loue not his comming, perish.
         
         
            CHAPTER XIII.
            
               AFter this great tempest from
Spaine was past, the Sunne did
shine as pleasantly vpon England
as before; by all the Spanish preparation,
there was not a man called
from his husbandry in England, not any artificer
from his trade; there was not so much as

one cottage burned; did euer the English make
any 
                  •
               ourney into Spaine, and returned without
doing no more harme then the Spaniards did
to vs? The English made after this, two iourneyes
into Spaine, and in both, did that which
they intended to doe; that is, ransacked
Townes, and put to flight the Armies which
incountred them. But this beyond the limits of
my purpose, which is onely to declare our deliuerances,
and to giue thankes and honour to
God for the same.
            The next danger intended and threatned,
brake out in Spaine by Tyrone. They that haue
written of Tyrone, say that he was a bastard, a
banished fugitiue, he lay lurking in Spaine, promising
to doe some seruice to the Pope and
Spaniard, as some had done before; he was raised
to the honour of an Earle by the Queene,
and being twice in danger (once for a murther,
and then for vsurping the title of O-Neale) was
pardoned for both. Hugh, Baron of Dungannon,
now Earle of Tyrone, being set on by the
Spaniard to worke some mischiefe:A
                     •••
                   1597. 
               An. Dom.
1597. suddenly assailed the 
                  •
               ort of Black-water,
which done, he wrote to Kildare to side with
him, and at the same instant to Sir Iohn
Norrice, (who was then sent out Lord Generall
i
                  •
               o Ireland, with thirteene hundreth of the
N
                     •
                  therland ould Souldiers, newly retired from
the warres in Britaine,) to him Tyrone wrote
that he might be mildly dealt withall, and not
be driuen headlong vpon the dangerous rockes

of disloialty: in the meane time he was alwaies
guarded with a thousand Horse, and 6280. foot
of Vlster, besides 2300. of Connaugh; hereupon,
he and all his partakers were proclaimed traitors.
Thus was the rebellion raised which was
hardly quenched with much bloud. Sir Iohn
Norrice was a Generall as well experienced in
warre, as any that then liued: yet in the Irish
warres, he was not so acquainted. The aduantage
of the enemy was such, that time was rather
spent in taking of booties, and friuolous
parlies, then in any memorable exploit. The
one looking still for fitter opportunities, and the
other expecting daily his promised succours
from Spaine.
            
            To spare the shedding of bloud, the Queene
commanded her Commissioners, the Treasurer,
and chiefe Iustice to conferre with Tyrone; who
complained of wrongs offered to him by Sir
Henry Bagnall, Marshall: and thereupon exhibited
a petition in humble manner containing
that himse
                  •
               fe and all his followers might be pardoned,
and be restored to their former estates:
that they might freely exercise their Romish
Religion; that no Garrison souldiers, Shirriffe,
or other officer should intermeddle within the
iurisdiction of his Earledome: that the company
of fifty Horsemen with the Queenes pay
might be restored to him, in the same state that
formerly he had led them: that the spoilers of
his Countrey and people might be punished,
and that Sir Henry Bagnall should pay him a

thousand pound, promised in dowry with his
Sister, whom Tyrone had married, and who was
now deceased. Others also laid out their grieuances
conceiued, such were Odonell, Brian
Mac Hugh og
                     •
                  , Mac Mahun, and Euer Mac
Conly: They receiued reasonable answers to
their demands. But vnto them the commissioners
proposed certaine Articles: That they
should forthwith lay downe their Armes, disperse
their forces, subm
                  •
               ssiuely acknowledge
their disloialties, admit the Queenes Officers in
their gouernment, re-edi
                  •
               ie the forts they had
defaced, suffer the Garrison to liue without disturbance,
make restitution of spoiles t
                  •
               ken, confesse
vpon their oathes how far they had dealt
with forraine Princes, and renounce all forraine
aid. These propositions the Rebels liked
not, but departed with a resolution to maintaine
their owne demands. Which moued Generall
Norrice, aided with the Lord Deputy, to march
with his Army to Armagh; when Tyrone heard
of his approach, in great perplexity he forsooke
the Fort of Blacke-water, set on fire the villages
about, and plucked downe the towne of Dungannon,
with part of his owne house, bewailing
his state to be past re
                  •
               ouery.
            The countrey thus wasted, and no victuals
to be had, Norrice set a Garrison in the Church
of Armagh, strengthned Monahan, and proclaimed
Tyrone Traitor in his owne territories.
Tyrone to gaine time, presented to him a fained
Petition, signed with his owne hand, cast

himselfe downe at the Queenes Pictures feet,
vngir
                  ••
               s sword, and craued pardon vpon his
knees. And in the meane time dealt for aides out
of Spaine; wherein hee preuailed so farre, that
King Philip sent messengers with cap
                  •
               tulations,
that at a praefixed time h
                  ••
                would send him a
competent Armie to ioyne with the Irish, that
all conditions of Peace with the English should
be reiected, and that the Rebels should be furnished
with munition from Spaine.
            
            Hereupon (though there was a cessation from
Armes, he began to hurry, and wast the country,
and burne villages, and driue away booties.
And hauing done this, put on the vizard of
dissimulation againe, & sued for pardon, which
to effect, hee sent the Letters of King Philip his
promises, to the Lord Deputy, with the causes
of his owne discontents; so he shuffled, that by
his dissimulation, or by the negligence of others,
most part of Connaught and all Vlster
were reuolted and in a rebellion.
            In which estate Thomas Lord Burrough was
sent Lord Deputy into Ireland; he was no sooner
arriued, but Generall Norrice being crossed
at the Court, or discontented, died as was
thought, through griefe. The Lord Deputy set
presently forward to meet with the Rebels,
whom hee encountred at Moiry, and defeating
them, tooke the Fort of Black-water. The enemies
seeking to rescue it, were defeated by the
Earle of Kildare, but Tyrone thinking all his
hope was gone if he lost that Fort, beleaguerd

it. The Lord Deputy preparing straightway to
rescue the place, was suddenly taken with sicknesse
and died.
            
               Tyrone lay still before the Fort of Blacke-water;
               Anno 1598.
for the raising of his siege Sir Henry Bagnall
was sent with fourteene Ensignes of the choisest
troupes. These the Earle met neare to Armagh,
& being most eagerly bent against S•. Henry,
by his exact care and diligence, or by the others
negligence, he got the victory, wherein
Sir Henry lost his life: the English had not receiued
such an ouerthrow since their first setting
foot in Ireland. 15. Captaines were killed,
and 1500. Souldiers were routed, and put to
flight. The Garrison of Blacke-water hereupon
surrendred, and the Rebels were thereby furnished
with Munition and Armour, and Tyrones
glory extolled. By this the strength of the rebellion
was increased.
            In this desperate estate stood Ireland, when
Robert Earle of Essex was sent thither Lord
Lieuetenant, and Lord Gouernour Generall;
he led twenty thousand Soldiers, sixteene thousand
foot, the rest horse-men: as soone as hee
came, he called a councell touching the affaires;
It was thought fittest, that Monster should bee
first cleared of those petty Rebels lying nearest,
whereupon (contrary to his owne opinion, and
his directions receiued from the Queene) hee
made first to Monster, and cleared those parts,
though with more losse of time and men, then
was well liked of the state here: from thence he

went into Le
                     •
                  nster, against the O Conars, and
O Neiles, whom he vanquished. Thence he sent
Sir Coniers Clifford against Orork, himselfe taking
another way to distract the Forces of Tyrone.
Sir 
                  
                     ••
                  niers Clifford was defeated and
slaine: whereupon the Lord Generall made
towards Vlster, and came to Louth. Tyrone
shewed himselfe vpon the hills on the other
side of the Riuer. And falling vnto his wonted
vaine of dissimulation, desired a parley with the
Lord Lieuetenant, but hee reiected it; answering,
that if hee would conferre with him, hee
should finde h
                  •
               m the next morning in the head
of his troupes, on which day after a light skirmish,
a horseman of Tyrones troupes, cryed
with a loud voice, that Tyrone was not willing
to fight, but to parley vpon peace with the Lord
Generall; which thing was againe denied. The
next day as the Lord Lieuetenant was in his
march forward, one Hagan sent from Tyrone
met him, and declared that the Earle most humbly
desired to haue the Queenes mercy and
peace, and besought that his Lordship would
be pleased to afford him audience, which if hee
would grant, then would he with all reuerence
attend at the foord of the Riuer, not farre from
Louth. To this motion at last he consented: and
sent to discouer the place, and hauing a troupe
of horse vpon the next hill, came downe alone
to the Riuer. Tyrone attending on the other
side, as soone as he saw his approach, rode into
the Riuer vp to the Saddle, and with semblance

of reuerence, saluted the Lord Lieuetenant. And
hauing had some conference together the space
of an houre, both returned to their companies:
after this Tyrone making suit for a further conference,
the Lord Lieuetenant taking with him
the Earle of Southampton, Sir George Bourchier,
Sir Warram Saint Leger, Sir Henry Dan
                  
                     •
                  ers,
Sir Edward Wingfield, and Sir William
Constable, went to the Foord; where Tyrone
with his Brother Cormac, Mac Gennis, Mac
Gui
                     •
                  , Ener Mac Cowly, Henry Oui
                     •
                  gton, and
O Quin, attended their comming. And vpon
conference it was concluded, that certaine Commissioners
should the next day meet for a treaty
of peace, and in the meane time, there should be
a cessation of warres from sixe weekes to sixe
weekes, vntill the first of May, yet so as it might
be free on both sides, after fourteene dayes warning
giuen to resume hostility afresh. And if
any of Tyrones confederates would not thereto
consent, to be prosecuted at the Lord Lieuetenants
pleasure.
         
         
            CHAPTER XIIII.
            
               THe Queene was presently informed,Anno 1599.
that in Ireland, the Spring,
Summer, and Autumne were
spent, without seruice vpon the
Arch-rebell, that her men were
diminished, large summes of money consumed

without doing that for which he was sent, that
by this meanes the Rebels were incouraged, and
the Kingdome of Ireland laid at hazard to bee
lost. Whereupon the Queene wrote somewhat
sharpely to the Lord Lieuetenant; which mooued
him so much, as leauing his charge to bee
managed by others, he came into England, hoping
to pacifie the Queene. When he came, he
was commanded to keepe his Chamber, and
soone after was committed to the custody of
the Lord Keeper.
            
            No sooner was the Lord Generall departed
from Ireland, but that Tyrone (notwithstanding
the cessation from warre, drawing his
Forces together, tooke the field; to whom Sir
William Warren was sent, to charge him with
breach of promise; he answered, that his doings
were according to couenants, hauing giuen
warning before: his cause was iust, for that the
Lord Lieuctenant was committed in England,
vpon whose honor he reposed his whole estate,
neither would hee haue any thing to doe with
the Councellors of Ireland. Hereupon presuming
vpon Spaine, hee sent Odonel into Connaught,
receiued tumultuous persons, strengthened
the weake, glorying euery where that hee
would restore againe the ancient Religion and
liberty of Ireland, and expell the English out of
Ireland. To which end, some money and munition
was sent from Spaine, and Indulgences
from Rome. And for an especiall fauour the
Pope sent him a plume of Phoenix feathers,

for a Trophy of his victories.
            
               Tyrone vnder pretence of deuotion, in midwinter
went to the Monastery of Tipperary, to
worship the Crosse: from thence hee sent out
Mac Guir with a number of rifeling robbers, to
spoile and prey vpon the peaceable subiects,
with whom Sir Warram Saint Leger met, and
at the first incounter ranne Mac Guir through
the body with a Lance, and was likewise runne
through with his Lance. Whereupon Tyrone
made ready to returne from Monster sooner
then was expected, or himselfe meant.
            At this time, Charles Blunt,
               Anno 1600. Lord Mountioy,
was sent Lord Lieuetenant generall into Ireland.
At his first comming, hearing that Tyrone
was to depart out of Monster, hee hastened
to stop his passage in Feriall, and there to giue
him battell, which the Earle preuented by taking
another way, hauing intelligence of the
Lord Generall his designes. The spring drawing
on, the Deputy put himselfe in his march toward
Vlster, with purpose to driue the Earle to
a stand. In the meane time Sir Henry Docwray
at Loughfoil, and Sir Ma
                     •
                  thew Morgan at Belishanon
planted the Garrisons, which they effected
with small resistance, and repressed the
Rebels in diuers ouerthrowes.
            The Lord Generall likewise held Tyrone very
hard, and with light skirmishes euer put him to
the worst: sothat he now perceiuing his fortunes
to decline, withdrew himselfe backwards into
his ould corners. The Lord Lieuetenant entred

in Lease, the place of refuge and receit of all the
Rebels in Leinster, where hee shew Ony Mac
Rory-Og, chiefe of the family of the O Mores,
a bloudy, bould, and desperate yong man: and
so chased out the rest of his companions, as
that neuer since they were seene in those parts.
And though winter began to draw on, yet marched
hee forward to the entry of the Mairy,
three miles beyond Dundalk.
            
            The passage into Vlster is euery way naturally
cumbersome, and it was helped by the Rebels
who had fortified and blocked vp the entrance
with fences of stakes stucke in the ground, with
hurdles ioyned together, and stones in the
midst, with turfes of earth laid betweene hills,
woods and bogges, and manned the place with
a number of souldiers. But the English brake
through their Pallisadoes, and beate backe the
enemy. The Lord Deputy placed a garrison
eight miles from Armagh, where in memory
of Sir Iohn Norrice, he named the Fort Mount
Norrice. In his returne he had many skirmishes.
At Carlingford the enemies were assembled to
stop his way, but were all discomfited, and put
to flight. In the midst of winter hee entred the
Glinnes, that is, the vallies of Leinster, a secure
receptacle of the Rebels. There he brought into
subiection Donel Spanioh, Phelim Mac Pheogh,
and the O Tooles; of whom he tooke hostages.
Then went he to Fereall, and draue Tirell, the
most approued warriour of all the Rebels, from
his fastnesse (that is, his bogs and bushes) vnto

               Vlster, and after some other good seruices done
here, the spring approaching, he marched into
Vlster, fortified Armaugh, and remoued Tyrone
from the Fort of Blacke-water, where hee
had fortified himselfe.
            In the meane time the Pope and the King of
Spaine laboured to maintaine the rebellion in
Ireland, and to helpe Tyrone. Their agents were
a Spaniard elected Archbishop of Dublin by
the Pope, the Bishop of Clowfort, the Bishop of
Killaloe, and Archer a Iesuite. These by prayers
and promises of heauenly rewards, perswaded
the Spaniard to send succours into Ireland,
which hee did, vnder the Generall, Don Iohn
d' Aquila, a man that conceiued great hopes, and
was confident of much aid from the titular
Earle Desmond, and Florence Mac Carly, a Rebell
of great power; wherein the man was much
deceiued; for Sir George Carew Lord President
of Munster, had preuented all his designes,
and sent them prisoners into England, where
they were fast. Don Aquila with two thousand
Spaniards of old trained souldiers, with
certaine Irish fugitiues landed at Kinsale in
Monster, the last of October, Anno 1600. and
presently published a writing, wherein he stiled
himselfe Master Generall, and captaine of the
Catholike King in the warres of God, for holding
and keeping the faith in Ireland: this drew
diuers distempered and cuill-affected persons
on his side.
            The Lord Deputy gathering his companies,

hasted to Kinsale, and incamped neere vnto
the Towne, on the land side. In the meane time,
Sir Richard Leuison, with two of the Queenes
shippes, inclosed the hauen, to forbid all accesse
to the Spaniards. Then on both sides the Canon
played vpon the towne.
            But newes was brought that two thousand
Spaniards more were arriued at Bere hauen,
Baltimor, and Castle hauen. Sir Richard Leuison
was imployed vpon them, in which seruice
he sunke fiue of their shippes. Vnto these new
landed Spaniards, whose Leader was Alfonso
o-campo, O-donel ouer the ice by speedy iourneyes
and vnknowne by-wayes repaired, vnseene
of the English. And a few dayes after, Tyrone
himselfe, with O Roik, Raimund, Burk,
Mac Mahun, Randall Mac Surly, Tirrell, the
Barron of Lixnawe, with the choise of the
Nobles, making sixe thousand foot, and fiue
hundreth horse. All confident of victory, being
fresh, strong, and more in number then the English,
who were out-wearied with a winter siege
with scarcity of victuals, their horse weake with
fore trauell.
            In this hope Tyrone vpon an hill not a mile
from the English campe made a brauado two
dayes together, intending to haue put these new
supplies of Spaniards, with eight hundreth Irish,
by night into Kinsale, as did appeare by
letters intercepted from Don Aquila. To preuent
this, the Lord Deputy appointed eight Ensignes
to keepe watch, and himselfe with the

               President of Monster, and the Marshall, at the
foot of the hill, chose out a conuenient plot to
giue the Earle battell; who the next morning
seeing the English so forward, by his bag-pipers
sounded the retreat; whom the Lord Generall
followed, and forced them to a stand in the
brinke of a bogge, where their horsemen were
disordered and routed by the Earle of Clan-Ricard.
The maine battell was charged by the
Lord Deputy himselfe, who discharged the
parts of a prouide
                     •
                  t Captaine, and of a valiant
souldier. The rebels not able to withstand him,
brake their arrayes, and fled confusedly in disorder:
In the pursuit, many were slaine. Tyrone,
O-donel, and the rest flung away their weapons,
and shifted for themselues by flight. Alfonso
Ocampo, and sixe Ensigne bearers were taken
prisoners, nine of their Ensignes were born away
by the English, and twelue hundreth Spaniards
slaine. This victory obtained, dismaied
both the Spaniards in Kinsale, and the rebels.
Tyrone was forced into his starting holes in Vlster.
O-donel fled into Spaine. The rest of the
Rebels were driuen to hide themselues.
            The Lord Generall returning to the siege of
Kinsale, began to raise Rampires, and to mount
his Cannons nearer the towne, in which worke
sixe dayes were spent without any impeach
from the Spaniards. Don Aquila seeking now
to get cleare and be gone, sent his Lieuetenant
with the Drum-maior to the Lord Deputy;
wherein hee craued, that some Gentleman of

credit, might bee sent into the towne, with
whom he might parly for peace. The Lord Deputy
sent Sir William Godolphin, to whom Don
Aquila signified, that hee had found the Lord
Deputy, though his eager enemy, yet an honourable
person: the Irish of no valour, rude, and
vnciuill, yea, and (that which hee sore feared)
persidious and false. That hee was sent from the
King of Spaine his Master, to aide two Earles,
and now he much doubted whether there were
any such in rerum natura; considering that one
tempestuous puffe of warre had blowne the
one of them into Spaine, and the other into the
North, so as they were no more to bee seene:
willing therefore he was to treate about a pace,
that might bee good for the English, and not
hurtfull to the Spaniards. Albeit he wanted nothing
requisite to the holding out of the siege,
and expected euery day out of Spaine, fresh
supplies to finde the English worke and trouble
enough.
            The matter thus proposed,Anno 1601. the English being
weake, and wearied with a winter-siege, the
Lord Deputy consented to an agreement, vpon
these Articles.
            1. That Iohn d'Aquila should quit the places
which he held in the Kingdome of Ireland,
as well in the towne of Kinsale, as in the Forts
and Castle of Baltimar, Ber
                     •
                  hauen, and Castlehauen,
and should deliuer them vnto the
Lord Deputy, or to whom hee should appoint.
            
               2. That Don d' Aquila and his Spaniards
should depart with armes, money, munition,
and banners displayed. The souldiers notwithstanding
to beare no Armes against the Queene
of England, till such time as they were vn
                  •
               hipped
in some part of Spaine.
            
            3. That Ships and Victuals should be granted
to them in their departure, for their money,
at such reasonable prises as the country could
afford.
            4. That if contrary windes inforced them
into any other part of Ireland, or England, they
might bee intreated as friends, with safety of
harbour and prouisions necessary for their money.
            5. That a cessation should be from warre, a
security from iniuries.
            6. That the Shippes in which they should
be imbarked, might freely passe by other English
Shippes, without molestation, and the
Shippes arriuing in Spaine, might safely returne
backe againe without any impeachment of the
Spaniards. For security whereof, the said Don
d' Aquila should deliuer for hostages such three
of their Captaines as the Lord Deputy would
choose. Tyrone seeing his hopes gone, his men
slaine, his restlesse conscience gaue him no repose,
hee shifted from place to place in much
feare and perplexity. In the meane time, the
Lord Deputy refreshed his weary and winterbeaten
souldiers, repaired the decayes, renewed
the Garrisons in Monster. This done, hee

departed for Dublin. From thence toward the
spring, by an easie march well appointed, hee
returned into Vlster, meaning to belay the enemy
on euery side, by planting his Forts, so to
take him in his toile: thus comming to Blackwater
hee transported his Army ouer the Riuer
vpon floats,Charles Mount. and beneath the ould Fort, he erected
a new; which thing so terrified the Rebell,
that he set on fire his owne house at Dunganon,
and got himselfe farthe
                  •
                from danger. The Lord
Deputy followed him close, spoiled the Cornefields,
and burnt the villages, and booties were
brought in on euery side. The Forts in Lough
crew, Lough Reogh, and Magher lecond; were
yeelded vp, and Gar
                  •
               isons placed in Lough,
Neaugh, or Sidny, and in M
                     •
                  naghan; whence
with their continuall sallies, they kept the enemies
in such feare, that they hid themselues in
woods, complaining and exclaiming against
Tyrone, that had brought them all to ruine for
his priuate discontents, and began to repent
them so farre, as they made hast who should
first come in to the Lord Deputy. The Earle seeing
how the world went, thought good to preuent
the worst by his submission, which in
humble letters he sent to the Queene, who gaue
the Lord Deputy authority to pardon his life,
though hardly drawne to remit his offences, his
friends daily solicited the Lord Deputy for his
peace; which at last was granted, to put his
life and reuenues without any condition, to the
will of the Queene. Whereupon all Mellifont
               
accompanied with two persons and no more,
he had accesse to the Chamber of Presence,
where the Lord Deputy sate in a Chaire of Estate.
Tyrone in base and poore array, with a
deiected countenance, at the first entrance, fell
downe vpon his knees, and so rested, till hee
was commanded to arise; and comming neerer,
stepping two paces, he fell downe prostrate, and
with great submiss
                  •
               on acknowledged his sinnes
against God, and his fault against her Maiesty.
The next day the Lord Deputy departing from
Dublin, tooke Tyrone thither, meaning to transport
him for England. But the death of Queene
Elizabeth staied that designe, and King Iames
succeeding, and being receiued with admirable
loue of all sorts, at his first entrance 
                  •
               ardoned
Tyrone. And Ireland hath beene since held in
greater peace then euer in the memory of any
stories hath beene formerly knowne.
            After all this, Tyrone, a man not framed for a
peaceable course, but onely for trouble, fell into
his last pageant, in this manner. Montgomery was
made Lord Bishop of Derry, (who was after,
Lord Bishop of Meath) and because the reuenues
of that of Derry and some other Bishoprickes
neare adioyning were so much impaired,
that they were no way able to make a
reasonable maintenance; the Bishop sought by
lawfull meanes to get some Lands taken without
right or law from his Bishopricke, and to
recouer things desperately lost, if hee could.
This thing could not be effected, without the

offence of Tyrone, who had gotten into his
hands the greatest part of the Bishoprick
lands. In so much, that Tyrone vnderstanding
the Bishop sought to recouer the Lands of the
Bishopricke, told the Bishop thus much: My
Lord you haue two or three Bishoprickes, and
yet you are not content with them, you seeke the
Lands of my Earledome. My Lord, quoth the
Bishop, your Earledome is swolne so bigg with
the Lands of the Church, that it will burst if it
be not vented. The Bishop intending in a lawfull
course to recouer the Lands lost, found
that there was no man could giue him better
light and knowledge of those things, then O
Cane, who had beene great with Tyrone: and
to make vse of him was a matter of difficulty;
yet some meanes being vsed to him, he came of
his owne accord to the Bishop, and tould him
that he could helpe him to the knowledge of
that which he sought, but he was afraid of Tyrone:
nay said the Bishop, I will not trust you,
for I know that one bottle of Aqua vitae will
draw you from me to Tyrone. Whereupon hee
tooke a Booke and laid it on his head, saying,
ter liuro, ter liuro: which as my Lord of Meath
said, (who tould me this story) is one of the
greatest kinde of affirming a truth which the
Irish haue, and after this ceremony performed,
they keepe their promise: O Cane vsing this ceremony,
promised to reu
                  •
               ale all that hee knew
in that matter, if hee would on the other side
promise him to saue him from the violence

of Tyrone, and not to deliuer him into England;
which he promised to doe. Whereupon the Bishop
resolued to bring him to the Councell of
Ireland, there to take his confession; as they
came along by Dungannon, Tyrones Sonne
came forth with sixteene horsemen, but finding
the Bishop well appointed and guarded with
men, tould him that he came forth onely to attend
his Lordship some part of the way, and so
after, he rode with him a reasonable way, tooke
his leaue and returned. The Bishop feared that
hee came to take O Cane from him, and thought
that he meant to doe it, if the Bishop had not
beene better prouided then he was. Thus they
comming peaceably to the Councell, the confession
of O Cane was taken. After this, Processe
were sent to Tyrone to warne him to come at an
appointed time, to answere to the suit of the
Lord Bishop of Derry. There was no other intention
then, but in a peaceable manner to bring
the suit to a triall. But behold the burthen of an
euill conscience. Tyrone had entred into a new
conspiracie, to raise another rebellion; of this
conspiracy was O Cane. This thing was secret,
the Councell knew nothing of it. Tyrone being
serued with Processe to answere the suit, began
to suspect that this was but a plot to draw him
in; that surely all the treason was reuealed by
O Cane, whom he knew to be of the conspiracy:
that the pretence was a Processe, and a triall in
law, but the intent was to haue his head. Vpon
this bare suspition, Tyrone resolued with such

other as was in the conspiracy to flye, & therupon
fled out of Ireland with his confederates, &
lost al those lands in the North of Ireland, which
by his Mies. autority, & the diligence of his Mies.
subiects which haue been vndertakers, are now
planted with a more ciuill people, then before.
            This story of Tyrone, being compared with
that of Stucley, & other Irish commotions, may
proue the implacable mind of the Pope; and the
fauour of God in deliuering vs. Stucley by the
prouidence of God was turned another way, &
came not into Ireland, as he purposed: they who
came were euer destroyed. But no enemy did euer
more hurt there, then Tyrone. But when the
accompt is cast vp; what haue all the aduersaries
of England got in the end? They haue, like secret
serpents nibled at the heel. And indeed this hath
bin the practise of the ould Serpent, in troubling
the Church. And we haue both warning of his
malice, & a promise of deliuerance, & in the end
to tread on his head, that now biteth at our heels.
The womans seed shal break the serpents head,
               Gen. 3. 15. 
               but
the serpent shal bruise his heel. The promise is fulfilled
in Christ Iesus our head, and yet by the Apostle
extended to the Church, Rom. 16. 20. The
God of peace shall tread Satan vnder your feet
shortly. It is true, that this is done in a spirituall
battell, wherin Satan & sin shall be ouerthrown:
yet to comfort his Church, and to teach vs to
stay with patience the finall fulfilling of his
promises, he doth in the meane time send many
deliuerances to his Church, and many times

               beateth down Satan & Satans instruments vnder
the feet of his Church. For is not this a treading
down of Satans head, when we see al the instruments
that Satan hath stirred vp to our destruction,
to be by the hand of God beaten & trodden
to dust? Verely, vnto vs it is a signe of comfort,
& that from the Lord, but to our aduersaries
a sign of seare. The true Church of God hath
a priuiledge aboue others in this world, though
persecuted in & by this euill world, yet there appeareth
alwaies an eminent priuiledge of the
Church. Whē the Iewes were Gods Church, this
appeared among them, what was their priuiledge?
They were called by God from & before al
other nations, not because they were stronger or
greater, or wiser, but because God would fulfill his
promise to their Fathers.
               Rom. 3. 2. And to them were committed
the Oracles of God; & as the Apostle doth
inlarge the same thing,Rom. 9. 4. 
               to them pertained the adoption,
& theglory, & the couenants, and the giuing
of the law, & the seruice of God, and the promises.
In all which may appeare what God did
for them, and what he doth for his Church alwaies:
but what are they to doe to God? onely
to worship him according to these oracles,
this law, these couenants, these promises, which
God hath giuen them. By these things then
may the Church be knowne, we may add another
thing to these, whereby we finde that God
would alwaies be knowne to be the God of his
people, of his Church; that is, a miraculous protection
of his Church, and strange deliuerance

out of dangers. This miraculous protection and
deliuerance, God shewed to Israel d
                  •
               uers waies;
and this hath he like wise shewed to the Church
of Christians, and then especially when the
Church hath beene most oppugned. And this
mercy hath God declared to no Church more,
then to the Church of England: wee haue the
Oracles of God among vs, and these wee labour
to preserue without mixture, that no Oracles of
men may be ioyned with them in any equality.
This we professe, and for this we suffer. This is
our glory, that wee suffer as the Church of God
hath all waies suffered. This is our glory, that we
are persecuted by a people that haue forsaken
their God. For they that haue forsaken 
                  •
               he onely
preferment by the Oracles of God committed
to their trust, and haue against that trust,
thrust in mens Oracles, mens traditions to
match the Oracles of God in equall authority:
they who worship not God according to Gods
Oracles deliuered to them, but according to
their owne inuentions; these men haue forsaken
their God. And these bee they that glory so
much of the name of the Catholike Church against
vs, God knoweth his Church; for the
Lord knoweth who are his: But our aduersaries
deale not with God to please him, but with men
to deceiue them. If they should deceiue some
men with the maske, and with the empty title
o
                  •
                the Catholike Church, what haue they gotten
thereby? God is not deceiued, and God will
in his time make it knowne where his Catholike
               
Church is. God will not haue his Catholike
Church maintained with lyes, with wicked and
vngratious Practises, with treasons and rebellions,
with conspiracies; they who practise such
things, can neuer proue themselues to bee the
Catholike Church; but the true Catholike
Church is knowne by holding the Oracles of
God, by worshipping God according to his own
Oracles, by suffering patiently the practises of
wicked men, by committing their cause to God,
by trusting in God, and in the power of his
might, and by miraculous deliuerances out of
danger by the onely hand and power of God.
This holy and heauenly protection of God of
the Church of England, may plainely proue vnto
all the world, that the Church of England
is a part and true member of that Catholike
Church that serueth God in truth and sincerity,
enioying those priuiledges and fauours
which God doth vouchsafe to no people, sauing
to his owne Church.
            
            Now let the Pope goe on in his course, and
fulfill his measure: let him honour wretched
and wicked rebels, the scum of the earth: let
him send a peacockes taile, as he did to Stucley,
let him send a plume of Phoenix seathers, as hee
did to Tyrone (if they were Phoenix feathers, or
if the Pope did not collude in one thing, as that
Fryer did in another thing, who vndertooke to
shew to the people a feather of the wing of the
Angell Gahriell; a plume of whose feathers was
more befitting the Pope to send, if his holinesse
               
hath such command ouer Angels, as they say he
hath.) Let them I say proceed in the workes of
darkenesse as they haue done, and as they continue
to doe: let vs trust in the Lord, who hath
manifested to all the world by his great, mercifull,
and manifold deliuerances, that hee hath
taken the protection of vs. And as he hath done
hitherto, assuredly he will doe to the end, if we
faile not: for God will not forsake vs, if we forsake
not him. Indeed if we forsake him, and fall
away from the truth of Religion, in the Church,
and from the execution of iustice in the State;
and from obedience to the faith: then may wee
loose our part in God, and loose our confidence
in his helpe, and loose the blessed benefit of his
protect
                  •
                on. They can neuer preua
                  •
               le against vs
by any other way, then by our forsaking of
God. When Balac the King of Moab, had sent
for Balaam the false Prophet, and by him vnderstood
that it was impossible for him to preuaile
against Israel, though Balaam was sent to
curse them: At last hee was informed by his
false Prophet Balaam, that there was no hope
to preuaile against Israel, vnlesse there were some
meanes deuised to draw Israel into sinne against
God, and so would God be offended with them,
and then might their aduersaries preuaile against
them: this aduise was most pernicious against
Israel. For the women of Moab were
sent among the Israelites to intise them both to
bodily and spirituall fornication. And this indeed
prouoked Gods anger: and therefore the

Lord commanded Israel to vexe the Midia
                  
                     •
                  nites,
and to smite them,
               Numb. 25. 17. 
               for they trouble you
with their wiles. The King of Spaine hath proued
Balaam the false Prophet, the Pope of Rome,
to curse the Church and State of England: hee
hath beene as greedily bent to curse England, as
euer Balaam was to curse Israel. His curses by
Gods goodnesse haue beene turned into blessings
vpon vs. The more hee hath cursed, the
more haue wee receiued blessings from God.
The Pope perceiuing that his curses cannot preuaile
against vs, hath entred into the consultation
of Balaam the false Prophet, to send among
vs Priests and Iesuites secretly, who as
they say, are well acquainted both with carnall
and spirituall fornication. These come among
vs and trouble vs with their wiles. And if by
their wiles we be once drawn away from God,
then may they preuaile, but not otherwise then
as the d
                  •
               uell hath sometimes permission to preuaile
against Gods people. But so long as wee
stand the Church of God, holding the Oracles
of God committed to vs, morshipping. God according
to the rules of the holy doctrine, wee
may with ioy of h
                  ••
               rt expect the protection of
God as we haue had. Of these things what can
our aduersaries deny? Can they deny that wee
haue the Oracles of God among vs, onely reuerencing
them? Can they deny the miraculous
pro
                     ••
                  ction of God ouer vs from time to time, against
all their wicked practises? let our enemies
be iudges herein. Can they deny that the Pope
               
hath runne the course of false Balaam against
vs? Can they deny that their Priests and Iesuites
come creeping in among vs, to draw vs away
from God to bee partakers with them in
their superstition and idolatry? these things are
manifest to the world, and to their owne consciences:
then we leaue them vnto the seruice
of their Balaam, let them leaue vs to the seruice
of our God.
            
         
         
            CHAPTER XV.
            
               QVeene Elizabeth after so many
bloudy and dangerous practises
attempted against her, being
mightily protected by God, ended
her dayes in peace and safety:
The enemy was not permitted
to hurt her, with all their bloudy and barbarous
practises. After her, succeeded our peaceable
Salomon, King Iames, who laboured to establish
peace, if it might bee: But when hee
spake of peace, they prepared themselues for
warre.
            
            He was first encountred with such a practise,Anno 1603.
whereof because I know not the truth and bottome,
I must follow such relations as I finde.
King Iames our
                  •
               gracious Soueraigne, being called
into the right of his owne inheritance, by
the great and admirable applause and affections
of all good men from the highest to the

               lowest of England: And declaring his constant
resolution for the maintenance of Religion, deferred
his Coronation till Saint Iames day. In
the meane time some vnquiet spirits entred into
a conspiracy, (their vaine hopes for aduancing
of their Religion, failing) their designe as is said,
was to surprize the King, and Prince Henry. Of
forces they presumed, meaning to retaine them
prisoners in the Tower, and with treasures therin
to maintaine their intent, or to carry them to
Douer Castle, and there by violence, either to
obtaine their owne pardons, a tolleration of
Religion, and a remouall of some Counsellors of
state, or else to put some other proiect in execution.
To conceale this treason, Watson the
Priest deuised oathes for secrecie, and himselfe
with Clark, another Priest taught; that the act
was lawfull, being done before the Coronation:
for that the King was no King before hee was
annointed, and the Crowne solemnly set vpon
his head.
            The other persons inuolued in this practise,
were Henry Brooke, Lord Cobham, Thomas
Lord Gray of Wilton, Sir Walter Ralegh, Sir
Griffin Markham, Sir Edward Parham,
George Brooke, Bartholomew Brookesby, and Anthony
Coply. All which were apprehended and
committed. The sicknesse being then rife in
London, the Tearme was kept at Winchester, the
place designed for their arraignement, whether
they were conueied vnder strong guard. The
first brought to triall was George Brooke,
               
brother to the Lord Cobham, Sir Griffin Markham,
Sir Edward Parham, Brooksly, Coply, Watson
and Clark. The inditement was, that they
had conspired, first to destroy the King; then
to raise rebellion, to alter Religion, to subuert
the State, to procure forraine inuasion. These
their intents they had made known to the Lord
Gray, whom they intended to make Earle Marshall
of England, Watson Lord Chancelour,
Georke Brookes Lord Treasurer, Markham Secretary:
that with the King the Lords also
should be surprized in their Chambers at Greenwich,
and the Lord Maior and Aldermen of
London should be sent for, and so shut vp in the
Tower.
            
            
               George Brooke answered, that he had commission
from the King to doe that he did, onely to
trie faithfull subiects; but being required
to shew his Commission, hee could produce
none. Sir Griffin Markham, excepting onely
the imputation of bloud, confessed his offence
penitently; alledging it was through a discontented
minde, and desired the Lords to bee a
meane to the King for mercy Watson and
Clark, (the former of which confessed that he
had drawne all those Gentlemen into those
plots) like true Roman Priests, auerred that
they held the King for no King, vntill hee was
crowned: and therefore it could not be treason:
alledging that Saul was no King, till hee was
chosen in Mispeh, though hee had beene annointed
in Ramoth by the Prophet Samuel.
               
Neither Ieroboam, who in the dayes of Salomon
had beene confirmed by the Prophet to
raigne ouer Israel, vntill the people made him
King, vpon the foolish answere of Rehoboam:
making no difference betweene the mediate and
ordinary succession of lawfull Kings in Common-wealths
established: and those which God
himselfe extraordinarily aduanced to be scourges
to an vngratefull land. It was tould them
that in England the King neuer dieth, that
there is no interregnum, that the Coronation
is but a ceremony to shew the King to the people.
Two dayes after was Sir Walter Ralegh
brought to the barre, hee was indited for combining
with the Lord Cobham (his accuser as
it was said in the foresaid designes) he pleaded,
not guilty, and so stood for his purgation. Hee
pleaded for himselfe a long time, and with some
admiration of men, who thought that a man of
such vnderstanding would hardly bee drawne
into a plot so foule, and so foolish: yet hee was
found guilty, and had sentence of death.
            The like iudgement, a few dayes after, passed
vpon the Lord Cobham and Gray, arraigned
on two seuerall dayes. The former was indited
for combining with Sir Walter Ralegh, and
George Brooke to procure forces from the King
of Spaine, and the Arch-Duke for inuasion:
the other for ioyning with the foresaid Priests,
Knights, and Gentlemen in their conspiracies.
Sir Edward Parham was only acquitted by the
Iury. Of the rest, onely three died. Watson,

Clark, and George Brooke. Watson had before in
Print laid open at large the treasonable practises
of the Iesuites, and at his death left this suspition
on them, that they in reuenge, had cunningly
drawne him into this action, which
brought him to his end. After this the Lords
Cobham and Gray, and Sir Griffin Markham
were by a Warrant to be executed the Friday
next. But the King inclined to mercy, sent at the
day appointed a Pardon for them; the manner
whereof was such, as gaue vnexpected ioy to
them that looked for nothing but death. The
Pardon was brought to the place where they
were to be executed, by Master Gibb a Gentleman,
so secretly, that none present vnderstood
any thing thereof: Sir Griffin Markham was
first brought to the Scaffold (erected in the Castle
Greene,) and made himselfe ready for the
stroke of the Axe. When secretly Master Gibb
deliuered to the High Shiriffe the Kings warrant
to the contrary; who vnderstanding his
Maiesties intent, tooke backe the prisoner (as if
he were first to confront the two Lords, vpon
some seruice of the King) and brought him vnto
the Castle Hall. Then was the Lord Gray
brought forth, who hauing poured out his
prayers vnto God, at length kneeling downe
for the stroke of death, the Sheriffe bad stay,
telling the Lord that some further seruice was
expected of him; and thereupon led him likewise
into the Castle Hall. The Lord Cobham
was last brought forth: who being in preparation,

and prayers, the Lord Gray and Sir
Gr
                     •
                  ffin were brought backe againe. All the
three prisoners appearing together on the Scaffold,
the Sheriffe notified his Maiesties warrant
for the stay of the execution. At which example
of Clemency, vnexpected both of the prisoners
and spectators, there arose great shoutes
of the people, crying, God saue the King. The
condemned wished that they might sacrifice
their liues to redeeme their faults, and to repurchase
so mercifull a Prince his loue.
            This attempt seemed to be a matter of lesse
danger, because there appeared neither strength
to act the businesse intended, nor heads to carry
it. But our thankfulnesse must appeare to
God for our least deliuerances. It is certaine by
their confessions that a great mischiefe was intended,
howso
                  •
               uer they might seeme vnable to
effect it. And this we may obserue, that no treason
was euer attempted without a Romish
Priest. The treasons attempted in England,
haue that proper and peculiar marke, to haue
a Priest in the practise.
         
         
            
            CHAPTER XVI.
            
               NOw I enter vpon a Narration,
which may fully open our aduersaries
to the world: wherein appeareth
the profundity of malice
and cruelty, and vngodlinesse,
and whereby all men may
vnderstand by what spirit these men are led.
The Histories of former times containe no example
like it. Which sheweth that wicked inuentions
are growne to a greater ripenesse in
the Romish generation. And when they are
come to their full ripenesse
                  •
                they themselues
may vnderstand what they are to looke for. In
the meane time let all men vnderstand the difference
betweene the Church of God, and that
which in the Scripture is called ecclesia malignantium.
               Odiui ecclesi
                     •
                  m malignantium. Psal. 25. 
                     •
                  . in edit. vul
                     •
                  ata.
That Church of the malignant may
sufficiently appeare by all the former practises,
but especially by this of the Gunpowder treason.
            
            This treason was first thought on in the last
yeare of Queene Elizabeth, when Henry Garnet
the Superiour of the malignants here, Catesby,
and others sent Thomas Winter into Spaine,
to negotiate with the Spanish King in the name
of the English Catholikes: First to send an army
to them, who were now in readinesse to ioyne
their forces with his: secondly, to grantsome
pensions to sundry persons deuoted to his seruice

in England: And thirdly, Winter was to
giue aduertisement of the discontents that the
young Gentlemen and Soldiers had conceiued
vpon the death of Essex, whereby a fit occasion
was offered to forward the popish cause. To prosecute
this businesse, hee made for his meanes,
Father Creswell the leiger Iesuite in Spaine, Don
Petro Francesa second secretary to the State, and
the Duke of Lerma: all which assured Winter
that the office of his imploiment would be
very gratefull to his Master. The place of landding
concluded vpon by them was Kent or Essex
if the Kings Army were great, if otherwise,
then Milford hauen in Wales was held fittest.
With these and other like pro
                  •
               ects Winter all
this summer followed the King in his progresse.
And lastly had answer by the Count Miranda,
that the King would bestow an hundreth thousand
crownes towards the expedition, halfe
thereof to be payed that yeare, and the rest the
next Spring, when at the farthest hee meant to
set foot in England. On whose behalfe hee willed
the English Catholikes to maintaine their
promise, whom hee respected (as was said) as
his owne proper Castilians; and further desired
their continuall aduertisemonts; if in the meane
time it chanced the old Queene to die.
            
               Winter thus laden with hopes, returned
from Spaine, and acquainted Garnet, Catesby,
and Tresham, with what had passed, which they
related to others. All were glad to heare the
newes, and rested satisfied, expecting the day.

But before the next Spring, Queene Elizabeth
died. To giue notice of her death, Christopher
Wright was from Catesby and others sent into
Spaine. Guy Fawkes was likewise sent from
Bruxells by Sir William Stanly into Spaine,
both of them to prosecute the former negotiation,
assuring the Spanish King, that King Iames
would runne the same course, and proceed as
rigorously against the Catholikes, as the late
Queene had done, for whose defence they desired
instantly that some Spaniards might bee
transported vnto Milford hauen. Where the
English Papists would bee forward to assist
them, hauing in a readinesse two thousand horse
furnished for the enterprise. But the Spa
                     •
                  iard
would not now hearken to their motions, or
proceed any further to any forcible enterprise
            In the meane while, the Iesuites had beene
tampering to disswade the acceptance of King
Iames into England, vrging it that death was
rather to be indured, then to admit an heretike.
And those that gaue him consent, they held liable
to excommunication by the censure of Pope
Clement 
                     〈◊〉
                  . The Papists seeing their great ankerhold
to faile them from Spaine, began to enter
into more desperate courses. Catesby tooke his
ground from the doctrine of Father Parsons:
That the whole Schooles both of Diuines and
Lawyers,
               In his Booke Philopater. Sect. 2. take this position vn
                  •
               oubtedly to bee
beleeued, That if any Christian Prince shall
manifestly turne from the Catholike Religion,

and desire of seeke to reclaime others from the
same, he presently falleth from all princely power
and dignity, and that also by vertue and power
of the law it selfe both diuine and humane, euen
before any sentence pronounced against him by
the supreame Pastor and Iudge. And that his
Subiects, of what estate or condition soeuer, are
freed from all bond of oath of alleageance
which at any time they had made vnto him as
to their lawfull Prince. Nay, that they both
may and ought (prouided they haue competent
strength and force) cast out such a man from
bearing rule among Christians, as an Apostata,
an Heretike, a Back-slider, a Reuolter from
our Lord Christ, and an enemy to his owne
State, and common-wealth; least perhaps hee
might infect others, or by his example or command,
turne them from the faith: yea they affirme
further, that if a Prince shall but fauour
or shew countenance to an Heretike, he presently
looseth his Kingdome. By this fiery diuinity of
their owne making, or receiuing it from the spirits
of error and doctrines of diuels, (for those
things that are taught for doctrines, not being
found in the word of God, are doctrines of diuels,
much more they that are contrary to the
doctrines of Gods word) by these doctrines
the Gunpowder-treason tooke strength. The
Parliament dissolued the seauenth of Iuly, and
was prorogued vntill the seauenth of February
following, Catesby being then at Lambeth, sent
for Thomas Winter, who had beene imployed

into Spaine, and brake with him vpon the blowing
vp of the Parliament house; who answered,
that indeed strooke at the root: but if it should
not take effect, said hee, as most of this nature
miscarrie, the scandall would be so great, which
Catholike religion might hereby sustaine, as
not only our enemies, but our friends also would
with good reason condemne vs. Catesby answered,
the nature of the disease required so sharpe
a remedy, and asked him if hee would g
                  •
               ue his
consent. Yes, said he, in this or what else soeuer,
he would venture his life. But he proposed
difficulties, as want of an house, and of one to
carry the mine, noise in the working, and such
like. Catesby answered, let vs giue the attempt,
and where it 
                  •
               aileth, passe no further: but first
quoth he, because wee will leaue no peaceable
and quiet way vntried, you shall goe ouer, and
informe the Constable of the state of the Catholikes
here in England, intreating him to sollicite
his Mai
                  •
               stie, that the penall lawes may bee recalled,
and we admitted into the ra
                  •
               ke of his
other subiects. Withall, you may bring ouer
some confident Gentlemen, such as you shall
vnderstand best able for this businesse, and named
vnto him Master Fawkes. Shortly after,
Winter passed the seas, and found the Constable
at Bergen neare Dunkirk: where by helpe of
Master Owen hee deliuered his message. Whose
answere was, that he had strict command from
his Master, to doe all good offices for the Catholikes,
and for his owne part hee thought

himselfe bound in conscience so to doe, and that
no good occasion should bee omitted, but hee
spake to him nothing of this matter.
            Returning to Dunkirk with Master Owen
they had speech whether the Constable would
faithfully helpe them, or no: Owen said, he beleeued
nothing lesse, and that they sought onely
their own
                  •
                ends, holding small accompt of
Catholikes. Winter told him, that there were
many Gentlemen in England, who would not
forsake their Countrey vntill they had tried
the vttermost. And to add one more to their
company, as a fit man both for councell and execution
of whatsoeuer they should resolue, wished
for Master Fawkes, who as he had heard,
was a man of good commendation. Owen told
him, the gentleman deserued no lesse, but was
at Brussels, and that if he came not, as happily
he might before Winters departure, hee would
send him shortly after into England. Winter
went shortly after to Ostend; where Sir William
Stanly as then was not, but came two dayes
after. Winter remained with him three or foure
dayes. In which time he asked him, if the Catholikes
in England should doe any thing to
helpe themselues, whether hee thought the
Arch-Duke would second them? he answered,
no. For all those parts w
                  •
               re so desirous of peace
with England, as they would indure no speech
of other enterprise. Neither were it fit, said he,
to set any pro
                  •
               ect a foot, now the peace is vpon
concluding▪ 
               Winter told him there was no such

resolution, and fell into other speech; asking him
of Master Fawkes, whom Sir William much
commended: and as they were in speech,
Fawkes came in. Sir William told him, this is the
Gentleman you spake of; and after they had
imbraced, Winter told Fawkes, that some good
friends of his wished his company in England,
and appointed to meet at Dunkirk, where they
might conferre. Meeting at Dunkirk, they had
conference, and resolued both to come into
England. They came first to Catesby: whether
came Master Thomas Percy. The first
word he spake after he came into their companie,
was, Shall we alwaies, Gentlemen, talke, and
neuer doe any thing? Catesby tooke him aside,
and had speech of somewhat to be done, so as
first they might all take an oath of secrecy;
which within few dayes after, they did. The
oath was this: You shall sweare by the blessed
Trinity, and by the Sacrament you now purpose
to receiue, neuer to disclose, directly nor indirectly,
by wo
                     •
                  d or circumstance, the matter that shall
he proposed to you to keepe secret, nor desist from
the execution thereof, vntill the rest shall giu
                     •
                  
you leaue. This oath was first taken by Catesby,
Percy, Wright and Fawkes, behinde Saint Clements.
After the oath taken, they went into the
next roome and heard Masse, and receiued the
Sacrament vpon it. That done, Catesby disclosed
to Percy, and Winter and Iacke Wright to
Fawkes the businesse, for which they tooke the
oath, which they approued. Then was Percy
               
sent to take the house, which they vnderstood
did belong to one Ferris; which with some difficulty
in the end he obtained, and became Tenant
to Whinyard, as Ferris was before. Fawkes
vnderwent the name of Master Percy his man,
calling himselfe Iohnson; because his face was
most vnknowne, and receiued the keyes of the
house, vntill they heard that the Parliament
was adiourned to the 7. of February. At which
time they all departed seuerall wayes into the
Countrey, to meet againe at the beginning of
Michaelmas Tearme. It was thought conuenient
to haue a house to receiue prouision of powder
and wood for the mine; from which house
the prouision might be conueied to that house
which Percy had taken: this was taken in Lambeth,
and Keyes was appointed the trusty keeper
thereof. When they were agreed to begin and
set things in order for the mine, they were staied
a while, because the Scottish Lords were appointed
to sit in conference of the Vnion in Percy
his house. The time of their sitting being past,
they entred vpon the mine, hauing prouided
themselues of baked meats, the lesse to need sending
abroad.
            Whilst they were together, they fell into discourse
what they should doe after this deede
was done. The first question was, how they
might surprise the next heire. The Prince happily
would be at Parliament with the King, his
Father: how should they then be able to seaze
vpon the Duke? This burden Percy vndertook,

that by his acquaintance, he with other Gentlemen
would enter the Chamber without suspition,
and hauing some doozen others at seuerall
doores to expect his comming, and two or
three on horsebacke at the Court gate to receiue
him, he would vndertake (the blow being giuen,
vntill which hee would attend in the Dukes
Chamber) to carry him safe away: for he supposed
most of the Court would be absent, and
such as were there, not suspecting, or vnprouided
for any such matter. For the Lady Elizabeth,
it were easie to surprise her in the country,
by drawing friends together at an hunting
neare the Lord Harringtons, and Asby Master
Catesby his house being not farre off, was a fit
place for preparation The next was for money
and horses, which if they could prouide in any
reasonable measure (hauing the heire apparant)
and the first knowledge by foure or fiue dayes
was oddes sufficient. Then what Lords they
should saue from the Parliament, which was
first agreed in generall, as many as they could
that were Catholikes, or so disposed; but after
they descended to speake of particulars. Next
what forraine Princes they should acquaint
with this before, or ioyne with after. For this
point they agreed, that first they could not inioyne
Princes to that secrecy, nor oblige them
by oath, so to be secure of their promise; beside,
they knew not whether they will approue the
proiect or dislike it. And if they doe allow therof,
to prepare before, might beget suspition:

and not to prouide vntill the businesse were
acted; the same letter that carried the newes of
the thing done, might as well intreat their
helpe and furtherance. Spaine is too slow in
their preparations to hope any good from the
first extremities, and France too neere and to
dangerous, who with the Shipping of Holland,
we feared of all the world might make away
with vs. While they were in the middle of these
discourses, they heard that the Parliament
would be anew adiourned vntill after Michaelmas,
vpon which tidings they brake off both
discourse and working. About Candlemas they
brought ouer in a Boat the powder which they
had prouided at Lambeth, and laid it in Master
Percy his house; because they would haue all
their danger in one place. Then falling to their
worke in the mine, they came against the stone
wall, which was very hard to beat through, at
which time they called Kit Wright to their
company; but as they were working vpon the
wall they heard a rushing in a Cellar, of remouing
of coales. Whereupon they feared that
they had beene discouered, and they sent
Fawkes to goe to the Cellar; who finding that
the Coales were a selling, and that the
Cellar was to bee let, viewing the opportunity
thereof for their purpose, Percy went and
hired the same for yearely rent. They had before
this prouided twenty barrels of powder,
which they remoued into the Cellar, and couered
them w
                  •
               th billets and faggots which they
had prouided for that purpose.
            
               After this they thought fit to send Fawkes
to acquaint Sir William Stanly, and Master
Owen with this matter, but so that they might
receiue the oath of secrecy. The reason why
they desired Sir William Stanly should be acquainted
herewith, was to haue him with them
so soone as he could. And for Master Owen, he
might hold good correspondencies after with
forraine Princes. Master Fawkes departed about
Easter for Flanders, and returned in the
end of August. He brought word that Sir William
Stanly was not returned from Spaine, so
as he vttered the matter onely to Owen, who
seemed well pleased with the businesse, but told
him that surely Sir William wou
                  •
               d not bee acquainted
with any plot as hauing businesse now
a foot in the Court of England; but he himselfe
would be alwaies ready to tell him, and send
him away so soone as it were done.
            About this time Master Percy and Catesby
met at the Bathe. Where they agreed that the
company being yet but few, Catesby should
haue the others authority to call in whom hee
thought best. Whereupon he called in Sir Euerard
Digby, and after that Master Tresham. The
first promised fifteene hundreth pounds, the second
two thousand pounds. Master Percy promised
all that he could get of the Earle of Northumberlands
rents, which was about foure
thousand pounds, and to prouide many galloping
horses, to the number of ten.
            Meane while, Fawkes and Winter bought

somenew powder, as suspecting the first to bee
danke, and conueied it into the Cellar, and set
it in order, as they resolued it should stand.
Then was the Parliament anew prorogued vntill
the fifth of Nouember. So that all of them
went down till some tenne dayes before. When
Catesby camevp with Fawks to an house by Enfield-chase,
called White-webs; whether Winter
came to them. Catesby willed Winter to inquire
whether the young Prince came to the Parliament.
Winter told him that hee heard that his
Grace thought not to be there. Then said Catesby,
must we haue our horses bey
                  •
               nd the water,
and prouision of more company to surprise the
Prince, and eaue the Duke alone.
            All things thus prepared: the Saturday of the
weeke immediately praeceding the Kings returne,
which was vpon Thursday (being but
ten dayes before the Parliament) The Lord
Monteagle, sonne and heire to the Lord Morley,
being in his owne lodging ready to goe to supper
at seauen of the clocke at night, one of his
footmen, whom hee had sent of an errand ouer
the street, was met by an vnknowne man of a
reasonable tall personage, who deliuered him a
Letter, charging him to put it into my Lord his
Masters hands: which my Lord no sooner receiued,
but that hauing broken it vp, and perceiuing
the same to bee of an vnknowne, and
somewhat vnlegible hand, and without either
date or subscription; did call one of his men to
him for helping him to reade it. But no sooner

did he conceiue the strange contents thereof, although
he was somewhat perplexed what construction
to make of it, (as whether of a matter
of consequence, as indeede it was, or whether
some foolish deuised Pasquill by some of his enemies,
to skarre him from his attendance at the
Parliament) yet did hee as a most dutifull and
l
                  •
               iall subiect, conclude not to conceale it, what
euer might come of it. Whereupon notwithstanding
the latenesse and darkenesse of the
night in such a season of the yeare, he presently
repaired to his Maiesties Pallace at White hall,
and there deliuered the same to the Earle of Salisbury
his Maiesties principall Secretary. The
Earle hauing read the Letter, and heard of the
manner of comming of it to his hands, did
greatly incourage and commend the Lord for
his discretion; te
                  •
               ling him plainely, that whatsoeuer
the purpose of the Letter might proue
hereafter, yet did this accident put him in mind
of diuers aduertisements hee had receiued from
beyond the seas, wherewith he had acquainted
as well the King himselfe, as diuers of his Priuy
Councellours, concerning some businesse the
Papists were in, both at home and abroad, making
preparation for some combination among
them against this Parliament time: for inabling
them to deliuer at that time to the King some
petition for tolleration of Religion, which
should be deliuered in some such order, and so
well backed, as the King should be loath to refuse
their requests; like the sturdy-beggars
               
crauing almes with one open hand, but carrying
a stone in the other in case of refusall. And
therefore did the Earle of Salisbury conclude
with the Lord Monteagle, that he would in regard
of the Kings absence impart the same Letter
to some more of his Maiesties Councell.
Whe
                  •
               eof the Lord Monteagle liked well, onely
adding this request, by way of protestation,
that whatsoeuer the euent hereof might proue,
it should not be imputed to him, as proceeding
from too light and too sodaine an apprehension,
that hee deliuered this Letter being onely
moued thereto for demonstration of his ready
deuotion and care for preseruation of his Maiestie
and the State. And thus did the Earle of Salisbury
presently acquaint the Lord Chamberlaine
with the said Letter. Whereupon they
two in the presence of the Lord Monteagle, calling
to minde the former intelligence already
mentioned, which seemed to haue some relation
with this Letter; the tender care which they
euer had to the preseruation of his Maiesties
person, made them apprehend, that some perillous
attempt did thereby appeare to be intended
against the same, which did the more neerely
concerne the Lord Chamberlaine to haue
care of, in regard that it doth belong to the
charge of his office, to ouersee as well all places
of Assembly where his Maiesty is to repaire,
as his Highnesse owne priuate houses.
And therefore did the said two Councellors conclude,
that they should ioyne vnto them three

more of the Councell, to wit, the Lord Admirall,
the Earles of Worcester and Northampton,
to be also particularly acquainted with this accident.
Who hauing all of them concurred together
to the re-examination of the contents of
the said Letter, they did conclude, that how
slight a matter it might at the first appeare to
be, yet was it not absolutely to be contemned,
in respect of the care which it behoued them to
haue of the preseruation of his Maiesties person.
But yet resolued for two reasons, first to
acquaint the King himselfe with the same, before
they proceeded to any further inquisition
in the matter, as well for the expectation and experience
they had of his Maiesties fortunate
iudgement in clearing and soluing of obscure
riddles and doubtfull mysteries, as also because
the more time would in the meane while bee
giuen for the practise to ripen, if any was, wherby
the discouery might be the more cleare and
euident, and the ground of proceeding thereupon
more safe, iust, and easie. And so according
to their determination did the Earle of Salisbury
repaire to the King in his gallery vpon
Friday, being Alhallow day, in the afternoon,
which was the day after his Maiesties arriuall,
and none but himselfe being present with his
Highnesse at that time: Where without any other
speech or iudgement giuen of the Letter,
but onely relating simply the forme of the deliuery
thereof, he presented it to his Maiesty; the
contents of the Letter are as followeth.
            
               My Lord, out of the loue I beare to some of
your friends, I haue a care of your preseruation.
Therefore I would aduise you, as you tender your
life, to deuise some excuse to shift off your attendance
at this Parliament. For God and man
haue concurred to punish the wickednesse of this
time. And thinke not slightly of this aduertisement,
but retire your selfe into your Country,
where you may expect the euent in safety: for
though there be no appearance of any stirre, yet I
say, they shall receiue a terrible blow this Parliament,
and yet they shall not see who hurt them.
This counsell is not to be contemned, because it
may doe you good, and can doe you no harme: for
the danger is past as soone as you shall haue burned
this Letter. And I hope God will giue you
the grace to make good vse of it. To whose holy
protection I commend you.
            The King no sooner read the letter, but after
a little pause, and then reading it ouer again,
he deliuered his iudgement of it in such sort, as
he thought it was not to bee contemned. For
that the stile of it seemed to be more quicke and
pithy, then is vsuall to be in a pasquill or libell,
(the superfluities of idle braines.) But the Earle
of Salisbury perceiuing the King to apprehend
it deeplier then he looked for, knowing his nature;
told him, that he thought by one sentence
in it, that it was like to be written by some fool or
mad man, reading to him this sentence in it: for
the danger is past as soone as you haue burned the
Letter: which he said was like to be the saying

of a foole. For if the danger was past so soone as
the Letter was burnt, then the warning behooued
to be of little auaile, when the burning of
the Letter might make the danger to bee eschewed.
But the King by the contrary considering
the former sentence in the Letter. That
they should receiue a terrible blow at this Parliament,
and yet should not see who hurt them:
ioyning it to the sentence immediately following
already alleadged, did thereupon coniecture,
that the danger mentioned, should bee
some sudden danger by blowing vp of powder:
for no other insurrection, rebellion, or whatsoeuer
other priuate or desperate attempt could
be committed, or attempted in time of Parliament,
and the authors thereof v
                  •
               seene, except
it were onely by a blowing vp of powder,
which might be performed by one base knaue
in a darke corner. Whereupon he was moued
to interpret and construe the latter sentence in
the Letter, (alleadged by the Earle of Salisbury)
against all ordinary sense and construction
in Grammer, as if by these words, for the danger
is past as soone as you haue burned the Letter,
should be closely vnderstood the sudden
and quicknesse of the danger, which should be
as quickly performed, and at an end, as that
paper should be of bleasing vp in the fire; turning
that word, as soone, to that sense of, as
quickly. And therefore wished that before his
going to Parliament, the vnder-roomes of the
Parliament house might be well and narrowly

searched. It must be confessed that God put this
vnderstanding in the Kings heart. For albeit
now vpon the euent made knowne, a man may
easily see that no other construction can bee
made of the Letter, then that which the King
made: yet before the euent was knowne, the
wisest did not apprehend that vnderstanding.
And therefore we must acknowledge that God
would haue it knowne and brought to knowledge
by the King himselfe, that all the body
of the Kingdome might rest most vnder God,
beholding to the King, their head for the generall
deliuerance. The Earle of Salisbury wondring
at his Maiesties commentary, which hee
knew to be farre contrary to his ordinary and
naturall disposition, who did rather euer sinne
vpon the other side, in not apprehending nor
trusting due aduertisments of practises and perils
when hee was duely informed of them,
whereby hee had many times drawne himselfe
into many desperate dangers, and interpreting
rightly this extraordinary caution at this time
to proceed from the vigilant care he had of the
whole state, more then of his owne person,
which could not but haue all perished together
if this designement had succeeded: he thought
good to dissemble still vnto the King that there
had beene any iust cause of such apprehension.
And ending the purpose with some merry ieast
vpon this subiect, as his custome is, tooke his
leaue for that time.
            But though hee seemed so to neglect it to his

Maiestie, yet his customable and watchfull care
of the King and the State still boyling within
him; and hauing with the blessed Virgin Mary,
laid vp in his heart the Kings so strange iudgement
and construction of it, he could not bee
at rest till hee acquainted the foresaid Lords
what had passed betweene the King and him in
priuate. Whereupon they were all so earnest to
renew againe the memory of the same purpose
to his Maiestie, as it was agreed, that he should
the next day being Saturday repaire to his
Highnesse. Which hee did in the same priuy
Gallery, and renewed the memory thereof, the
Lord Chamberlaine then being present with the
King. At which time it was determined that
the said Lord Chamberlaine should according
to his custome and office, view all the Parliament
houses both aboue and below, and consider
what likelihood or appearance of any such
danger might possibly be gathered by the sight
of them. But yet as well for staying of idle rumors,
as for being the more able to discerne any
mystery the nearer that things were in readinesse,
his iourney thither was ordained to be
deferred till the afternoone before the sitting
downe of the Parliament,
               Nouemb. 5. Anno 1605. which was vpon the
Munday following. At what time he (according
to his conclusion) went to the Parliament
house, accompanied with the Lord Monteagle,
being in zeale to the Kings seruice earnest and
curious to see the euent of that accident, whereof
he had the fortune to be the first discouerer.

Where hauing viewed all the lower roomes, he
found in the vault vnder the vpper house great
store of prouision of Billets, Faggots, & Coales.
And inquiring of Whinyard keeper of the Wardrop,
to what vse hee had put those lower
roomes, and cellars: he told him that Thomas
Percy had hired both the House and part of the
Cellar or Vault vnder the same. And that the
wood and coale therein was the said Gentlemans
owne prouision. Whereupon the Lord
Chamberlaine casting his eye aside, perceiued a
fellow standing in a corner there, calling himselfe
the said Percy his man, and keeper of that
house for him, which was Guido Fawkes, the
instrument which should haue acted that monstrous
tragedy.
            The Lord Chamberlaine looking vpon all
things with an heedfull eye, yet in outward appearance
with but a carelesse and racklesse
countenance, he presently addressed himselfe to
the King in the said priuy Gallery, where in the
presence of the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Admirall,
the Earles of Worcester, Northampton,
and Salisbury, he made his report what he had
seene and obserued there. Noting that Monteagle
had told him, that hee no sooner heard
Thomas Percy named to be the possessour of
that house, but considering both his backwardnesse
in Religion, and the old dearenesse in
friendship betweene himselfe and the said Percy,
he did greatly suspect the matter, and that
the Letter should come from him. The Lord

               Chamberlaine also told, that he did not wonder
a little at the extraordinary great prouision
of wood and coale in that house, where Thomas
Percy had so seldome occasion to remaine: as
likewise it gaue him in his minde that his man
looked like a very tall and desperate fellow.
This could not but increase the Kings former
apprehension and iealousie. Whereupon he insisted,
as before, that the house was narrowly
to bee searched, and that those Billets and
Coales would bee searched to the bottome,
it being most suspitious that they were
laid there onely for couering of the powder.
Of this same minde also were all the
Councellors then present. But vpon the
fashion of making the search, was it long
debated. For on the one side they were all
so iealous of the Kings safety, that they all agreed,
that there could not be too much caution
vsed for preuenting the danger: And yet on
the other part, they were all extreame loath and
dainty, that in case this Letter should proue to
be nothing but the euaporation of an idle braine,
then a curious search being made, and nothing
found, should not onely turne to the generall
scandall of the King and the State, as being so
susp
                  •
               tious of euery light and friuolous toy, but
likewise lay an ill-fauoured imputation vpon
the Earle of Northumberland, one of his Maiesties
greatest Subiects and Councellors, this
Thomas Percy being his kinseman, and most
confident familiar. And the rather were they

curious vpon this point, knowing how farre the
King detested to be thought suspitious or iealous
of any of his good subiects, though of the
meanest degree. And therefore though they all
agreed vpon the maine ground, which was to
prouide for the security of the Kings person,
yet did they much differ in circumstances, by
which this action might bee best carried with
lea
                  •
               t dinne and occasion of slander. But the
King himselfe still persisting that there were
diuers shrewd appearances, and that a narrow
search of those places could preiudice no man
that was innocent, he at last plainely resolued
them, that either must all the parts of those
roomes be narrowly searched, and no possibility
of danger left vnexamined, or else hee and
they all must resolue not to meddle in it at all,
but plainely to goe the next day to the Parliament,
and leaue the successe to fortune, which
he beleeued they would be loath to take vpon
their consciences: for in such a case as this, an
halfe-doing was worse then no doing at all.
Whereupon it was at last concluded, that nothing
should be left vnsearched in those houses.
And yet for the better colour and stay of rumor,
in case nothing were found, it was thought
meet, that vpon a pretence of Whinyards missing
some of the Kings stuffe or hangings which
he had in keeping, all those roomes should bee
narrowly ripped for them. And to this purpose
was Sir Thomas Kneuet, (a Gentleman of his
Maiesties priuie Chamber) imployed, being a

Iustice of Peace in Westminster, and one, of
whose ancient fidelity both the late Queene,
and our now Soueraigne haue had large proofe.
Who according to the trust committed vnto
him, went about the midnight next after, to
the Parliament house, accompan
                  •
               ed with such
a small number as was fit for that 
                  •
               rrand. But
before his entry into the house, finding Thomas
Percyes alleadged man standing without the
doores, his Cloathes and Bootes on at so dead
a time of night, he resolued to apprehend him,
as he did, and the
                  •
               eafter went forward to the
searching of the house. Where after hee had
caused to be ouerturned some of the Billets and
Coales, he first found one of the small Barrels
of powder, and after, all the rest, to the number
of thirty sixe barrels great and small. And thereafter
searching the fellow whom he had taken,
found three matches; and all other instruments
fit for blowing vp the powder, ready vpon him;
which made him instantly confesse his owne
guiltinesse: declaring also vnto him▪ that if hee
had happened to be within the house, when he
tooke him, as he was immediately before (at
the ending of his wo
                  •
               ke) hee would not haue
failed to haue blowne him vp, house and all.
            Thus after Sir Thomas had caused the wretch
to be surely bound, and well guarded by the
company he had brought with him, he himselfe
returned back to the Kings Pallace, and gaue
warning of his successe to the Lord Chamberlaine,
and Earle of Salisbury, who immediately

warning the rest of the Councell that lay in the
house, as soone as they could get themselues
ready, came with their fellow Councellors to
the Kings Bed-chamber, being at that time
neere foure of the clocke in the morning. And
at the first entry of the Kings Chamber doore,
the Lord Chamberlaine being not any longer able
to conceale his ioy for the preuenting of so
great a danger, told the King in a confused hast,
that all was found and discouered, and the
traitor in hands and fast bound.
            Then order being first taken for sending for
the rest of the Councell that lay in the to
                  •
               ne,
the prisoner himselfe was brought into the
house. Where in respect of the strangenesse of
the accident, no man was staied from the sight
in speaking with him: and within a while after
the Counce
                     ••
                  
                did examine him. Who seeming
to put on a Roman-resolution, did both to the
Councell, and to euery other person that spake
to him that day, appeare so constant and set
                  •
               ed
in his grounds, as they all thought they had
found a new Mutius Scaeuola borne in England.
For notwithstanding the horrour of the fact,
the guilt of his conscience, his sudden surprising,
the terrour which should haue strucken
him by comming into the presence of so graue
a Councell, and the restlesse and confused questions
that euery man all that day did vexe him
with; 
                  •
               et was his countenance so farre from being
deiected, as hee often smiled in scornefull
manner, not onely auowing the fact, but

repenting onely, with the said Scaeuola, his failing
in the execution thereof; whereof hee said,
the diuell and not God, was the discouerer: answering
quickly to euery mans obiections, scoffing
at any idle questions which were propounded
to him, and iesting with such as he thought
had no authority to examine him. All that day
could the Councell get nothing out of him
touching his complices, refusing to answer to any
such questions which he thought might discouer
his plot, & laying all the blame vpon himselfe.
Whereunto, he said, he was moued onely
for Religion and conscience sake, denying the
King to be his lawfull Soueraigne, or the annointed
of God, in respect he was an Heretike,
and giuing himselfe no other name then Iohn
Iohnson, seruant to Thomas Percy. But the next
morning being carried to the Tower, hee did
not there remaine aboue two or three dayes,
being twice or thrice in that space re-examined,
and the racke onely offered, and shewed vnto
him, when the maske of his Romi
                     •
                  h fortitude
did visibly begin to weare and slide off his face.
And then did he begin to confesse part of the
truth, and thereafter to open the whole matter.
Out of his conscience, and especially out of the
confession of Thomas Winter haue we drawne
the praeceding narration. The confession of
Fawkes was taken presently after his apprehension.
The confession of Winter was taken the
23.Anno 1605. of Nouember, before the Lords of the
Councell.
            
            
               They that were first in the treason, and laboured
in the mine, were Robert Catesby, Robert
Winter, Esquires, Thomas Percy, Thomas Winter,
Iohn Wright, Christopher Wright, Guido
Fawkes, Gentlemen; and Bates, Catesbyes man.
They that were made acquainted with it,
though not personally labouring in the mine,
nor in the cellar, were Euerard Digby Knight,
Ambrose Rookewood, Francis Tresham, Esquires.
Iohn Grant Gentleman, and Robert Keies.
            
            The newes was no sooner spread abroad that
morning, which was vpon a Tuesday, the 5. of
Nouember, and the first day designed for that
session of Parliament: but some of those conspirators,
namely Winter, and the two Wrights,
brethren, thought it high time for them to hasten
out of the towne, (for Catesby was gone
the night before, and Percy at foure of the
clocke in the morning the same day of the discouery)
and all of them held their course, with
more hast then good speed to Warwicke-shire
toward Couentry, where the next day morning
being Wednesday, and about the same houre
that Fawkes was taken in Westminster, one
Grant, a Gentleman, hauing associated to him
some others of his opinion, all violent Papists,
and strong Recusants, came to a stable of one
Benock a rider of great horses, and hauing violently
broken vp the s
                  •
               me, carried along with
them all the great horses that were therein, to
the number of seauen or eight, belonging to diuers
Noblemen & Gentlemen of that country,

who had put them into the riders hands to be
mad
                  •
                fit for their seruice. And so both that company
of them which fled out of London, as also
Grant and his complices met altogether at
Dunchurch at Sir Euerard Digby his lodging
the Tuesday at night after the discouery of this
treacherous attempt. The which Digby had
likewise for his part appointed a match of hunting
to haue beene hunted the next day, which
was Wednesday, though his minde was Nimrod-like
vpon a farre other manner of hunting,
more bent vpon the bloud of reasonable men,
then of bruit beasts.
            
            This company and hellish society thus conuened,
finding their purpose discouered, and
their treachery preuented, did resolue to runne
a desperate course, and since they could not
preuaile by so priuate a blow, to practise by a
publike rebellion, either to attain
                  •
                to their intents,
or at least to saue themselues in the throng
of others. And therefore gathering all the company
they could vnto them, and pretending the
quarell of Religion, hauing intercepted such
prouision of armour, horses, and powder, as
the time could permit, thought by running vp
and downe the Country, both to augment
peece by peece their number: (dreaming to
themselues that they had the vertue of a snowball,
which being little at the first, and tumbling
downe a great hill, groweth to a great quantity,
by increasing it selfe with the snow that it meeteth
in the way) and also that they beginning

first this braue shew in one part of the Country
should by their sympathy and example stir
vp and incourage the rest of their Religion in other
parts in England to rise, as they had done
there. But when they had gathered their force
to the greatest, they came not to the number of
fourescore. And yet were they troubled all the
houres of the day to keepe and containe their
owne seruants from stealing from them. Who
notwithstanding of all their care, dai
                  •
               y left
them, being farre infer
                  •
               our to Gedeons host in
number, but f
                  •
               rre more in faith and iustnesse
of the quarrell. And so after that this Catholike
troupe had wandred a while through Warwickshire▪
               
to Worcestershire, and from thence to the
edge and borders of Staffordshire, this gallantly
armed band had not the honour at the last to be
beaten with a Kings Lieutenant or extraordinary
Commissioner sent down for the purpose,
but onely by the ordinary Sheriff
                     •
                  
                of Worcestershire
were they all beaten, killed, taken, and
dispersed. Wherein ye haue to note this following
circumstance so a
                  •
               mirable, and so 
                  •
               iuely
displaying the greatnesse of Gods iustice, as it
could not be concealed without betraying in a
manner the glory due to the Almighty for the
same. Although diuers of the Kings Proclamations
were posted downe after these traitors
with all speed possible; declaring the odiousnesse
of the bloudy attempt, the necessity to
haue had Percy preserued aliue, if it had beene

possible, and the assembly of that rightly-damned
crew, now no more darkened conspirators,
but open and auowed Rebels: yet the farre
distance of the way, (which was aboue an hundreth
miles) together with the extreame deepnesse
thereof, ioyned also with the shortnesse
of the day, was the cause that the hearty and louing
affections of the Kings good Subiects in
those parts preuented the speed of his proclamations.
For vpon the third day after the flying
downe of these Rebels, which was vpon the
Friday next after the discouery of their plot,
they were most of them all surprised by the Sheriffe
of Worcestershire at Holbeach, about the
noone of the day, in manner following.
            
               Grant, of whom mention was made before,
for the taking of the great horses, who had not
all the praeceding time stirred from his owne
house till the next morning after the attempt
should be put in execution, he then laying his
accompt without his Host, (as the prouerbe is)
that their plott had, without failing, receiued
the day before their hoped-for successe, tooke,
or rather stole out those Horses for inabling
him, and so many of that soul-lesse society that
had still remained in the Country neare about
him, to make a sudden surprise vpon the Kings
elder daughter, the Lady Elizabeth, hauing her
residence neare to that place, whom they
thought to haue vsed for the colour of their
treacherous designe (his Maiestie her Father,

her Mother, and male-Children being all destroyed
aboue.) And to this purpose also had
that Nimrod Digby prouided his hunting-match
against the same time, that numbers of
people being flocked together vpon the pretence
thereof, they might the easilier haue brought
to passe the sudden surprise of her person.
            Now the violent taking away of those horses
long before day, did seeme to be so great a riot
in the eyes of the common people, that knew
of no greater mystery: and the bold attempting
thereof did ingender such a suspition of
some following rebellion in the hearts of the
wiser sort, as both great and small began to stirre
and arme themselues, vpon this vnlooked-for
accident. Among whom Sir Fulk Greuil the
elder, Knight, as became one both so ancient in
yeeres, and good reputation, and by his office
being Deputy Lieuetenant of Warwickshire,
though vnable in his body, yet by the zeale
and true feruency of his minde, did first apprehend
this foresaid riot to bee nothing but the
sparkles or sure indices of a following rebellion.
Whereupon both stoutly and honestly he took
order to get into his owne hands the munition
and armour of all such Gentlemen about him,
as were either absent from their owne houses,
or in doubtfull guard, and also sent such direction
to the townes about him, as thereupon did
follow the striking of Winter by a poore Smith,
who had lik
                  •
               wise beene taken by those vulgar

people, but that he was rescued by the rest of
his company, who perceiuing that the Country
before them had notice of them, hastened
away with losse in their owne sight, sixteene of
their followers being taken by the townesmen,
and sent presently to the Sheriffe at Warwicke,
and from thence to London.
            
            But before twelue or sixteene houres past,
Catesby, Percy, the Winters, Wrights, Rookwood,
and the rest, bringing then the assurance
that their maine plot was failed, and bewrayed,
whereupon they had builded the golden
mountaines of their glorious hopes: they then
tooke their last desperate resolution, to flock
together in a troupe, and wander as they did,
for the reasons aforetold. But as vpon the one
part, the zealous dutie to their God and their
Soueraigne was so deepely imprinted in the
hearts of all the meanest and poorest sort of the
people (although then knowing of no farther
mysterie, then such publike misbehauiours, as
their owne eyes taught them) as notwithstanding
their faire shewes and pretence of their
Catholike cause, no creature, man or woman
through all the Country, would once so much
as giue them willingly a cup of drinke, or any
sort of comfort or support, but with execrations
detested them. So on the other part, the Sheriffes
of the Shires where-through they wandred,
conuening their people with all speed possible,
hunted as hotly after them, as the euilnesse

of the way, and the vnprouidednesse of their
people vpon that sudden could permit them.
And so at last after Sir Richard Verney Sheriffe
of Warwickeshire had carefully and straightly
beene in chase of them to the confines of his
County, part of the meaner sort being also apprehended
by him: Sir Richard Walsh Sheriffe
of Worcestershire did likewise dutifully and hotly
pursue them through his Shire. And hauing
gotten sure triall of their taking harbour at the
house aboue-named,Holbeach in Staffordshire, the house of Stephen Littleton. he sent Trumpetters and
messengers to them, commanding them in the
Kings name to render to him, his Maiesties
Minister; and knowing no more at that time of
their guilt, then was publikely visible, did promise
vpon their dutifull and obedient rendring
to him, to intercede at the Kings hands for the
sparing of their liues; who receiued onely from
them this scornefull answere (they being better
witnesses to themselues of their inward euil consciences)
that he had need of better assistance,
then of those few numbers that were with him,
before hee could be able to command or controll
them.
            But here fell the wondrous worke of Gods
iustice, that while this message passed betweene
the Sheriffe and them: the Sheriffe and his peoples
zeale being iustly kindled and augmented
by their arrogant answer, and so they preparing
themselues to giue a furious assault: and
the other party making themselues ready within

the house to performe their promise by a defence
as resolute; it pleased God that in the
mending of the fire in their Chamber, one small
sparke should flye out, & light among lesse then
two pound weight of Powder, which was drying
a little from the Chimney: which being
thereby blowne vp, so maimed the faces of some
of the principall rebels, and the hands and sides
of other of them (blowing vp with it also a great
bag full of powder, which notwithstanding neuer
tooke fire) as they were not onely disabled
and discouraged hereby from any farther resistance,
in respect Catesby himselfe, Rookwood,
Grant, and diuers others, of greatest accompt
among them, were thereby made vnable for defence,
but also wonderfully stricken with amazement
in their guilty consciences, calling to memory
how God had iustly punished them with
that same instrument, which they should haue
vsed for the effectuating of so great a sinne; according
to the ould saying, In quo peccamus, in
eodem plectimur. Inasmuch as they presently
(see the wonderfull power of Gods iustice vpon
guilty consciences) did all fall downe vpon
their knees praying God to pardon them for
their bloudy enterprise. And after that, giuing
ouer any further debate, opened the gate, suffered
the Sheriffes people to rush in furiously
among them, and desperately sought their owne
present destruction; The three specialls of them
ioyning backs together, Catesby, Percy, and Winter;
               
whereof two with one shot, Catesby and
Percy, were slaine, Winter was taken and saued
aliue.
            And thus these resolute and high-aspiring
Catholikes, who dreamed of no lesse then the
destruction of Kings and kingdomes, and promised
to themselues no lower estate, then the
gouernment of great and ancient Monarchies,
were miserably defeated and quite ouerthrowne
in an instant, falling into the pit which they had
prepared for others; And so fulfilling that sentence
which his Maiestie did in a manner prophesie
of them, in his oration to the Parliament:
some presently slaine, others deadly wounded,
stripped of their cloathes, left lying miserably
naked, and so dying rather of cold, then of the
danger of their wounds; and the rest that either
were whole, or but lightly hurt, taken and led
prisoners by the Sheriffe, the ordinary Minister
of Iustice, to the Go
                  •
               le, the ordinary place euen
of the basest malefactors; where they remained
ti
                  •
               l their sending vp to London, being met with
a huge confluence of people of all sorts, desirous
to see them, as the rarest sort of Monsters: fooles
to laugh at them, women and children to wonder,
all the common people to gaze, the wiser
sort to satisfie their curiositie in seeing the outward
cases of so vnheard-of a villany; and generally
all sorts of people to satiate and fill their
eyes with the sight of them, whom in their harts
they so farre admired and detested, seruing so

for a fearefull and publick spectacle of Gods
fierce wrath and iust indignation. They liued
blindely, they practisea diuellishly, they dyed
desperately; Their memory is cursed throughout
all generations.
            Now what haue our aduersaries to say to
these, or what can wee say to these things, but
that there is a God in heauen, that destroyeth all
the purposes of the Pope on earth? whatsoeuer
haue beene attempted against vs, the Pope is
firme on their side; God hath manifested himselfe
many waies to be on our side. What cause
haue we then, & how many waies are we prouoked
to trust in God, to loue him, to worship him,
that so miraculously hath defended vs? to cleaue
with all singlenes of heart to that cause that hath
bin so mightily maintayned by Gods hand and
power? And what cause haue our adu
                  •
               rsaries to
examine themselues, and more narrowly to examine
the cause which God by so many iudgements
hath condemned? The people of Israel
were mightily protected by the hand of God, &
so long as they truely serued God al their aduersaries
could neuer preuaile against them, they
were defended by power from aboue, God did
watch ouer them; but when they fell from God,
God did suffer them to fall into the hands of their
enemies. There will hardly be found any president
euen among the people of God, that for so
many yeeres together they haue bin continually

deliuered from so many, so cruelly intended, so
dangerous assaults. The deepest deuises of malice,
reaching euen from hell vnto hellish men
vpon earth haue beene practised against vs, as
this last which came from the deepenesse of Satan:
wherein without sword or speare, without
any shew of warlike preparations, their hellish
deuise was at one blow to root out religion,
to destroy the state, the head with the body,
the King with the stat
                     •
                  , the Father of our
Country, the Mother of our Country, the oliue
branches the hopefull succession of our King,
the Reuerend Clergy, the Honourable Nobility,
the faithfull Councellors, the graue Iudges,
the greatest part of our Knights and Gentry,
the choisest Burgesses, the Officers of the
Crowne, Councell, Signet, S
                     •
                  ales, and of other
seates of iudgement, the learned Lawyers, with
an infinite number of common people, the Hall of
iustice, the houses of Parliament, the Church vsed
for the Coronation of our Kings, the monuments
of our former Princes, all Records of Parliament,
and of euery particular mans right,
with a great number of charters, and other
things of this nature, all these things had the
diuell by his agents deuised at one secret blow
to destroy.Psal. 124. 
               If the Lord had not beene on our side,
may Israel now say, if the Lord had not beene on
our side when men rose vp against vs, they had
then swallowed vs vp quicke, when their wrath
was kindled against vs: praised be the Lord

which hath not giuen vs vp a prey to their
teeth, our soule is escaped as a Bird out of the
snare of the Fowlers; the snare is broken, and we
are deliuered: our helpe is in the name of the
Lord, which hath made heauen and earth.
            
            We labour against the Papists to proue our
Church a true Church of God: They on the other
side labour to proue themselues the onely
Catholike Church, and our assemblies to be, as
they call them, assemblies of Heretikes. God
hath determined this controuersie most euiden
                     •
                  
                  ly
by his word, and most powerfully from heauen,
by his continuall protection of vs, and destruction
of all the wicked practises which they
haue attempted against vs. Was there euer any
cause in the world so strongly ma
                  •
               ntained on the
one side, as our cause hath beene? was there euer
any execrable practises in the world so pow
                  •
               rfu
                  •
               ly
condemned from heauen, as their practises
haue beene? God open their eyes, that
they may see and vnderstand that they fight against
God. The Church of Rome, so long as it
stood the Church of God, did neuer practise either
by open warres, or by secret conspiracies
to destroy Kings, and subuert Kingdomes: but
by the preaching of Gods word, by examples of
piety, and sanctimony, laboured to draw the
ignorant vnto the knowledge and obedience of
the truth: that course is now vtterly forsaken
of them; for how can they teach the truth to
others, that are themselues in ignorance and in

the shadow of death? or how can they giue examples
of an holy life, whose whole practise
and conuersation is in bloud, in malice, in wicked
and wretched actions? And will they neuer
vnderstand that they who practise such
things can not inherit the Kingdome of God?
cannot be the Church of God? cannot pray to
God, or expect any blessing from him vpon
their execrable practises? there is a manifest
change of their Church, and they will not see
it. They aske vs, when was this change, vnder
what King, vnder what Emperour, vnder what
Pope? But if they were wise, they would first
inquire whether there be a change or no? and
then inquire further of the time and manner of
it. We say that which no man can deny, that
there is a notorious change: this is euident,
for the Church of old neuer allowed the cruelty,
the impiety, the execrable wickednesse which
is daily practised by the great Masters of the
Church of Rome, and allowed and approued by
the Pope. Then there is a change, & it is euident
to all. But this is a change of manners of the
Church, not of the doctrines. If therefore they
demand of vs, how a change of the doctrines
may be proued: We are able to point out from
time to time that the doctrines which they haue
inuented, were neuer heard of in the Church
before such times as wee are able to point at.
Master Iewell the reuerend Bishop of Salisbury,
for piety and learning the mirrour of his time,

hath made full and faire proofe, that of those
Articles wherein he challenged all the Learne
                  •
               
of the Church of Rome, not one of them was euer
taught in the Church before the 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
of Christ 600. his proofes stand vnanswered
to this day Though Master 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                ha
                  ••
               .
done his best to examine them, who wanted
neither learning nor eloquence, bu
                  •
                onely trut
                     •
                  
               
wanting on his side, the challenge is still made
good. We are also able to point to another time,
before the year of Christ 1000. many of the gr
                  •
               atest
& grossest errors in popery was neuer taught
or heard 
                  •
               n the Church: as the doctrines of transubstantiatio
                     •
                  ,
of the reall presence, as it is vnderstood
in the Church of Rome, of the Popes
power to depose Kings, and absolue their subiects
f
                  •
               o
                  •
                their allegeance, or to war
                  •
               ant their
subiects to rebell 
                  •
               gainst them, of he doctrines
of Grace, and iustification as now they are
taught in the Church of Rome, of the doctrine
of merits whether ex congruo, or condigro, of
the seauen sacraments, and many other of this
nature, of which we are assured that not one of
them can be proued euer to haue beene taught
or heard of in the Church before the yeare of
Christ one thousand. Wee are further able to
point to another time, before which the rule of
faith was neuer changed in the Church, this
was their last attempt in the points of Doctrine,
a desperate attempt against the truth. For from
the Apostles time, till the Councell of Trent,
               
the rule of faith was euer held in the Church
one and the same; that is, the doctrine contained
in the sacred canonicall Scriptures: that this
onely rule of faith was held in the Church till
the Councell of Tr
                     •
                  nt, it is euidently proued by
the full consent of the ancient Fathers, and
moreouer by the confession of all Writers in the
Church of Rome before the Councell of Trent:
such as wereI
                     •
                   cant. ca
                     •
                  t. serm. 30 
               Bernard,
               Lib. 1. sent. dist. 1 
               Peter Lumbard
               In 
                     •
                   ad Timoth. cap. 6. et Sum. par. 1. q. 1. a
                     •
                  . 8. 
               Thomas Aquin
                     •
                  s,
               In prolog Sent. q 2. 
               Iohann
                     •
                  s Scotus,
               Praef in Sent. 
               Durandus,
               Distinct. 37. c. 14. 
               Clemens 1. Pope,
               1 Sent q. 1. art. 3. cor
                     ••
                  l lit. H. 
               Cardinalis Cameracensis,
               Dec. m: sub vtra
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   specie. 
               Iohn Gerson,
               Locor. lib. 3. c. 29. 
               C
                     •
                  nradus Clingius,
               Dereuelat Antichr. apud Posseuin Biblioth, sel
                     •
                  ct. lib. 2. cap. 2
                     •
                  . 
               Ios. Acosta.
               Lib 13. verbo, Scriptura. 
               Alfonsus de castre, and many others.
To repeat the testim
                  •
               n
                  •
               es of al
                  •
               , would bee tedious.
Let it suffice to repeate one testimonie of
Aquinas. wherein all the rest agree. Aquinas
in the first place cited saith: Prophetarum &
Apostolorum doctr
                     •
                  na dicitur canonica, quia est
regula intellectus nostri, & ideo nullus aliter debet
docere; that is, the Doctrine of the Prophets
and Apostles is called canonicall, because it is
the rule of our vnderstanding, and therefore no
man ought to teach otherwise. And in the second
place cited, he saith: Innititur fides nostra reuelationi
Apostolis & Prophetis factae; that is,
our faith resteth vpon the reuelation made to the
Apos
                     •
                  les and Prophets. Then, traditions was neuer
accounted the rule of our vnderstanding, or
that whereupon our faith must rest, though
the same be more fully pr
                  •
               ued out of the Scriptures
themselues, and from a full consent of the

ancient Fathers, as is otherwhere manifested:
yet this I thought here might suffice to declare
the opinions of them that liued in the Church
of Rome next before the Councell of Trent, as
many of these did, which I haue before named.
So that this is euident, the rule of faith was
neuer altered in the Church of Rome before the
Councell of Trent. Then did they alter this
rule, by putting traditions of their Church into
the rule of faith, and Lucifer-like matching,
equalizing and mating the wisedome of God
with their owne follies. Then all is changed,
when the manners of the Church, the doctrines
of the Church, and the very rule of faith is
changed. What greater change may be looked
for hereafter in the Church of Antichrist, I
know not; but this is sufficient to moue vs to
forsake them as the congregation of the impious,
the Church of the malignant. And because
they haue forsaken God and his truth, therefore
by the iust iudgement of God are they permitted
to runne into so many foule errors, and such
wicked and execrable practises, that neither
Christians nor heathen, guided onely by the
light of nature could euer approue. If they say,
that we also haue our faults and sinnes: I answere,
that when w
                  •
                turne our selues to consider
our sinnes against God, wee all finde our
selues guilty, and not able to answere one of a
thousand that he ma
                  •
                iustly charge vs withall.
Our vnthankefulnesse to him is so great for his

manifold blessings, and wonderfull protection;
our sinnes we conceale not from him, wee acknowledge
vnto God, that if he lay his rod vpon
vs as we haue deserued, if he should cast our
l
                  •
               nd ba
                  •
               ke againe into that former blindnesse
wherein it lay in popery, God is iust, wee haue
d
                  •
               serued great punishments. But if wee turne
our selues vnto another consideration, comparing
our religion with theirs, our practises with
theirs, then I say, though we cannot iustifie our
selues before God, yet are we able to iustifie our
selues in respect of them. Let our enemies be our
iudges. When euill is committed among vs, it
is punished, and therein we reioyce, that euill is
punished. It was neuer found that execrable
practises were approued by vs, for that were to
forsake religion: but the most wicked practises
that haue beene heard of, are not onely committed
by them, but approued, yea and commended:
as the killing of Henry 3. of France
was practised by a Fryer, and commended by
the Pope. These bee the sinnes that doe ripen
them for Gods iudgements. For the time will
come when great Babylon shall come in remembrance
before the Lord,
               Apoc. 16. 19. 
               to giue vnto her the cup
of Wine of the fiercenesse of his wrath: and againe,
therefore shall her plagues come at one day,
death,
               Apoc. 18. 8. 
               and sorrow, and famine, and she shall bee
burnt with fire; for strong is the Lord God
which will condemne her. In the meane time we
wait vpon God, and we doe in humblenesse of

heart offer vp to God the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiuing, that it pleased him of his goodnesse
and vnsearchable mercies towards vs, to
call vs out of Babylon, to giue vs hearts to obey
his calling, to make choise of this Church
which himselfe hath planted in Great Britaine,
to inable it to stand against all the furious rage
and wicked practises of the Pope and his adherents.
         
         
            The Conclusion.
            Some Considerations proposed to such as
are not well affected to Religion.
            1 
                  KIngs and States, when they
are miraculously protected
by the hand of God, and deliuered
from great dangers,
may vnderstand what blessing
they haue by a Church
planted in their State. The Church bringeth
the blessing to the State: because God regardeth
them that are faithfull to him, and for their
fakes blesseth the whole.
            2 This Church that bringeth such a blessing
to States, is much questioned now, where it is,
and how to finde it: for diuers striue for it, and
the true Church is but One.
            
            
               3 That is t
                  •
               e true Church that hath h
                  ••
               d the
ru
                  •
               e of Fa
                     •
                  th, from the Apostles time: That is
the false Church, that ha
                  •
               h changed that ru
                  •
               e.
            4 Who hold this rule, and who n
                  •
               t, may be
knowne by the holy Doctrines contained in
the Scripture, ex consanguinitate doctrinae.
            
            5 Learni
                     •
                  g is nec
                  •
               ssary to inable a man to
iudge aright of these th
                  ••
               gs: but Learning may
be also in men that are corrupt and vng
                  •
               dly.
And therefore a man can neuer be we
                  •
               l 
                  •
               nabled
to iudge of these things, without the Spirit of
God directing his Learning.
            
            6 Th
                  •
                true Church is ruled by the Spirit of
God, and preserued from errours and heresies,
against which the gates of hell shall not preuaile:
            
            7 A lay man, that hath the Spirit of God,
is better able to iudge of the Church, and of the
members thereof▪ then a man in Ecclesiasticall
function, that hath not the Spirit of God.
            8 They that are contentious, seditious, cruel
                  •
               ,
m
                  •
               licious, vncle
                  •
               ne, adulterers, idolaters,
murt
                  •
               er
                  •
               rs, or such like, haue not the Spirit of
God The reason is euident, because these, and
such like, are the fr
                     •
                  its of the flesh, contrary to
the fruits of the spirit.
            
            9 From these principles if the Princes that
are of the Romish religion wou
                  •
               d be pleased to
ex
                  •
               m
                  •
               ne Themselues, their Religion, their best
learned and religious men, their Doctrines, their
Pr
                     •
                  ctis
                     •
                  s; 
               
                  •
               hey might b
                  •
                a 
                  
                     •
                  enerous search easily
finde w
                  •
               ere is Gods Church, and where is Gods
Spirit.
            
            
               10 Withall they may be pleased to consider
the Workes of God, his protection and miraculous
defence of his Church; which miraculous
defence hath appeared here ouer the Church
of England, as also elsewhere; but more conspicuous
here, more illustrious examples of Gods
mercy will hardly be found any where: God
hath for many yeeres deliuered this Church,
preserued vs in peace when all the nations about
vs haue beene in bloudy warres.
            11 It cannot be proued that God did euer in
such manner, and so many waies defend a Nation,
but onely there where he had a people of his
owne, his t
                  •
               ue Church.
            
            12 It can neuer be proued that they that professe
and practise malice, cru
                  •
               lty, sedition, idolatrie,
and such other workes of the flesh, are the
true Church of Christ.
            
            13 They that make falshood their refuge, and
hide themselues vnder vanitie, haue no cause to
boast themselues to be the Catholike Church.
If wee should rehearse the strange lyes which
they haue invented against Luther, Caluin, Beza,
against d
                  •
               uers reuerend Bishops, whereof
some are departed, some yet liuing, against the
Church and State of England, it would fill a
Booke to speake of their particular lyes. They
vnderstand wel
                  •
                enough whom they serue herein,
their practise is to lye, their hope is that euery
lye cannot be examined by the common people,
they care not though it be found out to be

a lye by some, so it be not found by the multitude,
whom to de
                  •
               ciue is their chiefe care; not
respecting God, nor truth, nor Gods Church,
which is the pillar of truth, and may not bee
maintained with lyes.
            
            14 How the Pope, the Iesuites, the whole
Church of Rome is well knowne by the fruits
of the flesh, and how the fruits of the spirit of
God could neuer for these many hundreth
yeares be obserued in them, I leaue to the consciences
of all to consider, but especially to
the great Iudge that must iudge them and
vs. Whose blessed and ioyfull comming,
the true Chur
                     •
                  h doth loue
and wait-for in faith and
patience.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Errata.
            
               In the summarie cap. 14. for who inforced the Bishop, r. who
informed the Bishop. Page 11. for E
                  •
               communicate, r. Excommunication.
p. 4. 
                     •
                  . for sweare, r. sware p. 76 for did tare, r. did teare. p. 78.
for othermens, r. other meanes. p. 166. for all Mellifont, r. at Mellifont.
p. 206. for out of his conscience, r. out of his confession.
         
      
   