
      
         
            
            
            CERTAINE
CONSIDERATIONS
drawne from the Canons of the
laſt Sinod, and other the Kings Eccleſiaſticall
and ſtatute law, ad informandum animum Domini
Epiſcopi Wigornenſis, ſeu alterius cuiuſuis iudicis
eccleſiastici, ne temere & inconſulto proſiliant ad depriuationem
Ministrorum Eccleſiae: for not ſubſcription, for
the not exact vſe of the order and forme of the booke
of common prayer, heeretofore provided by the
Pariſhioners of any pariſh Church, within
the Dioceſſe of Worcester, or for the
not preciſe practiſe of the rites,
ceremonies, & ornaments
of the Church.
            Prov. 25. 2.
            The glory of God is to conceale a thing ſecret, but the
Kings honor is to ſearch out a thing.
            Eſai 51. 7.
            Hearken vnto me ye that know righteouſnes, the people
in whoſe heart is my Law, feare ye not the reproch of men, neither
be ye afraid of their rebukes.
            Cod. de Epiſcopis
&
Cleric l. nul.
li licere.
            Nec delatoris nomen ſuſpicionem
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                formident, cum 
                  •
               ides
atque industria corum, tam laude, quam honestate, ac pariter
pretate, non careat, cum veritatem in publicas aures,
lucem
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                deduxerint.
            1605.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right Honorable Lords, the Lords
of his Maieſties moſt honorable privie
Counſell.
            
               MOST Noble Lords, may it pleaſe your good Lordſhippes,
to be put in remembrance how the holy
Ghost calleth and entituleth the Princes of the
earth by the name of Gods. By which ſo rare and
admirable a ſtyle, ſo high & ſupereminent a title,
men of your estate, cōdition & qualitie be taught,
that as your names are, ſo ſhould your perſons be, Gods by name & calling,
therefore every way ſuch maner of perſons, as the most high God,
the God of Gods, hath commaunded you to be.
            That is to ſay (as Iob ſayeth) Deliverers of the poore and fatherles,Cap. 29.
when they crie, and there is none to helpe; eyes to the blind, & feete
to the lame; diligent in ſearching out things you know not; breakers of
the chawes of the Lyons, and the pluckers of the pray out of their teeth.
That ſo you being covered with Iustice, as with a Robe, and with a
crowne, the bleſsing of them which are ready to periſh, might come
vpon you, and the distreſſed beeing ſuccoured, might have cauſe to
prayſe you.
            And (most Honorable Lords) by ſo much the more have we preſumed
to tender vnto your Lordſhips favorable examinatiō, theſe conſiderations,
by how much the more your fame, prayſe and honour may
be ſounded, and reſounded throughout all the Churches, when you ſhall
be well pleaſed to become humble interceſſors vnto our most gracious
and Christian Lord and King, for a more temperate, mild, and charitable
courſe, by the Dioceſans and other ordinaries, hereafter to bee
held against the Ministers; vntill they ſhall defend their late cenſures,
penall proceedings and ſentences, for omiſsion of rites, ceremonies, ornamentes,

&c. to be in every due regard and circumstance anſwerable
to the Kings eccleſiasticall Lawes and Statutes.
            In the meane ſeaſon, that more rigour and ſeveritie of law hath of
late bene vſed in ſome of their Conſiſtories, then was meete, theſe conſiderations
with their reaſons drawen from the lawes, ſtatutes, and Canons,
which them ſelves profeſſe and practiſe (if rightly they were applied
to their proceedings) may ſufficiently witnes. For by theſe groūds
and reaſons, if inquiſition or information had ben made, or taken, ſentences
of grace and abſolution, rather then of diſgrace and condemnation
ought (in our iudgement) to have enſued.
            If we ſhould be demanded, what colour of law or reaſon they can
pretend, for their forme and maner of proceedings, we might rather
have cauſe to wonder, then be able to yeeld any reaſonable aunſwere to
ſuch demaund. And therefore as they be old inough, ſo good leave ſhal
they have from vs, to make anſwere for them ſelves.
            Only thus much we might be able, reaſonably to defend, that a good
government being lightſome, can not brooke the darkſomnes of that
which is evill. And on the other ſide, that an evill governement, being
darkſome, can not but flie the lightſomnes of that which is good.
If the government then of the Church by Dioceſans, & other ordinaries,
had bene lightſomnes, and not rather darkſomnes, it could not
have come ſo to paſſe, as it hath done, that the Moone, as it were abaſhed,
and the Sunne, as it were aſhamed, ſhould flye before the obſcuritie
of most groſſe darknes: That lampes of pure oyle, and candlestickes
of fine golde, ſtanding and burning day & night in the temple, ſhould
be removed and put out: and that in ſteed thereof, both woodden candleſtickes,
and lights of bulruſhes, ſhould be brought in, and ſet vp.
            Nay, if we had not ſeene it with our eyes, & heard it with our eares,
it would have ſeemed a wonder, altogether vncredible vnto vs, that not
one (ſo farre as we can learne) among 2. or 3. thouſand Ministers (ſome
whereof are notoriouſly knowne, to be ignorant & vnlearned, ſome idle
and non reſident, ſome common bibbers & taverne haunters, ſome dycers
and gamesters▪ ſome fighters and quarellers, ſome wanton & adulterous,

ſome ſimoniacall and vſurious, ſome pompous and ambitious,
ſome greedy and covetous, ſome ſwearers and ſwaggerers, and ſome prophane
and voyd of all honestie of life) ſhould ſo much as once in twoo
yeares, for any of theſe groſſe impieties, bee publickly admoniſhed, or
marked with the least note of diſgrace, for not conformitie to the holy
lawes of God: And yet notwithstanding, that a third or fourth part of
three or foure hundred painfull, diſcreet, learned, grave and godly ministers,
within leſſe then ſixe monethes, ſhould be ſuſpended, deprived, or
depoſed ſome from their offices, and ſome from their benefices; not for
commiſsion of the leaſt of the groſſeſt of theſe ſinnes, but only for omiſsion
of the least of the commaundements and traditions of men. If wee
ſay we had not both heard and ſeene, and knowne theſe things, wee could
never have beleeved them to be true.
            Nay if we had not heard it, and knowne it, how incredible might it
be, that ſundry learned and godly Ministers, vowing, protesting, & offering
to teſtifie vpon their corporall othes, that they abſtayned from the
vſe of ceremonies, for none other cauſe, but onely for feare of offendinge
God, wounding their owne weake conſciences, & ſcandalizing their brethren,
could not for all this, by the Dioceſans be accepted, but commanded
away and put to ſilence.
            Now alas (Most noble Lords) if ſuch a courſe of Iustice, and ſuch an
hand of iudgement, by your Lordſhippes, or other the Kings Iustices &
Officers were held in the civil governement of the common weale, what
out-cryes would there be made in all the corners of the land, yea & with
what ſwarmes of diſordered and riotous perſons, would the Kings Dominions,
in ſhort ſpace, be overſflowen and pestered?
            It is true (my Lordes) we confeſſe, that non relatione criminum,
ſed innocentia rei purgantur. And therefore to excuſe any Miniſter
wherein he may iustly be blamed, is farre from our minde and purpoſe.
For we graunt that every one must beare his owne burthen, and that
every man ought by his owne innocencie, to purge himſelfe, bee other
mens offences never ſo great, or ſeeme his owne, in his owne eyes, never
ſo ſmall.
            
               
But we have therefore balanced the toleration of ſcandalous and
vnlearned miniſters, with the moleſtation of learned and godly Miniſters,
to the end your Lordſhippes vnderstanding the number of ſinnes
and impieties every where daily abounding, by the multitude of the former,
and the ſcarcitie of godlines in every place to be ſeene, by the pa
                  •
               citie
of the later, your Lordſhippes by your wiſedomes might foreſee, and
by your authorities prevent that pestilent contagion of ignorance of
Gods revealed will, which by this preposterous ſufferance, of the one, &
violent progreſſe against the other, is ready to infect the whole Church,
and by conſequence, to lay wast the common weale, as a pray to the popiſh
faction.
            For is there not by this me
                  •
               nes a way prepared and made ready for
the greatest part of the people, to revolt from the Goſpell to poperie? and
ſo from their naturall and Chriſtian Lord and King to a forein & antichriſtian
Pope? For let the booke of God be once ſealed vp from the
people in Engliſh, as in time of poperie it was ſealed vp, vnto our fathers
in Latine; and let the people by example of the wicked & ſcandalous life
of Miniſters be drawne along in their owne naturall corruption, who
will not be ready to aſsiſt every Ieſuite & Seminarie, whē he ſhal preach
poperie, the very miſtris and mother of all corruption & rebellion?
            The wearing of a whit Surplice, and the feyned making of an ayrie
croſſe in Baptiſme, how litle the popiſh faction, by the ſame wilbe quieted
and kept in awe, the late outragious ſtarting out in Wales, and their
madd combynings in other places, may be a good caveat for your Lordſhippes
to conſider: whether their driftes bee not rather to enterpriſe a
more publike diſturbance, then to continew them ſelves within the liſtes
of that obedience wherevnto they were conſtreyned in the raigne of our
late Soveraigne of bleſſed memorie, Queene Elizabeth.
            Your Lordſhips therefore could not but performe a moſt acceptable
ſervice, firſt vnto God, and his Church: ſecondly vnto the King & his
Realme, if your Lordſhips would be pleaſed to bee petitioners vnto his
Maieſtie, that by his Regale and Supreame power, there might bee an
healing of the former errour, and vncharitablenes of the Dioceſans and

other ordinaries. For it can not be denied but that by their manner of
proceedings, they haue ſinned againſt God; in this, that they have aequaled,
nay rather in ſome things preferred their owne Canons & Decrees,
before the commaundement of God. And therfore it cannot be but that
they have herein, as much as in them lay, provoked the wrath of God
againſt the King and his whole Realme, if by the Kings zeale, this their
ſo groſſe a ſinne be not reformed. My Lordes, we are well adviſed what
we ſpeake herein before your Lordſhips, for we ſpeake nothing but what
we prove thus:

                  Whoſoever for not wearing a Surplice, or for not croſſing
in Baptiſme, ſuſpendeth or depriveth a Preaching Miniſter,
otherwiſe vnreproveable for life and doctrine, and
not ſuſpendeth, nor depriveth, but tolerateth an vnpreaching
miniſter, ſcandalous in life, & ignorant of doctrine,
the ſame perſon preferreth in this thing, the obſervation
of his owne Canon and Decree: before the
commandement of God.
                  But ſome Dioceſans and ordinaries, for not wearing a ſurplice,
& for not making a croſſe in Baptiſme, do ſuſpend
and deprive preaching Miniſters, otherwiſe vnreprovable
for life and doctrine, and yet doe neither ſuſpend,
nor deprive, but tolerate vnpreaching miniſters, ſcandalous
in life, and ignorant of doctrine.
                  Therefore ſome Dioceſans and Ordinaries in this thing,
preferre the obſervation of their owne canons and decrees,
before the commandement of God.
               
            
            We could heape argument vpon argument, vnanſwerable to this
purpoſe, but we ſhould then paſſe the boundes of an epistle, and become
over tedious vnto your Lordſhippes. Only therefore we most humbly beſeech
your Lordſhips in the behalfe of the faithful Ministers of Christ,
with patience to heare thus much▪ viz. that for their diſſenting in matter
of ceremonie, from the Dioceſans, they ought no more by the Dioceſans

to be traduced for factious ſectaries, or ſeditious ſciſmatickes, then
the Dioceſans them ſelves ought to be traduced, for ſuch maner perſons,
by their owne diſſenting from the Cardinals and Popes of Rome.
            For there being as litle difference betweene a ſect, and a ſciſme, as
there is betwene a beſome & a broome, & there being alſo as ſmal oddes
betweene faction and ſedition, as betweene an edifice and a building,
it followeth, the Ministers diſſenting from the Dioceſans of England, or
the ſame Dioceſans diſſenting from the Cardinalls and Popes of Rome,
if neither of them be ſeditious ſciſmatickes, that neither of them can be
factious ſectaries.
            When Paule was accuſed by Tertullus, that he was found a peſtilent
fellow,Act. 24. and a moover of ſedition among all the Iewes thorough all the
world; the Apostle anſwered that they neither found him in the temple
diſputing with any man, neither making vproare among the people,
neither in the Synagogues nor in the Citie. Art not thou (ſaith the chief
Captaine,Act. 21. 38 ſpeaking to Paule) the Egyptian, who before theſe dayes rayſed
a ſedition, and led out into the wildernes, foure thouſand men that
were murtherers? By which places it appeareth, that a ſeditious or factious
perſon, by the holy ſcriptures, is adiudged to be ſuch a kind of perſon,
as who boaſting himſelfe, rayſeth, leadeth, or draweth away much
people after him, and vnto whom much people reſort and obey: yea and
by the civile law,Act. 5. 36. 37. not every one that omitteth ſome duetie commanded,
but ſuch a one as gathereth people together, or ſtirreth thē to make a tumult,
and ſhall drawe him ſelfe and his followers, to ſome place of ſafetie
to defende him ſelfe and them against an evident commandement,Cod. de ſeditio li. 1. and
publike diſcipline, only ſuch a man, I ſay, by the civile lawe is to be puniſhed,
as a ſeditious & factious perſon. For theſe kind of mē only are properly
ſaid, ſeorſum ire, & partes facere. Seditio then being quaſi
ſeorſum itio, and faction quaſi partium factio, yeaGloſ. lind. de heret. c. 2 verb. ſectam a ſect alſo, being
ſic dicta, quia fit quaſi ſectio, vel diviſio: and aGloſ lind. de Magiſ ca. 1. verb. ſciſmatum. ſciſme, being illicita
diviſio, per inobedientiam, ab vnitate Eccleſiae facta, vel illicita
di
                     •
                  ceſſio eorum, inter quos vnitas eſſe debet: it followeth,
that whoſoever by inobedience, or tumultuouſlie goeth not a part, or maketh

not a part from the vnitie of the Church, but either in doing, or
ſuffering, quietly ſubmitteth him ſelf to the lawes, that he can neither be
factious ſectarie, nor ſeditious ſciſmaticke.
            And indeed (my Lords) from hence is it, that the Dioceſans and
whole Clergie of England (ever ſince they made a ſeparation from the
vnitie of the Church of Rome) have falſlie bene named, and reputed ſectaries
& ſciſmatickes, as though they had without cauſe devided them
ſelves from the vnitie of the true church of Christ. Whereas in trueth,
the Church of Rome by hir Apostaſie, having cut hir ſelfe from the vnitie
and vniverſalitie of the doctrine and diſcipline of the true and mother
church of Ieruſalem, is hir ſelfe become the most notable and prime
ſectarist and ſciſmatick of all the world. And of whoſe ſchiſmes our Dioceſans,
ſo farre as they partake with hir, can not be but guiltie. Vnles
then the Dioceſans can approve them ſelves, touching their vſe of ceremonies
and Dioceſan governement, to ſtand in vnitie with the true &
new Ieruſalem, in theſe dayes repaired & departed from the old ſciſmes
and ſectes of Rome; we aſſure our ſelves that they ſhall never bee able to
prove thoſe ministers which ſtand not in vnitie either of iudgement, or
practiſe with them, but be conſcionably and ſo lawfully divided in theſe
things, from them, for ſuch diviſion, to be ſectaries or ſciſmatickes? For
it muſt be an vnlawful diſceſsion, by inobedience, from the vnitie of the
firſt and mother church of Ieruſalem, and not a lawfull departure, vpon
conſcienc, efrō the vnitie of the daughter
                  •
               church of England, that maketh
a ſect or ſciſme. For otherwiſe, ought not all other Churches ſtande
in vnitie of ceremonies and governement with the church of England?
or vnlawfully dividing them ſelves from the church of England, must
they not become ſciſmatickes & ſectaries? And how then are not almoſt
all the christian and reformed churches in the world, not onely almost,
but altogether ſciſmatickes and heretickes? For have they not divided
them ſelves from all thoſe rites, ceremonies and ornaments, yea & from
that maner of Dioceſan governement, which are yet reteyned in the

Church of England?
            My Lords, I confeſſe that brevitie and perſpicuitie are two commendable
graces of the toung and of the penn; & ſuch as in all mens ſpeeches
and writings, are much to be affected. But yet how long or tedious ſoever
already I have bene, I most humbly beſeech your Honorable Lordſhippes,
to licence me to paſſe on one ſteppe further, eſpecially the matter
being of ſuch importance, as the ſame may not well bee paſſed over with
ſilence.
            It hath pleaſed Sir Edward Cooke Knight, his Maixseſties Attornie
Generall, with all candor and charitie, to confirme and ſatisfie by demō
               ſtrative
profes, all ſuch as were not inſtructed in theſe points following;
Firſt, that an eccleſiaſtical Iudge, may puniſh ſuch Parſons, Vicars &c.
as ſhall deprave, or not obſerve the booke of common prayer, by admonition,
excommunication, ſequeſtration, or deprivation, & other cenſures
and proceſſe, in like forme as heretofore hath beene vſed in like caſes by
the Queenes Eccleſiaſticall lawes, though the act of primo Eliza had
never inſflicted any puniſhment for depraving, or not obſerving the
ſame.
            Secondly, ſeeing the Authoritie of an Eccleſiasticall Iudge, is to proceed,
and to give ſentence in eccleſiaſticall cauſes, according to the eccleſiaſticall
law, that the Iudges of the common law ought to give faith &
credit to their ſentence, and to allow it to be done according to the eccleſiaſticall
law, when the iudge eccleſiaſticall hath given ſentence in a caſe
eccleſiaſticall, vpon his proceedings, by force of that law. For (ſaith he)
cuilibet in ſua arte perito eſt credendum.
            
            Now then, as theſe two pointes bee plainly taught and demonſtrated
vnto vs, ſo alſo even by the ſame demonſtrative reaſons, it is cleere, that
there muſt be, firſt, a depraving, or not obſerving of the booke: ſecondly,
that every ſentence given by an Eccleſiaſticall Iudge, in a caſe of depraving,
or not obſerving of that booke, muſt be given, according to the eccleſiaſticall

law, and vpon his proceedings by force of that lawe in like
forme, &c.
            From whence it followeth, that all ſentences touching depravation
or not obſervatiō of the booke, be either voyd ſentences by reaſon of nullitie,
or no good ſentences by reaſon of iniquitie and iniustice, if by the
Iudges Eccleſiasticall, vpon their proceedings, the ſame ſentences have
not bene given by force and according to the ſame lawes, in like forme
as heretofore hath bene vſed in like caſes by the Kings. Eccleſiasticall
Lawes; or if the factes charged vpon the Ministers, by the iudges eccleſiaſticall,
by the letter & intendement of the law, be no depravations, or
not obſervations of the ſame booke. And therefore to the end all queſtions
touching theſe two poyntes, might hereafter vtterly ceaſe, and bee
quite buried, your Lordſhipps could not performe a more acceptable ſervice
to the King, the Church, and Realme, then by an humble importuning
his Maiestie, to have it explaned by parliament; both who (by the
letter and true meaning of the Statute) bee depravers or not obſervers
of the booke, and alſo what lawes Eccleſiasticall, may, and of right ought
to be called, indeed and trueth, the Kings Eccleſiastical Lawes. For vnleſſe
aſwell touching theſe pointes, as touching the former pointes of Sir
Edward Cooks, it be throughly decided, what is the binding and aſſured
law, how ſhould the Ministers, or others, content and ſatisfie themſelves
with an vndoubted trueth?
            And that this maner of controverſie about the invaliditie of ſentences,
of deprivation, given by eccleſiasticall Iudges, is not a controverſie
now firſt moved, but that the ſame hath bene long ſince handled and
diſcuſſed, is a matter yet remayning (I doubt not) vpon publike record.
For whereas ſentences were given in the tyme of King Edward the
ſixt, for the depriving of Steven Gardener, from the Biſhoprick of
Winceſter, Bonner from the Biſhopricke of London: Heath from
the Biſhoprick of Worceſter: Day from the Biſhopricke of Cheſter:
Tunſtall from the Biſhopricke of Durham: Veſſay from the Biſhopricke

of Exeter: wherein many grave and learned commiſsioners were
imployed: as the Archbiſhop Cranmer, Ridlie Biſhop of London:
Goodrick Biſhop of Elie; Sir William Peeter, and Sir Thomas
Smith, the Kings Secretaries: Sir Iames Hales, one of the Iudges of
the Law: Maister Goſnell, Maiſter Goodrick, Maister Liſley,
Maiſter Stamford, men notably learned in the common lawes of this
Realme Mai. Leveſon, and Mai. Oliver, Doctors of the Civill Law,
nevertheles the ſame ſentences, were in the tyme of Queene Mary, revoked
and diſannulled without Perliament, within the ſpace (as myne
Authour ſayth) of three dayes, by vertue of other Commiſsioners, for
faultes found in the proceſſes, viz. that the former Commiſsioners had
proceeded ex officio, without authoritie, contrary to the Kings Eccleſiastical
Law: ſometimes quod iuris ordo non fuerit ſervatus, &c.
ſometimes that the Interrogatories were ministred to divers perſons
without knowledge of the defendants, &c. ſometimes that ſome of the
witneſſes were examined privately without oath: ſometimes that their
exceptions and appellations, were not admitted, but their perſons committed
to priſon, pendente appellatione, &c.
            
            And therefore (most honorable Lords) it is to be conſidered, if the
like, or greater and more notorious defaultes and enormities, bee to bee
found in any ſentence of deprivation, given ex officio, by a Dioceſan
governour at this day, whether the ſame ſentence ought to be maintayned
as good and iust, or rather whether the ſame ought not (as the
Kings law requireth) to bee reverſed and diſannulled, as evill and erroneous?
            And thus I leave and commend vnto your most honorable care,
circumſpection, and vigilancie, the hearkening and ſpying out, by all the
poſsible wayes and meanes in your highest wiſedomes, you can best deviſe,
how the good lawes, ſtatutes & Decrees of the Church & Realme,
being duly executed, a learned, vertuous, paynfull, and godly Ministerie
may be nurſed and ſuffered to grow vp. And how on the other ſide,

an Idle, Ignorant, Scandalous, and godles ministerie may (as worthily
it deſerveth) be cut downe, and troden vnder foote: The one by a perpetuall
Decree and ordinance of God, hath establiſhment from heaven,
and therefore without ſinne & offence to God can not be neglected: the
other ſpringeth from below, and is much like to an evill herbe, or weed,
which if it be not ſpeedily rooted vpp, but ſuffered to ſpread, will ſoone ſo
over-ſpread the gardens of God, with vice and impietie, as there will
ſcarce be any roome left, for vertue and pietie, the one by vſe, and execution
of the Kings eccleſiasticall lawes, may eaſilie be cheriſhed: the other
without abuſe and contempt of the ſame law, can not in any ſort bee
tolerated.
            
               It was ſaid vnto Shebna, the Steward of the houſe of King Hezekiah:
What haſt thou to doe here? and what haſt thou here,
that thou ſhouldeſt hewe thee out a ſepulchre, as he that heweth
out his ſepulchre, in an high place, or graveth an habitation
for him ſelfe in a rocke?
            But, oh, you most noble Lordes, are not as Shebna in the houſe of
Hezekiah,Iſa. 22. 11. but you are vnto King IAMES, and his houſe, as was
Eliakim vnto Hezekiah, and to the houſe of King David. As the
key of the houſe of King David was layde vpon the ſhoulders of Eliakim,
ſo is the Key of the houſe of King Iames, laid vpon your ſhoulders.
If you ſhall open, no man ſhall ſhut; if you ſhall ſhut, no man ſhall open.
Would your Lordſhippes then bee fastened as a nayle, in a ſure place, as
Eliakim was? And would you deſire to be the throne of the glorie of
your Fatbers houſes, as Eliakim was to his? You must then hee clothed
with the garmentes, and ſtrengthened with the girdle of Eliakim:
yea and you must be Fathers, to the inhabitantes of Ieruſalem, and of
the Cittie of God. Yea Shebna, though he were in mans iudgement ſo
fastened, as though he ſhould never fall, yet must his face bee covered,
and he him ſelfe rouled and turned like a bale in a large lande. Yea hee
must be driven from his ſtation, destroyed out of his dwellinge place,

and bidden to departe. Nay the burden that was vppon him, must bee
cutt off, that the Chariottes of his glorie, may bee the ſhame of his fathers
houſe.
            Theſe thinges, most honorable Lordes, if you accompliſh and bring
to effect, you ſhall approove your ſelves vnto the great and mighty
GOD, to be ſuch little Gods vnder him, as you may not bee aſhamed
at his glorious appearance, but may reioyce and be glad, that your worthie
and divine actes, have beene aunſwerable to your divine and
worthie names. And thus the God of power, and Maiestie, confirme,
ſtrengthen, and ſtabliſh your heartes faithfully and couragiouſlie to doe
the worke of God, and of his King.
         
         
            
            The Corrector to the Chriſtian
Reader.
            
               THis tempeſt (good Reader) having blowne
downe ſo many poore Parſons houſes, vncovered
their Churches, and overthrowne
their Pulpits, hath wakened mee to behold
the harmes and to conſider the danger, leaſt
ſtaying vnder the roofe of a tottering building,
I might, perhaps, bee ſuddenly overwhelmed with the
ruines. Herevpon I betoke me to examine the foundations
vpon which this houſe ſo ſore beaten doth ſtand: I found the
groundworkes good and ſure, even Chriſt and his Apoſtles
with all the ſacred word of God. The walles I perceyved well
ſtrengthened with buttreſſes of the fayreſt and firmeſt ſtone,
that the Temple hath bene repayred within theſe laſte times.
I grew ſecure that howſoever the tiles did fly about our eares,
yet the walles and the ſubſtance would abide: Notwithſtanding
I looked about me ſtill for more props, no ſtore being ſuperfluous
in ſuch extreeme perill, and, by Gods good providence,
I light vpon this worthy Treatiſe, very learnedly written
and with great judgement, whereby I receyved comfort
and confirmation a freſh. In it I beheld how the vehemencie
of the ſtorme forced things cleane contrary to the current of
our owne lawes; And from hence I conceyved this tempeſt
would be blown over anon. For can his ſacred Maieſtie, when
he ſhall throughly vnderſtand how his ſtatutes are abuſed, ſuffer
his moſt loyall ſubjects to groane any longer vnder ſuch

heavy oppreſſion? It cannot bee, but together with his high
Court of Parliament, he will at laſte take order that the ambition
of none ſhalbe of greater force, then his regale decrees.
I have thought good to imparte vnto thee this treaſure, that
thereby thou maiſt learne what the Lawes of the Lande require
in this caſe, and maiſt labour by prayer and by what
dutifull and lawfull meanes thou canſt to obteyne remedie.
            
               Farewell.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Certaine conſiderations drawne from the
Canons of the laſt Synod, and other the Kings Eccleſiaſticall
& ſtatute law, ad informandum animum Domini Epiſcopi Wigor
                  •
               enſis
ſeu alterius cuiuſuis iudicis eccleſiastici, ne temere, & incōſulto proſiliant
ad deprivationem ministrorum eccleſiae: for not ſubſcription,
for the not exact vſe of the order and forme of the book of common
prayer, &c.
            
               FIrſt by the letter of the ſtatute 25. H. 8. cap. 19. it ſeemeth
to be a playne caſe, that no conſtitutions, canons
or decrees, by what name ſoever they be called,
ought to bee made, promulged, or put in execution
within this Realme, vnleſſe the ſame be made by the
whole clergie of the Realme, aſſembled by the kings
writ in their convocations. For as by theſe wordes
(the Clergie of the Realme) inſerted in the ſubmiſſion & petition of the
clergie,By whole Clergie wee meane the Archb BB. & other learned of the clergie heretofore vſually aſsembled in convocation by the Kings writ. the whole clergie of the Realme is vnderſtood, even ſo likewiſe,
theſe wordes, (clergie of the Realme) beeing repeated in the body of the
act, can not well be taken and vnderſtood, to bee meant of parte of the
clergie, but of the whole body of the clergie of the Realme. For otherwiſe
the body of the Act ſhould not accord, and bee anſwerable to the
ſubmiſſion.
            The laſt Synod then, being (as appeareth by the tytle of the booke of
canons) but a provinciall convocation, for the province of Canterbury,
conſiſting only of the Biſhop of London, preſident of the ſame convocation,
and the reſt of the Biſhops and Clergie of the ſaid Province, it followeth
(the Archbiſhop of Yorke and the Biſhops of that Province, & ſo
the whole Clergie of the Realme not beeing aſſembled with the Kings
writ to this Synod,The articles of religion 1562. were agreed vpon in convocation by the whole clergie of the Realm, vide 13. Eliz. ca, 12. that the conſtitutions made in this Synode, have nor
bene made by the whole clergie of the Realme, according to the true intent
and meaning of this ſtatute, and conſequently, that they ought not
to have bene promulged and executed at all, eſpecially within the province
of Yorke. But to let this paſſe, and not ſimply and altogether to
ſtand vpon this poynt, being alſo ready, vpon better reaſons, to alter our
opinion, be it for the tyme admitted and graunted, that the canons, and
conſtitutions of the laſt Synod,Par in parē nō habet im perium, and therefore Yorke not ſubiect to Canterbury▪
                according to the true meaning of the
ſtatute, were lawfully made and promulged. Nevertheleſſe, for ſo much
as throughout all the Canons, ther is not ſo much as mēcion once made
of any ſentence of deprivation, from an eccleſiaſticall benefice, for any
crime whatſoever: frō hence it ſeemeth evident, that the Synod never intended,

that the peyne of deprivation ſhould follow vpon refuſall of
ſubſcription, or for the not vſe of any ornaments, rites or ceremonies, required
and enioyned by thoſe canons.
            Beſides, for ſo much as the Synode by the 36. canon, & other canons
mentioning the vſe of ornaments, rites and ceremonies, hath appointed
and ordeyned ſome certeyne and ſpeciall peynes, yea and peynes farre
leſſe then deprivation, for the offences aforeſaid: herevpon on alſo it forcibly
enſueth, that deprivation for thoſe offences, by the Synod, are cleerlie
ſecluded. Poenalia ſunt odioſa: odia ſunt
               ſf. de li. & poſthu. l. cum quidá. 
               restringenda; poenae igitur
               
                  
                     •
                  f. de poen. l. interpretatione. de poe. diſt. l. 
                     •
                  poenae. Lyud, de celeb. miſs. c. vle. verb. animabu
                     •
                  , & Lind. de cō
                  ceſ
                     •
                  i. preb. 
                     ••
                  eſurientis verb procurantes. 
               molliendae, potius quam exasperondae.
            
            
               And againe
                     •
                  , ſtatutum poenale non eſt
                  •
                extendendum ad caſus non expreſſes,
ſed ſtrictè debet intelligi ſicut iacet in ſuis terminis. And therfore
it is concluded that conſtitutio poenalis, licet detur omnimoda ſimilitudo,
& ſubſit 
                  •
               adem ratio, non tamen trecipit extenſionem, ad non expreſſa,
quia talis extenſio fierit per hommem non habentem potestatem condendi
legem.
            The peyne then by the Synod being appointed for not ſubſcription to
be no greater peyne, then not to be ſuffered, to preach, to catechiſe, or to
be a Lecturer, or Reader, &c. It followeth that the Synode adiudged, the
peyne of deprivatiō to be too great a peyne for the offence of refuſall, to
ſubſcribe, ex quantitate poenae, cognoſcitur quā titas delicti: qu
                     •
                  a poena de
                  
                     •
                  et
eſſe
               mag. char. cap. 14. Panor. in 
                     〈◊〉
                  , querenti de verb. ſiguif. nu. 5. 
               commenſurabilis delicto. And thefore this offence being adiudged
by the peyne to bee but ſmall, the peyne can not be extended to deprivation.
Quia poena non debet excedere delictum, & beneficium non est
auferendum alicui etiam a Papa, ſine magna & manifest a cauſ
                     •
                  .
            
            
                Nay were it ſo that deprivation had bene mentioned in the canon as
a meete peyne,Panor, in c. multa de preb nu. 10. ca. ſtatut. de cle
                     •
                  . lib. 6. to have bene inflicted, for the offence of refuſall, yet if
vpon any wordes of the canon, a doubt might have ryſen, whether deprivation
ſhould follow or no, in this caſe, cum ſimus in poenalibus, verba
capi debent, in potior
                     •
                   ſignificatu, vt euitemus poenam.
            
            
               
               Nay more if by the wo
                     •
                  ds of the canon, vere & propriè ſumpta, it were
without all controverſie; that deprivation for refuſal, might be inflicted,
nevertheleſſe this peyne by the opiniō of Baldus for this offence in ſom
caſe, is not to be inflicted: Statuta poenalia ſemper intelliguntur (ſaith he)
habere inſe clauſulam. ſi delicta dolo committantur. If refuſall thē ſhould
be made vpon conſcience, and conſequently, not per dolum: The peyne
ceaſeth, as a peyne by cōmon right, not compriſed within the canon; yea
& in this caſe, the peyne ceaſeth though the cōſcience be erron
                     •
                  ous, contra
legem conſcientiae, non est obediendum ſuperiori, etiumPanor c. inquiſition. de ſent. excom. nu. 3. Papae: duplex

enim est lex. quaedam priuata ſeu conſcientiae, quaedā publica: priuata est
potentior publica: hinc dicimus quod quae ſpiritu Dei aguntur, non ſunt
ſub legePanor. in cad aures, de aeta. & cual 
                     •
                  . publica. And therefore conſcientia quanquam erronea, & ſcrupuloſa
ſequenda est,Panor in c. per tuas ex iii. nu 3. & 4. deſimo L. Bald. de nihi
                     •
                  urand. l vide. ſi non potest de iure informari, & veniens contr
                  •
               
conſcientiam ſuam, etiam ſcrupuloſam, aedific at ad Gehennam, 
                  •
               d est,
committit peccatum mortale, quod punietur paena Gehennae: id eſt ignis aeterni.
And another he ſaith, quod nemo debet grauare conſcient
                  •
               am ſuam,
ſed ſalutem animae ſuae, praeferre cuicunque officio. And an other concludeth,
propter ſcandalum vitandum potest de iure omitti obedientia,Simon de Graph. de caſibus conſcientiae, pa. 359.
quod quidem procedit, vt non ſolum ſuperſedendum ſit obedientiae ſuperioris,
ad ſcandalum vitandum, cum ipſe quod iniquum est praeceper
                  •
               t,
ſed etiam cum aliquid iust um praeceperit.
            
                Yea and Maſter Doctor Bilſon,
               Exacting the oath 1. Part. 33. though not in Iudiciali, yet in foro
conſcientiae, holdeth and teacheth in effect the very ſame in theſe words:
we (ſaith he) grant, he that woundeth a weake conſcience, ſinneth againſt
Chriſt: wee may not for things indifferent, trouble the weake mindes
of our brethren.
            Nay by Thomas Archbiſhop of Canterbury,
               The inſtitutiō of a chriſtian mā dedicated to K. H. 8. fol. 57. 58. 
               Edward Archbiſhop of
Yorke, & all other the Biſhops, Prelats and Archdeacons of the Realme,
it was concluded and agreed in maner, forme and effect following, viz.
One Rule or canon is neceſſary to be conſidered, concerning the obedience
which is required vnto the rules & canōs ordeyned by the Prieſts
and Biſhops. For as much as that parte of the iuriſdiction of Prieſtes &
Biſhops which conſiſteth only in outward ceremonies, and ſuch things
as be themſelves but meane and indifferent, ſurely there is no other obedience
required in the ſame, but that men may lawfully omit, or doe otherwiſe
then is preſcribed by the ſaid lawes, & commandements of the
Prieſts and Biſhops; So that they do it not in contempt or deſpite of the
ſaid power and iuriſdiction. But have ſome good and reaſonable cauſe
ſo to doe, and offend not, nor ſlaunder not their neighbours in their
doing. For in theſe pointes, Chriſtian men muſt ſtudie to preſerve that
libertie wherevnto they bee called and brought by Chriſtes bloud and
his doctrine. That is to ſay: Although men ought to repute and thinke
that the obſervation of holydayes, faſtingdayes and other conſtitutions,
be expedient and neceſſarie for ſuch endes and intentes as they be made
for. And though men ought to repute and thinke that all the ſaid ends
and intentes be very good, expedient & neceſſarie, aſwell for a common
order, &c. yet ſurely men may not eſteeme them but as thinges indifferent,
& of no ſuch neceſſitie, but that men may vpon cauſes reaſonable,

well omit & leave the ſame vndone, ſo that it be not in caſe of contempt
and ſclander. This rule and canon men muſt diligently learne.
            Yea: but did Ma.Anſwer. 
               Bilſon ſpeake that in the perſon of the Magiſtrate,
or in the perſon of a brother? As for the rule and canon mentioned by
the ſaid Archbiſhops of Canterburie and Yorke, and other Biſhops and
Prelates, it is to be vnderſtood of ſuch ceremonies & ordinances, as the
Prieſts and Biſhops preſcribe vnto the people, and not of politicke conſtitutions
of the Church, given or confirmed by the Magiſtrate.
            Well: but if a Chriſtian Magiſtrate (notwithſtanding the dignitie of
his perſon) be a chriſtian brother,Reply. would not my Lord of W: (if he were
demanded) anſwere, that a Chriſtian Magiſtrates ſword, is committed
vnto him rather for quieting, then for troubling: for healing, then for
wounding of the weake conſciences of his Chriſtian ſubiects?
            For in that, that Princes and ſubiects, meeting in the communion of
Saints, be therein brethren, how ſhould the perſon of a Chriſtian Magiſtrate
(though in excellencie h
                  •
                f
                  •
               rr ſurmount the perſons of all his ſubiects,)
alter the nature of a Chriſtian trueth, in a Chriſtian communitie?
And if it be a trueth in chriſtian communitie, that Chriſtian brethren,
ought not to trouble the weake mindes of their Chriſtian brethren, in
things indifferent, doeth not a chriſtian Magiſtrate ſinne, if he obey not
this trueth? but to let this paſſe: where you demand, whether M. Bilſon
ſpeake in the perſon of a Magiſtrate, or in the perſon of a brother: I referre
it to the iudgment of all men, whether in that place of his booke,
his wordes immediatly going before, and following after, doe not as directly
touch the Magiſtrates office, as by any poſſible meanes they may.
For he in that place mainteyning the Magiſtrats authorite, touching his
lawfull requiring of an oth vnto the ſupremacie, both for coacting and
correcting ſuch, as deny the lawfulnes of the ſame: And for this purpoſe
having cited the deſperatenes of the Donatiſts, who ſlew themſelves, rather
then they would be forced to forgoe their fancies, in the end ſaith
thus: How beit we grant that he wth woundeth a weak cōſcience, ſinneth
againſt Chriſt. Whervpon alſo againe follow theſe words, a litle after; we
may not for things indifferent, trouble the Weake mindes of our brethren.
A Chriſtian Magiſtrate then, (for of a chriſtian Magiſtrate he ſpeaketh)
ſinneth againſt Chriſt, if he trouble the weake mindes of his Chriſtian
brethren, or wound their weake conſciences for things indifferent. And
ſo this reply might ſuffice alſo, vnto that exception made touching the
rule and canon of the Archbiſhops and Biſhops, before rehearſed, had
not them ſelves in expreſſe termes, more fully cleared this point. For they

make no maner difference or diſtinction, betwene the preceptes and ordinances
of Prieſtes and Biſhops, rightfully made by authoritie of their
iuriſdiction, whether they be confirmed, or not cōfirmed, by the people,
or chriſtian Magiſtrate: But they affirme directly the ſame precepts and
ordinances being once receyved by the common conſent of the people,Fol. 57.
and authoriſed by the lawes of Chriſtian Princes, that no other obedience
is required to them, but that men may lawfully omitt, or doe otherwiſe,
then as is preſcribed by the ſaid Lawes and commandements,
of the Prieſts and Biſhops, ſo that they doe it not in contempt or deſpite
of the ſaid power and iuriſdiction.
            Yea moreover (ſay they) although men ought to repute & think, that
all the ſaid ends and intents, be alſo very good, expedient & neceſſary, aſwell
for a common order and tranquilitie, to be had among the people,
as alſo for the better inſtruction & inducement of the people, vnto the
obſervation of theſe things, wherein conſiſteth indeed that ſpirituall iuſtice,
& that ſpirituall honor and ſervice, which God requireth of vs; yet
ſurely men may not eſteeme them, bus as things indifferent; and of no
ſuch neceſſitie, but that men may vpon cauſes reaſonable, well omit and
leave the ſame vndone, ſo that it be not in caſe of contempt & ſclander.
            And vnto theſe caſes,7. (eſpecially at this time, above all times) ſpeciall
regard is to be had, even by the Provinciall or Eccleſiaſticall law it ſelfe;
for ſeeing in every Dioceſſe, there be not a few of the principall Paſtours
(alleadging the holy Scriptures, for the ground of their vpright conſciences)
that refuſe not vpon will, but vpon conſcience; not vpon contempt
or deſpite of the power of Biſhops,Conſtit. o
                     •
                  . c. eccleſias: ne dig. tra
                     •
                   ad sir. & gloſſa ibid verb 
                     •••
                  ltitudinis. but vpon reaſonable cauſe, and
without offence or ſlandering of their neighbours, to ſubſcribe and vſe
the ceremonies, it is plaine by the ſame eccleſiaſtical law, that they ought
to be reſpected and tolerated: Propter multitudinem, vtique ſeuerit
                     •
                  ti
detrahitur: ſuperſedendum ergo correctioni, vbi pacis perturbatio timetur.
Item vt ſcandalum vitetur, lustos homines, aliquando ſimulare oportet,
ob ſuam & aliorum ſalutem, vt ſcilicet grauiora vitentur. Hoc ergo caſu
faciet quilibet Praelatus, pro ſalute hominum, quod iustè potest; nec vltra
existimet, ſe habere, quod faciat, ne ad inſtar imperiti medici, vno collirio,
omnium oculos curare conetur.
            
            
               And vnto this alſo agreeth, that which is alleadged by Panormitane,8. Panor. in 1. de cler, 
                     •
                  grot.
               in a caſe of the ſubſtraction of the fruits of an Eccleſiaſticall benefice,
from a Clarke, who by reaſon of ſicknes and infirmitie, is vnable to diſcharge
his cure. Quilibet clericus: (ſaith he) dicitur miles Dei, & militat
in Eccleſia: And therefore he concludeth that Clerici non debent terreri,

nec inhumaniter tractari, ne cum alij, exemple hui
                  •
               ſmodi eſſent deterriti,
inueniri forte non poſſet, qui vellet clericatui inſeruire, & eccleſiae
militare: hoc enim videtur turbare ſtatum eccleſiasticum, nedum praeſentem
ſed etiam ſuturum: And further (ſaith he) Potest adduei haec ratio
multum notabilis in argumentum, quod clericus, non debet priuari beneficio
ſuo, ſinc cauſa, etiam per Romanum pontificem, nam existente infirmitate,
& ſic impotentia ſeruiendi, cum non ſubtrahi debeat beneficiam, ne
ex hoc turbetur ſtatus Eccleſiae, ergo multo fortius, vbi nulla ſubest cauſa
rationabilis: But in the caſe of refuſing to ſubſcribe, or for the not vſing
the rites, ceremonies and ornaments, for conſcience, there is no reaſonable
cauſe of deprivation, therefore, &c.
            
            Furthermore if the canon had decreed, that a Miniſter refuſing to ſubſcribe,
ſhould bee puniſhed by eccleſiaſticall cenſure, in this caſe the
peyne of deprivation, ought not to be inflicted, becauſe by this clauſe
(Eccleſiaſticall cenſure) is vnderſtood interdiction, ſuſpention a
                  •
               d excommunication,
which bee poenae multum fauorabiles, & in animarum
remedium inductae; and doeth not comprehend depoſition, deprivation,
or degradation, quia illae poenae ſunt multum odioſae.
            
            Laſtly, were it ſo that the Synod had indeed decreed, that a Miniſter for
refuſall to ſubſcribe, ſhould be deprived from his eccleſiaſtical benefice:
& were it ſo likewiſe, that a Miniſter ſhould indeed refuſe, not vpon conſcience,
but vpon a ſelfe will, & dolo m
                     •
                  lo to ſubſcribe, in this caſe I anſwere,
that the Miniſter can not lawfully for this offence, by this provinciall
canon be deprived: The reaſon is this: Beneficia eccleſiaſtica ſecundū
antiquam ordinationem ſunt perpetus,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   diſt. faperversū, extra. de t. aegrot. 
                     〈◊〉
                   totum. 
                     •
                  ag. chart. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . H. 8. c. 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  9. 
               & habent fundationem 
                     •
                   lure communi,
which ancient ordinances, being agreeable to the common law of
the Realme, & confirmed by the high Court of Parliament, can never be
diſanulled by the Synode: Quia non poteſt inferior diſponere, nec contra
ius commune, nec contra legem ſuperioris, maximè in praeindicium tertij.
            
         
         
            Conſiderations for the not exact and preciſe vſe, of
the Booke of common prayer, attayned and gotten by
the Pariſhioners of M. for the Miniſter to vſe in
the ſame pariſh Church.
            IT is provided and enacted,
                  
                     •
                  liza. c. 2 
                     •
                  . 6. that the bookes concerning the ſaid ſervices,
ſhal at the coſts & charges of the pariſhioners of every pariſh,
be attayned and gotten, &c. And that ſuch pariſhes, where the ſaide
bookes ſhalbe attayned and gotten, &c. ſhall within three w
                  •
               ckes, after

the bookes ſo attayned and gotten, vſe the ſaid ſervice, and put the ſame
in vre according to this act: from whence it ſeemeth to follow, (the Miniſter
not being commanded to attayne & get the ſaid booke) if the pariſhioners
have not hitherto attayned and gotten the ſaid booke, that the
miniſter of the ſame pariſh, is not boūd to vſe the ſaid ſervice, & put the
ſame in vre, which is not attayned & gotten for him, to be vſed & invred.
            That the pariſhioners of the ſaid pariſh church, have not hitherto attay
ned & gottē the ſaid book, ſemeth to be manifeſt vpō theſe cōſiderations:
            The Booke which the Miniſter of the ſame Church is bound to vſe,
ſhould differ from the booke of common prayer, authoriſed by act of
Parliament, 5. and 6. Ed. 6. But in foure poyntes, that is to ſay: one of alteration,
or addition of certeine leſſons, to be vſed on every ſunday in the
yeare, an alteration & correctiō of the forme of the Letany, and two ſentences
only added, in the delivery of the Sacrament, to the cōmunicants,
and none other, or otherwiſe.
            But in the booke attayned and gotten by the ſaid pariſhioners, ther
                  •
               
be moe alterations, then are ſpecified in the ſtatute; The forme of the Letany
is not corrected and altered, and moreover there is ſome detraction
from the very matter of the booke, which detraction ought not to have
bene made, and which is conteyned in this prayer following:
            From the Tyrannie of the Biſhop of Rome, and all his deteſtable
enormities, Good Lord deliver vs.
            
            And as touching the forme of the Letanie of K. Edw. booke, whereas
the ſame by the letter of the Act, ſeemeth by the Parliament, to have ben
altered & corrected (for the words ſtand thus, viz. altered & corrected,
& not to be altered & corrected) yet now ſo it is, that the ſame forme remaineth
ſtil in the pariſh book vnaltered, & vncorrected. For the whole
forme, order, and diſpoſitiō of prayers, which is in the Letanie of the pariſh
book is the ſame forme, order & diſpoſition of prayers which was in
the Letany of K. Ed. book, Except vnhappely we ſhall ſay, that the tranſpoſition
and alteration of the prayer of Chryſoſtom (by the booke of K.
Edw. according to the nature of the letter of that prayer appointed to be
read, laſt of all the prayers in the Letanie) is an alteration and correction
of the forme of the Letanie, when as notwithſtanding the tranſpoſition
and alteration of that prayer by the pariſh booke, appointed not to bee
read laſt, but before ſundrie other prayers, is rather a playne corruption,
and not a correction, of that parte of the forme of the Letanie: For
this tranſpoſition is as if an huſband-man, ſhould ſet his cart before

his horſe; or as an Orator ſhould place his cōcluſion before his proheme.
            Again it can not probably or reaſonably be gathered, that the Parliament
mentioning an alteration & correction made of the forme of the
Letany, did intēd by the words (forme of the Letany altered & corrected)
that part of the matter of the Letany was or ſhould be altered & corrected.
For the matter of that prayer was good, and without fault, & needed
no alteration and correction at all, yea and had the Parliamēt detracted
or intended, that that prayer ſhould be detracted out of the Letany, and
that by the detraction thereof, the forme of the Letanie had ben altered
and corrected, then would no doubt the Parliament have ſpoken properly
and plainly in this caſe, like as the ſame did in the other two caſes,
in this or the like maner, viz. one prayer againſt the tyrannie of the Biſhop
of Rome, and all his deteſtable enormities, detracted: In like ſorte,
I ſay, as it enacted, one alteration or addition of certeyne leſſons to bee
vſed on every ſunday in the yeare, and two ſentences only added in the
delivery of the Sacraments to the communicants: wherefore the Parliament,
in the excellencie of their iudgement & ſharpnes of their wiſdom,
by th
                  •
               ſe wordes (forme altered and corrected) neceſſarily implying, that
the forme of the Letany of King Edwards booke, was faulty and corrupt,
it can not by any reaſonable conſtruction bee gathered, that the
Parliament by forme of the Letanie, did intend any part of the matter of
the Letanie, which was good and ſincere. For if we ſpeake properly, and
not tropically, plainly, and not obſcurely; iudiciouſly, and not ridiculouſly;
(as all Statutes and all wiſe Law-makers ſpeak or ought to ſpeak)
we can not ſay, that any parte of the matter of a thing, is the forme of a
thing. For what a vanitie were it to call the matter of a loafe, the forme
of a loaſe? The matter of an houſe, the forme of an houſe? or the matter
of a man, the forme of a man? much more vainly then needs muſt w
                  •
               
ſpeake, if we call the matter of a maſt of a ſhip, the forme of a ſhip; the
matter of the clapper of a bell, the forme of a bell; or the matter of the
whit of an egge, the forme of an egge. Wherefore it can not otherwiſe
be intended by the Parliament, but that the faulty and corrupt forme,
order, and diſpoſition of prayers conteyned in the Letany of King Edwards
booke, was, or at leaſtwiſe, ſhould have bene corrected and altered
into an holy & ſincere forme, order, and diſpoſition of prayers, and
not to have continued ſtill faulty and corrupted, as the ſame was in the
beginning and firſt originall thereof. Yea and that this indeed was the
true meaninge of the Parliament, is more fully confirmed vnto vs out
of the doctrine of one of the Homilies, commaunded publikely to bee

read in the churches: For cōmon prayer (ſaith the Homilie) is rehearſed
and ſaid by the publicke Miniſter,The ſecond part of the right vſe of the Church. in the name of the people & the
whole multitude preſent, whervnto they giving their ready audience,
ſhould aſſent and ſay Amen. But in the Letany of the bo
                  •
               ke attayned
and gotten by the Pariſhioners, the forme of prayers is not framed after
this maner. For in ſome part of the Letany the Miniſter only repeateth
ſome thing, for the which the people praye, and ſo it commeth to
paſſe, that the people only praye, and not the Miniſter: yea and ſo the
Miniſter ſupplieth the place of the people, and the people the place of
the miniſter. Agayne in ſome other partes of the Letany, the miniſter
prayeth for one thing, and the people following, pray for another; By
meanes whereof, the faultie and corrupt forme, order and diſpoſition
of prayers in the Letany, diſagreeable to the doctrine of the Homilie,
remayneth vnaltered and vncorrected, contrarie to the act of Parliament
and doctrine of the church of England.
            Concerning addition and alteration ſpecified in the act, there be divers
and ſundry other alterations, and ſome additions alſo, in the pariſh
booke; differing from the booke of King Edward, in wel-nigh l.
materiall poyntes. And for the vſe of which pointes, if the Kings Iudges
and Iuſtices ſhould as ſtrictly and rigorouſly proceed, as the Bb.
have done, and yet doe, for the not vſe of the Su
                  •
               plice & Croſſe, they
might bring all the miniſters of the church within danger of ſixe monethes
impriſonment, and of the loſſe of one yeares profite, of all their
ſpirituall promotions to the King. For theſe words of the ſtatute, that
all and ſingular miniſters, in any Cathedrall or Pariſh church, &c. be
bound to ſay and vſe the Mattens, Evenſong, celebration of the Lords
Supper, and adminiſtration of each of the Sacramentes, and all their
common and open prayer, in ſuch order and forme as is mentioned in
the ſaid booke ſo authorized by Parliament in the fifth & ſixth yeeres
of the Raigne of King Edward the ſixth with one alteration, &c. and
none other or otherwiſe: Theſe wordes (I ſay) doe as exactly and preciſely
bind all Miniſters to vſe the book of King Edw. and none other
or otherwiſe in all poyntes (excepting the excepted) as they binde anie
Miniſters to vſe the rites & ceremonies, mencioned in the ſaid booke:
But how can any Miniſter vſe that order of ſervice, and none other or
otherwiſe, which is appointed in the booke of fift and ſixt Edw. 6. (excepting
the excepted) when as ſome other order of ſervice (exceptinge
the excepted) is concluded within the booke, provided by the Pariſhioners?

And for the vſe of which booke, rather then for refuſall of the
vſ
                  •
                of which booke, a miniſter is puniſhable by the ſtatute. And to
make the thing which we have in hand to be vndeniable, & without
cavil: namely, that the booke provided by the Pariſhioners, is not that
booke, which is authoriſed by act of Parliament: it is to be noted (beſides
the alterations and additions ſpecified in the ſtatute) that there is
one great and mayne alteration, betweene the two bookes, of ſundrie
chapters, appointed to be read for the firſt leſſons, at Mattens, & Evenſong,
vpon divers feſtivall dayes. Which alteration alſo, it is evident,
that the ſame was made generally, and for the moſt part from the better,
to the worſe, namely from the canonicall ſcriptures, to the Apocriphall
writings: from whole chapters, to peeces of chapters, and that
as it ſeemeth not without fraud and colluſiō to the Queene & Realm.
The proofe of which alteration is apparantly ſcene by the ſeverall kalenders,
of both bookes. Vnto which kalenders, for the firſt & ſecond
leſſons, (except the ſame be proper leſſons) at morning and evening
prayer the miniſter is referred. For in a Rubrick before Te Deum, at
morning prayer, it is ſaid: There ſhal be read two leſſons diſtinctly
with a loude voyce; the firſt of the old teſtament, the ſecond of the
new, like as they be appointed by the kalender, except there be proper
leſſons aſſigned for that day. And in the order for evening prayer it is
thus ſaid: Then a leſſon of the old Teſtament as is appointed likewiſe
in the kalender, except there be proper leſſons appointed for that day.
And after Magnificat: then a leſſon of the new Teſtament; Now theſe
firſt and ſecond leſſons, whether they be proper or not proper leſſons,
aſſigned by the pariſh booke, that many of them doe vary from th
                  •
               
firſt and ſecond leſſons, appointed by the booke of 5. and 6. Edw. 6. is
plainly to be ſeene, not only by the kalenders of both bookes, but alſo
by the order appointed for proper leſſons: A paterne whereof at certeyne
feaſt dayes followeth:

                  
                      
                     Kalender of King Edwards originall printed booke.
                     Kalender of the Pariſhes printed booke.
                  
                  
                     Stevens day 
                     
                     Morning prayer. 1. leſſon Eſa. 56
                     Morning prayer. 1. leſſon. Pro. 28
                  
                  
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon. Eſa. 57
                     Evening prayer. 1. leſſon. Eccle. 4.
                  
                  
                     Saint Iohn. 
                     
                     Morning prayer. 1 leſſon. Eſa. 58
                     Morning prayer. 1 leſſon. Eccle. 5.
                  
                  
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon. Eſa. 59
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon. Eccle. 6.
                  
                  
                     Innocents. 
                     
                     Evening prayer. 1. leſſon. Eſa. 60
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon. Wiſd. 1
                           •
                        
                     
                  
               
               
Vpon the circumciſion day both bookes agree ſaving that King
Edwa. readeth the whole 10. chapter of Deuter. at evening
prayer, and the Pariſh booke but part: vpon the Epiphanie,
the chapters at morning and evening prayer, for firſt and ſecond
leſſon by both bookes are the ſame. But the Genealogie
of our Savior Chriſt mencioned in the third of Luke, by the
Kings booke is appointed to be read, whereas by the Kalender
and one rubricke in the pariſh booke, the ſame is appointed
not to be read.
            
               
                  
                      
                     King Edw. Kalender.
                     The pariſh bookes Kalender.
                  
                  
                     Converſ. of Paule. 
                     
                     Morning prayer. 1 leſſon Ge. 46
                     Morning prayer. 1 leſſon Wiſd. 5
                  
                  
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon Gen. 47
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon Wiſd. 6
                  
                  
                     Purification of Mary. 
                     
                     Morning prayer. 1 leſſon Ex. 12
                     Morning prayer. 1 leſſon Wiſd. 9
                  
                  
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon Exo. 13
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon Wiſd. 12
                  
                  
                     Mathias. 
                     
                     Morn. prayer. 1 leſſon Num. 33
                     Morning prayer. 1 leſſon Wiſ. 19
                  
                  
                     Even. prayer. 1 leſſon Num 34
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon Ecclus. 1
                  
                  
                     Annunciat. of Mary. 
                     
                     Morning prayer. 1 leſſon Joſ. 21
                     Morning prayer. 1 leſſon Ecclus. 2
                  
                  
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon Joſ. 22
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon Ecclus. 3
                  
               
            
            
                Vpon Monday and Tewſday in Eaſter weeke, vpon the aſcenſion
 day and Whitſunday King Edwa. booke appointeth, no
 proper Chapters, for the firſt Leſſons, but only proper chapters
 for the ſecond leſſons: and ſo referreth the Miniſter for the
firſt leſſons on thoſe dayes, to the chapters which by the common
Kalender are appointed to bee read vpon thoſe dayes.
            Whereas the pariſh Booke appointed proper chapters aſwell for
the firſt as ſecond leſſons vpon all thoſe dayes.
            
                Vpon Monday and Tewſday in Whitſunday weeke by the K.
 book, there be no proper chap. appointed for the firſt or ſecōd
 leſſon at morning or evening prayer: whereas the pariſh book
 appointed vpon Monday part of Gene. 11. at morning prayer
 for the firſt leſſon; and for the ſecond leſſon 1 Corint. 12. And
for the firſt leſſon at evening prayer, of the ſame day, parte of
the 11. of Numbers. Vpon Tewſday in the ſame weeke, for
the 1. leſſon at morning prayer part of the 19. 1. kings, and
for the firſt leſſon at evening prayer Deut. 30.
            
               
               
                  
                      
                     King Edwa. Kalender.
                     The pariſh bookes Kalender.
                  
                  
                     Marke. 
                     
                     Morn. prayer. 1 leſſon 2. K. 3
                     Morn. prayer. 1 leſſon Ecclus. 4
                  
                  
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon 2. K. 4
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon Ecclus. 5
                  
                  
                     Philip and Iacob. 
                     
                     Morn. prayer. 1 leſſon 2. K. 15
                     Morn. prayer. 1 leſſon ecclus. 7
                  
                  
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon 2. K. 16
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon ecclus. 9
                  
                  
                     Barnabe. 
                     
                     Morn. prayer. 1 leſſon Heſt. 3
                     Morn. prayer. 1 leſſon ecclus. 10
                  
                  
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon Heſt. 4
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon ecclus. 12
                  
               
               
                  
                      
                     King Edw. Kalender
                     The pariſh bookes Kalender.
                  
                  
                     Peter. 
                     
                     Morn. prayer. 1 leſſon Iob. 31
                     Morning prayer. 1 leſson ecclu. 15
                  
                  
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon Job. 32
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſson ecclu. 19
                  
                  
                     Iames. 
                     
                     Morn. prayer. 1 leſſon eccl. 10
                     Morning prayer. 1 leſson ecclu. 21
                  
                  
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon eccle. 11
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſson ecclu. 23
                  
                  
                     Bartholomew. 
                     
                     Morn. prayer. 1 leſſon ezek. 3
                     Morn. prayer. 1 leſson ecclu. 25
                  
                  
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon ezek. 6
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſson ecclu. 29
                  
                  
                     Matthew. 
                     
                     Morn. prayer. 1 leſſon micha. 7
                     Morning prayer. 1 leſson ecclu. 35
                  
                  
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon Nahu. 1
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſson ecclu. 38
                  
                  
                     Michael. 
                     
                     Morn prayer. 1 leſſon Zecha. 7
                     Morning prayer. 1 leſson ecclu. 39
                  
                  
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon Zecha. 8
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſson ecclu. 44
                  
                  
                     Luke. 
                     
                     Morn. prayer. 1 leſſon Iudu. 13
                     Morning prayer. 1 leſson ecclu. 51
                  
                  
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon Jud. 14
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſson Iob. 1
                  
                  
                     Simon and Iude. 
                     
                     Morn prayer. 1 leſſon Sapi. 17
                     Morn. prayer. 1 leſson Iob. 24. 25
                  
                  
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon Sapi. 18
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſson Job. 42
                  
                  
                     All Saints.
                     Morni. prayer. 1 leſſon Wiſd. 3
                     Morn. prayer. 1 leſson part of Wiſ. 3
                  
                  
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon Wiſd. 5
                     Even. prayer. 1 leſson part of Wiſ. 5
                  
                  
                     Andrew.
                     Morni. prayer. 1 leſſon Eſai. 5
                     Morning prayer. 1 leſson Pro. 20
                  
                  
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſſon Eſai. 6
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſson Pro. 21
                  
                  
                     Thomas. 
                     
                     Morn. prayer. 1 leſson Eſa. 48
                     Morning prayer. 1 leſson Pro. 23
                  
                  
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſson Eſa. 49
                     Evening prayer. 1 leſson Pro. 24
                  
               
            
            Vnto theſe alterations there is one maine difference to be added
and fitt in this place to be obſerved, cōcerning certaine dayes,
wherein proper leſſons are to bee read. For by the booke of
King Edw. it is ſaid proper Pſalmes & leſſons for divers feaſts
and dayes, but by the pariſh booke, the title is after an other
maner. viz. Leſſons proper for holy dayes. From whence it
followeth that all thoſe dayes wherein proper leſſons are to
be read, are by that title accompted to be holy dayes: which is

repugnant to a Rubricke of the ſame booke, entituled: Theſe
to bee obſerved for holy dayes, and none other. Out of which
Rubrick (amongſt a number of holy dayes there ſpecified)
ſix dayes be ſecluded from being holy dayes; for the which
ſix dayes notwithſtāding, proper leſſons are appointed to be
read, as vpon holy dayes: and theſe ſix dayes be the dayes following:
viz. the day of the cōverſion of Paule, Barnabes day,
Wenſday and Thurſday before Eaſter, Goodfriday, and Eaſter
even.
            It ſeemeth therefore not to be ſo ſafe a matter, as men are borne in
hand it is, for miniſters abſolutely to ſubſcribe, that there is nothing
in the whole booke of common prayer, repugnant to the holy worde
of God, ſeeing there is ſo groſſe and palpable a repugnancie in the
booke it ſelfe. Conſentiet null
                     •
                  , qui ſecum diſſidet ipſe. Vnto which repugnancie
alſo may be added an other repugnancy more abſurd. For
beſides the alterations and additions before ſpecified, and not compriſed
in the ſtatute, there is a Rubrick added, which not only repugneth
the booke of K. Edward, but alſo croſſeth the kalender, aſwell of the
pariſh booke it ſelfe, as of the booke of K. Edward. By which Rubrick
alſo there is a detraction from the booke of K. Edward, worſe then the
former of the Letany. Becauſe this Rubrick appointeth onely part of
the firſt chapter of Saint Matthew, and part of the third chapter of
Saint Luke to be read, whenſoever by the kalender or booke, thoſe
chapters come to be read. Whereas the kalender of both bookes appointeth
the whole firſt chapter of Saint Matthew, & the whole third
chapter of Saint Luke to be read vpon divers dayes in the yeare. As for
example, both bookes on the firſt Sunday after the nativitie, appoint
the whole firſt chapter of Saint Matthew to be read for the Goſpell.
Which whole chapter alſo is appointed by the kalenders of both
bookes, to be read for the ſecond leſſon of morning prayer on the ſecond
day of lanuary, the third of May, and the 31. of Auguſt. The like
is to be obſerved by the kalenders, for the reading of the whole third
chapter of Saint Luke, for the ſecond leſſon at morning prayer, vpon
the 21. of February, the 19. of Iune, and the 17. of October.
            But theſe chapters are no part of the Booke of cōmon prayer,Obiection. and
by the Preface before the ſecond part of the Homilies, a Miniſter may
for ſome chapters of the old Teſtament, read ſome chapters of the
New, as to him ſhall ſeeme to tend more to edification.
            
               
By your leave,Anſwere. this your exception ſeemeth to be but an homelie, &
frivoulous exception: For though the chapters bee no part of the
booke of common prayer, yet be the chapters part of the matter of
the common ſervice of the church preſcribed by the booke: yea and
the formall and orderly reading of ſuch and ſuch chapters, at ſuch &
ſuch times, is part alſo of the order and forme of ſaying the ſame ſervice.
Inſomuch as neither Mattens nor Evenſong, in matter & forme
can be ſong or ſaid, without the chapters be read. And as for the preface
to the Homilies, that by the ſame the miniſter is at libertie to leaue
ſome chapters of the old, for ſome chapters of the new Teſtament, for
firſt or ſecond leſſon, what doeth that helpe the falſification of the pariſh
booke, when the ſame, in place of ſix and twentie, or thereabouts,
of Canonical, hath appointed ſo many of Apocriphall chapters, vpon
feaſt dayes to bee read? Or how can the Preface exempt a Miniſter
from being puniſhable before the Kinges Iuſtices, if he ſhall follow
ſome private preface, and breake the Kings publike edict?
            But both bookes agree in many pointes,Obiection. and namely that the Miniſter
in Baptiſme ſhall make a croſſe vpon the childes forehead, & ſhall
ſay: We ſigne thee with the ſigne of the croſſe, &c. And therefore how
ſoever the bookes may differ in ſome moe pointes then are mentioned
in the Statute, yet cleane to diſavow the book of common prayer provided
by the Pariſhioners, not to bee the booke of common prayer,
which the Miniſters in their dayly miniſt
                  •
               atiō are bound to vſe, is but
a cavill, and reproveth the whole ſtate of Prelacie and of the Realme,
who have received and vſed the ſame booke, ever ſince the firſt yeare
of our late Queenes Raigne.
            
               King Henrie the eight,
               Anſwere. writing to the Emperour againſt the Pope,
telleth him, that a free man ignorant of his freedome, doth not therefore
become a bondman, becauſe ignorantly he ſubmitteth him ſelfe
to ſervitude; No more (ſay we) is the State of the Realme, lyable to reproofe,
when having committed the ordering of theſe affayres to the
fidelitie and circumſpection of the Clergie, it hath bene abuſed by the
Clergie. Howſoever the State then of the Realme have received and
vſed the booke, attayned and gotten by the Pariſhioners, it mattereth
not to the point in queſtion. For if the Clergie vnwitting to the State,
have cauſed or ſuffered a booke to bee printed and publiſhed, which
hath but the ſhew of a booke, then (as it ſeemeth) hath the Clergie no
law, but the ſhewe of a law to enforce the vſe of ſuch a booke, as the

State hath not authorized. And therefore we may not for clearing the
Clergies iuſt reproofe, confeſſe an vntrueth, and ſtill conceale a kinde
of iniuſtice (vnwitting to the State) executed by the Cleargie, vnder a
colour of Iuſtice, as if their iniuſtice by colour of errour, were maintainable
by the State: For ſo contrarie to all reaſon and good duetie,
(which we owe to the ſtate and to the Church) we ſhould not only interlace
the innocencie of the State, with the guiltines of the Cleargie,
but alſo mingle the churches induſtrie, with the Clergies ill huſbandrie.
It is therefore no cavill, to oppoſe a iuſt and true anſwere, to an
vntrue and vnſound plea:
            For albeit the two bookes agree in many pointes, and ſpecially in
mencioning the making of a croſſe, &c. nevertheles the pariſh booke,
can not therefore any more truely be counted, that booke which is
authoriſed by act of Parliament, then can that coyne bee reckoned to
be the Kings coyne, which hath in it, nine partes ſilver, and the tenth
part copper, nether is it any more lawfull for an ordinary, to preſſe the
vſe of a booke, in it ſelfe corrupted, though in many points it agree
with the originall; then it is ſufferable for the Kings Iuſtices, to enforce
the vſe of a coyne in it ſelfe counterfeite, though in forme and charactere,
it be like the Kings Image and ſuperſcription. Wherefore the
mencion made in the pariſh booke of making of a croſſe, &c. not being
a matter of power ſufficient to warrant the pariſh booke; but the
booke authoriſed by act of Parliament, being a matter of power to
warrant the making of a croſſe, &c. wee may iuſtly avow the booke of
common prayer, attayned and gotten by the pariſhioners, not to bee
that booke, which the Miniſters in their day he miniſtration of divine
ſervice, be bound to vſe, notwithſtanding the making of a croſſe and
ſigning the child in the forehead with a croſſe, be therein mencioned:
If reply bee made that this plea would but litle eaſe or advantage the
Miniſters in caſe the right booke ſhould be reviewed, corrected and
new printed, we then reioyne and averre. Firſt, that the day is paſt long
ſince, before which time this worke ſhould have bene refined, and that
therefore it is now too late, without a new law, to reviewe and amend
the ſame.
            Secondly, that this plea will not only, but litle eaſe and advantage
the nullities, iniquities and iniuſtices of ſentences heretofore paſſed, by
the ordinaries vnder colour of that booke, but alſo much advantage
the King and his ſtate, if his Maieſtie might bee pleaſed to do as King

               Ioaſh, king of Iudah, or as K. Henry the eighth, king of England did:
king Ioaſh, in, or about the beginning of his raigne (as it ſeemeth) having
appointed the Prieſtes to take all the ſilver of dedicate thinges
brought to the houſe of the Lord, and therwith to repaire the broken
places of the houſe, whereſoever any decay was found, and the Prieſts
vntill the three and twentith yeare of his Raigne, not having mended,
that which was decayed, nor repayred the ruines of the Temple, the
king (I ſay) becauſe of the Prieſts negligence, commanded the Prieſts
to receive no more money, and tooke from them the ordering of the
money, and committed the ſame to his Secretary, and to Ieho
                     •
                  ada the
high Prieſt, who gaue the money made ready, into the hands of them
that vndertooke the worke, and that had the overſight of the houſe
of the Lorde, of whom there was no reckoning taken, becauſe they
dealt faithfully.
            If the Prieſtes then of our age, have not only not within three and
twentie, but not within three and fortie yeares publiſhed that booke,
which is mended and corrected by the Queene & her ſtate, in the firſt
yeare of her Raigne; but alſo for the ſpace of eight and fortie yeares,
have ſuffered a corrupted booke, to be intruded into the place of a true
booke, we commend it to the wiſedome of our Soveraigne Lord king
IAMES, (who is as an Angell of God to diſcerne betweene things that
differ) (there being no high Prieſt in our dayes like faithfull as was Iehoiada
the high Prieſt in the dayes of king Ioaſh) whether his Maieſtie
might not be pleaſed for the redreſſe of this and other corruptions in
the Eccleſiaſticall ſtate,2▪ K. 12. 4. 5 to appoint as king Henry the eighth did, an other
Cromwell, to be his Maieſties Vicegerent and Vicare generall over
the Clergie.
            Vnto theſe differences and alterations betwene the two bookes, not
mencioned in the ſtatute may be annexed, both an addition of certaine
new prayers, and ſome alteration alſo of the forme of the old prayers
to be ſaid after the end of the Letanie. By addition in the pariſh booke,
there be ſet three ſeverall prayers, not any one of them mencioned in
the Kings booke, viz. A prayer for our Biſhops & Curates, beginning
thus: Almightie and everlasting God, which only workest great marveilles,
ſend downe vpon our Biſhops and Curats, &c. Secondly, a prayer
out of the 2. of Corint. 13. 13. viz. The grace of our Lord Jeſus
Christ, &c. And thirdly, a prayer beginning thus: O God whoſe nature
and propertie is ever to have mercie, &c.
            
            
               
And whereas by the forme of King Edwards booke, the Letanie
ſhould ever end with this collect following: viz. Almightie God,
which hast given vs grace at this time with one accord, &c. and ſo this
collect ſhould be after the prayers for rayne, for faire weather, in the
time of dearth, in the time of warre, and in the time of any common
plague, or ſicknes, as the time requireth. This collect (I ſay) by King
Edw. booke appointed to be ſaid after all theſe prayers, is by the pariſh
booke ſet before all theſe. Yea and it is to be ſaid alſo, before the prayer
beginning: O God whoſe nature & propertie is ever to have mercy.
By meanes wherof the very forme and order of ſome prayers, appointed
in the Kings booke, and by the ſtatute commaunded to be vſed,
and none other, or otherwiſe is ſo tranſpoſed, and inverted, as that
the miniſter obſerving the pariſh booke, can not but breake the order
and forme of common prayer, commanded to be vſed, and ſo can not
but caſt his body, & one whole yeares fruites of his benefice, vpon the
kings Iudges, and Iuſtices mercy.
            Moreover, beſides theſe additions and alterations, in the end of the
Letany of King Edw. booke, there is one prayer inſerted, which by the
pariſh booke is wholy left out, namely: O God mercifull Father, which
in the time of Heliſeus, &c.
            
            Laſtly, at the latter end of the communion, in the kings book there
is one Rubrick concerning kneeling at the communion, which Rubrick
is not in the pariſh booke, & the ſame beginneth thus: Although
no order, &c. There is alſo one Rubrick among thoſe Rubricks which
are in the pariſh booke not to be found in the Kinges booke, beginning
thus: And in Cathedrall or Collegiat Churches, &c.
            
            Wherefore the pariſh booke, in ſo many and materiall poyntes, being
thus groſly corrupted, and no one true original copie provided by
the pariſhioners for the miniſters to vſe, it ſeemeth to be a very lamentable
and wofull caſe; that ſubſcription to a feyned record ſhould bee
thus ſtreightly vrged. And that ſo many learned, peynfull and godly
Miniſters for refuſing to ſubſcribe, or preciſely to vſe an vnauthenticall
ſcedule, ſhould be grieved and moleſted.
            By what guyle, or by whoſe cunning ſo foule a ſtratageme, to the
deluding of the Queene, the Lords, and commons in Parliament aſſombled,
was firſt wrought, we know not. Neither have we any reaſon
to charge any of the Clergie now living, with ſo foule and groſſe an
abuſe. Becauſe there is not one of the Clergie, to our knowledge, living,

that in the beginning of our late Queenes raigne, had ought to
medle in Church-government, or ſurvey of printing bookes. But this
we may ſpeake, and not ſpeake (as we thinke) vntruly that ſome one
guilfull prieſt, or other, vnwitting to the Queene and State, yea and it
may be vnwitting to the Clergie too, was ſuffered to ſhoufle, and to
ſet the cardes with the ſleight of a falſe finger. For otherwiſe, it could
not poſſibly have come to paſſe, that ſo many chapters of the Apocryphall
writings, ſhould be conveyed into the pariſh booke, in ſteed of
ſo many chapters of the true and authenticall ſcriptures, appointed
by K. Edw. booke; eſpecially the ſame chapters, in the pariſh booke,
(as it were of ſet purpoſe) being ordered to be read, when all the people
are ſolemnly aſſembled, togither vpon feſtivall dayes.
            Wherefore theſe differences betweene theſe bookes being apparantlie
true, and the ſtatute having decreed, that the miniſter ſhalbe bound
to ſay, and vſe the Mattens, Evenſong, &c. in ſuch order and forme, as
is mencioned in the ſame booke of King Edward, with ſuch alterations
and additions, as be mentioned in the act, & none other, or otherwiſe,
and the pariſhioners not having atteyned and gotten the ſaide
booke, it is a matter that worthily and neceſſarily requireth the conſideration
and reſolution of the Kings learned Iudges and Iuſtices:
Whether a Miniſter by the letter of the ſtatute be bound
exactly and preciſely to vſe a booke atteyned and gotten
by the pariſhioners, the ſame booke not being authoriſed
by the letter of the ſtatute? And if not, then whether
the Miniſter by the letter of the ſtatute, bee to looſe and
forfeite to the King, one yeares profit of all his ſpirituall
benefices and promotions, and his body to ſuffer impriſonment
by the ſpace of ſix monethes, if he ſhall refuſe
to vſe ſome part of a booke not authoriſed. For it ſemeth
(as yet) to vs abſurd, that a Miniſter ſhould bee vrged to
vſe ſuch a booke, as for the vſe whereof, hee hath no authoritie,
or that he ſhould be puniſhed for refuſing the
vſe of ſuch a booke, as for the vſe whereof, hee is by the
law puniſhable.
            
            
               
But be it graunted, that the very booke authoriſed, and none other
is atteyned and gotten by the pariſhioners for the Miniſter to vſe; then
is it againe a matter carefully to be weighed, and for the ful contentation
of the mindes of all perſons to be reſolved, by the Iudges, what
maner of fact is to be holden and adiudged by the Letter of the Statute,
to be a breach of the ſtatute, and for the which fact, a Miniſter,
before the Kings Iuſtices, is puniſhable in maner and forme expeeſſed
in the Act.
            For the better reſolution of which queſtion, it ſhall not be amiſſe to
repeate in this place the firſt clauſe of the body of this Statute. For in
the clauſe of the repeale of the ſtatute of Queene Mary, and reviving
the booke of king Edw. it is ſaid; that the laid booke ſhall ſtande and
be in full force and effect, according to the tenor and effect of this
Statute, the tenor and effect of this ſtatute then, is to bee noted, the
wordes whereof are theſe:
            And further be it enacted by the Queenes Highnes,Note that the Lordes only, & not Lordes ſpirituall and temporall, are mencioned: ſpirituall Lordes therefore were not of this Parliament. For by divers ſtatutes when only Lords are mencioned, temporall Lordes are included, and ſpiritual Lords excluded. with the aſſent
of the Lords and Commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, and
by authoritie of the ſame, that all and ſingular Ministers in any Cathedrall
or Pariſh church, &c. ſhall from, and after, &c. be bound to ſay
and vſe the Mattens, Even ſong, Celebration of the Lords ſupper, and
administration of each of the Sacramentes, and all their common and
open prayer, in ſuch order and forme, as is mentioned in the ſaid booke
ſo authoriſed by Parliament, in the ſaid fifth & ſixth yeares of the raign
of King Edward the ſixth, with one alteration or addition of certayne
leſſons to be vſed on every Sunday in the yeare, and the forme of the Letany
altered and corrected, and two ſentences only added, in the deliverie
of the Sacrament to the communicantes, and none other or otherwiſe.
            Out of which clauſe one ſpecial poynt for the better vnderſtanding
of the whole tenor and effect of the ſtatute is to be obſerved: Namely,
that the Parliament hath wholy in this branch omitted, and not once
mencioned the vſe of any rites, or ceremonies, in ſaying and vſing the
Mattens, Evenſong, celebration of the Lords Supper, and adminiſtration
of each of the Sacramentes. So that vnleſſe ſuch rites and ceremonies,
as be mentioned in the book of K. Edw. the ſixth, be reſpectively
part of the order & forme of ſaying & vſing Mattens, Euenſong,
celebration of the Lords Supper, and adminiſtration of each of the Sacramentes,
&c. it can not bee denied, but that rites and ceremonies
mencioned in that book, are ſecluded out, and not compriſed within

this branch; and therefore not commanded by this branch to be vſed.
            The 2. branch of the body of this ſtatute followeth in theſe words:
            And that if any maner Parſon, Vicare, or other what ſoever miniſter,
that ought or ſhould ſing or ſay common prayer mencioned in the
ſaid booke, or minister the Sacramentes, &c. refuſe to vſe the ſaid common
prayers, or to minister the Sacramentes, &c. as hee ſhould vſe to
Minister the ſame, in ſuch order and forme, as they be mencioned and
ſet forth in the ſaid booke, or ſhall wilfully ſtanding in the ſame, vſe any
other rite, ceremonie, order, forme or maner of celebrating of the Lordes
Supper, openly or privily, or Mattens, Evenſong, administration of
the Sacramentes, or other open prayers, then is mentioned and ſet foorth
in the ſaid booke, &c. or ſhall preach, declare, or ſpeake any thing in the
derogation or depraving of the ſaid booke, &c. & ſhalbe therof lawfully
convicted, according to the lawes of this Realme, &c. ſhall looſe and forfeite
to the Queenes Highnes, &c. for his first offence, the profite of all
his ſpirituall benefices and promotions, comming and ariſing in one whole
yeare next after his conviction. And alſo, that the Parſon ſo convicted,
ſhall for the ſame offence ſuffer impriſonment for the ſpace of ſixe monethes,
without bayle or mainpriſe.
            Now by the letter of this branch, it can not be denied, but that foure
ſeverall kindes of offences mencioned in the ſame, by what ſoever miniſter,
they ſhalbe committed, are every of them puniſhable alike, by
one and the ſelf ſame maner of peyne, notwithſtanding the offences
ſeeme to be of divers natures. One conſiſting in the refuſall of the vſe
of common prayer; an other in the refuſall of the adminiſtration of
the Sacramentes, in ſuch order and forme, as they be mencioned and
ſet foorth in the ſaid booke. A third vpon a wilfull and obſtinate ſtanding
in the ſame, in vſing ſome other rite or ceremonie, then is mencioned
and ſet foorth in the ſaid booke. And a fourth in ſpeaking againſt,
or depraving the booke, or any part thereof.
            As for the which ſpeaking againſt, or depraving the booke, the letter
of the Statute ſeemeth to bee ſo playne, as that no maner ſcruple
can be moved, what the minde & intendement of the Parliament was,
about the ſpeakers againſt, or depravers thereof.
            But touching the offence of a Miniſters refuſing to vſe the ſaid cō
               mon
prayers, and of his refuſing to miniſter the Sacramentes in ſuch
order and forme as they be mencioned, & ſet forth in the ſaid booke,
and wilfully & obſtinately ſtanding in the ſame, of his vſing any other

rite or ceremonie, then is mencioned, &c. theſe Queres following,
reallie and properly ariſe from the letter of the foreſaide two former
branches.
            For ſeeing there is no mention at all made of rites and ceremonies,
in the former branch, and ſeeing alſo there is no puniſhment by the
ſecond branch, mencioned to be inflicted vpon a Miniſter for the refuſall
of the vſe of rites and ceremonies, but onely vpon a wilfull and
obſtinate ſtanding in the ſame, for the vſe of other rites and ceremonies,
then are mentioned and ſet foorth in the ſaide booke, it ſeemeth
doubtfull and queſtionable.
            
               First Quaere.
               Whether a Miniſter conſcionably refuſing to vſe ſome of
the rites and ceremonies mencioned and ſet forth in the ſaide
booke, be puniſhable before the Kings Iuſtices, in maner and
forme before expreſſed, vnles wilfully & obſtinately ſtanding
in the ſame, hee ſhall vſe any other rite or ceremonie, then is
mencioned, &c.
            
            
               Second Quaere.
               If a Miniſter that is bound to miniſter the Sacrament of Batiſme,
doe not refuſe to miniſter the ſame Sacrament, in ſuch
order and forme as is mencioned & ſet forth in the ſaid booke,
but ſhall in very deed and trueth miniſter the ſame Sacrament
in ſuch order and forme, as is mencioned and ſet foorth in the
ſaid booke; whether the ſame Miniſter bee puniſhable before
the Kings Iuſtices in maner and forme before expreſſed, for
not making a croſſe, or not ſigning the childe in the forehead
with a croſſe, after the ſacrament of Baptiſme is fully and perfectly
miniſtred? For ſo this ſacrament bee miniſtred in ſuch
order and forme, and with ſuch rites and ceremonies preceeding
baptiſme, as be mencioned in the ſaid booke, and none other
rite or ceremony, with wilful obſtinacie be vſed in the miniſtration
of Baptiſme, it ſeemeth cleere by the letter and ſenſe
of the Statute, that the Miniſter is not puniſhable, before the
Kings Iuſtices, by the peyne of impriſonment, &c. for omiſſion
of the croſſe after baptiſme.
               
                  
For this fact (of not croſſing after baptiſme) not being within
the letter of the Statute, it is abſurd to ſay that the ſame fact
ſhould be puniſhable by the law, when as the ſame fact is not
within but without the compaſſe, ſcope and letter of the law.
               That this omiſſion of croſſing, is an omiſſion after the miniſtration
of Baptiſme, and not an omiſſion of the order & forme
mencioned to bee in the miniſtration of Baptiſme, is made
cleere vnto vs, by the decree of all the Lordes ſpirituall, and
Clergie, by the Kings confirmation, vnder the great ſeale of
England, & by the opinion of ſome great Lawyers & Iudges,
publiſhed in open ſeates of Iuſtice. For this hath ben decreed,
confirmed and publiſhed that the making of a croſſe, and ſigning
the childe in the forehead with a croſſe, is no parte of the
ſacrament of Baptiſme; and that baptiſme is fully and perfectlie
miniſtred, without theſe rites and ceremonies.
               This caſe then of the omiſſion of the croſſe after baptiſme,
being moſt cleere by ſuch a cloud of witneſſes, that the ſame is
not an omiſſion of that order and forme appointed to be in the
miniſtration of Baptiſme, it ſeemeth to be a thing moſt cleere,
that a miniſter by the letter of the Statute, is no more puniſhable
before the Kings Iuſtices, for omiſſion of the Croſſe after
Baptiſme, then is any perſon by the letter of the Statute of
Queene Mary puniſhable by the Kings Iuſtices, for maliciouſlie
or contemptuouſly moleſting, letting, vexing, or troubling,
or by any other vnlawful wayes or meanes diſquieting, or miſvſing
any Preacher, not in, but after his ſermon, preaching or
collation.
            
            
               Third Quaere.
               Whether a Miniſter that ought or ſhould ſay common
prayer in any pariſh Church, bee puniſhable before the Kings
Iuſtices, in maner and forme before expreſſed, if he ſhall not refuſe
to vſe all, but ſhall vſe ſome of the ſaid common prayers, in

ſuch order and forme, as they be mencioned, and ſet forth in
the ſaid booke? For it is not ſaid in this clauſe; if he refuſe to
vſe all, or any of the ſaid prayers, but it is ſaide, if the Miniſter
that ought to ſinge or ſay common prayer mencioned in the
ſame booke, refuſe to vſe the ſaid common prayers, &c. If then
he obſerve the order and forme of the booke, by ſaying ſome
of the prayers, in that order and forme as they bee mencioned
in the booke, though hee ſay not all and ſinguler the prayers,
it ſeemeth by the letter of the ſtatute that he is not puniſhable,
before the Kings Iuſtices: Indeed if the booke had appointed,
but two prayers onely, as it hath appointed but two Sacraments
only, and the Miniſter in this caſe ſhould haue refuſed
to ſay one prayer, and only have ſaid the other prayer; in this
caſe it ſeemeth to be without all controverſie, that hee ſhould
have violated the law, becauſe the letter of the law ſayth, if he
ſhall refuſe to vſe the ſaid common prayers, which word prayers
being of the plurall nomber, muſt conteyne two prayers at
the leaſt.
            
            
               Fourth Quaere.
               Whether a Miniſter that ought or ſhould vſe the rites and
ceremonies, mencioned in the ſaid booke of common prayer,
be puniſhable before the Kings Iuſtices, in maner & forme before
expreſſed, if he ſhall not refuſe to vſe all but ſhall vſe ſome
of the ſaid rites and ceremonies, in ſuch order & forme as they
be mencioned and ſet forth in the ſaid booke? For it is not enacted,
that the Miniſter ſhall vſe all and every the ſaid rites &
ceremonies, or if he ſhall refuſe to vſe any of the ſaide rites and
ceremonies, but it is ſaid, or ſhall wilfully and obſtinately ſtanding
in the ſame, vſe any other rite, ceremonie, order, forme, or
maner, &c. By which Letter of the Statute, it ſeemeth that the
Miniſter is none otherwiſe puniſhable before the Kings Iuſtices,
vnleſſe wilfully and obſtinately ſtanding in the ſame, hee

ſhall vſe ſome other rite, ceremonie, order, forme or maner of
celebrating the Lords Supper, then is mencioned, &c.
               And vpon this clauſe (as hath bene heretofore generally conceaved)
certaine inditements, exactly framed even by ſome Iuſtices
of aſſiſes ſitting vpon the bench, againſt certaine Miniſters,
for the not obſervation of the booke, before other of the
Queenes Iuſtices haue ben traverſed and avoyded, as being in
this point erroneous, and not agreeable to the intendement of
the ſtatute. Yea and it hath bene the opinion of ſome great
Lawyers, who have bene ſince Iudges, that it is almoſt impoſſible
to frame an indightement againſt a Miniſter, for the
breach of the firſt parte of the former clauſe of the ſtatute,
which is not traverſable and avoydable.
            
            
               Fift Quaere.
               If a Miniſter bound to ſay common prayer in any pariſh
church, ſhall not refuſe to vſe, but indeed ſhall vſe the ſaid common
prayers, in ſuch order and forme as they bee mencioned
in the ſaid booke, whether he be puniſhable before the Kings
Iuſtices, in maner and forme before expreſſed, if he refuſe to
ſay any part, chapter or ſection, of the ſaid booke, which part,
chapter of ſection conteyneth no prayer. For howſoever the
whole booke be authoriſed, yet the peyne ſeemeth in this caſe
to have bene inflicted, only for the omiſſion of prayer, and not
for the omiſſion of every part, chapter or ſection of the booke.
               Beſides theſe queſtions and their reaſons there bee other reaſons to
induce vs, to be of opinion that a Miniſter before the Kings Iuſtices is
not puniſhable in maner and forme, above expreſſed, for his refuſing
to vſe all and every prayer, and prayers; rite, and rites; ceremonie, and
ceremonies; ſection, and ſections, in ſuch order and forme as they
bee mencioned and ſet forth in the ſaid booke.
               In the preface to the booke it is confeſſed, that nothing can almoſt
ſo plainly be ſet forth, but that doubts may ariſe in the vſe and practiſing
of the ſame, and therefore for the appeaſing of all ſuch diverſi
                     •
                  ie,
and for the reſolution of all doubts concerning the maner how to vnderſtand,

doe, and execute the things conteyned in the booke, it is provided
that the parties that ſo doubt, or diverſly take any thing, ſhalreſort
to the Biſhop of the Dioceſſe, who by his diſcretion ſhall take order
for the quieting and appeaſing of the ſame, ſo that the ſame order
be not contrarie to any thing, contained in the ſaid booke. And in the
two laſt clauſes of the preface, it is ſaid, that all Prieſtes and Deacons
ſhall be bound to ſay daylie the morning & evening prayer, either privately
or openly, except they be lett by preaching, ſtudying of Divinitie,
or by ſome other vrgent cauſe.
               And that the Curate that miniſtreth in any pariſh Church or Chappell,
being at home, and not otherwiſe reaſonably lett, ſhall ſay the
ſame in the pariſh Church or Chappell, where hee miniſtreth. From
which places of the preface, (being part of the booke) it is plainly to
be gathered, that the intent and meaning of the Parliament was not to
have the Miniſters to be puniſhed before the Kings Iuſtices, in maner
and forme before expreſſed, for refuſing to vſe all, and ſinguler the
prayers, rites, ceremonies and ſections, in ſuch order & forme as they
be mencioned in the ſaid booke, if either vpon the Miniſters doubts
ryſing in the vſe and practiſe of theſe things, the Biſhop by his diſcretion
did not take order for the quieting and appeaſing of the ſame; or
if the Miniſter by preaching the word, ſtudying of Divinitie, or by
ſome other vrgent or reaſonable cauſe, were let ſo to doe.
               And if no Miniſter, in any of the caſes before mēcioned, be puniſhable,
by the Kings Iuſtices in maner and forme aboue expreſſed, then
it is manifeſt by the proviſoes following, that the Archbiſhops and Biſhops
have no power and authoritie, by vertue of this act, to inquire
and puniſh the default of any miniſter, in theſe caſes, by admonition,
excommunication, ſequeſtration, or deprivation.
               And this not onely by the letter of the laſt proviſoe, ordeyned for
corroboration of the Archbiſhops, Biſhopps, and other Ordinaries
power and authoritie, but alſo by the proviſoe next and immediately
following that Proviſoe, is a matter moſt cleere and vndeniable.
               Provided alwayes, and be it enasted, &c. That all and ſingular
Archbiſhops and Biſhops, &c. ſhall have full power and authoritie, by
vertue of this Act, aſwell to inquire in their Viſitation, Synodes, &c. to
take accuſations, and informations, of all and every the thinges above
mentioned, done, committed or perpetrated, within the limites of their
Juriſdictions, &c. And to puniſh the ſame by admonition, excommunication,

ſequestration, or deprivation, &c.
               If then a Miniſter ſhall not doe, commit, or perpetrate any of the
things above mencioned, and ſo not be puniſhable by the Kings Iuſtices,
it followeth that the ſame miniſter is not puniſhable by the Ordinarie.
               
                  And this alſo by the next Proviſoe is more playne, by which it is enacted:
That What ſoever perſon offending in the premiſes, ſhall for his
offence first receyne puniſhment of the Orainarie, ſhall not for the
ſame offence eſt ſoones be convicted before the lustices; And likewiſe receyving
for the ſaid first offence puniſhment by the Iustices, he ſhall not
for the ſame offence eſt ſoones receyve puniſhment of the Ordinarle: No
offence then puniſhable before the Iuſtices, no offence puniſhable by
the Ordinarie.
               From all which premiſes it ſeemeth that the Queene, the Lords and
Commons, never intended to impoſe ſuch an exact and preciſe obſervation
of the booke of common prayer vpon the Miniſters, as that in
no place, nor at any tyme, they ſhould omitt the reading, ſaying, or vſing
of a chapter, a prayer, a ſection, a rite or ceremonie, vpon peyne
of impriſonment, &c. before the Queenes Iuſtices, or vppon peyne of
deprivation before the ordinary.
               And therefore the intent of the Parliament, not beeing ſo much to
binde the Miniſter to ſuch an exact and preciſe obſervation, as to ſeclude
all orders and formes of prayers, miniſtration of Sacramentes,
vſe of rites and ceremonies, not mentioned and ſet forth in the ſaide
booke, it ſeemeth very vnreaſonable, and much derogatorie to the authoritie
of that Parliament, that Archbiſhoppes and Biſhoppes,
who were all ſecluded from that Parliament,
ſhould by their extentions, conſtructions, and interpretations (as it
were) invert the playne meaning of the Parliament, and that, ea qua
ſunt destinata in vnum ſinem, ſhould by them bee converted to an other
end.
               But now if the Archbiſhops and Biſhops (at the abandoning of the
Popes power out of the Realme) have (as we confeſſe they had) an ordinarie
iuriſdiction by the ſtatutes of the Realme, reſerved to their
Arch
                     •
                  epiſcopall and Epiſcopall ſeas, ſhall therevpon thinke, that lawfully
by their ordinary iuriſdiction onely (without regard of any Authoritie
graunted vnto them by the ſtatute) they may proceed ex officio,
                  
to puniſh theſe defaultes, then we pray their Lordſhips to reſolve
vs, by what law, beſides this ſtatute, they may ſo proceed.
               Firſt, this booke before 5. and 6. of Edward the ſixth, was never alive,
and being once dead by the ſtatute of Queene Mary, was but reſtored
to life by the Queenes ſtatute of Reviver. Before this ſtatute thē
was revived, theſe offences were no offences, for where no lawe was,
there could be no offence.
               Beſides, we have ſome reaſon to conceave thus well of the Ordinaries,
that they ſhould be more prudent & diſcreete, then to iuſtifie their
criminall proceſſe ex officio, by a plenarie power, or a ſoveraigne pleaſure.
And to ſay, that ex officio, by vertue of the popiſh canon Law they
may lawfully proceed to ſuſpenſion, excommunication, or deprivatiō
of any Miniſter of the Goſpell, for the not obſervation of the booke of
common prayer, we aſſure our ſelves, that ſo to ſay, were to ſay amiſſe,
yea and more then ever they will be able to proove.
               Firſt, the whole forme & order of common ſervice, adminiſtration
of Sacramentes, vſe of rites and ceremonies, as they be mencioned and
ſet forth in the booke of common prayer, by all the groundes & rules
of that popiſh law, is adiudged to be erroneous, ſciſmaticall and hereticall.
And therefore the refuſing to vſe the ſame booke, or any parte
thereof, is ſo farre from being puniſhable by the ſame law, as by the
ſame law, it is a matter worthy of high prayſe, and commendation for
a Miniſter to refuſe to vſe it.
               Againe, what a vaine part were it, for an ordinarie to plead the popiſh
canon law, for the validitie of his proceding ex officio, when as the
whole body and every title, chapter and verſicle of the ſame law, at
the petition and ſubmiſſion of the Clergie hath long ſince bene for
ever adnulled, made voide and of no value, by an act of Parliament?
In regard whereof, and in regard alſo, that every ordinaries proceſſe
ex officio, may be aſwell iuſtifiable in reſpect of him ſelfe, as aequall toward
the Kings ſubiects, it much every way importeth him, that his
proceedings ex officio, be tempered hereafter with better morter, and
grounded vpon a ſurer foundation, then be the maximes & principles
of that law. Namely it behooveth that they bee founded and eſtabliſhed
vpon the Kings, either eccleſiaſticall or temporall lawes and ſtatutes,
of which ſorte of the Kings lawes we may bouldly and honeſtly
ſay, that the Popiſh and foraine canon law is none: which ſaying alſo
of ours we briefly proove thus:
               
                  
The Clergie of the Realme, aſwell for their ſucceſſors, as for themſelves,
having (like humble and obedient ſubiects to the King) promiſed
in verbo ſacerdotij, that they would, never from thence forth, preſume
to attempt, alleage, claime or put in vre, or enact, promulge or execute
any new canons, coſtitutions or ordinances, provinciall or other, &c.
It was enacted by authoritie of Parliament, according to the ſaid ſubmiſſion
and petition of the Clergie, that neither they, nor any of them
from thence forth ſhould preſume to attempt, alleadge, claime or put
in vre any conſtitutions or ordinances Provinciall or Sinodalls, or any
other canons. All canons then (by theſe wordes or any other canons)
of what ſort or degree ſoever, whether domeſticall and homebread or
ſtrangbread and foraine canons, before that time made, were once vtterly
forbidden to be attempted, alleadged, claimed or put in vre, by
which meanes they were once, concerning their practiſe and execution,
with vs adnulled and made void, And therefore ſo many of them,
as at that time were not, or ſince that time have not bene revived and
reauthorized, ought not to be attempted, alleadged, claymed or put in
vre at this day.
               It remaineth then to be diſcuſſed, what canons, conſtitutions, ordinances
Provinciall or Synodall, or what other canons, were at that
time, or have at any time ſithence bene recommanded, & reeſtabliſhed;
vnto which point from the whole ſcope & plaine letter of the ſtatute,
we anſwere, that only ſuch canons, conſtitutions and ordinances provinciall
or Synodall, may be attempted, alleadged, claimed and put in
vre, as were made before that time, by the Clergie within the Realm, &
were not contrariant nor repugnant to the lawes, ſtatuts and cuſtomes
of the Realme, nor to the domage or hurt of the Kings prerogative
Royall. And that therefore all canons, decrees, decretall, ſextes, clementines,
extravagants and all other whatſoever conſtitutions and ordinances,
Papall, being ſtrangers and aliens from the common wealth
of England, and not begotten by the Clergie within the Realme, are
forbidden at this day to be attempted, alleadged, claimed or put in vre:
The reaſons of which our anſwere drawne from the letter of the ſtatute,
be theſe:
               The Parliament having enacted, as before is mencioned, did nevertheleſſe
(according to an other branch of the petition of the Clergie)
not only give to the King & 32. perſons, by him to be nominated, &c.
power and authoritie to viewe, ſearch and examine the ſaid conſtitutions

and ordinances Provinciall and Synodall, before that time made
by the Clergie of this Realme; but alſo enacted, that ſuch of them, as
the Kings highnes and the ſaid 32. perſons ſhould deeme & adiudge
worthy to be continued and kept, ſhould be from thence forth kept,
obeyed and executed within this Realme; All canons then made before
that time, without the realme, being ſecluded by the Parliament,
from the view, ſearch and examination of the King and 32. Perſons,
though he and they had deemed and adiudged the ſaid canons to have
bene continued, kept, and obeyed: yet notwithſtanding the ſame Canons
ought not to have bene kept, obeyed and executed. For only ſuch
canons, by the King and 32. Perſons, ought to have ben deemed & adiudged
worthie to be continued & kept; for the continuance and keeping
wherof, power & authoritie by Parliament was given to the King
and 32. Perſons. But ſuch canons, conſtitutions and ordinances, Provinciall
or Sinodall only, and not Papall, were committed, &c. Therefore
Papall being once diſclaymed, and diſauthoriſed by Parliament,
and not againe committed by Parliament, to view, ſearch and examination,
were never by intendement of Parliament, to bee continewed,
kept and obeyed within this Realme. And this againe moſt pregnantly
is confirmed vnto vs by the laſt proviſoe of this act, the wordes
whereof are theſe:
               Provided alſo that ſuch canons, conſtitutions, ordinances, and Synodalls
Provinciall being already made, which be not contrariant or
repugnant to the lawes, ſtatutes and cuſtomes of the Realme, nor to
the domage or hurt of the Kings prerogative Royall, ſhall now ſtill be
vſed and executed as they were before the making of this act, till ſuch
time as they be viewed, ſearched or otherwiſe ordered and determined
by the ſaid 32. perſons, or the more part of them, according to the tenor
and effect of this act:
               Now by what other words, then by theſe of this proviſoe, could the
Parliament more fully and clearly have expreſſed their mind, that the
ſame, by the tenor and effect of this proviſoe intended for ever wholy
to ſeclude all Papall and foraine canons, from being vſed and executed
within this Realme? For at the petition and ſubmiſſion of the
clergie, the Parliament having firſt enacted, that neither they, nor any
of them from thencefoorth, ſhould preſume to attempt, alleadge,
clayme, or put in vre any conſtitutions o
                     •
                   ordinances Provincionall,
or Synodalles, or any other Canons: And againe, at the petition and

ſubmiſſion of the Clergie, the ſame Parliament having committed to
the view, ſearch; examination and iudgement of the King; and 32.
perſons, ſuch Canons, conſtitutions, and ordinances, or the ſaid Canons,
conſtitutions, and ordinances provinciall and Synodall, which
as thertofore had bene made by the Clergie of this Realme: And laſtlie
by this proviſo, the ſame Parliament having enacted, that ſuch Canons
provinciall, conſtitutions provinciall, ordinances provinciall, &
Synodalls Provinciall (for the word Provinciall by the whole tenor
and effect of this Act, can not in this place but have reference to everie
of theſe wordes) ſhall ſtill be vſed and executed, &c. till ſuch tyme
as they be viewed, ſearched, or otherwiſe ordered and determined by
the ſaid two & thirtie perſons, &c. Seeing theſe things (I ſay) be thus,
Firſt ſubmitted, then afterwards committed, and laſtly provided, and
not one word, ſillable, or lotter ayming at the continuance, vſe, keeping,
or obedience of the popiſh canon law, it can not bee averred by
any, vnleſſe he be too too conceited, & opiniative, that the Canon law
or any part thereof, made by the Pope without the Realme, may lawfully
at this day be attempted, alleadged, claymed, or put in vre within
the Realme, by any Iudge Eccleſiaſticall what ſoever: yea and thus
much alſo is confirmed by a ſtatute 37. H. 8. c. 17.
               Howſoever therefore the Kings of England, deryving their Eccleſiaſticall
Lawes from others,Sir Edward Cooke, de iure reg. eccle, fol. 9. being proved, approved and allowed hereby
and with a generall conſent, are rightly and aptly called the Kings
Eccleſiaſticall lawes of Englande in like maner as thoſe lawes which
the Normans borrowed from England, were called the lawes of Normandie,
and as thoſe lawes which the Romans fetching from Athens,
being allowed and approved by that ſtate, were called Ius ciuile Romanorum,
howſoever I ſay this be true, nevertheles herevpon it will
not follow that thoſe Eccleſiaſticall lawes thus borrowed and derived
from others, may then any more rightly and aptly be called the Kings
Eccleſiaſticall lawes of Englande, when once by and with a generall
conſent in Parliament, they have bene diſproved and diſallowed; Yea
and when alſo they have bene vtterly adnulled, and commanded never
to be put in execution within the Realme of England: From whence
it ſeemeth to follow, that whatſoever ſubiect ſhall take vpon him, full
and plenarie power to deliver iuſtice in any cauſe to any the Kinges
ſubiects, or to puniſh any crime and offence within the Kings Dominions
by vertue of thoſe lawes, once by ſo abſolute & high an authoritie

diſanulled, that the ſame perſon denyeth the Parliament, to have
full power to allow and diſalow lawes in all cauſes, to all the Kinges
ſubiects, and conſequently, that the high Court of Parliament, is not a
compleat Court for the whole and intyre body of the Realme.
               Wherefore, albeit we graunt (as the trueth of the Kings law is) vnto
the Archbiſhops, Biſhops, & other Ordinaries, that lawfully they may
proceede to inquire in their viſitations and Synodes, and els where, to
take accuſations and informations of all and every thing and things
above mencioned, done, committed, and perpetrated within the limites
of their iuriſdictions and authoritie, and to puniſh the ſame by
admonition, ſuſpenſion, ſequeſtration, or deptivation, though thus
much had never bene provided by the ſtatute: nevertheles we deſire to
be reſolved, whether any miniſter ought to bee puniſhed by theſe, or
any other cenſures and proceſſe, before the ordinarie, for any offence
mencioned in this act, if for the ſame offence the ſame Miniſter, by
vertue of this act, be not puniſhable before the Kings Iuſtices? And
therefore for example ſake, put this caſe, viz. That a Miniſter for the
not croſſing of a childe vpon the forehead (after baptiſme is fully adminiſtred)
be indighted before ſome of the kings Iuſtices, and afterward
vpon a traverſe before ſome other of the kings Iuſtices, the
ſame Miniſter be found to have miniſtred the ſame ſacrament of Baptiſme,
in ſuch order and forme, as in the booke is preſcribed. Notwithſtanding
the omiſſion of this ceremonie, after baptiſme, and that
vpon ſuch a traverſe, the indightment, before the ſaid ſecond Iuſtices,
be found to be vnſufficient in law, and the Miniſter by the ſame Iuſtices
be adiudged not to be in danger of the penaltie of impriſonment,
&c. becauſe his ſuch not croſſing is no offence againſt the law, we demand
(we ſay) in this caſe, whether the ſame Miniſter, by the Biſhops
of the Dioceſſe, may be ſuſpended, or deprived from his miniſterie, or
from his benefice for the ſame his not croſſing, yea or no.
            
         
         
            
            Conſiderations againſt the deprivation
of a Miniſter, for the not vſe of a
Surplice in divine ſervice.
            IN the whole body of the ſtatute, there is not one ſyllable or letter,
frō the which any ſemblance of reaſon can be deduced, that any
Miniſter of the church, for refuſing to vſe, or for the not vſing of
any ornament appointed by the ſtatute, or by the book to bee in vſe,
ſhould be puniſhed with the peyne of deprivatiō. For what ſoever puniſhment
a Miniſter, for the breach of the Statute, may ſuſtayne, by the
kings Iuſtices, the ſame is only to be impoſed for ſuch offences, as are
ſpecified before the laſt proviſoe of the ſtatute. Ornamentes therfore
of the church provided to be reteyned, and to be in vſe, being not cō
               teyned
in thoſe premiſes, or things mencioned before the ſecond proviſoe,
concerning the Archbiſhops and Biſhops authoritie, and for refuſing
whereof, a Miniſter, by the premiſes is puniſhable, it followeth
(there being no puniſhmēt for refuſing the vſe of ornaments in the laſt
proviſoe) that the not vſe of ornamentes, is not puniſhable before the
kings Iuſtices. And if there be no puniſhment appointed to be inflicted
before the kings Iuſtices for the refuſing to vſe any ornament, thē
much leſſe is there any puniſhment to be inflicted for the refuſall of
the vſe of a Surplice. For the Surplice is ſo farre from being commanded
to be worne, as an ornament, in every ſervice of the church, as the
ſame is not ſo much as once particularly mencioned, either in the pariſh
booke, or in the ſtatute.
            Nay by the generall wordes, both of the ſtatute and the booke, the
Surplice is wholy ſecluded from being appointed to be an ornament
of it ſelfe, in ſome part of the ſervice of the Church. For if with the
ſame in ſome part of the ſervice there be not a Cope provided to bee
worne, the Surplice may not be worne. For the better manifeſtation
whereof, it is neceſſary that we ſet downe the wordes of the Statute, of
the pariſh booke, and of the booke of the ſecond of K. Edw. the ſixth:
vnto which booke of king Edward, for the vſe of ornaments, the Miniſters
be referred, both by the pariſh booke & ſtatute of 1. Eliza. c. 2.
the wordes of which ſtatute are theſe:
            Provided alwayes and be it enacted, That ſuch ornamentes of the

Church, and of the Ministers ſhall be retayned and be in vſe as was in
the church of England, by authoritie of Parliament, in the ſecond yeare
of the raigne of King Edward the 6. vntill other order ſhalbe therein taken
by authoritie of the Queenes Mateſtie, with the adviſe of her Commiſſioners,
appointed and authoriſed vnder the great ſeale of England,
for cauſes Eccleſiasticall, or of the Metropolitane of this Realme.
Thus farre the ſtatute: the wordes of the pariſh booke follow:
            
            It is to be noted, that the Minister at the time of the Communion and
other times in his ministration ſhall vſe ſuch ornamentes in the Church,
as were in vſe by authoritie of Parliament, in the ſecond yeare of King
Edw. the ſixth, according to the act of Parliament, in that caſe enacted
and provided. The wordes of which booke of the ſecond of King Edward,
are theſe:
            
            Vpon the day and at the time appointed, for the ministration of the
holy Communion, the Priest that ſhall execute the holy ministerie, ſhall
put vpon him the vesture appointed for that miniſtration, that is to ſay,
A white Albe playne, with a veſtiment or cope:
            
            
               Afterward it is ſaid thus: Vpon Wenſdayes and Fridayes the Engliſh
Letany ſhalbe ſaid or ſong, &c. And though there he none to communicate
with the Priest, yet thoſe dayes (after the Let any ended) the Prieſt
ſhall put vpon him a playne Albe, or Surplice, with a Cope, and ſay all
things at the Altar, &c.
            From all which places it is plaine, Firſt, that no Miniſter, at any time
vpon Wenſdayes and Fridayes, after the Letany ended, was bound ſimplie
to weare a ſurplice at the Altare, for it was in his choyſe, to put vpon
him a playne Albe or Surplice, with a Cope.
            Secondly, that no Prieſt vpon the day and at the time appointed for
the Miniſtration of the holy communion, might put vpon him a Surplice,
but only a white Albe playne, with a veſtiment or Cope.
            Thirdly, that no Miniſter vpon Wenſdayes and Fridayes, when hee
read the Letany, did weare, or was bound to weare an Albe, or Surplice
and Cope. For it had bene in vayne and a thing ridiculouſe for
the booke to have willed the Miniſter, after the Letany ended, to put
vpon him thoſe ornamentes, if in the time of reading the Letany, hee
had had them vpon his backe.
            Fourthly, that no miniſter at or in any of the times & ſervices aforeſaid,
is bound to put vpō him a Surplice, vnleſſe therewithall he weare
a Cope. For the vſe of ornamentes ought to be according to the act of

Parliament. And therefore where no Cope, there by the act no Surplice:
where no Altar to goo vnto after the Letany ended, there no Surplice
to be put on after the Letany: where a Communion with a white Albe
plaine, & a veſtiment or Cope, there a cōmunion without a Surplice.
            There is yet one other ſpeciall obſervation before touched, though
for an other purpoſe, worthy to be reiterated in this place againſt the
vſe of the Surplice at the communion, reading the Letany, and ſaying
prayers at the Altar. And that is this: Namely for that as well the Statute
1. Eliza. as the pariſh booke hath revived and commaunded the
vſe of thoſe ornamentes, according to the Act of Parliament, 2. Edw.
6. which were repealed and forbidden by the booke of the 5. and 6. of
King Edward the ſixth.
            
            It is to be noted,The order where morning & evening prayer, &c. fol. 1. 
               ſaith the booke of 5. and 6. of King Edw. 6. That
the Minister, at the time of the communion, and all other times, in his
ministration ſhall vſe neither Albe, vestiment nor Cope, but being an
Archbiſhop or Biſhop, he ſhall have and weare a Rochet, and being a
Priest or Deacon, he ſhall have and weare a Surplice only.
            And here it is to be noted (ſayeth the pariſh booke) that the Miniſter
at the time of the communion, and at all other tymes, in his miniſtration,
ſhall vſe ſuch ornamentes in the church as were in vſe by Authoritie
of Parliament in the 2. yeare of the reigne of King Edw. the 6.
according to the Act of Parliament in that caſe made and provided,
which were as the booke of K. Edw. ſaith, an Albe with a veſtiment or
Cope, at the communion, and an Albe or Surplice with a Cope, vpon
Wenſdayes and Fridayes after the Letany ended.
            But by the Provinciall conſtitutions,Obiection. ratified and confirmed by Act
of Parliament, the pariſhioners are enioyned, at their coſtes and charges,
to provide a Surplice, and in vayne were this charge layde vpon
them, if ſo be the Miniſter were not bound by the law to weare it.
            It is true,Anſwere. and can not be denied, that all pariſhioners are enioyned,
and that every Maſſe-prieſt is bound by the Provincials, the one ſorte,
to provide, the other to weare a Surplice, for and at the celebration of
the Maſſe, and for and in the vſe of other popiſh ſervices. The reaſon
of the vſe of which Surplice, by the popiſh Gloſers and Provincials, is
yeelded to be this;Lind de celebra. Miſſae c. l
                     ••
                  theamina That the Prieſt muſt be clothed with white, to ſignifie
his innocencie and puritie, and alſo ob reverentiam & Salvatoris
nostri & totius caelestis curiae, quam ſacramento altaris conſiciendo &
confecto non est dubium intereſſe.
            
            
               
But how doeth it follow, either from the provincall, or reaſon of
the provinciall, that a Miniſter of the Goſpell is bound by the provinciall
to weare a Surplice at the miniſtration of the word and Sacraments
of the Goſpell, when the doctrine and ſervice of the Goſpell is
contrarie and repugnant to the ſervice and doctrine of the Maſſe?
            And when by the ſtatute the Provinciall is not to be vſed and executed,
but as it was vſed and executed before the making of the ſtatute,
which was Anno 25. of King Henry the eight, at what time the ſervice
of the Maſſe, called the Sacrament of the Altar, was only in requeſt.
A Miniſter therefore of the Goſpell, by the Provinciall is no
more bound to weare a ſurplice, then by the Provincials & other lawes
of the Realme, he is bound to ſay a Maſſe: For the Provinciall appointeth
a ſurplice to bee worne at the Maſſe and other idolatrous ſervices,
all which ſervices and which Maſſe (as being blaſphemous to the ſacrifice
of our Saviour Chriſt once made vpon the croſſe, & repugnant
to the holy worſhip of God) is abrogated by the lawes of the Realme.
            Now then it were to bee wiſhed that all ſtates were given to vnderſtand,
by what equitie, law or good conſcience grounded vpon the ſaid
ſtatute, bookes or Provincials, ſundry grave, learned and godly Paſtors
and other Miniſters, for ſundry yeares paſſed, have bene deprived, ſuſpended
or excommunicated from their benefices, dignities, promotions
and miniſteries, for not vſing the ſurplice?
            If the Archbiſhops, Biſhops and other ordinaries, have heretofore
proceeded lawfully in this caſe, by any other right then ſtatute lawe, it
were greatly to be wiſhed, & a thing tending every way to their honor,
credite and reputation, that the ſame their Iuſtice were made publikely
knowne, to the end all maner perſons and ſtates; might reſt them
ſelves fully ſatisfied and well perſwaded of the integritie of ſuch their
proceedings, as wherof they now ſtand in doubt.
            For our partes we acknowledge, that the Queenes Highnes had authoritie
by the ſtatute with the adviſe of her Commiſſioners, &c. or
Metropolitane, to take other order for ornamentes. But wee never yet
vnderſtood, that any other order was taken accordingly: and eſpeciallie
in any ſuch ſorte, as that the Archbiſhops, Biſhops & other Ordinaries
might warrant their ſentences of deprivation to be lawfull againſt
the Miniſters, which refuſe to vſe the Surplice. By the Advertiſements
wherevpon (as it ſeemeth) they did principally rely, and by authoritie
whereof they did chiefly proceed, it is apparant that neither the letter,

nor intendement of the ſtatute (for the alteration of ornamentes) was
obſerved: And that therefore the commaundement of wearing a Surplice
in ſteed of a white Albe playne, by the advertiſſementes, was not
duely made.
            For though by her Highnes letters it doth appeare, that ſhe was deſirous,
as the preface to the advertiſemēts importeth, to have adviſe from
the Metropolitane & cōmiſſioners, that ſhe might take order; nevertheles
that her Highnes, by her authority, with their adviſe, did take order
& alter the ornamēts: this (I ſay) doth no where appeare, no not by the
advertiſements them ſelves. Howſoever then the Metropolitane vpon
the Queenes mandative letters, that ſome orders might be taken, had
conference and communication, and at the laſt, by aſſent, and conſent
of the eccleſiaſticall commiſſioners, did think ſuch orders as were ſpecified
in the advertiſements, meete and convenient to be vſed and followed:
nevertheleſſe, all this proveth not that theſe orders were taken
by her Maieſties Authoritie. For the Metropolitane and Commiſſioners,
might thinke, agree and ſubſcribe, that the advertiſementes were
meete and convenient, and yet might theſe advertiſements be never of
any valew, as wherevnto her Highnes authoritie was never yeelded.
            But be it graunted that the Surplice by the Advertiſements,The Biſhop by his ordinary iuriſdictiō hath no authority to deprive a miniſter for not wearing a Surplice. or other
canons, hath bene duely authorized, yet herevpon it can not bee concluded,
that an ordinary by his ordinarie Iuriſdiction, hath power to
deprive a Miniſter from his benefice for not vſing a Surplice. vbi non
ſertur in contra facientes aliqua poena, conſtitutio eſt imperfecta, & modicum
prodeſſe poterit, quoad contra facientes, there being thē no peine
mencioned in the advertiſementes to bee impoſed vpon a Miniſter for
the not vſe of a Surplice, how ſhould a Miniſter for the not vſe of a
Surplice, ſuffer the loſſe of his benefice, which is one of the greateſt
peynes?
            
               Herevnto happily it wilbe anſwered,
               ff. Si quis ius diceat non obte l 1. & l 2. ſi quis in iu
                     •
                   vocat. 
               that vbi certa poena ſtatuta eſt,
non debet Iudex ab ea recedere, vbi vero non est ſtatuta, tunc est imponenda
ad arbitrium Iudicantis. And further, that, respectu poenae infligendae
proper contemptum Iudicis; non reperitur proviſio regulariter, à
lege facta, & ideo Judex potest arbitrio ſuo poenam imponere.
            Touching which anſweres it may brieflie be replyed, that the peyne
ſpoken of in the civil law, is generally vnderſtoode of a pecuniarie
peyne, to be aſſeſſed and applied to the ſilke; or more ſpecially, it may
be vnderſtood, that among many corporall peynes, the Iudge arbitrarily

may chooſe which ſhall ſeeme to him moſt modicinable. Now,
theſe kinde of peynes, it is manifeſt, that neither of them by the ordinarie
Iuriſdiction eccleſiaſticall, in the church of England, can be impoſed
for contempt.
            And as for that which to the ſame effect may bee alleadged,Foraine canō law aboliſhed, 25. out of
the forein canoniſtes or forein canon law, thus ſtandeth the caſe: The
whole plott & frame of the building of the canon law (as before hath
bene proved) is cleane ruinated and waſted.H 8. c. 19. From whence it followeth,
that all the poſts, ſommers, walles, plates, rafters, and roofe of that
pallace,A Biſhop by the forrain canon lawe, hath no iuriſdiction. with all the yron, leaden and wooden implementes, and vtenſilles
thereof, be all likewiſe rotten and naught, elſe but droſſe & canker.
And ſo from the Nullitie thereof, it is to be inferred, that an ordinary
can not defend or practiſe his ordinarie Iuriſdiction by that
law, againſt any of the Kings ſubiectes. For all ſtrange and forein law,
is both a ſtrange power, and a forein traytor to the Kings crowne, and
for that cauſe, can not be pleaded in any of the kinges eccleſiaſticall
courtes, without being in danger of looſing her head.
            Howſoever then this rule,An ordinarie by the Kings eccleſiaſtical law cannot impoſe an arbitrarie peyne for not wearing a Surplice. in the romiſh conſiſtories, by the Romiſh
law, be true that an Ordinarie for inobedience or contempt, may impoſe
an arbitrary peyne, where a ſtatute or conſtitution hath appointed
no peyne: yet becauſe this rule is an irregular enimy to the regiment
of the kings Crowne, it ſeemeth that the kings ſubiect is wronged
whenſoever an eccleſiaſticall ordinary, for contempt, ſhal impoſe
arbitrarily, any peyne, for the which peyne he hath not expreſſe warrant
from the kings eccleſiaſticall law.
            Beſides, if the Romiſh canon law, were the Kings eccleſiaſticall law,
yet doth not the former exception prove, that a Parſon or Vicare, may
be deprived from his benefice, by the ordinaries iuriſdiction, for the
not vſe of a ſurplice; only the ſaid exceptiō affordeth thus much: viz.
that if an ordinarie iudicially and canonically (as they call it) according
to the ſanctions, not of the Engliſh, but of the Romiſh church,
have admoniſhed a Miniſter to weare a ſurplice, the exception (I ſay)
affordeth in this caſe thus much, that his ordinary for contempt may
impoſe an arbitrary peyne, if ſo be nether by common right, nor by
conſtitutiue law, there be an ordinarie peyne impoſed. But now ſo it is,
that this caſe falleth not out to be within the compaſſe of the peyne of
deprivation, for not wearing a ſurplice. For it is contempt only, and
not the not wearing of a ſurplice, that arbitrarily may bee puniſhed in
this caſe:
            
               
Why then though an ordinary be not able by the Kings Eccleſiaſticall
lawes,Obiection. to drawe in a Miniſters deprivation, principally and by the
head, for not wearing a ſurplice, yet it ſeemeth that he may drawe in
the ſame conſequently, & as it were by the tayle; namely, by chardging
him with wilfull periury or obſtinat contempt; for the which
cauſes he may iuſtly be deprived.
            Nay,Anſwere. ſoft good Sir, your concluſion is without premiſſes. For who
ever graunted that the Romiſh canon lawe was the Kings eccleſiaſticall
law? howſoever then, from part of mine anſwere made to the exception,
of contempt, you might gather that by the Romiſh canon
lawe, the deprivation of a Parſon or Vicare, for contempt, may bee
drawne in by the tayle, though not by the head; nevertheles we ſtil denie
that any Parſons or Vicares deprivation, directly or indirectly by
the head, or by the tayle, either for contempt or periury, pretended to
be committed for inobedience to canonicall admonition, can iuſtly
be inflicted by the kings Eccleſiaſticall lawes.
            Firſt wee affirme (as earſt hath bene ſaid) that aſwell the branch as
the budd, the tayle as the head of the Romiſh canon law is cleane cutt
of from the body of the kings eccleſiaſticall law.
            Secondly, that the oath of canonicall obedience, exacted by the ordinary
from the Parſon or Vicare, hath ever bene exacted hetherto,
onely by vertue of the foraine canon lawe, and not ſo farre (as we can
learne) by any the kings eccleſiaſticall lawes.
            And therefore periury againſt a Parſon or Vicare, for refuſing to
weare a ſurplice at his ordinaries command (by the kings eccleſiaſticall
lawes) can not be obiected; For where there is no lawfull oath
taken, there no lawfull puniſhment for the breach of the ſame oath
can be inflicted, by meanes whereof, one halfe of the tayle before ſpoken
of, is diſiointed.
            And as for the other halfe, viz. that for contempt of the ordinaries
iuriſdiction, a Parſon or Vicar (having promiſed reverently to obey his
Ordinary, and other chief Miniſters vnto whom the governement and
charge is committed over him; Following with a glad minde and will
their godly admonition, and ſubmitting them ſelves to their godlie
iudgementes) that a Parſon or Vicar, I ſay, may lawfully for contempt
be deprived from his benefice, if he refuſe to put vpon him a Surplice
at his Ordinaries admonition, and vpon his Ordinaries iudgment, this
might have ſome colour, if the Ordinaries admonition and iudgment

by the holy ſcriptures, could be proved to be a godly admonition, and
a godly iudgement: or if the former rule were a rule aſwell drawne
from the Kings eccleſiaſticall law, as from the forain canon law; or if
there were no certeyne peyne by the Kings eccleſiaſticall law appointed
for contempt: or that among divers certeyne peynes, deprivation
were one. But ſeeing the ſame rule is none of the Kings eccleſiaſticall
rules, and that admonition, ſuſpenſion and excommunication, & not
deprivation by the Kings eccleſiaſticall lawes, be certeyne and ordinarie
peynes, to be inflicted for contempt, it followeth by the Kings eccleſiaſticall
laws, that an Ordinarie may not arbitrarily, at his pleaſure,
for ſuch contempt, inflict the peyne of deprivation.
            Nay, were it true that the Romiſh and forein canon law, touching
this point of puniſhment by deprivation for contempt, were in force
within the Realme of England, yet we affirme, even by the ſame law,
that a Parſon or Vicare, for the not wearing of a Surplice, in divine
worſhip, at his Ordinaries commaundement, is no more by his Ordinarie,
to be deprived from his benefice, having a reaſonable cauſe to
refuſe the wearing of a Surplice, then is a Biſhop to be deprived by an
Archbiſhop from his Biſhopricke, for not putting in execution ſome
of his provinciall Decrees; when as the ſame Biſhop hath any reaſonable
impediment, not to execute the ſame decree. For this Rule, contemptus
fit, ex ce ipſo, quòd dum poſſunt hoc facere, illud tamen exequi
contradicunt, is of no more efficacie 
                  •
               gainſt a Miniſter ſubiect to a Biſhop,
then it is againſt a Biſhop ſubiect to an Archbiſhop. For as Epiſcopus
est ordinarius omnium Presbyterorum ſuae Dioceſeos, ſo is Archiepiſcopus,
ordinarius omnium Epiſcoporum ſuae provinciae. And therfore
as it may be ſaid, quod praecipitur Rectori, ſeu Vicario, ab Epiſcopo
imperatur ei, & quod
               Lind. de conſtitut. ec. quia incontinentiae. verb praecipimus. 
               imperatur neceſſe est fieri ab eo, & ſi non fiat, poenam
habet; ſo likewiſe, vbi preceptum Archiepiſcopi est factum Epiſcopo,
ibi neceſſe est vt obediat. vnde verbum
               verb. praecipimus. 
               praecipimus, habet vim ſententiae
definitiuae, aſwell by an Archbiſhop againſt a Biſhop, as by a Biſhop
againſt a Parſon or Vicare.
            For as haec dictio praecipimus, vſed by a Biſhop to a Parſon or Vicare,
importat aliquid de voluntate & authoritate Epiſcopi faciendum, vel
non faciendū, ſo by the ſame word vſed by an Archbiſhop to a Biſhob,
tenetur Epiſcopus cui praecipitur, quòd praeceptum adimpleat, voluntate
& authoritate Archiepiſcopi. In like ſort then, as a Biſhop to ſave him
ſelfe, both from contempt, & the penaltie of contempt, may alleadge,

and plead againſt an Archbiſhop, that he did not therefore obey and
execute his Metropolitanes commandement, by reaſon of abſence out
of his Dioceſſe, ſicknes or other reaſonable impediment, even ſo every
Parſon and Vicare to avoid contempt, may pleade for his innocencie,
againſt the admonition of a Biſhop, that Iustam habet excuſationem,
quare illud non debeat,
               ex. de conc. praeb. c. quia &c. vlt. de elect. Lind de caſti. quia verb neglexerit. Lind. de ſen ten. excom. verb. contemp. gloſ in verb contempſe
                  
                     •
                  it c. 1. de appell. li. 6. 
               vel non poſſit, vel nolit facere. Non enim potest
dica ſponte negligere, qui potestatē faciendi, quod incumbit non habet.
Et negligens dicitur, qui deſidioſus, vel inconſiderains est, ad ea quae
agere debet, cum non ſubſit rationabile impedimentum & contemnere
dicitur, qui ſine cauſa, non facit quod preceptum est. Et contemnere videtur.
Jdem eſſe quod aſpernari, vel non curare, & hoc est verum quando
non ſubest cauſa. Wherevpon Linwood concluding, that propter
inobedientiam poſſunt ſubditi corum beneſicjs priuari, quia graviter
pecat; qui obedientiam infringot hoc verum eſt, ſaith he, ſi ſponte, & ſine
cauſa hoc ſiat. Let vs then for examples ſake only, ſuppoſe that the Biſhop
of Chichester, commanded by the Archbiſhops grace of Canterbury,
to proceed to the deprivation of M. N. Vicare of P. in the Dioceſſe
of Chicheſter, for his not cōformity in wearing a ſurplice, ſhould
notwithſtanding his commandement, ſpare the ſaid Vicare his deprivation,
and being convented before his Metropolitane to anſwere this
contempt, ſhould for his excuſe alleadge that he had received letters of
ſpeciall grace, in behalf of the ſaid Vicare from the Kings Maieſtie, by
which he was required to reſpite the ſaid Vicare, and to aſſigne him a
longer day. Suppoſe this (I ſay) for examples ſake to be true, I demand
in this caſe, whether the Kings letters directed to the Biſhop, were not
a reaſonable impediment and iuſt cauſe, to ſave the Biſhop from the
penalty of contempt, (which by the canon lawe, is the loſſe of his Biſhoprick)
for the not execution of the Archbiſhops provinciall Mandate.
If all the Advocates of the Archbiſhops conſiſtories, muſt needs
grant that his Highnes letters were a iuſt excuſe to exempt the Biſhop
from the penalty of contempt, how much more iuſtly and reaſonably
may thoſe Advocats conclude, that the ſame Vicare was to be excuſed
from contempt, againſt the Biſhops admonition, when for his defence
he alleadged, and was ready by his oath to have avowed the teſtimony
of his owne conſcience, rightly (as he was perſwaded) grounded vpon
the holy commandement of the moſt high God, that he durſt not for
feare of wounding his owne conſcience, and diſpleaſing God, to weare
the ſurplice in any part of Divine worſhip? For if the requeſt of an

earthly king ſuperior to an Archb. be a reaſonable excuſe, to ſave a BB.
from contempt againſt an Archb. How much more ought the authoritie
and precept of an heavenly king, be a iuſt and reaſonable impediment,
to ſave a miniſter, from contempt againſt a Biſhops admonitiō?
            Vnleſſe then a Biſhop will avow and be able out of holy writ, to iuſtifie
that a Miniſters conſcience (eſpecially a Miniſters conſcience,
who walketh (as Zakarias did) in all the commandements and ordinances
of the Lord without reproofe,Luke 1. can not be any iuſt or reaſonable
excuſe or impediment, why he ought not, or may not, or will not
in Divine worſhip weare a ſurplice, being thervnto admoniſhed by his
ordinary, vnles (I ſay) the Biſhop out of holy writ be able fully to prove
that ſuch a Miniſters conſcience is no iuſt or reaſonable cauſe to ſtay
him from wearing a ſurplice in Divine worſhip, in this caſe I ſay, that
even by the Romiſh canon law it ſelf, there can no contempt be charged
vpon ſuch a Miniſter, for not obeying his ordinaries, firſt, ſecond
& third admonitions; the reaſons whereof, even out of the ſame canon
law have bene alleadged before in the firſt parte of theſe cōſiderations.
            But to leave the foraine canon law, and all the rules thereof, as being
no branches of the Eccleſiaſticall lawes of England, let it be granted
that before the ſtatute of 25. H. 8. c. 19. ſome canon or conſtitution
Synodall or Provinciall, had bene made, or ſince have bene made, by
the Clergie of the Realme, in their cōvocation aſſembled by the Kings
writ, that a Parſon or Vicare, for periurie or contempt eccleſiaſticall,
ſhould bee deprived of his benefice; nevertheleſſe it ſeemeth that the
ſame is a voide canon, and a void conſtitution: Becauſe it is contrary
or repugnant to the lawes and cuſtomes of the Realme: By which
lawes and cuſtomes no free man of the Realme, can be diſpoſſeſſed, of
his franck tenement, for contempt or periury in any of the kings temporall
Courts. All Parſons and Vicars then canonically inſtituted &
inducted, being not ſubiects at this day to any forain power, but being
freemen of the Realme, in as large and ample maner as any Layickes,
the Kings other ſubiects be, it ſeemeth that a Parſon & Vicare (by the
lawes and cuſtomes of the Realme) being a Freehoulder, ſhould for
none other cauſe looſe his Freehould, then for the which like cauſe, a
Layicke may looſe his.
            Yea and becauſe no Layicke by the laws & cuſtomes of the Realme,
may bee put from his Freehould for contempt, no though the ſame
cōtempt be committed againſt the kings Proclamation, or any decree

made in his high Courte of Chancerie: by ſo much the more vnreaſonable
it ſeemeth to be, that a Parſon or Vicare for contempt againſt
his ordinaries admonition, ſhould bee deprived from his benefice, by
how much a contempt againſt the Kings commaundement, is more
heinous then is a contempt againſt the ordinaries admonition.
            You miſtake the caſes,Anſwer. & as it ſeemeth, you vnderſtand not the law.
The Freehold of a layick, and the Freehold of an eccleſiaſticall perſon
be not of one nature. The former belongeth vnto him by a title inveſted
in his perſon, but the latter apperteyneth vnto a Church-man, in
the right of his Church: If then the Churchman be diſplaced from his
Church, it followeth by a neceſſary cōſequence, that he muſt likewiſe
be diſcharged from his freehold. For he, being in the eye of the law
dead vnto his Church, can no more enioy the freehold which he held
in the right of his Church, then can a dead Layick any longer holde a
Franktenement, in right of his perſon. And for your better ſatisfaction
herein, I would have you to conſider, that the like courſe of Iuſtice
is kept and miniſtred againſt certeine officers in the common weale:
which officers, ſo ſoone as for any iuſt cauſe they ſhall be put frō their
offices, doe withall and forthwith looſe ſuch their freeholdes, as iointly
with their offices, and in regard of their offices they held.
            The Maiſter of the Rolles and Warden of the Fleete, having their
offices graunted for terme of life, though other of them by the ſame
graunt be ſeiſed of a freehold, the one of the houſe called the Rolles,
the other of the houſe called the Fleete: nevertheles if the firſt bee put
from his Maſterſhip, and the ſecond from his Wardenſhip, neither can
the one, nor the other, by the law and iuſtice of the Realme, reteyne either
of thoſe houſes, as his Freehold; For as the houſes were iointly
with their offices, & in reſpect of their offices granted. So their offices
being once taken from thē, they muſt withal by neceſſary conſequence
forgo thoſe their houſes, wch for the time they held as their freeholds.
            Well: if this be all that may gayneſay our poſition, then be not our
caſes miſtaken, neither yet have we ſo ignorantly vrged & applied the
law and free cuſtomes of the Realme, as you would beare vs in hande.
For though we grant, whatſoever you have excepted, to be true, yet can
not the ſame be a barre againſt our pleading.Reply. For wee have hetherto
pleaded no more in effect, but thus, viz. that a Parſon or Vicar during
his miniſteriall function, being in the eye of the law, no dead but a living
perſon, and a free man of the Realme, ought no more, for a contempt
vnto his Ordinaries admonition, by any law of he Realme bee

diſpoſſeſſed from the freehold, which in right of his function he enioyeth,
then can a Layicke for contempt vnto the Kings commandement,
be diſſeiſed of his.
            And what if the Freeholdes of a Layick, & of an eccleſiaſtical perſon,
be (as you ſay they be) diverſly poſſeſſed, the one by right of church,
the other by right of perſon, what doeth this (I ſay) impugne our ſaying,
that no Freeholder for cōtempt of the Kings cōmandment may be
puniſhed with loſſe of his freehold, whē the great Charter of England
telleth vs, that a freemā ſhall not be amerced for a ſmall fault, but after
the quantity of the fault. And for a great fault, after the maner therof,
ſaving to him his contenement or freehold. If then vnto every freemā
puniſhable by the law, though his fault be great, his Contenement or
Freehold ought to be reſerved; it ſeemeth much more reaſonable to
follow, that no Churchman, being a freeman of the Realme, may for
contempt be puniſhed, with loſſe of his Contenement or Freehold.
            And that you may conſider (againſt our next conference) more deeply
of this matter, let me put this caſe vnto you viz. That a Churchman
and a temporall perſon, both freemen of the Realme; for one and the
ſelfe ſame contempt againſt the king, were puniſhable by the great
Lordes in the ſtarre chamber, or in any other Court, by other of the
Kings Iuſtices; would our lawes & freecuſtomes of the Realme (think
you) iuſtifie, that the ſpirituall perſon, enioyning ſtill his ſpiritual function,
might in this caſe be mulcted with the loſſe of his benefice, and
yet the tēporal perſon not to be puniſhable by the loſſe of his freehold?
            The examples produced by you, relieve no whit at all your caſe, nay
rather they ſtand on our ſide, and make good our part. For how long
ſoever the Maiſter of the Rolles and Warden of the Fleete, doe enioy
their offices, for ſo long time, by your owne collection, they ought to
enioy their Freeholdes, annexed to their offices; yea and you aſſume in
effect, that they may not lawfully for contempt, or any other cauſe, be
diſſeiſed of their freeholds, ſo long as they be poſſeſſed of their offices.
            Now then, if from the identity of reaſon you would conclude, that a
Parſon or Vicare for contempt lawfully depoſed from his miniſteriall
function, ſhould in like maner lawfully looſe his freehold, annexed to
his office, as the Maiſter of the Rolles, and Warden of the Fleete, put
from their offices, ſhould looſe theirs, we would not much have gainſaid
your aſſertion. For we hold it vnreaſonable that a Parſon or Vicar
depoſed from his miniſteriall function, ſhould enioy that freehold or

maintenance which is provided for him that muſt ſucceed in his miniſterial
charge. But then your aſſertion would make nothing againſt
vs. For ſo you muſt prove that your officers for contempt only, may
lawfully be put from their freeholds annexed to their offices, and yet
notwithſtanding remaine the ſame officers ſtill.
            And then indeed; frō ſome parity or ſemblance of reaſon, you might
have inferred, that a Parſon or Vicare for cōtempt deprived of his free
hold, annexed to his function, might notwithſtanding ſuch cōtempt,
enioy his miniſteriall function ſtill. But to diſpute after this ſort, were
idlely to diſpute, & not to diſpute ad idem. For how doth this follow?
The Kings officer, if for contempt he be displaced from his office can
not withall but be displaced from his freehold, which ioyntly with
his office, and in regard of his office, he poſſeſſed.
            
            
               Therfore a Parſon or Vicare for contempt, may lawfully be deprived
from his benefice or freehold annexed to his ministeriall function,
and yet notwithſtanding enioy his ministeriall function ſtill. And
this is the maine point & generall caſe (for the moſt part) of all the Miniſters
which at this day for contempt, ſtand deprived. For among all
the ſentences pronounced for contempt, there is ſcarce one to be foūd
which depoſeth a Parſon or Vicare from his miniſterial office, but onlie
which depriveth him from his Church, Parſonadge, or Vicaradge.
Whereby the vnreaſonablenes of certeine ordinaries, in their proceſſe
of deprivatiōs, become ſo much the more vnreaſonable, by how much
more vnreaſonable it ſeemeth to be, that any publicke officer ſhould
lawfully be continued in his publicke office, and yet not be ſuffered to
enioy any publick meanes, to mainteine the ſame his office.
            And thus much have we replied vnto your anſwere, made vnto our
pleadings, that by the lawes and freecuſtomes of the Realme, a Parſon
or Vicar, being a freeman of the Realme, may not for cōtempt vnto his
ordinaries admonitiō, be deprived from his freehold, if ſo be you grant
that he may enioy his miniſterial function ſtill. As touching the lawes
of the church, it hath ben already ſufficiently demonſtrated, that there
is then no contempt at all committed againſt an admonition, whē the
partie admoniſhed can alleadge any iuſt or reaſonable cauſe of his not
yeelding to his admoniſher. And if no contempt in ſuch caſe be made,
then no deprivatiō from a benefice, or depoſition from the miniſterie,
in ſuch caſe ought to follow.
         
         
            
            Conſiderations againſt ſubſcription, to
the booke of the forme and maner of making
and conſecrating Biſhops, Prieſts
and Deacons.
            WHat the reaſon or cauſe ſhould be, that ſubſcription vnto
this booke of conſecration & ordination of Biſhops, Prieſts
and Deacons, hath bene of l
                  •
               te yeares, ſo hotly and egerly
purſued by the Lords of the Clergie, is a miſterie, perhaps,
not of many of the laytie well vnderſtood. And how ſoever vnder colour
of the maintenance of obedience to the ſtatute of the Realme,
whereby this booke is confirmed, the ſame ſubſcription may ſeeme to
be preſſed: nevertheles if the maine drift and reaſon of this preſſure,
were well boulted out, it is to be feared, that not only the vnlawful ſupremacie
of an Archbiſhop is ſought to be advāced above the lawfull
ſupremacie of our Soverayne Lord King Iames; but alſo that the Synodals,
Canons and Conſtitutions made by the Clergie, in their convocation,
are intended, if not, to be preferred above, yet at leaſtwiſe to
be made equall to the common law and ſtatutes of the Realme.
            By the ancient lawes and cuſtomes of the Realme, one parcell of the
Kings iuriſdiction and imperiall Crowne, hath evermore conſiſted in
graunting eccleſiaſticall iuriſdiction, vnto Archbiſhops, Biſhops and
other Prelats. For the maintenance of wich imperiall iuriſdiction and
power, againſt the vſurped ſupremacie of the Biſhop of Rome, divers
ſtatutes, not introductorie of new law,Cooke de lure. regis eccle. fol. 8 but declaratorie of the old, in
the time of King Henry the eight, King Edward the ſixth, and of our
late moſt Noble Queene deceaſed, have bene made and enacted.
            Yea and in a book entituled The Inſtitution of a Chriſtian man, compoſed
by Thomas Archbiſhop of Canterburie, Edward Archbiſhop of
Yorke & all the Biſhops,fol. 53. divers Archdeacons & Prelates of the Realme,
that then were,fol. 55. dedicated alſo by them to King Henry the eight, it is
confeſſed and acknowledged that the nomination & preſentation of
the Biſhopricks, apperteyned vnto the kings of this Realme. And that
it was and 
                  •
               halbe lawfull to Kinges and Princes, and their Succeſſors,
with conſent of their Parliaments, to revoke and call againe into their

owne handes, or otherwiſe to reſtreine all the power and iuriſdiction
which was given and aſſigned vnto Prieſts & Biſhops, by the lycence,
conſent, ſufferance and authoritie of the ſame Kings and Princes, and
not by authoritie of God and his Goſpell, whenſoever they ſhall have
grounds and cauſes ſo to doe, as ſhalbe neceſſarie, wholeſome and expedient
for the Realmes, the repreſſing of vice, & the increaſe of Chriſtian
faith and religion,
            Ever ſince which time (vntill of late yeares, the late Archbiſhops of
Canterbury, with the counſel of his colledge of Biſhops, altered that his
opinion, which ſome times in his anſwere made to the admonition to
the Parliament, he held) it was generally and publickely maintained,
that the ſtate, power and iuriſdiction of Provinciall and Dioceſan Biſhops
in England, ſtood not by any Divine right, but meerly and altogether
by humaine policie and ordinance alone. And that therefore,
according to the firſt and beſt opinion and iudgment of the ſaid Archbiſhops,
Biſhops, &c. the ſame their iuriſdiction might be taken away
and altered at the will and pleaſure of the kings of England, when ſoever
they ſhould have grounds and cauſes ſo to doe.
            Mary ſince, when as the Diſcipline and governement provinciall, &
dioceſan miniſtred and exerciſed by the late Archbiſhop deceaſed, and
his Suffraganes, was diverſly handled, diſputed and controverted, not
to be agreeable, but repugnant to the holy Scriptures, & neceſſarie alſo
for the repreſſing of vice, the increaſe of faith and Chriſtian religion,
to be changed; they herevpon iuſtly fearing, that the moſt vertuous &
Chriſtian Queene deceaſed, vpon ſundry cōplaints made in open Parliament,
againſt their many vniuſt greevances, would have reformed
the ſame their maner of governement; they then preſently vpon new
adviſe and conſulation taken, boldly and conſtantly avouched the
ſame their governement, to have bene from the Apoſtles times, and agreeable
to the holy ſcriptures;Do. Sutclif. Doct. Bilſon and therefore alſo perpetuall, and ſtill
to be vſed, & in no caſe to be altered, by any king, or Potentate whatſoever.
            By meanes of which this their enclyning to the popiſh opinion, and
holding their Iuriſdictiō to bee de iure divino, & profeſſedly mainteyning
in the Homilie (wherevnto alſo ſubſcription is vrged) that the
King,2. part of the right vſe of ye Church and all the Nobilitie, ought to be ſubiect to excommunication,
there is now at length growne ſuch a mayne poſition, of having a perpetuall
Dioceſan and Provinciall governement in the church, that rather

then their Hierarchie ſhould ſtoope, they would cauſe the Kings
Supremacie, which he hath over their ſaid Iuriſdiction, to fall downe
to the ground; In ſo much as by their ſuppoſition, the King hath no
authoritie, no not by his ſupreame power, to alter their ſayd governement
at all. And to this end and purpoſe (as it ſeemeth) in their late
canons have they deviſed and decreed, this booke of ordination, to be
ſubſcribed vnto. Which ſubſcription can not but quite and cleane overthrow
the Kings ſupremacie and auncient iuriſdiction, in the moſt
dangerous degree. For if their Provinciall and Dioceſan orders and
degrees of Miniſterie, together with their iuriſdiction, be to bee vſed,
(as eſtabliſhed and derived vnto them by the holy ſcriptures) how then
can it be in the power and iuriſdiction of the King, to graunt, or not
to graunt the vſe of Provinciall and Dioceſan Biſhopiſme and iuriſdiction?
Or how may the provinciall Biſhops, with their Dioceſan
Suffraganes, be called the kings eccleſiaſticall officers, if their iuriſdictions
be not derived vnto them from the king? For if they be called
Gods Biſhops, or Biſhops of Gods making, how then may they anie
more be called the kings Biſhops, or Biſhops of the kings preſenting,
nominating and confirming?
            Nay, beſides, who then can alter them? who can reſtreyne them?
who can revoke or recall their power and iuriſdiction? who can reſiſt
them? or what king of England may pluck his neck from vnder their
yoke? Nay, how ſhould the kings Supremacie (as by the ancient
Lawes of the Realme it ought) remayne inviolable, when his Royall
perſon, whole Nobilitie and Realme, is ſubiect and lyable to the cenſure
of the canon Law, excommunication? Which law the Provinciall
and Dioceſan Biſhops to this day, in right and by vertue of their
Provinciall and Dioceſan iuriſdiction, and none otherwiſe, do ſtil vſe,
practiſe, and put in execution?
            Beſides,If Dioceſan Biſhops bee ſcripturely Biſhops, thē may they ſtand without y• King. Dioceſon Biſhops hither to vphelde only by the lawes of the Realme. if Biſhops Provinciall and Dioceſan (as they be deſcribed in
that book) be commanded in the Scriptures, and were in vſe ever ſince
the Apoſtles times, then ought they to be in the Church of England,
though the King and his law never allowed, nor approved of them.
But to hold this opinion, as it will vphold the Popes ſupremacie (becauſe
the generall reaſons which vphold a Provinciall Biſhop, will vphold
a Pope) ſo will it once againe, not only impeach the Kings ſupremacie,
but alſo be repugnant to the lawes and cuſtomes of the Realm.
By which ſupremacie, lawes and cuſtomes only, the provinciall & dioceſan

Biſhops have bene hitherto vpheld. For ſeing the lawes and cuſtomes
of the Realme, doe make the Kings nomination, preſentation,
and confirmation, the very eſſence and being of a Provinciall, & Dioceſan
Biſhop with vs, So that theſe offices ought to be held only, from
the authoritie, gift and graunt of the King: how ought not the kings
nomination, preſentation, authoritie and gift, yea and the law it ſelf, in
this caſe wholy ceaſe, if the order, degree, miniſterie and iuriſdiction of
a provinciall and dioceſan Biſhop be founded in holy Scripture? Vnleſſe
we ſhall affirme, that, that was in the Apoſtles times, which was
not, or that, that is to be found in holy Scripture, which is not? Namely
that there were in the Apoſtles times, and that there be in the holy
Scriptures, no Biſhops but provinciall and dioceaſan Biſhops to bee
found? And that by the law of God and the Goſpell, every King and
Potentate, hath ſupreme power to ſuffer none but Provinciall & Dioſan
Biſhops to be in the Churches.
            So that by ſubſcription to allow, that provinciall and Dioceſan Biſhops,
be Scripturely Biſhops, and that their iuriſdiction and power, is
a Scripturely iuriſdiction and power, is to deny that their iuriſdiction
and power, dependeth vpon the kings iuriſdiction and power, or that
by the kings gift and authoritie they be made Biſhops.
            But how doeth ſubſcription (you will ſay) to the booke of ordination
approve the orders and degrees of provinciall & dioceſan Biſhops,
to be by Divine right, rather then by humane ordinance? How? Why
thus: it is evident (ſaith the preface of that booke) to all men diligently
reading holy Scripture and ancient Authors, that from the Apoſtles
times, there have bene theſe orders of Miniſters in Chriſtes Church,
Biſhops, Prieſts and Deacons. Yea and by the whole order of prayer,
and of Scripture read, & vſed in the forme of conſecrating of an Archbiſhop
or Biſhop, it is apparant that the order of an Archbiſhop or
Biſhop, conſecrated by that booke, is reputed & taken to be of Divine
inſtitution. And therfore ſeing the names of thoſe orders of Miniſters,
muſt neceſſarily be taken and vnderſtood of ſuch orders of Miniſters,
as be ſett forth and deſcribed in the body of that booke, it muſt needes
be intended, that the Miniſters by their ſubſcription, ſhould approve
the orders of Miniſters, mencioned in that booke, to be of Divine inſtitution,
and conſequently, that provinciall and dioceſan Miniſters or
Biſhops, have not their eſſence and being from the nomination, gift &
authoritie of the King.
            
               
Beſides, if we ſhould vnderſtand by the word (Biſhop) him that hath
the Miniſtrie of the word and Sacraments, as the Paſtor & teacher; and
by the word (Prieſt) the Preſbiter, that is the Governing elder; and by
the word (Deacon) the provider for the poore, then for the Miniſters
to ſubſcribe to the booke of ordination, would no way iuſtifie thoſe
officers or degrees of Miniſters, which are deſcribed in that booke, but
would indeed vtterly ſubvert and overthrow them. Becauſe the orders
and degrees of a provincial & dioceſan Biſhop, of a Prieſt and Deacon
mentioned in that booke, be of a farr differing nature from thoſe orders
and degrees of Miniſters, which are mencioned in the Scriptures:
becauſe they only agree in name, and not in nature.
            Wherfore ſeeing there be other orders and degrees of Biſhops then
Provincial & Dioceſan Biſhops found in the holy Scriptures, & ſeeing
alſo Kings and Princes being Vicarij Dei, be commanded to authoriſe
all things for the trueth; and nothing againſt the trueth: it ſeemeth neceſſarie
that his Maieſtie ſhould not only reſtrayne the Provinciall and
Dioceſan Biſhops, from vrging ſubſcription to this booke of ordination,
(being ſo derogatory (in their ſence and conſtruction) to his ſupremacie
as nothing can be more,) but alſo to keepe the Biſhops them
ſelves within the tether and compaſſe of the word of God. For if the
word of God, doe approve amongſt the Miniſters of the Word and Sacraments,
a primacie of order only, & denyeth vnto them any primacie
of iuriſdiction and power in eccleſiaſticall governement, (as the
learned Proteſtants have proved againſt the Papiſts touching Peters
ſupremacie) then will it follow that ours alſo ought to bee reduced to
the ſame compaſſe, both for the Kings Maieſties ſafetie, and the Churches
good. Leaſt Princes giving them more then God alloweth them,
they ſhoud them ſelves looſe that right and authoritie, which they
ought to reteyne in their owne Royall perſons.
            
               Now that it may not be obiected that we begge the queſtion of
Scripturely Biſhops, not having any primacie of iuriſdiction & power
in eccleſiaſticall government, (to let paſſe all particuler reaſons of the
Proteſtants againſt the Papiſts in this point) it ſhall ſuffice in this place
to produce for witneſſes ſix & forty Iurors, againſt whō no chalendge
or exception can be taken; Namely the ſaid Thomas Crammer, Archbiſhop
of Canterburie: Edward Archbiſhop of Yorke: Iohn Biſhop of
London: Cuthhert Dunèlmem Steven Winton: Robert Cariolen: Iohn
Exon: Iohn Lincoln: Rowl and Coven & Lichfield: Thomas Elien: Nicholas

Sarum: Iohn Banger: Edward Herefordien. Hugh Wigornen.
Iohn Roffen. Richard Cicestren. William Norwicen. William Meneven.
Robert Aſſaven. Robert Landaven. Richard Wolman, Archdeacon of
Sudbur. William Knight Archdeacon of Richmond: Iohn Bell, Archdeacon
of Gloster: Edmond Boner, Archdeacon of Lecester: William
Skipp, Archdeacon of Dorſet: Nicholas Heeth, Archdeacon of Stafford
Cuthbert Marſhall, Archdeacon of Notingham: and Richard Curren,
Archdeacon of Oxford: Together with William Cliff, Galfrid
Downes; Robert Oking, Radulf Bradford, Richard Smith, Simon Mathew,
John Fryn, William Lukemaſter, William May, Nicholas Wotton,
Richard Cox, Iohn Edmonds, Thomas Robertſon, Iohn Baker, Thomas
Baret, Iohn Haſe and Iohn Tyſon, Sacrae Theologiae, iuris eccleſiastici,
& civilis Profeſſores.
            
               All which Archbiſhops, Biſhops, Archdeacons and Prelates, having
with one voyce and accord ſhewed vnto King Henry the eight, that divers
good Fathers, Biſhops of Rome, did greatly reprove and abhorre
(as a thing cleane cōtrarie to the Goſpell & the Decrees of the church)
that any Biſhop of Rome, or elſwhere, ſhould preſume, vſurpe, or take
vpon him the tytle and name of the vniverſall Biſhop, or of the head
of all Prieſtes, or of the higheſt Prieſt, or any ſuch like tytle; proceede
further,
               fol. 59. 60. 
               and in the end conclude, and give vp their verdict thus. For
confirmation whereof, it is out of all doubt, that there is no mencion
made, neither in ſcripture, neither in the writings of any authenticall
Doctour or Authour of the Church being within the tyme of the Apoſtles:
That Chriſt did ever make, or inſtitute any diſtinction or difference
to be in the preeminence of power, order, or iuriſdiction betweene the
Apoſties them ſelves, or betweene the Biſhops them ſelves; but that
they were all aequall in power, order, authoritie and iuriſdiction. And
that there is now, and ſith the tyme of the Apoſtles, any ſuch diver
                  ••
               tie or
difference among the Biſhops, it was deviſed by the ancient Fathers, &c.
For the ſaid Fathers conſidering the great and infinite multitude of
Chriſtian men, and taking examples of the ould Teſtament, thought it
expedient to make an order of degrees, to be among Biſhops and ſpirituall
governours of the Church; and ſo ordeyned ſome to be Pa
                  •
               riarkes,
ſome to be Primates, ſome to be Metropolitanes, ſome to be Archpiſhops,
ſome to be Biſhops, &c. Which differences the ſaid holy Fathers
thought neceſſarie to enact and eſtabliſh, by their Decrees and conſtitutions,
not for that any ſuch differences were preſcribed and eſtabliſhed

in the Goſpell, or mencioned in any Canonicall writings of the Apoſtles,
or teſtified by any eccleſiaſticall Writer within the Apoſtles tyme. And
thus farre their verdict.
            But let vs graunt, that orders of Biſhops, Prieſtes and Deacons bee
conteyned in the holy ſcriptures, yet if thoſe orders of Biſhops, Prieſts
and Deacons which are eſtabliſhed in the booke, be not the ſame orders
of Biſhops, Prieſtes & Deacons, which are authoriſed by the ſcriptures:
then (through the aequivocation of theſe wordes; Orders of Biſhops,
Prieſtes and Deacons) there being afalacie: how ſhould this
forme and maner of ſubſcription be lawfull? viz. that the booke cō
               teyneth
nothing contrarie to the word of God, & that it lawfully may
be vſed? For only ſuch orders of Biſhops, Prieſtes and Deacons, ought
to be acknowledged, ſubſcribed vnto, & vſed, as by the holy ſcriptures
are warranted. And therefore ſuch as are conteyned in the booke, if ſo
be they be divers frō thoſe which are approved in the holy ſcriptures,
how ſhould they without ſinne be ſubſcribed vnto, and vſed? Vnleſſe
we ſhall affirme, that Miniſters of the Goſpell of God, may rightfully
approove of ſuch orders of Miniſters, as the Lord and Law giver of the
Goſpell never allowed ne approoved.
            And thus much have we ſpoken touching not ſubſcription, touching
the not exact vſe of the order and forme of the booke of common
prayer, and touchinge the not preciſe practiſe and wearing of the
rites, ceremonies and ornaments of the church.
            Wherein if we have ſpoken otherwiſe then as for our ſpeaking wee
have warrant from the Kings lawes, our earneſt deſire is that it may be
ſhewed vnto vs wherein we haue erred. For if there be any thing
whereof we be ignorant, we ſhalbe willing to be taught the ſame, and
having learned it, to yeald to the practiſe thereof.
            In the meane time, ſeing not to weare a Surplice in the miniſtration
of Divine ſervice, not to make a croſſe in Baptiſme, & not to ſubſcribe,
&c. in it ſelfe, is not a ſinne againſt any commandement of God, nor a
thing ſcandalous vnto the people: And ſeeing alſo the Parſons who refuſe
to weare and vſe the ſame, be in every reſpect men of good note,
condition, fame, qualitie and behaviour, yea & ſuch as againſt whom,
no miſdemeanor for doctrine or life, which might aggravate their offence,
can iuſtly be obiected, we may lawfully (as we thinke) conclude
in their behalf, that de aequitate & miſericordia iuris, they ought to be
reſpected and tolerated, rather then for their refuſall meerely ſtanding

vpon their conſciences (whether erroneous or not erroneous, it ſkilleth
not) de rigore iuris, (if there be any ſuch rigour) to be ſuſpended,
excommunicated or deprived, yea and in ſo generall and doubtfull a
caſe of conſcience, vpon ſo ſlender a ground of periury or contempt,
vpon perſons every way ſo peaceable & well qualified, and wherein no
ſcandall hath enſued, we ſuppoſe it can not bee ſhewed among all the
decrees and ſentences recorded, among all the Popiſh canoniſts, that
ever any Popiſh ordinaries, in any age have vſed the like iudiciall rigour
againſt any their Popiſh Prieſts.
            It is to be noted, that the foraine canon Law, is none otherwiſe in
any part of this Treatiſe intended to be the Kings Eccleſiaſticall law,
then only vpon a falſe ſuppoſition of the Archbiſhops and Biſhops:
Becauſe the ſame law is yet vſed & practiſed in their Conſiſtories, notwithſtanding
it hath bene long ſince aboliſhed by Act of Parliament.
            God ſaue King IAMES.
            
         
      
      
         
            Faultes eſcaped in printing.
            
               In the Epiſtle.
               Fol. 2. pag. 1. lin. 12. ſay we, for (ſay we)
               Fol. 4 pag. 1. l. à fine. 9. efrom, for from.
               Fol 6. pag. 1. l. à fine 3. Winceſter for Wincheſter.
            
            
               In the Booke.
               Pag. 11. l. à fi. 11. appointed for appointeth.
               Pag 11. l à fi. 6. appointed for appoonteth.
               Pag. 12. the 8. line is ſuperfluous.
               Pag. 19 l. 7. expceſſed for expreſſed.
               Pag. 22 l à ſi 10 ad in marg. 1. Mar ſeſ. 2. 6. 3.
               Pag. 24. l. 14. fift for fifth.
               Pag. 24. l à fi. 11. decretall, for Decretalls.
               Pag. 35. l. 11 provincalls, for Provincials.
               Pag. 36. in fine, in marg. diceat for dicent.
               Pag. 37. in marg 25. is to be added to H. 8. &c.
               Pag. 39 l à fi. 10 preceptum for praeceptum. ibid in mar. cc. for. c.
               Pag. 40. in mar. caſti for couſti. & contemp. for contem.
               Pag. 42. l. vlt he for the.
               Pag. 43 l. 17. à ſi enioyning for enioying.
               Pag. 46. l. 8. Ardbiſhops, for Archbiſhop.
               Pag. 47. in f. in mar. Dioceſon for Dioceſan.
               Pag. 48. l. 12. Dioocaſan, for Dioceſan.
            
         
      
   