
      
         
            
            
            THE LIFE, CONFESSION, AND HEARTIE REPENTANCE OF Francis Cartwright, Gentleman; For his bloudie Sinne in killing of one Maſter STORR, Maſter of Arts, and Miniſter of Market Raſon in Lincolnſhire. Written with his owne hand.
            PSAL. 51. 14.
            Deliuer me from bloud-guiltineſſe, O God, thou that art the God of my health: and my tongue ſhall ſing of thy Righteouſneſſe.
            LONDON, Printed for Nathaniell Butter. 1621.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               Francis Cartwrights PVBLIQVE REPENTANCE FOR HIS BLOVDIE SINNE.
            
               THree ſpeciall Motiues, beſides the ſuggeſtion of the Spirit of God in my owne ſoule priuately, haue enforced mee to this publique declaring my ſelfe.
            Firſt, becauſe my Acts haue bin committed before the face of Heauen, and in the eye of the World, I cannot thinke, but I am bound in conſcience to giue ſatisfaction to the offended world; that it may bee as well a witneſſe of my ſerious and moſt humble repentance, as it hath bin a Spectator of thoſe crimes which haue iuſtly vpbrayded my condemnation before the Tribunals both of God and Man. Verily, me thinkes, I am like a Leper in the Congregation, whom euery one will ſhunne, nay,

who is bound to ſay to others; Come not neere mee, for I am vncleane. Euery eye that looketh on mee is a Dart to wound me with the remembrance of mine owne guiltineſſe, euery finger doth or may point at me, as a man forlorne of men. So vncleane, ſo deſpicable ſhall I remayne, till I publiſh and proclaime my vncleanneſſe. Surely, there will bee no reſt in my bones by reaſon of my ſinne, vntill I haue doubled the confeſſion of my ſinne. I owe a dutie of ſubmiſſion, not onely to God himſelfe, whoſe deepeſt curſe I haue deſerued, but alſo to his Church and people, whom I haue grieuouſly ſcandalized. Nay, I owe a reparation to my owne loſt credit. Hath ſome deed of mine beene in the fowleſt colours blazed to the world in print? So may, perhaps, my printed Contrition redeeme my reputation from thoſe obloquies it is almoſt buried in, as well as my neere dead ſoule hath internally receiued a new life from the mercifull breath of God, inſpiring into it all compunction and iuſt ſorrow that may preuent his eternall Iudgement.
            Secondly, that ſince I haue beene deeply branded with ſhame of the world outwardly, and with the terrors of God, and ſcourge of conſcience inwardly, my example may be a dreadfull thunderclap of warning and affright to all, preſuming and perſeuering Sinners, whom the hand of God will ſurely finde out, and deeply wound with the Darts of his vengeance.
            Laſtly, and chiefly, that by this Diſcourſe of mine, the world may ſee the power and goodneſſe of the Almighty, that hath not forſakē me when I fled from him and my ſelfe, but hath euen then powred on me

the freſheſt Balme of his mercies, when the wounds of my ſoule feſtered and ſtunke moſt, giuing mee leaue to ſurfet on ſinne, that I might lothe it; to dye my hands in bloud, that I might ſeeke the bloud of Chriſt to purifie mee; and to wallow in ſenſualitie and ſecuritie, that my true repentance at laſt might lodge me ſafe in the repoſe of a quiet conſcience. Let it not therefore ſeeme tedious to thee, charitable and compaſſionate Reader, to ſuruey my Anatomy thus by my ſelfe diſected, of which I will not leaue one ſmall veine or ſinew vndiſcouered; but from my firſt, to this day, truly and ingeniouſly without extenuating partialitie, leſt ſo I ſhould ſeeme to cheriſh, not abandon mine owne corruption; I will relate how miſerable I haue made my ſelfe in what I haue beene, how much recollected and reuiued I am, in what I now am; and how happy I hope to bee, in what I reſolue to perſeuer in, till the conſummation of my wretched life.
            Firſt, my youth and morning of my dayes was clouded with a ſtubborne and head-ſtrong diſobedience to my Parents, the firſt and worſt note of a deſperate and obſtinate ſinner; to whom I ſo much forgot my owne dutie, that all their indulgence to mee, I valued as their duties; their Councels were diſeaſes to my courſes, their Monitions were irkſome to my eares, becauſe enemies of my ryots, and their gentle chaſtizements the Contradictors of my laſciuiouſnes; ſo that euen then before I knew what it was to bee, I had made my ſelfe nothing, and which is worſe vnſenſible of any thing; their cares ſtill followed mee, and ſtill my ſtubborneſſe fled from them, to heape

the hotter coales vpon my head. Little did I regard that which moſt behooued me to learne and practiſe: The feare of the Lord is the beginning of Wiſedome,
               Prou. 1. 7, 8, 9. 
               but Fooles deſpiſe inſtruction. My ſonne heare the inſtruction of thy Father, and forſake not the Law of thy Mother: For they ſhall bee an ornament vnto thy head and chaines about thy necke.
            
            Vpon this foundation of my diſobedience, the Deuill began to build a Manſion for himſelfe to inhabite, and ſo grew my ſoule a Cage of vncleane Birds, wherein many foule ſinnes were bred, and grew to ſuch ſtrength, that I was maſtered by them: One Impietie begat another, yet ſtill I thought my ſelfe not ſufficiently fleſht in wickedneſſe, till I defaced the Image of God, firſt in my owne ſoule, by hatred and reuengefull malice; then in anothers body, by homicide. O frightfull remembrance! O the deep ſting, O the diſmall ſound of this crying ſinne! Wretched man that I am. Was it not hainous enough for mee to kill a man, but I muſt by my fury bee put on ſuch a one, whoſe Coat and qualitie added many degrees to the fouleneſſe of the Murther; a Miniſter of Gods Word, mine owne Paſtor and Watchman of my ſoule, Maſter William Storr, Maſter in Arts, who being a zealous deteſter of my lewd courſes, and both in priuate and publike vſing ſharpe reprehenſions to me and of mee, did thereby kindle in mee an hatred, not of mine owne lewdneſſe, but of his perſon? I might perhaps by way of extenuation ſay, that had he vſed greater words and milder reprehenſions to me, he might by Gods bleſſing haue plucked me out of the ſnare of Satan, and ſo had preuented this

ſhortning his owne dayes by my hand. I might ſay that my diſtemper was enraged by his vnſeaſonable corroſiues, which might perhaps haue beene allayed and cured by gentle Balmes. But I vtterly diſauow all abating any part of my crime: I ſtand forth here to accuſe, to arraigne, and to condemne my ſelfe, not to vſe defences or mitigations, much leſſe like to our firſt parents to put off my fault, and lay it vpon others: Nay, I dare not ſo much as catch at Fig-leaues to couer my owne ſhame. I proclayme my worſt deformities, that others ſeeing them and hating them, may now pitty my perſon▪ and comfort my ſoule.
            Being thus enraged againſt him, and reſoluing to execute ſome notable reuenge vpon him; I did not (as the Searcher of all hearts witneſſeth with me) intend more to him then ſome ſlight wounding, as the manner I tooke him in may in ſome ſort witneſſe: the place being publike in the ſight of many, my ſelfe vnreadie, and vnprouided for my owne ſafetie by flight, which I ſhould haue ordered my courſefor, had my intent beene murtherous.
            But here it pleaſed God in his iuſt iudgement, for my hardneſſe of heart and contempt of his Word and Commandements, to giue ouer my hand to wound deeper then my heart intended. Woe is mee, my heart bleedeth to thinke, how deepe my Sword pierced. The enemy of Mankinde was a Murtherer from the beginning, he gat ſuch dominion ouer me, that he made my Sword and hand his Seruants, and ſo made me like vnto himſelfe, a bloudy Man-ſlayer. So muſt I needes acknowledge my ſelfe, becauſe my heart, though not before ſo intending, yet as principall

is guiltie of that which my hand did in the heate of fury. True it is, and alas, woe is mee for it, I gaue him diuers wounds, whereof within eight dayes hee dyed, yeelding vp that ſoule which iuſtly craued for vengeance vpon me for diſſeuering it from the bodie. This done, I retyred and ſaued my ſelfe by flight withall conueniencie I could, & with a reſolution to recouer Scotland, after many dangerous eſcapes I attayned to Barwicke; where I was for the fact apprehended; and from thence (though it were a Garriſon obſerued with all ſtrictneſſe) I made a ſtrange eſcape, and thence ouer-land I went towards Plimmouth, in which paſſage, though I auoyded all the way-layings to preuent me, at Warwicke I was queſtioned in ſuſſpition of a Robbery, but for that my innocence could not be frighted, though ſtill the guilt of the other fact purſued mee, but neyther ſo retyred or ſafe was I, that my being freed from the hand of Iuſtice, could either free my bodie from Gods Iudgement, or my minde from fearing it, carrying euer with mee a diſtreſſed conſcience, that like a troubed Sea toſſed me to and fro, yet neuer ſo left by Gods mercy, that I had not euer a true and ſenſible feeling of what I had done, though my diſtractions directed mee not a courſe which way to redeeme my ſelfe; the horrour of my fact and deſpaire fighting againſt mee on the one ſide, my viewing and conſidering of Gods mercies oppoſing that on the other, till thus in the following dangers and calamities of my life, which after I ſhall ſhew, God hath by threatning me with vnheard dangers, alwayes following mee, and yet neuer hurting, as if his Prouidence would not leaue one houre

of mine to ſuch ſecuritie, as might make me preſume that he had forgotten to puniſh me, longer then I remembred to be mindfull of my ſinnes, and renew my Repentance for them.
            My ſelfe, with my load of ſinne and guiltineſſe, being thus then from Dartmouth, ſhipt in a Veſſell bound for Saint Malo
                  •
               s in France, Almightie God knowing the corruption of my nature, leſt I ſhould forget his power and my ſelfe, in this ſeeming ſafetie of myne, commanded the Winds and Seas to warre againſt our poore Barke, which prouoked a more fearfull tempeſt within me, then could bee threatned without, though wee ſpent our mayne Maſt by the board; for then I began to remember that excellent ſaying of the Pſalmiſt, Whither ſhall I goe from thy ſpirit?
               Pſal. 139. 7, 
                     •
                  . 
               or whither ſhall I flye from thy preſence? Let me take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the vttermoſt parts of the Sea▪ yet thither ſhall thine hand leade me, and thy right hand hold me, &c.
            
            Then much more then before, my conſcience wak'd my ſleeping ſoule, and the wounds I had made were bleeding before mee; in this danger God vouchſafed vs his mercy, and ſet vs ſafe on ſhore in the Ile of Garnſey; there ſhould I againe haue beene examined (as vſually Paſſengers are) to giue account what I was, and whither I would, and ſo in likelihood ſhould haue bin diſcouered. But this I ſhifted off by getting into a ſmall Boate: and ſo vnknowne, I paſſed from Garnſey into France, to the Roades, and ſo to Roane, where I liued about ſixe monethes; being at length expoſed to as much miſerie, as perplexitie could lay on a friendleſſe Stranger in an vnknowne Land. Theſe ſufferings ſtill brought me home to my

ſelfe, and neerer to God, in the true acknowledgement of my vild fact; and his mercy in the extremeſt wracke of my want; ſee the Prouidence of God my ſtill Preſeruer. Three ſhips of the States came to Calice to receiue mony, lent by the States to the French King; with whom like a reſtleſſe man, being at that preſent releeued with mony by my Father, I ſhipt my ſelfe, and from Rotterdam I came to Delphe, where Sir Francis Vere entertayned me a Gentleman of his Company; during my aboad in that ſeruice, I receiued continuall ſollicitings for my amendment, repentance, and comfort from one Maſter Trigg of Longledenham in Lincolnſhire a godly Preacher, whoſe daily Letters quickened and ſeconded that good worke the Lord had already begun in me. My Father had by this time, being the yeare 1603. procured my Pardon, and ſent for me home, for which I was no ſooner ſhipt; but ſtill obſerue how God followed me with mercy, and threatning iudgement; leſt my pardon from my Prince, ſhould make mee careleſſe of his better forgiueneſſe, and negligent in the begging it. The Seas muſt againe ſwell as angry to beare my ſinnes, and as if all theſe dangers of Rockes and Seas had bin to little, our Tempeſt beaten Veſſell muſt bee chaſed by a Dunkarker Man of Warre, ſo that their was no hope left to ſaue vs from theſe dangers, but his Omnipotent hand, which ſafely from all theſe deliuered mee once againe on Engliſh ground.
            Scarce was I entertayned at home, but leaſt ſtill I ſhould neſtle my ſelfe in a ſecure ſlumber, another affliction aroſe to endanger mee. The wife of the

ſlaine ſueth an Appeale againſt me, notwithſtanding my Pardon, againſt which her Plea, by reaſon of ſome error in the forme of it, I obtayned a defence or defeate, called, Ne recipiatur: yet after this was, my Pardon queſtioned at the Bench of Aſſiſe for about fiue yeares together, the Iudges of that Circuit ſtill binding me ouer, and refuſing to giue allowance to it: Which I acknowledge (though it were Summum lus againſt mee) yet that it was very honourably and Iudge-like done of them, in ſo notorious a Crime as mine. As alſo his Maieſtie himſelfe, by whoſe extraordinary grace I enioy my breath, was in point of Iuſtice very willing that ſome defect, if poſſible, might haue beene found in my pardon, and ſo ſhould I haue vndergone the iuſt ſtroke of the Law: which not only others, but euen my ſelfe wondered how I could eſcape. Thus the terrours of deſerued death were ſtill knocking at the doores of my eares and heart.
            In all which troubled time, new prouocations were daily offered me, whereby I was in danger to draw more bloud vpon me, or make my ſelfe vncapable of my pardon; all which things God ſuffered mee to be temped with, but not to fall into, in the meane while, my Father was taken away from my troubles, and out of this World, I reſolued to haue gone againe out of this Land; in which time I hoped with my earneſt Repentance, to obtayne forgiueneſſe from my God, and a new acceptance at my returne into the boſome of my offended Countrey: but the Appeale beeing croſſed, and finding my Pardon firme, I altered that determination, and prayed

to God to bleſſe me with a Wife, with whom I might in an honeſt life weare out my dayes, and retyre my ſelfe to God and the ſetling of my conſcience. To this end I ſolicited a Gentlewoman, in which ſuite of mine, many dangers layed ſiege to me, and by the moſt meanes that euer man did; I ſcaped the depriuing of my life, by foure men which aſſaulted mee with Halberts, and grieuouſly wounded me; running mee thorow the body, and giuing mee grieuous wounds.
            How iuſt, O Lord, had it beene that I, by whoſe hand the life of a man was ſpilt, ſhould haue beene made a due Sacrifice though not to Iuſtice, which if I eſcaped, vet to reuenge, which I deſerued: Yet though left for dead by this aſſault, it pleaſed God to preſerue my life: I hope to my further repentance, and his better ſeruice.
            This done, my Pardon yet wanted allowance by Sir Peter Warberton, who enforced me publikely to ſubmit my ſelfe to the Church, and ſo in the Conuocation houſe before my Lords Grace of Canterburie, and the reſt of the Reuerend Biſhops and Cleargie in the Parliament time; I did acknowldge my fault, and gaue teſtimonie of my Contrition and Repentance, and made a true profeſſion of my Religion; and then the ſaid worthy Iudge and Iudge Wamſley, gaue allowance to my Pardon.
            Thus freed from the externall puniſhment of the Law, and my minde thereby the better ſetled for my inward content; I beſtowed my ſelfe in Marriage, in which God gaue mee the bleſſing of a Father in my Poſterity, and thus retyred my ciuill life, woue mee

againe into the opinion of my Countrey, and conuerſation of the Miniſterie, from which, before my Fact had iuſtly excommunicated me; Maſter Doctor Hooke, now Archdeacon of Yorke, then entertayning me a Soiourner in his houſe, with my Wife and Family; he and other Miniſters of thoſe parts affording me their conference, comforts and ſocietie. Yet leſt my paſt troubles and vexations of bodie and minde, ſhould fooliſhly make mee hope; that I had made an ample ſatisfaction to God and the World, the Omnipotent Power had deſtined a new tryall for me; and in the midſt of my ſeeming peace, I muſt be expoſed to a Warre almoſt as fearefull as the firſt, as if by doing new miſchiefes, I ſhould only bee made capable of ſatisfying for the olde, or by loſing my ſelfe againe, I ſhould thus bee found the ſecond time my firſt Repentance inſufficiently perfected.
            My occaſions drawing me to Grantham, vnhappily, I encountred with one Maſter Riggs, a man vrged by his owne raſhneſſe (as I conceiue it) to ſeeke his owne fall by my hand, that I being made the luckleſſe inſtrument of his death, might then truely ſee that God was not at attonement with my ſoule for the firſt, when he permitted me to be a Deſtroyer of a ſecond: vnmoued by any occaſion of mine, groſly, and ſtrangely, three or foure ſeuerall times he heaped iniuries vpon me, beyond the temper of any humane ſufferance, vnleſſe, in thoſe with whom the Spirit of God had more reſidence then yet it had with mee, nor ſatisfied with this but he muſt needs purſue me, though auoiding him and in my way home aſſaulted me with his Sword, of whom I receiued hurts; but

in concluſion, by me hee fell; his wound being dreſt, the Surgeons warranted life, but the worke of the Lord is beyond the imagination of likelihood, or the fraile apprehenſion of weake man: It was otherwiſe for my greater puniſhment determined by him: but on the aſſurance of his Dreſſers; I was bayled, and when the newes of his death came vnlookt for, I was perſwaded to flye, which for theſe two cauſes I vtterly refuſed. Firſt, and principally, I knew & had before tryed that I could not flye from the wrath of God, though I were couered with Mountaines, or hid in the Caues of the Earth; and therefore rather deſired (if ſo it pleaſed him to accept of my poore life as a Sacrifice for the bloud I had ſpilt) willingly, and patiently to lay my ſelfe on the blocke of death. Secondly, my Wife and innocent Children, muſt needs haue beene by my flight expoſed to all ill ſufferings for my guilt; my Wife widdowed and comfortleſſe; my Children Fatherleſſe and deſtitute, and my eſtate which my ſtay might ſaue for them thus confiſcated. For theſe cauſes, was I apprehended, and in a moment rauiſht from all I delighted in, hauing nothing left to feed on but my Deſpayre, had not God ſent mee inward comfort, no companion, but miſerable and afflicted thoughts, no houſe to dwell in but a Priſon and no Comforter; (I mean outward) but Iobes, the skorne and reproch of all my Frinds, and Acquaintance. In this miſerable Exigent, I arraigned my ſoule, which ſtill had nothing to pleade, but guiltie, a hopeleſſe Plea; ſo that had not my ſtill preſeruing God, who though I forſooke him, neuer yet forſooke mee, ſent mee infinite comforts and

aſſurances by two daily viſiting godly Miniſters, Maſter Buddle, and Maſter Atkinſon, I ſhould there I feare, haue proued my owne Executioner, and haue dyed deſpayring. By their good meanes, I beganne with a liuely faith to lay hold on the merits of Chriſt, and reſt my wearie, ſicke and ſtaggering ſoule vpon his Croſſe.
            Maſter Buddle neuer leauing mee, the time of Impriſonment and Irons. For which the Lord giue to him, and all my iuſt and mercifull Friends, mercie to his and their houſes, as Paul prayed for Oneſiphorus who was not aſhamed of my chaines, and neuer left mee till he had remoued from mee a deſperate opinion I was falling into, that God hated mee from the beginning, euery thing beeing ſo croſſe to mee from my birth, in which hee ſatisfied mee, that it was for ſinne: and that God hated none but for ſinne, of which, if I repented, and truely turned to God, I ſhould finde God his fauour towards me, and that theſe afflictions would be good for me.
            New troubles yet (behold) aſſayled me, and now the Lord began to viſit me euery way as in my ſelfe, ſo in what was neereſt and deareſt vnto mee, my only Child for whoſe meanes of liuing, I had expoſed my ſelfe to the ſtroke of death, was touched by the angrie hand of God (hopeleſſe of recouerie) his wretched Mother weeping, the Bell tolling, his Graue prepared, and which was a doubler of my torment, my ſelfe like a condemned Gally Slaue, led in Irons to ſee his departure. The grieuouſneſſe of this ſpectacle ſtrooke a ſudden amazement into me, and then I beganne earneſtly, and faithfully to beſeech God

not to lay my ſinnes on the head of my innocent Child, but to turne his mercifull face towards him, howſoeuer his diuine Iuſtice intended to diſpoſe of me; My gracious God heard me, and paſt and beyond all earthly hope and meane; in an inſtant reſtored him to health.
            Now the time of my tryall for Maſter Riggs came, where though my Iudge was ſeuere in reſpect of my paſt life; and not truſting the vnder-Sherife, did himſelfe chooſe out a Iury of men of the better faſhion to iudge vpon mee without partiality, yet vpon the Euidence of my auoyding him, I was not found guiltie of Murther, charged vpon me in the Indictment, but of an inferiour degree. At which time being adiudged without bayle to ſuffer a yeares impriſonment, I felt againe the hand of God vpon mee by viſiting my ſaid Sonne in a ſtrange manner, that all men might take this for a terrible note of his Iudgement, and rather then accidentall or naturall diſeaſe, hee was crippled and taken lame in all his limbes, and deformed in all proportion, as if the Lord had in him figured the lameneſſe and deformitie of his Fathers ſoule. About 4. yeares this continued on him & then God in his good time reſtored him to perfect health and abilitie of bodie, leauing mee this vſe of all his Iudgements which haue threatned mee and mine, that like an Indulgent Father 
                  •
               e hath ſtill ſhaken the Rod ouer mee, but not layed it on me; that I might feare to offend him becauſe I ſee his power; and loue and ſeeke him becauſe I taſte his mercies.
            My freedome at the yeares end, purchaſed I had not, yet in all theſe ſufferings buried the old man ſo

much in me, as that there remayned not to much of him in my corruption, (notwithſtanding all theſe extreames) moſt of my Eſtate I ſold to ſatisfie ſuch engagements as my troubles had pawned me in, the ſurplus of which, I dedicated not (I confeſſe) that pious way I ought either in ſetling my then vnſetled ſelfe in any honeſt Calling, or conuerting my left ſtock to good imployment, but borrowing too much libertie from Gods mercie, I gaue my ſelfe to my Pleaſures, which I called lawfull Recreations, though in themſelues not vnlawfull, being moderately vſed, yet ſurely very much vnbeſeeming ſuch a Penitent as I was, or ought to haue beene; and as if this had bin nothing, I went farre further; and put my money out to Vſury; for which, my Curſe was to be vtterly cheated of the moſt of it, becauſe God in his infinite goodneſſe ſaw, that whilſt I had any thing left to feed my vanities withall, I could not be made wholy and fully his.
            Thus hauing diſpoſed my ſelfe of all wayes and power to liue and maintayne my Family heere, I began to lay this to my ſelfe, that God had deſeruedly and iuſtly taken from mee all that I was Maſter of, and to prayſe him for ſo gentle a chaſtizement, and that now it lay vpon mee by inuocating his bleſſing, and endeuouring my ſelfe in any courſe (how difficult ſoeuer) to leaue ſomething by my labours purchaſt for my Wife and Children, ſince my ſinnes had made them deſtitute, neuer deſpayring, but that it might pleaſe God to preſerue mee, and fully to prouide for me; to this intent I was an earneſt Suitor about the Court, to ſome Acquaintance of my wiues;

only for imployment, forreigne or domeſticall, ſuch as their diſcretions ſhould Iudge mee fit for▪ In this Court-hope, I languiſht long, till my neceſſities ſtrained my patience, euery courſe failing mee, on which I built. At laſt no way was left mee, but to ſhip my ſelfe for Argeares in the laſt Fleete; depending ſtill on the mercy of God, and reſoluing to ſerue faithfully and reſolutely in all ſuch actions my Commander ſhould impoſe on me.
            In a Ship called the Vaunt-gard, Vice-Admirall of the Fleete, I was appointed by the Generall to the Commaund of Sir Richard Hawkins, a Gentleman, from whom I receiued noble reſpect, and worthy fauours; yet God that would not yet poſſeſſe me of any certaine quiet either in Friends or Fortunes, though my reſolution were fixt to all Conformitie, and my deſires wholly dedicated to the redeeming my loſt Credit with ſome good Action, ſtill exagitated my Companions with ſecret heart-burnings againſt mee, and for the Lord was angry with me, to whom could I be acceptable; he being at warre with me, from whence ſhould I expect peace, theſe my enemies, by daily prouokings on purpoſe to tempt me ſo farre that my fury might forfeit my life, and make me forget my ſelfe and God: that had not my wiſe Captaine preuented it, by giuing mee leaue to depart home, I am afraid, I had confiſcated my life to Marſhall Law, and heapt more bloud vpon my ſinne-drenched Soule. Thus was I depriued of all the comforts I reſolued of, and forced thus to returne home, rather as it may be thought with an addition of ſhame, then Garland of Honour; for God

knew how good ſoeuer to my ſelfe this courſe ſeemed, it was not fit for me, neither was the time of my peace yet come.
            In a Ship called the Marigold of London, I was by my Captaine prouided for to come home, when in the very Roade of Malaga, in the face of the Fleet, and beginning of our Voyage wee had like to haue periſhed, had not the Lord againe extended his mercie. Two other Engliſh Ships hoyſing ſayle with vs, our Ship was foule of another Ship which lay at Anchor in the Roade, and when ſhe ſhould haue looffed, ſhee fell the contrary way, as ſeeming vnwilling to venter her ſelfe at Sea with ſo heauy a burthen as I was charged with; the Sea was exceeding high, nor could the ſhip worke, being euer foule of one Ship or another, and in ſpight of all art and labour could be by the Mariners imployed ſhee would to ſhoare, as if ſhe deſired to ſpew me out of her ſicke bowels; and had ſhe not in midſt of all theſe dangers by the letting fall of an Anchor beene ſtopped, ſhee had ineuitably ſplit vpon a Rocke that was then menacing her. Away were our Companions gone to Sea, and we thus left, then began I to feare, leaſt the Sea-men ſhould lay all this miſ-aduenture on me, and prayed feruently that the Lord would not that way puniſh me, but for his mercie ſake deliuer vs. With much labour and more feare, at length we put to Sea, where we had not long beene, but on this ſide the Straites of Gibiralter, when we were almoſt paſt feare; ſtill the Iudgement of God purſued me, leſt I ſhould forget: Fiue Turkes men of Warre bore vp with vs; and like the feare of theſe, the Sea had none; to reſiſt we

were vnable, though wee addreſſed our ſelues for fight, and to be taken Slaues to Infidels and Vaſſals, to the common enemies of Chriſt, oh what can crueltie more deuiſe to puniſh with; or the trembling heart of deiected man more feare to ſuffer vnder! Yet from this gaping miſchiefe the Lord prouided an vnexpected deliuerie, for thoſe which are by nature the deuourers of men, prooued our Deliuerers. Two Lions we had aboard vs, which they knew ſent from Argears a Preſent to our King, for which cauſe in all likelihood they left vs without ſpoyling, that preſent intimating a League of Amitie betwixt our Nation and their Towne; this I applyed to my ſoule, and confeſt the wonderfull Workes of God.
            Parted thus from the Turkes, all the reſt of our time at Sea till we made Land, was for the moſt part frighted with all the hideous feares that ſalt Region is full of, ſo that I ſuſpected my ſelfe ſtill, and applyed all to mine owne heart, as well the dangers as deliuerances; aſſuring my ſelfe, that ſuch iudgements could follownone but mee, and ſuch redemptions none but ſuch the Lord had reſerued for ſome good Worke.
            At Deale I landed, and in my way to Chatham, as I was haſtily comming out of the hyred Coach which I came in; my Sword ſuddenly fell out with the point vp, nor could I ſtop my ſelfe: but violently with all my weight I fell vpon it; yet the Lord turned the harme from mee, and betwixt my arme and bodie it ſlided: of which eſcape, then and now I make this vſe; that though I had ſcaped the threatnings of the Seas, the furie of the Turkes; my ſelfe had that about mee the Lord could deſtroy me with,

in my greateſt ſecuritie, which had I periſht in, would haue prooued the fearefulleſt of all that euer threatned. That I by whoſe vnhappy Sword, two before had fallen, ſhould now after the Law was appeaſed, and all my recited dangers ſcaped, be expoſed to an exemplary and wretched end vpon my owne Weapon, for in the vnlikelieſt meanes, more horror ſtill aggrauates the iudgement.
            
               Francis
            
         
         
            
            
            Francis Cartwrights RESOLVTION AND RELIGION.
            
            
               THus my Life hath beene an heauie burthen to mee, continually preſſing mee downe. And although in my youth, I was truely taught the true and ſound Religion, how to feare, honour and ſerue God; in ſo much that I durſt not preſume to runne wilfully into ſin, or to liue and continue in ſinne without Repentance: Yet ſo farre at length the ſubtilties of Satan, the allurements and pleaſures of the World, mine owne naturall frailties, and my want of Temperance and Iudgement preuailed and ouer-maſtered mee; that I preſumed of the name of Faith, and of Gods Mercies towards me, and gloried in mine owne eſtate and condition while I compared my ſelfe with ſome others, whom I perceiued ſo much to neglect God, as that they only vſed Policie, and made Religion onely

a Cloake; and I blinde and miſerable wretch ſo preſumptuouſly thruſt my ſelfe on Gods mercies, without regard to Gods Lawes.
            So from hence haue proceeded all other euils and miſchiefes which haue befallen me. Hence it is that I haue ſo fearefully fallen, and ſo grieuouſly and haynouſly ſinned againſt God, committing theſe outragious ſinnes which I would not haue committed for the ſauing of my life, and for the expiating and ranſoming of which, after that I had acted and committed them, I would willingly haue giuen my life, if it could haue beene accepted for a ſatisfaction. And God, for theſe my ſinnes, giuing me ouer; I waſted my Eſtate by Suites, not abating myne expences as my Eſtate waſted: whereby I ſee plainly that Gods heauie and dreadfull hand hath haunted and purſued me not only for my cruell and bloudy ſinne committed vpon Maſter Storr, but alſo for my other ſinnes and tranſgreſſions which I haue committed, ſometimes preſuming too much, and ſometimes deſpayring of Gods mercie. So that now being as it were, brought to the ſtake, and as a miſerable diſtreſſed man put vpon the Racke; I am inwardly forced to make confeſſion of my ſinnes, open profeſſion of my deſires, purpoſes and reſolutions, and giue account of my Religion before Almightie God and the World.
            I doe ſee and obſerue Gods fearefull Iudgements vpon all notorious Sinners from Adam vntill this preſent Age, not onely teſtified and recorded in the holy Scriptures and in prophane Hiſtories, as for example vpon Cain, Saul, Achitophel, Iudas, Herod,
               
and cruell Nero, and ſuch like; but euen alſo daily executed before our eyes, as vpon Varney, Danſecar, Percie, Cateſby, Wright, and all ſuch Murtherers, Traytors, Pirats, Theeues, and vniuſt perſons.
            Sir Francis Varney an Engliſhman borne, and liuing here in Senſualitie vntill he had ſpent his Eſtate, went to Sea, and became Pirate. And falling in at Argears, and there for ſome ſmall time remayning, hee fell in loue with a Whore or Proſtitute, but ſhee being ſubtile, would not incline to him without marriage; nor marrie vnleſſe he would forſake his profeſſion of Chriſt and turne Turke. Hee inraged with Luſt after this Whore (became Turke) and preſently marryed her, which hee no ſooner had done, but a Dogge, which Dogge before wayted on him and loued him; aſſaulted and fell vpon him ſuddenly, moſt Lion or Tygre-like, as though hee would inſtantly haue deuoured him: but being reſcued, yet the Dogge in that rage tore the Calues of his legges. And yet a further iudgement fell vpon this Varney, for (albeit the Turkes for ſome ſmall time, gaue him command and office) in the end they caſhiered him, and being taken by the Spaniard, iudged him to the Gallies, where he wrought as a Slaue, vntill he dyed moſt miſerably.
            
               Danſeker a Dutchman being a Pirate at Argears, though he turned not Turke, yet hee was as it is reported, murdered by them of Argears priuately.
            An Heatheniſh Pagan, Infidell, or Atheiſt, I am not: Neither am I of the Romiſh Religion, though (I confeſſe) there are many carnall reaſons which do perſwade me to imbrace and put in practice ſome of

their Opinions and Doctrines, as praying to Saints; becauſe I hold my ſelfe vnworthy to pray to God Almightie, Purgatory that I might haue an end of torment, and not remayne vnder eternall wrath and Vengeance in Hell: Merit or ſatisfaction by Fryerly auſteritie.
            For ſuch as I whoſe conſcience is burthened, are held fit to be new moulded and tutored in their Monaſteries, and ſet vpon ſtrange and hideous Exploits, for redemption of themſelues, and good of that Church. Beſides, I haue had many fauors & courteſies from ſome noble and zealous perſons of that Religion, the loſſe of which I doe willingly ſuſtaine for this mine open profeſſion. Yea, being by Gods heauie iudgements plunged into the depth of extremities, I haue beene beholding to ſome of the learned among them, and can now, if my conſcience would ſuffer me, be entertayned among them, either into their Cloyſters, or for the Warres; and be eſteemed and ſufficiently relieued with neceſſaries: whereas I am now neglected by mine owne Nation, who all ſeeme to verifie in me that ſaying of DAVID, God hath forſaken him, purſue and take him. And though all this be come vpon mee, yet, I profeſſe, I doe not encline to beleeue the Romiſh Doctrines of the Maſſe, Tranſubſtantiation, Merit, Iuſtification by Workes, and ſuch like. I acknowledge that all the glorie of our ſaluation is due to God, who worketh all in all. And to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt we owe all the thankes, who by his owne ſufferings, and with his moſt precious bloud hath ſatisfied the Law, pacified Gods wrath, payd our debt and ranſome, and cancelled the bond.
            
               And if they of mine owne Religion here in this Church of England ſhould vtterly refuſe me, forſake and caſt mee off, yet will I ſtill holde this opinion, and thus reuerently eſteeme, thinke, and ſpeake of this Church and Religion, and will chooſe rather to liue in concontinuall penury, then to be of another minde: For I am ſure, this Religion is that which is taught in Gods holy Word, and therefore I muſt needs beleeue it; As for the doctrine of the Church of Rome, I could neuer find comfort in it, only in that which they deny to Lay-men, that is, the reading of the Scriptures do I find true ground of cōſolation.
            True it is, that ſimple and vnſtable men may abuſe their reading of the Scriptures vnto errour, and by Gods gracious promiſes therein recorded, may take occaſion to preſume and truſt too much to their own Faith and Gods Mercies: But this ought not to make vs diſclayme or to neglect the daily reading of Gods ſacred Word; for there is no meanes like to this ſo powerfull, to keepe men from committing of ſinne; nor after ſinne committed, to vphold them from falling into finall Deſperation.
            For my part, I haue deſired as much as any Sinner that euer was, the content of this Worlds baſe ſinfull Pleaſures, Ryot, Vain-glory, Reuenge, Exceſſe in Prodigalitie, and the like: But theſe croſſes and calamities befalling me. The reading of the Scriptures accompanied with the ſweet Conference and Comfortable Letters of mercifull learned men, who haue dealt with me thoſe wayes in England, and by writing to me into the Low Countries, (among whom I cannot omit to name with reuerence and thankfull

acknowledgement, Maſter Trigg, Maſter Buddle, Maſter Craſhaw, and of late at Lambith, Maſter Doctor Goad▪
                and Maſter Doctor Featly, &c. vnto whom I haue ſued as the woman did to Chriſt, euen for Crummes falling from our Sauiours Table) haue moſt powerfully opened mine eyes, and enlightened myne heart and ſoule to ſee, ſeele, and taſte Gods Iudgements and Mercies, myne owne ſinnes and tranſgreſſions, the peace of conſcience, the difference of Sinners penitent and impenitent. Cain, Saul, Achitophel, and Iudas, their deſpayre; and the confeſſion and repentance of Dauid, Peter, and the reſt of Gods Saints.
            Seeing Dauid that great anointed King and all the renowned Seruants of God, haue confeſſed their bloud guiltineſſe and other foule ſinnes, and haue repented of them, and openly exclaymed againſt them: Shall I a wretch not worthy to be named among the meaneſt of all deiected Sinners, thinke it a ſhame to me, and bluſh to confeſſe my ſinnes, and openly to publiſh my griefe and repentance? Eſpecially (ſeeing) now all the World; Learned Men, Gods Meſſengers, Friends, Enemies, the Troubles and Miſeries which I haue ſuſtayned, the peace and torment of Conſcience which I haue felt, doe prouoke mee, teach mee, driue me to confeſſe my ſinnes and offences, offending and tranſgreſſing the Lawes of God.
            I here (therefore) in bitterneſſe of ſoule, confeſſe my faults, and cry out againſt all my ſinnes committed from my birth to this preſent, from Maſter Storr his bloud; to euery hurt and wrong which I haue done to any, in deed, word, or thought: not

onely for my crueltie and reuenge done to men, but for that I haue ſince alſo thought it lawfull to defend my ſelfe with Sword, contrary to the Lawes of God, when I might perhaps better haue done it by other meanes.
            It wounds me to think of my blaſphemous oaths vttered in paſſion and diſtemper. My diſobedience to my Parents, my exceſſe, my drinking of healthes, my prodigalitie: yea, my eating and drinking of more then to ſuffice nature, and my feeding of Horſes, and Dogges with mans food, ſuch as many good Chriſtians wanted; expecting of the bleſſing for my faith without workes, and for beleeuing without liuing of a ſanctified life, or truly following of a lawfull calling; my open and ſecret ſinnes, my many motions to ſinne, and too much yeelding to Satans ſubtilties and mine owne imperfections, vaine and light diſpoſition, proneneſſe to Anger, Pleaſure, Diſtruſt, Deſpayre, my preſumption when God ſhewed any miraculous deliuerance, or any mercie to my ſoule, bodie or eſtate.
            All theſe are as a terrible Armie of ſo many deadly foes, and like ſo many Swords and Speares entring into my heart and ſoule. When I conſider with my ſelfe mine owne vncertaine condition, how when I haue thought my ſelfe ſafe and ſure, I haue found immediately that I haue beene moſt vncertaine and in greateſt danger; and when in greateſt danger, by Gods helpe and power moſt ſecure; how in euery pleaſure and calamitie I haue found a baite, and in euery baite an hooke; and that though for the ſpace of ten yeares laſt, I haue had a reſolution not to ſinne

with purpoſe; but rater to dye: yet by myne owne weakneſſe and wilfulneſſe in paſſion, I haue fallen into ſo innumerable and ſo abominable ſins, and haue as it were trampled vnder foote the bloud of the Son of God, and returned like the Dogge to his vomit, and like the Swine to the myre, by my continuall falling; repenting from the bottome of my heart, for all and euery ſinne which I haue committed from my birth, to this moment.
            And vpon the knees of my heart, doe with ſuch humble deſire and affection, as the difference requireth betweene the Mightie and Almightie Commander of Heauen, Earth, and Sea; and mee one of the greateſt Sinners in the World, a wretched vile worme of no reputation: yea, with as ſeruent and vehement importunitie as euer any Thiefe did craue pardon, or childe mercy and forgiueneſſe, do I begge and ſue for pardon of God the Father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, the ſeer of the ſecrets of all hearts, for his mercies ſake, whoſe mercies are ouer all his workes, whoſe mercie preuayleth and reioyceth againſt his iuſtice, and whoſe louing kindneſſe laſteth for euer.
            Vpon his promiſes made vnto vs in his holy word, doe I build all my hope and confidence, euen ſuch as theſe following: viz. That though our ſinnes bee as Crimſon or Scarlet, he will make them white as Snow,
               Eſay 1. 1
                     •
                  . 
               or Wooll. That at what time ſoeuer a Sinner doth repent, he will put out all his iniquites; that if they would turn from their wickedneſſe, and do righteouſneſſe, they ſhall not dye but liue, That he hath Balme of Gilead to heale the weake and ſicke. Alſo vpon theſe promiſes

of our Lord Ieſus, God equall with his Father, who ſaith, Come vnto me all ye that trauell and bee heauie
               Mat. 25. 
               laden, and I will eaſe you, &c. His diſgraces, reproches, troubles, teares, ſighes, grones, thornes, skornes, whipping, ſpitting vpon, beating, ſtripes, ſweating, nayling, hanging, wounding, bleeding out his heartbloud, Paſſion, Death, Reſurrection, and Aſcenſion are ſo many Salues and Medicines to cure my bleeding ſoule. His bloud ſpeaketh better things then the bloud of ABEL, and the cry thereof ouercommeth the voice of Maſter Stors bloud, and of all other my loud crying ſinnes which call to Heauen for vengeance. And therefore with this his bloud which hath ſatisfied for all temporall and eternall puniſhments, doe I come ſprinkled before God, and for the price and ſatisfaction made by this bloud, do I cry for mercie, mercie, and earneſtly deſire grace to liue hereafter an holy and righteous life. I am a Chriſtian and a penitent Sinner: how can I deſpaire or doubt of ſaluation, knowing Gods infinite Mercie and Truth? that he is not onely a God of Mercy readie to pardon but alſo a God of Truth, who will truly fulfill his word and promiſe of pardon; vpon mens true Repentance, as of iuſtice in puniſhing them, who perſiſt in ſinnes committed. Why ſhould I bee afraid to touch the hemme of my Sauiours garment; ſeeing his promiſes are made vnto mee, his ſatisfaction for me, and for ſuch Sinners as I am, he did vndergoe all his ſufferings, from the pricke of the Thorne to the wound with the Speare; from his firſt groane, to his laſt act of paſſion, his graue and buriall to his Reſurrection and Aſcenſion into Glory? Mee, thinkes,

thoſe bleſſed words of the Apoſtle are ſpoken not onely to me, but of mee; Ieſus Chriſt came into the World to ſaue Sinners, of whom I am the chiefe. Can I repenting doubt? Can I being a Chriſtian bee ſo baſe as to bee aſhamed to confeſſe the Faith of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Can I haue more content, or ayme at more then to be a Chriſtian Conuert and a true Penitent, ſeeing there is no higher honour in the world to bee aymed at, no glory comparable to bee a true Chriſtian? Can diſgrace, pouertie, calamitie, height, or depth, life or death, ſinne or the Deuill daunt me? They cannot, they cannot, for I finde God a light to mee in the midſt of darkneſſe, and a refreſhing comfort in all calamities. In ſo much that when I am in the deepeſt deſpayre for my ſinnes, in the greateſt agonies and horrours of conſcience and moſt bitter paſſions, thinking with my ſelfe what an Eſtate I once had, and how poore I am now? How I was valued, now deſpiſed, how they who eſteemed mee liuing in ſinne, doe now refuſe mee repenting of my ſinne.
            What great cauſe of diſcomfort it is to me, that I cannot nor am able to haue the breeding, or to enioy the ſight of my Children being Infants, for whom I would ſuffer death, hauing no refuge but to bee a Souldier or ſerue: yet ſtill euen when I am thus deiected, and caſt downe as low as ſinne, miſery, and the Deuill can caſt me downe: I doe not let goe my hold, but doe cleaue to God and am vpholden by him continually.
            When it is manifeſt that none of theſe things can tempt and allure me eyther to remoue my Religion

which I profeſſe, or to forſake my Lord Ieſus Chriſt whom I ſhould forſake and forgoe, if I ſhould reſolue to liue in Theft, Piracie or any other ſinne: That I haue time to publiſh this I am fully ſatisfied my ſoule is at reſt: I am leſſe carefull of my life a thouſand times, not deſperately but humbly yeelding my ſelfe to God; if I ſtarue, periſh, dye by the Sword, bee taken captiue by the Turke, and liue a moſt miſerable Slaue all my dayes: Yea, come wofull life or ſhamefull death I will truſt in God though he kill me, and will neuer flye from him.
            And here (I profeſſe) and proteſt before God and the World, that as I haue diſhonoured God, ſtayned my ſelfe with bloud in a moſt vile and abominable manner, and defiled the honour of Religion to the great ſcandall and offence of many: So I doe now with all my heart deſire, if I may be thought worthy, and haue a due calling thereunto, to ſtand with my Sword in my hand, and to expoſe my ſelfe to the greateſt dangers in the World; in the moſt bloudie Battels, Fire or Sword, where God may ſhew extraordinarie Mercie or Iudgement, in the defence of the Goſpell and of true Chriſtian Religion. And as I haue baſely ſlaine a Miniſter of Gods Word, ſo in defence of the men of God, the faithfull Miniſters of his Word in this Church of England, I may in any breach or danger interpoſe my ſelfe euen betweene them and death, and defie and withſtand all their Enemies, or any other wayes yeeld my ſelfe to Gods Iudgements, Tryals, Corrections, and Directions, in a Vocation how low and meane ſoeuer, and neuer turne Capuchine, or take vpon mee any Popiſh and

Superſtitious Vow and profeſſion of auſteritie which is a fit refuge for Cowards, Cains and Iudaſſes.
            
            Though my ſins are innumerable and abominable which ſtill hang faſt on me, and cleaue as ruſt vnto my corrupt nature: yet I haue the Balme of Gilead, the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt; the mercie of God, and the Diuine Power of Heauen to counteruaile them all. Yea, I haue many markes and tokens of Gods grace giuen to me, and of his mercy ſhewed towards me which doe much refreſh my ſoule.
            As firſt, that I aske and ſue for mercie at no other power, but at the hand of God for our Lord Ieſus Chriſts ſake, and ſo in the right way to the Fountaine of Life.
            Secondly, That I find great content and comfort in wraſtling againſt fleſh and bloud, and all myne owne corruptions, and in maintayning to the Deuils face my Religion, Faith, Hope, Repentance.
            Thirdly, That I hold my certaine and reſolute determination, as an armour againſt his fiery Darts, and doe ſtill lay faſt and ſure hold on our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, hoping to perſeuer and hold out to the end.
            Fourthly, That I haue peace of conſcience more then the World is worth, which if I neuer had taſted nor knowne but were as an Heathen or Turke, I ſhould with the World (holding that for bloud, vengeance muſt haunt without Redemption, and ſo being frighted with Furies vnknowne and endleſſe) grow deſperate, and like Varney and Danſekar, dye with bloudie content in reuenge, or proſecute till death Piracie or Theft, to mitigate my endleſſe tormenting miſeries, and to leaue my Children an Eſtate,

though neuer ſo vniuſtly got.
            Fiftly, That I cannot be brought to deny Chriſt, or to doubt that there is a Chriſt, nor be pulled from beleeuing in Chriſt, and hope to bee ſaued through him, by the Deuill, nor all my ſinnes, if I had all the ſinnes in the World vpon me.
            Sixtly, That I am deliuered from the danger and infection of the Romiſh Religion. For if I were of that Religion, I would attempt any ſinfull courſe, as Theft or Piracie to releeue my wants in hope of Pardon, Penance or Purgatorie, (for no puniſhment ſhould terrifie me, let it bee whatſoeuer it could bee, euen Purgatorie it ſelfe, ſo it might haue end I would willingly endure it, if ſo be it might procure me pardon, and vnder that condition grant mee libertie to ſinne) I ſhould with them of that Religion hold that Iuſtice muſt bee ſatisfied neceſſarily vpon Sinners in this World, and that by our owne bodily ſufferings, ſinne muſt bee expiated, and there is no auoyding it. And ſo I would ſeeke by voluntary earthly puniſhment in this life to ſatisfie Iuſtice, by turning Pilgrime or Capuchine.
            Yea, I am aſſured that our Lord Ieſus hath ſatiſfied for all puniſhments of vengeance both temporall and eternall, though I haue endured or ſhould hereafter vndergoe all miſeries and calamities, and euen a moſt bitter and painfull death, yet I doe not account them any ſatisfaction or expiation, my bloud cannot ſatisfie for bloud; I may if God ſhould ſo diſpoſe, haue a bloudie end, as a iuſt reward of my ſinne, I cannot deny it: but what can ſatisfie to iuſtifie? Surely none of mine owne miſerable

calamities can make any part of ſatisfaction, that is a thing which I vtterly diſclayme; onely the bloud and ſatisfaction of Ieſus Chriſt is that on which I doe lay hold and relye by Faith for Iuſtification.
            Yet becauſe not onely the Maieſtie of God hath beene deeply offended by my haynous tranſgreſſions, but alſo his Church greatly ſcandalized, and the mindes of my graue Fathers and deare Brethren in Chriſt no leſſe deeply wounded in their compaſſion for him that dyed by my hand, then himſelfe was in his paſſion and bodily diſſolution, whoſe many wounds bleed a freſh in my eyes and memorie: I profeſſe my ſelfe readie and willing to endure whatſoeuer other humiliation this bleſſed Church hath or ſhall impoſe vpon mee, for the further aſſurance of my ſatisfaction to her, which may in ſome ſort ſuite with the depth of my offence againſt her and her Children.
            Verily as I abhorre Popiſh ſatisfaction, derogating from the merits of Chriſts bloud, ſo I with others more learned then my ſelfe; wiſh that the ancient Diſcipline of the Primitiue ſincere Church were more throughly reuiued in euery ſcandalous crime by publike confeſſion, ſubmiſſion and ſatiſfaction to the Chriſtian Congregation. Wherein my ſelf deſire as much to go beyond others in my humiliation, as I haue exceeded all in my preſumptuous tranſgreſſions. With offenſiue, but penitent Ecebolius, in the Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtory, I ſay of my ſelfe; Caſt me out, tread vpon me for vnſauourie Salt.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   