
      
         
            
            
            THE
Spaniſh Colonie,
OR
Briefe Chronicle of the Acts and
geſtes of the Spaniardes in the Weſt Indies,
called the newe World, for the
ſpace of xl. yeeres: written in the Caſtilian
tongue by the reuerend Biſhop
Bartholomew de las Caſas
or Caſaus, a Friar of the order
of S. Dominicke.
            
            And nowe firſt tranſlated into
engliſh, by M. M. S.
            ¶Imprinted at London for
William Brome.
1583.
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            Spaniſh cruelties and tyrannies, perpetrated
in the Weſt Indies, commonly termed
The newe found worlde.
            Briefly deſcribed in the Caſtilian language, by the
Biſhop Tryer Bartholomew de las Caſas or Caſaus, a
Spaniarde of the order of Saint Dominick, faithfully
tranſlated by Iames Aliggrodo, to ſerue as a
Preſident and warning, to the xij. Prouinces of
the lowe Countries.
            
               Happie is hee whome other mens harmes doe make to
beware.
            
            
               GOds iudgementes are ſo profound
as mans wiſdome, no not
the power of Angels is able to
enter into their depth. Thou
ſhalt (frendly Reader) in this diſcourſe
beholde ſo many millions
of mē put to death, as hardly
there haue been ſo many ſpaniardes
procreated into this
worlde ſince their firſte fathers
the Gothes inhabited their Countries, either ſince their ſecond
progenitors the Sarazens expelled and murdered the moſt part
of the Gothes, as it ſeemeth that the Spaniardes haue murdered
and put to death in the Weſterne Indies by all ſuch meanes as
barbarouſneſſe it ſelfe coulde imagine or forge vpon the anueld
of crueltie. They haue deſtroyed thriſe ſo much lande as chriſtendome

doth comprehende: ſuch torments haue they inuented,
yea ſo great and exceſſiue haue their trecherie been, that the
poſteritie ſhall hardly thinke that euer ſo barbarous or cruell a
nation haue bin in the worlde, if as you woulde ſay we had not
with our eyes ſeene it, and with our hands felt it. I confeſſe that
I neuer loued that nation generally, by reaſon of their intollerable
pride, notwithſtanding I can not but cōmend & loue ſundry
excellent perſons that are among thē. Howbeit, God is my witnes,
hatred procureth me not to write thoſe things, as alſo the authour
of the booke is by nation a Spaniard, and beſides writeth
farre more bitterly then my ſelfe.
            But two reaſons haue moued me to publiſhe this preface,
which I do dedicate to all the prouinces of the Lowe countreys:
The one, to the end, awaking thēſelus out of their ſleep, may begin
to thinke vpon Gods iudgements: and refraine from their
wickednes and vice. The other, that they may alſo conſider with
what enemie they are to deale, and ſo to beholde as it were in a
picture or table, what ſtay they are like to bee at, when through
their rechleſneſſe, quarrels, controuerſies, and partialities themſelues
haue opened the way to ſuch an enemie: and what they
may looke for. Moſt mē do ground their opinion vpon the goodneſſe
of their cauſe, concluding, that in as much as God is iuſt,
he will graunt victorie to the right, and will ouerthrowe the
wicked. This was Iobes friendes diſputation, where they concluded
that for that Iob was afflicted, vndoubtedly he was wicked.
Which reaſon is drawen out of a certaine rule, which it ſeemeth
that nature hath printed in our hartes, that is, that God
puniſheth the euill, and in mercie rewardeth the good deedes.
There vpon did the inhabitants of Malta report that Gods vengeance
would not permit S. Paul to liue, when after he had eſcaped
ſo dangerous ſhipwracke, the Viper leaped vpon his hande.
Howebeit notwithſtanding this rule be certaine and true, yet
do manie therein diuerſely deceiue them ſelues, concluding
thereby that GOD ſendeth no affliction but to the wicked,
as if hee laide not his croſſe alſo vpon the good: As Iob, the
Prophetes, and Martyres: yea, his owne ſonne Ieſus Chriſt,
and that for the mortifiyng of the fleſhe, and more and more to
quicken man in good liuing: and for his ſonne, to the ende in
him to puniſh our ſinne which hee tooke vpon him. Others doe

beleeue that God wil neuer ſuffer ſinne to bee long vnpuniſhed,
notwithſtāding yt hauing long waited patiētly for our repentāce,
his clemencie is at length conuerted into iuſtice. Some againe,
that it is vnpoſſible for the wicked to gette the vpper hande in
an euill cauſe, notwithſtanding wee dayly ſee it fall out contrary:
vndoubtedly the Turkes victories & conqueſtes in Chriſtendome
haue no foundation, but conſiſt vpon meere tyrannie and
vſurpation. For although Chriſtians ſinnes, eſpecially the great abuſe
in Gods ſeruice, haue bin the cauſes of our puniſhment, yet
muſt we confeſſe that the chriſtians, what errors ſoeuer ſome of
them do in their doctrine maintain, are not neuertheles ſo farre
deuoid of the truth, as are the Turkes, and yet do we ſee howe
mightily in few yeres they haue cōquered & encroched vpō chriſtendom.
Alſo before the comming of the Turkes, namely ſoone
after the time of Mahamet, there came ſuch a flock of Sarazins,
that they deuoured firſt Egypt, then all Affrick, & rooting out
Chriſtianitie out of the ſaid countries ſeazed vpon al Spaine: yea
proceeding forward, they camped in Aquitain vpon the riuer of
Toyre: inſomuch that it was to be doubted yt they might ſoone
haue caught hold vpon France, & ſo vpon the reſt of chriſtēdom,
had not God raiſed vp that mightie Duke of Brubant, Charles
Martel, who defeating them, driue them beyond the Pirenean
mountaines. But if we liſt to conſider the examples contained
in the holy Bible, whoſe reaſons are more exactly expounded by
the prophets, we do find that in the time of K. Hezechias, although
the head citie, namely Hieruſalem, was not forced, yet
the leſſer townes being taken by the enemie, the flatte countrey
ſpoyled, the K. and the princes of Iuda had no more left them
but the bare walles of Hieruſalem. Alſo, albeit God did marueilouſly
ſtrike the armie of Senacherib, and that his own children
flew him in his gods temples: yet were not gods people free from
ſuffering much, and from ſeeing the enemie enioy the moſt part
of their law: their cōmons did beare that which nowe we know,
& more then we would, that is what an enemy entring by force
of armes into a land is able to do. But Nabuchadnezers victories
were far others, whē he tooke, burned, & ſacked euē the head citie,
together with ye very temple of Hieruſalē, & took their K. P.
& hie P. priſoners, & 
                  •
               lu pulled out ye eies, & fettered ſome of thē
forcing the cōmons during the ſiege to eate their own dong &

Who is hee therefore that dare accuſe God of wrong, ſith ſuch
tyrants be called the Axe in the Lordes hands, as the executioners
of his iuſtice? Further wee ſee, that thoſe that haue the moſt
right are by the wicked robbed, ſlaine, & murdered, which is neuertheleſſe
Gods doing. For it is ſaid: Curſed be he that doth the
Lordes worke negligently, in which place the holy ſcriptures do
ſpeake of ſuch miniſters and inſtruments of God. In this diſcourſe
of Don Bartholomew de las Caſas, wee do finde a manifeſt
example. For I pray you what right had the Spaniards ouer
the Indians: ſauing that the Pope had giuen them the ſaid land,
and I leaue to your iudgemente what right hee had therein:
for it is doubtfull whether his power doe ſtretch to the diſtributing
of worldly kingdomes. But admit hee had that authority,
was there therefore any reaſon that hee ſhould for crying in the
night, There is a God, a Pope, & a King of Caſtile who is Lord
of theſe Countries, murder 12. 15. or 20. millions of poore reaſonable
creatures, created (as our ſelues) after the image of the liuing
God: Heere doe I, as in the beginning I ſaid, ſee a bottomleſſe
depth of Gods iudgements. For it is a ſmall matter to ſay
that the wicked doe moleſt better men then themſelues, for the
cauſes aforeſaide: but to ſee a whole nation, yea, infinite nations
periſh ſo miſerablie, and as it ſemeth, without any cauſe, is it that
maketh moſt men to wander, yea euen aſtoniſheth ſuch as do examine
theſe effects by the rule of their owne reaſons. Howebeit
we haue two examples in the Bible, though not altogether like,
yet very neere. It is ſaide in the ouerthrowe of Sehon: In thoſe
dayes wee tooke all his townes, and deſtroyed men women and
childen in the ſame, neither left we any thing remaining. The
like ſentence is there alſo of Og king of Baſan, yea, Moſes ſone
after alloweth all that was done, commaundeth Ioſua to doe as
much to all the other kinges in his iourney as was done
to thoſe two. If wee ſeeke the cauſe of ſuch executions,
man will bee as it were at his wits ende and ſtande mute. Againe,
if men ſhould conſider the example of king Saule whom
God reiected, becauſe he did not wholy diſcomfit Amelec, but
ſaued their king, and reſerued the fatteſt of their cattell for
the ſacrifices, their vnderſtanding woulde giue ſentence cleane

contrarie to gods. What will they ſay, was it not a comēndable,
yea, a noble minde, for a king to ſpare his brother, either for an
Iſraelite to ſpare the cattell to the ende to ſacrifice them to the
God of Iſrael: yet was Gods ſentence pronounced by Samuel
cleane repugnant thereto, God loueth obedience better then
ſacrifice. And not long before God had commaunded both,
namely, that the Cananites and Amalekites ſhoulde bee rooted
out: and therefore hee was to bee obeyed, and for their diſobedience
the Cananites remained thornes in the eyes of Iſrael,
and the king of Amalec whome Samuel neuertheleſſe hewed
in peeces, was the ſubuerſion of Saule and his royall familie, But
here may expreſſe reaſons be alleadged for ſuch iudgements of
God, which ſeeming ſeuere to man are neuertheleſſe, in that
they proceeded from God, meere iuſtice. Moſes ſaith, when
the Lord thy God hath reiected them before thy face, think not
in thine hearte, ſaying: The Lorde for my righteouſneſſe hath
cauſed mee to enter poſſeſſion of this lande, ſeeing hee hath for
their wickedneſſe rooted out theſe nations before thy face.
For thou art not through thy righteouſnes and vprightneſſe of
heart come to inherite their land, but it is for the abhominatiōs
of theſe people, whom the Lord thy god hath expelled before thy
face.
            True it is, that as in a cleeare ſunnie light we may more eaſily
diſcerne all that is obiect to our ſight, euen ſo of things conteined
in the holy Scriptures commonly the cauſes are to bee
founde: but for other matters, as the deſtruction of diuers nations
among the Heathen: and finally for this ſo cruell and horrible
example, conteined in this booke, there can bee alleadged
no particuler reaſon, other then that gods iudgemēts are bottō
               leſſe
pits: alſo that ſith he hath done it, it is iuſtly done. And yet
are not the Spaniardes beeing the executors of this vengeance,
more excuſable then Pilate for condēning our ſauiour, or Annas
or Caiphas for procuring his death notwithſtanding gods
counſaile and hand wrought thoſe things. For behold gods ſentence
pronounced againſt the wicked, whom he vſeth in chaſtening
the good, whom by thoſe meanes he doth trie, and puniſheth
the wicked according to their deſarts:
            
               
               Oh Asſhur, the rod of my wrath: and the ſtaffe in their hands
is my indignation. I will ſende him to a diſſembling nation, & I
wil giue him a charge againſt the people of my wrath, to take
the ſpoyle, and to take the pray, & to treade them vnder foote
like the mire in the ſtreete. But he thinketh not ſo, neither doth
his heart eſteeme it ſo, but he imagineth to deſtroy and to cut
off not a few nations. For he ſaith, Are not my princes altogether
kings? Is not Calno as Charchemiſh? Is not Hamath like
Arpad? Is not Samaria as Damaſcus▪ Like as my hande hath
found the kingdomes of Idols, ſeeing their idols were aboue Ieruſalem
& aboue Samaria: Shall not I, as I haue done to
Samaria and to the Idols thereof, ſo do to Hieruſalē & to the
idols thereof? But when the Lord hath accōpliſhed al his worke
vpō mount Siō & Ieruſalē, I wil viſit the frute of the proude
hart of the K. of Aſhur, & his glorious & proud lookes, becauſe
he ſaid, by the power of my own hand haue I done it, & by my
wiſdom, becauſe I am wiſe. Therfore I haue remoued the borders
of the people, & haue ſpoiled their treaſures, and haue pulled
downe the inbabitants like a valiant man. And my hand
hath found as a neſt, &c. So that although the wicked for a
time doe triumph, yet doth not God leaue their abhominable
cruelties vnpuniſhed. But Gods iudgements being in the mean
time ſuch, that by the wicked he puniſheth thoſe that be wicked:
notwithſtanding their wickednes be ſomewhat leſſe, as alſo
the good bee chaſtiſed by the cruell and bloodthirſtie: it is
certaine that wee are not thereby to iudge that our ſelues ſhall
haue the victorie ouer our enemies, becauſe our cauſe is the
better, for we are repleniſhed with vice enough, whereby to
leaue vnto god ſufficient matter to puniſhe vs. And therefore
as I ſaide two thinges mee thought, and yet mee ſeemeth
in theſe Countries worthie admiration: One is, that wee
truſting that the defence of our libertie is vnto vs a iuſte occaſion
doe not in the meane time conſider that wee commit no
leſſe faults, then thoſe which Ezech, caſt in the Sodomites teeth,
Beholde the iniquitie of thy ſiſter Sodom was pride, fulneſſe of
bread, and the eaſe of Idlenes: theſe were in her & in her daughters▪
               
and 
                  〈…〉
                as if we
had made attonement with death, we fear not gods iudgemēts.
If we looke vpon the 
                  〈…〉
                may ſee a great abuſe
in gods ſeruice: but ſo far are we from indeuoring to correct it,
that contrariwiſe ſome would that the remembrance of God, at
the leaſt for this time, might be buried in obliuion: therein reſembling

                  〈1 line〉
               
on, or the children which would that during their infancie there
might grow no twigge
                  •
                in the wood
                  •
               . Others 
                  〈…〉
               
reformed, being neuer the leſſe reformed but in mou
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               . For
the wine and the harpe as the prophet ſaith, are as common in
their bankets as afore time, neither are they ſory for the contrition
of Ioſeph. The other is, that in maner euery man generally
hath an eye to his owne priuat affaires, no 
                  〈…〉
               
the common, vnleſſe it bee to reproove, but not to help▪ 
               
                  •
               atr
                  ••
               
poſſeſſeth many of their heartes, and which is more ſtrange,
although there bee many in theſe Countries that haue heretofore
felt the manifeſt iniuries of the ſpaniards: yet as if their
memo
                  •
               y wholy failed them, they be redy to compound with the

                  〈◊〉
                they ſuppoſe, to the deſtruction of their confederates, 
                  〈◊〉
                in

                  〈◊〉
                to the generall subuerſion of the whole countrie. To the
end therfore they may at the leaſt 
                  〈◊〉
                in a 
                  •
               able behold the nature
of their enimie, his purpoſe & intent: here 
                  •
               aſueth a true hiſtory
written by one of their owne nation, wherein they may learne
not that which is yet fully executed in theſe low countries, but
which (had not god ſtopped their courſe) they had long ſince put
in execution: and hereby I hope al good men wil 
                  〈◊〉
                to be reſolute,
and 
                  •
               mending their liues 
                  〈◊〉
                ioy
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               , not in
wordes only, but in deedes alſo, to repell ſo arrogant and 
                  〈◊〉
               
an enemie. But there needeth no other admonitiō then the
ſame which the authour hath ſet down, and therefore I pray you
reade him as diligently as he 
                  〈…〉
               
graue and worthy 
                  〈…〉
               
himſelfe to his owne ſo cruell and barbarous nation: and
let vs render thanks to god for ſending vs ſo good maiſters to
inſtructe vs in our dueties in this ſo miſerable and wretched
time, in hope 
                  •
               hat we not quailing in our office, he will alſo finally
graunt vs happie deliuerance.
         
         
            
            The Argument of this preſent
Summarie.
            
               THe ſtate of thinges happened in the Indies,
euen from the time they were moſt wonderfully
diſcouered alſo ſince the Spaniards
for a while began to enhabite thoſe places,
and afterward ſucceſſiuely vnto theſe daies,
haue in all degrees bin ſo maruailous & incredible
vnto ſuch as haue not ſeen thē, that
they may ſeeme ſufficient to darken and burie in obliuion and ſilence
whatſoeuer els haue paſſed in all former ages throughout
the world, howe great ſo euer is hath been, amongſt which the
ſlaughters and murders of theſe innocent people, together with
the ſpoiles of townes, prouinces, & kingdomes, which in thoſe
parts haue bin perpretated, as alſo diuers others no leſſe terrible
matters are not the leaſt. Theſe things whē 
               dō Bart
                     •••
                  w de las
Caſa
                     •
                  s, being made of a monke a biſhop at his comming to the
court, there to enforme our 
                  •
               . & M. the Emperor, as hauing 
                  〈◊〉
               
an eiewitnes of the ſame, had rehearſed to ſundry perſons, who
as yet were ignorant thereof, & thereby hauing driuen the hearers
into a kind of extaſie & maze, he was importunately requeſted
briefly to ſet down in writing ſome of them 
                  〈◊〉
                of ye laſt,
which he did. But afterward ſeeing ſundry perſons who deuoyd
of remorſe and compaſſion, being through auarice & ambition,
degenerate frō all humanitie, and who by their execrable deedes
were grown into a reprobate ſence, not being ſatiſfied with ſuch
fellonies & miſchiefs as they had committed in deſtroying ſuch
a part of ye world by all ſtrāge kinds of cruelties, were now again
importunate vppon the King, to the ende vnder his authoritie

and conſent, they might once more returne to committe the
like, or worſe, if worſe might be, he determined to exhibite
the ſaide Summarie which he had in writing and record
vnto our Lorde the prince, to the ende his highneſſe
might finde meanes that they ſhoulde be denied,
which he thought beſt to put in print,
to the ende, his highneſſe might with
more eaſe reade the ſame. This
therefore was the cauſe of
this preſent Summarie,
or briefe information.
         
         
            
            The Prologue of the Biſhop Frier
Bartholomewe de las Caſas or Caſaus,
to the moſt high and mightie prince,
Our Lord Don Philip Prince
of Spaine.
            
               MOſt high and mightie Lorde, as god
by his prouidente hath for the guiding
and commoditie of mankinde
in this world, in Realmes and Prouinces,
appointed kings to bee as fathers,
and as Homer nameth them
ſhepheardes, and ſo conſequently the moſt noble &
principall mēbers of cōmon weales▪ ſo can we not
iuſtly doubt by reaſon of the good willes that kings
and princes haue to miniſter iuſtice, but that if there
be any thinges amiſſe, either any violences or iniuries
committed, the only cauſe that they are not redreſſed,
is, for yt princes haue no notice of the ſame.
For certainely if they knew of them, they would
imploy all diligence and indeuour in the remedie
thereof. Whereof it ſeemeth that mention is made
in the holy Scripture in the Prouerbes of Salomon,
where it is ſaid, Rex qui ſedet in ſolio Iudicii diſſipat omne
malum intuitu ſuo. For it is ſufficiently to be preſuppoſed
euen of the kindly and natural vertue of a king,
that the only notice that he taketh of any miſchiefe
tormenting his kingdome, is ſufficient to procure
him, if it bee poſſible, to roote out the ſame as being
a thing that hee cannot tollerate euen one only moment
of time.
            Conſidering therefore with my ſelfe moſt mightie

Lord the great miſchiefes, dammages and loſſes,
(the like wherof it is not to be thoght, were euer cō
               mitted
by mankind) of ſo large and great kingdoms,
or to ſpeake more truely, of this ſo large new world
of the Indies, which God and holy Churche haue
cōmitted & cōmēded vnto the K. of caſtile, to the end
they might gouern, cōuert, & procure their proſperitie
as well temporally as ſpiritually. I therefore (I
ſay) being a man of experience, and filtie yeeres of
age or more, conſidering theſe euils, as hauing ſeene
them committed, at my being in thoſe countreys:
Alſo that your highnes hauing information of ſome
notable particularities, might be mooued moſt earneſtly
to deſire his Maieſtie, not to graunt or permit
to thoſe tyrantes ſuch conqueſtes as they haue found
out, and which they do ſo name, (whereinto if they
might be ſuffered they would returne) ſeeing that of
themſelues, & being made againſt this Indian, peaceable,
lowly & milde nation which offendeth none,
they be wicked, tyrannous, and by all lawes either
naturall, humaine or diuine, vtterly condemned, deteſted
and accurſed: I thought it beſt, leaſt my ſelfe
might become alſo guiltie, by concealing the loſſe
of an infinite number both of ſoules & bodies whiche
are ſo cōmitted, to cauſe a few of their dealinges
which of late I had ſelected, frō amōg infinit others,
and that might truely bee reported to bee printed, to
the ende your highnes might with more eaſe peruſe
and reade them ouer. Alſo whereas your highnes
maiſter the Archbiſhop of Toleto, when hee was
biſhop of Carthagena required them at my handes,
and then preſented them to your highnes: peraduenture

by reaſon of ſuch great voiages as your highnes
tooke vpon you, both by ſea and by land for matters
of eſtate wherein you haue bin buſied, it may be you
haue not peruſed, either haue forgotten them, and
in the meane time the raſh and diſordinate deſire of
thoſe which thinke it nothing to do wrong, to ſhed
ſuch aboundance of mans blood, to make deſolate
theſe ſo large countries of their naturall inhabitants
and owners, by ſlaying infinite perſons, either
to purloyne ſuch incredible treaſures, doe dayly
augment, theſe tyraunts proceeding vnder all counterfet
titles and colours in their inſtante and importunate
ſute, namely, to haue the ſaid cōqueſts permitted
and graunted vnto them: Which in truth cannot
be graunted without tranſgreſſing the lawe both
of nature and of God, and ſo conſequently not without
in curring mortall ſinne, worthie moſt terrible
and euerlaſting torments: I thought it expedient to
doe your highneſſe ſeruice in this briefe Summarie
of a moſt large hiſtorie, that might and ought to bee
written of ſuch ſlaughters and ſpoyles as they haue
made and perpetrated. VVhich I beſeeche your
highneſſe to receiue and reade ouer, with that royall
clemencie and courteſie, wherewith you vſe to accept
and peruſe the workes of ſuch your ſeruants, as
no other deſire, but faithfully to employ thēſelues
to the common cōmoditie, and to procure the proſperitie
of the royall eſtate.
            This Summarie beeing peruſed, and the vildenes
of the iniquity committed againſt theſe poore innocent
people, in that they are ſlaine and hewed in peeces
without deſart, only through the auarice and

ambition of thoſe that pretend to the doing of ſuch
execrable deedes, being conſidered, It may pleaſe
your highneſſe to deſire, and effectually to perſuade
his Maieſtie to denie any whoſoeuer ſhall demaund
or require ſo hurtfull and deteſtable enterpriſes: yea,
euen to bury any ſuche ſuite or petition in the infernall
pit of perpetuall ſilence, thereby ſhewing ſuche
terror & diſlike as hereafter no man may be ſo bold,
as once to name or ſpeake thereof. And this (moſt
mightie Lord) is very expediēt & neceſſarie, to the
ende God may proſper, preſerue and make the eſtate
of the royall crowne of Caſtile for euer to floriſhe
both ſpiritually and temporally.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A briefe Narration of the deſtruction
of the Indes, by the
Spanyardes.
            
               THe Indes were diſcouered the yeere
one thouſande, foure hundred, nientie
two, and inhabited by the Spaniſh
the yeere next after enſuing: ſo as it
is about fourtie niene yeeres ſithens
that the Spaniards ſome of them wēt
into thoſe partes. And the firſt land
that they entered to inhabite, was the
great and moſt fertile Iſle of Hiſpaniola,
which contayneth ſixe hundreth leagues in compaſſe. There
are other great and infinite Iles rounde about and in the confines
on all ſides: which wee haue ſeen the moſt peopled, and the
fulleſt of their owne natiue people, as any other countrey in the
worlde may be. The firme lande lying off from this Ilande two
hundreth and fiftie leagues, and ſome what ouer at the moſt, contayneth
in length on the ſeacoaſt more then tenne thouſande
leagues: which are alreadie diſcouered, and dayly be diſcouered
more and more, all ful of people, as an Emmote hill of Emmots.
Inſomuch, as by that which ſince, vnto the yere the fourtieth and
one hath beene diſcouered: It ſeemeth that God hath beſtowed
in that ſame countrey, the gulphe or the greateſt portion of mankinde.
            GOD created all theſe innumerable multitudes in euery
ſorte, very ſimple, without ſutteltie, or craft, without malice, very
obedient, and very faithfull to their naturall liege Lordes,
and to the Spaniardes, whom they ſerue, very humble, very patient,
very deſirous of peace making, and peacefull, without
brawles and ſtruglings, without quarrelles, without ſtrife, without
rancour or hatred, by no meanes deſirous of reuengement.
            They are alſo people very gentle, and very tender, and of an
complexion, and which can ſuſtayne no trauell, and 
                  〈◊〉
                die

very ſoone of any diſeaſe whatſoeuer, in ſuche ſorte as the very
children of Princes and Noble men brought vp amongſt vs, in
all commodities, eaſe, and delicateneſſe, are not more ſoft then
thoſe of that countrey: yea, although they bee the children of labourers.
They are alſo very poore folke, which poſſeſſe litle,
neither yet do ſo much as deſire to haue much worldly goodes, &
therefore neither are they proud, ambitious, nor couetous. Their
diet is ſuch (as it ſeemeth) yt of the holy fathers in the deſert hath
not been more ſcarſe, nor more ſtreight, nor leſſe daintie, nor leſſe
ſumptuous. Their appareling is commonly to goe naked: all
ſaue their ſhamefaſt partes alone couered. And when they be clothed,
at the moſt, it is but of a mantell of bombacie of an elle and
a halfe, or a two elles of linnen ſquare. Their lodging is vpon a
matte, and thoſe which haue the beſt: ſleepe as it were vppon a
net faſtened at the foure corners, which they call in the language
of the Ile of Hiſpaniola, Hamaſas. They haue their vnderſtanding
very pure and quicke, being teachable and capable of all
good learning, verye apt to receiue our holy Catholique
faith, and to be inſtructed in good and vertuous maners, hauing
leſſe encombrances and diſturbances to the atteyning there vnto,
then al the folke of the world beſids, and are ſo enflamed, ardent,
and importune to knowe and vnderſtand the matters of the faith
after they haue but begunne once to taſte them, as likewiſe the
exerciſe of the Sacraments of the Church, & the diuine ſeruice:
that in truth, the religious men haue need of a ſinguler patience
to ſupport them. And to make an ende, I haue heard many Spaniardes
many times holde this as aſſured, and that whiche they
could not deny, concerning the good nature which they ſawe in
them. Vndoubtedly theſe folkes ſhoulde be the happieſt in the
worlde, if onely they knewe God.
            Vpon theſe lambes ſo mecke, ſo qualified & endewed of their
maker and creator, as hath bin ſaid, entred the Spaniſh incontinent
as they knewe them, as wolues, as lions, & as tigres moſt
cruel of long time famiſhed: and haue not done in thoſe quarters
theſe 40. yeres be paſt, neither yet doe at this preſent, ought els
ſaue teare them in peeces, kill them, martyre them, afflict them,
torment them, & deſtroy them by ſtraunge ſortes of cruelties neuer

neither ſeene, nor reade, nor hearde of the like (of the which
ſome ſhall bee ſet downe hereafter) ſo farre foorth that of aboue
three Millions of ſoules that were in the Ile of Hiſpaniola, and
that we haue ſeene, there are not nowe two hundreth natiues of
the countrey. The Iſle of Cuba, the which is in length as farre
as frō 
               Vallodolyd vntil Rome, is at this day as it were al waſt.
S. Iohns ile, and that of Iamayca both of them very great, very
fertil, and very fayre: are deſolate. Likewiſe the iles of Lucayos,
neere to the ile of Hiſpaniola, and of the north ſide vnto that of
Cuba, in number being aboue threeſcore Ilandes, together with
thoſe which they cal the iles of Geante, one with another, great
and litle, whereof the very wurſt is fertiler then the kings gardē
at Seuill, and the countrey the healthſomeſt in the world: there
were in theſe ſame iles more then fiue hundreth thouſand ſoules,
and at this day there is not one only creature. For they haue bin
all of them ſlayne, after that they had drawen thē out from thence
to labour in their minerals in the ile of Hiſpaniola, where there
were no more left of the inbornes natiues of that iland. A ſhip riding
for the ſpace of three yeeres betwixt all theſe ilands, to the
ende, after the inning of this kinde of vintage, to gleane and cull
the remainder of theſe folke (for there was a good Chriſtian moued
with pitie and compaſſion, to conuert & win vnto Chriſt ſuch
as might be found) there were not found but eleuē perſons whiche
I ſaw: other iles more then thirtie nere to the ile of S. Iohn
haue likewiſe bin diſpeopled and marred. All theſe iles contayn
aboue two thouſand leagues of lande, and are all diſpeopled and
laide waſte.
            As touching the maine firme lande, wee are certaine that our
Spaniardes, by their cruelties & curſed doings haue diſpeopled
& made deſolate more then ten realmes greater then all Spaine,
compriſing alſo therewith Aragon and Portugall, and twiſe as
much or more land then there is from Seuill to Ieruſalem whiche
are aboue a thouſand leagues: whiche realmes as yet vnto
this preſent day remaine in a wildernes and vtter deſolation, hauing
bin befor time as well peopled as was poſſible.
            We are able to yeeld a good and certaine accompt, that there
is wtin ye ſpace of ye ſaid 40. yeeres, by thoſe ſaid tyrānies & diuliſh

doings of the Spaniards 
                  •••
               n to death vniuſtly and tyrannouſly
more then twelue Millions of ſoules, men, women, and children▪
And I verilie do beleeue, and thinke not to miſtake therein, that
there are dead more then fifteene Millions of ſoules.
            Thoſe whiche haue goe them out of Spaine into that countrey,
bearing them ſelues as Chriſtians, haue kept two generall
and principall wayes to eradicate and aboliſhe from off the face
of the earth thoſe miſerable nations: The one is their vniuſt,
cruell, bloodie and tyrannicall warre. That other maner is, that
they haue ſlayne all thoſe which coulde any kinde of wayes ſo
muche as gaſpe, breath, or thinke to ſet them ſelues at libertie, or
but to withdrawe them ſelues from the tormentes whiche they
endure, as are all the naturall Lordes, and the men of valour
and courage. For commonly they ſuffer not in the warres to
liue any, ſaue children and women: oppreſſing alſo afterwardes
thoſe very ſame with the moſt cruel, dreadful, and hainous thraldome
that euer hath been layde vpon men or beaſtes. Vnto theſe
two kindes of tyranie diabolicall, may be reduced and ſorted as it
were the iſſues one vnder another to their head, all other their diuerſe
and infinite maners of dooing which they keept to lay deſolate,
and roote out thoſe folke without number.
            The cauſe why the Spaniſhe haue deſtroyed ſuche an inſtnite
of ſoules, hath been onely, that they haue helde it for their laſt
ſcope and marke to gette golde, and to enriche them ſelues in
a ſhort tyme, and to mount at one leape to very high eſtates, in no
wiſe agreeable to their perſons: or, for to ſay in a word, the cauſe
hereof hath been their auarice and ambition, whiche hath ſeaſed
them the exceedingeſt in the worlde in conſideration of thoſe
landes ſo happie and rich, and the people ſo humble, ſo patient,
and ſo eaſie to be ſubdued. Whom they haue neuer had any reſpect,
or made any more accompt of (I ſpeake the trueth of that
whiche I haue ſeene all the tyme that I was there conuerſant)
I ſay not then of beaſtes (for woulde to GOD that they had entreated
and eſteemed them but as beaſtes:) but leſſe then of the
myre of the ſtreetes, and euen as muche care is it that they haue
had of their liues and of their ſoules. And by this meanes haue
died ſo many Millions without faith and without ſacramentes.
            
               
It is a certaine veritie, and that which alſo the tyrants them
ſelues knowe right well and confeſſe, that the Indiens throughout
all the Indes neuer wrought any diſpleaſure vnto the Spaniardes:
but rather that they reputed them as come from heauen,
vntill ſuche tyme as they, or their neighbours had receiued
the firſt, ſundrie wronges, being robbed, killed, forced, and tormented
by them.
            
               Of the Ile of hiſpaniola.
               IN the Ile Hiſpaniola, which was the firſt (as we haue ſaid)
where the Spaniardes arriued, beganne the great ſlaughters
and ſpoyles of people: the Spaniardes hauing begunne to
take their wiues and children of the Indies, for to ſerue their
turne and to vſe them ill, and hauing begunne to eate their victualles,
gotten by their ſweate and erauell: not contenting them
ſelues with that which the Indians gaue them of their owne
good will, euery one after their habilitie, the which is algates
very ſmall, foraſmuch as they are accuſtomed to haue no more
ſtore, then they haue ordinarily neede of, and that ſuch as they get
with litle trauell: And that which might ſuffice for three houſeholdes,
reconing tenne perſons for eche houſholde for a moneths
ſpace, one ſpaniarde woulde eate and deſtroy in a day.
               Nowe after ſundry other forces, violences, and tormentes,
which they wrought againſt them: the Indians beganne to perceiue,
that thoſe were not men diſcended from heauen. Some
of them therefore hid their victuals: others hid their wiues and
children: ſome others fledde into the mountaynes, to ſeparate
them ſelues a farre off from a nation of ſo harde natured and
ghaſtly conuerſation. The Spaniardes buffeted them with
their fiſtes and baſtouades: preſſing alſo to lay handes vpon the
Lordes of the Townes. And theſe caſes ended in ſo great an
hazarde and deſperatenes, that a Spaniſhe Captaine durſt aduenture
to rauiſh forcibly the wife of the greateſt king and Lord
of this Ile. Since whiche time the Indians began to ſearche
meanes to caſt the Spaniardes out of their landes, and ſet them

ſelues in armes: but what kind of armes? very feeble and weake
to withſtand or reſiſt, and of leſſe defence (wherfore all their wars
are no more warres then the playings of children, when as they
play at Iogo di Canne or Reedes.) The Spaniardes with their
Horſes, their ſpeares and launces, beganne to commit murders,
and ſtraunge cruelties: they entred into Townes, Borowes,
and Villages, ſparing neyther children, nor old men, neither women
with childe, neyther them that lay In, but that they ripped
their bellies, and cut them in pieces, as if they had been opening
of Lambes ſhut vp in their folde. They layed wagers with ſuch
as with one thruſt of a ſworde woulde paunche or bowell a man
in the middeſt, or with one blowe of a ſworde woulde moſt redily
and moſt deliuerly cut off his head, or that woulde beſt pearce
his entrals at one ſtroke. They tooke the little ſoules by the
heeles, ramping them from the mothers dugges, and cruſhed
their heades againſt the clifces. Others they caſt into the riuers
laughing and mocking, and when they tombled into the water,
they ſayde, nowe ſhift for thy ſelfe ſuch a ones corpes. They put
others, together with their mothers and all that they met, to the
edge of the ſword. They made certayne Gibbets long and low,
in ſuch ſort, that the feete of the hanged on, touched in a maner
the ground, euery one enough for thirteene, in the honour and
worſhip of our Sauiour and his twelue Apoſtles (as they vſed
to ſpeake) and ſetting to fire, burned them all quicke that were
faſtened. Vnto all others, whom they vſed to take and reſerue aliue,
cutting off their two handes as neere as might bee, and ſo
letting them hang, they ſayd: Get you with theſe letters, to carry
tydinges to thoſe which are fled by the mountaines. They murdered
commonly the Lordes and nobilitie on this faſhion: They
made certayne gra
                     •
                  es of perches layed on pickforkes, and made
a litle fire vnderneath, to the intent, that by litle and litle yelling
and deſpeiring in theſe tormentes, they might giue vp the ghoſt.
               One time I ſawe foure or fiue of the principall Lordes
roaſted and broyled vppon theſe gradeirons. Alſo I thinke
that there were two or three of theſe gredirons, garmſhed
with the lyke furniture, and for that they cryed out

pitiouſſy, which thing troubled the Captayne that hee could not
then ſleepe: hee commaunded to ſtrangle them. The Sergeant,
which was worſe then the hangman that burned them (I knowe
his name and friendes in Seuill) woulde not haue them ſtrangled,
but him ſe
                     •
                  fe putting boulets in their mouthes, to the ende
yt they ſhould not crie, put to the fire, vntil they were ſoftly roſted
after his deſire. I haue ſeene all the aforeſayd things and others
infinite. And foraſmuch, as all the people which coulde flee,
hid themſelues in the mountaynes, and mounted on the toppes
of them, fled from the men ſo without all manhood, emptie of
all pitie, behauing them as ſauage beaſtes, the ſlaughterers and
deadly enemies of mankinde: they taught their houndes, fierce
dogs, to teare them in peeces at the firſt viewe, and in the ſpace
that one might ſay a Credo, aſſayled and deuoured an Indian as
if it had been a ſwine. Theſe dogges wrought great deſtructions
and ſlaughters. And foraſmuche as ſometimes, although ſeldom,
when the indians put to death ſome Spaniards vpon good right
and lawe of due Iuſtice: they made a Lawe betweene them,
that for one Spaniarde, they had to ſtay an hundreth Indians.
            
            
               The realmes which were in this Ile of
Hiſpaniola.
               THere were in this Ile Hiſpaniola, fiue greate principall
realmes, and fiue very mightie Kinges, vnto whome almoſt
all the other Lordes obeyed, whiche were without
number. There were alſo certaine Lordes of other ſeuerall
Prouinces, which did not acknowledge for ſoueraigne any
of theſe Kinges: One realme was named Magua, which is as
much to ſay, as the kingdome of the playne. This plaine is one
of the moſt famous and moſt admirable thinges of all that is in
the worlde. For it contayneth foureſcore leagues of grounde,
from the South ſea vnto the North ſea: hauing in breadth fiue
leagues, and eight vnto tenne.
               
                  
It hath in one ſide and other exceeding high mountaynes.
There entreth into it aboue thirtie thouſande riuers and lakes,
of the which twelue are as great as Ebro, and Duero, and Guadalqueuir.
And all the riuers which iſſue out of a Mountayne
which is towardes the Weſt, in number about fiue and twentie
thouſande, are very rich of golde. In the which mountayne or
mountaynes, is contayned the prouince of Cibao, from whence
the mines of Cibao take their names, and from whence
commeth the ſame exquiſite golde and fiue of 24. karrets, which
is ſo renowined in theſe partes. The King and Lorde of this
realme was called Guarionex, which had vnder him his Vaſſals
and Lieges ſo great and mightie, that euery one of them was able
to ſet forth threeſcore thouſande men of armes for the ſeruice
of the king Guarionex. Of the which Lordes I haue knowen
ſome certayne. This Guarionex was very obedient and vertuous,
naturally deſirous of peace, and well affectioned to the
deuotion of the kings of Caſtile, and his people gaue by his commaundement,
euery houſekeeper a certayne kinde of Dromme
full of golde: but afterwardes being not able to fill the Dromme
cutte it off by the middeſt, and gaue the halfe thereof full. For
the Indians of that Ile had litle or none induſtrie or practiſe to
gather or drawe golde out of the mines. This Caceque preſented
vnto the king of Caſtile his ſeruice, in cauſing to be manured
all the landes from the Iſavella, where the Spaniſh firſt ſited,
vnto the Towne of Saint Domingo, which are fittie leagues
large, on condition that hee ſhoulde exact of them no golde: for
he ſayd, (and hee ſayde the trueth) that his ſubiectes had not the
ſkill to drawe it out. As for the manuring which he ſayde hee
woulde procure to bee done: I knowe that hee coulde haue done
it very eaſely, and with great readineſſe, and that it woulde haue
been worth vnto the king euery yeere more then three Millions
of Caſtillans, beſids that it would haue cauſed, that, at this houre
there had bin aboue fiftie Cities greater then Seuille.
               The payment that they made to this good king and Lord,
ſo gracious and ſo redowbted, was to diſhonour him in the perſon
of his wife, an euill Chriſtian, a Captayne rauiſhing her.
This king coulde haue attended the tune and opportunitie to auenge

him ſelfe in leuying 
                     〈…〉
                  
drawe him ſelfe rather, and onely 
                     〈…〉
                   thus
being baniſhed from his real
                     •
                  e 
                     〈…〉
                   of the 
Cignaios, where there was a great Lorde his 
                     〈◊〉
                  . After
that the Spaniardes were 
                     〈◊〉
                   of his 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ and 
                     •
                  ee coulde

                     〈…〉
                   himſelfe 
                     〈…〉
                   againſt the Lorde
whiche had 
                     〈…〉
                   and make great 
                     •
                  l
                     ••
                  ghters
through the coun
                     •••
                  y 
                     〈◊〉
                   they goe, 
                     〈…〉
                   they found
and tooke 
                     〈…〉
                  
a Shippe, to carrie him to C
                     •
                  ſtile: which ſhippe was loſt uppon
the ſea, and there were wi
                     •
                  h him drowned many Spaniardes,
and a great quantitie of Golde, amongſt the whiche alſo 
                     〈◊〉
                  
the great 
                     〈◊〉
                   of Golde, 
                     〈…〉
                   weying three
thouſande▪ 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
GOD to wreake 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               The other rea
                     ••
                  tie was called of Mar
                        •••
                     , where 
                     〈◊〉
                   at this
day the port at one of the 
                     •
                  oundes of the play
                     ••
                  , 
                     〈◊〉
                   the
North: and it is farre greater then the rea
                     ••
                  e of Portugall, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
of golde, and copper 
                     〈…〉
                  . The king was called

                     〈◊〉
                  , which had 
                     〈…〉
                   many great Lordes▪ of the
which I have knowen and ſeene ſundrie▪ 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
firſt the 
                     〈◊〉
                   admyrall, when he 
                     ••
                  co
                     •
                  ered the I
                     •
                  
                  dies,
whom at that time that he diſcouered the Ile, the ſaid 
                     〈…〉
                  
ſo graciouſly, bountifully, & 
                     〈◊〉
                   withall
the Spaniardes who were with him, in 
                     〈◊〉
                   him 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
(which the Admirall was carried in) that he 
                     ••
                  ulde not haue 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   made off in his owne countrey of his owne father. This
did I 
                     •
                  nderſtand of the Admyrals owne mouth. This king died,
in 
                     〈◊〉
                   the ſlaughters and cruelties of the Spaniards through

                     〈…〉
                  , 
                     •••
                  yng deſtroyed and 
                     •
                  epri
                     •
                  ed of his 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪
And in the 
                     〈◊〉
                   Lordes his ſubi
                     •
                  ctes died in the tyrannie, and

                     〈◊〉
                   that ſhall be declared hereafter.
               The thirde Realme and dominion was M
                        •
                     gu
                        •••
                     , a countrey
alſo admirable, very healthſome, and very fertile, where the

beſt 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               The 
                     〈…〉
                   was named 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
m
                     •••
                  es of his ſerui
                     •••
                  
                  ▪ The Spaniardes 
                     •
                  ooke this king with
great ſubtiltie▪ and malice, e
                     •
                  en as hee was in his owne houſe▪
                  
                     •
                  ou
                     •••
                  ng him of nothing▪ They 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
                     •
                  a ſhippe to 
                     〈…〉
                  
other ſhippe in the porte 
                     〈…〉
                   vpſayle: Beholde
howe God by his i
                     •
                  ſt 
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  g
                     •
                  ment, woulde decla
                     •
                  e that i
                     •
                   with other
thinge
                     •
                  , was an exceeding 
                     〈◊〉
                   ini
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  tie and 
                     ••
                  iuſt, by
ſending the ſame night a 
                     〈◊〉
                  , which ſunke, and drenched that

                     〈◊〉
                   with the Spaniardes that were within. There died alſo
with them the 
                     〈…〉
                   with 
                     •
                  oltes and irons.
This Prince 
                     〈◊〉
                   three or foure brothers 
                     〈…〉
                  , and couragious

                     〈1 line〉
                  
Lorde and brother ſo againſt all equitie, together with the w
                     •••
                  s
and ſlaughters which the Spaniardes made in other realmes,
and ſpecially after that they had hearde that the king their brother
was dead▪ they put themſelues in armes to 
                     •••
                  ounter the
Spaniardes and to auenge the 
                     〈…〉
                   who 
                     〈◊〉
                   the other ſide

                     •
                  eeting with them 
                     •
                  n 
                     •
                  orſebacke (
                     〈…〉
                  
aboue all that may bee to 
                     〈◊〉
                   the India
                     ••
                   with) ſo they
rage in diſcomfitures and maſſacres▪ that the one 
                     〈◊〉
                   of
this Realme hath beene thereby deſolate and diſpeopled.
               The fourth Realme i
                     •
                   the ſ
                     •
                  me whiche is 
                     〈◊〉
                   of X
                        ••
                     agua.
This Realme 
                     〈…〉
                  
or to ſpeake of, 
                     〈…〉
                  
the other REalmes i
                     •
                   language and poliſhed ſpeech, in 
                     〈◊〉
                  
and good maners, the be
                     ••
                   co
                     •
                  poſed and ordered▪ For as much
as there were many noble Lordes and Gentlemen, the people
alſo beeing the beſt made and 
                     〈◊〉
                   be
                     ••
                  ifull. The King 
                     〈◊〉
                  
to name 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   which had 
                     〈◊〉
                   called An
                        •••
                     ona. 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
two, the brother and ſiſter▪ had 
                     〈◊〉
                   great ſeruices to the kings
of Caſtile, and great 
                     〈◊〉
                   to the Spaniardes, deliu
                     •
                  ring
them from ſundrie daungers of death.
               
                  
After the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of Beh
                        ••
                     mo, An
                        ••••
                     na 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
So
                     ••
                  raigne of the Realme. 
                     〈…〉
                  
the G
                     ••••
                  nour of this Ile with threeſcore Horſes, and more
then three hundre
                     ••
                   footemen (the horſemen alone had beene enough
to ſpoyle and ouerrunne not this Ile alone, but all the
firme lande withal.) And ſo 
                     〈◊◊〉
                   beeing called, more
then three hundre
                     ••
                   Lordes 
                     〈…〉
                  , of whome the
chiefeſt, 
                     〈…〉
                   cauſed to be
                     •
                   conueyed into a houſe of
thatch, and 
                     〈…〉
                  . 
                     •
                  owe on this wiſe
were theſe Lordes 
                     〈…〉
                  : all the reſt of the Lordes,
with other folk infinite, were ſmitten to 
                     •
                  each with their ſpeares
and ſwordes.
               But the Soueraigne L
                     •
                  die Anac
                        •
                     ona, to doe her honour
they hanged▪ It happened that certaine Spaniardes, eyther of

                     〈◊〉
                   or of co
                     •••
                  ouſneſſe, 
                     〈…〉
                   detayned certayne
young 
                     〈…〉
                  : becauſe they
woulde not 
                     〈◊〉
                   them ſlayne, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   them behinde them
on their horſe backes: another Spaniarde came behinde, whi
                  
                     •
                  he
ſtabbed them through with a ſpeare. If ſo bee any child
                     •
                  
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   boy tombled downe to the grounde▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Spaniarde

                     〈◊〉
                   and 
                     •
                  utte off his legges.
               Some certayne of theſe 
                     〈◊〉
                   which coulde eſcape this

                     〈…〉
                  , paſſed 
                     〈…〉
                   Ile neere unto
the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , within 
                     〈◊〉
                   eyght leagues. The gouenour condemned
all thoſe which had paſſed the 
                     〈…〉
                   becauſe
they had 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   was called 
                     
                        •
                     igney, ouer the whiche
raigne
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  , whome the
Spaniardes hanged vp. The people were in
                     ••
                  nite whome I
ſa
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   aliue, 
                     〈◊〉
                   rent 
                     ••
                   p
                     •••
                  es, and tormented 
                     〈◊〉
                   and

                     ••
                  raung
                     ••
                  y, and whome I ſawe made ſlaues, euen ſo many as
they 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               And 
                     〈◊〉
                   for as muche as there are ſo manye

                     〈…〉
                  
                  
thoſe peoples, that they can not conueniently be 
                     〈◊〉
                   in
writing (yea I doe verily beleeue that of a 
                     〈◊〉
                   of thinges to
be ſpoken of there can not be diſciphered of 
                     〈◊〉
                   thouſande 
                     •••
                  tes
one:) I wil only in that which 
                     〈◊〉
                   the warres 
                     〈◊〉
                   me
                     •
                  
                  tioned
conclude, auerre, and iuſtifie in conſcience, and as before
God, that of all others, which I ouerpaſſe to ſpeake of, or ſhall
bee able to ſpeake of, the Indians neuer gaue no more occaſion,
or cauſe, then might a conuent of good religious perſons
well ordered, why they ſhoulde bee robbed and ſlayne, and
why thoſe that eſcaped the death, ſhoulde be retayned in a perpetuall
captiuitie and bondage.
               I affirme yet moreouer, for ought that I can beleeue or
coniecture, that, during all the time that all this huge number
of theſe Iſlanders haue been murdered and made away vtterly,
they neuer committed againſt the Spaniardes any one mortall
offence, puniſhable by the l
                     ••
                   of m
                     •
                  n▪ And concerning offences,
of the which the puniſhment is reſerued vnto God, as are deſire
of reuengement, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and rancour, which theſe people might
beare againſt enemies ſo capitall as were the Spaniardes, that
very fewe perſons haue been attached with the blemiſhe, and
leſſe violent and forcible did I finde them, by the good experience
I had of them, then 
                     〈…〉
                   twelue yeeres of
age. And I knowe for certayne and infallible, that the Indians
had euermore moſt 
                     •
                  uſt cauſe of warre againſt the Spaniardes:
but the Spaniardes ne
                     •
                  er had any iuſt cauſe of warre agaynſt
the Indians, but they were all 
                     〈◊〉
                   and moſt 
                     •
                  nrighteous,
more then can bee ſpoken of any tyrant that is on the
whole earth. And I affirme the 
                     〈…〉
                  other
actes and geſtes by them 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               The warres 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and all the men 
                     〈◊〉
                   to death thereby
reſerued 
                     〈◊〉
                   the young 
                     〈◊〉
                  , women, and children▪
(the which they departed among them, in giuing 
                     〈…〉
                  ,
to another fourtie, and to another an hundreth, or tow hundreth,
according as 
                     •
                  uery one had the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   Tyrant,
whom they called the 
                     〈◊〉
                  ) they 
                     〈…〉
                   Spaniardes
vppon that condition and colour, that they woulde teache
them the Catholike faith, they themſelues who took vppon

them this charge of ſoules, commōly all idiots, or vtterly ignorant
perſons, barbarous men, extreemely couetous and vitious.
               Nowe the carke and care that theſe had of them, was to ſend
the men vnto the mines, to make them drein them out golde,
which is an intollerable trauell: and the women they beſtowed
into the countrey to their farmes, to manure and till the ground,
which is aſore trauell, euen for the very men, the ableſt and
mightieſt. They gaue to eate neither to one nor other, nought
ſaue graſſes and ſuch like thinges of no ſubſtance: in ſuche ſorte
as the milke of the breſtes of the wiues newe deliuered of their
childbyrth dryed vp: and thus dyed in a ſmall ſeaſon, all the litle
creatures their young children. Further, by reaſon of the ſeparation
and not cohabiting of the men with their wiues, the generation
ceaſed betweene them. The men died with toyle and
famine in the mineralles: theſe the women died of the ſame in
the fieldes. By theſe meanes were conſumed and brought to
their endes ſo huge a number of the folke of this Iſlande. By
the like might be aboliſhed and exterpate, all the inhabitantes of
the worlde.
               As touching loding, they layde vpon them foureſcore or
an hundreth poundes waight, which they ſhoulde carrie an hundreth
or two hundreth leagues: The Spaniſh alſo cauſing them
ſelues to be carried in lytres vppon men armes, or beddes made
by the Indians, in faſhion of nettes. For they ſerued their
turnes with them to tranſporte their carriages and bagage as
beaſtes, wherby they had vpon their backes & ſhoulders, w
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  es
and galles as poore galled beaſts. Alſo as touching whippings,
baſtonading, buffeting, blowes with the fiſt, curſing, and a thouſande
other kindes of torments, which they practiſed vpon them
during the tune that they trauayled, of a trueth, they can not bee
recounted in a long ſeaſon, nor written in a great deale of paper,
and they ſhoulde bee euen to affright men withall.
               It is to be noted, that the deſtruction of theſe iles and lands,
beganne after the deceaſe of the moſt gracious Queene, da
                     •
                  e
Iſabell, which was the yeere, a thouſande, fiue hundreth, and
foure. For before there were layed waſte in this ile, but certayne
Prouinces by vniuſt warre, and that not wholly altogether▪
                  
& theſe for ye more part, or in a maner al were cōcealed frō
the knowledge of ye Q. (vnto whō it may pleaſe god to giue his
holy glory) foraſmuch as ſhe had a great deſire, & a zeale admirable,
yt thoſe people might be ſaued & proſper, as we do know good
examples, the wc we haue ſeen wt our eies, & felt with our hands.
               Further note here, yt in what part of ye Indies ye Spaniſhe haue
come, they haue euermore exerciſed againſt ye Indiās, theſe innocēt
peoples, ye cruelties aforeſaid, & oppreſſiōs abominable, & inuēted
day by day new tormēts, huger & monſtrouſer, becōming euery
day more cruel. wherfore god alſo gaue thē ouer to fal headlong
down with a more extreme downfal into a reprobate ſenſe.
            
            
               Of the two Iles S. Iohn. and Iamayca.
               THe Spaniſh paſſed ouer to ye Ile of S. Iohn, & to yt of Iamayca
(wc were like gardens for bees) 1509. ſetting beforethē
ye ſame end which they had in the Ile Hiſpaniola, & committing
the robberies & crimes aforeſaid, adioyning therunto many
great & notable cruelties, killing, burning, roſting & caſting thē
to ye dogs: farthermore, afterwards oppreſſing, & vexing them in
their minerals & other trauel, vnto ye rotting out of thoſe pore innocēts
wc were in theſe two Iles, by ſupputatiō 6. C. M. ſoules:
yea I beleue, yt they were more thē a miliō, although there be not
at this day in either Ile. 200. perſons, and all periſhed without
faith and without Sacramentes.
            
            
               Of the Ile of Cuba.
               IN the year 1511 they paſſed to ye Ile of Cuba, which is (as I
haue ſaid) as long as there is diſtāce frō Vall
                     •
                  d
                     •
                  l
                     ••
                   to Rome▪
(where were great prouinces, & great multitudes of people)
they both begā 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   in thē after ye 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
far more cruelly. There came to paſſe in this Ilād matters
worth ye noting: A C
                     •
                  cique named Hathuey, which had co
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  eyed
himſelfe frō ye Ile Hiſpaniola to Cuba wt many of his people,
to auoid the calamities & 
                     〈…〉
                   ſo vnnatural of ye ſpaniſh:
when 
                     〈◊〉
                   certain Indians had told him 
                     〈…〉
                   the Spaniards
were cōming towards Cuba, he 
                     〈…〉
                  :
Nowe you know that the Spaniards 
                     〈…〉
                   this 
                     〈…〉
                  
ye knowe alſo by experience how they 
                     〈…〉
                  
ſuch & the people of 
                     〈◊〉
                   (meaning 
                     〈…〉
                  ) 
                     〈◊〉
                  
they come to do ye like here. Wot ye why they do it? they anſwered

no, vnleſſe 
                     〈…〉
                   they are by nature void of humanitie. He
replied: They do it not onely for yt
                  ▪ but becauſe they haue a god
whom they hono
                     •
                   & do demand very much & to yt end to haue frō
vs as wel as others to honor him wtall they do their vttermoſt to
ſubdue vs. He had thē by him a litle cheſtful of gold & Iewels, &
ſaid, Behold here the God of the Spaniards, let vs do to him▪ if
it ſo ſeeme you good, A
                     •••
                  os (which are windleſſe
                     •
                   & daunces)
thus doing, we ſhall pleaſe him & he wil command ye Spaniards
yt they ſhal do vs no harme: They anſwerd all with a loud voyce:
Wel ſaid ſir, wel ſaid. Thus then they daūſed before it, vntil they
were wery, thē quoth the L. Hathuey, Take we heed howeuer y•
world go, if we keep him, to ye end yt he be takē away frō vs in the
end they wil kill vs: wherfore let vs caſt him into ye riuer: whervnto
they all agreed, and ſo they caſt it into a great riuer there.
               This L. & 
                     〈◊〉
                   wēt alwaies fleeing ye ſpaniſh, incontinent as
they were arriued at ye ile of Cuba, as he wc knew thē but too wel▪
& defēded himſelf, whē as he met thē. In ye end he was takē & only
for becauſe that he fled frō a nation ſo vniuſt & e
                     •
                  uel, & that▪ he
defended himſelf frō ſuch as would kil him, & oppreſſe him euen
vnto ye death, wt all his folk, he was burned aliue. Now as he was
faſtned to the ſtake, a religious mā of S. Frācis order, a deuout
perſō, ſpoke to him ſomwhat of God & of our faith which thin
                     ••
                  
this ſaid L. had neuer heard of, yet might be ſufficiēt for the time
which ye hutchers gaue him, that if he would beleue thoſe things
which were ſpokē to him he ſhould go to heauen, where is glory
& reſt euerlaſting, yt if he did not beleue, he ſhould go to hel, there
to be tormēted perpetually. The L. after hauing a litle pauſed to
think of ye matter, demanded of the religious man, whether yt the
ſpaniards went to heauen? who anſwered, yea: ſuch of them that
were good. The Cacik anſwered againe immediatly wtout any
further deliberation, that he would not go to heauen, but that hee
would go to hell, to the ende, not to come in the place where ſuch
people ſhould be, and to the end not ſo ſee a nation ſo cruell. L
                     ••
                  
here the praiſes and honour, which God and our faith haue receiued
of the Spaniardes, which haue gone to the Iudes.
               One tyme the Indians came to meete vs, and to
receiue vs with victualles, and delicate cheere, and with

all entertaynmene ten leagues of a great city, and beeing come
at the place, they preſented vs with a great quantitie of 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
and of bread, and other meate, together with all that they coulde
doe for vs to the vttermoſt.
               See incontinent the diuell, whiche put him ſelfe into the
Spaniardes, to put them all to the edge of the ſworde in my preſence,
without any cauſe whatſoeuer, more then three thouſande
ſoules, which were ſet before vs, men, women, and children. I
ſaw there ſo great cruelties, that neuer my man liuing eyther
haue or ſhall ſee the like.
               Another tyme, but a fewe dayes after the premiſſes, I ſente
meſſengers vnto all the Lordes of the prouince of Hauana,
aſſuring them, that they ſhoulde not neede to ſee are (for they had
hearde of my credite) and that without withdrawing themſelues,
they ſhoulde come to receiue vs, and that there ſhoulde bee done
vnto them no diſpleaſure: for all the countrey was afraide, by
reaſon of the miſchiefes and murderings paſſed, and this did I
by the aduice of the Captayne him ſelfe. After that wee were
come into the Prouince, one and twentie Lordes and Cacikes
came to receiue vs, whome the Captayne apprehended incontinent,
breaking the ſafe conduite whiche I had made them, and
intended the day next following to burne them aliue, ſaying that
it was expedient ſo to doe, for that otherwiſe thoſe Lordes one
day, woulde doe vs a ſhrewde turne. I founde me
                     •
                   ſelfe in a
great deale of trouble to ſaue them from the fire: howbeit in the
ende they eſcaped.
               After that the Indians of this Iſlande were thus brought
into bondage and calamitie, like vnto thoſe of the Ile of Hiſpaniola,
and that they ſawe that they dyed and periſhed all without
remedie: ſome of them began to flie into the mountaynes, others
quite deſperate hanged them ſelues, and there hung together
hu
                     •
                  ſbandes with their wiues, hanging with them their litle children.
And through the crueltie of one onely Spaniarde, whiche
was a great tyraunt, and one whom I knowe, there hunge
them ſelues more then two hundred Indians: and of this faſhion
died an infinitie of people.
               There was in this Ile an officer of the kinges, 
                     〈◊〉
                   whome

they gaue for his ſhare three hundred Indians, of whome at the
ende of three monethes there died by him in the trauayle of the
mynes, two hundred and ſixtie: in ſuche ſorte, that there remained
nowe but thirtie, which was the tenth part. Afterwardes
they gaue him as many more, and more, and thoſe alſo be made
hauocke of in like maner, and ſtill as many as they gaue him, ſo
many hee flewe vntill hee dyed him ſelfe, and that the diuell carried
him away.
               In three or foure monethes (mee ſelfe beeing preſent) there
died more then ſixe thouſande children, by reaſon that they had
plucked away from them their fathers and mothers whiche they
ſent into the mines. I behelde alſo other things frightfull.
               Shortly after they reſolued to climbe after thoſe whiche
were in the mountaynes, where they wrought alſo ghaſtly
ſlaughters, and thus laide waſte all this Ile: which wee behelde
not long after, and it is great pitie to ſee it ſo diſpeopled and deſolate
as it is.
            
            
               Of the firme lande.
               IN the yeere one thouſand fiue hundred, and foureteene, there
landed in the maine a miſchieuous gouernour, a moſt cruell
tyraunt, which had neyther pitie nor prudencie in him, being
as an inſtrumēt of the wrath of God, fully reſolued to ſet into
this land agreat nūber of Spaniards. And howbeit yt aforetime
certayne other tyrauntes had entred the lande, and had ſpoyled,
murdered, and cruelly entreated very many folke: yet was it not
but on the ſea coaſt that they ſpoyled, and robbed, and did the
worſt that they could. But this ſurpaſſed all the others whiche
came before him, and all thoſe of all the Ilandes, howe curſed
and abhominable ſoeuer they were in all their doings. He not
onely waſted or diſpeopled the ſea coaſt, but ſacked alſo great
realmes and countreys, making hauockes by ſlaying and murdering
of peoples, infinite to bee numbred, and ſending them to
hell. He ouer ranne and herried moſt of the places in the land,
from Darien vpwarde, vnto the Realme and Prouinces of Nicaragua

within being, which are more then fiue hūdred leagues
of the beſt and moſt fertile grounde in the whole worlde, where
there were a good number of great Lordes, with a number of
townes, borrowes, and villages, and ſtore of gold in more abundaunce
then was to bee founde on the earth vntyll that preſent.
For albeit that Spaine was as it were repleniſhed with gold, of
the fineſt that came from the Ile Hiſpaniola: the ſame had been
only drawen out of the entrals of the earth by the Indians, of ye
mines, aforeſaid, wher they died as hath been ſayde.
               This gouernour with his men, found out newe ſorts of cruelties
and torments, to cauſe them to diſcouer and giue him golde.
There was a captayne of his, which flue in one walke and courſe
which was made by his commaundement, to robbe and roote out
more then fourtie thouſand ſoules, putting them to ye edge of the
ſword, burning thē, & giuing thē to ye dogs, & tormēting them diuerſly:
wc alſo a religious man of the order of S. Francis, who
went wt him, beheld wt his eies, and had to name frier Francis of
S. Romaine.
               The moſt pernicious blindnes, wc hath alwaies poſſeſſed thoſe
who haue gouerned the Indians in ſtead of the care wc they ſhold
haue for the conuerſion & ſaluation of thoſe people, (wc they haue
alwaies neglected, their mouth wt painted fables ſpeaking one
thing, but their heart thinking another) came to ye paſſe, as to cō
                  mand
orders to be ſet down vnto ye Indians to receiue the faith, &
render thēſelues vnto ye obediēce of the K. of Caſtile, or otherwiſe
to bid thē battel wt fire & ſworde, & to ſlay thē or make thē ſlaues:
As if ye ſonne of God which died for euery one of thē had cōmanded
in his law, wher he ſaith, Go teach al nations, yt there ſhould
be ordināces ſet down vnto infidels, being peacefull & quiet, & in
poſſeſſion of their proper lande, if ſo be they receiued it not foorth
with, wtout any preaching or teaching firſt had: & if yt they ſubmitted
not thēſelues to ye dominiō of a king, whō they neuer ſawe &
whom they neuer heard ſpeake of, & namely ſuch a one as whoſe
meſſengers & mē were ſo cruel, & ſo debarred frō all pitie, & ſuch
horrible tyrāts, yt they ſhould for ye loſe their goods & lands, their
liberty, their wiues & childrē, wt their liues. Which is a thing too
abſurd & fond, worthy of al reproch & mockery, yea worthy of hel
fire, in ſuch ſort as whē this wicked and wretched gouernour had

accepted the charge, to put in execution the ſayde ordinances, to
the end to make them ſeeme ye more iuſt in appearance. For they
were of thēſelues impertinent, againſt all reaſon & law, he commanded
(or peraduenture ye thieues, whom he diſpatched to doe ye
executiō, did it of their own heads) whē they were purpoſed to go
a rouing & robbing of any place, where they knewe yt there was
any gold, ye Indians being in their towns & dwelling houſes, wt
                  out
miſtruſting any thing, ye wicked Spaniards would go after ye
guiſe of thieues, vnto within halfe a league neere ſome town, borowe,
or village, and there by themſelues alone, & by night make
a reading, publication, or proclamation of ye ſaid ordinances, ſaying
thus, Oyes Caciques & Indians of this firme land of ſuch a
place: Be it knowen vnto you, that there is one God, one Pope,
one king of Caſtile, which is L. of theſe landes: make your appearance,
al delay ſet aſide, here to do him homage, &c. Which if
you ſhall not accompliſh: Be it knowen vnto you, yt we wil make
war vpō you, and we wil kil you, & make you ſlaues. Hereupon
at the fourth watch in ye morning, the poore innocents, ſleeping
yet with their wiues and children: theſe tyrantes ſet vppon the
place, caſting fire on the houſes which commonly were thatched,
& ſo burn vp all quick men, womē & children, more ſodainely thē
that they could of a great many be perceiued. They maſſacred at
the inſtant thoſe that ſeemed thē good, & thoſe whō they took priſonners,
they cauſed thē cruelly to die vpō ye rack, to make thē to
tell in what places there were any more golde thē they found wt
them: and others which remayned aliue, they made them ſlaues,
marking them with a hot iron, ſo after the fire being out & quenched,
they go ſeeke the golde in their houſes. This is then the deportement
in theſe affayres of this miſchieuous perſon, with all
the bond of his vngodly Chriſtians, which hee trayned from the
fourteenth yeere, vnto the one and twentie, or two and twentieth
yeere, ſending in theſe exploytes ſixe or moe of his ſeruants
or ſouldiers, by whom he receiued as many ſhares, ouer and beeſides
his Captaynes Generalles part, which he leuied of all the
golde, of all the pearles, and of all the iewels which they tooke
of thoſe whom they made their ſlaues. The ſelfſame did ye kings
officers, euery one ſending forth as many ſeruants as he coulde.
               
                  
The Byſhoppe alſo, which was the chiefe in the Realme,
hee ſent his ſeruauntes to haue his ſhare in the bootie: They
ſpoyled more golde within the tyme, and in this realme, as farre
foorth as I am able to recken, then woulde amount to a million
of Ducates, yea, I beleeue, that I make my reckoning with the
leaſt. Yet will it bee founde, that of all this great thieuing, they
neuer ſent to the king ought ſaue three thouſande Caſtillans,
hauing there about killed and deſtroyed aboue eyght hundred
thouſande ſoules.
               The other tyraunt gouernours which ſucceeded after, vnto
the yeere thirtie and three, ſlue, or at leaſt wiſe conſented, for
all thoſe which remayned to ſlay them in that tyrannicall ſlauerie.
               Amongſt an infinite ſorte of miſchiefes, which this gouernoure
did, or conſented vnto the doing during the time of his
gouernment, this was one: To witte, that a Cacike or Lorde
giuing him, eyther of his good will, or whiche is rather to bee
thought for feare, the weight of niene thouſande Ducates: the
Spaniardes not content withall, tooke the ſaide Lorde, and tyed
him to a ſtake, ſetting him on the earth, his feete ſtretched vp, againſt
the which they ſet fire to cauſe him to giue thē ſome more
golde, The Lorde ſent to his houſe, whence there were brought
yet moreouer three thouſand Caſtillans. They goe a freſhe to
giue him newe tormentes. And when the Lorde gaue them no
more, eyther becauſe he had it not, or becauſe hee woulde giue
them no more, they bent his feete agaynſt the fyre, vntill that the
very marrowe ſprang out and trylled downe the ſowles of his
feete: ſo as hee therewith died. They haue oftentimes exerciſed
theſe kinde of tormentes towardes the Lordes, to make
them giue them golde, wherewith they haue alſo ſlayne them.
               An other tyme, a certayne companie of Spaniardes, vſing
their theftes and robberies, came to a mountayne, where were
aſſembled and hid a number of people, hauing ſhunned thoſe
men ſo pernicious and horrible: whom incontinent entring vpon,
they tooke a three or foureſcore, as well women as mayds, hauing
killed as many as they could kill.
               The morrowe after, there aſſembled a great companie of

Indians, to purſue the Spaniardes, warring againſt them for
the great deſire they had to recouer their wiues and daughters.
               The Spaniards perceiuing the Indians to approche ſo neere
vpon them, would not ſo forgo their pray, but ſtabd their ſwords
thorowe the bellies of the wiues and wenches, leauing but one
alone aliue of all the foureſcore. The Indians felt their hearts
to burſt for ſorrowe and griefe which they ſuffered, yelling out
in cries and ſpeaking ſuche woordes: O wicked men, O yee
the cruell Spaniardes: doe yee kill Las Iras? They terme Iras
in that countrey the women: as if they woulde ſay, To kyll
women, thoſe be actes of abhominable men, and cruell as
beaſtes.
               There was a tenne or fifteene leagues from Ioanama, a
great Lorde named Paris, which was very riche of golde: The
Spaniardes went thither, whome this Lorde receiued as if they
had been his own brethen, and made a preſent vnto the Captaine
of fiftie thouſand Caſtillans of his own voluntarie accord. It ſemed
vnto the Captaine and the other Spaniardes, that he which
gaue ſuch a great ſumme of his owne will, ſhoulde haue a great
treaſure, which ſhoulde be the ende and eaſing of their traueyles.
They make wiſe, and pretende in wordes to depart: but they returne
at the fourth watch of the morning, ſetting vpon the towne
which miſtruſted nothing, ſet it on fire, whereby was burnt and
ſlayne a great number of people, & by this meanes they brought
away in the ſpoyle fiftie, or threeſcore thouſand Caſtillans moe.
               The Cacik or Lorde eſcaped without being ſlayne or taken,
and leuied incontinent as many of his as he coulde. And at the
ende of three or foure dayes, ouertaketh the Spaniardes whiche
had taken from him an hundreth and thirtie, or fourtie thouſande
Caſtillans, and ſet vppon them valiantly, killing fiftie Spaniardes,
and recouering all the golde whiche they had taken from
him. The others ſaued them ſelues by running away, beyng
well charged with blowes and wounded.
               Not long after, diuers of the Spaniſhe returne againſt the
ſaide Cacik, and diſcomfite him with an infinite number of his
people. Thoſe which were not ſlayne, they put them to the ordiuarie
bondage: in ſuch ſort, as that there is not at this day, neyther

track nor token, that there hath bin liuing there eyther people,
or ſo much as one man alone borne of woman within thirtie
leagues of the lande, which was before notably peopled and gouerned
by diuers Lordes. There is no reconing able to be made
of the murders which this caitiffe with his companie committed
in theſe realmes which he ſo diſpeopled.
            
            
               Of the prouince of Nicaragua.
               THe yeere a thouſande, fiue hundred, twentie and two, or
twentie three, this tyraunt went farder into the lande: to
bring vnder his yoke the moſt fertile prouince of Nicaragua, &
ſo in thither hee entred in an euill houre. There is no man which
is able worthely and ſufficiently to ſpeake of the fertiltie, healthſomeneſſe,
proſperitie, and frequencie, of thoſe nations that
there were.
               It was a thing wonderfull to beholde, howe well it was peopled,
hauing townes of three or foure leagues in length, full of
maruilous fruites, which fruites were alſo the cauſe of the frequencie
of the people. Theſe people, for as muche as the countrey
was flatte and leuell, hauing no hilles where any might
hide them, and for that it was ſo pleaſant and delectable, that the
natiue inhabitauntes coulde not abandon it but with great heart
griefe and difficultie, for which cauſe they the rather endured and
ſuffered grieuons perſecutions, ſupporting as muche as they
coulde, the tyrannies and ſeruitudes, inflicted by the Spaniſhe.
Alſo for that by their nature they were verye ſofte natured and
peaceable people, theſe (I ſay) this tyraunt with his mates
made to endure (that which hee had vſed alſo to doe to deſtroy
likewiſe other realmes) ſo many dammages, ſo many murders,
ſo many cruelties, ſo many ſlaueries and iniquities, that there is
no humane tongue is able to diſcipher them. He ſent fiftie horſemen,
and cauſed to ſlay all the people of this prouince, (which is
greater then the countye of Roſſillon) with the ſwoorde: in
ſuch ſort, as that he left aliue, nor man, nor woman, nor olde, nor

young for the leaſt cauſe in the world: as if they came not incontinent
at his commaunde: or if they did not bring him ſo many
load of Mahis, which ſignifieth in that country bread corne: or if
they did not bring him ſo many Indians to ſerue him and others
of his company: for the countrey lay leuell, as was ſayde, and no
creature coulde eſcape his horſes and diueliſhe rage.
               He ſent Spaniardes to make out rodes, that is to ſay, to go
a thieuing into other prouinces: and gaue leaue to thoſe rouers,
to carrie with them as many Indians of this peaceable people
as they liſted, and that they ſhoulde ſerue them, whome they put
to the chayne, to the ende they ſhoulde not giue ouer the burdens
of three or foureſcore poundes weight, wherewith they loded
them, whereof it came to paſſe oftentimes that of foure thouſand
Indians, there returned not home to their houſen ſixe on
liue: but euen fell downe ſtarke dead in the high way: and when
any were ſo wearie that they coulde march no farther for the
lieaft of their burdens, or that ſome of them fell ſicke, or fainted
for hunger or thyrſt, becauſe it ſhould not neede to ſtande ſo long
as to vnlocke the chaine, and to make the ſpeedier diſpatch, hee
cut off the head from ye ſhoulders, and ſo the head tumbled downe
one way, and the bodie another. Now conſider with your ſelues,
what the other pore ſoules might thinke the whiles, Certainely
whē as he vſed to ſpeede out ſuch voiages, ye Indians knowing yt
none in a maner euer returned home again, at parting one frō another
they would weep and ſigh, ſaying: ſuch waies are ye ſame
where as we were wont to ſerue ye chriſtians, & howbeit we traueiled
ſore there: yet that notwithſtanding we came home again
to our houſen, our wiues and our children: but nowe wee goe
without hope euer to returne againe to ſee thē, & to liue together
with them.
               At a time when he woulde make a newe ſharing forth of the
Indians, becauſe his pleaſure was ſuch, yea men ſay that it was
in deede to ridde the Indians, as thoſe to whome hee meant no
good at all, but to giue them away to whome he ſawe good: hee
was the cauſe that the Indians ſowed not their groundes one
whole yeeres continuance.
               
                  
So as nowe, when they wanted bread, the Spaniards tooke
away from the Indians their Mahis, which they had in ſtore for
prouiſion, to nouriſhe them and their children: whereby there
dyed of famine, more then twentie or thirtie thouſande ſoules.
And it came to paſſe, that a woman fallen madde with the famin,
ſlue her ſonne to eate him.
               Foraſmuch as euery towneſhippe, and all other places inhabited
that the Spaniardes had in their ſubiection, was none
other then a very garden of pleaſure (as hath bin ſayd) they kept
them ſelues euery one forſooth in the place eſcheated to him in
partition (or as they vſe to ſpeake) giuen him in commaund, and
did their affayres, nouriſhing themſelues with the goods and
prouiſions of the poore Indians. In this wiſe did they take the
landes and inheritaunces perticuler wherewith they ſuſtayned
themſelues, ſo as the Spaniardes kept in their owne houſes, all
the Indians, Lords, old men, women, and children, cauſing them
to ſerue them day and night without reſt, euen to the infantes
as ſoone as they coulde but goe, to put them to the greateſt thing
they were able to doe: yea and to greater thinges then they were
able to doe. And thus haue they couſumed and aboliſhed, and
doe yet euery day vnto this preſent, conſume and aboliſh the few
remayning behind, not permitting thē to retayn houſe nor ought
els that is their owne. Wherein they may vaunt to haue ſurmounted
them ſelues, in their owne iniquities and vnrighteouſneſſes
by them wrought in Hiſpaniola.
               They haue diſcomfited and oppreſſed in this prouince a great
number of people, and haſtened their death in cawſing them to
beare boordes and tymber vnto the hauen thirtie leagues diſtance,
to make ſhippes with: and ſent them to goe ſeeke honnie
and waxe amiddeſt the mountaines, where the Tigres deuoured
them: Yea they haue laden women with childe, and women new
deliuered or lying in, with burdens enough for beaſts.
               The greateſt plague whiche hath moſt diſpeopled this prouince,
hath beene the licence which the gouernour gaue to the
Spaniardes, to demaunde or exact of the Cacikes and Lordes of
the countrey ſlaues. They did giue them euery foure or fiue
moneths, or as often times as euery one coulde obtayne licence

of the gouernour fiftie ſlaues: with threatninges, that if they
gaue them not, they woulde burne them aliue, or cauſe them to
bee eaten with dogges.
               Nowe ordinarily the Indians doe not keepe ſlaues,
and it is muche if one Cacike doe keepe two, three, or foure:
Wherefore to ſerue this turne, they went to theyr ſubiectes, and
tooke firſt all the Orphelius, and after wards they exacted of him
that had two children one, and of him that had three, two: and in
this maner was the Carike, fayne to furniſhe ſtill to the number
that the tyrane impoſed, with the great weeping and crying of
the people: for they are people that doe loue (as it ſeemeth) tenderly
their children. And for becauſe that this was done continually,
they diſpeopled from the yeere 23. vnto the yeere 33.
all this realme. For there went for ſixe or ſeuen yeeres ſpace,
fiue or ſixe ſhippes at a time, carrying foorth great numbers of
thoſe Indians, for to ſell them for ſlaues at Ioanama and Peru:
where they all dyed not long after. For it is a thing prooued
and experimented a thouſande times, that when the Indians
are tranſported from their naturall countrey, they ſoone ende
their liues: beſides that theſe giue them not their ſuſtenance,
neyther yet dimmiſh they of their toyle, as neyther doe they buy
them, for ought elſe but to toyle. They haue by this maner
of doing drawen out of this prouince of the Indies, whome they
haue made ſlaues, being as free borne as I am, more then ſiue
hundreth thouſande ſoules. And by the diueliſhe warres which
the Spaniſhe haue made on them, and the hidious thraledome
that they haue laid vpon them, they haue brought to their deaths,
other fiftie or threeſcore thouſande perſons, and doe yet dayly
make hauocke of them at this preſent. Al theſe ſlaughters haue
been accompliſhed within the ſpace of fourteene yeeres. There
may be left at this day in all this prouinces of Nicaragua, the
number of a foure or fiue thouſande perſons, whiche they alſo
cauſe to die as yet euery day, through bondages and oppreſſions
ordinarily and perſonall, hauing bin the countrey the moſt peopled
in the worlde, as I haue already ſaide.
            
            
               
               Of newe Spayne.
               IN the yeere one thouſande, fiue hundred and ſeuenteene, was
newe Spaine diſcouered: at the diſcouerie whereof were
committed great diſorders and ſlaughters of the Indians, by
thoſe which had the doing of that exployit. The yeere a thouſande,
fiue hundred, and eyghteene, there went Spaniſh Chriſtians
(as they terme them ſelues,) to rob and ſlay, notwithſtanding
that they ſayde they went to people the countrey. Sithence
that yere, a thouſande, fiue hundred, & eyghteen, vnto this preſent
the yeere a thouſande, fiue hundreth, fourtie two, the vniuſt dealings,
the violencie, and the tyrannies which the Spaniardes
haue wrought againſt the Indians, are mounted to the higheſt
degree of extremitie: thoſe ſelfe ſame Spaniardes, hauing thorowly
loſt the feare of God, and of the king, and forgotten themſelues.
For the diſcomfitures, cruelties, ſlaughters, ſpoyles, the
deſtructions of Cities, pillages, violences, and tyrannies which
they haue made in ſo many realms, and ſo great, hath bin ſuch &
ſo horrible, that all ye things which we haue ſpokē of are nothing
in compariſon of thoſe which haue bin done and executed frō
the yere 1518. vnto the yere 1542. & as yet at this time, this moneth
current of Septēber, are in doing & cōmitting ye moſt grieuouſeſt,
& the moſt abominableſt of al: in ſuch ſort yt the rule whiche
we ſet down before is verified: That is, that from the beginning
they haue alwaies proceeded frō euil to worſe, & haue gone
beyond thēſelues in ye moſt greateſt diſorders & diueliſh doings.
               In ſuch wiſe, as that ſince the firſt entring into new Spaine,
wc was on the eight day of April, in ye 18. yeere, vnto ye 13. yeere,
which make 12. yeeres complete: the ſlaughters & the deſtructions
haue neuer ceaſed, which the bloodie and cruel handes of ye
Spaniardes haue continually executed in 400. and 50. leagues
of land or there about in cōpaſſe, roūd about Mexico, & the neighbour
regions round about, ſuch as the which might contaynt 4.
or 5. great realmes, as great & a great deale farre fertiler then is
Spain. All this countrey was more peopled with inhabitantes,

then Toledo, and Seuill, and Valadolyd, and Sauagoce, with
Barcelona. For that there hath not beene commonly in
thoſe cities, nor neuer were ſuch a worlde of people, when they
haue beene peopled with the moſt, as there was then in the
ſayde countrey, which contayneth in the whole compaſſe more
then one thouſande eyght hundred leagues: during the time of
the aboue mentioned twelue yeeres, the Spaniardes haue ſlaine
& done to death in the ſayd hundred & fiftie leagues of land what
men, what women, what young and litle children, more then
foure millions of ſoules, with the dint of the ſworde and ſpeare,
& by fire, during (I ſay) the conqueſts (as they call them) but rather
in deede during the routes of barbarous tyrantes, ſuche as
are condemned not onely by the law of God, but alſo by alllaws
of man, and are worſer then thoſe which are done by the Turke
to deſtroy the church of Chriſt. Neyther yet doe I here compriſe
thoſe, whom they haue ſlayne, and do ſlay as yet euery day, in the
aforeſaid ſlauerie and oppreſſion ordinary.
               There is no tongue, ſkill, knowledge, nor induſtrie of man,
which is able to recount the particularities of the dreadfull dooings,
which theſe arrand enemies, yea deadly enemies of mankinde
haue put in vre generally throughout and in diuers parts,
and at diuers times within the ſaide compaſſe of grounde, ſpecially
ſome of the deedes done, becauſe of their circumſtances whiche
make them become the more haynous, can not be well as it
ought to be diſciphred by any diligence, leaſure, or quoting what
ſoeuer that may be thereto employed. Howebeit I will rehearſe
ſome things of certayne parties, but vnder proteſtation, & as if I
were ſworne ſolemnly to tell the trueth, that is, that I doe beleeue
that I ſhal not when I haue all done, touch one only point
of a thouſande.
            
            
               Of newe Spaine in particular.
               Amongſt other murderers & maſſacres they committed this one
which I am now to ſpeak of, in a great citie more thē of a thirtie

thouſande houſeholdes, which is called Cholula: that is, that,
comming before them the Lords of the countrey and places nere
adioyning, and firſt and formoſt the Prieſtes with their chiefe
high prieſt in proceſſion, to receiue the Spaniardes with great
ſolemnitie and reuerence, ſo conducting them in the middeſt of
them, towardes their lodgings in the citie, in the houſen and
place of the Lorde, or other principall Lordes of the Citie: the
Spaniardes aduiſed with themſelues to make a maſſarre, or a
chaſtiſe (as they ſpeake) to the ende, to raiſe and plant a dread
of their cruelties in euery corner of all that countrey.
               Nowe this hath been alwayes their cuſtomary maner of
doyng, in euery the regions which they haue entred into, to execute
incontinent vpon their firſt arriuall, ſome notable cruell
butcherie, to the ende, that thoſe poore and innocent lambes
ſhould tremble for feare whiche they ſhould haue of them: in this
wiſe they ſent firſt to ſommon all the Lordes and Noble men of
the citie, and of all the places ſubiect vnto the ſame citie: who
ſo ſoone as they came to ſpeake with the captyne of the Spaniardes,
were incontinent apprehended before that anye bodye
might perceiue the matter, to bee able therevppon to beare tydinges
thereof vnto others. Then were demaunded of them
fiue or ſixe thouſande Indians, to carry the loadings and carriages
of the Spaniardes: which Indians came forth with, and
were beſtowed into the baſe courtes of the Houſen. It was a
pitifull caſe to ſee theſe poore folke, what time they made them
redy to beare the carriages of the Spaniarde. They come all
naked, onely their ſecrete partes couered, hauing euery one vpon
their ſhoulder a nette with a ſmall deale of victuall: they
howe them ſelues euery one, and hold their backes cowred down
like a ſort of ſilly lambes, preſenting them ſelues to the ſwords,
and thus being all aſſembled in the baſe court together with others,
one part of the Spaniſhe all armed, beſtowe them ſelues
at the gates to hemme them in, whiles the reſt put theſe poore
ſheepe to the edge of the ſworde and the ſpeares, in ſuch ſort, that
there coulde not ſcape away one onely perſon, but that hee was
cruelly put to death: ſauing that after a two or three dayes, you
might haue ſeene come forth ſundry all couerred with blood whiche

had 
                     〈◊〉
                   and ſaued them ſelues vnder the dead bodies of their
fellowes, and nowe preſenting themſelues before the Spaniardes,
aſking them mercy and the faiung of their liues; they
founde in them no parte, nor compaſſion any whit at all but were
all hewed in peeces.
               All the Lordes whiche were aboue and vnderneath were all
bounde, the Captayne commaunding there to hee brent quicke
being bounde vnto ſtakes pitched into the grounde. Howe be it
one Lorde, which might bee peraduenture the principall and
king of the countrey ſaued him ſelfe, and caſt him ſelfe with thirtie
or fourtie other menne into a temple thereby, which was as
good vnto them as a forte, whiche they call in their language,
qewe: and there be defended him ſelfe a good part of the day.
But the Spaniards, whoſe handes nothing can eſcape ſpecially
armed for the warre, caſt fire on the temple, and burned all
thoſe which were within. Who caſt out theſe voyces and cries,
O yee euill men! O ye euill men! What diſpleaſure haue wee
done you? why doe yee ſlay vs? Goe. Goe you ſhall come at
Mexico: where our Soueraigne Lorde Mortenſuma ſhall
take vengeance of you. It is reported that as the Spaniardes
played this gay play in the baſe court, putting to the edge of the
ſword a fiue or ſixe thouſand men, their captaine hauing his heart
all in a Iollitie ſang.
               
                  Mira Nero de Tarpeya à Roma como ſeardias
                  Gritos, dan ninos, y vie
                        •
                     os: y el de nada ſe dolia:
               
               That is to ſay,
               
                  Fro Tarpey top, dan Nero gan ſee Roome all flaming
brenne,
                  Both young and old cry out, the whiles his heart did neuer
yerne.
               
               THey made alſo another great butcherie in the Citie of Tapeaca;
whiche was greater and of more number of houſeholdes,

and more people inhabiting then in the citie afore ſor
                     •
                  e.
They ſiue here with the ſharpe of the ſword, an infinite number
of people, with great circūſtances & particularties of cruelties.
               From Cholula they went to Mexico. The king Motenſuma
ſent to meete them a thouſande of preſentes, and Lordes, and
people, making ioy and mirth by the way.
               And at the entry of the cawſie of Mexico, whiche reacheth two
leagues in length, he ſent alſo his brother; accompanied with a
great number of honorable Lordes, bearing with them rich preſents,
gold, ſiluer, & apparell: & at the barres of the citie, the king
in perſon with all his great court, came to receiue them, beeing
carried in a lighter of golde, and them accompanied vnto
the palace which hee had cauſed to bee made ready for them.
               The ſelfe ſame very day, as ſome haue tolde me the which were
then and there preſent, they tooke by a certayne diſſimulation
the great king Moteuſuma, as he miſtruſted nothing, and ordained
foureſcore men to keepe him. Afterwardes, they put giues
on his feete. But letting all this paſſe, in the which there were
notable poyntes to ſpeake of, I will onely rehearſe one which
was ſinguler wrought by th
                     •
                  ſe tirantes. The Captaine general
of the Spaniſhe was gone to thē ſea porte to take another Spaniſhe
Captayne, which came againſt in warre: and hauing lefte
another vnder captayne in his roome, with a fewe more then an
hundreth men to keepe the ſayde king Motenſuma: theſe ſame
aduiſed with them ſelues to doe another thing woorthy the note,
to the ende, to encreaſe and augment more and more in all thoſe
regions, the awe which they had of them: a practiſe and ſtratageme
which (as I ſayde before) they haue often vſed. All this
meane while the Indians, the common people, and the Lordes
of the whole Citie ſought none other thing, ſaue onely to ſhewe
pleaſure and paſtime to their Lorde which was deteyned priſoner.
And amongeſt other ſportes which they made him: were
their friſkes and daunces whiche they made in the euening thorowe
out all the high ſtreetes and markette places, which daunces,
they call Mitotes, as in the iles they call them Areytos.
               
               The do weare in theſe friſkes all their riche furniture, their
beſt gorgious attyre, and their iewels, deſpiſing them ſelues to

liking in all thinges, for theſe are the greateſt ſignes of ioy and
feſtiuitie that they doe vſe. Nowe at this time, the nobilitis alſo,
and princes of the blood royall, eche one after his degree kept
their reuels and feaſtes at the neereſt vnto the houſe where was
deceyned priſoner their ſoueraigne. Ioyning vnto the walles of
the ſaide palace, were there more then two thouſande youthes,
Lordes children, which were the flower of the nobilitie of all the
ſtate of Morenſuma. Againſt thoſe made out the captayne of the
Spaniardes with a troupe of ſouldiers, ſending the others vnto
other places of the citie where the friſks and daunces were kept,
and all making wiſe onely to go ſee them. The captayne had giuen
in charge, that at a certayne appointed houre, they ſhould all
caſt them vpon thoſe dauncers, and hee himſelfe for his own part,
caſting himſelfe into the thronge, the Indians miſtruſting nothing,
but onely intending their diſport, hee ſaith: Saynttiago, let
vs amongſt, them, & vpon thē ſirs. And thus their arming ſwords
in their fiſtes, they began to rip theſe bodies naked and delicate,
and to ſhed that blood gentle and noble, in ſuch ſort, as that they
left not a man aliue. The others performed the like in other places,
a thing which ſet all thoſe realmes and nations in a fright &
extreme deſperation, and whereof as long as the world ſhall laſt,
they will neuer lin (if themſelues do not decay) to lament, and recorde
in their Areytos & ſolemne meetings, as in rime theſe calamities,
and the ſpoile of the ſpring of their ancient nobilitie, of
the which they are wont to vaunt thēſelues & glory very much.
               The Indians ſeeing ſo great an iniquitie, and a crueltie neuer
heard of the like, made againſt ſo many innocentes without
any cauſe: ſpecially hauing put vp quietly the impriſonment &
that no leſſe wrongfull of their ſoueraigne Lorde, who alſo had
commaunded them not to make warre vpon the Spaniardes: all
the citie put them ſelues in armes, whervpon the Spaniards being
aſſaulted and many of them hurt, with much a do might they
eſcape, but ſet a dagger on the cheſt of the breſt of the priſoner
Motenſuma to kill him, if he laied not him ſelfe out at a gallery
or winddowe, to cōmand the Indians that they ſhould not beſet
the houſe, & they ſhould keepe thē quiet. The Indians taking no
care as then of obeying, aduiſed thē to chuſe a L. & captayn from

amongſt them ſelues to conduct their battals. And for as much
as the Captayn which was gone to the hauen, was returned victorious,
leading with him more Spaniardes then he had carried
foorth, and for that hee was nowe neere at hande, the combate
ceaſed about a three or foure dayes, vntill ſuch time as hee was
entred the towne.
               Then the Indians aſſembled an infinite number of people
out of all the countrey, and ſkirmiſhed in ſuch wiſe, and ſo long
a ſeaſon, that the Spaniſh thought they ſhould al die on the place,
wherefore they deliberated to abandon the citie for one night.
That which their diſſeighu being knowen to the Indians, they
ſlewe of them a great number vppon the bridges of the Marſhes
in a warre moſt rightfull, and moſt lawfull for the cauſes moſt
righteous which they had as hath been ſaide: the whiche euery
reaſonable and true dealing man will mayneteyne for good.
Soone after, the Spaniſhe hauing realied themſelues, the
combat with the Citie renewed, where the Spaniardes made an
horrible and ghaſtly butcherie of the Indians, and ſlue an infinite
of people, and brent aliue the great Lords.
               After theſe great and abhominable tyrannies committed
in the Citie of Mexico, and in other cities, and the countrey
renne, fifteene, and twentie leagues compaſſe of Mexico: this
tyrannie and peſtilence aduaunced it ſelfe forwarde, to waſte alſo,
infect, and lay deſolate the prouince of Panuco. It was a
thing to bee wondered at of the worlde, of people that there
were, and the ſpoyles and ſlaughters there done. Afterwarde
they waſted alſo after the ſelfe maner, all the prouince of Tuttepeke,
and the prouince of Ipelingo, and the prouince of Columa:
eche prouince conteyning more grounde then the realme of Leon
& of Caſtile. It ſhoulde bee a thing very difficulte, yea, impoſſible
to ſpeake or recount the diſcomfitures, the ſlaughters, and
the cruelties, which they there committed: and woulde cauſe a
great remorſe vnto the hearers.
               Here is to be noted, that the title wherewith they entred,
and beganne to make hauocke of all theſe harmeleſſe and ſilly
Indians, and haue diſpeopled that countrey, which ſhoulde haue
cauſed a great reioycing to all thoſe which ſhoulde bee in trueth

Chriſtians, beyng ſo peopled as they were: was to ſay that they
ſhoulde come and put them ſelues in ſubiection, to ſerue the
king of Spain, otherwiſe that they woulde kill them, or make
them ſlaues. And thoſe which came not incontinent to ſatiſfie
their demaundes ſo vniuſt, and did not put them ſelues into the
handes of men ſo vniuſt, cruell, and beaſtly, they called them
rebelles, as thoſe which had lift vp them ſelues agaynſt the
kinges Maieſtie, and for ſuch they accuſed them to the king our
ſoueraigne Lorde: the blinde vnderſtandings of thoſe which gouerned
the Indians, beeing not able to comprehende nor perceyue
this much, which in their lawes is more cleerely taught
then any other principle of Lawe, that is, that none can bee reputed
a rebell, if firſt hee be not a ſubiect. Nowe let Chriſtians,
and thoſe which haue any perceyuerance conſider with
them ſelues, if ſuche caſes can prepare and informe the mindes
of any nations whatſoeuer liuing in their countrey in aſſurance,
and not thinking to owe any thing to any perſon, hauing their
owne naturall liege Lordes whom they ſerue and obey, ſuddenly
to come and tell them tydings:
               Put you vnder the obeyſance of a king a ſtranger, whom
ye neuer ſawe, nor neuer hearde of before: otherwiſe knowe yee
that wee will rent yee incontinent all to peeces, ſpecially when
it is knowen by experience that they doe it in deede as ſoone as
it is but ſayde. And that which is farre more frightfull, they
take thoſe, which doe yeelde them ſelues to obey, to put them
into a moſte grieuous bondage, in the whiche there are
toyles incredible, and tormentes greater and of longer continuance
then thoſe ſame of them which are excuted by the ſwoorde,
for in the ende they periſhe, they, their wiues, their children, and
their whole generation.
               And put the caſe, that through the threates and frightes aforeſaide,
thoſe peoples, or any others whoſoeuer doe come to
obey and acknowledge the dominion of a ſtraunger king: doe
not theſe blunderers ſee, being altogether benummed with ambition
and deueliſh couetouſnes, that they winne not a mite of
right, foraſmuche as ſo it is, that it is cauſed vpon frightes and
terrours which might bee able to ſlake men the conſtanteſt and

the beſt aduiſed: and that by the lawes of nature, man, and
God, it hath no more force then a handfull of winde, to make any
thing auaylable to any purpoſe whatſoeuer, ſauing the puniſhment
and obligation which abideth them in the bottom of hel. I
paſſe ouer the loſſes and dammages which they doe to the king,
when as they ſpoyle his realmes, and bring to nought (as much
as in them lyeth) all the right which they haue in the Indies.
               Theſe are nowe the ſeruices, whiche the Spaniardes haue
done, and as yet doe at this houre vnto the aforeſaide kinges, and
ſoueraigne Lords, vnder the colour of this gallant title, ſo rightfull,
and ſo ſmoothly garniſhed.
               This Captayne tyraunt, with this gorgeous and pretended
title, diſpatched two other Captaynes, as very tyrauntes and
farre more cruell, and leſſe pitifull then him ſelfe, into greate
realmes moſt flouriſhing, and moſt fertile, and full of people, to
witte, the realme of Guatimala, which lieth to the ſeawarde on
the South ſide, and the ſame of Naco, and Honduras, otherwiſe
called Guaymura, which coaſteth on the ſea on the North ſide,
confronting and confining the one with the other, three hundred
leagues diſtaunce from Mexico. Hee ſent the one by land,
and the other by ſea: both the one and the other carried with
them a maynie of trowpes to ſerue on horſe backe and a foote.
               I ſay the trueth, that of the miſchieues which theſe two
haue wrought, and principally hee whiche went to Guatimala
(for that other dyed ſoone after of an euill death,) there
might be made a great booke, of ſo many villanies, of ſo manie
ſlaughters, ſo many deſolations, and of ſo many outrages and
brutiſhe vniuſtices, as were able to affright the age preſent
and to come.
               For certayne this man ſurpaſſed all the others, preſent, and
gone before, in quantitie and in number, as well for the abominations
whiche hee committed, as for the peoples and countreys
whiche he layde waſte and deſert. All the which thinges were
infinite.
               Hee which went by ſea committed exceeding pillinges, cruelties,
& diſorders amongſt the people on the ſea coaſt: before whō
ſome comming with preſents from the realme of Yucatane whiche

is the high way to ye aforeſaid realme of Naro & Guaimura,
towards the which they went: when he came vnto them he ſente
captaynes, & a many of men of armes through all that land, whiche
went ſacking, ſlaughtering, & deſtroying as many people as
there were to be foūd, & principally one, who with three hundred
more, hauing mutined and rebelled, and ſetting himſelfe into the
countrey towardes Guatimala, went ſpoyling and burning all
the towns that he found, in killing and robbing the people inhabitants
of them. That which he did of a ſet purpoſe, in more
then an hundred and twentie leagues of the land, to the end, that
if any had ſent after him, thoſe which ſhould come, ſhoulde finde
the countrey diſpeopled and debelled, and that they were ſo ſlain
of the Indians, in reuenge of the dammages and ſpoiles by them
made. After whome haue ſucceeded ſundry others moſt cruell
tyrantes, the which with their ſlaughters and dreadful cruelties,
and by bringing the Indians into thraldrome, whom afterwards
they ſoulde vnto thoſe who carried them with their ſhippings of
wine, garments, and other things, and by reaſon of the tyrannicall
ſeruitude ordinary, ſince the yeere a thouſande, fiue hundred,
twentie foure, vntill the yeere 1535. haue layd waſte thoſe ſame
prouinces and realmes of Naro and Honduras, the which reſē
                  bled
a paradiſe of pleaſures: and were more peopled, frequented,
and inhabited, then any countrey of the worlde: and nowe of late
we comming a long thereby, haue ſeene them ſo diſpeopled and
deſtroied, that who ſo ſhould ſee them, his heart would cleaue for
ſorrowe, ware he neuer ſo flintie.
               They haue ſlaine within theſe eleuen yeeres, more then two
Millions of ſoules, hauing not left in more then an hundreth
leagues of the countrey ſquare, but two thouſande perſons,
whome they ſlay as yet dayly in the ſayde ordinarie bondage.
               Nowe let vs returne to write of the great tyraunt and Captayne,
which went to Guatimala, (who, as hath been ſayde, exceeded
all the aforepaſſed, and is comparable to all thoſe, which
are at this day) from the prouinces neere to Mexico, (according
as him ſelfe wrote in a letter to the principall tyraunt whiche
had ſente him) diſtaunte from the realme of Guatimala 400.
leagues, (keeping ye way by him traced) & as he went, ſlu, robbed,

burned and deſtroyed all the countrey, whereſoeuer he be came,
vnder the ſhadow of title aboue mantioned, ſaying: yt they ſhould
ſubmit themſelues vnto thē, that is to ſay, vnto men ſo vnnatural,
ſo wicked, and ſo cruell: in the name of the king of Spaine, who
was vnto them vnknowen, and of whom they had neuer hearde
ſpeake: and the which thoſe nations there eſteemed more vniuſt
and more cruell then they his men were. And the tyrauntes giuing
vnto them no reſpect of time to deliberace, they fling vpon
the poore folke, in a maner as ſoone as the meſſage was done,
putting all to fire and blood.
            
            
               Of the Prouince and realme
of Guatimala.
               NO ſooner arriued hee into this ſaide realme: but that he
beganne with great ſlaughter of the inhabitaunces. This
notwithſtanding the chiefe Lorde came to receiue him, being caried
in a lighter, with trumpettes and tabours, reioycinges, and
diſportes, accompanied with a great number of the Lordes of
the citie of Vitlatan, head citie of the whole realme, dooing them
alſo ſeruice with all they had, but ſpecially in giuing them foode
abundantly, & whatſoeuer they demaunded beſids. The Spaniſh
lodged this night without the citie, foraſmuche as the ſame ſeemed
vnto them ſtrong, and there might bee thereby daunger.
               This Captayne called to him the next morrowe the chiefe
Lorde, with other great Lordes, who beeing come as meeke
ſheepe, hee apprehended them al, & commaunded thē to giue him
certayne ſummes of golde. They anſwering that they had none,
foraſmuch as the countrey yeelded none: hee commaundeth incontinent
to burne them aliue, without hauing committed any
crime whatſoeuer, and without any other forme of proces or ſentence.
               As the Lordes of all theſe prouinces perceiued, that they
had burned their ſoueraigne Lordes, onely becauſe they gaue
them no golde, they fledde all to the mountaynes, commaunding

their ſubiectes to goe to the Spaniardes, and to ſerue them as
their Lords, but that they ſhould not diſcouer them, nor giue thē
intelligence where they were.
               With this, loe all the people of the countrey, preſenting
them, and proteſting to bee theirs, and to ſerue them as their
Lordes: The Captayne made anſwere that hee woulde not
accept of them, but that hee woulde kill them if they tolde not
where were their Lordes. The Indians anſwered, they could
not tell ought: but as touching them ſelues they were content,
that they ſhoulde employ them to their ſeruice, with their wiues
and children: and that they ſhould vſe their houſen, and that there
they might kill, or doe what ſo euer them pleaſed.
               It is a wonderfull thing, that the Spaniardes went to their
villages and borrowes, and finding there theſe ſilly people at
their worke, with their wiues and children, neyther miſdoubting
any thing they pearſed them with their Boreſpeares, and hackled
them to peeces. They came to one borrowe great & mightie,
which helde it ſelfe more aſſured then any other, becauſe of
their innocencie: whome the Spaniſhe layde deſolate in a maner
all whole, in the ſpace of two houres, putting to the edge of
the ſword, children, with women, and aged perſons, and all thoſe
which could not eſcape by flying.
               The Indians ſeeing that by their humilitie, by their preſentes
and patience, they could not pacifie nor mitigate the madmoode,
and enraged heartes of their enemies, and that without
any reaſon, or ſhewe of reaſon, they were hackt in peeces: and
ſeeing likewiſe that they were ſure to die ere long: they deuiſed
to aſſemble and realye themſelues to die all in warre, and auenge
themſelues the beſt that they could vpon, enemies ſo cruel
and diueliſhe: knowing alſo well enough them ſelues without
weapons, ſtarke naked, weake, and on foote, and ſuche as
coulde by no meanes preuayle or carrie away the victory, but
that in the ende they ſhoulde be deſtroyed: they aduiſed between
them to digge certayne ditches in the middeſt of the wayes, to
make their horſes tomble into, and pearcing their bellies with
pikes ſharpned and brent at one ende, there beſtowed of purpoſe,
and couered ouer ſo orderly with greene turfe, that it ſeemed

there was no ſuch matter.
               There fell in horſes once or twiſe: for the Spaniardes afterwardes
coulde beware of them. But nowe to auenge them,
they made a law, that as many Indians as might be taken aliue,
ſhoulde bee flong into the ſame pittes. Hereuppon they caſt in
women with child, and women newe deliuered of childbirth, and
olde folke as many as they coulde come by, vntyll that the ditches
were filled vp. It was a lamentable thing to beholde the
women with their children ſtabbed with theſe pickes. All beſides,
they ſlue with thruſt of ſpeares, and edge of ſwoorde. They
caſt of them alſo to fleſhe fraunching dogges, which tare them
and deuoured them. They brent a Lord at a great fire of quicke
flames: ſaying, they woulde herein doe him honour. And they
perſiſted in theſe butcheries ſo vnnaturall, about ſeuen yeeres,
from the yeere 24. vntill the yeere 31. Let any eſteeme, what
may bee the number of people: whome they might haue
ſlayne.
               Amongſt an infinite of horrible actes which this curſed
tyraunt did in this realme with his bandes of ſouldiers, (for his
vnder captaynes were no leſſe miſchieuous and inſenſate then
himſelfe, and withall likewiſe thoſe that were vnder them again
to ſerue their turne,) this one was notable: That where as in the
prouince of Cuzcatan, where is at this houre, or neere there aboutes
the citie of Saint Sauiour, a countrey very fertile with
all the ſea coaſte on the Southe, contayning fourtie or fiftie
leagues: and likewiſe in the Citie of Cuſcatan the mother Citie
of the prouince, there had been made him a very great entertaynement,
of more then twentie or thirtie thouſande Indians
attending him, all laden with poultrie and other victuals: this
Captayne arriuing, and hauing receiued the preſentes, hee commaunded
that euery one of the Spaniardes ſhoulde take of this
great number of people, ſuch as ſhoulde pleaſe him, to ſerue him
all the time that they ſhoulde make their abode there, and that
they ſhoulde conſtrayne them to beare for them, of their carriage
all that ſhould bee needefull.
               Euery man tooke vnto him other an hundred, or fiftie, or as

many as it ſeemed ſuffiſed him to bee well ſerued. Theſe poore
lambelike innocentes ſerued the Spaniards with all their power,
that there wanted nothing, vnleſſe they ſhoulde doe vnto
them godly honour. Meane while this captayne demaunded of
the Lordes very much golde: for they were principally commen
for that purpoſe.
               The Indians anſwered that they were ready to giue them
all the golde they had: and layed together a great furniture of
batchets of copper and gylt, where with they ſeruè their owne
turnes, the ſame reſembling golde, as in deede it hath in it ſome
litle deale. The Captayne cauſeth to put to the touch: and as
he ſawe it was copper, hee ſayde to the Spaniardes, nowe the
diuell take ſuch a countrey: let vs bee gone hence, ſeeing here is
no golde heere: and euery man put the Indians whiche hee hath
retayned to ſerue him, to the hotte irons, and ſo to marke them
for ſlaues.
               That which they did, branding with the kinges marke all
that they might. I ſawe the ſonne him ſelfe of the principall
Lorde of this citie, to bee ſo branded. The Indians which eſcaped,
with all other of the Countrey ſeeing all the miſchiefes of
the Spaniſhe, beganne to aſſemble, and put them ſelues in
armes: wherevppon the Spaniardes woorke great diſcom fitures
and ſlaughters, returning to Guatimala where they builded
a citie, the which God of a iuſt iudgement hath renuerſed
with three ouer whelmings falling all three together: the one
was with water, the other with earth, and the thirde with ſtones,
of the bigneſſe of tenne or twentie oxen. By ſuche like meanes
all the Lordes and the men that were able to beare armes being
ſlayne: thoſe which remayned, were reduced into the diabolicall
ſeruitude afore ſaide, being made tributaryſlaues or villayns
regardant, but giuing for their tribute ſonnes and daughters,
for they will haue none other kind of bondimen. And ſo the Spaniards
ſending whole ſhips laden with them to Peru to ſell thē,
wt their other ſlaughters, haue deſtroyed & laide deſert an whole

Realme of an hundred leagues ſquare or about, a countrey the
moſt bleſſeful, and peopled the moſt that might be in the worlde.
               For the tyraunt him ſelfe wrote hereof, that it was more peopled
then Mexico: and herein hee ſayde the trueth. Hee hath
done to death, with his conſortes and confrayryes, more then
foure or fiue Millions of ſoules in fifteen or ſixteen yeeres ſpace,
from the yeere twentie foure, vnto the fourtieth yeere: and yet
at this houre they ſlay and deſtroy thoſe that remayne.
               This tyraunt had a cuſtome, when as hee went to make
warre vpon any Citie or Prouince: to carrie thither of the Indians
alreadie vnder yoked, as many as hee coulde, to make
warre vpon the other Indians: and as hee gaue vnto a ten or
twentie thouſande men which he ledde along no ſuſtenaunce, he
allowed them to eate the Indians whiche they tooke: And ſo
by this meanes hee had in his campe an ordinarie ſhambles of
mans fleſhe, where, in his preſence they killed and roaſted children.
They killed men, onely to haue off from them their handes
and their feete, which partes they helde to be the dayntieſt morcels.
When the nations of other countreys vnderſtoode of all
thoſe vnnaturall doings, they could not tel what to do for frightfulneſſe.
               He was the death of an infinite ſorte of the Indians in making
of ſhippes, the which hee carried from the North ſea vnto
the South, which are an hundred and thirtie leagues. He tranſported
after this rate great ſtore of artillerie, which he loded vpon
the ſhoulders of theſe poore folke going naked: whereby I
haue ſeene very many fall downe in the high way, by reaſon of
their great burdens.
               Hee vndid whole houſholdes, by taking from the men their
wiues and daughters: the which afterwardes hee diſperſed in
gyftes to his marriners and ſouldiers to pleaſe them withall,
who led them along with them in their nauies. He ſtuffed all
the ſhippes with Indians, where they dyed for thryſt and hungar.
Certaynely if I ſhoulde ſtande to tell the particularities of
theſe cruelties: I ſhoulde make a great booke thereof, whiche
ſhoulde aſtoniſhe the worlde. Hee made two nauies, eyther of

a great number of ſhippes, with the which hee conſumed as with
fire and lightning flaſhing from heauen all thoſe peoples: O
howe many poore children hath hee made fatherleſſe Orphans.
howe many men and women widowers and widowes, bereeuing
thē alſo of their childrē! How many adulteries, whoredoms
and rapes, hath he been the cauſe of! How many hath he of free
made villanyes: Howe many anguiſhes and calamities by him
haue nombers ſuffered: Howe many hath hee cauſed to ſhedde
teares, ſighes and groninges: Of how many deſolations hath
he been the occaſion in this life, and the meanes for others to ſall
into euerlaſting damnation in the life to come, not onely of the
Indians which are innumerable, but of the miſerable Spaniardes,
with whoſe ayde he hath ſerued himſelfe in villanies ſo
exceſſiue, and ſinues ſo enormous, and abominations ſo execrable:
I wiſhe in God that hee had taken pitie of him: and that hee
had been pleaſed in ſo euill an ende as he ſent him.
            
            
               Of newe Spaine, and Panuco,
and Xaliſco.
               AFter the exceeding cruelties and ſlaughters aforeſayd, and
the others whiche I haue omitted, whiche haue been executed
in the prouinces of newe Spayne and Panuco: there came
to Panuco an other tyraunt, cruell, and vnbrideled, in the yeere
1525. Who in committing very many cruelties, and in branding
many for ſlaues, after the maner aforeſayde which were all
free, and in ſending very many ſhippes laden to Cuba, and Hiſpaniola,
where they might beſt make Marchandiſe of them, hee
archieued the deſolation of this prouince.
               And it hath come to paſſe in his tyme, that there hath been
giuen for one Mare, eyght hundred Indians ſoules partakers of
reaſon. And this man from this roome was promoted to bee
preſident of Mexico, and of all the prouince of new Spaine, and
there were promoted with him other tyrauntes, to the offices of
Auditorſhippes: in the which dignities they committed ſo many

vngracious turnes, ſo manie ſinnes, ſo many cruelties, robberies,
and abhominations, that a man can not beleeue them to be
ſuch. And they ſet forwarde alſo this countrey into ſo extreme a
deſolation, that if God had not kept them by meanes of the reſiſtance
of the religious men of Saint Francis order, and if that
there had not been prouided with all ſpeede a court of audience,
and the kings counſayle in thoſe partes friende to all vertue,
they had laide waſt all newe Spayne, as they haue done the Ile
of Hiſpaniola.
               There was a man, amongſt thoſe of the company of this
captayne, who to the end to encloſe a gardē of his, wt a wal: kept
in his workes eight thouſande Indians, without paying them
ought, nor giuing them to eate, in maner that they dyed, falling
down ſuddēly, & he neuer tooke the more thought for the matter.
               After that the chiefe Captayne which I ſpake of, had finiſhed
the laying waſte of Panuco, and that hee vnderſtoode the
newes of the comming of the kinges court of Audience: hee
aduiſed with him ſelfe to proceede farther into the innermoſte
partes of the realme, to ſearch where hee might tyrannize at his
eaſe, and drewe by force out of the prouince of Mexico 15. or 20.
Millions of men, to the ende, that they ſhoulde carrie the loades
and carriages of the Spaniardes whiche went with him, of
whom there neuer returned agayne two hundred, the others being
dead on the high wayes.
               Hee came at the prouince of Mechuacam, which is diſtant
from Mexico fourtie leagues, a region as bliſſefull and full of
inhabitauntes, as is that of Mexico. The king and Lorde of
the countrey went to receiue him with an infinite companie of
people, which did vnto them a thouſande ſeruices and curtiſies.
               Hee apprehended him by and by, for that hee had the brute
to be very rich of gold and ſiluer: and to the ende, that hee ſhoulde
giue him great treaſures, hee beganne to giue him the torments,
and put him in a payre of ſtockes by the feete, his body ſtretched
out, and his handes bounde to a ſtake, hee maketh a flaſhing fire
againſt his feete, and there a boy with a baſting ſprinkle loked
in oyle in his hande ſtoode and baſted them a litle and a litle, to
the ende to well roaſte the ſkynne. There was in one ſide of
him a cruell man, the whiche with a croſſebowe bente, aymed

ryght at his heart, on the other ſide an other which helde a dogge
ſnarling, and leaping vp as to renne vppon him, which in leſſe
then the tyme of a Credo, had beene able to haue torne him in
pieces: and thus they tormented him, to the ende hee ſhoulde
diſcouer the treaſures which they deſired, vntyll ſuche tyme as a
religious man of Saint Frauncis order tooke him away from
them, notwithſtanding that hee dyed of the ſame tormentes.
               They tormented and ſlue of this faſhion very many of the
Lordes and Cacikes in theſe Prouinces: to the ende that they
ſhoulde giue them gold and ſiluer.
               At the ſame time a certayne tyrant going in viſitation to
viſite the powches, and to robbe the godes of the Indians, more
then for any care hee had of theyr ſoules, founde, that certayne
Indians had hid their Idolles, as thoſe which had neuer been
better inſtructed by ye curſed Spaniards of any better god, he apprehended
and detayned priſoners the Lordes, vntyll ſuche time
as that they woulde giue them their Idolles: Suppoſing all
this while they had beene of golde or of ſiluer: Howebeit they
were not ſo, wherefore hee chaſtiſed them cruelly and vniuſtly.
               But to the ende hee woulde not remayne fruſtrate of
his intent, which was to ſpoyle, hee conſtrayned the Cacikes
to redeeme their ſayde Idolles, and they redeemed them for ſuch
gold & ſiluer as they coulde find, to the ende, to worſhip them for
Gods, as they had bin wont to do aforetime. Theſe be the examples
& deedes which theſe curſed Spaniardes do: and this is the
honour which they purchaſe to God, amongſt the Indians.
               This great tyraunt and Captayne paſſed farther from Mechuacham
to the Prouince of Laliſco, the which was all whole
moſt full of people, and moſt happie. For it is one of the moſte
fertilleſt and moſt admirable countrey of the Indies, whiche had
borrowes coutaining in a maner ſeuē leagues. As he entred this
coūtrey the L. with ye inhabitants, according as al ye Indians are
accuſtomed to do, wēt to receiue him wt preſēts & ioyfulnes. Hee
begā to cōmit his cruelties & miſchieuouſnes, wc he had learned &
all the reſt had bin accuſtomed to practiſe, wc is to heap vp gold wc
is their god. He burned townes, he tooke ye Cacikes priſonners.
and gaue them torments. Hee made ſlaues all that hee tooke.
               
                  
Whereof there died an infinite number tyed in chaynes. The
women newe deliuered of childe byrth, going laden with the
ſ
                     •
                  uffe of euill Chriſtian
                     •
                  , and being not abie to beare their owne
children becauſe of trauell and hunger, were fayne to caſt them
from them in the wayes, whereof there dyed an infinite.
               An euill Chriſtian taking by force a young Damſell to abuſe
her, the mother withſtoode him: and as ſhee woulde haue
taken her away, the Spaniarde drawing his dagger or rapier,
cutte off her hande, and ſlue the young gyrle with flaſhes of his
weapon: becauſe ſhee woulde not conſent to his appetite.
               Amongſt manye other thinges, hee cauſed vniuſtly to
bee marked for ſlaues, foure thouſande, fiue hundred ſoules as
free as they, men, women, and ſucking babes, from of a yere and
a halfe olde, vnto three or foure yeeres olde: which notwithſtanding
had gone before them in peace to receiue them, with an infinite
number of other thinges that haue not beene ſet downe in
writing.
               Hauing atchieued the diueliſhe warres innumerable, and
hauing in the ſame committed very many ſlaughters, hee reduced
all that countrey into the ordinary ſeruitude, peſtilential and
tyrannicall, into the which all the tyrant Spaniardes whiche are
in the Indies, are accuſtomed, or pretende to caſt thoſe people▪ In
the which countrey, hee conſented alſo, and permitted his Stewardes
and all others to execute tormentes neuer hearde of before,
to the ende, to drawe from the Indians golde and tribute.
His Stewardes ſlewe very many of the Indians, hanging them
and burning them aliue, and caſting ſome vnto the dogges, cutting
off their feete, handes, head, and tongue, they being in peace,
onely to bring them into a feare, to the ende they ſhoulde ſerue
him, and giue him golde and tributes: all this knowing, and ſeeing
this gentle tyrant, euen to come to the whippes, baſt onads,
blowes, with other ſorts of cruelties wherewith hee vexed
and oppreſſed them dayly.
               It is ſayde of him, that hee hath deſtroyed and burned in this
realme of Xaliſco, eyght hundred borroughes, whiche was the
cauſe that the Indians being fallen deſperate, and ſeeing thoſe
which remayned, howe they periſhed thus cruelly: they lift vp

themſelues, and went into the mountaynes, ſlaying certayne
Spaniardes: howe be it by good right. And afterwardes becauſe
of the wickedneſſes and outrages of other tyrauntes now
being, which paſſed by that way to deſtroy other prouinces (that
which they call diſcouering) many of the Indians aſſembled, fortifying
them ſelues vpon certayne rockes. Vpon the whiche
rockes the Spaniſhe haue made, and yet at this preſent, and a
freſhe doe make ſo many cruelties, that they almoſt made an end
of laying deſolate all this great countrey, ſlaying an infinite,
number of people.
               And the wretched blinderers forſaken of God, and giuen
ouer into a reprodate ſenſe, not ſeeing the cauſes moſt iuſt which
the Indians haue by the lawes of nature, man, and God, to hewe
them in peeces, if they had ſtrength and munimentes, and ſo to
caſt them out of their countrey: and not ſeeing the wickednes
of their owne cauſe, ouer and beſids ſo many violents and tyrannies
which they haue committed in that ſort, to mooue: warre a
newe: they thinke, ſpeake, and write of the victories which they
haue ouer the poore Indians, leauing them in deſolation,
that it is GOD which giueth the ſame vnto them, as though
their warres were atchieued rightfully: thus they reioyce, vaune
themſelues, and giue thankes vnto God for their tyrannies, as
did thoſe tyrantes and the eues of whom ſpeaketh the Prophete
Zacharie, in the eleuenth chapter: verſe 4. ſaying:
               Feede the ſheepe of the ſlaughter, they that poſſeſſe them
ſlay them, and are not grieued, and they that ſell them, ſay,
bleſſed be the Lorde, for we are become rich.
            
            
               Of the realme of Yucatan.
               THe yeere one thouſande, fiue hundred, twentie and ſixe, was
deputed ouer the Realme of Yucatan an other caytiſe gouernour,
and that through the lies and falſe reports which himſelfe
had made vnto the king: in like maner as hath the other tirants

vntill this preſent, to the end there might bee committed
vnto theē offices & charges, by means wherof they might rob at
their pleaſures. This realme of Yucatan was full of inhabitants:
for that it was a countrie in euery reſpect holſome, and
abounding in plentie of victuals, and of fruites more then Mexico:
and ſingulerly exceeded for the aboundance of honnie and
waxe there to bee founde, more then in any quarter of the Indies,
which hath beene ſeene vnto this preſent. It conteyneth
about three hundred leagues compaſſe. The people of that countrie,
were the moſt notable of all the Indies, aſwell in conſideration
of their policie and prudencie, as for the vprightnes of their
life, verily worthie the training to the knowledge of God: amongeſt
whome there might haue beene builded great Cities,
by the Spaniſhe, in which they might haue liued as in an earthly
Paradiſe, if ſo bee they had not made themſelues vnworthie,
becauſe of their exceeding couetouſneſſe, harde heartednes,
and heynous offences: as alſo vnworthie they were of other
moe bleſſings a great many, which God had ſet open in theſe
Indies. This tyrant bean with three hundred men to make
warre vpon theſe poore innocent people, which were in their
houſes without hurting any body: where he ſlue and ranſacked
infinite numbers. And for becauſe the Countrie yeeldeth no
golde, for if it had yeelded any, hee woulde haue conſumed thoſe
ſame Indians, in making them to toyle in the mynes: to the
ende hee might make golde of the bodies and ſoules of thoſe
for whome Ieſus Chriſte ſuffered death, hee generally made
ſlaues of all thoſe whome hee ſlue not, and returned the ſhips
that were come thither, vpon the blowing abrode and noyſe of
the ſelling of ſlaues, ful of people bartered for wine, oyle, vinegar,
powdred Bacons fleſhe, garments, horſes, and that, that euery
man had neede of, according to the Captaines eſtimate
and iudgement. Hee woulde let chooſe amongeſt an hundred
or fiftie young Damoſels: bartering ſome one of the fayreſt, &
of the beſt complexion, for a caſke of wine, oyle, vinegar, or for
a yorke powdred. And in like maner hee woulde let chooſe out
a young handſome ſtripling amongſt two or three hundreth for

the aforeſaide merchandize. And it hath beene ſeene, that a
youth ſeeming to be ye ſonne of ſome prince, hath been bartered
for a Cheeſe, and an hundreth perſons for an horſe. Hee continued
in theſe voinges from the yeere twentie ſixe, vntill the
yeere thirtie three, which are ſeuen yeeres, deſolating and diſpeopling
thoſe Countries, and killing the people there without
pitie or mercie, vntill the time that the newes came of the riches
of Peru, and that thereupon the Spaniardes hyed them thither,
by occaſion whereof this Diueliſh tyrannie ceaſed for a ſeaſon.
A few dayes after, his men returned, to doe and commit other
haynous enormities, as robberies, & wrongful impriſonments,
with offences great againſt God: neither doe they ceaſe as yet
at this day to doe them, but haue laide deſart and diſpeopled all
thoſe three hundred leagues, the which were as well repleniſhed
and peopled, as hath been ſaide.
               There is no man that can beleeue, or rehearſe the caſes particuler
of the cruelties, which were of them committed. I wyll
onely rehearſe two or three, comming to my remembraunce at
this inſtant. As theſe curſed Spaniards, went with their mad
dogges a foraging by the tracke, and hunting out the Indian
men and women: An Indian woman beeing ſicke, and ſeeing
ſhee coulde not eſcape their dogges, that they ſhoulde not
rent her as they did others: ſhee tooke a corde and hanged herſelfe
at a beame, hauing faſtened at her foote a childe ſhee had
of a yeere olde, and ſhee had no ſooner done: beholde theſe
Curres, whiche come and diſpatche this infaute, howe beit
that before it dyed, a Religious man a Fryar baptized
it.
               When the Spaniſhe parted out of this Realme, one amongeſt
others ſaide, to a ſonne of a Lorde of ſome Citie of Prouince,
that hee ſhoulde goe with him: the boy aunſwered,
and ſayde, hee woulde not forſake his Countrie. The
Spaniarde replyed: Goe with mee, or els I will cutte off
thine eares. The young Indian perſiſted in his firſt ſaying,
that hee woulde not forſake his Countrie. The Spaniarde
drawing out his dagger, cut off firſt one, & then his other eare.
               
                  
The young man abyding by it ſtill that hee woulde not leaue
his countrey: hee mangled off alſo his noſe, with the vppermoſt
of his lippes: making no more ſcrupuloſitie of the matter, then
if hee had giuen him but a phillip.
               This damnable wretch magnified him ſelfe, and vaunted
him of his doynges villauouſly vnto a reuerende religious perſon,
ſaying: that hee tooke as much paynes as hee coulde, to begette
the Indian women in great numbers with childe, to the
ende, hee might receiue the more money for them in ſelling them
great with childe for ſlaues.
               In this realme, or in one of the prouinces of newe Spaine,
a certayne Spaniard went one day with his dogs on hunting of
veuiſon, or els conies, and not finding game, hee minded his
dogs that they ſhould be hungrie, and tooke a little ſweet Babie
which hee bereaued the mother of, and cutting off from him the
armes, and the legges, chopped them in ſmall gobbettes, giuing
to euery dog his liuery or part there of, by & by after theſe morſels
thus diſpatched, hee caſt alſo the reſt of the body or the carkaſe to
all the kenell together.
               By this ye may ſee how great the dull heartednes of the Spaniardes
is in that countrey, and howe God hath deliuered them vp
into a reprobate ſenſe; and what accoumpt they make of thoſe
ſame nations which are created after the image of God, and redeemed
with the blood of his Chriſt. We ſhal ſee here after more
notable matter.
               Leauing nowe the cruelties infinite, and neuer hearde of
the like, which in this realme were done by thoſe which call thē
ſelues Chriſtians, and ſuch as no iudgement of man can ſufficiently
imagine them: I will conclude with this ſame: That is,
that being nowe departed the realme all the diueliſh tyrantes,
blynded with the couerouſnes of the riches of Peru, yt reuerend
father, fryer Iames, with foure other religious of S. Frauncis,
was moued in ſpirite to goe into this realme to pacifie them, and
for to preach to them, and to win vnto Ieſus Chriſt thoſe which
might bee remayning of the butcheries and tyranuous murders,
which the Spaniſh had bin perpetrating ſeuen continuall yeres.
               And I beleeue that theſe ſame were thoſe religious perſons,

the which in the yeere 34. certaine Indians of the Prouince of
Mexico, ſending before them meſſengers in their behalf, requeſted
them that they woulde come into their countrie, to giue thē
knowledge of that one onely God, who is God, and very Lorde
of all the worlde: and for whoſe occaſion the Indians helde a
councel ſundrie times, parlementing and informing themſelues
in their folke motes: to wit, what kinde of men thoſe might be,
which were called by the ſpeciall name of fathers and brethren,
and what it was that they pretended, and wherein they differed
from the Spaniardes, of whom they had receiued ſo many outrages
and iniuries: according in the ende to admit them with
condition, that they ſhould enter themſelues alone, and not the
Spaniardes with them, that which the religious promiſed thē.
For it was permitted them, yea, commaunded them ſo to doe, by
the Viceroy of new Spaine, and that there ſhoulde no kinde of
diſpleaſure bee done vnto them by the Spaniardes. The Religious
men preached vnto them the Goſpell of Chriſte, as they
are accuſtomed to doe, and as had been the holy intention of the
kinges of Caſtile, that ſhoulde haue been done. Howbeit,
that the Spaniardes in all the ſeuen yeres ſpace paſt, had neuer
giuen thē any ſuch notice of the truth of the Goſpel, or ſo much
as that there was any other king ſauing himſelfe, yt ſo tyranniſed
ouer them, and deſtroyed them. By theſe meanes of the religious,
after the ende of fortie dayes that they had preached vnto
them, the Lordes of the countrie brought vnto them, and put into
their handes their idols, to the end that they ſhoult burne them.
After alſo, they brought vnto them their young children, that
they ſhould catechiſe them, whom they loue as the apple of their
eye. They made for them alſo Churches, and Temples, and
houſes. Moreouer, ſome other prouinces ſent, and inuited
them, to the ende that they might come to them alſo, to preache,
and giue them the vnderſtanding of God, and of him whom they
ſaide to be the great king of Caſtile. And beeing perſwaded
and induced by the religious, they did a thing which neuer yet
before hath been done in the Indies. (For whatſoeuer the tyrants,
ſome of thoſe which haue ſpoyled thoſe Realmes, & great
Countries, haue contriued to blemiſhe and defame the poore Indians

withall, they are mockeries and leaſings:) twelue or fifteene
Lordes, which had very many ſubiecets and great dominion,
aſſembling euery one for his owne part his people, and taking
their aduiſe and conſent, of their owne voluntarie motion,
yeelded themſelues to the ſubiection, and to bee vnder the domination
of the kinges of Caſtile: admitting the Emperour as
king of Spain, for their liege Soueraigne. Wherof alſo they
made certaine inſtrumentes, by them conſigned, which I keepe
in my charge, together with the teſtimonies thereunto of the
ſaid religious.
               The Indians being thus onwarde in the way of the faith,
with the great ioy, and good hope of the Religious brethren,
that they ſhoulde bee able to winne vnto Ieſus Chriſte all the
people of the Realme that were the reſidue, beeing but a ſmal
number of the ſlaughters, and wicked warres paſſed: There entred
at a certaine coaſte, eighteene Spaniarde tyrantes on horſe
backe, and twelue on foote, driuing with them great loades of
Idols, which they had taken in the other Prouinces of the Indians.
The Captaine of thoſe thirtie Spaniards, called vnto
him a Lorde of the countrie there aboutes as they were entred,
and commaundeth him to take thoſe idols, and to diſperſe them
throughout al his countrie, ſelling euery idol for an Indian mā,
or an Indian woman, to make ſlaues of them, with threatening
them, that if hee did not doe it, hee woulde bidde them
battaile. That ſaide Lorde beeing forced by feare, diſtributed
thoſe Idols throughout all the countrie, and commaunded all
his ſubiectes, that they ſhould take them to adore them, and
that they ſhoulde returne in exchaunge of that ware Indies and
Indiſſes to make ſlaues of. The Indians beeing affeard, thoſe
which had two children, gaue him one, and he that had three gaue
him two. This was the ende of this ſacrilegious trafficke:
and thus was this Lord or Cacick, faine to content theſe Spaniards:
I ſay not Chriſtians.
               One of theſe abhominable chafferers, named Iohn Garcia,
beeing ſicke, and neere his death, had vnder his bed two packs
of Idols, and commaunded his Indiſh maide that ſerued him,

to looke to it that ſhe made not away his idols, that there were
for Murlimeus, for they were good ſtuffe: and that making
bent of them, ſhe ſhould not take leſſe then a ſlaue for a peece
one of them with another: and in fine, with this his Teſtament
and laſt will thus deuiſed, the caytife dyed, buſied with
this deep goodly care, and who doubteth but that he is lodged in
the bottome of hell▪
               
               Let it nowe bee conſidered, and well weyed, what kinde of
aduancement of religion it is, and what are the good examples
of Chriſtianitie of the behalfe of the Spaniſhe, that ſayle to
the Indies? What honour they doe vnto God, how they paine
themſelues to haue him knowen and adored of thoſe nations:
what carke and care the haue of the doing of it, that by their
meanes the rather the ſacred faith ſhoulde bee diſperſed, encreaſed,
and enlarged in the free paſſage thereof, amongeſt
thoſe ſilly creatures? And let it with all bee diſcerned, if the
ſinne of theſe men be any whit leſſe then the ſame of Ieroboam,
Which made Iſrael to ſinne,
                   by making two golden Calues
for the people, to fall downe before, and worſhippe: or otherwiſe
if it bee not like to the treaſon of Iudas, and which hath cauſed
more offence.
               Theſe bee the ieſtes of the Spaniardes, whiche goe to the
Indies, whiche of a truth very many times, yea, an infinit ſort
of times, for couetyſe, and to ſcratche golde, haue ſolde and do
ſell: haue reneaged, and do reneage as yet hitherto, and at this
preſent day: Chriſt Ieſus.
               The Indians perceiuing that, that, which the religious
had promiſed them, was as good as nothing: namely, that
the Spaniardes ſhoulde not enter thoſe Prouinces: and ſeeing
the Spaniards whiche had laded thither idols from other
places, there to make vent of them, they hauing put al their idols
afore into the handes of the Fryars, to the ende they ſhoulde bee
burned, and to the ende the true God ſhoulde bee by them adored,
all the Countrie was in a mutinie, and a rage againſt
the religious Fryars, and the Indians comming vnto
them, ſay:
               
                  
Why haue you lyed vnto vs, in promiſing vs by deceites that
there ſhould not enter any Spaniardes into theſe Countries?
And why haue you burnt our gods, ſeeing the Spaniards doe
bring vs other gods from other nations? Were not our gods
as good, as the gods of other prouinces? The fryars pacified
them in the beſt maner that they could, not knowing what to anſwere
them: and went to ſeeke out thoſe thirtie Spaniards, to
whom they declared the euill which they had done, praying thē
to get them thence. That which the Spaniards would not doe,
but ſaide to the Indians, that thoſe religious men had cauſed
them to come thither themſelues of their owne accorde, whiche
was rightly an extreeme maliciouſneſſe. In the end the Indians
deliberated to kill the religious men: By occaſion whereof,
the Fryars fled away in a night, hauing aduertiſement of the
caſe by ſome of the Indians. But after that they were gone, the
Indians better infourmed of the innocencie of the religious mē,
and of the vngraciouſneſſe of the Spaniardes, the ſent meſſengers
after them, neere hand fiftie leagues of, beſeeching them to
come againe, and crauing pardon of them. The religious, as
the ſeruants of God, and zealous for the winning of their ſoules,
beleeuing them, returned to them, and were receiued as it had
been Angels. And the Indians doyng them a thouſand ſeruices,
abode with them foure or fiue monethes. And for becauſe
the Spaniards would neuer departe that Countrie, and that
namely the Viceroy with all that he could doe, could not draw
them thence, newe Spaine beeing farre of, howbeit, hee had
cauſed them to bee proclaimed traitours: And for as muche as
they neuer ceaſed to commit their outrages, and griefes accuſtomed
amongſt the Indians, the religious perceiuing that ſooner
or later they ſhould ſmell of the ſmoke, and peraduenture the euill
light vpon their heades: and ſpecially that they coulde not
preach vnto the Indians with quiet, and aſſurance of the Indiās,
& of themſelues, by reaſon of the continuall aſſaultes and lewde
deportments of the Spaniſh, they deliberated to leaue ye realme:
which in this maner was deſtitute of the light and the doctrine:
and thoſe ſoules, abode vnder the darkneſſe of ignorance, and in
the miſerie they were in, the remedie, and the watering of the

knowledge of God being bereaued them, alreadie euen at their
beſt, and when as they began to receiue it with exceeding willingnes:
altogether like as if one ſhould withdraw the watring
from tender plants, and new ſet into a drie ground, at a hot time
of the yeere: and this by the curſed vngraciouſneſſe of the Spaniſh.
            
            
               Of the Prouince of Saint
Martha.
               THe prouince of Saint Martha, was a countrie where the
Spaniardes gathered golde in all plentie: the land beeing
with the regions adiacent very rich, and the people induſtrious
to drawe out the golde. Wherefore alſo from the yeere one
thouſand, fiue hundred, fortie two, infinite tyrants haue made
thither continually with their ſhips, ouerrunning, and raunging
along the countrie, killing and ſpoyling thoſe the inhabitants,
and ramping from them that gold that they had, with ſpeedie return
euer to their ſhips, which went and came oftentimes. And
ſo wrought they in thoſe prouinces great waſts, and ſlaughters,
and cruelties horrible, & that moſt commonly on the Sea coaſt,
and certaine leagues within the countrie, vntill the yeere one
thouſand, fiue hundred, and three. At what time there wente
Spaniſh tyrants to inhabite there. And for as much as the countrie
was exceeding riche as hath been ſaid, there euer ſucceeded
Captaines one in anothers roome, euerie one more cruell then
other: in ſuch ſort that it ſeemed that euerie one inforced himſelfe,
for the maſterie in doing of euilles and cruelties more
haynous then had been done by his predeceſſour. Wherefore
herein is the rule verified that we haue giuen before. The
yeere one thouſande, fiue hundred, twentie and nine, there went
a great tyrant, very reſolute, with great troupes: but without
any feare of God, or compaſſion of the nature of man, who
wrought ſuche waſtes, and ſlaughters ſo greate, that hee exceeded
all others that had gone before him, himſelfe robbing for

the ſpace of ſixe or ſeuen yeares that he lyued, great treaſures:
ſaue after beeing deceaſed without confeſſion, and fledde from
the place of his reſidence: there ſucceeded him other murdering
tyrantes, and theeues, which made an ende of the reſt of the people,
whome the embrewed handes with blood, and the caruing
ſwoordes of the tyruntes his forerunners, coulde not extyrp.
               They ſet themſelues ſo forwarde in the countrey, in inuading
and laying deſolate very manye prouinces, with killing,
and taking priſoners thoſe people, after the faſhion before practiſed
in other Prouinces, cauſing the Lordes together with
their Subiectes to ſuffer grieuous torments, both to make them
diſcouer the golde, and the places where golde might bee had:
ſurmounting as is ſayde euery way in number of miſchieuous
doinges, and in the maner of dooing, all that had paſſed before:
that from the yeere one thouſande, fiue hundred, twentie and
niene, vnto this day, they haue reduced into a wilderneſſe in
thoſe ſame quarters more then foure hundred leagues of lande,
which was no leſſe peopled then the other countreys which wee
haue ſpoken of.
               Verily if I had to make a bedrolle of the vngraciouſneſſes,
of the ſlaughters, of the deſolations, of the iniquities, of the violencies,
of the maſſacres, and other greate inſolencies whiche
the Spaniardes haue done, and committed in thoſe Prouinces
of Saint Martha agaynſt God, the king, and agaynſt thoſe
innocent nations: I ſhoulde write an hiſtorie very ample.
But that maye bee done if God ſpare mee lyfe, hereafter in his
good tyme: onely I will ſette downe a fewe woordes of that
which was written in a letter by a Byſhoppe of this Prouince
to the king our Soueraigne: and the letter beareth date the
twentieth of May, 1541. The whiche Byſhoppe amongſt
other woordes, ſpeaketh thus: I ſay, ſacred Maieſtie, that the
way to redreſſe this countrey, is that his Maieſtie deliuer her
out of the power of Stepfathers, and giue vnto her an huſbande
whiche may intreate her as is reaſon, and according as ſhee deſerueth:
otherwiſe, I am ſure hereafter as the tyrauntes
whiche nowe haue the gouernment, doe torment and tormoyle
her, ſhee will ſoone take an ende, &c.
               
                  
And a little belowe hee ſayeth: Whereby, your Maieſtie
ſhall knowe clearely, howe thoſe whiche gouerne in thoſe
quarters doe deſerue to bee diſamounted, and depoſed from
their gouernment, to the ende, that the common weales maye
bee relieued. That if that be not done, in mine aduiſe, they
can neuer be cured of their diſeaſes. His maieſtie ſhal vnderſtand
moreouer, that in thoſe regions, there are not any Chriſtians but
diuels, that there are no ſeruantes of God and the king, but traitors
to the ſtate, and their king. And in truth the greateſt encombraunce
that I finde in reducing the Indians, that are in warre,
and to ſet them at peace, and to lead thoſe which are at peace to ye
knowledge of our faith, is vnnaturall & cruell entreaty, wc they yt
are in peace do receiue of ye ſpaniſh, being ſo deeply altered, & laū
                  
                  
                     •
                  ed,
yt they haue nothing in more hatred & horror, thē the name of
chriſtiās, ye which in al theſe countreys they cal in their lāguage,
yares, yt is to ſay, diuels. For ye acts which they cōmitted here, are
neither of chriſtians, nor of mē which haue the vſe of reaſō: but of
diuels. Whereof it commeth to paſſe, yt the Indies which doe ſee
theſe behauiors to be generally ſo far eſtrāged frō all humanity,
& wtout and mercy, aſwell in ye heads as in ye mēbers: they eſteem,
yt the chriſtians do hold theſe things for a law, & that their God, &
their K. are ye authors thereof. And to endeuor to perſwad thē otherwiſe,
were to endeuor in vaine, & to miniſter vnto thē ye more
ample matter, to deride and ſcorne Ieſus Chriſt & his law. The
Indians that are in warre, ſeeing the intreatie vſed toward the
Indians that are in peace: woulde chuſe rather to die once for
all, then to endure ſundrie deathes, beyng vnder the command
of the Spaniſh. I knowe this by experience, moſt victorous Ceſar.
&c.
               He ſayth for a ſurcharge in a chapter a lttle lower, His
M. hath in theſe parts more ſeruants then it ſuppoſeth. For here
is not one ſouldier of ſo many as are of them, that dare not ſay openly
& publikly, yt if he roue, rob, waſt, ſtay, or burne the ſubiects
of his M. to the ende yt they giue him ſome gold, he ſerueth there
in your M. wt this title, yt he ſaith, therof redoundeth to his M. his
part. Wherfore, moſt chriſtiā Ceſar, it ſhould be good, that youre
M. gaue them to vnderſtand, by chaſtiſing ſome ſeuerely, that it

receiueth no ſeruice in ought, whereby God is diſobeyed and
diſhonoured. All the aboueſayde are the formall woordes of the
ſaide Biſhoppe of Saint Martha: by the which may bee ſeene
clearly, what is done at this day amongeſt theſe poore innocent
peoples in thoſe countreys.
               He calleth the Indians in warre, thoſe which ſaued them
ſelues by flying into the mountaines from the ſlaughters of the
miſchieuous Spaniardes. And hee calleth the Indians in peace,
thoſe which after hauing loſt an infinite of their people, by the
maſſacres, haue been thralled into the tyrannicall and horrible
ſeruitude aforeſayde, and whereof in the ende they haue been fined
out, deſolated, and ſlayne, as appeareth by that which hath
been ſaide by the Biſhoppe, which notwithſtanding ſpeaketh but
litle, in compariſon of that which they haue ſuffered.
               The Indians in that countrey haue accuſtomed to ſay, if
when they are trauayled and dryuen vp the mountaynes loden,
they happen to fall downe, and to fainte for feebleneſſe, and for
payne: for at that tyme they lay on vpon them blowes with their
feete and with their ſtatues, and they breake theyr teethe
with the pomelles of their ſwordes, to make them riſe, and
march on without taking of breath, with theſe wordes, out vpon
thee, what a villanie art thou? they (I ſay) the Indians, for their
partes are wont to ſay, I can no more: kill mee heere right. I
doe deſire to die heere: and this they ſay with great ſighes, and
beeing ſcarce able to ſpeake, for hauing their heart drawen together,
declaring a great anguiſhe and dolour. But who were
able to giue to vnderſtande the hundreth parte of the afflictions
and calamities, that theſe innocent people doe ſuffer of the
curſed Spaniardes? God make them to take knowledge of it,
that are able and bounde to redreſſe it.
            
            
               Of the Prouince of Carthagene.
               THis Prouince of Carthagene is ſituate vnder, and a fiftie
leagues diſtant from the ſame of Saint Martha, towardes
the Weſt, confining with the prouince of Ceu, vnto the gulph

of Araba: which are a hundred leagues all along the Sea ſide,
and is a great countrie within land towardes the South. Theſe
Prouinces ſince the yeere 1498. or 99. vntill nowe haue beene
euill entreated, martyred, maſſacred, deſolated like vnto that of
Saint Martha: and there hath beene in theſe ſame done by the
Spaniardes ſuch cruelties, ranſackinges, and pillagings enormous:
as the which to make an ende the rather of this briefe
Summarie, as alſo to make way to the rehearſall of their euill
doinges in other Prouinces, I will not ſtande to touch in particuler.
            
            
               Of the Coaſte of Perles, and of
Paria, and of the Iſle of the Trinitie.
               FRom the coaſt of Paria, vnto the goulph of Veneſuela, without
foorth, which are two hundred leagues: the Spaniſhe
haue wrought great and ſtraunge deſtructions, rioting vppon
that people, and taking aliue as many as they coulde, to the ende
they might ſell them for ſlaues: and oftentimes making them
priſoners againſt the aſſurance and the promiſe of friendſhippe
made vnto them, neither keeping with them their faith plighted
vnto them, ye friendly entertainement which they had receiof
thoſe good people notwithſtanding: hauing beene entertained
and entreated in their houſes, as parents and children, vſing
them to ſerue their turn withall, and inioying all that they had,
and that that they were able to doe for them. It cannot bee well
told, nor particularly expreſt, the ſundrie kindes and greeuous
vexations, wronges, hurtes, and ſpoyles, which thoſe people
endured at the Spaniardes handes, from the yeere 1510. vntill
this preſent. I will onely rehearſe two or three actes, by the
whiche it may bee iudged of the reſt, innumerable and exceſſiue,
and worthy all tormentes and fire.
               In the Ile of the Trinitie, whiche is farre greater and more
fertile then the Iſle of Scicile, and ioyneth with the firme
lande of the coaſte of Paria, and where the people are the
deſt diſpoſed, and moſte enclined to vertue in their kinde, of all

the Indians, as they went, there a captaine Rouer in the yeere,
1510. accompanied with 60. or 70. other p
                     •
                  t
                     ••
                   theeues well appointed:
they publiſhed among the Indians by proclamations,
and other publike ſonmōs, that they ſhould come and dwell and
liue with them in that Ile. The Indians receiued them as their
owne bowels and babes: and as well the Lordes as ſubiectes
ſerued them with exceeding readines, bringing them to eate frō
day to day, as much as might ſuffice to feede, as manie moe people.
For this is the liberality of all theſe Indians of the new
world, to beſtow on the Spaniards of al that they haue in great
abundance. The Spaniſh build a great houſe of timber, in the
which the Indians ſhould dwell all together: for the Spaniſhe
would haue it ſo, that there ſhould be one only houſe for all, and
no more, to compaſſe that, which they had alreadie premeditate to
do, & did it. When they laid the thetch vpon the binding ſlaues
or ſparres, and had alreadie couered to the height of two mens
length, to the end that thoſe that were within might not ſee thoſe
that were without, vnder colour to haſten forward the woorke,
yt it might be the ſooner diſpatched, they ſet a great number of
people within, the Spaniards deuiding themſelues, the one part
of them being beſtowed without, compaſſing the houſe round about
with their weapons, becauſe of thoſe that might get forth,
the other part of them preſſe into the houſe: Thus laying hands
on their ſwordes, they began to threaten the Indians naked as
they were, to kill them if they did ſtirre, and then bound them.
And thoſe which fled they hewed them in peeces: Howbeit ſom
of the Indies which fled, both of the hurt & not hurt, with others
that had not come within the houſe, toke their bowes & arrowes
and aſſembled themſelues in another houſe, about an hundred or
two hundred perſons: And as they kept the gate, the Spaniards
ſet fire on the houſe, & burned them aliue. After with their purchaſe,
which might bee of an hundred or foureſcore perſons of
them which they had bounde: they get them to the Ile of ſaint
Iohn, where they ſolde the one moitie, and thence to the Ile of
Hiſpaniola: where they ſolde the other moity. As I reprehended
the captaine for this notable treaſon, at the ſame time, and at the
ſame Ile of Saint Iohn, hee made an anſwere: Syr, quiet your

ſelfe for that matter. So haue they commanded me to doe, and
giuen me inſtruction which ſent mee: that if I coulde not take
them by warre, I ſhoulde take them vnder countenance and colour
of peace. And in truth the Captaine tolde mee that in all
his life, he neuer had founde father nor mother, but in this Iſle
of the Trinitie, in reſpect of the friendly courteſies the Indians
had ſhewed him. And this hee ſpake to his owne greater cō
                  fuſion
and aggrauating for the ſurcharge of his owne offences.
They haue done other things ſemblable vnto theſe infinite, in
this firme lande: apprehending the poore people contrary to
the ſafe conduct promiſed. Let it now be weighed, what maner
of doings theſe are, and whether the Indians in this wiſe taken,
might iuſtly be made ſlaues.
               At another time, the religious Fryars of ſaint Dominicks
order, being determined to goe preache, and to conuert thoſe nations,
who had not the light of the doctrine for to ſaue their
ſouls, as is the caſe at this day of the Indians: they ſent a religious
man licentiate in diuinitie, a mā vertuous & holy, with a laie
man of his order his companion, to the ende hee ſhoulde take a
viewe of the Countrie, to trauerſe acquaintance with that people,
and ſearch out a place commodious to builde monaſteries.
The religious being arriued: they receiued them as Angelles
commen from heauen: and hearde with great affection, attention,
and willingneſſe ſuch wordes as the religious at that time
were able to giue them to vnderſtand, more by ſignes thē otherwiſe,
for they knew not the tongue. It came to paſſe that there
arriued there another ſhip, after that the ſhip in whiche the religious
men came was departed thence, and the Spaniſh in this
veſſell, keeping their diueliſh cuſtome, by ſuttelty without the
knowledge of the religious, carried away the Lord of the countrie
called Alfonſo: were it y• Friars had giuē him this name, or
els others. For the Indians loue & deſire to beare the name of ye
Chriſtiās, deſiring incōtinēt yt it may be giuen them euen before
they know any thing, yt they may be baptized. They induced
fraudilētly this Don Alfonſo to come aboord their ſhip with the
lady his wife, & other perſōs, making ſēblāce to go about to feaſt
thē. In the end there entred ſeuenteene perſons, together wt the

Lord and his Lady: the Lord truſting that the religious perſons
being entred into his Countrie, woulde keepe the Spaniardes
from doyng any wrong: for otherwiſe hee woulde neuer
haue put himſelfe in the handes of the Spaniſh. The Indians
therfore thus being in the ſhip, the traiterous Spaniards hoyſed
ſayles, and away they went to Hiſpaniola with them, there ſelling
them for ſlaues. All the Countrie ſeeing that their Lorde &
ſoueraigne Lady were carried away, they run to the religious
men, purpoſing to kill them. The poore men ſeeing ſo great a
villany, were of themſelues at apoint to dye for ſorrowe: and it
is well to be beleeued of them, that they woulde rather haue gyuen
their lyues in the quarrell, then to haue accorded that anye
ſuch iniury ſhould haue been committed: ſpecially conſidering
that was enough to hinder the courſe begun, ſo as thoſe poore
Heathens ſhould neuer, neither heare, nor hearing beleeue the
worde of God. Howbeit, they appeaſed the Indians in the beſt
maner they could, ſaying that they woulde write to them at Hiſpaniola
by the firſt ſhip that went, & would take ſuche care and
order in the matter, that their ſoueraigne ſhould be reſtored them
againe with thoſe that were in his companie. God ſent immediately
vpon a ſhip thither, no doubt for the greater confirmation
of the damnation of thoſe which there gouerned, and they
wrote to the Spaniſhe religious men that were in the Iſle of
Hiſpaniola. They cry out, and call heauen and earth to witneſſe
againſt them, both firſt, & ſundrie times after: But the Iudges of
the audience, would neuer giue them audience to do thē iuſtice,
for becauſe thēſelues had part in the bootie of the Indiās, which
the tyrants had ſo againſt all right & reaſon takē, The two religious
men, which had promiſed the Indians of the countrie, that
their Lord Don Alfonſo, with others ſhold come home▪ with the
reſt within foure moneths, ſeeing yt they came not neither in 4.
nor 8. made thēſelues redy to the death, & to giue their life, whiche
they had gaged before they came out of Spaine, if neede
ſhoulde bee, and in that ſort the Indians tooke vengeance on thē
in killing them iuſtly, notwithſtanding that they were innocent:
for becauſe that they thought that the religious men had beene
the occaſion of this treaſon, and for becauſe they ſawe that,
that whiche they had certified and promiſed them, tooke not
effect: to witte, that within foure monethes they ſhoulde haue

home their Lorde: and for that, at that time they knewe not, and
nowe as yet they knowe not in that countrey, that there is any
difference betweene the religious well diſpoſed: and the tyrants,
theeues, and robbers the Spaniardes. Thoſe religious men
therefore right happie, ſuffered vniuſtly, and for the wrong ſo
ſuffered, there is no doubt but they are very martyres, and doe
raigne at this day with God in the kingdome of heauen in bliſſe,
who woulde that by their obedience they ſhoulde be ſent thither,
and ſhould haue an entent, to preache and ſpredde the holy faith,
and ſaue all thoſe ſoules, and ſuffer thoſe afflictions, and death
it ſelfe when it ſhoulde be preſented vnto them for Ieſus Chriſte
his ſake crucified.
               An other time, by reaſon of the great tyrannies and execrable
actes of the curſed ones, bearing the name of Chriſtians, the
Indians ſlewe other two religious men of Saint Dominickes
order, and one of Saint Frauncis. Whereof I ran be a good
witneſſe for that I eſcaped at the time miraculouſly from the
ſame death, of the which it ſhoulde be a harde matter to entreat,
and woulde bee to amaſe men, by reaſon of the grieuouſnes and
horibleneſſe of the caſe. Wherefore I will not lay it abroad (for
being too tedious) vntil his tyme, and at the day of iudgement it
ſhall bee more euident, when God ſhall take vengeance of the
theeueries ſo horrible and ſo abhominable as are doone by thoſe
which beare the name of Chriſtians againſt the Indians.
               An other tyme in thoſe Prouinces at the Cape of the Codera
(as they call it) there was a towne, the Lorde whereof
was named Higueroto, a name eyther proper to the perſon,
or it may bee common to the Lordes of the place. This Lorde
was ſo bounteous, and his people ſo vertuous and ſeruiceable,
that as many Spaniardes as came thither by ſhippe, they founde
there good entertaynement, meate, lodging, all cheering, and
refreſhing. This ſaide Lorde had alſo deliuered many from
death of thoſe which were fledde thither out of other Prouinces,
where they had ryoted and tyranniſed, and come thither ſicke,
and halfe dead for hunger: whom they refreſhed, and afterward
ſent them away ſafe, to the Ile of Perles, where there were
Spaniardes, and might haue ſlayne them if hee had woulde,

without that euer any ſhoulde haue knowen it. And ſhortely
to ſay the Spaniſh did call the Subiectes of Higurroto, the
houſe and harbour of euery bodie. A caytife tyraunt aduiſed
him ſelfe to outrage that people alſo, when as they thought
them ſelues ſure enough: and getting him to a ſhippe, hee had
there inuited a greate number of people to come a boorde her
as they were accuſtomed to doe, and to truſt the Spaniardes.
               A great nūber of people being entred into her, men women,
and children, hee hoyſed ſayles, and went to the Ile of Saint
Iohn, where hee ſoulde them all for ſlaues.
               I came at the ſame inſtant to the Ile of Saint Iohn, and
I ſawe the tyrant, and vnderſtood what he had done. Hee had deſtroyed
all that towneſhip: whereby he did great harme to all other
his fellow tyrants, wonted to rob, and roue all along thoſe
coaſts, inſomuch as they had in abomination this act ſo hydeous,
being bereft thereby of their harbour, and houſe of retire, as ordinarie
& familiar vnto them as it had bin their own home & houſe.
               I deport me to recount the miſchieues infinite, and caſes abominable,
which haue bin vſed in that countrey, and are vſed as
yet.
               They haue ſingled out at times from all this coaſte, the which
was very wel peopled, vnto the Iles of S. Iohn & Hiſpaniola,
aboue two millions of ſoules, ſeaſed vpon by their purchaſes in
thieuing and robbing: which alſo euery one of them they haue
ſlaine not long after, by thruſting them into the minerals and other
tormoyls, beſides the great numbers there were there alreadie
before time, as we haue aboue ſaid. And it is a pitifull thing,
and able to make any heart to cleaue, were it neuer ſo harde, to
ſee all this coaſt of a countrey moſt fertile, to bee lefte all naked
and emptie of people.
               It is a tried caſe, that they neuer conuey away their ſhippings
of Indians ſo robbed & purchaſed, as I haue ſaid, but that they
caſt the third part into the ſea, beſides thoſe which they ſlay, whē
they will ſort thē to thēſelues for their chafer. The cauſe is, that
when as they will by all meanes atteine to the ende which they
haue propoſed to them ſelues: they haue need of a great number
of people, for to draw a great deale of money, according to the

quantitie of the ſlaues: & they prepare but a very ſmall deale of
ſuſtenance and water, to ſerue but a few perſons: to the ende that
thoſe tyrants whom they call purueyghours of the ſhips ſhould
not ſpend them much. And there is but euen ſcarſe enough, ſaue
to ſerue the Spaniardes turne which go a rouing and robbing:
and there is alwayes wanting for the poore Indians. Wherefore
alſo they die for hunger and thirſt: and then there is none other
remedie but to caſt them ouer the boord into the ſea. And verily
a man among them did tell me, that frō the Ile of Lucayos,
where had been wrought great ſlaughters in this maner, vnto
the Ile of Hiſpaniola, which are a threeſcore, or ſeuentie leages,
there trended a ſhip all alongſt, without that it had either compaſſe
or mariners carde, being guided onely by the tracke of
dead Indians carkaſſes, flotting vppon the ſeas, of them whiche
had been caſt in.
               And after they be landed in the Ile, whither they bring them
to make ſale of them: it is to make an heart to yearne of whoſoeuer,
haue he neuer ſo litle compaſſion, to behold them naked and
famiſhed, fall downe and faint for hunger and thirſt, women, and
aged men, and children.
               Afterwardes they ſoone after they ſeparate them, as it were
Lambes, the fathers from the children, and the wiues from the
huſbandes, in making troupes of them of tenne or twentie perſons,
and ſo caſt lottes on them, to the ende, thoſe curſed purnueighours
ſhould take their ſhare, which are thoſe who do equipe
or rig, and furniſh two or three ſhips for the nauy of thoſe tirants,
pirates, and rouers, robbing by ſea & land, ſeaſing vpon all they
come by, and pulling the poore men out of their owne houſen.
And looke when the lot falleth vpon the flock where there were
amōg thē any old or ſick perſō, ye tyrant to whō ye ſame eſcheated,
would ſay: That the diuell take the olde graybeard, why doeſt
thou giue him mee, to the ende I ſhoulde goe burie him? And
this ſicke raſcall, what haue I to doe that hee ſhoulde fall out
to my lotte: to the ende, I ſhoulde bee his Phiſition to cure him?
Hereby a man may ſee, in what eſtimation the Spaniardes haue
the Indians, and howe they accompliſhe the commaundement
of God, touching the loue of their neighbour, of the which

dependeth the lawe and the Prophetes. The tyrannie whiche
the Spaniſhe exerciſe ouer the Indians, to fiſhe for Pearles,
is one of the cruelleſt and curſedest thynges that is in the
worlde.
               There is no hell in this life, nor other deſperate ſtate in this
worlde, that may be compared vnto it: although that the trade
of golde finding, be in his kinde, very grieuous, and very miſerable.
They let them into the ſea, three, or foure, or fiue fadome
forth downe right vnder water, from the morning vntyll
ſunneſette, where they are continually flitting without ſtint, to
plucke oyſters, in the which are engendred the pearles. They
ſurge vp aboue the waters, with a nette full of oyſters to take
breath: where ſtandeth readie a Spaniſhe tormentor, in a little
cocke boate, or a brigantine, and if the poore wretches ſtay neuer
ſo litle while, to reſt them ſelues: they all to bee buffet them with
their fiſtes, and draw them by the haire into the water to returne
to their fiſhing. Their ſuſtenaunce is fiſhe, and the ſame very
fiſh which contayneth the pearles, and the bread Cacabi, or ſome
Mahis, which are the kindes of bread of that countrey: the one
of very ſlender nouriſhment, the other is not eaſie to bee made
into breade, of the which alſo, they neuer giue them their belly
full.
               The beddes that they lodge them in a nights, is to ſet them
by the heeles, their bodies requoyling on the coulde grounde, in
a payre of ſtockes for feare of running away. Sometymes
they are drowned in the ſea, and at their fiſhing and trauayle of
piking of pearles, and neuer riſe vp agayne aboue the water:
becauſe the Bunches and Whirlepooles (they call them Tuberones
and Maroxos) two kinde of monſters of the ſea moſt cruell,
which deuour a man all whole, and thoſe doe kill them and
eate them.
               Let it nowe here be conſidered, whither in this purchaſe
of Pearles, the commaundements of God, touching the loue of
God, and our neyghbours be kept, or not: when they throwe
thoſe people into daunger of bodyes and ſoules. For they ſlay
their neighbours by their couetouſneſſe, without that they
receiue, or fayth, or ſacramentes, or els they prolonge

them in a ſtate of life ſo horrible, that they bring them to their
ende, and conſume them in a few dayes. For it is impoſſible, that
men ſhould be able to liue any long ſeaſō vnder the water without
taking breath, the continuall cold percing them: & ſo they die
commōly, parbraking of blood at ye mouth: becauſe of the kitting
together of their cheſtes, or bulke of the breaſt ariſing thereof,
that they are ſo continually without breathing vnder the water,
and of the blooddy fluxe, cauſed by the cold. Theyr haires, which
by nature are cole blacke, alter and become after a branded ruſſette,
like to the haires of the ſeawolues. The ſalt peeter breaketh
out of their ſhouldiers, in ſuch ſort, that they ſeeme to bee a kind
of monſters in the ſhape of men, or els ſome other kinde of men.
They diſpatched in ridding about this inſupportable trauayle, or
rather to ſpeake rightly, this diueliſh torment, all ye Lucayan Indians
which were in the Iles, hauing ſauoured this gaynes, and
euery Indian was worth vnto them a fiftie, or an hundred
Caſtillans. They made an open marte of them, notwithſtauding
it were inhibited them, by the magiſtrate otherwiſe vnmercifull:
for the Lucayens were good ſwimmers. They alſo, about
theſe thinges haue ſlayne a number of the people of other
prouinces.
            
            
               Of the riuer Yuia Pari.
               THere runneth through the prouince of Paria, a riuer named
Yuia Pari, more then two hundred leagues within
land from the head. There entred the ſame riuer, an vnluckie
tyraunt, a great manie leagues vpwarde, in the yeere, one
thouſande, fiue hundred, twentie and niene with a foure hundred
menne or more: whiche there wroght greate ſlaughters,
burning aliue, and putting to the edge of the ſwoorde, an infinite
ſorte of Indians, whiche were in their landes and houſe
                     •
                  
doing hurt to no creature, and therefore ſecure, and miſtruſting
nothing.
               In the ende hee dyed an euill death, and his Nauie was
diſperaged: albeic that other tyraunts there were which ſucceeded

him in his miſchieuouſneſſes and tyrannies: and yet at this
day thither they goe, deſtroying, and ſtaying, and plunging into
hell the ſoules for whom the ſonne of God ſhed his blood.
            
            
               Of the realme of Ʋeneſuela.
               THe yeere 1526. the king our Soueraigne, being iuduced
by ſiniſter informations and perſwaſions dammageable to
the ſtate, as the Spaniardes haue alwayes payned them ſelues
to conceale from his Maieſtie the dammages and diſhonours
which GOD and the ſoules of men, and his ſtate doeth receiue
in the Indies: graunted and committed a great realme, greater
then all Spayne, that Veneſuela, with the gouernement
and entier iuriſdiction, vnto certayne Dutch Marchaunts, with
certayne capitulations and conuentions accorded beetweene
them.
               Theſe ſame entring the countrey with three hundred men:
they found the people very amiable, & meeke as lambes, as they
are all in thoſe parties of the Indies, vntill the Spaniſh do outrage
them. Theſe ſee vpon them wtout compariſon a great deale
more cruelly, then any of the other tyrauntes, of the whiche wee
haue ſpoken before: ſhewing them ſelues more vnnaturall
and fierce, then raging tygars, or wolues, or ramping Lions.
For they had the iuriſdiction of the whole countrey, poſſeſſing it
with more freedom, and vſing it with a greater care, and ſtarker
blinde madnes of couetyſe, ſeruing their owne turnes with all
practiſes and cheuiſaunees, to get and gather golde and ſiluer,
more then all they of whom hath bin ſpoken heretofore: hauing
wholly ſhaken off all feare of God, and of the king: yea, hauing
forgotten themſelues to bee men.
               Theſe diuels incarnate haue ſaide deſolate and deſtroyed,
more then foure hundred leagues of moſt fertill lande, and therein,
of prouinces exceeding and wonderfull, fayre vayles, to the
breadth of fourtie leagues, and hournes verye great, full of

people, and of golde. They haue ſlayne, and wholly diſcomfited
great and diuers nations, ſo farre foorth as to aboliſhe the languages
wonted to bee ſpoken, not leauing aliue that could ſkill
of them: vnleſſe ſome one or other, who had hid them ſelues in
the caues and bowels of the earth,, flying the dint of the ſworde,
ſo raging and plaging. They haue ſlayne, deſtroyed, and ſent
to hell by diuers and ſtrange maners of cruelties and vngodlyneſſes,
moe (I ſuppoſſe) then foure or fiue millions of ſoules: and
yet at this preſent, they ceaſe not to doe the ſame, by infinite outrages,
ſpoyles, add ſlaughters, which they haue committed, and
doe commit dayly vnto this preſent. I will onely touch three or
foure, by the which it may bee iudged of others, which they vſed
to accompliſh their deſtructions, and diſolations aboue mentioned.
               They tooke the Lord ſoueraigne of all the prouince without all
cauſe, onely to bereeue him of his golde, giuing him alſo the torture:
which Lorde vnbounde himſelfe, and eſcaped from them
into the mountaynes, wherefore alſo the ſubiectes roſe and were
in a mutinie, hiding thē ſelues vpō the mountaynes, amongſt the
hedges and buſhes. The Spaniardes make after to chaſe them,
and hauing founde them, commit cruell maſſacres, and as many
as they take aliue, they ſell them in port ſale for ſlaues.
               In diuers prouinces, yea in all where they became before
that they tooke the Soueraigne Lorde, the Indies went to receyue
them with ſonges, and daunces, and with preſents of gold
in great quantitie.
               The payment made them, was, to bee put to the edge
of the ſworde, and hewen in peeces. One time, as they went
to receyue the Spaniſhe in the faſhion aboueſayde: the Dutche
Captayne tyraunt, cauſed to bee put in a thatched houſe a greate
number of people, and hackled in peeces.
               And beeing on high, neere the top of the houſe certayne beames
which diuers had got vpon, auoyding the blooddy handes and
ſwordes of thoſe people (O mercileſſe beaſtes) the diueliſhe man,
ſent to put to fire, wherby as many as there were, were burned aliue.
By this meanes the coūtrey remained very deſert, ye people
flying into the mountaines, where they hoped to ſaue thēſelues.
               
                  
They came into another great prouince, in the confines of
the prouince and realme or Saint Martha, where they found the
Indians peaceable in their boroghs, & in th
                     •
                  ir houſē, doing their
buſines, they continued a long time with them, eating their ſtore,
and the Indians ſerued them, as if they had to receiue of them
their life and ſafegarde, ſupporting their continuall oppreſſions,
and vſuall outragiouſneſſes, which are intollerable: beſides that
one Spaniſhe glutton, eateth more in one day, then woulde ſuffice
an whole houſholde of more then ten Indians. They gaue
them at that time, a great quantitie of golde, of their owne good
will, ouer & beſides, other ſeruices innumerable, which they did
vnto them. At the ende as theſe tyrants would depart the place,
they aduiſed to pay them for their lodging, in this manner.
               The Almain tyrant gouernour, commaunded to take ſuche
Indians as they could, with their wiues and children, and that
they ſhould ſhut them vp within an incloſure, wounded in of purpoſe,
letting them know, that who ſo would come forth, and bee
let go free, that he ſhould redeeme himſelfe at the pleaſure of the
vniuſt gouernour: in giuing ſo much golde for himſelfe, ſo much
for his wife, and ſo much for euery polle of his children. And yet
to preſſe them the more, he commanded to giue them nothing to
eate, vntil ſuch time as they had perfourmed the quantity of gold
inflicted them for their raunſome. Many ſent to their houſen
for golde, and bought out themſelues as they were able, and
thoſe ſame were deliuered, and went abroad about their buſines
to get their liuing. The tyrant ſent certain Spaniſh thieues &
robbers, to go take them againe the ſecond time, after they had
bin redeemed. They are carried to the percloſe, and there wrung
with hunger and thirſt, to the ende, that they ſhoulde yet once agayn
pay for their freedom. And there were many amōgſt them,
which were taken and ranſommed two or three ſundry times.
Others which had not to giue, for becauſe they had all they had,
he let them within the toyſe dye for hunger.
               And in this maner hath bin deſtroyed a prouince very riche
of people and golde, the which hath a vale or bourne of fourtie
leagues, where hath beene brent a borough of the receite of a
thouſande houſholdes.
               
                  
This Tyrant reſolued with himſelfe to pearce farther into
the countrie, with a great deſire to diſcouer on that ſide, ye ſame
hill of Peru. By occaſion of which accurſed voyage both hee
and others carried foorth with them, Indians infinite, loden
with two or three quintalles weight, and beeing enchained. If
any were weake or wearie, fainting for hunger, or trauelling,
they cut incontinent his head off euen with the coller of the
chaine that yoked them: becauſe they ſhoulde not neede to vnhamper
the others that went with the ſame collers aboute their
neckes, and ſo tombled the head on the one ſide, and the bodie on
the other. And the load of him that had ſo failed was diſtributed
and beſtowed vpon others. To tel of the Prouinces, whiche hee
hath layed deſart, and the townes and places which hee hath
brent, for all the houſes are thetched, and to number the nations
which hee hath ſlaine, and the cruelties, and murders particuler,
which hee hath committed by the may, it would be a thing ſcarce
credible: howbeit very true and wonderfull. In this ſame very
courſe and ſteppes marched ſithence the other tyrants, who
came from the ſaid Veneſuela, and others of the Prouince of S.
Martha, with the ſelfe ſame holy intention to diſcouer the ſame
ſacred golden palace of Peru: and founde the whole countrie in
length more then two hundred leagues ſo burned, diſpeopled, &
ſpoyled, hauing been before moſt notablie peopled and moſt fertill,
as hath been ſaid, that themſelues as very tyrantes and ſauage
beaſtes as they were, wondered and ſtood aſtoniſhed to ſee
the trackes of the deſtructions ſo lamentable, whereſouer he had
paſſed.
               All theſe thinges haue been giuen in euidence with the depoſitions
of many witneſſes by the Atturney of the councel of
the Indies, and the euidences are kept amongſt the Recordes of
the ſame councell: and yet haue they neuer burnt aliue, any of
thoſe execrable tyrants. And this is nothing of all that whiche
hath beene proued, of the great outrages and miſchieues which
theſe haue committed. For as much as the miniſters of iuſtice,
which vntill this time haue him in the Indies, by reaſon of their
great wilfull and damnable blyndneſſe, haue neuer troubled
themſelues to examine the offences, ſpoyles, and murders, which

haue beene wrought, and yet preſently are wrought by the tyrants
in the Indies: ſaue only they will ſay, becauſe ſuche hath
cruelly intreated the Indies, the king hath loſt of his reuenews
ſo many thouſande Caſtilians in rent, and this little verdict ouer
general and confuſed, muſt ſuffice for the diſclaime of ſo many
villanies. And yet that litle which they take vpon them, they
doe not auerr, nor deuiur vpon, as they ought to do. For if they
had regarde of their dutie to God and the king, it woulde bee
founde, that thoſe Almaine tyrants haue robbed the king of aboue
three thouſand Caſtillans of gold. For thoſe prouinces of
Veneſuela with the others which they haue laid waſte, and diſpeopled
more then four hundred leagues forthright, as hath bin
ſaide, is a region the moſt bliſfull, and the richeſt of golde, and
was the beſt peopled of any in the worlde: in ſuch ſort, that they
haue diſturned from the kinges cofers, and occaſioned the loſſe
in this Realm of aboue two millions of rent, within ſeuenteene
yeeres ſithence by paſt, that theſe enemies of God and the king
haue begunne to deſtroy it: neither is there any hope that euer
thoſe loſſes will be repayred as long as the worlde ſhall indure:
vnleſſe it be, that God ſhold myraculouſly rayſe as many millions
of ſoules as are deceaſed. It ſhall not bee out of the way to
conſider, of what ſortes and howe exceſſiue haue beene the damages,
diſhonours, blaſphemies, & infamies, which God & his
lawe hath receiued: And wherewithall may bee recouered &
recompenſed the loſſe of ſo many ſoules as burne in hell fire
through the auarice and crueltie of thoſe tyrants Almains, ſhall
I ſay, or All
                     •
                  uains?
               Onely I will conclude the diſcourſe of their vngraciouſneſſe
and crueltie heerewith. That is, that ſithence they entred
the country vnto this preſent, that is to ſay, theſe ſeuēteene yeres
they haue ſent by Sea a great number of ſhips loaden & ſtuffed
with Indians, to make ſale of them as ſlaues at S. Martha, at
the Iſles of Hiſpaniola, and of Iamayca, and at Saint Iohns
Iſle, moe then one million: and doe ſende dayly, as nowe this
yeere one thouſand, fiue hundred, fortie two: the Court of the
Audience royall notwithſtanding ſtabliſhed, for, and at Hiſpaniola,
right well ſeeing all this, and diſſimuling to ſee it, yea, fauouring

and ſupporting all the matter: as likewiſe they haue
had theyr eyes bended at all the other tyrannies and ranſackings
infinite, which hath been done in all this coaſt of this firme land
which are about foure hundred leagues, the which haue been and
nowe are vnder their iuriſdiction, like vnto Veneſuela, & ſaint
Martha: all which the ſaid court might very well haue empeached
and remedied. There is none other cauſe of putting all
theſe Indians vnder yoke of bondage, ſaue the only peruerſe,
wilfully blinde, and obſtinate greedines, and inſatiable wretchedneſſe
of theſe moſt couetous tyrants, and all to haue, and
heape vp goods like as hath had all the reſt throughout all the
Indies, ramping theſe ſilly lambes and ſheepe out of their houſes,
and carrying their wiues and children in the maners of proceeding
ſo cruel and execrable as hath been ſaid, branding them
with the kings marke, to make them vendible for ſlaues.
            
            
               Of the Prouinces of the firme lande,
or quarter that is called Florida.
               INto theſe Prouinces went three tyrantes at three diuers
times ſince the yeere 1510. or 1511. there to put in vre the
actes which others, and two of them from among themſelues
haue committed in other quarters of the Indians: to the end
to aſpyre to high degrees, in no reſpect conuenient to their perſons,
higher then their merites in the cōmon wealth could conceaue,
with the blood & deſtruction of their neighbours: and they
are dead all three of an euill death, & their houſes likewiſe haue
been deſtroyed with them, the which they had builded in times
paſt, with the blood of mankinde, as I can be a ſufficient witnes
of all three, and their memorie is nowe aboliſhed from of the
face of the earth, as if they had neuer beene in this worlde.
They left all this Countrie in diſorder, and confuſion, and
their owne manners in infamie and horror, for certaine ſlaughters
whiche they did there, notwithſtanding not ſo manie,

for as much as God plagued them with death before they coulde
doe any more, and kept them from this outrage in this place, for
the euils for I knowe, and haue ſeene that they did in other
partes of the Indies.
               The fourth tyrant, that came laſt in the yere. 1538. cunningly
aduiſed, and beeing fully furniſhed: it is three yeeres ſince
there is no tidinges concerning him. Wee are certaine that incontinent
after his entrie thither: hee hath behaued himſelf cruelly,
and ſince hath beene as a man vaniſhed. That if he be aliue,
hee and his mainies haue deſtroyed theſe three yeeres a great
many mightie peoples, if hee hath found any in his enqueſt as
hee hath gone: for ſure he is one of the notoriouſeſt and beſt experimented
amongeſt them that haue done the moſt hurts, miſchieues,
and deſtructions in many Realmes with their conſorts:
wherefore I beleeue that God hath giuen him like end vnto the
others.
               Three or foure yeeres after the writing of the aboue written,
came out of the Florida the head of the petie tyrants which
went thither with this captaine tyrant, that there left his bones:
of whome wee vnderſtood the cruelties and euilles, whiche
there during his life time principailly, and vnder his conduct &
gouernment, and ſince after his curſed death, the vnnaturall
men haue executed againſt the Indians innocent, and harmeful
to none, to verifie that which I had prognoſticate before, they
being ſo exceſſiue, that they haue the more confirmed the rule by
mee ſet downe before at the beginning, that the farther they proceeded
to diſcouer, deſtroy, and to waſte countries and lands: the
more cruelties and notorious wickedneſſes they woulde doe againſt
God, and againſt their neighbours. It loatheth mee to recount
thoſe actes ſo curſed, ghaſtly, and bloodie, not of men but
of ſauage beaſtes: and therfore I would not trouble my head to
ſtand rehearſing thoſe which followed afterwards.
               They found many great nations, and wiſe common weales
well inſtituted for pollicie and ordinances. They executed vpon
them great ſlaughters after their cuſtome, to the ende to imprint
in their heartes an awe. They martyred and murdered them,
and loded them with weightie packes like beaſtes. And when

any was foreweeried or foreſpent, to the ende they ſhoulde not
need to looſe the chain. in the which they were giued in collers,
before they come at him that fainted, they pare off the head from
the collar brymme, the Troncke tombling one way, and the
chaine another: as we haue before recounted to haue beene vſed
otherwiſe.
               Entring a borough, where they were receaued with ioy, and
the Indians giuing them to eate their fill, and giuing them of
Indians more then ſixe hundred to carry their fardels, carrying
the heafte of beaſtes in their ſeruice, and dreſſing theyr horſes: the
tyrants being departed thence, a captaine kinſman of the principall
tyrant returned to rob the people, being without diſtruſte &
without feare, and ſlue with the thruſtes of Launce the Lorde
and Kyng of the Countrie, executing beſides other cruelties.
               In another borough, foraſmuch as it ſeemed them that they
were a little too neere neighbours, & ſtood more on their warde,
for the actes villanous and infamous, which they had hearde
of them: they put to the edge of the ſworde and launce, young &
olde, great and little, ſubiect and ſoueraigne, taking to mercy no
creature whoſoeuer.
               The head tyrant cauſed to pare off the noſe and lips downe
to the chin of a great number of Indians, yea, more then 200.
(as is ſaid) yt they had cauſed to bee ſent for from a certaine borough,
or it may bee came of their owne good will. And
thus in this eſtate ſo rufull, and in theſe ſorrowes and anguiſhes
of blood ſtreaming downe, they ſent them away: to the end
they might go carry newes of the holy woorkes and myracles,
which theſe preachers of the ſacred catholike faith, & baptiſed,
had wrought.
               Let it nowe bee iudged, what kinde of people theſe were,
what loue they beare to the Chriſtians, and howe they doe beleeue
that God is, whome they ſay to bee perfectly mercifull
and righteous, and that the lawe and the religion, of the
whiche they make profeſſion, and doe vaunt themſelues, is
without blemiſh. The miſchiefes are exceeding ſore & ſtrange,

which thoſe vngracious caytiues, children of perdition there
committed. And thus the deſperate and vnluckie Captayne
dyed without confeſſion: and we neede not to doubte but that he
lyeth buried in hell: if algates God of his infinite mercy ſecretly
diſpenſed in his hidden wiſdome hath not preuented him,
not dealing with him, after his demerites, in reſpect of his vngracions
lewdnes.
            
            
               Of the riuer of la Plata, that is
to ſay, of ſiluer.
               SIthence the yeere, one thouſande fiue hundred, and two or
three and twentie: certaine Captaines made three or
foure voyages vppe the Riuer of Plata, where there are
great Prouinces and Realmes, and nations well ordered
and endued with vnderſtanding. In generall we vnderſtood,
that they haue made there greate butcheries and inuaſions: but
like as this Countrie is farre diſcoaſted from the Indies moſt
famous, ſo we are not able, to quote the notableſt points in particuler.
Wee doubt no whit notwithſtanding, but that they
haue done and doe keepe as yet at this houre the ſame order of
proceedings as hath beene kept, and are in other quarters: for
they bee the ſelfeſame Spaniardes, and there are amongeſt
them of thoſe ſame, whiche haue trauerſed in other actes and
exploites ſuch as hath beene ſpecified. Moreouer, theyr going
thither, is to become riche and great Lordes as well as others:
that which cannot bee done without ſpoyling, robbinge,
ſlaying, and extirping the Indians, in maner and order holden
by the others.
               After the writing the aboueſaid, I haue vnderſtood, that of a
truth, they haue waſted and diſpeopled great Prouinces and
Realmes in that Countrie, exerciſing ſtrange ſlaughters & cruelties
vpon theſe poore people there, for the whiche they haue abled
themſelues as forwarde in wickedneſſe, or forwarder then

any other, as hauing the commoditie by the greater diſtance frō
Spaine, to ſinne the Freer, and by occaſion ther of haue liued
the more diſordered and fartheſt off from iuſtice: howbeit that
in all the Indies, there hath beene no regarde of Iuſtice, as appeareth
ſufficiently, by that which hath beene aboue ſaide.
               Amongeſt an infinite ſort of other thinges wee reade at the
counſell table for the Indies, theſe alſo which ſhall bee ſpoken
of hereafter. A tyrant gouernour gaue in commande to certaine
his bands to goe aſſault the Indians, and that if they gaue
them not to eate they ſhoulde kill them al. They went armed
wt this authoritie. And for becauſe the Indians would giue thē
none as being open enemies, more for feare of the ſighte
of them, as flying from them then for want of liberalitie, they
put to the edge of the ſwoorde more then fiue thouſande
ſoules.
               Item a certaine number of the folke of the Countrie came
to put themſelues into their handes, and preſented them their
ſeruice, whome at aduenture they had ſent for: and for becauſe
they came not ſo ſoone, or for becauſe they woulde after their
accuſtomed faſhion, engraue in them an horrible and aſtoniſhable
terrour: the grouernour commaunded that they ſhould put them
into the handes of other Indians, whome they holde for their enemies:
whereupon they came weeping and crying, and beſeeching
them that they woulde ſlay them, themſelues, and not deliuer
them into the power of their enemies, and hauing no mind
to yeede out of their houſes where they were, they were cut in
peeces, crying, and ſaying: Wee come to ſerue you in peace,
and do you ſlay vs? Our blood remaine imprinted on this wall,
for a witneſſe againſt you of our vniuſt death, and your barbarous
crueltie. Certes, this was an act of ſpeciall marke, worthie
to be remembred, and much more to bee lamented.
            
            
               
               Of the mightie Realmes, and large
Prouinces of Peru.
               IN the yeere 1531. went another great tyrant with certaine
other conſortes, to the Realmes of Peru, where entring with
the ſame title and intention, and with the ſame proceedings
as all the reſt before gone, foraſmuch as hee was one of them,
which had of long tune beene exerciſed in all kindes of cruelties
and murders, which had beene wrought in the firme lande
ſithence the yeere one thouſande fiue hundred, and ten, hee tooke
encouragement to accrewe in cruelties, murders, & robberies:
beeing a man without loyaltie and truth, laying waſte Cities
and Countries, bringing them to nought, and vtterly vndoeyng
them by ſlaying the inhabitaunts, and beeing the cauſe
of all the euils, whiche enſued in that Countrie: that I am
right well aſſured, that there is not a man that can recounte
them and repreſent them to the eyes of the Readers, as is requiſite,
vntill ſuch time that wee ſhall ſee them and knowe them
at the day of iudgement. As touching my ſelf, if I woulde
take vppon met, to recounte the deformitie, qualitie and circumſtances
of ſome one, I were not able to decipher them,
acording to that which is conuenient.
               Hee ſlue and laide waſte at his firſte arriuall with a miſchiefe
certaine boroughes, from whome hee pillaged a greate
quantitie of Golde. In an Ilande neere to the ſame prouinces,
named Pagna, well peopled and pleaſant, the Lord thereof
with his people receiued them as it had been Angels from
heauen: and ſixe monethes after, when as the Spaniſhe had
eaten vppe all theyr prouiſion: They diſcouered alſo vnto them
the corne whiche they kept vnder grounde for them ſelues,
their wiues, and their children, againſt a drie time and barren:
making them offer of all, with teers plentiful,
to ſpende and eate at theyr pleaſure. The recompence in
the ende whiche they made them, was, to put to the edge of the
ſworde and launce, a great quantitie of thoſe people. And thoſe

whom they could take aliue, they made them ſlaues: with other
cruelties great and notable which they committed, diſpeopling
as it were all that Ile.
               From thence they make to the pronince of Tumbala, whiche
is in the firme lande, where they ſlay and deſtroy as many as
they coulde come by. And becauſe all the people were fled as
affrighted by their horrible acces, they ſayde that they made an
inſurrection, and rebelled againſt the king of Spayne. This
tyraunt had this policie, and kept this order of proceeding, that,
vnto all thoſe whom hee toake, or vnto others which preſented
him with golde or ſiluer, or other thinges which they had: hee
commaunded them to bring more, vntill ſuch time as hee perceiued
that either they had no more, or that they brought him no
more. And then hee woulde ſay, that hee accepted them for the
vaſſals and lieges of the kinge of Spaine, and made muche of
them: and woulde cauſe it to bee proclaymed at ſounde of two
trompettes, that from thence forth they woulde take them no
more, and that they woulde doe them no maner harme at all:
ſetting it downe for good and lawfull, all that whatſoeuer hee
had robbed from them.
               And that hee put them in feare with newes ſo abhominable
which hee ſpredde amongſt them, before hee receiued them into
the ſafegarde and protection of the king, as though that after
they were receiued vnder the protection of the king, they woulde
not oppreſſe them, robbe them, lay them waſte and deſolate any
more, yea and as though he had not deſtroyed them.
               A fewe dayes after, the king & Emperour of thoſe realmes,
named Atabaliba, came accompanied with a number of naked
people, bearing their ridiculous armour, not knowing neyther
howe ſwordes did carue, nor ſpeares did pearce, nor horſes
did runne, nor who or what were the Spaniardes: who if the
diuelles had any money, woulde ſet them ſelues in enqueſt to
goe robbe them. Hee commeth to the place where they were,
ſaying: Where are theſe Spaniardes? Let them come, I will
not ſtirre a foote, till they ſatiſfie mee for my ſubiectes whome
they haue ſlayne, and my boroughs which they haue diſpeopled,
and for my wealth, which they haue bereeued mee.
               
                  
The Spaniardes ſet againſt him, and ſlue and infinite
ſorte of his people: they tooke him alſo in perſon, who came caried
in a litter born vpon mens ſhouldiers. They treat with him,
to the ende that hee ſhoulde raunſome himſelfe. The king offereth
to perfourme foure millions of Caſtillans, and performeth
fifteene, they promiſe to releaſe him: notwithſtanding in the
ende, keeping nor faith nor trueth (as they neuer kept any in the
Indies vnto the Indians) they layed vnto his charge altogether
vntruly, that by his commaundement the people aſſembled.
               The king anſwered, that in all the countrey there mooued
not a leafe of a tree, without his good will: that if there aſſembled
any people, they were to beleeue that it was by his commaundement,
and as touching himſelfe that hee was priſoner,
and they might ſlay him.
               All this not withſtanding, they condemned him to bee brent
aliue: but at the requeſt of ſome certayne, the Captayne cauſed
him to bee ſtrangled: and beeing ſtrangled, hee was burned.
               This king vnderſtanding his ſentence, ſayde: Wherefore
will you burne mee? What treſpaſſe haue I done yee? Did
not you promiſe mee to ſet mee at libertie, if I gaue you the
golde? and haue I not performed more then I promiſed? Seeinges
you will needes haue it ſo? ſende mee to your king of
Spayne: ſpeaking other thinges, to the great confuſion and deteſtation
of the great wrongfulneſſe that the Spaniardes vſed,
whom in the ende they burned. Here let be conſidered the right
and title of this warfare, the impriſonment of this prince, the ſentence,
and the execution of his death, and the conſcience, whereby
they poſſeſſe great treaſures, as in deed they haue robbed in
thoſe realmes from this king and other ſeuerall lordes infinite.
               As touching the innumerable cruelties, and notable, for ye miſchiefes
and enormities withall committed in the rooting out of
thoſe peoples by them, who call them ſelues Chriſtians: I will
here rehearſe ſome certayne, the which a fryer of S. Frauncis
order ſawe at the beginning, and the ſame certified vnder his
name and ſigne: ſending them into all thoſe quarters, and amongſt
others into this realme of Caſtile, whereof I retayne a
copie in my keeping in the which it is thus written:
               
                  
I Frier Marke, of the order of Saint Frauncis, commiſſarie
ouer the other friers of the ſame order in the prouinces of
Peru, and who was one of the firſt religious men, wt entred into
the ſaide prouinces with the Spaniardes: doe ſay, bearing true
teſtimonie of certayne things, the which I haue ſeene with mine
eyes in that countrey, namely, concerning the entreating and
conqueſtes made ouer the naturall inhabitaunts of the countrey:
firſt of all, I am an eyed witneſſe, and haue certayn knoweledge,
that thoſe Indians of Peru, are a people the moſt kinde hearted
that hath been ſeen among all the Indians, beeing curteous
in conuerſation, and friendly vnto the Spaniardes.
               And I ſawe them giue to the Spaniſhe in abundaunce, golde,
ſiluer, and precious ſtones, and all that was aſked them, and
that they had, doing them all kinde of ſeruice lawfull. And the
Indians neuer yee ded foorth to warre, but kept them in peace
ſo long time, as they gaue them not occaſion, by their euill entreating
of them and their cruelties, but contrariwiſe receiued
them with all amitie and honour in their boroughes, in giuing
them to eate, and as many ſlaues mankinde and women kind, as
they demaunded for their ſeruice.
               Item I am witneſſe, that without that the Indians gaue
occaſion: the Spaniſh as ſoone as they were entred the lande,
after that the greate Cacike Atabaliba, had giuen to the
Spaniſh more then two millions of gold, and had put into their
power the whole countrie without reſiſtance, incontinent they
burned the ſaid Atabaliba which was Lord of the whole countrie.
               And after him they brent his captayne generall Cochilimaca,
who had come to the gouernour in peace with other Lords.
In the like maner, alſo a fewe dayes after they burned a great
Lorde named Chamba, of the prouince of Quito, without any
fault at all, and without hauing giuen the leaſt occaſion that
might bee.
               In like maner they burned vniuſtly Schappera Lorde of
the Canaries. Alſo they brent the feete of Aluis a great Lorde
amongſt all thoſe which were in Quito, and cauſed him to endure
ſundrie other torments, to make him tell where was the
gold of Atabaliba: of the whiche treaſure as it appeared, hee
knewe nothing.
               
                  
Alſo they brent in Quito Coſopanga, who was gouernour
of all the prouinces of Quito, which vpon the requeſt to him firſt
made by Sebaſtian of Bernalcaſar Captayne vnder the gouernour,
was come to them in peace: and onely becauſe hee gaue
them not golde ſo much as hee demaunded of him their burned
him with very many other Caciks and principall Lorde▪ And for
ought that I can vnderſtand, the intente of the Spaniards was,
that there ſhoulde not bee lefte aliue one Lorde in the whole
countrey.
               Item I certifie, that the Spaniardes cauſed to aſſemble a
great number of the Indians, and ſocked them vp in three great
houſen, as many as coulde be pored in, and ſetting to fire, they
burned them all, without that they had done the leaſt thing that
might bee, or had giuen to the Spaniſhe the leaſt occaſion thereof
whatſoeuer. And it came to paſſe, that a prieſt, who is named
Ocanna, drewe a young boy out of the fire, in the which hee
burned, which perceiuing an other Spaniarde tooke from out
of his handes the boy, and flunge him into the middeſt of the
flames, where he was reſolued into aſhes together with others.
The which Spaniarde returning the ſame day to the campe, fell
downe dead ſuddenly, and mine aduice was hee ſhould not bee
buried.
               Item I affirme, to haue ſeene with myne owne eyes, that
the Spaniſhe haue cutte the handes, the noſes, and the eares of
the Indians, and of their women, without any other cauſe or
purpoſe, ſaue onely that ſo it came into their fantaſie, and that
in ſo many places and quarters, that it ſhoulde bee too tedious
to rehearſe. And I haue ſeene, that the Spaniſhe haue made
their Maſtiues runne vpon the Indians to rent them in pieces.
And moreouer, I haue ſeene by them brent ſo many houſes, and
whole borughes, or towneſhippes, that I am not able to tell the
number. Alſo it is true, that they violently plucked the little infants
from the mothers dugges, and taking them by the armes,
did throwe them from them as farre as they coulde: Together
with other enormities and cruelties without any cauſe, whiche
gaue me aſtoniſhment to behold them, and woulde be to long to
rehearſe them.
               
                  
Item, I ſawe when as they ſent for the Cacikes and other
principall Indians, to come ſee them in peace, and aſſuraunce
to them made, promiſing them ſafe conduct: and incontinent
as they were arriued, they burned them. They burned
two whiles I was preſent, the one in Andon, and the other in
Tumbala: and I coulde neuer preuaile with them to haue them
deliuered from burning, preached I vnto them neuer ſo muche.
And in God and my conſcience, for ought that euer I coulde
perceiue, the Indians of Peru, neuer lift themſelues vp, nor
neuer rebelled for any other cauſe, but for the euill entreating of
the other ſide, as is manifeſt vnto euery one, and for iuſt cauſe:
the Spaniardes deſtroying them tyrannouſly againſt all reaſon
and iuſtice, with al their countrey, working vpon them ſo many
outrages, that they were determined to die, rather then to ſuffer
much an other time.
               Item I ſay, that by the reporte of the Indians themſelues,
there is yet more golde hidden then is come to light, the whiche
becauſe of the vniuſtices and cruelties of the Spaniardes, they
woulde not diſcouer, neyther euer will diſcouer, ſo long as
they ſhall bee ſo euyll entreated, but will thoſe rather to die
with their fellowes.
               Wherein GOD our Lorde hath been highly treſpaſſed
agayinſt, and the kinges Maieſtie euill ſerued, hauing beene
defrauded in that, that his highneſſe hath loſte ſuche a countrey,
as hath been able to yeelde ſuſtenaunce to all Caſtile: for the recouerie
of which countrey, it will be a matter of great difficulty,
diſpence, and charges.
               All theſe hitherto are the formall woordes of the ſayde
religious perſon: the which are alſo ratified by the Byſhoppe
of Mexico, which witneſſeth that the reuerende father hath to
his knowledge affirmed all the aboue ſaide.
               It is heere to bee conſidered, that the good father ſayeth,
that he ſawe thoſe thynges. For that, that hee hath beene
fiftie, or an hundred leagues vp into the conntrey, for the ſpace
of niene or tenne yeeres, and that at the very beginning, when
there were not as yet but very fewe of the Spaniardes: but at

the ringing of the golde, there were quickly gathered and fleeked
thither foure or fiue thouſande, which ſhedde themſelues
foorth ouer many great realmes and prouinces, more then fiue
hundred or ſixe hundred leagues, the whiche countrey hath
beene throughly deſtroyed, they executing ſtill the ſelfe ſame
practiſes, and others more barbarous and cruell.
               Of a veritie from that day vnto this preſente, there
hath beene deſtroyed and brought to deſolation moe ſoules
then hee hath compted: and they haue with leſſe reuerence
of GOD or the King, and with leſſe plttie then before, aboliſhed
a great part of the linage of mankinde.
               They haue ſlayne vnto this day in theſe ſame realmes
(and yet dayly they doe ſlay them) moe then foure millions
of ſoules.
               Certayne dayes paſſed, they pricked in ſhooting with
dartes of reedes to death a mightie Queene, wife of Eling, who
is yet King of that Realme, whom the Spaniardes by laying
handes vpon him compelled to rebell, and in rebellion hee perſiſteth.
               They tooke the Queene his wife, and ſo as hath beene
ſayde, ſlue her againſt all reaſon and iuſtice, beeing greate
with childe as ſhee was, as it was ſaid onely to vexe her huſband
withall.
               If it ſhoulde bee expedient to recounte the particularities
of the cruelties and ſlaughters that the Spaniſhe haue committed,
and yet dayly doe committe in Peru: without all doubt
they ſhoulde bee ſo frightfull, and in ſo great number, that all
that wee haue hitherto ſaide of the other partes of the Indies,
woulde bee ſhadowed, and it woulde ſeeme a ſmall matter
in the reſpecte of the grieuouſneſſe and greate number
hereof.
            
            
               
               Of the newe realme of
Grenado.
               VVIthin the yeere 1539. there tooke their flight together
ſundry tyrantes, flocking from Veneſuela, from
Saint Martha, and from Carthagene, to ſearch for the Perous:
and there were alſo others which came downe from Peru it
ſelfe to aſſay, to make a glade farther into the countrey: And they
found from beyond S. Marthas and Carthagene, 300. leagues
vp into the countrey,, fertile landes, and admirable prouinces,
full of infinite people, kinde hearted like the reſt, and verye
riche, as well of golde as of precious ſtones, which they call emeraldes.
               Vnto the whiche Prouinces they gaue the name of Newe
Grenado: For becauſe that the tyraunt whiche came firſt into
this countrey, was a grenado, borne in our countrey. And
for becauſe that diuers wicked men and cruell of thoſe whiche
roaued ouer this parte, were not orious butchers, making it as
occupation to ſhedde mans blood, hauing the practiſe and experience
of the great fellonies aforementioned in moſte part of
the other regions of the Indies: it is the cauſe why their diueliſhe
woorkes haue beene ſuche, and in ſo great number, whiche
the circumſtaunces doe make appeare ſo monſtrous and odious,
that they haue farre exceeded the others, yea all the geſts
that haue gone before, done by others, or by them ſelues in other
Prouinces.
               I will recounte ſome one or other of an infinite whereof
they are giultie, as doone by them within theſe three yeeres,
and whiche yet they, ceaſe not to committe. That is, that
a Gouernour, for as muche as hee whiche robbed and ſlewe
in the newe Realme of Grenado, woulde not admitte him
for conſorte with him to robbe and ſley as did hee: hee
procured an enquirie, and thereby euidence came in agaynst

him with ſundrie witneſſes, vpon the fact of his ſlaughters, diſorders,
and murders which hee had done, and doeth as yet vnto
this day, the proceſſe of which enquirie, together with the euidences
was read, and is kept in the recordes of the counſell of the
Indies.
               The witneſſes doe depoſe in the ſame enquirie, that the ſaide
whole realme was in peace, the Indians ſeruing the Spaniards,
giuing them to eate of their laboure, and labouring continually,
and manuring the grounde, and bringing them muche
golde and precious ſtones, ſuche as are emerauldes, and all that
which they coulde and had: the townes, and the Lordeſhippes,
and the people being diſtributed amongſt the Spaniardes euery
one his ſhare: which is all that they ſtudie for, for that, that it
is their meane way to attayne to their laſt end and ſcope, to witte
golde,
               And all beeing ſubdued to their tyrannie and accuſtomed
bondage, the tyrant the principall Captayne which commaunded
ouer that countrey, tooke the Lorde and King of the countrey,
and detayned him priſoner ſixe or ſeuen monethes, exacting
of him golde and emerauldes without cauſe or reaſon at all.
The ſayde king, who was named Bogata, for feare which they
put him in, ſayde that he woulde giue them an houſe full of gold:
hoping that hee ſhoulde eſcape out of the handes of him whiche
tormented him. And hee ſent Indians which ſhoulde bringe
him golde, and by times one after an other, they brought in a
great quantitie of golde and precious ſtones. But bec auſe the
king did not giue an whole houſe full of golde, the Spaniardes
did kill him: ſethence that hee did not accompliſhe that which he
had promiſed.
               The tyraunt commaunding that this king ſhoulde bee arraigned
before him ſelfe: They ſommon and accuſe in this order
the greateſt king of all that countrey, and the tyraunt giueth
ſentence, condemning him to bee racked and tormented,
if hee doe not furniſhe forth the houſe full of golde.
               They giue him the torture and the ſtrapado with cordes:
they flinge burnyng ſewe
                     •
                   vppon his naked belly: they lay

on boltes vpon his feete, which were faſtened to one ſtake, and
gyrd his neck faſt vnto another ſtake, two men holding both his
handes, and ſo they ſet fire vnto his feete: and the tyrant, comming
vp and downe, nowe and then, willeth him to haue his
death giuen him by little and little, if hee made not readie the
golde. Thus they diſpatched and did to death that noble Lord
in thoſe torments, during the execution whereof, God manifeſted
by a ſigne, that thoſe cruelties diſpleaſed him, in conſuming
with fire all the towne where they were committed. All the
Spaniardes to the ende to followe their good Capataine, and hauing
none other thing to doe, but to hackle in peeces thoſe poore
innocents doe the like, tormenting with diuers and ſauage torments
euery Indian, both Cacike or Lorde of euery people or
peoples, with all their flocks, that were committed to their charges:
thoſe ſaid Lordes with all their ſubiects ſeruing them, and
giuing them golde and emerauds as many as they coulde, and
as muche as they had: Tormenting them onely to the ende
they ſhoulde giue them more golde, and rich myneralles: thus
they broyled and diſpatched all the Lordes of that Countrie.
               For the great feare of the notorious cruelties, that one of the
petie tyrants did vnto the Indians, there tranſported himſelfe
vnto the mountaines, in flying ſo great crueltie, a great Lorde
named Daytama, with many of his people. For this they
holde for their laſt remedie and refuge, if it might haue preuailed
them ought: and this the Spaniardes call inſurrection and
rebellion. Which the Captaine head tyrant hauing knowledge
of he ſendeth ſupplie of ſouldiers vnto the ſaid cruel man: (for
whoſe cruelties ſake, the Indians that were peaceable, and had
endured great tyrannies and miſchiefes, were nowe gone into
the mountaines:) to the ende hee ſhould purſue them. Who, becauſe
it ſufficed not to hide them in the entrals of the earth, finding
there a great multitude of people, ſlue and diſpatched thē,
aboue 500. ſoules, what mē, what womē, for they receiued none
to mercy. Alſo the witneſſes depoſe, that the ſaid Lord Daytamā,
before that the Spaniards put him to death, came to the cruell
man, and brought him foure or fiue thouſand Caſtillans, the
which notwithſtanding he was murdered as is aboue ſaide.
               
                  
Another time manie Indians beeing come to ſerue the Spaniardes,
and ſeruing them with ſuch humilitie and ſimplicitie,
as they are accuſtomed to doe, reputing themſelues aſſured: behold,
the captaine of the towne where they ſerued, who commeth
by night commaunding that thoſe Indians ſhould be put to the
edge of the ſworde, when they had ſupped, and whiles that they
were a ſleepe, taking their reſt after the toyle which they ſuſtained
the day time. And this hee did, for that it ſeemed him neceſſary
to do this maſſacre, to the end to engraue an awe of himſelf
in the heartes of all the peoples of that countrie.
               Another time the captaine commaunded to take an othe of
the Spaniardes, to wit, howe many euery one had in his ſeruice
of the Caciks, and principall Lords, and Indiās of the meaner
ſort: that incontinent they ſhoulde bee brought to the moſte
open place of the citie, where he commaunded that they ſhoulde
be beheaded: thus were there at that time put to death a foure or
fiue hundred ſoules.
               Moreouer theſe witneſſes depoſe concerning another of the
petty tyrants, that he had exerciſed great cruelties in ſlaying, &
chopping off the hands and noſes of many perſons, aſwell men
as women, and deſtroying very much people.
               Another time the captaine ſent the ſelf ſame cruell man with
certaine Spaniardes into the Prouince of Bogata, to bee informed
by the inhabitants what Lorde it was, that was ſucceſſour
vnto the chiefe Lorde, whom he had made to die ye cruell death
in thoſe torments ſpoken of before: Who running along the
countrie throughout ſundrie places, tooke as many Indians as
he could come by: And for that he could not learn of them, what
he was that ſucceeded that Lorde, he mangled off ſome handes,
he bid caſt others, men and women vnto hungrie maſtiues, who
rend them in peeces. And in this maner haue been deſtroyed very
many Indies, and Indeſſes. One time at the fourth watch
of the night, he went to ouerrunne Caciks or gouernours of the
lande, with many of the Indians, which were in peace, and helde
themfelues aſſured (for he had giuen them his faith, & aſſurance
that they ſhoulde receiue no harme nor damage) vpon credit

wherof, they were come foorth of their holes in the mountains,
where they had been hid, to people the plaine, in the which ſtoode
their citie: thus being commen without ſuſpition, & truſting the
aſſurance made, he tooke a great number, aſwell men as womē,
and commanded to holde out their handes ſtretched againſt the
ground, & himſelfe with a woodknife cut of their hands, telling
them that he did on them this chaſtiſement, for that they woulde
not confeſſe, where their new Lorde was, which had ſucceeded
in the charge of gouernement of the Realme,
               Another time for that the Indians gaue him not a cofer
full of golde, that this cruel captaine required them: he ſent men
to warre vpon them: who cut off the handes and noſes of men
and women without number. They caſt others before their dogs
being hunger bitten, and vſed to the feate of feeding on fleſh, the
which diſpatched and deuoured them.
               Another time the Indians of that Realme perceiuing, that
the Spaniards had brent 3. or 4. of their principall Lordes, they
fled for feare vp into a mountaine, from whence they might defende
themſelues againſt their enemies ſo eſtraunged from all
humanitie. There were of them by the teſtimonie of the
witneſſes a foure or fiue thouſande Indians. This aboue ſaide
Captaine ſent a great and notable tyrant, which exceeded farre
moſt of thoſe to whom he had giuen the charge to ranſacke and
waſte, together with a certaine number of Spaniardes, to the
ende that they ſhould chaſtiſe the Indian rebels: as they would
ſeeme to make them for that they were fled from a peſtilence &
ſlaughter ſo intollerable: and as though it apperteined vnto
them, to chaſtice and puniſh them as malefactors themſelues in
deede being worthie of all torment without that any body ſhould
haue of them pitie or compaſſion, being ſo deuoid thereof, as appeareth
by the handling of thoſe poore innocents of that faſhion.
Well, ſo it is that the Spaniſh by force preuailed to get vppe to
the mountaine: for the Indians were naked without weapons.
And the Spaniardes cryed peace vnto the Indians: aſſuring
them, that they would do them no harme: and that they of their
partes ſhoulde not war any longer. Streight way as the Indians
ſtinted from their owne defenſe, the vile cruel man ſent to ye
                  
Spaniardes to take the fortes of the mountaine, and when they
ſhoulde get them to encloſe within them the Indians. They ſet
then like vnto Tigers and Lions, vpon theſe lambes ſo meeke,
and put them to the edge of the ſworde, ſo long that they were
faine to breath and reſt themſelues. And after hauing reſted a
certaine ſeaſon, the captaine commaunded that they ſhoulde kill
and caſt downe from the mountaine, the which was very highe,
the reſidue that were aliue: that which was done. And theſe
witneſſes ſay, that they ſawe as it were a cloude of the Indians
caſt downe from the mountaine, to the number by eſtimation
of ſeuen hundreth men together, where they fell battered to
peeces.
               And to atchieue all his great crueltie, they ſearched al the Indians
that were hid amongſt the buſhes: and hee commaunded
to cut of their heads, at blockes ends: and ſo they ſiue them and
caſt them downe the mountaine: yet coulde not hee content him
ſelfe with thoſe ſaide thinges ſo cruell but that hee would make
himſelfe a litle better knowne, augmenting his horrible ſinnes,
when as hee commaunded that all the Indians men and womē,
which ſome priuate perſons had taken aliue (for euery one in
thoſe maſſacres is accuſtomed to cull out ſome one or other
mankinde and womankind, to the ende to become his ſeruants)
ſhoulde be put into a ſtrawen houſe, ſauing and reſeruing thoſe,
which ſeemed neceſſarie to bee employed in their ſeruice, and
that there ſhoulde be put to fire: thus were there burned fourty
or fiftie. Hee cauſed the reſt to bee flong to the carrion kinde
dogges, which rende them in peeces, and deuoured them.
               Another time the ſelfe ſame tyrant went to a Citie called
Cotta, and tooke there a great number of Indians, and cauſed
to be diſmembred by his dogs, a fifteene or twentie Lords of the
principal, and cut the handes of a great multitude of men & women:
which ſaide handes hee hanged one by another on a pole,
to the ende the other Indians might ſee that, which he had done
vnto them. There were ſo hanged one by another threeſcore and
ten payre of hands. He ſlyſed off beſides from many women and
children their noſes.
               No creature liuing and reaſonable, is able to decipher the

miſchiefes and cruell dealings of this fellowe, enemie of God.
For they are without number, neuer otherwiſe hearde of, nor
ſeene: thoſe, I meane, which he hath done in the lande of Guatimala,
and all about where he hath become, for there are a good
many yeres paſſed, in the which he hath bene profeſſed in the miſterie,
to bereaue that land, & thoſe people.
               The witneſſes ſay for a ſurcharge, that the cruell dealings &
ſlaughters which haue beene committed, and are yet in the ſaide
Realme of new Grenado, by the captaines themſelues in perſon
and by their conſents giuen vnto all the other tyrants, waſters,
and weeders of the nature of man, which were in his company,
and the which hath laid all the countrie wilde & waſte, are ſuche
and ſo exceſſiue, that if his maieſtie doe not take ſome order
therein in ſome time (albeit that the ſlaughter and diſcomfiture
of ye Indians is done only to bereaue thē of their gold, the which
they haue none of, for they haue ſurrendred all that which they
had) they wil in a ſhort time make an end of them ſo in ſuch ſort,
that there will bee no more Indians to inhabite the lande, but
that it wyll remaine in a wilderneſſe without beeing manured.
               Nay, wee muſt note heere the cruell and peſſilent tyrrannie
of theſe curſed tyrants, howe raging and diueliſh it hath beene,
that in the ſpace of two or three yeeres, ſithence that this realme
hath bene firſt diſcouered (which as they ſay both thoſe that haue
been there, and thoſe which depoſe as witneſſes, was the moſte
peopled of inhabitantes, as poſſiblie might bee any Countrie in
the worlde,) they haue raſed and emptied it with ſlaughters, declaring
themſeues ſo farre remooued from pittie, and the reuerent
feare of God and the Prince, that the opinion is, without
the preſent ſuccour of his Maieſty, to ſtay theſe vnnatural &
diueliſh tyrannies, there wil not remaine as muche as one man
aliue, & I verily beleue it. For I haue ſeen with mine own eyes
that in theſe parts, they haue deſtroyed and diſpeopled in a ſmall
time, great countries.
               There are other great Prouinces, which bounde vpon the
ſaide Realme, of newe Grenado, which they call Popay an and

Cali, and three or foure others, which containe more then 500.
leagues of ground, which they haue deſtroyed and deſolated in
the ſame maner, as they haue done others, robbing and ſlaying
with torments, and the enormities afore ſpoken of. For the land
is very fertile, and thoſe that come from thence now dayly, dot
report, yt it is a rufull thing to ſee ſo manie goodly townes burned
and ſayd deſolate, as they might behold paſſing vp & downe
that way: ſo as there, where there was wont to be in one towne
a thouſand or two thouſand houſeholdes, they haue not founde
fiftie, and the reſt vtterly ranſacked and diſpeopled. And in ſome
quarters they haue found two or three hundred leagues of lande
diſpeopled and burned, & great cities deſtroyed. And finally, by
that, that ſi thence into the Realmes of Peru, of the Prouince
ſide of Quito, are entred farre into the Countrie ſore and fel tyrants,
as far as to the ſaid Realme of Grenado, & of Popayan,
& of Cali by the coaſt of Carthagene, and Araba, & other accurſed
tyrants of Carthagene haue gone to aſſault Quito, and moreouer,
afterwards of the riuer ſide of S. Iohn, which is on ye ſouth
ſide, all the whiche haue met to ioyne handes together in this
exployte: they haue rooted out and diſpeopled aboue ſixe hundred
leagues of land, with the loſſe of an infinitie of ſoules, doing
ſtill the ſelfe ſame to the poore wretches that remain behind,
howſoeuer innocent they appeare to be.
               Thus then is the rule which I ſet down at the beginning, by
them verified: that is, that the tyrannie, rage, and vngraciouſneſſe
of the Spaniſhe, hath alwayes proceeded encreaſing in
their crueltie, vnnaturalneſſe, and miſchiuouſnes amongſt thoſe
ſo ſweete lambes. That which is continued at this preſent day
in thoſe Prouinces, amongſt other their doings worthy the fire
and torment, is this which followeth.
               After the ends of the ſlaughters and maſſacres of the warres,
they bring the people into the horrible bondage aboue ſaide, and
giue them to the commaundment of Diuels, to one an hundred
Indians, to another three hundred. The cēmaunder Diuel commandeth,
that there come before him an hundred Indians, which
incontinent preſent themſelues like lambes. He cauſing a forty
or fiftie amongeſt them to haue their heads cut off: ſaith vnto the
other there preſent, I will ſerue you of the ſame ſauce, if you

doe not mee good ſeruice, or if ſo be, that you goe out of my ſight
without my leaue.
               That for the honour of God, all they that haue read this peece
of worke, or ſhall giue it a reading, conſider nowe, whether this
act, ſo hideous, fell and vnnatural, doe not exceede all crueltie
and iniquitie, that may bee imagined, and whether the Spaniardes
haue any wrong offered them when a man calleth them
Diuels, & whether were better, to giue the Indiās to keep to the
diuels in hel, or the Spaniards which are at the Indies.
               After this I will rehearſe another diueliſh part, the which I
cannot tell whether it be leſſe cruell & deuoide of manhood, then
are thoſe of ſauage beaſtes: that is, that the Spaniſh which are
in the Indies, doe keepe certaine dogges moſt raging, taught
and trayned wholy to the purpoſe, to kill and rende in peeces
the Indiās. That let all thoſe yt are true chriſtians, yea, and alſo
thoſe which are not ſo, behold, if euer there were the like thinge
in the whole worlde: that is, to feed thoſe dogs, they led about wt
them whereſoeuer they goe a great nūber of Indians in chaines
as if they were hogs, and kill them, making a ſhambles of mans
fleſh. And the one of them will ſay to another, Lend mee a quarter
of a villaine, to giue my dogs ſome meate, vntill I kyll one
nexte, altogether as if one ſhoulde borrowe a quarter of an hog
or mutton. There bee others which goe foorth a hunting in
the morning with their curres, the which being returned to eat,
if another aſke him: Howe haue yee ſped to day, they aunſwere,
very well: for I haue killed with my dogs to day, fifteene
or twentie viliacoes. All theſe Diabolicall doings, with others
like haue beene proued in the ſutes of law, that the tyrants haue
had one of them againſt another. Is there any caſe more ouglie
or vnnaturall?
               I will here now deport me of this diſcourſe, vntill ſuch time,
yt there come other newes of things, in vngraciouſnes more notorious
and remarkable (if it ſo be, yt there can be any more greeuous)
or vntill ſuch time as wee may returne thither to beholde
them our ſelues anewe, as wee behold them for the ſpace of 42.
yeeres continually with mine owne eyes: Proteſting in a good
conſcience before God, that I doe beleeue, and I holde it for

certaine, that the damages and loſſes are ſo great, with the diſtructions
and ouerthrowes of Cities, maſſacres and murders,
with the cruelties, horrible and ougly, with the rauins, iniquities
and robberies, all the which things haue beene executed amongeſt
thoſe people, and are yet dayly committed in thoſe
quarters: that in all the things, which I haue ſpoken and deciphered,
as I was able the neereſt to the truth: I haue not ſaide
one of a thouſande, of that which hath beene done, and is dayly
a doyng at this preſent, be it that you conſider the qualitie, or bee
it, that ye conſider the quantitie.
               And to the end that all Chriſtians haue the greater compaſſion
of thoſe poore innocents, and that they complaine with mee
the more their perdition and deſtruction, and that they deteſt the
greedineſſe, loftineſſe, and felneſſe of the Spaniſh: that all doe
holde it for a moſt vndoubted veritie, with all that hath beene aboue
ſaide, that ſithence the firſt diſcouery of the Indies vntyll
nowe, the Indians neuer did harme vnto the Spaniſhe in any
place whereſoeuer, vntill ſuche time, that they firſte receiued
wrongs and iniuries, being robbed and betrayed: but indeede
did repute them to be immortall, ſuppoſing them to bee deſcended
from heauen, and they receiued them for ſuche, vntill ſuche
time as that they gaue it forth manifeſtly to be knowen by their
doings, what they were, and whereto they tended.
               I will adioyne heerevnto this, that from the beginning vnto
this houre, the Spaniardes haue had no more care to procure
that vnto thoſe people ſhoulde bee preached the faith of Ieſus
Chriſte, then as if they had been curre dogs, or other beaſtes: but
in lien thereof, which is much worſe, they haue forbidden by expreſſe
meanes the religious men to doe it, for becauſe that that
ſeemed vnto them an hinderance likely to bee, to the getting of
their golde, and theſe riches which their auarice foreglutted in.
And at this day there is no more knowledge of God throughout
the Indies, to wit, whether hee bee of tymber, of the ayre, or the
earth, then there was an hundred yeeres agoe, excepting 
                     •
                  ewe
Spaine, whether the religious men haue gone, which is but a
litle corner of the Indies: and ſo are they periſhed, and doe periſhe
all without faith, and without ſacraments.
               
                  
I brother Bartholomewe delas Caſas or Caſaus, religious
of the order of S. Dominicke, which by the mercie of God am
come into this courte of Spayne, to ſewe that the hell might hee
withdrawen from the Indes, and that theſe innumerable ſoules,
redeemed by the blood of Ieſus Chriſt, ſhoulde not periſhe for
euermore without remedie, but that they might knowe their
creator and bee ſaued: alſo for the care and compaſſion that I
haue of my countrey, which is Caſtile, to the ende that God deſtroy
it not for the great ſinnes thereof, committed againſt the
fayth and his honour, and againſt our neighbours: for certaine
mens ſakes notablie zealous of the glory of God, touched with
compaſſion of the afflictions and calamities of others, followers
of this court: howebeit, that I was purpoſed to do it, but I could
not ſo ſoone haue done it, becauſe of my continuall occupations,
I atchieued this treatiſe and ſummarie at Valencia, the 8. of
December, 1542. the force beeing mounted to the higheſt type
of extremitie, and all the violences, tyrannies, deſolations, anguiſhes,
and calamities aboue ſayde, ſpread ouer all the Indies,
where ther are any Spaniardes, although they bee more cruell
in one part then they bee in an other, and more ſauage, and more
abhominable.
               Mexico and her confines are leſſe euill intreated. In truth,
there they can not execute their outrages openly, for that there
and not elſewhere, there is ſome forme of iuſtice, as ſlender as
it is. For becauſe that there alſo they kill them with diueliſhe
tributes: I am in good hope, that the Emperour and King of
I payne, our liege Soueraigne Lorde, don Charles the fifte of
that name, who beginneth to haue vnderſtanding of the miſchieues
and treaſons that there haue been, and are committed againſt
thoſe poore people, againſt the will of God, and his owne,
(for they haue alwayes cunningly concealed the trueth from
him) will roote out thoſe euilles, and take ſome order for this
newe worlde that God hath giuen him, as vnto one that leueth
and doeth iuſtice: whoſe honour and proſperous eſtate Imperiall,
God almightie vouchſafe to bleſſe with long life, for the benefite
of his whole vniuerſall Church, and to the ſaluauen of his

owne royall ſoule. Amen.
               After hauing couched in writing the premiſſes, I vnderſtood
of certayne lawes and ordinaunces, whiche his Maieſtie hath
made about this time at Barcellone, Anno. 1542. in the moneth
of Nouember, and the yeere following at Madrill: by the which
ordinaunces, there is order ſet downe, as the caſe them ſeemeth
to require: to the end, to cut off the miſcheieues and ſinnes whiche
are committed againſt God and our neighbours, tending to
the vtter ruine & perdition of this new world. His Maieſtie hath
made theſe lawes, after hauing holdē many aſſemblies of perſons
of authoritie, of learning and conſcience, and after hauing had
diſputations and conferences in Valladolyd: and finally with the
aſſent and aduiſe of al thoſe others which haue giuen their aduiſe
in writing, and haue been founde neereſt approching vnto the
law of Ieſus Chriſt, and withall free from the corruption and
foyle of the treaſures robbed from the Indians: the which treaſures
haue ſoyled the handes and much more the ſoules of many,
ouer whom thoſe treaſures and auarice haue got the maiſterie,
and where hence hath proceeded the blinding, which hath cauſed
ſo to marre all without remorſe. Theſe lawes being publiſhed,
the creatures of thoſe tyrantes, who then were at the court, drew
out ſundrie copyes thereof (for it grieued them at the hearts: for
that it ſeemed them that thereby there was a doore ſhut vp vnto
them agaynſt their rauine and extortion afore rehearſed) and diſperſed
them into diuers quarters of the Indies. Thoſe which had
the charge to robbe, roote out, and conſume by their tyrannies,
(euen as they had neuer kept any good order but rather diſorder,
ſuch as Luſifer himſelfe might haue helde) as they read thoſe copies
before the new iudges might come to execute their charge,
knowing it (as it is ſayd, and that very exediblie) by thoſe who
vntill this time haue ſupported and mayntayned their crimes
and outrages, to be likely that ſuch execution ſhoulde bee vſed of
thoſe laws: they ran into a mutinie in ſuch wiſe, as that when
the good Iudges were come to doe their duties, they aduiſed
with them ſelues (as thoſe which had loſt the feare and loue of
God) to caſt off alſo all ſhame, and obedience which they owe to
the king, and ſo tooke vnto them the name of open and arrant

traytours, behauing them ſelues as moſt cruell and graceleſſe
tyrantes: and principally in the realme of Peru, where preſently
this yeere 1442. are committed actes ſo horrible and frightfull,
as neuer were the like, neither in the Indies, nor in all the
worlde beſides, not onely agaynſt the Indians, the which all or
in a maner all are ſlayne, all thoſe regions being diſpeopled: but
alſo betwixt themſelues by a iuſt iudgement of God, who hath
permitted that they ſhoulde bee the butchers one of an other of
them. By meanes of the ſupport of this rebellion, none of all the
other partes of this newe worlde would obey thoſe lawes: But
vnder colour of making ſupplication to his Maieſtie to the contrary,
they haue made an inſurrection aſwell as the others. For
that it irketh them to leaue their eſtates and goodes whiche they
haue vſurped, and to vnbinde the handes of the Indians, whome
they detayne in a perpetuall captiuitie. And there where they
ceaſe to kill with the ſwoorde, redily and at the inſtant, they kill
them a little and a little, by perſonall ſlaueries, and vniuſt charges
and intollerable. That which the king could not hither vnto
let: for becauſe that they all, great and litle, roue and robbe, ſome
more, ſome leſſ
                     •
                  
                  ▪ 
                  
                     •
                  ome ouertly, and ſome couertly, and vnder the
pretence of ſeruing the king: diſhonour God, and rob the king.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Authour his wordes farder to
king Philip, then at the time of
writing thereof, Prince of
Spayne.
            
               THat which followeth hereafter immediatly: is a part
of a Miſſiue or letter ſent, written by one, who him ſelfe
was a partie in theſe voiages: recounting the works the
which a captayne did, and conſented to the dooing in
the countrey, all the way as hee paſſed. And albeit ſo, that the
ſaide miſſiue being put to binding in one booke with other
papers, the binder eyther forgot, or loſt a leafe or two: notwithſtanding,
foraſmuch as the ſaid miſſiue contayned things
fearefull, euen to aſtoniſhement, the which one of them that
had done them had giuen me: and that I had them all in my
keeping: I thought good to preſent you therwithall, ſuch as
it is nowe, though without beginning or ending. For that
this fragment remayning of the whole, is full of notable
pointes: and therefore being reſolued that it ſhoulde bee ſo
printed, truſting that it will cauſe no leſſe compaſſ on and
horror in your highneſſe minde, then the other matters afore
mentioned, with a deſire forthwith to prouide for the redreſſe.
            
            The Miſſiue.
            
               HEe gaue licence to put them to the Chaine and
in bondage: That which they did: and the Captayne
led after him three or foure droues of theſe
perſons enchayned: and in this doing, he procured
not yt the countrey ſhoulde bee inhabited and
peopled (as had been conuenient ſhoulde haue

been done) but robbing from the Indians all their victuals they
had, the inbornes of the countrey were reduced to ſuche an extremitie,
that there were founde great numbers dead of famine
in the high wayes. And the Indians comming and going too
and fro the coaſt, laden with the carriage of the Spaniardes, hee
was the death by theſe meanes of about ten thouſande. For not
one that arriued at the very coaſt eſcaped death: by reaſon of
the exceſſiue heate of the countrey.
            After this following the ſame tract and way, by the whiche
Iohn of Ampudia was gone, hee ſent the Indians which hee
had purchaſed in Quito, a day before him, to the ende they ſhould
diſcouer the bourges of the Indians, and ſhoulde pillage them,
that when hee came with his maynie, hee might finde his bootie
readie.
            And thoſe Indians were his owne mates: of the whiche
ſuch a one had two hundred, ſuch a one three hundred, and ſuche
a one a hundred: according to the haggage that euery one of
them had: which Indians came to yeelde them ſelues to their
maiſters with all yt they had robbed. At dooing whereof they
committed great cruelties towarde young children and women:
and ſo had hee vſed before to doe in Quito, in burning the whole
countrey, and namely the garners where the Lordes kept their
Mahis in prouiſion.
            Hee ſuffered to bee done great outrages, in ſlaying the
ſheepe with the which they nouriſhed and entertayned for the
moſt part, both the Spaniſhe, and the naturall inhabitauntes of
the countrey. And onely to haue the braynes and the ſewet hee
permitted that there ſhoulde bee killed two or three hundred
wethers, of the whiche the fleſh was fayne to bee caſt away.
And the Indians friendes to the Spaniardes, and the whiche
went with the Spaniardes, onely to eate the ſheepes hearts, killed
a great number, for as much as they eate none other thing.
            And two men in one prouince, named Purua, killed 25. wethers
and ſheep fit for carriage like our horſe, & the which were
worth amongſt the Spaniardes twentie, and fiue and twentie
duckates a peece, only to haue to eate the braines, and the ſewet.
So as by this diſorder of exceeding ſlaughter of beaſtes, haue

been loſt aboue an hundred thouſande head of cattell. By occaſion
whereof alſo, the countrey came into a great neceſſitie: the
natiue of the lande miſerablie dying of famine. And Quito,
which was furniſhed of ſo great ſtore of Mahis, that it can not
bee well ſpoken, was by this meanes ſo aſſaulted with famaine,
that a ſtrike or buſhell of Mahis, was rayſed to the priſe of 10.
duckets, and a ſheepe to as muche.
            After that the ſayde Captaine was returned from the coaſt,
hee determined to depart from Quito, and to goe ſeeke the Captayne
Iohn de Ampudia, leauing thereto moe then two hundred
of foote men and horſe men, amongſt whome were a great many
inhabitauntes of the citie of Quito. Vnto thoſe inhabitaunts the
captaine gaue licence to carrie with them the Cacikes, that were
eſcheated them in ſharing, with as many Indians as they would.
That which they did: and Alfonſo Sanches Nuita caried forth
with him his Cacike, with moe then an hundred Indians beſids:
and in like maner Peter Cibo and his couſin: and they led out
more then an hundred and fiftie with their wiues: and ſundrie alſo
ſped out their children, becauſe that in a maner euery one died
for hunger. Alſo Moran inhabitant of Popaian, caried out moe
then two hundred perſons. And the like did all the reſt, citizens
and ſouldiers, euery one after his abilitie: the ſouldiers crauing
that they might haue licence giuen them to captiue thoſe Indians
men and women, which they carried forth: the which was
graunted vnto them vntyll the death of the ſayde captiues, and
thoſe deceaſed, to take as many more: for if the Indians were
ſubiectes of his Maieſtie, ſo likewiſe were the Spaniardes that
died in the warres as well as they.
            And after this maner departed the ſayde Captayne of Quito,
going to a citie called Otaba, the which he held at that houre
for his ſhare: and demanded of the Cacike, that there ſhoulde bee
giuen him fiue hundred men to lead to the warres: which were
giuen him with certayne principall perſons of the Indians. Hee
departed ſome of thoſe people amongſt his ſouldiers, and ledde
forth the reſt with him, ſome laden, and ſome chayned, and ſome
vnbounde to ſerue him, and to bring him meate.
            
               
Thus carried hee his ſouldiers ſome pinniond in chaynes,
and ſome in coardes. When they departed out of the Prouince
of Quito, they carried out moe then ſixe thouſande Indians, men
and women, and of al thoſe there neuer returned home into their
countrey twentie perſons. For they dyed all thorough the great
and exceſſiue trauell, which they made them endure in thoſe br
                  ••
               
               ling
countreys contrary to their nature. It happened at that
tyme that one Alfonſo Sanches, whom the ſaide Captayne ſent
for chieftayne ouer a certayne number of men into a Prouince
there, met with a good company of women, and young boyes
laden with victuals: who ſtayed wayting for them without mouing
from the place to giue them of that which they had, and hauing
ſo done, the captaine commaunded that they ſhould bee put
to the ſharpe of the ſworde. There happened here a mayuailous
thing: which was, that a ſouldier ſtriking an Indeſſe woman, his
ſworde brake a two in the middeſt, at the firſt blowe, and at the
ſeconde blowe there remayned nought in his handes, but the
pomell hauft without that the woman was hurt. And an other
ſouldier, willing to ſtrike another Indeſſe woman, with aſquare
dagger he had, the dagger brake at the firſt choppe, the length of
foure fingers, and at the ſeconde, there remayned vnto him no
more ſaue the hauft.
            At the ſame tyme the ſayde Captayne yeeded foorth of Quito,
and drewe out a great number of the naturall inbornes, vnmarriyng
them, and giuing their young wiues vnto his Indians
whom hee ledde along, and the others wiues hee gaue to others
which remayned in the citie, for that they were too olde.
            There followed out of Quito a woman with a litle childe
in her armes, crying after him, and entreating him, that her
huſbande might not bee forced to goe with him, for that ſhee
had three little children, the whiche ſhee coulde not nouriſhe
but were ready to dye for hunger:
            And as the Captayne gaue her a churliſhe anſwere at her
firſt ſute, ſhee returned the ſeconde time with greater cries, ſaying,
that her children dyed for hunger.
            
               
And ſeeing that the Captayne gaue her the repulſe, and that
hee woulde not reſtore her, her huſbande: ſhee beat the childes
head agaynſt the ſtones, and ſlue it.
            It came to paſſe alſo, that at the tyme that the ſayde
Captayne came into the prouice of Lili, to a towne called Palo
neere vnto the great riuer, where hee founde the Captayne
Iohn de Ampudia, which was gone before to diſcouer, and pacifie
the countrey: the ſaide Ampudia kepte a citie by him prouided
of a garriſō in the name of his maieſty, and of the marques
Frauncis of Pizarro: and had ſet ouer them for gouernours ordinarie,
one Petre Solano of Quennoues, and 8. counſellours,
& all the reſt of the countrey was in peace & ſhared out amongſt
them. And as he knew that the ſayd captaine was in the ſaid riuer,
he came to ſee him with a great number of the inhabitantes
of the countrey, and peaceful Indians, laden with victuals and
fruites. Shortly after alſo all the neighbour Indians came to
ſee him, bringing him food. There were the Indians of Xamundi,
and of Palo, and of Soliman, and of Bolo.
            Nowe becauſe that they brought no Mahis which he would
haue, hee ſent a great number of Spaniardes with their Indians,
to go ſearch for Mahis: commaunding them to bring ſome
whereſoeuer they founde any. So went they to Bolo, and to Palo,
and founde the Indians men and women in their houſen in
peace: and the ſayd Spaniards with thoſe that were with them,
tooke them and robbed their Mahis, their golde and couerings,
and all that they had, and bounde many.
            The Indians ſeeing that they entreated them ſo euill, went
to complaine vnto the ſayde Captayne, requeſting that all which
had been bereft them, might be reſtored them: But the Captain
woulde reſtore them none, and forbidde them to come at him any
more. Notwithſtanding foure or fiue dayes after the Spaniardes
eſtſoones returne to fetche Mahis, and to pilladge
the Indians natiue of the ſoyle as before time.
Wherefore, they ſeeing that the Captayne kepte no faith with
them: all the Countrie aroſe and reuolted from the Spaniſhe,
whereof enſued greate dammage, and GOD and the

kings maieſtie offended: and by this meanes the countrie remained
diſpeopled: for yt the Olomas & the Manipos their enemies
which are moūtaine people, & warlike, deſcended dayly to
take and rob them, when they perceiued the citie and places of
their abode left deſtitute. And amongſt them, hee who was the
ſtronger, did eate vp his fellowe, for all dyed for famine. This
done, the captaine came to the citie of Ampudia, where hee was
receiued for generall, and ſeuen dayes after from thence hee departed
to goe towards the harbour of Lili and Peti, with more
then two hundred horſmen and footemen. After this, that ſaide
is, the ſaide chiefe gouernour ſent his captaines of one ſide and
other, to bid cruell battayle to the natiue Indiās: ſtaying a great
number of them as wel men as women: burning alſo their houſes,
and ſpoiling their goods. This indured a good many dayes.
And the ſaide captaine was gone towardes a citie named Yee,
withall the Indians whome they had taken in Lili, without releaſing
any one: and beeing come to the ſaide Yee, hee ſent incontinent
Spaniardes to pilladge, take and ſtay all the Indians
men and women, that they coulde take: thus they burned moe
then an hundred. From this place they goe to a Citie called
Tukilicui, from whence the Cacike of the place yeeded foorth
incontinent in peace, a number of Indians going before him.
The captaine demaunded golde of him and of his Indians. The
Cacik told him that hee had but a ſmall deale, and that whiche
he had ſhould be giuen him: & immediatly al began to giue him
all that they had. Whereupon the ſayde captaine gaue vnto
euery of them a ticket, with the name of the ſaide Indian for a
teſtimoniall that hee had giuen him golde: affirming that hee
which ſhoulde haue neuer a ticket, ſhould bee caſt to the dogs
to bee deuoured, becauſe hee gaue him no golde. Whereupon
the Indians for feare yt they were put in, gaue him all the gold
that they were able: & thoſe which had none fled into the mountaines
and other townes for feare to be ſlaine. By reaſon whereof
periſhed a great number of the natiue inhabitants of the coū
               trie.
And ſhortly after the ſaid captaine commanded the Cacike
to ſende two Indians to another citie named Dagna, to will
them that they ſhoulde come in peace, and bring him golde in aboundance

bundance. And comming to another citie, he ſent that night many
Spaniardes to take the Indians, and namely of Tulilicui.
So as they brought the next morrow aboue an hundred perſons:
and all thoſe which could beare burdens, they tooke them for thē
ſelues, and for their ſouldiers, and put them to the chaine, wherof
they dyed all. And the ſaide captaine gaue the little children
vnto the ſaid Cacik Tulilicui that hee ſhould eate them: and in
truth the ſkinnes of thoſe children are kept in the houſe of the
ſaide Cacik Tulilicui full of aſhes: and ſo departed hee from
thence without an interpreter, and went towardes the Prouinces
of Calile, where he ioyned himſelfe vnto the captaine Iohn
de Ampudia, who had ſent him to diſcouer another way, dooing
both of them great outrages, and much miſchiefe vnto the inhabitants
of the countrie where they became. And the ſaid Iohn
de Ampudia came vnto a Citie, the Cacik and Lorde whereof
called Bitacur had cauſed to make certaine ditches to defende
himſelfe, and there fell into the ſame two horſes, the one of Antonie
Rodondos, the other of Marc Marqueſis. That of Marcos
Marquis died, the other not. For which cauſe the ſaid Ampudia
commaunded to take all the Indians men and women
that might be: And therupon tooke & laid together more then an
hundred perſons, whome they caſt aliue into thoſe ditches and
ſlue them, and brent withal more then an hundred houſes in the
ſaid citie. And in that maner met in a great Citie, where without
ſommoning (the Indians being at peace, and without anye
ſpokeſman to goe betweene them,) they ſlue with their ſpeares
a great number of them, making on them mortall warre. And
as it is ſaid, ſoone after they were met, the ſaide Ampudia tolde
the Captaine what hee had done in Bitaco, and howe hee caſt ſo
many into the ditches: and the ſayd captaine aunſwered, that it
was well done, and that he for his part had done as much at the
riuer of Bamba when hee entred the ſame, which is in the Prouince
of Quito, and that hee had flong into the ditches moe then
two hundred perſons, and there they ſtayed warring on all the
countrie. Soone after hee entred into the Prouince of Bitu, or
Anzerma: in making cruell warre with fire and blood till they

came as farre as vnto the ſalt houſes. And from thence hee ſent
Frauncis Garcia before him to pilladge, who made cruel warre
on the naturall inhabitants of the Countrie as hee had done before
him. The Indians came vnto him two and two, making
ſignes, that they demaunded peace on the behalfe of the whole
Countrie: alleadging that they woulde afoord him, all that hee
coulde reaſonably demaund, were it golde, or women, or victuals,
only that they woulde not kill them, as indeede it was a
troth. For themſelues afterwardes confeſſed it to be ſo. But the
ſaide Frauncis Garcia, bid them get them packing: Telling
them moreouer that they were a ſort of drunkardes, and that he
vnder ſtood them not, and ſo returned hee to the place where the
ſaide Captaine was, and they made a complot, to ouerrunne all
the Prouince, making cruell warre on all the Countrie, in ſpoiling,
robbing, and ſlaying all: and with the ſouldiers, which hee
brought with him drewe thence moe then two thouſand ſoules,
and all thoſe dyed in the chaine. Before departing the place
which he had peopled, they ſlue moe then fiue hundred perſons.
And ſo returned to the Prouince of Calili. And by the way if
any Inde or Indeſſe were weary, in ſuch ſort that they could not
paſſe any further, they did incontinently head them, paring it off
from the ſhoulders euen with the chaine, to the ende not to take
the paines to open the locke thereof: and to the end that others
which went the ſame way ſhoulde not make wiſe to be ſicke, and
by this meanes dyed they all: and in the high wayes were lefte
all thoſe people which he made his purchaſe of out of Quito, &
of Paſto, and of Quilla Cangua, and of Para, and of Popayan,
and of Lili, and of Cali, and of Anzerma, and a great number
of people dyed. Alſo immediately vpon theyr returne vnto
the great Citie, they entred into it, ſtaying all that they could:
taking in that day moe then three hundreth perſons.
            Hee ſent from the Prouince of Lili, the ſaide Captaine
Iohn de Ampidia, with very manye ſouldiers vnto the lodgynges
and peopled places of Lili: to the ende that they
ſhoulde take all the Indes and Indeſſes they coulde: And
that they ſhoulde bring them vnto him to ſerue for loadyng:

for becauſe that al thoſe which he brought him before time from
Anzerma & from Alli, were dead, whiche were great numbers.
And the ſaide Iohn de Ampudia brought moe then a thouſande
perſons, and ſiue very many. The captaine thus tooke as many
as he needed to ſerue his turne, and gaue the reſt vnto the ſouldiers,
which confined them to the chayne in whiche they dyed.
So diſpeopling the ſaid citie of Spaniardes and inbornes of
the countrie, both in ſo great a number, as appeareth by the fewneſſe
of the folke, that are remanent: he departed thence to goe
to Popayan, & left in the way a Spaniarde named Martine Aguirr,
who was not able to follow the reſt. And beeing come to
Popayan, he placed there a garriſon, and began to root out and
rob thoſe Indians there, in the order that he had kept elswhere.
And hee erected there a mynt royall, melting all the golde hee
coulde come by, with all that, that Iohn de Ampudia had before
he came vnto him, and without keeping any other audit or reckoning, and without giuing any part to any ſouldier, taking the
whole to his owne vſe, except a little as came in his head to giue
vnto ſuch as had loſt theyr horſes. And this done, bereauing the
kings Maieſtie of his fift part, ſaid he went to Cuſto, there to
giue in his account and audit vnto the gouernour. But in deede
he went to Quito, taking by the way very many Indians, men
and women, which all dyed by the way, or at the place at Quito.
Ouer and beſides that, he altered the coyne royall of the mynt,
which he had made. Here is to be remembred a word, which this
man ſpake of himſelfe, as one not ignorant of ſo many euils and
miſchieues, which he wrought. Fiftie yeres hence, thoſe the
which ſhall paſſe by this way, and heere ſpeake of theſe things,
ſhall ſay, This way went a Tyrant
            Your highnes may know and be well aſſured, that theſe entries
and aſſaults made vnto theſe realmes, and this maner of viſiting
the Indians, which liued in ſecuritie in their regions, and the
vngraciouſneſſe which he did in thoſe ſame, haue been practiſed
and executed by the Spaniards, which haue alwayes followed
the ſame traine and maner of doing, from the time that they firſt
began to diſcouer vnto this preſent day, throughout all the I
                  •
               
               de
                  •
               .
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               AMong diuers the remedies by Fryar de lat
Caſas Biſhop of the royal towne called Chiapa,
propounded in the aſſembly of ſundrie
prelates named Parſons, by his maieſties cō
               mandement
gathered together in the towne
of Valladolid the yeere of our Lord 1542 for
order and reformation to bee obſerued in the Indies: the eight
in order was this inſuing, which conſiſteth vpon twentie reaſons
& motions, whereupō he did cōclude, That the Indies ought not
to be giuen to the Spaniardes in Commendam, fee farme, or
vaſſelage, neither vnder any other title whatſoeuer: if his maieſtie
will according to his deſire eaſe them of ſuch tyrannies
and loſſes as they doe ſuſteine, deliuering them as it were out of
the Dragons throate: leaſt they doe wholy conſume and ſlay thē,
& ſo all that world remaine deſart & voide of the naturall me
habitants, wherewith we haue ſeene it repleniſhed.
            
            THe eight remedie, is among all other principall and moſt in
force, as without which all the reſt are to no purpoſe, for
that they all haue relation therunto, as euery motion to his proper
end, in whatſoeuer toucheth or is of any importaunce vnto
your Maieſtie, which no man can expreſſe: in as much as therupon
dependeth at the leaſt the whole loſſe or preſeruation of the
Indies. And the remedie that I ſpeake of is this, that your Maieſtie
do determin, decree, cō
               
                  ••
               d, & ſolēnely in your ſoueraigne
courts ordein by pragmaticall ſāctions & royal ſtatuts yt
                all the
Indies as well alreadie ſubdued, as heerea
                  ••••
                to bee ſubdued, may
bee inſerted, reduced, and incorporate into the royal crowne of
Caſtile & Leon, to be holden in chief of your maieſtie as free ſubiects & vaſſals, as they are. Likewiſe that they bee not giuen in
commendā
                vnto the Spaniards: but that it ſtand as an inuiolable
conſtitution, determination and royall lawe, that they neuer, neither
at this time, neither hereafter in time to come, may bee

alienated or taken from the ſaide royall crown, neither that they
bee giuen, commanded, demiſed in ſee farme, by depoſt, commandement
or alienatiō, either vnder any other title or maner what
ſoeuer, and bee diſmembred from the royall crowne, for any
whatſoeuer the ſeruice or deſart of any, either vpon any neceſſitie
that may happen, or for any cauſe or colour whatſoeuer that
may be pretended. For the inuiolable obſeruation, or eſtabliſhement
of which law, your maieſtie ſhall formally ſweare by your
faith, and on your worde and royall crowne, and by all other ſacred
thinges, whereby Chriſtian Princes doe vſually ſweare, that
at no time neither your ſelfe, neither your ſucceſſours in theſe
10. Dominions, or in the Indies ſo faire as in you ſhall he, ſhal
reuoke the ſame: and you ſhall further ſet downe in expreſſe
wordes in your royall will and teſtament, that this decree be
euer kept, mainteined, and vpholden: alſo that ſo farre as in your
ſelf or in them ſhal lie, they ſhall cōfirme and continue the ſame:
And for porofe of the neceſſitie hereof, there bee twentie reaſons
to be alleadged: out of which twentie we haue drawen and put
in writing ſo many as may ſeeme to ſerue to our purpoſe.
            
               Extract out of the ſecond reaſon.
               THe Spaniardes through their great auarice and couetouſnes
to get, doe not permit any religious perſons to enter into
their townes and holdes which they poſſeſſe, alleadging that they
receiue double loſſe by them. One and the principall is, that religious
perſons do keepe the Ind
                     •
                  es occupied when they gather
them togethar to their Sermons, ſo as in the meane time their
worke is omitted, while the Indians being 
                     〈◊〉
                  , laboure
                     •
                  : yea,
it hath ſo fallen out, that the Indians being in the Church at the
Sermon, the Spaniarde comming in in the face of all the people,
hath taken fiftie, or a hundred, or ſo many as he hath needed to
carry his baggage and ſtuffe, and ſuch as would not goe, he hath
l
                     •
                  den with ſtripes ſpurning them foorth with his feete, thereby
to the great griefe both of the Indians and of the 
                     〈…〉
                   perſons

                     ••
                  oubling & moleſting all that were preſent, & ſo defeating
thē al of the benefit of their ſaluatiō. Their other hinderance that

they ſay they doe ſuſteine, is, that after the Indians are taught &
become Chriſtians, they take vppon them as maſters, pretending
more knowledge then they haue, & therefore will not be ſo ſeruiceable
as afore.
               The Spaniards require no more of the Indians but authority
to commaund them, and that they worſhip them as Gods.
               The Spaniards openly and of ſet purpoſe, do hinder the courſe
of the goſpel, and keepe the Indians from Chriſtendome.
               Sometime it falleth ſo out, that a towne or borow is giuen betweene
three or foure Spaniardes, to one more, to another
leſſe, ſo as ſometime one hath for his portion the huſband, another
the wiſe, and the third the childrē as they were ſwine. Thus
doe they poſſeſſe the Indians. One appointeth them to labour a
peece of lande: another ſendeth them to the mines loaden like
beaſtes: another hyreth them by two and two as they were
moyles to carry burdens thirtie, fortie, fiftie, a hundred or two
hundred miles out right. And this haue we ſeen to be a daily vſe:
heereof commeth, it that the Indians cannot heare Gods word,
or bee inſtructed in Chriſtian faith: they make them of free mē
very ſtrange bondſlaues. They haue ſubuerted and diſperſed
great townes, and a whole worlde of people, ſo as they haue not
left any houſes ſtanding together, no not ſo much as the children
with the fathers. The Spaniards make no more account, neither
haue any more regard of conuerting the Indians, then if al thoſe
reaſonable ſoules ſhould periſhe with the bodies, and were not
hereafter to receiue immortall life, glory, or paine, no more then
beaſtes.
            
            
               Out of the thirde reaſon.
               THe Spaniards are charged to inſtruct the Indians in our holy
catholike ſaith: whereupon on a time when we examined
Iohn Colmenere of S. M
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     he, a fantaſtical ignorant, and fooliſh
man, who had gotten a great towne in commendam, and had
a charge of ſoules, he could not 
                     〈◊〉
                   how to bleſſe himſelfe: and
asking him what doctrine he taught the Indians cōmitted to his
charge, he ſaid, he gaue thē to the diuell: alſo that it was enough

for him to ſay Per ſignim ſanctin Cruces. Howe can the Spaniardes
that trauaile to the Indies, howe noble or valiant ſo euer
they bee, haue any care of the ſoules, when the moſt of them
are ignorant of their Creede and ten commandements, & know
not the matters perteining to their owne ſaluation, neither doe
trauaile to the Indies for any other purpoſe but to ſatisfie their
owne deſires and couetous affections, being for the moſt Parte
vicious, corrupt, vnhoneſt, and diſordinate perſons: ſo as he that
would way them in an equal ballance, & compare them with the
Indians, ſhoulde finde the Indians without compariſon, more
vertuous and holy then them. For the Indians what infidels ſoeuer
they bee, doe neuertheleſſe keepe them to one and their own
wife, as nature and neceſſitie teacheth, and yet we ſee ſome Spaniarde
haue foureteene or more, which Gods commandementes
do forbid. The Indians deuoure no mans goods, they doe no
man wrong: they doe not vexe, trouble, or ſlay any, where them
ſelues doe ſee the Spaniardes commit all ſinnes, iniquities, and
treacheries, that man can commit againſt all equitie and iuſtice,
To bee briefe, the Indians doe not beleeue any thing, but doe
mocke at all that is ſhewed them of God, beeing in trueth fully
rooted in this opinion of our God, that he is the worſt, the moſt
vniuſt and the moſt wicked of all Gods, becauſe he hath ſuch ſeruants:
alſo concerning your maieſtie, they thinke you the moſt
vniuſt and cruell of all kinges, becauſe you doe both ſende thither
and keepe heere ſuch euill ſubiectes, ſuppoſing that your maieſtie
doth feed vpon humane fleſh and blood. We know theſe things
to be very new and ſtrange to your highnes, but yet there they
be very vſuall and auncient. Many like matters which with our
eyes we haue ſeene might we ſpeake of, but they would be offenſiue
to your maieſties eares, and would beſides feare men, forcing
thē to wonder that euer God ſtaied ſo long from plaging Spaine
in the bottomleſſe pit. This title, to giue the Indians to the Spaniards
in cōmedā, was neuer inuented to any other end but only
to finde occaſion to bring them into bondage. One Spaniard being
Lorde, or hauing the charge of ſome towne or village, will
do more harme by his example and wicked life, then a hundred
good religious perſons can do good by edifiyng or conuerting.
            
            
               
               Out of the fourth reaſon.
               THe Spaniardes hauing authoritie to commaunde, or particular
intereſt in the Indies, can not by reaſon of their great
couetouſnes abſtaine from afflicting, troubling, diſquieting, vexing,
or oppreſſing the Indians, taking away their goodes, landes,
wiues, or children, and vſing among them many other kindes of
iniquitie, for the which they can haue no redreſſe, ſanction, or
warrant at your Maieſties chiefe iuſtice, becauſe the Spaniardes
doe make them afraide: yea ſometimes doe kill them, leaſt they
ſhoulde complaine, as wee haue had certaine notice: and therevpon
it is euident, that they can haue no reſt or quiet, to tende to
matters pertaining God, but doe ſuſtaine a thouſande lets, anguiſhes,
tormentes, ſorowes, afflictions, heauineſſes, and cares,
hating your Maieſtie, and abhorring Gods lawe, which they
finde ſo heauie, bitter, and intollerable: as alſo your Maieſties
yoke and dominion ſo inſupportable, tyrannous, worthie to bee
reiected and caſt off, that they curſe God and fall into deſperation,
attributing to him all the aforeſaide euils, becauſe that vnder
the colour and title of his lawe, they do receiue ſuch miſhappes,
which hee doth beare withall, and doth not correct or chaſtice
thoſe which boaſting to be his ſeruanntes, doe put them to all
this. They doe night and day mourne after their gods, thinking
them to bee better then ours at whom they ſuſtaine ſuche
harmes, while contrary wiſe of their owne they reape there ſo
many commodities: and there is nothing that troubleth them ſo
much as the Chriſtians.
            
            
               Out of the fifth reaſon.
               VVE can ſhewe to your Maieſtie, that the Spaniardes
haue within 38. or 40. yeeres ſlaine of iuſt accompt,
aboue 1
                     •
                  . Millions of your ſubiectes. I will not ſay howe mightily
this worlde of people migh
                     •
                   haue multiplied. This countrey

being the fertileſt, whether for cattel, or mankinde, that is in the
worlde: the foile being for the moſt part, more temperate and fauourable
to humaine generation. All theſe innumerable 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
and all theſe people haue the Spaniards ſlaine, to the end to 
                     〈◊〉
                  
ſway, gouerne, & cōmaund ouer the reſt & when in iniuſt wars
they haue ſlaine them, then doe they vſe the reſt who 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  aue
withſtood them, in drawing gold & ſiluer, yoking them together
like beaſts, to make them carry their burdens, 
                     〈…〉
                   burdening
them withall that they can gaine, and 
                     〈…〉
                  
one to them, ſo that they may 
                     〈…〉
                  
but the truth, and yet do leaue out much vnſpoken o
                     •
                   th
                     •
                  t 
                     〈◊〉
                  
world knoweth: and whoſoeuer woulde otherw
                     ••
                  e perſwade
your Maieſtie, or would endeuour to excuſe thoſe offences, wee
will euen by force of the truth, dr
                     •
                  ue him to knowledge 
                     〈…〉
                  
guilty of treaſon, & that he is partaker in theſe murders & roberies
committed in the Indies, or els 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſo to be.
               What plague of peſtilence, or mortalitie could there haue fallen
from heauen that had been able to conſume or make waſt about
2500 leagues of flat countrey repleniſhed with people, and
would not haue left either trauailer or inhabitant?
            
            
               Out of the ſixt reaſon.
               THe Spaniardes only for their temporall commoditie, haue
blemiſhed the Indies with the greateſt infamie, that any
man euen among the moſt horrible and villanous perſons in the
world, could be charged withal, & whereby they haue ſought to
take thē out of the degree of mankinde: nam
                     •
                  ly that they all were
polluted with the abhominable ſinne againſt nature: which is a
wretched and falſe ſlaunder. For in all the great Iles. Hiſpaniola,
S. Io
                        ••
                     , Cuba, & Lama
                        ••
                     a: Alſo in the 60. Iles of 
                     〈◊〉
                   whiche

                     〈…〉
                   inhabited with an infinite nomber of people, the ſame
was neuer thought vpon, or once mentioned, as ourſelues 
                     〈…〉
                  
who made diligent inquiſition & ſearch, euer from the beginning.
Moreouer, through all Peru, there is no ſuch 
                     〈◊〉
                   neither
is there any one Indiā thoughout ye whole realm that crime, neither generally throughout all the Indies
ſauing that in ſome other part there is a voice of a few: for
whoſe 
                     〈…〉
                   all that world is not to be 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
We may ſay as much of the eating of mans fleſh, which likewiſe

thoſe places that I haue named are free of: although that in other
places they do it in deed. They be alſo charged with their idolatrie,
as if for being idolaters, men ſhould take vpon them to
puniſh them, & not referre them to God only, againſt whō they
ſin, whiles they haue both lands & dominions ſeuerall to them
ſelues, which they hold not of any other thē their natural Lords:
beſides that our anceſters were alſo idolaters before the faith
was preached vnto them, & that all the world was gathered to
Chriſt. The Spaniardes haue purpoſely, & effectually hindered
the teaching of the law of God and Ieſus Chriſt: with all other
vertues among the Indians, & driuen away the religious perſons
out of townes and fortreſſes, leaſt they ſhoulde ſee and diſcloſe
their tyrannies: yea, they haue by their euill example, infected &
corrupted the Indians, teaching them many odious behauiours
and vices, which before they knew not, as blaſpheming the name
of Ieſus Chriſt, practiſing of vſerie, lying, & many other abhominations
wholy repugnant to their nature. Again, to commit the
Indians to the Spaniards, or to leaue them in their handes, is vndoubtedly
as much as to giue or leaue them to theſe that will
deſtroy & bring them to nought, as well in body as ſoule.
               The Spaniards hauing fraudulently perſwaded K. Ferdinand, he
ſuffered the Indians to be trāſported out of the Iles of Lucayos
into Hiſpaniola, and ſo contrary to all reaſon, either naturall or
diuine, diſpoſſeſſed them of their own houſes and lands, wherby
there periſhed aboue 50000. ſoules: ſo as in aboue 50. Iles, wherof
ſome were greater then the Ile of Canary, which before were repleniſhed
with people man Ante heape, afterward there were to
be found not aboue eleuen perſons as our ſelues can teſtifie. To
let your Maie
                     •
                  tie 
                     〈…〉
                   dealing of
the inhabitants of the ſaide 
                     〈…〉
                   the
ſlaughters, cruelties, and ſpoyles that 
                     〈◊〉
                   Spaniardes, theſe good
chriſtians made among them, 
                     〈…〉
                   make your royall eares
to gloe, and your 
                     〈…〉
                  , and to your ſelfe to depart.
That the Spaniardes haue warred vpon the Indians, that they
haue killed them, taken away their wiue
                     •
                  , ch
                     •
                  ldren, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and
kindred. alſo that they haue robbed them of all their goodes,

is alreadie ſufficiently proued, as alſo the countrey being vtterly
diſpeopled and deſert, doeth ſhewe it: the worlde crieth out
vpon it: the Angels doe bewaile it, and God himſelfe doth dayly
teach it vs by the great puniſhments that he layeth vpon vs.
            
            
               Out of the ſeuenth reaſon.
               THe Spaniardes doe ſucke from the Indians the whole ſubſtaunce
of their bodies, becauſe they haue nothing el
                     •
                  e in
their houſes. They make them ſpitte blood: They exhibite them
to all daungers: They lay vpon them ſundrie and intollerable
trauailes: and more then al this, They loade them with torments,
beatings, and ſorowings: To be briefe, they ſpoile and conſume
a thouſande maner of waies.
               To put the Indians into the Spaniardes handes, is, to giue
the childes throate to a frantick and mad man when he hath the
raſor in his hande: or it is as much as to deliuer men into the
power of the furious or capitall enemies, who long time haue
verye deſirouſly wayted to put them to death. It is as a man
ſhoulde commit a faire young virgin to the guiding of a young
man ſnared, tranſported, and doting in her loue, whereby ſhee
ſhoulde be ſpoiled and deflowred, vnleſſe ſhee were miraculouſly
preſerued. To be briefe, it were as good to throwe them among
the hornes of wilde Bulles, eyther to deliuer them vnto
hunger ſtarued Wolues, Lions, and Tygres, and as much good
ſhoulde they gette by any lawes, preceptes, or threates made to
the ſaide hungrie beaſtes, for the forbidding of them to deuoure
them, as much do we ſay and affirme will any lawes, threates,
or preceptes, ſtay the Spaniardes, when they haue authoritie ouer
the Indians from murdering them for their golde. Yea by
great and long experience that we haue, wee doe certifie our
highneſſe, that notwithſtanding you ſhoulde commaunde to ſet
vp a G
                     •
                  bbet before euery Spaniardes gate, and ſweare by your
Crowne, that for the firſt Indian that ſhoulde be miſſed or ſlain,
you woulde haue them all hanged, yet would they not for feare
thereof abſtaine from ſlaying the Indians, in caſe your Maieſtie
ſhould graunt or giue them ſupreme power and authoritie ouer

them, or otherwiſe howeſoeuer.
            
            
               Out of the eight reaſon.
               BEſides all that the Indians doe indure in ſeruing and pleaſing
the Spaniarde, there is yet a butcher or cruell hangman, to
keepe them in awe appointed in euery towne and place, and is
tearmed Eſtanciero or Calpiſque: who hath authoritie to lay
his clawes vpon them, and to make them labour, and doe what
the Lorde Commaunder, or chiefe thiefe will. So as if in hell
there were no other torment, yet were this incomparable. This
hangman whippeth them, hee ladeth them with ſtripes, hee baſteth
them with ſcalding greaſe, he afflicteth them with continuall
tormentes and trauelles, he forceth & defloureth their daughters
and wiues, diſhonouring and abuſing them: hee deuoureth
their hennes whiche are their greateſt treaſure, not beecauſe
them ſelues doe eate them, but that of them they offer preſents
and ſeruice to their greateſt Lorde and chiefe tyrant: hee
vexeth them with innumerable other tormentes and griefes: &
leaſt they ſhoulde complaine of ſo many iniuries and miſeries,
this tyrant putteth them in feare, ſaying: that he will accuſe
them, and ſay that he ſee them commit idolatrie. To be briefe,
they muſt pleaſe and content aboue twentie diſordinate and
vnreaſonable perſons: ſo as they haue foure Lordes and
maiſters. Your Maieſtie, their Cacique, him that hath them in
commendam, and the Eſtanciero of whom I laſt ſpake, whiche
Eſtanciero is to them more grieuous to beare then a quintall of
lead, among which we may alſo in truth adde all the Mochachos
and Mores, that do ſerue the commander and maſter, for they al
do moleſt, oppreſſe, and robbe theſe poore people.
            
            
               Out of the tenth reaſon.
               IT is greatly to be feared, leaſt God will lay Spain deſolate, euen
for thoſe horrible ſinnes that this nation hath cōmitted in the
Indies, whereof we do euidently beholde the ſcorge, and all the
world doth ſee & confeſſe that already it hāgeth ouer our heads,
wher with God doth afflict & ſhew that he is highly offēded in
thoſe parts through the great deſtruction and waſt of thoſe nations,
in that of ſo great treſures as haue bin tranſported out of the

Indies into Spaine (the like quantitie of golde and ſiluer, neyther
K Salomō, neither any other worldly prince euer had, ſawe,
or heard of) there is none left, beſids yt
                   of that that was here before
the Indies were diſcouered, there is nowe none to be foūd,
no neuer a whit. Hereof it commeth that thinges are thriſe dearer
then they were, the poore that haue want doe ſuffer great
miſeries: and your maieſtie can not diſpatch matters of great importaunce.
            
            
               Out of the eleuenth reaſon.
               SO long as Lares bare ſway and ruled, that was ix. yeeres, there
was no more care of teaching or bringing the Indians to ſaluation,
neither was there any more labour employed, or once
thought of, to that purpoſe, then if they had been trees, ſtones,
dogges, or cats. He waſted great townes and fortreſſes, hee gaue
to one Spaniard 100. Indians, to another fiftie, to another more
or leſſe, as euery man was in liking or fauour, and as it pleaſed
him to graunt. He gaue children, & old men, women with child,
and in childbed, men of countenance and commons, the naturall
Lords of the towns and countreys, he parted them among thoſe
to whom he wiſhed moſt wealth and commoditie, vſing in his
letters of commaund this ſpeech following: To you ſuch a man,
are giuen ſo many Indians with their Cacique, them to vſe in
your mines and affayres. So as all, great and ſmall, young and
olde, that could ſtand on their feete, men, women with childe, or
in childbed, one or other, trauailed and wrought ſo long as they
had any breath in their bodies. He gaue leue to take away maried
men, and to make them drawe golde, ten, twentie, thirtie, fourty,
or eightie leagues, or farther. The women remayned in farme
houſes and graunges, in great labours about gathering of great
heapes for the making of the bread that they doe eate, which is,
to heape together the earth whiche they doe digge, and rayſe
foure handfull hie, and twelue foote ſquare, that is a giaunts labour,
namely to digge the hard earth, not with mattockes or ſhouels,
but with In other places they ſpinne cotten, and
doe ſuch other worke, as are moſt meete for gaine and rayſing of

coyne, ſo that the man and wife ſhould not ſee one another in 8.
or 10. monethes or a whole yere. And at their meeting they were
ſo worne with labour and hunger, that they had no minde of cohabitation,
whereby their generation ceaſed, & their poore children
periſhed, becauſe the mothers through hunger and trauaile
had no milke wherewith to nouriſh them: This was a cauſe
that in the Ile of Cuba, one of vs being there, there periſhed in
the ſpace of three moneths for hunger 7000, children, ſome deſperate
women ſtrangled and killed their owne children, others
finding them ſelues with childe, did eate certaine hearbes thereby
to looſe their fruit, ſo that the men died in the mines, the womē
periſhed in the farme houſes, their whole generatiō in a ſhort
ſpace decayed, and all the countrey lay deſolate. The ſaide gouernour,
to the ende without releaſe to keepe them in continuall
labour, ſtil gaue them away, and yet beſides their great labours
he ſuffered them rigorouſly, & very auſterely to be miſuſed. For
the Spaniardes that had them in commaund, appointed certaine
hangmen ouer them, ſome in the mines whom the termed Miniero,
other in the farmes, that were called Eſtanciero: vnnaturall
and pitileſſe perſons that beate them with ſlaues and cords,
boxing them, pricking them with needles, and ſtill calling them
dogs: neither did they euer ſhewe any ſigne of humanitie or clemencie,
but all their dealings did conſiſt of extreame ſeueritie,
rigor, and bitterneſſe, ſo as in troth it might be thought great
crueltie ſo to entreat or gouerne the verie Moores, being the
cruelleſt of all others, for all the damage that they haue done to
the Chriſtians: where the Indians are more treatable, curteous
gentle, and obedient, then any other nation in the worlde.
Farther, when becauſe of theſe Eſtancieros and Minieros, together
with ſuch labours as they put them vnto, ſome of them fled
into the mountaines, as making full acco
                     •
                  mpt to bee killed,
the Spaniardes choſe certayne officers whō they termed Alguazil
del Campo, that ſhoulde purſue and hunt them out of the
mountaines.
               The gouernour had alſo in the Spaniſh townes and fortes,
certayne of the moſte honourable and principall perſons

about him whome hee called Viſitors, vnto whome alſo beſides
their other ordinarie portions that he had giuen them, he gaue in
reſpect of their offices 100. Indians to ſerue them. Theſe in the
townes were the greateſt executioners, as being more cruel then
the reſt, before whom Athuaziles del campo brought all ſuche
as had bin taken in this chaſe. The accuſer, hee that had them in
commaund, was preſent, and accuſed them, ſaying: This Indian
or thoſe Indians are dogs, & wil do no ſeruice, but do dayly run
to the mountaines, there to become loyterers & vagaboundes:
And therfore required they might be puniſhed. Then the viſitor
with his own hands boūd thē to a pale, & taking a pitched cord,
in the Gallies called an Eele, which is as it were an iron rod, gaue
them ſo many ſtripes, & bet them ſo cruelly, that the blood running
downe diuers parts of their bodies, they were left for dead.
God is witneſſe of the cruelties committed among thoſe lambs:
I am perſwaded that of the thouſād part I can not rehearſe one,
neither can any other tell it as it ought. The labour that they
were put vnto, was to drawe golde, whereto they had need haue
men of iron. For they muſt turne the mountaines 1000. times
vpſide downe, digging and hewing the rockes, and waſhing, and
clenſing the gold it ſelfe in the riuers, where they ſhall continually
ſtand in the water vntill they bruſt, and rent their bodies euē
in pieces. Alſo whē the Mines peraduēture doe flow with water,
then muſt they alſo beſides all other laboures, drawe it out
with their armes. To be briefe, the better to comprehend the labour
that is emploid about gathering golde and ſiluer, it may
pleaſe your Maieſtie to conſider, that the heathen Emperours (except
to death) neuer condemned the Martyres to greater tormentes,
then to mining for mettall: ſometimes they were kept
a whole yeere at the mines: but afterward perceiuing howe manie
periſhed there, they decreed that they mine for golde but
fiue moneths, which was fourtie dayes in melting, during which
time they tooke ſome reſt.
               And what was their reſt? They during thoſe fourtie dayes,
made heapes of that which they ſhoulde eate, that is, they digged
the earth, and caſt it on heapes as is aforeſaide, whiche labour
doeth exceede, dreſſing of vines, or tilling of the earth.

Throughout the yere they neuer knew holiday, neither might be
ſuffered from labour little or much. Beſides that during all this
toyle, they neuer had ſufficient food, no not of Cacabi whiche is
the common countrie bread, and being made of rootes doth but
ſmally nouriſh except there be ſome fiſh or fleſh to eate withal.
Moreouer, they gaue them of that countrie pepper, and Aies,
which be rootes like vnto nauetes, roſted or ſodden. But ſome
Spaniarde, peraduenture meaning to ſeeme liberall in their
diet woulde weekely kill a hogge for 50. Indians, whereof the
Aliniero would conſume two quarters, and part the other two
among the Indians, giuing daily to euery man as great a peece as
the Iacekins doe giue of holy bread in their Churches. Some
there were that through nigardlineſſe wanting meate to giue
them, woulde ſend them two or three dayes abroade into the
fieldes and mountaines, to feed where they might ſatisfie themſelues
with ſuch fruite as hang on the trees, and then vppon the
force of that which they brought in their guttes, woulde force
them to labour two or three dayes more without giuing thē any
one morſell to eate. For the loue of God therefore, let your
Maieſtie thinke what ſubſtance or ſtrength thoſe bodies naturally
ſo delicate and feeble, and nowe almoſt conſumed and oppreſſed
with theſe trauailes, could gather of this food: alſo how it were
poſſible for thoſe that liued ſo ſorowfull, heauie and woeful alife,
in ſuch labour without food ſhoulde liue long. The gouernour
commanded they ſhoulde bee paide their day wages and expences
for any labour or ſeruice that they ſhoulde doe to the Spaniarde,
and their wages was three blanckes euery two dayes, whiche
in the yeere amounted to halfe a Caſtelin, that is worth 225
Maruedies: wherewith they might buye a Combe, a looking
glaſſe, and a paire of blew or greene beades. Yea, many yeeres
they had nothing at all paide them, but hunger and ſtripes did ſo
abound, that the Indians regarded none of this, neither ſought
any more but euen once to get a good meales meat, or to die for
all, as wiſhing to forſake ſo deſperate a life. He depriued them of
their libertie, ſuffering the Spaniards to keepe them in ſuch bitter
bondage and priſon as no man that had ſeene it, would or coulde
once thinke for: not leauing them any thing in this worlde free

to vſe at their pleaſures: yea, notwithſtanding the beaſtes haue
ſome time reſt, and bee ſuffered to feede abrode in the fieldes, yet
woulde not theſe Spaniards that we ſpeake of, graunt the Indians
any time or leaſure ſo to doe: but the gouernour himſelfe
would force them to an obſolute, perpetuall, forced, & vnwilling
bondage. For they neuer had their free wil to do any thing at al of
themſelues, becauſe the Spaniards couetouſnes, crueltie and tyrannie,
was ſtil forcing them to ſome labour, not as captiues, but as
beaſts, that are led bound to do whatſoeuer man will appoint. Againe,
if at any time they were ſuffered to depart to their houſes
to reſt them, then ſhould they there find neither wife, children,
nor food: as alſo although they had there found any meat, yet
ſhould they not haue had time to make it readie: ſo that there
was no remedie but death. Thus grew they into ſicknes through
long and grieuous trauailes, and that was ſone caught among thē
as being (as is aforeſaid) of a very delicate and tender cōplection,
& much againſt their nature it was to be thus ſodenly, contrary
to their wont, & vnmercifully put to ſuch labours, & to be beatē
with ſtaues, & ſpurned at, beſides the calling of thē at euery word
Villacos, & vpbraiding thē, that they counterfeated ſickneſſe like
loytering loſels, becauſe they would not labour. When the Spaniards
perceiued the ſicknes increaſe, ſo as there was no profit or
ſeruice to be looked for at their hands, then would they ſend thē
home to their houſes, giuing thē to ſpend in ſome 30 40. or 80.
leagues trauaile, ſome halfe doſen of Radiſh or Refortes, that is a
kinde of nauet roote, & a little Cacabi, where with the poore
men trauailed not far before they ſhold deſperately die, ſom went
2 or 3. leagues, ſome 10. or 20. ſo deſirous to get to their owne
home there to finiſh their helliſh life that they ſuffered, that they
euē fel down dead by the waies: ſo as, many times we haue foūd
ſom dead, others at deaths doore, others groning & pitifully to
their powers pronouncing this word, hunger, hunger. Then the
gouernour ſeeing that the Spaniard had in this wiſe ſlaine, half or
two 3. parts of theſe Indians, whō he had giuen them in commaund,
he came a freſh to drawe new lottes, and make a newe
diſtribution of Indians: ſtill ſupplying the number of his firſte
gift, and this did hee almoſt euery yeere.
               
                  
                  Pedrarias entred into the firme land, as a woolfe that had long
beene ſtarued doth into a flocke of quiet and innocent ſheepe &
lambs: & as Gods wrath and ſcourge, committing infinit ſlaughters,
robberies, oppreſſions & cruelties, together with thoſe ſpaniards
whom he had leuied, and laid waſt ſo many townes and
villages, which before had bin repleniſhed with people, as it were
an
                     •
                   hilles, as the like was neuer ſeene, heard of, or written by any
that in our dayes haue delt in hiſtories. Hee robbed his maieſtie
& ſubiects with thoſe whom he tooke with him, and the harme
that he did amounted to aboue four, yea ſixe millions of gold: he
laid aboue 40. leagues of land deſart, namely from Darien, where
he firſt arriued vnto the prouince of Nicaraga, one of the fruitfulleſt,
richeſt and beſt inhabited lands in the world. From this
curſed wretch ſprang firſt the peſtilence of giuing the Indians in
commaund, which afterward hath infected al thoſe Indies where
any Spaniards doe inhabite, and by whom all theſe nations are
conſumed: ſo that from him and his commandes, haue proceeded
the certaine waſte and deſolation that your maieſtie haue ſuſteined
in theſe ſo great lands and dominions ſince the yeere 1504.
               When we ſhall ſay that the Spaniards haue waſted your maieſties,
and laid you deſolate ſeuen kingdomes bigger then Spaine,
you muſt conceaue that we haue ſeene thē wonderfully peopled,
and now there is no body left, becauſe the Spaniards haue ſlaine
all the naturall inhabitants by meanes aforeſaid, and that of the
townes & houſes there remaineth only the bare walles: euen as
if Spaine were all diſpeopled, and that all the people being dead,
there remained only the walles of cities, townes and caſtles.
            
            
               Out of the 13. reaſon.
               YOur maieſtie haue not out of al the Indies one maruedie of
certaine perpetuall & ſet rent, but the whole reuenewes are
as leaues and ſtraw gathered vpon the earth, which beeing once
gathered vp do grow no more: Euen ſo is all the rent that your
maieſtie hath in the Indies, vain & of as ſmal cōtinuāce as a blaſt
of wind, & yt
                   proceedeth only of yt
                   the ſpaniards haue had yt
                   Indi

in their power: and as they doe dayly ſlay and roſt the inhabitants,
ſo muſt it neceſſarilie enſue that your maieſties rights and
rentes doe waſte and diminiſhe.
               The kingdome of Spaine is in great danger to bee loſt, robbed,
oppreſſed and made deſolate by forraigne nations, namely
by the Turks and Moores, becauſe that God who is the moſt iuſt,
true, and ſoueraigne king ouer all the worlde, is wrath for the
great ſinnes and offences that the Spaniardes haue committed
throughout the Indies, by afflicting, oppreſſing, tyrannous dealings,
robbing and ſlaying ſuch and ſo many people without law
or equititie, and for the waſting of ſuch and ſo large landes in
ſo ſhort a ſpace, whoſe inhabitants had reaſonable ſoules, and
were created and framed to the image and likeneſſe of the ſoueraigne
trinitie, and beeing gods vaſſals, were bought with his
moſt precious blood, who keepeth account, and forgetteth not
one of them: but had choſen Spaine as his miniſ
                     •
                  er and inſtrument,
to illuminate and bring them to his knowledge, and as it
had bin for a wordly recompence, beſides the eternal reward, had
graunted her ſo great natural riches, and diſcouered for her ſuch
& ſo great fruitfull and pleaſant landes, and with al ſuch artificial
treaſure, together with ſo many incomparable mines of gold, ſiluer,
ſtone, and precious pearle, with infinite other commodities,
the like whereof were neuer ſeene ne heard of: all which notwithſtanding,
ſhee hath ſhewed herſelfe ſo vnthankfull, in yeelding
euill for ſo many benefites which ſhee had receiued. And
God ordinarily vſeth this rule in executing his iuſtice & puniſhment,
that is, that he chaſtizeth ſinne with the ſame, or with
that which is quite contrarie to that wherwith the ſinne is committed.
               The deſtructions, griefes, violences, iniuries, cruelties, and
murders done and committed againſt thoſe people, are ſo greate,
horrible, publike & euident, that the teares, lamētations & blood
of ſo many innocent perſons doe aſcende to the high throne of
heauen, & doe not returne before they haue ſounded in yt
                   very
eares of God, from whence they after deſcend, and ſtraying ouer
the face of the earth doe ring in the eares of al forraigne nations,
ſo horrible and inhumaine as may be: wherupon enſueth among

the hearers great offence, horror, abhomination, hatred and inf
                     •
                  
                  mie
toward the kinges and commons of Spaine, whereof in time
to come may enſue great damage.
            
            
               Out of the ſaid Biſhop and authours proteſtation.
               THoſe loſſes and detrimentes that by theſe occaſions the
crowne of Caſtile and Leon, together with the reſt of ſpain
haue ſuſteined, as alſo ſuch other ſpoyles and ſlaughters as hereafter
will bee committed throughout the whole Indies, both
the blinde ſhall ſee, the deafe heare, the dumbe publiſhe, and the
wiſe ſhall iudge. Further in as much as our life is ſhort, I doe
take God to witneſſe with all the Hierarchies and thrones of
Angels, all the ſaints of the heauenly court, and all the men in the
worlde: yea, euen thoſe that ſhall hereafter bee borne, of the certificate
that here I doe exhibite? alſo of this the diſcharge of my
conſcience, namely that if his maieſtie graunteth to the Spaniards
the aforeſaide diueliſh and tyrannous partition, notwithſtanding
whatſoeuer lawes or ſtatutes ſhall bee deuiſed, yet will
the Indies in ſhort ſpace be laid deſart and diſpeopled, euen as the
Ile of Hiſpaniola is at this preſent, which other wiſe would bee
moſt fruitfull and fertile: together with other the Iles & lands
aboue 3000. leagues about, beſides Hiſpaniola it ſelf and other
landes both farre and neere. And for thoſe ſinnes, as the holy
ſcripture doth very well informe mee, God will horribly chaſtize,
and peraduenture wholy ſubuert and root out all Spaine.
Anno, 154
                     •
                  .
            
            
               The Prologue of Biſhop Bortholomewe
de las Caſas or Caſaus, to the moſt
mightie Lord and Prince of Spaine,
Don Philip our good Lorde.
               MOſt high and mightie Lorde, of late I was moued and by
the kings moſt vigilant counſaile for the Indies, vpon their
zeale and honour that they beare to our Lord God; as alſo hartie

loyalie, wherwith they be adorned for his maieſties ſeruice, forced
in writing to ſet downe ſuche matter as to your perſon by
mouth I haue heretofore reported: namely, what I thought touching
the title and claime that the kings of Caſtile doe make to
the ſoueraigne and vniuerſall principalitie ouer the Indians: notwithſtanding,
ſome did ariſe, who miſliking that I dealt and trauailed
with his maieſtie and your highnes, about the diſcomfitures
and loſſes compaſſed and perfourmed againſt the people of
thoſe countries, and reported that in as much as I did ſo far deteſt
and with ſuch bitterneſſe and ſharpnes did abhorre them: as
alſo I will ſtill doe, ſo long as I liue, I doe call in doubt, and ſomewhat
deminiſh the ſaid royall title and right.
               In which deede, as a teſtimonie what I did think, and in truth
according to God and his holy lawe doe ſtill hold, I exhibited 30.
propoſitions, deuoid of all other proofe then what eache of them
in it ſelfe did conteine, the one of neceſſitie following the other,
becauſe I was driuen to ſend them to his maieſtie vnder pretence
of the great counſaile that then was holden.
               Afterward proceeding and perſiſting in deſire to ſerue god by

                     〈◊〉
                   felling ſome mens ſlanders, who either for want of comprehending
the truth, or els hauing ſome other purpoſes & contrarie
meanings, do preſume vnder a fained and counterfet kinde of
ſeruice to the kings (who of thēſelues naturally are endued with
courteous & ſimple mindes and hearts, iudging & meaſuring all
other by themſelues) to preſent vnto them, a poyſoned, bitter, &
peraduenture a mortall drinke which doth not only waſte kingdomes
& common wealthes, in procuting their carefull calamities
& dolorous deſtruction. but alſo doe bring euen the kinges
owne perſons to the pit of manifeſt danger & irreparable detriments
and loſſes. With which frandulous counſails they doe infect
ſo much as in thē lieth, the good & godly affections of kings,
and do ſubuert all the princes vertuous deuiſes & ſtudies. Hereof
did ſometime that moſt mightie king Artaxerxes otherwiſe
tearmed Aſſuerus complaine, as appeareth in the booke of Heſter.
I haue ſo indeuoured my ſelfe (moſt mightie Lord) that now
I haue ſet in hand the proofe of the ſaid 30. propoſitions & ſome
more, comprehending the whole in this brief ſummarie, which

is taken out of a greater volume, wherein euery article is more
perticulerly expounded: herein ſetting in ſight only the 17. and
18. propoſition, becauſe the whole ſubſtance of this matter may
be reduced to theſe two propoſitions as to the principles & ends.
               The title here of ſhould in my opinion haue been: A probatorie
tretiſe of the ſoueraigne Empire, and vniuerſal principalitie,
which the kings of Caſtile haue ouer the Indies: As preſuppoſing
that it is manifeſt & proued, in that the Apoſtolike ſea
hath graunted it, and that there needeth no other opening of the
reaſons whereupon the graunt of this empire conſiſteth.
               I purpoſe in this treatiſe chiefly to diſcharge my conſcience,
vſing that meane which it ſeemeth that Gods prouidence hath
appointed me. My great age (for I am aboue 50.) being the cauſe
of my large knowledge and eye experience of the Indian affaires,
alſo to giue notice of that which paſſed in theſe partes, as alſo
what was to be done, euer referring my ſelf to the like deſire that
the diſorders that I haue there ſeen practiſed might be redreſſed.
And the rather becauſe thoſe that hinder this redreſſe & are moſt
hurtful to thoſe lāds, are ſuch as being deuoid of truth & iuſtice,
do indeuout by counteſeating and mingling that which is falſe &
vntrue, and withall ſeeming to doe it for your maieſties ſeruice,
eſpecially colouring your right to this new worlde, are in trueth
altogether withſtanders of your ſeruice & weale, either ſpirituall
or temporall (as euery true chriſtian & wiſe man wil graunt)
The other benefite that I hope to obteine and reape by this treatiſe,
is, that I ſhall detect and vnfold thoſe mens errours, who
raſhly dare affirme that the right and principalitie of the kinges
of Caſtile ouer the Indians is, or ſhoulde conſiſt of armes and
great force, entring vpon them euen as Nemrod who was
the firſt hunter and oppreſſour of mankinde did euer, and eſtabliſhe
his principalitie, as the holy ſcripture teſtifieth: either as
great Alexander and the Romans, and all other cotable and famous
tyrants, doe lay the foundation of their Empires: alſo as
the Turke doth nowe adaies inuade, trouble, and oppreſſe chriſtendome:
and yet haue not any of them once approched the
ſpaniſh tyrannies.
               How far thoſe men that do pronounce ſuch a ſentence do euill

ſeruice, and offend the ſincertie and loue of the king of Caſtiles
iuſtice, is here very eaſie to be iudged.
               Who for proofe of their matters doe commit error vpon error,
and ſo doe heape together other things both abſurd, wicked
and vnworthie to bee once hearde from theſe men which bee
taken either for Chriſtians or for reaſonable perſons. For vſually
ſuch as ſtray from vertue and truth, in excuſing one fault, or
mainteining one errour, doe runne headlong into many. Others
there are that do colour them with fairer & honeſter titles,
who alſo deſerue to be reiected, reproued, & laughed at: as thoſe
that ſay, becauſe we haue more wit, or that we border neereſt vp
on them, either for that the Indians are infected with ſuche and
ſuch vices, we may ſubdue them: with other like colours wherwith
they bee ſo far from vpholding or confirming that which
they weene to ſtrengthen and fortifie, that finally they lay all in
the duſt. To the end therefore that his maieſtie may bee certified
of all aforeſaid, and as a moſt Chriſtiā and iuſt prince, may
diſcerne betweene the pure and corrupt: alſo betwene right &
wronge, and withall that he may knowe who ſerueth him faithfully,
and thoſe that hange vppon him only to ſatisfie their owne
affections: and for their priuate profit doe inuent and deuiſe new
titles for his Indies, which be neither probable nor of any effect,
& ſo do hope to come to do their duties before that I were able.
Further for that offering this treatiſe to your highnes, his maieſtie
ſhall bee ſerued thereby, ſith himſelfe ſhall haue ſuch lettes
there as he goeth, I doe moſt humbly beſeech your highneſſe in
his name to accept it: alſo to examine, diſcerne, and vnderſtande
it with ſuch wiſedome and clemencie as you holde of his maieſtie,
and as himſelfe would doe, ſeeing it is ſo, that Gods prouidence
hath appointed your highneſſe to inherite, as we doe hope
the ſame right in the empire & principalitie of thē: beſides if it
ſeeme neceſſary to be publiſhed in other places out of this realm
I will, if your highnes ſo command me, put it in latin: & although
it ſhould not deſerue to bed ſperſed either in latin or otherwiſe,
yet were not the loſſe great, in that I cauſed it to be printed onlie
to the end your highneſſe might with more eaſe reade the ſame,
whoſe glorious life and royall eſtate, the Lorde increaſe and proſper,
Amen.
            
            
               
               The ſumme of the diſputation between
Fryer Bartlemewe de las Caſas or Caſaus, and
Doctor Sepulueda.
               DOctor Sepulueda the Emperors chronographer hauing information,
& being perſwaded by certayne of thoſe Spaniardes,
who were moſt guiltie in the ſlaughters and waſtes
committed among the Indian people, wrote a booke in Latine in
forme of a Diologue very eloquently, and furniſhed with all
floures, and precepts of Rhetoricke, as in deede the man is verie
learned and excellent in the ſaide tongue, which booke conſiſted
vpon two principall concluſions: The one, that the Spaniardes
warres againſt the Indians, were as concerning the cauſe and
equitie that moued thē thereto, very iuſt: alſo that generally the
like war may & ought to be cōtinued. His other concluſion, that
the Indians are bound to ſubmitte them ſelues to the Spaniards
gouernment, as the fooliſhe to the wiſe: if they will not yeelde,
then that the Spaniards may (as he affirmeth) warre vpon them.
               Theſe are the two cauſes of the loſſe and deſtruction of ſo infinite
numbers of people: alſo that aboue 2000. leagues of the
maine lande, are by ſundrie newe kindes of Spaniſh cruelties
and inhumaine dealinges bin lefte deſolate in the Ilands: namely
by conqueſtes and commaundes as he nowe nameth thoſe
which were wont to be called Partitions.
               The ſayde Doctor Sepulueda coloureth his treatiſe, vnder the
pretence of publiſhing the title which the kinges of Caſtile and
Leon doe chalenge in the gouernment and vniuerſall ſoueraigntie
of this Indian world, ſo ſeeking to cloake that doctrine whiche
he endeuoureth to diſperſe and ſcatter as well in theſe lands,
as alſo throughout the kingdomes of the Indians. This booke he
exhibited to the royall counſaile for the Indies, very earneſtly
and importunately lying vpon them for licence to print it, which
they ſundry times denied him in reſpect of the offence, dangers,
& manifeſt detriment, that it ſeemed to bring to the commonwealth.
               
                  
The Doctour ſeeing that heere hee coulde not publiſhe his
booke, for that the counſaile of the Indies woulde not ſuffer
it, he delte ſo farre with his friendes whiche followed the Emperours
court, that they gotte him a patente, whereby his Maieſtie
directed him to the royall counſayle of Caſtile, who knewe
nothing of the Indian affaires: vpon the comming of theſe letters
the court and counſaile being at Aranda in Duero, the yeere
1547. Fryer Bartholomewe de las Caſas or Caſaus, Biſhoppe
of the royall towne of Chiapa, by happe arriued there, comming
from the Indians, and hauing intelligence of Doctor Sepulueda
his driftes and deuiſes, had notice alſo of the contentes of his
whole booke: but vnderſtanding, the authours pernitions blindnes,
as alſo the irrecouerable loſſes that might enſue vpon the
printing of this booke, with might & maine withſtood it, diſcouering
& reuealing the poyſon wherewith it abounded, and
whereto it pretended.
               The Lordes of the royall counſell of Caſtile, as wiſe and
iuſt iudges, determined therefore to ſende the ſayde booke to
the Vniuerſities of Salamanca & Alcala, the matter being for he
moſt part therein Theologically handled, with commaundement
to examine it, and if it might be printed, to ſigne it: which Vniuerſities
after many exact and diligent diſputations, concluded,
that it might not be printed, as contayning corrupt doctrine.
The Doctour not ſo ſatiſfied, but complayning of the Vniuerſities
aforeſayde, determined, notwithſtanding ſo many denia
                     •
                  les
and repulſes at both the royall counſailes, to ſende his treatiſe
to his friends at Rome, to the ende there to print 
                     ••
                  , hauing firſt
transformed it into a certayne Apologie written 
                     •
                  o the Biſhop
of Segouia, becauſe the ſame Biſhoppe hauing peruſed the treatie
and booke aforeſaide, had brotherly and charitablie as his
friende by letters reprooued and counſayled him. The Emperor
vnderſtanding of the impreſſion of the ſayde booke and Apologie,
did immediatly diſpatche his letters patents, for the calling
in and ſupreſſion of the ſame, commaunding likewiſe to gather
in agayne all copies thereof throughout Caſtile, for the ſaid
Doctour had publiſhed alſo in the Caſtilean language a certaine
abſtract of the ſaide booke, thereby to make it more common

to all the lande: and to the ende alſo that the commons, and ſuch
as vnderſtood no latine, might haue ſome vſe thereof, as being
a matter agreeable and toothſome to ſuche vs coueted great riches,
and ſought wayes to clyme to other eſtates, then eyther
themſelues, or their predeceſſors coulde euer attaine vnto without
great coſt, labour, and cares, and often times with the loffe
and deſtruction of diuers.
               Which when the Biſhoppe of Chiapa vnderſtoode, hee determined
alſo to write an apologie in the vulgar tongue, againſt
the ſaide doctors ſummarie, in defence of the Indies, there in impugning
and vndermining his ſoundations, and anſwering all
reaſons, or whatſoeuer the doctor coulde alleadge for him ſelfe,
therin diſplaying & ſetting before the peoples face the dangers,
inconueniences and harmes in the ſayde doctine contayned.
               Thus as many thinges paſſed on both ſides, his Maieſtie i
                     •
                  
the yeere 1550. called to Valadolid, an aſſemblie of learned men,
as well Diuines as Lawyers, who being ioyned with the Royall
counſaile of the Indies ſhoulde argue, and among them conclude,
whether it were lawfull without breach of Luſtice, to leuie
warres, commonly tearmed conqueſtes, againſt the inhabitantes
of thoſe conneries, without any newe offence by them committed
their infidelitie excepted.
               Doctor Sepulued a was ſummoned to come and ſay what hee
coulde, and being entred the counſayle chamber, did at the firſt
ſeſſion vtter his whole minde. Then was the ſayde Biſhoppe
likewiſe called, who for the ſpace of fiue dayes, continually did
reade his Apologie: but being ſomewhat long, the Diuines and
Lawyers there aſſembled, beſought the learned and reuerende
father Dominicke Soto his Maieſties confeſſour, and a dominican
Fryer, who was there preſent, to reduce it into a ſummarie
and to make ſo many copies as there were Lordes, that is fourteene,
to the ende they all hauing ſtudied vpon the matter, might
afterwarde in the feare of God ſay their mindes.
               The ſayde reuerend father and Maſter Soto, ſet downe in the
ſaide ſummarie, the doctors reaſons, with the Biſhops anſweres
to the ſame. Then had the doctour at his requeſt a copie
deliuered him to aunſwere: out of whiche Summarie

he gathered twelue againſt him ſelfe, whereto hee made twelue
anſweres, againſt which anſweres the Biſhoppe framed twelue
replies.
            
            
               Doctor Sepulueda his prologue to the
Lordes of the aſſemblie.
               MOſt worthie and noble Lordes, ſith your Lordſhippes and
graces haue as iudges for the ſpace of fiue or ſixe dayes
heard the Lorde Biſhop of Chiapa read that booke, whereinto he
hath many yeeres laboured to gather all the reaſons that either
himſelf, or others could inuēt to proue the cōqueſt of the Indies
to be vniuſt, as ſeeking firſt to ſubdue barbarous nations before
we preach the Goſpell vnto them, which haue been the vſuall
courſe correſpondent to the graunt made by Pope Alexander
the ſixt, which all kinges and nations haue hetherto taken &
obſerued: it is meet, and I doe ſo deſire you, that I who take
vpon mee to defende the graunt and authoritie of the Apoſtolike
ſea, together with the equitie and honour of our kinges and nation,
may haue the like graunt, and that it may pleaſe you diligently
to giue me audience, while briefly and manifeſtly I do anſwere
his obiections and ſubtilties: ſo doe I hope in God, and
the trueth which I take vpon me to defende, that I ſhall plainely
ſet before your eyes, and ſhew you that al yt is ſpoken on the contrarie
part before ſo noble and wiſe iudges, who are not any way
to be ſuſpected of preferring whatſoeuer may be alleaged before
truth and equitie which are of ſuch importance, doth conſiſt only
vpon friuelous and vayne reaſons. I will therefore, cutting
off my ſpeech come to the purpoſe. For it is ſmall honour or curteſie
to vſe tediouſnes among ſuche perſons, beeing occupied in
waightie affaires, namely, in the gouernement of the common
wealth.
            
            
               The Biſhoppe of Chiapa his prologue
to the Lordes of the aſſemblie.
               
                  
MOſt worthie and noble Lords, right reuerend and learned
fathers, hitherto in whatſoeuer I haue read, or in writing
exhibited in this ſo notable and honourable aſſemblie, I haue generally
ſpoken againſt the aduerſaries of the Indian enhabitants
of our Indies that lie in the Occean ſea, not naming any, although
I knowe ſome, who openly doe ſeeke to write Treaties
thereof, and frame their grounde vppon an excuſe and defence
of ſuche warres as were, are, and yet may be proſecuted againſt
thoſe people, which haue beene the occaſions of ſo muche miſchiefe,
ſo manye ouerthrowes, loſſes, and ſubuerſions of ſuche
and ſo great kingdomes, together with manie townes and infinite
numbers of ſoules. Alſo that they ſubduing of thoſe nations
by warres before they haue by preaching hearde of the
faith or name of Ieſus Chriſte, is a marter conformable to our
Chriſtian lawe: alſo that ſuch warres are iuſt and lawfull, whereof
it ſeemeth that the reuerende and worthie Doctor Sepulu
                     •
                  
                  da
hath nowe opened and declared him ſelfe the principall vphoulder
and defendour, in that hee anſwereth to thoſe reaſons,
authorities, and obiections, that bee to the contrary: which in
deteſting the ſaide warres, and to the ende to ſhewe that the
ſame beeing by another name called conqueſtes, are wicked and
tyrannous, I haue drawen into this our Apologie whereof I
haue read part vnto your excellencies and Lordeſhippes.
               And ſeeing hee hath ſought to diſcloſe him ſelfe, and feared
not to bee taken for the authour of ſo execrable impietie,
whiche doe redownde to the ſlaunder of the faith, the diſhonour
of the name of Chriſtianitie, and the domage as well ſpirituall
as temporall of the moſt part of mankinde: I thought it
verie meete, as it is, ſo openly to impugne it, and for cutting off
of the poyſoned cancker whiche hee ſeeketh to diſperſe abroade
in theſe countreys, to the deſtruction and ſubuerſion of the
ſame, to ſet my ſelfe as an aduerſarie and partie agaynll him.
               Wherefore I beſeech your noble Lordeſhippes graces and fatherhoodes,
to way this ſo waightie and daungerous matter,
not as any peculiar cauſe, for I pretende no farther, but to defende

it according as becommeth a Chriſtian, but as apperteining
to God his honour, the vniuerſall Churche, and the eſtate
as well temporall as ſpirituall of the kinges of Caſtile, who are
to giue accoumpt of the loſſe of ſoules alreadie periſhed, and
hereafter to periſh, vnleſſe the gate be ſhutte vp againſt this heauie
courſe of warres, whiche Doctour Sepulueda endenoureth to
iuſtifie. Alſo that this honourable aſſemblie admitte no Sophiſtrie
by him vſed to couer and cloake his hurtfull opinion, whereby
hee ſheweth a pretence to colour and defende the authoritie
by him called Apoſtolike, and the Empire, whiche the kinges of
Caſtile and Leon haue ouer theſe Iudians. For no Chriſtian
can lawefully and honeſtly confirme and defende the authoritie
tearmed Apoſtolike, eyther the ſoueraignetie of any Chriſtian
king by vniuſt warres, by filling hilles and valyes with innocent
blood, either with the infamie and blaſpheming of Chriſt and
his faith:
               But the Apoſtolike ſea is rather by ſuche meanes defamed
and looſeth her authoritie, the true God is diſhonoured, and
the true title and right of a king is loſte and periſheth, as euery
wiſe and Chriſtian man may eaſily gather by that which Doctor
Sepulueda him ſelfe hath propounded.
               This title and right is not founded vpon the entrie into thoſe
countries, and againſt thoſe people to robbe, ſlay, and tyrannoſly
to rule ouer them, vnder pretence of preaching the faith, as
thoſe tyrāts entred & haue done, who by an vniuerſallmaſſa cre
and ſlaughter, haue murdered ſuch a multitude of Innocentes:
But it conſiſteth of a peaceable, louing, and gentle preaching of
the Goſpell, and of an vnfaigned introduction and foundation
of faith, and of Chriſtes principalitie. Yea who ſo euer goeth
about to giue our Kinges and Lordes any other tide, whereby to
obtayne the ſoueraigntie and principalitie ouer thoſe Indians, is
ſtarke blind, offendeth God, is a traitour to his king, and an enemie
to the Spaniſh nation, whom he abuſeth and moſt pernitiouſly
deceiueth, ſeeking to repleniſh hell with ſoules.
               Leaſt therefore any of your Lordſhippes graces or fatherhoods

ſhould ſtay vpon theſe damnable humors, it were mee
                     ••
                  
as becommeth moſt chriſtian & wife men: yea; and very expedient
to put to ſilence ſo hurtful and abhomnable an opinion. And
although in our Apologie, wee may ſeeme to haue ſatisfied, and
at large anſwered whatſoeuer may be brought in defence of the
ſaid Apologie, yet becauſe the doctor hath once againe propounded
his defences, by parting father Sotoes ſummarie into twelue
obiections, reaſon willeth mee to replie and ſhew that his obiections
are friuolous, and to no purpoſe.
            
            
               Out of which replies, heere followeth the abſtract
of two that ſtand vs in ſt
                     ••••
                  .
               THe report is vnture that the Indians did yeerely ſacrifice in
nowe Spaine 
                     •
                  0000 perſons▪ either one 100. or 50. For
had that been ſo, wee could not nowe haue found there ſo much
people: and therefore the Tyrants haue inuented it, thereby to
excuſe and iuſtifie their tyrannies alſo to deteine ſo many of the
Indians as eſcaped the oppreſſion and deſolation of the firſt vintage,
in bondage and tyrannie. But we may more truely ſay, that
the Spaniards during their aboade in the Indies, haue yeerely ſacrificed
to their ſo dearely beloued and reuerende Goddeſſe Couetouſnes
more people, then the Indians haue done in a 100.
yeeres. This doe the heauens, the earth, the elements, and the
ſtarres both teſtifie and bewaile: the tyrants, yea, the very miniſters
of theſe miſchiefes cannot denie it. For it is euident howe
greatly theſe countries as out firſt entrie ſwarmed with people, as
alſo how we haue nowe laide it waſte, and diſpeopled the ſame:
wee might euen bluſhe for ſhame, that hauing giuen ouer all
feare of God, wee will yet neuertheleſſe ſeeke to colour and excuſe
theſe our ſo execrable demeanours: conſidering that only for
getting wealth and riches, wee haue in 45. or 48. yeeres, waſted
and conſumed more land then all Europe, yea and part of Aſia,
                  
doe in lengih and breadth con
                     •
                  aine, robbing and vſurping vpon
that with all crueltie, wrong, and tyranny, which wee haue ſeene
well inhabited 
                     〈…〉
                   people among whome there haue
been ſlaine and deſtroyed 20. millions of ſoules.
            
            
               In the laſt and twelfth replie as followeth.
               THE Spaniardes haue not entred into India for any deſire
to exalt Gods honour, or for zeale to chriſtian religion,
either to fauour, and procure the ſaluation of their neighbours,
no neither for their princes ſeruice, whereof they doe ſo vainely
bragge: but conetouſnes hath brought them and ambition hath
allured them to the perpetuall dominion ouer the Indies, which
they as tyrants and diuels, doe couet to bee parted among them:
and to ſpeake plainely and flatly, doe ſeeke no other but to expell
and driue the kings of Caſtile out of all that worlde and themſelues
ſeazing thereupon, by tyrannie to vſurpe and take
vpon them all royall ſoueraigntie.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            Imprinted at London at the three
Cranes in the Vintree by Thomas
Dawſon, for William Broome.
1583.
            
         
      
   