
      
         
            
            
            
               The Ruinous fal of Prodigalitie: with the notable examples of the beſt aprooued aucthours which hath bin written of the ſame. Newly ſet foorth by Iohn Carr.
            
            
               
                  TIMOTHI. 6 CHAP 1. Epiſtle.
               
               ¶ Charge them that are riche in this world, that they be not hie minded, and that they truſt not in vncertayne ryches, but in the liuyng God.
            
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Fleetſtreet, by Wylliam How: for Hēry Kirkham ANNO. 1573.
         
         
            
            
            To my very eſpeciall and ſinuler good freinde, Mayſter 
               
                  •
               dmond Yonge, Gentilman: Student of the Law. Iohn Car, wiſheth continuall health, and proſperitie, to the pleaſure of God.
            
            
               
                  CONSIDERYNG with my ſelf, how greatelye wee are bounde, to render thanks vnto God, for the great benefits, which he hath beſtowed vpon vs: whiche benefits are infinit, and wee are not able to yeelde vnto him, prayſe, honour and glory, ſo much as he deſerueth, whiche thinge I did well perpend, therfore I thought it meete to practiſe my pen, in the exerciſe of the litle talēt which God hath lent vnto mee: to the

augmenting of Vertue, and to abrogate vice, for I was mooued to diuulgate, or ſet foorth this ſimple woorke, accordinge to my literature, as far as my capacitie was able to compaſſe. For I beyng wholy drowned, in the Lake of ignorance, had nothing more precious, to preſent vnto you, but this the paterne of my ſimplicitie, whiche God hath lent vnto mee. I was the much more imboldened, to dedicate this ſimple worke vnto you, ſith that I haue knowen your zelous affection, which yet you haue euer borne, to the encreaſe of learnyng, and that your ſtudie hath euer bin preſt, to ſerche

and looke for the preſeruation of the ſame. And moreouer becauſe that I had a good hope and affection, that you woulde as well eſteeme of this my ſimple woorke, beyng the firſt frutes of my labour, as though it were a greate deale more better. And according as I perceiue and vnderstand how that you doo take this ſimple woorke being preſented vnto you, it wil animate and encourage me, to employ my ſtudie, more then yet I haue doone hitherto. And although that I want the flowers of rethorike, to beutyfi and ſet forth this ſimple worke, yet I ſhall deſyre ye, as I haue don

before, to accept it: and if that any fault you finde there in, I ſhall deſyer ye; to oſtende your fauour ſo muche, that I may haue entelligence of it, for I wyll euer more ſubmit my ſelf, to the counſell of the learned: and further more, I ſhall deſyer ye, not thinke the worſt of it, for I wil not, nor meane not to teache any man, how and after what ſort, he ſhall behaue him ſelfe, in any reſpect. For I my ſelf, haue as much neede of teaching, as he that hath most, but I will alway ſtande vnder the correction of the learned. Thus hopyng that you will accept this my trauayle and good

wil, according to your accuſtomed curteſie, and be a patrone, in the defence of this my worke and to gratifie your curteſie, I will ſhew my ſelf frendable towards you, and now I am lothe to trouble ye, with any▪ more circumſtance, but wiſhyng God to preſerue you in health, wealth, and felicitie, to his bleſſed will and pleaſure.
            Amen.
            
               Your friende to his poore power Iohn Carr.
            
         
         
            
            Another to the ſame, in commendation of Learnynge.
            
               NO kinde of grounde ſo barren is,
               but that by labour may
               Be brought to bring foorth fruitful vines
               the Poets ſo doo ſay.
               Euen ſo no mynde or memorie,
               that is ſo dull to learne:
               By practiſe often in the ende
               he wyſdom may deſerne.
               For as the water drops in time
               doth perſe the ſtone ſo harde:
               Euen ſo doth learnyng perſe the mynde,
               to it to haue regarde:
               For what is he that learned is,
               and therin doth delight:
               That wyll not to the ſimple foole,
               and weake wits this reſight?
               That learnyng paſſeth masſie Golde,
               and perfit precious ſtone:
               And requiſit it is for to
               be had of euery one.
               
                  what would kinge Creſus mounts of gold
               preuayle where learnyng wants?
               No fruits of wealth doth ſpring, but of
               learning like Olyue plants.
               The golden waues of Pactolus,
               whiche Midas plague did purge,
               Inferiour is to learned lore,
               for wealthe to vice dothe vrge.
               And learning men to vertue bringes
               and perfect ſoules dothe make,
               Therefore his good wyll do accepte,
               whiche pende this for thy ſake.
            
            FINIS.
            
               I. C.
            
         
         
            
            To the Readers.
            
               THE STATE OF the worlde is ſo good (gentill Reader,) that Iniquitie hath gotte the vpper hande of Truethe and Honeſt dealing: and Iniquitie dothe floriſhe nowe ſoo muche in the worlde, that all the preachinge and teaching that nowe is vttered, by the preachers of the woorde of God, cannot perſwade the people from wickedneſſe, but ſtyll they perſiſte in their malignitie: whiche thynge I perfectly viewe and beholde, and do praye to God continually that it might be amended, and according vnto my bounden duetie, I haue employed my ſtudie to the augmentinge of vertue, and to the ouerthrowe of vice. In ſearchinge forthe of worthye hiſtories, whiche are worthy to be had in memorie: vnto the ende, that thoſe which do reade and beholde them, and ſee the ende of ſuche wicked lyuinge, they may refraine from it. And becauſe that now the moſt part of the worlde is geuen vnto Pryde and Prodigalitie, I haue here to the edificatiō wrytten and ſet forth the ruinous

fall of Prodigalitie, with notable examples of Hiſtories of the beſt aproued aucthours whiche haue written of the ſame: In dede I haue paſte ouer manye hiſtories, the whiche I might well haue treated of, but for breuities ſake I haue refrayned them, and broughte in diuers others, which obliuion wolde haue blot ted out of memorie: and if that therin thou doeſt finde any faultes, doo not ſtande carpinge on it, but lightly paſſe them ouer, and ſay thou ſeeſt them not then of the learned ſorte, thou ſhalt alwaies be cōmended: for in deed I want the knowledge of Tertullian for Retho rike, & the tongue of Mercury, to paint forthe eloquence, and therefore I am in doubte, that thou wilt not accepte this my ſimple trauell, and take it in good parte, for I haue done it for the profite of my natiue Countrey, to the augmentinge of the glorie of God, and ſo I craue thee to accept it, farewell in CHRISTE.
            
               Yours to his power Iohn Carr.
            
         
         
            
            Againſt all carpers and finde faultes.
            
            
               THou carpinge Momus hold thy peace,
               thy taunting wordes refrayne:
               I knowe thy ſpite is prone to ſpeake,
               eche woorke for to diſdaine.
            
            
               The learned route commendes the thinge,
               and dothe it well accepte:
               But thou whoſe tongue dothe neuer lye
               dothe fautleſſe thinges obiecte.
            
            
               And Zoylus, thou whoſe mouthe ſtands ope,
               thy carping woordes to ſounde:
               Againſt eche thinge, the ſhame to thee,
               in thende will ſure redounde.
            
            
               Thou ſpits thy ſpight, when one thou ſeeſt
               a peece of woorke hath framde:
               Thy harte dothe thinke, thy tongue doth carpe,
               and woldſt haue him defamde.
            
            
               In ſpight of thee thou Momus thou,
               and Zoylus in lyke caſe:
               The aucthour of this woorke againe,
               his ſlender quyll will trace.
            
            FINIS.
            
               I. C.
            
         
         
            
            E. Y.
            
               Your name deere freinde
               in fewe lines haue I written here,
               Them ponder well
               and in your minde them euer beare.
            
            
               
                  Embrace vertue,
               
                  Delighte in the truethe.
               
                  Make no diſcorde,
               
                  Obaye God,
               
                  Neuer do wronge,
               
                  Deale iuſtly.
            
            
               
                  Yelde to the truethe,
               
                  Opreſle not the poore.
               
                  Noriſhe the needie,
               
                  Geue good councell,
               
                  Encline to Goddes woorde.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The fall of Prodigalitie.
            
            
               
                  NOTHINGE DOTHE ſeme ſo commodious to the life of man, as to conſider and immitate, this preſēt ſtate of the world. For if euery man wold▪call to remembraunce, how, and after what ſorte, eche kinde of ſtate doth liue, & reuolue with him ſelfe, the woorkes of the Almighty, whiche is ſo magnanimous, then ſhall hee perceiue, if that man leadeth his life agreable vnto the worde of God, and eſpecially thoſe that are learned, whiche haue the knowledge of the trueth, and can vnderſtand the doctrine that is conteined in the miſteries of the ſcriptures: they in mine opinion ſhuld be the followers, moſte chiefely of the ſame: But I am of the opinion of S. Auguſtine, whiche ſaithe, thoughe that the learned rowte, do reade and ſee the way to ſaluation, yet I thinke (ſaith he) that thoſe whiche are vnlearned, wyll be there before them: for in deede I ſay

ſo my ſelfe, that it is an eaſy matter for a horſeman to ride to Rome ſoner thenHorſemen are ſwifter then footemen. hee the which doth god a fote: by which I doo meane, that thoſe the whiche are learned, ſhould ſoner obtaine the kingdome of God, then the ignorant can do: and they maye rather followe the waye of vertue, becauſe they do beholde, the enormitie, that enſueth to thoſe that do breake, or ſtray from that waye of vertue, and run into the horrible and lothſome way of wickedneſſe, as many doo at this preſent time, for I ſe dayly that nature doth growe, more peruerſe then other: for thoſe, whiche a man wyll eſteeme to be moſt ciuyll, are moſte ryotous, and thoſe the whiche are thought to be moſte prodigall or riotous, are by their exterior or outward aparāce moſt full of ciuillitie, whereby one is not able to ſay that hee doth knowe a perfect man of liuinge, the whiche is a thynge to be wondred at, conſidering the great learninge that flowes at this day, more then euer it dyd, and the Goſpel is truly preached, yet the ſtate of the worlde, is growē to ſuch malignitie, as though

that we had no teaching nor preaching, for it was neuer more couetouſe, nor the people were neuer more edicted vn to riotouſneſſe: for hee which is a man but of a meane eſtate, wil bragge of his gentillitie, yea, and kepe cōpanie with thoſe the whiche hathe ſubſtaunce and wealthe, becauſe that he will not be counted an inferior vnto them. More whoredom, filthy fornication, was neuer vſed, ſince the firſt originall, more diſſimulation, neuer was hard of nor ſeene? What more ſhould I ſay, ſithe the ſtate of all thynges doth decay: and the world was neuer more full of impietee. And what is the cauſe of this? I will accordynge to my ſimple knowledge, reuele vnto you. You ſee, dayly with your eyes, that euery man, if that he be of any reputation, he will ſtande in the ſame, yea, and rather then he wil loſe any parte of his reputation, he will boaſt of the ſame, to make men beléeue, that is ignorant of his ſtate, that he is ſome Frankelin, or ſome Gentilman borne, then he to vpholde his ſtate, will ſeeme to be a royſtyng gamſter,

at Dice or at tables, or at Cardes, the which if he vſe any thynge longe, will make his reputation fall, and conſume his ſubſtance, thoughe it be but ſmall, then he muſt be driuen of meere neceſſitie, to go borrow money of ſome of his familiar aquaintance: and when he hath borrowed the ſame money, hee wyll neuer reſte tyll the dice haue lefte none, and thus he wyll and muſt make ſhifte to mainteine his gaminge: Now the time drawes on, that hee muſt pay his creditour the money whiche he borrowed, and hee hath it not to pay: then muſt hee ſell his landes or his goodes to pay it, or els muſt go to priſon, and becauſe that hee wyl not ſeeme ſo to be deſamed by impriſonment, he will ſell that whiche is worthe a hundred pound for .iiij. ſcoore, and thus hee muſt do if he frequent him ſelfe in exerciſe of ſuch vnſeemely gaminge: then of force hee muſt be conſtrayned to make ſhifte for money one waye or other. Some wyllTheſe are the cōmon pactiſes of ſome at this daye. vſe a kinde of diſſimulation, to cloake matters couertely, and will cogge and foyſte, and addulate a matter to gayne

by: and other ſome ſtyll goe playe the royſtinge rouers, and watche quicke corſes, when it were more meeter for them to be in their beddes a ſleepe▪ and all becauſe that they wante that whiche they ſhoulde haue, to maintayne theyr eſtates: Nowe if that hee be a man of any reputation, and thus in ſuperfluitie haue ſpent his ſubſtaunce, then wil hee crowche and crepe to his friendes, now if his friendes perceiue any grace or amendment in him, they wyll helpe him, and beſtowe theyr lyberalitie on him, and then: if he againe do fal, to the lyke vice, as hee dyd before, they wyll ſeme to drawe theyr fauour from him, and ſo will cleane reiect hym, and thus ſhall hee be broughte into miſery. And againe, if that one hauinge ſubſtaunce, and ſpende it ſo ſuperfluous, and hath no friendes to helpe him, nor none to whom he may ſewe for any reliefe, thē muſt hee forſake his olde companions, then his riotouſneſſe is tourned into a moſt myſerable ſtate of penurie: thus doth many at this preſent time decay, thus are they brought lowe, whiche loked

ſo highe. I woulde wiſhe therfore eche ſtate to conſider his callinge, and to remember the inconuenience of ſuperfluitie: for what wil a man do, when that hee wanteth ſubſtance, which ſomtyme had it? for when hee conſidereth the ſtate hee hath been in, and reuolue with him ſelfe his ſtate preſent, it wyll be dolerous vnto him, mary the nereſt waye to auoyde the daunger of this dolour, is: before to conſider this whiche is chaunced afterward, and thinke with him ſelfe, that if I do nowe ſpende ryotouſly this ſubſtance whiche I haue in my youth, I ſhal want the ſame in my age, therefore I wyll ſpare it, I wyll pleade ſimplicitie, I wyll not ſtand on my reputation, but yeld vnto the worſt rather then geeue occaſion of wronge, this will hee doo, the whiche doth not regarde the pleaſure of vaine thynges: Nowe I doo not wryte this vnto you, pretendinge to alowe couetouſneſſe toCouetouſneſſe is of th'aucthor here reiected. be exerciſed among ſuche youthes, as I do wryte of, but I doo write this to the intente that they ſhould not ſpend that whiche they haue, in ſuperfluitie, as in

gaminge, in gay apparell, in kepyngeGood exerciſes are here alowed. of ſuche companie as are edicted vnto riotouſneſſe. In frequentinge ſuch exerciſes as are not commendable: mary in deed I can not diſalowe ſome kinde of exerciſes, which are wrought by the agilitie of the body, ſo that they be vſed with a mediocritie, not ſuperfluous, nor vppon brauery, to gayne the name of a lyuely youthe: and ſome other exerciſes I do diſcommende, becauſe they are viciouſe. Nowe I wyll not ſeeme to teache a man what exerciſe hee ſhall vſe, for that will I referre to his owne diſcrete minde: but I do ſhewe the enormitie whiche enſueth to thoſe, which friuolouſly do ſpend their time in vaine pleaſures of the worlde: as in delighttinge in Pryde, whiche is the mother of all miſchiefe, and in drunkennes: for when a man or woman is drunke, they are then edicted vnto all miſchiefe, and other vices beſide, whiche I perceyue that the worlde is geuen to, therfore I woulde wiſhe that this may be a reformation for thoſe the which haue hitherto led their liues in ſuche wickedneſſe,

and that they may henceforthe, frame their mindes to the Imitatinge of vertuous exerciſe: & not to eſteme the vaine pleaſures of this worlde, whiche is but a vale of miſerie, but I do beleeue it were as eaſie to tourne the ſtone into the water, as to cauſe ſome of them to exterminate and caſt of the vſe of ſuche vices, for they are ſoo rooted in them, that they can not parte a ſonder: But nowe to procede further, let vs ſe what worthy Hiſtories the auncient Hiſtoriographers haue left with vs in learned bookes, towchinge the fall of Prodigalitie.Herodotus a Greeke hiſtoriographer. Marcus Huua was Dictator of Rome, one of the higheſt offices there. I call to remembraunce that Herodotus a writer of Hiſtories, dyd pen in his Booke, that ſometime one Huua was Dictatour of Rome, this Huua hauing no more ſonnes but onely one, he was verye carefull for hym, and loued him entierly, for as the ſtory ſaith, that he did decke him vp in coſtly aray, the fyneſte that mighte be gotten, and kept him at ſchole: but he was ſo pampred and nuſled vp in worldely prophanitie, that hee had rather minde on his Prodigalitie then on his Booke, and

woulde rather exerciſe hym ſelfe in diuers kyndes of games, as diſinge, cardinge, and other moe, whiche oughte not to be vſed, but rather to be reiected and ſo hee continued the ſpace of ſeuen yeres, in whiche time he had conſumed his fathers ſubſtaunce, ſo muche, that his father dyd ſeeme to withdrawe his greate loue and good wyll from hym, and dyd kepe him in ſo ſhorte, that hee coulde not haue the value of one penye, but his father woulde knowe how that it was beſtowed. Nowe this youthful ſonne, contrary vnto his fathers wyll, woulde priuielye reſorte vnto his olde companions, whoſe companies before hee frequented, and they gaue him ſuch councell, that hee woulde not ſeeme no more to be kepte in at his fathers pleaſure, but dyd ſhewe him ſelfe ſo obſtynate, that all his friendes hated him: it came to paſſe that his father dyed, and he poſſeſſed his landes and goodes, & he through his companions entiſement, was ſeduced from all vertuouſe trade and led his life in a moſt ryotous rate, and conſumed it cleane: when all was

gone, and had nothinge lefte to maynteine his former ſtate, his olde companions which before had frequented his company forſooke hym cleane, and rather ſought his deſtruction, then for his proſperitie, and ſo in greate myſerye, he wente beggynge his breade, and at laſte, fell to robbinge, and ſoo was taken, and accordinge to the lawe ſuffered deathe: Oh what avayled Fortune whiche to hym was incomparable? for where that he had welth and ſubſtance, was verye well eſteemed and beloued amonge the Senatours of Rome for his fathers ſake, nowe was he thorowe riotous Prodigalitie, broughte to vtter deſtruction: the like in theſe our daies wee maye beholde with our eies, for a noumbre there bee of ſuche chyldren, whiche doo include vice, and abrogate vertue, and all becauſe that they are edicted vnto Prodigalitie, whiche is repugnaunt vnto vertue, as theyr exteriour operations doth manifeſtly oſtend,Do nomore then your habilitie is able to reache. for where the minde is geuen to playe prodigall partes, and deſirouſe to goo braue and to kepe companie with royſters,

to be franke in expences, to bee free in liberalitie, more then his habylitie is able to vpholde, for I count him a very innocent, that will put his hand further then his ſleue wil reache, and to bragge or boaſte of his gentillitie, all theſe vices dothe derogate vertue, but I muſte confeſſe that lyberalitie procedeth of a gentle harte, as when hée doth geeue ſome thinge for a recompence, for gentelnes or profite, whiche he hath founde: but yet it maye digreſſe from the boundes of vertue. In rewardinge exceſciuely, or in prodigal expences, or on other thinges inconuenient, of ſmal importance, in deede I muſt ſaye, that ſuche errogation, is not worthye to be counted the name of lyberalitie, but a thinge done on a brauerie: In prodygal promptnes, is a ſingular ſigne, that the aucthour thereof, is rather geuen to prodigalitie, then to ciuill demeanour: Nowe let vs ſee farther, how they whiche haue vſed prodigalitie, are come to vtter deſolation. Iolas a luſtye youthe,Iolas born in Athens. a worthye example. dwellinge in Athens, at a feſtiual day, whiche the Athenians vſed to celebrate

hee to honour the Feaſt, beſtowed .x. thouſand pound in aparel for him ſelfe,They dyd celebrate to Diana, the Goddes of chaſtitie and .xx. men, whiche hee had hyred to waite vpon hym as that daye: he was ſo richely decked in coſtely robes, that euerye man wondered at him, and dyd ſtande in an admiration with them ſelues, howe that hee was able to deuyſe ſo riche garmentes to be made, but the minde whiche is edicted vnto vyce, or prodigall actions, nothynge to ſuffice his minde, is to harde or difficulte for him to deuiſe or inuente: Hee beinge thus decked, in ſuche coſtly array, dyd glorye in him ſelfe, and perceiued that the people dyd wonder at his greate expences and coſt in apparel, dyd euer after continually, weare the ſame, and ſtil mainteined it, as longe as his moneye did laſt: In the ende to conclude ſhort, hee had neither moneye, goodes, nor landes, but was gladde to ſet his feete vnder other mens tables, and becauſe he coulde not haue his wyll as hee was wonte to haue, he fell to ſhifting other waies, and kept company with whores and becauſe that theſe harlots had robbed

a gentell man, they were taken, and Iolas with theym in their company,Take hede of this exaumple. and ſo was priſoned, where in he died myſerably. Thus ye ſe, what the ende of his prowde prodygalitie came vnto: Trewlye the ende of it is lyttell better, for if euerye youthe or younge man, would conſider this, and reuolue with him ſelfe, the imminent daunger that on prodigalitie doth procede, they woulde abandone them ſelues from it: but he that is naturally diſpoſed, to be prodigall, cannot be ciuill: In deede I muſte confeſſe, that it is ſeldome ſeene that a young man ſhoulde be ciuill, till he come to .xxiiii. yeres of age, or there about: in deede then he growes to ſom ſtature, and by wiſdome▪ is ledde to beBambes kinge of Nauers brother. Xenophon ciuill: I had almoſt forgotten Bambes, which was the king of Nauers brother, howe prodigally hee did liue, Xenophon makethe mention: for hee woulde vſe to haue chaunge of aparell, iiij. times aday, and he did glory in it, in ſo much that hee woulde neuer haue reſperte to thynke on the comon wealth: the ende of it was this, hee was oppreſſed with

warres, by the Hungarians, and was taken pryſoner, and coulde not be ranſomed, without great ſubſtance, he was cladde in a riche armour, and ſette in a peyre of ſcales or ballance, and he was weyed ten times in pure maſſie golde, whiche much enpoueriſhed his treaſury, that when hee came to his kingdom hee hadde but ſmall ſubſtaunce, and becauſe hee coulde not haue his pleaſure of wealthe, as hee was wonte to haue, dyd ertorte his cominaltie, and they ſeingeRebellion agaynſt a prodigall kinge. theym ſelues ertorted, to maynteine his prodigalitie, rebelled againſt him, and ſlewe hym, thus alwaye the prodigal people do come▪ to deſtruction for oftentimes we ſee, that he the whiche dothe exalte him ſelfe, is broughte lowe, and hee the whiche doth humble him ſelfe, is exalted: but we may perceius plainely, that at this day there is fewe of our younge youthes, or elles gentill men (as ye would terme them) that will enter into a pathe, which leadeth vnto humilitie, but rather wyll of him ſelfe be ſo obſtinate, that hee wyll not force, friende nor foe, but wilfully

runne aſtraye▪ from the vertuous imitation, whiche hee oughte to practice, and if his friendes or his parentes, doo tell him of the ſame, then he is ſtreight at defiaunce with them, and thereby he neglecteth his dewetie towardes them, which in the .xx. of Exod. we are commaundedExodus▪
                of God to kepe, ſayinge, Honour thy father and thy mother, &c. but tho prodigall childe forceth not that, but wyll rather ſhewe him ſelfe obſtynate againſt them, then dotheyr commandmentes, which now in theſe our daies, to our lamentable reproche, is to much ſeene and proued by experience. Chyldren more diſobediente to parentes, I thinke was neuer ſeene: children and young men, more edicted vnto Pryde, and Prodigalitie, I iudge in mine opinion, was neuer harde of, chyldren more ſubtyll and crafty then are nowe in theſe our daies, I haue not harde of, for nowe the younge teacheth the olde, the yonge correcteth the olde, the yonge ſekethe for the ſuperioritie of the olde, the whiche is contrary vnto dewtie, for thoughe hee be neuer ſo poore, nor neuer

ſo in myſerie, if hee be olde, thoſe which are young for the honour of their age, oughte for to yelde reuerence vnto them, and not ſtoutely to ſtande at defiaunce againſte them: for wee muſt honour age, in hope that wee oure ſelues ſhall be olde: but wee maye perceiue that a greate number do ſtray from the ſame perfecte pathe of vertue, as the xlij, chyldren dyd, whiche mocked Heliſeus,4. Reg. 2. after the aſcention of his maſter Helias. Then Heliſeus turned againe, and curſed the Children, then immediately twoo ſhee beares came out of the wodde and deuoured them, this example I do bring in, in this place, becauſe I perceiue that the world is at this ſtay that children being brought vp and nuſled in wickedneſſe, when they come to age, they wyll not ſeeme to ſhewe any obedience to their parentes, but ſeeke to haue their owne wylles, whereby they fall from vertue vnto vice, and ſo aduaunce them ſelues euen to the top of the prodigall Porte: then there they ſet forth them ſelues in their brauery, and there they vaunte and bragge of theyr

reputation, the whiche God knowes, is but very bace, yet they ſet a good face on the matter, and wyll not loſe it for boſting, and as I call to remembrance the like example I did find in the workes of Maturia, a Romain writer, thatMaturiae a Romain writer dwellinge in Verona at the Citie of Verona in Italye, there was a poore man which went begging of his bread, for wante of any other releuement, and when hee came within halfe a league of the Cittie, there was twoo lyttell boyes playinge together, whiche kepte ſheepe oute of the corne, and this olde man came by, and they ſeinge hym, they lefte their playe, and rayled vpon him, and threwe ſtones at him, and with durte and mud they ſore miſuſed hym, then the olde man ſaide, take hed children, that you do not reape ſuche fruite, as your ſeede whiche you ſowe, bringeth forth: Then thoſe two children lefte the olde man, and fell to wraſtlinge together, harde by a ſtynking pitte of mud 
                  〈◊…〉
                it chaunced that the twoo boyes fell therein bothe together, one hauing holde of the other: and they beinge in, coulde not obteine no

reſcue, but there were drowned. Thus they whiche will ſeeme to deſpiſe age, otherwiſe then duetie doth binde them, we maye perceyue do come to a myſerable ende, Nowe whether it was for wante of wyt that they did deſpiſe him, or whether it was vpon their owne voluntary wyll, in a brauery vpon prodigalitie, I cannot rightly ſaye: but wee may ſee at this daye, that youth is wilfull, and often times will do ſuch dedes whiche dothe not become theim, and agayne, many of their parentes are ſoo fonde ouer theym, that theye wyll not geue correction, but rather geue occaſion to prompte them in it: which when they come to age, they cannot refraine it, but muſte needes put in vre his former practiſe: This is an other cauſe that manye fall to predigalitie, and include vice, and exclude vertue, whereby their deede is worthy of no landable reporte, but perpetuall infamie: for experience dothe enforme vs, that alwaies the doings of the prodigal wight is wicked, and that the ende of it is miſerie: as for exaumple.
            
               
               Iulius Caeſar that worthy conquer ourIulius Caeſar. was ſo radicate in Pryde and prodigalitie, that he thoughte him ſelfe not terreſtrial and mortal, but in a maner immortall, & Celeſtial, whereby he refrained the company of his men, and made a decree that none ſhoulde come to him vn called, in ſo muche, that in tracte of time his nobles enuied him for his preſumption, and ſpecially Marcus Brutus, wherby his life was often in daunger,Marcus Brutus ſome ſay was Iulius Caeſars ſonne a baſtarde borne. for they pretended to ſlea him: but ther was one whiche knewe of the conſpyracie, and hee bare ſuche good wyll to Caeſar, that hee thoughte to geue hym knowledge of it, that hee mighte preuente theym. He then wrote the fame of the conſpiracie in a bill, and the ſame daye that Iulius Caeſar ſhoulde go to the councell houſe, hee preſumed contrary vnto the kinges commaundemente, to come to his preſence, and deliuered the byll to hym, but he beinge prowde, did not regarde the perſon that gaue it him nor yet eſtemed the byll: but in a rage threwe it away, and denied to reade it, and the ſame tyme hee was ſlayne, by

               Marcus Brutus, and more of the confederacie, whiche were appoynted.
            O ende moſt myſerable, which was reaped vnto hym, thorow his prodigall preſumption, for if hee hadde not been pufte vp with Pryde, hee woulde haue eſtemed the man that wrote the byll to geue him intelligence of it, but hee being addicted to glory in himſelf, did not regarde nor feare the imminent daunger, that haply ſhould enſue, to reward him for his preſumption, for the ende of it is euer lyttell better. Therefore I woulde wiſhe all thoſe the whiche doo heare, and thoſe the whiche doo reade, this booke, to immitate and reuolue with them ſelues, that Pride in thende hathe euer a fall, as for example.
            
               Dioniſe the kynge of Scicill, was expulſedDioniſius. out of his Countrey, for his intollerable Pride, and was faine to kepe a grammar ſchole in Italie, and ſo lyued begginge for his breade: and truely theſe Hiſtories whiche I do here reſite, may geue occaſion vnto vs, to dirrogate the horrible ſinne of Pryde: for nothynge can offende God ſo ſore, as a

hautie harte, and a proude preſumptuous mynde: for I remember an olde prouerbe: A proude hart and a beggars purſe, can neuer agree. He that is of ſmall habillitie, wyll thynke him ſelfe checke mate, with thoſe the whiche are of a greatter reputation: yet hee wyll thinke him ſelfe, that his reputation is coequall vnto his, Thus are manye in theſe daies addicted vnto pryde and prodigalitie, and wyll neuer ſeme to ſhew themſelues, humble and lowelye, but loke ſtoute and luſtie, as thoughe that there were none equall to them.
            
               Perſes kynge of Macedonia, was forPerſes. his execrable Pride, enuied and hated of all his kynred, and they cauſed hym to be taken priſoner, by Paulus Emilius whom the ſaid Perſes did warr againſt, and hee was bounde and led pryſoner, yet his Pride was ſoo intollerable and odious to his nobilitie, that his owne ſonne was afterwarde conſtrained, deſtitute of friendes, to become a ſmythe, and ſo liued in myſerye.
            Loe here wee ſee, that pryde and prodigalitie, dothe in the ende bringe man

to vtter deſolation, and not onely hym, but his poſteritie, and dothe therby get perpetuall ſhame and reproche, and doth reape hate and diſdaine of his frindes, and ſoo in the ende, comes to myſerie, as theſe examples dothe teach vs.
            
               Tarquine was the laſte kinge of theTarquine, father to him that rauiſhed Lucrece. 
               Romaines, and his Pryde was more cauſe of his exile and baniſhement, thē for the cauſe that his ſon rauiſſhed Lucrecia, wife to Colatinus. In dede the rauiſhinge of Lucrecia was a meanes whereby they myghte finde a clawe againſt hym, as thereby they did in dede and ſo they expulſed him from al kingly aucthoritie, and neuer after had king but were gouerned by conſules: and ſo they remaine at this day: thus we may beholde and ſee, that euermore the prodigall man is odious to his countreye, and that he can obteyne no fauoure nor friendeſhippe at his friendes handes: but ſhame and diſdaine, for the originalGeneſis. 4, of pride came by Caine, when he diſdained Abel, becauſe god accepted his brother Abels ſacrifice, more better then his, and the ende of Caine was miſery,

and ſo is the ende of al prodigal people.
            The lord Morton of Douer in EnglandeMorton of Englande. a righte good example. was a very proude and prodigal man, and delyghted moche the company of royſters, the whiche in the ende dydde torne to his inconuenience, as I wyll here reſite: Hee commonlye frequented the gaminge houſes, and dyd game and ſpende much, and when that hee had ſo continued, the ſpace of one or two yeres, his welthe beganne to faile him, then hee came to an abbot (it was the abbot of Malmsbury, as farre as I coulde remembre by the ſtory) and to this abbot hee made his mone, and did ſhew the cauſe how, and after what forte his ſubſtance was conſumed: thenA good anſwere to him. the abbot ſaide vnto him, go thy wayes thyther agayne, & loke where thou didſt ſpende a ſhilling nowe ſpende twaine, alas quoth hee I haue it not to ſpende: then ſaid the abbot you might haue told me this when you had it, and not now when it is gone, I haue noo other aunſwer to make vnto you. Then Morton departed with a heauy harte, and came to the houſe wherein hee had ſpente his

ſubſtance, and finding one of his mates there that had wonne his money, and hadde ben a procurer of him to ſpende, when he ſaw him, his hart was fraight with care: remembringe the ſtate hee was in, and the ſtate of the time preſent dyd with his ſworde run hym throwe, and ſo ſlewe him, and then he ſat down and wept bitterly, and for ſorrow ſlewe him ſelfe. Lo ſee his miſerable ende, this hiſtorie I found written in an olde booke in Weſtminſter abbey, whiche booke was written by a Monke of the ſame abbey: I think that this ſtory ſemes to be trewe, for what care wyl ſooner perce a mannes harte, then when once hee hathe obteyned the wealthe of the worlde, and afterwarde fall to myſerie, as the Sacred ſcriptures dotheLuke. 15. teache vs there of the prodigall chylde, whiche ſpente his porcion in riotouſeneſſe, and was neuer careful for to kepe and ſaue the ſame, to the entent that he might, obteine the pleaſure of it an other daye, but riotouſly waſted it, what was his end? the Scriptures do oſtend, he was faine to eate amonge ſwine.
            
               O miſerable ſtate: yet in the ende he repented, and came home to his father againe, who receyued him very louingely, and did more reioyce in hym, then hee dyd in his ſonne, whiche dydde not in ſuche cauſe offende. Thus you maye ſee always that prodigalitie doth conſume wealth, good name, and fame, it abateth honour, it diſgraceth a mans credite, it cauſeth hate of friendes, and reape the loſſe of fauour, yea, and moreGoddes diſpleaſure is worſt of al then this, it draweth the diſpleaſure of God towardes vs, and maketh manye thinges deere whiche would be plenty, it cauſeth men to ſwarue from God, it reapeth to them perpetuall dampnation, for the proude harted man mindeth nothynge, but his pryde: the couetouſe man mindeth nothinge but his wealth. I compare Pride and Couetouſneſſe together, becauſe of al vices that is, and are vſed, none doo more reſemble one an other, then theſe two. For hee that is proude, is alwaies couetous and gredie for to obteyne wealth, to maintayn it, the couetous man is proude in his harte, though he doo not ſhewe it,

exteriorly, or outwardely, but becauſe that I haue treated of Pryde and Prodigalitie hytherto, I wyll leaue of to ſpeake of other vices, but towche them a little as occaſion ſerueth me, but if I had a thouſand tongues to ſpeake withall, and a voyce as lowde as braſſe, I coulde not vtter the vices which oughte to be ſpoken of, to the reproche of ſuche as vſe theim at this daye: but forthe I wyll procede as I haue begonne, towchinge the fall of Prodigalitie.
            I founde certayne verces wrytten by Lampridius in latten, I haue engliſhed them, ſomwhat effectually for my purpoſe: thoughe I haue not placed theim in order as they were in latten.
            
               ¶ LAMPRIDIVS.
               When youth begins to run the wanton race, which vayne deſire prouoketh to enſew:
               Then vice to reſt in him will finde a place, and cauſe him ſtray to be of vertuous crew,
               Pride firſt prouokes him ſo for to enſew▪ Then other vices followes faſt by heapes apace
               And ſo doth mā procure to run his wicked race.
            
            
               Likewiſe the ſame Lampridius, doth ſhewe what dammage enſueth to thoſe that are prodigall, and more ouer hee there dothe wryte, of what diſpoſition or nature he is of, that is geuen to prodigalitie: but in the ende hee concludes that Pride and Prodigalitie, is the deſtruction of all thoſe that vſeth it.
            In deede I muſt and wyll commend clenlines and comlines of aparell, vſed with a mediocritie, for it is to be abhorred to haue too ſumptuous apparell, to flaunte it in brauerye, and not hable to mainteine it, neyther oughte it to bee too ſimple and poore: but in a means modeſtie, whiche is beſt conuenient for profite and honeſtie. It is not meete to ſee a beggar weare a riche robe: nor it is not decent for a maieſtrate to weare a patched gowne: but I woulde wiſhe, that euerye man accordinge to his callinge, woulde vſe the garmentes moſt meteſt for him: In deede comely garments importeth the maieſtie of a mā, and ſumptuous garmentes not meete for his eſtate, diſgraceth his audacitie.

For what neede a rynge of golde in a ſwines ſnowte, ſure it is not comelye nor decent, but contrary vnto wiſdom?
            
               Homer writeth of Vliſſes, that whenVliſſes in Homer is created at large. his ſhippes, & almoſt al his men, were after longe toſſinge on the ſeas, neare hande periſhed, he was driuen on land where Alcinous raigned as kinge, among the nations of Pheacas, and this Alcinous harbored Vliſſes and his men and gaue him good enterteinement, for he was very bare without apparel, and Nauſicaa daughter to Alcinous ſente a mantle to Vliſſes, whiche when that he had it on, hee repreſented a wonderfull Audacitie and countenaunce of Maieſtie, whereby that Alcinous, ſayde: I woulde that Vliſſes woulde take my daughter Nauſicaa to wife. And in dede apparell mete for his ſtate, which weareth it, it is a perfite and pure thing to ſet forth him ſelfe: but if he weare garmentes and attire not mete for his habilitie, it imbaceth his grace & geſture, therefore I ſaye, let hym alwaies that thinketh to liue in the lawe of God, and

in the feare of him, not to deſire other apparell, then with a mediocritie, whiche is decente for him, for in exceſſe of aparell enſueth muche inconuenience, as I haue written before in this booke: but nowe to conclude, I doo paſſe ouer many worthy hiſtories, which hath ben toſt in the braynes of ſondry authours, the whiche were excellente good, to be treated of, but I haue ben ſomwhat tediouſe in this my ſimple woorke, and therfore I thinke it mete now to make an ende, therefore theſe thinges which I haue reherſed, towchinge the fall of Prodigalitie, ought of all eſtates to be had in memorie, and perfitelye pondered, and be vigilant that they fall not to the lyke vice, for the enormitie of it, I haue already reſited. Nowe all ye readers and hearers, conſider with your ſelues that Prodigalitie is abhorred of God and man, and that wee ought not to vſe it, therefore of you let it be reiected and trode vnder your feete. And all you parentes which deſire to haue your children lyue in the feare of God, kepe

them ſo in youth, that in age they may obeye you, and ſoo ſhall you gayne the fauoure of God and man, and be heires of the kingedome of Heauen, where the Lorde Ieſus dothe raigne in his celeſtiall glorie, to whom be all honour and glorie, for euer and euer. Amen.
            FINIS.
            
               I. Carr.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
               Imprinted at London, in Flet
               ſtreete, by William How: for Henry Kirckham, at the ſigne of the blacke Boy, at the litle North doore of Poules. 1573.
            
         
      
   