
      
         
            
            
               
THE FOVNTAINE OF ANCIENT FICTION.
            Wherein is liuely depictured the Images and Statues of the gods of the Ancients, with their proper and perticular expoſitions.
            Done out of Italian into Engliſh, by Richard Linche Gent.
            Tempo è figliuola di verità.
            
               IL VOSTRO MALIGNARE NON GIOVA NVLLA.
            
            LONDON, Printed by Adam Iſlip.
            1599.
         
         
            
            
            
               To the right vertuous and well-diſpoſed Gentleman, M. Peter Dauiſon Eſquire, Richard Linche wiſheth all affluence of worldly proſperities, and the fruition of all celeſtiall graces hereafter.
            
               WOrſhipful Sir, the firſt thing that I here wil requeſt at your hands, ſhall be pardon, in preſenting vnto your view a ſubiect ſo much diſagreeing with your owne diſpoſition. The matter it ſelfe I graunt can challenge no ſuch graue Mecenas, being indeed vvholly fabulous: but the willingneſſe of my ſoule, to ſhew ſome ſigne of gratefulneſſe for curteſies receiued, hath inforced me to aduenture ſo far vpon your acceptance, as to offer this ſtrange-borne child of idleneſſe wholly vnto your fauourable patronage. And herein I imitate the faſhions and vſances of the ancient Perſians, vvho alwaies vvhen they ſaw their king, vvould offer vp ſomething or other that they had about them vnto him, as a token and teſtimonie of their loue, dutie, and reuerence and one day the king being abroad,

one of his ſubiects vpon the ſuddain met him, vvho hauing nothing in his hands to giue him, ran in all haſt to the vvaters ſide, and brought him both his hands full of vvater, which the king graciouſly accepted, & gaue him thanks as for a greater preſent. This peece of work (Sir, may be compared to thoſe hands ful of water) being indeed of little vvorth and value, and alſo very haſtily performed, vvhich as it is, I offer in the fulneſſe of loue, and do deſire a fauorable cenſure for the ſame: for I knovv, that as a handfull of vvater is an vnmeet preſent for a king, ſo this matter ſo ſtuft and compacted of poeticall and vaine fiction, is not altogether beſeeming the countenance ofſo graue and ſo vvorthy a perſonage. But my error herein proceedeth vvholly of my vvillingnes to do ſomething that might merit your forepaſſed fauors, and to diſcouer a good meaning of gratefulnes, though the meanes it ſelfe perhaps proue not grateful vnto you. Howſoeuer it is, I conſecrate it vvholly vnto your ſelfe, and craue patience if any haſtbred imperfection therin offend your better iudgement. Thus recommending you vnto the ſafegard of the diuine Maieſty, I vviſh you all fortunes ſutable to your vertues.
            
               Yours in all loiall fidelitie moſt aſsured.
Richard Linche.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               HE that beleeueth, that in his writings he pleaſeth all mens humors, too much crediteth his owne opinion, and flattereth his owne iudgement: for men indeed that haue attained to the true maturitie of knowledge, & arts perfection, it is good to agree with, as for lame, and yet ſnarling cenſurers, it is matterleſſe to ſatisfie: for ſo much as the prodigality of ſuch their lauiſh opinions, hath his firſt conception of old father Ignorance, and is brought vp and educated by an infectious nurſe, called Selfeglorie. This matter now handled, was vndertaken ſuddainly, and diſpatched haſtily, for which he craueth milder constructions, & in very deed had it not by an extraordinary accident happened into the hands of a stranger, it had not now (poore father forſaken child) endured the inſupportable tyranie of lawleſse cenſure. But when I found that it was ſo far gone, and as it were irreuocably eſcaped from out my hands, and euen ready to be thruſt out naked & clothleſſe into the world, I choſe rather to father it, and re-entertaine ſuch my wandring traueller, and beſtow ſome few lines in his behalfe vnto the reader, than that ſo bare a ſubiect ſhould paſse in his imperfections vnepiſtled, or not

befriended with the authors name in ſuch his priuateneſse and obſcuritie. Such as it is therefore, either culpable in words too much affected, or in diſproportion being not methodically compoſed, or in ſhallowneſse in the not proper vnderſtanding of the firſt authors meaning, it muſt now paſſe, as for me it is too late to recall it, and too needleſſe to repent it, for howſoeuer it is, it once neuer imagined to haue been now ſubiest to the error-ſearching ſight of a generall eye, being only pend & tranſlated for mine owne exerciſes and priuate recreations. But herein I am ſomething too tedious, for as it is an abſurd part in an architector to frame a long & vaſt entry for a little houſe and of ſmall receit, ſo for me to vſe many words in this place, whoſe ſubſtance (you will ſay) challengeth no worthines, they ſhould be friuolouſly beſtowed, and time purpoſe-leſſe entertained. For the indifferent Readers I cannot but promiſe equal allowance: for any venom-lipt roughcenſuring Satires, I keepe ſorrow for their woodborne inciuility and ruſtike imperfections, and do arme my ſelfe with ſteele-mettald patience to abide the ſhocke of their iniurious toung-oppreſsions. And ſo in haſt I leaue you.
            
               Rich. Linche.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Images, Statues, and Pictures of the gods of the auncients, vvith their ſeuerall expoſitions.
            
            
               THere haue liued verie few people, or rather none at all, ſince the firſt proportionleſſe and indigeſted heape of all things (whatſoeuer) was reduced by diuine prouidence into this admirable forme: which haue not among themſelues embraced a certaine and peculiar ſort of religious adoration. For the ſoule of man euen vpon her firſt entrance into this earth-framed and corrupted receptable of her celeſtiall eſſence, doth ſeeme to bring then with her a certaine kind of naturall religion, the diuinitie whereof procureth the diſcrepance betwixt men and beaſts, which as they want the intellectuall ſence and feeling of any ſuch motion, do therfore neither worſhip or reuerence any deitie: Onely man, whoſe bodie is framed erect, with his eies ſtill

looking on that perſpicuous and thought-amazing compoſition of the heauens, is forcibly conſtrained to beleeue, that there hath been ſome one of eternall and infinit command, that hath had that vnſpeakable wiſdome, and inexcogitable care, as firſt to compoſe, then to gouerne and diſpoſe this ſo rare and miraculous wonderment: and him they entearme by the name of GOD; as it were the giuer of al good things, who by his infiniteneſſe is eternal; incomprehenſible, and inuiſible. But ſuch their beleefe extended not ſo farre, nor was it ſo impreſſed in all mens hearts, as that euery one therefore attained to this ſtaineleſſe and truth-yeelding opinion. For at the firſt, the corruptible ſottiſhneſſe, and faith wanting weakneſſe of man was ſuch, as illuſtrating the heauens and their reuolutions, the earth and her encreaſe, the ſea with her ſtrange courſes, onely with the externall eies of their faces, not admitting the ſame to anie contemplation or ſoule obſeruance, the vulgars, and ſuch as blindfolded went groping vp and down in the dark for knowledge, were entangled in ſuch an intricate garden and Labyrinth of error, that they were firmely perſuaded that there was a god in this Statue, another in that picture of earth, ſtone, and other mettals, and oftentimes in painted Images: from whence it proceeded, that there were then in ſuch friuolous and ſuperſtitious reuerence, ſo innumerable multitudes of gods among the auncients. For not onely the ſeuerall humours of diuerſe Nations, but euerie particular Cittie, cauſed their Image that they would worſhip, ſo to be framed, according as they were then to craue and

requeſt ſome eſpeciall and extraordinarie boone of their wooden deities, or hauing alreadie obtained it, entended thereby to manifeſt their thankſgiuing and gratefulneſſe. And being (as it were) rockt aſleep with the pleaſing conceit of this their ſuperſtition, it grew ſo farre vpon them, that in the end they worſhipped and deuoutly adored men like vnto themſelues, ſuch as were knowne to haue inuented and found out ſome ſpeciall good and adiuvament for their eaſie and quiet liuing, or to haue (as it were) hewen out and forced from their deepe-ſearching capacities ſome ſtrange and vncouth art, ſcience, or profeſſion. And to theſe men were erected and dedicated excellent grauen ſtatues, in whoſe curious architecturie all thoſe good things and deeds which they deuiſed or atcheeued here among men, were liuely and exactly ſet forth and interſected. And although this kind of Idolatrous veneration, firmly poſſeſt the thoughts of men generally, yet vniuerſally it extended not. For there then liued, who carried an irremoueable beleefe of the ſacred deitie of one God onely, which was euerduring and inuiſible, and therefore ſhaped not to themſelues any further Image or repreſentation (which who ſo ſeekes to entertaine, walketh in the erroneous paths of ſoule-endangering ignorance.) The Iewes (which among the ancients attained nigheſt vnto the ſure and infallible truth) worſhipped one God onely, and him they adored not in counterfeit and ſtone-built Statues, diſcerned onely with the eies of the body, but with the cleere-ſhining light of the mind, and were ſtill rapt with premeditating and

contemplatiue thoughts of his ymeuſe and incomprehenſible diuinitie. And as Cornelius Tacitus affirmeth, Cornelius Tacitus. they accounted them wicked and impious, who of themſelues would make ſuch counterſhape or repreſentation of God, compoſing in it likeneſſe and ſimilitude to the proportion of a humane and terrene bodie: and therefore neither in their Cities, nor in their Temples admitted they any ſuch vaine & ſenceleſſe adoration. Lycurgus (who in perfection and maturitie Licurgus. of true knowledge, did no way equalize the Iewes) would not by any meanes that there ſhould be contriued any frame or Idea of their gods, becauſe (ſayth hee) they cannot bee likened neither to man or anie other liuing creature, and being likewiſe inuiſible, who can depicture that which his eyes neuer faw. Lactantius writeth, That the Aegiptians worſhipped Lactantius. with all deuotion the foure elements, and yet not making any Image or picture of them. The Perſians, the Scythians, and thoſe of Libia, neuer had Statues, Altars, or Temples, but onely made their reſort in ſeuerall conuenticles to conſecrated woods & groues, and to them onely they ſubmitted themſelues in reuerence, and powred out ther deuotion. And ſo likewiſe did thoſe of Maxilia in Gallia Narbonenſe, worſhipping in all humilitie certaine woods and groues, which they purpoſely conſecrated for that intendement: and directed vp all their deuout praiers and obteſtations to leaueleſſe trunkes and ſtocks of trees, wherevpon Lucan writeth thus of them:
            
               They worſhipt ſtockes, and armeleſſe trunckes of trees,
               
                  
Which neither ſhape or due proportion haue,
               And to theſe poſts all reuerence they gaue.
            
            
               Cornelius Tacitus (writing of Germany) ſayth, That the Germanes not onely denied all reuerence to any pictures of their gods, but would not by any meanes ſuffer any Temples to be built or dedicated vnto thē: ſaying, that it was very incongruent and inconuenient to ſhut vp their deities within the wals of ſo ſmall a circuite, and that it was not a thing meet or agreeable for their infinite greatneſſe to bee ſhaped out to the ſmall forme and proportion of a humane bodie. As the Grecians did after that, and the Romanes, and before them the Aegyptians, who all framed their Images of their Gods to the due likeneſſe and proportion of a mans bodie. But yet they did not ſo farre ouerſhoot themſelues, as to thinke that their celeſtiall gods had either heads, hands, or feet; but to ſhew (as Varro ſayth) That the ſoule of man, which is impriſoned Varro. here in the fleſhly dungeon of the bodie, reſembles the diuine ſoules, which inhabite in the celeſtiall dwellings of the heauens: and for that the mind or ſoule cannot externally bee ſeene or proportioned, they did prefigure it, and make it apparent by the ſhape of a humane bodie. Porphirius ſayth, as Euſebius 
               Porphirius. reporteth, That the Images of their gods were made to the likeneſſe of men, becauſe God (ſaith he) is al ſpirit and reaſon, whereof men, and no other creatures doe participate. Lactantius giueth another reaſon of Lactantius. theſe Statues, ſaying, that they were firſt made for the conſeruation of the remembrance of deceaſed kings

and gouernours, for the perpetuall eterniſement of their famous and memorable atcheeuements: wherevpon Euſebius writing of the Eccleſiaſticall hiſtorie, Euſebius. likewiſe writeth, That it was a generall cuſtome among the Gentiles to honour the greateſt perſonages, and men of beſt demerit, by repreſenting their Ideas by Statues or Pictures, and ſo by that meanes keeping them as it were aliue by the memorious trophies of their neuer-dying worthineſſe; wherby their ſucceeding poſteritie might euidently perceiue what reſpectiue regard was had and cannonized of thoſe who had in their life time adioined to their valerous approuements, ciuile and vertuous conuerſation: you ſhall read in Plinie, that in Rhodes were found at one Plinie. time more than three thouſand Statues, and not many leſſe in Athens, or in Delphos, and ſo alſo in manie other places of Greece. In which fooliſh ſuperſtition, Rome alſo (though not ſo lately) was vnto any of thoſe nothing inferior, who had indeed gathered together ſo many pictures and ſuppoſed gods, that it was ſaid, that in Rome there were another ſort of people made of ſtone, for what pictures ſoeuer they could get, either of painters or ingrauers, they omitted no meanes to compaſſe, and with thoſe would they beautifie their houſes, not only in the Citie, but euen in their country or farme-houſes: which indeed was iudged to bee too effeminat & ſoft for the ſtrict and ſeuere life of the Romanes. Lucullus (as Varro 
               Lucullus. writeth) had ſuch delight in ſuch Images, that almoſt euery day infinite numbers of people reſorted to his farmes in the country to ſee his ſtrange pictures and

curious engraued Statues. And this note the ancients obſerued, that thoſe their Images were made with a deuiſe, as when they pleaſed themſelues, they might take off their heads, and ſet them vpon others. Whervpon Suetonius ſpeaking of the glorious and inſolent Suetonius. humor of Caligula, ſayth, That he perceiuing himſelfe to haue ſurpaſſed all other Princes and Gouernours his predeceſſours in greatneſſe and powerfull command, began to ſooth himſelfe vp ſo farre in that inſolencie and ſuperarrogation, that hee commanded all theſe heads of their greateſt Gods, which either for deuotion or rare workemanſhip, were moſt adored, as that of Iupiter Olympius and others, ſhould be taken away, and vpon themſhould bee placed the true portraiture of his owne, moſt exquiſitely hewed and engraued. And Lambridius likewiſe ſayth, That Lambridius the Emperour Commodus tooke away the head from that famous and art-exceeding Image of Nero, which was ſo cutiouſly with ſuch ingenious architecturie depictured, and vpon that likewiſe commanded his owne to be erected. Not long after this, the Statuaries of Princes were ſo regarded & held in ſuch reuerent embracements, as whatſoeuer (occaſioned by what meanes you will) had fled to theſe priuelegious places, had ben freed from any purſuing danger whatſoeuer, and not to be inforced or brought away during his ſtay in that ſo regarded ſanctuarie. Onely wee read of Marcus Antonius (who as Suetonius affirmeth) flying Suetonius. to the Statue of Iulius Caeſar, for his better ſafegard, was by Auguſtus cauſed violently to bee haled from thence, and afterwards ſtopping his eares to all

praiers and entreaties, commanded him to bee ſlaine. The Statues of Princes were oftentimes portraied out naked, oftentimes alſo clothed, and moſt commonly gloriouſly depainted with gold: as wee read with Titus Liuius, who ſaith, That Acylius Glabrio was the firſt in Italie that made any golden Statuarie, Titus Liuius. and after that it was generally accuſtomed through all the Country. Alexander Afrodiſeus writeth, That in Alexander Afrodiſeus. thoſe daies the Images of their gods, and of their princes were made as it might ſeeme naked, & a greater honor therby was attributed vnto thē, as of thoſe whoſe clemencie and iuſtice lay open and manifeſt vnto all men: ſignifying that Princes and Magiſtrates ought to be naked as it were, and immaculate from all corruptible vice, carrying in themſelue a chriſtalline and clear conſcience, not cloked or couered with any inward miſcheef working or deceitful thoughts. Vpon anie pompeous ſolemnitie of any exerciſes and ſports, not onely the Images of their gods were carried by ſeuerall turnes on mens ſhoulders, but alſo the Statues of Emperours, valerous Captaines, and farre famed commanders, were likewiſe preſented on thoſe feaſtiuals. But Alarius, in that hee was ignoble by birth, and of meane diſcent (as Saluſt ſayth) had not Saluſt. then to carrie any picture of his owne, nor of his anceſtors, but in ſteed of thoſe, hee there manifeſted the high and condigne rewards he had receiued for theſe ſo honourable and renowned priſes which hee won, and triumphantly carried away in many gallant and victorious expeditions. Aſſuredly, the Images and Statuaries of the gods in thoſe daies were almoſt

innumerable, and framed into ſo many ſeueral and infinit faſhions, as to endeauour to ſet them all downe, were as difficult, as blindfolded to worke my ſelfe out ofſome intricate and ſtrange-framed Labyrinth. Onely thoſe whom approued and autentike Authors will warrantiſe currant and paſſible, we will now remember: and yet if all other Nations had obſerued that courſe which the Aegyptians vſed, happily we might haue touched the moſt part of them. For according to the writings of Plato, in Aegypt were reſerued Plato. among all their moſt reuerend and ſacred reliques, thoſe engrauen or painted Images which were then alreadie framed and left vnto them from their aunceſtors, neuer labouring or ſtudying to inuent more, as almoſt all other Nations at that time buſied themſelues. In Greece for the moſt part their gods were faſhioned, according as the ſeuerall humour of the people then affected, euery one enucleating thereby theirſelfe-pleaſing conceits, and inward delectations: ſo that becauſe the Lacedemonians were generally martiall people, and verie oftentimes in wars imployments, their gods were alwaies depictured in cōplete armour. And the Phenicians (in that they were giuen to Merchandiſes, and other worldlie gaine-procuring trauels, accounting him onely bleſt that poſſeſſed greateſt treaſure and abundance of wealth) cauſed their gods to bee hewen out with a great ſwolne bag or purſe in each of their hands. And ſo likewiſe in diuerſe other diſcrepant faſhions, were their Statues in thoſe ages framed, according as they then beleeued to be in them ſeuerall natures, powers, & effects:

by reaſon whereof, (as Euſebius rehearſing the words of Porphirius ſaith) The ancients to make the diuerſitie Porphirius. of their gods appeare, depictured ſome male, and ſome female, others virgines, and others married, and ſo accordingly habited them in their agreeable veſtments. The mettals and ſubſtance of which Statues, Euſebius (taking it from Porphirius) thus ſayth: That Porphirius. God being abſolutely cleere, pure-ſhining, and corruſcant, whoſe eies-dazelling luſtre man cannot comprehend with terrene ſence, they alwaies framed his picture of the moſt fine and precious tranſparent chriſtall, and of the moſt pure and vnblemiſhed marble that they could by any meanes and by all ſtrict inueſtigation acquire and compaſſe: ſometimes alſo they would frame his Statue of the moſt glorious gold, to ſhew the eternall and diuine fire that burneth continually where hee remaineth, and that his nature is free from all corrupted ruſtineſſe of our humane affections. Others that would haue his Statue of black ſtone, entend thereby to note his inuiſibilitie. It is written by Plutarch, That the making of theſekind of Statues, Images, and Pictures, hath been very ancient, Plutarch. but (ſayth hee) the fathers in thoſe daies, did make them for the moſt part of wood, becauſe it ſeemed to them, that the hard and art-reſiſting mettall of ſtone was too ſtubborn and harſh a ſtuffe for them to make their gods of, and that either gold or ſiluer were too baſe, as being excrements of an vnfertile and fruitleſſe ſoile, becauſe whereas the mines of thoſe mettals are found, are ſildome ſeene anie plant or root to grow: and ſuch ground as brought not forth flower,

hearbes, and other fruits, they held as accurſed and vnfortunate. Theſe men indeed which liued in thoſe daies, were not ſo bewitched with the enchantments of the ſweet-ſeeming, though ſoure-prouing delights of this world, nor regarded they the vſe of either ſiluer or gold in ſuch ineſtimable priſe, but ſtudied onely, and were laborious to ſearch out ſuch life-preſeruing commodities, as they might thereby bee fed and nouriſhed. Plato in like manner would haue ſuch Statues Plato. altogether of wood, For (ſaith he) the earth being a place conſecrated vnto the gods, there ought not to bee compoſed thereof any Image or Picture, ſo likewiſe neither of gold or ſiluer, for that among the poſſeſſours of thoſe mettals, there is hatched and brought forth deteſtable contentious, and malicious enuies. And Lactantius ſaynth, That ſuch glorious Lactantius. and gold-emboſſed Statues of their gods, did onelie ſhew the auaricious minds of men, who vnder the ſhadow of religion and deuotion, would bee continually poſſeſſed with infinit ſtore of riches, both of gold and ſiluer, and other very precious ſtones and iewels, whereof they made them ſuch ſumptuous Images, which indeed many of thē regarded & endeared, more for the ineſtimable coſt and charges beſtowed vpon them, than for anie reuerence of thoſe gods by which they were repreſented. But the opinion of Plato, as I haue ſaid, was to haue them altogether made of wood: For Yron (ſayth hee) and other ſuch hard mettals are vſed and imployed in many fatall and horrible bloudie maſſacres, and are the occaſions of huge and infinite ſlaughters. Tibullus ſpeaking of their domeſticall Tibullus.
               
gods, whom they called Lares, thus ſayth of them: Maruell not you fooliſh men to ſee theſe our gods made of ſtockes of drie trees, for ſuch (ſayeth hee) in the proſperous daies of our contentfull fathers, when religion, faith, and Iuſtice were ſincerely and louingly emboſom'd, were reuerenced with truer zeale of vnfained veneration, than are now adaies theſe gorgeous and gold-compoſed Statues. It is written by Plinie, That Images and Pictures be of great antiquitie Plinie. in Italie, yet they were not made of any other mettals but wood: and ſome few of ſtone, ſince Aſia was vaſſallized and ſubiugated to the Romanes. And for that vnto all ſuch Statues and Images of their gods, was annexed and adioyned the picture of Eternitie, I thinke it not amiſſe in this place in ſome ſort to touch it. Although Boccace writing of the Progenie of the gods, ſayth, That the auncients haue deriued it from Boccace. 
               Demogorgon, as the principall and firſt of them all, and who inhabited in the middle center of the earth, encircled round about, & circumueſted with a dark and obfuſcate cloud, breathing from his mouth a certaine liquid humiditie: but herein I will proceed no further, hauing no further warrant for ſuch depicturance: onely I will now reuert my penne to the Statue of Eternitie, which what it is, the name doth cleerely diſcouer, containing in it ſelfe all worlds and ages, and not limitted or meaſured by any ſpace of time: And therefore Triſmegiſtus, Plato, and the Pythagorickes, called Time the Image of Eternitie: in Triſmegiſt. that it is reuolued in it ſelfe, and admits no date. Wherevpon for the more ample and copious manifeſting

thereof, we will heare the opinion of Claudius 
               Claudius. in his Stiliconyan comends, who there makes a deſcription by a Serpent, that compaſſeth round with her bodie the denne or caue wherein ſhe lyeth, in ſuch ſort, that making as it were a circle, ſhe holdeth in her mouth the end of her taile: by which is ſignified the effect of time, which in it ſelfe alwaies goeth round: which deſcription is taken from the Aegyptians, who before that the vſe of letters and of writing was inuented, ſignified the circumference of a yeare by a Serpent, with her taile betweene her teeth: For that in times there is the like coherence and depencie, for the end of one yeare or time paſſed, is the beginning of the other ſucceeding. And I remember the picture of Eternitie to be by ſome thus defigured: A woman clothed in rich robes downe to her feet, holding in her right hand a round ball, and vpon her head is inſtrophiated a thinne vaile, which ſpreads and caſts it ſelfe downe ſo farre, as both her ſhoulders are therewith wholly circumcinct and couered. The Image weighed in the heedfull ballance of aduiſe, is not much vnlike that reported by Claudianus, which wee will endeauour (though not in his right colours) thus to compoſe.
            
               Downe in a vale (cloſe hid from Phebus eie,
               Held in the arms of two heauen-threatning mountains,
               From out whoſe boſome furiouſly their flie,
               With vnreſiſted force, two ſwiftwing'd fountaines)
               There dwels an aged Caue: that nere will die,
               Though death ſits pictur'd in her horrid countenance,
               
                  
She ſends foorth Times, and cals them backe againe,
               For Times and Ages aye with her remaine.
            
            
               Vpon her lap a greene-ſcal'd Serpent lies,
               Whoſe hugeneſſe fils her wide rotunditye,
               Darting forth fierie ſparckles from her eyes,
               And what ſhe finds, deuoures moſt hungrilie,
               Her wrinckled taile faſt twixt her teeth ſhe ties,
               Euen which ſhe ſeemes to gnaw moſt greedilie,
               All in a circle thus ſhe ſits involved,
               Whoſe firme tenacitie is ne're diſſolved.
            
            
               And at the gate of this ſo ſtrange-fram'd denne,
               In Matrons habit, and in graue attire,
               Stands gracious Nature noting with her pen,
               Whom ſhe lets forth, and whom againe retire:
               And round about the caue the ſoules of men
               Flie here and there, as ſeeming to aſpire,
               And longing to recouer heauen; but theſe
               With Nature muſt remaine till death ſhall pleaſe.
            
            
               In furtheſt nooke and corner of the cell,
               Sits an old man, whoſe colour'd haire
               Is far more white then any toung can tell,
               And whoſe cleere louely face exceeds all faire,
               Writing downe lawes for thoſe that here do dwell,
               That ignorance may neuer cauſe deſpaire,
               And as he ſits, each ſtar he doth diuide,
               And euery Plannet in his courſe doth guide.
            
            
               Preſcribing with immutable decree,
               
                  
To euery one their courſes as they lie,
               By whom all liuing things (what ere they be)
               That haue or life, or death, doo liue and die,
               Then ſtreight he turnes him round about to ſee
               How Mars attends his courſe full buſilie,
               Who though through doubtfull paths he long doth ſtray,
               Yet at the length all tends but to one way.
            
            
               How Iupiter the worlds ne're-failing friend,
               Directs his circuit through the azur'd skie,
               How Luna at her brothers iournies end,
               Rides in her purple coach moſt gloriouſlie,
               How ſoure-fac'd Saturne his ſlow ſteps doth tend,
               And how faire Venus through the aire doth flie,
               And next to her ſucceeds heauens meſsenger,
               Poſting amaine as Phebus harbenger.
            
            
               Who when (He) comes in his al glorious ſhine,
               Great Nature meets him in moſt reuerent wiſe,
               To whom the aged man doth make a ſigne
               In curteſie, as though he meant to riſe,
               When straight the gates of this ſame caue diuine,
               Open themſelues with wondrous ſubtleties,
               Within whoſe adamantine cell is ſeene
               What from beginning of the world hath been.
            
            
               Here, euerie age of ſundry mettall's framed,
               Apactly ſeated in his due degree,
               And of thoſe mettals ſo they ſtill are named,
               Whether of wood, braſse, yron, or ſteele they be
               Here ſhall you ſee, the ſiluer age ſo famed,
               
                  
Staining the former in cleere puritie,
               But when you ſee (that) of reſplendent gold,
               The other, but baſe mettals you will hold.
            
            The deſcription of this caue or denne (according Boccace. to the opinion of Boccace) importeth thus much: That Eternitie hath an abſolute and ſole commaund ouer all times, and therefore ſhe liues farre hence remoted in ſome vnknowne vale: where humane ſteps neuer approached, but is euen vnfound out of the celeſtiall inhabitants, that is, thoſe happie ſoules which ſtand before the preſence of the greateſt, who onelie knoweth all things: ſhee ſendeth forth times, and recals them backe againe, for that from her, all ages haue had their beginning, inſtantly poſſeſſe their being, and with her for euer ſhall continue: ſhe ſits incircled and inuolued in her ſelfe, as wee haue alreadie diſcouered in the former deſcription by the forme of a Serpent, who continually with her taile in her mouth, turneth her ſelfe round with as great ſlowneſſe or leiſure as is poſſible, ſhewing thereby that Time with a creeping and vnſeene pace, ſteales by little and little cleane from vs. At the entrance of the caue (where Nature ſits) the ſoules of men ſeeme to flutter and houer ouer her head: which importeth the infinite numbers of men that are euerie day created, bringing then with them their ſoules, and for that they appeare to flie directly ouer the boſome of Eternitie, it meaneth, that whoſoeuer attaines vnto (that) excellencie of perfection, muſt firſt enter his aſpiring ſteps by the means of Nature, and for that cauſe ſhe is placed at the dore or

portall. The aged man, which there ſits deuiding and parting the ſtarres, may be called God, not that hee is old, for time ouer him loſeth her vertue, and worketh no effect; who of himſelfe is perpetuall and euer-liuing: but that the auncients heretofore haue pleaſed ſo defigure him, and becauſe he effecteth all things by infinite wiſdome, ruling and commanding all creatures whatſoeuer, by his vnſpeakeable power, they therefore attribute vnto him old age, wherein is commonly found more wiſdome, grauitie, and experience than in youth. Thus farre Boccace reporteth, not touching any thing at all the explication of the ages and worlds, which followed in that his deſcription, in that indeed they were not ſo enigmaticall, but euery one might eaſily admit the conceiuing knowledge of ſo familiar intendements. Therefore now wee will proceed, beginning with the Image or Statue of Saturnus, according as it hath beene by the Auncients heretofore compoſed.
            
               Saturne.
               SAturne being expulſed heauen by Iupiter (as hiſtories record) and throwne downe from thence into this middle region: after many daies ſailing vpon the ſea, at the length hee ariued in Italie, where hee liued manie yeares with Ianus, then king of that part of the Countrey where Rome afterwards was built: but poorely and meanely he liued, as indeed all the people in thoſe times did, as hauing vnfound out the vſe of tilling and planting, whereby corne and other

fruits of the earth might ſuppeditate their wants of neceſſarie food and victuall. The vſe of which things they now learned from Saturne, who painfully inſtructed them in the perfect knowledge of the nature of each ſoile, and how, and by what induſtrious meanes of art any ground (fruitleſſe of it ſelf by nature) might become fertile and rich. This learned and powerfull skill of Saturne, Ianus infinitely admired, inſomuch, as (manifeſting his gratefulneſſe, for ſo be hoofefull and commodious a good turne receaued) he communicated part of his kingdome for him to liue vpon: affording him many other princely and reſpectiue regards. And further commanded his people, that when he died, they ſhould with all reuerence honour him as a god, a thing eaſily embraced by the ignorant Heathen in thoſe daies, who in that they had receiued ſo vnexpected a benefite from his meanes, willinglie condiſcended to aſcribe and attribute vnto him all godlike reuerence, and deuout adoration, as men indeed vnto whome the ſole and eternall God had not miniſtred the Key of vnderſtanding, that their cloſeſhut hearts liuing in the darke caue of ignorance, might therewith bee opened and vnlocked for the admittance of the true acknowledgment of his ſacred deitie: but they onely worſhipped him for their god, who by his humane knowledge had found out ſome new means either for the earths better increaſe, or other like profit that were moſt auaileable for their labour-leſſe and ſluggiſh liuing. And therefore they willingly adored Saturne as a mightie and puiſſant god, dedicating vnto him manie ſumptuous Statues

and temples. And him in his Statue they framed with a hooke or ſyth in his hand, demonſtrating thereby (as they meant it) the inuention of tilling of the ground, becauſe with that the corne once recouering his maturitie, is cut downe. Other writers there are, that would haue him ſignifie Tyme, as that with his ſythe he ſhould meaſure and proportioniſe the length of Time, and therewith to decurtate and cut away all things contained therein. Thoſe alſo would haue him to be in the ſhape of a very aged man, as one who began from beginning of the world, holding in his hand a child, which by peecemeales, hee ſeemes greedily to deuour, importing the reuenge hee tooke, being baniſhed heauen by his owne children: thoſe which eſcapt the furious gulfe of his maw, were onely foure, Iupiter, Iuno, Pluto, and Neptune, which intend the foure elements, Fire, Aire, earth, and Water, which are not periſhable by the all-cutting ſickle of deuouring time. Martianus Capella depictures him, holding in his right hand a Serpent, with the end of Martianus Capella. her taile in her mouth, ſtill turning round with a heauie and dead ſlow pace, and he hath his temples redemyted with a greene wreath, which ſeemeth ſtill to flouriſh, his haire of his head, and his beard all milke white, looking like one of many yeares, withering and declining, and yet manifeſting that it is in his power to rebecome youthfull, freſh, and blooming. The wreath on his head imports the beginning or ſpring of the yeare, his haire and beard the ſnowie approch of churliſh Winter, the ſlowneſſe of the ſerpents paces the ſluggiſh reuolution of that planet, which as

it is of all the greateſt, ſo it asketh longeſt time for his circular circumference, and in that from this plannet proceed dolorous and diſmall effects, they ſhape him to be old, louring, ſorrowing, hardfauonred and ſluggiſh, his nature being cold, drie, and melancholie. The ſame Martianus ſayth, That the nuptials of Mercurie Martianus and Philologia, when ſhe had ſearched and perviewed each corner of the higher and lower heauens, ſhee found Saturne ſitting with great ſolitude in an extream cold manſion all frozen & couered with yſe and ſnow, wearing on his head a helmet, on which was liuely depictured three heads, the one of a Serpent, the other of a Lyon, and the third of a Boare: which three by many conſtructions may ſignifie the effect of Time, but in that it is by the Authors themſelues, but ſleightly approued, we will wade no further in it. And yet Macrobius toucheth it very neerely, when hee deſcribes Macrobius. him with a Lyons head, a Dogs head, and a Wolfes head: intending by the Lyons head the time preſent, which duly placed betweene that paſt and that to come, preuaileth moſt, and is of greateſt force; or diſcouering thereby the ſtormie troubles of mans life, by the rough, vnpleaſing, and grim aſpect of the Lyon: by that of the Dog, is meant the preſent time, who alwaies fawnes on vs, and by whoſe alluring delights we are drawne vnto vaine and vncertain hopes: The Wolues head ſignifies the time paſt, by his greedie deuouring what ere he finds, leauing no memorie behind of what hee catcheth within his clawes. Aſtarte the daughter of Celum, and wife and ſiſter of Saturne, made for her husband a princely helmet,

which had foure eies, two before, and two behind, which continually ſhut themſelues, & ſlept by turns, ſo that two alwaies were open, and vpon his ſhoulders were likewiſe made foure wings, two of them volant, and two couchant, which ſignified, that although he ſlept, he alwaies waked, and flying, continued fixe and permanent; vnclouding hereby the nature of Time: theſe heads were cut out with exquiſite ſubtletie, and rare politure: Euſebius further ſaith, Euſebius. That the ſame Aſtarte placed alſo vpon the head of Saturne two wings, demonſtrating thereby by one of them the excellencie and perfection of the mind, and by the other he meant mans ſence and vnderſtanding. For ſay the Naturaliſts, the ſoule of man when ſhe entreth into the humane bodie, bringeth with her from the ſpheare of Saturne the force of knowledge and diſcourſe, ſo that the Platonickes vnderſtand by Saturne, the mind, and the inward contemplation of things celeſtiall, and therefore called the time wherein hee liued the golden age, as a time, entertaining quiet, concord, and true content. And Macrobius among the reſt of his deſcriptions ſayth, That his Macrobius. feet are tied together with the threds of woll, agreeing thereby with the Prouerbe of the Latines, ſaying, That the gods doe not any thing in haſt, nor make any forced ſpeed to caſtigate the iniquities of men, but proceed with a ſlow and vnwilling progreſſion, as giuing them time and leiſure of amendment. And thus concerning the Statues of Saturne.
            
            
               
               Ianus.
               IT lieth farre from my intendement in this treatiſe to touch in any ſort the life of the gods of the auncients, or to tell now how Ianus was one of the richeſt kings of Italie, and how hee receiued Saturne then an exile, and participated part of his kingdome vnto him in lewe of thoſe his knowledges diſcouered: for ſo much as my purpoſe onely extendeth to tell of the Images and Statues which in thoſe times of blindneſſe and ſuperſtition were erected and conſecrated vuto their gods. According therefore to Macrobius, Ianus was the firſt that in all Italie cauſed ſacred temples Macrobius. and ſanctuaries of deuotion to bee built, ordaining ſacrifices and ſuch like rites of expiation to bee vſed with all reuerence and zealous ſolemnization. By reaſon whereof hee himſelfe was afterwards among thoſe ignorant Plebeians, held and cannonized as a god. And becauſe I ſay that hee was the firſt inuenter and ſetter vp of ſuch ſacrifices, the auncients would neuer offer vp any of their oblations vnto their gods, vnleſſe they had firſt inuocated the helping aſſiſtance of Ianus. And this reaſon alſo induced them the rather thereunto, for that hee was afterwards ſuppoſed to be the god which continually ſat at the dore or portall of heauen: ſo that the petitions and praiers of men below, could not paſſe or aſcend vnto the hearing of their gods, vnleſſe he had firſt granted and allowed ſuch their acceſſe and admittance. The gates or dores of the heauēs are ſaid to be two, the one placed

at the Eaſt, the other at the Weſt; through the firſt the ſun entreth, when he commeth to illuminat with his brightneſſe the worlds obſcutitie; and through the other hee goeth out when hee deſcendeth to the Antipodes. Thoſe therefore that by the ſunne vnderſtand Ianus (as Macrobius and others) attribute vnto him the charge or keeping of thoſe gates, in that he is alwaies freely licenſed to enter in and go out through them at his pleaſure, and for this cauſe they ſhape him forth with two faces, for that the ſun alwaies looketh round about him, both before and behind in ech part and corner of the world: and in one of his hands they put a long rod or wand, and in the other a key; ſhewing by the one the rule and gouernement hee commandeth ouer all the world: and by the other hee openeth and vnlocketh it as it were from the cloſe priſon of vapourous cloudineſſe, when hee diſcouers the orientall reſplendencie of his radiance, and how he ſhutteth it vp againe when he leaueth it to the gloomy gouernment of the night. Neither is this to be vnderſtood by the day and the night only, but by all the yeare alſo, as when the ſun vnloſeth the ſpring from the ſtubborne embracements of the Winter, enamelling the pleaſant verdure of the earth with ſo many delicate and diuers-coloured flowers, where is found all choice of pleaſing pretineſſe in that gorgeous faire of bounteous Nature: which at his due time ended, the ſun locketh vp ſuch the ſumptuouſnes therof, ſuffering the earth to lie naked to the mercileſſe tiranny ofyce and ſnow, whoſe all-periſhing coldneſſe benums her vſeleſſe and ſtiffewaxing

ioints, which lately ſo empreſſe-like floriſhed, and was ſo gloriouſly inueſted. The 2 faces of Ianus ſignifie alſo Time, the one of thē being withered & hoary, intendeth the time paſt, the other youthful & beardles, meaneth the times after cōming and ſucceeding. Plinie 
                  Plinie. writeth, That Numa king of the Romanes cauſed the Statue of Ianus to be hewen out in ſuch ſort, that the fingers of his hands appeared to be three hundred threeſcore and fiue, to demonſtrate thereby that hee was God of the yeare, and had the ſole rule and gouernement thereof. Wherevpon they called the firſt moneth of the yeare Ianuarius, of Ianus, there then king. The Phenicians, as Marcus Tullius and Macrobius report, vnderſtood by Ianus, the world: Marcus Tullius, and Marcobius. and therefore framed his Image in the forme of a ſerpent, holding her taile in her mouth, continually turning round and circumfered: as that the world doth nouriſh and feed it ſelfe, and the times thereof depending and cohering one of another. But returning to the two faces of Ianus, ſome will haue ſuch depicturance to ſignifie the wiſdome and graue intellect of prudent Princes, which beſides that by their wiſe counſels they doe act things politikely and diſcreetly, inſtantly, and for the time preſent, carrie likewiſe in themſelues a fore-prouiding preſcience to preuent, and therby to remedie ſucceeding miſcheefs and enſuing daungers: for that with the one face before, and the other behind, they continually behold and view round about them, recording things paſt, and premeditating thoſe likely to follow: the which things the ancients prefigure vnto vs by the Statue of
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
                  
intending (as Plutarch ſayth) That Princes and Gouernors Plutarch. ought to bee the true patternes and mirrours of gods among men. And as the Romanes worſhipped Anteuorta, and Poſtuorta as companions and fellowes with their gods; the one pre-knowing what wil come, the other remembring things paſt, as that from the diuine powers, nothing liue obſcured or vnreuealed: ſo in the Image of Ianus, with two faces, is imported the wiſdome and knowledge of kings and rulers, which ought not to bee ignorant in any thing whatſoeuer, which may tend to the quiet religious and ciuile gouernement of their people and country. There haue ben alſo who haue depictured Ianus with foure faces, as there were Statues of the ſame found in diuerſe places of Tuſcane: and vndoubtedly they manifeſted thereby the foure ſeaſons of the yeare, being all of diuerſe natures and effects, but becauſe the deſcription of the Spring, the Summer, Autumne, and Winter are with euerie one very familiar, I will ceaſe to proceed therein, commemorating that onely of Ouid, when he ſpeaketh of the regall ſeat of Phoebus:
               
                  Before diuine Apolloes regall ſeat,
                  The beauteous ſpring ſits crown'd with curious flowers,
                  Next whom (with eares of corne about her head)
                  The ſummer ſits in her all-parching heat,
                  And Autumne (dy' de with iuice of grapes) downepoures
                  A world of new-made wine of pureſt red,
                  Next whom (as placed all in due arow)
                  Sits grim-fac'd winter couerd all with ſnow.
               
               
                  
Theſe Stations are many times thus intellected: by the Spring is meant Venus: the Summer ſignifies Ceres: Autumne challengeth Bacchus: and for the Winter, wee oftentimes vnderſtand Vulcan: & ſometimes the winds with Eolus their commaunder: becauſe from theſe proceed thoſe tempeſtuous ſtormes, which are commonly predominant in that ſeaſon. Vnder the feet of lanus is oftentimes placed twelue altars, meaning thereby the moneths of the yeare, or ſignes of the Zodiake, which the ſunne yearely in his expedition doth circulate. There was found in Rome a Statue dedicated vnto Ianus, which had as it might ſeeme, foure dores, and vnderneath foure columnes, which vnderpropped and ſupported the weightie heauineſſe of the Image, in euery one of which columnes were ſet foure ſeuerall ſhels of fiſh, wherein were interſected the twelue months with greateſt curiouſneſſe of art delimated and filed. And let this ſuffice for the Statues of Ianus, progreſſing to the Images and Pictures dedicated to the Sunne: for that he ſeemes to be the graund patrone of all Times, and that all things whatſoeuer haue their being and increaſe through his vertues and motions.
            
            
               Apollo.
               THe error that ſo poſſeſſed the vnſetled and wauering thoughts of the auncients, beleeuing that there were many and diuerſe gods; proceeded from the opinion that they then carried of wiſeappearing and learned-ſeeming men in thoſe daies,

who with their pleaſing deliuerie of things, ſuppoſed to bee reuealed vnto them, brought and ſeduced the people into ſuch a ſetled beleefe of thoſe their abſurdities, as long after it continued, ere they could free their intangled conceits from ſuch their bewitching enſnarements: for they onely ſeeking from what originall cauſe the birth and encreaſe of things vpon the earth might ariſe (wholly ignorant of the true conceiuement thereof, as men guided only by others opinions, and common natures reaſons, and therfore not able to aduance their cogitations to the imbracement of the true cauſe indeed, being the inuiſible and euer-liuing God) ſome of them iudged the elements to be the cheefe and efficient workers of what the earth yeelded forth and produced. Neither did all of them attribute this vnto al the elements together, but ſome only gaue the cauſe of ſuch increaſe to the vertues of the water, ſome to fire, ſome to the aire, and many alſo to the earth. Whervpon the Poets (as Ariſtotle ſaith) Ariſtotle. being the firſt that chaunted forth the powers of ſuch their gods, induced the ſillie and ſoon-perſuaded people to thinke, that there were then in efficient power many and diuers. By reaſon whereof, and vpon ſuch ſurmiſes, they called Neptune or Oceanus, the father of the gods; and the mother of them Veſta or Ops, the wife of Saturne: whome likewiſe they entearmed, Lagrand Madre, vnderſtanding thereby the earth, in that from her as from the originall proceed al increaſes whatſoeuer, and this was generally the opinion of the Arcadians. Thales Mileſius aſcribed the cauſe of Thales Mileſius. ſuch generation of things vnto the vertues of the

water, and ſo diuerſe others were of diuerſe and ſeuerall opinions: and in the end they brought the vulgars to beleeue likewiſe, that the Sunne, the Moone, and the Starres, were the only cauſes of ſuch encreaſe on the earth: whereupon it iſſued, that they were afterwards regarded and worſhipped as gods, hauing Altars, Statues, and Temples conſecrated vnto them. And yet generally with the Aſſyrians this perſuaſion preuailed not: For (ſay they) we may well erect Temples and Images to many other gods, but vnto thoſe whoſe true ſhapes wee may continually behold with our eies, it ſhall bee very purpoſeleſſe: yet notwithſtanding (ſaith Macrobius) becauſe ſome in thoſe daies affirme the ſonne and Iupiter to be all one, in one part Macrobius. of Aſſyria there was found a Statue made and erected of the Sonne, all gloriouſly beautified and poliſhed with gold, in the forme of a young man without a beard, who ſtretching out his armes, held in the right hand a coachmans whip, and in the left a thunderbolt with certaine eares of corne: ſhewing therby the powers, both of Sol and Iupiter. And becauſe that of all the celeſtiall bodies hee carrieth greateſt force in the creation of terrene things, the ancients through him vnderſtand many times many of their gods, as his vertues, natures, and effects are many. Wherupon it grew that they framed him in ſo diuers and ſeuerall ſhapes. But leauing ſuch their opinions to themſelues, wee will now ſpeake of him as he is Apollo, Sol, and Phebus, which three I doe make all one, him therefore the auncients (as I haue already ſaid) ſhaped with a very youthfull countenance, beardleſſe, and young-yeard.

                  Alciatus (ſpeaking of that youthfulneſſe which the ancients Alciatus. then framed and ſet downe in the ſhape of a beauteous Nimph, with her apparell exquiſitely well wouen, excelling in curious worke of foliature, hauing her temples bound about, and inſtrophiated with ſweet-ſmelling garlands, reſembling much the goddeſſe Flora) depainteth there among ſuch workes of youthfulneſſe the true forme of Apollo and Bacchus, as vnto which two it did onely belong to bee alwaies young: Whereof Tibullus likewiſe ſpeaking, Tibullus. among other his deſcriptions, thus ſayth:

                     Bacchus alone, and Phebus aye are young,
                     Though both of them haue beards both white and long.
                  
               
               Where Tibullus depainteth Apollo with a bread, though Macrobius and generally all others, ſet him downe otherwiſe, as Dioniſius the Tyrant of Syracuſa likewiſe approueth, when he (taking occaſion to diſcouer the ſharpeneſſe of his conceited ieaſts,) with great furie pulled away the beard from the picture of Eſculapius, ſaying, That it was very inconuenient and incongruent, that the father ſhould be beardleſſe, and the ſonne to haue one ſo wondrous huge and exceeding long: for that indeed it is read, that Eſculapius was the ſonne of Apollo. Many that haue depictuted the ſhape of Apollo, make him holding in his hand a Harpe with ſeuen ſtrings, agreeing in number with the planets of the heauens, which mouing with a due deſtinction, yeeld forth a pleaſing harmonie. Macrobius 
                  Macrobius. ſayth, That the ſunne continually ſtandeth amidſt

the planets, commanding them to haſten or enſlacke their reuolutions, in manner as in efficient vigor and ſtrength they receiue from him their vertues and operations. And for this cauſe likewiſe the auncients called him the head or guide of the Muſes, which likewiſe were framed like vnto young virgines of beauteous and youthfull aſpect, habited as wandering and ſiluane Nimphs, with diuerſe-ſhaped inſtruments in their hands, melodiouſly and with a ſoule-rauiſhing touch continually playing: and from theſe all the liberall ſciences acknowledge their being, whereupon they were entearmed the daughters of Iupiter and Memoria, as inſtantly becomming skilfull and perfect in what they vndertake to learne. They were impalled with coronets, compoſed of ſundry-ſhaped flowers and leaues, to which were annexed beauteous garlands of palme: and oftentimes alſo they had their temples curiouſly adorned with feathers of diuerſe and ſtrange colours, by which is intended their victorious preuailement ouer the Piërides, contending for the pleaſantneſſe of their voice to compare with them in ſinging, which being afterwards foiled and diſgraced in ſuch their ſuper-arrogating challenges, were for their ſancineſſe therein, metamorphiſed into tatling birds, which with vs wee call Pies, readie and prompt to bring forth many familiar languages by vſe and teaching. Some thinke alſo, that ſuch their coronets of flowers and palme, ſignified the triumph which they carried away from the Syrens, preſuming likewiſe to compare with them for the cleereſt and moſt delightfull voices. And in Rome of latter times

was ſeene a Statute dedicated vnto the Muſes, which on the head and culme of the picture had many and diuers-faſhion'd feathers infixed; and they were thought to bee thoſe of the Syrens. The auncients when they intended to ſet down how the liberall arts, and all other ſciences, depended one vpon the other, and were as it were knit and coheared together, depictured the Muſes, holding one another by the hand, and heedfully dauncing (as it were in a round) lead and guided by Apollo: which meaneth that ſuperiour light and vnderſtanding, which illuminateth and enknowledgeth the intellectuall parts of men. The heauens (according to the opinion of the Platonickes) haue euery one their ſeuerall Muſe, called by them oftentimes Syrens, as moſt harmoniouſly and ſweetly ſinging, alluded vnto the celeſtiall orbes, which in number are likewiſe nine, and haue their motions according as they receiue their ſeuerall powers from the ſon, which commandeth abſolutely both aboue him, here with vs, and in the lower center: by reaſon whereof he is called Dio del Cielo, della Terra, e dell' Inferno: and the auncients attribute vnto him powerful commands ouer all the three. The Harpe which (as I haue ſaid before) he holdeth in his hand, denotateth the celeſtiall and incomparable muſicke of the heauenly orbes: his ſhield or target by his ſide, repreſents the circular compoſition and rotunditie of our hemyſphere; for the ancients defigure him with a ſhield on his arme, and ſome alſo giue him a quiuer of arrowes on the other ſide, which may ſignifie, that as they once loſed from the bow, penetrate and enter

in with great force where they hit, ſo the forcible vertues of the Sunnes tranſparent raies, ſearch out and pierce through the ſmalleſt craſe or voidance on the earth. Others that ſay Apollo is called Dio dell' Inſerno, and giue thoſe arrowes ſo appropriated vnto him, doe meane, that from the ouer-vehement ardour and riſcaldation of his beames, peſtilences and infections are engendred and nouriſhed on the earth: but yet ſay they, not ſo vniuerſally diſperſed, or vndoubtedly mortall, but with the moderate warmth and temperature thereof, they are chaſed away, and healthie aires and naturall increaſes ſpring vp and re-ſucceed. Among other things appropriated vnto the Sun, the ancients dedicated vnto him a Wolfe, and their reaſon was this: That as the powerfull vertue of the Sunne ſucketh vp and drieth the watriſh exhalations of the earth: ſo the voracious greedineſſe of the Wolfe diſpatcheth and conſumeth that prey which in his famin meeteth him by chance. Afterwards it grew that ſome were of opinion, that the Sunne, the Moone, and the Stars, fed themſelues and were maintained and nouriſhed with the moiſtures and humidities, aſcending from the earth. And this Homer ſeemeth to affirme, Homer. when he ſayth, That Iupiter with other gods (meaning the Sun and certaine Starres) deſcended downe to Oceanus to a banquet. It is reported, that the Wolf is of ſo ſharpe and cleere ſight, that hee ſees very perfectly in the thickeſt night, piercing through the vaporous miſtineſſe of the ſame, as the Sunne vpon his firſt apparence and ſecond howers circuit, rarifies the condenſate aire, baniſhing the obfuſtate and conclumerated

cloudineſſe thereof. In Delphos in the temple of Apollo, there was found the picture of a Wolf of ſtone and other hard mettals, exquiſitely well cut out and hewen, and the liuely parts thereof were with ſuch great cunning and curiouſneſſe of art intrauerſed, as it poſſeſſed the beholders eies with an earneſt and continuous admiration. And this picture there was held with ſuch great veneration, for that Latona begot with child by Iupiter, and transformed afterwards to a Wolfe (as fearing to bee detected by Iuno) brought forth being ſo metamorphiſed, and in that ſtrange ſhape, Apollo: or that as ſome others thinke, that picture was regarded there with ſuch zealous obſeruance, for that it was ſuppoſed to be a Wolf which diſcouered the ſacriledge and robbing of certaine endeared reliques from that temple: howſoeuer, my opinion is, that the auncients vſed to appropriate the names of ſuch beaſts to their gods, as they perceiued to be in them any aſſimilitude or correſpondencie of natures and effects. Martianus therefore ſayth, That Martianus. vnto Apollo was conſecrated the Crow, in token of his foretelling and propheticall diuination: and likewiſe the Swan, manifeſting thereby by the contrarie colours of theſe two birds, that the perſpicuous and corruſcant tralucencie of the ſun, maketh the aſpect of the day in cleereneſſe and brightneſſe like to the feathers of the Swan, and after his departure from vs, abſenting his irradiance from the worlds illuſtrement, he cauſeth the night to look of that pitchie and gloomie countenance, reſembling in darkeneſſe and ietty hue thoſe feathers of the Crow. Pauſanias writeth, Pauſanias.
                  
That in many places of Greece they reuerenced with great deuotion a Cocke, as the bird of Apollo, becauſe in his morning notes hee pre-warneth vs of the appropinquation of the Suns returne. Homer maketh Homer. mention, That the Sparrow-hawke (as wee now call them) was conſecrated to Apollo, and hee calleth hir his ſwift-poſting meſſenger. And in the ſame place hee writeth, That Telemachus returning home into Ithaca, beheld a Sparrow-hawke in the aire eagerly purſuing and chaſing a Doue, which he tooke as a ſpeciall diuination of ſucceeding good hap, and that hee ſhould now free and emptie his houſe of thoſe ouerearneſt and importunate ſuters which daily remained there for the loue of his mother. Euſebius reporteth, Euſebius. That in Aegypt the Image of Sol was ſo framed, that it ſeemed to be ſet in a ſhip, carried vp, and ſupported by a Crocadile: meaning to ſignifie by the ſhip, that quicke motion and liuely ſtirring, which in each moiſture and humiditie worketh for the generation of what it containeth: & by the Crocadile is vnderſtood that wholeſome and ſweet water from which the Sun by vertue of his temperate raies exhaleth away all corruptible and infecting humors. And further, touching the Sparrow-hawke this may bee ſpoken: It is found written by Diodorus Sycula, entreating of theſe Diodorus Sycula. beaſts and birds, which in the daies of the auncients were worſhipped and regarded as gods, that in thoſe times a Sparrowhawke was ſeene in Thebes, a Cittie of Aegypt, carrying in her mouth a booke written with red letters, which ſhee deliuered to the Prieſts and Churchmen there, containing in it in breefe, with

what zeale and vnfained veneration the gods ought to be worſhipped and adored, and how neerely now it concerned them to proceed with a heedfull and due effectuating what was there propoſed: Wherevpon afterwards it grew, that their writers of ſacred and holy bookes did weare alwaies on their head a red cap, with a wing of the ſame bird infixed thereunto. The auncients heretofore did not only vnſhadow the propertie of their gods, by beaſts and liuing creatures, but many times alſo by plants, flowers, & trees, which they conſecrated of purpoſe, & dedicated vnto them: wherevpon the lawrell or Bay was then appropriated vnto Apollo, and therewith were made wreaths and garlands, with which his temples were girt and redemyted in token (as ſome think) of the ardent loue and affection which he caried to Daphne the daughter of Peneus, transformed into that tree by Neptune. The Aegyptians, before the vſe of letters and writing was found out, framed the ſhape of the ſun by compoſing a ſcepter, in the vpper top whereof they inſected an eye, very curiouſly and with great induſtry of art engrauen: and they called it The eye of Iupiter, as that he beheld and ouer-viewed the large ſcope and compaſſe of the world, ruling it with great wiſedome and due execution of rightfull iuſtice, ſo intended by the ſcepter, ſignifying command and gouernement. The Lacedemonians cauſed the Statue of Apollo to bee cut out with foure eares, and with as many hands, the reaſon that they ſo ſhaped him as many thinke, was for that hee was ſeene to fight for them in that forme and proportion: but others take it to diſcouer & ſhew

vnto vs the iudgement and prudencie of that god, as being ſlow to ſpeake, and readie to heare, and thervpon it grew as a Proue be among the Grecians, Heare him (ſay they) that hath foure eares: meaning thereby the ſound knowledge and vnderſtanding of him that heareth much and ſpeaketh little. Apulcius affirming, Apulcius. That the ſunne with his deepe-ſearching raies beholdeth any thing whatſoeuer, ſayth, That in Theſſalie were certaine witches, which when they had with their enchauntments and ſorceriſmes either bewitched any man, or theeuiſhly ſtolne any thing away, would preſently flie, and conuey themſelues into transfaced and vpreared caues, and many times into graues where dead carkaſſes lay interred, ſeeking by ſuch meanes to ſhrowd themſelues from the view and ſight of the ſun, thinking it almoſt impoſſible to keep any thing hid from the farre-reaching and ſin-diſcouering eie thereof. The Phenicians had the Statue of the ſun framed of blacke ſtone, large and ſpacious at the bottome, but very ſharpe and narrow at the top, the which Herodotus reporteth, they boaſted to haue Herodotus. receiued from heauen, and they ſolemnely affirmed that to be the true Image or Idea of the ſun, not made by any cunning of art, but ſo defigured by the diuine powers. Lactantius ſayth, That in Perſia the ſunne was Lactantius. the principall and cheefeſt God they there adored, and him they worſhipped in a caue or denne, and his Statue was framed in this manner: Hee had the head of a Lyon, and was habited according to the Perſian cuſtome, wearing on his head ſuch tires & ornaments as the women of Perſia vſed to bee intreſted with, and

he ſeemed to hold by main force, a white cow by the hornes. The head of the Lion meaneth, that the ſun hath greater vertue and domination in that ſign then in any other of all the Zodiake: or that he is of power and commaund among the planets ſo mightie as the Lyon is among beaſts: the caue or den intendeth his eclipſe: the cow may ſeeme to ſignifie the moone, for thoſe reaſons which hereafter in her deſcription ſhall be diſcouered. The ſun ſeeming to inforce and conſtraine her, meaneth, that hee very oftentimes darkeneth her light, and cleane taketh away her brightnes, in that Nature (by her propoſed lawes) commands her to obey and follow him. Pauſanias writeth, That Pauſania. in Patra, a citie of Achaia, was found a Statue dedicated to Apollo. made of ſtrange ſtones and other very hard mettals, and it ſeemed to haue the frame & proportion of an Oxe or Cow, which beaſts as they ſaid, were gratefull to Apollo: and Homer ſpeaking how Apollo Homer. was hired to keepe the heard of cattell for Laomedon, thus ſaith, when hee reported the ſpeech of Neptune:
               
                  When firſt I laid the ſure foundation
                  Of thoſe proud clouds aſpiring wals of Troy,
                  Nere to brought by force to ruination,
                  Nor ſtooping her high lookes to dire annoy,
                  Had ſhe beleeu'd Caſſandras diuination,
                  Thou Phebus, in thy ſhepheards weeds didſt keepe
                  In penſiue ſolitude thy wandring ſheepe.
               
               Which ſhewes, that beſides the many names

aſcribed to Apollo, hee was likewiſe ſometimes called a ſheepeheard, from which it may be intended, that as from the temperat heat and vertue of the ſun al things here are nouriſhed and increaſed, ſo by the diligent care of the ſheepeheard, his flocke receiueth healthineſſe, ſoundneſſe, and increaſe. Lucianus ſayth, That Lucianus. the Aſſyrians only defigured Apollo with a beard, reprehending all others for ſhaping him otherwiſe, ſaying, that ſuch youthfulneſſe and greeneneſſe of years, diſcouered a certaine want and imperfection, which (ſay they) ought not to bee allowed in framing the Statues of their gods, and therefore they ſhaped him with a reaſonable long beard, as one attained to his true and perfect virility: and vpon his breaſt they placed a ſhield, holding in his right hand a ſpeare, on the top whereof was ſet forth a figurelet of Victoria: in his left hand hee ſeemed to hold a very rare flower: downe from his ſhoulders depended a veſtement, wherein was curiouſly proportioned the head of Meduſa, from which dangled and pointed downewards infinite ſwarmes of Snakes: on the one ſide of him were placed certaine Eagles volant: before his feet ſtood the liuely picture of a Nimph, which on either ſide of her likewiſe had two other Nimphs placed, whoſe bodies a Serpent with her flexible and oftenturnings ſeemed to annodate and conioine. This curious-compoſed Statue flowed with ſtrange varieties of eie-delighting and illuſtrious decoraments, that vndoubtedly the beholders eares asked as great ſatisfaction to vnderſtand the meaning, as their eyes craued time to behold the matter. And for that Macrobius
                  
ſets it ſo forth, wee will heare what expoſitiue interpretation he can deliuer it. His beard which from his chin hangeth downe very long, ſharpening it ſelfe towards the end, reſembles (ſayth hee) the raies of the ſun, which from the heauens reach downe vnto the earth. The ſhield and ſpear intend the nature of Mars, for that with ſome they are held to be all one. The figure of Victoria, ſheweth vs, that all things whatſoeuer, are ſubiect vnto the ſun, and haue their beginning and being from the vertues thereof. The flower ſignifies the beauties and excellencies of thoſe things, which the ſecret powers of the ſun with the life-giuing warmeneſſe of the ſame engendreth, nouriſheth and maintaineth. The Nimph which ſtands before his feet, repreſenteth the earth, the which the ſun from aboue, comforteth with his moderat heat: The which alſo the Aſſyrians themſelues did ſeeme to confirme (as ſaith Macrobius) by the Image of their god, which Macrobius: they called Adad, vnto whom they made ſubiect and obedient the goddeſſe Adargate, and vnto theſe two they beleeued all things to bee tied in ſubiection; and by the one they vnderſtood the ſun, and by the other the earth. The other two Nimphs which ſtand on both ſides of him, ſignifie the mould or ſubſtance whereof things are made, and Nature which ſhapes them into proportion. The Serpent with her often twining of her bodie, denotateth the many crooked windings and turnings which the ſun with his raies incircleth. The Eagles in that by nature they are ſwift of wing, and couet alwaies to flie very high, are alluded vnto the wonderful velocitie, and exceeding altitude

of the ſun: or as the Eagle commaundeth aboue all other birds, ſo the ſunne hath his abſolute dominion ouer the Planets. The habite which hee wore on his ſhoulders with the head of Meduſa, ſignifies Minerua, which is nothing elſe (as Porphirius ſayth) but Porphirius. that pure vertue of the ſun, which cleareth and refineth human intellect, and infuſeth ingenious conceits into the braines of men. The Aegyptians compoſed many Statues of the ſun, and among the reſt one was in the ſhape of a man, with the head of it (as it might ſeeme) halfe ſhauen, and the haire taken away, ſo that on the right ſide only remained haires, which (according to Macrobius) meaneth, that the ſun is neuer abſent Macrobius. from Nature, but ſhe continually feeleth the vertues and operations of his raies. And that that part of the head that is ſhauen, ſignifies, that though the ſun for ſome time detaine his glorious aſpect from the world, yet that he is to return and re-beautifie the ſame with as great brightneſſe as at the firſt, as thoſe haires ſo ſhauen wil againe ſpring forth & re-increaſe to their true and full perfections. And in ſome parts of Aegypt they infixed on the Statue of the ſun two feathers, the one of them blacke and of a duskie hue, the other bright and ſhining: and the blacke they termed Penna infernale, and the other Penna celeſte, for that the ſunne keepeth his abiding in the heauens all thoſe times when he paſſeth through thoſe ſixe ſigns of the Zodiake, whoſe vertues make the ſtation of the parching ſummer, being called Segni ſuperiori, and they report him to deſcend down into the lower center of the earth (called Tartarius) when he beginneth

to take his circuit through the other ſixe ſignes, entearmed Segni inferiori. And for that they placed thoſe feathers ſo vpon him, it ſignified (as Macrobius likewiſe ſayth) his ſwiftneſſe and faſt-flying circumference. It is read, that in one part of Aegypt they vnderſtood the ſun by the name of Serapides (which name likewiſe is oftentimes taken for Iupiter) and him they ſhaped in forme of a man, holding in his left hand a buſhell, intending thereby that there ought to be a proportion and due meaſure among men, obſerued with an equal and iuſt diſtribution of all things neceſſarie. And this their god which they then tearmed Serapides, had a Statue in the temple of Alexandria a cittie in Aegypt dedicated vnto him, compacted almoſt of all ſorts of ſtrangeſt and vnknowne mettals, and it was framed of ſo exceeding huge and immeaſurable extenſion, that his armes (being ſtretched forth) reached to both ſides of the temple, at the one ſide of which was made with ſubtle curiouſneſſe of art a windolet or ſmalleſt proſpectiue hole, into which the all-ſearching radiance of the ſun vpon his firſt apparance (hauing vnbolted the purple colour'd dores of the Eaſt) would penetrate and enter, gliſtering and ſhining with a maruellous reflection on the well-hewen and finely-poliſh'd face of that Coloſſe, in ſuch a ſort, that the fooliſh and faith-wanting vulgars in thoſe times, credibly beleeued, that the ſun came euery morning of dutie to ſalute Serapides, and to kiſſe his cheekes. This picture was there adored with all reuerence and humble veneration, being made with ſuch incredible art & workmanſhip, that the ſtones and other hardeſt mettals

thereof were ſo collaterally couched, and with ſuch priuie conclanſture, as it they had ben waxe, or framed of other like flexible ſubſtance, being ſo exquiſitely well diſpoſed, and with ſuch commodulat order of diſcreet correſpondencie. Martianus Capella ſpeaking of the marrying of Mercurie, ſayth, That Mercurie Martianus Capella. and Vertue looking for Phebus for his aduiſe in ſome matters, found him ſitting gloriouſly in a regall and tribunall ſeat, hauing before his feet foure veſſels of ſeuerall mettals, whoſe lids were cloſely ſhut and couered, and theſe were made of diuers formes and ſubſtances, the firſt was framed of the moſt hard and durable yron, from which there ſeemed to euacuate freſh-burning and liuely fires, and it was called, Capo di Vulcano: The next was of cleereſt and brighteſt ſiluer, filled with the puritie of well-tempred aire, and this was called Riſo di Gioue: the third was compacted of ſolide and peizie lead, implete with raine, haile, froſt, and ſnow, called Morte di Saturno: the laſt which ſtood neere to Phebus, was framed of the fineſt and tranſparent glaſſe, containing in it the inuiſible ſeed which the vpper elements ſprinckle on the earth, and it had to name Poppa di Giunone. Out of theſe veſſels, ſometimes from the one, and ſometimes from the other, would he call out ſuch working vertues, as therby men here below receiued their health and life, or their diſeaſes and death: ſo that when hee intended to ſend vnto the world a healthie temperature, and lifepreſeruing aire, he would commixe ſome of that contained in the ſiluer veſſell, with that incloſed in the veſſel of glaſſe: and when hee meant to plague the

world with peſtilences, infections, and mortalities, he conioined the burning and ardorous flames of the yron veſſell, with that inteined in the other of Lead. Wherby it may directly appeare, that the diuerſities and contrarious effects of Times, proceed from the moderation of the ſuns forcible radiance, or from the extremitie of his fierie riſcaldation: and that as the one bringeth with it a generall healthineſſe and encreaſe, purging the aire of groſſe and plagues-ingendring vapours, ſo the intemperature and ouerſcorching furie of the ſame, poſſeſſing the earth with a vniuerſall ariditie, poyſoneth the aire with infectious humors, and diſtilleth downe on the middle region all kinds of noiſome vnſoundneſſe and infirmities, by whoſe ill-ſmelling odors and corruptions, the bodies of men and all other creatures, become lame, ſick, putrified, and diſeaſefull. Among the auncients, Eſculapius (as is already ſaid) was held to be the ſonne of Apollo, and hee was ſaid to bee the father of Higiea, which interpreted, ſignifies ſoundneſſe of bodie, and perfection of health. And Pauſanias taking it from the Pauſanias. Phenicians, ſayth, That Eſculapius is nothing elſe but the aire, which purged of ill humours by the ſun, bringeth vigour and luſtineſſe to men on the earth: whereupon alſo they called him many times god of Phiſyke. But returning to the Images of Apollo, there was found at Naples a Statue dedicated vnto him, which (beſides many other curious ornaments and beauties it was decked with) had depictured on one of the ſhoulders with greateſt skill and diſquitition of the, inuenter, a liuely and excellent-proportioned

Doue: and there ſtood before the Image a virgin, maruellouſly well cut forth, which ſeemed with wondrous earneſtneſſe to behold, and as it appeared to reuerence the bird: which virgin among the ancients was ſaid to be Parthenope, who in her trauels from Greece to Naples, was ſafely conducted by the good guidance and leading of a Doue, perceiuing by many manifeſt tokens comming from that bird, the good ſucceſſe and effect of that her iourny. Martianus (oftentimes buſie in the deſcriptions of Phebus) thus Martianus ſets himforth: Vpon his head (ſayth he) hee weares a gorgeous and royall crowne, whereon were deſtinctly diſperpled, and apactly inchaſed many moſt precious, priceleſſe, and corruſcant gems, of ſuch conſpicuous and bright-glittering luſtre, as dazelled any humane eyes to gaze thereon: of which, three of them beautified his all glorious and far-ſhining forehead, and theſe exceeded any of the reſt in puritie of gliſter and daintineſſe of colour; ſixe other adorned his temples, three on the one ſide, and three on the other, with rare perſpicuitie and incredible cleerenes, whoſe vertues at certaine times of the year with diuers and ſeuerall hues, compounding the pleaſant and perfect verdure of the ſpring with ſundry-ſorted colours of ſtraungeſt commixture, beautifies and depaints the earth. The other three which were placed in the hindermoſt part of the crowne, are of this nature, that they are firſt engendred, and receiue their true and ful perfection in the moſt cold ſnowie and yce-frozen Winters: his treſſes of haire which hang downe his ſhoulders, looke like the moſt pure and refined gold,

his countenance ſeemeth at the firſt view wholly flamigerous, and hee hath two wings infixed on his heeles, beſet with ſparkling and ardent Carbuncles, his vpper veſtment is compacted of a wondrous thin and ſubtle ſubſtance, wouen & wrought in, as it might ſeeme, with fineſt purple and pureſt gold. In his left hand hee holdeth a bright ſhield compoſed of rich ſtones, and in his right hand a haſtie and furious-flaming firebrand: and thus farre among other his deſcriptions, Martianus depictures him. Euſebius likewiſe Euſebius. writeth, That in Elefantinopolis, a city in Aegypt, the Image of Apollo was framed to the due likeneſſe of a man throughout the bodie, ſaue onely that hee had the head of a Ram with young and ſmall hornes, and his aſpect was of a cerulean and blewiſh-greene, not vnlike that of the ſea: which ſignifies (as Euſebius interprets it) that the Moone conioined with the ſun in the ſigne of Aries, becomes more moiſt and humorous then at any other times, from whoſe humiditie there fall on the earth watriſh miſts and thickned vapours. But leauing theſe things to the Aſtrologers, I will impoſe an end to the Statues of Apollo, concluding with that deſcription of his and his ſiſters birth, which Claudianus reporteth to bee ſo curiouſly wrought in an vpper garment which belonged to Proſerpina. And although in the Italian it carrieth a farre more pleaſing grace than in the Engliſh, yet finding it there ſet downe in verſe, I thought it not irrequiſite ſo to diſcouer it.
               
                  There might you ſee with greateſt skill intexed,
                  
                     
The portraiture of Phebus liuely drawne,
                  And his faire ſiſters ſhape thereto annexed,
                  Whoſe beauteous parts ſeem'd ſhadowed o're with lawne:
                  And though with equall art both were explained,
                  And workmans care gaue ech of them their due,
                  Yet to the view great difference remained
                  In habit, ſhape, aſpect, and in their hue:
                  For one of them muſt giue the day his light,
                  And th' other reigne commandreſſe of the night.
               
               
                  Both twins eu'n newly born th' are here ſet downe,
                  For ſo it pleaſd the workman to deuiſe,
                  And Thetis ready, when ſhe ſees them frowne,
                  With gently rocking them to ſtill their cries:
                  There might you ſee the loue of their faire mother,
                  Dandling the ſmiling babes within her armes,
                  Now kiſsith ſhe the one, and now the other,
                  With carefull ſtudie to preuent their harmes,
                  And when ſhe hath remou'd all troublous noice,
                  She charmes them faſt aſleepe with heauenly voice.
               
               
                  Thus was great Phebus in his tender yeares,
                  Strengthleſſe his vertues, and his lookes were mild,
                  Nor any fierie countenance appeares,
                  More then is found in a quick-ſprighted child.
                  Some bluſh-like tincture ſometime dy'de his face,
                  Much like a new-blowne red-leaud roſe: his geſture
                  Such as beſeemd one of ſo royall race:
                  More pallid-hu'd and wan lookt his faire ſiſter,
                  Whoſe pure-white yuorie forehead, there adornes
                  With wondrous grace, two new-ſprung ſiluerie hornes.
               
               
                  
And thus farre Claudianus touching the birth of Sol and Phoebe. In this concluſion of the Statues and and Images of Sol, may alſo be inſerted a breefe touch and deſcription of Aurora, who although in the vpper region of the higher heauens, ſhe goeth as it were as herald and meſſenger of Phebus, diſcouering to the world his gladſome comming and returne, yet I thought it fitteſt in this treatiſe to poſtplace her, and to ſpeake of her after his mention, and ſucceeding him: for ſo much indeed, as ſhe is wholly engendred, and receiueth her being frō the vertue of his beames, and is no other but that rubicund & vermillion bluſh in the skies, which the fierie ardencie of the ſuns firſt apparence worketh in the orientall parts of the heauens, and from thence diſcending, beutifies with ſuch reſplendant guilture the forehead of our hemyſphere: neither doe I find (although with the ancients ſhe was held and worſhipped as a goddeſſe) that ſhe hath anie Statues, Images, or Altars dedicated vnto her. Homer 
                  Homer. deſcribes her of the aſpect of a young virgin, hauing her haire diſheueled, and hanging looſe about her ſhoulders, being of the colour of the pureſt gold, and that ſhee ſits in a glorious chaire, compacted alſo of gold, with all the reſt of her veſtures of that colour, hue, and gliſter. Virgil ſayth, That vpon the inſtant Virgil. time of the ſable-faced nights departure, ſhee commeth with one of her hands full of roſes, gilliflowers, and lillies, taken out of a little basket which ſhee carrieth in her other hand, and after that thoſe twinkling candles of the firmament are by her approch fled and vaniſhed, ſhee beſprinkleth thoſe flowers on the marble

pauement of the lower heauens, adorning the ſame with a wondrous grace and vnſpeakeable beautie. Others there are that deſcribe her, holding in one of her hands a flaming torch, and that ſhee is drawne in a gorgeous and ſtarre-beſpotted chariot by winged Pegaſus, which fauour ſhe obtained of Iupiter by many importunate requeſts, preſently after the downefall of Belleferon: and thus farre touching the Statues of Phebus, and deſcriptions of Aurora.
            
            
               Diana.
               FOr ſo much as among the auncients the Moone was reuerenced and adored vnder diuers and ſeuerall names, ſo likewiſe did they then erect and dedicat vnto her Statues, Altars, and Images of diuers and ſeuerall formes, for that with ſome ſhe was called Diana, with others Proſerpina, with others Hecate, with other ſome Lucina, and in Aegypt generally entearmed Iſis. And according vnto ſuch the propertie of her names they ſo aſcribed vnto her, would they expreſſe her proportion of bodie, her habit, her natures, vertues, and effects. And therefore according to the deſcription of Propertius, ſhee was depictured in the Propertius. ſhape and due reſemblance of a young and pleaſantlooking virgine of moſt amourous and beauteous aſpect, hauing on either ſide of her forehead two ſmall gliſtering hornes, newly peeping forth: and that ſhe is moſt gloriouſly drawne through the aire in a purple coloured coach by two furious and ſwift-paced horſes, the one being of a ſad and darkiſh colour, the

other beautifull and white, which (according to Boccace) 
                  Boccace. entendeth her powerfull operations, as well in the day as in the night. Feſtus Pompeius writeth, That Feſtus Pompeius. her charriot is drawne by a Mule, comparing her (being cold of nature) to the barrenneſſe and ſterrillitie of that beaſt; and as her ſelfe giueth no light or ſplendour of her ſelfe, but borroweth ſuch her brightneſſe of her brother Phoebus, ſo the Mule neuer engendreth by any of her owne kind, but by aſſes, horſes, and other like beaſtes. There are alſo who depicture the chariot of the Moone, drawne by two white bullockes (as Claudianus) when he ſpeaketh of that great ſearch and enquiry which Ceres made for the finding out of her rauiſhed daughter. It is read, that in many places of Aegypt they reuerenced the Image of a bullocke with wonderfull zeale and veneration, which they cut out and depainted of a ſad colour, hauing one of his flanckes beſpotted with diuers white ſtars, and on his head were placed two ſuch ſharpe hornes, as the Moone ſeemeth to carrie in her cheefeſt waine, and lights imperfection. And in thoſe places they offered great Sacrifices vnto her vpon the ſeuenth day after any child was born and brought into the world, as in token of their gratefulneſſe and thankſgiuing for the ſafe deliuerie of ſuch new-borne infant: for from the moiſture and humiditie of the Moone (ſay they) the woman receiueth ſpeedier deliuerance, and the child eaſier euacation. And for theſe cauſes would they oftentimes inuoke her gracious aſſiſtance, entearming her the moſt mightie, mercifull, and moſt ſacred Lucina. Marcus Tullius writing againſt Verres, 
                  Marcus Tullius.
                  
deſcribeth there a Statue or Picture of Diana, which he brought from out a temple in Cicilia, and he ſaith that it was of a wondrous heigth, and huge demenſion, hauing the whole bodie circumcinct with a thin vaile or couerture, the face of it of a moſt youthfull and virgineall aſpect, holding in her right hand a liuely, burning torch, and in her left an yuorie bow, with a quiuer of ſiluer-headed arrows hanging at her back. The torch or firebrand (as Pauſanias ſayth) ſignifieth Pauſanias. that brightneſſe and day-reſembling ſplendor, which ſhe ſo graciouſly affordeth to the vncertaine ſteps of forren-nationed pilgrimes, and diſconſolate trauellers: the ſharpe pointed arrowes meane thoſe dolourous fits and paſſions that women feele at their childs deliuerance, which in this point is appropriated vnto her as ſhe is Lucina. Among the Poets Diana is called the goddeſſe of hunting, and imperiall gouerneſſe of pleaſant groues, ſhrub-bearing hils, and chriſtal-faced fountaines: giuen vnto her as ſome hold, for that in the heauens ſhe neuer keepeth any direct courſe, but wanders and ſtragles from that true and perfect circuit which the ſunne alwaies obſerueth, as likewiſe hunters in the chaſe and purſuit of their game leaue the moſt accuſtomed and trodden paths, poſting through vncouth thickets and way-leſſe paſſage: and they depicture her in the habit of a young nimph, with her bow ready bent in her hand, a quiuer of arrowes hanging at one ſide of her, and to the other is faſt tied a moſt ſwiftfooted greyhound, with a coller about his necke ſet and inchaſed with many rich ſtones of infinite value, and after her follow a troope of ſiluan

virgines and light-paced huntreſſes, whoſe habites and aſpects I remember to be by ſome thus deſcribed.
               
                  Early one morne old Tithons ſpouſe aroſe,
                  And raiſd young Phebus from his quiet reſt,
                  Drawing the certaines that did then diſcloſe
                  Him faſt twixt Thetis armes whom he lou'd beſt.
                  He when he heard the ſummons of the day,
                  After ſome ſweet repaſt streight ſtole away.
               
               
                  Scarce was he mounted on his glorious car,
                  When thwart th'ambitious hils and lowly plaine,
                  Scouring a pace, you might perceiue a far
                  A troupe of Amazons to poſt amaine,
                  But when they neerer came vnto your view,
                  You might diſcerne Diana and her crue.
               
               
                  A careleſſe crue of young-year'd Nimphs, deſpiſing
                  The ioyous pleaſures and delights of loue,
                  Waſting their daies in rurall ſports deuiſing,
                  Which know no other, nor will other proue.
                  Wing'd with deſire to ouertake the chace,
                  Away they fling with vnreſiſted pace.
               
               
                  Some haue their haire diſheuel'd hanging downe,
                  Like to the ſuns ſmall ſtreames, or new gold wires,
                  Some on their heade doe weare a flowry crowne,
                  Gracing the ſame with many curious tires,
                  But in their hot purſute they looſe ſuch graces,
                  Which makes more beautie beautifie their faces.
               
               
                  
                  Their neckes, and purple-vained armes are bare,
                  And from their yuorie ſhoulders to the knee,
                  A ſilken veſture o're their skin they weare,
                  Through which a greedie eie would quickly ſee.
                  Cloſe to their bodies is the ſame ingerted
                  With girdles, in the which are flowers inſerted.
               
               
                  Ech in their hand a ſiluer bow doth hold,
                  With well-ſtor'd quiuers hanging at their backes,
                  Whoſe arrowes being ſpent, they may be bold
                  To borrow freely, ſo that none ere lackes:
                  They neuer need be niggards of their ſtore,
                  For at their idle times they make them more.
               
               
                  Sometimes when hotteſt they purſue their chaſes,
                  You may perceiue how faſt the ſweat diſtilleth
                  In haſty-running ſtreames adowne their faces,
                  Like ſeuen-fold Nilus when ſhe prowdly ſwelleth:
                  For from the time that firſt Hyperion burneth,
                  They ceaſe not till the widowed night returneth.
               
               
                  And in that ſwartiſh and eſtranged hue,
                  Cauſd by th'abundance of ſuch blubbred heate,
                  They looke like youthfull men at the firſt view,
                  So are their beauties ouer-drownd with ſweate.
                  Thus are thoſe nimble skipping Nimphs diſplaid
                  That vſe t'attend that Goddeſſe, Queene, and Maid.
               
               And thus much touching the deſcription of thoſe virgines, which are ſaid to accompanie that woods-delighting goddeſſe in her ſports of hunting.

                  Pauſanias writeth, That the bow in which Diana her Pauſanias. ſelfe vſeth to ſhoot, is made of the ſaddeſt coloured Ebonie, cleane contrarie to the opinion of Ouid, who Ouid. directly deſcribeth it to be of the pureſt gold: and hee further writeth, that her chariot is drawne by two white Hinds, (as Claudianus likewiſe affirmeth) when Claudianus. hee ſayth:
               
                  Downe from the ſteepeſt clouds-o're-peering mountaines,
                  Drawne in a chariot by two winged hinds,
                  Poſts the commandreſse of the groues and fountaines
                  With greater ſpeed than Eols angrie winds,
                  O're hils and valleyes, rocks, and roughest ſeas,
                  Theſe golden-horned hinds goe where they pleaſe.
               
               It is read likewiſe with Pauſanias, that in Arcadia was a Statue made of Diana, all couered ouer with the skin of a Hind, and from her ſhoulders there hung a quiuer of arrowes: in one hand ſhee held a burning lampe, and the other ſhee leaned vpon the heads of two gentle ſerpents, and before her feet there ſtood a hound, cut out and proportioned with wondrous great art and induſtrious labour of the workeman. The auncients firſt began to conſecrate Hinds vnto Diana, ſince that time that ſhee ſent ſuch infectious plagues among the Grecians, in token of her diſpleaſure which ſhee conceiued againſt Agamemnon, for killing a Hind. And afterwards alſo among the Romanes they did commonly ſacrifice a Hind vnto her, adorning their holy ſanctuaries and temples with the hornes thereof. And hetherto for the deſcription

of the Moone as ſhe is Diana, who was oftentimes alſo among the auncients called Triuia, and depictured with three heads, which indeed rather belongeth vnto her as Hecate, and not as Diana. This Hecate the auncients worſhipped and adored, as ſhe that had the guard and keeping of all croſſe waies, and ſuch lanes as in the end concurred and conioined themſelues in one, and for that cauſe they depictured her with three heads, whereupon Ouid thus ſpeaketh:
               
                  If in thy trauels thou doe miſse thy way,
                  Doubtfull and wauering how to guide thy paces,
                  Enquire what Hecate to that will ſay,
                  Who for three ſeuerall waies hath ſeuerall faces,
                  Inuoke her aid, and ſhe will guide thy feet,
                  Which alwaies after the true path ſhall keepe.
               
               From whence likewiſe it proceeded, that Virgil oftentimes cals her Trigemina, Triuia, and Triforme. And it is ſaid, that Orpheus aſcribed vnto her ſuch faces, meaning to declare thereby the diuers and ſundrie aſpects which we oftentimes may diſcerne to be in the Moone, and that her vertues and effects are powerfull and working, not onely in the heauens where ſhee is called Luna, and on the earth where ſhee is knowne by the name of Diana, but alſo extend down euen to the bowels of Erebus, where ſhee is called Hecate and Proſerpina, where it is ſuppoſed ſhee remaineth during the time of her lights abſence from the worlds view and illuſtrement. And theſe things Euſebius thus expoundeth: The Moone (ſaith hee) is Euſebius.
                  
called Hecate and Triforme by reaſon of the many ſhapes and figures that appeare many times to bee in her countenance, which proceedeth from the quantitie of the light which ſhe receaueth from the beams of Phoebus. The auncients appropriated the Lawrell vnto her as due vnto her from her brother Apollo. And thus much as ſhee is Hecate. The Aegyptians (as I haue alreadie ſaid) worſhipped the Moone vnder the name of Iſis, and her they depictured couered with a blacke and ſable veſture, in token that of her ſelfe ſhee giueth no light. And it is written by the Poets that ſhe was the daughter of the floud Inachus, and called by the name of lo, and after that ſhe loſt her virginitie to Iupiter, ſhee trauelled into Aegypt, where among them ſhe was ſo entearmed by the name of Iſis. And they framed her Statue, holding in one hand a Cymball, and in the other an earthen veſſell of water, whervpon (as Seruius ſayth) many ſuppoſed her to bee the Seruius. Genius of Aegypt, in that through ſuch her depicturance the nature of that country was opened and diſcouered: vnderſtanding by the Cymball which ſhee ſo holdeth in one of her hands, that vncouth noiſe and farre-heard murmure which Nilus roareth forth, when with her tumbling and furious billowes ſhee ouer-waſheth the ſpacious fields of Aegypt: and by the other veſſell of water, the many Riuers, Pooles, and Lakes in which that Country excelleth. Apulcius 
                  Apulcius. reporteth, that after his recouerie from his tranſmutation into the forme of an aſſe, bee dreamed to haue ſeene Iſis appeare one night before him in a viſion, and hee there ſo deſcribes her, as it may bee eaſily gathered

that ſhee was the very ſame as I haue alreadie ſet downe Luna to be, and which the Aegyptians with ſo ſtraunge and new-found ceremonies ſo adored. Martianus writeth, That Philologia entring into that Martianus ſpheare of the Moone, ſaw there many and diuers-framed Cymbals, and likewiſe the torches of Ceres, the bow of Diana, the Timbrell of Cibele, and a kind of ſhape alſo with three hornes, which I haue already ſaid to bee in the Moon: all which things are appropriated and due vnto Luna. But returning to the deſcription which Apuleius ſo maketh of her in ſuch his Apuleius. viſion, he ſayth, That ſhee then ſeemed vnto him as it were all wet and new come out of the ſea, with her haire hanging looſe about her ſhoulders, and vpon the crowne of her head was mounted a moſt curious and delicate chaplet, compoſed of diuers ſweet-ſmelling and ſundry-ſorted flowers, in the midſt of her ſhining forehead appeared a certaine ſquared and quadrangulate circle, glittering with wonderous luſtre and vnſpeakeable corruſcancie: on either ſide of her ſtood certaine young whelpes of Serpents: her aparrell ſeemed to bee of diuerſe colours of a moſt ſubtle and thin ſubſtance, ſome part of it ſhewing white, and of an aſhie hue, otherſome darkiſh and ſad, and in ſome other places of it, it appeared reddiſh and high coloured. And ouer this garment ſhe wore one other of all blacke, yet gliſtering in that kind, and of a moſt perfect iettiſh hue, which was very thicke beſpotted and adulterated with true-ſhapt ſtarres of gold and ſiluer, amidſt the which was inſerted a moſt glorious and bright-ſhining Moone, formed out with inimitable

art of the workeman, and round about the hem or skirt of this vn matchable veſture was interpoſed a moſt curious and delicate border of verdent foliature, intrauerſed among the liuely depicturances of all kinds and ſorts of fruits. In her right hand ſhee held a certaine inſtrument made like a Cymball, which of it ſelfe would yeeld forth a moſt ſhrill and lowd report: from her left arme hung downe a ſtraunge-faſhioned veſſell, compacted clean of gold, with the handle and foot of it proportioned into the forme of a liuely ſerpent, which ſeemed mightily puft vp and ſwoln with poyſon: and before her feet there was placed a certaine ornament and skilfull deuiſe, made of the leaues of palme. And thus farre Apuleius deſcribes the apparance of Iſis. The varietie of ſuch-her colours in her apparrell, may be drawne into theſe naturall reaſons: for that the Moone doth oftentimes turne her ſelfe into diuerſe aſpects, which thereby denotate the diuerſities of the natures of ſeaſons ſucceeding, as hir rednes and high colour foretelleth the approch of furious and bluſtring winds, her dark and muddy-hued looke the cluſtring together and conglomeration of watrie clouds from which iſſueth ouer abundance of raine and moiſture, and her white and cleare aſpect pretokeneth calmes and ſerenitie of weather: her vpper garment being black, ſignifieth as I haue ſaid, that ſhe hath no light of her ſelfe. Some thinke, that the Cymball which Apuleius deſcribes ſo to bee in one of her hands, diſcouered thoſe old vſances of the auncients, who in thoſe times credibly ſuppoſed to haue infinitely pleaſed the Moone by making certain ſtrange

muſicall noices which they cauſed by certaine inſtruments then in requeſt among them: others ſay, that it intended that pleaſant ſound which the Moone in her reuolution through the vpper heauens is heard to make, which is alſo the opiniō of the Platonicks, who affirme, that the ſtirring of the celeſtiall orbes yeeldeth forth a moſt harmonious and delightful muſick. Herodotus ſayth, That in thoſe ſacrifices which the Herodotus. Aegyptians vſed ſo to offer vp to Iſis, the women accuſtomed to play on Cymbals, and the men on tabers, honouring ſuch their feaſtiuals with infinite ſorts of rites & ceremonies of ſolēnization. The veſſell which hung downe from her left hand, ſignifies the liuely motion and ſtirring of the waters, cauſed by the operatiue humiditie of the Moone, wherevpon it is ſuppoſed, that according to her fulneſſe or decreaſing of her light, the ſea receaueth that prowd and loftie carriage of her billowes in her flowing, and that lowly and deiected demeanure in her ebbing: and for that the often changes and alterations of the Moone, may in ſome ſort touch the vnſtedfaſt and vncertaine remaine of all things in mans life, it is not amiſſe to remember the ſayings of Ambroſius, who many times alludeth Ambroſius. the goods, poſſeſſions, and pleaſures, which here men doe enioy to the inconſtant and mutable changes of the Moones aſpects, noting thereby, that there is nothing on the earth firme, permanent, or euer during, but that all the beauties and ornaments of the world are waſted and ſpoiled by the ſeuere tyrannie of all-deuouring time: wherupon (according to the opinion of manie) the Romanes afterwards

(ſuch eſpecially as were nobly deſcended, and of auncient family) wore alwaies on the tops of their ſhoes certaine little Moons curiouſly depainted, inſomuch, as that they being of mightie reuenues and of powerfull commands, might ſo bee remembred and put in mind of the caſualtie and doubtfull enioying of ſuch their world-bred felicities and terrene pleaſures: and that continually meditating on ſuch the inſtabillitie of fortunes gifts and fauours, they ſhould not grow inſolent, prowd, forgetfull of their being, or ouerhighly thoughted. And thus much concerning the Statues of Diana.
            
            
               Iupiter.
               THat euer-memorable and famouſed preuailement which Iupiter ſo victoriouſly carried ouer his father Saturne, in expelling him from the imperiall gouernement of the heauens, with manie other valerous and haughtie performances by him atchieued, purchaſed and won vnto him ſuch wondrous reputation and credite among the auntients, that they not onely dignified him with all titles and graces of warlike honour, but alſo deified him with ſuch reuerence and adoration, as they euer afterwards held him as a moſt mightie and powerfull God, exuperating any of the reſt in the heigth of glorie, ſtate, and magnificence, and ſo accordingly erected vnto him moſt ſumptuous temples and coſtly altars, reputing him indeed to be the only and eſpeciall god that had the power and authoritie to befriend or proſper

the eſtates of men here below, or to plague & ſcourge them with croſſes, miſeries, and mortalities, where vpon the Latines called him Iupiter a iuuando, for thoſe many benefits and good turnes wherewith hee poſſeſſed the people then liuing on the earth. The Platonickes vnderſtand by Iupiter the ſoule of the world, and that diuine ſpirit, through whoſe mightineſſe all things whatſoeuer firſt receiued their being, and ſtill ioiouſly increaſe and flouriſh in their inſtant continuance: and ſuch powerfull ſpirit and commander they entearmed by the name of god. Orpheus (that farre-famed Orpheus. Theologian among the Greekes) aſcribed thus much vnto Ioue, that he was the firſt before any thing in the world receiued forme, and ſhall continue the laſt after the conſumation and diſſolution therof, and that he ſitteth on the higheſt part of it, whoſe feet reach downe to the loweſt and baſeſt corner thereof, within whom is contained earth, water, aire, fire, day, and night: whoſe Image he thus ſetteth forth, his head (ſayth hee) with thoſe his golden-hued lockes, is the beauteous firmament gloriouſly adorned with ſuch infinite armies of tralucent ſtars, and from ech ſide of his temples peepe forth two yong golden hornes, ſignifying by the one the Eaſt & by the other the Weſt, his eies are the Sunne and the Moone, his ſhoulders and breaſt the ſpacious compaſſe of the aire, and the wings thereon infixed, intend the furious ſwiftneſſe of the winds, his bellie downe to the knee, is the wide earth circūcinct with the waters of the ſea, & his feet diſcend down throgh the bowels of the lower center. This deſcription of Iupiter made by Orpheus, is not

much vnlike that of Pan, by whom the auncients alſo ſignifie the vniuerſe, and tooke him and Iupiter to be al one, as his Image or Statue in ſome ſort manifeſted, which was erected (as Iuſtine writeth) in a temple in Iuſtine. Rome hard by the hill Palatine, which appeared to the view almoſt all naked, ſaue that it was ſlightly enſhadowed and couered with the skin of a goat. It is read therfore that this Pan was reputed in thoſe daies among the auncients to be one of thoſe gods that remained & kept his habitation among the hils, woods, and groues, for that all of ſuch their gods as they then ſo worſhipped, could not poſſibly haue roome and ſeuerall commands in the heauens, but that of neceſſitie ſome muſt be enforced to deſcend downe and liue below vpō the earth: among the which (as I haue ſaid) was Pan, who was indeed moſt of any, adored and worſhipped of the ſheepeheards, as hee that had the peculiar care and gouernement of their flockes, and of the encreaſes thereof, whoſe ſhape Siluius Italicus 
                  Siluius Italicus. thus ſetteth forth:
               
                  Vpon the ſheepeheards cheeſeſt feaſtiuall,
                  When downe the floure-imbroder'd lawnes they trace,
                  Playing on Oten pipes moſt muſicall,
                  To whoſe due ſteps they frame a true-kept pace,
                  In front of all the troope you there may ſee
                  Goat-eared Pan in this ſolemnitie.
               
               
                  From out his head two ſmall-tipt new-growne hornes
                  Aduance themſelues, about whoſe ether ſide
                  A flourie garland twines, and there adornes
                  
                     
His curled temples with a wondrous pride,
                  His face is of a reddiſh bluſh and fierie,
                  From which doth hang a ſtiffe-rough beard and hairie.
               
               
                  And for his bodies veſture he doth weare
                  The fineſt skin of the moſt ſpotted Doe,
                  That euer any in thoſe woods did beare,
                  Which from his ſhoulders looſe hangs to his toe,
                  And when he walkes, he carrieth in his hand
                  A ſheepeheards hooke made of a knotleſſe wand.
               
               After ſuch his deſcription hee progreſſeth further, and ſaith, That he is of that maruellous firme footing, that hee eaſily climeth vp, and aſcendeth the moſt craggie and ſteepe mountaines that bee, and is of a moſt wonderfull ſpeed and ſwiftneſſe in his running, alluded therein to the nature of the world, which in his reuolution and circumference turneth about with a ſuddaine and quicke diſpatch of time Seruius ſayth, Seruius. That the auncients ſo ſhaped Pan with hornes, as entending thereby the beames of the ſunne, or thoſe hornes of the Moone, which ſhee ſeemeth in her imperfection and lights decreaſing to carrie. Boccace vnderſtandeth by ſuch his hornes; newly ſprung forth Boccace. and reuerſed towards the heauens, the celeſtiall bodies which receaue knowledge and conceiuances by two manners; the one by art, through which by Aſtrologicall skill and iudgement, the courſe and extrauancie of the ſtarres is proportioned and knowne with their habitations, natures, and diſtances; the other is that continuall proofe and efficient power

which is emploied here in things below: The redneſſe and high colour of his face, ſignifieth that pure and liuely fire, which aboue the reſt of the elements is adioined next to the heauenly ſpheres: his long beard hanging downe ouer his breaſt, meaneth the two ſuperior elements, Aire and Fire, which are of nature, force, and operation, maſculine, and they infuſe their workings and impreſſions in the two below, which are feminine: The ſpotted veſture which hee weareth ouer his ſhoulders, ſignifies the eight ſphere, ſpotted and beſpangled with ſo many gliſtering ſtars, which couer all things belonging vnto naturall encreaſes: The Sheepeheards hooke which hee alwaies carrieth in one of his hands, diſcouereth (according to Boccace) the rule and gouernment which Nature beareth ouer all terrene things: And in that it is at one end ſomewhat crooked and retorted, it vnſhadoweth (as Seruius ſayth the courſe of the yeare, which in it ſelfe Seruius. is circumfered and bended: And in the other hand ſome place a whiſtle or pipe made of ſeuen reeds, demonſtrating thereby the celeſtiall harmonie aboue, which hath in it ſelfe ſeuen ſeuerall ſounds, and ſeuen differing voices, according to the reuolution & working of the ſeuen ſpheres, from which they receaue ſuch their muſicall motion. And this Macrobius vnderſtandeth Macrobius. many times for Eccho, whom the auncients report to be moſt entirely beloued and endeared of Pan, of whome (beſides that which Ouid ſpeaketh of her in the tranſmutation of Narciſſus) it is read, that ſhe was a goddeſſe, and the daughter of Speech, and of the Aire, and therefore inuiſible. Whereupon

                  Auſonius Gallus reporteth, That ſhee hath oftentimes diſuaded and reprehended him whoſoeuer will vndertake Auſonius Gallus. to depicture her, and Auſonius repeats it there in an Epigram, whoſe ſence is thus reduced to a Sonnet.
               
                  Surceaſe thou medling Artiſt thy endcuour,
                  Who for thy skill haſt reapt ſuch long-liu'd fame,
                  Striue not to paint my bodies ſhape, for neuer
                  Did any humane eies behold the ſame:
                  In concaue Cauernes of the earth I dwell,
                  Daughter of th' aire, and of ech tailing voice,
                  In woods and hollow dales I build my cell,
                  Ioying to re-report the leaſt-heard noice,
                  To greefe-opprest, and men diſconſolate,
                  That tell ech groue their ſoules vexation,
                  Their dying agonies Iaggrauate
                  By their plaints accentsiteration,
                  And he that will deſcribe my forme aright,
                  Muſt ſhape a formeleſse ſound, or airieſpright.
               
               But returning to Pan, I will proceed in his deſcription, whoſe lower parts of him are defigured, as it were ouer growne with maruellous rough and ſtubborne haire, with the feet of a Goat: ſignifying hereby the nature of the earth, which in ſome places is hard, craggie, buſhie, and vneuen, being beſet with plants, trees, and briars, and in ſome places champaine, in others full of deepe-diſcented vallies, and other where very mountainous. Some alſo will haue Pans hornes ſignifie the effigies and aſpect of the

new-changed Moone, his rubicund and fierie face the bluſhing countenance of the morning againſt the approch of Phebus, and likewiſe of the euening vpon his tramontation and diſcent to the antipodes, whoſe beames then ſeeming to reach downe vnto the earth, are vnderſtood by his long and ſharp-pointed beard. The ſpotted skin ouer his ſhoulders, explicates (as hath before been ſpoken of) the innumerable companies of ſtarres which preſently ſhew forth & aduance themſelues vpon the ſunnes departure towards the kingdome of Oceanus. The rod or ſheepehooke in his hand, meaneth the rule and gouernment which he carrieth ouer all things. By the pipe of ſeuen reeds may be intended the muſical melodie of the heauens, cauſed (as ſome hold) by the motion of the ſunne. And ſo diuerſe men varie and differ in their deſcriptions, ſimiles, & applications. Plato vnderſtandeth through Plato. Pan, Reaſon & Knowledge; and that it is of two ſorts, the one of a man, the other of a beaſt: And for that (ſayth hee) it is many times argued and reaſoned both truly and falſely betweene two parties, hee entendeth by the vpper part of Pan the truth, accompanied with reaſon, which being of it ſelfe diuine, erecteth and lifteth vp it ſelfe alwaies towards the heauens; and that part below ſignifies the falſeneſſe of things, which being harſh, beaſtly and rude, liueth here in the world, and is onely delighted with the pleaſures and fooliſh vanities thereof. But howſoeuer this deſcription of Pan may be drawne into ſeuerall meanings, it pleaſed the auncients ſo to defigure him from the middle vpward (as I haue ſaid) they framed him to the proportion

and ſimilitude of a man, with his face ruddie and ſanguine, being very hairie, his ſhoulders and breaſt couered with the skin of a ſpotted Doe, Panther, or Leopard. In the one hand he held a ſheepehooke, and in the other a whiſtle, much vſed of ſheepeheards, when in their pleaſant humors they carroll forth their rurall notes of mirth and iouiſance: from the middle downewards hee carried the perfect ſhape of a Goat, both thighes, legs, and feet. After the ſame forme and portraiture alſo were the Faunes, Siluans, and Satyres depictured and ſet forth, hauing little ſhort hornes growing on their heads, with ſmall eares, and ſhort tailes. And it is read that among ſome people they are held in very great regard and obſeruance, and that they are crowned by them with lillies, and other delicate flowers. They are of a moſt wonderfull ſpeed in running, and inhabite among the ſteepeſt and higheſt hils of India, (according to Plinie) being of that incredible Plinie. footmanſhip, that they are neuer taken vnleſſe by extremitie of old age, or other impedimentall diſeaſe or ſickeneſſe. Plutarch writeth, That there Plutarch. was one of theſe brought and preſented for a rare gift vnto Sylla, returning from the warres againſt Mithridates. But regreſſing to Pan, Herodotus writeth, That he Herodotus. was one of thoſe eight cheefe and principall gods which were ſo worſhipped and adored among the Aegyptians, and among the Mendeſians held in greateſt regard and reputation. And vnto him there they dedicated and conſecrated the Pine, of whoſe leaues they compoſed many curious garlands, and encompaſſed his hornes therwith: the reaſon hereof (as ſome

ſay) was for the loue of a virgine called Pitis, afterwards metamorphiſed into that tree: as it is read alſo of Syrinx, turned into a reed, whereof Panſo frameth his pipes and rurall inſtruments. And now to the finiſhing of the Statues of Iupiter, beginning with that which is read with Porphirius, Euſebius, and Suida, who Porphirius. Euſebius. Suida. depicture the Image of Iupiter as it were ſitting vpon a firme and irremouable ſeat; to ſignifie that that vertue which gouerneth and preſerueth the world, is firme, permanent, and continuing: the vpper parts of the picture appeare naked and vnclothed, the lower parts couered and inueſted: diſhadowing therby, that the mercie and compaſſion of the diuine powers is alwaies manifeſt and apparent to thoſe that are poſſeſſed with an vnderſtanding ſpirit: the lower parts being clothed, meaneth, that all the while that wee are here in the world delighted, and as it were rockt aſleepe with the illecebrous blandiſhments thereof, we cannot any way apprehend ſuperior knowledges, but they are kept obſcured, hid, and vnreuealed from vs. In his left hand he held a ſcepter, for that (ſay they) on that ſide of the bodie lieth the principall part of man, being the heart, from which are diſperſed and ſent out the vitall ſpirits and powers of the body: and as the king ruleth abſolutely, and commandeth ouer his people at his pleaſure, ſo the world, & al things cō
                  tained therein, are tied in ſubiection and dutie vnto the will of the higheſt king. In his right hand they place a mightie Eagle, ioyned with the portraiture of Victoria, meaning thereby as by the other, that as the Eagle ouer all other birds whatſoeuer ruleth as cheef,

ſo all the men in this world, and all other things incloſed within her ſpacious embracements, ſtand vaſſalized and ſubiect to the all-commanding power of Iupiter. And this picture was erected in Piraeus, a ſtately and magnifique gate of Athens. The Aegyptians framed vnto themſelues for the picture of Iupiter, a peece of ſquared wood, wherein was proportioned two round circles, as it were one ouer the other, through which there ſeemed to creepe a Serpent, hauing the head of a Sparrowhawke. The circles intended the wideneſſe and rotunditie of the world: the Serpent the great commander and conſeruer of all things therein; for among the Aegyptians and Phenicians they held that Serpents were of a diuine and ſupernaturall power, as hauing ſuch ſpeed and ſwiftneſſe in their going, without the ſupportation of any exterior lim, carried onely by an interior ſpirit and liuelineſſe, which makes them ſo often wreſt & retort their bodies with ſo many flexuous and winding turnings, and that they liue on the earth a wonderfull long time, as disburdening themſelues of their years, by diſpoiling and vncaſing them of their vpper skins, and ſo inſtantly againe rebecome youthfull and vigorous: the head of the Sparrowhawke ſignifieth nimbleneſſe, promptneſſe, and agilitie. Martianus (when Martianus. hee writeth how Iupiter ſummoned all the gods to the marriage of Mercurie and Philologia) depictures him there impalled with a regall crowne, all adorned with moſt precious and glittering ſtones, ouer his ſhoulders he weares a thin vaile, wouen and made vp by Pallas owne hands, which appeareth all white,

wherein are inſerted diuerſe ſmall peeces of glaſſe, formed out into the due proportion of the moſt reſplendant ſtarres: in his right hand hee holdeth two round bals, the one wholly of gold, the other halfe gold and halfe ſiluer: in the other hand an yuorie Harpe with nine ſtrings, his ſhoes are made of the greene Smarald, and he ſitteth on a footcloth, wherein is wrought and intexed diuerſe ſtraunge workes, with the feathers of a Peacocke, and hard by his ſide lieth a tridentall gold-emboſſed maſe. And ſo farre Martianus among manie other his deſcriptions, ſets him forth. In many Countries the Statues and Images of Iupiter were ſo depictured, as they thereby diſcouered not only what hee was, and of what vertue, power, and commaund, but gaue light as it were and admoniſhed Princes and Gouernours how to proceed in the execution of their rule and authority, as being on earth the viceroyes and vnder kings vnto Iupiter, appointed and inſtalled by him to ſee iuſtice and equitie truly and effectually miniſtred and performed. And Plutarch writeth, That in ſome places of Plutarch. Crete were Statues erected of Iupiter, which had all the proportion and ſhape of a humane bodie, ſaue that they had no eares, ſignifying thereby, that he that commandeth in ſuperiour authoritie aboue others, ought not to be perſuaded or carried away by any priuate conference, or gloſing inſinuation, but muſt ſtand vpright, firme, and ſtedfaſt, not leaning to one ſide more than to another, whereby he may be known not to fauour or partialize. And contrarily, the Lacedemonians framed his picture with foure eares, as

that Iupiter heareth and vnderſtandeth all things, alluded alſo to the wiſdome of Princes and Magiſtrats, which ought to haue information of euery cauſe or matter throughly before they deliuer out a definitiue ſentence or iudgement: and likewiſe that they receiue and admit intelligences and notices how their lawes, precepts, and edicts, are kept and obſerued among their ſubiects. Pauſanias reporteth, That among the Argiues there was erected in the temple of Minerua, Pauſanias. the Statue of Iupiter made with three eies; two of them ſeated in their right places, and the other in the middle of his large forehead: vnderſtanding thereby, that he hath three kingdomes to gouerne and mainetaine: the one the heauens, as that eſpecially and intirely commanded by him: the other Hell, which is there vnderſtood by the earth, which compared with the wondrous glorie and beauteous excellency of the heauēs, may in that reſpect worthily merit that name: and the third kingdome is the ſea, for ſo much as Eſchylus in manie places entitleth him with the name of the lord and commander of the watrie gouernement Eſchylus. and dominion. It is read alſo, that hard by the pictures of Iupiter, was alwaies placed the Image of Iuſtitia, as that kings and great potentates might not commit anie thing wherin iuſtice and right were not adminiſtred. And much to this purpoſe Plutarch writeth, Plutarch. That in Thebes were certaine Statues and Images of Iupiter made without hands, demonſtrating thereby the dutie of Iuſticers, and authoriſed Officers, for that indeed they ought to bee as it were without hands; that is, that they ſhould not receaue any kind

of bribe or reward, nor bee corrupted with the enticing proffers of bounteous gifts, whereby they might become iniurious to the true deſeruers of right and equitie, and bee drawne to giue wrongfull iudgement vpon the truth-inferring pledant. Some there are alſo who haue defigured him without eyes, as by that meanes Iuſticers, and men authoriſed for deciding lites and controuerſies, might not ſee their deereſt friends in ſuch times of pleading, and ſo not put in mind either of friendſhip, kinred, or other occaſion to lead them to partialitie. And it is thought that this Iupiter with the Romanes, was the ſame which they then entearmed Deus Fidius, ſo reuerenced and adored among them, whoſe picture was alwaies kept among their moſt ſacred and regarded reliques, and it was thus compoſed: There ſtood in the midſt of a Temple a great Coloſſe of marble, out of which was framed and hewen with great curioſitie of art, a window, in which were inſculped three figures, whereof one of them which ſtood and was placed on the right hand, being in the forme of a well-yeard man, full of modeſtie and grauitie, had theſe letters engrauen vpon it, Honor: The other on the left hand, formed into the portraiture of a woman in Matrone-like habite, carried theſe letters, Veritas. Theſe two pictures ſeemed to hold one another hand in hand, before whom there was placed the third figure, of the proportion of a young man, of beauteous, yet ſober aſpect, on whoſe head were infixed theſe words, Deus Fidius. And thus much touching that note, taken from the writings of Pauſanias. There haue beene few Statues

compoſed of Iupiter, to which hath not been annexed the ſhape of an Eagle, which bird of all others the Auncients haue moſt often appropriated vnto him, by which (as it is poetiſed) his glorious charriot is ſwiftly drawne and conueied through the airie paſſages. Some hold, that Iupiter when hee warred & was conuerſant here below in many fights & skirmiſhes, was by many ſignes and tokens giuen by an Eagle, aſſured of proſperous and fortunate ſucceſſe, which afterwards fell out true, he himſelfe victoriouſly triumphing in thoſe wars: Or that as he is feared and adored among men, ſo the Eagle carrieth a ſuperioritie, and raigneth as Empreſſe ouer all other birds. Among the Eleans (a people in Greece) the Statue of Iupiter was compacted of gold and yuorie, and himſelfe ſitting vpon a regall and ſtately ſeat, was impalled with a coronet, made with the leaues of an Oliue. In his right hand hee held the Image of Victoria, crowned in the ſame manner: and in his left hand a ſcepter, tempered of diuerſe and ſundrie mettals, on the top whereof was mounted the true portraiture of an Eagle: his ſhoes were all of gold, whereon was ſet forth and depainted the formes of diuerſe ſtrange beaſts and of rareſt flowers. The ſeat it ſelfe was cleane gold, in which was inchaſed with moſt excellent embelliſhments and curious politure, the liuely repreſentation of many vnknowne birds and fiſhes. And this Statue was vpheld and ſupported by foure Images of Victoria, hewen out and proportioned with inimitable skill of the art Topiaria. And it is read, that in Caria (a region in the leſſer Aſia) was erected a Statue of Iupiter,

holding onely in one of his hands a Poleaxe, and Plutarch alledgeth this reaſon for it, ſaying, That Hercules after that hee had ouerthrowne and ſlaine Hippolita, Queene of the Amazones, tooke them from her and carried away among other her armes, this poleaxe, which afterwards he gaue to Omphale his wife, which by birth was of Lydia: and in this reſpect the kings of Lydia alwaies afterwards vſed to carrie with them in the warres ſuch weapon, and held and regarded it as a thing ſacred, and of a wondrous reſpect. This weapon through the ſucceſſion of maniekings in the end came to Candaules, who not vouching to carrie it himſelfe alwaies, gaue it in charge to one that accompanied next vnto him, who afterwards with Candaules himſelfe was ſlaine by Giges, then triumphant victor ouer thoſe warres ſo vndertaken: who among other ſpoiles and reliques, carried and brought the ſame away into Caria, which firſt the Amazonian commandreſſe ſo loſt to Hercules. And this was now infixed in the one hand of this Statue, which was dedicated vnto Iupiter. And thus much touching the Images, Statues, and Pictures conſecrated vnto him.
            
            
               Iuno.
               THoſe that haue written, that the Auncients vnder the names of diuerſe gods haue worſhipped the foure elements, haue vnderſtood by Iuno the Aire, calling her the ſiſter of Ioue, by whom is meant alſo that element of Fire. And as they then adored and worſhipped him as ſupreame gouernour

of the heauens, ſo likewiſe they entearmed and entituled her the Queene and Ladie thereof, being both indeed the ſuperiour elements, which in themſelues haue greater ſtrength, vertue, and operation in the creation and encreaſe of things here below than the other two: and oftentimes alſo they take I uno for the earth, and in that reſpect acknowledged as the wife of Iupiter, in that (ſay they) there falleth from aboue a certaine powerfull and engendring ſeed on the earth, by whoſe ſtrength and vertue it receiueth means and abilitie to bring forth, maintaine, and nouriſh what we ſee here produced. There are manie alſo who haue worſhipped and taken this goddeſſe the ſame as Luna, cognominating her by the name of Luna, as it were ſignifying thereby, that ſhe giueth light & guidance to the deliuerance of the new-borne infant. From whence it grew, that the auncients parting (as it were) and diuiding the parts of men ſeuerally and aſunder, giuing vnto euery god ſome one part, ſome another, whereof they ſhould take charge and care, haue dedicated the eye-lids vnto Iuno, in that they are placed and next adioined to our eies, by which we receaue our light and ſteps direction, and that they ſeeme to defend and protect the puritie of their vertues from any hurtfull and offenſiue thing that might otherwiſe fall downe, and get in vpon them. The Statue of Iuno hath been framed by the auncients into the proportion of a woman of middle age, yet habited like a graue Matron, holding in the one hād a ſiluer veſſell, and in the other a ſharpe-pointed ſpeare: and although it may ſeeme ſtrange to place in the

hand of Iuno this warlike weapon, ſhee being of her ſelfe naturally mild, peacefull, and gentle, yet the auncients haue ſo defigured her, in that ſhe is many times alſo fierce, wrathfull, and furious, as ſhee ſhewed her ſelfe when ſhee conioined with the Grecians to ouerturne the proſperous eſtates of the Phrygians, aduenturing her ſelfe in perſon, accompanied with Minerua amidſt the moſt perrillous and deſperate skirmiſhes of thoſe warres: as Homer among thoſe his notes Homer. more copiouſly remembreth it, where alſo hee ſayth, That her chariot (for in thoſe times the greateſt Captaines and eſpeciall commaunders alwaies fought in chariots) gliſtered as it had been beſet with pureſt carbuncles, the axletree was of ſolide gold, the wheeles of Ebonie, whoſe circulous plates with the nailes thereof were cleane ſiluer, the chaines whereunto the horſes were tied, were gold, and the ſeat wherein ſhe her ſelfe ſat mounted, was of the moſt refined ſiluer, beautified, adorned, and beſpotted round about with ſtarres of gold. And although at all other times almoſt ſhee is depainted to bee drawne in her chariot by two gentle birds, yet at this approch ſhee is reported to bee carried by two furious horſes. And Virgil 
                  Virgil. likewiſe deſcribes her in ſuch a chariot, when he ſaith that ſhee affected and fauoured Carthage very much, as to leaue there her chariot, horſes, & furniture therof. Homer by the many and ſundry colours which appeare Homer. to bee depainted in that her chariot, vnderſtandeth and meaneth the ſeuerall aſpects of the aire. And Boccace taketh it otherwaies, ſaying, that ſhe is ſo gloriouſly Boccace. ſet forth and adorned with colours, to ſignifie

that ſhe is goddeſſe of riches, and ſuch her weapons ſo belonging vnto her doe vnſhadow, that for riches, wealth, honour, and aduancements, men vndertake armes, and are conuerſant in the greateſt dangers of the warres. And ſhee is alſo oftentimes pictured with a ſcepter in her hand, to ſhew that ſhee hath the beſtowing of gouernments, authorities, & kingdomes: as likewiſe ſhee promiſed Paris vpon ſuch his cenſure of beautie betweene the three goddeſſes. Vnto her alſo is dedicated among the auncients, the Peacocke, as the bird cheefly appropriated vnto her, as that men are ſo drawne and allured with the deſire of riches to the poſſeſſion and embracement thereof, as the diuerſe-coloured feathers of this bird, enticeth the beholders eyes more and more to view, & to gaſe vpon them. And Boccace (ſpeaking of the progenie of the gods) ſaith there, That men of mightie reuenues, Boccace, treaſures, and poſſeſſions, are alluded to this bird, as that they are prowd, inſolent, deſirous to ouer-rule all men, and well pleaſed to be ſoothed vp and flattered in ſuch their thraſonicall humours and ouer-arrogant haughtineſſe, deſirous to be praiſed & extolled, whether iuſtly or vndeſeruedly, it matters not: of which ſort of people, as in thoſe times of Boccace, ſo I doe not thinke alſo, but in theſe daies many of them may be eaſily found out. Among the auncients it is deliuered, that the meſſenger of Iuno is called Iris, by which name alſo the Rainebow many times is vnderſtood, and that ſhee was the daughter of Thaumante, which ſignifieth admiration, inſomuch as the ſtrange varietie of the colours thereof, poſſeſſeth the beholders

minds, with a continuing wonder and admiring continuation. And ſhee is apparrelled in looſe veſtures for the more nimbleneſſe and diſpatch of the goddeſſes affaires and negotiations, who beſides this meſſenger had alſo fourteene other nimphs, continually awaiting vpon her, preſt and readie to performe all dutious ſeruices, and ſeruiceable duties: as Virgil 
                  Virgil. affirmeth when he ſayth, that ſhee promiſed vnto Eolus the faireſt & moſt beautifull of all her handmaids, if he would let looſe his then impriſoned winds to the diſperſing and ſcattering of Aeneas fleet, then bound for the coaſts of Italie. And theſe are ſaid to bee the cauſes of the changes and alterations of the aire, making it ſometimes faire, ſometimes tempeſtuous, rainie, and cloudie, and ſome other times ſending down haile, ſnow, thunder, and lightening. Martianus depainting Martianus Iuno ſitting in a lower chaire vnder Iupiter, thus deſcribes her: She hath her head (ſayth he) inueſted and couered with a thinne white vaile, on the top whereof is ſeated a ſtately coronet, inchaſed & adorned with many moſt precious and rare-found Iewels, as the Heliotrope, the Smarald, Iacynth, and Scythis, with manie other of more vnknowne vertues and wonder-worthie operations: her inward veſtures are compoſed of ſome maruellous ſubtle ſubſtance, reflecting with a moſt ſtarre-like gliſter, appearing as it had beene made of glaſſie tinſell: ouer it depended a mantle or vpper couerture of a ſad & darkiſh colour, yet yeelding forth (as it were) a ſecret-ſhining luſtre and beautie: her ſhoes were of a moſt obſcure and gloomie colour, as ſignifying the ſable countenance
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
                  
which ſuddaine wonder the afflicted and waue-toſſed ſea men tooke as an aſſured token of inſuing ſafetie, as it afterwards fell out. Whereupon it came to paſſe, that alwaies afterwards that ſtarre was inuocated and called vpon by diſtreſſed Mariners, as Seneca and Pliny 
                  Seneca. Plinie. likewiſe report, That the appearance of that ſtar foretelleth ſerenitie of weather, and peaceable calmes. And becauſe this ſtar is ſeated in the aire, and ſo Iuno her ſelfe many times taken for the aire, it pleaſed Apuleius (as I haue alreadie written) as he tooke it by tradition from the auncients to accompany this goddeſſe with thoſe two brothers Caſtor and Pollux. It is found with Pauſanias, that in a certaine place of Beotia Pauſanias. there was a temple dedicated vnto Iuno, in the which was erected her Statue, of a wondrous heigth and extenſion, and it had to name as the Italian giueth it Giunone ſpoſa. The reaſon of ſuch name may be this: Iuno on a certaine time vpon ſome occaſions diſpleaſed and diſcontented with Iupiter, in a great choller and furious rage departed from him and went away euen to the furtheſt parts of Eubea, he willing to pacifie and calme ſuch the conceaued anger of his wife, asked aduiſe of Citheron then lord of that Countrey, how ſhe might be won, called home, and reclaimed: hee preſently aduiſed him, that hee forthwith ſhould cauſe to bee built an Image or picture of the wood of an Oke, in the due likeneſſe and proportion of a yong virgine, and couering it ouer with ſome nuptiall veſtments, ſhould procure the ſame cunningly to be caried along with him to the place where marriages were then vſed to bee ſolemniſed, that by ſuch meanes it

might bee blaſed abroad how a new marriage was intended, and the old ſpouſe for euer reiected and forſaken. Iupiter liking of this new-deuiſed plot, inſtantly proceeded to the execution thereof. And in the end when all matters were readie, and hee himſelfe going with this picture in great ſolemnitie to the accuſtomed place of marriages, Iuno vnderſtanding thereof, ſuddenly approched, and fearing indeed to bee now caſt off for euer, in great anger and iealouſie violently tore away the garments of the ſuppoſed bride, and finding it to bee a counterfeit Image, and a deuiſe made onely to reduce her to her old husband, conuerted ſuch her diſpleaſure into new liking & fancie, and at this conceited ieaſt infinitely reioiced. Afterwards among the auncients, this day was (in remembrance of the reuniting of Iupiter and Iuno) held and obſerued in great ſolemnization. This fable Euſebius reporteth to bee by Plutarch thus vnclouded: The diſcord (ſayth hee) which ſo aroſe betweene Iupiter & Iuno, Plutarch. is nothing elſe but the diſtemperature and ſtrugling contention of the elements, from whence iſſueth the deſtruction, death, and ouerthrow of all things whatſoeuer; as by their quietneſſe, concordance, & agreement, they are produced and conſerued: if therefore Iuno (which is as much as a watriſh, moiſt, and windie nature) in ſuch their ſtriuing and diſagreements ouermaiſter and ſubiect Iupiter, there enſue moſt wonderfull flouds and rainie wetneſſe on the earth, as once happened in the Countrey of Beotia, being all ouercouered and drowned with the ſuperabundance of ſuch flouds and waters, till by the reuniting and

knitting together of the old kindneſſe betweene Iupiter and his ſpouſe, the waters decreaſed, ſhruncke away, and diſſipated themſelues into ſeuerall armes of the ſea, which indeed fell out euen vpon that verie inſtant when Iuno pluckt away thoſe cloths, ſo inueſted vpon the Image, and diſcouered the ſubſtance and bodie of an Oke: of which tree alſo it is written, that it was the firſt of all others that ſprouted forth of the earth after the departure of the vniuerſall deluge and inundation of the whole world, and which (as Heſiodus ſayth) then brought vnto mankind manifold and ſundrie profites and conueniences, as that by the fruits thereof, men in thoſe daies liued and receaued nutriment, and by the wood of it built and compoſed their manſions houſes and temples. The auncients heretofore haue conſecrated vnto Iuno the Lillie, and thereof haue framed for her diuerſe wreaths and garlands, and they called it the Roſe of Iuno, becauſe being beſprinckled with her milke, they turned & were preſently made white, being before of a ruddie and ſanguine colour, & it is thus fabulized: Iupiter (knowing of the old hatred, and ſpightfull malice which his wife alwaies carried towards Hercules) one day (as ſhe lay aſleepe) ſo deuiſed and brought to paſſe, as hee conueyed Hercules with great ſecrecie to the paps of Iuno, that thereby he might ſucke and draw from her ſome of her milke, whoſe vertues ſhould diſanull and fruſtrate her old conceaued ſpight, and change the ſame into a new-made loue and kindneſſe. But Hercules ſucking ouergreedily, and belike pulling too hard vpon her paps, Iuno ſodainly awaked, and perceiuing

him ſo vnexpectedly there, whom from her ſoule ſhe ſo much hated, diſtractedly as it were ſtarted frō him, and by that meanes of violence her milke ſpurting forth, and making through the element a certaine white liſt and ſtreake, called by the Aſtrologers Via lactea diſcended downe on the earth, and fell vpon thoſe Lillies, then growing ſanguine and reddiſh, which afterwards grew diſcoloured, pale, and milkie white. Tertullian writeth, That in Argos a Cittie of Tertullian. Greece, was erected a Statue vnto Iuno, all couered ouer, and behung with the bowes of a Vine, and vnderneath the feet of it lay the skin of a Lyon, which diſcouered thereby the hatred and diſdaine ſhe caried towards Bacchus and Hercules, both which were highly ſeated in her greateſt disfauour; much like the kindneſſe vſed of ſuch in theſe our daies, for it is poetiſed indeed, that ſhee was Stepmother vnto them both. Some haue depictured the Statue of Iuno in Matrones habite, holding in one hand the head of the flower Poppie, and at her feet lying a yoke as it were, or a paire of fetters: by theſe was meant the marriage knot and linke which coupleth the man and wife together; and by the Poppie the innumerable iſſue of childrē, which in the world are conceaued & brought forth, alluded to the numberleſſe plentie of ſeed contained in the head of that flower. And this was ſo appropriated vnto her, for that with many ſhe is ſuppoſed and held to be the goddeſſe of Mariage. And thus farre concerning the Images and Pictures dedicated vnto her.
            
            
               
               Terra, olagran Madre.
               THe earth among the Auncients was taken and held to bee the firſt, and of greateſt antiquitie of all other their gods, and in that reſpect they tearmed her to be the mother of them all. And as they perceiued in her ſundrie natures, and diuers properties, ſo they aſcribed vnto her diuers and ſeuerall names, and erected Statues and Altars vnto her, according to thoſe names, vnder which they then ſo worſhipped and adored her, who (as I haue alreadie written) was with many taken and vnderſtood for Iuno: and thoſe ſtatues and images which were dedicated vnto her, were made alſo many times of many other goddeſſes: whoſe properties ſignified them to bee in nature the ſame as the earth, as firſt Lagran Madre, la Madre de i dei, Ope, Rhea, Cibele, Veſta, Cerere, Proſerpina, anb manie others which of their places and habitations where they then remained, had their names accordingly, all ſignifying one & the ſame thing, being as I haue ſaid, the Earth, frō the which indeed, & from whoſe fruits, all things here in the world ſeeme to receaue their life and being, and are nouriſhed & conſerued by the fertileneſſe thereof, and in this reſpect ſhee was called the mother of the gods, inſomuch, as all thoſe gods of the Auncients, which were ſo ſuperſticiouſly adored and held in that reſpectiue regardance, liued here once on the earth, and were fed and maintained by the increaſes, fruits, & ſuppeditaments thereof. But to returne to ſpeake of thoſe her ſeuerall names, firſt ſhee was called Ope, (who alſo was

the wife of Saturne) for that it ſignifies aſſiſtance, aid, and adiuuament, in that there is nothing ſo commodious, helping, or auaileable to the preſeruation of human life, as the earth with her encreaſes: wherevpon Homer cals her the giuer of life, becauſe by her Homer. meanes all liuing things doe breath and enioy vitalitie. And Martianus deſcribing her ſayth, That ſhee is Martianus. enaged, and of many yeares, and growne vp to a great bigneſſe and corpulencie, and ſaith, that notwithſtanding that ſhe is old, ſhe continually bringeth forth iſſue from her wombe, being as it were encompaſſed and ſet round about with her ſonnes and daughters: ſhe goeth for the moſt part in greene veſtures, with her vpper vaile ouer her bodie, beſpotted with diuers and ſundrie colours, wherein is wrought & ſet forth infinite curious knots, among which are inſerted all thoſe things which with mortall men are moſt eſteemed, as precious jems, ſtones, pearles, and other moſt rare mettals of vnknowne, and therefore vnſpeakeable values. Varro (as S. Auguſtine reporteth in his booke Varro. calle de Ciuitate dei) ſayth, that the earth is called Ops, becauſe by mans helpe, induſtrie, and labour, it becommeth more rich, fertile, and increaſefull, and that the oftener it is wrought vpon, tilled, and manured, it reacheth ſtill to more plentie, perfection, and fecunditie. Shee is called Proſerpina (according to the opinion of many) in that the blades and ſtalkes of corne ſpring forth and grow with ſuch ſtealing and vnſeene progreſſion and faſhion of encreaſe, as the Serpent in her ſliding paces ſmoothly creepeth, and ſnekingly conueyeth her ſelfe away. Shee is entearmed Veſta;

becauſe ſhe ſitteth alwaies clothed and inueſted. And Varro deſcribeth the picture of Ops, (as it is taken out Varro. of Boccace) to be thus, and he thus expoundeth it: On her head (ſayth he) ſhe weareth a ſtately crowne, made in the forme of many towers and caſtles, in that the circuit and compaſſe of the earth is round, like the ſhape of a crowne, and is repleniſhed and filled with Citties, Caſtles, and Villages: her apparrell is wouen and compoſed of greene hearbes, all ouerſhadowed with frondiferous boughes, diſcouering thereby the infinite numbers of trees, plants, and flowers, growing on the earth. In one of her hands ſhee holdeth a Scepter, which ſignifies, that in the world are manie riches, kingdomes, and gouernements, as alſo the powerfull commands and mightineſſe of terrene Lords and Potentates. By the ball which ſhee holdeth in her other hand, is meant the roundneſſe of the earth, diuided into two ſpheres: and hard by her is placed a chariot with foure wheeles, which diſcouereth, that although ſhe hir ſelfe remaineth for euer firme and irremoueable, yet the workes and negotiations of the world are continually altering, changing, and vnſtable, according to the natures and powers of the foure ſtations of the yeare. This chariot is drawne by foure Lyons, which enucleateth either the ſubtiltie which husbandmen vſe ouer their ground, to couer & hide the ſeed ſo ſoone as it is ſowne, from the greedineſſe and narrow ſearch of the birds: as Lyons (according as Solynus reporteth) are accuſtomed, when they are chaſed and hunted by woodmen to ſweepe & diſperſe Solinus. the duſt with their tailes, that ſo the print and impreſſion

of their footing, might not detect their courſe of eſcape, or elſe to ſhew, that there is no ground ſo barren, ſtubborne, and fruitleſſe, but may in time by often cultiuation, & induſtrious manuring, be made a plenteous & fertile ſoile, as the Lyons themſelues in the end become gentle, tame, and tractable. The emptie and void ſeats which are placed round about the picture, doe import, that there is no countrey ſo populous and abounding in people, but are by peſtilences, infections, diſſentions, and warres, waſted, ſpoiled, and depopulated; or to ſhew that in many places of the earth are diuerſe countries vnpeopled and deſolate. And thus farre Varro in his deſcription of Ops. It is read with Iſiodorus, that the Image of this goddeſſe, Iſiodorus. called Lagran Madre, is framed holding in one of her hands a key, ſignifying thereby, that the earth in the time of Winter and cold ſeaſon, is locked vp (as it were) and incloſeth within it the ſeed which is diſperſed and throwne downe into it, which at the approch of the Spring and Summer doth peepe forth, and ſhew it ſelfe againe, at which time it is ſaid, that the earth is again vnlocked, and openeth her boſome. Cornelius Tacitus reporteth, That certaine people of Cornelius Tacitus. Germanie worſhipped and adored this goddeſſe, as ſhe that of all other was the moſt friendly & helping to mankind, ſupplying their wants and neceſſities with her manifold fruits and encreaſes. And in that they erected not vnto her (as I haue in ſome places alreadie written) any Statues, Images, or Pictures, they performed ſuch their adoration in cōſecrated groues, wherein they placed a chariot or coach, couered all

ouer with ſacred veſtures, vnto which no man might be ſuffered to approch and touch, but only a certaine Prieſt appointed to ſpeake to her, as hee onely that knew the goddeſſe to be there, & was further acquainted with all her vnreuealed matters of ſecrecie, and in this reſpect they all gaue him preheminence, place, and dignitie. And this chariot was drawne very ſolemnely (and with all obſeruancie of reuerence done vnto it by the people) by two white Cowes. It is to be pre-intended, that the world in thoſe daies was not afflicted with warres, ſtratagemes, contentions, inteſtine broiles, and fatall maſſacres, neither knew it the vſe of yron or ſteele, the daies and yeeres were then circumfered in ioy, tranquilitie, and hearts content, all places were free, peacefull, ſecure, and quiet, & vnto this ſight and ſolemnitie the people came flocking in, with great humility deuoting vnto her their poore ſeruices, with many gifts, preſents, and oblation. And after that this goddeſſe afterward intended to end ſuch her progreſſe, and to abide no longer below in the world, the chariot with the cloths thereof, was ſuddainely by ſome ſleightfull art throwne violently into a Lake or Riuer, with the picture of the goddeſſe in it, and the ſeruants ſo appointed for this deuiſe, all ouerwhelmed and drowned in the water. And it is thought, that this fond ceremonie encreaſed mightily their opinion and beleefe of ſuch their religion, and cauſed that ſhe was alwaies among them adored and worſhipped as a mightie goddeſſe. And this goddeſſe was alſo called (as I haue alreadie written) Cibele, which name (according to the opinions of

manie) came of a certaine mount ſo entearmed. But Feſtus Pompeius giues her the ſame nature and vertues, Feſtus Pompeius. and the ſame Statues, Images, and Pictures as ſhe hath being Ops, with her chariot likewiſe drawne by two furious Lyons: which Ariſtotle likewiſe affirmeth, when writing of many wonders and miraculous Ariſtotle. things in the world, he remembreth in ſuch his deſcription a certaine ſtone which groweth on the hill Sipilus in Phrygia, the which who ſo had found and caried away any part of it into the Temple of Cibele, he ſhould become inſtantly moſt dutifull obedidient and regardant vnto his parents, although he had before infinitely hated, deſpiſed, and by violent and impious hands beaten them: and vnder her picture there in that temple, were placed with great curioſity of art, two ſtately and maieſtical Lyons. But Diodorus 
                  Diodorus. and manie others are of opinion, that the Lyons ſo dedicated vnto her, ſignified, that ſhe was once fed and nouriſhed by them on that Mountaine Sipilus, as it is read alſo of many others that haue beene kept aliue and preſerued by Wolues, Harts, Beares, and Serpents. The Naturaliſts, and ſuch as haue laboured for the vertue and nature of things produced, ſay that the elements admit in themſelues ſuch a coherence, communencie, and coniunction, that the one is eaſily changed into the nature of another, according as the aire becommeth indenſate and groſſe, or pure and rarified. And in that regard there ought to follow leſſe admiration among vs of ſuch intricate names, effects and properties of the gods of the auncients, as the one ſometimes vnderſtood for one thing, and ſometimes

for another, and yet all ſignifying vnder ſeuerall names and titles one and the ſame thing: as Iupiter oftentimes is taken for the element of Fire, ſometimes for the aire, and ſo likewiſe the Sunne and the Moone in many places taken for the ſame, and yet expoſed vnder diuerſe names. The waters alſo had diuerſe gods, ſhewing forth their ſundry qualities and effects in the ſame manner, as the earth, from whoſe boſome aſcend vp miſtie and vapourous exhalations, and are ſetled and remaine in the lower part of the aire, compoſing there thicke and conglomerated clouds, from whoſe moiſtneſſe afterward iſſue downe on the earth great vents and abundance of raine. And for this cauſe (according to Fornutus) the earth is called Rhea, as it were guiltie, and being the cauſe and occaſion of ſuch Fornutus. ſhowers and rainie moiſtures. And the Image of this goddeſſe was ſet forth with many Cymbals and veſſels of water, as alſo torches, lampes, and firebrands, meaning thereby the many lightenings and ſuddain flaſhes which immediately precede the approches of violent and tempeſtuous ſhowers. The Statue of the earth (as ſhe is Veſta) is proportioned in the ſhape of a young virgine, with her apparrell beautified and bedecked with many curious ornaments, and attires of ſundrie and diuerſe colours, as wee ſee the earth vpon the comming of the Summer to bee ſo gloriouſly beſpotted with ſeuerall-ſorted flowers. But it is to bee obſerued, that among the auncients was alſo another Veſta, which as the firſt (as I haue ſaid) ſignified the earth, this intended the fire, that is, that liuely & nouriſhing heat, from which (being diſperſed into the

bowels of the earth) euerie thing therein contained, receiueth his being and encreaſe, and of this the auncients ſhaped not any Image or Statue, in that it could not be diſcerned by any outward eies, but with diuine and contemplatiue thoughts, being of it ſelfe wholly celeſtiall. And beſides theſe names of the earth, it was called alſo, when of it ſelfe it proued not fertile, but induſtriouſly manured by the labours of man, by the name of Ceres, and her Statue was framed to the aſſimilitude of an aged Matron, hauing her head circumcinct and redemyted with eares of corne, holding in her hand the ſtalke of a Poppie, in that this flower ſignifieth fertilitie and great encreaſe. And Orpheus 
                  Orpheus. writeth, That her charriot is drawne by two furious Dragons of moſt fierce and indomitable nature. And the reaſon of it as Heſiodus reporteth is, in that in the Heſiodus. Iſland Salamina, ſeated by the Euboicke ſea, there liued a moſt powerfull, angrie, and deuouring Serpent, of a moſt admirable, ſtrange, and vncouth hugeneſſe, by which indeed all that Countrey became waſted, ſpoiled, and depopulated, vntill afterwards by the valerous proweſſe of Euricolus it was ouermatched, chaſed, and expelled the Countrey, which vpon that fled into the next Prouince called Elouſis, where at that time Ceres remained, as hoping by her to bee protected and ſafe guarded. And from that time it long after continued there in the temple of Ceres, as her attendant ſeruant and miniſter. Many alſo haue depictured Ceres with many torches, lights, & firebrands in her hands, as in the ſame manner in a temple ſeated vpon a promontarie of Attica was a Statue ſo depainted

by Praxitiles. The reaſon was, as ſome hold, in that ſhe had been ſo ſeene raging vp and downe in the ſearch and enquirie of her daughter Proſerpina, rauiſhed and ſtolne away by Pluto. And hetherto concerning ſuch Statues, Altars, and Depicturances.
            
            
               Neptune.
               AMong the auncients Neptune was held and ſuppoſed to bee him of the three brothers to whoſe ſhare the kingdome of the waters fell and was allotted, and therefore and in that reſpect they entearmed him god of the ſea, depainting him with diuerſe and ſeuerall countenances, ſetting him forth ſometimes with mild and pleaſant lookes, at other times louring and ſad, and at other times with a mad, furious, and angrie aſpect: which is giuen him (according to Virgil & Homer) in that the ſea it ſelfe at ſundrie times, ſo ſheweth her ſelfe. And they deſcribe him manie times to bee naked, holding in his hand a ſiluer Trident, or forked Mace, and ſtanding vpright, as carried in the conceauitie of a huge marine ſhell, which in ſteed of a Charriot, is forciblie drawne by two monſtrous horſes, which from the middle downeward haue the due proportion and ſhape of Fiſhes, as Statius at large deſcribeth them. Sometimes they depaint him with a thinne vaile hanging ouer one of his ſhoulders of a cerulean or blewiſh colour. Lucianus (ſpeaking of certain ſacrifices offred by certaine people of Greece vnto Neptune) ſetteth Lucianus.
                  
him downe there with maruellous long hair, hanging down ouer his ſhoulders, being of a very ſad & darkiſh colour. And yet Seruius and many other writers doe Seruius affirme, that among the auncients all their gods of the ſea were for the moſt part depainted in ſhape of old men with white and hoarie haires, as that their heads were ſo died with the froth and ſpume of the ſea. Whereupon Philoſtratus (deſcribing Glaucus being Philoſtratus. a god alſo of the ſea) ſayth, That he had a long white beard which was very ſupple, gentle, and ſoft, & that the haire of his head was alſo very white, and hung downe wet & dropping about his ſhoulders, his eyes to be greene, and maruellouſly gliſtering, being hollow, and ſet farre into his head, his brow full of furrowes, wrinckles, and greene ſpots, his breaſt all ouergrowne alſo with a greeniſh coloured ſea weed or moſſe, ſomething like that which hangs to the bottomes of ſhips after long voyages, his bellie, and from thence downeward both thighes, legs, & feet, became fiſh-like full of fynnes and ſcalie, and that hee had a wonderfull long taile, all gliſtering with ſcales, which he alwaies lifted vp and aduanced aboue the waters. The three-forked Trident ſo giuen to Neptune, ſignifieth the three gulfes of the Mediteranean ſea, which from the head thereof mainely tumbleth downe into the Ocean. Others allude it to the three ſeuerall natures of the waters, as that thoſe of Riuers and Fountaines are in the taſt ſweet and pleaſant, thoſe of the ſea ſaltiſh, ſharpe, and hard, and thoſe of lakes, pooles, and ſtanding meres are neither bitter nor ſalt, nor yet pleaſing, ſweet, or gratefull to the taſt. Vnto Neptune

alſo the auncients gaue the Trumpet or horne, as belonging vnto him, which they deuiſed in reſpect of that ſhrill and loud-noiſed ſhell which the Tritons vſed alway to carrie & ſound before him: which Tritons were ſuppoſed alſo to be gods of the ſea (according as Solinus deliuereth) but moſt writers entearme Solinus. them the ſea-trumpeters, or els the Heralds of the great Emperor Neptune. Higinus writeth, That when the Giants warred and contended with the gods of the heauens, Iupiter in great earneſtneſſe ſent downe vnto Neptune for ſome of thoſe his Tritons, which being come, made forthwith ſuch a horrible & fearefull noiſe with ſuch their crooked and retorted ſhels, as the Gyants neuer before hearing any ſuch like noiſe, all aſtonied and amaſed, not being able to endure the terrible and affrighting ſound thereof, inſtantly retraited, fled away, & departed. Solinus reporteth, That on the top of a certaine Temple dedicated vnto Saturne, the people of Lydia erected and placed one of theſe Tritons, ſounding forth with with his Trumpet: vnſhadowing thereby (as Macrobius expounds it) that from the times of Saturne, hyſtorie Macrobius. and letters began firſt to ſpeake (as it were) ſound forth and to be heard, which vntill thoſe daies ſlept dumbe vnreuealed, mute, and ſpeechleſſe. Theſe Tritons as ſome affirme, were not altogether fained and deuiſed by Poets, for that (as it is credibly written) there now remaine in the ſea, fiſhes which haue the due proportion and ſhape of men from the middle vpwards. Plynie writeth, That in the time of Tiberius the Emperor, Plinie.
                  
there arriued at Rome certaine Embaſſadours, ſent from the Cittie of Lisbona in Portugall, concerning ſome priuate negotiations of their eſtate, who there credibly reported, that they themſelues had beard ſuch Tritons ſo to ſound their crooked ſhels, hard by the ſhoare where they dwelt. Alexander Neapolitanus 
                  Alexander Neapolitanus. reporteth, That a certaine Gentleman a neere neighbour of his, and a man of worth and credite, conſtantly affirmed, that hee had ſeene a ſeaman taken by certaine fiſhers, which at that time being dead, was all couered ouer and ſeaſoned with honny, to the end it might laſt, and continue ſweet: and that he ſaw it then in Spaine, being ſent thither from the furthermoſt parts of Affrica, as a preſent of great wonder and admiration, and much after this manner hee deſcribeth it: It had the face of an aged man (ſayth hee) with the haire of his beard and head wondrous rough, ſtubborne, and long, of a cerulean or azure colour, his ſtature exceeded the proportion of a man, vpon his ſhoulders grew two wings, ſuch as vpon many other fiſhes are now commonly knowne, & his skin, though wonderous tough, and of great thickneſſe, yet ſhined and gliſtered very brightly. The ſame Authour adioyneth, That Theodorus Gaza likewiſe affirmed, that hee had ſeene a ſea-nimph or water-maid (one of thoſe which we call Nereides) by great fortune caſt a ſhore on the coaſt where hee inhabited, which ſayth he, had the true aſpect & countenance of a woman of a moſt pleaſing & beauteous face, but from her necke to her thighes ſhee was couered all ouer with ſcales, and ſo downeward became wholly like a fiſh: wherevpon it

grew, that the Poets fained ſuch Nereides to be moſt beautifull and gracious Nimphs, attending the gods and goddeſſes of the ſea, as Oceanus, Nereus, Neptune, Thetis, Dorida, Galatea, and others, which Galatea as Heſiodus writeth, is ſo entearmed by reaſon of the whiteneſſe of her skinne, who alſo deſcribes her haire to be milke white. Ouid ſayth, That Polifemus being bewitched with her incomparable beautie, deſcribeth her to bee more cleere and faire than the pureſt Lillie. Philoſtratus in a certaine tablet which hee maketh Philoſtratus. of the Cyclops, depictureth Galatea drawne in a ſtraunge-framed chariot by two mightie Dolphins, on a quiet and gentle ſea, which Dolphins were guided by two ſiluer raines, held in the hands of old Tritons daughters, ouer her head was carried a Canope made of Purple ſilke, and Siluer, to enſhadow her delicious face from the beautie-ſcorching furie of the ſunnes irradiance: her haire hung diſperſed ouer her ſhoulders, which with the reflection of Phoebus beames ſeemed like ſmall wires of gold, with the fauourable and gentle breath of Zephirus diſſipated and ſpread abroad. The preſcribed Alexander Neapolitanus, credibly deliuereth, that one of thoſe Tritons which before we ſpake of (or as wee may tearm them) marigenous men, hauing by chance from a little caue or hollowneſſe of a rocke where he lay, eſpied a yong woman fetching water from a fountaine there hard by, vpon a ſodaine leapt out of his watry denne, ſet vpon her, and forced her violently with him into the ſea, notwithſtanding her vehement ſhrikes, and all-endeuoured reſiſtance: which being by ſome of the inhabitants

thereabouts perceaued, though a farre off, they laid plots, & conſulted among themſelues, how they might again entice him to the land by any means whatſoeuer: which afterwards they accompliſhed by ſending another maid to that fountaine, & ſpreading that place all ouer with ſubtle nets, in the end they enſnared him therein, and ſo brought him aliue into the Towne; which within three daies, not being able ſo long to endure the land died. Not altogether vnlike to theſe Tritons (in reſpect of human ſhape) but more neerely indeed reſembling thoſe Nereides, are thoſe which wee entearme by the names of Syrens, in that (as it is poëtiſed) they haue alſo the face and countenance of a woman, & ſo the reſt of their bodies aboue vnto the middle, from which downward they become fiſhes. And it is written with ſome, that theſe haue wings, and that their feet are like thoſe of a Cocke. Seruius deſcribeth that lower part of them to bee in the ſhape of a bird: as Ouid alſo remembreth, when he Ouid. ſayth, That thoſe were the companions of Proſerpina, which after that ſhe was rauiſhed by Pluto, were metamorphiſed into ſuch formes, being halfe women, & halfe birds. But howſoeuer the Poets varie in their opinions, they generally vnderſtand by thoſe Syrens the delicate pureneſſe of beautie, wantonneſſe, pleaſure, & enticing allurements to the daliancie of amorous embracements. And it is read, that they ſing ſo melodiouſly, and with ſuch a ſence-beſotting ſweetneſſe, that the ſuſpectleſly inchaunted ſea-trauellers are infinitely beguiled and lulled aſleepe with the harmony and pleaſing blandiſhment thereof, and by

that meanes are murthered and deuoured by them, as indeed it often times befalleth vnto thoſe miſerable and vnfortunate men, who bewitched with the illecebrous and honny-dewed tongues of harlots, ſuffer themſelues to be (as it were) caſt into a ſleep, ſhutting the eyes of vnderſtanding and reaſon, and by that meanes are made a prey to thoſe deuouring & greedie vulturs, & in the end vtterly eaten vp, waſted, and conſumed. Whereupon Boccace reporteth, That the Boccace, Auncients heretofore depictured the Syrens dauncing and ſporting in a greene meade, which was all ouer ſpread and ſtrewed with bones and carkaſſes of dead men: vnclouding thereby the aſſuredneſſe of ruine, decay, and periſhment to thoſe that ſo voluptuouſly addict themſelues to the vnbridled affection of ſuch laſciuious and ſoule-hazarding concupiſcence. As there are many moſt ouglie monſters and ſtrangeformed creatures in the ſea (thought indeed to bee much more then on the land) ſo Homer alſo maketh eſpeciall mention of one, which hee calleth by the Homer. name of Scilla, which (ſayth hee) liueth in a fearefull darke and ſecret cauerne hid in the ſea, in the nature of ſome huge rocke, and who with her vncouth and lowd barking and howling, make the waters thereabout mightily reſound with an incredible report and eccho of ſuch her ſtrange violations. And this monſter ſayth he, hath twelue feet, ſix neckes, & ſix heads, and in euery mouth are placed three ranckes of moſt wonderfull huge teeth, from whence continually iſſueth and guſheth forth a moſt deadly venomous fome: her heads are alwaies peeping forth with greedie vigilancie

to ſee if any ſhip doe paſſe by that way, that thereby ſhee might make a prey of the poore, miſerable, and diſtruſt leſſe paſſengers, as once happened to the moſt afflicted and hard-fortuned companions of Vliſſes.
               Of the before-mentioned Nereides, Plato writeth, Plato. that there are ſuppoſed to bee a hundred, maieſtically riding on Dolphins, and alwaies attending on Neptune, which number of them hee alſo remembreth, when he deſcribeth that ſtately & magnifique temple which the Atlantickes dedicated vnto Neptune, where hee himſelfe was depictured, ſeated in a ſumptuous chariot, holding the raines of the bridle in one hand, and a whip in the other, and his ſea-horſes galloping with incredible ſwiftneſſe & celeritie of pace: and this Statue was made with ſuch immeaſurable extenſure and height, being alſo adorned with many pillars round about, that it ſeemed a moſt wonder-worthie & huge piramides, the top whereof reached vp euen to the vppermoſt roofe of the temple.
               
                  Martianus (when hee ſpeaketh of the concouation of the gods to the marriage of Philologia) deſcribeth Neptune of a greeniſh complexion, wearing on his head a white crowne: ſignifying thereby, the ſpumie froth of the ſea, being troubled and boiſterouſly toſſed with the ouer-furious blaſts of Boreas. Among the Auncients alſo the picture and portraiture of Neptune was ſhaped out, not much vnlike that of Oceanus, whome they called and held as the father of the watrie gods, and vnderſtanding by him all the whole powers, natures, and effects of the ſea.

                  Thales Mileſius iudged to be the firſt and cheefe producer of all things whatſoeuer, and which opinion Thales Mileſius. the Poets afterward embracing, ſuppoſed Oceanus as I haue alreadie ſaid, to bee the father of all ſuch their gods: whom they depaint riding on the ſea, drawne in a glorious Car, accompanied & attended vpon with a mightie troope of Nimphs, and thoſe before-ſpecified Tritons, ioyfully ſounding forth their ſhrill-voiced Trumpets: after theſe doe follow a wonderfull heard of marine beaſts, commanded & kept together by Proteus; for it is read, that in the Carpathian ſea are found great numbers of beaſts, which for the moſt part haue the vpper part of them like calues, and the reſt like fiſhes, which with vs are called ſea-calues. Of theſe and many other ſuch ſemi-fiſhes, the Poets aſcribe the charge and gouernement to Proteus. The chariot in which Oceanus is ſo decribed to ride, ſignifieth the compaſſe which the ſea maketh about the bodie of the earth, the rotunditie of which, is repreſented by the wheeles of that chariot. By theſe nimphs is meant the propertie and nature of the waters, and the diuers and ſeueral operations and effects thereof, the which by the Auncients were vnderſtood, not onely vnder the name of Oceanus, Neptunus, Thetis, Dorida, and Amphitrio, but alſo many times vnder the title and name of Achelous, Alpheus, and diuers others: for by the firſt is intended onely the nature of the ſalt waters, & by theſe, that of Fountains, Springs, and Riuers, which likewiſe by the Auncients in thoſe daies were formed and depictured in humane ſhapes. But before I proceed any further concerning the waters,

I will here ſomewhat touch the deſcription of the winds, becauſe hauing ſpoken of the ſea, I thinke it not here incongruent to inſert them, for that vpon the waters they commonly ſhew forth their force and power more than on the land. And although I might haue before among the treatiſes of Iuno conueniently remembred them, in that (according to the opinion of the Naturaliſts) the aire it ſelfe being moued and troubled, is the very wind, and that Iuno is oftentimes alſo taken for the Aire, yet it ſhall not bee ouer-much digreſſion in this place to capitulate ſome opinions, as they are deliuered vnto vs by the writings of others.
               The winds therefore among the Auncients, were held and worſhipped as gods, and Sacrifices and oblations offered vnto them accordingly, with great zeale, and many rites and ceremonious obſeruances, for ſo much as they reputed & iudged all proſperous and ſucceſſefull voyages of nauigation to proceed by the fauourable quietneſſe and gentle diſpoſition of the winds, which they depictured with two ſmall wings infixed on their ſhoulders, and with a fierie and high-coloured countenance, with their cheekes puft vp and ſwolne like one that with maine force ſtriueth to ſend forth ſome forcible blaſt, their natures and qualities are diſcrepant, in that ſome ingender and thicken clouds, ſome againe with their breath expell and chaſe them away, otherſome occaſion the fall and ſprouting forth of great abundance of raine, and others againe drie vp the aire, making it thin, ſubtle, and cleere. And as in diuers manners they ſhew forth

their properties, natures and powers, ſo are they of the Poets diuerſly deſcribed and ſet downe, of whom it is written, that foure onely are the cheefe and principall which blowe from the foure quarters of the world, euery one ſeuerally from his owne ſeat & quarter, as they are touched by Ouid in his diuiſion and partition of the vniuerſall frame of the world. And yet (according as Strabo reporteth) with many there are acknowledged onely two: the one called Aquilo Strabo. or Boreas, being the wind that blowes frō the Septentrionall, which alſo (as Pauſanias writeth) had a moſt ſtately and excellent Statue curiouſly cut out and engrauen in the Temple of Iuno in Greece, frequented by the Eleans: and the other is called Auſter or Notus, predominating the Southerne region of the aire, and becauſe commonly proceed from his blaſts darke ſhowers and ſtormy tempeſts, he is thus, or to the like effect deſcribed:
               
                  All gloomie-faced, lookes the stormie South,
                  Whoſe euer-weeping eye, drop ſhowers of raine,
                  Who with his ſtrong-breath'd allore-turning mouth,
                  Kings stone-built temples tumbles downe amaine,
                  Whoſe furious blaſts the waue-tost ſeaman feeleth,
                  When vp aloft his ſhip is hoiſd to heauen,
                  Whoſe ſtorme-craſ'd ſides ech churliſh waue ſo reeleth,
                  That her right courſe ſhe neuer keepeth euen.
                  He neuer lookes with any cleere aſpect,
                  His temples are adorn'd with clouds, his ſeat
                  Of terrifying thunderbolts compact,
                  Which when he ſends, he denotates huge heat.
                  
                     
He neuer breaths or ſighs with any paine,
                  But from the ſame doe iſſue ſhowers of raine.
               
               Of theſe winds, the third is called Eurus, whoſe blaſts proceed frō the Orientall parts. And the fourth, whoſe mild and gentle breath procures ſo temperate and pleaſing aire, is called Zephirus, who (for that his warme calmeneſſe and moderate blowing, is the cauſe of the flowers and hearbes better increaſes) is ſuppoſed by the Auncients to bee the husband of Flora, the goddeſſe and ladie of all ſweet-ſmelling flowers. And this ſhall be ſufficient for the winds in this place, returning now to the finiſhing of thoſe deſcriptions of the flouds and riuers, which according to the Auncients, were framed in the ſhape of a man, wearing long haire, and with a long milke white beard, and leaning vpon one arme, (as Philoſtratus remembreth) when he ſayth, that riuers are neuer ſtreight, or runne out right: and as Statius likewiſe depictureth the floud Statius. Inachus, which paſſeth through the continent of Greece, ſaying thus:
               
                  Amidst a fertile flowre-adorned Dale,
                  Wal'd round about with banckes of ſedge and willow,
                  Lies horned Inachus, dreirie and pale,
                  Leaning his head and arme (as on a pillow)
                  Vpon a veſſell full of water filled,
                  Which thorow fertile Grecia is distilled.
               
               The Riuers (according to Seruius) are framed with hornes, either becauſe the murmure and noiſe of the

waters, ſomthing reſemble the ſoft bellowing of buls, or elſe becauſe wee alwaies ſee, the bankes and ſides of riuers to be retorted (as it were) winding and crooked like hornes: whereupon Virgil, where hee calleth Virgil. Tiber the king of all the flouds and riuers of Italie, calleth him there cornuted (as it were) hauing horns. And with ſome alſo the riuer Po is faſhioned into the ſhape of a bull, for thoſe reaſons belike before ſpoken of and mentioned. And hitherto in this treatiſe it ſhal be ſufficient to haue proceeded.
            
            
               Pluto.
               THe ancients hereto fore allotted vnto euery ſeueral place a perticular king, gouernor, or cōmander, who of that place ſo committed vnto him, ſhould take vpon him an eſpeciall care and charge, who there commanded and ruled as an abſolute lord, as it is poëtiſed of the kingdomes of the heauens, the waters, and the earth: in the partition of which, it fell out, that the gouernement of the lower center which is vnder vs, happened and was allotted vnto Pluto, which alſo with vs is called Erebus. He therefore was amongſt them then accounted the king and lord of the dead, and that hee according to the lawes of Iuſtice gaue them their puniſhments & torments according as they had deſerued, when they liued vpon the earth. Yet many writers doe affirme, that vnto that office were appointed, and did belong the three iuſt iudges, Eacus, Rhadamantus, and Minos, of which three, ſome little here in this place ſhall be commemorated.
               
                  
                  Plato therefore ſayth, that in the times of Saturne Plato. thoſe lawes and orders were in practiſe and exerciſed which alſo in the firſt daies of Pluto were held & obſerued, and his words are theſe: There was a law (ſaith he) in thoſe times, that thoſe men which in their life time had liued well, and according to the rules of vertue and her commandements, ſhould after they were dead bee ſent and tranſported vnto the Iſland of the fortunate: and that thoſe which had liued viciouſly and lewdly, ſhould bee conueyed to the place of horror, there to receaue condigne puniſhments, according to their merits and qualities of offences. And in thoſe times (ſayth hee) when alſo Iupiter began to raigne with vſurped authoritie, all men were adiudged to puniſhments, pains, or elſe to happie pleaſures, euen the very day before the parties died. By meanes whereof many were wrongfully condemned, & ſome alſo ſent to the bleſſed Iſland, that had deſerued intollerable paines and tortures. The which thing Iupiter vnderſtanding by the information of Pluto, who complained of that abuſe, thus anſwered. Well (ſayth hee) I wil find out a remedie for this inconuenience preſently, and therewith ſeemed to be wondrous angry. This proceeds (ſayth he) in that men are adiudged, being then liuing, and who knowes not that this man, or that man hath friends and great alliances, who wil not ſticke to bribe and corrupt the Iudge for fauour and partialitie, and that this other man hath deadlie enemies and ill-wiſhers, who continually are aggrauating the offence, and prouoke by vnlawfull meanes ſome wrongfull ſentence to bee denounced. As for

great mens faults, they are couered and hid with glorious abillements, with wealth, authoritie, noble diſcent, gentrie, and parentage, And then the Iudges themſelues being earthly, (and therefore imperfect) muſt needes giue wrongfull iudgement and verdict. We muſt therefore take ſome ſuch order, that in theſe caſes mortals muſt not bee pre-acquainted with the times when they muſt die, as now they doe, and therevpon commaunded Prometheus to performe it accordingly: for after that (ſayth hee) they ſhall be thus deſpoiled of their earthly robes, riches, and power, and being dead and naked, ſhall appeare before Iudges likewiſe dead and naked, (which then ſhall bee void of friendſhip, partialitie, or fauour) it ſhall be an eaſie matter in this caſe to giue true and rightfull iudgement, according to the qualitie and height of their offences. For the confirmation of which my purpoſe and intended decree (which I haue now reſoluedly concluded within my ſelfe) my pleaſure is, that my three ſonnes, two of them borne in Aſia, being Minos and Rhadamantus, and another in Europe, which is Eacus, ſtanding in a certaine greene meade, out of which doe part and are diuided two ſeuerall waies, the one into Hell, and the other into Eliſum (for ſo we may now call them) ſhall bee appointed there as Iudges of the ſoules of mortals, Rhadamante iudging thoſe of Aſia, and Eacus thoſe of Europe. And that, if it fortune that any doubt or vndecided ſcruple, ſhall ariſe betweene them, that then the ſame bee referred preſently vnto Minos, that thereby hee may giue his cenſure and opinion of it: for ſo much as wee intend

to deale and proceed vprightly in theſe caſes, & that there be not admitted therein any fauour, couſenage, or deceit. This (ſayth Plato) was the order and decree of Iupiter, which afterward was preſently effected & put in execution. Firſt vpon the examination of their ſins, Rhadamantus and Eacus ſate together in two yron chaires, holding in either of their handes a white rod. And Minos (diuided from them both) was ſeated all alone, holding in his hand a golden ſcepter, who ſeemed to meditate and ponder with a muſing & ſad countenance vpon the puniſhments, torments, or pleaſures, to be denounced & due to the offenders. As Vliſses (according as Homer reporteth) gaue out that at his being in that infernall kingdome, hee there ſaw the three Iudges in ſuch manner ſo to doome the ſoules of men: and thus farre are the words of Plato. Martianus writeth, (where he ſpeaketh of the lower Martianus. region) that Pluto himſelfe ſitteth moſt maieſtically in a mightie ebon chaire, holding in one of his hands a blacke imperiall ſcepter, and on his head ſeated a ſtately and ſumptuous crowne. At this left hand ſitteth his Ladie Proſerpina, attended with many furies and vgly ſpirits, at whoſe feet lieth chained the dog Cerberus. And further the ſame Authour proceedeth not. Vnto Pluto alſo the Auncients haue giuen a triumphant chariot, drawne with foure furious blacke horſes, from out whoſe fierie noſthrils proceedeth wondrous thicke and ill fauoured ſmoakes: which is alſo the opinion of Claudianus. Although Boccace ſpeaketh Boccace. only of three horſes, and that his charriot hath but three wheeles. Some write alſo, that Pluto hath his

head redemited and compaſſed about with a garland or wreath made of the leaues of Cipres trees, which ſignifie ſadneſſe and horror, and which are vſed in burials, maſſacres, & about dead carkaſſes. Others affirm, that the ſame garland is made of the Narciſſus leaues, for thoſe alſo are held gratefull, and are employed about dead bodies, in memorie of the vntimely death of that youth, afterwards transformed into that flower. And the like garlands alſo did thoſe furies weare which were attending on Pluto, and which were appointed by him to afflict the ſoules of men with ſuch meaſure of torments and paines, as their vicious and leaud life had merited and worthily deſerued, their names were Alecto, Tiſiphone, and Megaera: who in ſtead of haire to adorne their heads, had venemous Snakes and Adders encompaſſing the ſame, whoſe winding and crooked tailes hang downe diſſipated and diſparckled all about their ſhoulders, faces, and breaſts. Some writers doe alledge a fourth furie, adioined to theſe three, which they entearme by the name of Liſſa, which is as much to ſay as madneſſe, & therefore they hold, that from her proceed all lunacies, diſtractneſſe of ſence, & forgetfulneſſe of vnderſtanding and reaſon. Wherupon Euripides reporteth, Euripides. that Iris (commanded by Inno) brought this furie to her ſonne in law Hercules, becauſe ſhee intended to bewitch him with a braine diſtempering paſſion of madneſſe, furie, and rage. And this Liſſa is alwaies depictured with an yron ſtringed whip in her hand. Poets alſo haue in ſome ſort annexed vnto theſe furies, as partaking ſomething of their natures, thoſe monſters

which are called Harpiae, for that the Ancients beleeued, that theſe alſo were employed by the gods in puniſhing the ſinnes of mortall men, who are ſaid alſo to remaine & inhabite in the infernall kingdome: although Virgil reporteth, that they dwel in the Iſlāds Virgil. called Strophades, enuironned with the Ionian ſea, & are deſcribed to haue the face and countenance of beauteous and faire women, yet leane and ſomething meagre, the reſt of their bodies framed in the due proportion and ſhape of birds, with mightie broad wings, and crooked and ſharpe talents, for ſo Virgil deſcribeth them, which afterwards was moſt excellently imitated by Arioſto. Of theſe Harpiae are engendred thoſe birds which are called Striges, which alwaies flie in the night, and (as it is written) in the dead of ſilence get into mens houſes where young children are, and priuily ſucke their bloud, whereby oftentimes by loſſe of too much bloud, they miſerably pine away and periſh. Statius ſayth, That theſe haue alſo the face of women, and do remaine & breed in the infernal region. Some alſo haue writ, that thoſe ſpirits which are called Lamiae, with the Grecians are held to be the verie ſame as the other, which they called by the names of inchantreſſes or deuilliſh old women, alwaies practiſing miſcheefe, hurt, and villanie. Philoſtratus ſayth, That they are ill ſpirits, or wicked diuels, cruell, bloudie, and luxurious without meaſure, and moſt hungrie and greedie after human fleſh. Suida and Fauorinus report of one Lamia, who was a Suida and Fauorinus. moſt louely and beauteous woman, on whom Iupiter became exceedingly enamoured, who had alſo one

goodly and faire child, at whoſe delicate feature and well-ſhaped lineaments, Iuno exceedingly repined, and in the end by her infinit ſpight and iealouſie, cauſed it to be by ſuch night ſpirits moſt cruelly murthered: vpon which vnexpected and vnluckie accident, the woe-afflicted mother became almoſt frantike and diſtracted of her wits, who ſince in that miſerable paſſion of phrenſie vſeth to wander vp and downe, working and contriuing all the miſcheefe, hurt, and deſpight to all other young children whatſoeuer. Others write, that theſe Lamiae had the faces of women, and the feet of horſes. But Dyon the hiſtorian deſcribeth Dyon. them in another ſort, which alſo with many is held to be the moſt probable.
               It is read therefore with him, that in certain deſarts & vnhabited places of Lybia, are certaine moſt fierce rauening, and moſt furious beaſts, which (ſayth hee) haue the face, necke, & breaſt of a woman of the moſt loue-alluring faire and delicate hue, that any art of man for a moſt perfect colour can any way inuent, who in their countenance and eyes doe retaine ſo pleaſing a grace, and ſuch attractiue and enticing ſmiles, that they doe enwrap & ouercome (as it were) the beholders ſences euen with an entranced wonderment, and amaſed admiration. The reſt of their bodie is all couered ouer with moſt hard gliſtering & bright ſcales, whoſe forme downeward is of the ſhape of a moſt vglie ſerpent, fearefull and terrible. They haue not any wings, nor haue they any voice, onely like ſnakes they doe hiſſe, and make ſome ſoft noice with their lips: they are ſo infinite ſwift and nimble in running,

that no other beaſt is thought able to ouertake them, they make their prey of wild men, by laying open, and diſcouering their delicious ſnow-white breaſts, which who ſo ſeeth, becommeth inſtantly ſo beſotted with the beautie thereof, that hee preſently deſireth the taſt of thoſe pleaſures which are promiſed by ſo faire outward ſhewes, and in comming to embrace them, they themſelues altar not in any point their countenance, vnleſſe by ſeeming to bee baſhful, modeſt, and ſhamefaſt, they ſixe their eies downward on the earth, alwaies keeping hid and ſecret their ſharpe talents and ſerpent-ſhaped tailes, vntill by ſuch their inueagling and deceitfull demeanures, they fully are poſſeſſed of the prey betweene their embracements, which preſently they impoyſen to death with the venome of their ſting, and afterward doe eat and deuour them moſt greedily, whoſe mans fleſh-coueting maw is neuer filled or ſatisfied. Homer ſpeaketh of Homer. a certaine beaſt which was called Chimaera, which was deſcribed to haue the head of a Lyon, the bellie or middle part of a Goat, and the taile and feet of a Dragon, and from whoſe mouth iſſued forth fierie ſparckles, which alſo Virgil affirmeth in more large allowance. The neerer coniectures are, that this Chimaera was not a beaſt, but a certaine high mountaine in Licia, from whoſe top ſeemed to aſcend & mount flames of liuely fire (not vnlike the nature and qualitie of thoſe of the hill Mongibell) in the vpper parts of this mountaine, in certaine hollow caues & dens liued many Lyons of an extraordinarie, furious, and cruell kind: towards the bottome of it, which was incompaſſed

about with many high trees, buſhes, and thickets, were found infinite numbers of Snakes, Serpents, and Dragons, in that abundance, as the Country therabouts was altogether vnfrequented and diſinhabited of any human dwellers. For which inconuenience (proceeding from the number of thoſe rauenous beaſts) it is written, that Belleferon found out a remedie, and endeuoured ſo far, as he draue all thoſe beaſts cleane out of that country: for which cauſe (it ſhould ſeeme) the Poets afterwards ſuppoſed, that the beaſt Chimaera was ſlaine by Belleferon.
               
               Concerning the ſiſters, which wee call Parcae, and which are ſaid to attend on Pluto, there are alſo three, whoſe names are Clotho, Lacheſis, and Atropos, whereof the firſt (according to the opinion of the ancients) taketh charge of the birth & natiuities of mortall men: the ſecond, of all the reſt of their life: and the laſt, of their inſtant deaths, and departure out of this world: all which three are depictured ſitting on a row, buſily employed in their ſeuerall offices, the yongeſt ſiſter drawing out of a diſtaffe a reaſonable big thred, the ſecond winding it about a wheele, and turning the ſame till it became little and ſlender, and the eldeſt, which ſeemed decrepit and far in yeares, ſtood readie with her knife, (when it ſhould bee ſpun) to cut it off: and they are deſcribed to be inueſted with white vailes, and with little coronets on their heads, wreathed about with garlands, compoſed of the flowers of Narciſſus. And now to conclude with theſe deſcriptions of the Inferi, wee will end with that of Charon, ſuppoſed to be the ferry man of Acheron, with the

explication thereof, as both Boccace and Seruius haue deliuered, as alſo Virgil and Homer, and diuers others affirming the ſame.
               By Charon therefore is vnderſtood Time, which Boccace. Time (according to ſome opinions) is the ſon of Erebus, (which is taken for the diuine and celeſtiall counſell, held priuately before the world began) and from which, ſince, all things haue been produced: and as the Ancients (as I haue ſaid) ſuppoſed it to bee the father of Time, ſo likewiſe they held the Night to be the mother thereof, inſomuch, as before time there was neuer any matter whatſoeuer, nor any light or apparance of day could bee diſcerned, and therefore this Erebus by the Auncients is placed now in darkneſſe, which is the infernall region. And whereas Charon is ſuppoſed to haue the tranſportation and paſſing ouer of the ſoules of mortall men from the one ſide of the riuer Acheron, or (as ſome call it) Stix vnto the other, it is enucleated (as it were) & vnclouded thereby, that Time ſo ſoone as wee are borne and brought forth into the world, doth carrie vs along by little and little vnto our deaths, and ſetteth vs ouer the riuer of Acheron, which word interpreted, ſignifieth ſorrowfulnes, for that indeed we paſſe this life with miſeries, aduerſities, and laments. He is deſcribed old, and yet exceeding ſtrong, for that Time neuer looſeth his ſtrength or vertue by the ouer-ruuning of yeares, and hee is apparrelled with a blacke and moſt noiſome ſtinking mantle, which hangeth looſely ouer his ſhoulders, whoſe ſmel nothing is almoſt able to endure, al which ſignifieth; that while men are here in this world ſubiect

to time, we neuer reſpect the glorie of the celeſtiall habitations, only deuoting our ſelues to the riches, wealth, and pleaſures of this world, which indeed are moſt vile, filthie, and ſtincking, compared to thoſe ioious and happie bleſſings of heauen, whereunto wee ſhould wholly addict our ſelues, and direct our ſtudies, endeuouring by all endeuours to acquire & purchaſe the ſame vnto vs: but wee are ſo couered ouer & inueſted with this cloake and vaile of mortalitie and mundane affections, that wee are carried away blindfolded into a thouſand miſerable and diſordinate deſires. For the canckred ruſt of effeminate deſires hath ſo deepely eaten into this our yron age, as notwithſtanding the infinite labourious endeauours of many artificiall workemen, haue moſt largely extended, yet eſt tali rubigine tincta vt oleū & opera perdiderunt, Who euer aſſaied the varniſhing thereof. For ſuch an irradicable habite hath it attained vnto, that as the peſtiferous ſhirt, wherein the treble nighted brood was enwrapped, effuſed a venomous contagion, which did incorporate it ſelfe into the fleſh, fretted the ſinnewes, and feſtered into the marrow, ſo this en-eating yron mole, wherewith the inſenſate oſ-pring of this time is attainted, admitteth a remedileſſe infection, that ſtaineth the chriſtalline purifie of our minds, & dooth eneruate the contexed ground of our ſences: onely wee herein differ from him, that the poyſon wherewith hee was infected, wrought in him ſuch torment, as hee inſtantly ſought a remedie: but perceauing it ſo deepely rooted, that otherwiſe he could not bee thereof diſpatched, hee ſacrificed himſelfe

in a fire, whoſe aſcending flames mounted him vp to the heauens: whereas contrariwiſe wee (as entoxicat with Circaean drugs, and lulled aſleepe by the villainous deceits of the ſweet-ſeeming delights wherwith wee are beſotted) ſeeke by all meanes poſſible to pamper and feed vp our humourous conceits, and loath death, for nothing ſo much as wee thereby are depriued and diſpoſſeſſed of our pleaſures, which wee willingly would neuer forſake, from whence while wee draw backeward, with all our forces ſtill clinging to our foule deſires, wee are by the weight of wickedneſſe throwne downe headlong, and precipitated into hell. And thus much ſhall ſuffice for the deſcriptions and expoſitions neceſſarie in this Treatiſe.
            
            
               Mercurie.
               IT hath beene alreadie largely declared, that among the Ancients manie, yea infinite numbers of gods were held and worſhipped in moſt ſtrange and ſuperſticious adoration, of which, as many of them had many places and charges to take care of, protect, and gouerne, ſo likewiſe they were to vndertake many functions, offices, and duties. By reaſon whereof, it proceeded, that alſo they had ſo many names, titles, and degrees appropriated vnto them, which is the cauſe, that the Ancients oftentimes ſhape forth & engraue the effigies and forme of one god in diuerſe and ſeuerall faſhions, according as they were at that time to ſhew forth the qualitie, nature, and condition of ſuch

their then preſented deitie and working vertue. By meanes whereof, becauſe vnto Mercurie (of whome we now entreat) they attributed theſe natures, as that hee ſometimes was taken to be the god and patron of gaine and profit, ſometime of eloquence, and ſometime alſo of theft, ſubtiltie, and deceit, they haue depainted him now in this ſhape and now in that forme, and alwaies diuerſly: but the trueſt draught and ſimilitude of his portraiture is, wherein hee is depictured and ſet forth as the meſſenger of the gods: of which office alſo there were two ſorts held and obſerued among the gods, the one was executed by Mercurie, and the other by Iris, betweene both which, all the embaſſages and errants diſpatched whereſoeuer, were done and performed: onely this difference there was, that Iris more particularly attended vpon Iuno, and was for the moſt part commanded by her onely, vnleſſe when the gods among themſelues had intended to afflict mortals with peſtilences, wars, or ſome other all ruinating miſcheefes, then was Iris commonly imployed in theſe fatall meſſages. And about other matters of ſports, meetings, marriages, or pleaſant affaires, Mercurie was ſolelie vſed and commaun-
               The Auncients therefore depictured his forme in ſhe likeneſſe & ſhape of a yong man without a beard, with two ſmall wings infixed on the tops of his eares, his bodie almoſt all naked, ſaue that from his ſhoulpers depended a thinne vaile, which winded & compaſſed about all his bodie: in his right hand hee held a golden purſe, and in his left his Caducaeus or Snakie ſtaffe: behind him was depictured a liuely Cocke,

and with wings alſo on his heeles: with the Aegyptians his ſtaffe was thus deſcribed, Hee hath (ſay they) in one of his hands a ſlender white wand, about the which two ſerpents doe annodate and entwine themſelues, whoſe heads doe meet together euen iuſt at the top thereof, as their tailes alſo doe meet at the lower end, and the one of them is a male, & the other female. And this depicturance with them was called Concordia, or Signum pacis. Whereupon afterwards it grew, that Embaſſadours and great parſonages (employed in matters of ſtate) carried alwaies in their hands ſuch like ſtaffe, and were alſo called Caduceators. Many who would haue depictured the portraiture of Peace, haue taken and ſet downe this for the verie ſame, adioining vnto it ſome certaine branches of the Oliue tree. Wherevpon it is written by Virgil, 
                  Virgil. that Aeneas ſending certain Embaſſadours to the king of the Latines, cauſed them all to bee crowned with greene Oliue branches. Statius alſo ſayth, That when Statius. 
                  Tidaeus went to demand of Etheocles the kingdome of Thebes in the name of Polinices, hee held in his hand an Oliue branch, as a token of a peaceful Embaſſador. And that (when he could not obtaine his requeſt and demand) he violently threw it frō him on the ground, and in a furious manner ſtampt vpon it with his feet, as the ſigne of a moſt fatall and bloudie warre, which afterward was proſecuted accordingly. But now, hauing taken this occaſion to ſpeak of the Oliue branch, it ſhall not be much digreſſion ſomwhat to touch the Statues of Concordia or Peace, who (according as Ariſtofanes deliuereth) was framed in the ſhape of a Ariſtofanes.
                  
young woman, holding betweene her armes the infant Pluto, taken ſometimes for the god of Riches, in that by Peace they are acquired and conſerued, and by warres waſted and conſumed. And this Peace was by the Ancients held to be a very ſpeciall and louing friend to the goddeſſe Ceres, from which two proceed the encreaſes of fruits and corne, & all other nutriments whatſoeuer. And Tibullus thus ſpeaking of her ſayth: Tibullus.
               
               
                  All-plenteous, faire, and well-diſpoſed Peace,
                  In whom all learning finds eternall ſpring,
                  Through whom Bellonaes ſtratagems doe ceaſe,
                  Thou waſt the firſt of all that ere did bring
                  The ſtiffeneckt bull vnto the crooked yoke,
                  Making the fields yeeld plenty euery where,
                  Who with thy gentle mildly-gouern'd ſtroke
                  Exempteth all the world from further feare.
                  By thee, all proſpers well conſern'd, and cheriſht,
                  By furious war, all's loſt, conſum'd, and periſht.
               
               Wherevpon Claudianus reporteth, that Ceres by no entreaties would marrie her daughter either to Mars or Phoebus, being importunately ſued vnto by both of them: in that ſhee held Mars as her profeſſed and open enemie, and excepted alſo againſt Phoebus, for that with his ouer-ardent and fierie beames, her encreaſes were parched, burned, and conſumed. But returning to our firſt intended treatiſe, it hath ben already ſpoken, that Mercurie was depictured & drawn forth with two wings on the top of his eares, and alſo

(as ſome hold) two leſſer infixed on his heeles, & with his white rod or wand in his hand, as Homer alledgeth when hee ſayth: that Iupiter ſent him to Calipſo to releaſe Vliſſes and others of his companie from theſe miſcheeuous and diueliſh enchauntments, and when he was ſent alſo at another time to conduct Priamus through the Grecian campe to demand the body of his ſlaine ſonne Hector. And at another time when he was diſpatched to Aeneas, then remaining and ſoiourning with Dido the Carthaginean Queene. And indeed generally of all writers hee was deſcribed in that forme: vnto thoſe feathers or wings ſo placed vpon Mercurie (who as I haue ſaid, is oftentimes taken for learning and eloquence) is compared and alluded the nature of ſpeech, diſcourſe, and words; in that they are no ſooner pronounced and deliuered from the priſon: like manſion of the mouth, but they doe as it were flie away, and are ſo ſudainely vaniſhed and departed, as if they had wings (as a man may ſay) to carrie them away both out of ſight and hearing. And in that regard Homer oftentimes calleth them winged or Homes. feathered words. Almoſt all writers agree, that Mercurie was depictured with very long hair on his head, and that it hung downe about his ſhoulders: wherevnto alſo ſome hold, that his wings were faſtened, yet Apulcius deſcribes it otherwiſe, (when hee writeth of Apuleius. the Comedie of the goddeſſes, ſtriuing for the golden ball) where hee ſayth, that Mercurie was ſent vnto them by Iupiter, and that he appeared there like a verie youth, hardly attained to full virillitie, and that hee had very ſhort haire on his head, which looked

like the colour of amber, and was curled, and that for his veſtures he had only a ſubtle & thinne vaile, compoſed of purple ſilke. Martianus Capella deſcribes him to bee young alſo, but of a maruellous ſtrong & Martianus Capella. actiue conſtitution, and of a well diſpoſed bodie, of well-knit artures, ioints, and ſinewes, and on his chin ſayth hee, begin to ſprout forth and ſhew themſelues, certaine young haires of a yellowiſh colour. According to his opinion is Statius. But Lucianus deſcribeth him without either his Caduceas, or any ſuch wings Lucianus. ſo infixed vpon him, or that hee had any ſuch yellow haire, but ſayth, that hee lookt like a luſtie yong man, powerfull and vigorous, and that hee was very skilfull and well exerciſed in running, wraſtling, and actiuitie Philoſtratus. Wherof likewiſe Philoſtratus ſpeaketh when he ſayth, that Paleſtra was the daughter of Mercurie (which ſince wee haue entearmed by the name of wraſtling) and that ſhee was ſo indifferently formed, that it was very hard to iudge her either for a man or woman: for ſayth hee, her countenance ſeemed both youthfull & maidenly, her haire not altogether ſo long as a womans, nor ſo ſhort as a mans, her breaſts were delicate and white, and yet ſmall and ſlender, her generall proportion euery way pleaſing, and yet nothing effeminate, and hee deſcribes her there, ſitting in a greene meade, holding betweene her naked breaſts an Oliue branch, gratefull and acceptable vnto her, in that the wraſtlers (called alſo Paleſtrians, which did cuſtomably vſe thoſe kind of exerciſes) vſed to annoint their bodies before they attempted their ſports, with the oyle of Oliues. And thus Philostratus depainteth her,

ſaying, that ſhe was the daughter of Mercury, becauſe it is read indeed, that he was the firſt inuenter & ſetter vp of thoſe exerciſes of wraſtling, leaping, & other actiue & agile performances. And for this and other cauſes the Ancients worſhipped and adored as a god, Mercurie, vnto whom alſo, they attribute the firſt deuiſing and finding out of Letters, Muſicke, and Geometrie. Hee was taken alſo for the god of Trafficke & Marchandiſes, as that vnto thoſe kind of profeſſours it is fit and neceſſarie to haue eloquence, knowledge, and ſubtiletie of wit for the better managing & handling their deceitfull affaires, wherevpon Fulgentius 
                  Fulgentius. ſayth, That the wings ſo depictured on the heeles of Mercurie, ſignifie the courſe of thoſe that do traffick, which (ſayth hee) is alwaies vncertaine and full of doubt, now proſperous, and anone vnfortunate, and that they themſelues are carried vp and lifted vp (as it were) with the wings of hope, and aſſurance of good ſucceſſe, and many times alſo deſpairing, & that they are continually vexed with vn-aſſured thoughts, and diſquieting vigilancie; the which thing the Cock, placed behind this god, doth ſignifie & diſcloſe, although with ſome it is held, that this Cocke rather meaneth the watchfulneſſe and waking ſtudies of learned men, for ſo much as for thoſe kind of men that profeſſed letters, it was held an odious thing in thoſe daies to ſpend the whole night in ſleepe and drowſie cogitations. And therefore Mercurie was often taken for that light of knowledge, & ſpirit of vnderſtanding, which guides men to the true conceauement of darke and enigmaticall ſentences. And yet notwithſtanding,

naturall and ſeaſonable reſt and repoſe was altogether alſo in thoſe times allowed as the refreſher of mens wits. Pauſanias writeth (ſpeaking of the Countrie Pauſanias. of Corinth) that with the Trezemyans there was erected an altar, on which were performed & offered certaine Sacrifices and oblations to the Muſes, and vnto Sleep, as ioining them both together, & accounting Sleepe to bee a greater friend, and more agreeable to the Muſes than vnto any other god or goddeſſe whatſoeuer, vnto which Sleepe alſo they erected Statues, Images, and Pictures, adoring him with great zeale, reuerence, and veneration, as ſuppoſing him to be a great god, and the giuer of eaſe and quiet, & the mittigater and allaier of great and heauie labors. According to Homer & Heſiodus, Sleepe was accounted the brother of death, the which thing alſo the Images inſculped in the curiouſly-engraued cheſt of Cipſelus, liuely explained, wherein was inchaſed and ſet forth the true reſemblance and portraiture of a woman, of a moſt ſoure, louring, & ſad aſpect, ſomething growne in yeares and elderly, who in her left hand held a young child, of a reaſonable & ordinarie beautie, and in her right arm another child of a moſt ſwartiſh, blacke, and dull complexion, hauing his legs and armes growing maruellous crooked; both theſe children were cut out and faſhioned with their eies ſhut, the firſt was Sleepe, and the other Death, being both brothers and twinnes: the woman that held them ſo in her armes, was Night, and mother vnto them both. This Night alſo hath been defigured by the Ancients in forme of an old woman, hauing two great wings

growing on her ſhoulders, all coleblacke and ſpread abroad, as if they ſeemed to offer a flight, and that ſhe is drawne alſo in a charriot, whoſe foure wheeles are made of Ebonie. Boccace ſayth, That the wheeles therof ſignifie the foure parts of the night ſo diuided and diſtinguiſhed by Martiners, as alſo of ſouldiors vpon their guards. And hee there alſo affirmeth, that ſhee looketh with a very heauie and ſad countenance, but her vpper garment or vaile being of a black ſubſtance is notwithſtanding depainted and adulterated with ſundrie ſpots of ſiluer, made to the true aſſimilitude and ſhape of ſtarres, which (ſayth hee) is alluded to the beauteous ornament of the heauens. Tibullus ſayth, That the Night like a graue Matron is alwayes attended & waited vpon with all her children, which are ſaid to be, Death, Sleepe, the Starres, Melancholie, and many others. Philostratus in a Tablet (which hee Philoſtratus. made for Amphiarus) depainteth there the portraiture of Sleepe in the ſhape of an aged woman, all lazie, ſlouthfull, and ſluggiſh, and that ſhee was habited with two ſeuerall veſtments; that aboue was white, and the other vnder that, all blacke, by the one is vnderſtood the day, and the other the night: & ſhe held in one of her hands a horne, from which ſhee ſeemed to poure forth vpon mortall men the ſeed of reſt, eaſe, and quiet. Ouid deſcribing her place of her habitation, Ouid. ſayth, That ſhe dwelleth with the Cimerians (people which by reaſon of the abſence of the ſunnes illumination) haue continuall darkeneſſe. Homer ſetreth Homer. downe her dwelling place to bee in Lemnos, an Iſland embrac'd by the Egean ſea. Statius ſayth, That ſhee Statius.
                  
abideth with the people of Ethiopia. And Arioſto writeth of her abode to bee in the furthermoſt nooke or corner of Arabia. But Ouid (as I haue ſaid) ſpeaking of her habitation to bee with the Cimerians, ſayth alſo, That the bed ſhee reſteth vpon, is made of the hardeſt and blackeſt Ebonie, couered all ouer with blacke veſtures or attillatures, & that on the top of the bedſtead are framed forth in moſt excellent and curious manner, an infinite multitude of dreames, of diuerſe and ſeuerall natures figured out and expoſed. But of this it ſhall be ſufficient to haue ſaid thus much, reuerting my pen to the perfecting of our former matter of Mercurie.
               It is read therefore, that vnto the Statues and Images dedicated vnto Mercurie (thoſe eſpecially which were erected in publike ſtreets and high waies) it was the vſe and cuſtome for euery paſſenger that paſſed by, to throw ſtones, ſtickes, or other ſuch like, according as vpon the firſt veiw, or by chance they happened vpon them, by reaſon whereof, about thoſe Statues in very ſhort time, were raiſed very great hils only of ſtones: by which is either ſignified, that the gods (ſo adored in thoſe daies) were to bee reuerenced and worſhipped with all thoſe things, which at the firſt ſight preſented themſelues, thereby offering them vp (as it were) as an oblation vnto them; or elſe it did meane, that Learning, Diſcourſe, and Knowledge, is compacted and made of little parcels and peeces of phraſes, figures, and ſentences, as that hill was grown to mightineſſe & huge proportion, by heaping and entermingling of thoſe little ſtones ſo particularlie

gathered together, and accumulated by the paſſengers.
               The Auncients alſo haue aſcribed vnto Mercurie the charge, care, & protection of ſheepheards, which Homer likewiſe ſeemeth to confirme, when hee ſayth, that Phorbus was the richeſt in cattell and heards of beaſts of all the Troians whatſoeuer, whome Mercurie (ſayth hee) fauouring and affecting, had raiſed and aduanced to that wealth and happineſſe. Pauſanias 
                  Pauſanias. writeth, That in a certaine Prouine of Corinth in a high way, was erected an Image or Statue of Mercurie, wholly compoſed of braſſe, at whoſe right ſide was depictured forth a Lambe, lying on the ground. The ſame Author alſo ſayth, That there was another of the like held in great reuerence among the Tanagreans, people of Beotia, on the ſhoulders of which picture was drawne forth, ſitting, the portraiture of a Ram with golden hornes, and the reaſon of it was, in that (as they held) Mercurie was ſeene to go in ſuch ſort with a Ram on his ſhoulders, round about the wals of a Cittie in Beotia, when hee cauſed a moſt greeuous and infectious peſtilence to ceaſe, which had almoſt periſhed and conſumed all the inhabitants of that citty. Wherevpon it was alwaies afterward obſcrued, that vpon the celebration and ſolemnizing of the feaſt of Mercurie, there was appointed a beautifull young man, who ſhould that day three times go round about the wals of the cittie, with a Ram on his ſhoulders. Pauſanias ſpeaketh alſo of another kind of Pauſanias. Statue, which was brought from Arcadia vnto Rome, and there erected in the temple of Iupiter Olympicus,

which on his head had a helmet of engrauen Steele, and ouer his ſhoulders was caſt a Souldiours coat, who held alſo vnder his arme the ſhape of a Ram.
               
                  Macrobius, who is of opinion, That by all the gods of the Auncients were vnderſtood the ſeuerall vertues Macrobius. of the Sunne, ſayth, that the wings ſo giuen to Mercurie (as is before touched) doe ſignifie the ſwiftneſſe and velocitie of the Sunnes expedition in the Zodiake. And that whereas it is written, that hee ſlue Argos the guardian and keeper of the daughter of Inachus, transformed afterward into a Cow, he ſayth, that that Argos ſuppoſed to haue ſo many eies, is nothing elſe but the heauens, beautified with ſo many ſtarres, which beholdeth and gouerneth the earth: which earth alſo the Aegyptians in their ſacred letters framed in the likeneſſe of a Cowe, ſo that Mercurie (who is alſo oftentimes taken for the ſunne) thus killing Argus, is only the baniſhing, vanquiſhing, or putting to flight of the ſtars in the firmament, which (as it were) hide themſelues vpon the firſt appropinquation of the ſuns all glorious reſplendencie. Martianus ſayth, That Philologia entering into the ſecond heauens, ſaw there comming towards her a Virgine, Martianus holding in one of her hands a certaine tablet, wherein were interſected many deſcriptions, properties, conditions, and figures of Mercurie. In the midſt of which was liuely proportioned a certaine Birde of Aegypt like vnto a Storke, which with them was called lbis, and alſo the head of a young man with long yellow haire, & round about it ſeemed to twine two

young Serpents. Vnder that was drawn a white wand all gilded at the top, in the midſt of it of a greeniſh colour, and towards the end coale blacke. On the right hand of it was depictured a great ſhel of ſome ſtrange fiſh, and alſo a Scorpion: and on the left ſide was depainted a Goat, & a little bird, much like vnto a Sparrow-hawke: all which depicturances containe within themſelues the myſteries and darke meanings of the Aegyptians, with whom Mercurie was worſhipped & adored vnder the name of that god, which with them was called Anubis, and was depictured alſo with his Caduceus, as Apuleius likewiſe (where hee writeth of Apuleius. certaine tales of thoſe people which trauelled with Iſis) depainteth him. And ſayth, that Anubis (which the Aegyptians called Mercurie) was ſetforth & depictured ſometimes of a blacke and ſwartiſh complexion, ſometimes alſo very beautifull, and of a faire aſpect. And among ſome of them alſo they framed his Image, as hauing the head of a Dog, in his right hand holding a Snakie wand, and with his left ſhaking a greenebough of Palme. By the head of the Dog was vnderſtood the ſubtiletie & craftineſſe which proceeded from Mercurie, for ſo much as there is thought no beaſt to be ſo wiſe, capable, and wilie as the Dog: Or elſe they ſo ſhaped him with the head of a Dog, for that (as it is written by Diodorus Siculus) this Anubis Diodorus Siculus. was the ſonne of Oſiris, who long before that following his father in the warres, ſhewed himſelfe ſo valerous and approued hardie, as that indeed after he was dead, hee was worſhipped & honoured as a god. And for that in his life time, hee alwaies carried depainted

in his ſhield the portraiture of a Dog, defiguring the ſame alſo vpon all his other armes, his Image or Statue was afterward in that manner drawn and ſet forth with a Dogs head, demonſtrating alſo thereby, that hee was louing, faithfull, and obedient to his father, defending him alwaies from all dangers, abuſes, and perrillous accidents, which alſo is commonlie ſeene in that beaſt towards his maiſter or keeper.
               There be ſome haue written, that Mercurie was taken & held for the very ſame as Hercules, or not much different frō him, as his Image or Picture held among the French men manifeſted, which people likewiſe adored him as the god of Wiſdome & Eloquence, and his Statue was thus compoſed:
               There was hewen and cut out with moſt exquiſite skill and care of the workmen, an excelently well-proportioned Image, in the ſimilitude and ſhape of a very aged man, euen decrepit as it ſhould ſeeme, and in the extremitie of yeares, his head almoſt bald, ſauing that on the ſides remained ſome few haires, ſhort, and curled, his countenance ſeuere, grim, and ſoure, his complexion of a tawnie and time-worne hue, his vpper veſture was the skin of a Lyon, and in his right hand he held an vnweldy and huge poleaxe, in his left hand an yron bow, and at his backe hung a quiuer of ſteeleheaded arrowes, to the end of his tongue were faſtened and annexed many ſmall chaines & linkes of gold, with which hee ſeemed to pull and draw vnto him infinite multitudes of men of ſundry Nations, which were alſo tied and faſtened to thoſe chaines, and yet

of themſelues ſeemed voluntarily to follow him, the picture looking alwaies backeward to behold ſuch innumerable troopes flocking towards him. And this peece of worke was framed with inexplicable & rare perfection of knowledge, beautified & adorned with delicate politure and true couching and conclauſture of thoſe hard and almoſt impenetrable ſtones. By the deſcription and ſetting forth of which, is diſcouered and vnript (as it were) the all-drawing force, and attractiue power of eloquence, ſo attributed & aſcribed by theſe people vnto Hercules. In framing him old and in yeeres, is vnderſtood, that in men of experience and long ſtudies, eloquence is of more vertue and power, as attained vnto naturitie of perfection, being indeed raw (and therefore not well digeſted) in yonger yeeres which of neceſſitie muſt want iudgement and a ſetled experience to adioine vnto it, by which it is made more forcible, preuailing, and gracious, as Homer at large & copiouſly ſpeaketh thereof in his commends and praiſes of Neſtor. From whoſe mouth (ſayth hee) moſt fluently ruſhed forth ſtreames of dulcet honny, and whoſe penne diſtilled ſugred drops of delicious ſweetneſſe, and whoſe workes and fruits ſo compleat & adorned with golden ſentences, aſſuageth the malice of time, and mittigateth and allaieth her ſpight of forgetfulneſſe, whoſe perpetuitie is engrauen in the braſſe-leaued bookes of neuer-dying memorie. And thus much concerning the Statues, Images, Pictures, and Deſcriptions made of Mercurie, held among the Ancients to be the god of craft and eloquence.
            
            
               
               Minerua.
               IT is manifeſt, that the knowledge of neuer ſo many things without either a grace, or a certaine kind of pleaſing deliuerie of the ſame, is not abſolutely exquiſite in praiſe; yet merritting due commends, though not in the excellencie or height thereof: ſo likewiſe to ſpeake much, and to enter into the handling or diſcourſe of many matters for one that knoweth little, & is but ſleightly trauelled in the truly-conceaued paths of literature; not only diſcouers an ineducated rudeneſſe, and lame ignorance of letters, but oftentimes induceth vnto himſelfe danger, and may offend very highly, as Marcus Tullius at large and learnedly hath written. As therefore among the Ancients Mercurie was taken and held (in reſpect of his melliſluous and honny-dewed tongue of deliuerie) for the god of eloquence: ſo likewiſe was Minerua reuerenced and adored amongſt them, for the Queen and Goddeſſe of Wiſedome, Learning, and Knowledge. And to let vs vnderſtand, that it is requiſite (as before is ſomething touched) to know very well what we vndertake to ſpeake and diſcourſe of, and to apprehend a right conceauement what wee ſuppoſe wee know indeed, to argue with ſhort and pithie diſputes, thereby to pull on attention, and auoid the miſerie of being thought to be tedious; to contend mildly, and laſtly, to write methodically, and with a good grace, (being indeed a ſpeciall introducement of a reading ſpirit) the Ancients haue thought fit to conioine the

Statues of this god & goddeſſe together, as betweene whom reſted a kind of Sympathie and concordance of diſpoſitions, and they called it by a Greeke name, Hermathena, for that the Grecians entearmed Mercurie Hermes, and Minerua they called Athena. And they vſed to erect this Picture or Image, alwaies in ſchooles, intending thereby to put ſchollers in mind, that they ought to embrace knowledge with eloquence, making thereof a compoſed medling and entermixing, as that by the one, the other receaued farre greater vertue, grace, and perfection by the combination of both their powers together.
               And it was held among the Auncients, that Wiſdome and Knowledge was not only neceſſarie, and to be acquired ſolely in Citties, and in priuate & domeſticall gouernements, but alſo to be entertained & imbraced abroad in the warres, among Generals, Captaines, and all ſorts of commanders: therefore they attribute vnto Minerua the care & charge of the wars, and depicture her in her Statue all armed like a valiant commandreſſe, as it is recorded that ſhee ſhewed her ſelfe very gallant, valerous, and forward in the warres, held betweene the gods & the Gyants, wherin (as it is written with ſome) ſhee hand to hand ſlew Pallantes the moſt fierce, terrible, and mightieſt of them all. Whereupon ſhee afterwards got the name of Pallas, and was ſo entearmed. But other writers affirme, that ſhee was called Pallas, for ſome other reaſons, whereof it ſhall bee now needleſſe to ſpeake, only it is ſufficient, that they all agree, that Minerua and Pallas were all one and the ſame.
               
                  
Many haue written alſo, that Bellona was goddeſſe of the warres, and the ſame as Minerua, but by their Statues and Images dedicated vnto them, theſe differences doe appeare: By Minerua was vnderſtood and intended the wiſe councels and aduiſed prudencie of Captaines and Officers, in managing their militarie affaires: and by Bellona were meant all bloudie ſtratagems, maſſacres, ſurpriſes, executions, and fatall meetings of the enemie whatſoeuer, and therfore ſhe was depictured to hold in one of her hands a whip of redhotyron ſtrings, and in her other hand a great earthen baſen, filled vp with coniealed bloud, ſhee was held alſo to be the goddeſſe of wrath, furie, and anger, and many times depainted with a trumpet at her mouth, as ſhee that gaue the ſigne of battell, and of generall encounters. But moſt writers doe agree, that ſhee was moſt commonly depictured with a flaming firebrand in her hand, for that the Auncients (as it is read with Licofrones) before the vſe of the Trumpets was found Licofrones. out, when they intended to giue a ſignall or token of battell, accuſtomed to ſend a ſlaue before the campe of the enemie with a flaming torch or firebrand in his hand, the which after that hee had ſhaken three times in his hand, would throw it downe towards the face of the enemie, and preſently after begun their battell & furious encounters on both ſides. Claudianus & Statius doe report, that this Bellona was the firſt that was ſeene to carrie in her hands this fierie token of fight. And thus much ſhall ſuffice for her deſcription as ſhe is taken for Bellona.
               Minerua by moſt writers was depictured in the

ſhape of a young woman, of a liuely and freſh countenance, yet ſomething threatening and angrie in hir lookes, her eyes were very fixe, aſſured, and ſtedfaſt, and much like the colour of a blewiſh greene, or that of a troubled ſea, and ſhee was armed complete at all peeces, with a long ſpeare in one hand, & on hir other arme a ſhield or target, made of the pureſt Chriſtall, on the top of her helmet was placed a garland, made of Oliue branches, and hard by her ſide were drawne forth, and portraied two young children with naked kniues in their hands, ſeeming (as it might appeare by their lookes) to menace one another, the one was called Feare, the other Horror, as that thoſe two alwaies waited, and were conuerſant in warres and bloudie controuerſies. Wherevpon Statius (writing that Mars Statius. commanded by Iupiter to ſet warres and quarrels betweene the Argiues and Thebans) ſayth there, that Mars ſent before him thoſe two, Feare, and Horror. Pauſanias writeth, that the picture of Feare was ſhaped forth in ſeuerall formes by the Auncients, as that Pauſanias. ſometimes it was made with the head of a Lyon, terrible and furious; which manner was vſed much by the Grecians, and which forme was engrauen on the ſhield of Agamemnon: with ſome other it was framed with the face and bodie of a woman, but of ſo vgly and deformed countenance as is poſſible to imagin. The Corinthians dedicated this picture ſo made, vnto the ſonnes of Medea, ſlaine and murthered for bringing ſuch fatall gifts to the daughter of old Creon, whereby ſhe and all that regall familie periſhed, and were for euer extinct.
               
                  
The Oliue tree was conſecrated to Minerua, for that (as Virgil ſayth) the Athenians vſed to crown the Virgil. heads of Conquerors and triumphant commanders, with garlands thereof. Many writers doe diſagree in the deſcription of Minerua, and eſpecially thoſe of Greece. Touching the birth of her, it is written, that ſhe was borne without a mother, and that ſhee iſſued and came forth into the world out of the head of Iupiter (according to the opinion of all fantaſticke Poets.) By which is meant & vnderſtood, that all human knowledge and vnderſtanding proceedeth from the ſuperior and diuine guidance aboue, whereby theſe intellectuall parts become celeſtiall, and deſpiſers of terrene delights. But Martianus interpretes it to the diſgrace of women, (being indeed a great and ſore enemie vnto all that ſexe) but (his expoſition being too ſeuere and rigorous in that behalfe) it ſhall not be pertinent further to declare it. Whoſe opinion alſo Ariſtotle himſelfe ſomething embraced, affirming (being too much opinionated therein) that as Minerua Ariſtotle. was borne without a mother, ſo all women generally are of themſelues without wit, knowledge, ſecrecie, or aſſured conſtancie: but ſuch inuention proceedes onely of malice, and ſome other ſeed of rancour, which was indeed irradicated in his breaſt againſt that praiſe-worthie ſexe. Wherin I dare in ſome ſort contradict Ariſtotle, in that (it is apparent) that there are in the world women of as great ſpirit, wit, capacitie, and ſetled reſolutions as moſt men are, and are as eloquent in deliuery of their thoughts, & as ſcholler-like in chuſing fit and ſignificant words, in compoſing &

annexing their pithie, ſententious, and well-placed phraſes, as moſt men are whatſoeuer (exempting ſome famous profeſſed Doctors, and daily Students.) But returning to Minerua, the Auncients (as I haue ſaid) framed her Statue to be all armed throughout, in the faſhion of a moſt valerous and hardie warrior: & ſhe wore on her head a wonderfull rich helmet, all made and hammered of maſſie gold, which with the beauty thereof ſhined moſt gloriouſly, ſending forth a moſt excellent luſtre, and delicate tranſparencie. Homer 
                  Homer. ſayth, That by this helmet ſo infixed on her head, is ſignified, that the wit and policie of man (which alwaies reſteth in the braine of the head) is (as a man may ſay) ſo armed, and at all times prouided & readie, that it deſendeth the bodie from all eminent dangers, miſcheefes, and inconueniences, & that it doth ſhine, & is made beautifull with vertuous & worthie works, ſtudies of contemplation, and diuine meditations. The ſame Homer ſayth, That the excellent wit of man Homer. doth neuer diſcouer all that it knowes, nor yet leaueth all that it diſcourſeth of, eaſily to be vnderſtood & conceiued: wherein ſuch words are cōpared to the doubtfull anſweres of an Oracle, or the darke and intricate ſpeeches of Sphinx: whereby belike it came, that in a certaine part of Aegypt, they placed in the temple of Minerua, the Statue and portraiture of this Sphinx, which the people there reuerenced & adored, beleeuing it to be the goddeſſe Iſis.
               
                  Pauſanias (ſpeaking of the Athenians) ſayth, That Pauſanias. there was in that countrie a very ſtately, and curiouſly built Image of Minerua, which had engrauen on the

top of the helmet the ſhape & forme of Sphinx, and on both ſides of it were cut out & carued the portraitures of two Griffins, which are held indeed to be neither beaſts nor birds, but doe equally partake of both kinds, for they haue the vpper part (as the head, necke and wings) of an Eagle, and the reſt of their bodies ſhaped to the true ſimilitude of Lyons. Theſe ſtrange formed beaſts are found to remaine (though Pliny ſets them downe as fabulous) in the furthermoſt parts of Scythia, where (as it is written) are certaine mines of gold and ſiluer, which theſe Griffins doe continually guard and keepe, ſo that the people of that Country, being called Arimaſpes (which as many writers affirm haue but one eye in their forehead) cannot without great danger and hazard of their liues dig or ſeach for any of that gold.
               On the top alſo of that helmet ſo made for Minerua, ſomeimes they placed the forme of a Cocke, as in one part of Greece (inhabited by the Eleans) there was ſuch a Statue erected & made by Phidias, which was wholly framed of gold and yuorie, which was ſo conſecrated and dedicated vnto Minerua, becauſe that bird of all others is moſt fierce, bold, and hardie in his fight, as likewiſe in Captaines and men of war, is requiſite and required: or els it did demonſtrat therby the vigilancie and wakefull cogitations of great commanders and wiſe Gouernors, in whom is required great foreſight, watchfulneſſe, & care. And herein I muſt ſomewhat digreſſe from this treatiſe of Minerua, to obſerue my Authour, who in this place hath inſerted ſome few capitulations of other abſtracts, the

firſt beginning with the deſcriptions of Veritas, or Truth, with the explications thereof.
               It is written with many Authors, & eſpecially with Hippocrates, that the effigies and portraiture of Truth Hipocrates. was framed in the due ſimilitude & likeneſſe of a beauteous young woman, attired with very graue & modeſt abillements, and yet for that kind of elderly habite, very rich and coſtly. And the ſame Authour alſo depainteth there the ſhape of Opinion, likewiſe reſembling a young woman, not altogether ſo faire & louely, and yet not deformed or ill proportioned: who (ſaith he) ſeemed rather impudent than modeſtly bold, in all her demeanures, with her hands reaching forth to take and receaue whatſoeuer is offered and preſented.
               
                  Philoſtratus (ſpeaking of Truth) ſayth, that ſhee remaineth in the caue of Amphiarus, clothed all in white garments, gliſtering, and of a beautifull hue, where alſo ſhe was taken and ſuppoſed to bee the mother of Vertue, which Vertue, the Auncients reuerenced and worſhipped as a ſacred Goddeſſe, & conſecrated many Temples, Statues, and Altars vnto her, whoſe Image they erected directly before the Temple which was dedicated vnto Honor, meaning thereby, that none could enter or haue acceſſe thereunto, but by meanes of the other, and that there was no way or meanes to get true honour, but by the way & line of vertue, as that honour, dignitie, and aduancement were the rewards and recompences of vertuous and well-gouerned actions: and this picture of Honor alſo (as diuers write) was oftentimes ſet forth with

two wings on the ſhoulders thereof, intending & vnſhadowing thereby, that honour and glorie doe as it were lend wings vnto men of vertue and merit, to lift vp and aduance themſelues aboue the ordinarie pitch and ſeat of vulgar and deſertleſſe people, euen to the wonder and admiration of all men.
               
                  Lucianus ſpeaking of a certaine Temple dedicated Lucianus. vnto Truth, ſayth, that in the midſt thereof was erected her Image or Statue in the forme of a young woman, all ſorrowfull, ſad, and diſcontent, habited in vnſeemely rags and baſe attire, and (as it ſhould ſeeme by certaine ſuperſcriptions ouer the head) ſhee complained, that ſhe was ill-intreated, abuſed, & wronged by Fortune.
               In many places (eſpecially in Greece) Vertue hath been ſhaped forth in forme of a Pilgrime or traueller, in that ſhe findeth no reſting place, ſecure abode, or certaine habitation, being ſometimes vexed & oppreſt by the gouernement of Tyrants, ſometimes of Vſurers, and auaricious commanders, ſometimes by luxurious Rulers, & ſometimes alſo by the furie and chances of warres, inteſtine ſeditions, & ciuil broiles. Sometimes ſhe is defigured forth like a graue and auſtere Matrone, ſitting vpon a foure-ſquared ſtone, all ſolitarie, penſiue, and melancholie, and leaning her head vpon her knees, as though ſhee ſeemed wearie of her life, being ſo full of croſſes, miſeries, and perturbations.
               It is written with Zenophon and Marcus Tullius, that Hercules when he was in his adoleſcencie, and Zenophon. prime of his blooming daies, wandering by chaunce

in a deſart and vnfrequented wood, came where two ſeuerall waies diuided themſelues in two contrarie courſes, the one leading directly into the wood, and the other enclining on the one ſide thereof: Hercules as vncertain which of theſe two he ſhould take, ſtood pondering and conſidering of the choice, hee had not long ſtood thus reuoluing within himſelfe, but there appeared before him (all on the ſudaine) two women, the one of which was called Pleaſure, who indeed was wondrous beautifull to the eye, and of a louely aſpect, wanton in her demeanure, and exceeding pleaſing in all her geſtures, and ſhee was apparrelled with verie glorious and gorgeous abillements, whoſe eyedazeling brightneſſe amaſed Hercules with huge admiration thereof, ſhe was ſo adorned and decked with reſplendant iewels, and gliſtering ſtones, & this woman ſeemed to perſuade him to take the way of ſenſualitie & delights, which at the firſt entrance appeared vnto him very large, faire, and eaſie, beſet with very pleaſant and greene hearbes, and diuers-coloured flowers, but towards the end it grew very ſtreit, ſtony, rough, and full of ſharpe-pricking thornes: the other woman (ſomewhat more graue & ſetled in her countenance) was called Vertue, who was clothed with verie ſimple and meane garments, and ſhee with her finger pointed vnto that way which ſhee would wiſh Hercules to take, which indeed at the beginning ſhewed it ſelfe very narrow, full of rockes, and ſteepe-aſcending banckes, verie crooked, and almoſt in-acceſſable; but after towards the midſt it ſhewed very pleſant, and at the very end of it was a moſt delicat green

mead, all beſet and enwalled with trees of the rareſt and daintieſt fruits that could bee wiſhed for, the vale it ſelfe all beſpangled (as it were) with field-flowers of ſundry ſorts and colours, entermixed with the odoriferous roſe, gillowflower, marigold, & pinke: through the midſt of this greene plot, glided and ſtole along a ſoft-murmuring chriſtall ſpring, through the puritie of whoſe cleereneſſe (by meanes of the reflection of the ſunnes beames) an infinite number of golden hewed peble ſtones, daunced as it were, & leaped on the ſands, as moued and ſtirred with the ſwift-paced current of that faire-running water: and vnto this path Hercules betooke himſelfe, labouring & ſtriuing very eagerlie to paſſe in at the firſt entrance, which at the length, with continuing and laborious endeauours, he recouered, & ſo attained to that delicious & beautifull medow, which his choice ſo elected, afterwards purchaſed vnto him euer-liuing fame and glory, regiſtered by time in the braſſe-leaued booke of endleſſe perpetuitie.
               The Auncients alſo made and dedicated Images and Statues for the adoration and worſhip of Honor, which (as Alciatus giueth vs to vnderſtand) they framed Alciatus. in the ſhape of a little child, clothed and apparelled with a purple garment, hauing a garland of Lawrell, wreathed about his head: with whome was depainted to hold hand in hand the god Cupid, who ſeemed to lead and guide the child vnto the goddeſſe Vertue, which was depictured right ouer againſt it, hewen forth and engraued with exquiſite and rare intaliature.
               
                  
Among the Auncients likewiſe was reuerenced and adored as a great goddeſſe, the Ladie Volupia, 
                  
                     Volupia the goddeſſe of pleaſures. which they held to bee the goddeſſe of pleaſures and delights: and her Statue was depainted, as hauing a pallid and leane countenance, yet ſitting in a pontificall and maieſtike chaire, all embrodered and emboſſed with ſtarres of refined gold. And vnder her feet was drawne out the picture of Vertue, looking as though ſhe had ben deiected, troden downe, and deſpiſed by her.
               It is written with Plinie (as alſo Solinus and Macrobius 
                  Plinie. affirme the ſame) that in a certaine temple dedicated vnto this goddeſſe Volupia, was cut out with egregious skill of the workeman (as ſitting vpon an Altar) the goddeſſe Angerona, looking with a heauie and ſad countenance, which alſo was framed with her lips tied together, and faſt conioined, to ſhew vs therby, that in all pleaſures or other mattets whatſoeuer, it behoueth vs to hold our peace, & to keepe ſilence. Macrobius expounds it thus, that whoſoeuer knoweth how to vſe ſecrecie, ſilence, and to diſſemble his greefes, and diſcontents, ſhall in the end ouercome them, and ſhall lead a moſt pleaſant, eaſefull, and quiet life.
               The Aegyptians did much reuerence and worſhip their god of Silence, which with them was called Harpocrates, and according to the Greekes, Sigaleon: whoſe Statue and Image (as Martianus and Apuleius 
                  Martianus. record) was made in the likeneſſe of a young child, who cloſe to his lips held one of his fingers, as a ſigne of ſecrecie. Whereupon it comes, that the ſame

faſhion is now alſo obſerued when men would ſignifie by ſigns, that a thing ſhould not be vnreuealed or ſpoken of. Sometimes the portraiture of this God is drawne without any face at all, all couered ouer with the skin of a Wolfe, on which were depainted as many eyes and eares as could bee inſerted thereon: ſignifying thereby, that it was needfull to ſee and heare much, and to ſpeak little, in that he that ſpeaketh not, offendeth not. By the Wolues skin is vnderſtood the propertie of that beaſt, who when it hath ſtolne anie prey, preſently conueyeth himſelfe away, and runneth with ſuch heed, feare, and quietneſſe, that hee dares not in all that time ſo much as drawe his breath, or pant, with ſuch ſlie ſecrecie doth he eſcape and ſteale away.
               But now it is time to returne to our firſt intreatie of Minerua, whom (as I haue alreadie ſaid) the Auncients all armed, with a Speare or Dart in one hand, and a Chriſtall ſhield in the other. By the ſhield (in that Minerua is taken for Wiſdome and Knowledge) is vnderſtood the roundneſſe and compaſſe of the world, gouerned with wiſe decrees, politike lawes, & diſcreet commandements. By the Dart or Speare, is vnſhadowed the force, vertue, and power of wiſdome, & that the words and ſpeeches of a learned man do preuaile, and are effectual throughout the whole world: or that the ſharpeneſſe and vigour of an excellent wit, & allapprehending capacitie, is able to penetrate & make entrance into the hardeſt and obſcureſt enigma whatſoeuer; as the Dart being furiouſly deliuered from the hands of a powerfull bodie, pierceth very deepe into

any hard ground or other mettall of good proofe or reſiſtance.
               
                  Pauſanias writeth, that in a certain place of Greece was erected a moſt huge and great Coloſſus, out of which was cut forth and carued the picture of Minerua, ſitting as it were on a little ſtoole, & drawing forth ſmall threds from a diſtaffe: for that the Ancients ſuppoſed her to bee the firſt inuentreſſe and deuiſer of ſpinning, as alſo of weauing in ſilke, and other like inuentions.
               They attribute alſo vnto her the firſt finding out of almoſt all kind of Arts and Sciences: vnderſtanding thereby, that the wit and inuention of man (for which Minerua, as I haue ſaid, is taken) is the beginner and diſcouerer of all ſorts of trades, faſhions, ſciences, or profeſſions whatſoeuer: touching which the Poets do faine, that Prometheus with the helpe of Minerua went vp to the higher heauens, and ſtealing away ſome part of the fierie chariot of the Sunne, gaue and beſtowed it on men below, whereby afterwards they contriued new arts, and mechanicall trickes of cunning and skill, euery one after his owne maner, deuiſe, & humor: in working of which arts (as Pliny writeth) is required two things, the firſt is Wit, and Conceit, and the other, Heed, Care, and true effecting of what is propoſed: the firſt is meant by Minerua, the laſt by Vulcan (which is as much to ſay as fire) for vnder the name of Vulcan, wee oftentimes read the nature of fire to bee vnderſtood, being the inſtrument and meanes to forme and faſhion almoſt all things whatſoeuer.
               
                  
Many writers haue deſcribed the portraitures of Vulcan and Minerua both in one Statue and Image, as Plato in one place ſayth, That theſe two were equallie ſuppoſed to bee the gods and protectors of Athens, Plato. for ſo much indeed as in thoſe times the ſtudie and practiſe of Sciences, was no leſſe vſed and followed than the profeſſion and inward exerciſes of letters and learning.
               Others write, that Neptune and Minerua were the ioint-protecters of Athens, ſo appointed by the order and decree of Iupiter, wherevpon the Athenians ſtamped and imprinted vpon their coine the picture of Neptunes Trident, and on the other ſide the portraiture of Minerua.
               But (as I ſaid before) Vulcan was many times vnderſtood for fire, or at the leaſt for the force, propertie, and nature thereof, as Euſebius in many places alloweth. Alexander Neapolitanus reporteth, that in one place of Aegypt was erected the Statue of Vulcan, Alexander Neapolitanus. which held in one of his hands the true and liuely proportion of a certaine beaſt, which we call a Mole, and in his other hand a thunderbolt: and the Aegyptians ſo placed a Mole in his hand, for that they ſuppoſed that Vulcan had ſent into one part of Aegypt infinite and vnſpeakeable numbers of Moles of purpoſe to eat, gnaw, and deſtroy the ſadles, bridles, targets, and ſuch like furniture made of Leather, belonging to the Arabians their enemies, who then were entred into their Countrie with huge armies of ſouldiours, to ouerrun and depopulate the Country, which notwithſtanding afterwards by the innumerable ſwarmes

as it were of theſe Moles, (ſo noiſome and offenſiue vnto them) were conſtrained to retire, leaue, & abandon the countrey: which thing is not altogether vnlikely, for ſo much as many autentike and approoued Authours haue verified the like.
               
                  Elianus reporteth, that the rootes of trees and Elianus. hearbes in certaine parts of Italie, were eaten and deſtroyed in ſuch ſort with multitudes of Rats, that the inhabitants in the end (although they daily endeuoured to kill them) were notwithſtanding for penurie, faine to leaue and forſake their Countrey. Marcus 
                  Marcus Varro. 
                  Varro writeth, That there was a Towne in Spain ſcituated on a ſandie ground, which was ſo vndermined by Connies, that in ſhort time it ſunke, and was vtterly decaied. Neither haue theſe chances happened only in wild Countries and many continents, but in places alſo enuironned with the ſea, as that it is written, that one of the Iſles Cyclades, called Giare, was by the ouer-abundance and multitudes of Rats and Mice, left void and deſtitute of inhabitants, being ſo tormented and annoied with them, that very neceſſitie cauſed them to forgoe their Countrie. It is alſo reported, that in Fraunce a very famous towne was by the ſaid vermine (ſo abounding therein) left void & vnfrequented of any Inhabitants. The like chance alſo (as it is written) happened in a certaine country of Affrica by the ſwarmes of Locuſts and Graſhoppers. Plinie reporteth, That in a certaine Prouince adioining to the confines of Aethiopia, Ants, and other ſmall vermine, exiled thence all the inhabitants thereabout. The people of Megaris in Greece, were conſtrained

by bees to leaue and forſake the countrey. Theophraſtus ſpeaketh of another Countrey, which was deſtroyed by Palmers, which are little wormes, long and rough, hauing many legs, and in Latine may be called Bruchi, Campe, or Multipede. Antenor writing alſo of the Iſle of Crete, ſayth, That a certaine multitude of Bees, chaſed out of a great Cittie all the inhabitants thereof, vſing their houſes in the ſtead of hiues.
               But returning to our former matter, which was, that the people of Aegypt verily beleeued, that thoſe Moles were ſent by Vulcan into their Countrey to deſtroy and driue away their enemies the Arabians, then entred into the land: It is crediblie written by Plutarch and others, that the people of Arabia do at Plutarch. this time infinitely abhor & hate thoſe kind of beaſts, and doe lay all plots and deuiſes to kill & deſtroy them whereſoeuer they heare them to remaine, which kind of vermine alſo the Ethiopians, & eſpecially the coniurers of Perſia hold an opinion to be very odious & diſpleaſing to their gods. But it is not written, that the Aegyptians beleeued that Vulcan ſhould ſend them thoſe Moles, nor what reaſon moued them vnto that conceit in the embracing of ſuch opinion: but it is ſo recited as is before ſpoken of by that Author Alexander Neapolitanus, without any further explication of it. Although with ſome writers it is thus expounded: By Vulcan (ſay they) is meant the drineſſe and extreame heat of that ſeaſon, which was ſummer: or elſe indeed the naturall drineſſe and warmth of that Countrey of Aethiopia. And Plinie writing of thoſe

vermine ſayth, they doe encreaſe and multiply in moſt aboundant manner, alwaies coueting thoſe places, which by the ardent furie of the ſunnes vertue, become drie, ſandie, and craſed, as likewiſe moſt of the countrey of Aethiopia is, and further expoſitions are not found to bee deliuered by anie Writers, touching that opinion and conceit of the Aegyptians.
               The opinions and writings which the Ancients haue made of Vulcan, remaine diuerſe & many, and in that reſpect hee is ſhaped forth ſometimes in this forme, and ſometimes in another: with ſome hee is depictured, ſtanding, working, and hammering in a Smiths forge on the hill Etna in Sicilia, framing thunderbolts for Iupiter, and faſhioning arrowes for the god of loue and was taken to bee the rareſt workman that euer liued, vnto whome when the gods had anie occaſion to vſe ſuch maner of weapons, they preſently repaired: as Thetis went vnto him to deſire him to forge an armor for her ſonne Achilles, and Venus for her ſonne Aeneas.
               Some depicture him lame of one leg, and of a very blacke and ſwart complexion, as one all ſmokie, & of a general ill-ſhaped proportion of all his lineaments. It is not read, that vnto Vulcan were appropriated any beaſts, plants, or trees, as vnto all other of their gods, onely Elianus writeth, that the Egyptians conſecrated Elianus. vnto him the Lyons, in that thoſe beaſtes of all other are moſt hot, drie, & fierie by nature, by which abundance of heat within their bodies, it comes to paſſe, that they doe ſo exceedingly feare and are aſtonied at the ſight of fire, which they can by no meanes indure,

but run from it with great affrightment. It is read alſo, that on the hill Mongibell in Sicillia there are certain great dogs, which do there guard and keepe the Temple of Vulcan, which is ſeated hard by a woods ſide, adioyning to that Mountaine, and the people thereabouts doe worſhip and adore Vulcan in that Temple, and in thoſe conſecrated woods and buſhes.
               It is written by the Poets, that Vulcan was the husband of Venus, as lawfully married vnto her, and that they are alwaies depictured together, as accompanying one the other. By which is vnderſtood, that the generation and birth of creatures (meant by Venus) cannot bee effectuall without a moderate heat & warmeneſſe (which is alſo vnderſtood by Vulcan.) Some alſo doe adioine Mars as the companion to Venus, meaning by him the heat of the Sunne, wherevpon the Alcitans (people inhabiting the furthermoſt parts of Spaine, as Macrobius reporteth) made the Statue and Image of Mars, ſo adorned and beautified with the beames of the ſunne, in as liuely manner as could bee deuiſed; which picture was there reuerenced with wondrous zeale and adoration. Macrobius alſo ſayth, That the gods (being the ſubſtance of the celeſtiall fire) were onely different in name, and not otherwiſe: and that Mars was generally taken for that heat and warmeneſſe which proceeded from the vertue of the Sun. By reaſon whereof, the liuely heat and bloud which is within vs, is eaſily ſet on fire & enflamed with anger, furie, and deſire of warre: of which things Mars alſo is held and ſuppoſed to bee the god. And after that faſhion the Auncients worſhipped &

adored him, dedicating vnto him many ſumptuous Statues, Images, and Pictures, and they ſhaped him of aſpect, moſt fierce, terrible, and wrathfull, with hollow red eyes, very ſpeedie and quicke in their reuolutions, his face all hairie, with long curled lockes on his head, depending euen to his ſhoulders, of a coaleblacke colour, he ſtood all armed throughout, with a ſpeare in one hand, and in the other a whip, and ſometimes they depicture him riding on a horſe, ſometimes drawne in a chariot, whoſe horſes were called Feare and Horror: And ſome other ſay, that his chariot was drawne with two men, which alwaies accompanied him whereſoeuer he went, and they were called Furie & Violence. The which thing Statius imitateth when Statius. he ſayth. That Iupiter ſent for Mars, and commanded him to raiſe and ſtirre vp bloudie warres and quarrels between the Argiues and Thebans. And in this place Statius deſcribeth the armes of this god to bee theſe: He wore (ſayth hee) on his head a helmet moſt bright and ſhining, and of ſo fierie a hue and gliſter, as it ſeemed there iſſued out of it great flaſhes of lightning, his breaſtplate was of ſolid gold, reflecting with a moſt glorious and eye-delighting luſtre, and there was inſculpt thereon many figures and ſhapes of moſt fierce and vgly monſters, his ſhield was depainted all ouer with a red or bloudie colour, inchaſed alſo with moſt ſtrange-ſhaped and deformed beaſtes, cut out and engrauen with rare inuention, & puritie of workmanſhip, excelling in the topiarie art. And thus hee rode with aſpeare and ſcourge in either of his hands, in a moſt coſtly and gold-emboſſed Charriot,

whoſe horſes (called Furie and Violence) were guided by the two churliſh coachmen, Wrath and Deſtruction: directly before this chariot was depainted the portraiture of Fame, ſtretching abroad her wings, & ſeeming to proffer a flight, which at the firſt view, ſeemed to mount, and afterward to roue abroad, and ſearch into all corners of the earth, and this picture appeared (a little off from it) to be very ſmal, but comming neere vnto it, it was of a great bigneſſe, which workemanſhip was performed with great cunning and preciſe curiouſneſſe of art. The Auncients alſo pictured this Fame in the forme of a woman, apparelled with a thin and ſleightly-wouen mantle of purple ſilke, which was cloſe girted about her bodie, that ſhe might with more ſwiftneſſe runne and ſcour through the Countries of the world, in both her hands ſhee ſeemed to hold a crooked ſhell, long and hollow like to an inſtrument, which wee call a Cornet, which ſhe held to her mouth. With ſome ſhe is depainted with two wings on her ſhoulders, and her face beſet full of eyes, and ouer all her bodie were infinite numbers of eares, and tongues liuely ſet forth and depictured, as Virgil moſt excellently hath deliuered, who alſo ſayth, Virgil. that ſhee flieth alwaies in the night without taking ſleepe or repoſe at any time, and that ſhee commonly ſeateth her ſelfe on the top of a high turret, where ſhe vttereth and babbleth foorth all that either her eyes haue ſeene, or her eares haue heard, being indeed ſo many, that nothing can eſcape them, whereby ſhee was entearmed the tatling Ladie, & miſtreſſe of news. But touching the former deſcriptions of Mars: It is

written with ſome, that ſuch his glorious and ſumptuous chariot whereon hee vſed to ride in the wanres, was commonly drawne with foure mightie ſtrong horſes, which were ſo furious, hot, and prowd, that euen very fierie ſparkles ſeemed to iſſue forth frō their noſthrils Iſiodorus ſayth, That the picture of Mars was Iſiodorus. oftentimes ſet forth and depainted, with the breaſt of it all naked and vnclothed, to vnſhadow thereby, that in the warres and chaunces of danger, men ought not to be timorous, but ſhould expoſe themſelues to all hazardous and vncertaine aduentures whatſoeuer. Herodotus writeth, that the people of Scithia hung vp Herodotus. a ſword in the middle of a temple, and worſhipped it as the Image of Mars, as people ignorant, how to repreſent the god of warre otherwiſe. Statius deſcribing Statius, the houſe of Mars ſayth, That it is built in an obſcure corner of Thracia, where the people wholly giue and addict themſelues to warres and ſtratagemicall policies, and that it was wholly made and compoſed of yron, all ruſtie, blacke, and foule, and that the porters there which kept the gates, were called Horror and Madneſſe, within the houſe inhabited Furie, Wrath, Impietie, Feare, Treaſon, and Violence, of all which, the gouerneſſe and commandreſſe was Diſcord, who there was ſeated in a regall and princely throne, holding in one of her hands a bright ſhining ſword, and in her other a great yron baſen full of humane bloud. Of this Diſcord it is written, that ſhee was the ouerthrow and ruine of that famous towne of Phrygia in Aſia Minor, called Troy, & the reaſon (as ſome write) was, in that ſhee was not inuited to a certaine great

feaſt made on the Mountain Pelion by Iupiter for the ſolemnizing and celebrating of the nuptials between Peleus and Thetis, where almoſt all gods and goddeſſes whatſoeuer, were conuented; and where alſo ſhee appeared, but notwithſtanding was commaunded by Iupiter to depart from that marriage, and not allowed to bee at the ſolemnization thereof: and this great meeting was not ten daies before the contention betweene the three goddeſſes for the golden ball, ended and decided by Paris, which prooued the deſtruction of all the houſe of Priamus, and flaughter of the Troians; for of this marriage was begotten that euer-famed knight Achilles: but as I told you, becauſe Diſcord could not be admitted to this feaſt, prepared only for merrie, pleaſant, and for familiar agreements, ſhe afterward raiſed ſuch miſcheeuous occaſion, and ſo laboured day and night in her diuelliſh plots, that by her meanes grew that long-continuing warre and enmitie betweene the Phrygians and Pelaſgians, proſecuted, maintained, and ended, by the proweſſe of this new-borne child Achilles. Virgil ſayth, That this Diſcord was by many writers framed and ſet forth in the likeneſſe of one of the furies of hell: as likewiſe Petronius and Aristides affirme, ſaying, That ſhee hath the aſpect and looke of an infernall hag, with hollow Petronius. and bleared eyes, far ſunke into her head, from which euermore diſtilled downe many watrie drops, her lips are pale and drie, her teeth all furd with lothſome corruption, her breath all-infected, ill-ſauoured, and thicke, her cheekes diſcoloured, wan, and thin, & that ſhee ſtretched forth her long & leane hands, as readie

to catch and take hold of any occaſion profered, in her breaſt ſhe carried a naked knife with a ſharp point, her legs were wondrous crooked, and little, as ſcarce able to ſupport the burthen of her withered bodie, for her garment ſhe wore a mantle made of black rug; and thus Petronius deſcribes her leaning vpon a ſtaffe. Pauſanias writeth, that in a lid of a cheſt giuen to Cipſelus, was engraued & carued the combat of Aiax and Hector, performed in the preſence of Diſcord, which (ſayth hee) was an old and hard-fauoured woman.
               
                  Arioſto vpon ſome occaſion ſpeaking of Mars (from Arioſto. whom now we haue a little wandred deſcribeth there his pallace or court where hee vſed to abide, ſaying, that through euery part and corner of the ſame, were heard ſtraunge ecchoes, reſounding moſt perfectly, which of themſelues without anie former ſpeech, would yeeld forth voices moſt plainely and diſtinctly, which commonly were fearefull ſhrikes, threatnings, and diſmall cries: in the midſt of this pallace was erected the Image of Vertue, whoſe lookes ſeemed to bee ſad and penſiue, and her ſoule all ſorrow-beaten, diſcontented, and melancholie, and ſhee ſtood leaning her head on her arme in moſt diſtreſſefull maner: hard by her was ſeated in a chaire the picture of Furie, triumphing in ioy, pleaſure, and delight, and ſeeming prowd with good fortunes, and happie ſucceſſes. Not farre from her ſat Death, with a bloudie and ſtearne countenance, whoſe face was ouerwaſht with bloud, and hackt with many and cruell ſlaſhes, where vpon a ſtately altar, he was offering ſacrifices in goblets made

with the skuls of men, and filled vp euen to the brim with humane bloud; which oblation was conſecrated to god Mars, with coales of fire (which ſet on flame the ſacrifice) fetcht from many Citties, Townes, and Holds, burnt and ruinated by tyrannie of the Warres: round about the Court were hanged vp (as pictures to beautifie the ſame) many famous ſpoiles and glorious enſigns of victorie, brought from all the parts & corners of the world: In his bed chamber were depainted forth with wondrous curious workmanſhip, fatall maſſacres, burning of townes, diſmall ſlaughters of men, caſtles won by treaſon, murther, and villanie, with many ſuch like all in row conioined and ſet together.
               Vnto Mars was conſecrated by the Auncients, as gratefull vnto him, a Cocke, either to ſhew thereby the vigilancie and carefull watch which ſhould bee in ſouldiours, or elſe (as Lucianus writeth) becauſe that Alectrio (a ſouldiour entirely beloued and endeared of Mars) was by the gods transformed and chaunged into this bird. Some alſo haue appropriated vnto him the wolfe, being a moſt rauenous & deuouring beaſt, and therefore attributed vnto him; in that all ſouldiers and men of warre, vpon their firſt furie and heate are giuen much to ſpoiling and conſuming of goods, ruinating and ouerthrowing all things whatſoeuer, that happen vnto them in the pride of their choler, & firſt inflamation of their bloud: or elſe becauſe this beaſt (as I haue in other places remembred) ſeeth moſt perfectly in the darkeſt night, as wiſe and prouident captaines and commaunders ought to doe, that is, that

they with an all-foreſeeing aduiſedneſſe and circumſpection, preuent and fruſtrate the ſecret, darke, and hidden plots, and cloſe-contriued ſtratagemes of the enemie whatſoeuer, for by the ſharpe-ſighted eyes of this beaſt is vnderſtood the farre-reaching capacitie and wittie braine of a politicke commaunder, in diſcouering and ſeeing through the ſecret and concealed intendemennts of his aduerſarie. And thus much ſhall ſuffice for the natures and properties of Mars, impoſing alſo an end to the Statues, Images, and Pictures dedicated, erected, and conſecrated to him, as alſo to Minerua, ſo taken by the Auncients to bee the goddeſſe of Wiſedome, Learning, and of Wars.
            
            
               Bacchus.
               HIſtories doe deliuer vnto vs, that this Bacchus (of whome wee now entreat) was held among the Auncients in great repute and eſteeme for a moſt valerous, hardie, and well-approued Captaine, performing in thoſe his times many worthie, haughtie, and gallant ſeruices, which gained vnto him the report and title of a victorious and all-conquering commander: as Diodorus Siculus, and many other autentike Authours haue written. But in the end, whether in regard of ſuch his valiancie, or other perticular propertie and knowledge, he was amongſt others of their ſuperſticious errors, cannonized & worſhipped as a god, dedicating temples, and erecting Altars and Statues vnto him: among whome alſo hee was knowne and called by diuerſe and ſeuerall names, as

ſometimes Bacchus, ſometimes Dioniſius, & at other times Liber pater, & many other, and by reaſon thereof was ſometimes depictured in this form, and ſometimes in that ſhape, according to the ſeuerall opinion of the people with whome hee was ſo worſhipped. Philostratus ſayth, That his Statue was framed in the likeneſſe of a young man without a beard, of a corpulent & groſſe bodie, his face of a high colour, and very big, and about his head was wreathed a garland of yuie leaues, from his temples ſeemed to peepe forth two ſmall hornes, and cloſe by his ſide lay a certaine beaſt, called a Panther. The which deſcription made by Philoſtratus, is in ſome ſort drawne from the Philoſtratus. nature and qualitie of Wine, of which indeed, the Poets faine that Bacchus is the god, for ſo much as he (as it is written) was the firſt that euer found out the commoditie thereof, and diſcouered vnto men (then abiding in ignorance thereof) the manner of gathering grapes from the vinetree, and to preſſe and bruſe them together, of whoſe iuice and licour afterwards Wine was made. But ſome affirme, that Icarus the father of Erigonus, firſt inuented the making of Wine, and that it was firſt of all drunke in Athens, where he himſelfe being drunke with the force thereof, was miſerably ſlaine by the people. And it is alſo written that in Italy Saturne was the firſt that euer inſtructed them in the true vſe of the grape, which hee before had practiſed and learned in Crete. Plutarch ſayth, That in France one Arras an Etruſcian was the firſt that cauſed it to bee vſed. But concerning the truth of the firſt inuention thereof, it is infallibly certaine, that it was

found out by Noe, which Lactantius and Ioſephus affirme, beſides, that place alſo in the nineteenth of Geneſis approoues it, which is ſufficient warrant againſt all allegations whatſoeuer. Iaques de Bergamus in his Iaques de Bergamus. ſecond booke of the Chronicles of the world, ſayth, That Noe by this meanes found out the nature of the grape: Noe (ſayth hee) on a certaine day viewing and marking the feeding of beaſts on a mountaine of Armenia called Coricus, among the reſt eſpied a young bul brouſing on the berries of a wild vine, of which he had not long fed, but that hee became exceeding wild, furious, and mad. Noe wondring at the force and effect of thoſe berries, planted them afterwards on better grafts, and ſo had the experiment and triall of the vertue and propertie of them, of which preſently after hee cauſed Wine to be made, and for that cauſe, was among the Scythians called Ianus, which ſignifieth in that language, the giuer of Wine.
               But proceeding with the depicturances of Bacchus, Claudianus ſayth, that his Image or Statue is made and ſet forth (as it were) all naked and without clothes, meaning thereby, that the furie and working power of wine ouer-abundantly taken, cauſeth a man to diſcouer, lay open, and (as it were) make naked, anie ſeceret or concealed thing whatſoeuer, which before that time with neuer ſo much labour, induſtrie, and care, was kept priuate, cloſe, and vnreuealed: with ſome Bacchus is depictured in the ſimilitude of a very aged man, anatomiſing and vnſhadowing thereby, that the exceſſe taking of wine, haſteneth on, and is the cauſe of the ſudaine and vntimely approch of old

age, as debillitating and eneruating the contexed ground of our ſences and ſinnewes, with the ſucking vp and drying of the humiditie and naturall moiſture of youth-maintaining humours: for ſo much as it is manifeſt, that the vnexpected failing, and weakeneſſe of our ſences, (by that meanes admitting a more feeble eſtate of our bodies) being old age, is nothing elſe but the abſence and vtter decay of a naturall moiſtnes within vs, and a generall ſiccitude throughout the whole compoſition of our bodies; which wee ſeeking to recouer and re-poſſeſſe, accept no meanes ſo fit, nor thinke any preſcription ſo auaileable, as the vſuall drinking of wine, wherein indeed men are infinitely deceaued, and inuelloped (as it were) with clouds and miſts of blindneſſe, and of error: for ſo much as though wine bee in the firſt taſt and receit thereof into our bodies, ſomething moiſt and engendring rume and raw humours, yet it is in the operatiue vertue and power ſo maruellous hot and fierie, that it drieth vp, and concocteth all the moiſtneſſe and humiditie whatſoeuer, before ingendered and bred: for Galen (that euer-famous Doctor) ſayth, That the greateſt Galen. drinkers of Wine, the more they drink, the more drie and thirſtie doe they find themſelues, & by how much the more they thinke and doe beleeue to quench and allay their thirſt by drinking more Wine, ſo much doe they encreaſe and augment their drineſſe and deſire thereof.
               Not much vnlike that former deſcription of Bacchus, was that depicturance which wee read to bee made of one Comus, held and reputed among the

Auncients to bee the god of Feaſts, Banquets, and mirth-miniſtring cōuenticles: whoſe Statue or Image was likewiſe drawne forth and framed in the reſemblance and likeneſſe of a very young man, whoſe face ſeemed to thruſt out a few ſmall haires, his countenance pleaſant, gracious, and ſmiling, and his complexion rubicund and high coloured. And Philoſtratus deſcribes him ſtanding at the dore of agreat chamber full of gueſts, inuited to a moſt ſumptuous banquet, wherein was much drinking and feaſting, with great exceſſe, and too much ſuperfluitie, as ſolemniſing and celebrating the eſpouſals of a new-married virgine: and ſayth, that hee ſtood there leaning on a ſtaffe, with his eies halfe ſhut, and halfe open, ſo that by little and little his head declined towards his boſome, and his boſome towards his arme, then reſting on the ſtaffe, which was indeed verie vncertainly placed: and thus betweene falling, and a weake ſupporting of himſelfe, hee reelingly wauered and mooued to and fro: about his head (ſayth hee) was wreathed a garland of ſmeet-ſmelling flowers, and alſo ouer moſt part of his bodie, at the one ſide of him was placed a great goblet of wine, and hard by that a muſicall inſtrument like to a Cymball: the flowers ſo redemiting his temples, ſignifie ioy, mirth, and pleaſance, and the inſtrument the lightneſſe of heart, and contempt of ſadneſſe and melancholike cogitations: his pleaſant, freſh, and liuely countenance ſhewes, that by the operation and ſtirring vertue of wine, mens ſpirits are awaked and made ioifull, as without doubt a moderat and temperate receit thereof, quickeneth & reuiueth

drouſie and drooping ſences, infuſing into their ſpirits a more loftie and aſpiring thought. Plinie writeth, Plinie. that diſcreet taking of wine, encreaſeth & contexeth a mans forces and ſinewes, purifies the bloud from coniealed corruption, ſharpens the ſight, comforteth the ſtomach, procureth appetite, prouoketh vrine, nouriſheth ſleepe, forceth vomites, purgeth melancholie, expelleth ſorrowfulneſſe of heart, and to conclude, exceedingly reioiceth and dooth letificate the ſpirits of men. Plato ſayth, That as raine temperately affoorded, nutrifieth and giueth encreaſe to all kind Plato. of herbage whatſoeuer, and that ouer-much abundance thereof, and extraordinarie inundations, deſtroyeth, drowneth, and ſpoileth them: euen ſo wine taken with moderation, and diſcreetly, comforteth the heart and ſpirits, whereas ouermuch vſed, it ſcorcheth, inflameth, and conſumeth it: Apuleius Paniaſis 
                  Apuleius Paniaſis. (that writ of the diuers operations of meats) ſayth, That one cup of wine a man may drinke after meales with health, and the preſeruatiue meanes thereof, but the ſecond quickeneth and prouoketh venerous luſts, and the third bringeth ſhame, diſhonour, & infamie. The Grecians neuer put any water into wine, but cauſed a little wine to bee medled with a great quantitie of water, Heſiodus commandeth, that one cup of wine bee intermingled with three of water. The auncient Romanes abſolutely forbad the vſe of Wine to anie women or children, as Valerius reporteth.
               
                  Plinie writeth, That wine was ſo highly forbidden in Rome, and with ſuch ſeuere penalties impoſed on Plinie. the breakers of ſuch law, that on a time a certaine

maid hauing ſtolen the keyes of her maiſters wineſeller, priuily to haue drunke and taſted thereof, (or perhaps a deſire onely to infringe the commaundement, according to the humours of many of that ſex) was for the ſame (without anie further intent therein meant by her) adiudged by famine to looſe her life, and that alſo not without the conſent and well-liking of many of her friends, kinsfolkes, and parents.
               It is written of Romulus, that when hee had made any great feaſt or banquet, and inuited many gueſts therevnto, would haue great plentie of wine at the table, but would neuer himſelfe ſo much as taſt thereof, ſaying, that to morrow he was to determine of weightie affaires.
               It is read, that Iulius Caeſar neuer drunke wine: and yet that famous Alexander, that true ſubiect of warshyſtorians, almoſt neuer abſtained it, but in the end it ouerthrew him, and depriued him of further vſe thereof.
               
                  Anachraſes ſayth, That Wine preſenteth vnto Anachraſes. vs three grapes, the firſt of pleaſure, the ſecond of drunkenneſſe, and the laſt of teares, ſorrow, and diſgrace.
               
                  Diodorus Siculus ſayth, That Bacchus was depictured among the Grecians in two ſeuerall formes, the one of a verie aged man with a very long beard, growing ſtiffe and thicke, the other of youthful years, of a pleaſant and amorous aſpect: by the firſt is vnfolded the nature of wine, being immeaſureablie taken, which maketh men looke furious, wild, and of a ſterne countenance, and by the ſecond (as when wine is moderately

and temperately taken) is meant, that it maketh men pleaſant, diſcourſiue, and full of merry paſtimes. Macrobius, who (as I haue alreadie many times Macrobius. remembred) alwaies vnderſtood by the nature of ſuch their gods, the ſeuerall properties and vertues of the Sunne, ſayth, That Bacchus was framed ſometimes in the likeneſſe of a young child, ſometimes of a youth, ſometimes at the full age and growth of a man, and ſometimes in the forme of one very aged and decrepit, with a long white beard, to ſignifie that all theſe ſeuerall ages and encreaſes are ſeene to bee in the ſun, for in the time of the winter Solſtitium, whē the daies doe then newly begin to lengthen and grow longer, it may bee ſaid, that hee is then a young child, dailie encreaſing and growing. And that at the Equinoctiall of the Spring hee hath attained to the yeares of adoleſcencie, and may bee called a young man. Then afterwards at the Solſtitium of the Summer, when daies are fully at the longeſt, and can lengthen no more, hee is ſaid to be at the eſtate of entire virilitie and manlie growth, and hath then a full beard, without further increaſing or growing. But becauſe after that time the daies begin againe to ſhorten, by reaſon of the ſunnes withdrawing himſelfe from our horiſon, and obſcuring his bright irradiance and glorie from the world, he may be called an oldman, as ſhortening and leſſening his daies declining and drawing to an abſolute obſcuritie and departure from this life, and thus Macrobius hath expounded his application.
               
                  Diodorus Siculus deſcribeth Bacchus with two hornes on his head, which (ſayth Macrobius) ſignifie Diodorus Siculus.
                  
the raies and beames of the ſun, but Diodorus ſayth, That by them rather is vnſhadowed and intended, that Bacchus was the firſt that inſtructed and taught men how to till their grounds, by ſubiugating and coupling their Oxen for the performance thereof. Some writers vnderſtand by thoſe hornes ſo infixed on Bacchus, audacitie, impudencie, boldneſſe, and fierceneſſe, approoued by the ouermuch taking of wine, which makes men hardie and aduenturous, as alſo impudent and ſhameleſſe, as is generally affirmed by Philoſtratus, Feſtus Pompeius, Porphirio, Perſius, and others that haue writ thereof. Muſonius a Greeke writer Muſonius. ſayth, That vnto Bacchus were not onely hornes giuen, but that hee was of many Poets deſcribed and defigured in the ſhape and likeneſſe of a bull, the reaſon was, for that (as Poets deliuer) Ioue (transformed into a ſerpent) lay carnally with his owne daughter Proſerpina, the which by him being great, brought forth Bacchus in the forme of a young bull, wherevpon with the Cizenians (people inhabiting the further parts of Perſia) his Image and Picture was framed to the true ſimilitude and likeneſſe of a bull. But Theopompus and other writers ſay, that they gaue thoſe hornes ſo vnto Bacchus, in that in Epirus and Theopompus. many places thereabouts, were buls of that hugenes and mightie bodies, that with their hornes (being anſwerable alſo in bigneſſe) the people there made them their great veſſels to drinke in, which there was a generall cup or veſſell throughout all thoſe Countries thereabouts, and which faſhion alſo ſpread it ſelfe afterwards into many other Countries round about

them, among which they alwaies vſed and accuſtomed to drinke out of hornes. The Athenians afterward taking hold of that cuſtome and manner, framed their ſiluer veſſels and bowles wherein they vſed to drinke, in the faſhion and proportion of crooked and retorted hornes.
               But it is vnderſtood with ſome, that ſuch hornes on Bacchus, ſignified certaine few haires, which from either ſide of the head were left growing in thoſe daies, which likewiſe now at this time the Prieſts and holy men of Armenia (and in many places of India) doe vſe to weare, and obſerue, which doe ſhaue all the vpper part and top of their heads, and alſo behind in their neckes, (reſeruing onely two mightie long lockes, growing on either ſide before, towards their temples) which they vſed to bind with a fillet or lace very hard, and ſo made them to ſtand of themſelues erect and out right. For which cauſe and faſhion alſo Moſes was ſaid among the Hebrewes to haue had hornes, and ſo was King Liſimachus with the Perſians.
               
                  Philoſtratus writeth, That Bacchus was oftentimes depictured and drawne forth in his Statues and Images, clothed with womens garments, and in effeminate habite, when hee reporteth, that hee went in ſuch manner apparrelled, with a long purple robe, beautifully ſet forth and adorned with tires of ſilke, vnto his loue Ariadne, and that then he wore on his head a coronet of roſes, curiouſly compoſed & made, his companions and followers alſo were all in like wanton and looſe abillements, faſhioning themſelues

ſome like rurall Nimphs, as the Driades, Oriades, and ſuch like; ſome like the ſea Nimphs, as the Nereides, Syrens, and others; and ſome alſo in the ſhape of Satires, Faunes, and Siluans, and all theſe attended him, going to his amorous delights, and ſports with Ariadne. The clothes and garments of women, ſo ſaid to bee on Bacchus, ſignifie, that the inordinate taking of wine weakeneth and debillitateth the naturall forces and powers of a man, making him feeble, vnconſtant, and ſtrengthleſſe, like a woman: or that (as ſome hold) he was ſo depictured, becauſe on certaine daies of the yeare hee accuſtomed ſo to habite himſelfe, when thoſe great feaſts, which were called Bacchanalia, were ſolemniſed and kept, at which almoſt all the women thereabout would meet, drinking and carouſing in that abundance and immoderate exceſſe, as they would become with the force thereof euen furiouſly mad, braineſicke, and wild, with dauncing and leaping, ſinging loud canticles, beating one another, running among the woods, vallies, and mountaines, and vſing all ſtrange and rude geſtures, and behauiours, worſe than people extreamely mad and lunatike. And in this manner almoſt all the hither part of Theſſalie for the ſpace of tenne daies vſed to banquet and riot, delighting in their barbarous cuſtomes, and vnciuile obſeruances.
               
                  Pauſanias writeth, that among the Eleans the picture of Bacchus was there cut out, as hauing a long Pauſanias. beard, with a garment or gowne couering all his bodie euen to the feet, and that hee held in one hand a hooke or ſharpe ſythe, and in the other a goblet or

bowle of wine, and round about him were depainted forth many vinetrees, and other fruitfull and commodious plants. And with ſome hee was called Bacchus Baſſareus, by reaſon of that long garment which vſually hee wore, and which was called Baſſara, ſo named of a certain place in Lidia, where thoſe kind of cloths were made, or els it was ſo called of the skinnes of wolues, which thoſe women in their Bacchinall feaſts vſed to weare about their ſhoulders, for that in the Thracian language a wolfe is called Baſſara. Neither did thoſe women vſe onely the skins of Wolues, but of Panthers and Tygres alſo, which they careleſly wold hang about their ſhoulders in their fits of drunkenneſſe and furie, tearing vp the graſſe and hearbes with their nailes as they went along, their haire hanging ouer their faces, which they ſet forth with diuerſe and ſundrie-coloured flowers; ouer one of their armes they wore a garland made of yuie leaues, or the white Poppie, for that this Poppie was ſuppoſed to be an infernall flower, and growing on the banckes of Acheron, and therefore the Ancients appropriated it vnto the companions and followers of Bacchus, for that among ſome he was held alſo and taken to be the god of the infernall region, whereupon (as I haue already very lately deliuered) the Poets doe affirme that hee was borne of Proſerpina, which was Queene of the lower kingdome, wife to Pluto, and daughter to Iupiter and Ceres.
               It is written with Diodorus Siculus, that Bacchus was not alwaies conuerſant and merrie in drinking Diodoros Siculus, and in feaſts, but ſayth, that hee ſhewed himſelfe in

many ſeruices a very valerous & couragious captaine, and followed the warres with great fortunes manie yeares together, in which time, he would commonlie weare for his vpper garment the skinnes of Panthers, and ſuch like beaſts. He victoriouſly ouercame in battell (ſayth Diodorus) many kings and great commanders, as Licurgus Pentheus, and others, and alſo ſubiugated and reduced vnto his commaund all the hether India, returning from thence with mightie triumph and victorie, carried on the backe of a huge Elephant, with all his whole armie celebrating and extolling the praiſes and worthy exploits of their lord & commander. Neither is it read, that before his time there was euer any king or Prefect that euer triumphed in the warres, or was led home with ſuch ceremonious ſignes and teſtimonies of victorious preuailement ouer his enemies. And therefore vnto Bacchus, as vnto the firſt triumpher, was conſecrated the bird Pica, being a bird full of prattle, and apt to ſpeake any familiar language, for that in thoſe triumphs it was lawfull for any one to reprooue anothers vices with any diſpightfull tearmes, or diſgrace whatſoeuer, euerie one crying out, and obiecting what might bee ſaid to the defence or deniall thereof.
               The Auncients alſo haue attributed vnto this god the firſt innention and making of garlands, who alſo was the firſt that did weare any, and for himſelfe hee made them of yuie leaues, which afterwards was conſecrated alſo vnto him: whereupon Alexander the great minding to imitate him therein, cauſed all his armie in his returne from the conqueſt of India, to

make them garlands and wreaths thereof. This plant or tree was for diuerſe reaſons attributed vnto Bacchus. Plutarch ſayth, That it hath in it ſelfe ſuch a hidden Plutarch. and ſecret power and vertue, that being applied in a certaine faſhion, obſerued by the Phyſicians, it cauſeth men without either beere or wine to bee exceeding drunke and giddie in the braines. Eustathius writeth, That yuie according to the Greeke word Euſtathius. thereof, which is Liſso, ſignifieth luſt, or deſire of carnall voluptuouſneſſe, and in that reſpect was giuen vnto Bacchus, for that men being drunke and ouercome with the braine-diſtempering furie thereof, are ſooner drawne and enclined to thoſe deſires, than at other times.
               The Statues of Bacchus alſo was ſometimes (as ſome writers report) ſet forth and adorned with coronets made of the leaues of a Fig tree, in memorie (as ſome hold) of a Nimph which was called Syca, which word with the Greekes ſignifieth as much as Fico in Italian: which Nimph was entirely beloued of Bacchus, and metamorphiſed by the gods into that plant. As it is read alſo of Staphilis, a Nimph on whome Bacchus was likewiſe exceedingly enamoured, and who afterwards was transformed into a vine tree: ſo that it ſhould ſeeme from thence it comes, that theſe plants are ſo pleaſing & grateful vnto Bacchus. With ſome alſo hee is crowned with the leaues of the flower Narciſſus, and many other fragrant and ſweet-ſmelling flowers. Wherevpon Statius ſayth, That his Chariot wherein hee was vſed to bee drawne, was all adorned and beautified with flowers, hearbes, and

young plants. Boccace (by the Charriot which is ſo giuen vnto him) expoundeth, that by the extream taking of Wine, mens heads, and alſo their bodies goe tumbling and reeling vp and downe like the wheeles of a charriot: which ſayth hee) being drawne with Panthers and Tygres, ſignifieth, that the working power of Wine maketh men ſeeme furious, cruell, and terrible in their lookes, and wild behauiours, according to the qualities of thoſe beaſts ſo appropriated vnto him. Philoſtratus ſayth, That thoſe Panthers are ſo giuen Philoſtratus. vnto Bacchus, for that they are of amoſt hot and drie conſtitution, (as commonly the drinkers of wine are) and that they are light and ſpeedie either in leaping or running, as men likewiſe find them more nimble and light when they are drunke and haue ſomewhat ouergone themſelues in too much wine, than they doe at any other time. The ſame Authour alſo ſayth (in a certaine place where hee depainteth the ſhip of Bacchus) that the prow or forepart therof was framed in the likeneſſe and proportion of a Panther, round abound which were Cymbals and Shalmes depainted, and plaied vpon by many young men: in the midſt of the ſhip was placed a long and ſtreight tree, on the top of which were hung purple garments, wouen with pure gold of Triolus, which the frantike women in the Bacchinall feaſts vſed to weare, which alſo were depictured there with rare perfection of true cunning and workemanſhip: on both ſides of the ſhip were ſet forth with great life many yuie trees full of berries, as alſo many vines, whoſe verie braunches with plentie of fruit, ſeemed to craſe and breake off

from the ſtocke, whoſe greene leaues and new ripened grapes were depainted forth with vnſpeakeable curiouſneſſe and labour. Towards the bottome of the ſhip was hewen and cut out a moſt liuely and perfect fountaine, flowing and ſtreaming with pure Wine, whoſe ſweetneſſe certaine men (moſt exactly drawne forth vnderneath it) ſeemed to taſt, and eagerly receaue, wherein was diſcouered by admirable skill of the workeman, a moſt liuely repreſentation of an exceeding thirſt and deſire of drinke: and thus Phtloſtratus deſcribeth the ſhip of Bacchus, whoſe verie like by all deſcriptions and particular reſemblances, was long time kept and preſerued in Rome, in the temple there called La chieſa di Santa Agneſe, and afterward called the temple of Bacchus.
               It is written of Bacchus by ancient Authours, that when hee was a young child, the three fatall ſiſters compaſſed him about as he lay in his cradle, and caſt ouer his face two moſt venomous and vgly ſerpents, which as hiſtories mention, neuer offended him: from whence it afterwards grew, that the bacchinall women, in celebrating their rites and ceremonies, vſed to eat and deuour young Snakes. And Catullus ſayth, that thoſe frantike women in performing and executing Catullus. the ceremonious obſeruances of their feaſt, vſed to carrie in one of their hands ſome member & part of a young heyfar, all mingled and cut in peeces: and the reaſon was for that (as it is read) Pantheus king of Thebes (being a great enemie to all thoſe cuſtomes and faſhions) deſpiſed and ſet at nought all ſuch honours ſo dedicated vnto Bacchus, neither would hee

admit by any meanes any ſuch ceremonie to bee performed within his rule and gouernement, who to derogate the more from Bacchus, and diſgrace his obſeruances, one day as they were buſily employed in great reuerence and zeale amidſt their cheefeſt oblations, cauſed a mad heyfar (or as Ouid reporeth, a wild Beare) to bee driuen in amongſt the thickeſt troope of them, ſo to diſturbe and affright them in their ceremonious intendements, who at the firſt being ſomewhat ſuddainely ſurpriſed, ſat aſtonied, but remembring themſelues, and being alſo halfe drunke, they furiouſly ſet vpon the beaſt, and with ſhort bils and kniues, and other ſuch like weapons as they had, hewed and cut it into a thouſand little peeces, and euery one ioying and reioicing in their victorie & triumph, fell preſently again to drinking, of which being ouercome and ſubdued, in great furie they ranne vp and down, carrying in their hands ſome peece or other of the ſlaughtered beaſt, with making ſtraunge ſhrikes, ſhouts, and vncouth noiſe for the victorie therof, and thus through the woods, buſhes, hils, or vallies would they in an extreame furie, and forgetfulneſſe of ſence, confuſedly and out of order run galloping together. And euer afterward to eterniſe this their preuailemēt ouer that beaſt, would they in their bacchinall feaſtes and drinking, carrie in one of their hands ſome ioint or other of a new kild heyfar. And thus much ſhall ſuffice for the Statues, Pictures, and Deſcriptions that ancient writers haue made and deliuered of Bacchus.
            
            
               
               Fortune.
               
                  LActantius writeth, that this Fortune is nothing els but a vaine, idle, and ſenceleſſe name, which ſheweth foorth the ſhallowneſſe and weakeneſſe of mans wiſedome, in attributing the ſucceſſe or euent of any thing whatſoeuer, to her vertue, power, or pleaſure. Which opinion alſo Marcus Tullius confirmeth, ſaying, that this name of Fortune was firſt brought in and vſed to couer and ſhadow the ignorance of man, who (ſayth hee) giueth the ſucceſſe of all haps and accidents vnto her, of which hee himſelfe by naturall iudgement can ſhew no reaſon: which onely proceedeth from the barrenneſſe and dulneſſe of wits and capacities, for ſo much as thoſe things and euents, whereof hee could giue any likely reaſon or coniecture of probabilitie for the effect thereof, hee neuer aſcribed vnto this goddeſſe Fortune. But the Auncients were no more deceaued in this, than in other the gods and goddeſſes, and therefore conſecrated and dedicated vnto her many Statues, Altars, Temples, and Pictures, adoring her as the abſolute diſpoſer and diſpenſatrix of mundane affaires and buſineſſes. And they ſuppoſed, that as well all euill, and bad miſcheefes and inconueniences, as good and happy proſperities proceeded from her. By reaſon whereof, there was held to be two Fortunes, the one good, the other bad, and from the one came riches, happineſſe, quiet, content, and pleaſures: from the other all miſery, war, affliction, croſſes, and diſaſter calamities whatſoeuer.

Wherevpon ſhe was depictured with ſome, as hauing two faces, the one white and well-fauoured, the other blacke and diſproportioned. Alexander Neapolitanus 
                  Alexander Neapolitanus. reporteth, That at Preneſtes was a temple dedicated vnto Fortune, wherein was drawne out & portrayed a Picture or Image in the ſhape and forme of two Siſters, both conioined together in the ſame Statue, and that it was there held and worſhipped in high reuerence and adoration: And it was taken for the repreſentation of Fortune. But yet amongſt moſt people, and according to moſt writers, there is acknowledged but one Fortune. Pauſanias ſayth (writing of the monuments Pauſanias. of antiquitie) that the moſt auncient Statue and Image of Fortune was that which Bupalus (that farre-famed Architector & Ingrauer) compoſed and made in Greece, which picture afterwards the Smyrneans (people alſo of that Countrey) bought with a great ſumme of money. And the ſame was cut out and proportioned in the ſhape and likeneſſe of a woman, on whoſe head was infixed a round and circular ball, and in one of her hands ſhe held the horne of plentie and abundance, called Cornucopia: by which depicturance is plainely vnderſtood the office & propertie of that goddeſſe, which is to haue the beſtowing and giuing of great riches, wealth, and treaſures, the which notwithſtanding ſhee beſtoweth on men with ſuch vncertainety, that they neuer remaine long with them, but are vnſetled, vnſure, and quickely rowled from them againe, as the heauens are toſſed and circumfered by the two poles, reſembled thereunto by the ball ſo placed vpon her head. Lactantius ſayth, Lactantius.
                  
that vnto Fortune was giuen the ſterne or rudder of a ſhip, to ſignifie, that ſhee doth rule, commaund, and gouerne all humane things whatſoeuer, as the ſhip is gouerned by the rudder: and ſayth, that ſhee is vnconſtant in all her gifts, mutable, and neuer aſſured, fauoring and affecting for the moſt part wicked and irreligious perſons, and aduancing men of meane worth, vertue, and learning, deiecting and oppreſſing the true children, and rightly begotten of the muſes, and thoſe in whom perfection of merit abideth. And ſhee is oftentimes alſo called the blind goddeſſe, and the vncertaine and partiall Ladie, and that ſhe is humourous, and muſt be pleaſed by ſubmiſſion and acknowledgement of her power and ſuperioritie, as certaine verſes much to the ſame effect, doe demonſtrate and teſtifie, which engliſhed are theſe, or much agreeing with the true meaning of the Authour:
               
                  Imperious ruler of the worlds deſſeignes,
                  Ladie of ſollace, pleaſure, and of paines,
                  Who in thy well-pleaſd humours, kings erecteth,
                  And when thou liſt, them down againe deiecteth:
                  Powerfull in all, in few things conſtant, alluring
                  Baſe men to greatneſse, though nothing aſſuring:
                  Thoſe which true vertue truly doe embrace,
                  Not ſubiect to the ſmiles of beauties face,
                  Nor ſeating vaine-built hopes on glaſsie frame,
                  Of big-ſwolne titles of thy glorious name,
                  Thou doeſt ſeuerely ſcourge with vniuſt rigour,
                  Shewing in their afflicts thy powerfull vigour.
                  Like tennis-bals thou beat'ſt vs to and fro,
                  
                     
From fauours to diſgrace, from ioy to woe,
                  From wars to peace, from rule to be commanded,
                  Till at the length cleane out of ſight w' are banded:
                  When ſtreight freſh bals (cald Fauorits) come in place,
                  Which (being new) looke with a ſmooth-white face,
                  And for a while are pleaſing and well-liking,
                  And gently tost with mild and eaſie ſtriking,
                  Till in ſome humor (wearied with that play)
                  Some ſtiffer racket bandies them away,
                  O Fortune, that thy ſacred deitie,
                  Should ſo conſiſt in ſuch varietie.
               
               And in another place a diſcontented perſon railing againſt her crueltie, thus ſayth:
               
                  How long ſhall theſe my ſoule-bred ſorrowes last
                  Which hourely thus increaſe and multiplie?
                  Tell me (prowd Fortune) ſhall they neuer waſt?
                  Is there no date of this my miſerie?
                  Wilt thou needs ſhew enſample of thy pride
                  On my o're-burdened wo-poſſeſſed heart,
                  Which thouſand times far better might abide
                  Deaths all-concluding momentanie dart.
                  But yet if in the end thou ſhew me grace
                  (As thou delight'st in instabillitie)
                  And looke on my deuoires with ſmiling face,
                  Changing theſe greeſes to ioies tranquillitie,
                  O then how gladly would I theſe endure,
                  If of thy fauour I might ſo be ſure.
               
               
                  Forc'd by vile Fortune, I ſeeke out new waies,
                  
                     
And range in vncouth corners of ech wood,
                  Where darkeneſſe, and ſad ſilence ſpend their daies,
                  And melancholy liues in angrie mood,
                  There ſit I penning Satyres gainſt theſe times,
                  Railing gainſt Fortunes malice in my wrongs,
                  Compoſing Odes, and rage-expreſsing rimes,
                  Sad madrigals, and heart-vnburdening ſongs:
                  There as a man all dead with diſcontent,
                  I feed on ſighs, and drinke mine owne ſalt teares,
                  When ſenceleſſe trees ſhed ſap, and doe relent,
                  And floures do hang their heads, as though th'had eares
                  To heare my plaints, and all doe ſeeme to ſay,
                  We waile thy hap thou Image of decay.
               
               
                  The chriſtalline and ſiluer-faced Brookes
                  Their ſoft-toucht muſicke to the dancing stones
                  Doe ceaſe, they wonder ſo at my ſad lookes,
                  Ech ſauage Beast doth bellow ſorth my mones,
                  The vales-delighting Nimphs, and hill-borne Faunes
                  That wonted were to leape and lead the hay,
                  Croſsing the flourie verdure of the lawnes
                  To hearken to my mones would rest that day,
                  The ſhrill-voic'd Birds ſing forth a dolefull ditty,
                  And warble out ſome dreirie note of mourning
                  To ſhew how much my greefes they all did pitty,
                  As one in fires of woes for euer burning,
                  The woods grow wearie of my wretchedneſſe,
                  Nimphs, Brookes, Beaſts, Birds, admire my heauineſſe.
               
               By all which wee may euidently perceiue what ſway and power ouer humane affaires, is aſcribed

vnto Fortune. And in another place a certaine in amoretto paſſion-rent (as a man may ſay) and full of melancholie, partly complaining of his miſtreſſe, but eſpecially inueighing againſt the fooliſh partialitie of Fortune, in aduauncing the deſertleſſe and illiterates, leauing and forſaking the vertuous and learned to miſeries, and all-deſpiſed pouerties, (as alſo accuſing the world and the children therof with two much forgetfulneſſe of themſelues, in regarding ſo deerely the fruition of many riches and pleaſures, wholly neglecting, or rather ſcorning the embracement of vertue, letters, or knowledge) thus ſayth. But firſt the Poet ſetteth downe the place where this diſcontented louer vnbowelled (as it were) and anatomiſed his hearts oppreſſions.
               
                  Downe by that prowd ambicious Riuers ſide,
                  On whoſe enameld bankes were wont to lie
                  The weeping ſiſters of that daring guide, The daughters of Clymene, and ſiſters of Phaeton.
                  
                  That needs would rule the chariot of the skie,
                  Vnder the ſhade of a frondiferous beech,
                  Sits greefefull Dolio breathing out this ſpeech:
               
               
                  Sleepe Phebus, ſleepe, reſt in thy watrie bed,
                  Looke on vs this blacke and diſmall day,
                  Wher at he pauſ'd, and hanging downe his head,
                  Greefe stopt the paſſage of his ſpeeches way.
                  All ſorrow-wounded thus, he lookt like one,
                  Whom heau'ns had metamorphiz'd to a ſtone.
               
               
                  Such ſtone, within whoſe concaue boſome dwels,
                  
                     
Some thin-cheekt Fountaine, leane and hollow-eyed,
                  From out whoſe loines ſpring forth a thouſand wels,
                  Which cloſely ſneke away for being ſpide,
                  So ſtealingly there creepes Downe Dolios face
                  Two ſmall deuided ſtreames with ſilent pace.
               
               
                  At laſt, when inward greefes had almoſt ſlaine him,
                  (For vn-reuealed woes ſoone kill the heart)
                  Viewing the bluſhing Eaſt, he thus gan plaine him,
                  O thus he waild, as though his life ſhould part:
                  Sleepe Phebus, ſleepe, reſt in thy watrie bed,
                  O reſt in Thetis lap thy drowſie head.
               
               
                  And thus he often woo'd, and ſtil entreated
                  The ſun to hide the glorie of his face,
                  Which words he iterated and repeated,
                  To ſhew the blacke diſaſters of his caſe,
                  Sad night (he knew) best fitte à his dull ſpright,
                  The wo-tormented ſoule doth hate the light.
               
               
                  O cruell Fortune, ſtepdame to my ioies,
                  That diſhinherits them from ſweet content,
                  Plunging their hopes in ſeas of dire annoies,
                  Depriuing them of gifts which Nature lent,
                  When will thy prowd inſulting humor ceaſe,
                  That freed frrom cares, my ſcule may liue in peace.
               
               
                  But why doe I entreat thy ruthleſse heart,
                  That knowes thy greateſt pleaſure, thy delights,
                  Cenſiſts in aggrauating my ſoules ſmart,
                  Poyſen'd with woe by venome of thy ſpight?
                  
                     
No, let me rather curſe thy bloudie mind,
                  Which executes the wrath of one ſo blind.
               
               
                  So blind as will aduance ech low-bred groome,
                  To haughtie titles of a glorious place,
                  Lifting him vp from nothing, to the roome
                  Where thoſe of honours, and of vertues race
                  Should ſeated bee, and not th'illiterate:
                  Learning, not place, doth men nobillitate.
               
               
                  But what thou wilt, muſt ſtand, the reſt muſt fall,
                  All human kings pay tribute to thy might,
                  And this muſt riſe, when pleaſeth thee to call,
                  This other perriſh in a wofull plight:
                  Thy courſes are irregular, thy kindneſſe
                  Miſplac'd, thy will lawleſſe, all is blindneſſe.
               
               
                  Thou filſt the world with hell-bred villanies,
                  Diſ arming vertue of all true deſence,
                  Leauing her naked midſt her enemies,
                  That are both void of learning, wit, and ſence:
                  Only this ſence they haue, for e're to hold
                  Their high-pil'd heapes of all-preuailing gold.
               
               
                  And that is it that chokes true vertues breath,
                  Making it die, though ſhe immortall be,
                  Fruitleſse it makes it, ſubiect vnto Death,
                  That's want: or elſe it liues eternally,
                  But men doe count of vertue as a dreame,
                  Only they ſtudie on ſome golden theame.
               
               
                  
                  Neuer was any thing ſo priceleſſe deemed,
                  So louingly emboſom'd in mans thought,
                  No not religious rites are ſo eſteemed
                  As gold, for which both earth and hell are ſought,
                  All paines are eaſe, ſo wee may it obtaine,
                  All eaſe is paine, when wee ſhould vertue gaine.
               
               
                  Where haue you ſeene one of the Muſes traine,
                  Whoſe mind is impleat with vertues ſeed,
                  Scorning this worldly ſoule-polluting gaine,
                  But that he liues in euerlaſting need,
                  And yet not baſely, though in meane eſtate,
                  For vertue ſcornes baſe meanes with deadly hate.
               
               
                  But there's no thought of vertue, no regard,
                  Whereas this guilded idoll beares the ſway,
                  Men of deſart from fauours are debard,
                  And churliſhly thruſt from preferments way,
                  When ſome baſe Gnatoes ſleepe in Fortunes lap,
                  Whoſe wealth, not wit, procures ſuch fooles ſuch hap.
               
               
                  Then come you wounded ſoules, conioine with me,
                  In ſome obumbrate thicket let vs dwell,
                  Some place which heau'ns faire eie did neuer ſee,
                  There let vs build ſome ſorrow-framed cell,
                  Where weele caſt our ſighs and ſum our cares,
                  Penning them ſadly downe with ſea-ſalt teares.
               
               
                  Wearying the lowd-toungd daughter of the aire, Eccho.
                  
                  Infuſing trembling horrors in ech beaſt
                  With ſuddein-broken accents of diſpaire,
                  
                     
With deepe-fetcht grones, as ſignes of our vnreſt:
                  And if the Satyres aske why we complaine,
                  Fortune commands, and vertue now is ſlaine.
               
               
                  Thus in theſe raging fits of true-felt paſsion,
                  This melancholike louer vſd to crie,
                  Railing gainſt Loue and Fortune in ſuoh faſhion,
                  As if twixt both there were one ſimpathie
                  Of natures and of humours all one kind,
                  Both being falſe, mutable, and both blind.
               
               And in this inuectiue and ſelfe-afflicting vaine, the ſame Louer in another place further complaineth of the ouermuch rigour of his Ladie, preſeruing and continuing in hate and ſcorne of his loue: which words reduced to a Sonnet, are theſe, or to the like effect.
               
                  Hard is his hap who neuer finds content,
                  But ſtill muſt dwell with heauy-thoughted ſadneſse,
                  Harder that heart that neuer will relent,
                  That may, and will not turne theſe woes to gladneſse,
                  Then ioies-adue, comfort and mirth, farewell,
                  For I muſt now exile me from all pleaſure,
                  Seeking ſome vncouth caue where I may dwell,
                  Penſiue and ſolitarie without meaſure,
                  There to bewaile my ſuch vntimely fortune,
                  That in my Aprill daies I thus ſhould periſh,
                  And there that steele-hard heart ſtill ſtill t'importune,
                  That it at laſt my bleeding ſoule would cheriſh,
                  If not, with greedie longing to attend,
                  
                     
Tillpitty-moued Death my woes ſhall end.
               
               And thus farre haue I continued the exclamations of an vnhappy louer, who in the ſame place alſo writ many other inuectiues againg Fortune and Loue, ioining them both together, which I will here pretermit, hauing already too much digreſſed from our cheefe intendement: reuerting therefore from whence we left you, it is written, that the Thebans in a certain ſtatue which they dedicated vnto Fortune (being alſo in the ſhape & ſimilitude of a woman) placing in one of her hands a yong child, which they tearmed by the name of Pluto, which with many is taken to bee the god of riches: ſo that is diſcouered, by repreſenting Pluto in the forme of a child, that in the hands of Fortune was the beſtowing and diſpoſing of wealth, riches, poſſeſſions, and aduancements, commanding thē and hauing that abſolute authority & rule ouer them, as mothers gouerne and rule their children. Martianus thus deſcribes her to appeare at the mariage of Philologia. Martianus. There was (ſaith he) among the reſt a young and beautifull woman, more talking and more abounding in idle diſcourſe and words then any of the reſt, who ſeemed to be full of geſtures and of fantaſtike carriage of her bodie, and alwaies mouing and ſtirring vp and downe, her vpper garment was of the thinneſt ſilke, whoſe lightneſſe the leaſt breath of wind would puffe vp, her ſteps and paces as ſhee went, were very vncertaine, & ſhe neuer would abide long in one place, or in one companie, and hee ſayth, that her name was Chaunce, which alſo is the ſame in ſence as Fortune,

and which likewiſe with ſome is called Nemeſis: ſhee carried in her lap (which was very ſpacious & wide) almoſt all the ſundrie kinds and ſorts of all the beauties, ornaments, riches, and graces of the world, of which, ſome ſhee ſeemed to offer with her hand to ſome that ſtood by, but in ſo haſtie manner, and ſo ſuddenly as was poſſible, as that if they did not inſtantly take hold and accept of her curteſie, all what was offered was loſt, to ſome ſhe ſeemed very familiar & kind, dallying with them and playing with their locks, and vſing many other ſuch wanton and alluring behauiours: but to ſome others againe ſhe would ſeeme maruellous angry and diſpleaſed, ſtriking them ouer the faces and heads with a white wand, which ſhe held in her hand, and with ſuch ſigne and token of reuenge, as if ſhe had ben highly prouoked and incenſed, and would aſſuredly acquite her ſelfe on the offenders whoſoeuer.
               In a temple in Greece was erected a Statue of Fortune, which was made in the ſorme and ſimilitude of a graue Matrone, habited and clothed in garments ſutable to the deſires and faſhions of elder yeeres, and in her countenance ſhe ſeemed very ſad and penſiue: a little before her was placed the Image and portraiture of a young virgine, amourous in aſpect and pleaſant, which ſeemed to giue & offer her hand to the picture of the other: behind theſe (euen hard at their heeles) was engrauen forth another Image in the likeneſſe of a young child, which with one of her armes ſeemed to leane on the picture of the ſad Matrone, which looking ſo dolefull and heauie, ſignifies her ſelfe to bee

that Fortune which is alreadie paſt and ſlipt by, and therefore ſhe ſits lamenting and bewailing the departure thereof. The other which ſeemed ſo pleaſant and offered her hand, is the preſent Fortune, and the yong infant behind them both, is that which is to come and ſucceedeth.
               Among the Ancients and among the old writers, Fortuna and Nemeſis were oftentimes taken to bee all one, yet at other times they made this difference and ſeuerall natures to appeare for Nemeſis: as Amianus Marcellinus ſayth) was held and taken to bee the Amianus Marcellinus goddeſſe, to whom only it belonged to puniſh and caſtigate the offences of the wicked and male act is, afflicting them with paines and torments, according to the qualitie of their ſins; and alſo rewarded the vertuous and well-liuers with aduancements, honour, and titles of place and dignitie: and that ſhe did know and ſee all things euen into the darkeſt and moſt priuate corner of the world, & therevpon was by the Auncients ſuppoſed to be the daughter of Iuſtitia, who (ſay they) dwelt & inhabited in a very ſecret corner, within the houſe of Eternitie, where ſhe noted downe in her books of memorie, the offences and wicked deeds of the euill. Macrobius ſayth, this Nemeſis was adored Macrobius. and worſhipped among the Aegyptians as the reuenger and cheefe enemie of pride, inſolencie, & haughtineſſe, and that ſhe was alſo with many called Rhamnuſia, ſo tearmed of a certain place among the Athenians; where alſo was erected and dedicated vnto hir a moſt ſtately and magnifique Statue of marble, and that ſhee was alſo ſometimes knowne by the name

of Adraſtia, of king Adraſtus, for that he was the firſt that euer cauſed her to be held in that worſhip and reuerenced regard, and that euer conſecrated any altars or temples vnto her.
               The ſame Author alſo deſcribeth her, ſaying, that her picture was depainted and ſet forth with wings on her ſhoulders, to ſignifie, that ſhe was alwaies readie and at hand amongſt men: hard by her ſide was placed the rudder of a ſhip, & ſhe her ſelfe ſtood vpon a round wheele, holding in hir right hand a golden ball, and in the other a whip, manifeſting thereby, that where ſhe fauoured or diſliked, either aduancements, wealth and honour, or miſeries, croſſes, and afflictions followed and enſued.
               She is oftentimes alſo depainted, as holding the bridle of a horſe in one of her hands, and in the other a ſmall and long peece of wood of a certain meaſure, which we call an ell or a yard: vnſhadowing thereby, that men ought to rule & reſtrain their tongues from euill and corrupting ſpeeches, and that they ſhould adminiſter iuſtice and true meaſures with whom they deale or doe conuerſe.
               It is written with Pauſanias, that Nemeſis was the Pauſanias. moſt ſeuere and cruell puniſher of arrogancie & vainglory of all others, & ſaith, that ſhe abaſed & brought downe the inſolencie and ouer-weening boldneſſe of the northerne barbarous people, who with an aſſured conqueſt and victorie (as they thought) entered into the countries of the Athenians, and there (ſcorning as it ſhould ſeeme) their ſmall forces and reſiſtances, fell to ſpoile and rifeling, and preſently ſet vp and

erected their huge Coloſſus, or piller of marble, which they of purpoſe brought with them to ingraue and ſet forth their victories, trophies, and ſpoiles that they ſhould make of their enemies: but being afterward ouercome themſelues, & beaten back into their countries, the ſame ſtone the Athenians cauſed to be conſecrated vnto Nemeſis, whoſe picture and counter fet by the incomparable skill of Phidias, was moſt curiouſly and exactly ingrauen thereon, to ſhew therby, that ſhee only was the cauſe of the cleane ſubuerting and expelling their fatall enemies out of their Countrey, and that ſhee therein extended her power and office to the reuenging and aboliſhing the ouerhaughtie attempts of pride, & foole-hardie preſumption. And in that ſhe was thus held to be puniſher of vaine humors, and prowd demeanures of mortals, the Ancients alſo held and ſuppoſed her to bee the verie ſame in nature and propertie as the goddeſſe Iuſtitia, whoſe deſcription (as Aulus Gellius affirmeth) was by Chriſippus thus ſet forth and compoſed. Aulus Gellius.
               
               Her Statue (ſayth hee) was framed out in the due proportion and ſimilitude of a beauteous young virgine, who was not of any prowd, loftie, or diſdaineful countenance, nor baſe or deiected in her looke or cariage, but carrying ſo ſetled and modeſt demeanures, as ſeemed worthy of all reuerence, loue, and due commendation, her eyes ſeemed moſt quicke in their circumference, cleere and liuely, which ſhe often turned this way, and that way, looking and prying into euery place round about her, and for that cauſe the Auncients entearmed her the all-diſcerning Ladie. Apulcius
                  
oftentimes vſed to ſweare & take his oath by the light of Phoebus, and eye of Iuſtitia, adioining them both together in equalitie of cleereneſſe. By which may be vnderſtood, that there ought to be in Iudges and adminiſters of iuſtice, a ſharpe & cleere eye to find out and inueſtigat the truth, & as it were to ſee into (with the ſight of capacitie) any offēce or crime perpetrated whatſoeuer: whoſe cleereneſſe and far-piercing manner of examination, diſcouers and laies open what before hath ben long kept hid, & in darke and obſcure couertures. And inframing her like a virgine, is alſo meant, that ſuch officers, and men authoriſed for execution of iuſtice, ought to reſemble a virgines chaſtitie, by not ſuffering themſelues to be tempted and ſo led away by corruption of bribes, by partialitie, flatterie, or inſinuation, but to remaine vnmoued, conſtant, and ſtedfaſt in ſinceritie of conſcience, proceeding in their profeſſion according to right, equitie, & reaſons Pauſanias writeth, that in a certaine place in Aegypt Pauſanias. was portraied forth the Image of Iuſtitia, in reſemblance alſo of a faire young virgin, which ſeemed to draw after her with her left hand, another blacke and hard fauoured woman, which ſhe haled and puld forward, euen by maine force, & ſtriking her many times ouer the face and head in moſt deſpightfull & ſeuere manner, ſeeming therein (as it were) to reuenge ſome wrong or iniurie offered vnto her. The young virgin was Iuſtitia, and the other Iniuria: which intellecteth vs thereby, that Iudges and ſuch like officers for ciuile & domeſtike gouernments, ought continually ſtriue by all endeuours to ſuppreſſe wrongs, iniuries, and

miſdemeanures, and that no man receiue moleſtations, violence, ot hard vſages of the ſtronger partie. And that they alſo carie an equall hand ouer all matters and complaints expoſed vnto them, and not to giue forth and denounce ſentence, till both ſides may bee produced to plead for themſelues, alledging lawfull reaſons for their innocencie, and purgation of thoſe crimes obiected againſt them: vnleſſe they will reſēble that Iudge which Apelles drew forth in a certaine peece of worke of his, which (according to Lucianus) is thus deſcribed, with the occaſion and reaſon Lucianus. of the depainting and ſetting out thereof:
               After that Ptolomie king of Aegypt had deliuered Apelles out of priſon, and reſtored him to libertie, when indeed he had once thought to haue puniſhed him with ſeuere tortures of death (hauing ouerlightly beleeued the vniuſt information of Antiphilus, who meerely of malice had accuſed him of a certaine rebellion and inſurrection in that Countrey) & after that in lieu of ſuch his wrong of opprobrie and falſe impriſonment, he had giuen him a hundred talents, as part of amends for ſuch his trouble, & had commanded that Antiphilus ſhould alwaies afterwards be his ſlaue and bondman: for requitall of ſuch his iniurious practiſes, and ſlandering his integritie of life, hee in a fantaſticall humor, betooke himſelfe to his art, intending by ſome curious deuiſe thereof to ſhew forth the depicturance of the danger & perill of his life, which at the time of ſuch his accuſation hee then ſtood in, which was in this manner with incomparable knowledge of skil performed, being called Calūnia di Apelle:
               
               
                  
There was placed in a iudiciall and high ſeat, made (as it were) for the determining & deciding of ciuile cauſes and affaires, the Statue of a man, with maruellous long ears, ſuch as Midas is reported to haue had, who there repreſented the preſence of a graue & reuerend Iudge. Vnto this Iudge two women (one of the one ſide, and the other on the other ſide) ſeemed to whiſper ſome matter or other in his eares, the one of them was called Ignorance, the other Suſpition, and hee held forth his hand towards another woman, called Calumnia, being of the ſhape of a beautifull, rich, and young woman, then comming & approching towards him, ſhee was maruellous gorgeous in her habit, and of a paſſing faire aſpect, ſauing that at that inſtant ſhe ſeemed ſomewhat angrie, diſdainefull, & diſcontented, inſomuch, as her eies looked very red and fierie: In her left hand ſhe held a flaming torch, & with her right ſhee ſeemed forcibly to draw & plucke after her a young man by the haires of his head in moſt tyrannicall ſort, who miſerablie and dolefully with both his hands erected toward the heauens, bemoned & lamented his woe afflicted condition and ſtate: a little before her approched Enuie, which was in the forme of a wondrous leane old man, with pallid & meagre face, on whoſe withered cheeks it ſhould ſeeme Time with the all cutting plow-ſhare of his remorſe-leſſe crueltie had wrought deepe furrowes, & inuolued wrinkles. And immediately after her (Enuie vſhering them all) came two young women more, which ſeemed to flatter and gloſe with her with perſuaſiue and inſinuating phraſes, extolling her beautie, and (as it

were, forcing her to aſſume a ſtrong opinion of her owne incomparable faireneſſe, & ſeemed alſo to adore and decke her abillements and cloths with many conceited and curious toies of fantaſie and delight: & the one was called Deceit, and the other Trecherie, both ſiſters, and of one humor. After all theſe followed alſo another woman (whoſe name was Penitence) habited with vild ragged and baſe attirements, who infinitely deploring her beeing, ſeemed to crucifie her ſelf with ſtrange impaſſionated fits beyond all meaſure, who looking backe, and ſeeing another poore woman making haſt to ouertake her (called Truth) euen for verie ſorrow ſhame & greefe, fell into diuers ſounds, & was readie to die and depart from the world. And thus Lucianus deſcribes that picture, which was called Calumnia di Apelle. By which this little may bee obſerued, that the meaning of it is nothing elſe but a falſe & malicious accuſation, entertained and ſupported by the Iudge of one, that is not there himſelfe in preſence to purge and cleare himſelfe of that which is obiected againſt him, whoſe accuſer is oftentimes Enuy: ſeconded and coadiuted by Deceit and Trecherie: the cauſe of the Iudges raſh ſentence, is Ignorance, together with Suſpition, and the imbracing of calumniation or ſlander of the innocent: the bewailing & teares of Penitence at the diſcouerie of Truth, ſhews the greefe and ſhame that the guiltleſſe and true perſons receiue by bringing their reputation in queſtion of villanie and diſhoneſty. And this ſhall ſuffice for the deſcription of this Picture of Apelles, with the explication thereof, returning to the finiſhing and concluding of

the Statues and Images dedicated vnto Fortune.
               
                  Quintus Curtius ſayth, That Fortune was depictured among the people of Scythia, in the forme of a woman without feet, & that there was placed round about at her right hand a number of little wings, firſt to ſignifie, that ſhee cannot ſtand faſt or firme, & that her gifts and fauors are no ſooner giuen, but are preſently loſt, & doe (as it were) ſudainely flie from a man before they be fully intertained or poſſeſſed. Alexander 
                  Alexander Neapolitanus. 
                  Neapolitanus writeth, That with certaine people of Greece her Picture or Statue was wholly framed and compacted of glaſſe, as ſhewing thereby, that vpon euery ſmal occaſion, riches, and happineſſe are decaied, conſumed, and periſhed. And yet all the Ancients for the moſt part ſo abſolutely relied & confided vpon her power and vertue, that they referred and attributed all luckie ſucceſſes of battels & other pleaſures alſo vnto her fauor, kindnes, and good liking. In Rome (as Liuie reports) was erected a very ſumptuous temple Liuie. by Camillus, which he dedicated vnto Fortune after the victorious ouerthrow hee gaue vnto the Hetruſcians.
               
                  Plutarch alſo ſpeaketh of another Temple which was dedicated vnto Fortune, which was built two miles out of Rome in that very place, where Coriolanus, approching like a gallant captain in arms (though then againſt his country) met with his owne mother, and others of his kinred, at whoſe vrgent intreaties & praiers, hee ſurceaſed to proceed in his (till then) implacable furie and wrath, and ſo that glorious Metropolitane of the world, was no doubt preſerued

from ſaccage and ruine at that time, for that before he had reſolutely vowed to burne & conſume it to aſhes. And in this place (as I haue ſaid) was erected a temple vnto Fortune, where ſhe was portraied forth in braſſe to the reſemblance and true proportion of a woman, which afterwards (ſome Deuill hanting the ſame) was taken and held by thoſe faith-wanting Idolaters in great reuerence & adoration, as a moſt infallible and true Oracle.
               It is written of Galba, that whē he had taken away a certaine chaine or bracelet of gold from this Image of Fortune (which was then hung about her necke) & had placed it on the Statue of Venus, that ſhee (that ſame very night following) appeared vnto him in his ſleepe with threatening meanes & words of reuenge, which ſo appalled & confounded his ſences, that not many daies after in a great affrightment and terror, he departed from this life ſpeechleſſe and dumbe many houres before he died.
               With many Authors it is written, that in a certain country of Aegypt Fortune is depictured, as turning round a great wheele made of glaſſe, on the top wherof are ſet forth the pictures of many men playing ioifully, and in the pride of mirth and iolitie ſome others alſo climing & endeuouring to aſcend to the top therof, and others hauing newly attained it, precipitating and tumbling downe backe againe.
               
                  Spartianus writeth, that almoſt all the Romane Emperours were ſo addicted to an opinion, which they Spartianus. embraced of the powerfull mightineſſe of this Fortune, that they kept euermore her picture or Image

in their bed-chambers, and other priuat places of retrait, & that when any of them died, the ſame Image was preſently caried into the lodging of the knowne ſucceſſor.
               The firſt (as Liuie affirmeth) that cauſed in Rome any temples to be erected vnto Fortune, was Seruius 
                  Liuie. 
                  Tallius, the ſixt king of the Romanes. And yet Plutarch 
                  Plutarch. ſaith in his bookes intituled (The fortune of the Romanes) that Marcius, which was the fourth king (after their computation) was the firſt that dedicated or built any Statues or temples vnto this goddeſſe; & that as this Empire attained higher and higher vnto her puiſſance and glorie, ſo the ſuperſtitious deuotion of theſe people, increaſed for the reuerencing and worſhipping of Fortune, which afterwards ſpread it ſelfe throughout all Italie, though it continued no long time.
               The Philoſopher Cebes reſembled Fortune very fitly Cebes. vnto a Comedie, in which many actors appeare, oftentimes in likeneſſe and ſimilitude of kings & great monarchs, and preſently after performe the part of ſome rogue or villan, & are become poore fiſhermen, ſlaues, and bondmen, and ſuch like. Socrates compared Socrates. her alſo vnto a common place of meeting, conuenticle, or theatre, where without all order or obſeruation as they come, men are placed and haue their ſeats; nothing reſpecting the worthineſſe or dignity of any among them whatſoeuer, all being intermingled, and confuſedly thronged together: ſhewing thereby, that Fortune without either reſpect of gentrie, worthines, or merit, but all vnaduiſedly, & without order or reaſon beſtoweth her fauors, riches, and felicities.
               
                  
It is read, that Vupal was the firſt that in all Greece cauſed any Statues, altars, or temples to be conſecrated vnto this goddeſſe Fortune, and that in the towne of Smyrna he erected one moſt ſtately temple, in the midſt whereof, the portraiture of Fortune was placed; which picture was cut out & carued with incredible curiouſneſſe of the workeman, and beautified & graced with diuers delicat embelliſhments, and almoſt art-exceeding politures.
               In Egira a city of Achaia, the Image of Fortune was drawn forth in the ſhape of a maruellous fair woman, who held in one of her hands the horn of abundance, called Cornucopia, and in the other the boy Cupid: all which (as Pauſanias interpretes it) ſignifieth, that it little auaileth any woman to bee of a beautifull, amorous, & well-compoſed feature, if fortune in that bodie be wanting and abſent: meaning that beauty without riches or honor, loſeth partly her value & eſteem among men, which riches are intended by that Cornucopia, ſignifying abundance of wealth, and enioying of much treaſure. And indeed he is very fortunate & happy, that in his loue ſhall find beauty to be counterpoiſd with riches, and that the fruition of that ſhal be accompanied with the graces of Venus, and thoſe all-ouercomming accomplements.
               
                  Giraldus (writing of the gods of the ancients) ſaith, that with ſome Fortune is depictured riding on a Giraldus. horſe, who with his wonderfull and ſtrange ſwiftnes of gallop, caries her away almoſt inuiſible: and after her poſteth Deſtiny, with great furie and exceeding celerity, holding in her hand an yron bow ready bent, and aiming to ſtrike Fortune euen at the very heart.

This breefe depicturance may vnfold vnto vs the vnſtaied and changing mutabilitie of Fortune, and her ſudain & moſt ſwift departure from thoſe whom euen now ſhe fauoured & highly aduanced: or that it ſignifies, that ſhe is alwaies flying from deſtiny, ſeeking all means to auoid her cōpany, for that indeed theſe two can neuer accord or agree together; for ſo much as where Deſtiny ſets hir foot, Fortune is there as itwere inchanted & coniured, as hauing no power, efficacie, or vertue. And thus much ſhal ſuffice for the depicturances & deſcriptions, with the ſeuerall explications adioined, which are read in autenticke writers to bee made and deuiſed by the Auncients of this their goddeſſe Fortune.
            
            
               Venus.
               BEfore it bee diſcended to the deſcriptions of the images & ſtatues dedicated vnto this goddes Venus, it ſhall not be impertinent ſomwhat to touch the ſeueralnatures & conditions vnderſtood & ſignified by her, as being a furtherance & light to conceiue the reaſons why ſo many diuers ſtatues & pictures were ſo diuerſly faſhioned & compoſed of her. According therfore to the opinion of the Poets, Venus was taken to be the goddeſſe of wantonnes & amorous delights, as that ſhe inſpired into the minds of men, libidinous deſires, and luſtfull appetites, & with whoſe power & aſſiſtance they attained the effect of their loſe concupiſcence: whervpō alſo they entermed her the mother of loue, becauſe that without a certaine loue & ſimpathie of affections, thoſe deſires are ſildome accompliſhed. And vnto hir they aſcribe the care and charge of

marriages and holie wedlockes, of which likewiſe it is written, that Himeneus & Iuno are the protectors & rulers. But according to the works of nature, which vnder this name, are indeed diuerſly vnderſtood, Venus doth ſignifie that ſecret & hiddē vertue by which all creatures whatſoeuer are drawne with aſſociation, effectuating thereby the art of generation: whervpon Macrobius ſaith, that from Venus is brought the deſire Macrobius. and humor of carnall luſts and voluptuouſnes, which afterward taking root more deeply, conduceth vnto a true accompliſhment therof. Some that haue written of theſe naturall cauſes, haue affirmed, that Venus, Iuno, Luna, & Proſerpina haue ben al one, retaining only different names and titles, in that many effects and iſſues proceeding from them, haue ben diuers and ſeuerall. But leauing theſe opinions, let vs now enter into the Images & Pictures made and compoſed of her.
               It is written with Philo (an Hebrew author of great antiquitie) that this Venus was born and ingendred of the froth of the ſea, taking force and vertue of the priuities of Celum, which his ſon Saturn cut off & threw down therin: and her ſtatue is framed in the ſhape of a moſt beautiful and amorous yong woman, which ſeemed alſo to ſtand vpright in the midſt of a huge ſhell of a fiſh, which was drawn by two other moſt vgly & ſtrāge fiſhes, (as Ouid at large noteth it) who alſo ſaith, Ouid. that vnto her was conſecrated the Iſland of Ciprus, & eſpecially in it the city of Paphos, ſtanding by the ſea ſide, for that ſhe was ſeen and diſcouered vpon hir firſt apparance out of the ſea, to go on land on that part of the country: by reaſon wherof, the people therabouts adore and worſhip hir with great zeale & veneration,

and erected and dedicated vnto her a moſt rich and ſtately temple very gorgeous and coſtly.
               
                  Pauſanias ſaith, that Venus is drawne in a coach through the airie paſſages, with two white Doues (as Apuleius alſo affirmeth) being birds of all others moſt agreeable and pleaſing vnto her, & are called the birds of Venus: for it is written indeed, that they are moſt abundantly inclined to procreation, & that almoſt at all times of the year, they ingender, increaſe, and bring forth their young, of whome it is obſerued, that vpon their firſt aſſociation and coupling together, they do kiſſe one another, and as it were embrace, and friendly intertain their acquaintance and friendſhip; alluded to the faſhions and cuſtomes of amorous louers, in their firſt ſalutes, and times of daliance. Eleanus writeth, that Eleanus. theſe birds are ſo cōſecrated vnto Venus, for that (ſaith he) it is read, that on a certain mountain of Sicilia, called Erice, were kept and obſerued certain daies as holy daies and times of paſtime and diſport, the which the Sicilians tearmes The daies of paſſage; inſomuch (as the Indians report) that Venus paſſed and took hir iorney in thoſe daies from thence into Libia, at which time not one doue was ſeene to remain behind in the country, as attending & accompanying the goddeſſe in hir voiage, which being performed and ended, they al returned and came back again vnto their old haunts and accuſtomed places as before: whervpon after that, certain ſolemnities and rites were on that mountaine kept and celebrated.
               
                  Horace and Virgil affirme, that the chariot of Venus is drawn by two white Swans, wherof Statius alſo maketh mention, ſaying, that thoſe kind of birds are moſt

mild, innocent, and harmeleſſe and therfore giuen vnto Venus: or that their harmonious & pleaſant notes, which they ſing a litle before the approch of death, are compared to the amorous & delightful diſcourſes and conferences of louers, which commonly afterward proue & turn into ſorrow, miſery, or death. With the Grecians the image & picture of this goddeſſe was ſet forth naked & without cloths, as Praxitiles alſo an excellent ingrauer in the Iſland of Guidos compoſed it: meaning therby, that al venerous & licentious people are by ſuch their inordinat luſt, like beaſts, depriued of ſence, & left as it were naked and deſpoiled of reaſon and the cloths & garments of vnderſtanding; & oftentimes alſo ſtripped and waſted of their priſtine & former riches, and goods. And this picture there framed in that Iſle of Guidos, was wrought and cut out by the ſame Praxitiles with ſuch exquiſit art & deepe-knowledged skil, that the deſire of the veiw and ſight therof drew and allured many paſſengers and voiagers by ſea to ſaile to Ciprus to ſatisfie their eies of what their eares ſo highly had heard commended.
               The ancients vſed to dedicat vnto this goddeſſe many plants & flowers, among the which, ſpecially were the roſes, whoſe fragrant and ſweet odor is reſembled vnto the pleaſing delights & outward faire ſhews and colours of loue, & in that they are of that bluſhing and rubicund colour, and that they can hardly bee pluckt without their pricks, and moleſting mens fingers: they are likened vnto luxurious people, & ſuch as giue thē
                  ſelues ouer to the vnbridled affections of carnality, for that ſuch vnlawful & foule deſires are ſildome effectuated without ſhame & bluſhing, & that there accompanieth

and conioineth with them, dolors, afflictions, paines, greefes, horrors, and a polluted conſcience, or els they are ſo compared, for that the color & delicat hue of theſe roſes is ſoon faded, periſhed, & dccaied, as the beuties of women, as alſo the delights & pleaſures therof ſudainly fall away and are conſumed. But concerning theſe roſes, the Poets do inuēt, that at the firſt they were of a milke white colour, & grew verie pale and diſcoloured: vntil Venus on a certain time hauing intelligence that Mars (for ſome iealouſie conceaued) had complotted & determined a deuiſe to haue murdered her ſweethart Adonis, and ſhe in great haſt and rage running to preuent & diſanull the intended miſcheef, greeuouſly prickt hir foot on the ſtalks of theſe flowers, of which wound (ſending forth abundance of bloud) they were preſently turned into that freſh colour which now at this time they do retaine.
               It is read with Pauſanias, that Marcellus erected and Pauſanias. dedicated a moſt ſumptuous temple vnto this goddes Venus: which he cauſed to be built two miles off from Rome, that thoſe kind of humors & wanton pleaſures ought to bee remoted a farre off from the minds and thoughts of all chaſt virgines of Rome.
               
                  Lactantius writeth, that the Lacedemonians framed Lactantius. & compoſed the Image of Venus all armed like a warrior, holding in one hand a ſpeare, and in the other a ſhield or target, which depicturance they deuiſed in regard of a certain ouerthrow which the women of that coūtry gaue vnto their enemy the people of Meſſenia, and with ſucceſſe they ſuppoſed to haue proceeded from the power and aſſiſtance of Venus, as inſpiring into thoſe womans hearts manly courages, ſtontneſſe,

and reſolutions. In memory whereof, they alwaies afterward reputed Venus to be of moſt forcible power and mightineſſe in arms, and after that beleefe reuerenced, adored, and worſhipped hir. Concerning which depicturance and ſetting forth of the ſtatue of Venus, Auſonius in a certain Epigram made by him to that purpoſe, ſaith, that Pallas was moſt wonderfully Auſonius. incenſt, and mightily ſtomacked ſuch deſcription ſet out in that maner, and that ſhe preſently fel into great contention and quarrell with Venus, for allowing it ſo to be done, that ſhe of her ſelf any way ſhould ſeem therby to take vpon her any martiall performances or exploits, derogating and detracting from her honor, dignity, and worthineſſe. In which Epigram alſo Auſonius declareth how prowdly and gallantly Venus anſwered her thereunto: as that ſhe wondered and ſtood amaſed how Pallas durſt now be ſo raſh, bold & ouerhardie, as to accuſe or braue her therein, conſidering that ſhe ſtood then all armed, and had much more aduantage againſt her, than ſhe had vpon the mountain Ida, wherein likewiſe by the verdict of Paris, ſhe vtterly then confounded and ouerthrew her mightineſſe, and made hir depart away aſhamed, angry and diſcontented. All which argumentation & ſtriuing controuerſies, the ſame authour moſt exquiſitely there hath ſet down and depainted. And thus far only in this treatiſe ſhal be progreſſed, as not aduenturing to diſpleaſe the modeſt in capitulating ſuch ouer-wanton and too laſcious expoſitions and meanings which the Auncients made and vnderſtood of the natures, qualities, properties, and conditions, of this their goddeſſe Venus.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   