
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A SHORTE AND briefe narration of the two Nauigations and Diſcoueries to the Northweaſt partes called NEWE FRAVNCE:
            Firſt tranſlated out of French into Italian, by that famous learned man Gio: Bapt: Ramutius, and now turned into Engliſh by Iohn Florio: Worthy the reading of all Venturers, Trauellers, and Diſcouerers.
            IMPRINTED AT LONdon, by H. Bynneman, dvvelling in Thames ſtreate, neere vnto Baynardes Caſtell.
            Anno Domini. 1580.
            
         
         
            
            
            ¶TO THE RIGHT VVORſhipful Edmond Bray Eſquire, High Sherife within hir Maiesties Countie of Oxenford: I. Florio vviſheth much encreaſe of worſhip in this life, and in the Worlde to come, eternall happineſſe.
            
               THe olde ſaying is: None ſo bolde as blynd Bayard: nor anye ſo readye to vndertake, as the leaste able to performe: Euen ſo (right Worſhipfull) it nowe fareth with me, who (at the requests and earneste ſolicitations of diuers my very good frends heere in Oxforde) haue vndertaken this tranſlation, wherin I holde my ſelfe farre inferiour to many. Howbeeit, foraſmuch as that ſeruaunt was of his Lord and Maister moſt highly diſcommended, whiche hiding his Talent in the grounde, had thereby profited nothing: my ſelfe being very loath to incurre the ſame faulte, and ſo to become worthy the like reprehenſion, haue the rather aduentured to tranſlate this parte of Nauigation, whiche (I aſſure my ſelfe with other mens trauel and diligence) may be an occaſion of no ſmal commoditie and benefite to this our Countrie of Englande. And heerein the more to animate and encourage the Engliſhe Marchants, I doe onely (for breuitie ſake) propoſe vnto them the infinite treaſures (not hidden to themſelues) whiche both the Spaniardes, the Portugales, and the Venetians haue ſeuerally gained by their ſuche nauigations and trauailes. Nowe (right Worſhipful) when I had well conſidered with my ſelfe, that hir Maiestie hathe deemed your Worſhip a very meete man for that aucthoritie wherein you nowe preſently remaine, I my ſelfe coulde not but accompt your Worſhip (for the preſent) the fittest man within the ſhire, to patronize and defende this my ſimple labour, whereby any benefite maye either happen to hir Maiesties perſon, or commoditie, to hir highneſſe common weale: and if the wealthe of a Prince be any cauſe of the ſafetie of his perſon, (which, who doubteth? it may be (and not vntruly) ſaide to be bothe. But to the ende your Worſhippe haue not altogither ſo muche cauſe to condemne

me for this my bolde attempt vpon no maner of acquaintance, I thought it not vnfit vnto you, that I haue the rather herevnto preſumed, vppon the request and warrant of my deare and welbeloued friend Maister H. Leigh, who (no doubt) is a man verie mindfull of al your Worſhips courteſies from time to time ſhewed toward him.
            Thus not willingly deſirous to be herein more tedious than is requiſite, I ceaſe from troubling your good Worſhip, hartily praying the Almightie, to encreaſe the ſame, with abundaunce of all other vertues, to his good wil and pleaſure: and withall, wholly committe my ſelfe vnto your Worſhips good dispoſition. From Oxenford the 25. of Iune. 1580.
            
            
               Your Worſhips moſt humble at commaundement. I. Florio.
            
         
         
            
            ¶To all Gentlemen, Merchants, and Pilots.
            
               WHen I had taken in hande to tranſlate thys Treatiſe, which I did for the benefite and behoofe of thoſe that ſhall attempt any newe diſcouerie in the Northweaſt partes of America, I thought good brieflye to touch the vſe of my tranſlation, that the Reader may ſee and conſider the drift of my trauell. For, although this Diſcourſe may ſeeme very barraine, and not to containe ſuche matter as is pretended, as beyng a particular Relation of certaine Prouinces whyche haue beene hitherto of all men rather contemned than throughly knowen: yet if the Marchant Venturer, or skilfull Pilot, or whoſoeuer deſirous of newe Diſcoueries, haue the readyng and peruſing thereof, for whome eſpecially I haue done it into Engliſhe, they will find matter worthy the looking, and conſequently, gratefully accept my paines herein. For here is the Deſcription of a Countrey no leſſe fruitful and pleaſant in al reſpects than is England, Fraunce, or Germany, the people, though ſimple and rude in manners, and deſtitute of the knowledge of God or any good lawes, yet of nature gentle and tractable, and moſt apt to receiue the Chriſtian Religion, and to ſubiect themſelues to ſome good gouernement: the commodities of the Countrey not inferiour to the Marchandize of Moſcouy, Danske, or many other frequented trades: the voyage verye ſhorte, being but three weekes ſayling from Bristowe, Plymmouth, or any commodious Porte of the Weaſt Country, with

a direct courſe to the coaſt of the Newe found land. Al which oportunities beſides manye others, mighte ſuffice to induce oure Engliſhemen, not onely to fall to ſome traffique wyth the Inhabitants, but alſo to plant a Colonie in ſome conuenient place, and ſo to poſſeſſe the Countrey without the gainſaying of any man, whiche was the iudgement and counſell of Iohn Baptista Ramuſius, a learned and excellent Coſmographer, & Secretary to the famous ſtate of Venice, whoſe words, bicauſe they are not impertinēt to this purpoſe, I haue here ſet downe. Why doe not the Princes (ſaieth he) whyche are to deale in theſe affaires, ſende forth two or three Colonies to inhabite the Country, & to reduce this ſauage natiō to ſome ciuilitie? conſidering what a battle and fruitfull ſoyle it is, how repleniſhed with all kinde of graine, how it is ſtored wyth al ſortes of Byrdes and Beaſtes, wyth ſuch faire and mighty Riuers, that Captaine Carthier and his company, in one of them ſayled vppe a hundreth and foure ſcore leagues, findyng the countrey peopled on both ſides in greate abundaunce. And moreouer, to cauſe the Gouernors of thoſe Colonies to ſend forth men to ſearch and diſcouer the North lands about Terra del Lauorader, and toward Weaſt northweaſt to the Seas whiche are to ſaile to the Country of Cataya, and from thence to the Ilands of Molucke. Theſe were enterpriſes to purchaſe immortall praiſe, which the Lord Anthony di Mendoza Viceroy of Mexico, willing to put in execution, ſent forth his Captains both by Sea and by Land vpon the Northweaſt of Nuoua Spagona, and diſcouered the Kingdome of the ſeauen Cities about Ciuola
               ▪ And Franciſcus Vaſques de Coronada, paſſed from Mexico by lande towarde the Northweaſt 2850. miles, in ſo muche, that he came to the Sea, whyche lyeth betweene Cataya and America, where he met with the Catayan ſhyppes. And no doubt, if the French men in this their newe Fraunce, would haue diſcouered vp further into the land towards the Weaſt northweaſt partes, they ſhoulde haue founde the Sea, and might haue ſayled to Cataya. Thus much out of Ramuſius, where you may ſee this learned mans iudgement concerning

the planting of Colonies, and inhabiting theſe countries, whych might be a meane, not only to diſcouer the Sea on the backe-ſide, as he deſireth, but alſo to come vnto the knowledge of the Countries adiacent: and namely of Saguenay, whiche aboundeth with Golde and other Mettalles, as in the ſeconde Relation is to be ſeene. All whyche thyngs, excepte they builde and inhabite, can neuer be atchieued, for as Fraunciſcus Lopez di Gomara, and dyuers other Spaniſhe Authors affirme, the Spanyards neuer proſpered or preuailed, but where they planted: whych of the Portingales maye alſo be verifyed, as in the Hiſtories of all theyr Conqueſts and Diſcoueries doth manifeſtly appeare. And as there is none, that of right may be more bolde in this enterprice than the Engliſhmen, the land being firſt found out by Iohn Gabot the Father, and Sebastian Gabot, one of hys three ſonnes, in the yeare 1494. in the name and be halfe of King Henry the ſeauenth, as both by the foreſaide Ramuſius in his firſt Volumes, and our owne Chronicles, and Sebastian Gabots letters patents yet extant, and in his Mappe maye be ſeene: ſo there is no nation that hath ſo good righte, or is more fit for this purpoſe, than they are, who trauayling yearely into thoſe partes with 50. or 60. ſaile of ſhippes, might very commodiouſlye tranſporte a ſufficient number of men to plant a Colonie in ſome conuenient Hauen, and alſo might yeeld them yearly ſuccour, and ſupply of al things neceſſary, receyuing againe ſuch commodities as the country doth produce. And this the Frenchmen had done long ſince, if firſt their warres with the Spanyardes, and ſince their cruell diſſentions at home, had not hindered them. And Iohannes Varrozzana a Florentine, if he had not beene preuented by death, purpoſed (as the foreſayde Ramuſius writeth) to perſwade Francis the French King to ſend forth good ſtore of people to inhabite certaine places of theſe coaſtes, where the aire is moſte temperate, and the ſoyle moſte fruitfull, with goodly Riuers and Hauens ſufficient to harborough any nauie, the inhabitantes of which places might be occaſiō to bring many good purpoſes to effecte,

and amongeſt manye others, to reduce thoſe poore rude and ignorant people to the true worſhip and ſeruice of God, and to teache them how to manure and till the ground, tranſporting ouer Beaſtes and Cattell of Europe into thoſe large and champion countreys, and finally, in time they might diſcouer vp into the land, and ſearch, whether among ſo many Ilands as are there, there be any paſſage to the Sea of Cataya. And thus much oute of the third Volume of Voyages and Nauigations, gathered into the Italian tongue by Ramuſius: whiche Bookes, if they were tranſlated into Engliſh by the liberalitie of ſome noble Perſonage, ou
                  •
                Sea-men of England, and others, ſtudious of Geographie, ſhoulde know many worthy ſecrets, whiche hitherto haue beene concealed. For, the beſte Coſmographers of this age (as I am by the skilfull in thoſe Sciences informed, and as to him that doth diligently conſider their Mappes, it ſhall plainely appeare) haue deſcribed Aſia, Africa, and America, chiefly by the help of thoſe bookes. But to returne to that from whence I did digreſſe, althoughe ſome attemptes of oure Countrey-men haue not had as yet ſuche ſucceſſe as was wiſhed, they ought not therefore to bee the ſlower in this enterprice, for if they were of late contented in their voyage, to haue ſtayed al the Winter in thoſe colder Countries, if their ſtore of victualles had beene ſufficient, howe muche rather ought we nowe in a farre more temperate clime, where Iames Carthier, accompanyed wyth 120. men remained a whole Winter contrary to hys determination when he ſet out of Fraunce? Thus beſeeching God, that this my trauel may take that effect for the which it is meant, I commende the diligent conſideration to al ſuch Gentlemen, Merchants, and Pilots, as ſeeke Gods glory, the aduauncement of their Countrey, and the happy ſucceſſe, to the prouidence of the Almighty, who in my opinion hath not in vaine ſtirred vppe the mindes of ſo many Honourable and Worſhipfull perſons to the furtheraunce of theſe commendable and worthy Diſcoueries.
            
               
                  In Oxford▪
                  
               
               I. F.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ The firſt relation of Iames Carthier of the new land called New Fraunce, nevvly diſcouered in the yeare of oure Lorde, 1534.
            
               ¶How Maiſter Iames Carthier departed from the Port of S. Malo, with two Ships, and came to the new land, and howe he entred into the Porte of Buona Vista.
               
               
                  AFter that Sir Charles of Mouy, Knight, Lord of Meyleray, & Vice-admirall of Fraunce, had cauſed all the Captaines, Maiſters, and Mariners of the Shippes to be ſworne to behaue themſelues truely and faithfully in the ſeruice of the moſt Chriſtian King of France, vnder the charge of the ſayde Carthier, vpon the 20. day of Aprill. 1534. we departed from the Porte of S. Malo with two Ships of thrée ſcore tun apéece burden, and by well appointed men in eche one, and with ſuche proſperous weather, we ſailed onwardes, that vppon the 10. of May we came to the newe found land, where we entred into the cape of Buona Vista, which is in Latitude 48. degrées and a halfe, and in Longitude. *. But bicauſe of the great ſtore of Ice that was alongeſt the ſayde lande, we were conſtrayned to enter into a Hauen called, Saint Katherins Hauen, diſtaunt from the other Porte aboute fiue leagues towarde South ſoutheaſt: there did we ſtay ten daies, looking for faire weather, and in the meane while we mended and dreſſed our boates.
            
            
               
               ¶ Howe we came to the Ilande of Byrdes, and of the greate quantitie of Byrdes that there be.
               VPon the 21. of May the wind beyng in the Weaſt, we hoiſed ſaile, and ſailed toward North and by eaſt from ye Cape of Buona Vista vntil we came to the Iland of Birdes, which was enuironed about with a banke of Ice, but brokē and crackte. Notwithſtanding the ſaide banke, our two boates went thither to take in ſome Birdes, whereof there is ſuch plentie, that vnleſſe a manne didde ſée them, he woulde think it an incredible thing; for albeit the Ilande (which containeth aboute a league in circuite) be ſo full of them, that they ſéeme to haue béene brought thither, and ſowed for the nonce, yet are there a hundreth fold as many houering about it as within, ſome of the which are as big as Iayes, blacke and white, with beakes lyke vnto Crowes: they houer alwaies about the ſea, they cannot flye very high, bycauſe their wings are ſo little, and no bigger than halfe ones hand, yet doe they flye as ſwiftly as any birdes of the ayre leuell to the water, they are alſo excéeding fat: we named them Aporath. In leſſe than halfe an houre we filled two boats ful of them, as if they had béene with ſtones: ſo that beſides them which we did eate freſh, euery ſhip dyd powder and ſalt fiue or ſixe barrels ful of them.
            
            
               ¶ Of two ſortes of Byrdes, the one called Godetz, the other Margaulz: and how we came to Carpunt.
               
               BEſides theſe, there is an other kinde of Birdes, whyche houer in the aire ouer the ſea, leſſer than the others: and theſe doe al gather thēſelues togither in the Iland, & put thē
                  ſelues vnder the wings of other byrds that are greater: theſe we named Godetz. There are alſo of another ſorte, but bigger, & white, who bite euen as Dogges: thoſe wée named Margaulz. And albeit the ſaid Iland
                     •
                   be 14. leagues from the maine lande, notwithſtanding Beares come ſwimming

thither to eate of the ſaide Byrdes: and our men founde one there as greate as any Cowe, and as white as any Swanne, who in their preſence leapt into the ſea, and vpon Whitſonmonday (folowing our voyage towarde the lande) we mette hir by the way, ſwimming towarde lande as ſwiftly as wée coulde ſaile: ſo ſoone as we ſawe hir we purſued hir with our boates, and by maine ſtrength tooke hir, whoſe fleſh was as good to be eaten, as the fleſhe of a Calfe of two yeares olde. The Wedneſday following beyng the 27. of the moneth, we came to the entrance of the Bay of the Caſtels, but bycauſe the weather was ill, and the greate ſtore of Ice wée founde, we were conſtrayned to enter into an harborough about the ſaide entraunce called Carpunt, where, bycauſe wée could not come oute of it, we ſtayed till the 9. of Iune, that thence wée departed, on hope with the aide of God to ſaile further than the ſaid Carpunt, which is in latitude 51. degrées.
            
            
               ¶ The deſcription of the newe founde lande, from Cape Razo, to the Cape of Degrade.
               
               THe lande from Cape Razo, to the Cape of Degrade, whiche is the point of the entrance to the Bay that trendeth from head to head toward North northeſt, and South ſouthweaſt, al this part of land is parted into Ilands, one ſo néere the other, that there are but ſmall riuers betwéene them, thorowe the whyche you may paſſe with little boates, and therfore there are certaine good harbourghs, among whyche is that of Carpunt, and that of Degrade. In one of theſe Ilands, that is the higheſt of them all, béeyng on the toppe of it, you maye playnely ſée the two lowe Ilandes, that are neare to Cape Razo, from whence to the Porte of Carpunt, they counte it twentie and fiue leagues, and there are twoo entraunces thereat, one on the Eaſt, the other on the South ſide of the Iland. But it is to be noted, that from the ſide, and pointe of the Eaſte, bycauſe that euerye where

there is nothing elſe but ſhelues, and the water is very ſhallowe: you muſte goe aboute the Ilande towarde the Weſt the length of halfe a Cable or thereaboute, and then to goe towarde the South, to the ſaid Carpont. Alſo you are to take héede of thrée Shelues that are in the Chanel vnder the water: and towarde the Iland on the Eaſte ſide in the Chanell, the water is about two faddome déepe, and cleare grounde. The other trendeth toward Eaſt northeaſt, and on the Weſt you may go on ſhoare.
            
            
               ¶ Of the Ilande whiche now is called Saint Katherins Ilande.
               GOing from the Point of Degrade, and entring into the ſayde Baye towarde the Weaſt, and by North: there is ſome doubt of two Ilandes that are on the right ſide, one of the whiche is diſtant from the ſaide pointe 3. leagues, and the other 7. either more or leſſe than the firſt, beyng a lowe and plaine land, and it ſéemeth to be parte of the maine lande. I named it Saint Katherines Ilande: in which, toward Northeaſt there is verye drye ſoile: but aboute a quarter of a league from it, very ill ground, ſo that you muſte goe a little about. The ſaide Iland, and the Porte of Caſtelles trend towarde North northeaſt, and South ſouthweaſt, and they are about 15. leagues aſunder. From the ſaide Porte of Caſtels to the Porte of Gutte, whyche is in the northerne parte of the ſaid Bay, that trendeth towarde Eaſt northeaſt, and Weaſt ſouthweaſt, there are twelue leagues and an halfe: and aboute two leagues from the Porte of Balances, that is to ſay, the thirde parte, athwarteth the ſayde Bay: the deapth being ſounded it is about 18. faddo
                     •
                   and from the ſaid Porte of Balances to the White Sands 
                     〈◊〉
                   Weaſt ſouthweaſt there is 15. leagues, but you muſt 
                     •
                  ike héede of a ſhelfe that lyeth about 3. leagues outward from the ſayd White Sands on the Southweaſt ſide aboue water like a Boate.
            
            
               
               ¶ Of the place called White Sandes: of the Ilande of Breſt, and of the Ilande of Byrdes: the ſortes and quantitie of Byrdes that there are founde: and of the Porte called the Iſlettes.
               WHite Sandes is a Roade in the whiche there is no place garded from the South, nor Southeaſt. But towarde South ſouthweaſt the ſaid roade there are two Ilandes, one of the which is called Breſt Iland, and the other the Ilande of Byrdes, in whiche there is great ſtore of Godetz, & Crowes with red beakes and redde féete: they make their néeſtes in holes vnder the ground euen as Connies. A point of land being paſſed about a league from White Sands, there is a Port & paſſage found, called the Iſlettes, a better place than White Sandes: and there is great fiſhing. From the ſaide Porte of the Iſlettes, vnto another called Breſt: the circuite is aboute ten leagues. This Porte is in latitude 51. degrées and 55. minutes, and in longitude. *. From the Iſlettes, to that place there are many other Ilandes: and the ſaide Porte of Breſt is alſo amongſt thoſe Ilandes. Moreouer the Ilands doe compaſſe more than 3. leagues from the ſaid Breſt, beyng lowe, and ouer them are the other landes (aboue mentioned) ſéene.
            
            
               ¶ Howe we wyth our Shippes entred into the Porte of Breſt, and ſayling onwarde towarde the Weaſt, we paſt amidſt the Iſlettes, which were ſo many in number, that it was not poſsible to tel them: and how we named thē the Iſlettes.
               
               VPon the 10. of Iune we with our Ships entred into the Port of Breſt, to furniſh our ſelues with water and wood, and to make vs readye to paſſe the ſaide Bay. Vpon Saynt Barnabas day, ſeruice being heard, we with our boates went beyond the ſaid Porte toward the Weaſt, to ſée what harboroughes were there: we paſſed throughe the midddeſt of the

                  Iſlettes, which were ſo many in number, that it was not poſſible they might be told, for they continued about 10. leagues beyonde the ſaide Porte. We to reſt our ſelues ſtayed in one of them a night, and there we found greate ſtore of Duck
                     •
                   egges, and other byrdes that there doe make their neaſtes, we named them all, the Iſlettes.
               
            
            
               ¶ Of the Porte called S. Antonies Porte, S. Seruans Porte, Iames Carthiers Porte: of the riuer called S. Iames: of the cuſtomes and apparell of the inhabitors in the Iland of White Sandes.
               THe next day we paſſed the ſaide Ilandes, and beyonde them all we found a good Hauen, whyche we named S. Antonies Hauen, and howe one or two leagues beyonde, we founde a little riuer toward the Southweſt coaſt, that is betwéene two other Ilandes, and is a good harborough. There we ſette vppe a Croſſe, and named it S. Seruans Porte▪
                   and on the Southweſt ſide of the ſaid Porte and riuer, about one league, there is a ſmall Ilande as round as any Ouen, enuironed about with many other little Ilandes, that giue notice to the ſaide Portes. Further about two leagues, there is an other greater riuer, in whiche they tooke good ſtore of Salmon, that we named S. Iames his Riuer. Beyng in the ſayde riuer, we ſawe a Shippe of Rochell that the night before had paſſed the Porte of Breſt, where they thought to haue gone a fiſhing: but the marriners not knowing where they were, we with our boates approched neare vnto it, and did directe it to another Porte one league more toward the Weaſt than the ſaide riuer of S. Iames, which I take to be one of the beſte in all the Worlde, and therefore wée named it Iames Carthiers Sound. If the foile were as good as the harboroughes are, it were a great commoditie: but it is not to be called the new Land but rather Stones, and wilde Furres, and a place fitte for wilde beaſtes, for in all the Northe▪ Ilande I didde not ſée a Cart
                     •
                  oade of 
                     •
                  ood earth: yet went I on ſhoare in many

places, and in the Iland of White Sandes, there is nothyng elſe but Moſſe, and ſmall Thornes ſcattered here and there, withered and drye. To be ſhorte, I beléeue that this was the lande that God allotted to Caine. There are men of an indifferent good ſtature and bigneſſe, but wilde and vnruly: they weare their haire tyed on the top like a wreath of Hay, and put a woodden pin within it, or any other ſuch thing, in ſteade of a naile, and wyth them they binde certaine birdes feathers. They are clothed with beaſtes ſkinnes, as wel the men as womē, but that the womē go ſomwhat ſtraightlier and cloſer in their garmentes than men doe, wyth their waſtes gyrded: they paint themſelues with certaine Roan coloures: their Boates are made of the barke of a trée called Boul, wyth the whyche they fiſhe, and take greate ſtore of Seales, and as farre as we coulde vnderſtande ſince oure commyng thither, that is not their habitation, but they come from the maine lande out of hotter Countreys, to take of the ſayde Seales and other neceſſaries for theyr lyuing.
            
            
               ¶ Of certaine Capes, that is to ſay, the double Cape, the pointed Cape, Cape Roiall, and the Cape of Milke: of the Mountaines of Barnes: of the Ilandes of Do
                        •
                     e▪ houſes; and of the greate fiſhing of Cods.
               VPon the 13. of that moneth we came to our Shippes agayne with our boates, on purpoſe to ſaile forwards, bycauſe the weather was faire, & vpon Sundaye we cauſed ſeruice to be ſaide: then on Monday being the 25. of the moneth, we departed from Breſt and ſailed toward the South to take a viewe of the landes that there we had ſéene, that ſéemed vnto vs to be two Ilandes: but when we were amiddeſt the Bay, we knew it to be firme lande, where was a greate double Cape, one aboue the other, and therfore wée named it the Double Cape. In the entrance of the Bay we ſounded, and founde it to be an hundred faddome rounde aboute vs.

From Breſt, to the double Cape, there is about 20 leagues, and aboute fiue, or ſixe leagues beyond we ſounded againe, and founde 20 faddome water. The ſaide lande lyeth Northeaſt, and Southweaſt. The nexte day being the 16. of the moneth, we ſailed along the ſaide coaſte towarde Southweaſt, and by South, aboute 35 leagues from the double Cape, where wée founde very ſtéepe and wilde hilles, among the whyche were ſéene certaine ſmall Cabbans, whyche we in the Countrey call Barnes, and therfore we named them the Hilles of the Barnes. The other Lands and Mountaines are all craggie, cleft, and 
                     •
                  utte, and betwixt them and the ſea, there are other Ilandes, but lowe. The day before, through the darke miſts and 
                     •
                  ogges of the weather, we coulde not haue ſighte of any lande, but in the euening we ſpyed an entraunce into the lande, by a ryuer, among the ſaide Hilles of Barnes, and a Cape lying toward the Southweſt about 3. leagues frō vs. The ſaide Cape is on the top of it blunt pointed, and alſo towarde the Sea, it endeth in a pointe, wherefore we named it the pointed Cape, on the north ſide of whiche, there is a plaine Iland. And bycauſe we would haue notice of the ſaid entrance, to ſée if there were any good Hauens, we ſtroke ſaile for that night. The next day being the 17. of the Moneth, we had ſtormie weather from Northeaſt, wherefore we tooke our way toward the Southweſt vntil Thurſeday morning, and we went about 37. leagues, til we came athwart a Bay full of rounde Ilandes like Doue houſes, and therefore wée named them the Doue houſes. And from the Bay of Saint Iulian, from the whyche to a Cape that lyeth South and by weaſt, which we called Cape Riall, there are 7. leagues, and toward the Weaſt Southweaſt ſide of the ſaide Cape there is another that beneath is all craggie, and aboue round. On the North ſide of whiche about halfe a league there lyeth a lowe Ilande,Cape Latte. that Cape we named the Cape of Milke. Betwéene theſe two Capes there are certaine lowe Ilandes, aboue whiche, there are alſo certaine others, that ſhew that there 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſome riuers. About two leagues from Cape Roiall,
                  
we ſounded, and found tenne faddome water, and there is the greateſt fiſhing of Coddes that is poſſible: for ſtaying for our companie, in leſſe than an houre we tooke aboue an hundred of them.
            
            
               ¶ Of certayne Ilands that lie betweene Cape Roiall, and the Cape of Milke.
               
               THe nexte daye, being the eyghtenth of the Moneth, the winde with ſuch rage turned againſt vs, that we were conſtrayned to go backe toward Cape Royall, thinking there to find ſome harborough, and with oure Boates wente to diſcouer betwéene the Cape Royall, and the Cape of Milke, and found, that aboue the low Ilands there is a great, and very déepe Gulfe, within which are certaine Ilands. The ſayd Gulfe on the South ſide is ſhutte vp. The foreſayd low grounds are on one of the ſides of the entrance, and Cape Royall is on the other. The ſayde lowe groundes do ſtretche themſelues more than halfe a league within the Sea. It is a playne Countrey, but an ill ſoyle: and in the middeſt of the entrance thereof, there is an Iland. The ſayde Gulfe in latitude is fortie eyght degrées and an halfe, and in Longitude. *. That night we found no harborough, and therefore we launched out into the Sea, leauing the Cape toward the Weaſt.
            
            
               ¶ Of the Iland called S. Iohn.
               
               FRom the ſayde daye vntill the 24. of the moneth, being S. Iohns day, we had both ſtormie weather and winde againſt vs, with ſuch darkneſſe and miſtes, that vntill Saint Iohns day, we could haue no ſight of any land, and then had we ſight of a Cape of land, ye from Cape Royall lieth Southweaſt, about 35. leagues, but that day was ſo foggie and miſtie, that we could not come néere land, and bycauſe it was S. Iohns day, we named it Cape S. Iohn.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ Of certayne Ilands called the Ilands of Margaulz, and of the kinds of beaſtes and birds that there are found. Of the Iland of Brion, and Cape Dolphin.
               
               THe nexte daye being the 25. of the moneth, the weather was alſo ſtormie, darke, and windie, but yet we ſayled a part of the day toward Weaſt North-weaſt, and in the euening we put our ſelues athwart vnto the ſecond quarter that thence we departed, then did we by our compaſſe know that we were North-weaſt, and by Weaſt about ſeauen leagues and an halfe from the Cape of S. Iohn, and as we were aboute to hoyſe ſayle, the wind turned into the North-weaſt, wherefore we went toward North-eaſt, about fiftéene leagues, and came to thrée Ilands, two of whiche are as ſtéepe and vpright as any wall, that it was not poſſible to climbe them: and betwéene them there is a little clift. Theſe Ilands were as full of Birds, as any fielde or meddow is of graſſe, that there do make their neſtes: and in the greateſt of them, there was a great and infinite number of thoſe that we cal Margaulz, that are white, and bigger than any Géeſe, which were feuered in one part. In the other were only Godetz Iſoli, but towarde the ſhoare there were of thoſe Godetz, and greate Apponatz, like to thoſe of that Ilande that we aboue haue mentioned: we went downe to the loweſt part of the leaſt Iland, where we kild aboue a thouſand of thoſe Godetz, & Apponatz. We put into our Boates ſo many of them as wée pleaſed, for in leſſe than one houre, we might haue filled thirtie ſuch boates of them: we named them the Ilands of Margaultz. About fiue leagues from the ſayde Ilandes, on the Weaſt, there is another Iland that is about two leagues in length, and ſo much in breadth: there did we ſtay all night to take in water and wood. That Ilande is enuironed rounde about with ſande, and hath a very good roade about it thrée or four faddome déepe. Thoſe Ilands haue the beſt ſoyle that euer we ſaw, for that one of their féelds is more woorth, than all the new land. We foūd i
                     •
                   all full of goodly trées, medowes,

champaines full of wild peaſon blomed, as thicke, as ranke, and as faire, as any can be ſéene in Brittayne, that they ſéemed to haue bin plowed and ſowed. There was alſo great ſtore of gooſeberies, ſtrawberies, damaſke roſes, parſeley, with other very ſwéete and pleaſant hearbes. About the ſaid Iland are very great beaſtes, as great as Oxen, which haue two great téeth in their mouths like vnto the Elephant, and liue alſo in the Sea. We ſaw one of them ſléeping vpon the banke of the water: we thinking to take it, went to it with our Boates, but ſo ſoone as he heard vs, he caſt himſelfe into the Sea. We alſo ſawe Beares, and Woolues: we named it Brions Iland. About it towarde South-eaſt, and North-weaſt, there are great medowes. As farre as I could gather and comprehend, I thinke that there be ſome paſſage betwéene the new land, and Brions land, if ſo it were, it would be a great ſhortning, as well of the time, as of the way, if any perfection coulde be founde in it. Aboute foure leagues from that Ilande towarde Weſt South-weaſt, there is firme lande, that ſéemeth to be as an Ilande, compaſſed aboute with little Ilands of ſandes. There is a goodly Cape, which we named Cape Doulphin, for there is the beginning of good groundes. On the ſeauen and twentith of Iune we compaſſed the ſaid landes about that lie Weaſt South-weaſt: a farre off they ſéeme to bée little hilles of ſande, for they are but lowe landes: we coulde neyther goe to them, nor land on them, bycauſe the winde was againſt vs. That daye we wente fiftéene leagues.
            
            
               ¶ Of the Iland called Alezai, and of S. Peeters Cape.
               THe next day we went along the ſaid land aboute tenne leagues, till we came to a Cape of redde lands, that is all craggie, within the which, there is a bracke looking toward the North. It is a very low Countrey. There is alſo betwéene ye ſea & a certain poole a plaine fielde and frō that Cape of land
                     •
                   and ye poole, vntill to another Cape, there is about 14. leagues▪
               
               
                  The land is faſhioned as it were halfe a circle, all compaſſed about with ſand like a ditch, ouer which, as farre as ones eye can ſtretch, there is nothing but marriſh groundes, and ſtanding pooles. And before you come to the firſt Cape, very néere the mayne lande, there are two little Ilands. Aboute fiue leagues from the ſeconde Cape towarde South weaſt, there is another Iland very high and poynted, which we named Alezai. The firſt Cape we named S. Peeters Cape, bycauſe vpon that day we came thither.
            
            
               ¶Of the Cape called Orleans Cape: of the Riuer of Boates: of wild mens Cape: and of the qualitie and temperature of the Countrey.
               FRom Brions Iland to this place, there is a good ſandie ground, and hauing ſounded toward South-weaſt euen to the Shoare, about fiue leagues, we found 12. faddome water, and within one league 6. and very néere the ſhoare rather more than leſſe. But bycauſe we would be better acquaynted with this ſtonie and rockie ground, we ſtroke our Sayles lowe and athwart. The nexte daye being the laſt of the moneth ſaue one, the winde blewe South and by Eaſt. We ſayled Weſtwarde vntill Tueſday morning at Sunne riſing, béeing the laſt of the moneth, without any ſighte or knowledge of any lande, except in the euening towarde Sunne ſette, that we diſcouered a Land, whiche ſéemed to bée two Ilandes, that were beyond vs Weſt ſouth-weaſt, about nine or tenne leagues. All the next day till the nexte morning at Sunne riſing we ſayled Weſtward about fortye leagues, and by the way we perceyued that the lande wée hadde ſéene like two Ilandes, was firme lande, lying South ſouth-eaſt, and North north-weaſt, till to a verye good Cape of lande called Orleans Cape. All the ſayde lande is lowe and playne, and the faireſt that may poſſibly be ſéene, full of goodly meddowes and Trées. True it is that we could finde no harborough there, bycauſe it is

all full of ſhelues and ſandes. We with our boates went on ſhore in many places, and among the reſte we entred into a goodly riuer, but very ſhallow, which we named the riuer of boats, bycauſe that there we ſaw boats ful of wild men, that were croſſing the riuer. We had no other notice of the ſayde wilde men: for the winde came from the Sea, and beate vs againſte the ſhore, that we were conſtrained to retire oure ſelues with our boates toward our ſhippes, till the next day morning at Sunne riſing, being the firſte of Iuly, we ſayled Northeaſt, in which time there roſe great myſtes & ſtormes, and therefore we ſtrucke our ſayles till two of the clocke in the after noone, that the weather became cleare, and there we had ſight of Orleance Cape, & of another about ſeuē leagues from vs, lying North and by Eaſt, and that we called Wilde mens Cape. On the Northſide of this Cape aboute halfe a league, there is a very dangerous ſhelf, and banke of ſtones. Whileſt we wer at this Cape, we ſaw a man running after our boats that were going along the coaſt, who made ſignes vnto vs that we ſhoulde retourne towarde the ſayd Cape againe We ſéeing ſuch ſignes, began to tourne toward him, but he ſéeing vs come, began to flée: ſo ſoone as we were come on ſhoare, we ſet a knife before him, and a woollen girdle on a little ſtaffe, and then came to our ſhips again. That day we trended the ſayde land about nine or ten leagues, hoping to finde ſome good harborough, but it was not poſſible, for as I haue ſayd alreadie, it is a very low land, & enuironed round about with great ſhelues. Neuertheleſſe we went that day on ſhore in foure places to ſée the goodly and ſwéete ſmelling trées that there were: we founde them to be Cidrons, Ewe-trées, Pines, white Elmes, Aſhes, Willowes, with manye other ſortes of trées to vs vnknowen, but without any fruit. The groundes where no wood is, are very faire, and al full of peaſon, white and red gooſeberies, ſtrawberies, blackeberies, and wilde corne, euen like vnto Rie, that it ſéemeth to haue bene ſowen and plowed. This Countrey is of better temperature than any other that can be ſéene, and very hote.

There are many Thruſhes, Stockdoues, and other byrdes: to be ſhort, there wanteth nothing but good harborough.
            
            
               ¶Of the Baie called Saint Lunario, and other notable Baies, and Capes of lande, and of the qualitie, and goodneſſe of thoſe groundes.
               THe next day being the ſeconde of Iuly we diſcouered and had ſight of land on the Northerne ſide towarde vs, that dyd ioyne vnto the lande aboueſayd, all compaſſed about, and we knewe that it had about * in déepth, and as muche athwart, we named it Saint Lunarios Baie, & with our boates we went to the Cape toward the North, and founde the land and grounde ſo lowe, that for the ſpace of a league from land there was but halfe a faddome water. On the Northeaſt ſide from the ſayde Cape about ſeauen or eight leagues there is another Cape of lande, in the middeſt whereof there is a Baie faſhioned triangle wiſe, verye déepe, and as far as we could ken from it lieth Northeaſt. The ſaid Baie is compaſſed about wt ſands and ſhelues about ten leagues from land, and there is but one faddome water: from the ſaide Cape to the banke of the other, ther is about fiftéene leagues. We being a croſſe the ſayde Capes, diſcouered another lande and Cape, and as farre as we coulde ken, it lay North & by Eaſt. All that night the weather was very ill, and great windes, ſo that we were conſtrained to heare a ſmall ſayle vntill the next morning, being the thirde of Iuly, that the winde came from the Weſt: and we ſayled Northwarde, to haue a ſight of the lande that we had left on the Northeaſt ſide, aboue the lowe landes, among whiche high and lowe landes there is a Gulfe, or Breach, in ſome places about ſixe and twenty faddome déepe, and fiftéene leagues in breadth, with varietie of landes, hoping to finde ſome paſſage thyther, we went euen as the paſſage of the Caſtels. The ſayde gulfe lyeth Eaſte Northeaſt, and Weſt Southweſt. The grounde that lyeth on the South ſide of the ſayde gulfe, is as good and eaſie to

be wrought, and full of as goodly fieldes and meadowes, as anye that euer we haue, as plaine and ſmoothe as anye die: and that which lyeth on the North, is a Countrey altogither hillie, full of woods, and very high and great trées of ſundry ſortes: among the reſt there are as goodly Ceders, and Firre trées, as poſſibly can be ſéene, able to make maſtes for ſhips of thrée hundered Tunne: Neyther did we ſée anye place that was not full of the ſayde trées, excepted two onlye, that were full of goodly medowes, with two very faire Lakes. The middeſt of the ſayde Baie is ſeauen and fourtie degrées and halfe in latitude.
            
            
               ¶Of the Cape of Hope, and of Saint Martins Creeke, & howe ſeuen boats ful of wilde men, came to our boate, wold not retire themſelues, but being terrified with our Colubrins and lanches we ſhot at them, they fled with great haſt.
               THe Cape of ye ſaid South land, was called The Cape of Hope, through the hope that there we had to finde ſome paſſage. The fourth of Iuly we went along ye coaſt of ye ſayd land on the Northerly ſide to finde ſome harborough, where we entred into a Créeke altogither open on ye South, where there is no ſuccour againſt ye wind: we thought good to name it S. Martines Creeke. Ther we ſtayed frō the fourth of Iuly, vntil the twelfth: while we were there, on Monday being the ſixth of ye month, ſeruice being done, we wt one of our boates went to diſcouer a Cape & point of lande yt on the Northerne ſide was about ſeauen or eight leagues from vs, to ſée whiche way it did bend, & being within halfe a league of it, we ſawe two cōpanies of boats of wilde men going frō one land to the other: theyr boates were in nūber about fiue & fortie or fifty. One parte of the whiche came to the ſayde pointe, and a great number of the mē went on ſhore, making a grét noyſe, beckning vnto vs that we ſhoulde come on lande, ſhewing vs certaine ſkinnes vppon péeces of Woodde, but bicauſe we hadde but one onely boate, we woulde not goe to them;

but went to the other ſide, lying in the ſea: they ſéeing vs flée, prepared two of their boats to follow vs, with whiche came alſo fiue more of them that were comming from the ſea ſide, al which approched néere vnto our boate, dauncing, and making many ſignes of ioye and myrth, as it were deſiring our friendſhip, ſaying in theyr tongue NAPEV TONDAMEN ASSVRTAH, with manye other that we vnderſtoode not. But bicauſe (as we haue ſaid) we had but one boate, we wold not ſtande to theyr curteſie, but made ſignes vnto them, that they ſhould turne backe, which they would not do, but with great furye came toward vs: and ſodainely with their boates compaſſed vs aboute: and bycauſe they woulde not awaye from vs by any ſignes that we coulde make, we ſhotte of two péeces among them, whiche did ſo terrifie them, that they put themſelues to flight towarde the ſayde pointe, makyng a great noyſe: and hauing ſtayde a while, they began a new, euen as at the firſt, to come to vs againe, & being come néere our boate, we ſtrucke at them with two launces, which thing was ſo great a terrour vnto them, that with greate haſt they began to flée, and would no more follow vs.
            
            
               ¶How the ſayde men commming to our ſhippes, and our men going toward them, both parties went on land, and how the ſaide wilde men with great ioye beganne to traficke with our men.
               THe next daye, part of the ſayde wilde men with nine of their boates came to the point and entrance of the créek, where we with our ſhips were at road. We being aduertiſed of theyr cōming, went to the point where they wer with our boates: but ſo ſoone as they ſawe vs, they began to flée, making ſignes that they came to traficke with vs, ſhewing vs ſuche ſkinnes as they cloth themſelues withall, whiche are of ſmall value. We likewiſe made ſignes vnto them, that we wiſhed them no euil: and in ſigne thereof two of our men vē
                  tured to go on lande to them, and carrie them kniues wyth

other Iron wares, and a red hat to giue vnto their Captain. Which when they ſaw, they alſo came on land, and broughte ſome of their ſkinnes, and ſo began to deale with vs, ſéeming to be very glad to haue our iron wares, and other things, ſtil dauncing with many other ceremonies, as with their handes to caſt ſea water on theyr heades. They gaue vs whatſoeuer they had, not kéeping any thing, that they were conſtrained to go backe againe naked, and made vs ſignes that the nexte day they would come againe, and bring more ſkinnes wyth them.
            
            
               ¶How that we hauing ſent two of our men on lande with wares, there came about .300. wilde mē with great gladnes. Of the quality of the Country, what it bringeth forth, and of the Baie called The Baie of heate.
               
               VPō Thurſday being the eight of the moneth, bicauſe the winde was not good to go out with our ſhips, we ſet our boates in a readineſſe to go to diſcouer the ſaide Baie, and ye daye we wente fiftéene leagues within it. The nexte day, the winde and wether being faire, we ſayled vntil noone, in which time we had notice of a great part of the ſayd Baie, and how that vpon the lowe landes, there were other lands, with high mountaines: but ſéeing that there was no paſſage at al, wée began to turne backe again, taking our way along the coaſt, and ſayling, we ſawe certaine wilde men, that ſtoode vpon the ſhore of a Lake, that is among the lowe groundes, who were making fires and ſmokes: we went thither, and founde that there was a Chanel of the ſea, that did enter into the Lake, & ſetting our boates at one of the banckes of the Chanell, the wilde men with one of their boates came vnto vs, & brought vs péeces of Seales readie ſodde, putting them vpon péeces of wood: then retyring themſelues, they woulde make ſignes vnto vs, that they did giue them vs. We ſente two men vnto them with Hatchets, kniues, beades, & other ſuch like ware, whereat they were very glad, and by and by in cluſters they

came to the ſhore where we wer with their boates, bringing with them ſkinnes, and other ſuch things as they had, to haue of our wares. They were more than thrée hundred men, women, and children: ſome of the women which came not ouer, we might ſée them ſtande vp to the knées in water, ſinging and dauncing, the other that had paſſed the riuer where we were, came verye friendlye to vs, rubbing oure armes with their owne handes, then woulde they lifte them vppe towarde heauen, ſhewing manye ſignes of gladneſſe: and in ſuch wiſe were we aſſured one of another, that we very familiarly beganne to trafficke of whatſoeuer they had, till they had nothing but their naked bodies, for they gaue vs al whatſoeuer they had, and that was but of ſmall value. We perceiued that this people might verie eaſily be conuerted to our religion. They go from place to place. They liue only with fiſhing. They haue an ordinarie time to fiſh for their prouiſion. The Countrey is hotter, than the Countrey of Spaine, and the faireſt that can poſſibly be found, altogither ſmooth, and leauel. There is no place, be it neuer ſo little, but it hathe ſome trées (yea albeit it be ſandie) or elſe is ful of wilde corn, that hath an eare like vnto Rie: the corn is like Oates, ſmall Peaſon as thicke as if they had bin ſown & plowed, white & red gooſeberies, ſtrawberies, blackberies, white & red Roſes, wt many other floures, of very ſwéete and pleaſāt ſmel. Ther be alſo many goodly medowes ful of graſſe, & Lakes where gret plentie of Salmons be. They cal a Hatchet in their tōg Cochi, and a knife Bacon: we named it The Bay of Heate.
               
            
            
               ¶Of another nation of wilde men: of their maners, liuing and clothing.
               WE being certified that there was no paſſage through the ſaid Bay, we hoiſed ſaile, & went frō 
                  S. Martines Creeke vpon Sonday being the twelfth of Iuly, to go & diſcouer further in the ſaid Baie. and went along the ſea coaſt Eſtward about eightéene leagues, till we came to the Cape of Prato, where we found the tide very greate, but ſhallow, and the ſea

ſtormie, ſo that we were conſtrained to draw toward ſhore, betwéene the ſaide Cape and an Ilande lying Eaſtwarde, about halfe a league from the Cape, where we caſt Ancker for that night. The next morning we hoiſed ſayle to trend ye ſaid coaſte about, which lyeth North Northeaſt. But there roſe ſuch a ſtormie and raging winde againſt vs, that we wer cō
                  ſtrained to come to the place againe, from whence we were come: There did we ſtay all that daye till the nexte, that wée hoiſed vp ſayle, and came to the middeſt of a riuer fiue or ſixe leagues from the Cape of Prato Northward, and being ouerthwart the ſaid riuer, there aroſe againe a contrarie winde, with great fogges and ſtormes. So that we were conſtrayned vpon Tuiſday, being the fourtéenth of the moneth, to enter into the riuer, and there did we ſtay til the ſixtéenth of the moneth, loking for faire weather to come out of it, on which day being Thurſdaye, the winde became ſo raging, that one of our ſhippes loſt an Ancker, and we were conſtrayned to go vp higher into the riuer ſeauen or eighte leagues, into a good harborough and ground, yt we with our boates found out, and through the euil weather, tempeſt, and darkeneſſe that was, we ſtayed in the ſaide harborough till the fiue and twentith of the month, that we coulde not come out: in the mean time we ſawe a greate multitude of wilde men that were fiſhing for Mackrels, whereof there is great ſtore. Their boats wer about fortie, and the perſons, what with men, women, and children, two hundred, which after they had haunted our cō
                  panie a while, they came very familiarly with their boates to ye ſides of our ſhips. We gaue thē kniues, combs, beades of glas, & other tri
                     ••
                  es of ſmal value, for which they made many ſignes of gladneſſe, lifting their handes vp to Heauen, dauncing and ſinging in their boates. Theſe men may very wel & truely be called Wilde, bicauſe there is no poorer people in the world. For I thinke al that they had togither, beſides theyr boates and nets, was not worth fiue ſouce. They go altogither naked, ſauing their priuities, which couered with a little ſkinne, and certaine olde ſkinnes that they caſt vppon them.

Neyther in nature nor in language, do they any whit agrée wt them we found firſt: Their heads be altogither ſhauen, except one buſh of haire, they ſuffer to grow vpon the toppe of theyr crowne, as long as a horſſe taile, and then with certaine leather ſtrings binde it in a knot vpon their heades. They haue no other dwelling but their boates, which they tourne vpſide down, and vnder them they lay themſelues al along vpon the bare ground. They eate their fleſhe almoſte rawe, onely that they heate it a little vppon imbers of coles, ſo doe they theyr fiſhe. Vpon Magdalens day we with our boates wente to the bancke of the riuer, and fréelye went on ſhore among them, whereat they made many ſignes of gladneſſe, and al their mē in two or thrée companies began to ſing and daunce, ſéeming to be very glad of our comming. They had cauſed al the yōg women to flée into the wood, two or thrée excepted, that ſtayed with them, to each of which we gaue a combe, and a little bell made of Tinne, for which they were very glad, thanking our Captaine, rubbing his armes and breaſtes with theyr handes. When the men ſaw vs giue ſomething vnto thoſe that had ſtayde, it cauſed all the reſt to come out of the wood, to the ende they ſhould haue as muche as the others: Theſe women were about twentie, who altogither in a knot fell vpon our Captaine, touching and rubbing him with their hāds, according to their manner of cheriſhing and making muche of one, who gaue to eache of them a little Tinne bell: then ſodainely they began to daunce, and ſing many ſongs. There we founde great ſtore of Mackrels, that they had taken vpon the ſhore, with certaine nettes that they make to fiſhe, of a kinde of hempe that groweth in that place where ordinarilye they abide, for they neuer come to the ſea, but onlye in fiſhing time. As farre as I vnderſtand, ther groweth likewiſe a kinde of Millet as bigge as ſmall Peaſon, like vnto that which groweth in Breſil, which they eat in ſtead of bread. They had greate ſtore of it. They call it in theyr 
                     •
                  ong RAPAIGE. They haue alſo Primes, (that is 
                     •
                  o ſaye Damſins) which they dry for winter as we do, they cal thē 
                  HONESTA.
                  
They haue alſo Figges, Nuttes, Apples, and other fruites▪ and Beanes, that they cal SAHV, their Nuttes CAHEHYA. If we ſhewed them any thing that they haue not, nor knowe not what it is, ſhaking their heads, they will ſay NOHDA, whiche is as much to ſay, they haue it not, nor they know it not. Of thoſe things they haue, they would with ſignes ſhew vs the way how to dreſſe them, and how they grow. They eate nothing that hath any taſt of ſalte. They are very great Théeues, for they will fil
                     •
                  h and ſteale whatſoeuer they can lay hold of, and all is fiſh that commeth to net.
            
            
               ¶ How our men ſet vp a great Croſſe vpon the poynt of the ſayd Porte, and the Captayne of thoſe wild men, after a long Oration, was by our Captayne appeaſed, and contented that two of his Children ſhould goe with him.
               VPon the 24. of ye Moneth, we cauſed a faire high Croſſe to be made of the heigth of thirtie foote, which was made in the preſence of many of them, vpon the poynt of the entrance of the Gulfe, in the middeſt whereof, we hanged vp a Shéeld with thrée Floure de Luces in it, and in the toppe was carued in the wood with Anticke letters this poſſe, VIVE LE ROY DE FRANCE. Then before them all we ſet it vp vpon the ſayd poynt. They with great héede beheld both the making and ſetting of it vp. So ſoone as it was vp, we altogither knéeled downe before them, with our hands towarde Heauen, yéelding God thankes: and we made ſignes vnto them, ſhewing them the Heauens, and that all our ſaluation dependeth only on him which in them dwelleth: whereat they ſhewed a great admiration, looking firſt one at another, and then vpon the Croſſe. And after we were returned to oure Shippes, their Captayne clad with an old Beares Skinne, with thrée of his Sonnes, and a Brother of his with him, came vnto vs in one of their Boates, but they came not ſo néere vs as they were wont to do: there he made a long Oration vnto vs, ſhewing vs the croſſe we had ſet vp, and making

a Croſſe with two of his fingers, then did he ſhew vs all the Countrey about vs, as if he would ſay that all was his, and that we ſhould not ſet vp any Croſſe without his leaue. His talke being ended, we ſhewed him an Axe, fayning that we would giue it him for his ſkinne, to whiche he liſtned, for by little and little he came néere our Ships. One of our fellowes that was in our boate, tooke holde on theirs, & ſuddaynely lept into it, with two or thrée more, who enforced him to enter into our Ships, whereat they were greatly aſtoniſhed. But our Captaine did ſtraightwayes aſſure thē, that they ſhould haue no harme, nor any iniury offered them at all, and entertained them very frendly, making them eate and drinke. Then did we ſhew them with ſignes, that the Croſſe was but only ſet vp to be as a light and leader which wayes to enter into the port, and that we would ſhortly come againe, and bring good ſtore of iron wares and other things, but that we would take two of his children with vs, and afterward bring them to the ſaid port againe: and ſo we clothed two of them in ſhirtes, and coloured coates, with red cappes, and put about euery ones necke a copper chaine, whereat they were greatly contented: then gaue they their old clothes to their fellowes that wente backe againe, and we gaue to each one of thoſe thrée that wēt backe, a hatchet, and ſome kniues, which made thē very glad. After theſe were gone, and had told the newes vnto their fellowes, in the after noone there came to our ſhips ſixe boates of them, with fiue or ſixe men in euery one, to take their farewels of thoſe two we had retained to take with vs, and brought them ſome fiſh, vttering many words which we did not vnderſtand, making ſignes that they woulde not remoue the Croſſe we had ſet vp.
            
            
               ¶ How after we were departed from the ſaide porte, following our voiage along the ſayd coaſt, we went to diſcouer the land lying South-eaſt, and North-weaſt.
               THe nexte daye, being the 25. of the moneth, we had faire weather, and went from the ſaid porte: and being out of

the Riuer, we ſailed Eaſt North-eaſt, for, after the entrance into the ſaid Riuer, the land is enuironed about, and maketh a bay in maner of halfe a circle, where being in our Ships, we might ſée al the coaſt ſayling behind, which we came to ſéeke, the land lying South-eaſt and North-weaſt, the courſe of which was diſtant from the riuer about twentie leagues.
            
            
               ¶ Of the Cape S. Aluiſe, and Momorancies Cape, and certayne other lands, and how one of our Boates touched a Rocke and ſuddainely went ouer it.
               ON monday being the 27. of the moneth, about ſunne ſet we went along the ſaide lande, as we haue ſayde, lying South-eaſt and North-weaſt, til Wenſday that we ſaw another Cape, where the land beginneth to bend toward ye Eaſt: we went alongſt it about 15. leagues, then doth the land begin to turne Northward. About thrée leagues frō the ſayd Cape we ſounded, and found 12. faddome water. The ſaid lands are plaine, and the faireſt and moſt without woods that we haue ſéene, with goodly gréene féelds and medowes, we named the ſaid Cape S. Aluiſe Cape, bycauſe that was his day: it is 49. Degrées and a halfe in Latitude, and in Longitude. *. On Wenſday morning we were on the Eaſt ſide of the Cape, and being almoſt night, we went North-eaſtward for to approch néere to the ſaid land, which trēdeth North and South. From S. Aluiſe Cape, to another called Momerancies Cape▪
                   about fiftéene leagues, the lande beginneth to bende Northweaſt. About thrée leagues from the ſayd Cape, we woulde néedes ſounde, but we could finde no ground at 75. faddome, yet went we alongſt the ſayd land, about tenne leagues, to the Latitude of 50. degrées. The Saturday following, being the firſt of Auguſt, by Sunne riſing, we had ſight of certayne other landes, lying North, and North-eaſt, that were very high and craggie, and ſéemed to be mountaynes: betwéene which were other low lands with Wooddes and Riuers: we wente aboute the ſayde landes, as well on the one ſide as

on the other, ſtill bending North-weaſt, to ſée if it were either a Gulfe, or a paſſage, vntill the fifth of the moneth. The diſtance from one land to the other, is about fiftéene leagues. The middle betwéene them both, is 50. degrées and a thirde part of one in Latitude. We had much ado to go fiue miles farther, the winds were ſo great, and the tide againſt vs. And at fiue miles end, we might playnely ſée and perceyue land on both ſides, whiche there beginneth to ſpreade it ſelfe, but bycauſe we rather-fell, than gote way againſt the wind
                     •
                  , we went toward land, purpoſing to goe to another Cape of land, lying Southwarde, which was the farthermoſt out into the Sea that we could ſée, about fiue leagues from vs, but ſo ſoone as we came thither, we founde it to be nought elſe but Rockes, ſtones, and craggie cliftes, ſuch as we had not found any where that we had ſayled Southwarde from S. Iohns Cape: and then was the tide with vs, which caryed vs againſt the winde Weſtwarde, ſo that as we were ſayling along the ſayd coaſt, one of our Boates touched a Rocke, and ſuddainely went ouer, but we were conſtrayned to leape out, for to direct it on according to the tide.
            
            
               ¶ How after we had agreed and conſulted what was beſt to bee done, wee purpoſed to returne from S. Peeters ſtraight, and from Tiennots Cape.
               AFter we had ſayled along the ſayd coaſt, for the ſpace of two houres, behold, the tyde began to turne againſte vs, with ſo ſwift and raging a courſe, that it was not poſſible for vs with thirtéene oares to rowe or gette one ſtones caſt farther, that we were conſtrayned to leaue our Boates with ſome of our men to gard them, and tenne or twelue men went on ſhoare to the ſayd Cape, where we found that the land beginneth to bend South-weaſt, whiche hauing ſéene, we came to our Boates againe, and ſo to oure Shippes, whiche were ſtill readie rigged, hoping to goe forward: but for all that, they were fallen more than four leagues where we had lefte

them, where ſo ſoone as we came, we aſſembled togither all our Captaynes, Mayſters, and Marriners, to haue their aduice and opinion what was beſt to be done: and after that euery one had ſayd, conſidering that the Eaſterly windes beganne to beare ſway, and blow, and that the floud was ſo great, that we did but fall, and that there was nothing to be gotten, and that ſtormes and tempeſtes beganne to puffe in thoſe new Countreys, and that we were ſo farre from home, not knowing the perils and dangers were behind, for eyther we muſt agrée to turne and come backe againe, or elſe to ſtay there all the yeare. Moreouer, we did conſider, that if an exchange of the Northerne windes did take vs, it were not poſſible for vs to depart thence. All which opinions being heard and conſidered, we altogither determined to addreſſe oure ſelues homeward. Now bycauſe vpon Saint Peeters day we entred into the ſayde ſtraighte, we named it Saint Peeters Straight. We ſounded it in many places, in ſome we found 70. faddome water, in ſome 50. and néere the ſhoare but 30. and cléere ground. From that day till Wenſday following, we had a good and proſperous gale of wind, that we trended the ſayd land about on the North Eaſt South-eaſt, Weaſt and North-weaſt ſides: for ſuch is the ſituation of it, excepted one Cape of low lands that bendeth towarde South-eaſt, about 25. leagues from the ſtraight. In this place we ſawe certayne ſmokes, that the people of the Countrey made vppon the ſayd Cape: but bycauſe the winde blew vs towarde the coaſt, we went not to them, whiche when they ſaw, they came with two Boates and twelue men vnto vs, and as fréelie came vnto our Shippes, as if they had bin French men, and gaue vs to vnderſtande, that they came from the greate Gulfe, and that Tiennot was their Captayne, who then was vpon that Cape, making ſignes vnto vs, that they were going home to their Countreys where we were come from with our Shippes, and that they were laden with Fiſh. We named the ſayd Cape, Tiennots Cape. From the ſaide Cape all the lande trendeth Eaſt South-eaſt, and Weſt Northweſt.

All the land lyeth low, very pleaſant, enuironed with ſand, where the ſea is entermingled with mariſhes and ſhallowes, the ſpace of twentie leagues: then doth the land begin to trend from Weaſt to Eaſt, North-eaſt altogither enuironed with Ilands two or thrée leagues from land, in whiche as farre as we could ſée, are many dangerous ſhealues more than foure or fiue leagues from land.
            
            
               ¶ How that vpon the ninth of Auguſt we entred within White Sands, and vpon the fifth of September we came to the port of S. Malo.
               
               FRom the ſaid Wenſday, vntill Saturday following, we had a great wind from the South-weaſt, whiche cauſed vs to draw Eaſt North-eaſt, on which day we came to the Eaſterly partes of the new land, betwéene the Barnes and the Doble Cape. There beganne great ſtormie winds comming from the Eaſt with great rage: wherefore we coaſted the Cape North North-weaſt, to ſearche the Northerne parte, which is (as we haue ſayd) all enuironed with Ilands, and being néere the ſaid Ilands and land, the wind turned into the South, which brought vs within the ſaid gulfe, ſo that the next day being the ninth of Auguſt, we by the grace of God entred within White Sands. And this is ſo much as we haue diſcouered. After that, vpon the fiftéenth of Auguſt, being the feaſt of the Aſſumption of our Lady, after that we had heard ſeruice, we altogither departed from the porte of White Sands, and with a happie and proſperous weather, we came into the middle of the Sea, that is betwéene the new
                     •
                   land 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Bri
                        •
                     tanie, in which place we were toſt and turmoyled thrée dayes long with great ſtormes and windie tempeſts comming from the eaſt, which with the aide and aſſiſtance of God we ſuffered: then had we faire weather, and vpon the fifth of September, in the ſaid yeare, we came to the port of S. Malo whence we were come.
               
                  
                  
                     The language that is ſpoken in the Land newly diſcouered, called new Fraunce.
                     God
                     —
                     the Sunne
                     
                        Iſnetz
                     
                     the Heauen
                     
                        camet
                     
                     the Day
                     —
                     the Night
                     
                        aiagla
                     
                     Water
                     
                        ame
                     
                     Sand
                     
                        estogatz
                     
                     a Sayle
                     
                        aganie
                     
                     the Head
                     
                        agonaze
                     
                     the Throate
                     
                        conguedo
                     
                     the Noſe
                     
                        hehonguesto
                     
                     the Teeth
                     
                        heſangne
                     
                     the Nayles
                     
                        agetaſcu
                     
                     the Feete
                     
                        ochedaſco
                     
                     the Legges
                     
                        anoudaſco
                     
                     a dead man
                     
                        amocdaza
                     
                     a Skinne
                     
                        aionaſ
                              •
                           a
                     
                     that Man
                     
                        yea
                     
                     a Hatchet
                     
                        aſogne
                     
                     greene Fiſh
                     
                        gadag
                              •
                           urſere
                     
                     good to be eaten
                     
                        gueſand
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Almonds
                     
                        anougaza
                     
                     Figges
                     
                        aſcond
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Gold
                     
                        henyoſco
                     
                     the priuie members
                     
                        aſſegnega
                     
                     an Arow
                     
                        cacta
                     
                     a greene Tree
                     
                        haued
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     an earthen diſh
                     
                        auda
                              •
                           o
                     
                     a Bow
                     —
                     Braſſe
                     
                        aignetaze
                     
                     the Brow
                     
                        anſce
                     
                     a Feather
                     
                        yco
                     
                     the Moone
                     
                        caſmogan
                     
                     the Earth
                     
                        conda
                     
                     the Winde
                     
                        canut
                     
                     the Rayne
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           nnoſcon
                     
                     Bread
                     
                        cacacomy
                     
                     the Sea
                     
                        a met
                     
                     a Shippe
                     
                        caſaomy
                     
                     a Man
                     
                        vndo
                     
                     the Heares
                     
                        hoc hoſco
                     
                     the Eyes
                     
                        ygata
                     
                     the Mouth
                     
                        hach
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     the Eares
                     
                        h
                              •
                           ntaſco
                     
                     the Armes
                     
                        ageſc
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     a Woman
                     
                        enraſeſco
                     
                     a ſicke Man
                     
                        alouedeche
                     
                     Shoes
                     
                        att
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     a Skin to couer a mās priuy mēbers
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           nſcoz
                              •
                           n vondico
                     
                     Fleſh
                     —
                     red cloth
                     
                        cah
                              •
                           neta
                     
                     a Knife
                     
                        agobod
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     a Macrell
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                     Nuttes
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                     Apples
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           oneſta
                     
                     Beanes
                     
                        ſabe
                     
                     a Swoord
                     
                        acheſco
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Heere endeth the firſt relation of Iames Carthiers diſcouery of the new land called New France, tranſlated into Engliſh out of Italian by I. F.
               
            
            
               Aſſai ben balla a chi fortuna ſuma.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ A ſhorte and briefe narration of the Nauigation cauſed to be made by the King of France, to the Ilands of Canada, Hochelaga, Saguenay, and diuers others, which now are called New France, vvith a diſcourſe of the particulars, cuſtomes, and manners of the inhabitoures therein.
            
               
                  Chap. 1.
               
                  IN the yeare of our Lord 1535. vpon Whitſonday, being the 16. of May, by the commandement of our owne Captayne Iames Carthier, and with a common accord, in the Cathedrall Churche of S. Malo, we deuoutely each one confeſſed our ſelues, and receyued the Sacrament: and all entring into the Quier of the ſayde Church, we preſented our ſelues before the Reuerend Father in Chriſt, the Lorde Biſhop of S. Malo, who bleſſed vs all, being in his Biſhops Roabes. The Wenſday following, béeing the 19. of May, there roſe a good gale of winde, and therefore we hoyſed Sayle with thrée Shippes, that is to ſay, the great Hermina, being in burthen about a hundreth, or a hundreth and twentie Tunne, wherein the foreſayde Captayne Iames Carthier was Generall, and Maiſter Thomas Froſmont chiefe Mayſter, accompanyed with Mayſter Claudius of Pont Briand, Sonne to the Lord of Monteceuell, and Cupbearer to the Dolphin of France▪ 
                     Charles
                   of Pomera
                        •••
                     , Iohn Powlet,
                   and other Gentlemen. In the ſecond Shippe called the little Hermina, being of thréeſcore Tunne burthen, were Captaynes vnder the ſaid Carthier, Mace Salobert, and Mayſter William Marie. In the third Shippe called the Hemerillon, being of forti
                     •
                   Tunne in burthen, were Captaynes M. William Brittan, and M. Iames Maingare. So we ſayled with a good and proſperous wind, vntil the 20. of the ſaid moneth,

at which time the weather tourned into ſtormes & tē
                  peſts, ye which with contrarie winds, and darkeneſſe, endured ſo long yt our ſhips being without any reſt, ſuffered as much as any ſhips that euer went on ſeas: ſo that the 25. of Iune, by reaſon of that foule and foggie weather, all our ſhippes loſte ſight one of another, neyther ſawe we one another againe tyll we came to the newe lande where we had appointed to méet. After we had loſt one another, we in the Generals ſhip were with contrarie windes toſt too and fro on the ſea, vntil the ſeuenth of Iuly, vpon which daye we arriued and came to the Iland called the Iland of Byrdes, which lyeth from the main lande .44. leagues. This Ilande is ſo full of byrdes, that all our ſhips might eaſily haue bin fraighted with them, and yet for the great number that there is, it wold not ſéeme that any were taken away. We to victual our ſelues filled two boats of them. This Iland hath the Pole eleuated .49. degrées, and 40. minutes. Vppon the eight of the ſayde moneth we ſayled further, and with a proſperous weather came to the Porte called The Port of white Sandes, that is in the Baie called The Baie of Caſtels, where we had purpoſed to méete and ſtay togither the fiftéenth of the ſaid month. In this place therfore we loked for our felows, that is to ſay, the other two ſhips, til the .26. of the moneth, on which daye both came togither. So ſoone as our fellowes were come, we ſet our ſhippes in a readineſſe, taking in both water, wood, and other neceſſaries. And then on the 29. of the ſaide moneth, early in the morning wée hoiſed ſaile to paſſe on further, and ſailing alongſt the Northerne coaſt that runneth Northeaſt and Southweſt, til two houres after Sunne ſet or there aboutes, and then we croſſed along two Ilandes, whiche doe ſtretch further forth than the others, whiche we called S. Williams Ilandes, b
                     •
                  ing diſtant aboute 20. leagues or more from the Porte of Breſt. All the coaſt from the Caſtels to that place lyeth Eaſt & Weaſt, Northeaſt and Southweaſt, hauing betwéene it ſundrye little Ilandes, altogither barren and full of ſtones, wythoute eyther earth or trées, excepted certayne Valleys onely. The

nexte daye being the laſte of Iulye ſauing one, we ſayled on (Weſtward to finde out other Ilands) which as yet we had not founde, xij. leagues and a halfe, among whiche there is a great Baye towarde the North all ful of Ilandes and great créekes, where manye good harboroughes ſéeme to be: them we named Saint Marthas Ilandes, from which about a league and a halfe further into the ſea, there is a dangerous ſhallow, wherin are four or fiue rocks, which lye from Saint Marthas Ilandes about vij. leagues as you paſſe into the ſaid Ilands, on the Eaſt and on ye Weſt ſide, to which we came the ſaid day an houre after noone, and from that houre vntil midnight we ſailed about fiftéene leagues athwart a cape of ye lower Ilands, which we named S. Germans Ilāds South-eaſtward frō whiche place about thrée leagues, there is a very dangerous ſhallow▪ Likewiſe betwéen S. Germans Cape & S. Marthas, about two leagues frō the ſaid Ilāds, there lyeth a bāck of ſand, vpon which hanck ye water is but two fadome déepe, & therfore ſéeing ye dāger of ye coaſt, we ſtruck ſaile & went no further ye night: The next day being ye laſt of Iuly, we wente al along the coaſt yt runneth Eaſt & weſt, Weſt & by North, which is al enuironed about wt Ilandes & drie ſandes, and in truth are very daungerous. The length frō 
                  S. Germans Cape to the ſaid Ilands is about xviij. leagues & a half, at the ende of which ther is a goodly plot of grounde full of huge & highe trées, albeit the reſt of the coaſt be compaſſed about wt ſandes wtout any ſigne or ſhew of harboroughs, til we came to Thiennots Cape, which tendeth Northweſt about vij. leagues from ye forſaid Ilāds, which Thiennots Cape we noted in our former voyage, & therfore we failed on all that night Weaſt Northweſt, til it was day, & then the winde turned again frō vs, wherefore we wente to ſéeke a Hauen wherin we might harbor our ſhips, & by good hap, found one fit for our purpoſe, about vij. leagues & a half beyond Thiennots Cape, and that we named S. Nicholas Hauen, it lyeth amidſt foure Ilandes that ſtretcheth into the ſea. Vpon the next we for a token ſet vp a woodden croſſe. But note by the way that croſſe muſt be

turned Northeaſt, and then bending toward it, leaue it on the left hand, and you ſhall finde thrée fadome water, and within the Hauen but two. Alſo you are to take héede of two ſhelues that leane outwarde halfe a league. All this coaſte is full of quicke ſandes and very daungerous, albeit in ſighte manye good Hauens ſéeme to be there, yet is there nought elſe but ſhelues and ſandes. We ſtaide and reſted our ſelues in the ſayde Hauen, vntill the ſeauenth of Auguſt being Sundaye: on whiche daye we hoyſed ſayle, and came towarde lande one the neather ſide towarde Rabaſts Cape, diſtant from the ſayd Hauen about twentie leagues North Northeaſt, and South Southweaſt: but the nexte daye there roſe a ſtormie and a contrarie winde, and therefore we coulde finde no Hauen there towarde the South. Thence we wente coaſting along toward the North, beyonde the aboue-ſayde Hauen aboute tenne leagues, where we founde a goodly greate gulfe, full of Ilandes, paſſages, and entraunces towarde what winde ſoeuer you pleaſe to bend: for the knowledge of this gulfe there is a greate Ilande that is a Cape of the maine lande, ſtretching ſomewhat further foorth than the others, and aboute two leagues wythin the lande, there is an Hill faſhioned as it were an heape of corne. We named the ſayde Gulfe Saint Laurence hys Baie. The twelfth of the ſayde month we went from the ſayd S. Laurence hys Bay, or Gulfe, ſayling Weſtwarde, and came to finde a Cape of maine lande on the Northſide of the Baye, that runneth from the ſaide Sainte Laurence his Baie about fiue and twentie leagues Weſt and by South. And of the two wilde men whiche we toke in our former voyage, it was tolde vs that this was of the Band
                     •
                   towarde the South, and that there was an Ilande, on the Southerlye parte of whiche is the waye to goe to Honguedo where the yeare before we hadde taken them in Canada, and that two dayes iourney from the ſayde Cape, an Ilande began the Kingdome of Siguenay, in the land
                     •
                   Northwarde extending towarde Canada, and aboute thrée leagues athwart the ſaide Cape, there is aboue fiftie faddome déepe.

Moreouer I beléeue that there was neuer ſo many Whale
                     •
                   ſéene as we ſawe that day about the Cape. The next daye after our Ladie day in Auguſt, being the fiftéenth of the month, hauing paſt thoſe ſtraightes, where we had notice of certaine landes that we left toward the South, whiche landes are full of very high hilles, and therfore we named them The Ilands of the Aſſumption, and one Cape of the ſayd high countryes lyeth Eaſt north-eaſte, and Weſte ſouth-weſt, the diſtaunce betwéene which, is about fiue & twentie leagues. The Countryes lying North, maye playnely be perceyued to be higher thā the Southerly more than thirtie leagues. We trended ye ſaide landes about towarde the South, frō the ſaid day vntyl Tweſday noone following, the winde being in the Weſt, and therfore we bended toward the North, purpoſing to go and ſée the land that we before had ſpyed. Being arriued there, wée founde the ſayd Ilands, as it were ioyned togither, and lowe toward the Sea. And the Northerly mountaines that are vpon the ſaide lowe Ilandes ſtretching Eaſte, Weſte, and by Southe. Our men tolde vs that there was the beginning of Saguenay, and that it was land inhabited, and that thēce commeth the redde Copper, of them named CAIGNETDAZE. There is betwéen the Southerly Ilands, and the Northerly about 30. leagues diſtance, and more thā 100. faddome depth. The ſaide men did moreouer certifye vnto vs, that there was the way and beginning of the gret riuer of Hochelaga, a ready way to Canada, which riuer the further it went the narower it came, euen vntil to Canada, and that then there was freſhe water, which went ſo farre vpwards, that they hadde neuer hearde of any man had gone to the heade of it, and that there is no other paſſage but with ſmall boates. Our Captayne hearing their talke, and how they did affirm no other paſſage to be there, woulde not at that time procéede any further, tyll he had ſéene and noted the other Ilandes, & coaſt towarde the North, which he had ommitted to ſée, after Saint Larance his gulfe, bycauſe he would exquiſitly know, if in the Ilandes toward the South any paſſage had bin diſcouered.
            
            
               
               ¶ How our Captain cauſed the ſhippes to retourne backe again, only to know if in Saint Laurence gulfe there were any paſſage towarde the North. CHAP. 2.
               VPon the 18. of Auguſt being Wedneſday, our Captain
                     •
                   cauſed his ſhippes to winde backe, and bend toward the other ſhore, ſo that we trended the ſayd Northerly coſt, whiche runneth South-eaſt, & North-weſt, being faſhioned like vnto halfe a bowe, and is a very high land, but yet not ſo high as that on the Southerly partes. The Thurſday following we came to ſeuen very high Ilandes, whiche we named The round Ilands. Theſe Ilandes are diſtant from the others about fourtie leagues, and ſtretche out into the Sea aboute thrée or foure leagues. Aboute theſe there are goodly lowe groundes to be ſéene full of goodlye trées, whiche we the Fryday following, with our boates compaſſed aboute. Ouerthwart theſe Ilandes there are diuerſe ſandie ſhelues more than two leagues into the ſea, very daungerous, whiche at a a lowe water remaine almoſt dry. At the furtheſt boundes of theſe lowe Ilands, that containe about tenne leagues, ther is a riuer of freſh water, that with ſuch ſwiftneſſe runneth into the ſea, that for the ſpace of one league within it the water is as freſhe as anye fountaine water. We with our boates entred into the ſaide riuer, at the entraunce of whiche we foūd about one fadome water. There are in this riuer many fiſhes ſhaped like horſſes, which as our wilde men told vs, al the daye long lye in the water, and the night on lande: of which we ſawe therein a great number. The next day being the one and twentith of the month, by breake of day we hoyſed ſayle, and ſayled ſo long about the ſayde coaſte, that wée had ſight of the Northerly partes of it, which as yet we had not ſéene, and of the Iland of the Aſſumption which we had founde, departing from the ſayde land: which thing ſo ſoon as we had done, and that we were certifyed no other paſſage to be there, we came to our ſhippe againe, whiche we had left at

the ſaid Ilands, where is a good harborough, the water being about nine or ten faddome. In the ſame place by occaſion of contrarie winds and foggie myſtes, we were conſtrayned to ſtay, not being either able to come out of it, or hoyſe ſayle til the four & twentith of the month. On which day we departed & came to a hauen on the Southerly coaſt, about 80. leagues from the ſaid Ilands. This hauen is ouer againſt thrée flat Ilāds yt lye amidſt a riuer, bycauſe on the half way of ye ſayd Ilands, & the ſaid Hauen toward the North, there is a verye great riuer that runneth betwéene the high & low Ilands, & more than thrée leagues into the ſea: it hath many ſhelues, & there is not altogither one fadome water, ſo that the place is very dangerous: & from bank to bancke of the ſaide ſhelues, there is either xv. or xx. yardes. All the Northerly coſt rūneth Eaſt Northeaſt and South Southweſt. The ſaide hauen wherin we ſtayed, is as it were but a ſluce of the waters that riſe by the floud, and but of ſmal accompt, we named them S. Iohns Iſleetes, bycauſe we founde them, and entred into thē the day of the beheading of that Saint. Aboute fiue leagues afore you come to the ſaid hauen Weſtward, there is no paſſage at al but only with little boates. The hauen of S. Iohns Iſlettes, dryeth vp all the waters that riſe by flowing, yea if it flowe a faddome. The beſt place to harborough ſhips therin is on the South part of a certaine little Iſlande that is ouer againſt the ſayde hauen, whereby the bancke or ſhore of of the Iland riſeth. Vpon the firſt of September we departed out of the ſaid hauen, purpoſing to go towarde Canada, and about 15. leagues from it towarde Weſt Southweſt, amidſt ye riuer there are thrée Ilandes, ouer againſt the whiche the riuer runneth ſwift, and is of a great depth, & it is that which leadeth, and runneth into the Countrey and kingdome of Saguenay, as by the two wilde men of Canada it was tolde vs. Thys riuer, paſſeth and runneth along very high and ſtéepe hilles of bare ſtone, where very little earth is, and notwithſtanding there is greate quantitie of ſundrie ſortes of trées that growe in the ſayde bare ſtones, euen as vppon good and

fertile ground, in ſuch ſorte that we haue ſéene ſome ſo great as well woulde ſuffiſe to make a maſte for a ſhippe of fortie Tunne burden, and as gréene as poſſible can be growing, in a ſtonie rocke without any earth at all. At the entraunce of the ſayd riuer we mette with foure boates ful of wilde men, whiche as farre as we coulde perceyue, verye fearefullye came toward vs, ſo that ſome of them went backe agayne, & the other came as neare vs as eaſilye they might heare and vnderſtond one of our wilde men, who tolde them his name, and then toke acquaintaunce of them, vpon whoſe word they came to vs. The nexte day, being the ſeconde of September, we came out of the riuer to goe to Canada, and by reaſon of the Seas flowing, the tide was verie ſwifte and daungerous for that on the South part of it there lye two Ilandes, about whiche more than thrée leagues compaſſe, lye manye greate ſtones, and but two faddome water: and the flowing amidſt thoſe Ilandes, is verye vnconſtante and doubtefull, that if it hadde not bene for our boates, we hadde bene in great dā
                  ger to looſe our liues: and coaſting along the ſaide dry ſands, there is more than fiftéen fadome water. About fiue leagues beyonde the riuer of Saguenay Southweaſt, there is another Ilande more Northerly acroſſe, whiche are certaine highe péeces of lande, and thereaboutes we thought to haue caſte Ancker on purpoſe to ſtaye the nexte tide, but we could ſound no ground by thrée ſcore fadome within a flighte ſhoote from ſhoare, ſo that we were conſtrayned to winde backe to the ſayde Ilande, where wée ſounded againe, and founde eightéene faddome. The nexte mornyng we hoyſed ſaile and wente thence, ſayling further on, where wée hadde notice of a certayne kinde of fiſhe neuer to-fore of anye manne ſéene or knowen. They are aboute the bigneſſe of a Purpois, yet nothing like them, of bodye verye well proportioned, headed lyke Graye-houndes, altogither as white as Snowe, wythout anye ſpotte, within which Riuer there is great quantitie of them: they do liue altogyther betwéene the Sea and the freſhe Water.

Theſe of the Countrey call them ADHOTHVYS, they folde vs that they be very ſauorye and good to be eaten. Moreouer they affirme none to be foūd elſe-wher but in that riuer. The ſixth of the month, the weather being calme & faire, we went about fiftéene leagues more vpward into the riuer, and there lighted on an Iland that looketh Northward, and it maketh a little hauen or créeke wherin are many & innumerable great Tortoyzes, continuallye lying about that Ilande. There are likewiſe great quantitie of the ſaid Aphothuys taken by the inhabitours of the Coūtry, ſo that there is as gret concourſe and méeting in that place as is at Bordeous in Fraunce at euery tide. This Iland is in length about thrée leagues, and in bredth two, and is a goodly and fertile plot of ground, repleniſhed with many goodly and great trées of manye ſortes. Among the reſt ther are many Filburde trées, which we found hanging full of them, ſomewhat bigger and better in ſauour than ours, but ſomewhat harder, and therefore we called it The Iland of Filburdes. The ſeuenth of the month, being our Ladies euen, after ſeruice we went from that Ilande, to goe vp higher into the riuer, and came to the Fourteene Ilandes, ſeauen or eight leagues from the Ilande of Filburdes, where the Countrey of Canada beginneth, one of which Ilandes is ten leagues in length, and fiue in bredth, greatlye inhabited of ſuch men as onlie liue by fiſhing of ſuche ſortes of fiſhes as the riuer affourdeth, according to the ſeaſō of them. After we had caſt Ancker betwéene the ſayde Ilande, and the Northerly coaſt, we went on lande and tooke our two wilde men with vs, méeting with many of thoſe Countrey people, who woulde not at all approch vnto vs, but rather fledde from vs vntill our two men beganne to ſpeake vnto them, telling thē that they wer Taignoagny & Domagaia, who ſo ſoone as they had takē aquaintance of thē, began greatly to reioyce, dauncing and ſhewing many ſorts of ceremonies: and many of the chiefeſt of thē came to our boats & brought many Eles, & other ſorts of fiſhes, with two or thrée burdens of great Millet wherwith they make their bread, & many gret muſ
                     •
                   milions.

The ſame daye came alſo manye other boates full of thoſe Countreymen and Women, to ſée and take aquaintance of our two mē, al which were as courteouſly receyued, & friendly entertayned of our Captayne, as poſſible could be. And to haue them the better acquaynted with him, and make them his friends, he gaue them many ſmall giftes, but of ſmall value: neuertheleſſe, they were greatly contented with them. The next day following, the Lorde of Canada (whoſe proper name was Donnacona) but by the name of Lorde, they call him Agouhanna, with twelue boates came to our Ships, accompanyed of many people, who cauſing tenne of hys Boates to go backe with the other two, approched vnto vs with ſixtéene men more. Then began the ſayde Agouhanna being néereſt vnto our Shippe, according to their manner and faſhion, to frame a long Oration, mouing all his bodie and members after a ſtrange faſhion, whiche thing is a Ceremonie and ſigne of gladneſſe and ſecuritie among them, and then comming to the Generals Shippe, where Taignoagny, and Domagaia ſpake with them, and they with him, where they began to tell and ſhewe vnto him what they had ſéene in Fraunce, and what good entertainment they had had, hearing which things, the Lorde ſéemed to be very glad of, & prayed our Captain to reach him his arme, that he might kiſſe it, whych thing he did: their Lord taking it, laid it about his necke, for ſo they vſe to do when they will make much of one. Then our Captayne entred into Agouhannas boate, cauſing bread and wine to be brought, to make the ſayd Lord and his companie to eate and drinke, which thing they did, and were greatly thereby contented and ſatiſfyed. Our Captayne for that time gaue them nothing, bycauſe he looked for a fitter oportunitie. Theſe things being done, each one tooke leaue of others, and the Lord went with his boates agayne where he was come from. Our Captayne then cauſed oure boates to be ſet in order, that with the next tide he might goe vp higher into the Riuer, to finde ſome harborough wherein to ſet our Ships: and the next tide we went coaſting alongſt

the ſaid Iland, about tenne leagues, at the ende whereof, we found a goodly and pleaſant ſluce of water, where is another little riuer and hauen, where by reaſon of the flo
                     •
                  d there, is two faddome water. This place ſéemed to vs very fitte and commodious to put our ſhips therein, and ſo we did very ſafely, we named it the holy Croſſe, for on that day we came thither. Néere vnto it, there is a village, whereof Donnacona is Lord, and there he kéepeth his abode: it is called Stad
                        •
                     gona, as goodly a plot of ground as poſſibly may be ſéene, and therewithall very fruitefull, full of goodly trees euen as in France, as Oakes, Elmes, Aſhes, Walnut
                     •
                   trées, Maple trées, Cidrons, Vines, and white Thornes, that bring foorth fruite as big as any Damſons, and many other ſortes of trées, vnder which groweth as faire tall hemp, as any in France, without any ſéede, or any mans worke or labour at all. Hauing conſidered the place, & finding it fit for our purpoſe, our Captayne withdrew himſelfe on purpoſe to returne to our Shippes, but beholde, as we were comming out of the Riuer, we met comming againſt vs one of the Lords of that village Stadagona, accompanied with many others, as men, women, and childrē, who after the faſhion of their Countrey, in ſigne of mirth and ioy, began to make a long Oration, the Women ſtill ſinging and dancing vp to the knées in water. Our Captayne knowing their good will and kindneſſe towarde vs, cauſed the Boate wherein they were, to come vnto him, and gaue them certaine trifles, as kniues, and beades of glaſſe, whereat they were maruellous glad, for we being gone about 3. leagues frō them, for the pleaſure they conceyue
                     •
                   of our comming, we might heare thē ſing, & ſée thē dance for all they were ſo farre.
            
            
               ¶ How our Captayne went to ſee and note the bigneſſe of the Iland, and the nature of it, and then returned to the Shippes, cauſing them to be brought to the Riuer of the holy Croſſe. CHAP. 3.
               AFter we were come with our Boates vnto our Shippes againe, our Captaine cauſed our Barkes to be made readie

to go on land in the ſayde Ilande, to note the trées that in 
                     •
                  hew ſéemed ſo faire, and to conſider the nature and qualitie of it, which thing we did, and found it full of goodlye trées like to ours. Alſo we ſawe many goodly Vines, a thing not tofore of vs ſéene in thoſe Countreys, and therefore we named it Bacchus Iland. It is in length about twelue leagues, in ſight very pleaſant, but full of woods, no parte of it wrought, vnleſſe it be in certaine places, where a few houſes be for Fiſhers dwellings, as before we haue ſayde. The next day we departed with our Ships to bring them to the place of the holy Croſſe, and on the 14. of that moneth we came thither, and the Lorde Dormacona, Taignoagny, and Domagaia, with 25. Boates full of thoſe people, came to méete vs, comming from the place whence we were come, and going toward Stadagona, where their abiding is, and all came to our Ships, ſhewing ſundrie and diuers geſtures of gladnes and mirth, except thoſe two that we had brought, to witte, Taignoagny, & Domagaia, who ſéemed to haue altered & changed their mind & purpoſe, for by no meanes they would come vnto our Ships, albeit ſundry times they were earneſtly deſired to do it, whervpon we began to miſtruſt ſomewhat. Our Captayne aſked thē if according to promiſe they would not go with him to Hochelaga, they anſwered yea, for ſo they had purpoſed, and then each one withdrew himſelfe. The next day being the fiftenth of the moneth, our Captaine wente on ſhore, to cauſe certaine poles and piles to be driuen into the water, and ſet vp, that the better and ſafe
                     •
                  yer we might ſet our Shippe there: and to behold that, many of thoſe Countrey people came to méete vs there, among whome was Donnacona, and our two men, with the reſt of theyr companye, who kepte themſelues aſide vnder a poynt or nooke of lande that is vppon the ſhoare of a certayne Riuer, and no one of them came vnto vs as the other did that were not on their ſyde. Our Captayne vnderſtanding that they were there, commaunded parte of oure menne to followe hym, and hée went to the ſayd poynt, where he found the ſayd Donnacona,

Taignoagny, Domagaia, & diuers other: and after ſalutations giuen on eache ſide, Taignoagny ſetled himſelfe formoſt to ſpeake to our Captayne, ſaying that ye Lord Donnacona did greatly gréeue and ſorrow that our Captayne and his mē did weare warlike weapons, and they not. Our Captaine anſwered, that albeit it did gréeue them, yet would not he leaue thē of, and that (as he knew) it was ye maner of France. But for all theſe words, our Captayne and Donnacona left not off to ſpeake one to another, and fréendly to entertaine one another. Then did we perceyue, that whatſoeuer Taignoagny ſpake, was only long of himſelf, and of his fellow, for that our Captaine departed thence. He and Donnacona entred into a maruellous ſtedfaſt league of friendſhip, whereby all his people at once with a loude voyce, caſt out thrée great cryes, (a horrible thing to heare) and each one hauing taken licence of the other for that day, we wente a boord agayne. The day following, we put our two great Shippes within the Riuer and harborough, where the waters being at the higheſt, are but one fadome and halfe déepe, and at the loweſt, but halfe a fadome. We left our Galion without the ſluce, to the ende we might bring it to Hochelaga. So ſoone as we had ſafely placed our Shippes, behold, we ſaw Donnacona, Taignoagny, and Domagaia, with more than fiue hundred perſons, men, women, and children, and the Lorde with tenne or twelue of the chiefeſt of the Countrey came a boord of our ſhippes, who were all courteouſly receyued, and friendly entertayned, both of our Captayne, and of all vs: and diuers giftes of ſmall value were giuen them. Then did Taignoagny tell our Captayne, that his Lord did greatly ſorrow that he woulde go to Hochelaga, and that he would not by any meanes permit that any of them ſhould goe with him, and that the Riuer was of no importance. Our Captayne anſwered him, that for all his ſaying, he woulde not leaue off his going thither, if by anye meanes it were poſſible, for that he was commanded by his King to goe as farre as poſſibly he could: and that if he (that is to ſay Taignoagny) would go with him, as he had promiſed

he ſhoulde be very wel entertained, beſide that, he ſhould haue ſuch a gifte giuen him, as he ſhoulde wel content himſelfe: for hée ſhoulde doe nothing elſe but goe with hym to Hochelaga, and come againe. To whome Taignoagny aunſwered, that he woulde not by any meanes go, and therevpon ſodainely returned to their houſes. The nexte day beyng the 17. of September, Donnacona retourned euen as at the firſte, and brought with him many Eeles, with ſundry ſorts of other fiſhes, whereof they take greate ſtore in the ſayde Riuer, as more largely hereafter ſhall be ſhewed. And as ſoone as they were come to our Shippes, according to their wonted vſe beganne to ſing and daunce. This done, Donnacona cauſed all his people to be ſette of one ſide, then making a rounde circle vpon the Sand, cauſed our Captaine with al his people to enter therein, then he beganne to make a long Oration: holding in one of his handes a Maiden child 10. or 12. yeares olde, whych he preſented vnto our Captaine: then ſodainely beganne his people to ſende out thrée ſhréekes or howles, in ſigne of ioy and league of friendſhippe, preſently vpon that he did preſent vnto him two other yong Male children one after another, but yonger than the other, at the gyuing of whyche, euen as before, they gaue oute ſhréekes and howles very lowde, with other ceremonies: for whyche preſents, our Capitaine gaue the ſaide Lorde greate and hearty thankes. The Lord tolde our Captaine then, that one of the children was his owne brother, and that the Maiden childe was daughter vnto his owne ſiſter, and theſe preſents were onely giuen him, to the end he ſhould not goe to Hochelaga at all, to whome our Captaine anſwered, that if they were onely giuen hym to that intent, if ſo he would he ſhould take them againe, for that by no meanes he woulde leaue hys goyng off, for as much as he was commaunded of his King. But concerning this, Domagaia tolde oure Capitaine, that their Lorde had gyuen him thoſe children as a ſigne and token of goodwill and friendſhippe, and that he was contented to goe wyth him to Hochelaga, vppon whyche talke greate

wordes aroſe betwene Taignoagny and Domagaia, by whyche we plainely perceyued that Taignoagny was but a craftie knaue, and that he pretended but miſchiefe and treaſon, as well by thys déede as others that we by hym hadde ſéene. After that our Captaine cauſed the ſaide chyldren to be putte in oure ſhippes, and cauſed two Swordes, and two copper Baſens, the one wrought, the other plaine, to be broughte vnto hym, and them he gaue to Donnacona, who was therewyth greately contented, yelding moſt hartye thankes vnto our Captain for them, and preſently vpon that he commaunded all his people to ſing and daunce, and deſired oure Captaine to cauſe a péece of artillerie to be ſhot off, bycauſe Taignoagny and Domagaia made great brags of it, and had tolde them maruellous things, and alſo, bycauſe they had neuer hearde nor ſéene any before: to whome our Captaine anſwered, moſt willingly: and by and by commaunded his men to ſhoote off 12. cannons charged with bullettes, acroſſe the wood that was hard by thoſe people and ſhips, at whoſe noiſe they were greatly aſtoniſhed and amazed, for they thoughte that Heauen had fallen vppon them, and put themſelues to flight, howling, crying, and ſhrieking, that it ſéemed hel were broken looſe. But before we went thence, Taignoagny cauſed other men to tell vs, that thoſe men whyche we had lefte in our Gallion at roade, had ſtaine two men of theyr company, wyth a péece that they had ſhotte off, wherevppon the reſte had put themſelues all to flight, as thoughe they ſhould all haue bene ſlaine, whych afterward we found vntrue, bicauſe our men had not ſhotte off any péece at all that daye.
            
            
               ¶ Howe Donnacona, Taignoagny, with others, deuiſed a prettie ſlight or pollicie: for they cauſed three of theyr men to be attyred like Diuels, fayning to be ſent from theyr God Cudruaigny, onely to hinder our voyage to Hochelaga. CHAP. 4.
               THe nexte day being the eightéenth of September, theſe men ſtill endeauoured themſelues to ſéeke all meanes

poſſible to hinder and let our going to Hochelaga, and deuiſed a pretty guile, as hereafter ſhall he ſhewed. They went and dreſſed thrée men like Diuels, beyng wrapped in dogs ſkins white and blacke, theyr faces beſméered as blacke as anye coales, wyth hornes on theyr heads more than a yar
                     •
                   long, and cauſed them ſecreatly to be putte in one of theyr boates, but came not néere our ſhippes as they were wont to do, for they lay hidden wythin the wood for the ſpace of two houres, looking for the tyde, to the end, the boate wherin the Diuels were, might approch and come neare vs, whych, when time was, came, and all the reſte iſſued out of the wood commyng to vs, but yet not ſo neare as they were wonted to do. There began Taignoagny to ſalute oure Captaine, who aſked hym if he woulde haue the boate to come for hym, he aunſwered, not for that time, but after a while he woulde come vnto our ſhippes: then preſently came that boate ruſhing out▪ wherein the thrée diuels were with ſuch long hornes on theyr heades, and the middlemoſt came making a long Oration, & paſſed a long our ſhippes without turning or looking toward vs, but with the boate wente to ſtrike on land
                     •
                  . Then dydde Donnacona wyth all his people purſue them, and lay holde on the boate and Diuels, who ſo ſoone as the menne were come to them, fell proſtrate in the boate euen as if they hadde béene dead: then were they taken vppe and carried into the Wood, béeyng but a ſtones caſt off, then euery one wythdr
                     •
                  we himſelfe into the wood, not onely ſtaying behinde with vs, where beyng, they beganne to make a long diſcourſe, ſo lowde, that we myghte heare them in oure ſhippes, whiche laſted aboue halfe an houre, and beyng ended, we gan to eſpie Taignoagny and Domagaia comming towards vs, holding their handes ioyned togyther, carying their hattes vnder theyr vpper garment, ſhewyng a greate admiration, and Taignoagny lookyng vppe to Heauen, cryed thrée tymes Ieſus, Ieſus, Ieſus, and Domagaia dooyng as hys fellow had done before, cryed, Ieſus Maria. Iames Carthier oure Capitaine hearing them, and ſéeyng their geſtures & ceremonies, aſked

of them what they ayled, and what was happened or chaunced anew, they aunſwered, that there were very ill tydyngs befallen, ſaying in French, Nenns est il bon, that is to ſaye, it was not good: our Captaine aſked them again, what it was, then anſwered they, that theyr Lord Cudruaigny had ſpoken in Hochelaga, and that he had ſent thoſe thrée men to ſhew vnto them that there was ſo muche Ice and Snowe by the way, that whoſoeuer went thither ſhoulde dye, whych wordes when we heard, we laughed, and mocked them, ſaying, that their God Cudruaigny was but a foole and a noddy, for he knewe not what he did or ſaide: then bade we them ſhewe his meſſengers from vs, that Chriſt woulde defende them al from colde, if they woulde goe with him. Then did they aſke of our Captaine, if he had ſpoken with him, he aunſweared, no, but that his miniſters had, and that he had tolde them they ſhoulde haue fayre weather: whiche words when they had heard, they thanked our Captaine, and departed toward the woodde to tell thoſe newes vnto their fellowes, who ſodainely came all ruſhing out of the woodde, ſéeming to be very glad for thoſe wordes that our Captaine had ſpoken, and to ſhew, that therby they had had, and felt great ioy. So ſoone as they were before our Shippes, they altogither gaue oute thrée great ſhréekes, and therevpon began to ſing and dance, as they were won
                     •
                   to doe. But for a reſolution of the matter Taignoagny and Domagaia tolde our Captaine, that theyr Lorde Donnacona woulde by no meanes permitte that any of them ſhoulde goe with him to Hochelaga, vnleſſe he would leaue hym ſome hoſtage to ſtay with him, our Captaine anſwered them, that if they would not go with him with a good will, they ſhould ſtay, for he would not by any meanes leaue his going off, but woulde by all meanes poſſible endeauour himſelfe to goe thither if he coulde.
            
            
               
               ¶ Howe oure Captayne▪ wyth all his Gentlemenne, and fiftie Marriners, departed wyth oure Gallion, and the two boates of Canada to go to Hochelaga, and alſo there is deſcribed, what by the way and vppon the riuer was ſeene. CHAP. 5.
               THe next day being the 19. of September we hoiſed ſaile, and with our Gallion and two boates departed to go vp the riuer with the floude, where on both ſhoares of it we beganne to ſée as goodly a countrey as poſſibly can with eye be ſéene, all repleniſhed with very goodly trées, and Vines laden as full of Grapes as coulde be all along the riuer; whyche rather ſéemed to haue bene planted and wrought by handy worke than otherwiſe. True it is, that bycauſe they are not dreſſed and wrought as they ſhoulde be, theyr bunches of Grapes are not ſo great as ours, alſo we ſawe all along the riuer many horſes inhabited of Fiſhers, whyche take all kyndes of fiſhes, and they with great familiaritie and kindneſſe came vnto vs, euen as if we had bene theyr Countreymen, and brought vs greate ſtore of fiſhe, ſuche as they hadde with other thyngs, whyche we exchaunged with them for other wares, who lifting vp their hands toward heauen, gaue many ſignes of ioy: we ſtayed at a place called Hochela
                        •
                     , about 25. leagues from Canada, where the riuer waxeth very narrowe, and runneth very ſwift, wherefore it is very dangerous, not only for that, but alſo for certain gret ſtones that are therein: Many boates and barkes came vnto vs, in one of whiche came one of the chéefe Lordes of the Countrey, making a long diſcourſe, who beyng come néere vs, did by euident ſignes and geſtures ſhewe vs, that the higher the Riuer went, the more daungerous it was, and bade vs take héede of our ſelues. The ſaide Lorde preſented and gaue vnto our Captaine two of his owne children, of whyche oure Captaine tooke one being a wench ſeuen or eight yeres old, the man child he gaue him againe, bycauſe it was too yong,

for it was but thrée yeares olde. Our Captaine as friendly and as courteouſly dyd entertaine and receyue the ſayd Lord and his company, giuing thē certaine ſmall trifles, & ſo they departed towarde ſhoare againe. Afterwards the ſaid Lord, his wife, and his daughter, came to viſite oure Capitayne at Canada, bringing hym certaine ſmall preſents. From the 19. vntill the 28. of September, wée ſailed vp along the ſaide riuer, neuer loſing one houre of time, all whyche time we ſaw as goodly and pleaſant a Country as poſſibly can be wiſhed for, full (as we haue ſaide before) of all ſortes of goodlye trées, that is to ſay, Oakes, Elmes, Walnut-trées, Cedrons, Firres, Aſhes, Boxe, Willowes, and greate ſtore of Vines, all as full of Grapes as coulde be, that if anye of our fellowes went on ſhoare, they came home laden wyth them: there are likewiſe many Cranes, Swannes, Géeſe, Duckes, Feaſants, Partridges, Thruſhes, Blacke-birdes, Turtles, Finches, Re
                     •
                  breaſtes, Nightingales, Sparrowes, with many other ſorts of Birds, euen as in France, and great plentie and ſtore. Vpon the 28. of September, wée came to a gret wide lake in the middle of ye riuer fiue or ſixe leagues broade, and twelue long, all that day we wente againſte the tide, hauyng but one faddome water, ſtill kéeping the ſaide ſcantling: beyng come to one of the heades of the Lake, wée coulde eſpye no paſſage or going out; nay, rather it ſéemed to haue bene cloſed and ſhutte vppe rounde about, and there was but halfe a faddome water, lyttle more or leſſe. And therefore we were conſtrayned to caſte Ancker, and ſtaye with our Gallion, and wente with oure two boates to ſéeke ſome going out, and 
                     •
                  e place we found four or fiue branches, whyche out of the riuer come into the Lake, and they come from Hoche
                        •
                     aga. But in the ſaide braunches, bicauſe of the greate fierceneſſe and ſwiftneſſe wherewith they breake out, and the courſe of the water, they make certaine Créekes▪ and goings acroſſe, yet at that time there was but halfe a faddome water. Thoſe Créekes beyng paſſed, we found thrée fadome, and as farre as we could perceiue by the floud

it was that time of the yeare that the waters are loweſt, for at other times they 
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  we higher by two faddomes. All theſe foure or fiue bra
                     •
                  ches do compaſſe about fiue or ſixe Ilandes very pleaſaunt, and thereby riſeth the end of the Lake, about 15. leagues beyond, they all do come into one. That day wée landed in one of the ſaide Ilands, and met with fiue men that were hunting of wild beaſts, who fréely and familiarly came to our boates without anye feare, as if we hadde euer béene brought vp togither. Our boates beyng ſomewhat neare the ſhoare, one of them tooke our Captaine in his armes, and caried him on ſhoare, as lightly and as eaſilie, as if he had bene a child of fiue olde: ſo ſtrong and ſturdy are thoſe people. We founde, that they had a greate heape of wilde Mice that lyue in the water, as big as a Conny, and very good to eate, which they gaue vnto our Captaine, who for a recompence gaue them kniues and glazen Beades. Wée aſked thē with ſignes if that was the way to Hochelaga, they aunſwered yea, and that we had yet thrée dayes ſayling thither.
            
            
               ¶ Howe our Captaine cauſed our Boates to be mended and dreſſed to goe to Hochelaga: and bycauſe the way was ſomewhat difficult and harde, we left our Gallion behinde: and howe we came thither, and what entertainement wee had of the people. CHAP. 6.
               THe nexte day our Captaine ſéeyng, that for that tyme it was not poſſible for our Gallion to goe on anye further, hée cauſed oure Boates to bée made readye, and as muche munition and victualles to bée putte in them, as they coulde well beare 
                     •
                   hée departed wyth them, accompanyed wyth manye Gentlemen, that is to ſaye, Claudius of Ponte Briand, Cup-bearer to the Lorde Dolphin of Fraunce: Charles of Poueray: Iohn Gouion: Iohn Powlet: with twēty and eight marriners; and Mace Iallobert, and

                  William the Britton, who had the charge vnder the Captain of the other two ſhippes; to go vp as farre as they could into that riuer: we
                     •
                   ſailed with good and proſperous weather vntill the ninetéenth of October, on whiche daye we came to the towne of Hochelaga, diſtant from the place where we had left our Gallion 45. leagues. In whych place of Hochelaga, and all the waye we went, we met with many of thoſe countrimen, who brought vs fiſhe, and ſuche other victualles as they had, ſtill dauncing, and greatly reioycing at oure comming. Our Captaine, to lure them in, and to kéepe them our friends, to recompence them, gaue them kniues, beades, and ſuch ſmall trifles, wherewith they were greatly ſatiſfied. So ſoone as we were come néere Hochelaga, there came to méete vs aboue a thouſand perſons, men, women and children, who afterwarde did friendly and merely entertaine and receyue vs as anye father woulde do his childe, whiche he had not of long tyme ſéene, the men dauncing on one ſide, the women on an other, and likewiſe the children on an other: after that they brought vs great ſtore of fiſh, & of their breade made of Millet, caſting them into oure Shippes ſo thicke, that you would haue thoughte it to fall from heauen. Whiche when our Captaine ſawe, he, wyth many of hys companye wente on ſhoare: ſo ſoone as euer we were alande, they came cluſtring aboute vs, making very muche of vs, brynging theyr yong children in theyr armes, onely to haue oure Capitaine & his company to touch them, making ſignes and ſhelves of great myrth & gladnes, that laſted more than halfe an houre. Our Captaine ſéeyng theyr louing kindneſſe and entertainment of vs, cauſed all the women orderly to be ſet in araye, and gaue them Beades made of Tin, and other ſuche ſmall trifles, and to ſome of the men he gaue kniues: then he returned to the boates to ſupper▪ and ſo paſſed that night, all whiche while all thoſe people ſtoode on the ſhoare as neare oure boates as they might, making great fiers, and dauncing very merily, ſtill crying, Aguiaze, which in their tongue ſignifieth Myrth and Safetie.
               
            
            
               
               ¶How our Captayne with fiue Gentlemen, and twentie armed men, all well in order, went to ſee the Towne of Hochelaga, and the ſcituation of it. CHAP. 7.
               OVr Captayne the next day very earely in the morning, hauing very gorgeouſly attired himſelfe, cauſed all his company to be ſet in order to go to ſée the Towne and habitation of thoſe people, and a certaine Mountayne that is ſomewhat néere the Citie: with whome went alſo fiue Gentlemen, and twentie Marriners, leauing the reſt to kéepe and looke to our Boates: we tooke with vs thrée men of Hochelaga to bring vs to the place. All along as we went, we founde the way as well beaten and frequented as can be, the fayreſt and beſt Countrey that poſſibly can be ſéene, full of as goodly great Oakes as are in any wood in France, vnder whiche the ground was all couered ouer with faire Akornes. After we had gone about foure or fiue leagues, we met by the way one of the chiefeſt Lords of the Citie, accompanyed with manye mo, who ſo ſoone as he ſaw vs, beckned and made ſignes vnto vs, that we muſt reſt vs in that place, where they had made a great fire, and ſo we did. After that we had reſted oure ſelues there a while, the ſayd Lord began to make a long diſcourſe, euen as we haue ſayd aboue they are accuſtomed to do in ſigne of mirth and frendſhip, ſhewing our Captayne and all his company a ioyfull countenance, and good will, who gaue him two hatchets, a paire of kniues, and a Croſſe, which he made him to kiſſe, and then put it about his necke, for whiche he gaue our Captayne heartie thankes. This done, we wente along, and about a league and a halfe farther, we beganne to find goodly and large féeldes, full of ſuche Corne as the Countrey yéeldeth. It is euen as the Millet of Breſill, as great, and ſomewhat bigger than ſmall Peaſon, wherewith they liue euen as we do with ours. In the midſt of thoſe féelde is the Citie of Hochelaga, placed néere, and as it were ioyned to a great Mountaine that is tilled round aboute,

very fertile, on the toppe of whiche, you may ſée verye farre, wée named it Mounte Roiall. The Cittie of Hochelaga is rounde, compaſſed aboute with timber, with thrée courſe of Rampires, one within another, framed like a ſharpe Spire, but layde acroſſe aboue. The middlemoſt of them is made and builte as a directe line, but perpendicular. The Rampires are framed and faſhioned with péeces of Timber, layde along on the grounde, very well and cunningly ioyned togither after their faſhion. This encloſure is in heigth aboute two roddes. It hathe but one Gate or entrie thereat, whiche is ſhutte with piles, ſtakes, and barres. Ouer it, and alſo in many places of the wall, there be places to runne along, and Ladders to gette vp, all full of ſtones, for the defence of it. There are in the Towne aboute fiftie houſes, aboute fiftie paces long, and twelue, or fiftéene broade, builte all of woodde, couered ouer with the barke of the woodde, as broade as any boorde, very finely and cunningly ioyned togither. Within the ſayde Houſes, there are manye roomthes, Lodgings, and Chambers. In the middeſt of euery one there is a greate Courte, in the middle whereof they make their fire. They liue in commons togither: then do the Huſbandes, Wiues, and Children, eache one retire themſelues to their Chambers▪ They haue alſo on the toppe of their Houſes certayne Garets, wherein they kéepe their Corne to make their bread withall: they call it CARRACONNY, which they make as héereafter ſhall followe. They haue certayne péeces of woodde, made hollowe, like thoſe whereon wée beate oure Hempe, and with certayne Béetles of woodde they beate their Corne to powder: then they make paſte of it, and of the paſte, Cakes, or elſe Tartes, then lay them on a broade and hote ſtone, and then couer it with hote Tiles, and ſo they bake their Bread, in ſtead of Ouens. They make alſo ſundrye ſortes of Pottage with the ſayde Corne of Peaſe, and of Beanes, whereof they haue greate ſtore: alſo with other fruites, as

Muſke Millions, very greate Cowcombers. They haue alſo in their Houſes certayne Veſſels, as bigge as anye Boate, or Tunne, wherein they preſerue and kéepe, their fiſhe, cauſing the ſame in Sommer to be dryed in the Sunne, and liue therewith in Winter, whereof they make greate prouiſion, as we by experience haue ſéene. All their viandes and meates are without any taſt or ſauoure of ſalt at all. They ſléepe vpon barkes of Trées layde all along vpon the grounde, with the Skinnes of certayne wilde Beaſtes, wherewith they alſo cloth and couer themſelues. The thing moſt pretious that they haue in all the Worlde, they call it ESVRONY: it is as white as any Snowe: they take it in the Riuer of Cornibotz, in the manner as héere followeth. When any one hath deſerued death, or that they take any of their enimies in Warres, firſt they kill him, then wyth certayne great kniues they giue great 
                     •
                  laſhes and ſtrokes vppon the buttockes, flanckes, thighes, and ſhoulders: then they caſt the ſame body ſo mangled, downe to the bottome of the Riuer, in a place where it is, called Eſurgny, and there leaue it tenne or twelue houres, then they take it vp againe, and in the cuttes finde thoſe. Of them they make beades, and weare them aboute their neckes, euen as we do them of golde, accompting it the preciouſeſt thing in the Worlde. They haue this vertue and propertie in them, they wyll ſtoppe or ſtench any bléeding at the noſe, for we haue proued it. Theſe people are giuen to no other exerciſe, but onely to huſbandrie, and fiſhing wherewith to liue, they haue no care of any other wealth or commoditie in this world, for they haue no knowledge of it, and that is, bycauſe they neuer trauell and goe out of theyr Countrey, as thoſe of Canada, and Saguenay do, albeit the Canadians with eyghte or nine Villages more alongſt that Riuer bée ſubiectes vnto them.
            
            
               
               ¶ How we came to the Towne of Hochelaga, and the entertaynemente there we had, and of certayne giftes oure Captayne gaue them, with diuers other things. CHAP. 8.
               SO ſoone as we were come néere the Towne, a greate number of the inhabitoures thereof came to preſente themſelues before vs after their faſhion, making very much of vs: we were by our guides brought into the midſt of the Towne. They haue in the middlemoſt parte of their houſes a large ſquare place, béeing from ſide to ſide a good ſtones caſt, where we were brought, and there with ſignes were commaunded to ſtay: then ſuddaynely all the Women and Maydens of the Towne gathered themſelues togither, parte of which had their armes full of yong Children, and as manie as could, came to rubbe our faces, our armes, and what parte of the bodye ſoeuer they could touch, wéeping for verye ioy that they ſaw vs, ſhewing vs the beſt countenance that poſſible was, deſiring vs with theyr ſignes, that it woulde pleaſe vs to touche theyr Children. That done, the menne cauſed the Women to withdrawe themſelues backe, then they euery one late downe on the ground round about vs, as if they would haue ſhewen and rehearſed ſome Comedie, or other ſhew: then preſently came the Women agayne, euery one bringing a foureſquare Matte in manner of Carpettes, and ſpreading them abroad on the ground in that place: then they cauſed vs to ſit vpon them. That done, the Lord & King of ye country was brought vpon nine or ten mens ſhoulders, (whome in theyr toung they call AGOVHANNA) ſitting vpon a great Stagges Skinne, and they layde him downe vpon the forſayde mattes néere to our Captayne, euery one beckning vnto vs that he was theyr Lord and King. This Agouhanna was a manne aboute fiftie yeares olde: he was no whitte better apparelled than any of the reſt, onely excepted,

that he had a certaine thing made of beaſts Skinnes (called Ricc
                        •
                     
                  ) like a redde towell, and that was in ſteade of his Crowne. He was full of the palſey, and his members ſhronke togither. After he had with certayne ſignes and beckes ſaluted our Captaine and all his company, and by manifeſt tokens bidde vs all welcome, he ſhewed his legges and armes to our Captaine, and with ſignes deſired him to touch them, and ſo he did, rubbing them with hys owne hands: then did Agouhanna take the wreath or crown he had about his head, and gaue it vnto our Captaine, that done, they broughte before him diuerſe diſeaſed men, ſome blinde, ſome criple, ſome lame and impotent, and ſome ſo olde that the heare of their eyeléeds came downe and couered their Chéekes, and laide them al along before our Captaine, to the ende they mighte of him be touched: for it ſéemed vnto them that God hadde bene deſcended and come downe from Heauen to heale them. Our Captaine ſéeing the miſery and deuotiō of this poore people, recited the Goſpel of Saint Iohn, that is to ſaye, In the beginning was the word: touching euerie one that were diſeaſed, praying to God that it wold pleaſe him to open the harts of this poore people, and to make them knowe his holy worde, and that they might receiue baptiſme and Chriſtendome: that done, he toke a booke in his hande, & with a lowde voyce redde all the paſſion of Chriſt, worde by word, that al the byſtanders might hear him, al which while this poore people kept ſilence, & were maruellouſly attentiue, loking vp to heauē, & imitating vs in geſturs. Thē h
                     •
                   cauſed he men al orderly to be ſet on one ſide, ye womē on another, & likewiſe the children on another, and to the chiefeſt of them he gaue Hatchets, to the other kniues, and to the women beades, and ſuch other ſmal trifles. Then where the children were, he caſte rings, counters, and branches made of Tin, whereat they ſéemed to be verie gladde. That done, our Captaine commaunded Shaw
                     •
                  es, and other muſical inſtrumēts to be ſounded, which when they heard, they were very merrie. Then we toke our leaue and wente to our boate▪ the womē
                  
ſéeing that, put themſelues before to ſtay vs, and brought vs out of their meates that they had made readie for vs, as fiſhe, pottage, beanes, and ſuche other things, thinking to make vs eate, and dine in that place: but bycauſe the meats hadde no ſauoure at all of ſalte, we liked them not, but thanked them, and with ſignes gaue them to vnderſtand that we hadde no néede to eate. When we were out of the Towne, diuerſe of the men and women followed vs, and broughte vs to the toppe of the forſayde mountaine, which we named Mount Roiall, it is aboute a league from the Town. When as we were on the top of it, we myght diſcerne, and plainely ſée thirtie leagues off. On the Northe ſide of it there are manye hilles to be ſéene, running Weaſte and Eaſte, and as manye more on the South, amongſt and betwéene the whiche the Countrey is as fayre and as pleaſaunte as poſſiblye can bée ſéene, being leauell, ſmoothe, and verye playne, fitte to be huſbanded and tilled: and in the middeſt of thoſe fieldes wée mighte ſée further a greate way
                     •
                   than where wée hadde lefte oure boates, where was the greateſt and the ſwifteſt fall of water that anye where hathe béen ſéene, as greate, wide, and large, as oure fighte myghte diſcerne, goyng Southweaſt along thrée fayre and rounde Mountaines that we ſawe, as we iudged aboute fiftéene leagues from vs. Thoſe whiche broughte vs thyther, tolde and ſhewed vs, that in the ſayde Ryuer there were thrée ſuche falles of water more, as that was where we hadde lefte oure boates: but bicauſe we coulde not vnderſtande theyr language, we coulde not knowe howe farre they were one from another. Moreouer, they ſhewed vs wyth ſignes, that the ſayde thrée falles being paſte, a manne myghte ſayle the ſpace of thrée moneths more alongſt that Riuer, and that along the Hilles that are on the Northe ſide, there is a greate Riuer, whyche euen as the other commeth from the Eaſte, wée thoughte it to bée the Riuer that runneth

throughe the Countrey of Saguenay: and wythoute anye ſigne or queſtion moued or aſked of them, they toke the chayne of oure Captaines whiſtell, whiche was of ſiluer, and the dagger hafte of one of oure fellowe Marriners, hangyng on hys ſide, being of yellowe Copper, guilte, and ſhewed vs that ſuche ſtuffe came from the ſayde Riuer, and that there bée Agouionda, that is as muche to ſaye, as euill people, who goe all armed euen to their fingers endes. Alſo they ſhewed vs the manner and making of theyr armoure: they are made of coardes and woodde, finelye and cunninglye wroughte togyther. They gaue vs alſo to vnderſtande that thoſe Agouionda, doe continuallye warre againſte them: but bycauſe we dyd not vnderſtande them well, wée coulde not perceyue how farre it was to that Countrey. Our Captaine ſhewed them redde Copper, whyche in theyr language they call Caignetadze, and lookyng towarde that Countrey wyth ſignes, aſked them if anye came from thence, they ſhakyng theyr heades aunſweared no: but they ſhewed vs that it came from Saguenay, and that lyeth cleane contrarye to the other. After we hadde hearde and ſéene theſe things of them, we drewe to oure boates accompanyed wyth greate multitude of thoſe people: ſome of them when as they ſawe anye of oure fellowes wearye, they woulde take them vppe on theyr ſhoulders, and carrye them as on horſſebacke. So ſoone as we came to oure boates, we hoyſed ſayle to goe towarde 
                     •
                  uer Gallion, doubting of ſome miſchaunce. Oure departure grieued and diſpleaſed them verye muche, for they followed vs along the Riuer as farre as they coulde: wée wente ſo faſte that on Mondaye beyng the fourth of October wée came where oure Gallion was. The Tweſdaye followyng, being the fifthe of the moneth, we hoyſed ſayle, and wyth oure Gallion and

boates, departed from thence toward the prouince of Canada, to the port of the Holy Croſſe, where we had left our ſhips. The ſeauenth daye we came againſt a riuer that commeth from the North, and entred into that riuer, at the entraunce wherof are foure little Ilandes, ful of faire and goodly trées: we named that riuer The riuer of Fouetz: But bycauſe one of thoſe Ilandes ſtretcheth himſelfe a great way into the riuer, our Captaine at the point of it cauſed a goodlye greate Croſſe to be ſet vppe, and commaunded the boats to be made readie, that with the nexte tide he mighte goe vp to the ſayde riuer, and conſider the qualitie of it, whiche we did, and that daye wente vp as farre as we coulde: but bycauſe we founde it to bée of no importaunce, and that wée coulde ſounde no bottome, we retourned down and back againe.
            
            
               ¶ Howe wee came to the Port of the Holie Croſſe, and in what ſtate we founde our ſhippes: and howe the Lorde of the Countrey came to viſite oure Captaine, and oure Captain him: and of certaine particular cuſtomes of the people. CHAP. 9.
               VPon Monday being the eleuenth of October we came to the Port of the Holy Croſſe, where our ſhippes were, & founde that the maiſters and Mariners we had lefte there, had made and reared a Trench before the ſhips, altogither cloſed with great péeces of Timber ſet vprighte and verye well faſtened togither: then had they beſet the ſaide trenche aboute with péeces of Artillerie and other neceſſarie things to ſhielde and defende themſelues from the power of all the Countrey. So ſoone as the Lorde of the Countrey heard of our comming, the next day being the twelfth of October, he came to viſit vs, accompanied with Taignoagny, Domagaia▪
                   and many others, fayning to be verye glad of our comming, making muche of our Captain, who as friendly as he could, entertayned them, albeit they had not deſerued it. Donnacona their Lord deſired our Captaine the next day to come

and ſée Canada, which he promiſed to do: for the next day being the thirtéenth of the moneth, he with all his gentlemen, and fiftie Mariners very wel appointed, went to viſite Donnacona and his people, about a league from our ſhips. The place where they make their abode, is called Stadagona. When we were about a ſtones caſt from their houſes, manye of the inhabitours came to méete vs, being all ſet in a ranke, and (as their cuſtome is,) the men al on one ſide, and the womē on the other, ſtil dauncing & ſinging without any ceaſing: and after we had ſaluted and receiued one another, our Captaine gaue them kniues and ſuch other ſlight things: then he cauſed all the women and children to paſſe along before him, giuing ech one a ring of Tin, for which they gaue him harty thāks: that done, our Captaine was by Donnacona and Taignoagny, broughte to their houſes (the qualitie conſidered) were very well prouided, and ſtored with ſuche victualles as the Countrey yéeldeth, to paſſe away the Winter withal. Then they ſhewed vs the ſkinnes of fiue mens heades ſpred vpon bourds as we do vſe parchmēt, Donnacona told vs that they were ſkinnes of Toudamani, a people dwelling towarde the South, who continually doe warre againſt them. Moreouer they tolde vs, that it was two yeares paſte that thoſe Toudamans came to aſſault them, yea euen into the ſaid riuer, in an Iland that lyeth ouer againſt Saguenay, where they had bene the night before, as they were going a warfaring in Honguedo, with two hundereth perſons, men, women, and children, who being all aſléepe in a 
                     •
                  ort that they had made, they were aſſaulted by the ſaide Toudamans, who put fire rounde aboute the 
                     •
                  ort, and as they would haue come out of it to ſaue themſelues, they were al ſlaine, onely fiue excepted, who eſcaped. For which loſſe they yet ſorrowed, ſhewing with ſignes, that one day they woulde be reuenged: that done, we came to our ſhippes againe.
            
            
               
               ¶ The manner how the people of that Country liue: and of certaine conditions: of their Faith, manners, and cuſtomes. CHAP. 10.
               THis people beléeue no whit in God, but in one whō they ca
                     •
                   
                  Cudrua
                        •
                     gni: the
                     •
                   ſay that often he ſpeaketh with thē and telleth them what weather ſhall followe, whether good or badde. Moreouer they ſay, that when he is angrye wyth them hée caſteth duſte into theyr eyes: they beléeue that whē they die they go into the Stars, and thence by little and little deſcend downe into the Horizon, euen as the Stars doe, and ye then they go into certaine gréene fieldes full of goodly faire & pretious trées, floures, and fruites. After that they had giuen vs theſe things to vnderſtand, we ſhewed them their errour, and tolde that their Cudruaigni did but deceiue them, for hée is but a Diuell and an euill ſpirite: affirming vnto them, that there is but one only God, who is in Heauen, and who giueth vs all neceſſaries, being the creatour of all himſelfe, and that onely we muſt belieue in him: moreouer, that it is neceſſarie for vs to be baptized, otherwiſe we are dampned into Hel. This and manye other things concerning our faith and religion we ſhewed them, all whiche they did eaſ
                     •
                  ly belieue,A noughtie liuer. calling their Cudruaigni, Agouiada: ſo that very erneſtly they deſired and prayed our Captaine that he woulde cauſe them to be baptiſed, and their Lorde, Taignoagny, Domagaia, and all the people of the towne came vnto vs, hoping to be baptiſed: but bycauſe we did not throughely knowe theyr minde, and that there was no bodie coulde giue them our beliefe and religion to vnderſtande, we excuſed our ſelues, deſiring Taignoagny and Domagaia to tell the reſte of theyr Countreymenne, that we woulde come againe another time, and bring Miniſters and Prieſtes with vs, for without them they coulde not be baptiſed: whiche they dyd eaſilye belieue: for Domagaia and Taignoagny hadde ſéene

many children baptiſed in Brytain while
                     •
                   they were there. Whiche promiſe when they hearde, they ſéemed to be verie gladde. They liue in common togither, and of ſuch commodities as their Countrey yéeldeth they are indifferentlye well ſtoared, the inhabitours of the Towne of  
                      _____ 
                    cloath themſelues with the ſkinnes of certaine wilde beaſts, but verie miſerably. In Winter they weare hoſen and ſhoes made of wilde beaſtes ſkinnes, and in Sommer they goe barefooted. They kéepe and obſerue the rytes of matrimony, ſauing that euerye one weddeth two or thrée wiues, whiche (theyr huſbandes being deade) doe neuer marrye agayne, but for the deathe of theyr huſbandes weare a certayne blacke wéede all the dayes of their life, beſmearing all their faces with cole duſte and greaſe mingled togyther almoſte halfe a quarter of an inche thicke, and by that they are knowen to be Widowes. They haue a filthye and deteſtable vſe in marrying of their maydens, and that is thys, they putte them all (after they are of l
                     •
                  wfull age to marrie) in a common place, as harlots frée for euerie manne that will haue to doe wyth them, vntill ſuch tyme as they finde a matche. Thys I ſaye, bycauſe I I▪ haue ſéene by experience manye houſen full of thoſe Damoſels, euen as our ſcholes are full of children in Fraunc
                        •
                     
                   to learne to reade. Moreouer, the miſrule and riot that they kéepe in thoſe houſes is verie greate, for verie want only
                     •
                   they ſporte and dallye togither, ſhewing what ſoeuer God hathe ſent them. They are no men of greate labour. They ploughe theyr groundes with certain péeces of wood, as big as halfe a ſworde, on whiche grounde groweth theyr corne, The call it Offici: it is as bigge as our ſmall Peaſon there is great quantitie of it growing in Braſil. They haue alſo great ſtore of muſke Milions, Pompons, Gourdes, Cowcombers, Peaſon, and Beanes of euerye coloure, yet differing frō ours. There groweth alſo a certain kind of Herb, wherof in Sommer they make greate prouiſion for all the yeare,

making great accompt of it, and only men vſe of it, and firſt, they cauſe it to be dryed in the Sunne, then weare it aboute their neck
                     •
                   wrapped in a little beaſtes ſkin made like a little bagge, with a hollow péece of ſtone or wood like a pipe: then when they pleaſe they make pouder of it, and then put it in one of the endes of the ſayd Cornet or pipe, and laying a cole of 
                     •
                  re vppon it, at the other ende ſucke ſo long, that they 
                     •
                  ll their bodies full of ſmoke, till that it commeth out of their mouth and noſtrils, euen as out of the Tonnel of a Chimny. They ſay that this doth kepe them warm and in health: they neuer go without ſome of it about thē. We our ſelues haue tryed the ſame ſmoke, and hauing put it in our mouthes, it 
                     •
                  ed that they had filled it with Pepper duſt, it is ſo hote. The 
                     •
                  omen of that Countrey doe labour muche more than the men, as well in fiſhing, (wherto they are greatly giuen,) as in 
                     •
                  illing and huſbanding theyr groūds, and other things: as wel the mē as women, and children, are very much more able to reſiſt colde, than ſauage beaſtes, for we with our own eyes haue ſéene ſome of thē, when it was coldeſt, (which cold was extr
                     •
                  eme raw, and bitter) come to our ſhips ſtark naked going vppon Snowe and Iſe, which thing ſéemeth incredible to them that haue not ſéene it. When as the Snowe and Iſe lyeth on the ground, they take great ſtore of wilde beaſts, as F
                     •
                  unes, Stagges, Beares, Martons, Hares, and Foxes▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   diuerſe other ſortes, whoſe fleſhe they eate rawe, hauing 
                     〈◊〉
                   dryed it in the Sunne or ſmoke, and ſo they doe their fiſhe. As farre forth as we coulde perceiue and vnderſtande by theſe people, it were a very eaſie thing to bring thē to ſome familiaritie and ciuilitie, and make them learne what one woulde. The Lord GOD for his mercies ſake leſſe there vnto his helping hande when hée ſéeth cauſe. Amen.
            
            
               
               ¶ Of the greatneſſe and deapth of the ſayd Riuer, and of the ſortes of Beaſtes, Birdes, Fiſhes, and other things that we haue ſeene, with the ſcituation of the place. CHA. 11.
               THe ſayd Riuer beginneth beyond the Iland of Thaſſumpcion, ouer againſt the high Mountaynes of Honguedo, and of the ſeauen Ilands. The diſtance ouer from one ſide to the other, is about 35. or 40. leagues. In the middeſt it is aboue 100. faddome deepe. The ſureſt way to ſayle vpon it, is on the South ſide, and towarde the North, that is to ſay, from the ſayd ſeauen Ilandes, where from ſide to ſide, there is ſeauen leagues, where are alſo two great Riuers that come downe from the hilles of Saguenay, and make diuers very dangerous ſhealues in the Sea. At the entrance of thoſe two Riuers, we ſaw many and great ſtore of Whales, and ſea Horſes. Ouerthwart the ſayd Ilands, there is another little Riuer that runneth along thoſe marriſh groundes about thrée or foure leagues, wherein there is great ſtore of water fowles. From the head of that Riuer to Hochelaga, there is about thrée hundred leagues: the originall beginning of it is in the riuer that commeth from Saguenay, which riſeth and ſpringeth among high and ſtéepe hilles: it entreth into that Riuer before it commeth to the prouince of Canada on the North ſide. That riuer is very déepe, high, and ſtraight, wherefore it is very dangerous for any veſſell to goe vpon it. After that riuer, followeth the prouince of Canada, wherein are many people dwelling in open boroughes and villages. There are alſo in the circuite and territorie of Canada, along, and within the ſayd riuer, many other Ilands, ſome great, and ſome ſmall, among whiche, there is one that conteyneth aboue tenne leagues in length, full of goodly and high tr
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  , and alſo many Vines. You may go into it from both ſides, but yet the ſureſt paſſage is on the South ſide. On the ſhoare or bancke of that Riuer Weſtward, there is a goodly, faire, and delectable ſ
                     •
                  ce, or Créeke, conuenient and fitte for to harborough Shippes. Hard by, there is in that Riuer one place very narrow, déepe, and ſwift

running, but it is not paſſing the third part of a league, ouer-againſt the which, there is a goodly high péece of land, with a Towne therein: and the Countrey about it is very well tilled and wroughte, and as good as poſſibly can bée ſéene. That is the place and abode of Donnacona, and of our two men we tooke in our firſte voyage, it is called Stadagona. But before we come to it, there are foure other peopled Townes, that is to ſay, Ayraste, Starnatan, Tailla, whiche ſtandeth vppon a hill, and Scitadin, and then Stadagona, vnder whiche Towne toward the North, the Riuer and Porte of the holy Croſſe is, where we ſtayd from the fiftenth of September, vntill the ſixtéenth of May 1536. and there oure Shippes remayned drie▪ as we haue ſayde before. That place béeing paſt, we found the habitation of the people called Teguenondahi, ſtanding vpon an high Mountayne, and the valley of Hochelay, whiche ſtandeth in a Champaigne Countrey. All that Countrey is full of ſundrye ſortes of woodde, and many Vynes, vnleſſe it be about the places that are inhabited, where they haue pulled vp the Trées to till and laboure the grounde, and to builde their Houſes and Lodgings. There is greate ſtore of Stagges, Déeres, Beares, and other ſuche lyke ſortes of Beaſtes, as Connies, Hares, Martons, Foxes, Otters, Weaſels, Badgers, and Mice excéeding greate, and diuers other ſortes of Veniſon. They cloath themſelues with the Skinnes of thoſe Beaſtes, bycauſe they haue nothing elſe to make them apparell withall. There are alſo many ſortes of Birds, as Cranes, Swannes, Cigne
                     •
                  s, wild Géeſe white and gray, Duckes, Thruſhes, blacke Birdes, Turtles, wilde Pigeons, Leuites, Finches, redde breaſtes, Stares, Nightingales, Sparrowes, and other Birdes, euen as in France. Alſo as we haue ſayde before, the ſayde Riuer is the plentifulleſt of Fiſh that euer hath of any man bin ſéene or heard of, bycauſe that from the head to the end of it, according to their ſeaſons, you ſhall find all ſorts of freſh water fiſh, and ſalt. There are alſo many Whales, Porpo
                     •
                  ſes, Seahorſes, and Adhothuis, whiche is a kinde of

Fiſh that we had neuer ſéene nor heard of before. They are as great as Porpoiſes, as white as any Snow, their body
                     •
                   and head faſhioned as a gray hound, they are woont alwayes to abide betwéene the freſh and ſalt water, which beginneth betwéene the Riuer of Saguenay and Canada.
               
            
            
               ¶ Of certayne aduertiſements and notes giuen vnto vs by thoſe Countreymen, after our returne from Hochelaga. CHAP. 12.
               AFter our returne from Hochelaga, we haue dealte, traffickt, and with great familiaritie and loue haue bin conuerſant with thoſe that dwelt néereſt vnto our Shippes, excepte that ſometimes we had ſtrife and contention with certayne naughtie people, full ſore againſte the will of the others. We vnderſtoode of Donnacona, and of others, that the ſayde Riuer is called Saguenays Riuer, and goeth to Saguenay, béeing ſomewhat more than a league farther Weaſt North-weaſt, and that eyght or nyne dayes iourneys beyond, it will beare but ſmall Boates. But the right and readye way to Saguenay, is from that Riuer to Hochelaga, and then into another that commeth from Saguenay, and then entreth into the foreſayde Riuer, and that there is yet one moneths ſayling thither. Moreouer, they tolde vs, and gaue vs to vnderſtande, that there are people clad with cloth as we are, very honeſt, and many inhabited Townes, and that they haue great ſtore of Golde, and redde Copper, and that aboute the land the ſayd firſt Riuer to Hochelaga and Saguenay, is an Iland enuironed rounde about with that and other Riuers, which beyond Saguenay enter into two or thrée great Lakes, and that there is a Sea of freſh water found, and as they haue heard ſay of thoſe of Saguenay, there was neuer manne heard of that 
                     •
                  ounde out the way and end thereof: for as they tolde vs, they themſelues were neuer there. Moreouer, they tolde vs, that where we had lefte oure Galion when

we 
                     •
                  ente to Hochelaga, there is a Riuer that goeth Southweaſt, from whence there is a whole moneths ſayling to goe to a certayne lande, where there is neyther Yſe nor Snow ſéene, where the inhabitours do cōtinually warre one againſt another, where is great ſtore of Oranges, Almonds, Nuttes, and Apples, with many other ſortes of fruites, and that the men and women are cladde with Beaſtes Skinnes euen as they: we aſked them if there were any Gold or red Copper, they anſwered no. I take this place to be toward Florida, as farre as I could perceyue and vnderſtand by their ſignes and tokens.
            
            
               ¶ Of a ſtrange and cruell diſeaſe that came to the people of Stadagona, wherwith bycauſe we did haunt their company, we wer ſo infected, that there died 25. of our companye. CHAP. 13.
               IN the moneth of December, we vnderſtoode that the Plague or Peſtilence was come to the people of Stadagona, in ſuch ſort, that before we knew of it, according to their confeſſion, there were dead aboue 50. wherevpon we forbad them neyther to come néere our Forte, nor about our Ships, or vs. And albeit we had driuen them from vs, the ſayd vnknowen ſickneſſe beganne to ſpread it ſelfe amongſt vs, after the ſtrangeſt ſort that euer was eyther heard of or ſéene, in ſo much, as ſome did loſe all their ſtrength, and could not ſtand on their féete, then did theyr legges ſwell, their ſinnowes ſhrinke as blacke as any cole. To others, all their Skinnes was ſpotted with ſpottes of bloud of a purple couloure: then did it aſcende vp alofte to theyr anckles, knées, thighes, ſhoulders, armes, and necke: their mouth became ſtincking, their gummes ſo rotten, that all the fleſh did fall off, euen to the rootes of the Téeth, which did alſo almoſt all fall out. With ſuch infection did this Sickneſſe ſpreade it ſelfe in oure thrée Shippes▪ that aboute the middle of February, of a hundreth and tenne perſons that we were, there were

not tenne whole, ſo that one coulde not helpe the other, a moſte horrible and pitifull caſe, conſidering the place wée were in, forſomuch as the people of the Country would dayly come before our forte, and ſaw but few of vs. There were alreadie eight deade, and more than fiftie ſicke, and as wée thought, paſt al hope of recouerie. Our Captaine ſéeing this our miſery, and that the ſickneſſe was gone ſo far, ordained and commaunded, that euery one ſhoulde deuoutly prepare himſelfe to prayer, and in remembraunce of Chriſt, cauſed his Image to be ſette vp vpon a trée, aboute a Flight ſhotte from the Forte, amidſt the Ice and Snowe, giuing all men to vnderſtande, that on the Sonday following, ſeruice ſhould be ſaide there, and, that whoſoeuer coulde goe, ſicke, or whole, ſhould go thither in Proceſſion, ſinging the ſeauen Pſalmes of Dauid, with other Letanies, praying moſte hartily, that it woulde pleaſe the ſaid our Chriſt to haue compaſſion vpon vs. Seruice beyng done, and as well celebrated as we could, our Captaine there made a vowe, that if it woulde pleaſe God to giue him leaue to returne into Fraunce, he would goe on pilgrimage to our Lady of Rocquemado. That daye Philip Rougemont, borne in Amboiſa, died, being two and twenty yeares olde, and bicauſe the ſicknes was to vs vnknowen, our Capitaine cauſed him to be ripped, to 
                     〈◊〉
                   if by any means poſſible we might know what it was, and ſo ſéeke means to ſaue and preſerue the reſte of the company: he was founde to haue his heart white, but rotten, & more than a pottle of red w
                     •
                  er about it: his liuer was indifferent faire, but his lungs blacke and mortified, his bloud was altogither ſhrūke about the heart, ſo that when he was opened, great quantity of rotten bloud iſſued out from aboute his heart: his milt toward the backe was ſomwhat periſhed, rough as if it had bin rubbed againſt a ſtone. Moreouer, bicauſe one of his thighs was very black without, it was opened, but within it was whole and ſounde: that done, as wel as we could he was buryed. In ſuche ſorte did the ſicknes continue and encreaſe, that there were not aboue thrée found men in the ſhips, and none was

able to go vnder hatches to draw drinke for himſelfe, nor for his fellowes. Sometimes we were conſtrayned to burie ſome of the dead vnder the Snowe, bycauſe we were not able to digge any graues for them, the ground was ſo hard froſen, and we ſo weake. Beſides this, we did greately feare, that the people of the Countrey would perceyue our weakeneſſe and miſerie, whiche to hide, our Captayne, whome it pleaſed God alwayes to kéepe in health, woulde go out with two or thrée of the companye, ſome ſicke, and ſome whole, whome when he ſaw out of the Fort, he would throw ſtones at them and chide them, faigning, that ſo ſoone as he came againe, he woulde beate them, and then with ſignes ſhew the people of the Countrey, that he cauſed all his men to worke and laboure in the Shippes, ſome in mending them, ſome in beating of chalke, ſome in one thing, and ſome in another, and that he woulde not haue them come foorthe, till their worke was done. And to make his tale ſéeme true and likely, he woulde make all his men whole and ſound to make a great noyſe, with knocking ſtickes, ſtones, hammers, and other things togither, at which time, we were ſo oppreſſed, and gréeued with that ſickneſſe, that we had loſt all hope euer to ſée France agayne, if God of his infinite goodneſſe and mercie had not with his pitifull 
                     •
                  ye looked vpon vs, and reuealed a ſingular and excellent remedie againſt all diſeaſes vnto vs, the beſt that euer was founde vpon earth, as héereafter ſhall followe.
            
            
               ¶ How long we ſtayed in the Porte of the holy Croſſe amidſt the Snow and Yſe, and how many dyed of the ſaid diſeaſe, from the beginning of it, to the midſt of March. CHAP. 14.
               FRom the midſt of Nouember, vntill the midſt of Aprill, we were kepte in amidſt the Yſe aboue one faddome thicke, and Snow aboue foure foote high, and more higher than the ſides of our Shippes, which laſted till that time, in

ſuch ſorte, that all our drinckes were froſen in the Veſſels, and the Yſe through all the Shippes, was aboue a handebreadth thicke, as well aboue hatches as beneath, and ſo much of the Riuer as was freſh, vntill to Hochelaga, was froſen, in which ſpace there dyed fiue and twentie of our beſt and chiefeſt men, and all the reſt ſo ſicke, that we thoughte they ſhoulde neuer recouer agayne, onely thrée or foure excepted. Then it pleaſed God to caſt his pitifull eye vpon vs, and ſente vs the knowledge and remedie of our healthes and recouerie, in ſuch maner as in the next Chapter ſhall be ſhewed.
            
            
               ¶ How by the grace of God we had notice of a certayne tree, wherby we all recouered our health: and the maner how to vſe it. CHAP. 15.
               OVr Captayne conſidering oure eſtate (and how that ſickneſſe was encreaſed and hote amongſt vs) one daye wente foorth of the Forte, and walking along vppon the Yſe, he ſaw a troupe of thoſe Countreymen comming from Stadacona, among whiche was Domagaia, who not paſſing tenne or twelue dayes afore, had bene very ſicke with that diſeaſe, and had his knées ſwolne as bigge as a Child of two yeares olde, all his ſinowes ſhruncke togither, hys téeth ſpoyled, his gummes rotten, and ſtincking. Oure Captayne ſéeing him whole and ſound, was thereat maruellous glad, hoping to vnderſtand and knowe of him how he had healed himſelfe, to the ende he might eaſe and help his men. So ſoone as they were come néere him, he aſked Domagaia how he had done to heale hymſelfe, he anſwered, that he had takē the iuice and ſappe of the leaues of a certayne Trée, and therewith had healed himſelfe: For it was a ſingular remedie agaynſt that diſeaſe. Then our Captayne aſked of hym if any were to bée had thereabout, deſiring him to ſhew it him, for to heale a ſeruant of his, who whileſt he was in Canada with Donnacona, &

was ſtricken with that diſeaſe: That he did, bicauſe he would not ſhewe the number of his ſicke men. Domagaia ſtraight ſent two women to fetche ſome of it, whyche broughte tenne or twelue braunches of it, and therewithall ſhewed vs the way howe to vſe it, and that is thus, to take the barke and leaues of the ſaide trée, and boile it togither, then to drinke of the ſaide decoction one daye, and the other not, and the dregges of it to be put vpon his legs that is ſicke: moreouer, they told vs, yt the vertue of that trée was, to heale any other diſeaſe: the trée is in their language called AMEDA. Our Captaine preſently cauſed ſome of that drinke to be made for his men to drinke of it, but there was none durſte taſte of it, excepte one or two, who ventured the drinking of it, onely to taſte and proue it: the other ſéeyng that, did the like, and preſently recouered their health, and were delyuered of that ſickeneſſe, and what other diſeaſe ſoeuer, in ſuche ſorte, that there were ſome hadde béene diſeaſed and troubled wyth the French Pockes foure or fiue yeares, and wyth thys drinke were cleane healed. After thys medicine was founde and proued to be true, there was ſuche ſtrife aboute it, who ſhoulde be firſte to take of it, that they were readye to kill one another, that a trée as bigge as anye Oake in Fraunce, was ſpoyled and lapped bare, and occupyed all in fiue or ſixe dayes, and wroughte ſo well, that if all the Phiſitions of Mountpelier, and of Louaine, hadde béene there wyth all the drugges of Alexandrîa, they woulde not haue done ſo muche in one yeare, as that trée dydde in ſixe dayes, and didde ſo preuaile, that as manye as vſed of it, by the grace of GOD recouered their health.
            
            
               
               ¶ Howe the Lorde Donnacona accompanyed with Taignoagny and dyuers others, fayning that they woulde goe to hunt Stags, and other wilde Deere, taryed out twoo moneths, and at theyr returne broughte a greate multitude of people with them, that we were not wont to ſee before. CHAP. 16.
               WHileſt that diſeaſe laſted in our ſhips, the Lord Donnacona, Taignoagny, with many others, fayning, that they would go catch Stags and Déere, which is in their tongue called Aiounesta, and Aſquenoudo, bycauſe the Ice and Snow was not ſo broken along the riuer that they coulde ſaile, it was tolde vs of Domagaia, and others, that they woulde ſtay out but fortnight, and we beléeued it, but they ſtayed aboue two moneths, whych made vs miſtruſt that they had bin gone to raiſe the Country to come againſte vs, and doe vs ſome diſpleaſure, wée ſéeyng oure ſelues ſo weake and faint. Albeit we had vſed ſuch diligence and pollicie in our
                     •
                   Forte, that if all the power of the country had bin aboute it, they coulde haue done nothyng but looke vpon vs: and whyleſt they were forthe, manye of the people came daylye to our ſhippes, and brought vs freſh meate, as Stags, Déeres, Fiſhes, with diuers other things, but helde them at ſuche an exceſſiue price, that rather than they would ſell them anye thing cheape, many times they woulde carry them backe againe, bycauſe that yeare the Winter was very long & they had ſome ſcarcitie and néede of them.
            
            
               ¶ How Donnacona came to Stadagona againe with a greate number of people, and bycauſe he would not come to viſite our Captaine, fayned himſelfe to be ſore ſicke, whiche he did onely to haue the Captaine come and ſee him. CHAP. 17.
               ON the one and twentith of Aprill Domagaia came to the ſhoare ſide, accompanyed with dyuers luſty and ſtrong

men, ſuch as we were not wont to ſée, and tolde vs that their Lord Donnacona woulde the next daye come and ſée vs, and bring great ſtore of Déers fleſhe, and other things with him. The next day he came and brought a greate number of men in Stadagona, to what end, and for what cauſe we knew not, but (as the prouerb ſaith) he that takes héede and ſhields him ſelfe from all men, maye happe to ſcape from ſome, for wée had néed to looke about vs, cōſidering how in nūber we were diminiſhed, and in ſtrength greatlye weakened, long of our ſickneſſe we had bene troubled withall, that we were conſtrayned to leaue one of our ſhippes in the ſayde Port of the Holy Croſſe. Our Captain was warned of their comming, and how they had brought a great number of mē with them, for Domagaia came to tel it vs, and durſt not paſſe the riuer that was betwixt Stadagona and vs, as he was wonte to doe, wherevpon we miſtruſted of ſome treaſon. Our Captain ſéeing this, ſent one of his ſeruantes to them, accompanied with Iohn Poulet being beſte beloued of thoſe people, to ſée who were there, and what they dyd. The ſayde Poulet and the other faygned onely to be come to viſite Donnacona, and bryng him certaine preſentes, bycauſe they hadde bene togither a good while in the ſayde Donnaconas Towne. So ſoone as he hearde of their comming, he gotte hymſelfe to bedde, fayning to be verye ſicke. That done, they wente to Taignoagny hys houſe to ſée him, and whereſoeuer they wente, they ſawe ſo manye people, that in a manner one coulde not ſtyrre for an other, and ſuche menne as they were neuer wonte to ſée. Taignoagny would not permitte oure menne to enter in anye other houſen, but ſtyll kepte them companye, and broughte them halfe way to our ſhips, and tolde that if it would pleaſe our Capitaine to ſh
                     •
                  we him ſo muche fauoure as to take a Lord of the Country people, whoſe name Agonna, of whom he hadde receyued ſome diſpleaſure, and carrye hym wyth

hym into Fraunce, he ſhoulde therefore for euer be bounde vnto hym, and woulde doe for hym whatſoeuer he coulde poſſible, and would do for him whatſoeuer he woulde commaund him, and bade the ſeruaunt to come againe the nexte daye, and bryng an aunſweare. Oure Capitayne béeyng aduertiſed of ſo manye people that were there, not knowyng to what ende, purpoſed to playe a pretty prancke, that is to ſaye, to take theyr Lorde Donnacona, Taignoagny, Domagaia, and ſome more of the chiefeſt of them, priſoners, in ſo muche as before he had purpoſed, to bring them into Fraunce, to ſhewe vnto our King what he hadde ſéene in thoſe Weſterne partes, and maruailes of the worlde, for that Donnacona had tolde vs, that he hée hadde béene in the Countrey of Saguenay, in whych are infinite Rubies, Golde, and other riches, and that there are white menne, who clothe themſelues wyth wollen cloth euen as wée doe in Fraunce. The ſayde Lorde was an olde manne, and euen from hys chyldehoode hadde neuer lefte off nor ceaſed from trauayling into ſtraunge Countreys, as well by Seas and Ryuers, as by Lande. The ſayde Powlet, and the other hauing tolde oure Capitayne theyr Embaſſage, and ſhewed hym what Taignoagny hys wyll was, the nexte daye hée ſente hys ſeruaunt agayne, to bidde Taignoagny come and ſée hym, and ſhewe what 
                     •
                  ée woulde, for hée ſhoulde bée verye well entertayned, and alſo parte of hys wyll ſhoulde bée accomplyſhed. Taignoagny ſente hym worde, that the nexte daye hée woulde come and bryng the Lorde Donnacona wyth hym, and hym that hadde ſo offended hym, whyche hée dydde not, but ſtayed two dayes, in whyche tyme none came from Stadagona to oure Shyppes, as they were wont to doe, but rather fledde from vs, as if wée woulde haue ſlayne them, ſo that then wée playnely perceyued theyr knauery.
               
                  But when they vnderſtoode, that thoſe of Sidatin did frequent our company, and that we had forſaken the bottome of a ſhip whyche we woulde leaue, to haue the olde nailes oute of it, the thirde daye followyng they came from Stadagona, and moſte of them wythout difficultie did paſſe from one ſide of the riuer to the other with ſmall Skiffes: but Donnacona hée woulde not come ouer, Taignoagny and Domagaia ſtood talking togither aboue an houre before they woulde come ouer, at laſte they came to ſpeake with our Captaine. There Taignoagny prayed him that he woulde cauſe the foreſayde man to be taken and carryed into Fraunce. Oure Captaine refuſed to doe it, ſaying, that his Kyng had forbidden hym to bring any man or woman into Fraunce, only that he might bring two or thrée yong boyes to learne the language, but that he woulde willingly carry hym to another lande, and there putte hym. Our Captaine ſpake this, onely to aſſure them, that they ſhould bring Donnacona wyth them, whom they had lefte on the other ſide, whych wordes, when Taignoagny hearde, he was very glad, thinking he ſhoulde neuer retourne into Fraunce againe, and therefore promiſed to come the nexte daye, whych was the day of the holy Croſſe, and woulde bryng Donnacona and all the people wyth hym.
            
            
               ¶Howe that vpon Holyroode day our Captaine cauſed a Croſſe to be ſet vp in our Forte: and howe the Lord Donnacona, Taignoagny, Domagaia, and others of theyr company came: and of the taking of the ſaide Lorde. CHAP. 18.
               THe thirde of May beyng Holy roode day, our Captaine for the ſolemnitie of the daye, cauſed a goodly faire croſſe of thirtie foote in heigth to be ſette vppe, vnder the croſſet of which he cauſed a ſhielde to be hanged, wherein was the Armes of Fraunce, and ouer them was written in antique

letters: FRANCISCVS PRIMVS DEI GRATIA FRANCORVM REX REGNAT, and vpon that daye, about noone, there came a great number of the people of Stadagona, Men, Women, and Children, who told vs, that their Lord Donnacona, Taignoagny, and Domagaia, were comming, whereof we were very glad, hoping to retayne them. Aboute two of the Clocke in the after noone they came, and being come néere our Shippes, our Captayne went to ſalute Donnacona, who alſo ſhewed him a merrie countenance, albeit very fearefully his eye were ſtill bent toward the woodde. Shortly after came Taignoagny, who bade Donnacona, that he ſhould not enter in our Forte, and therefore fire was brought forth by one of our men, and kind
                     •
                  ed where their Lord was Our Captayne prayed him to come into our Ships to eate and drinke as he was wont to do, and alſo Taignoagny, who promiſed, that after a while he would come, and ſo they did, and entred in our Shippes: but firſt it was tolde our Captayne by Domagaia, that Taignoagny had ſpoken yll of him, and that he had bid Donnacona he ſhould not come aboord our Shippes, Our Captayne perceyuing that, came out of the Forte, and ſaw that onely by Taignoagny his warning, the Women ranne away, and none but men ſtayed in great number, wherfore he ſtraight commanded his men to lay hold on Donnacona, Taignoagny, and Domagaia, and two more of the chiefeſt, whome he poynted vnto: then he commanded them to make the other to retire. Preſently after, the Lord entred into the Forte with the Captayne, but by and by Taignoagny came to make him come out agayne. Our Captayne ſéeing that there was no other remedie, beganne to call vnto them to take them, to whoſe crye and voyce all his men came foorth, and tooke the ſayd Lord with the others, whome they had appoynted to take. The Canadians ſéeing their Lord taken, beganne to runne away, euen as Shéepe before the Woolfe, ſome croſſing ouer the Riuer, ſome through the Wooddes, 
                     ••
                  th one ſéeking for his own aduantage. That 
                     •
                  one, we retired our ſelues, & laid vp the priſoners vnder good gard & ſafety.
            
            
               
               ¶How the ſaide Canadians the night following came before our Ships to ſeeke their men, crying and howling al night like Wolues: of the talke and concluſion they agreed vpon the next day: and of the giftes which they gaue our Captaine. CHAP. 19.
               THe night following, they came before our Shippes, (the Riuer being betwixte vs) ſtriking their breaſtes, crying and howling like Woolues, ſtill calling Agouhanna, thinking to ſpeake with him, which oure Captayne for that time would not permitte, neyther all the next day till noone, wherevpon they made ſignes vnto vs, that we had hanged or killed hym. Aboute noone, there came as great a number in a cluſter, as euer we ſaw, who wente to hide themſelues in the Foreſt, excepted ſome, who with a loude voyce woulde call and crye to Donnacona to ſpeake vnto them. Our Captayne then commanded Donnacona to be broughte vpon high to ſpeake vnto them, and bade hym be mercie, for after he had ſpoken, and ſhewed vnto the King of France what he had ſéene in Saguenay and other Countreys, after tenne or twelue monethes, he ſhoulde returne againe, and that the King of France would giue him greate rewardes, whereat Donnacona was very glad, and ſpeaking to the others, tolde it them, who in token of ioy, gaue out thrée great cryes, and then Donnacona and his people had great talke togither, whiche for wante of interpretours, can not be deſcribed. Oure Captayne hade Donnacona, that he ſhoulde cauſe them to come to the other ſide of the Riuer, to the ende they might better talke togither without any feare, and that he ſhoulde aſſure them, whiche Donnacona did, and there came a Boate full of the chiefeſt of them to the Shippes, and there anew beganne to talke togither, giuing greate prayſe vnto our Captayne, and gaue him a preſente of foure

and twentie chaynes of Eſurgny, for that is the greateſt, and preciouſeſt riches they haue in this worlde, for that they eſtéeme more of that, than of any Golde or Siluer. After they hadde long talked togyther, and that theyr Lorde ſawe that there was no remedie to auoyde hys goyng into France, hée commaunded hys people the nexte daye, to bring him ſ
                     •
                  me victualles to ſerue hym by the way. Oure Captayne gaue Donnacona as a greate preſente, two frying pannes of Copper, eyght Hatchets, and other ſmall trifles, as kniues, and Beades, whereof hée ſéemed to bée very glad, who ſente them to his Wiues and Children. Likewiſe, he gaue certaine ſmall giftes to them that came to ſpeake with Donnacona, they thanked him greatly for them, and then wente to their Lodgings.
            
            
               ¶How that the nexte daye, beeing the fifth of May, the ſayde people came agayne to ſpeake vnto theyr Lorde, and howe that foure Women came to the Shoare to bring him Victualles. CHAP. 20.
               VPon the fifth of May, verye earelye in the Morning, a greate number of the ſayde people came agayne to ſpeake vnto theyr Lorde, and ſente a Boate, whyche in theyr tongue they call Caſnoui, wherein were only foure Women, without any manne, for feare theyr menne ſhould be retayned.
               Theſe Women broughte greate ſtore of victualles, as Millet, whyche is their Corne that they liue withall, Fleſhe, Fiſhe, and other thynges after theyr faſhion.
               Theſe Women béeing come to our Shippes, our Captayne dyd very friendly entertayne them. Then Donnacona prayde our Captayne to tel thoſe women that he ſhould come agayne after ten or twelue monethes, & bring Donnacona to

                  Canada agayne with him, that hée did only to appeale them, which our Captayne did wherefore the Women, as well by words as ſignes, ſéeme to be very glad, giuing our Captaine thankes, and tolde him, if he came againe, and brought Donnacona with him, they would giue him many things: in ſigne whereof, eache one gaue our Captayne a chayne of Eſurgny, and then paſſed to the other ſide of the Riuer agayne, where ſtoode all the people of Stadagona, who taking all leaue of their Lord, wente home agayne. On Saturday following, béeing the ſixth of the moneth, we departed out of the ſayd Porte, and came to harborough a little beneath the Ilande of Orleans, aboute twelue leagues from the Porte of the Holy Croſſe, and vppon Sunday we came to the Iland of Filberdes, where we ſtayde vntill the ſixtéenth of that Moneth, till the fierceneſſe of the waters were paſt, which at that time ranne too ſwifte a courſe, and were too dangerous to come downe alongſt the Riuer, and therefore we ſtayde till fayre weather came. In the meane while, many of Donnaconas Subiects came from the Riuer of Saguenay to him, but béeing by Domagaia aduertiſed, that their Lorde was taken to be caryed into France, they were all amazed, yet for all that, they would not leaue to come to oure Shippes, to ſpeake to Donnacona, who tolde them, that after twelue monethes, he ſhoulde come agayne, and that he ſhoulde be very well vſed, with the Captayne, Gentlemen, and Mariners. Which when they hearde, they greately thanked oure Captayne, and gaue their Lorde thrée bundles of Beauers, and Sea Woolues Skinnes, with a greate knife of redde Copper that commeth from Saguenay, and manye other thyngs. They gaue alſo to our Captayne a Chayne of Eſurgny, for whyche oure Captayne gaue them tenne or twelue Hatchettes, and they gaue hym hartie thankes, and were very well contented. The nexte daye, béeing the ſixtéenth of May, wée hoyſed Sayle, and came from the ſayde Iland of Filburdes, to another, aboute fiftéene leagues from it, which is aboute fiue leagues in length, and there, to the ende

we might take ſome reſt the night following, we ſtaide that day, in hope the next day we might paſſe and auoyde the dangers of the riuer of Saguenay, which are great. That euening we went a land and found great ſtore of Hares, of which we toke a great many, and therefore we called it The Ilande of Hares: in the night there aroſe a contrarie winde, with ſuche ſtormes and tempeſt, that we were conſtrayned to bende to the Iland of Filburdes againe, from whence we were come, bycauſe there was none other paſſage among the ſaid Ilāds, and there we ſtayde till the one and twentie of that moneth, that faire weather and good winde came again: and then we ſayled again, and that ſo proſperouſly, that we paſſed to Honguedo, which paſſage vntil that time had not bene diſcouered: we cauſed our ſhips to courſe athwart Pratos Cape, which is the beginning of the Port of Cator: and bicauſe the wind was good and conuenient, we ſayled all day and all night without ſtaying, and the next day we came to the middle of Brions Ilande, which we were not minded to do, to the end we might ſhorten our way. Theſe two Ilands lie Northweſt, & Southeaſt, and are about fiftie leagues one from another. The ſaid Iland is in latitude 47. degrées and a halfe. Vpon Thurſday being the 26. of the moneth, and the feaſt of the Aſcention of our Lord, we coaſted ouer to go to a land and ſhallow of low ſands, which are about eight leagues Sowthweſt frō 
                  Brions Iland, on which are large Champaines, full of trées & towns, and alſo an encloſed ſea, of which neyther could we ſée or perceiue any gap, or any way to enter therein. On Friday following, being the 27. of the moneth, bycauſe the winde did change on the coſt, we came to Brions Iland againe, where we ſtayed till the beginning of Iune, and toward the Southeaſt of this Iland, we ſawe a land, ſéeming vnto vs as an Ilande, we coaſted it about two leagues and a halfe, and by ye way we had notice of thrée other high Ilands, lying toward the Sandes, after we had known theſe things we retourned to the Cape of the ſaide land, whiche doeth diuide it ſelfe into two or thrée very high Capes: the waters ther are very déep,

& the floud of the Sea runneth ſo ſwift, that it cannot poſſibly be ſwifter. That day we came to S. Laurence his Cape, whiche is 45. degrées and halfe towards the South, wée named it S. Paules Cape, it is at 47. degrées, and a quarter. The Sonday followyng, beyng the fourth of Iune and Whitſonday, we hadde notice of the coaſte lying Eaſt Southeaſt, diſtant from the new found land aboute 22. leagues: and bycauſe the wind was againſt vs, we went to a Hauen, which we named S. Spiritus Porte, where wée ſtayed till Tuiſdaye that we departed thence, ſayling along that coaſte vntill wée came to S. Peters Ilandes. We found along the ſaide coaſte many very dangerous Ilands and Shelues, whych lye all in the waye Eaſt ſoutheaſt, and Weaſt Northweaſt about 23. leagues into the Sea. Whileſt we were in the ſaid S. Peters Ilands we met with many ſhips of France and of Britaine, we ſtayed there from S. Barnabas day, being the 11. of the moneth, vntil the 16. that we departed thence and came to cape of Ras, and entred into a Porte called Rogaoſo, where we toke in freſhwater, and wood to paſſe the ſea: there we lefte one of our boates. Then vpon Monday, beyng the 19. of Iune, we went from that Porte, and wyth ſuche good and proſperous weather we ſailed along the Sea, in ſuch ſorte, that vpon the 6. of Iune. 1536. we came to the Porte of S. Malo, by the grace of God, to whom we pray, here ending oure Nauigation, that of his infinite mercie he will graunte vs hys grace and fauoure, and in the end, bring vs to the place of euerlaſting felicitie. AMEN.
               
               
                  Here foloweth the language of the Country, and Kingdomes of Hochelaga and Canada, of vs called Newe Fraunce: But firſte the names of theyr Numbers.
                  Secada.
                  1
                  Indahir.
                  6
                  Tigneni.
                  2
                  Aiaga.
                  7
                  Haſche.
                  3
                  Addigue.
                  8
                  Hannaion.
                  4
                  Madellon,
                  9
                  Ouiſcon.
                  5
                  Aſſem.
                  10
               
               
                  
                  
                     Here followe the names of the chiefeſt partes of man, and other wordes neceſſarie to be knowen.
                     the Heade
                     
                        aggonzi
                     
                     the Browe
                     
                        hergueniaſcon
                     
                     the Eyes
                     
                        higata
                     
                     the Eares
                     
                        abontaſcon
                     
                     the mouth
                     
                        eſahe
                     
                     the Teeth
                     
                        eſgongai
                     
                     the Tongue
                     
                        oſnache
                     
                     the Throate
                     
                        agonhon
                     
                     the Bearde
                     
                        hebelim
                     
                     the Face
                     
                        hegouaſcon
                     
                     the heares
                     
                        aganiſcon
                     
                     the Armes
                     
                        atayaſcon
                     
                     the Flanckes
                     
                        aiſſonne
                     
                     the Stomacke
                     
                        aggruaſcon
                     
                     the Bellie
                     
                        eſchehendo
                     
                     the Thighes
                     
                        hetnegradaſcon
                     
                     the Knees
                     
                        agochinegodaſcon
                     
                     the Legges
                     
                        agouguenehonde
                     
                     the Feete
                     
                        onchidaſcon
                     
                     the Handes
                     
                        aignoaſcon
                     
                     the Fingers
                     
                        agenoga
                     
                     the Nailes
                     
                        agedaſcon
                     
                     a Mans member
                     
                        amoaſcon
                     
                     a Womans member
                     
                        castaigne
                     
                     an Ele
                     
                        eſgueny
                     
                     a Snaile
                     
                        vndeguezi
                     
                     a Tortois
                     
                        heuleu
                              •
                           ime
                     
                     Wooddes
                     
                        conda
                     
                     leaues of Trees
                     
                        hoga
                     
                     God
                     
                        cudragny
                     
                     giue me ſome drincke
                     
                        quazahoa quea
                     
                     giue me to breakfaſt
                     
                        quaſa hoa quaſcaboa
                     
                     giue me my ſupper
                     
                        quaza hoa quatfriā
                        
                     
                     let vs goe to bed
                     
                        caſigno agnyda hoa
                     
                     
                        
                        good morrow
                     
                     
                        aignag
                     
                     let vs go to play
                     
                        caſigno candy
                     
                     come & ſpeak with me
                     
                        aſſigniquaddadia
                     
                     looke vpon me
                     
                        quagathoma
                     
                     Holde your peace
                     
                        aista
                     
                     let vs go with the boate
                     
                        caſigno caſnouy
                     
                     giue me a knife
                     
                        buazahca agoheda
                     
                     a Hatchet
                     
                        adogne
                     
                     a bowe
                     
                        ahenca
                     
                     a darte
                     
                        quahetan
                     
                     let vs go a hunting
                     
                        quaſign
                              •
                            donnaſcat
                     
                     a Stagge
                     
                        aionnesta
                     
                     a Sheepe
                     
                        aſquenondo
                     
                     a Hare
                     
                        Sourhanda
                     
                     a Dogge
                     
                        agayo
                     
                     a Towne
                     
                        canada
                     
                     a Man
                     
                        agu
                              •
                           huni
                     
                     a Woman
                     
                        agruaste
                     
                     a Boy
                     
                        addegesta
                     
                     a Wench
                     
                        agniaqueſta
                     
                     a Childe
                     
                        exiasta
                     
                     a Gowne
                     
                        cabata
                     
                     a doublet
                     
                        caioza
                     
                     Hoſen
                     
                        hemondoha
                     
                     Shoes
                     
                        atha
                     
                     a Shirte
                     
                        amgoua
                     
                     a Cappe
                     
                        castrua
                     
                     Corne
                     
                        oſizi
                     
                     Breade
                     
                        carraconny
                     
                     Water
                     
                        ame
                     
                     Fleſh
                     
                        quahouaſcō
                        
                     
                     Paces.
                     
                        queion
                     
                     Damſons
                     
                        honnesta
                     
                     Figges
                     
                        abſconda
                     
                     Grapes
                     
                        ozoba
                     
                     Nuttes
                     
                        quahoya
                     
                     a Hen
                     
                        ſahomgahea
                     
                     a Lamprey
                     
                        zisto
                     
                     a Salmon
                     
                        ondacon
                     
                     a Whale
                     
                        ainne honne
                     
                     a Gooſe
                     
                        ſadeguenha
                     
                     a Streete
                     
                        adde
                     
                     Cucumber ſeede
                     
                        caſconda
                     
                     to Morrow
                     
                        achide
                     
                     the Heauen
                     
                        quenhia
                     
                     the Earth
                     
                        damga
                     
                     the Sunne
                     
                        yſmay
                     
                     the Moone
                     
                        aſſomaha
                     
                     the Starres
                     
                        stgnehohā
                        
                     
                     the Winde
                     
                        cohoa
                     
                     the Sea
                     
                        agogaſy
                     
                     the waues of the Sea
                     
                        co
                              •
                           a
                     
                     an Ilande
                     
                        cahena
                     
                     an Hill
                     
                        agacha
                     
                     the Iſe
                     
                        honneſca
                     
                     Snowe
                     
                        cama
                     
                     Colde
                     
                        athau
                     
                     Hotte
                     
                        odazani
                     
                     Fier
                     
                        azista
                     
                     Smoke
                     
                        quea
                     
                     a Houſe
                     
                        canoca
                     
                     Beanes
                     
                        ſah
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Cinamond
                     
                        adhotathny
                     
                     my Father
                     
                        addathy
                     
                     my Mother
                     
                        adanahe
                     
                     my Brother
                     
                        addagrim
                     
                     my Siſter
                     
                        adhoaſſeue
                     
                  
               
               
                  They of Canada ſaye, that it is a monthes ſayling to goe to a lande where Cinamonds and Cloues are gathered.
               
               Here endeth the ſecond Relation of Iames Carthiers diſcouerie & nauigation to the newe founde Lande, by him named New Fraunce, tranſlated out of Italian into Engliſhe by I. F.
               
               
                  Patiſco il male ſperando il bene.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   