
      
         
            
            Galateo of Maister
Iohn Della Casa,
Archebishop of Beneuenta.
            
            
               Or rather,
A treatise of the mā
                  ners
and behauiours, it
behoueth a man to vse and eschewe,
in his familiar conuersation.
A worke very
necessary & profitable for
all Gentlemen, or
other.
            First written in the Italian tongue, and
now done into English by Robert
Peterson, of Lincolnes Inne
Gentleman.
            Satis, si sapienter.
            Imprinted at London
for Raufe Newbery dwelling
in Fleetestreate a litle
aboue the Conduit.
            
            An. Do. 1576.
         
         
            
            
               
                  HONI : SOIT : QVI : MAL : Y : PENSE :
                  blazon or coat of arms
               
            
         
         
            
            To the Right Honorable my
singular good Lord, the Lord Robert
Dudley, Earle of Leycester, Baron of Denbigh,
Knight of the Honorable order of the Garter,
Maister of the Queenes Maiesties Horses,
and one of her Highnesse priuie Counsell:
Robert Peterson wisheth
perfect felicitie.
            
               LIghting of late
(Right Honorable)
vpon this
treatise of courtesie,
penned by
an experienced
Italiā, & drawn for the profit therof,
in to so many lāguages: I thought
his lessons fit for our store, & sought
to make him speake Englishe.
            Wise was that Cato, that ended
bothe his learning, and liuing day
together. And truly, Courtesie and
Courtiership, be like Hippocrates

twinnes, that laughe together, and
grow together: and are so one affected,
that who so diuorceth them, destroieth
them. But yet, seeing moe
redie to condemne the least trip then
commend the best meaning, and
knowing that the Scarre sticketh
thogh good desert do hele the woūd:
& perceiuing that Naeuus in arti
culo pueri delectat Alcaeū, & Ro
scij oculi peruersissimi catulum,
That is, many dote on their fansie:
I durst not sēd this, mine Heyre &
firste fruites of my toile, to the view
of the world, without the guarde of
your Patronage, wherin there is no
presumption to teach them that are
perfected, but may serue either as
Simonides Characters, to stablish

memory, or as an Index, to point thē
to other behauiours enrolled whersoeuer.
Spread therefore (I beseeche
your honour) the winges of wellyking
ouer this worke, which presseth
to you, as not only the patrone to protect,
but the patterne to expresse any
courtesie therin cōteined. Mine
Authour reporteth one Maestro
Chiarissimo a perfect Masō, whē
he had described the finest precepts
of his art, to haue made his Regolo
a pyller so exactly, as would beare
the proofe of euery demonstration,
thinking it learned speedely, where
the mind and the eye, precept and
experience ioyned hands together:
whose steps I tread (though with better
successe then mine Author, who

could not finde a Regolo) hoping,
when others shall come to trie these
preceptes, not by showe or sound, as
fooles do their Golde: but, by your
behauiour, as by the touchstone: whē
they shal come, not token aloofe, but
at hand, to view your so singular demeanour,
so ciuil, so courteous, as maketh
you renoumed abrode, and honored
at home: coueted of the Noblest,
& wonderful of the learnedst:
when they shall in the glasse of
your courtesie, see the blots that blemishe
the dignitie of their estate:
when they cōpare these lessons with
the Regolo, they shal herein see no
lesse commoditie, then was in Alcibiades
Sileni (wherevnto Socrates
was compared) whiche though they

bare not, in the front, any shewe of
singularitie: yet within, bare they
pictures of excellent wit & delight.
This worke, if it please your honour
to vouchsafe as a companion of ease
to trace the pathes, which you haue
already so well beaten, (which presumeth
not to be guide for conduction)
or if your honour daine at highe
leasure to peruse it (whiche is not
cūningly but faithfully translated)
I doubt not, but your cōuntenance
will so credit the Author, as wil embolden
him to presse amongst the
thickest throng of Courtiers: And
herewithall beseeche your honour,
to accept the humble and dutifull
meaning minde of him: who, not satisfied,
till he might by some meanes

giue shewe of his thankefull minde,
for your honorable fauours shewed
vnto him, hathe offered this small,
though as faithfull a gyfte as Sinaetes
did to Cyrus: hoping, that your
honour will take it as well in worth,
as Artaxerxes did his poore Persians
handfull of water. Thus with
hartie prayer, for the aduauncemēt
of your estate, increase of honor, &
attainement of perfect and perpetual
felicitie: I cōmend your Lordship,
to the patronage and protectiō
of the Almightie. Your Lordships
moste humble to dispose and
commaunde.
            
               Robert Peterson.
            
         
         
            
            Al Signor Ruberto Peterson,
esortandolo A tradurre in
Inghilese il Galateo.
            
               Ben posson dirsi auuenturate carte
               Quelle ch' el dotto, e gentil Casa spese:
               Quand' in breue discors' à insegnar prese
               Del honesta creanza la prima arte.
               Poi che tanto si apprezz' in ogni parte
               Quel ch' ei ne scrisse, e ch' ei si ben intese
               E ch' ogn' vn con maniére più cortese
               Dal bel trattato suo tosto si parte.
               Esso à Donn' e donzelle, & cauallieri
               Non sol d' Italia: ma di Francia, e Spagna
               Di gentilezza mostr' i modi veri.
               Venga per voi felice anco in Brettagna
               E parli Inglese ne Palazzi alteri.
               Del regn' inuitto che l' Tamigi bagna.
               
                  Francesco Pucci
               
            
            
               Le creanze, è i costumi,
               Tanto splendenti lumi,
               Ch' a gli huomini fan l' huom superiore,
               Eccoli tratti fore
               De l' Italico seno
               E piántati ne l' Anglico terreno.
               Or se Li goda ogniun, che porta amore
               A 'l suo decoro, é a 'l suo compiuto onore.
               
                  Alessandro Citolini.
               
            
         
         
            
            Edouardus Cradoccus, S.
Theologiae Doctor &
Professor.
            Moribus quisquis rudis est ineptis,
            Nescit is vitam placidam tueri:
            Nemi ni gratus, sociusque nulli
            Charus habetur.
            Quisquis at pulchre simul & decore
            Se gerit, mentis studio repellens
            Rusticos mores, popularis ille
            Iure videtur.
            Hoc Petersoni liber hic venustus
            Praestat, ostendens habitu decoro
            Possit vt quisque probitate splendens
            Vtilis esse.
            Idque dum magno satagit labore,
            Italum fecit patria loquela
            Hunc perornatas meus hic amicus
            Fundere voces.
         
         
            
            Thomas Drant, Archedeacon
in praise of this Booke.
            
               An happy turne that Casa once did hatche,
               Of hauiours choice this booke in Ital' phrase:
               An Archebishop, and writer without matche
               In this he was, and peereles pight with prayse.
               Such he his lore so well and wise doth lend:
               It heare ne reade we can, but must amend.
            
            
               This booke by Tyber, and by Po hath past,
               Through all Italia Townes and Country lands.
               Iberus, throughe thy Spanishe coasts as fast
               It after yoade: and Gauls it held in hands,
               Throughe Rhenus realmes it spred in prosperous speede,
               To Lordes and Ladies reaching comly reede.
            
            
               It Peterson, to Britan eyes doth bring
               Translated true and trimme: and fit to frame
               Fayre maners fyne for men. This prety Ring
               Bedecketh feate our life: discourse and game
               It ordereth apt with grace. The booke is graue,
               Eke wise and good, for ciuil folke to haue.
            
         
         
            
            To his friend Mayster Robert
Peterson Gent.
            Thy Galateo (Peterson) doth shrowd him selfe to long,
            What? shall it sleepe Endymions yeares? thou dost thy countrie wrong.
            She hath a childs parte, Plato saies, and with the Author cries,
            That both thy toile, and this her gaine, may reare his skill to skies.
            What thoughe thou thinke thy present small, for view of gallant ones?
            This litle Diamond, shall out prize, a quarry full of stones.
            And Noble Cyrus (Man) will daine cold water in Sinaetaes hand:
            Then fray not, if thy booke, in pure, vnfiled termes doe stand.
            Translatours can not mount: for though, their armes with wings be spread,
            In vaine they toile to take the flight, their feete are clogd with lead.
            This faith, that makes the Authour, speake his owne in language new:
            Renoumes the more, then if thou blazdst it out, in painted hew.
            For, serpents lurke in greenest grasse, and with a garishe gloze,
            The Strūpet pounts in pride, where matrones marche in comelie clothes.
            Go publishe it, and dreade not scowling Momus poisond spite.
            And though Archilochus Iambes fly, or Theons taunts doe byte:
            Thinke, winds doe haunt the gallauntst trees, and Enuy things of state.
            And lightning checks, Cerauniaes tops, whome no hils els do mate.
            The best haue borne the bob, and Zoiles brutes durst geue the charge:
            But Zoile hangs, and Callisthen keepes in cage for talking large.
            And yet, wordes they be winde: but as erst Plinies Draconite
            No toole could pierce or carue: or as the gemme Chalazias hight,
            Keepes cold, though it in Aetna frie, or Adiantons flowers
            Drawes not a drop, though skies distill downe euerlasting showers:
            So good desert, doth chalenge good reporte by reasons rate,
            Though oft they beare the checkes and taunts, they cānot take the mate.
            Yet seeke Mecaenas wings to shroude thy toile: Virgilio
            Found his Augustus: Ennie thou maist finde thy Scipio.
            This trump shall sound thy praise. Syr Phoebus goldē rayes shall turne
            To foggie mistes, and seas that beare their ysie crust, shall burne:
            And lumpish lowte, with country shares shall salte Sea 
                  •
               ome diuide,
            And sowe his graine in Afrik Syrtes that wallow euery tide,
            Before this worke shall die: which neither loues thundering threate,
            Nor fierie flames shall waste, nor rustie, cankred age shall freate.
            Nolo Persium nolo Laelium.
            
               Your friend. I. Stoughton. Student.
            
         
         
            
            
               THe vine is praisde, that daintie grape doth giue
               Although the fruite more please then holsome be.
               Each fertil tree is fauord for the fruite,
               So is the hearb that gallant is to see.
            
            
               If this be trueth, he needes must merit well,
               That giues vs groundes to guide our erring wayes,
               And trades vs truely in the golden maze,
               Where vertu growes and courtlike manners stayes.
            
            
               
                  Galateo first did frame this golden booke
               In Ital land. From thence it went to Spaine.
               And after came into the coasts of Fraunce.
               And nowe at last in England doth remaine.
            
            
               The Authour sure deserueth more renoume,
               That so could spend his time for our behoofe,
               Then my poore wit or cunning can recite,
               As thou thy selfe by reading shalt finde proofe.
            
            
               And as the Authour merits passing well,
               So doth my friend deserue as greate a meede:
               That make a worke so hard to vnderstand,
               So easie that each simple may it reede.
            
            
               I say no more: for (lo) it were in vaine
               To praise good wine by hanging vp a bushe,
               The best will giue (I hope) my friende his due,
               As for the bad, I way them not a rushe.
            
            
               Thomas Browne
of L. I. Gent.
            
         
         
            
            To the Gentle Reader.
            Being very loathe (Gentle Reader) to varrie, of wilfulnes,
or securitie, from the trueth of our written copie: we
haue thought it necessarie, to make this compendious & exact
retractation of errours escaped in this impression.
         
         
            
               
                  
                     Pag▪
                     
                     Lin.
                     Errour.
                     Correction.
                  
                  
                     10
                     5
                     Passing
                     passed.
                  
                  
                     17
                     18
                     fottering
                     tottering.
                  
                  
                     26
                     23
                     neither
                     neuer.
                  
                  
                     29
                     6
                     easie
                     easily.
                  
                  
                     43
                     25
                     though
                           •
                        
                     
                     then
                  
                  
                     46
                     25
                     our free
                     our owne fre
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     55
                     5
                     so they beare
                     they beare.
                  
                  
                     49
                     13
                     And
                     To
                  
                  
                     56
                     26
                     woorse
                     were so
                  
                  
                     57
                     9
                     out
                     one
                  
                  
                     ibi.
                     19
                     bend
                     lend
                  
                  
                     59
                     2
                     Tuttessale
                     Tuttesalle
                  
                  
                     ibi.
                     10
                     thou
                     you
                  
                  
                     61
                     20
                     but
                     it
                  
                  
                     62
                     17
                     doe not
                     I doe not
                  
                  
                     63
                     26
                     in a marg. note. 297
                     291
                  
                  
                     64
                     6
                     one the
                     one or the
                  
                  
                     69
                     25
                     Gli frae
                     Et gli fece.
                  
                  
                     ibi.
                     29
                     Barbadomanie
                     Barbadomani.
                  
                  
                     74
                     10
                     Grimaldi
                           •
                        
                     
                     Grimaldi.
                  
                  
                     75
                     9
                     I ventre
                     Il ventre.
                  
                  
                     ibi.
                     26
                     did set
                     did litle set.
                  
                  
                     94
                     27
                     in the stone
                     in stone.
                  
                  
                     ibi.
                     ibi.
                     for singular
                     for the singular
                  
                  
                     98
                     17
                     doe
                     passe
                  
                  
                     100
                     3
                     wittes
                     willes
                  
                  
                     104
                     26
                     easie muche
                     easier much
                  
                  
                     115
                     21
                     out euery man
                     out to euery man.
                  
                  
                     Marginall notes misplaced.
                     Amended.
                  
                  
                     46
                     12
                     Bocc. Nouel 6. Gior. 5. fol. 259
                     Against Admeral in the 15. line.
                  
                  
                     ibi.
                     13
                     Peter the King of Aragon.
                     Against Peter King of Aragon, line. 17
                  
                  
                     59
                     24
                     Counselling and reprouing.
                     Against the 1. line in the 60. Page.
                  
                  
                     63
                     26
                     Bocc. Nouel. 5 Gior. 6. fol. 29
                           •
                        
                     
                     Against Maister Forese. line 12.
                  
                  
                     66
                     23
                     Bocc. Nouel. 8. Gior. 9. fol. 430.
                     Against Biondello in the 25. line.
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The treatise of Master Ihon Della
Casa, wherin vnder the person of an
old vnlearned man, instructing a youthe of his, he
hath talke of the maners and fashions, it behoues
a man to vse or eschewe, in his familiar
conuersation: intituled Galateo,
of fashions and maners.
            
               FOr as muche as thou doste
now enter the iourny, wherof
I haue allredy ronne forth
the better parte (as thou seest)
I meane the transitorie waye
of this mortall life: I haue determined
(such is the Loue I beare thee) to
shewe all the daungerous straights thou must
passe: For my experience maketh me feare,
yt walking that way thou mayst easily eyther
fall, or by some meanes or other go astray.
To the ende thou maist once, taughte both by
my instructions and experience, be able to
keepe the right waye, aswell for the helthe of
thy Soule, as the commendation and prayse
of the Honourable and Noble house thou
doest come of. And bycause thy tender Age,
is vnfit (as yet) to receaue more principall and
higher precepts, reseruing them for fytter
time, I will beginn to discourse of such things
as many men wyll deeme, perchaūce, but trifles:

I meane what manner of Countenance
and grace, behoueth a man to vse, that hee
may be able in Communication and familiar
acquaintance with mē, to shewe him selfe plesant,
courteous, and gentle: which neuerthelesse
is either a vertue, or the thing that comes
very nere to vertue. And albeit Liberalitie,
or magnanimitie, of themselues beare a
greater prayse, then, to be a well taught or manored
man: yet perchaunce, the courteous
behauiour and entertaynement with good
maners and words, helpe no lesse, him that
hath them: then the high minde and courage,
aduaūceth him in whome they be. For these be
such things as a mā shall neede alwayes at all
hāds to vse, because a man must necessarily be
familiar with mē at all times, & euer haue talk
& communication with them: But iustice, fortitude,
and the other greater, and more noble
vertues, are seldome put in vre. Neyther is yt
liberall and noble minded man, caused euery
hower to doe bountifull things: for to vse it often,
cannot any man beare the charge, by any
meanes. And these valiāt men yt be so full of
hyghe minde and courage: are very seldome
driuen to trye their valour & vertue by their
deeds. Then as muche as these last, doe passe
those fyrst, in greatnes (as it were) & in weight:
so much do the other surmoūt these in number,
& oftē occasiō to vse thē. And, if I could wel intend

it, I could name you many, whoe, (being
otherwise of litle account) haue ben & be styll,
muche estemed & made of, for their cherefull &
plesaunt behauiour alone: which hath byn
suche a helpe & aduauncemēt vnto them, that
they haue gotten greate preferments, leauing
farre behinde them, such men as haue byn endowed
with those other noble and better vertues,
spoken of before. And as these plesaūt
& gētle behauiours, haue power to draw their
harts & mynds vnto vs, with whome we liue:
so cōtrarywise, grosse and rude maners, procure
mē to hate and despise vs. Wherby albeit
the lawes, haue inioyned no payne for vnmanerly
& grose behauiours, as the fault that is
thought but light (& to saye a trueth, it is not
greate) yet we see notwithstanding, yt nature
herselfe punisheth thē wt sharpe & shrewde correction,
putting them by this meanes, besydes
ye cōpanie & fauour of men. And truly euē as
greate & foule faults, doe muche harme: so doe
these lyght, much hurt, or hurte at least more
oftē. For, as mē doe cōmōly fere ye beasts yt be
cruell & wild, & haue no maner of feare of som
litle ones, as ye gnats and the flyes, & yet by ye
cōtinual noiaūce they find by thē, cōplaine thēselues
more of thes thē of ye other: so it chaūceth
yt most mē do hate in maner asmuche, ye vnmanerly
& vntaught, as ye wicked, & more. So yt
               
there is no doubte, but who so disposeth himselfe
to liue, not in solitarie and deserte places,
as Heremites, but in fellowship with men,
and in populous Cities, will think it a very
necessarie thing, to haue skill to put himselfe
forth comely and seemely, in his fashions, gestures
and maners: the lacke of which parts
doth make those other vertues lame, and litle
or nothing can they work to good effect, without
other helpes: wheare this ciuilitie and
courtesie, without other releefe or patrimonie,
is riche of it selfe, & hath substance enough,
as a thing yt standeth in speache and gestures
alone.
            And that yu mayst now more easily learne
the way vnto it, thou must vnderstand, it
behoues thee, to frame and order thy maners
and doings, not according to thyne owne
minde and fashion: but to please those, with
whome thou lyuest, and after that sort direct
thy doings: And this must be done by Discretion
and Measure. For who so applieth himself
to much, to feede other mens humors, in his
familiar conuersation, and behauiour with
men, is rather to be thought a Iester, a Iugler
or flatterer, then a gentleman wel taught and
nourtured: As contrarywise, whoe so hath
no care or mynd to please, or displese, is a rude,

vntaught, and vncourteous fellowe. For asmuche
then, as our maners, haue some pleasure
in them when we respect other men, and
not our owne pleasure: if we diligētly searche
forthe what those things be, that most men
do generally lyke or dislike: we shall in suche
sorte wisely and easily finde out, the meanes &
wayes, to choose and eschewe, those fashions
and maners, we are to leaue or take, to liue amongest
men. We say then, that euery act
that offendeth any the common senses, or ouerthwarteth
a mans will and desire, or els
presenteth to the Imagination and conceite,
matters vnpleasaunt, & that likewyse, which
ye mynde doth abhorre, such things I say bee
naught, and must not be vsed: for vve must not
only refraine from such thinges as be fowle, filthy,
lothsome and nastie: but vve must not so muche
as name them. And it is not only a fault to dooe
such things, but against good maner, by any act
or signe to put a man in minde of them. And
therefore, it is an ilfauoured fashion, that some
men vse, openly to thrust their hands in what
parte of their bodye they lyst.
            Lykwise, I like it as yll to see a Gentlemā
fettle him selfe, to do the needes of Nature, in
presence of men: And after he hath doone, to
trusse him selfe againe before them. Neither

would I haue him (if I may geue him councell)
when he comes from suche an occupatiō,
so much as washe his hāds, in the sight of honest
company: for yt the cause of his washing,
puts them in minde of some filthy matter that
hath bene done aparte. And by the same reason,
it is no good maner, when a man chaunceth
to see, as he passeth the waye (as many
times it happeneth) a lothesome thing, yt wil
make a mā to cast his stomacke, to tourne vnto
the company, & shewe it them. And much
worse I like it, to reache some stynking thing
vnto a man to smell vnto it: as it is many a
mās fashiō to do, wt importunate meanes, yea,
thrusting it vnto their nose, saying: Foh, feele I
pray you, hovv this doth stink: vvhere they should
rather say, smell not vnto it: for it hath an yll sent.
And as these and lyke fashions offend the sē
               ses,
to which they appertaine: so to grynde
the teethe, to whistle, to make pityfull cryes,
to rubb sharpe stones together, and to fyle
vppon Iron, do muche offend the Eares and
would be lefte in any case. Neither must wee
refraine those things alone, but we must also
beware we do not syng, and specialy alone,
if we haue an vntuneable voyce, which is a
common fault with moste men: And yet, hee
that is of nature least apt vnto it, doth vse it

moste. So there be some kynde of men, that
in coffyng or neesing,Neesing. make suche noyse, that
they make a man deafe to here them: other
some vse in lyke things, so little discretion,
that they spyt in mens faces that stand about
them: besydes these there be some, that in
yauning, braye and crye out like Asses. And
yet such, with open mouth wil euer say and do
what they list, and make such noyse, or rather
such roaring, as the dumme man doth, when
he striueth with him selfe to speake. All these
yllfauoured fashions, a man must leaue, as
lothsome to the eare and the eye. And a mā
must leaue to yawne muche,Yawning. not only for the
respect of the matter I haue saide alreadye, as
that it seemes to proceede, of a certaine werynes,
that shewes that he that yawneth, could
better like to be els where, then there in that
place: as wearied with the companie, their
talke, and their doings. And sure, albeit a mā
be many times disposed to yawne, yet if he
be occupied with any delyght, or earnest matter
to think vppon: he shall haue no minde
to doe it. But if he be lumpishe & idle: it is
an easy matter to fall into it. And therefore,
VVhen a man yavvneth, in place vvhere
there bee slouthfull and Idle folkes, that
haue nothing to doe, the rest, as you may see

many times, yavvne againe for companie by & by:
as if he that yawned, had put them in minde
to doe it, which of them selues they would
haue done first, if hee had not begoone vnto
them. And I haue many tymes heard learned
and wise men say, that A yavvner meaneth
as much in Latin as a careles and Idle bodie. Let
vs then flye these condicions, that loathe (as
I sayd) the eyes, the Eares, & the Stomacke.
For in vsing these fashyons, we doe not only
shewe that we take litle pleasure in the company,
but we geue them occasion withall, to
iudge amis of vs: I meane yt we haue a drowsye
& heuie nowle, which makes vs yll wellcom,
to all cōpanies we come vnto. And whē
thou hast blowne thy nose,Blowing of the nose. vse not to open thy
handkercheif, to glare vppon thy snot, as if yu
hadst pearles and Rubies fallen from thy
braynes: for these be slouenly parts, ynough to
cause men, not so much not to loue vs, as if
they did loue vs, to vnloue vs againe. As
the Sprite of Labirintho doth testifie (who soeuer
he were that made it) who (to quenche yt
heate wherwith Master Iohn Boccase burned
in desyre and Loue of his Lady vnknowne)
tells,Looke in the beginning of Corbaccio. how she cowred her taile ouer the ashes,
sytting vppon her heeles, and coughed and
spatte out Collops.
            
               It is also an vnmanerly parte, for a man to
lay his nose vppon the cup where another
must drinke:Dropping of the Nose. or vppon the meate yt another
must eate, to the end to smell vnto it: But
rather, I would wish he should not smell
at all, no not to that which he himselfe
should eate and drinke: because it may
chaūce there might fall some droppe frō
his nose, that would make a man to loath
it: although there fall nothing at all in
deede. Neither, by mine aduise, shalt thou
reache to any man, that cup of wine wherof
thy selfe hast fyrst dronke and tasted: wt
               out
he be more then a familiar friend vnto
thee. And much lesse must thou giue any
parte of the peare or the fruite, which thou
hast bitten in thy mouth before. And esteeme
not light of my talke, for that these
things be of little account: For euen light
stripes (their number may be such) be able
to slaye fast ynoughe.
            
            Now you shall vnderstād, there was in
Verona, a bishop a wise mā, a learned & of a
singular good wit by nature, whose name
was GiouāniGiouanni. MatheoMatheo. Giberti:
               Giberti, bishop of Verona. Amōgst many
good parts yt were in him, he was very
courtious & liberall, to all gentlemen &
noble men that came vnto him, doing thē
all ye honor he could in his house, not with

ouer much pompe and cost, but with conuenient
entertainement and measure, such
as besemed well a man of the Clergie. It
chaunced in his time, a noble gentleman
called Count Richard,
               Count Richard. passing that way, to
spend a fewe dayes with the Bishop and
his householde together: which was thoroughly
furnished wt honest gentlemē and
very well learned. And bycause they found
him a Noble gentleman, courteous and
well beseene in all good behauiour, they
praysed him muche, and made muche of
him, saue that one vnmanerly fashion they
muche misliked in him. When the Byshop
was aduertised of it, consulting with
some of his familiars about it (as he was a
wise man in all his doings) straite they cō
               cluded,
it should be necessary to let ye 
               Count
haue knowledge of it: albeit they feared,
they should offend him. Upon this, ye 
               Count
taking his leaue, and redy to ryde away
the next morning, the Byshop called one
of his seruants vnto him, (a man of good
discretion) and gaue him in charge to take
his horse, to beare the Count company, some
parte of his waye: And when he sawe his
time, after an honest sorte, to tell him, that
which they had determined betwene them
selues. The same gentleman that had

this charge, was a man well strooken in
yeares, very lerned, and meruailous pleasaunt,
welspoken, comely, and had muche
frequented in his time, ye Courtes of greate
Princes: who was (perhaps) and is, called
Galateo:
               Galateo. at whose request and councell, I
first tooke in hand to set forth this present
treatise, Ryding with the Count, he found
him plesaunt talke ynoughe, and passing
frō one matter to another, whē he thought
it tyme to returne to Verona, in taking leaue
at parting, with a gentle & cherefull countenaunce,
he vsed this speache vnto him.
Syr Count, my Lorde yealdeth you many
thanks for the honour you haue done him, in
that it hath pleased you to vouchesafe his poore
house: and that he may not be vnthankfull, for
this your greate courtesie shevved vnto him, he
hath geuen me in charge, that I must leaue a
present vvith you in his behalfe: and he sends
it vnto vnto you vvith earnest request, that you
please to take it in good vvorthe: and this is
the gift. You are a goodly gentleman, and
the best manered man my Lorde hath euer
seene: So that very heedefully beholding
your behauiours, and particularly considering
them all, hee findeth no one that is not very

comely and comendable, only one vnsemely
trycke alone excepted, vvhich you make vvith
your lippes and your mouth together, feeding
at your meate vvith a certaine straunge noyes,
vnpleasaunt to all men that heare it. This my
Lord willed me to tell you, and prayes you to
endeuour your selfe to leaue it, and vvithall to
accept in levve of a beter present, this louing admonition
and councell of his: for he is sure,
there is none in the vvorlde, would make you
the like present. The Count (that neuer
wyst of his fault till now) hearing himselfe
reproued, chaunged his countenance a little,
but (as a mā full of stomacke ynough)
taking hart at gras
                  •
               e, he said: Tell your
Lorde, that yf all the gifts that men vvont to
geue eche other, vvere such as his, men should
be muche more riche then they are. And for
his greate courtesie and liberalitie to mee, geue
him many thanks I pray you, and let him be
sure, I will not fayle from henceforthe to mend
my fault, and God be vvith you.
            
            Now what shal we thinke this Bishop,
his modest and honest company about him
would say,Greedy feeding. if they sawe these whome wee
see other while, (like swyne wt their snouts
in the washe, all begroined) neuer lyft vp
their heads nor looke vp, and muche lesse
keepe their hands from the meate, and wt
               
both their cheeks blowne (as if they should
sound a trumpet, or blowe the fyer) not eate
but rauon: whoe, besmearing their hāds,
almost vp to their elbowes, so bedawbe
yt napkyns,Fyling the napkyns. that ye cloathes in the places of
easement, be other while cleaner. And to
mend these slouenly maners, be not ashamed,
many tymes with these filthy napkyns,
to wype awaye the sweat that trickleth
and falleth downe their browes,Sweating with feeding. their
face and their necke (they be such greedy
guts in their feeding) and otherwhile to,
(when it comes vppon them) spare not to
snot their sniueld nose vppon them. Truly
these beastly behauiours and fashions,
deserue not alone, to be thrust out of this
noble bishops house, that was so pure and
cleane: but to be throughly banished all
places, where any honest men should com.
Let a man then take hede, hee doe not begrease
his fyngers so deepe, yt he befyle the
napkins to much: for it is an yll sight to see
it: neither is it good maner, to rubbe your
gresie fingers vppō ye bread you must eate.
            The seruaunts that bee appointed to
waite vppon the table, must not (in any
wise) scratche and rubbe their heades,Precepts for seruaunts. nor
any parte els in the sight of their Lorde &
Master: nor thrust their hāds in any those

partes of their body that be couered, no not
so muche as make any proffer: as some
careles fellowes doo, holding their hands
in their bosome, or cast vnder the flappes of
their coates behind them. But they must
beare them abroade without any suspicion
and keepe them (in any case) washt & cleane
without any spot of durt vppon them. And
they that cary the dyshes, or reache the cup,
must beware at that time, they doe not spit,
coughe or neese: for in such doings, Suspiciō
is as greate, and offendeth asmuche, as the very
deede it selfe: and therefore, seruants must
forsee, they geue no cause to Maisters to
suspect: For that which might chaunce, anoyeth
asmuche, as if it had chaunced indeede.
            And if thou do roaste any fruite, or make
a toaste at the fyer, thou must not blowe
of the ashes, (if there be any) for it is an old
saying, that, vvinde vvas neuer vvithout water.
But yu must lyghtly stryke it vppō the
the plate, or after some suche sorte or other
beate of ye ashes. Thou shalt not offer thy
hādkerchiefe to any mā to vse it, albeit, it be
very cleane washed: for he to whome thou
doest offer it, can not (perhaps) awaye wt
it, and may be to curious to take it.
            When a man talketh with one,Breathing in a mans face. it is no

good maner to come so neere, that he must
needes breathe in his face: for there be many
that can not abyde to feele the ayer of another
mans breathe, albeit there come no
yll sauour from him. These and lyke fashions,
be very vnsemely, and would be
eschewed, because their senses, wt whome
we acquaint our selues, cannot brooke nor
beare them.
            Now, let vs speake of those things which
(without any hurt or anoyaūce to the senses)
offende the minds of most men, before
whome they be doone. You shall vnderstand,
that The appetites of men, (throughe a
naturall instinct and inclinatiō) beverie strange
and diuers: Some be cholerike & hasty, &
may not be satifsied with out reuenge: other
doe giue them selues cleane ouer, to
pamper the belly: this mā sets his delighte
in lust and sensualitie: that man is carried
away with his couetous desires: and many
suche appetites more there are, to
which mans mynde is too subiect: but
you shall not in any company, easily iudge
or discerne betweene them, where and
in what, they bee moste affected. For,
these matters doe not cōsist in the maners,
the fashions and speache of men: but rest in
some other point. They seeke to purchase yt
               
which the benefit of mutuall conferrence
may yeald them, & that doe (as I weene)
good will, honour, comforte and pleasure,
or some other thing lyke vnto these: & therfore
we must neither say or doe the thing,
that may giue any signe of litle louing or
esteming them, we liue withall.
            So that, it is a rude fashion, (in my cō
               ceipte)
yt som men vse, to lye lolling a sleepe
in that place, where honest men be met together,
of purpose to talke. For his so doing,
shewes that he doth not esteeme the
company, and little rekoneth of thē or their
talke. And more then that, he that sleepeth
(and specially lying at litle ease, as he
must) wonts (for the moste parte) to doe
some fowle thing, to beholde, or heare: and
many tymes they awake sweating and
driueling at the mouth. And in like maner,
to rise vp where other men doe sit and
talke, and to walke vp and downe the chā
               ber,
it is no poynt of good maner. Also
there be some that so buskell them selues,
reache, streatch and yawne, writhing now
one syde, and then another, that a man
would weene, they had some feuer vppon
them: A manifest signe, that the company
they keepe, doth weary them.
            Likewise doe they very yll, yt now & thē
               
pull out a letter ont of theyr pocket, to
reade it: as if they had greate matters of
charge, and affaires of the common weale
committed vnto thē. But they are much
more to bee blamed, that pull out theyr
knyues or their scisers, and doe nothing els
but pare their nayles, as if they made no
account at all of the company, and would
seeke some other solace to passe the time awaye.
Theis fashions to, must be left, yt
some men vse, to sing betwene the teeth, or
playe the dromme with their fingers, or
shoofle their feete: For these demeanours
shewe that a body is carelesse of any man
ells.
            Besides, let not a man so sit that he turne
his tayle to him that sitteth next to him:
nor lye fottering with one legg so hygh aboue
the other, that a man may see all bare
that his cloathes would couer. For such
parts be neuer playde, but amongst those
to whome a man needs vse no reuerēce.
It is very true, that if a gentleman should
vse these fashions before his seruants, or in
the prefēce of some friende of meaner condition
then him selfe: it would betoken no
pride, but a loue and familiaritie.
            Let a man stand vppright of him selfe,
and not leane or loll vppon another mans

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
shoulder: and when he talketh, let him not
pounche his fellow with his elbowe, (as
many be wont to doe) at euery worde they
speake, saying: Did not I say true Sirra, Master.
N. It is Master. H. And still they be iotting
with their elbowe.
            I would haue euery man well appareled,Apparell.
meete for his age and calling: for otherwise,
they seeme to haue men in contempt
that be better attyred then themselues.
            And therfore the Citizens of Padua, were
woont to take it done of spighte vnto thē,
when any gentleman of Venice walked vp
& downe their citie in his coate, as though
he thought him selfe in the countrey. And
a mans apparell, would not be made of
fine cloathe alone: but he must frame it, all
that he may, to the fashions that other men
weare, and suffer him selfe to bee lead by cō
               mon
vse: although (perchaunce) it be, and
seeme to be lesse commodious, lesse gallant,
and lesse faire in shewe, then his oulde.
            And if all men els, doe weare their heads
powled: it shalbe an yll sight for thee alone,
to weare a longe bushe of haire. And
where other men, make muche of their
beardes and weare them longe: thou
shalt not doe well to cut thine of, or shaue

it. For that weare to be ouerthwarte in
euery thing: which thou must (in any case)
beware of, except necessitie require it, as
thou shalt heare hereafter. For this singularitie,
beyond all other yll customes,
makes vs generally spyted of all mē. Thou
must not then go against common custome
in these things, but vse them measureably:
that thou maist not bee an odd man a
lone in a countrey: that shall weare a long
Gowne downe to the foote, where other
men weare them very shorte, litle beneath
the waste. For as it hapens to him, that
hath a very crabbed ylfauoured face, (I
meane suche, as is more harde and sower
thē most mennes be, for nature doth mostly
shape them well in moste men) that men
will wonder and (with a kinde of admiration)
gape most vppon him: So fares
it with thē that attire them selues, not as
most men doe: but as they are egged by
their owne fantasticall heads, with lōg
heare spred downe to their shoulders,
their beardes short and shauen, and weare
quaiues or greate cappes after ye 
               Flaundres
fashion: that all men doe gaze vppon them,
as wōdering at suche, whome they weene
haue taken vppon them, to conquer all

countries wheresoeuer they come. Let
your apparell then, be very well made, and
fit for your body: for they that weare rich
and coastly garments, but so illfauouredly
shaped, that a man would weene the measure
had byn taken by another: geue vs to
iudge one of these twaine, that eyther
they haue no regarde or consideration how
to please or displease: or els haue no skill to
iudge of measure or grace, or what doth
become them.
            Such maner of people, with their rude
behauiours and fashions, make men with
whome they liue, suspect, they doe esteeme
them but light. And that causeth
thē worse welcome whersoeuer they com
and yll beloued amongest men.
            But there be some besides these, that deserue
more then bare suspicion: their deeds
and their doings be so intollerable, that a
man cannot abide to liue amōgest them by
any meanes. For they be euer a let, a
hurt and a trouble to all the companie, they
be neuer redie: euer a trimming: neuer
well dressed to their mindes. But when
men be readie to sit downe to the table,
the meate at the boorde, and their handes
washed: then they must write or make

water, or haue their exercise to doe: saying,
It is too early: vve myght haue taryed a
vvhile: vvhat haste is this, this morning?
And thus they disquiet all the company, as
men, caring for them selues alone & theyr
owne matters, without consideration in
the worlde of other men. Besides this,
they will in all things be preferred aboue
others: they must haue the best bed, and
best chamber: they must take vppon them
the highest place at the table, and be first
set and serued of all men. And they be so
deintie and nice, that nothing pleaseth
them, but what they them selues deuise:
they make a sower face at any thing ells.
And they be so proude minded, that they
looke that men should waite vppon them
when they dyne, ryde, sporte, or solace them
selues.
            There be other so furious, testie & waywarde,
that nothing you doe can please
them: and what soeuer is said they aunswer
in choler, and neuer leaue brauling wt
their seruants, and rayling at them, and
continually disturbe the company with
their vnquietnes: vsing such speeches:
Thou cauledst me vvell vp this morning.
Looke heere hovv cleane thou hast made these

pynsons. Thou beaste, thou diddest vvaite
vvell vppon me to Churche. It vvere a good
deede to breake thy head. These be vnsemely
and very fowle fashions: suche as euery
honest man will hate to death. For, albeit
a mans minde were full fraught with all
humilitie, and would vse these maners, not
vppon pride or disdaine, but vppon a rechelesse
care, not heeding his doings, or elles
by meanes of yll custome: yet notwithstā
               ding,
because his outward doings, woulde
make men thinke him proude: it cannot be
chosen, but all men would hate him for it.
For, PridePryde. is none other thinge, then to despise
and disdaine another. And as I haue
saide from the beginning: Eache man desireth
to bee vvell thought of, Albeit there bee
no valoure or goodnes in hym.
            
            It is not long, synce there was in Rome
a worthy gentleman, of singular good witt
and profound learning, whose name was
Vbaldino Bandinelli.
               Vbaldino Bandinelli. This gentleman was
woont to say, that as ofte as hee went or
came from the Courte, although the stretes
weare euer full of gallant Courtiers, of
Prelates and Noble men, and likewise of
poore men, and people of meane and base
condition: yet he thought he neuer encountred
any, that was eyther better or worse

then himselfe. And without doubte hee
could meete with fewe, that might bee
compared in goodnes to him: respecting
his vertues, that did excel beyond measure.
But we must not alwayes in these things
measure men by ye Elne: We must rather
waye them in the millers scoles, then in
the goldsmythes balaunce. And it is a
courtious parte, redily to receaue them in
to fauour: not bycause they bee woorthe it:
but as men doe with coynes, bycause they
be currant,
            To go further, wee must doe nothing in
their syght whome wee desire to please,
that may shewe wee couet, rather to rule
and to reigne, then to liue in a familiar
equalitie amongest them. For hautines
of harte and ambitious disposition, as it
kindleth an yll opinion: so it ministreth
muche cause of contempte, which in conclusion
will so woorke against thee, yt thou
shalt bee cleane cast out of honest company.
But our dooings must rather beare a
signe and shewe of reuerence,A lowly minde. meekenes, &
respect to ye company, in which wee fellowship
our selues. So that, what so euer is
doone in meete and conuenient time, may
hapely deserue no blame: but yet in respect
of the place and the persone, it

may be reproued well: althoughe for it self,
ye matter deserue no rebuke. As to brawle
and to raile at your seruaunts (which we
haue talked of before) but muche more to
beate them. Because these partes, are asmuche
as to reigne and to rule: which no
honest and ciuil gentlemā wyll vse, in presence
of them he doth respect with any reuerence
or courtesie. Besydes this, the cō
               pany
is muche offended with it, and their
meetinges are broken, and especially, if it
be done at the table, which is a place of solace
and myrthe, and not of brawle and
scolding. So that I must nedes cōmend
Currado Gianfigliazzi for his ciuil behauiour
in yt he multiplied no words with Chichibio
to trouble his guests:Boccacc
                     •
                  o. Cior. 6. nouel. 4. fo. 194. albeit he deserued to
be sharply punished for it, when he would
sooner displease his master then Brunetta.
And yet if Currado had made lesse adoe about
it then he did: it had byn more his
prayse. For then he should neuer haue neded,
to call vppō God, to witnes his threatnings
so muche as he did.
            But to returne to our matter: it is not
good for a man to chide at the table for any
cause.Chiding at the Table. And if thou be angrie, shew it not,
nor make no signe of thy greefe, for the reason
I haue tolde thee, and specially yf thou

haue straungers with thee: because thou
haste called them to be merry, and this wil
make them sad. For, as the sharpe and
tarte things yt other men doe feede vppō in
thy sight, doe set thy teeth likewise on edge:
so to see other men vexed and out of quiet, it
maketh vs vnquiet too. I call them
FROMVVARD
               Fromewarde. people, which will in allthings
be ouertwhart to other men: as the
very worde it selfe doth shewe. For,
Fromewarde, signifieth asmuche, as Shorne
against the wooll. Now, how fit a thinge
this frowardnesFrowardenes. is, to wyn the good will
of men, and cause men to wyshe well vnto
them: that you your self may easily Iudge,
in t
                  •
               at it cōsisteth in ouertwharting other
me
                  •
               s desiers: which qualitie neuer maynteineth
friendship, but maketh friends become
foes. And therfor let them that desire
to be well thought of and welcome amongst
men, endeuour thēselues to shunne
this fault: For it breedes no good lyking
nor loue, but hatred and hurt. I would
councell you rather to measure your pleasures
by other mens willes: where there
shal come no hurt nor shame of it: and therin
alwayes to doe & to saye, more to please
other mens myndes and fansies, then your
owne.
            
               Agayne, you must be neither clownishe
nor lumpishe:Clownishe and Lumpishe but pleasaunt and familiar.
For there should bee no oddes, betweene
the Mystell and the Pungitopo: but that the
one is wilde: the other growes in gardens.
And you must vnderstand, that he is pleasaunt
and courteous: whose manners bee
suche in his common behauiour, as practise
to keepe, and maintaine him friendeship
amongst them: where hee that is solleyne
and waywarde, makes him selfe a straū
               ger
whersoeuer hee comes: a straunger, I
meane, asmuch as a forreigne or aliē borne:
where contrariwise, he that is familiar &
gentle, in what place so euer he comes: is
taken for a familiar and friend with all mē.
So that it shalbe necessarie for a man, to
vse him selfe to salute, to speake, and to answer
after a gentle sorte, and to behaue
him selfe wt all men so: as if hee were their
countryman borne, & of their olde acquaintance.
Which some can yll skill to doe,
that neither giue a man a good countenaunce:
easily say, No, to all things: neuer
take in good worthe, the honour and courtesie
that men doe vnto them (like to the
people I spake of before, rude and barbarous)
neuer take delight in any pleasaunt
conceites or other pleasures: but euer refuse

it all, what soeuer is presented or offered
vnto them. If a man say: Sir, suche a
one willed me to commend him vnto you:
They aunswere straite: vvhat haue I too
doe vvith his greetings? And if a man say:
Sir, suche a one your friend, asked me hovv you
did: They aūswer againe in choler: Let him
come feele my pulse. These carterlyke and
clownishe aunswers and maners, and the
men them selues that doe vse them: would
bee chased and hūted away, out of all good
and honest company.
            It yll becomes a man when hee is in
company, to bee sad, musing,Museing. and full of
contemplation. And albeit, it may bee
suffered perchaunce in them that haue long
beaten their braines in these Mathematicall
studies: which are called (as I take it) the
Liberall Artes: yet without doubte it may
not be borne in other men. For, euen these
studious fellowes, at suche tyme, when
they be so ful of their Muses: should be much
wyser to get them selues alone.
            Againe,Nycenes and Deyntines. to bee to nyce or to deyntie: it
may not be abiden, and specially in men.
For, to liue with suche kinde of people:
is rather a slauerie then pleasure. And sure
there bee som such, so softe & tender: yt to liue

and deale with such people, it is as daungerous:
as to medle with the fynest and
bryttelest glasse that may be: So muche
they are affrayde of euery light touche.
And they wilbe as testy and frowarde, if
you doe not quickly and readily salute
them, visite them, worship them, and make
thē answer: as some other body would be,
for the greatest iniurie yt can be donne vnto
them. And if you doe not giue them all
the due reuerence that may be: they will
presently take a thousand occasions to quarell
and fall out with you. Yf you chaūce
to Master him, and leaue out his title of Honour
or worship: he takes that in dougeon,
and thinkes you doe mock him. And if
you set him beneath as good a man as him
self at the table: that is against his honour.
If you doe not visite him at home at his
house: then you knowe not your dutie.
Theis maner of fashions and behauiours,
bring men to such scorne and disdayne of
their doings: that there is no man, almost,
can abyde to beholde them: for they loue
them selues to farre beyonde measure, and
busie them selues so much in that, that they
fynde litle leysure to bethinke them selues
to loue any other: which (as I haue saide
from the beginning) men seeke to fynde in

the conditions and maners of those with
whome they must liue: I meane, that they
should apply them selues to the fansies &
mindes of their friendes. But to liue wt
suche people, so hard to please: whose loue
and friendship once wonne, is as easie lost,
as a fyne scarfe is lightly caryed away
with the winde: that is no lyfe but a seruice:
and, besydes that it yealdeth no pleasure,
it geues a man greate disdayne and
horror. Let vs therefore leaue these softe
and wanton behauiours to women.
            In speach a mā may fault many wayes.Talke and Communication.
And first in the matter it selfe that is in
talke, which may not be vayne or filthye.
For, they that doe heare it, wyll not abyde
it: as ye talk they take no pleasure to heare:
but rather scorne the speache and the speaker
both. Againe, a man must not moue
any question of matters that be to deepe &
to subtile: because it is hardly vnderstoode
of the moste. And a man must warely
foresee, that the matter bee suche, as none of
the company may blushe to heare it, or receaue
any shame by the tale. Neyther
must he talke of any filthy matter, albeit a
man would take a pleasure to heare it: for, it
yll becomes an honest gentleman, to seeke
to please, but in things that be honest. Nei-Neither

in sporte nor in earnest,Holie thinges muste not bee 
                     •
                  easted at. Cicero. Mala & impia est Consuetudo, contra deos disputandi: siue serio sit, 
                     •
                  iue dissimulate. must a
man speake any thing against God or
his Saintes, how witty or pleasaunt so euer
the matter be. Wherein, the company
that Giouan Boccaccio hathe brought to
speake in his Nouelles and tales, hath faulted
so muche: that me thinkes euery good
body, may iustly blame them for it. And
you must thinke It is not only a token of great
detestation & Impietie in a man, to talke in iestinge
wise of God: but hee is a vvicked & sinfull
man, that will abyde to heare it. But you
shall finde some suche good men, as will flie
asmuche as the plague, the company of such
as talke so vnreuerently, and without respect,
of the incomprehensible Maiestie of
God. And vvee must not alone speake religiously
of him: but in all our talkes wee must
auoyde what vvee may, that our vvordes may
not vvitnes against our life and our vvorkes.
For mē doe hate their owne faultes otherwhile,
when they see them in another.
            Likewise it is vnsauourie,Talke out of time. to talke of
things out of tyme, not fitting the place
and company: although the matter it selfe,
and spoken in tyme, were otherwise both
good and godly. We must not then reherse
Fryers sermones to young gentlewomen,
when they are disposed to sporte thēselues:

as yt good man did, that dwelles not farr
hence, nere to S. Brancatio. And in feastes &
at table, wee must beware wee doe not rehearse
any sorowfull tales, nor put them in
minde of woundes, of sicknes, of deathes,
of Plagues, or of other dolefull matters.
But if another man chaunce to moue suche
matter: it shalbe good, after an honest and
gentell sorte, to exchaunge that talke, and
thrust in some other, yt may giue them more
delighte and pleasure to heare it. Albeit, not
long since I heard it said to a worthy gentleman
our neighbour, that Men haue many
times more neede to weepe then to laugh. And
for that cause hee said, these dolefull tales,
which wee call Tragedies, were deuised at
first, that when they were plaid in the Theatres
(as at that time they were wōt) they might draw
fourth teares out of their eyes, that had neede to
spēd thē. And so they were by their weeping,
healed of their infirmitie. But albeit it bee
good to doe so: yet it will il becōe vs to driue
men into theyr dumpes: especially where
they bee mett to feaste and to solace themselues,
& not to mourne. For if there be any,
yt hath suche weeping disease: it will bee an
easie matter to cure it, wt stronge Mustard
or a smoaky house. So that, in no wyse,

I can excuse our friend Philostrato,
               Bocc. G
                     •
                  or. 4. fol 183. In the beginning. for his
worke that hee made full of dule and of
death, to suche a company as desired nothing
more then myrthe. Wee must the
rather vse sylence, then discourse of suche
sorrowfull matters.
            And they doe asmuch amisse too, that neuer
haue other thing in their mouthe, then
their children, their wife, and their nourse.
My litle boy, made mee so laughe yesterday:
heare you: you neuer savve a svveeter babe in
your life: my wyfe is such a one, Cecchina told
mee: of troth you vvould not beleeue vvhat a
vvit shee hath: There is none so idle a body,
that will eyther intend to answer, or
abyde to heare suche foolishe pryttle prattle.
For it yrcks a mans eares to harken
vnto it.
            There be some againe, so curious in telling
their dreamesDreames. from point to point, vsing
such wonder and admiration withall,
yt it makes a mans hart ake to heare them:
& specially because (for ye most parte) they
be such kinde of people: as it is but labour
lost to heare, euē the very best exployts they
doe, when they be most awake, and labour
most to shew their best. Wherfore we must
not trouble men with so base and absurde
matter as dreames bee: especially suche

foolyshe things, as most tymes men haue.
Albeit I haue heard say many times, that
wisemen in times past, haue leaft in their
bookes many sortes of dreames, conteining
matters of deepe knowledge and vnderstā
               ding:
it followeth not yet, that wee, the vnlearned
and common sorte of people, should
vse it in our familiar and common talke.
And sure of all the dreames that euer I
heard (albeit I hardly listen to any) in my
cōceit, I neuer heard any, that was worth
the hearing but one alone, which the good
Master Flaminio Tomarozzo
               M. Flaminio Tomarozzo. a gentleman of
Rome did see, a man not vnlearned and
grosse: but full of knowledge and singular
witte. And thus was his dreame, This
gētlemā Master Flaminio Tomarozzo, thought
he was sitting in a very riche Apothecaries
shop, a neere neighbour of his. And after he had
byn there a while (what soeuer the occasiō was)
the people vvere vp in a rore one a sodayne, and
fell to spoilyng of all that vvas in the shoppe.
One tooke on Electuarie, another a Confectiō,
some one thing, some another, and presently
eate it vpp all: So that within a while, there was
neither virell glasse, ertherne pot, wodden boxe,
nor any pot els of drugges, that was not emptied
broken, or ouerthrowne. But amongest them
all, ther vvas one verye small glasse, full to the

toppe of verie cleare vvater, vvhich many did
smell to, but no man vvould taste. He stoode
not there long, but there came in a tall man, an
aged and very graue man, to looke vnto. This
Aged father beholding this vnfortunate Apothecaries
boxes and pottes, and finding some
emptyed, some ouerthrowne, and the better
parte broken: at lenght casting his eye asyde, he
chaunced to see the smal glasse I spake of before,
and setting the same to his mouthe, hee dranke
it vp so cleane: that he leaft not one droppe. And
this doone, he went from thence as the rest did
before. Master Flaminio vvas abashed and marueled
muche at this matter. And therefore
turning to the Apothecarie he sayed vnto him:
Syr, whoe is this that came laste? and why
did he drinke vp so sauourly, all the vvater in
that litle glasse, vvhich all the reast refused. To
vvhome the Apothecarie seemed to make this
aunsvver. My sonne, this is the Lord God.
And the vvater, that hee alone dranke, and all
the reast refused & vvould not taste as you savv:
vvas discretiō: vvhich, you knovv vvel ynough
men vvill not taste of, by any meanes.
            
            Such kind of dreames, I hould well
a man may rehearse, and heare with much
pleasure and profit. Bycause they doe
more resemble, the Cogitations & thoughts
of an awakened minde: or better, I

shoulde say, the vertue sensitiue: then the
visions and syghts of a drowsie head. But
those other dreames, without shape, fashiō
or sense: (which the moste parte of suche
men as we are, bee wont to haue) would be
forgotten cleane, and lost with our sleepe.
Howbeit, I doe not deny but the dreames
of good men and learned, be better and wiser
then theires of the wicked and more
vnlearned sorte.
            And albeit a man would weene, there
can bee nothing in the worlde more vaine
then Dreames: yet there is one thing more
light then they, and that are Lyes.Lyes. For there
is yet some shadovve, and, as it vvere, a certaine
feeling of that vvhich a man hath seene in his
dreame. But there is neyther shadovve nor
bodye of a trueth in a lye. And therfore we
should lesse busie mens eares, and their
mindes to harken to lyes, then to dreames,
because they bee otherwhile receiued for
truethes. But tyme, in the ende, discouers
suche pelfe: that lyers, not only doe
gayne no credite, but no man vouchesafes
to harken vnto them, in otherwise
(as the men that carry no substaunce in
their woordes) then if they had sayde nothing
or blowne a litle wynde.Men haue a pleasure to lye othervvhile. And you
shal vnderstād, ther be many yt vse to lye, not

minding any yll purpose in it, or to make
their owne peculiar proffit by it, to hurt other
men or shame their neighbour: onely
they doe it, for a pleasure they take to tell a
lye: as men that drinke not, all for thirst:
but for a pleasure they take, to taste of the
wine. Other some doe tell lyes, to make
a vaine glorious boasting of them selues:
vaunting and telling in a brauery, what
wonderfull exploits they haue doone, or
bearing men in hand, they be greate doctours
and learned men.
            In Silence too, after a sorte, without
speache,Lesinges and Counterfectinges. a mā may tell a lesynge: I meane
with his gestures and grace: as some you
shall see, that being of meane, or rather base
condition and calling, vse suche a solemnitie
in all their doings, and marche so
stately, and speake with suche a prerogatiue,
or rather discourse lyke Parleament
men, setteling them selues, as it were, in a
place of Iudgement, proudly prying about
thē like Peacockes: that it is a very death
to behold them.
            And some suche you shall fynde, that allthough
they bee combered with no more
wealthe then easily serues their turne: yet
will they neuer appeare vnles their neckes
be laden with chaines, their fingers full of

rings, their cappes beset with agletts, and
enery other parte bespangled, as though
they would defie ye King of Castiglio. Whose
behauiours be full of follies and vaine glorie,
which cometh of pryde, growing of vanitie
it selfe. So that wee must eschew
these faults, as foule and vnseemely things.
You shall vnderstand, in many Cities, and
those of the best, the lawes doe not suffer,
that riche men should go muche more gorgeously
attyred, then the poore. For poore
men thinke they haue a wrong: when mē
seeme, but in countenaūce alone, as it were
Imperiously to reigne ouer them. So that
we must carefully beware we fall not into
these follies.
            Neither must a man boaste of his Nobilitie,
his Honour or riches: muche lesse
vaunt of his witt,Glorious bostinge and braggeing. or gloriously reherse to
much of his deedes & valiāt Actes, or what
his Auncestors haue done, nor vppō euery
occasion, fall in rehersall of suche thinges,
as many men doe. For in suche case, a mā
would weene, they seeke, either to contend
with the Company, (if they be, or will take
vppon them to bee, as good Gentlemen, &
of as muche wealthe and worthines, as
they bee:) or elles to ouercrowe them, (if
they liue in meaner condition and calling,

then they doe) And as it were to vpbraide
them, their poore and base condition of life.
            A man must neither embase, nor exalte
him selfe to muche out of measure:Exalting a
                     •
                  d embasing. but rather
bury in silēce some parte of his merits,
then arrogate to muche vnto him. Bycause
Goodnes it selfe, vvhen it excedeth muche is euer
enuyde of some. And you may be sure,
they that embase them selues thus beyond
measure, refusing that worship and honour
that is but duely their owne of very right:
shewe more pryde in this contempte, then
they that vsurpe those things, that are not
so due vnto them. So yt a man perchaūce,
might saye, Giotto hath not deserued those
Cōmendatiōs yt some beleue,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  Nouel. 5 Go
                     •
                  r. 6. fo. 29
                     •
                  
                in yt he refused
to be called Master: being not only a master
but without doubt a singular and cunning
master in his art in those daies. But be
it blame, or praise yt he deserued: it is most
sure, he that refuseth that which euery mā
els doth hunt for: sheweth therin, he reproueth
or contemneth the common opinion
of men. And, to contemne the honour &
renowne, which other mē gape for so much,
is but to glorie and magnifie him selfe aboue
other. For asmuche as there is no
man (without he be mad) will refuse and
reiect things that be deare and of price: vnles

hee be suche, as hathe plenty and store
of those deare and deintye things.
            Wee must not boast of those good things
that be in vs, nor set them to lyght: for in ye
one, wee doe vpbraide men their faults: In
the other, wee scorne to muche their vertues.
But it behoueth euery man to speake
his owne praise, as litle as hee may. And
if occasion driue him vnto it: it shalbe good,
modestly to speake the truethe, as I haue
told you before.
            And therefore, they that desire to doe mē
a pleasure: must needes leaue one faulte, yt
is to common with all men: they must not
shewe them selues so afraide and fearefull
to speake their mindes, when a man dothe
aske their aduise. For, it is a deadly paine to
here thē, & specialy if they be mē, in ye Iudgemēt
of ye world, of good vnderstanding and
wisedōe. What a fetchīg about is this, ere
they cōe to yt mater? Sir I beseche you pardon
mee, if I doe not say vvell. I vvill speake like a
gros mā as I am: & grosly according to my pore
skil. And Sir, I am sure you vvil but mocke me
for it. But yet, to obey you: & they drawe their
words forth so lōg, & put thē selues to suche
paine: yt, while these ceremonies be a doīg, ye
hardest questiō yt is, might haue byn determined
with fewer words and shorter time:

bycause they cannot get out of these protestations,
when they bee in.
            They bee also very tedious to men, and
their conuersation & maners are very troublesome:
whoe shewe too base and abiect a
minde in their doings. And where the chefest
and highest place,Abiecte Minde. is apparantly due
vnto them: they will euer creepe downe to
the lowest. And it is a spitefull buisynes
to thrust them vp: For they will straite
iogge backe againe, like a resty Iade,
or a Nagge that startleth a side at his shadowe.
So that, there is muche a dooe wt
them, when wee meete at a doore. For
they will not (for all you can dooe) in any
case enter before you, but so trauerse their
ground, go ba
                  •
               ke, and so fray and defend
with their armes and their handes: that
at euery thirde steppe, a man must be ready
to wage battell with them: and thus
they breake of, all solace and pleasure, and
otherwhile, the buisynes they meete aboute.
            And therfore, Ceremonies,
               Ceremonies. which wee
name, as you heare, by a straunge terme, as
lacking a worde of our owne, bycause our
elders, hauing no knowledge of those superstitious
fashions, coulde not well giue
them a proper name. Ceremonies, I saye,

(in my Iudgement,) differ not much from
lyes & dreames, for their own very vainesse
it selfe. So that wee may couple and
ioyne thē together in this our treatise, sithe
occasion serues so fytt to speake of them
here, As a good man hath often shewed
me: those solemnities that church men doe
vse at their Altars, and in their diuine seruice
bothe to God and his holy things, are
properly called Ceremonies: but after, men
did begyn, to reuerence eche other with curious
entertaynements, more then were
conuenient, and would be called masters
and Lords, amōgest them selues, yealding
bending, and bowing their bodyes, in tokē
of reuerence one to another, vncouering
their heads, vsing highe titles and Styles
of honour, and kyssing their hands as if
they were hollye things: some body, by like
considering all these things well, and finding
these newe founde curious follyes
without any name: thought good to Christen
and call them Ceremonies, but sure in
a iest as I take it: as to be mery and make
good cheare, we terme it in sport, a triūph:
which custome, no doubt, tooke not his being
at vs, but elles where, as barbarous &
straunge: and not long since, from whence
I knowe not, transported into Italie:
               
whose deedes being wretched, and effects
base and vile, hath gotten encrease and honor,
in vayne woords alone, and superfluous
titles.
            
               Ceremonies then, if we cōsider well their
intēts that vse them: are but vaine shewes
of honour and reuerence, towardes him to
whome they be doone: framed of semblance
and wordes touching their titles and courtious
offers. I say vaine: In that we honour
mē to their face, whome we reuerence
not in deede, but otherwhile cōtemne. And
neuertheles, because we may not go agaīst
custome, wee giue them these titles: The
most honorable Lord suche a one: the Noble
Lord suche a one. And so otherwhile wee
offer them our humble seruice: whome wee
could better vnserue then serue, & cōmaund
then doe them any duety.
            Thē not Lesinges alone, but also Treacheries
and Treasons, shalbe called Ceremonies.
But because these wordes and these titles
aboue rehersed, haue lost their strēgth: and
waste, (as a man may say of Irō) their tē
               per,
wt such continuall occupying of it as we
doe vse: we must not so precisely way them
as other wordes, nor so strictly construe the
meaning of them. And, that this is true,
that which allwayes happens to all men,

dothe shewe it playne inoughe. For if wee
meete with a man, we neuer sawe before:
with whome, vppon some occasion, it behoues
vs to talke: without examining wel
his worthines, most commonly, that wee
may not offend in to litle, we giue him to
much, and call him Gentleman, and otherwhile
Sir, althoughe he be but some Souter
or Barbar, or other suche stuffe: and all bycause
he is appareled neate, somewhat gentleman
lyke.
            And as men in tymes past,Titles by Priuilege. were wont to
haue vnder the Priuilege of the Pope & Emperour,
peculiar & distinct titles of honour,
which might not be vntouched, without
doing wrong to the priuileged men: nor againe
attributed & geuen without a scorne,
to them that were no such priuileged persones:
So at this daie, wee must more
freely vse those titles, and the other significations
of honour, like to those titles: bycause
Custome the mightiest Lorde hathe
largely therewith, priuileged men of our
time.
            This vse and custome, though so fayre
and gallant without, is altogether vaine
within, and consisteth in semblance without
effect, & in wordes without meaning.

But this notwithstanding,Custom must not be altered it is not lawful
for vs to chaunge it: but rather, bycause it
is not our fault, but the fault of our tyme,
wee are bounde to followe it: but yet wee
must discretely doe it.
            So that wee are to noate,The end why ceremonies be vsed. that Ceremonies
are vsed, eyther for a Profit, or for a Vanitie,
or for a Duetie.
               Ceremonies for profit. And euery lye that is
told for a mans priuate profit: is a deceite,
a sinne, and a dishonest parte: for, in what
so euer it bee, A man can neuer honestly lye.
            
            And this is a common fault with flatterers,
that counterfet them selues to be our
friends, and apply them selues euer to our
desiers, what soeuer they be: not bycause
wee would haue it so, but to the ende wee
should doe them some pleasure, for it. And
this is not to please vs, but to deceiue vs.
And albeit this kind of fault be, peraduenture,
by reason of custome sufferable: yet
notwithstanding bycause of it selfe, it is
fowle and hurtefull, it yll becomes a gentle
man to doe it. For it is no honestie to seeke
a pleasure by the hurt of another. And if lyes
and false flatteries, may bee termed Ceremonies
(as I haue sayde before:) so oft, as
we vse them for respect of our gain & profit:
so oft wee doe hazard our good name and
credite: so that this consideration alone,

myght moue vs well to leaue all Ceremonies,
and vse them no more.
            It resteth now that I speake of those yt
bee done of Dutie,
               Dutifull ceremonies. and of those that be done
of a Vainesse. As touching ye first, VVe must
not leaue them vndone in any wise. For he
that faileth to doe them, dothe not onely displease,
but doth a wrong to him, to whome they
be due. And many times it chaunceth, ye
men come to daggers drawing, euē for this
occasion alone, that one man hath not done
the other, that worship and honour vppon
the way, that he ought. For to saye a trueth
The power of custome is great & of much force,
               Custome is a lawe.
(as I said) and would be taken for a lawe, in
these cases. And that is the cause we say:
You:
               You. to euery one, that is not a man of very
base calling, and in suche kinde of speach
wee yealde such a one, no maner of courtesie
of our owne. But if wee say: Thou:
               Thou. to
suche a one, then wee disgrace him and offer
him outrage and wronge: and by suche
speach, seeme to make no better reconing of
him, then of a knaue and a clowne.
            And although the tymes past, and other
countryes, haue vsed other maners: let vs
yet, keepe our selues to our owne: And let
not vs dispute the matter, which is the better
of twaine. For wee must obserue, not

those, that we Iudge in our owne conceits
to be good: but suche, as be currant by custome,
& vsed in our owne tyme: as lawes,
which we be bound to keepe, thoughe they
be not all of the best, tyll suche tyme, as the
magistrates, the Prince, or they that haue
power to amed them, haue chaunged them
to better.
            So that It behoues vs, hedefully to marke
the doings and speache, wherewith daily practise
and custome,
               Bocc. Nouel. 6 Gior. 5. fo. 259 
               wonteth to receaue, salute, &
name in our owne country, all sortes and kinds
of people, and in all our familiar communicatiō
with men, let vs vse the same.
               Peter the King of Aragon. And notwithstanding
the Admerall (as peraduēture the
maner of his time was suche) in his talke
with Peter the King of Aragon, did many
times: Thou him: Let vs yet saye to our
King: Your maiestie: and your highnes: aswell
in speache as in writing. And if
they haue followed the vse of their time:
then let not vs breake the fashions of ours.
And these doe I call Duetifull Ceremonies,
bycause they proceede not, as we would, or
of our free willes: but are layde vppō vs
by the Lawes: I meane, Common custome.
            
            And in suche things, as carry no euill meaning
in them, but rather some face of courtesie:
reason would and commaundeth, vve shoulde

rather obserue common Custome, then dispute
and lay the lawe for them.
            And albeit, to kisse in shewe of reuerence, of
very right appertayneth to the reliques of
Saints and there holy matters: yet if it bee
the maner of your country, at parting, to
say:I kisse your hande: I am your seruaūt: your slaue in chayne. 
               Signori, Io vi bascio la mano. Or: Io son
vostro seruidore: Or els: vostro schiauo in catena:
you must not disdaine it, more then
other. But, In farewelles and writings, you
must salute and take leaue, not as reason, but as
custome will haue you: and not as mē wont in
times past, or should doe: but as men vseat this
day: for it is a chorlishe maner to say: VVhat
greate gentleman is he I pray you, that I must
master him: Or: is he becom master parson, that
I must kisse his hands? for he that is wont to
be (Sird) and like wise (Sirreth) other: may
thinke you disdaine him, and vse some outrage
vnto him, when you call him to his
face, by his bare name, and giue him no
addition.
            And these termes of Seignory, seruice, &
duetye, and such other like vnto these, as I
haue sayde: haue lost a greate parte of their
harshnes, and (as hearbes lōg steepte in the
water) are sweetened, and made softe and
tender, by reason of muche speache in mens
mouthes, and cōtinuall vse to speake them.

So that we must not abhorre thē, as some
rude and rusticall fellowes, full of foolishe
simplicitie, doe: that would fayne beginne
the letters we write to Kinges and Emperours
after this sort. vz. Yf thou and thy
children be in healthe it is well: I am also in
healthe: saying, that suche was the beginning
of the letters, the Latins did write to
the magistrates of Rome. If men should
liue by their measure, and go backe to those
fashions and maners, our first fathers dyd
vse: the worlde thē by litle and litle, would
come so about, that we should feede vppon
acornes againe.
            And in these Duetifull Ceremonies, there
be also certain rules and precepts, we must
obserue: that wee may not bee touched wt
               Vainesse and Pride.
               Vanitie and pryde. And first of all, wee
must consider the country where wee doe
liue. For all customes be not currant a lyke in
all countreys.
               Respect of countrey. And peraduenture that
which they vse in Naples, which is a Citye
replenished with gentlemen, of good houses
and Lordes of greate power, were not
so fitte for Florens and Luke: Which are inhabited,
for the most part, with Merchāts
and plaine gentlemē, without any Prince,
Marques, or Barone amongest them. So
that the braue and Lordelike manners of

the gentlemē of Naples transported to Florence:
should be but waste, and more then
needes: like a tall mans gowne cast ouer
a dwarfe: as also the manners of Florence
shoulde be to pinchinge and straite, for the
Noble natures and mindes of the gētlemē
of Naples. And although the gētlemē of Venice,
vse great embracings and entertainementes
amongst themselues, and fawne
without measure the one on the other, by
reasō of their offices, degrees and fauours
they looke to finde when they meete and assemble
and choose their officers: yet for all
this, it is not conuenient, that the good
men of Rouigo, or the Citizens of Asolo,
should vse the lyke solēnities, embraceings
and entertainemēts one to another, haueing
no such kinde of cause amongst them:
Albeit all that same countrie (if I bee not
deceiued) is falne a litle, into these kinde of
follies, as ouer carelesse and apt inough by
nature, or rather learning those maners of
Venice their Lady and Mistris: because
Euerie man gladly seeketh to tread the steps of
his better: although there be no reasō for it.
            Moreouer we must haue a regarde to
the time, to the age, and the condition of
him,Time, age, condicion & calling must be respected. to whom we vse these ceremonies, and
likewise respect our owne calling: and with

men of credite maintaine them: but wt men
of small account cut them of cleane, or at
least, abridge them as muche as wee may, &
rather giue them a becke thē a due garde:
Which the courtiers in Rome can very
well skill to doe.
            But in some cases these Ceremonies be very
combersome to a mans busines,In what case Ceremonies be cumbersome. and very
tedious: as, Couer your head, sayes the
Iudge, yt is busied wt causes, and is scanted
of time to dispatche them. And this fellow
so full of these Ceremonies, after a number
of legges and shuflinge curtesis, aunswers
againe: Sir I am very well thus. But sayes
the Iudge agayne, Couer your head I say.
Yet this good fellow tourning twise or
thrise to & fro, making lowe conges downe
to the grounde wt muche reuerence and humilitie,
aunswers him, still: I beseache your
worship, let me doe my duetie. This busines
and trouble lasteth so long, & so muche time
is trifled: that the Iudge might very nere
haue dispatched all his busines within that
space. Then, although it be euery honest
mans parte, and the duety of euery meaner
body, to honour the Iudges, and mē yt
be called to worship & honour: yet, where
time wyll not beare it: it is a very troublesome
thing to vse it, and it must be eschewed,

or measured with reason.
            Neyther be ye self same Ceremonies semely
for young mē, respecting their Age: yt ould
mē doe vse together. Nor yet can it becom
men of meane and base condition, to vse the
very same, yt gētlemē & greate men may vse
one to another. And if wee marke it well,
we shall find, yt the greatest, ye best men, & mē
of most valour, doe not alwayes vse ye most
Ceremonies thē selues, nor yet loue nor looke
a mā should make many goodly curtsies
vnto them, as men that can ill spend their
thoughts one matters so vaine.
            Neither must handy crafts men, nor mē
of base condition, buisie thē selues to much,
in ouer solemne Ceremonies to greate men,
and Lordes: it is not lookt for in suche. For
they disdaine them, more then allowe thē:
because it seemes that in such, they seeke &
looke, rather for obedience and duetie, then
honour. And therefore it is a foule faulte in
a seruaūt, to offer his master his seruice: for
he coūts it his shame, & he thinks the seruāt
doth make a doubt, whether he is master or
no: as if it were not in him to imploy him,
& cōmaūd him too. These kinde of Ceremonies
would be vsed frankely. For, VVhat
a man dothe of duetie, is taken for a debte,
and hee finds him selfe litle beholding to

him that doth it. But he that dothe more,
then he is bound to: it seemes he parteth
with somewhat, and that makes men to
loue him, and to commende him for a liberall
man. And I remember mee well, I
haue hearde it sayde, that a worthy Graeciā
               
a greate versifier, was euer wont to saye:
that He that could skill to entertaine men with
a small aduenture, made a greate gayne.
            
            You shall then vse youre Ceremonies, as
the tailer shapes his garments, rather to
large then to litle: but yet not so, that hee
cutteth one hose large inough to make a
cloke. And if thou doe vse in this point,
some litle gentle behauiour, to suche as be
meaner then thy selfe: thou shalt be counted
lowly. And if thou doe asmuche to
thy betters: thou shalt bee sayde a Gētlemā
well taught,Vanitie. and courtious. But hee that
dothe herin to muche, and is ouer lauishe,
shalbe blamed as vaine and light: and perhaps
worse thought of too: counted a busie
body, a fidging fellowe, and in wife mens
sight, a flatterer: which vice, our elders
haue called, (if I doe not forget me) dowble
diligence. And there is no faulte in the
worlde, more to bee abhorred, or ye worsse
beseemes a gentleman, then this. And this
is the thirde maner of Ceremonies, which

simply procedeth of our owne will, and not
of custome.
            Let vs thē remēber, that Ceremonies, (as
I haue alwayes sayd) were not so necessarie
by nature, but a man might doe well
inough without them: As for example, our
coūtrie liued (it is not long since) in maner
cleane without any. But other mens diseases
haue infected vs, with these infirmities
and many mo. So that, custome and
vse obserued: the rest that is more, is but
waste: and such a sufferable leesing, as if
it be more in deede then is in vse, it is not
only vnsufferable, but forbidden: and so
vppon, the matter, a cold and vnsauourie
thing to noble mindes, that cannot brouse
vppon shrubbes and shewes.
            And you shall vnderstand, that trusting
my owne skill but little, in wryting this
present treatise: I thought good to consult
with many, and to take the Iudgement of
better learned men then my selfe. And
this in my reading I finde. There was a
King, they call him Oedipus:
               Oedipus. being banished
and driuen out of his countrie (vppon
what occasion I know not) he fled to King
Theseus
               Theseus. at Athens, the better to saue him
selfe and his life, from his enemies, that
mainely pursued him. This Oedipus now

comming before the presence of Theseus, by
good chaūce hearing his daughter speake,
(whome he knew by her voice, for he was
blind and could not beholde her with his
eyes) he was so presently striken with ioy,
that, not tarying to doe his allegeaūce and
duetie to the King, he did presētly embrace,
& make much of his daughter before him:
his fatherly affection so led him, and rulde
him so. But in the end finding his fault,
and better aduising him selfe of his doings:
he would needs excuse it to Theseus, & humbly
prayd his grace to pardon his folly. The
good and wise King, cut of his talke, and
bad him leaue his excuses, and thus saide
vnto him: Comfort thy selfe Oedipus, and bee
not dismayd at that thou hast done. For I will
not haue my life honoured with other mens
woordes, but with my owne deedes. Which
sētēce a man should haue alwaies in mind.
            And albeit men be well pleased, that mē
doe giue them worship & honour: yet when
they find them selues cuningly courted,
they be soone weary of it, and also disdaine
it. For these glauerings, or flatteries I
should say, to amend their knaueries & falsehoodes,
haue this fault withall: that these
glauering fellowes doe plainly shewe, they
count him, whome they court in this sorte,

but a vaine, and arrogant bodie, an asse
of grose capacitie, and so simple, yt it should
be an easie matter to bayte him and take
him too. And these Vaine and Curious Ceremonies,
besides that they be superfluous: so they
beare with all a shape of flattery, so slenderly couered,
that euery man doth opēly see them,
and know them plaine: in suche sorte, that
they that doe them, to the end to make a
gaine, besides that ill that is in them, wherof
I spake before: shewe them selues also,
gentlemen ill taught, without good maner
or any honest fashion.
            But there is another sorte of Ceremonious
people, who make it an arte and merchandise,
and keepe a booke and a reconing
of it. One these men (they say) they must
smile, on such men they must laughe: and, ye
better man shall sit in the chayr, and the other
vppon a lowe stoole: which superstitious
Ceremonies, I beleue, were transported
out of Spaine into Italie. But our
country, hath geuen them but colde entertainement,
and as yet they haue taken
but slender roote here: for this precise
difference of worship, and gentry, is
not liked of, with vs. And therefore
it is but ill maner, for a man to make
him selfe Iudge, which is the better man.
            
               But it is much worse for a man to make
a sale of his Ceremonies and entertainmēts,
(after ye maner of harlots) as I haue seene
many gentlemen doe in the court, geuing
good wordes and faire countenaunces for
a rewarde and recompence, of the goods
and the tyme, their seruaunts haue spent in
their seruice.
            And sure they that take a pleasure to vse
ouer many Ceremonies, more then neede:
shewe they doe it vppon a lustines and brauery,
as men that haue nothing elles in thē
of any valour.
            And bycause these follies are learned wt
ease inough, and carry withall a litle fayre
glose in shewe: they bestowe all their whole
mindes none other waye. But graue
matters they can not abide to weelde, as
things to farre aboue their reache: and
coulde finde in their harts to dwell in these
toyes and tryfles, as men whose capacitie
conceiueth nought of Importaunce: like
tender mylkesops that can be are no brūt:
or that, beside a glorious outside, haue not
mettall inough in thē to abide a flea byting.
And therfore, they could wishe it worse:
that these entertainments and acquaintāce
with mē, should go no further then the first
sight. And of these there bee an infinite

number.
            And some againe be to full of words,
and abound to muche in curtious gestures
to couer and hyde the defects and faults of
their treacheries, and their vile & base natures:
For they see, if they should be as barē
& rude in their woords, as they be in their
deeds & their doings, mē would in no case
abide them. And to saye a trueth, yow shall
finde yt 
               
                  〈◊〉
               of these two causes, drawe most
men one, to vse these wast and needles Ceremonies,
and nothing els: which lightly
most men cannot away withall, bycause
they be hindered by them, & their meanes,
to liue as they would, and lose their libertie:
whiche a mā dothe preferre aboue any
thing ells.
            Wee must not speake yll of other mē, nor
of their doings: althoughe it plainely appere,
that men do willingly bēd good eare
to heare it, as easily moued therto, by ye nature
of malice and enuy, that pynes at our
Neighbours prosperity and rising to
worship & honour: for at lēgth mē will eschewe
the acquayntaūce of SlaūderousSlaundering.
people, as much as they shunne the Oxe, yt
goreth with his horns, or strikes wt his
feete: making their reconing, that what
they tell them of vs, asmuche they will tell

vs, of them.
            And some ther be,Quareling. that so quarel at euery
word, question, and wrangle,Wrangling. that they
shew they haue litle skill in other mens
natures:Ouerthwarting. for, Euery man desireth the victory
should go one his syde: and hates it asmuche,
to be mastered in words, as to be vanquished in
any other acte that he dothe. So yt, willfully to
ouerthvvart a man, it workethe no Loue and
good vvill: but rather displeasure, 
                     •
                  ancoure
and malice. And therfore, he that sekes
to be well thought of, and would be taken
for a plesaunt and good Companion,
must not so redily vse these speaches: It
was not so: And, Nay: it is as I tell you. I wil lay
a vvager vvith you: But he must rather take
payns, to apply himself to other mēs mīds
cōcerning such things, as haue matter of
small importaunce: Bycause the victorye,
in such cases, is daungerous: for, the gayninge
the cause, in try
                  ••
               ing questions,
doth often loose the Loue of a faithfull
friend. And men are so farre out of loue &
liking, of such hot fellowes: that they will
by no meanes growe acquaynted with
suche, least they be dryuen euery hower to
bralle, to chide, and to fighte with them
for it. And suche kinde of people doe

purchase these names:Conquerour. Maister Vniciguerra:
Or,Ouerthwarter. 
               Sir Contraponi: Or, Sir Tutte
                     •
                  salle:
And sometime:Know all. 
               il Dottor suttile.
               The subtile Doctour.
            
            And if you chaunce otherwhile, to be intreated
of the cōpany to speake your mind:
I would haue you doe it after a gentle sort,
without shewing your selfe so greedie
to carry the bucklers away, as if you
would eate them vp for haste. But
thou must Leaue to euery man his parte:
And bee it right or vvronge, consent to the
minds of the most, or the most importunate:
and so leaue the fielde vnto them: that
some other, and not your selfe, may beate
and sweat, and chace in the winning of
the cause. For these quarelous contentions,
bee foule and ill fauoured fashions
for gentlemen to vse: and they get them
ill will and displeasure of all men for it:
and they bee vncomely for their owne
vnseemelines, which of it selfe offendeth
euery good honest minde, as it may chaūce
you shall heare hereafter.
            But the common fault of men is such,Counceling and reprouing▪
               
and eche man is so infected with this
selfe loue and liking of him selfe: that he
hath no respect or care to please any man
ells.
            
               And to shewe them selues fiue headed, of
muche vnderstanding, and wise: they
counsell, reproue, dispute, and bralle, to
daggers drawing, and allowe nothing els
but that they say them selues.
            To offer aduyse vnrequested: what is it
els but to vaunt youre selfe wiser then he
is, whom you do counsell: nay rather, it is
a playne checke to him, for his Ignoraunce
and folly. And therfore, you must not
                  ••
               
so; with all your acquaintance generally:
but only with your very friendes, or suche
whō you are to gouerne & rule: or els, whē
a man hapely standes in daunger & perill,
how muche a straunger so euer he be. But
in our common Acquaintance and conuersation,
Let vs not busy our selues, and medle
to muche vvith other mens doings. In which
fault many doe fall: but most of all, the
men of least vnderstanding. For, Men of
grose Capacities, consider but litle: And they
take no longe time to debate with them
selues, as men that haue litle busines to
doe.
            But how so euer it be,He that counselleth hath euer a good conceite of him selfe. hee that offereth
and geueth his counsell: geues
vs to thinke, hee hathe this conceite of
him selfe: that all the witt is in him,

and other poore men haue none at all.
            And sure there bee some, that stand so
muche in conceite of their wit: that they
will be in maner, at warres, with him, that
wil not follow the counsell they giue them.
And thus they will say. Very vvell: a poore
mans counsell vvill not be taken: suche a
one vvill doe as he list: suche a one geues no
heede to my vvordes. As though there were
not more Arrogancie in thee, that sekest to
bring a man to followe thy Counsell: then
there is in him, that followes his owne
aduise.
            And they doe also make the like fault,Reprouing and correcting of faults. yt
take vppon them to reproue and correct
mens faults, and to geue a definite sentēce
in all things, and lay the lawe to all men.
Suche a thing would not be done: You spake
suche woordes: Doe not so: say not so: The wine
that you drinke is not good for you: but would
be red vvine. You should vse suche an Electuarie,
and suche pilles: And they neuer leaue
to reproue and correct. And let vs passe
that ouer, that otherwhile, they busy them
selues so much, to purge other mēs groūds:
that their owne is ouergrowen, and full of
thornes and nettles. For it is a meruailous
payne vnto them, to heare one that syde.
            And as there be few or none, whose mids

can frame, to spend their lyfe with a Physition,
a Confessour, and muche lesse a Iudge
that hath iur
                  ••
               diction and power to controwle
and correct all criminall faultes:
so is ther not one, that can take any pleasure
to lyue, or make himself familiar with
suche Censors: so hard, and seuere. For, euery
man loueth libertye: and they woulde
robbe vs of it, and get to be our masters.
So that it is no good māner to be so redye
to corect and giue rules vnto mē: we must
geue Scholemasters and Fathers leaue to do
that. And yet that notwithstanding,
experience doth shewe, the childeren and
scholers both, do often hide them selues frō
them, you see.
            Doe not allow, that a man should scorne
or scoffeScornes and Scoffes. at any man, what so euerhe be:
no not his very enimy, what displeasure so
euer he beare him: for, it is a greater signe of
contempt and disdaine, to scorne a man, then
to do him an op
                     •
                   vvrōg: forasmuch as vvrongs
may be done, eyther of choler, or of som couetous
mynde or other. And ther is no mā
will take a displeasure with that, or for
that, he doth not set by: nor yet couet that
thing, he doth altogether contemne.
            So that, a man doth make some accōpt of

him he dothe wronge: but of him that he
scoffes and scornes, he makes no reconing
at all, or as litle as may be.
            And the Nature and effect of a scorne,
               The Nature of a scorne or a scoffe. 
               is
properly to take a contentation and pleasure to
do another man shame and villany: thoughe it
do our selues no good in the world. So
that, good maner & honesty, would vs beware
we scorne no man in any case: wherin
they be much to be blamed, that reproue
men those blemishes they haue in their
person, eyther in woords, as Master Forese
da Rabatta did, laughing at the coūtenaunce
of Master Giotta: or in deeds, as many doe,
counterfeting those that stutter, haulte, or
be crookte shoulderd. And likewyse,
they that scoffe at any man, that is deformed,
ill shapen, leane, litle, or a dwarfe, ar
much to be blamed for it: or that make a
gybing and iesting at such follyes as another
man speaketh, or the woordes
that escape him by chaunce: and with all,
haue a sporte and a pleasure to make a mā
blush: all these spitefull behauiours and
fashions, worthely deserue to be hated, and
make them that vse them, vnworthy to
beare the name of an honest gentleman.Bocc, Nouel. 5 Gior. 6. fo. 29
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  .
            
            And such as vse to iest at a man, be very
lyke vnto these: I meane them that

haue a good sport to mockeMockes. and beguile mē,
not in spite or scorne, but on a meriment alone.Difference betwen a scorne and a mocke
And you shall vnderstand, There is
no difference betvveene a scorne and a mocke:
but the purpose alone and intent a man hath, in
the meaning the one the other. For a man
mockes and laughes otherwhile, in a sport
and a pastime: but his scorne is euer in a
rage and disdaine. Although in common
speache and wryting, wee take the one
woorde sometyme for the other. But He
that doth scorne a man: feeleth a contentation
in the shame he hath done him: And hee that
dothe mocke, or but laughe: taketh no contentation
in that he hath done: but a sport,
to be merry & passe the time away: where
it would be, both a greefe and a sorrow, perchaunce,
vnto him, to see that man receaue
any shame, by any thing he said or did vnto
him.
            And althoughe I profited litle, in my
Grammar in my youthe: yet I remember
that Mitio, who loued Aeschines so muche,
that he him selfe had wōder at it: yet other
while, toke a sporte & a pleasure to mocke
him: as when he said to him self: I vvill
go to giue him a mocke: so that, I must inferre,
that the selfe same thing, done to the
very selfe same body: according to the intent

of him that doth it, may be eyther a
mocke or scorne.
            And bycause our purpose, cannot be
plainely knowne vnto other men: it shall
not be good for vs to vse such parts, as
bring men in doubt and suspicion, what
our intent and meaning is in them: but
rather let vs eschewe them, then seeke to
be counted Iesters. For, It many times
chaunceth, in boording and Iesting, one tackes
in sporte, the othet strykes againe in earnest: &
thus from playing, they come to fraying.
So, he that is familiarly mockte in pastime,
recons it, otherwhile, to be done to
his shame & dishonour, and therat he takes
a disdaine. Besides this, A mocke is no better,
then a deceyte. And naturally, it greueth
euery man to erre and be deceyued.
So that, many Reasons ther be to proue,
That He that seekes to purchase goodwill,
and be well thought of: must not make him
selfe to cunning in mockes and Iestes.
            
            It is very true, we are not able, in no
wise, to leade this paineful lyfe, altogether
without some pleasure and solace: And bycause
Iestes do geue vs some sporte, and
make vs merry, and so cōsequētly refreash
our spirits: we loue them that be pleasaunt,
merry conceited, and full of solace.

So that a body would thinke, I should rather
persuade the contrarie: I meane, I
shoulde say: It is conuenient and meete in
company, to vse prety mockes, and otherwhile
some Iestes and taunts. And without doubt,
they that can slint after a friendly and gē
               tle
sort, be muche more made of, and better
beloued then they that cannot skill or
haue no wit to doe it. Howbeit, it is needeful
in this, to haue a respect to many thīgs.
            And forasmuche as it is the intēt of him
that doth Iest: to make a sport and pastime
at his faulte, whome he doth loue and esteeme,
and of whom he doth make more thē
a commō account: it must be well lookte to,
that the fault, wherin his friend hath fallen,
be suche, as he may sustaine no slaunder
or shame, or any harme by any talke or
Ieste he makes vppon it: otherwise, his skil
doth ill serue him, to make a good difference
betweene a pleasaunt Iest, and a very
plaine wronge.
            And there be some men,Bocc. Nouel. 8 Gior. 9. fo. 430 so short & so testy,
that you must, in no wise, be merry, nor vse
any iesting with them. And that can Biondello
well tell, by Mayster Philippo Argenti
in the gallery of Cauiccioli.
            
            And moreouer, It cannot be good to ieaste
in matters of weite, and muche lesse in matters
of shame.
               No Iesting in matters of weight or of hame. For, men will weene that wee
haue a good sporte (as the common saying

is) to bragge and boast in our euill:Bocc. Nouel. 
                     •
                   Gior. 6. fo. 294. as it is
said, the Lady Philippe of Prato, tooke a singular
pleasure and contētation in the pleasaūt
& prety aūswer she made,Lupo is the proper name of a man aswell as a wolfe. to excuse her
loose and wanton life. And therefore, I
cannot thinke that Lupo of Vberti did any
thing extenuat or lessē his shame: but rather
increaste it greater, by the Ieste that hee
made to excuse his faulte, and qualifie the
opinion of his cowardly minde. For,
where he might haue kept him selfe safe
without daunger in the castle of Laterin,
wherein he was besieged round about, and
shutte vp: hee thought hee had plaide
the man good inoughe, in that hee could
say at the yealding it vp: that A wolfe
doth not loue to be besieged and shutte vp. For,
where it is out of time for to laughe, there to
vse any Iestes or daliaunce, it hath a very colde
Grace.
            
            And further, you shall vnderstād, there be
some Iestes yt bite, & some yt bite not at all.
For the first sorte:Bocc Nouel. 
                     •
                   Gior. 6. fo. 288 Iestes and Taunts. let yt wise counsell that
Lauretta gaue for that point, suffice to teach
you: That Iestes must bite the hearer like a
sheepe, but not like a dogge. For if it pinche,
as the byte of a dogge: it shalbe no more
a Ieste but a vvronge. And the lawes almost
in all countries, will, that who saith

any villanie vnto a man, shalbe greuously
punished for it. And, perchaunce, it were
not amisse, to prouide with all, some sharp
correction for him, that should byte in way
of iesting, beyond all honest measure. But
gentlemen should make account, that the
lawe that punisheth wronges, extendeth as
farre to iestes, and that they should seldome
or very easily nyp or taunt any man.
            And besides all this, you must vnderstād,
that a iest, whether it bite, or bite not, if it
be not fine & full of wit, men take no pleasure
at al to heare it, but rather are wearied
with it: or at least wise, if they doe laughe,
they laughe not at the iest, but at the iester
him selfe, that brings it forthe so colde.
            And bycause, Iestes be no other thing but
deceites: and deceite (as a thing that is framed
of subtilenes & craft) cannot be wrought
but of men, that haue fine and redy wittes, and
very present: therefore they haue no grace
in men that be rude, and of grose vnderstā
               ding:
nor yet in them alwayes, that haue
the best and floweing wittes: as, peraduē
               ture,
they did not altogether becōe Master
Iohn Boccaccio.
            
            But taūtes and Iestes be a special redines
and aptnes of wit, and quicken the
motions of the minde: wherefore they that

haue discretion, doe not in this point, consider
their will, but their disposition of nature:
and after they haue once or twise tried
their wittes, and finde them vnfit for suche
purpose: they leaue to labour them selues
any further in that kind of exercise: that it
may not chaunce vnto them,Bocc. Nouel. 2. Gior, 6. fo. 287. that hapt to
the knight of the lady Horetta. And if you
looke in to the maners of many, you shall
easily see, this that I tell you is true: I
say, that To Iest or to taunt, is not currant
with euery man that will, but onely with them
that can. And there be many that for euery
purpose, haue in their mouth redy, many of
these wordes, which wee call Bicticcichi:
that haue no maner of sense or meaning in
them. And some, that vse very foolishly
and fondly to chaunge Sillables into woords.
And some you shall heare speake and make
answer,Bycause these speaches haue no grace in our English toūge, I leaue them in the Italian. But our toung hath such absurd iests as plentifully as any other toung. otherwise thē a man would lightly
looke for, without any wit or pleasure in
the world in their talke. And if you doe
aske them, Doue e il signore? they answer againe.
Doue egli ha i piedi: and likewise.
Gli frae vnguer le mani con le grascia di signore
Giouan Boccadoro. Doue mi manda egli? Ad
Arno. Io mi voglio radere, Sarebbe meglio rodere.
Va chiama il Barbieri. Et perrhe non il
Barbadomanie. Al which be to grose, to rude,

and to stale:Bocc. Nouel. 10. Gior. 5. fo. 281. and such were almost, all the
pleasaunt purposes and iestes of Dioneo.
            
            But I will not take vppon me at this
tyme, to discourse of the best and the worst
kinde of iestes, what they be: aswel for that
other men haue written treatises therof
much more lernedly and better thē I can:
as also, bycause iestes & tauntes, haue at
first sight, a large and sure proofe of their
grace or disgrace: such, as thou canst not
do much amisse in this point, wtout thou
stand to much in thy owne conceyte, and
think to well of thy selfe: for where the iest
is prety and pleasaunt, there a man straite
is merry, and shewes a liking by laughīg,
and makes a kinde of admiration of it. So
that, where the company geues foorth no
liking of thy sportes and conceites, by their
mirthes and their laughing: hould thy
selfe still then, and iest no more. For it is
thy owne faulte thou must think, and not
theirs that do heare the: forasmuch as the
hearers, as it were allured, with the redye,
pleasaunt, and subtile aunswers or questions
(do what they can, will they or nill
they) cannot forbeare their laughing, but
laughe in spyte of their teeth. From whom
as from our right & lawfull Iudges, wee
must not appeale to our selues.
            Neither must a man, to make other men
merie, speake foule and filthie wordes, nor

make ilfauoured gestures, distorting his coū
               tenaūce,
& disfiguring his bodie. For, No mā
should, for other mēs pleasures, dishonest & dishonour
him self.
               Bocc. Nouel. 10. Gior. 5. fo. 281. It is an arte for a Iuggler &
iester to vse: it doth not become a gentleman
to do so.It is the beginning of a sōg. We must not then, imitate ye cōmon
and rude behauiours of Dioneo. Madonna
Aldruda Alzate La coda.
            
            Nor we must not coūterfet our selues to be
fooles & vnsauorie doltes: but as tune & occasiō
serueth, tell sōe pretie tale or sōe news,
neuer heard of before, he yt cā: & he yt cānot, let
him hold his peace. For, these be ye partes of
ye wit: which, if they be sodain & prety, giue a
proofe & a shew of ye quicknes of ye wit, & the
goodnes of ye maners of him ye speakes thē:
which thing doth verie much please men &
makes thē our louers & friends. But if they
be otherwise, they woorke thē a cōtrary effect.
For, mā would weene the asse would
play his parte: or yt sōe hody dody & louberly
lout would friske and daūce in his doublet.
There is another plesaūte kind of cōmunicatiō:Long talke & discourse. & yt is whē ye pleasure & grace doth not
cōsist in one merrie cōceite alone, but in lōg
& cōtinued talke: which would be well disposed,
wel vttered, & very wel set forth, to
shew ye maners, ye fashiōs, ye gestures & behauiours
of thē we speke, of so properly & liuely,

as ye hearer should think that he heareth thē
not rehearsed, but seeth them with his eyes
do those very thīgs he heares them to speak
of: which be very well obserued by the gentlemen
and gentlewomen both, in Boccace:
although yet otherwhile (if I be not deceiued)
they do affect and counterfet, more thē
is sightly for a gentleman or gentlewoman
to doe, like to these Comedie Players. And
to doe this well, you must haue the matter,
the tale, or the story, you take vppon you to
tell, perfect in your minde: and woordes so
redy and fit, that you neede not say in the
end:Bocc. Nouel. 2. Gior. 6. fo. 287. 
               That thing, and tother thing: This man,
what doe you call him: That matter, helpe me
to terme it: And, remember what his name is.
For this is iust the trot of the knight of
the lady Horetta. And if you doe reherse
any chaunce, in which there be many speakers:
you must not say: He said and he aunswered:
bycause this worde (He) serueth for
all men. So that the hearer that harkens
vnto it, is easily deceiued, and forgets whōe
you meane. Then, It behoues them that discourse
matters at length, to vse proper names, &
not to chaunge them after.
            
            And more ouer, a mā must beware that
he say, not those things, which vnsaide in
silence would make ye tale plesaūt inoughe,

and, peraduenture, geue it a better grace to
leaue them out. As to say thus. Such
a one, that was the sonne of such a one, that dwelt
in Cocomer streete: do you not knowe him? he
maried the daughter of Gianfigliazzi, the leane
scragge, that went so much to Saynt Laraunce.
No? do not you know him? why? do you not remember
the goodly strayght old man that
ware long haire dovvne to his shoulders? For
if it were nothing materiall to the tale,
whether this chaunce befell him, or him:
all thys long babble, and fond and folishe
questiōs, were but a tale of a Tubbe: to no
purpose, more then to weary mens eares
that harken to it, and long to vnderstand
the end. As peraduenture our Dant
hath made this fault otherwhile, where he
sayeth:

                  And borne my parents were of yoare in Lūbardie,
                  And eke of Mātuaes soyle they both by coūtry be.
               
            
            For, it was to no purpose, whether his
mother were borne at Gazuolo, or ells at
Cremona.
            
            But I lerned once of a straūger, a Rethorician
very lerned, a necessarie lesson cōcerning
this poinct: that Men must dispose and
order their tale, first vvith by names, and then

rehearse them (as neede is) that be proper. For,
the bynames alwayes beare the respect of
the persones qualitie: but the other are to
be vsed at the Fathers discretion, or his
whome they concerne.
            And therfore, that bodie whome in your
thought aud imagination to your selfe, you
doe cōceiue,Bocc. Nouel 6 Gior. 1. fo. 41. might be Lady Couetousnes her
selfe: in speache you shall call Maister Erminio
Grimaldi
                     •
                  : if suche be the common opinion,
the countrie hathe of him. And, if
there be no man in place where you dwell,
so notoriously knowne as might serue the
turne fit for your purpose: you must then
imagine the case further of, and set him a
name at your pleasure. It is very true,
that VVith muche greater pleasure we harken,
and better beholde (as it were with our eyes)
what soeuer is told vs of mē of our acquaintāce,
if the matter be suche as toucheth their maners:
then what vve doe heare of straungers and men
vnknovvne vnto vs. And the reason is this:
when wee doe knowe, that suche a man is
woont to doe so: we doe easily beleeue, he
hath doone so indeede: and wee take asmuche
knoweledge of him, as if wee were
present: where it chaunceth not so with vs,
in the case of a straunger.
            
               
               Our vvordes (be it in longe discourses or
other communication) Must be so plaine,Words would be plaine. that
all the companie may easily vnderstand them:
and withall, for sounde and sense they must
be apt and sweete. For if you be to vse one
of these two wordes: you shall rather say,
Il ventre:
               The, Bellie. then L' Epa. And where your
country speache will beare it,The Lyuer. you shall rather
say:The Paunche. 
               La Pancia, then L' Ventre: Or, il
Corpo.
               The Bellie. For, by these meanes you shalbe
vnderstoode,The Bodie. and not misse vnderstoode, as
we Florentines say, nor be darke and obscure
to the hearers. The which thing our Poet,
meaning to eschewe: in this very woorde
it selfe (I beleue) sought to fide out another,
not thinking muche of his paynes (bycause
it lyked him wel) to seeke farre to borrow it
els where. And sayd:

                  Remember hovv the Lorde
a man vvas fayne to be,
                  For mans offence and sinne in Cloyster
of virginitie.
               
            
            And albeit Dant the learned Poet, did set
by suche kinde of rules: I doe not think yet,
a mā should allow well of him in doing so.
And sure, I would not coūcell you to make

him your Maister in this point, to learne A
Grace: forasmuche as he him selfe had none.
For, this I finde in a Chronicle of him.
            This Dant, was somewhat proude for his knowledge, scornefull
and disdainfull, and muche (as Philosophers be) without
any grace or courtesie: hauing no skill to behaue him selfe in
company.
            But to come to our purpose againe: I
say, our speache must be plaine: which will
be easie inough to doe: if you haue wit to
choose those wordes that be naturally bred
in our soyle: and with all not so olde wt Age,
that they are become rotten and withered:
and as ouerworne apparell, leaft of and
cast a side.Old woordes out of vse, As, Spaldo, and Epa, and Vopo,
and Sezzaio, & Primaio. And moreouer, the
wordes you shall vse,Gergo is a very doubtfull manner of speache, as it were in Riddles: and very ambiguous. must haue no double
vnderstanding, but simple. For by coupling
suche wordes together: wee frame that
speache that is called Aenigma. And to
speake it plainer in our owne language, we
call it Gergo. As in this verse:

                  
                     
                        •
                     o vidi vn che da sette passatoi
                  Fu da vn canto all' altro trapassato.
               
            
            Againe,Ap
                     •
                   wordes and proper. our wordes would be, (as nere
as they myght be) aptly and properly applied
to that thing we go about to deliuer, &

as litle as may be, common to other matters:
for, in so doing, a man shall weene,
the matter it selfe is openly laide before
him: & that it is not expressed with wordes,
but pointed foorthe with the finger. And
therefore we may more properly say: A man
is knowen by his countenaunce, then by his
figure or counterfet.
               Dant. 23. Infer. And Dant did better
expresse the matter, when he saide.

                  The weightes
                  That peize the weight doe make the balāce creeke,
                  Then if he had saide
                  Crie out and make a noise.
               
            
            And it is a more proper and peculiar
speache to say, The shiuering of an ague, then
to call it The colde. And flesh that is Tidie,
to terme it rather, Fatte: then Fulsome.
            
            Ther be some woordes more in this place to like effect,
which I meane not to stande vppon now: bycause our
Englishe toūge cānot hansomely deliuer their perfect meaning.
For the Italians haue (as we haue, and all other
Countreis ells as well as wee) certaine peculiar wordes
and termes, so naturally and properly their owne, as it is not
possible to expresse them aptly and perfectly in any other
Language. And therefore the Author him selfe,
fearing, or knowing asmuche in the sense of these wordes,

which he hath inferred in this place (as it were preuenting
a blame) in maner excuseth and speaketh asmuch as I say,
as the matter it selfe that insueth doth shewe. For, th
                  •
               
Author him selfe following his purpose saithe thus.
            I am vvell assured, if some straunger
should, vnhappely for my credite, hit vppon
this t
                  •
               eatise of mine: he vvould laughe mee
to scorne, and say that I taught to speake in
riddles, or els in Ciphers. For as muche
as these vvordes, be almost so properly our
ovvne, that other countries haue no acquaintance
vvith them: or, if they vvoulde
vse them, yet they cannot tell hovv to vnderstand
them. For, vvho is it that knovves
vvhat Dant ment in this verse.
            Gia veggia per Mezzul perdere o Lulla.Dant. 28. Infer.
            
            Sure, I beleeue no man ells but vve that
are Florentines can vnderstand it. Notvvithstanding,
for any thing that I haue saide, if
there be any fault in this text of Dant: it is
not in the vvordes. But, if he haue faulted,
it is rather in this: that (as a man somevvhat
vvilfull) he vvould take vppon him, a matter
harde to be vttered in vvordes, and peraduenture
vnplesaunt to heare: then that he hath
exprest it ill.
            
               It is not then for a man to vse any talke,Talke in a forreigne Language.
with him that vnderstandeth not that language
you talke vnto him. Nor yet, bycause
a Douche man vnderstandes not the
Italian tounge, must wee (for that cause)
breake of our talke, to holde talke with him,
to make our selues counterfets, as Maister
Brufaldo did, and as some other be woont,
that fondly and coldly, without any grace,
thrust them selues in to Chat in their language
with whome they talke, what so euer
it be, and chop it out euery worde preposterously.
And many times it chaunceth,
the Spaniard talkes Italian with the Italian,
and the Italian babbles againe in a braueuery
and gallantnes, the Spanishe toung
with the Spaniard. And yet, it is an easier
thing to know, yt they both talke like strangers:
then to forbeare to laugh at the folish
follies that scape them both in speache. Let
vs not therfore vse our forreigne language, but
vvhen it is needefull for vs to be vnderstoode,
for some necessitie or other, that appertaineth vnto
vs: And in common vse, vse our owne
tounge, thoughe not altogether so good:
rather then a forreigne language, better
then our owne that is naturall vnto vs.
For a Lumbarde shall speake his owne

tounge more aptly (which is, notwithstanding,
but base and barbarous) then he shall
speake the Tuscane, or other language: euen
bycause he hath not so redily, so proper and
peculiar wordes, althoughe he studie much
for them, as wee our selues that be Tuscanes.
            
            But yet, if a man haue a respect to them
with whome he talkes: and for that cause
forbeare & leaue out those singular wordes,
(which I haue spokē of) and in stede of thē
vse the generall and common: his talke, by
suche meanes, shall haue the lesse pleasure &
delight.
            Besides this,Woordes that haue no honest meaning in them. it becometh euerie honest
gentleman, to eschewe those wordes that
haue no honest meaning. And, The goodnes
of wordes consisteth either in their sound, or
pronouncing: or, in their sense and meaning.
For a much as som wordes speake an honest
matter, and yet, perchaunce, there is a
certaine vnhonest sense perceaued to stand
in the pronouncinge of the worde it selfe:Rinculare, is to drawe backwarde, arselonge.
as Rinculare: which, notwithstanding, is
daily vsed of all men. But if a man or
woman should speake after this sorte, & at
that verie warning doe it in sight of any (I
meane shuffle backwarde vpon their taile)
then would the grosenesse of the worde

plainlie appeare vnto them. But our Palate,
throughe Custome and Use, happilie
tasteth ye wine (as it were) and the bestnes
of the sense of the worde, and not ye Dregges
or Leeze.
She gaue the Spanish figge
with both her thumbes at once.Dant. 25. infer
               
               Saith Dant.Fiche, is the thrusting of the thumbe betvveene the forefinger: vvhiche eyther for the vvorde or the remembrance of somthinge therby signified, is reputed amongste the Italians as a vvorde of Shame.
            
            But our women, would be much ashamed
to speake so: yea to shūne this ambig
                  •
               
               ous
woord, yt signifieth a worse matter, they
rather say Le castagne. Albeit yet some of
them at vnwares, many times, name that
vnaduisedly, which if another man had
spoken to trie them, would haue made them
blushe to heare that remembred in way of
blasphemie, which makes them women.
And therefore, suche as be, or would be better
mannered or taught,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  me take good heede
they doe eschewe, not only things vncleane
and vnhonest, but wordes also: and not somuche
those that be euill indeede, but tho
                  •
               e
that may be, or doe but seeme to be vnhonest,
foule & filthie: as some men say these
areof Dant.
               Dant▪ 17. 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               
                  She blewe large blastes of winde
                  Both in my face and vnder.
               
            
            Or els these.
            
               I pray thee tell mee vvhere about
the hole doth stand.
            And one of the Spirits said.
            Then come behinde and vvhere the hole
is, it may be scand.
            And you must knowe, that albeit two, or
moe wordes, otherwhile chaunce to tell
one selfe thinge, yet the one is more cleanly
then the other. As for example, to say:
She lay vvith him: and she satisfied his desire
vvith her person. For this self same speach, if
it were in other termes, would be to broad
before & to filthie to heare it. And speaking
of Endymion, you may more aptly say: Il Vago
della Luna: then you can say Il Drudo, althoughe
both these wordes doe import and
signifie A louer, and a Friend. And a much
honester speache is it, if you talke of Aurora,
to call, her. Tritons prety gerle and louer, then
Concubine. And it better becomes a mās
and womans mouth, to call Harlots, vvomē
of the vvorlde (as Belcolore did, who was
more ashamed to speake it then to doe it)
then to vse their common name: Thais is
a Harlot. And as Boccac
                     •
                  
                declared yt power
of whores and boyes. For, if he had termed
the males, by their beastly occupation,
as he termed the women: his talke would
haue byn foule & shamefull. And withall,

               A man must not alone bevvare of vnhonest and
filthie talke▪
               
               Base vvords and Vile. 
               but also of that vvhiche is base and
vile, and especially vvhere a man talketh & discourseth
of greate and highe matters. And for
this Cause, perchaunce, woorthely some
blame our Beatrice, sayeing:

                  To passe throughe Lethes floud,
the highest Fates vvould blott,
                  Yf man mighte taste the Viandes suche,Dant. 30. Purgato.
as there dooe fall by Lott,
                  And not pay firste a due
repentaunce for his scott.
               
            
            For, in my conceite, these base wordes
that come out of the Tauernes, bee verie vncomely
for suche a worthy discourse. And
when a man hathe like occasion to speake of
ye 
               Sunne, it shall not be good to call it The
Candell or the Lampe of the world: bycause
such woordes do put vs in minde of ye Oyle,
& the stuffe of the kitchyn. Neyther should
a man that is well aduised,Drudo, signifiethe a lasciuious louer. say that Saincte
Dominicke was Il Drudo della Theologia:
Nor yet talke, that the glorious Sainctes
haue spoken suche base and vile woordes:
As for Example to say.Dant. 22. Infer.
               And leaue to scratche whereas
the scabs of sinne breake out,
            
            For they sauour of ye dregges, & ye filth of
ye cōmō people, as euery man may easily see.
            
               Againe, in your long & large discourses,
you must haue ye like cōsideratiōs & cares, &
some more: ye which you may more cōmodiously
learne of your Maisters yt teache you
yt arte, that is commonly called Rhetorike.
            
            And amongest other things, You must
accustome your selfe,
               Gentle wordes in Communication. 
               to vse suche gentle and
courtious speache to men, and so sweete, that it
may haue no maner of bitter taste. And you
shall rather say, I cannot tell how to say it:
Thē say: you ar deceiued: Or, it is not true:
Or, you know it not. For, it is a courteous
and friendly parte to excuse a mans faulte,
euen in that very thing, wherein you know
how to blame him. And withall, it doth
well, to make the proper and peculiar fault
of your friend, indifferent and common to
you both: and first, to take one piece to your
selfe, and then after, to blame and reproue
him for it. VVee were deceiued and failed
muche: we forgot our selues yesterday to doe
so. Although suche negligence & errour,
or what soeuer it be: be altogether his fault
and not yours. And Restagnone forgat
him selfe muche, when he saide to his companions:
If your wordes doe not lie. For,
A man should not bring another mannes faithe
and honestie in question and doubte. But, if
a man promise you any thing, and doe not
performe it: it shall not doe well, for you to

say vnto him: You haue lost your credite with
mee: without some necessarie cause doe
driue you to say so, as to saue your owne
credite and honestie. But, you shall rather
say: You could not do it: Or, you did not
remember to doe it: Thē, you haue cleane forgotten
mee. For, these kinde of speaches,
haue some prickles & stinges of Complaint,
Anger and Choler. So that, suche as vse
them selues to speake suche churlishe and
fu
                  ••
               ishe woordes, are taken for sharpe and
sower fellowes: & men doe asmuche shunne
their acquaintāce: as to thrust them selues
vppon thornes and thistles.
            And bycause I knowe som, of this naughtie
cōditiō & qualitie: I meane some yt be so
hastie and greedy to speake, yt they take no
                  •
               
the sense with them, but ouer passe it and
runne before it, as the grehound, that doth
not pinche by ouershooting his game: therfore
I will not spare to tell you that, which
may be thought needeles to touche, as a
thing to well knowen: and that is, that
You shall neuer speake, before you haue first
considered & laide the plot in your minde what
it is you haue to saie.
               Parto & n
                     ••
                   Isconciatura. 
               For in so doing, your
talke shalbe well deliuered and not borne before
the time. I trust, straungers will easily
beare with this worde: if at least they

vouchsafe to read these trifles of mine. And
it you doe not skorne my preceptes: it shall
neuer chaunce you to say: vvelcome Maister
Agostino, to such a one, whose name is Agnolo,
or Bernardo. And you shal neuer need
to say, Tell me your name: Nor say againe,
I saide not well: Nor, Lorde vvhat doe I call
him: Nor to hack and to stutter long together,
to finde out a worde, Maister Artigo: no
Master Arabico: Tushe, what doe I call him
I should say, Maister Agabito. These fonde &
foolish behauiours & fashions, paine a man
as much to heare thē, as to be drawne and
haled with cordes.
            The voyce would be neither hoarse nor
shrill.Voyce and Tounge. And, vvhen you laugh and sporte in any
sorte: you must not crye out and criche like
the Pullye of a well: nor yet speake in your
yavvning. I knowe well it is not in vs, to
geue our selues a ready tongue or perfect
voyce at our owne will and pleasure. Hee
yt doth stutter, or is hoarse: let him not alwayes
bable and gabbe, and keepe a courte
alone: let him rather a mend the defect of
his tounge with silence, and hearinge: and
withall (if hee can) with studie diminishe
the fault of Nature. It is an yll noyse to
heare a man rayse his voyce highe, lyke to a
common Cryer. And yet I would not

haue him speake so lowe and softly, that
he that harkens, shall not heare him. And
if he be not heard at yt first time he speaketh,
he must speake, the next time, somewhat
plainer: but yet, not yoape out aloude, that
he make not men thinke he is woode and
angry with them: for hee shall doe but
well, to rehearse that againe he hath spoken,
yt men may vnderstand what he said.
            Your wordes would be disposed,Manner of Speache. euen
as the common vse of speache doth require
and not vnsorted, disordered and scattered
cōfusedly: as many be woont to doe vppon
a brauery, whose maner of talke is more
like a Scriuener (me thinke) that readeth
in his mother tounge, the Indēture he hath
written before in latine: then a man that
reasoneth or talketh in his Naturall language:
as this for example.
They drawe by sent of false
and fained steps of truth.
            
            Or if a man should preposterously place
his wordes thus.
Those times did blossomes geue
before their time of soothe.
            
            Which maner of speache, may be otherwhile
allowed in versifiers: but it is vtterly
forbidden in common talke.
            
               And, it behoues a mā, not onely to shūne
this versifying maner of speache, in his familiar
and common discourse, or talke: but
likewise eschewe ye pompe, brauery, & affectation,
that may be suffered and allowed
to inriche an Oration, spoken in a publike
place. Otherwise, mē that doe heare it, will
but spyte it, and laughe him to scorne for it.
            Albeit perchaunce, a Sermon may shewe
a greater cunning and arte, then common
talke. But, Euerie thing must haue his time
and place. For, he that walkes by the way
must not daunce, but goe. For, euery man
hath not the skill to daunce, and yet euery
mā cā skill to goe. But, Dauncing is meete for
feastes & weddings: it is not to vse in the stretes.
You must then take good heede you speake
not with a maiestie.
            It is thought by many Philosophers.
            And suche is all Filocolo, and the other
treatises of Maister Iohn Boccace, except
his greater woorke, and litle more perchaunce
Corbaccio.
            
            I would not for al this, that you should
vse so base a speache, as ye scum, as it were,
and the froth of the meanest and vilest sorte
of people, Launderers & Hucksters: but suche

as gentlemen should speake & talke, which
I haue partly told you before, in what sort
it may be done: that is, if you talke of matters
that be neither vyle, vaine, fowle, nor
lothesome. And if you haue skill to choose
amongest the woords of your owne coūtrie
speache, the purest and most proper, suche
as haue the best sounde, and best sense,
touching nor remembring, in no case, no
matter that is foule, vile and base: & if you
can place your woords in good order, and
not shoofle them together at randon, nor
yet, with ouer muche Curious studie, file
them (as it were) one your beades. Moreouer,
if you do dispose such things as you
haue to say with discretion. And take good
hede that you couple not vnfit & vnlikely
matters together: as for Example.

                  As sure as God is in Heauen:
                  So stands the staffe in the chimny corner.
               
            
            And if you speake not so slowe, as if you
were vnlustie: nor so hasty, as if you wer hū
               grie:
but as a wise and a temperate man
should doe. Likewise, if you pronounce
youre woords and your 
                  •
               illables with a
certaīe grace & sweetnes: not as a Scholemaister
yt teatheth yoūg Childrē
                to read & to

spell. Neyther must you mumble them nor
supp them vp, as if they were glued & pasted
together one to another. If you
remember these and such other rules and
precepts: youre talke will be liked, and
heard with pleasure eno
                  •
               ghe: and you
shall well maintaine the state and countenaunce,
that well besemeth a gentleman
well taught and honest.
            Besids these, there be some, that neuer
hould their tounge.Talkatiue Fellovves. And as the shippe
that sayles, doth not presently stand still,
by taking downe the sayles: So doe
they runne forward, as caried away with
a certaine brayde: and loosing the matter
of their talke, yet leaue not to babble, but either
repeate that againe that is said, or els
speake still they cannot tell what.
            And there be other so full of babble, that
they will not suffer another to speake. And
as wee doe see otherwhile, vppon the flowers
in the countrie where they thresh corne,
one Pullet pull the corne out of the others
beake: so doe they catche the tale out of his
mouth yt beganne it, and tell it them selues.
And sure, suche maner of people, induce
men to quarell and fight with them for it.
For, if you doe marke it wel: Nothing moues

a mā sooner to anger: then when he is soudainely
cut short of his will and his pleasure, be it of
neuer so little and small importaunce. As whē
you gape wide with yawning: another
should thrust his hand in your mouth: or
when you doe lift your arme redy to hurle
a stone: it is soudainly stayde by one that
stands behinde you. Euen then, as these
doings, and many moe like vnto these,
which tend to hinder the will and desire
of another (albeit but in way of sporte &
of play) are vnseemely, and would be eschewed:
So in talke and communication
with men, wee should rather pull one, and
further their desiers, by what meanes
we can, then stop them and hinder them
in it.
            And therefore, If any man be in a redines to
tell his tale: it is no good maner to interrupte
him: nor to say that you doe knowe it vvell.
Or, if hee besprinckle his tale here and
there, with some prety lye: you must not
reproue him for it, neither in wordes nor
in gesture, as shaking your hed, or scowling
vppon him, as many be wont:
gloriously vaunting them selues, that
they can, by no meanes, abide the taste
of a Lye 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ But, this is not the

reason of this, it is the sharpenes and sowernes
of their owne rusticall & eager Natures,
which makes them so venemous &
bitter in all companies they come: that no
man cares for their acquaintance.
            Likewise, It is an illfauoured condition to
stop another mās tale in his mouth: and it spites
him asmuche, as if a mā should take him by the
sleeue & hould him backe, euen whē he is redie
to runne his course. And when another man
is in a tale, it is no good maner for you, by
telling the company some newes, & drawing
their mindes to other matters, to make
them forsake him cleane, and leaue him alone.
For, it is an vncourtious parte for you
to leade and carry away the cōpany: which
the other (not you) hath brought together.
            And, whē a mā tells his tale, you must
geue good eare vnto him: that you may not
say otherwhile, O what? Or, how? which is
many a mans fashion to doe. And this is
asmuch trouble and paine to him that speaketh:
as to shoofle against ye stones, to him
that goeth. All these fashions, and generally,
that which may stoppe, and that
which may trauerse the course of another
mans talke, must be shunned.
            And, if a man tell his tale 
                  •
               lowe like a
drawelatche: you must not yet hasten him

forwarde, nor lende him woordes, although
you be quicker in speache then hee. For,
many doe take that ill, and specially suche,
as persuade themselues they haue a Ioly
grace in telling a tale. For, they doe imagine
you thīke not so well of thē, as they thē
selues doe: And that you would geue them
instructions in their owne Art: as Merchaunts
that liue in greate wealth & plentie,
would count it a greate reproche vnto
them, that a man should proffer them money,
as if they liued in lacke, & were poore
and stoode in neede of releefe. And yo
                  •
               
must vnderstād, that, Euery man in his owne
conceite, thinkes he can tell his tale well: althoughe
for modestie sake he deny it. And I
cannot gesse how it cometh to passe, that
the veriest foole doth babble most: which ouer
muche prattle, I would not haue a gentleman
to vse, and specially, if his skill be but
scant in the matter in talke: Not onely,
bycause it is a hard matter: but, He must rū
in many faults that talkes muche: but also, bycause
a man weenes, that, He that talkes all
the talke to him selfe, woulde (after a sorte) preferre
him self aboue them all that heare him, as a
Mayster would be aboue his scholers. And
therfore, It is no good maner for a man to take
vppō him a greater state, thē doth become him.
               
And in this fault, not men alone, but many
countryes fall into, so cackling and pratling:
that, woe be their eares that geue thē
hearing.
            But, as ouer muche babble makes a mā
weary: so doth ouer muche Silence
               Silence procure
as greate disliking. For, To vse silence in
place vvhere other men talke to and fro: is in
maner, asmuche a fault, as not to pay your share
and scot as other men doe. And as speache
is a meane to shewe men your minde, to
whome you speake: so, doth Silence againe
make mē wene, you seke to be vnknowne.
So yt, as those people which vse to drinke
muche at feastes, and make them selues
drunke, are wont to thrust thē out of their
companie, that will not take their drinke
as they doe: So be these kinde of mute &
still fellowes, coldly welcome to pleasaūt
and mery companie, that meete to passe the
time away in pleasure and talke. So that,
It is good maner for a man to speake, and likevvise
to hold his peace, as it comes to his turne,
and occasion requires.
            
            As an old Chronicle maketh mention.
There was in the parts of Morea, a very
good workmā in y• stone: Who for ye sīgular
good skill he had in his Art, was called (as
I take it) Maestro Chiarissimo.
               Maestro Chiarissimo. This man

(now well strooken in yeares) made a certaine
treatise, & therin gathered together al
ye precepts & rules of his arte: as the man yt
had very good skill to doe it: shewing in
what sorte the proportions and lineaments
of the body, should be duely measured, as
well euery one a parte by it selfe, as one respecting
another: yt they might iustly & duely
be answerable ye one to the other: which
treatise of his, he named Regolo.
               Regolo. Meaning
to shewe, that according to that, all the Images
and pictures, that from thensforth
any workemā should make, should be squared
& lined forth: as ye beames, and ye stones,
and the walles, are measured by ye rules &
precepts of that booke. But, for that it is a
muche easier matter to speake it, then to
worke it, or doe it: and besides that, The
greatest number of men, especially of vs that be
prophane and not learned, haue our senses much
quicker then our vnderstanding, and consequently,
better conceiue particular things and
Examples, then the generall propositions and
Syllogismes (which I might terme in plainer
speache, Reasons) for this cause this
worthy man I speake of, hauing regard
to the Nature of workemen: whose
capacities are vnfit and vnable to weeld
the weighte of generall Precepts and

rules: and to declare more plainely, with
all his cunning and skill: hauing found out
for his purpose, a fine marble stone, with
muche labour and paine, he fashioned and
shaped an Image of it, as perfectly proportioned
in euery parte and member: as the
precepts and rules of his treatise had before
deuised. And as he named the booke,
so did he name that Image, and called it by
name of Regolo.
            
            Now, (and it pleased god) I would I
could but one parte of those twoe points,
which that noble Ingrauer & worckeman I
speake of, had perfect skill and knowledge
to doe: I meane, that I could gather together
in this treatise, after a sorte, the due
measures of this Art I take vppon me to
treate of. For, to perfourme the other, to
make the second Regolo: I meane, to vse
and obserue in my maners, the measures I
speake of, framīg and forming, as it were,
A Visible Example, and a materiall Image of
them: it were now, to muche for me to doe.
For asmuch as, It is not inough to haue knowledge
and Art, in matters concerning maners &
fashions of men: But it is needefull withall, to
worke them to a perfect effect, to practise and vse
them muche: whiche cannot be had vppon rhe
soudaine, nor learned by & by: but it is number
               
of yeares that must winne it: & ye best parte
of mine be runne fourth alredy, you see.
            But for all this, you must not make
ye lesse reconing of these precepts. For, A
man may well teache another the way: although
he haue gone out of the way himself. And
peraduenture, they that haue lost their wayes,
do better remember the hard wayes to fynd:
then they that neuer went a misse. And, if
in mine infancie, when minds be tender
and pliable, like a young 
                  •
               wigge, they that
had ye charge & gouernemēt of me, had had
the skill to smoothe my manners, (perhaps
of Nature somwhat hard and rude) and
would haue polished and wrought them
fine: peraduētute I should haue beene such
A one, as I trauaile to make thee Nowe,
whome I loue no lesse then if thou were
my sonne.Nature must be maystered by Reason. 
               For albeit, the power of Nature
be greate▪ yet is she many tymes Maistered and
corrected by custome: But, we must in tyme
begin to encounter and bea
                  •
               e her downe,
before she get to muche strēgth and hardines.
But most men will not doe so: but
rather yealding to their appetite without
any striuing, following it where so euer it
leades thē, thinke they must submitte thē
               selues
to Nature: As though Reason were
not a naturall thing in man. But, Reason

hath (as a Lady and Mistris) povver to chaunge
olde customes,
               Reason dothe chaunge olde Customes & helpeth Nature. 
               and to helpe & hold vp Nature,
when she doth at any time dec
                     •
                  y and fall. But
very seldome we harken vnto her. And yt
for ye moste parte, maketh vs like vnto thē
whome god hath not endued wt Reason: I
meane brute beastes, in whome notwithstanding,
something yet worketh: not their
owne Reasons (for they haue none of them
selues) but ours: as in horses you see it:
which by nature would be euer wilde, but yt
their ryder makes them tame, and withal,
after a sorte, redy & very well paced. For
many of them would haue a hard trot, but
that the rider makes them haue an easier
pace. And some he doth teache to stand
still, to galopp, to treade the ringe, and do
the carreere: And they learne to doe it all
well you see. Then, if the horse, the dog, ye
hauke, & many other beastes besides, more
wylde then these, be guided and ruled by
Reason, and learne that which their owne
Nature cannot attaine, but rather repugneth:
and become after a sorte cunning and
skilfull, so farre as their kinde doth beare it,
not by Nature, but by custome & vse: how
muche then may we thinke wee should excell
them, by the precepts and rules of our
Reason, if wee tooke any heede vnto it.

But, The Sēses desire & couer presēt delightes,
what soeuer they be: and can abide no paines,
but puts them of. And by this meanes, they
also shake of Reason, and thinke her vnpleasant,
forasmuche as she sets before them, not pleasure,
many times, hurtfull: but goodnes and
vertue, euer paynfull, sower and vnsauoury in
taste. For, while we liue accord
                     •
                  ing to the Sense,
wee are like to the selly sickmā, to whom al cates
neuer so deinty & sweete, seeme vntoothsome:
and he chideth still with his Cater and Cooke,
in whome there is no fault at all for it. For, it is
the Nature of his disease, and the Extremitie
of his sicknes, and not the fault of his meate, that
he doth not sauourly taste what he eates. So Reason,
which of it sel
                     •
                  e is svveete and sauourie:
seemes bitter in taste vnto vs, though it haue no
ill taste in dede. And therfore as nice & deītie
felowes, we refuse to make any taste of her:
& couer our grosnes, wt saying that Nature
hath no spurres nor raines yt can pricke her
forth, or hold her backe. Where sure, if an
Oxe or an Asse; or a Hogge, could speake: I
beleeue, they could not lightly tell a more
fowle & shamefull tale thē this. VVe should
be childrē still all the time of our riper yeares, &
in our extreame age: and vvaxe as very fooles
vvith gray heary heads, as vvhen vve vvere very
babes: if it vvere not that reasō, vvhich increaseth
in vs vvith our yeares, subdueth affections in vs,

and growen to perfection, transformeth vs from
beastes in to men. So that it is well seene, shee
ruleth our senses and bridleth our wittes. And
it is our owne Imperfection and not her
faulte, if we doe swarue frō vertue, goodnes,
and good order in life.
            It is not then true, that there is not a
bridell and Master for Nature. Nay, she
is guided and ruled by twaine:Custome & Reason, tvvoe brydles of Nature. 
               Custome I
meane, and Reason. But, as I haue tould
you a litle before: Reason without Custome
and vse, cannot make an vnciuile bodie, well
taught and courtious: Which custome and
vse, is as it were, bred and borne of tyme.
And therefore they shall doe well, to harkē
betime vnto her, not only for that, by this
meanes, a man shall haue more time and
leasure to learne to be such as she teacheth,
and to become as it were a houshould seruaunt
of hers, and one of her trame: but also
bycause The tender age, as pure and cleane,
doth easily receaue all Impressiōs, and reteineth
more liuely, the colours vvherevvith she is dyed:
then vvhen a man comes to ryper yeares:
And also, bycause The things vvherein vvee
haue byn nourished and trained frō our youth,
doe ordinarily please vs, aboue all other things.
And for this cause, it is said that Diodato,
               Diodato. a
man that had a singular good gift & grace

of vtterance, would euermore bee the first
that came fourth vppon the stage to shewe
his Comedie: allthoughe they were all but
coūterfets vnto him, whosoeuer they were
that should haue spoken before him. But
he would not his voice should occupie other
mens eares, after they heard another
man speake. Although, in respect of his
doings, it were a greate deale Inferiour
to his. Seing then, I cannot agree my
workes and my wordes together, for those
causes I haue shewed you before, as Maestro
Chiarissimo did: whoe had as good a skil
to doe it, as he had knowledge to teache it:
let it suffice that I haue tould in some part
what must be done, bycause I am not by any
meanes able to doe it in dede. He that liueth
in darkenes, may very vvell Iudge vvhat
comfort it is to enioy the benefit of light. And
by an ouer long silence, vve knovve vvhat pleasure
it is to speake: so when you beholde my
grose and rude maners: you shall better
Iudge, what goodnes and vertue there is
in courtions behauiours and fashions.
            To come againe then to this treatise,
which growes now to some end: wee say
that Those be good maners and fashiōs, which
bring a delight, or at least, offend not their senses,
their mynds, and conceits, vvith vvhom vve

liue. And of these, wee haue hitherto spoken
inoughe.
            But you must vnderstand with all this,
that, Men be very desirous of bevvtifull things,
vvell proportioned and comely. And of counterfet
things fovvle and ill shapen, they be as
squemish againe, on the other side. And this
is a speciall priuilege geuen to vs: that other
creatures haue no capacitie, to skill
what bewtie or measure meaneth. And
therefore, as things not common wt beastes
but proper to our selues: we must embrace
them for them selues, and holde them dere:
& yet those, much more, yt drawe nerest to ye
knowledge of man: as which are most apt
and inclined to vnderstand the perfection
which Nature hath lefte in men.
            And albeit, it be a hard matter, to shewe
precisely, Bevvtie,
               Bevvtie. what maner of thing it is:
yet yt you may haue sōe marke, to know her
by: you must vnderstand, yt 
               VVhere iointly &
seuerally, euery parte & the whole hath his due
proportion and measure, there is Bevvtie. And
that thing may iustly be called fayer, in vvhich
the saide proportion and measure is found. And
by that I did once learne of a wise & a learned
man: Bevvtie he said, would consist but
of one, at the moste. And Deformitie
               Deformitie. contrarywise,
measured her selfe, by Many. As
you may see by the faces of fayer & goodly

women. For, the euen lineaments and
due proportions of euery of them: seeme
to haue byn created & framed by the iudgement
and sight of one force alone. Which
cannot be thought in them that be foule &
deformed. For, when you beholde a womā,
that hath, peraduenture, bigge and bowle
eyes, a little nose, blubbe cheekes, a flat
mouth, an out chinne, & a browne skinne:
you thinke straite that that face is not one
womans alone: but is moulded of many
faces, and made of many peeces. And yet,
you shall finde amongest them, some such,
whose partes cōsidered alone by thēselues,
be very perfect to see to: but all set together,
be foule and ill fauoured: not for any other
cause, but that they be lineaments of many
sayer women, and not of one: So that
a mā would weene, shee had borrowed her
partes, of this and that woman. And it
may be, that Painter that had all the fayer
maides of Calabria, naked before him: had
none other intent therein, then to iudge &
discerne in many, ye partes yt they haue, as it
were, borrowed heere one, & there another,
of one, alone: to whome restoring frō eache
yt was her right: imagining yt 
               Venus bewty
should be such, and so proportioned: he set
him selfe to paint her.
            And, you must not thīk, yt this is to be seene

the faces, the partes, and the bodies of women
alone: but it happeneth more or lesse,
in speache, in gestures & doings. For, if you
should chaunce to see a Noble woman gorgius
and gallant, washing of cloutes in a
Riuer by ye highe waye side: Althoughe if
this were not, you might hapely passe away
by her, wt little heede to her persō or state: yet
this would not brook you nor like you, yt her
seruile doings doe shewe her more thē one.
For her state should answer her honourable
condition and calling. But her woorke
is suche, as is meete for women of base and
seruile life: & although you shall feele, neyther
yll sauour nor sent come from her, nor
heare any noyse that should offend you, nor
any thing els to trouble your minde: yet
the foule and filthy maner of doing it, and
the vnseemely act it selfe: will make you
muche to loathe it. You must then beware
of these fowle and vncomely behauiours,
asmuche, nay, more then of those other, I
haue spoken all this while. For, it is a harder
matter a greate deale, to knowe whē a
man faulteth in these, then when he faulteth
in them. Bycause, It is easie much, vve
see, to feele then to vnderstande. But yet, it
may chaunce otherwhile, that euen that
which offendeth the senses, may also offend

the minde: thoughe not altogether after
one sorte,Apparelling according to the Time. as I haue told you before:
shewing you that A man must apparell
him selfe, according to the fashions that
other men vse: that it may not be thought
he doth reproue and correct their doings:
The which thing offendeth most men that
seeke to be commended: And the wisest mē
that be, mislike it too. For, the garments
of the olde world, haue lost their date, for
men of this age and this season to weare.
And it is suche an ill shapen sight, to see a
man clad with other mens cloathes: that
a man would weene there would be a fray
betwene the doublet & ye hose: their cloathes
doe sit, vppon them so vnto wardly.
            So that, many of those matters I haue
spoken of allredy, or peraduēture all, might
be aptly rehersed here again: forasmuch as
this measure I speake of here, is not obserued
in these thīgs: nor the time, nor ye place,
nor the worke, nor the worker, accorded &
fitted together, so well as it should be. For
mens minds and fansies doe like it, & take
a pleasure and delight in those things. But
I thought it good to apply & speake these
matters, rather vnder ye badge, as it were,
of the Senses and desires: then properly
assigne them to the minde: that a man may

the more easily perceiue them: bycause It is
a naturall thinge, for euerie man to feele and desire:
but euery man cannot so generally
vnderstand, and especially that, whiche
we call bewtie, gallantnes or entertainement.
            It is not inoughe for a man, to doe things that
be good: but hee must also haue a ca
                  •
               e, hee doe
them with a good grace.A Grace, vvhat it is. And a good grace is
nothing els, but suche a maner of light (as I may
call it) as shineth in the aptnes of things set in
good order and wel disposed, one with another:
and perfectly knit and vnited together. VVithout
which proportion and measure, euen that
which is good is not faire: & the fairenes it self,
is not plesaunt. And as meates, though they
be good & sauourie will giue men no minde
to eate thē, if they haue no pleasaunt relish
and taste: So fares it with the maners of
men other while (althoughe in them selues
in no respect they be ill, but foolishe a little,
and fond) if a man doe not season them
with a certaine sweetenes, which you call
(as I take it) Grace, and Comlines.
            
               So that, euery vice of it selfe, without
any further matter to helpe it (it cannot
be chosen) must needes offend a man.
For, Vices be things so foule and filthie: that
honest and modest mindes, will greeue to see

their shamefull effects. And therefore, it shall
behoue them that seeke to be well thought of,
with their familiar acquaintāce, aboue all things
els to eschewe vices, and especially those, that
be foulest and worst: as Leachery, Couetousnes,
Crueltie, and other. Of which, some be
beastly, as Drunkennes, and Gluttonie: some
vncleane, as Leacherie: other some horrible, as
Murther, and such other: all which for them
selues, and for the very naughtines, that is properly
in them al, all men eschewe more, or lesse:
But, as earst I said, generally al, as thīgs
of greate disorder, make a man misliked
muche of all men.
            
            But, bycause I haue not taken vppon
me to shew vnto you, mēs sinnes, but their
Errors: it shalbe no parte of my charge at
this time to entreate of ye Nature of vices &
vertues: but onely of the seemely & vnseemely
fashions and maners wee vse one with
another. One of the which vnseemely
fashions was, that Coūt Richard
               Counte Richarde. did vse: of
which I tould you before. Which, as vnseemely
and vnfitting with those other his
good and faire maners hee had besides:
that same worthie Bishop (as a skilfull
and cunning Mayster in musicke will ea-aesily

here a note out of Tune) had quickly
founde out.
            
               It shalbe then, necessarie for gentlemen and
men of good behauiour, to haue a regard to this
measure I speake of: in going, in standing, in
sitting, in gesture, in porte, in apparell, in talke,
in silence, in rest and in action. For, a man
must not apparell him selfe like a woman:
that the Attire may not be of one sorte, and
the person of another: as I doe see it in
some that weare their heads & their beards
curled with bodkins,Beardes and Heades curled with bodkins. and haue their face,
and their necks, & their hands, so starchte
and painted, that it were to muche for a
girle, nay harlot, that makes a merchā
               dize
of it, and sets her selfe to the sale.
            You must smell,Sweete smeles neither of sweete nor of
sower: for a gentleman would not sauour
nastily like a begger: nor yet should a man
carry a sauour and sent about him, like a
harlot or whoore. I doe not by this forbid,
but you may very well vse some sweete
smelles of sweete waters.
            Your apparell must be shaped according
to the fashion of the time,Apparell according to the fashion & 
                     ••
                  lling. and your calling,
for the causes I haue shewed you before.
For, VVe must not take vppon vs to alter customes
at our will. For time doth beget them,
and time doth also weare them out.
            
            
               Euery mā may applie those fashiōs, that
be in common vse, ye moste to his owne aduantage,
that he can. For, if perchaunce
your legges be very long, and men vse but
short garments: you may vse a meane, not
to long, nor to short. And if your legges
be to small, to greate, or crooked: make
not your hosen of to light and garishe a colour,
that it may not call men to looke and
to gawre vppō your deformitie. Thou must
weare no garment that shall be to light, or
ouermuche daubde with garding: that mē
may not say, thou hast Ganymedes hosen, or
wearest Cupides doublet. But, whatsoeuer
it be thou wearest, let it be fit and well
made for thy bodie: least thou seme to braue
it, in another mans cloathes.
            But with all, thou must in any case respect
thy condition or estate. For, A man of
the Clergie, must not be attired like a Souldier:
nor a Souldier goe like a Player. When Castruccio
was in Rome with Lodouico Bauero
at a greate Pompe, and triumphe: who
was both Duke of Lucca and Pistoia, and
Count of Palazzo, and Senatour of Rome:
this Castruccio, being Lorde greate Mayster
of the saide Lodouico Bauero his househoulde:
for his brauery, made him a coate
of crimsin, vppon the brest wherof, there

was this deuise, in letters of Golde
It is euen as God will.
And vppon the backe behinde.
And it shallbe as God will.
            
            I beleeue, you thinke this garment,
would haue become Castruccio his Trumpeter
better, then it could become him.
            And although Kings be free frō checke,
and may doe what they list: Yet, I could
neuer commend King Manfrede, Whoe
euer more vsed, to suite him selfe in greene.
Wee must then haue a care, that our apparell
be not onely wel made for the bodie: but
that it be meete for our calling.Apparel acording to the Countrey And withall,
it be suche, as the countrie doth vse,
where wee liue. For, As in diuers places be
diuers measures, and yet bying and selling euery
vvhere vsed: So in sundry landes be sundrie
customes, and yet euery vvhere a man may behaue
him, and apparell him selfe, soberly and
comely.
            
            These same feathers, which the Neapolitanes
and Spaniardes be wont to weare, and
braueries and Embroderies: haue but ill
place amongest graue gowned men, & theattires
that Citizens doe weare. But their
Armour and weapons become suche place

a greate deale worse. So that, looke what
hapely might be allowed in Verona, would
not, perchaunce, be suffered in Venice. For
as muche as these gallants, all begarded,
and huffing in fethers, & warlike fellowes,
would not doe well, in this Noble Citie so
peacefull & Ciuil. Suche kinde of people
be rather, in maner, like nettles and
burres, amongest good and sweete garden
flowers. And therefore, they come out of
season to mē that medle with grauer matters
then they doe.
            I would not haue a gentleman to runne
in the streate,Running and going in the streat and other such gestures. nor go to fast: for that is for
lackies, and not for gentlemen to doe. Besides
that, it makes a man weary, sweate,
and puffe: which be very vnsightly
things for suche men to doe. I would
not yet haue a man go so softe and demurely,
as a maide or a wife. And when
a man walkes, it is no good sight to see a
man shake his bodie to muche, nor to hold
his hands bare and emptie: nor yet cast &
sting his armes vp & downe, in such sort as
a man would weene, hee were soweing of
Corne in the field: nor Stare in a mans
face, as if he had spied a mares nest.
            
               Ther be sōe again, in their gate pul vp their
fete as high as a horse yt hath ye spauē: yt a mā
would thīk they did pluck their fete forth of

bushell. Other againe stampe their feete so
harde on the ground: that they make allmoste
asmuche noyse as a carte. Another
goes as if he were splay footed. And suche
a one quiuers with his legges, as he stāds.
Some other againe, at euery foote, stoope
to stroke vp their hose as they goe. And sōe
set their handes to their sides, and iet vp &
downe like a Pecocke: which fashions doe
muche offend men: not as well, but as ill
beseeming a man to vse them. For, if your
horse, perchaunce, doe champe and play on
the hit, and gape or lill out his tounge, albeit
this geue little proofe of his goodnes:
yet it commends him well to the sale: and
you shoulde finde a misse of it, if it were otherwise:
not bycause ye horse should be ther
fore the worse: but bycause he should shew
the lesse courage and pleasure. Now, if it
stand so, that Comelines and Grace, be so
much made of in beasts, and also in things
without life or sense, as experience doth
shewe, that, Two things of equall goodnes &
comodities, beare not for all that, a like price,
if a man doe beholde a finer proportion &
bewtie, more in the one then he sees in the
other: How muche then more, should it
be estemed and commended in men, capable
of Reason.
            
               
               It is a rude fashion for a man to clawe
or scratche him selfe,Gestures and Fashions, at the Table. when he sitteth at the
table. And a man should at such time haue
a very greate care yt he spit not at all.Spytting. But
if neede inforce him, then let him doe it, after
an honest sorte. 
               I haue heard tell, many
times, of suche countries that be so sober:
that they doe neuer spitt. And what should
then let vs, but we may well forbeare it for
suche a little while.Greedie Eating. We must also beware
we doe not eate so greedily, that wee get
the hicket, or belche withall: as some that
feede so fast, that they noy the cōpany with
it: they blowe and puffe to loude.Scovvring of the teethe Likewise,
you must not rubbe your teeth with
your napkyn, & much lesse with your fingers.
For these be trickes for a slouen.VVashing the mouthe. Neither
must you openly rynce your mouth wt
the wine, and then spit it fourthe. Neither
is it gentleman like,Carrying a Sticke, in the Mouthe. to carry a sticke in your
mouth from the table when you rise, like ye
birde that builds her a nest: or put it in
your eare, for that is a Barbars tricke.
            And to weare a toothpicke,To vveare a Toothepicke about your Necke. about your
necke: of all fashions that is ye worst. For,
besides that it is a bauld Iewell for a gentleman
to pull forth of his bosome, and putteth
mē in mind of those Toothdrawers, that
sit one their benche in the stretes: it makes

men also to thinke, that the man loues his
belly full well, and is prouided for it. And I
see no reason, why they should not aswell
carry a spoone, about their neckes, as a
toothepicke.
            
            It is a rude fashion besides,Chearing at the table. to leane
ouer the table, or to fill your mouth so ful of
meate, that your cheekes be blowne vp wt
               all:
neyther must you by any maner of meanes,
giue another man to know what pleasure
you take, in the meate or the wine. For
yt is for Tauerners and Bousers, to vse
suche fashions. And to entertaine men yt
sit at your table, with these wordes: You
eate nothing this morning. There is nothing
that likes you. Or, tast you of this or of that: I
doe not allowe of these fashions, although
they be commonly receiued and vsed of all
men. For, albeit by these meanes, they
shewe they make much of those they haue
inuited vnto them: yet, many tymes, they
make mē to leaue to eate wher they would.
For, it geues them to thinke, they haue
their eyes, allwayes vppon them, and that
makes them ashamed to feede.
            
            Againe,Carueing. I doe not like it, that a man shall
take vppō him to be a caruer of any meate
that stands before him: if he be not muche
the better mā, that is the caruer: that he to
whome he carues, may thinke he receiueth
some credite & honour by it. For, Amongest
men that be of like cōditiō and calling, it makes

a hart burning: that he that playes the caruer,
should take more vppō him then another. And
otherwhile, yt which hee carueth, doth not
like him to whom it is geuen. And more thē
this, by this meanes he sheweth, that the
feaste is not sufficiētly furnished, or at least
not well disposed in order, when some haue
muche, & other none at all. And ye Mayster
of the house, may chaunce to take displesure
at that, as if it were done to doe him shame.
Neuerthelesse in these matters, a man must
demeasne him self, as common vse and custome
will allowe, and not as Reason & duetie
would haue it. And I would wishe a mā
rather to erre in these poīts with many, thē
to be singular in doing well. But whatsoeuer
good maner there be in this case, thou
must not refuse it, whatsoeuer is carued
vnto thee. For it may be thought thou doest
disdaine it, or grunt at thy caruer.
            Now,Drincking & Carrovvsing. to drink all out euery mā: which is
a fashiō as litle in vse amōgst vs, as ye terme
it selfe is barbarous & straūge: I meane, Ick
bring you, is sure a foule thing of it selfe, &
in our countrie so coldly accepted yet: yt we
must not go about to bring it in for a fashiō.
If a man doe quaffe or carrouse vnto you, you
may honestly say nay to pledge him, & geueing
him thankes, confesse your weakenesse, that
you are not able to beare it: or else, to

doe him a pleasure,
               Drincking muche vsed in Graecia: and by So
                  
                     •
                  rates. 
               you may for curtesie taste it:
and thē set downe the cup to them that will, and
charge your selfe no further. And although
this, Ick bring you, as I haue heard many
learned men say, hath beene an auncient
custome in Greece: and that the Graecians doe
muche commend a goodman of that time,
Socrates,
               Socrates. by name, for that hee sat out one
whole night long, drinking a v
                  •
               e with another
good man, Aristophanes:
               Aristophanes. and yet ye next
morning in the breake of the daye, without
any rest vppon his drinking, made suche a
cunning Geometricall Instrument, that there
was no maner of faulte to be found in the
same: And albeit they say besides this, that
Euen as it makes a man bould and hardy, to
thrust him selfe venterously otherwhile, in to
daungerous perils of life: so likewise it brings
a man in to good temper and fashion, to enure
him selfe otherwhile, with the daūgers of things
not euer chauncing: And bycause the drinking
of wine after this sorte, in a vie, in such
excesse and waste, is a shrewde assault to
trie the strength of him that quaffes so lustily:
these Graecians, would haue vs to vse
it for a certaine proofe of our strength and
constancie: and to enure vs the better, to
resist and master all maner of strong temptations.
            
               All this notwithstanding, I am of a cō
               trary
mind: and I doe thinke all their reasons
to fond, and to foolishe. But, we see
that Learned men haue suche art and cunning
to persuade, and such filed wordes to serue their
turne: that wrong doth carry the cause away,
and Reason cannot preuaile. And therefore
let vs giue them no credite in this point.
And what can I tell, if they haue a secret
drift herein, to excuse and couer the fault of
their countrey, that is corrupt with this
vice. But it is daungerous, perchaunce,
for a man to reproue them for it: least asmuch
happen to him, as chaunced to Socrates
him selfe, for his ouer lauish controuling
and checking of euery mans fault. For,
he was so spited of all men for it: that many
articles of heresies & other foule faultes
were put vp against him, and he cōdemned
to die in the end: allthough they were false.
For in truthe, he was a very good man, &
a Chatholike: respecting ye 
               Religion of their
false Idolatrie. But suer, in that he drunke
so muche wine that same nyght: he deserued
no praise in the worlde. For, the hoggshead
was able to holde & receiue a great
deale more, then his companion and hee
were able to take: if yt may get any praise.
And though it did him no harme, that was

more, the goodnes of his strong braine: thē
the continencie of a sober man. And let the
Chronicles talke what they list of this matter,
I giue God thankes, that amongest many
the Plagues that haue creapt ouer the Alpes, to
infect vs: hitherto this worst of all the rest, is
not come ouer: that vve should take a pleasure
and praise, to be drunke. Neither shall I euer beleue,
that a man can learne to be temperate, of
suche a Mayster as vvine and drounkennes.
            
            The Stewarde of a Noble mans house,Inuiting of straungers.
may not be so bolde to inuite straungers,
vppon his owne head, and set them downe
at his Lorde & Maysters table. And there
is none that is wise, will be intreated to it,
at his request alone. But otherwhile, the
seruaunts of the house, be so malepert and
saucie, that they will take vppō them, more
then their Maister: of which things wee
speake in this place, more by chaunce, then
that the order we haue taken from the beginning,
doth so require it.
            A man must not vncase him selfe,A recapitulation of sundrie precepts. Vncasing. in the
presence of any assembly. For it is a slouenly
sight, in place where honest men be
met together of good conditiō and calling.
And it may chaunce he doth vncouer those
parts of his bodie, which work him shame
& rebuke to shewe thē: besides yt, it maketh

other mē abashed to looke vpō thē.Washing of hands and combyng of heades. Againe,
I wold haue no mā to combe his head, nor
washe his hāds before mē. For such things
would be done alone in your chamber, and
not abrode: without it be, I say, to washe
your hands when you sit downe to the table.
For, there it shall doe well, to washe
them in sight, although you haue no neede:
that they with whome you feede, may assure
them selues you haue done it. A man
must not come forthe with his kercheif, or
quaife one his head, nor yet stroke vp his
hosen vppon his legges in company.
            
            
               Some men there be,Gestures of the face and Countenaūce and other partes. that haue a pride or
a vse to drawe their mouthes a little awry,
or twinckle vp their eye, & to blow vp their
cheekes, and to puffe, and to make, with
their countenaunce, sundrie such like foolishe
and ilfauoured faces and gestures. I
councell men to leaue them cleane. For,
PallasPallas. her selfe, the Goddesse, (as I haue hearde
sōe vvise mē say) tooke once a greate pleasure to
soūd the flute & the cornet: & therin she vvas
verie cūning. It chaūst her, on day, soūding her
Cornet for her plesure ouer a fontain, she spide
her selfe in the vvater: and vvhē she beheld those
strāge gestures she must nedes make vvith her
mouth as she plaid: she vvas so much ashāed of it
that she brake the corner in peces & cast it away.

truely she did but well, for it is no instrumēt for
a vvoman to vse. And it becomes men as ill,
if they be not of yt base conditiō and calling,
that they must make it a gaine, & an art to
liue vppon it. And looke what I speake,
concerning the vnseemely gestures of the
countenance and face: concerneth likewise,
all the partes and members of man. For it
is an ill sight, to lill out ye tounge, to stroke
your bearde much vp and downe (as many
doe vse to doe) to rubbe your hands together:
to sighe, & to sorrowe: to tremble
or strike your selfe, which is also a fashiō wt
some: to reatche and stretche your selfe, &
so retching, to cry out after a nice maner,
Alas, Alas: like a coūtry cloune, yt should
rouse him selfe in his couche.
            
            And he that makes a noyse wt his mouth
in a token of wonder,Mopping or mowing. and other while, of cō
               tempte
and disdaine: counterfeteth an ilfauouredgrace.
And Counterset things, differ
not muche from truethes.
            
            A man must leaue those foolishe maner
of laughings,Vnseemely Laughinges. groase and vncomely. And
let men laughe vppon occasiō, and not vppon
custome. But a man must beware he
doe not laughe at his owne gestes,Laughing at his owne Gestes. and his
doings. For that makes men weene hee
woulde faine praise him selfe. It is for o-other

men to laughe that heare, and not for
him that telles the tale.
            
            
               Now, you must not beare your selfe in
hand, that bycause eache of these matters
considered a parte, is but a small fault,
y• hole therefore together should be as light:
but you must rather persuade your selfe yt
               Many a litle doth make a mickle, as I tould
you from the beginning. And how muche
lesse they be, so much the more neede a mā
hath to looke well in to thē: bycause they be
not easily perceiued a far of, but creepe in to
vs by custom, before we be a ware. And, As
light expences often vsed, in Continuance of
time, doe couertly waste and consume a greate
masse of wealth and riches: So doe these light
faultes with the multitude and number of thē,
in secret ouerthrow all honest and good ciuilitie
and maner. So yt we must not make a light
reconing of them.
            Moreouer,Mouinges and gestures of the bodie. it is a nedefull obseruation
to bethinke your selfe, how you doe moue
your bodie, and specially in talke. For, it
many times chaunceth, a man is so ernest
in his tale, that hee hath no minde of any
thing els. One wagges his head. Another
lookes bigg and scowles with his browes.
That man pulls his mouth awry. And tother
spittes in and vppon their faces with

whome he talkes. And som suche there be
that moue their hands in suche a sorte, as
if they should chase ye flies as they go: which
be very vnhansome & vnseemely maners to
vse. And I haue heard it saide (for you
knowe I haue byn familiarly acquainted
with learned men in my time)  that Pindarus
               Pindarus.
that worthy man was wōt to saye: that

                  VVhatsoeuer it were that had a good & fauourie
taste: vvas seasoned by the hands of the Graces.
Now, what shall I speake of them yt
cōe forthe of their studies with their penne
in their eare: and nibble their hankercheifs
in their mouthe, or ly lolling wt their legge
ouer the table, or spit one their fingers,and
of a nūber of other blockishe gestures
and fashiōs more then these, which
cānot be all rehearsed well: nor
shal not, I meane, put me to
further paines to tel thē al
if I could. For, there be manie
perchaunce will say this is to
muche, that I haue
said allredie.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   