
      
         
            
               
                  
                  A briefe Treatise,
published by Walter Cary 1587.
and now the fift time 1609.
newly imprinted:
                  Wherein are to be found diuers
good and speciall helpes for
many Diseases. And for any thing herein mentioned, as heretofore I refered the patientes to M. Gray, so now (he being dead)
I referre them to M. Clapham,
at the signe of the Blew bell
and the Vnicorne in Fanchurch
streete.
                  Ecclus. 30. 15.
Health and Strength is aboue all Gold; and
a sound Body aboue infinite Treasure.
                  
                  Imprinted at London by W. White,
for the company of Stationers.
1609.
               
               
                  
                  The Authors Verse.
                  
                     WHo liues in health, and doth despise
                     The meane to keepe and gaine the same,
                     Let him be sicke, force not his cries,
                     His follie makes him too too blame:
                     Else pinch his Pursse, and teach him say,
                     This Physick's vaine, away, away.
                  
                  
                     Shall hee that's flush and feathered,
                     Say moolting time shall neuer bee?
                     The dolefull Mew doth not he dread,
                     Who sores as hie as thou canst see:
                     Mans health is frayle, Physitians loue,
                     Health got they keepe, and griefes remooue.
                     Walter Cary.
                  
               
               
                  
                  TO THE READER.
                  
                     
                        FOR that I am
now fully resolued
(gentle Reader)
for sundry causes,
to leaue the practise
of Physicke,
cōtenting my selfe
with that small
portion, wherewithall God hath otherwise
blessed mee: I haue thought it my
duetie to vse some meanes, whereby I may
either in like, or more ample sort (according
to my poore talent) benefit my Countrie.
Whereupon I haue published this
short worke, therein reuealing diuers good
and perfect remedies, for many common
and ordinarie Diseases.
                  My meaning was not to write of all,
but of those onely, in the which I haue had

greatest experience. And though both
in the description (desiring to be more
plaine) and cure thereof, I digresse somewhat
from many writers: yet I wish thee
not rashly to condemne mee. But if thou
mislike any thing herein conteyned, write
thy minde, and deliuer it to the Printer,
and I will be very willing, by writing
againe, to satisfie thee: or otherwise
thankfully to accept
thine aduise, and
confesse my
fault.
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  The Table.
                  
                     FOr the Head-ach Cap. 4.
                     For such as are much bound or costiue,
and haue their excrementes
alwayes hard and dry. cap. 4.
                     For the Swimming of the Head. cap. 4.
                     For sore and red Eyes cap. 4.
                     For rēd faces cap. 5.
                     For the Morphew cap. 5.
                     For those that are troubled with Biles,
Scabs, Itches, or such like cap. 6.
                     To preuent the Pockes and Measels in
Children cap. 6.
                     For those that are full of Fleame cap. 7.
                     For the Cough, and for the shortnes of
Breath cap. 7.
                     For an Heat and a Cold cap. 7.
                     For those who are toward the consumption
of the Lunges cap. 7.
                     For a Surfet cap. 8.
                     For the Heart-burning cap. 9.
                     For continuall Vomit cap. 9.
                     For those that haue no appetite to
Meate cap. 10.
                     For those who are troubled with the
gnawing of the Guttes or Stomach;
also for the Collicke and for Winde,
and all corruption which causeth
Winde cap. 11.
                     
                        
For the Rheume cap. 12.
                     For the Yellow Iaundise cap. 13.
                     For the stopping of the Liuer cap. 13.
                     For the Blacke Iaundise cap. 14.
                     For the hardnes of the Spleene cap. 14.
                     For the Piles cap. 14.
                     For the Greene sicknesse cap. 15.
                     For the quotidian Ague cap. 16.
                     For the quartane Ague cap. 17.
                     For the tertian Ague cap. 18.
                     For the Plague cap. 19.
                     For the Crampe cap. 20.
                     For Burning or Scalding cap. 21.
                     For a Felon and Whitblow cap. 22.
                     For a Ring-worme, Tetter, or such like,
cap. 23.
                     For the Tooth-ach cap. 24.
                     For the disease of English wantons ca. 25.
                     For Wormes of all sortes cap. 26.
                     For presumption of health cap. 27.
                     Three stayes of health cap. 28.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     Of a Potion which
is to be vsed in sundry cures.
                     The first Chapter.
                     
                        IN this first Chapter,
I minde to
speake of a Potion,
or Purgation;
which in sundrie
cures (as hereafter
doth appeare) is
to be vsed. And
whereas Nature
hath brought foorth Purgers of diuers
kindes, according to the diuersitie of corruption
in mans body; some purging one
humor, and some another, &c. I haue made
choyce of the best and safest, to be taken in
euery kind: also in such sort prepared and
corrected them, as they shall be found very
fit without all danger, paine, or vexation
whatsoeuer, to answere the necessitie of
such, whose bodyes of any manner of corruption
require to be purged.
                     I first deuised this Potion about eight
yeares since, and seeing the gentle working
and good successe therof with few, I grew

in further liking of the same. And therevpon
hauing giuen it to many, and that in
sundry diseases, I found it to be of such excellencie,
the vertue thereof so wonderfull,
and so well pleasing my patien
                           •
                        es, that I
did preferre it before all the rest. For it cureth
diuers griefes of the Head, also red
and watering sore Eyes; it cleanseth the
Stomach, & cureth the Heart-burning, it
prouoketh a good appetite, & helpeth digestion;
it is good against the Rheume, the
obstruction of the Lunges, the Cough, and
shortnes of breath; it cleanseth those who
are troubled with Biles, Scabs, Itches,
or such like; it cureth the Collicke, & preuayleth
greatly against Wind; it is good
in the blacke and yellow Iaundise; it helpeth
the inflamation of the Liuer; in the
Greene sicknesse it is a present helpe, & excellent
against al Feuers, and diuers other
Diseases. And to conclude, my long experience
hath so perswaded mee of the goodnesse
thereof, that I thinke I should do my
country-men much wrong, if I should any
longer keepe frō them so great a treasure.
                     The vse thereof, shall be declared in euerie
Chapter, where I intreat of the Diseases
particularly.
                     I haue deliuered my Bill for the making

of the same, and other things, vnto Maister
Clapham in Fanchurch-street at the signe
of the Blew-bell & Unicorne, Apothecarie;
of whose good dealing since M Grayes
death, I haue made very sufficient tryall.
                     It may be kept good, and in perfect vertue,
three weekes, or a month, contrary to
the nature of other Purgers. If any man
minde to carry it farre, let him signifie so
much to M. Clapham, that it may be prouided
of purpose.
                     And here I haue thought very requisite
to shew the causes why I haue not published
the manner of making this Potion,
for that I am charged by some, that I haue
a yearely benefite by the same; and for
mine owne gaine, doe keepe it from the
multitude: which is most vntrue. For,
(as I haue a fayth vnto God) the Apothecarie
hath the whole profit thereof. Neither
is it such, as that any man ought to
grieue thereat.
                     1 The first cause is, for that the composition
of Medicines doth properly pertaine
to the Apothecarie, and that it is great reason
euery man haue the benefit of his owne
profession.
                     2 The second cause is, the ignorance of
the multitude in chosing the simples or ingredients,

wherin is such skill, that the Apothecarie
himselfe (except he be of great
iudgement) is often deceiued.
                     3 The third cause, their ignoraunce in
making the Potion, yea, though happily
they haue good Simples. But because
some, dwelling farre from London, finde
themselues grieued, that they cannot haue
the Potion conueniently without great
charge, hauing sudden occasiō to vse it, neither
keepe it so long good as they would;
I haue now deuised a Sirup of Lignum
aloes,
                        The Sirup of Lignum aloes which may be kept one whole yeare
and longer, in perfect strength and vertue.
This Sirup is of the like nature with the
Potion, and is to be vsed as the Potion.
But by the addition of diuers thinges it is
of greater vertue, especially against Melancholy,
the infirmities of the Spleene,
and the Diseases proceeding of wind. For
the vse hereof, and the quantitie, I referre
thee to the obseruations in the third chapter,
and especially to the 12. Obseruation.
Onely this I will thee not to forget, that
now being a Sirup, it must be dissolued in
some liquor, and taken warme, either in
Broth, Wine, or Ale, clarified: in Ale or
Broth made thin, and without all Spices,
when the disease is hot & cholericke: when

the patient is grosse and full of Flegme, in
Wine; also in like sort, when the patient
is cold, dry, and full of dead melancholy.
                  
                  
                     Answers to such Obiections as may be
made against the vse of this Potion.
                     The second Chapter.
                     
                        IT will perhaps be obiected against me,
that it is very vnlikely, that one Medicine
should be good for so many diseases.
                     To which I answere, that we haue
receiued of our old and excellent Writers,
diuers Confections, wherein are conteined
sundry Purgers; whereof some purge
Flegme, some Choler, and others Melancholy.
So that I conclude, of necessitie
they are good in al flegmaticke, cholericke,
and melancholicke Diseases; which are infinite.
And following their example, I haue
made my Potion of like nature.
                     2 Further it may be obiected, that some
require to be purged with strong Purgations;
others with gentle: for children, and
they which are brought to great weakenes
either by age, or by sicknesse, must be mildly
vsed: but others, as the person & disease
require, more roughly. Wherefore, how

can one Potion serue for both? Hath it two
contrary natures? Is it both strong and
gentle?
                     I answere, that where the disease or person
require a strong Purgation, I giue it
in the greater quantitie, and the oftner: 
                           〈◊〉
                        
where a gentle Purgation is required I
giue the lesse; as hereafter doth appeare.
                     3 Thirdly, it may be obiected, that in
some diseases of the Stomach, especially,
the patient is to be purged with Pilles,
Electuaries, or such like, which being of
more grosse substance then a Potion, continue
longer in the place where the corruption
is, and worke effectually: whereas a
thin Potion slippeth away, leauing the
worke vndone.
                     I answere, when I prescribe my Potion
for purging the Stomach, I wish my patient
to take it one houre before he rise: for
lying in his bed, it cannot more suddainly
passe the Stomach, then your grosser sort
of purgers; and then no doubt it will farre
excell Pilles, Electuaries, &c. For being a
thinne substaunce, it will very easily ioyne
with the corruption which it findeth in the
Stomach, and dissolue the same: whereas
these grosser Medicines require first to be
dissolued themselues; which is no small

trouble to nature.
                     4 Fourthly, it may be obiected, that I
preferre my Potion before the Receiptes
of diuers excellent & famous men, which
haue been alwayes esteemed euen as Fathers
of Physicke.
                     I must needs confesse, that whatsoeuer
I haue, I haue it from them. But notwithstanding,
I hope no man thinketh nature
barren, or that she hath spent her self in our
Fathers, & left nothing for their Children.
I haue read & practised, according to that
which I found in these excellent men, and
haue herein only added to their inuentions.
So that if you receiue any benefite by this
Potion, or by ought else which here you
shall find, ascribe the honour vnto them: I
craue nothing, but accept my labour as a
sufficient recompence for my paines.
                  
                  
                     Certaine Obseruations.
                     The third Chapter.
                     IN taking of my Potion, thou needest
not keepe thy Chamber, nor House
strictly, as in strong Purgations; but
mayst walke abrode, if otherwise thy
Disease be no let vnto thee.
                     2 Thou needest not make any curious

obseruation of times for the taking thereof:
I onely aduise thee to forbeare euery
change and full of the Moone, in which are
conteined the Eclipses. For the Eclipse of
the Sunne is but ye change of the Moone,
(although of more force then the ordinarie
change) neither the Eclipse of the Moone,
other then the perfect opposition or full.
                     3 It may be taken cold, of such whose
stomaches cannot beare the sauour of physicke,
but haue their natures glutted with
often taking of Medicines.
                     4 If a Child and an elder body be sicke
both of one Disease, in which the Potion
is to be taken, let the Child take lesse, and
haue fewer stooles; but the elder more.
For as a small Uessell is sooner emptied
then a greater, conteining a greater quantitie:
euen so is the body of a Child sooner
purged, then ye body of one of riper yeares;
specially, for that in a Child the humours
are more moyst and fluxible.
                     5 They, whose bodyes are full, and as it
were loden with corruption, shal find wonderfull
ease, if they take it ten dayes in the
fall, and ten dayes in the spring; as also
now & then one good spoonfull before supper,
which will gather togither the relicks
of digestion, with other corruption, & cause

the patient to haue the next morning one
great stoole.
                     6 Take some broth within two houres,
or lesse, after the taking of the Potion, or a
Cawdle, or some like supping.
                     7 The Patient ought not to sleepe,
within three houres after the taking of the
Potion.
                     8 A child of three yeares old may take
of it very safely.
                     9 If it offende thy taste, vse Sugar, or
wash thy mouth with Wine, or some other
like thing, which I referre to thine owne
discretion.
                     10 If thy body be dry, and such as a
Purgation will hardly worke withall;
thou must take the greater quantitie.
                     11 If thy body be very moyst, and ouer
apt to be purged: thou canst not take too
little.
                     12 To finde a proportion betweene thy
body and the Potion, take thou first three,
foure, or fiue spoonefuls fasting, & marke
how many Stooles that quantitie giueth
thee. If it giue thee more than thou wouldest
haue, take lesse the next day: if it giue
thee fewer, take more. By this meane,
when I shall hereafter, in any Disease, aduise
thee to take so much as shall giue thee

foure, fiue, or sixe stooles, more or lesse;
thou shalt be able, by this rule, to prescribe
thy selfe the quantitie. But for the most
part (thy body being neither very dry and
melancholy, neither ouer moyst and exceeding
easie to be purged) euery good spoonefull
will cause and prouoke one stoole.
                     13 During the time of taking the Potion,
especially if thou take it long, to cause a
generall euacuation of thy body, abstaine
from those things which are very hot; as
Wines, Spices, Salt, and salt meates, &c:
and also from raw fruites, greene hearbes,
and all cold thinges; or at the least, vse of
these as little as thou maiest. For thy body
being emptied, it is very requisite thou
make supply with those thinges, which are
of good nutriment, and fittest to breed good
blood: For otherwise, it is but vaine to take
away that which is bad, and to fill the place
with that which is worsse. Wherefore let
thy Drinke be Ale, thy Bread of the finest
of good Wheate; whereof also eate very
little thy Meates for the most part boyled,
and such as are fine and light of digestion.
                     14 In any wise read and marke well
these rules, before thou take of the potion.
                  
                  
                     
                     For the Head-ach, and for such as are
much bound, and haue their excrement
alwayes hard and dry: also for the swimming
of the Head, and for red
and sore Eyes.
                     The fourth Chapter.
                     THe Head-ach proceedeth of diuers
causes: First of heate, and chiefely
of the Sunne, which heateth the
Braine and blood about the Head:
and this kind of Head-ach is sayd to be of
heat alone, without the mixture of any Humour
causing the same.
                     2 The second kind of Head-ach (contrarie
to the first) is of cold alone, and happeneth
most vnto those, who hauing long
vsed to keepe their heads warme, suddainly
take cold. But because these two kindes
happen seldome, also for the most part stay
not long, and the causes being knowne, may
easily be preuented, I write nothing touching
the cure of the same.
                     There are also diuers other griefes of
the Head; but mine intent is to speake here
onely of the cure of those which follow.
                     3 The third kind of headach is of fulnes,
when the partie liuing in great securitie,
some & some feedeth his bodie excessiuelie,

euen vntill his Eies swell with fatnesse,
and his whole Bodie be puffed vp like a
bladder,
                     4 The fourth kind is of corrupt humors,
which abounding in great quantitie, are the
verie present cause alone of the Headach,
without any other accidentall matter.
                     For cure of this third & fourth kind, take
of my Potion, so much as shall giue thee
three, foure, or fiue stooles a daie for eight
daies or longer, vntill thy head and bodie
be well emptied. In this sort shalt thou vse
the potion for the cure of the swimming or
giddinesse of the head, and for sore and red
watering eies.
                     5 The fift kind is of the fume of corrupt
humors, & not of the humors themselues:
for that the corruption lying in the stomach,
onely casteth vp to the braine euill fumes,
which offende the same, being of all other
partes the most sensible.
                     For cure of the fift kind, take of my Potion
so much as shall giue thee foure or fiue
stooles a day, for three dayes, and keepe thy
bed one houre after the same; but sleep not.
                     6 There is also one other kind of headach,
which proceedeth of the excrement,
continuing ouer-long in the body; whereof
I thinke it very necessarie to speake.

After thou hast receiued thy food, first▪ Nature
sucketh from it that which is thin and
pure, leauing the rest as grosse & corrupt.
And if then it remaine longer in the body,
the noysome fumes thereof (it being now
an excrement, and hauing lost the nature of
a nutriment) ascend vp to the Braine, and
cause the Head-ach: also otherwise (nature
being as yet forced to feede thereupon) it
greatly infecteth the body: So that it is in
reason a thing vnpossible for him to be long
in health, who is much costiue or bound in
his body. For cure of this sixt and last kind,
take for ten or twelue dayes together (or
longer) euery morning fasting, so much of
my Potion, as shall giue thee one stoole a
day more then ordinarie. And when thou
hast brought thy body to good order, take
alway lesse and lesse: for by that meanes
thou shalt toll nature on to doe her worke
without helpe. And in any wise remember,
that euery morning, both whilest thou vsest
the Potion, and afterwards also, thou offer
thy selfe to the Stoole, although thou feele
no prouocation.
                  
                  
                     
                     For Pimples, or other itching humors
rising in the face, and for all itches of
the bodie, a verie rare ointment.
                     The fift Chapter.
                     FOr the Pimpies or other itching humors
rising in the face: when you goe
to bed annoint the place lightlie euery
night, and in the morning moisten it
with a litle new milke, and wipe it, for your
bodie annoynt when you go to bed by a fire
foure or fiue nights, which will kill an itch
be it neuer so olde.
                  
                  
                     For those that are troubled with Biles,
itches, scabs, and such like, proceeding
of inward infection.
                     The sixt Chapter.
                     SOme by nature, from their Parents,
some by long and euill diet, others by
companie haue their bodies inclined
to Biles, Scabs, itches and such like:
all which I will teach thee to cure euenin
as perfect an order as thou ma
                           •
                        est wash a
foule vessell with faire water.
                     Take of the potion, so much as shal giue

thee foure stooles a daie, for three daies.
The fourth day take of the rootes of Briony,
which thou shalt haue at maister Claphams,
and boile halfe an ounce thereof, and
one whole mase in a pint of ale gently halfe
an houre: then adde thereto a little Sugar:
And let the Patient drinke a good draught
thereof warme, and keepe his Bedde, and
sweat three houres; aud during his sweat
now and then let him take more of this
Ale, vntill he haue taken the whole pint:
but if it be a Child, lesse; as the age dooth
require. Use this order three daies together,
and longer, if the disease haue beene of
long continuance.
                     Note, that in Sweating, the patient
must rubbe his bodie with warme clothes,
to take away such corruption as commeth
out by sweating.
                     Note also that by this meanes thou
maiest preuent the Pockes and Meazels
in Children, and others, in such
sort, as they shall be vnapt
to take them, as they
which haue had
them.
                  
                  
                     
                     For those that are full of Flegeme, also for
the Cough and shortnesse of breath, for such
as haue taken an heat and cold, and for
those which are towards the consumption
of the Lunges.
                     The Seuenth Chapter.
                     THey, whose bodyes are full of flegme,
and haue their Lunges stuffed with
the same, or other corruption; so that
thereby they are troubled with the Cough,
are thus to be cured. Take of my Potion
for three dayes euery morning fasting, so
much as will giue thee foure or fiue stooles
a day: for thereby thou shalt finde thy body
vnladen of much Flegme. Then take
one handfull of the hearbe called Tussilago,
or otherwise Vngula caballina, Lickerish
scraped and brused 2. ounces, Aniseed
brused halfe an ounce, I soppe foure branches:
boyle these in three pintes of water
gently, vntill halfe bee consumed: then
straine & put therto three ounces of Sugar
or Sugar-candie, which is better: Drinke
hereof a reasonable quantitie, well warmed
euery morning one houre before you
rise, for ten dayes after your purging, or
longer: for it will cause the flegme to come
vp easily, and is a wonderfull preseruatiue

for the lungs, keeping them from putrifaction.
                     But otherwise, if you will haue a thing
of like or greater vertue, also more readie,
more pleasant, and which wil last longer in
perfect force; take the things aboue mentioned,
in such quantities as before; that
is of the leaues of Tussilago one handfull,
Lickerish scraped and bruled two ounces,
Aniseede brused halfe an ounce, I ssop foure
branches, & of the Herbe commonlie called
Ros solis, halfe an handfull. Steepe these
in a quart of verie good Malmesie, and let
it stand in a reasonable heat by the fire side,
close stopped 24. houres or more. After
take it from the fire, and when it is almost
cold, straine it, and put thereto a pound and
a halfe of fine Sugar well beaten, and then
let it stand in as gentle an heate as you can,
vpon a chafing dish with embers, in a faire
Pewter vessell, vntill it be verie thicke alwaies
stirring it now and then: It will
bee well in eight or nine houres. But if
thou wilt haue a certaine rule; when it groweth
to bee thicke, drop two or three drops
on a colde Pewter vessell; and if when it
is perfect cold, it bee as it were a gellie, and
will not run, then it is well. Keepe it in
a gallie pot close stopped, somewhat neere

the fire.
                     For the cough, thou shalt vse it in this
order. After purging as before, clarifie a
draught of Ale, and put to it a spoonefull
thereof, drinking it warme and fasting.
                     If anie man bee sicke of anie disease,
wherein he is also troubled with tough and
slimie fleame; let him take now and then a
litle hereof vppon a kniues point, and hold
it long in his mouth: so that it melt downe
some & some: For thereby the fume thereof,
and part of the substance will passe with
the breath into the lunges, loose the fleame,
and cause it to void easilie.
                     For those that are troubled with the
shortnesse of breath, hauing their lunges
drie; so that it is a continuall labour for
them to fetch their wind: it is good first to
take of my Potion, now and then for a daie
or two, asmuch as will giue them three or
foure stooles at a time; and afterwards to
vse the Medicine before rehearsed made
with Malmesie, in this order following.
Clarifie a draught of Ale, and put therein
the yolk of a new laid egge, and one spoonefull
of the medicine, when you are ready to
take it from the Fire: and let the patient
drinke it fasting, and fast one houre after
it. Although thou haue beene troubled

with this griefe many yeares, yet if thou
vse this medicine it will moisten and open
thy lungs or lights, and cure thee. Thou
canst not vse it too long, for it is both a nutriment
and a medicine. In this sort also
shalt thou greatlie ease them which are entring
into the consumption of the Lunges.
But if they will bee cured, they must withall
abstaine from all Spices, Wines, and
Salt meates, which fret or inflame their
bodies. Also they must haue a great care,
that they vse no violent Exercise to ouer
heate their Bodies; and that in Coughing
they straine their Lightes as little as possible
may bee, least by violent Coughing
they teare them. Cheese, nuts, and all rawe
fruites also are verie euill for them. They
cannot haue too great care in their diet
and vsage. For this disease is verie harde,
and almost vnpossible to bee perfectlie cured.
                     If any man, by vehement labour or exercise,
heate his bodie excessiuelie, and during
his heate, either by Drinking, by rest,
or any meanes, suddenly coole himselfe extreamelie,
for the most part he falleth sicke
vnto death: and if he escape, yet he remaineth
weake and sicklie during his life, for
nature misliketh nothing more than a sudden

passage from the one contrarie, which
is extreame heate: vnto the other, which
is extreame cold. Now, if the partie thus
heating his Bodie, do keepe himselfe so
warme that he abate the extremitie by little
and little; vntill he come to that state, in
which he was before his heate: then he falleth
not sicke, neither doth nature complain
at all. Wherevpon I thinke by great reason,
and I am sure by long experience I
may conclude, that the best meane to cure a
man in this extremitie, is to bring his bodie
orderlie againe to the like heate, wherin
it was when he tooke cold, and to suffer the
same some and some as it were by degrees
to passe away: which thou shalt do in this
order.
                     Take a pint of ale, clarifie it, and dissolue
therein as much treacle as a walnut, and a
spooneful of the medicine before rehearsed,
made with malmesie. Let the patient drink
a good draught hereof warmed fasting, and
keepe his bed, & sweat, foure or fiue hours
after it; and during his sweat, now and
then let him take of the Ale thus prepared
vntill he haue taken all. If it be a Child,
lesse quantitie will serue: and in anie wise
abate his sweate verie gentlie, and beware
he take no cold. For three mornings following,

let him take one draught of the like,
two howers before he rise, and keepe his
body warme without sweating.
                     Note, if in the beginning of his sickenesse,
thou vse the order prescribed for the
first day, hee will presently recouer. But
if hee haue been long sicke, and so weake
that he bee not able to sweate as before,
there is no hope of life.
                     Note, that if the patient be much bound,
I wish thee to giue him fiue or sixe spoonefuls
of my Potion, to ease and disburden
nature: and let him drinke oft, milde and
thin Broth warme.
                  
                  
                     For a Surfet by ouer eating.
                     The eight Chapter.
                     
                        WHen any man, either by long fasting,
being very hungry, or otherwise,
comming to such daintie
meates as he is not vsed vnto,
eate ouer much, and cloyeth nature; she
refuseth to digest at all: like as one seeing
a burden farre too heauie for him to beare,
doth not so much as once offer to lift it.
                     This griefe is in the quantitie of things
taken. But there is also the like in the euill

quality of meats, although they exceed not
in quantitie, as in eating of fresh-herings,
fat Pies, Piecrust, heauie Cakebread, and
such like: whereof eating but so much, as
may well be eaten of better meates, oftentimes
groweth greater sicknes.
                     For cure, if the Patient complaine, as
yet the cause or matter of his griefe being
in the stomach: giue him a draught of water
warme as milke from the cowe, with
two spoonefuls of Sallet oyle, which will
cause him to Uomit: but if it worke not
quickly, let him helpe it with his finger, by
offering it to his throate. And after his vomit,
giue him three or foure spoonfuls of a
Cawdell; or some Broath reasonably hot;
and let him haue great care of his diet, for
fiue or sixe daies following: first, that hee
eate nothing but what is warme and easie
to digest; next, that he eate not at anie
time much in quantitie.
                     But if the matter passe the stomach,
with verie slight or no digestion, so that a
Uomit will not pleasure him; giue him a
draught of sacke fasting, well burned, putting
thereto as much Tr
                           •
                        acle as an Hazell
Nut, and Sugar as you thinke sufficient;
and let him keepe his bed, and sweat foure
houres; more or lesse as you thinke good,

according to the strength of the patient:
and in his sweat, now and then let him take
Ale clarified with a little Mace, wherein
also dissolue some sugar: for thus shall you
make perfect digestion, through the whole
body, of that whereof he did surfet.
                  
                  
                     For the Heartburning.
                     The ninth Chapter.
                     I Thinke it good togither with the multitude,
to content my selfe with the ordinarie
name of this disease, which is, the
heart burning: although it be a disease of
the Stomach, and not of the Heart. They
which are troubled with this griefe, are for
the most part at ease, after they haue eaten,
but when their meat is digested, they feele
a continual heate or bitternes in the mouth
o
                           •
                         their stomaches; they often belch, and
haue a continuall readines (as it were) to
vomit. In some it is of long continuance,
in others it riseth vpon euery light occasion,
especiasly by eating of fat, salt, and cholericke
meates.
                     As touching the cure, first I wish thee to
marke verie diligentlie, after what meates
and drinkes thou art most troubled with

this disease, and forbeare the same: for assure
thy selfe, that they are either very vnfit
to make good blood, or otherwise thy
nature hath some speciall mislike thereof.
I wish thee also to take this for a generall
rule, that what griefe soeuer thou mayest
helpe by good diet or abstinence; in any
wise take no Physicke for the same. But if
thy long euill diet hath laden thy stomach
with hot, salt, & cholericke humors, which
doe cause the heart burning: then take of
my Potion for three dayes euery morning,
so much as shall giue thee foure or fiue
stooles: so shalt thou cleanse thy stomach
perfectly: which is a very sufficient and
perfect cure.
                     
                        For those which Vomit continually
after meat.
                        THere are two speciall causes of this
Disease▪ the one is, when the first
veines which receiue the nutriment
from the stomach, are stopped: the
other, when the body is long bound, and
the excrement very hard, so that the patient
goeth scarsely once in ten dayes to the
stoole. In some it groweth to such extremitie,
that they neuer goe to the stoole: but
that which remayneth after digestion, passeth

from them by Uomit.
                        For cure, take foure spoonefulles of my
Potion fasting; and if that worke not, take
more the next day; and so foorth, alwayes
increasing the quantitie, vntill it worke.
                        The next day, after it hath wrought,
boyle a pint of good White-wine, with one
handfull of Parsely, a quarter of an houre
or better; then straine it, and put thereto a
litle Sugar: and let the patient drinke a
reasonable quantitie thereof warme, and
keepe his bed, and sweat three houres: and
during his sweat, let him take now and
then more of the same, vntill he haue taken
all.
                        Afterwardes, let him take fasting, so
much of my Potion as will giue him one
Stoole a day. This hee must continue in
such sort, that he suffer not his excrement
to stay long, or to dry in his body; but that
he be alwayes soluble.
                        Note, the White-wine thus prepared,
together with the sweating, openeth the
first veine, and maketh good passage into
the body. The purging dissolueth, & draweth
downe the excrement, and some & some
bringeth nature to her vsuall course: also
cleanse
                              •
                           h the stomach of such corruption, as
happely is some cause of the griefe.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     For those that haue no appetite
to Meate.
                     The tenth Chapter.
                     THere are diuers causes of this Disease:
but I will rehearse onely two,
which are most vsuall. The one is,
when the first Ueines doe not sucke,
which is their naturall action, whereby
they receiue food for the whole body: and
this is found in men of diuers constitutions.
The other is proper vnto fatte and
grosse bodyes, which are alwayes stuffed,
(as it were) and so full, that nature seemeth
contented with that she hath, and hath little
desire of more. For cure, take of my Potion
euery day as much as will giue thee
two or three Stooles, and in few dayes
thou shalt feele thy selfe exceeding hungry:
But if thou haue not good appetite presently
after thy purging, take White wine
boyled, in such sort, as in the Chapter before
is prescribed.
                  
                  
                     
                     For those, who are troubled with the
gnawing of the stomach or guttes:
also for the collicke and wind, and all
corruption which causeth wind.
                     The xi. Chapter.
                     THese griefes rise of such corrupt and
slymie humours, as cleaue to the inner
part of the Stomach and Guts;
and are thus very easily to be cured.
Take of my Potion so much as shall giue
thee three or foure Stooles a day, for fiue
or sixe dayes, more or lesse, respecting the
age and body of the patient. For when his
Stomach & Guts are cleansed, hee is very
perfectly cured. Then learne to auoyde all
windy and slimie meates, whereby thou
shalt be able to preuent these diseases. I
muse at the madnesse of such as in this case
vse Pepper, Ginger, and other hot spices:
also Coriander seed, or any thing of like
nature: for that in reason it is farre better
to take away the matter of the Disease,
in such sort as I haue sayd, then to ioyne
one contrarie with another, & to let them
both remayne. These hotte thinges are
fitter to warme a cold Stomach, and to
make it apt to digest▪ beeing moderatly

vsed, then to clense it, being full of corruption;
and good chiefly for those who are in
yeares, and haue naturall heat so decayed,
that by Arte they are forced to seeke helpe,
where Nature fayleth.
                  
                  
                     For the Rheume.
                     The twelfe Chapter.
                     FOr the Rheume, I chiefly prescribe
thee three Rules following: for that
the cure thereof consisteth more in the
patientes owne good gouernment,
then in much taking of Physicke.
                     
                        The first Rule.
                        Use labour and exercise; for thereby thou
shalt stirre vp naturall heat, and consume
the waterish humours, which doe cause the
Rheume: but if the weather be such as thou
canst not goe abroade, either 
                              •
                           osse a great
yarne Ball against a wall, or driue a great
woodden Top in some conuenient place:
for both these are very good exercises. Use
them twise a day, and continue alwayes
one houre; but make an end an houre before
meate: and in the beginning, as also a
little before thou ende, vse gentle labour,
that thou abate thy heat by litle and litle:
this is the chiefe and principall meane,

both to preuent & cure this griefe. Which
dooth appeare manifestlie: first, for that
they, who labour much, are neuer troubled
with the Rheume: next, that students, and
such as vse litle stirring or motion of their
bodies, are most subiect thereto: for while
they sit still, the outwarde partes of their
bodies are cold; so that their bloud, together
with their humors, remaine within:
Neither haue they anie such euacuation by
the Pores, as nature requireth, to consume
the Rheumaticke humour, which then seeketh
another vent: and either the Patient
is forced to spit it out, or else it runneth out
at his Nose: or thirdly, it slily trickeleth
into the Lungs. Here also maiest thou gather,
why Studentes are commonlie so
leane; for by neglecting exercise, which
should disperse the bloud, they starue the
outward parts of their bodies.
                     
                     
                        The second Rule.
                        Feed most vpon hot meates, and especially
such as are well roasted: for hot meats
warme the Stomach▪ and stirre vp naturall
heate through the whole body, which digesteth
the humors; chiefelie, if at thy meate
thou talke and be merrie.
                     
                     
                        
                        The third Rule.
                        Keepe thy Head and Necke warme,
and thy Feete dry.
                     
                     
                        The fourth Rule.
                        Drinke little; and touching thy drinke
also, obserue these Rules following.
                        1 Let thy Drinke be reasonable strong,
and not small in any wise: for the smallest
Drinke is most waterish. And if thou take
of that continually from time to time,
which yeeldeth alwayes new matter of
thy Disease, it is very hard for thee to haue
helpe.
                        2 Either drinke not at all, or very little
toward the end of thy meales: for so shalt
thou suppresse the moysture, which otherwise
would ascend.
                        3 Let not thy Drinke bee ouer stale,
sower, or sharpe.
                        4 Drinke not White or Rhenish wine.
                        5 If thou drinke Claret wine, first
looke it be no small or hedge Wine: next,
take it well Sugered, and in the midst of
thy meate one draught. There are diuers
other rules, but I will not perswade thee
to any curious obseruations of the same:
yet will I rehearse them, least I should
seeme to contemne that which is allowed
of the learned.
                     
                     
                        
                        The sixt Rule.
                        6 Fast and watch. The reason alledged
is, that both these drie the bodie. But these
alone being obserued, rather hurt then
helpe: Whereof I take witnesse; earnest
Students, which rise earlie, fast long, eate
little, and sit vp late, yet most troubled with
the Rheume of all others. Wherefore in
steede of these, eate freelie, but drinke sparinglie:
also sleepe harde, but lie verie
warme: For then is thy bodie in like state
as when thou vsest exercise. But watching
is vnnaturall, maketh a drie senselesse
Braine, caus
                              •
                           th sore Eyes, and a cold waterish
Stomach, which are woorse then the
Rheume.
                     
                     
                        The seuenth Rule.
                        7 Keepe thee in a warme Ayre, and goe
warme.
                     
                     
                        The eight Rule.
                        8 Holde thy Breath hard now and then,
which forceth the Blood to the outward
parts of the Body, and turneth withall the
course of the Rheumatike humours.
                     
                     
                        The Cure.
                        Now, to helpe those which afterwardes
by these Rules meane to continue their
health themselues (for otherwise it is but
vaine to seeke helpe) first I wish them

to take of my Potion two dayes, & so much
at a time, as will giue them sixe or seuen
stooles: the third day towards bed, burne a
good draught of Sacke, with a branch of
Rosemarie: and when you haue doone burning
of it, presently brew it with a good
quantitie of Sugar, and the yolke of a new
layed Egge. And let the patient drinke it
in bed, and keepe his body very warme all
night: for so shall he digest & consume the
Rheumatick humors: vse this three nights
together.
                        Note, if he be a thin leane body, and full
of blood, either delay the Sacke the better
with Sugar; or vse Ale in stead of Sacke,
least the Sacke inflame his blood.
                     
                  
                  
                     For the Yellow Iaundise, and stopping
of the Liuer, a very easie and
perfect cure.
                     The xiij. Chapter.
                     THE yellow I aundise proceedeth of
choler, being mixed with blood, and
therewith also dispearsed ouer the
whole body. There are diuerse causes
of this Disease, which make diuerse
kindes thereof.
                     1 The first kind is by the biting of some

venemous Beast, whose Poyson ioyneth
with the blood, and maketh the same cholericke.
                     2 The second kind is chiefly in the declination,
or going away of an hot Feuer:
for when Nature hath got the vpper hand,
she dispearseth ye yellow choler, which was
the matter of the Feuer, and driueth it out
of the bodie, by vrine, by stoole, and by the
pores: which are the three speciall and most
natural meanes, whereby she emptieth the
bodie. So that in this kind, the skin, which
is ful of pores, or insensible holes, the vrine
and Excrementes of the Patient are verie
yellow.
                     3 The third kinde is through the inflamation
of the Liuer, which being ouer hot,
worketh too vehemently vpon the nutriment,
which it receiueth, and conuerteth it
not into good bloud, according to his office
and dutie: but it selfe beeing distempered
into a matter of like heat, which is Choler,
or rather verie Cholericke bloud.
                     4 The fourth kind is through the weakenesse
of the Gall, which is not able to su
                           •
                        ke
or drawe from the Liuer the cholericke humours;
but suffereth them together with
the Bloud to passe into the Bodie, which
thereby is coloured yellow.
                     
                        
5 The fift kind is through the obstruction
or stopping of the vessels, that are betweene
the Liuer and the Gall; which being
stopped, the Choler cannot passe into
the Gall, but is carried with the Blood into
the body, and stayneth it.
                     6 The sixt kind is through the obstruction
of the passage, from the Gall, into the
bowels; for that being stopped, the Gall is
not able to emptie it selfe. But the Choler
is repelled, and passeth backe into the Bodie,
which otherwise should colour and
staine the Excrement yellow. In this fift
and sixt kinds therefore, the Excrement of
the Patient is white, also he feeleth an heauinesse
in his right side. These two last
kinds of Iaundies are most cōmon, which
are thus to be cured. As for the rest, I
write nothing: for (to confesse a truth) since
I knew the vse of the roote of the white
Uine, otherwise called Brionia, a thing not
knowne, and yet of speciall vertue, I neuer
vsed other meane to cure the Iaundise.
Whereby I gather, that either altogether,
or most commonly, the griefe riseth of obstruction.
Take of the rootes of Brionia
halfe an ounce, and Parslie halfe an handfull:
boyle these very gently in a pint of
White or Rhenish wine halfe an houre,

close couered, then straine it, and let the patient
drinke a good draught therof reasonable
hot, fasting, and keepe his bed, & sweate
three or foure houres, as the continuance of
his disease doth require, & his strength wil
permit, which I refer to his owne discretion:
and during his sweat, let him drinke of
the rest, vntill he haue taken all: and if he
desire to drinke yet more in his sweat, giue
him Ale clarified, putting therto one whole
Mace, and a litle Sugar.
                     Note, the more he sweateth & drinketh,
the more the vessels stopped are opened,
the matter digested, and his Iaundise the
sooner cured. The next day take so much
of my Potion as will giue thee seauen or
eight Stooles: for thy sweating doth but
open the vessels, and digest the corruption
which lieth in them: but the purging doth
take it away. It were also more agreeing
with physicke & reason, if thou purge
a little before thy sweating, to cleanse thy
stomach and guts, least such corruption as
lyeth there, be caried into the body. But
in the meaner sort, who euer do expect suddaine
helpe, I often haue omitted the first
purging: yea, and sometimes also, they
feeling ease, haue neuer sought for the second.
                     
                        
Note, if the Iaundise in short time after,
shew not himselfe perfectly cured: let the
patient sweat againe, as before.
                     Note also, hereby thou shalt cure the obstruction
of the Liuer.
                     But the most easie and ready cure of the
Iaundise, is by the conserue for the Iaundise;
of which take euery morning fasting,
for ten dayes together, as much as a Walnut,
and fast one houre after it.
                  
                  
                     For the Blacke Iaundise, for the hardnesse
and swelling of the Spleene or
Milt; also for the Piles.
                     The xiiij. Chapter.
                     LIke as the Yellow Iaundise proceedeth
of Choler; so the Blacke Iaundise
of Melancholie: which ioyning
with the Blood, is dispearsed ouer the
whole body. It is knowne by diuers
signes, but chiefly by this token, which wil
serue for all. They that are troubled with
this Disease, haue alwayes dry, withered,
and blacke bodyes. It is very hard to
be cured, and requireth great diligence of
the patient: for Melancholie is a very
stubborne humour, and (without great digestion)
will not yeeld to any Purgation
whatsoeuer. For cure, take Ceteracke, the

inner rine of the Ash, the roots of the white
Uine, Parsely; of each foure ounces: hoyle
these gently in three gallons of Whey clarified
one houre at the least, and being cold,
keepe it in some cleane vessell vntill the
same bee well setled. Take hereof well
warmed a great draught or two, euery
morning fasting (for thou canst not take
too much) and walke after it, vntill the body
be hot: or else vse some other exercise,
to stirre thy blood, that the Whey may bee
the better dispearsed within thy body.
Take it at ye least thirtie or fourtie daies together,
especially in the Spring and Fall.
But alwayes remember to take so much of
my Potion with the Whey, as will giue
thee dayly one stoole more then ordinary.
                     Note, that the Whey thus prepared,
doth digest some & some the melancholy;
and the potion doth take it away from time
to time, as it is made fit to be purged.
                     Note also, that it is good for thee to annoynt
thy left side about thy girdle stead,
where the Spleene lyeth, with oyle of
Wormewood warmed, or oyle of Brionie▪
                        
which is farre better.
                     Note thirdly, that in this sort thou mayest
cure the swelling and hardnesse of the
Spleene: also the Piles or Hem
                           •
                        rrhoides.
                  
                  
                     
                     For the Greene-sicknesse.
                     The xv. Chapter.
                     THis Disease happeneth, when the
Liuer is also weakened, that it is
not able to conuert the nutriment
into blood; but the digestion thereof
is raw, so that the whole body is filled with
water and fleame, in stead of good blood.
It is found most in Maydens, who either
of folly desire to abate their colour, & to be
ouer fine; or otherwise of childish appetite,
feede vpon such things, as change the state
of their bodyes, which are these: Apples,
Peares, Plums, Cheries, and generally
all raw Fruites and H
                           ••
                        rbes: also, Otemeale,
Wheate, Barlie, raw Milke, and
many other thinges of like nature. They
that haue this Disease, are very pale and
greenish: if they chaunce to cut a Finger,
no Blood, but Water will rather follow.
They feele a great paine in their heades,
with a continual panting or beating. They
are faint also, with shortnes of breath; and
haue their naturall course stayed.
                     For cure, take of my Potion, for foure
or fiue dayes, euery day so much as shall
giue thee fiue or sixe stooles. The next day

after thy Purging, boyle halfe an ounce of
the rootes of the white vine in a wine pint
of Ale gently, a quarter of an houre, and
drinke a good draught thereof, and keepe
thy bed, and sweate three or foure houres,
more or lesse, as the body of the patient will
beare: and in thy sweating, drinke of thy
Ale now and then, vntill thou haue taken
all, or as much as thou canst. The day following,
take a good draught of thy Ale in
like sort prepared, one houre before thou
rise, and keepe thy body warme without
sweating vse this last order twelue dayes:
But it were farre better to walke after thy
draught, or to vse some other exercise;
whereof I haue spoken in the Chapter for
the Rheume, for one houre to heat & stirre
the humors in thy body. Use withall, onely
meates of good nutriment and easie digestion,
& thou shalt haue very speedy helpe,
and also perfect health.
                  
                  
                     For the quotidian Ague, which
commeth euery day.
                     The xvj. Chapter.
                     TAke Centurie, Burrage, and Betonie;
of each three handfulles, Fumiterrae
one handfull, Iuie berries one

pint: choppe all these very finely together,
and put them into a faire Stillatorie, with
one pint of White-wine; and distill them
with as gentle a Fire as is possible, vntill
thou haue all the Water: which keepe in a
Glasse close stopped with yellow Waxe.
                     For the Quotidian Ague, let the patient
take seauen or eight spoonefuls of this
Water warmed, two houres before his fit,
and keepe his bed, and sweat three or foure
houres: and in his sweating, let him drinke
Ale clarified reasonable hot, now and then:
and into euery draught put two spoonefuls
of the Water.
                     The next day, in like order two houres
before his fit, get him into a sweat: and do
in all thinges as before.
                     Note, that the Water is more perfectly
made, if the thinges be first digested in a
close vessell, in Balneo Marie, or Fimo
equino, eight or ten dayes.
                     Note also, that these thinges orderly
doone, and the patient well kept from the
ayre, the Ague is cured in two dayes. But
if by some ouersight, it chaunce to continue
longer, begin againe, and vse the like order
for two dayes, as before.
                     Note thirdly, it will be more easily cured,
if thou purge before thy sweating,

with so much of my Potion as will giue
thee fiue or sixe stooles.
                     If a Child be sicke of a Quotidian or
Tertian ague, which being young will not
bee perswaded to take inward things: take
an ounce of the Rootes of the white Uine,
beate them to Powder; also, take halfe so
much wheat flower, and boile both in a little
milke vntill it be thicke: then spread it
vpon two linnen clothes, & bind it warme
to the Wristes of the child; when it is drie,
take fresh. In foure daies for the most part
the ague is thus cured, it helpeth much also
for all others, and in all agues.
                  
                  
                     For the quartane ague.
                     The 17. Chapter.
                     THe Quartane Ague is a disease so
hard to cure, that it hath beene alwaies
accounted the reproach and
shame of the Physicians. For it resisteth
the fore of all their vsuall medicines,
and doth in despite of them triumph ouer
their patient. Wherefore I shall now take
a hard matter in hand, and I know my slender
receipt shall be greatly suspected, for

the working of so rare an effect. But notwithstanding,
being greatly incouraged by
experience, and reason, hir good Lady and
Gouernesse; I will boldly proceed heerein.
Take on thy two good dayes, euery
day so much of my Potion fasting, as will
giue thee sixe or seuen stooles: The third
day, which is thy fit day, passe ouer, as thou
thinkest good; for I prescribe thee nothing.
The fourth day, take of the Water, whereof
I spake in the Chapter before, a reasonable
draught warmed, early, and keepe thy
bed, & sweat moderatly fiue or sixe houres;
and during thy sweat, drinke now and then
Ale clarified warme, & into euery draught
put three spoonefuls of the Water, and one
spoonefull of good wine vineger. Use this
order foure dayes togither.
                     If the Quartan forsake thee not in that
time (which I thinke almost impossible)
vpon thy next fit day, two hours before thy
cold, take the like quantitie of the water as
before, and sweat vntill the time of thy cold
be past, and in thy sweate drinke Ale clarified,
as before also. Use this order three
times, onely vpon thy fit dayes. After thy
fits haue left thee, take ten dayes together
of my Potion, so much as will giue the
                           •
                        
dayly two stooles.
                     
                        
Note, that this Water being dispearsed
in thy bodie, by naturall heate stirred vp in
sweating, doth in wonderfull sort ripen and
digest the matter of the quartane Ague: so
that it far excelleth all the preparatiues of
the world: For thereby alone I haue cured
many without purging; but it is farre better
to purge.
                  
                  
                     For the Tertian Ague, which commeth
euery second day.
                     The 18. Chapter.
                     TAke of Centuary sixe handfuls, Endiue
twelue handfuls, distill these
with a very gentle fire, and keepe
the water close stopped in a Glasse;
but let the Glasse bee but halfe full, for so
it will keepe the better.
                     For cure, first let the Patient take so
much of my Potion, as will giue him fiue
or six stooles on his good day: the next day,
two houres before his fit will come, giue
him a reasonable draught of the Water
warmed well, whereunto ad a little sugar,
and let him keepe his bed, and sweate three
or foure houres: and in his sweat, let him
drinke Ale clarified; and in euery draught

of Ale, put two or three spoonefuls of the
water: vse this order also the second fit,
and thou shalt giue the Feuer such a check,
that it dareth not assault the patient any
more. Be carefull, and thou mayest cure
many extreame hot Feuers with this Water,
euen in one fit: but after the fittes bee
gone, purge, and so shalt thou deale very
orderly: thou mayest make a Water of
Celendine alone, which will cure the quotidian,
tertian, and quartan Agues, is this
sort. Take this Hearbe when it bloweth,
and is in greatest force, chop it very small,
and digest it in a close vessell of Glasse ten
dayes, in Balneo Mariae; which done, thou
shalt find it blacke and of a very sweete and
pleasant sauour; then distill it with a gentle
heat: and when in thy iudgement thou
hast halfe the Water, take it away, & keepe
it by it selfe; then increase the heate of the
fire, and get as much more Water as thou
canst. These Waters are to be vsed as the
others, whereof I haue spoken in the cure
of these agues: but the first water being of
the colder nature doth cure onely the Tertian,
the second being hotter, cureth the
quotidian and quartan.
                  
                  
                  
                     A generall cure for all Agues.
                     The 19. Chapter.
                     TAke a good draught warmed of the
Iulip for Agues one houre before
your fit, and keepe your Body very
warme, and within halfe an houre,
take as much also in like sort, take also in
the same order the third draught: in three
fits this cureth all Agues orderly vsed.
If the Patient keepe his Bed, and sweate
in taking the Iulip, hee may be the sooner
cured.
                  
                  
                     For the Plague.
                     The 20. Chapter.
                     THere be three speciall causes of this
disease. The first is the iust iudgement
of GOD, for the sinnes of the
people: And herein I consent with
the Diuines, that in this case the Plague
commeth as it were by the commandement
of God; and then in vaine worketh the pollicie
of Man vnto health, where the power
of the Almightie worketh to destroy.
Wherefore repentance and amendment of

life, is the only salue for the sore. Yet withall,
for that we are ignorant of the determination
of God; I wish no man to omit
such naturall meanes, as he hath prouided
for the preseruation of our natural bodyes,
least thereby he tempt him.
                     The second kind proceedeth of the corruption
of the Ayre, which is of two sorts;
the one generall, the other particular. The
Ayre is generally infected, by the distemperature
of the Heauens, which thou shalt
know in this sort. The weather is long
darke, cloudy, foggy, stifeling, very hot
and moyst: also our bodyes faint, we loath
the breath we draw, for it bringeth a most
sensible and present offence; it is hard to
keepe Flesh sweete, litle Frogs & Todes,
also flies, Lobchesters, & Wormes of sundry
sortes (such as commonly proceed of
putrifaction) doe greatly abound: and to
conclude, the Heauens do as it were refuse
to draw the corruption from the Earth,
but rather seeme to yeelde downe againe
such as they had taken away before. The
Ayre is particularly infected by the sauour
of dead Carcases; as it happeneth oft in
battaile, where many are slaine, and lie vnburied:
which infecteth the particular

                           •
                        lace, onely where the bodyes lie: also, by

the euill and putrified sauour of a fennie or
marish ground, or such like. And further,
by the breath and sauour of the bodyes of
such as throng togither in a taynting or
stifeling sort, especially in some close or
sluttish place: as it happeneth (no doubt)
often in London, and such like Cities of
great resort, that many lodge together in
one small roome, hauing perhaps as many
Beds as the place will well containe. And
then, after one houre or two, how may any
of these draw fresh or sweete breath, but
such as his fellowes haue drawne often
before, as also the rancke fume of their
bodyes? Both which, are so contrary to
Nature, that some and some with continuance,
they infect the vitall spirites, and
breed such corruption as bursteth out into
the Plague.
                     The third kind of Plague riseth of the
corrupt Humours in mans body, by euill
diet ingendred. And these last sorts come
by the permission of God, like as ye first by
his commandement. To preuent this heauie
griefe, first I wish one old order to be
renewed; which was, to make Fires in all
great Cities & Townes in ye open streets,
vpon certaine dayes euery yeare: which

no doubt doth greatly cleanse and purifie
the ayre. And although this order was diligently
obserued by the followers of the
Pope: yet I thinke they did it rather of
policie then of religion, and therefore being
good, it is not to be reiected. Secondly, I
thinke it very necessarie for Citizens, and
such as liue in a close ayre, now and then to
assemble themselues together in the fields
in some sweete and open place, there also to
vse moderate exercise; which will greatly
purifie their bodyes: and in the meane
time, to leaue a good huswife at home to see
the house made cleane & sweete, by sweeping,
by strowing good Hearbes, by ayring
the bedding, by opening the windowes,
to let fresh ayre into euery roome, &c.
                     Thirdly, I wish that through all London,
in euery Ward, there may be certaine
appoynted to see, that no House or Roome
within any house, be ouer pestered with
lodgings or people, and to driue out of the
Citie such as vpon examination they shall
finde to be vagabondes, or vnnecessarie
members. For this is no lesse requisite for
such a Citie, then a Purgation for him
whose body is full of corruption.
                     For cure, take Endi
                           •
                        e water a quart,
Centuarie water a pint, Iuie berries halfe

an handfull bruised: Boyle these together
gently a quarter of an houre, and when you
take it frō the fire, dissolue therein as much
Treacle as a Nut, and a litle Sugar; also
put thervnto three spoonefuls of Uineger.
                     As soone as euer the patient doth complaine,
& nature being yet strong, giue him
fasting one good draught thereof warme,
and let him keepe his bed, and sweate ten
houres or lesse, as the strength of the patient
will beare. And in his sweating, giue
him now and then Ale clarified, and into
euery draught put two or three spoonefuls
of the decoction. When he riseth, giue him
some Broth not made ouer strong, neither
with much Spice; and be very carefull to
keepe him from the ayre. This decoction
thus vsed, will either force out the sore; or
else if the patient sweate throughly well,
cure him without any sore. And if thou find
he be not greatly eased within viii. houres
after his sweating, the next day vse the like
order. But whereas in this, and diuers other
diseases heretofore, I haue prescribed
the patient to drinke in his sweating, I
know it doth not agree with many Writers:
neither do I take it to be absolutely
good; but herein rather I admit a small
euill, to auoyde a greater.
                  
                  
                     
                     For the Crampe.
                     The 21. Chapter.
                     FOr the Crampe I wish you to vse
Vnguentum Brioniae, (by which name
aske for it of M. Clapham, warme it
well, and annoynt the place where you are
commonly troubled, and rub it vntill it be
dry, by the fire side. It is a very present
helpe: once or twise annoynting, will serue
for a long time. This is also of marueylous
force for Sinewes that are shrounke,
and stiffe Ioyntes: and good for those
which haue their Faces drawne awrie, or
any other Conuulsion.
                  
                  
                     For Burning and Scalding.
                     The 22. Chapter.
                     TAke of your ordinarie gray Sope, a
                           •
                        d
annoynt the place burned or scalded
presently: once annoynting will serue,
if you take it as soone as it is done, both to
take away the Fire, and to heale it without
any further matter. Assuredly, it farre excelleth

all other Medicines. I haue often
seene such helpe hereby onely, as before I
thought impossible. But if it be not within
a quarter of an houre or lesse annoynted
with Sope, then take Goose-grease, which
hath been kept from Salt, for it must be
such in any wise, & annount the place therewith
well warmed twise a day: for this alone
will heale it; and so, that it shall neuer
be seene, except it be burned very deepe.
                  
                  
                     For a Fellon, and Whitblow.
                     The 23. Chapter.
                     TAke Wine-vineger, and Wheate
branne; boyle them together in such
quantities as you thinke good, till it
be thicke, alwayes stirring it well: it
is made in halfe a quarter of an houre.
Spread it thicke vpon a linnen cloth, & lay
it to the Fellon, and aboue it, as hot as the
patient can wel abide: dresse it once in xii.

                           •
                        oures: vse it iii. or iiii. dayes, or longer, if
the Fellon hath been of long continuance.
The like order, but lesse time, will serue to
cure the Whitblow, or an angry & burning
Swelling: it draweth out the corruption,
being applyed hot, and driueth it not in, although

the Uineger be cold. If the Uineger
be very sharpe, so that it will get off the
Skinne, annoynt the place first with a litle
sweete Oyle, lightly ouer.
                  
                  
                     For the Ring-worme, Tetter,
and such like.
                     The 24. Chapter.
                     TAke the iuice of Celendine, and bath
the place twise or thrise a day, and in
very short time it will helpe thee.
                  
                  
                     For the Tooth-ach.
                     The 25. Chapter.
                     TAke the iuice, or rather milke of the
garden Spurge, and temper it with
Wheate flower vntill it be an hard
Past or Dough. If thy Tooth be hollow,
put the quantitie of a Barly corne thereof
into it; also put of it in a cloth, and lay it to
thy Iaw or Gummes. But if thy body be
very moyst, and Rheumaticke withal, then
I referre thee to that Chapter, where I
haue spoken of the Rheume: for in that
case is required a more generall euacuation
or emptying of thy body.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of the Disease wherewith our wantons
of England are troubled.
                     The 26. Chapter.
                     THere is yet one other disease, whereof
it is very requisite to speake;
wherewith our Wantons of England
are much troubled. For (not
respecting the force or helpe of Nature)
if they feele neuer so small or litle a griefe,
they must presently to Physicke; vntill
they haue so filled their bodies with drugs,
that they are sicker of their Physicke, then
of any Disease. In this griefe, a litle more
witte will be a present helpe: for so shall
they haue heauier Purses, lighter Hearts,
and sounder Bodyes.
                  
                  
                     For the Wormes of all sorts.
                     The 27. Chapter.
                     TAke of the pouder of Centuarie
leaues, one ounce, pouder of Sen.
Alex. halfe an ounce; Wormeseed
finely beaten, one ounce; then take
good Malmesie a quarter of a pint or better;
of the best Honie three ounces; dissolue
the Honie in the Wine with a gentle

heat, and then put in all the Powders, an
                           •
                        
stirre it well together: which done, put i
                           •
                        
into a cleane Bladder, knit i
                           •
                         close, & hang
it in the chimny, vntill it be an hard lumpe.
You may vse it as the Worseseed alone is
commonly vsed: giue a Child the weight
of a groat at a time; to the elder sort more,
as you thinke good: it killeth the Wormes,
and causeth them to voyde.
                  
                  
                     For those which haue their health.
                     The 28. Chapter.
                     HE which hath his health, and would
so continue, I wish him either to
forbeare, or litle to vse those things
which greatly digresse from that
constitution or mediocritie, in which man
is created. Our Physitians doe call euery
thing hot, or cold, in respect of the nature of
man. For if it be some what hotter then his
nature, then it digresseth, and they tearme
it hot in the first degree: if yet hotter, hot
in the second degree: and in like manner to
the third and fourth. Which because it doth
so farre exceed his constitution, by dayly
proofe is found to be vnto him flat poyson.
The like consideration on the contrary side
haue they of cold thinges. Whereby you

may gather, how like alwaies desireth like,
and abhorreth the contrarie. The thinges
which are like, & best agree with the nature
of man, are good holesome vsuall meates &
drinkes: a dry, fresh, & sweet aire; moderate
sleepe & trauell, or labour: which although
it were allotted to vs as a punishment by
God, yet mercifully withall he hath made
it a meane to preserue our health. The
things which greatly disagree, are wines,
spices, salt meates, & all very hot things:
which thou shalt know by taste. For either
they bite like Pepper, fret like Salt, or
else shew some manifest great heate in the
mouth. Also on the other side, all rawe
fruites, & cold hearbes, with diuers things
of like nature. Much vse of sauces, deuised
by belly Gods, whom God hath puni
                        
                           •
                        hed,
as much by want of appetite, hauing
meate at will; as the poore by want of
meate, hauing good appetite. To liue in a
thicke or foggie Ayre, to liue idlely, and to
exceed in eating, drinking, sleeping, watching,
or venerie. I would not haue any
man to thinke, that I doe vtterly condemne
all very hot and cold thinges: but
seeing they are rather of the nature of medicine
then nutriment, I wish them to bee
very discreetly and moderately vsed: for

hot things are to be vsed when a mans bodie
is ouer cold; and cold things when his
body is ouer hot: but to vse either, the body
being not distempered, is meere madnesse.
                     Now further, for so much as all men are
subiect vnto death, and our bodies (as yeelding
thereunto) from time to time alwaies
gather corruption: to preserue our health
as much as may be, vntill we haue run that
race which God hath appoynted, I commende
vnto you this receipt.
                     Take Borage & Parselie, in like quantitie;
boyle them in Whey clarified, and
keepe it in some earthen vessell. Use of it
warme, in the Spring especially, euery
morning fasting, a good draught: and in
euery draught, take so much of my Potion▪
as will giue thee two stooles a day more
then ordinarie. Some may vse it ten dayes
together, others fifteene, or twentie, as the
body doth require. By this meanes thou
maist preuent many diseases, and keepe thy
body in very good state. It maketh women
apt to conceiue, if (during the taking hereof)
they liue chast: and it hath many other
speciall vertues which for breuitie sake I
will omit.
                     FINIS.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Here followeth an Addition by
the same Author, wherein be
declared three speciall
stayes of health.
                  
                     The first, by the vse of a new kind of
Worme-wood wine.
                     The second, by Bathing.
                     The third, by Annointing of the body.
                  
                  
                     The first Chapter.
                     
                        FOr that Lignum Aloes
is one of the chiefest
Simples, which is vsed
in the making of this
Worme-wood Wine,
and such as yeeldeth the
greatest vertue thereto; I may not let to
speake (yet in briefe sort) what I read therof.
Lignum Aloes is the wood of a tree,
which according to some writers, groweth
in diuers partes of Babylon; and others
affirme, that it is one of the Trees of Paradise,
                        
growing by one of the waters there▪
whose armes 
                           •
                        alling into the waters, are
carried by the swiftnesse thereof into other
places farre from thence, where the inhabitantes
find them, and send them into diuers
partes of the world.
                     Being cut in small Chips and laid vpon
roles, this wood yeeldeth a fume somwhat
pleasant, and most healthfull: For it comforteth
the Braine and all the senses woonderfullie:
Also entering into the Lunges
with the breath preserueth the same, and expelleth
al euill and infectious ayre. It hath
beene euer verie rare, of great value, and in
effect of the same price with siluer, weight
for weight. Princes and great States did
vse long since to burne it in their Chambers,
and to Perfume their bedding therew
                           •
                        th,
to the intent that sleeping, they might
draw the sauour of the same into their bodies.
Also the great Prelates (who neue
                           •
                        
were behinde for preseruation of them
selues) vsed the like, in Perfuming the 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
and the vestments which they weare▪
and gaue the meaner sort-leaue to vse onl
                           •
                        
Frankincense, being a thing of far lesse value.
I found in a booke made by a Frier, an
Englishman, in Magdalen colledge Librarie
in Oxford, a great discourse touching

the nature and vertues of Lignum aloes,
which hee preferreth farre before all the
knowne simples of the world. Hee commendeth
it wonderfullie, being steeped in
Wine, and so taken.
                     Further, hee writeth of an Oyle made
therewith, which was sent from Prince to
Prince for a most pretious Iewell; but in
exceeding small quantitie.
                     The making thereof hee sheweth not,
which somewhat greeued me, and I thinke
therein he was ignorant. He reporteth of
certeaine Priests which had it, where with
they would annoint the Noses and Lips of
such as by sicknesse were in great extreamitie,
vsing also deuout Praiers, and often
thereby onely reuiued them; wherevpon in
the sight of the People, they were thought
to worke great miracles, and were had in
maruellous estimation; for they were dee
                        
                           •
                        ed
very Holy Men, and to worke these

                           •
                        ffects cheefely by their praiers, which was

                           〈◊〉
                         be attributed vnto the Oyle, and yet as

                           〈◊〉
                         naturall meane prouided by God; For

                           •
                        he wonderfull vertue thereof entering at
the Nostrils and Mouth, directly vnto the
Lungs & Heart (the two principall Members
of Mans Common wealth (I meane
his Body) maketh a very strong supplie

in the conflict betweene. Nature and the
Disease, which is the cause of so sodaine
re
                           •
                        ouerie. There came at the length of this
Oyle vnto the 
                           
                              •
                           ope, who kept it as a
wonderfull treasure, and sent thereof to diuers
great Princes; whose vertue indeede
was su
                           •
                        h, while it was well and truely
ma
                           •
                        e, that both the fame and price thereof
was great. But after, within a short time,
it 
                           〈◊〉
                         counterfaited, that there was

                           〈…〉
                         whole worldes, and the Priestes

                           〈…〉
                         had of it from Rome;
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         the Priestes vsed as a very holy

                           〈…〉
                         vnto those that were sicke; but

                           〈◊〉
                         vertue being gone, they ceased to worke

                           〈…〉
                         thereby. And yet continuing their

                           〈◊〉
                         of extreame vnction, which they

                           〈…〉
                         
                        vnctionis,
                        
                           〈…〉
                         diuers Prayers, did annoynt

                           〈…〉
                        , mouth, eares, eyes, the palmes

                           〈…〉
                         hand
                           •
                        s, the soales of the feete, and

                           〈…〉
                         of the sicke body. For these are

                           〈…〉
                        , whereby sinne entereth 
                           〈◊〉
                        
s
                           •
                        ule of man. But to conclude, who
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
will know more of the nature of

                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Aloes, let him read the old writers
in Physicke.
                  
                  
                     
                     This Chapter intreateth of the nature
of Worme-wood wine, and
how it is to be vsed.
                     The second Chapter.
                     THe vertues of this Worme wood-wine,
are both great, and many.
First, it keepeth the body solub
                           •
                        e,
and is good for such as seldome goe
to the Stoole, it cleanseth the Stomach,
openeth the Liuer and the Sp
                           •
                        eene, and
causeth a good and cleere Complection, it
strengthneth the Heart and m
                           •
                        keth 
                           〈…〉
                        
it cleanseth the Braine and k
                           •
                        epeth all
the senses perfect; also preserueth the Memorie,
it is good for womens weake backs;
it is generally an excellent and most 
                           •
                        amiliar
Medicine, and cleanseth the Body of
such corrupt humours as gather therein
from time to time. It is a very good preseruatiue
against the Plague, and may be
taken from the quantitie of halfe a pint or
better at one time, vnto the quantitie of a
quarter of a pint, or lesse: it is good to fast
one houre after it, and to vse it onely in the
morning; which being obserued, I restraine
you from no further libertie. Maister

                        Clapham the Apothecarie hath direction
for the making hereof.
                  
                  
                     The 3. Chapter.
                     OUr Fathers long since, were wont
to vse a very sleight kind of Bathing.
Now and then they boyled
Hearbes in water, and therewith
did bath and rubbe their bodyes towardes
bed; which now, is greatly neglected. It
is a farre greater meane to preserue our
health, then that we should so lightly esteeme
thereof. For it taketh away such
corruption as Nature casteth out by the
pores, which otherwise would happily
cause Scabs, Itches, or such like, and keepeth
the body sweete from all rancke sauors
of sweate. Wherefore I prescribe
one generall Bath in this sort, and to that
effect. Take Rosemarie, Balme, Isop,
and Mallowes, of each two handfuls, boile
these in foure gallons of Spring water
vntill there be a third part consumed,
then straine and put thereto one gallon of
new Milke: bathe your body herewith
warme by the fire
                           •
                         side two or three houres
after supper. It is very good to vse it foure
times in the yeare at the least; and in the
Sommer once or twice euery month.
                  
                  
                     
                     The 4. Chapter.
                     AFter your Bathing, rub your body
very dry with a Linnen cloth; and
presently vpon, annoint it ouer very
lightly with this Oyntment: yet
vse no more but that you may easily dry in.
                     Take Balme greene in the beginning of
Iune, or in May, when you shall find it in
chiefest strength, and chop it very small:
take further very sweete Oyle, and the fact
of a Bucke killed in the chiefe of Sommer;
or that which is better, the fatte of a
Stagge, in equall quantitie: let these
stand in a very gentle heate together eight
or tenne houres, then straine and keepe the
Oyntment in some clea
                           •
                        e vessell. It keepeth
the Ioyntes souple, making the Sinewes
nimble and plain
                           •
                        : also it cureth the
drinesse of the Skinne. They which vse it
after Bathing, as before, shall find themselues
the stronger, and more lustie. For
it defendeth the body from coldnesse of the
ayre, and thereupon auoydeth Aches of the
Ioyntes and Sinewes.
                     FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  The Hammer
for the Stone: So named, for that it sheweth the
most excellent remedie that euer was knowne for
the same.
                  Lately deuised by Walter Carie
maister of Arts, and student
in Physicke.

                  
                  Imprinted at London by W. White
for the companie of Stationers.
1609.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE READER.
                  COnsidering with my selfe (gentle
reader) how common a disease the
Stone is, and how little helpe the
parties grieued haue by vsuall
meanes in this our time, and of long time
haue had: and also hearing it diuers times
obiected, that the most learned Physitiā
can neither preuent the Stone in those
who naturally are inclined thervnto, neither
cure it in those in whom it is ingendred,
I did indeauour my selfe with all
studie and diligence, to finde out some
speciall thing, which might farre excell
the remedies now daily vsed, for the cure
of that grieuous disease.
                  Whereupon taking mine inuention
frō 
                     Etius, who vsed very much the powder
of Goates blood for cure of the same:
also being further perswaded thereunto
by authoritie of diuers writing of the
nature of Goates blood: I did draw a
pure & cleere liquor out of the blood of
the male Goate, which I haue thought
good to name the Quintessence for the
Stone.
                  
                     
And hauing made experience thereof
now two yeares and better, with diuers, I
thought good to publish the same, to the
reliefe of many, which are grieued with
that infirmitie, and that in such sort, as it
shal appeare vnto the world▪ that I rather
seeke herein to benefit my Country, then
any priuate gaine to my selfe.
                  For wheras no man troubled with that
disease, can haue the helpe of the Physitian,
without his great charge: I haue deuised
that meane, that any man so diseased,
may haue such ease with very small
charge, as I dare boldly auouch, can not
be had by any vsuall meanes.
                  But
                        •
                      for the commendation hereof, I
leaue it rather to be commended by the
helpe & ease of those, who feare & feele
the passions of that most terrible disease,
then vse any long rethorical perswasiōs,
knowing that the good Wine needeth
no Garland; and that the fairest Garland
can be no long credit to sower Wine.
                  And now that this my Quintessence
may take the better effect, I thinke it very
necessarie, to signifie vnto such as are inclined
to the Stone, and to those that are
already troubled with the same. First, the
causes of the Stone, and whereof it is ingendered.

Secondly, the difference of
Stones ingendred in mans body. Thirdly,
the vsuall way both to preuent & cure
the Stone. And fourthly, the way or
meane now late deuised, for preuenting
and curing of the same. Wherein being
somewhat instructed, they shall be the
better able to gouerne themselues in auoyding
and curing the disease, as not
needing the Physitians continuall counsell,
but being Physitians to themselues.
Yet I would not haue any man think that
I minde to make any long or curious discourse
of the Stone, touching all the deepest
poynts of the same, as indeauouring
to make the readers perfect Physitians
herein; but onely to shew them a superficiall
knowledge, sufficient to direct them
in the taking of my Quintessence.
                  And thus (gentle Reader) haue I deuided
that, whereof I minde to write, into
foure partes; wherein I will not indeuour
my selfe to speake whatsoeuer may conueniently
be spokē: but rather to speake
nothing that may conueniently be le
                        •
                     t
out.
                  W. C.
               
               
                  
                  The Author to those that are
vexed with the Stone, in
verse as followeth.
                  
                     1
                     THy Siluer, Gold, thy pretious Stone.
                     Thy Mucke, thy worldly wealth,
                     Nought helpeth now thy greeuous grone,
                     No ease it giues to Health.
                  
                  
                     Now doest thou lie.
                  
                  
                     2
                     Amidst thy friendes a prisoner,
                     a peece of pining Clay:
                     Thy hope for want of heartes desire,
                     Doth fayle, and vade away.
                  
                  
                     Thou seek'st to die.
                  
                  
                     3
                     Thy friends eye-teares, thy hearts drops blood,
                     Thy limmes and ioyntes doe quake:
                     Thy stomach vomites that is good.
                     Whose force makes bedstead shake.
                  
                  
                     An endlesse woe.
                  
                  
                     4
                     Thy dolefull life, is but a death,
                     And death were life to thee:
                     For paine deth cease with thy last breath,
                     But life heapes miserie.
                  
                  
                     Come death; why so?
                  
                  
                     5
                     What, what, sendes God a maladie,
                     And not a meane for ease?
                     No Physicke good? No remedie
                     This raging griefe t'appease?
                  
                  
                     
                     Though Physicke faile.
                  
                  
                     6
                     Behold a faythfull friend vnknowne,
                     (To doe his Countrie good)
                     Will ease this griefe and heauie grone,
                     With water of Goates blood.
                  
                  
                     Then doe not quaile.
                  
                  
                     7
                     Though dreadfull Death an actien brought,
                     This Goate thy bale will bee,
                     And though the cause be slily wrought,
                     The verdict goes with thee.
                  
                  
                     Lift vp thy heart,
                  
                  
                     8
                     His harme, thy hope: his woe, thy wealth:
                     His heart receiues the knife:
                     He yeeldes his blood to bring thee health,
                     His death, shall be thy life.
                  
                  
                     And end thy smart.
                  
                  
                     Loe thus the Author greetes thee well,
                     Thy friend without desart:
                     He craues but thankes, and so doth sell
                     A salue for wounded heart:
                     He seekes good will, giues ease of paine,
                     Good wordes for ware: an easie gaine,
                     Vale.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     The causes of the Stone, and how
it is ingendred in mans body.
                     The first Chapter.
                     IT is not vnknowne vnto such as haue
bestowed any time in the studie of Physicke,
that as well the old, as the new
Writers, with one consent agree,Two causes the Stone. that
there are two causes of the Stone: the
one materiall, the other formall. The materiall
cause is an earthy, grosse, thicke, and
slimie humour: the formall cause is the
heate of mans body, digesting or baking
the sayd humour, vntill it be hard, which
then remayneth in the nature of a Stone:
this will I make more manifest to you by
a familiar example.
                     Clay of it selfe is an earthy and slimie
substance, which I will compare vnto the
humor whereof the Stone is ingendered.
Also the Fire I wil compare vnto the heat
of mans body; whereby you may see how
the Stone in ingendred. For this Clay,
being baked in the Fire, is made a Stone,
and looseth his nature of Clay.
                     Here also I thinke it good to note, that
Nature requireth alway a fit matter to

worke vpon. For one onely action of Nature
at one time worketh diuers and very
contrary effects: which happeneth, because
of contrarietie of the matters wherevpon
she worketh, and not by any diuersity of her
action. For as by Fire, Clay is made a
Stone: so Chalke being a Stone, by Fire
is conuerted into powder. And as Clay
by Fire is made a cast and firme substance,
which before was soft, and easie to be dissolued
in Water: so Chalke being before,
a fast and sound lumpe, is by the same fit to
be dissolued in Water, because of the discontinuitie
or separation of his partes.
                     Whereby you may gather, that this
slimie humour, being in mans body, hath a
nature very apt to be turned into a Stone,
and yeeldeth it selfe to the speedie generation
thereof, wherevnto it is naturally inclined,
which otherwise by so small heate,
could hardly bee. And therefore I would
wish euery man to haue a speciall care in
refusing Mea
                           •
                        es, and other things, which
are apt to breed the Stone, and in vsing
the contrary; which hereafter in place conuenient,
touching the preuenting of the
Stone, I will not omit,
                  
                  
                     
                     The difference of Stones ingendred
in mans body.
                     The second Chapter.
                     I Haue (according to my promise) briefly
spoken of two causes of the Stone.
Now with like breuitie, I will speake
of the difference of Stones ingendred
in mans body; which I find by experience,
to differ in place, colour, forme, quantitie,
and hardnesse.
                     1 As touching the first, there are two
vsuall places where the Stone is ingendered;
the Kidnies, and the Bladder. Unto
the stone of the Kidnies, the middle-aged,
and they that somewhat decline, are most
subiect. And these Stones of the Kidnies
are also of two sortes. For they are either
ingendred in the hollow vessels of the Kidnies;
or in the substance or fleshie partes.
But vnto the Stone of the Bladder, Children
are most inclined: which hapneth, for
that all Children (for the most part) first
eate often, ere that which they eate before
be digested. Next, after they haue eaten,
they vse violent exercise, and motion of
their bodyes continually, whereby they
force a thicker and more grosse iuice or nutriment,

from the stomach into the body,
then Nature requireth: and that grosse
substaunce, setling in the bottome of the
Bladder, by the temperate heate of the
child, is conuerted into a Stone. As in the
making of the artificiall Wmes, if you let
them passe through the strayner gently of
their owne accord, they come cleare: but if
hastily you force them by wringing, they
come thicke, and being setled, will be full
of Groundes in the bottome.
                     2 Secondly for colour, there are some
Stones white, some blacke, others yellow;
some red, some of ash-colour, & some mixt
of diuers colours. Which diuersitie happeneth
chiefly by difference of the matter,
whereof the Stones were ingendred: and
somewhat by digestion of the Stones, either
by smaller or greater heat, with either
longer or shorter time.
                     3 The third difference of Stones, is in
forme or fashion. For some are round, as a
Ball: some like an Egge, some like a
Pease, some like a Barlie corne: some
sharpe, some piked, & of diuers & sundry other
formes, wherof I need not to speake.
                     4 The fourth difference is in quantitie:
for the Stone differeth in quantitie
from the bignesse of a pins head, or lesse,

vnto the quantitie of an Egge, or greater.
And the smaller sort of Stones are (for the
most part) ingendred in the Kidnies, and
that either in the hollow vessels of the Kidnies,
as I sayd before: which being but
small, the Stone cannot exceed the bignesse
thereof, and therefore must be small
also. Or else in the substaunce or fleshie
partes of the Kidnies, here and there dispearsed,
which also are seldome found to be
great. But the greater sort of Stones are
alwayes ingendered in the Bladder, for
that the vessels being great, will also admit
the generation of a great Stone.
                     5 The fift difference, is in hardnesse.
For there are some (as I haue often seene)
scant congealed or baked, so that one may
breake them to grite with this finger & his
thumbe. Others somewhat harder, and not
easie to be broken. And others so hard, as
they will not easily yeeld to the Hammer.
The Stone that breaketh gently, is (for
the most part) red, or yellow. The middle
sort, is of diuers colours. The hardest,
white. There is also a mixt kind of Stone,
compact of hard stones lightly knit togeather
by soft Grauell; and this kind is most
dangerous and painefull in voyding.
                  
                  
                     
                     The vsuall way how to preuent and
cure the Stone.
                     The third Chapter.
                     IN the two former Chapters, I haue
briefely touched the matter whereof the
Stone is ingendered, and the difference
of Stones. Now I will shew the vsuall
meanes, both to preuent and cure the
Stone, which (amongst the Physitians of
our time) are now dayly practised. The
Stone in those who onely feare the Disease,
and are not yet troubled therewith,
is preuented by two speciall meanes. The
one is, by abstinence from Meates, and
thinges which are apt to breed the Stone.
Which are of 2. sortes also. For either they
breede in the body of a fitte matter, easie
to be conuerted into a Stone: as Ueale,
Pigge, Lambe, Ling, Greene-fish, Eeles,
Cheese, Milke; and generally, all very
grosse, slimie, sweete, and fatte Meates.
Or else, they cause an vnnaturall heate in
the Body, and inflame the Kidnies, and
other partes: as, heating the Backe at the
Fire, lying much vpon the Backe; also
great vse of Pepper, Ginger, and other
Spices, or any thing of like nature. The

other by purging that humour, which being
in the body, is not yet digested to the
nature of a Stone: which is done by two
meanes also. Either by Purgation, and
lexatiue Medicines; or otherwise, by those
thinges, which beeing of a very subtile,
thin, and piercing nature, do passe sodainely
through the Liuer, the Kidnies, and the
Bladder, and violently carry with them
such slimie and grosse humours, as they
finde by the way: as White-wine, & Rhenish-wine,
with such like, taken fasting:
which being not taken fasting, worke not
this effect. For being vsed either with, or
soone after Meate, they hasten the digestio
                           •
                        ,
and carry grosse and raw humours into
the body, whereby they worke a very contrary
effect, and ingender the Stone, being
much vsed.
                     But the Stone beeing already ingendered,
by the vsuall meanes is to be cured;
chiefely by thinges which cause the Stone
to breake & voyde: as Saxifrage, Parsely,
Pellitorie of the wall, Gromwell, & other
thinges infinite; whereof I haue named
foure good, pleasant, & easiest to be taken.
There are also diuers other meanes: as
letting Blood, Purging, Glisters, Uomits,
and mollifying or distending the narrow

and strict vessels with Oyles, &c.
wherein the Stone sticketh. But for breuitie
sake, all these I let passe.
                  
                  
                     The preuenting and curing of the
Stone, by a new meane lat
                           •
                        
deuised.
                     The fourth Chapter.
                     I haue hitherto briefly touched the causes
of the Stone, the differences of
Stones, and the vsuall meanes for preuenting
and curing the Stone. Now
I minde to shew the way, both to preuent
and cure the same, by the Quintessence of
Goates blood.
                     The vse whereof, for those that are from
their father and mother, or either of them
naturally inclined therevnto, or otherwise
feare the Disease, and would preuent the
same: is, to take twentie or thirtie dayes
in the Spring, and likewise in the Fall
of the Leafe, two spoonefuls thereof in a
good draught of their accustomed drinke
fasting, and to fast one houre after it; which
will without all question preserue them
from the disease.
                     But vnto those, who are troubled with

the Stone, and feele now & then a passion
thereof, I haue thought good to prescribe
this order. Cause foure or fiue gallons of
Drinke to be brewed & tunned vp in a litle
vessell fit for the same: and when it is new
tunned, adde thereto bound togeather, one
good handfull of Parselie, and one handful
of Pellitorie of the wall; but for want of
Pellitorie, take the more Parselie, though
the other were better. And when your
Drinke (being either Ale or Beere, as you
like best) is stale enough, drinke therof euery
morning fasting a good hearty draught,
adding thereto two spoonefuls or more of
the Quintessence (for in great quantitie
you cannot erre) and fast one houre after it,
as before. But whiles you take it, vse no
violent motion of your body, but gentle
walking, or such like: least the Stone beginning
to breake, the peeces thereof fall
into the narrow vessels betweene the Kidnies
and the Bladder; or from the Bladder
into the Yard, to your great torment: and
this order I wish you to vse, as long as
you finde any Grauell to voyde. But because
oftentimes the Grauell doth voyde,
and yet not to be discerned, as my late experience
hath taught me, I thinke it requisite
here to shew the strange working of the

                        Quintessence. If you put into a cuppe of
Wine a peece of light, hollow, & soft Sugar,
the Wine presently entreth into all
partes thereof, and causeth it to fall like a
sandie substance. But if you put into the
same cup of Wine, a peece of white, hard,
and perfect good Sugar, it resisteth the
Wine, and suffereth onely the outwarde
parts in long time, some & some to be dissolued.
So likewise, if the Quintessence
finde in the body an hollow, soft, & grittie
Stone, it entereth presently into the same,
dissolueth it, and causeth it to voyd in Grauell,
being not able to suffer the long action
or working of the Quintessence. But the
Stone being hard, long digested, and hauing
his substance fast and soundly compact
together, the Quintessence can not
enter into the same, but worketh vpon the
outwarde partes thereof; and the more
strongly it abideth and resisteth, the more
perfectly the Quintessence resolueth the
same. For manifest proo
                           •
                        e thereof, if in taking
the Quintessence, you find no grauell
to voyde, 
                           〈◊〉
                         your Urine first m
                           •
                        de, after
the taking of the Quintessence, in some
open vessell, vpon the Embers in a temperate
heate; and suffer it so to stand vntill all
the Water be breathed away, & that which

remayneth be perfect dry, which you shall
finde a grittie substance, if you were troubled
with the Stone. And this is a very
perfect tryall. Now I thinke it good to
note, that if the Stone be great in quantitie,
and in the Bladder, you must vse the
Quintessence the longer, and not looke to
be cured miraculously with the vse thereof
a weeke or two. And against this kind specially,
I wish that Parsely be vsed (as before)
for that it is a great opener, and will
helpe ye 
                        Quintessence to passe more swiftlie
vnto the Kidnies & the Bladder, where
it ought to worke; which otherwise continuing
long in the stomach, loseth part of
his vertue, and worketh no
                           •
                         so effectually.
But if the partie be very olde withall, and
hath his Kidnies and Bladder exulcerat,
or either of them, yet chiefly the Bladder;
then I wish him not only to vse the Quintessence
as before, but also to obserue very
diligently this Diet. Abstaine from all
Wine, Aqua vite, Aqua-composita, Be
                           •
                        re,
Ueriuice, Uineger, Aliger, Perrie, Cider,
Salt and salt Meates; all Spices, Orenges,
Lemmons, Mustarde; and all raw
Fruites, and generally from all thinges
which cause the Urine to be hot, sharpe, or
fretting. For then, although the Stone be

cured, yet the partie hath litle ease, for
that the sharpe Urine, hauing accesse to the
sorenesse and rawnesse of the Kidnies or
Bladder, wil not suffer the partes infected
to heale, but rather increaseth the griefe.
If you be troubled with the exulceration
of the Bladder, the manifest and continuall
paine thereof will declare the same: also,
the griefe in making water, and hardinesse
of making water, which rather droppeth
then runneth, because the force expuisiue
is decayed: and if with the exulceration of
the Kidnies, then haue you paine in your
Loynes. But if you be grieued with either
of any continuance, with your Urin, there
voydeth often slimie corruption, like the
white of an Egge, or filthy Blood, & such
like: I wish those who remaine in this
case, especially troubled with the exulceration
of the Bladder, not to torment their
bodyes with much Phisicke. For although
eased, yet cured they cannot be. Onely I
counsell them (as before) to remooue the
Stone, and to auoyde (by abstinence from
the thinges afore recited) the sharpnesse of
Urin, which are the causes efficient of their
griefe; and that done, to vse for healing of
their sore Kidnies and Bladders, as neere
as may be, a reasonable quantitie of Gotes

milke, euery morning fasting: also, the
sirup of Plantine is a speciall thing in these
griefes, vsing one spoonefull thereof in the
morning in Ale clarified.
                     And now to end this my short worke,
I let passe that which a number of writers
set foorth of the nature of the Gote, and the
vertue of his bloud against the stone. Only
I alleadge one sentence of Fuchsius▪
                         an
excellent, wise, and learned Physitian,
which I finde in his Booke De medendis
morbis. Writing of the Stone, and the
cure thereof, after he had shewed diuers
remedies, he endeth thus: Sanguis denique
hircinus, ad calculos cùm renum, tùm vesicae
praesens remedium est. Nam praeexistentes soluit,
& per vrinam excernit, & vt alij ampliùs
non generentur prohibet, ac dolor
                              •
                           m sedat.
And to conclude, Goates Blood is a present
remedy, both for the Stone of the
Kidnies and the Bladder. For it dissolueth
those that are there already, and voydeth
them by Vrine, and suffereth no more to
ingender; also taketh away the paine.
                     
                     But least this most excellent Medicine
should be slaundered, I haue thought good
to signifie, that if any person hauing vsed
the Quintessence, in such sort as is requisite,
both for time and order, finde not such

remedie as I haue promised, & he looked
for: let him (if it seeme good) repaire to my
house in Wickeham aforesayd, where hee
shall finde me readie without either penny

                           〈…〉
                         to doe what possible I
may 
                           〈…〉
                         cure. And if by taking
ought 
                           ••••
                        n, I breake my promise,
let mee be rather thought a
deceauer, then one seeking
to benefit my
Countrie.
                     FINIS.
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
   