
      
         
            
            
               
THE Hammer for the stone: So named, for that it sheweth the most excellent remedie that euer was knowne for the same.
            
               Latelie deuised by Walter Carie Maister of Art, and student in Physicke.
            ¶ Imprinted at London, by Henrie Denham dwelling in Pater noster Row at the signe of the Starre. 1580.
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               COnsidering with my selfe (gentle reader) how common a disease the stone is, and how little helpe the parties grieued haue by the vsvall means of Physicians in this our time, and of long time haue had: and also hearing it diuerse times obiected, that the most learned Physician can neither preuent the stone, in those, who naturallie are inclined thervnto, neither cure it in those in whom it is ingendered, I did endeuor my selfe with all studie and diligence, to find out somthing, which might far excell the remedies now dailie vsed for the cure of the stone.
            VVherevpon taking mine inuention from Etius, who vsed very much the powder of Goats bloud for cure of the same: also being further persuaded therevnto by authoritie of diuerse,

writing of the nature of goats bloud: I did with my great charge attempt to draw a pure and cleare liquor out of the bloud of the male goat, which with the patience of the Physicians, I will be bold to call a Quintessence.
            And hauing made experience therof now two yeares, and better, with diuerse: I thought good to publish the same, to the reliefe of many, which are grieued with that disease, and that in such sort, as it shall appeare vnto the world, that I rather seeke herein to benefite my Countrie, than anie priuate gaine to my selfe.
            For whereas no man troubled with that disease, can haue the helpe of the Physician, without his great charge: I haue deuised that meane, that anie man so diseased may haue such ease with verie small charge, as I dare boldlie auouch, cannot be had by anie vsuall meanes.
            
               
But for the commendation hereof I leaue it rather to be commended by the helpe and ease of those, who feele the passions of that most terrible disease, than vse anie long Rhetoricall persuasions, knowing that good wine needs no garland, & that the fairest garland can be no long credite to sowre wine.
            But for better performance of my promise, I thinke it verie necessarie, to signifie vnto such as are inclined to the stone, and to those that are alreadie troubled with the same: First, The diuision of the booke into foure Chapters. the causes of the stone, and whereof it is ingendered. Secondlie, the difference of stones ingendered in mans bodie. Thirdlie, the vsuall way, both to preuent and cure the stone. And fourthlie, the way or meane now late deuised for preuenting and curing of the same. VVherin being somwhat instructed, they shalbe the better able to

gouerne themselues, in auoiding and curing the disease, as not needing the Physicians continuall counsell, but being Physicians to themselues.
            Yet I would not haue anie man think, that I mind to make any long or curious discourse of the stone, touching all the deepest pointes of the same, as endeuoring to make the Readers perfect Physicians herein: but onelie to shewe them a superficiall knowledge, sufficient to direct them in the taking of my Quintessence, both for the preuenting and curing of the stone.
            And thus (gentle Reader) haue I diuided that, wherof I mind to write into foure partes, wherein I will not endeuor my selfe to speake whatsoeuer may conuenientlie be spoken: but rather to speake nothing that maie conuenientlie be left out.
            W. C.
         
         
            
            The Author to those that are vexed with the stone, in verse, as followeth.
            
               THy siluer, gold, thy precious stone,
               Thy mucke, thy worldlie wealth,
               Nought helpeth now thy grieuous grone,
               No ease it giues, no health:
               Now dost thou lie
            
            
               Amidst thy friends a prisoner,
               A péece of pining claie.
               Thy hope for want of hearts desire,
               Doth faile and vade awaie:
               Thou seek'st to die.
            
            
               Thy friends eie tears, thy hart drops blood,
               Thy lims and ioints do quake,
               Thy stomach vomits that is good,
               whose force makes bedsted shake:
               An endlesse wo.
            
            
               Thy dolefull life to thée is death,
               And death were life to thée,
               For paine doth cease with thy last breath,
               But life heapes miserie.
               Come death! why so?
            
            
               what? what? sends God a maladie,
               and not a meane for ease?
               No Physicke good? no remedie?
               This raging griefe t'appease?
               Though Physicke faile,
            
            
               
                  
Behold a faithfull friend vnknowne,
               (To do his Countrie good,)
               will ease this griefe and heauie grone,
               with water of Goates blood:
               Then do not quaile.
            
            
               Though dredfull death an action brought,
               This Goat thy baile will be:
               And though the cause be slilie wrought,
               The verdict goes with thée:
               Lift vp thy hart,
            
            
               His harme, thy hope: his wo, thy wealth:
               His heart receiues the knife,
               He yéeldes his bloud to bring thée health,
               His death shall be thy life,
               And end thy smart.
            
            
               Lo, thus the Authour gréetes thée well,
               Thy friend without desart:
               He craues but thanks, and so doth sell
               A salue for wounded hart:
               He séekes good will, giues ease of paine,
               Good wordes for ware: an easie gaine.
            
            Vale.
         
      
      
         
            
            The causes of the stone, and how it is ingendered in mans bodie. The first Chapter.
            
            
               IT is not vnknown vnto such as haue bestowed any time in the studie of physicke, that as well the old as new writers, with one consent do all agrée, that there are two causes of the stone: the one materiall, Two causes of the stone. the other formall. The materiall cause is an earthlie, grosse, thicke, and slimie humour: the formall cause is the heate of mans bodie, digesting or baking the said humour, vntill it be hard, which then remaineth in the nature of a stone. This will I make more manifest vnto you by a familiar example.
            Claie of it selfe is an earthlie and slimie substance, which I will compare vnto the humour whereof the

stone is ingendered. Also the fire I will compare vnto the heate of mans bodie, whereby you may sée how the stone is ingendered. For this claie being baked in the fire, is made a stone, and looseth his nature of claie.
            Here also I thinke it good to note, that nature requireth alwaies a fit matter to worke vpon. For one onelie action of nature, at one time worketh diuerse and verie contrarie effectes: which happeneth, bicause of the contrarietie of the matters whervpon she worketh, and not by anie diuersitie of hir action.
            For as by fire, claie is made a stone: so chalke being a stone, by fire is conuerted into powder. And as claie by fire is made a fast and firme substance which before was soft, and easie to be dissolued in water: so chalke being before a fast and sound lumpe, is by the same fire made fit to be dissolued in water, because of the discontinuitie, or separation of his parts.
            Whereby you may gather, that this

slimie humour, being in mans bodie, hath a nature verie apt to be turned into a stone, which otherwise, by so small heate could hardlie be. And therefore I would wish euerie man to haue a speciall care in refusing meats, and other things, which are apt to bréede the stone, and in vsing the contrarie, which hereafter in place conuenient, touching the preuenting of the stone, I will not omit.
         
         
            The difference of stones ingendered in mans bodie. The second Chapter.
            
            
               I Haue (according to my promise) brieflie spoken of the two causes of the stone. Now with like breuitie I will speake of the difference of stones ingendered in mans bodie, which I find by experience to differ in Fiue speciall differences of the stone. place, colour, forme, quantitie, and hardnesse.
            As touching the first, there are two

vsuall places where the stone is ingendered, the kidnies, and the bladder. Unto the stone of the kidnies, the middle aged, and they that somewhat decline, are most subiect. And these stones of the kidnies are also of two sorts. For they are either ingendered in the hollowe vessels of the kidnies: or in the substance or flechie parts.
            But vnto the stone of the bladder, children are most inclined: which happeneth, for that all children (for the most part) first eate often, before that which they eate before be digested. Next after they haue eaten, they vse violent exercise, & motion of their bodies continuallie, wherby they force a thicker & more grosse iuice or nutriment, from the stomach into the body, than nature requireth: and that grosse substance settling in the bottome of the bladder, by the temperate heate of the childe, is conuerted into a stone. As in the making of the artificiall wines, if you let them passe through the strainer gentlie, of their owne accord,

they come cleare: but if hastilie you force them by wringing, they come thicke, and being settled, will be full of grounds in the bottome.
            Secondlie for colour, there are some stones white, some blacke, others yellowe, some red, some ash colour, and some mixt of diuerse colours. Which diuersitie happeneth chieflie by difference of the matter wherof the stones were ingendered: and somewhat by digestion of the stones, either by smaller or greater heat, with either longer or shorter time.
            The third difference of stones, is in forme or fashion. For some are round, as a ball: some like an egge, some like a pease, some like a barlie corne: some sharpe, some piked, and of diuerse and sundrie other formes, whereof I néede not speake.
            The fourth difference is in quantitie. For the stone differeth in quantitie, from the bignesse of a pins head, or lesse, vnto the quantitie of an egge, or greater. And the smaller sort of

stones, are (for the most part) ingendered in the kidnies, and that either in the hollowe vessels of the kidnies, as I said before: which being but small, the stone cannot excéed the bignesse thereof, and therefore must bée small also. Or else in the substance or fleshie parts of the kidnies, here and there dispersed, which also are neuer found to be great. But the greater sort of stones are alwaies ingendered in the bladder, for that the vessell being great, will also admit the generation of a great stone.
            The fift difference is in hardnesse. For there are some (as I haue often séene) which are scant congealed or baked, so that one may breake them to grit with his finger & his thumbe. Others somewhat harder, and not easie to be broken. And others so hard as they will not easilie yéeld to the Hammer. The stone that breaketh gentlie, is (for the most part) red or yellowe. The middle sort is of diuerse colours. The hardest, white.
         
         
            
            The vsuall waie how to preuent and cure the stone. The third Chapter.
            
            
               IN the two former Chapters I haue brieflie touched the matter, whereof the stone is ingendered, and the difference of stones. Now I will shewe the vsuall meanes, both to preuent and cure the stone, which (amongst the Physicians of our time) are now dailie practised.
            The stone in those, who onelie feare the disease, and are not yet troubled therewith, is preuented by two speciall meanes. The one is, by abstinence from meates, & things which are apt to bréede the stone. Which are of two sortes also. For either they bréede in the bodie a fit matter, easie to be conuerted into a stone: as Ueale, Pigge, Lambe, Ling, Gréenefish, Eeles, Chéese, Milke: and generallie, all verie grosse, slimie, swéete, & fat meates. Or else they cause an vnnaturall heat

in the bodie, and inflame the kidnies, and other parts: as, heating the backe at the fire, lieng much vpon the back, also great vse of Pepper, Ginger, and other spices, or anie thing of like nature.
            The other by purging that humor, which being in the bodie, is not as yet digested to the nature of a stone: which is done by two meanes also. Either by purgations, and laxatiue medicines: or otherwise, by those things, which being of a verie subtile, thin, and pearsing nature, passe suddenlie through the liuer, the kidnies, and the bladder, and violentlie carrie with them, such stimie and grosse humours, as they find by the way: as, white wine, and Rhenish wine, & such like taken fasting: which being not taken fasting, worke not this effect. For being vsed either with, or soone after meat, they hasten the digestion, & carrie grosse and rawe humours into the bodie, whereby they worke a verie contrarie effect, and ingender the

stone being much vsed.
            But the stone being alreadie ingendered by the vsuall meanes, is to be cured chiefly by things, which cause the stone to breake and void: as Saxifrage, Parslie, Pellitorie of the wall, Gromwell, and other things infinite, whereof I haue named foure good, pleasant, & easiest to be taken. There are also diuerse other meanes: as letting bloud, purging, glisters, vomits, and mollifieng or distending the narrowe and streight vessels with oiles, &c. wherein the stone sticketh. But for breuitie sake, all these I let passe.
         
         
            The preuenting and curing of the stone, by a new meane late deuised. The fourth Chapter.
            
            
               IHaue hitherto briefly touched the causes of ye stone, the difference of stones, and the vsuall meanes for preuenting and curing of the stone.

Now I mind to shewe the waie, both to preuent and cure the stone▪ by the Quintessence of Goates bloud. But the maner of making this Quintessence, the choice of the Goat, the time of the yeare, the diuersitie of the bloud of the arterie, and of the veine, and the order of distilling, and circulating the same: also, the preparation of the Béere in which it must be taken, I will not here speake of: but will deliuer it in writing, to the right worshipfull and most learned companie of Physicians in London: wishing them to appoint certaine Apothecaries, which shall be sworne for the iust & true making of this Quintessence: which being so made, the Physicians may direct the same to be giuen, as to them (their patients, and circumstances rightlie weied) shall soeme most méete.
            But in the meane time you shall haue of this Quintessence (although no great quantitie, yet so much as shall be sufficient for the triall of the

same with a great number, and of the Beere prepared, in which it must bée taken) at Maister Graies house the Apothecarie The place where the Quintessence is to be had. in Fanchurch streate: whose honestie and good dealing I dare boldlie commend vnto you. The order of vsing this Quintessence, is this.
            
               Take euerie morning fasting halfe a wine pint of the Beere prepared, into 
               How this Quintessence is to be vsed. 
               which the Apothecarie shall adde a quantitie appointed of the Quintessence.
            
            But because the diuersitie of patients will make a diuersitie of the quantities of the Béere, & that the elder sort are able to take more, and the yonger lesse, let this be a generall rule.
            Euerie one take a verie good and heartie draught, according to the abilitie of the person, in the morning, and fast one houre after it. And if he be not as yet vexed with the stone, it is sufficient to vse this twentie daies in the Spring, and twentie daies in the fall of the leafe: which will preserue him

from the disease. But if he be troubled with the stone, let him vse it as long as he findeth any grauell to void: which is a certain rule to know when he is cured.
            Also he must vse no violent motion of his bodie, but gentle walking, or such like, whiles he taketh it: least the stone beginning to breake, the péeces thereof fall into the narrowe vessels, betwéene the kidnies and the bladder: or from the bladder into the yeard, to the great torment of the Patient.
            You shall haue this halfe pint, with the Quintessence therein, sufficient for one quantitie for foure pence: which I haue thought good to set down certaine, that euery man might knowe the same: and considering the charge in buieng the Goates, and kéeping them, also in making the Quintessence, I thinke euerie man may easilie satisfie himselfe the benefite to be verie small.
            And now to end this my short worke, I let passe that which a number

of writers set forth of the nature of the Goat, & the vertue of his bloud against the stone. Onelie I alledge one sentence of Fuchsius, an excellent, wise, and learned Physician, which I find in his booke De medendis morbis. Writing of the stone, & the cure therof, after he had shewed diuerse remedies, he endeth thus: Sanguis denique hircinus, ad calculos cùm renum, tùm vesicae praesens remedium est. Nam praeexistentes soluit, & per vrinam excernit, & vt alii amplius non generentur prohibet, ac dolorem sedat. And to conclude, Goates bloud is a present remedie, both for the stone of the kidnies and the bladder. For it dissolueth those that are there alreadie, and voideth them by vrine, and suffreth no more to ingender, also taketh away the paine.
            
            Now I thinke it good to note, that if anie person dwelling farre from London, would take of this Quintessence, & cannot haue the Béere fresh carried, in which it ought to be taken, let him buie at Maister Graies of the

               Quintessence, which he shall haue for fiue shillings the wine pint: and when he will vse it, boile halfe an handfull of Parslie in strong Ale, half an houre or lesse: and into one hartie draught thereof, adde two spoonefuls of the Quintessence; and drinke it in the Morning fasting, and fast one houre after it, at the least. Use this order twentie daies togither.
            The cause whie I wish the Parslie to be vsed is, for that it is a great opener, and will helpe the Quintessence to passe more swiftlie to the kidnies & the bladder, where it ought to worke, which otherwise continuing long in the stomach, would not worke so effectuallie.
            But least this most excellent medicine should perhaps be standered: as also, if any person whatsoeuer desireth to haue conference with me for his greater ease, not finding (perchance by some abuse) such remedie as I haue promised, and he looked for: let him (if it seeme good) repaire to my

house in great Wickam in the Countie of Buckingham, where he shall find the Authour, without either pennie or pennie worth, readie to do what possiblie he may, for his further cure. And if by taking ought, herein hée breake his promise, let him be thought rather a deceiuer, than one séeking the benefite of his Countrie.
            FINIS.
         
      
   