
      
         
            
            
            THE
ORIGINALL
OF IDOLATRIES:
OR,
THE BIRTH
OF HERESIES:
A true, Sincere, and exact deſcription of all ſuch SACRED
SIGNES, SACRIFICES, and SACRAMENTS as
haue been inſtituted and ordained of GOD
ſince ADAM;
With the true ſource and liuely Anatomy of the Sacrifice
of the Maſſe.
            
            Firſt faithfully gathered out of ſundry Greeke and Latine
Authors, as alſo out of diuers learned Fathers;
By that famous and learned ISAAC CASAVBON, and by him Publiſhed
in French, for the good of Gods Church: And now
tranſlated into Engliſh for the benefit of this
Monarchy;
By ABRAHAM DARCIE.
            LONDON
Printed by Authoritie, for NATHANIEL BVTTER.
Anno Dom. MDCXXIV.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE HIGH
AND MIGHTY
CHARLES
PRINCE OF VVALES, &c.
            Heire Apparant to the incomparable
Monarchies of GREAT BRITAINE, &c.
            
               Moſt mighty PRINCE,
            
            
               
                  HEAVEN
turning all the Eminent
DANGERS and
PERILS, of your
HIGHNES famous
TRAVELL to a

ſtrengthening and Confirmation of your
HEROICALL and Magnanimous
SPIRIT, happily returned your HIGHNES
to your owne proper Soyle with
all true Hearts, ioyfull CRIES, and inexpreſsible
ACCLAMATIONS of your loyall
Subiects, who (with the rest of GODS
people) are euer bound to yeeld Thankes
vnto the LORD; in ſolemnizing that bleſt
SVNDAY whereon your HIGHNES
landed:
            I am bold at this your ioyfull Returne, to
preſent to your PRINCELY view, This
Excellent, ſincere, and moſt learned worke,
which may ſerue for a true and bright MIRROR,
wherein cleerely to diſcerne the liuely
Portraiture of the true CHVRCH,
by the foule and odious deformities of her
OPPOSITE. A Treatiſe ſo faithfull

and rare, that it will abſolutely reſolue many
doubts which vndoubtedly haue beene
diſcuſſed in your HIGHNES hearing;
and poynt out, as it were, with a diuine finger,
the vncleane Puddle and Sinke, from
which all moderne Impurities in GODS
SERVICE tooke apparant Originall. It was
first Publiſhed in French, and now by my
willing indeauors expreſt in Engliſh, out of
a poore Strangers zeale, and deſire herein to
make knowne to your HIGHNES the
inward loyall affection of my heart, wholly
douoted to the humble obſeruance of your
High, and moſt deſeruing Titles, and Illuſtrious
dignities: Reſoluing euer both in life
and death, conſtantly to perſeuer
            
               Your HIGHNES moſt
Humble and deuoted proſtitute,
AB. DARCIE.
            
         
         
            
            A TRES-PVISSANT PRINCE CHARLES
PRINCE DE GALLES DVC DE CORNVALL, YORKE, ET
ALBANI, MARQVIS D'ORMONT,
CONTE DE CHESTER, &c. FILZ VNIQVE DV ROY.
            CHARLES STVART
            ANAGRAM.
            CHAST STAR RVLE long,
            on your Illuſtr'ous Name,
            HEAV'N pleaſing PRINCE,
            Accept this ANAGRAME.
            AT HOME, in FORREIGNE PARTS,
            at SEA, on LAND
            SAFE you haue STOOD; So may
            you euer ſtand,
            TO fright pale DANGER, checke
            SINNES Surging SEAS,
            SINNE that doth hourely ſeeke
            the SOVLES diſeas;
            THe various Changes of your
            FAMES bright STORY;
            ANGELS protect for that
            IMMORTAL GLORY:
            RIch glittering STAR-LIGHT,
            (Sempiternall Sence
            RAuiſht at ſight) of GODS
            Omnipotence:
            VNder whoſe SACRED Sempitern
            Defence,
            LOng liue CHAST STAR, on
            Earth, to RVLE and ſhine
            ETernally in HEAV'N,
            a Star DIVINE.
         
         
            
            IN
PERPETVALL
HONOR AND IMMORTALL
FAME OF THE RIGHT
Honourable, moſt pious, Religious, and truly Noble,
the LORDS of the Magnificent Court
of the moſt Gracious and Noble PRINCE
OF GREAT BRITTAINE.
            Sir THOMAS HOWARD Viſcount ANDIVER
Maſter of the Horſe to our Gracious PRINCE.
            ROBERT Lord CARIE Baron of LEPINTON,
Chamberlaine to the PRINCE'S Highnes.
            SPENCER Lord COMPTON Maſter of the
Robes to his Highneſſe.
            IOHN Lord VAGHAN, Controler of his
Highnes, Illuſtrious and Honourable Houſhold.
            And to the right generous, and moſt vertuous
Sir ROBERT CARR Maſter of his Highnes Priuie Purſe,
One of the Gentlemen of the PRINCE his Bed-Chamber.
Sir FRANCIS COTTINGTON, his Highnes Secretary,
Sir EDMOND VARNEY. Sir WILLIAM HOWARD.
Sir RICHARD WINN. Sir WILLIAM CROFTS.

Sir IOHN NORTH.
Mr. IOHN SANDELANS. Mr. FRANCIS CARIE.
            Gentlemen of his Highnes Priuie Chamber.
            Mr. THOMAS CARIE. Mr. GEORGE KIRKE.
Mr. ARCHIBALD PITCARNE. Mr. ENDIMION PORTER.
Mr. WILLIAM MVRRAY. Mr. IAMES LEVISTON
Groomes of his Highnes Bed-Chamber.
            Mr. ROBERT TERVVIT, And Mr. IAMES BVY.
Quary to the PRINCE.
            Mr. PETER YONG. Mr. PETER NEVVTON.
Gentlemen Vſhers dayly Wayter.
            Mr. HVMPHREY DETICKE,
Gentleman Vſher Quarter Wayter.
            Mr. IAMES ELIOT, Mr. PHILIP PROGER,
Mr. IOHN PORTVIS,
Groomes of the Priuy Chamber.
            Mr. THOMAS GERMAN,
Page to his Highnes.
            And to the moſt learned and pious, Mr. Doctor MAVVE, And Mr.
Doctor WREN, Chaplaines to the Highnes of Prince CHARLES.
            Moſt worthy Patrons of HONOVR, patternes of
VERTVE, and Noble Louers of LEARNING
and good endeuours.
            ABRAHAM DARCIE preſents to their iudicious viewes, this Excellent
Worke by him Tranſlated for their Honorable vſe. Wiſhing to their Religious
ſelues, with the reſt of the Nobles and worthy Seruants of his Highneſſe
that were in SPAINE with our PRINCE, all externall,
internall, and eternall happines in the holy Trinity.
         
         
            
            
            
            TO
THE HONOR
AND VSE OF THE
MOST ILLVSTRIOVS,
GEORGE, Duke of Buckingham, his Grace:
            
               And to the Right Honourable
               The Earle of Arran, Son
to the Marquis Hamilton.
WILLIAM Earle of
Denbigh, &c.
               HENRY Viſcount Rochford,
&c.
               Sir HENRY RICH, Baron
of Kenzington.
               
               Sir DVDLY NORTH.
               Sir GEORGE GORING.
               IAMES Earle of Carlile
Viſcount Doncoſter &c.
               THOMAS Viſcount Andeuer,
&c.
               SPENCER Lord Compton.
               
               ROBERT Lord Digbigh.
               
               Sir ROBERT CARR.
               Sir IOHN NORTH.
               Sir WILLIAM CROFT.
               Sir FRANCIS COTTINGTON.
               Sir EDWARD VARNEY.
            
            With the reſt of the Noble Peeres and worthy Gentlemen
of GREAT BRITAINE, that were in SPAINE, to
Attend on the Moſt Mighty and Gracious Prince
CHARLES, our incomparable Prince.
            ABRAHAM DARCIE humbly preſents the Tranſlation of this excellent and rare
Worke to their Honorable cenſure; wiſhing to their Noble, Religious and Vertuous
Perſons all increaſe of true HONOR in this WORLD, and in HEAVEN
infinity of thoſe incomprehenſible FELICITIES, and eternall
ioyes allotted to Chriſts Elect.
         
         
            
            
               MOST ILLVSTRIOVS,
RIGHT HONORABLE,
RIGHT WORTHY,
            
            
               NO HONORS can bee comparable to thoſe,
which GOD moſt graciouſly returnes vpon
them, who conſtantly in this WORLD,
aduance the true HONOR of his NAME,
and confidently maintaine, againſt all oppoſitions,
his ſacred Verity and Truth. This famous
MONARCHY hath alwayes, as vpon ſo many firme and
Noble Pillars, committed the earthly foundation of GODS
Church and flocke, to the Religious care and Honourable
ſupportations of her Noble Peeres, out of which number,
you are ſuch Patrons, as haue euer manifeſted a rare and confident
protection of GODS vnſpotted Religion and Worſhip:
but in your late HONOVRABLE employments in forraine
parts, vnder our Illuſtrious PRINCE, they haue receiued
a more apparent teſtimony of your true HEARTS
RELIGION and ZEALE, when ſoiourning for a time, (as one
may ſay) in the very Tents of KEDAR, and beholding with
your bodily eyes, many ſuperſtitious Idolatries, you yet retained

firme and vnſhaken, the treaſure of a ſincere faith, and
inuiolable conſcience, hauing conueniently
—L'OEVIL AV GVET,
the eye at his ſight-hole, (as our French Prouerbe termes
it) the better to diſcerne of all obiects, and with the ſurer
ayme, to leuell all your Honourable Actions, and worthy
deſignes.
            There is no doubt but your Noble ſelues mette with many
Oppoſitions and Encounters, by way of diſcuſſion and Argument:
But the Scripture being a Teſt & quadrant, by which
they are not willing to trie, or ſquare their proceedings, Learned
CASAVBON hath made a diligent ſearch & Inquiſition
of their owne Regiſters, and Records, and chiefly out
of the Volumes of the Commentaries of ELASOPOLITAN,
whereas by the direction of a Diuine hand, may bee
found out the Birth and Originall of all adulterous and
ſtrange Adoration, from the firſt ADAM, to theſe our later
times, but eſpecially the Sacrifice of the ROMANE MASSE,
is here moſt learnedly delineated to true life, from the cradle
and infancie thereof, till now that it hath made ſo great
and perillous a progreſſion.
            The AVTHORS are nominated the ſeuerall parcels ſet
downe, as they were in ſeuerall AGES annexed, the perſpicuous
difference betwixt it, and the infallible forme of the
Apoſtolicall, and Primitiue CHRISTIAN worſhip is explained,
with whatſoeuer elſe that meere HVMANE TRADITION
& INVENTION hath vniuſtly vſurped, ouer Orthodoxall,
and vnſpoated true ſeruice in the CHVRCH OF
GOD. So as clearely diſcerning the Scandals, the Scandalizers
likewiſe are as plainely reuealed, and this Chriſtian
Domus deuiſa in ſe: Out of my humble and dutifull affection,

I could not but commend this excellent Treatiſe, to your
Honourable viewes, and learned cenſure, the which I haue
ſtudiouſly expreſſed in the Engliſh Tongue, principally to
manifeſt vnto all your Lorſhips, my ſeruiceable and grateful
heart, both to euery one of your Honours in particular, as
alſo to this happy Kingdome in generall, to whoſe bounties
and protection I ſtand deepely oblieged; and as he,
whoſe thoughts haue no higher ſcopes nor
ayme, then iuſtly to bee reputed.
            
               YOVR GRACE,
YOVR HONORS,
and YOVR WORTHINES,
Moſt faithfull, and humbly deuoted,
ABRAHAM DARCIE.
            
         
         
            
            THE AVTHORS EPISTLE
TO THE READER.
            
               Moſt courteous Reader,
            
            
               COnſidering the Controuerſies and bloudy hatred grown
betwixt thoſe (who profeſſe themſelues Christians)
about Religion, for they aſpiring to retaine theſe vaine
ſuperſtitions proceeding from their predeceſſors: and
many alſo not contented, do inuent new Sects, Schiſmes
and Hereſies: Others (leaſt in number) diuinely inſpired,
and of God elocted, deſire to extirpate the Darkneſse of Ignorance,
thereby to cauſe reſplendently to ſhine, the Light, and claritie of Truth:
But it ſeemes, that the most dangerous Poyſon that Satan vſeth to entoxicate
men with the Venym of ſedition, and cruell contention and hatred,
deriues chiefly from the Maſse, deſguiſed with ſome good meaning, maſked
and couered (peraduenture) with a good intention. And although
that many heretofore haue by ſundry faithfull deſcriptions endeueured
to diſcouer to the world the deceitfulnes, error, and blindneſſe thereof,
yet could they not preuailc, nor giue light to their duskiſh and heauy
ſight.
            
               Therefore now, without any paſſion, I haue faithfully extracted, and
liuely drawne out, from the Volumes of ELASOPOLITAN'S
COMMENT ARIES: (It is a large & faithfull deſcription;
whereof the ſecond Volume treates of the Conſtitutions of great
Pontiſs, Soueraigne Prieſts, and Sacrificers, as haue been ordained
ſince the beginning of the World, and their true Number Power,
Riches and Authority; (all for thy only benefit) this ſincere Summary
of the Sacrifice, called The Maſſe.
            
               
In this Treatiſe (though little in appearance) are deſigned and ſet
downe all ſuch Sacred Signes, Sacrifices, and Sacraments ordained of
GOD from time to time: As alſo the Corruptions that haue grown
ſucceſsiuely in the Church of GOD: whereby I doe euidently ſhew
the birth of all Hereſies and Idolatries, and eſpecially the true Originall
of the Maſſe; for the which the world is in great ſtrifes, bloudy Contentions,
cruell Diuiſions, Hatred, and lamentable Ciuile Warres: for
ſome do Inuectiuate & Inueigh againſt it, alleaging that it is newly deuiſed
and inueuted; others defend it by preſcription, and long poſseſſion; and
thus by ſuch like altercations the Chriſtian Church is ſore afflicted with
the yoke and Terror of Sedition. But if thou art a Chriſtian (beloued
Reader) of what Sect ſoeuer, Papiſt, or Euangelicall; I pray thee
heartily, for thy owne good, to haue patience to reade this Worke; for by
it thou mayeſt euidently know, and plainely diſcouer the very trueth of
what ſoeuer thou ſtandest in doubt of, what Sacrifices, Sacraments, and
Sacred Signes haue beene inſtituted of GOD ſince Adam; what is the
Maſſe and Originall thereof; who were her Founders, Augmenters,
and Inuenters; and to the end thou mayeſt firmely beleeue with aſſurance,
all the Contents herein mentioned, haue recourſe to thoſe Authors out of
whoſe Bookes and Workes I haue drawne and deriued it: their Names
and Bookes are quoted in the Margent. So ayming at GODS
glory and thy owne Benefit, I reſt with my prayers to GOD.
to inſpire thee with his Holy Spirit, by the interceſſion
of our onely Sauiour, Redeemer, and Mediatour
IESVS CHRIST. Amen.
         
         
            
            THE
TRANSLATOR TO
the Courteous Reader, wiſheth all
Sauing health in IESVS CHRIST.
            
               
                  WIſe Politicians (fauourable Reader) in their Inſtitutions, and
Gouernnement of Common-wealths, doe hold for an infallible
maxime, that to reforme Corruptions and abuſes in States,
better courſe cannot be taken, then often to reduce things
to their primitiue Original; Becauſe Lawes at firſt enacted
with good and profitable intention, in the Reuolution of
few yeeres, by mens inſtability and inconſtancie of minde,
or the peculiar intereſt of Auarice by Iniuſtice, are abrogated
and neglected. The Venetians beeing a people at this day celebrous, and famous for
their Gouernement, have a ſupreame Magiſtracie, which they call A Syndicate, that once in a
few yeeres, ſuruey all the Offices and Dignities in their Common-wealth, the Duke himſelfe
not there excepted, to looke into abuſes, and preuent their deepe roo
                     •
                  e and plantation; that ſo all
things may continue and ſtand entire, according to the rules and precepts of their firſt Conſtitutions
and ordinances.
            
            Alſo a Garden-plot, though neuer ſo curiouſly drawne or diſtinguiſhed into
borders, and ſet with all manner of odoriferous flowers, and wholeſome herbes, yet
euery ſhowre of raine brings foorth new weedes, the which if they be not carefully,
and dayly ſupplanted, will ſoone ouergrow the good plants, and bring the
ſame to a wilde and ſauage plot of ground. And though the ineuitable deprauation
and corruption of mans nature carry ſo ſtrong a hand in things tranſitory and
mutable, yet one would thinke they ſhould be more ſtable and prouident in thoſe
courſes tending to eternall ſaluation, and ſoules reprobation, in obſeruing thoſe
Lawes and Commandements, vttered by GOD himſelfe, and recommended to all
Poſterities for a ſquare Rule, whereby to meaſure our faith and actions. Notwithſtanding
men are more prone to Declination and Corruption, in that from the very
beginning, and firſt inſtitution of the Law Moſaicall, till theſe preſent times, that
for many ages haue receiued the cleere and manifeſt Truth, and doctrine Euangelicall,

               Hereſies haue euer crept in and caried too powerful an hand, as Verity it ſelfe,
like gold in the bowels and entrals of the earth, is encombred with a wonderfull
deale of oare and droſſe, which is not like to be ſeparated till the laſt fire of tryall,
which ſhall prooue euery mans worke, and caſt out the droſſe to be trampled and
troden vnder foote; wherefore (Chriſtian Reader) for the better ſatisfaction and
generall good of all Gods Church, I haue laboured to tranſlate this curious and
admirable Maſter peece, moſt worthy and neceſſary to be obſerued and read: for
thou mayeſt, as in a Miner, cleerely ſee and diſcouer the Birth and the Originall of
this ſoule Monſter Hereſie, in the Church, euen from the firſt ages before the written
Law, as alſo during the force and efficacie of the Moſoicall Sacrifices, and now in
theſe later times more pertinent vnder the Law and precepts of Chriſts holy Goſpel,
wherein are deduced the Authors and Founders of the Romane Maſſe. And
what conformity it holds with the Ethnicke-Rites and Ceremonies, and how farre a digreſſion
it hath made from the doctrine, life, and practiſe Apoſtolicall, and the ages
of the Primitiue Church, wherein the Author euer hath abandoned all paſſion & partiality,
and in ful proofes, cited none but either approued and authentike Authors,
as the ancient Doctors and writers of the Church, that liued before the preſent
Inundations of ſuperſtitious Traditions.
            Bring them to the Text of Gods Word, compare them with the example of the Prophets and Apoſtles,
obſerue the Cuſtomes of the Primitiue Churches and thus, by reducing them to their beginnings
it will be, eaſie to iudge whether they ſtand ſtill in that v
                  •
                ſpotted integrit
                  •
               e, or haue not adulterouſly
prophaned the ſincere worſhip of GOD, with many, and meere humane int
                  •
               emions.
            If thou doeſt but vouchſafe the diligent and carefull reading hereof, I make
no doubt but it will yeeld great comfort to thy Conſcience, & confirmation to thy
Faith, as that which will cleerely delucidate many hidden paſſages that haue not
hitherto been reuealed: and if it may take this happy effect, I ſhall thinke
my paines ſufficiently requited and recompen
                  •
               ed in all things,
ayming at GODS glory, and not mine owne.
And thus I reſt
            
               Thine affectionate,
and humbly deuoted,
ABR. DARCIE.
            
         
         
            
            A TABLE OF THE
Contents of this Booke.
            
               CHAP. 1. Of Sacred Signes. Fol. 1.
               CHAP. 2. Of Sacrifices. 2.
               CHAP. 3. Of Corruptions. 10
               CHAP. 4. Corruptions puniſhed. 18
               CHAP. 5. The Ceremoniall Law accompliſhed by IESVS
CHRIST. 21
               CHAP. 6. Of Sacraments ordained by IESVS CHRIST
himſelfe. 23
               CHAP. 7. Of the Corruption of the Sacrament of Baptiſme. 27
               CHAP. 8. Of the Corruption of the Sacrament of the LORDS
Supper. 30
               CHAP. 9. The ancient Religion of the Romane Empire. 37
               CHAP. 10. How the Biſhops of Rome began their Corruptions. 40
               CHAP. 11. The first greatneſſe of Popes, proouing Antichriſts,
and bringing in the Sacrifice of the Maſſe. 44
               CHAP. 12. Of the Maſſe in particular, with her true Original. 48
               
                  
CHAP. 13. The Maſſe diuided, with the true nature of Holy
Water. Fol. 54
               CHAP. 14. The Proceſsion of the Maſse. 57
               CHAP. 15. The third part of the Maſſe, that is, the Altars and
Candles lighted. 61
               CHAP. 16. Of Incenſe and Offertories, with other parts of the
Maſse. 65
               CHAP. 17. Of the round Hoſte, with the conſecration of the
ſame. 69
               CHAP. 18. Of diuers parts and ſundry Ceremonies belonging to
the Maſse. 72
               CHAP. 19. Againſt Idolaters Antiquity, and long poſſeſsion
of the Maſſe. 76
               CHAP. 20. Againſt the Idolatry of the round Hoſte. 80
               CHAP. 21. The inuention of Tranſubſtantiation, with confutation
of that labyrinth of Idolatry. 83
               CHAP. 22. Compariſon betweene the two holy Sacraments. 99
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE BIRTH OF HERESIES:
OR,
A true and faithfull deſcription
of all ſuch SACRED SIGNES, SACRIFICES,
and SACRAMENTS, as haue
been inſtituted of God ſince the
Worlds Creation;
Together with the Originall and true
Anatomie of the Maſſe:
As alſo the corruptions and abuſes of all thoſe
holy things from the beginning.
            
               CHAP. I.
               Of Sacred Signes.
               
                  IN the time preordained of GOD
by his inſcrutable and incomprehenſible
Wiſedome, (when hee had
created man to his true Image and
likeneſſe, the better to moue and
incite him to feare and obedience,
as alſo to make him partaker of his

bleſsings, he gaue him ſome exerciſe of vertue whereby
hee might acknowledge him his Almighty GOD,
and omnipotent Creatour) were ordained many
Signes, Sacrifices, and Sacraments: Firſt, to our firſt
Father Adam, to whom with his Succeſſors, corporall
men, God allotted corporall ſignes, to approue
the better of their obedience, to wit, trees planted in
the middeſt of the Orchard, and earthly Paradiſe,
which although they were not of any other qualitie
then the other plants: yet notwithſtanding being dedicated
and conſecrated of God for Sacraments, or
Sacred Signes, their qualitie was then for to ſerue as
Seales for the Teſtimonie and approbation of his diuine
wil and pleaſure, which was effected by the infinite
goodneſſe and bounty of God, to make appeare
and knowne, that the Aſſociation, Confederation
and alliance contracted with man his Creature, was
ordained from time to time, yea, from the beginning
of all times: Thus, I ſay, were exteriour and
Corporall Signes, which man could ſee and contemplate
with his Corporall Eyes, conſtituted to ſerue
for an aſſurance, pledge, and hoſtage of the Diuine
Couenant.
               Theſe Trees and ſubſtantiall Fruits ordained for
our firſt and common Father, were committed and
giuen vnto him to keepe, without diminiſhing, eating,
or waſting of them, vpon paine of eternal death.
Wherefore wee muſt in faith beleeue, that they were
not vaine Signes and Sacraments, or as a meere and
ſimple Picture, but whereas life or death depended
on them: they comprehended both the ſignes and
thing ſignified; wherein conſiſted the knowledge and
wiſedom to feare God,Prou 7. 2, 3. and obey him. And therefore
they were called the Fruits of the knowledge of good
and ill, & the Trees of life; For in the careful keeping
of theſe ſacred fruits, and obeying God, there was

promiſed etetnall life; whereas on the contrary, by
abuſing the Sacrraments, and oppoſing the will
of God, there was intimated to vs by exteriour
ſignes, that eternall death and damnation was purchaſed.
               For other exerciſes required of man towards God,Sacrifices before the written Law.
concerning the reuerence, honor & adoration of him,
many and diuers Sacrifices were celebrated, euen before
the Law, written by Moſes. And though God
Almighty, Creatour of Heauen and Earth, needs not
any humane workes,Pſal. 50 or to bee nouriſhed with the
bloud of beaſts, or with terreſtriall fruits, yet hee had
alwayes a deſire to draw man vnto him, in an externall
obedience and feare, by Signes, Sacrifices, and
Sacraments: ſo as the Sacrifice of Lambes, offered
by Abel, were agreeable and pleaſing to God. Noah
in like manner, after the inundation of waters paſt,
in ſigne of his recognition and obedience towards
God,Geneſ. 4. erected an Altar,Hebr. 11. immolated an offered ſacrifices
of vnſpotted ſheepe and birds,Geneſ. 6. 7, 5. whereof hee
made a reall Holocauſt acceptable to the Lord. By
which examples we may eaſily diſcerne, that Sacrifices
tooke not their beginning in Moſes time, but
that Innocent and Iuſt Lambe was prefigured in Abels
Sacrifice,Apoc. 13. as a type of Ieſus Chriſt, ſlaine and offered
from the beginning of the world.
               After the rigor & iuſtice of the deluge was appeaſed,The Rainbow.
that hapned for a puniſhment of Tyrants offences
on earth, in ſigne of a reconciliation, & Couenant renewed,
our good God ordained the ſigne of the Rainbow,Geneſ. 9.
for a pledge and aſſurance of his Diuine mercie.
This ſigne and celeſtiall Bowe, though it formerly
appeared in thicke cloudes, beeing a notice of
raine to enſue, notwithſtanding it was not as yet
conſtituted nor appointed to ſerue man for a ſigne or
Sacrament, vntill the time that it was by God ordained

for an aſſurance of the Couenant contracted
with the good Father Noah, and his ſucceſſors.
               After this,Circumciſion in the yeere of the world 2048. with the faithfull Patriarch Abraham,
there was another confederation and alliance contracted
by the wiſedome of God, who, for a pledge
and aſſurance to him and his poſterity, conſtituted
the externall ſigne of Circumciſion, to ſerue him for
a Sacrament, and a perpetuall notice of Gods holy
will and pleaſure: and ſo he was enioyned to circumciſe
the male infants within the eighth day of their
natiuitie,Geneſ. 17. vpon paine of being reiected from the number
of thoſe people whom God had adopted.
               Then followed to his poſterity afterward, called
The people of Iſrael, the ſacrifice of the immaculate
Lambe, which was ordain'd by the ſhedding of bloud,
to preſerue them from the appointed ſlaughter in Egypt:
                  Exodus 12.
As alſo the fleſh thereof was appointed to bee
eaten, and celebrated feſtiually euery yeere, on the
day called The Paſcha, or Eaſter; for a ſigne and
commemoration of their Deliuerance from Pharaohs
ſeruitude: and to the participation of the fleſh of
this Paſchall Lambe, was annexed the vnleauened
bread for ſeuen dayes,Exodus 12. on paine of Death.
               Other ſacred ſignes were ſent by God to his Elect
people, to winne them continually to his feare and
obedience:The Cloud. The Pillar of fire, Exod. 13. as the ſigne of the Cloud, to conduct the
people by day; and the flaming and fierie Pillar, for
their guide and direction by night; and all to deliuer
them out of the hands of the Tyrant Pharaoh.
               
               Then followed the ſigne of the diuiſion of the
Arabicke Red Sea,The diuiſion of the Arabick red ſea, in the yeere of the world, 2403. ouer which the elect people of
God paſſed. By all which admirable ſignes, it pleaſed
God to prefigure the holy Sacrament of Baptiſme,
inſtituted afterwards by the elementall ſigne
of water, which is the waſhing of Regeneration, and
the renouation of the Holy Ghoſt.
               
                  
Now during the time that this elect people of
God were detained in the Arabian Deſarts,1. Cor. 10. Titus 3. and barren
Wildernes, they had prouiſion of heauenly bread,
wherewith they were nouriſhed for fortie yeeres,
which was alſo holy a Sacrament, inſtituted by the
power and will of God,Heauenly Manna. and held in ſo high an admimiration,
that each one amongſt the people ſaid,
Man-hu,Exod. 16. what a wonderfull thing is this? They ſaw
celeſtiall Manna exhibited to them without trauell,1. Cor. 10. a
Figure of the Bread of Life, which came downe from
Heauen, giuing life to all the faithfull.
               Another wonderfull ſigne there was ordained by
God,Iohn 6. of the Rocke guſhing out with cleere water in
Mount Horeb, to quench the peoples thirſt, who
were very dry, and almoſt ſtifled with heat.
               This was a ſigne and figure of the true Rocke Ieſus
Chriſt, out of whom came bloud & water, to quench
perpetually the thirſt of ſinners, and refreſh our
ſoules.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               Of Sacrifices.
               
                  BEſides theſe ſignes and Sacraments aboue-mentioned,Diuers ſacrifices ordained by God, in the yeere of the world 2455. Holocauſts.
which were onely
by God ordain'd: there was alſo a
Law enacted & publiſhed for ſacrificers
by Moſes, as Signes, Figures, and
Shadowes of that abſolute Sacrifice,
conſummated by Ieſus Chriſt; ſo that
Sacrifices were either publike, or priuate; generall, or
particular. Some were Holocauſts, being Sacrifices
that were wholly conſumed with fire: Others conſiſted

of beaſts ſlaine and immolated to eate,Diuiſion of ſacrifices, extracted out of Exodus, Leuiticus, & Numbers. Beaſts appointed for ſacrifice. there
were earthly and ayerie Creatures. Amongſt thoſe
terreſtriall, were the moſt obedient and obſequious
beaſts; as the Oxe and the Calfe, the Hee, and shee
Goat: and ſo likewiſe amongſt Fowle, the moſt mild
and gentle; as the Pidgeon, and Turtle.
               Of Sacrifices againe, ſome were publike, and others
priuate or particular: thoſe publike were either
quotidian or euery ſeuenth day, either at New
Moones, or in times of Faſting: but they were chiefely
celebrated at three feſtiuall times of the yeere;
which were:
               Firſt,Daies appointed for ſacrifices. the dayes of vnleauened bread, when the Paſchall
Lambe was offered, and eaten.
               Secondly, the time of Harueſt, and firſt Fruits.
               And thirdly, at the Feaſt of Vines, and Oliues, towards
the end of the yeere.Exod. 23. They were commanded
to immolate euery day two Lambes; one in the morning,
another in the euening, after the Altar was firſt
perfumed, with Incenſe and Odours.
               Some of the Sacrifices alſo were ordain'd,See the books of Philo the Iew, and of Ioſephus. for corporall
things, which were celebrated with ſhedding
of bloud, other ſacrifices were without bloud for
things incorporate. Sacrifices named Holocauſts concerned
onely the honour of God, becauſe the whole
oblation was conſum'd in the fire.Holocauſt: Philo the Iew in his Treatiſe of Beaſts, appointed for ſacrifice. For which Holocauſts,
the Male, and not the Female was receiued as
an oblation, that is to ſay, the Oxe, the Lamb, or Goat
of a yeere old.
               In the ſacrifice for Health,Ioſeph lib. 3 c. 20. De Antiq. Iudaic. Leu. 9. 2, 3, 4. Sacrifice for health. it was a matter indifferent,
whether the oblation were Male or Female: but
of the victime offered, three parts were reſerued for
the Prieſt, which was the fat, the two Rumnions, and
the Kidney, or Fillet of the Kidneys.
               There was another difference betweene the Sacrifice
for Health, and that celebrated for ſinne: for in

the one, they were inioyn'd to eate vp all the oblation
in two dayes; and in the other for ſinne, the Prieſt
was commanded to eate it vp in one day: and by this
meanes ſome Sacrifices were termed Holocauſts:
ſome were ordained for health, other ſome for ſinnes.
               Sacrifices for ſinne were diuers,Sacrifices for ſinne. both in reſpect of
the perſons, and of the oblations.
               For he that offended out of ignorance,Sacrifices for ſinne out of ignorance. his expiation
was celebrated with a female Sheepe or Goat: but
the expiation for voluntary and wilfull ſinne, was
with a Male ſheepe.
               The High Prieſts ſinne was expiated by the ſacrifice
of an immolated Calfe:Sacrifices for the High Prieſts ſinne, for the Princes, for the Magiſtrate, and for particular men. that of the Prince with
an Hee Goat, or Bull: that of a Magiſtrate, with an
Hee Goat; and the ſinne of a particular man, with a
female oblation.
               The Sacrifice for expiation of offences towards
God,Leu. 3. 4, 5 6. was with a Ramme.
               The Sacrifice of a man polluted,Sacrifice for a polluted man. Sacrifice for a deliuered woman. was alſo with a female
Sheepe or Goat: and for a womans expiation
after child-bed, was a Lambe of yeere old, a yong
Pidgeon, and a Turtle.
               For the clenſing of the Leprous were appointed
two liuing Fowles,Leuit. 12. pure and cleane,Sacrifice for the Leprous. Cedar-wood,
and Hyſop, two whole Lambes, and a female ſheepe
of a yeere old,Leuit. 14. with Meale and Oyle.
               Another Sacrifice was celebrated,Sacrifice for manſtruall polution. for a man or woman
polluted, by ſhedding his Seed, or her menſtruall
bloud; with two Turtles, and two yong Pigeons.
               If the great Oblations failed, they had recourſe to
Doues, Pigeons, or Turtles, or for Holocauſts: others,
maintenance.
               In all Sacrifices there was pure Flowre,Leauen and Honey forbidden in all ſacrifices. vvithout
Leauen, Salt, Incenſe, and Oyle: and nothing was permitted
to be offered vpon the Altar, with Leauen or
Honey.
               
                  
Notwithſtanding in the Sacrifice conſtituted for
the Purification of a woman ſuſpected of Adulterie,Sacrifice for a woman ſuſpected of Adulterie.
there was neither Incenſe, nor Oyle, as in other Sacrifices;Numb. 5.
but it was offered with water, mingled with
the duſt, or aſhes, gathered vp from the floore of the
Temple.
               There was alſo another Sacrifice,Sacrifice of Nazareans. celebrated for
thoſe that had made ſome great Vow, called Nazareans,
                  Numb. 6.
when the time of their Deuotion was expired,
wherein they were appointed to offer three Victimes,
                     Philo the Iew in his Treatiſe abouenamed.
a Lambe of a yeere old, a Sheepe, and a Ramme: the
one, that is, the Lambe, to ſerue for a Holocauſt: the
other, of a female Sheepe, for Saluation, and the third
oblation for Health. Furthermore, his haires that
made the oblation, were to be caſt into the fire, to be
burned together with the Holocauſt.
               I was willing particularly to diſcourſe of the diuerſitie
of sacrifices, that hereby I might make knowne
the great goodneſſe, and bounty of our God: who in
the Law of ſacrifices, publiſht by Moſes, meant to
curbe and reyne in the rude people of Iſrael, as it were
with a Bridle, who could not forget the Aegyptian
Idolatries, wherein they had beene nouriſhed and
bred, for foure hundred and thirty yeeres, vnder the
tyranny of the Pharaohs. But what rigorous Lawes
ſoeuer enacted:Exod. 20. what Ceremonies or Sacrifices ſoeuer
he did ordaine them: this people euer made a relapſe
into their Idolatry, abuſing the Law of God, and corrupting
the holy Sacraments, and ſacrifices, as hereafter
ſhall be expreſſed. But if any man deſire to know
more at large, the multitude and varietie of ſacrifices:
let him reade the bookes of Philo the Iew 
                     •
                  ; and
of Ioſephus in his Antiquities of the Iewes, according
as Moſes hath expreſſely written in the bookes
of Leuiticus, and Numbers.
               
               There was another ſigne and Sacrament inſtituted

of God,Arke of Couenant. by the Arke of Couenant, deſcribed in Exodus,
being a ſacred ſigne, and dedicated to receiue
celeſtiall diuine Oracles,Exod. 25. 26, 27, 28. to the end to induce
the people to a remembrance, feare, and obedience of
God To accompany and honour the Arke of Couenant,
many other externall ſignes were conſtituted
by God, as the ornaments and conſecrations of the
Prieſts;Ephod. eſpecially that ornament called the Ephod:
both which and the Sacrifices, the Iſraelites abuſed
and prophaned with their Idolatries.
               Another ſacred ſigne there was,Water of Purification conſecrated. of cleanſing water,
or Water of expiation, inſtituted by God, for
Moſes and Aaron the High Prieſt. This cleanſing or
purifying Water was conſecrated,Numb. 15. with aſhes taken
vp by an vnpolluted man, of the oblation offered in
the Holocauſt, that is to ſay, of the whole Red Cow,
without ſpot, not hauing euer bin expoſed to labour.
               The Fire; for the burnt-offering was ordained to
be of Cedar-wood, Hyſop, and of Purple-Crymoſine.
Polluted men were ſprinkled ouer with this Water,Exod. 38.
for an expiation and purgation of their corporall
blemiſhes.
               At the entry of the Tabernacle, or Temple, there
was a kinde of Lauer like a Font of Braſſe, forged at
firſt of ſeeing Glaſſes, of the Iſraelitiſh Women. In
this Lauer or Holy-water Font, was put this Water
of Purification, where with the Prieſts beſprinkled
themſelues, before they celebrated their ſacrifices, to
the end they might be purified, and obtaine grace and
remiſsion of ſinnes.
               After the death of the High Prieſt Aaron, the Iſraelitiſh
people, ingratefull towards God, for the benefit
he ſent them, murmuring when they were wearie
of the heauenly Manna,Brazen Serpent. which hee gaue them
bountifully for their ſuſtentation, they were puniſhed
with the ſtingings of venemous Serpents.Numb. 27. But God

being mercifull, gaue them a ſacred ſigne, to bee preſerued
and reſtored to health, that is to ſay, the ſigne
of the Brazen Serpent erected vp on high, which was
a Figure of Ieſus Chriſt crucified.Iohn 3. 7.
               
               This in briefe is the greateſt part of the Signes, Sacrifices,
and Sacraments, inſtituted by God, in the
firſt Church of the Iſraelites, being figures of the true
and perfect ſacrifice, accompliſhed and immolated
by Ieſus Chriſt, the true Meſsias, the Eternall Prieſt,
who ſits at the right hand of God his Father.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               Of Corruptions.
               
                  NOW wee muſt ſuccinctly produce
how Man by his owne fault falling
into obliuion and diſobedience againſt
GOD his Creator,Corruption began firſt in Adam.
                   abuſed
herein diuine fauour and grace, and
corrupted the ſacred ſignes, ſacrifices
& Sacraments, by him ordain'd
and inſtituted. For elſe what perſwaded our firſt Father
and his Wife Eue to hide themſelues, when they
heard and were ſet in the way of God, but that they
had abuſed his ſacred ſignes, and violated the Law of
thoſe Fruits prohibited and forbidden them?
               This holy ſigne which our firſt Parents ſo alienated
and abuſed, was the originall of other Vices and corruptions
hereafter deſcribed, wherein two men are
falne,Corruption of the ſacrifices by Aaron. Exod. 32. Deut. 9. hauing a relliſh of the corrupt maſſe in Adam.
               
               Omitting the particular corruptions of ſignes, ſacrifices,
and Sacraments, before the Law written by
Moſes, we will begin in ſetting downe briefely, the

moſt notable errors committed by the greateſt Sacrificers,
Kings and Prieſts, with others, that had the gouernment
and charge of the people. When Moſes remained
in Mount Sinai, to receiue the Commandements
from God, his brother Aaron the High Prieſt
cauſed a golden Calfe to be framed, of the earings deliuered
vnto him by the people of Iſrael, hee built an
Altar, offered Incenſe, and celebrated Sacrifice, cauſing
the common people to adore this Image. Was
not this an abuſing of the ſacrifices ordained by God,
and a corrupting of their true vſe, procuring the
ſame to be ador'd, which before was it ſelfe offered,
and immolated, according as the cuſtome was?
               His ſonnes alſo,Corruption of ſacrifices by Nadab and Abihu. Leuit. 10. Numb. 11. 
                  Nadab, and Abihu, were they not
conſum'd with fire, becauſe they adulterated the true
vſe of ſacrifices, and tooke vnconſecrated wood, by
corrupting the inſtituted Law?
               The people of Iſrael ingratefull for the benefit receiued,
in being deliuered from Pharaohs captiuitie;
did they not murmure againſt the holy Sacrament of
celeſtiall Manna, when they contemned and deſpiſed
this Bread of Life, crying out for fleſh to eate? Achan
the ſonne of Charmes, did not hee violate the Law of
ſacred ſignes, when hee committed ſacriledge, by detaining
the ſpoiles of Iericho, which were vowed and
conſecrated for ſacrifices to God?Ioſh. 7.
               
               If any man more curious, deſires to ſee the abuſes
and corruptions continued by the ſame people, let
him reade the Hiſtories of the Iudges of Iſrael, and
he ſhall perceiue,Iud. 6. 3. 6. 8, 9. that in all ages men haue neuer been
content with the true adoration inſtituted by God;
but in ſtead of externall ſignes conſtituted by God,
to drawe the people to his feare, and obedience,
they haue forged and brought in their owne inuentions:
and in ſtead of reuerencing the Altars, and the
Arke of Couenant,Iud. 10. in the name of the lonely one

God, which were externall ſacred ſignes, the Iſraelites
miſ-led by the Idolatries of their neighbours,
the Syrians,Judg. 50. Sidonians, Moabites, Ammonites, and
Paleſtines, erected Altars to ſtrange gods, to Baal
and Aſtaroth.
               
               
                  Iephta Iudge, and Conductor of the Iſraelites, did
not he corrupt the Law of Sacrifices, when he offered
vp his owne daughter, excuſing himſelfe by a Vow he
made, which was not ſo enioyned him by God?
               The ſacred ſigne ordain'd for the High Prieſt,Inhumane ſacrifice of Iephta. Iudg. 17. and
Sacrificer, in celebrating of Sacrifice, called the Ephod,
ſeruing for an externall ornament, was it not
abuſed by Gideon, Captaine of Iſrael, when of the
ſpoiles of the Madianites, and their earerings, hee
forged an Ephod of gold; by meanes whereof, the
people fell to great Idolatrie?
               How long was this externall ſigne of the Ephod abuſed,Idolatry by the golden Ephod.
                  
when an Image was thereof erected in Siloe,
by the Mother of Michas: ſo that Prieſts were expreſſely
inſtituted to ſacrifice thereunto, and an Altar
edified; and thus was the true vſe of holy ſacrifices
corrupted? While the Temple continued in Siloe, into
what depraued and adulterate Rites did the
Prieſts and Sacrificers fall, who were appointed, and
ordained for the celebration and Miniſterie of holy
ſacrifices, and Sacraments, when by long cuſtome,
they vſurped this priuiledge ouer the people, that
when the ſacrifice was ſolemnized, and the fleſh of
the oblations was a boiling, their ſonne or ſeruant
hauing a trident or iron hooke in his hand, he had the
libertie to rake out of the pot or Cauldron, whatſoeuer
he could bring vp with his hooke?1. Sam. 2. Moreouer,
with more extreme Leuiticall Tyrannie, this ſeruant
of the Prieſts had the priuiledge, to demand of the
Celebrater ſome fleſh to roaſt for the Prieſt, or elſe
he might violently take whatſoeuer he liſted.
               
                  
Were not theſe wonderfull abuſes, and deteſtable
corruptious practiſed by the ſacrificers and High
Prieſts, vnder the pretext and colour of ſacrifice?
What groffer corruption can be mentioned, then that
of the children of Eli the High Prieſt,
                     Ophni and Phinees corrupters of ſacrifices. nam'd Ophni,
and Phinees; who, vnder the colour of deuotion,
committed infamous Whoredoms, with the women
that watcht neere to the holy Oraculous ſigne,1. Sam. 2. inſtituted
by God. For which ſinne, they were lamentably
ſlaine, and the Arke of Couenant violently taken
away by the Philiſtims, who erected it in the Temple
of their Idol Dagon.
                  1. Sam. 4. But God not permitting this ſacred
ſigne to the thus prophaned, he cauſed the Image
of Dagon to fall downe, and ſent grieuous puniſhments
vpon the Philiſtims,
                  1. Sam. 5. 6. ſo as they were conſtrained
to re-deliuer vp againe the Arke of Gods Couenant.
               This ſacred ſigne was ſo precious and eſtimable,Arke of ſacred. Couenant.
that being but abuſed and prophaned by the Bethſamites,
that were not of the Order of the Leuites,
fiftie thouſand of the common people, and ſeuenty of
the moſt apparant and remarkeable amongſt them,
were by diuine reuenge cut off by ſodaine death.
               This example may make them tremble, that preſume
to profane the fignes and Sacraments inſtituted
by God,Againſt the corruption of ſacred ſignes. 
                  Vzza alſo, for abuſing the ſame ſacred ſigne,
though it were with a good intention, to eaſe the
Arke of the Couenant, that leaned too much of one
ſide, was he not puniſhed with death? For other prophanations
committed by the Iſraelites,2. Sams 6. Oſias. there are
examples of Oſias puniſhed with Leproſie; for adulterating
the ſacrifices, and aſſuming the Miniſterie of
incenſing, allotted onely to the Prieſts.
               
                  Saul the firſt elected King of the Iſraelites,2 Chron. 26. Saul. was put
to the Sword, and his Kingdom ſucceeded to another,
as was foretold him by Samnel, in that he prophaned

the ſacrifices, and permitted his Subiects to commit
the like abuſes.1. Sam. 13. Ioſeph. lib. 
                        •
                     . cap. 4. de. Antiq. ludae. His ſucceſſors to the kingdomes
of the lewes, and Iſraelites, did they not perſeuer
in their abuſes and corruptions of the Sacrifices and
Sacraments ordained by God, when they celebrated
Sacrifices to the gods, Astaroth the god of the Sidonians;1. Kings 11.
                  Chamos, of the Moabites; and Melcom, or
Moloch of the Ammonites: building Temples and
Oratories for them, offering incenſe, and ſolemnizing
ſacrifices to them?
               
                  Ieroboam King of the Iſraelites, did not onely erect
a golden Calfe,Ieroboam. 1. Kings. 12. as the high Prieſt Aaron formerly
did; but hee ſet vp two golden Cowes in the two
Temples of Bethel, and of Dan: he inſtituted ſtrange
Prieſts, corrupted the Law of God, and cauſed Sacrifices
to be celebrated after the manner and forme
of Aarons.
               
               This Idolatrie and corruption of Sacrifices was
continued by the Iſraelites for more then foure hundred
yeeres,1. Kings 14. during the reignes of their Kings, who
had taught them to adulterate the true manner and
forme of Sacrifices, in particular Chappels and Oratories,
edified on the tops of hilles, and conſecrated
in ſhadie forreſts, violating the law of ſacrifices ordained
for the holy Temple, in the ſacred Citie of
God: For particualr examples of abuſes committed
againſt the true vſe of ſacrifices, we reade an hiſtorie
of Maacha,
                  1. Kings 16. the mother of King Aſa, who cauſed
an Image to bee erected to god Pan: ſhe conſecrated
and dedicated vnto him a ſhadie Forreſt, and celebrated
to him ſacrifices.
               
                  Achab another King of the Iſraelites erected an
Altar,Achab. 1. Kings 16. and procured ſacrifices to bee ſolemnized to
god Mars, otherwiſe called Baal; to whom hee dedicated
and vmbragious Groue,Ioſeph. lib. 8. cap. 10. to pleaſe herein his
wicked wife Iezabel. Hee alſo built another Temple

and Altar to the god of the Tyrians, ordained ſacrificing
Prieſts, and inſtituted about 40. falſe prophets.
His ſonne & ſucceſſor Ochoſias,
                  Ochoſias. inſtructed by his father
in corrupting the true vſe of the ſacrifices, cauſed
men not onely to immolate to Baal, who ſignified
Mars, but perſeuering ſtill in farre greater corruptions,2. Kings 1.
he built another Temple to the god of the Acaronites,
                  Ioſeph. li. 9. cap. 1.
called by Ioſephus, Myos; and by the Grecians
Priapus, to which god hee offered ſacrifice.
               And to bee ſhort, what more abominable corruption
can bee imagined, then the inuention of Purgatory
fire,Purgatory fire. 2. Kings 16. which the Iſraelites abuſed, cauſing their
children to paſſe through the middeſt of the fire, in
Tophet, a valley belonging to the ſonnes of Ennon, ſacrificing
to god Moloch?
               
               This corruption of ſacrifice,
                     In the booke Alcoran. though it had been
practiſed ſince Moſes time, notwithſtanding the
idole of Moloch,
                  Aſoar. 29. lib. 46. and Aſoar. 5. in the valley of Ennon, was not demoliſhed
till the reigne of good King Joſias, more
then nine hundred yeeres after Moſes.
                  Ignem gehennae, non niſi numero dierum praeterminato. Animas ſentire docet Alcoranliber, & ad diem Veritatis omnes accedere operum ſuorum mercedem accepturos, Aſoar. 5. Neuertheleſſe,
this abuſe hath been continued by the Arabians
and Africans, euen to this preſent day; for the Alcaroniſts
and Mahumetans are of this beliefe, that the
ſoules of the dead ſhall paſſe through fire, to bee purged
and purified of their offences. By this briefe collection
wee may cleerely diſcerne, how from the beginning
of the world man hath fallen by his owne
defect into this gulph of the error and corruption of
Sacred Signes, Sacrifices, and Sacraments inſtituted
for him, by God. But the moſt capitall abuſes; from
whence the original of all Idolatry deriues, haue proceeded
from this, in that, carnall and fleſhly men
haue bin alwayes more addicted to viſible ſignes and
externall ceremonies,The cauſe of corruption in Sacraments. then to things ſignified and intimated
in Sacraments; for in ſtead of circumciſing
their hearts, and caſting off the old skinne of ſinne,

to bee regenerated,Apo
                        •
                     . 13. and purified by the bloud of the
heauenly oblation offered vp before all ages, they haue
taken and vnderſtood the circumciſion carnally, for
nothing but the corporall foreskin circumciſed. For
did they follow the interpretation of God hereof by
Moſes,
                  Deut. 10. 50. which was to circumciſe the prepuce of
their hearts? Did the people of Iſrael giue credit
to the good Prophet Ieremias, who admoniſhed them
of the ſpirituall Circumciſion, and to circumciſe the
foreskin of their hearts,Ierem. 4. in caſting off the old skinne
of their corrupt nature? The like hath hapned in ſacrifices
and ſacred ſignes inſtituted by God, for ſignes
of that ſacrifice conſummated in the ſacred perſon of
Ieſus Chriſt: for carnall man had reference to the
corporall bloud of the terreſtriall beaſts, whereas
man ſhould haue raiſed vp his ſpirit to heauen,
to haue apprehended what was preſigured and
ſignified, by the Immolation and Oblation of
beaſts.Eſay 7. And therefore diuine Iuſtice is denounced
by the Prophets; What neede haue I, ſaith the Lord
God, of your ſacrifices? I am angry with the oblation
of your ſheep; I take no more delight in the bloud
of oxen, nor of lambes, and ſacrificed goats. Why
labour you to erect Altars to mee? Ile none of your
vaine Offerings and Oblations; I abhorre your Incenſes;
I cannot endure your New Moones, your
Sabbaths, your aſſemblies, nor your feaſts: all this
is but vanity. I haue conceiued an hatred againſt
your Feaſts of New Moones, O you Iſraelites, and
your ſolemne celebrations. I am weary with hauing
endured ſo much:Pſal. 41. you are ready to addreſſe vnto
mee your prayers, but I will no more heare you,
for the abuſes you haue committed, by your hands
full of blood: I will accept of no Bull hereafter, from
the houſe of Iſrael, becauſe ſacrifices are not pleaſing
to mee.Eſay 66. I take as much delight in the ſacrifice

of an immolated Oxe, as in the murder of a man
ſlaine: and in the Oblation of Incenſe,Ierem. 6. as in the adoration
of an Idoll: Wherefore then, ſaith GOD,
take you ſo much paines to hunt after Incenſe from
Saba, and for odours out of a farre Countrey to
mee, to celebrate ſacrifices that are not pleaſing
to mee?
               Who incited you, O Iſraelites, to erect Images
to the god Moloch, and to the ſtarre of Romphan,
during the time you were in the deſarts, where I fed
you with my heauenly Manna?Amos 5. Your Feaſtes are
odious to mee, your Holocauſts, Oblatio ns, and
Sacrifices for ſafetie I will reiect; your Offerings diſpleaſe
mee. By what meanes therefore muſt wee
preſent our ſelues before GOD? Muſt it bee by oblations
of Heifers of a yeere old? Doth God take
pleaſure in the great number of ſheepe ſacrificed
to him, or in the abundance of conſecrated oyles?
Shal I offer vnto him, ſaith the Prophet, the firſt born,
for remiſsion of ſinnes?
               Our good God herein clearely expreſſeth what he
would haue vs to follow;Pſal. 
                        •
                     . which is equity, to loue
mercie, and to humble themſelues before him with
a contrite heart:2. Sam. 15. Obedience is better then ſacrifice,
or the fat of ſacrificed ſheepe. What mooued God
to refuſe the Sacraments and Sacrifices by himſelfe
ordayned, but onely the abuſes and corruptions the
Iſraelites had committed, vnderſtanding too carnally,
the ſignes and ceremonies therein concurring to
drawe them onely to true feare and obedince? For,
in ſtead of comprehending what was figured in the
ſignes and corporall ſacrifices, they relyed on the fleſh
of immolated beaſts: whereas they ſhould haue circumcized
the prepuce of their hearts, they depended
meerely in carnall circumciſion, and in the meane
while ſtrayed from the true adoration of God, in repairing

to the Creatures, as to the Starres, and the
Queene of Heauen, and to other ſtrange gods, offering
Incenſe to them, building of Temples, inſtituting
of Prieſts, Chaplaines, and Sacrificers, making
Oblations, and celebrating ſacrifices to them.
               And then further, to heape vp all corruptions,
they offered ſacrifice with the bloud of Innocents,
offering, and cauſing them to paſſe thorow the Purgatory
fire, in the valley of Tophet. For the abuſes
alſo committed in the holy Sacrifices, ſacred ſignes,
and Oblations conſtituted for God, it was ſaid to
the people of Iſrael by the Prophets, that God would
haue no more of their Feaſts, of their New Moones,
nor of their celebrated ſacrifices,4. Eſdras 7. by bloudy and idolatrous
people.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               Corruptions puniſhed.
               
                  AFter that the inſcrutable Wiſedome of
God knew the obſtinacie and infidelity
of the Iſraelitiſh people, which perſeuered
ſtill in committing Idolatrie,
by corrupting the ſacred ſignes, ſacraments,
and ſacrifices; and in ſtead of acknowledging
Gods infinite goodneſſe, that had freed them
from the tyranny of Pharaoh, and fedde them in the
Deſart; who had brought them into a promiſed fertile
Land, and had ſo many times aſsiſted them in
the warres, againſt their neighbours, the Canaanites,
Moabites, Madianites, Philiſtines, Ammonites,
Syrians, Sydonians, and other enuious

people, and enemies: This rude and ingratefull people
continued ſtill in their Idolatry, inſtructed by
their Prieſts, ſacrificers, Princes, and Kings, without
returning to the true adoration of one onely God: For
this cauſe, after great mercies ſhewed, and long expectation
of a Iuſt & rigorous Iudge, who by all courſes
of correction was deſirous to reduce his people by diuine
particular inflictions; which was, by excited
wars, by captiuities, & ſeruitudes, by diuiſions of the
Kingdom, diſtributed between Roboam and Ieroboam,
ſucceſſours to Salomon, who fell to extreme Idolatry,
by inteſtine and ciuill warres, growing betweene
the ſame people, diuided in themſelues, and by other
vſuall ſcourges, to chaſtize thoſe whom God
meant to fauour, for the reducing of them vnder his
feare and obedience. At laſt, this people beeing too
much obdurate, and inueterated in their Idolatries,
were brought into miſerable ſeruitude vnder the
Tyranny of the vnbeleeuing Aſſyrians,4. Kings 15. 24. the Idolatrous
Babylonians, and their kingdomes wholly extirpated.
               But ſome pretty while after, when the ſame people
by the ſpeciall mercy of God, were deliuered out
of the hands of theſe infidell Tyrants, reſtored to
their liberty, and Countrey of promiſe, they againe
fell to Idolatry more then before, vnder the
gouernement of their ſacrificers and high Prieſts,
which confounded the Spirituall and Temporall together,
ſo farre as to inueſt themſelues with the Royall
Scepter, and Diadem.
               Then came in the Hereſies of the Phariſees,Ioſeph. lib. 13. ca. 16. de Ant. Iud. the
Sadducees, the Eſſeans, Galileans, Masbutheans
Hermerobaptiſts, and Samaritanes, corrupted
through the diuerſity of ſtrange Nations, hauing ſubdued,
and inhabited the Countrey of Samaria next
to Iudea.
               
               
                  
For the Babylonians worſhipped Succobenoth for
their god.Ioſeph. lib. de Antiq. Iud. The Cutheans of Perſia had for their god,
Nergal, or Nergel. The Hamathenſians called vpon
their god Aſima. The Ananoys worſhipped Nebahaze,
and Thartace. The Sepharuamenſians, held
for their gods, Adramelech, and Anamelech; to
which gods they ſacrificed their childrē, cauſing them
to paſſe through the fire.
               Wherefore, when all kind of Idolatry was thus
ſpred among the Iſraelites, when the ſacrifices were
abſolutely corrupted, the ſacrificers became mercenary,
auaricious, tyrants and Idolatrous. The people
made tributary to the Tyrants of Rome; the
Countrey of Judeae reduced to a Prouince,Ioſeph. lib. 15. cap. 3. next to
that of Syria, vnder the ſubiection and power of
the Romanes; as alſo the Order and Law of electing
high Prieſts adulterated, and their dignity quite baſtardized,Ioſeph. li. 8. cap. 8.
ſo as without any reſpect made of the
race Leuiticall; the ſacrificers were conſtituted by
the Conſuls,Entroſ. 1. cap. 12. and Deputies of Rome at their pleaſure,
and whereas before they were permanent during
life, they now became Annuall.
               When the Royall Scepter was alienated from
the Progenie of Judea,
                  Geneſ. 49. their Kingdome wholly ſubuerted,
as before was prophecied: the incomprehenſible
power of God was reuealed by his Sonne,
begotten before all ages, who humbled himſelfe to
take vpon him humane fleſh, in the wombe of the
Virgin, to redeeme his people, and to reſtore them
to grace and fauour with God.
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               The Ceremoniall Law accompliſhed by
Ieſus Chriſt.
               
                  NOw, as in Adam, through his preuarication
and ſinne,Compariſon between Adam and Ieſus Chriſt. and in abuſing
the Sacred ſignes committed
to his guard and cuſtodie, as the
whole maſſe of humane fleſh was
tainted with the leauen of ſinne; ſo
by the ſecond Adam Ieſus Chriſt,
wee were againe by grace purged from all our offences.
To our firſt and generall Father Adam, was
giuen the Sacred ſigne for an exerciſe of obedience,
and other ſacred ſignes to his ſucceſſors, Sacrifices, and
Sacraments inſtituted by God, the Tree of Life, the
Fruits of the knowledge of Good and Ill; the Rainbowe;
Circumciſion; the vnſpotted Lambe; the vnleauened
bread; the Cloude; the Pillar of Fire; the
Red ſea diuided; Heauenly Manna; Water out of the
Rocke; the Oblations & Holocauſts of beaſts for ſacrifice;
the Arke of Couenant; the Brazen Serpent;
the Temple edified in the holy Citie: All which ſacred
ſignes, Sacrifices and Sacraments, were figures
of that which was accompliſhed in Ieſus Chriſt.
               For firſt hee was the true Tree of Life, planted in
the middeſt of the Paradiſe of God,Ieſus Chriſt the Tree of Life. in and by whom,
wee that were baſtard ſlips, haue been engraffed, to
obtaine eternall life:Apoc. 2. Rom. 12. Hee committed to our keeping
the Fruits of the Tree of Wiſedome, by his holy Goſpel
commanding vs to preſerue it entirely, without
adulterating or corrupting the ſame, without adding
or dimiſhing there-from, vpon pain of eternall death.
               
                  
Hee was as the Rain-bow, extended all ouer the
Aire,The Rain-bow. to aſſure vs of the League and Couenant contracted
between God and vs, that we ſhould no more
be drowned in the deluge of ſinne: He was circumciſed,
that the Law in him might be accompliſhed,
that ſo the prepuce of our hearts might be circumciſed,Circumciſion. Galat. 4.
and to make vs caſt off our old corrupted skinne
in Adam.
               
               Hee was like the flaming Buſh,The flaming Buſh. incarnate in the
wombe of the Virgin, conceiued by the Holy Ghoſt,
without the ſeed of Man; the ſacred Virgin, like the
Buſh, remaining notwithſtanding entire, and not
conſumed.
               He was ſacrificed,Paſcall Lambe. like the iuſt & Innocent Lambe,
and his Blood ſhed,Iohn 1. to preſerue vs from the Tyranny
of satan,Heb. 13. and to open vnto vs a paſſage, whereby we
may enter into the Land of Promiſe, the Heauenly
Kingdome.
               Hee is that true vnleauened Bread which came
downe from Heauen,The bread of Life. incorrupt and vnſpotted; of
whom we muſt eate for our ſpirituall nouriſhment;1. Cor. 5.
that we may celebrate the Feaſt of that miraculous
paſſage from Pharaoh, in the Land of true Liberty.
               Hee was the Cloud,The Cloud, the Pillar of Fire, The Red Sea. the firie Pillar, the diuided
Red Sea, which conducted and deliuered vs out of the
hands of our enemies; out of whoſe opened Side,
came Water and Bloud for our Saluation.
               He was the heauenly Manna,1. Cor. 10. ſent from Heauen,Job. 19. to
feed vs for euer;Heauenly Manna. and the true Rocke, out of which
iſſued Water, to quench their thirſt for euer, which
beleeue in him.The flowing Rocke.
               
               It was He,Liuing Water. that onely offered vp the ſauing Sacrifice
for the expiation of our ſinnes;1. Cor. 10. both Prieſt and
Sacrifice,Sacrifice. both the Offerer,Heb. 1. 8, 9, 10. and the Oblation; remaining
an Eternall High-Prieſt, at the Right Hand of
God, his Father; beeing entred into the Holy and

Heauenly Sanctuarie,Heb. 9. not built with mens hands, but
by the Hand of God.
               He was the true Arke of Alliance and Couenant,Arke of Couenant. by
which God reuealed and manifeſted his Oracles; and
in him he did reſide, to accompliſh his diuine and incomprehenſible
Myſteries.
               He was like to the Brazen Serpent,Brazen Serpent. faſtened to the
Croſſe, to giue health vnto the ſicke, which returne
to him,Ioh. 3. and contemplate on him by Faith.
               He was the true Temple of God,Temple of God. wherein the Holy
Ghoſt dwels, one God in Trinity; in, and by
whom God is onely adored.Ioh. 2.
               
               He was the true and ſacred Oblation, of whom the
reall water purgatorie was made,Holocauſt, and water Purgatorie. for the purgation
of euery blemiſh. Himſelfe, with his owne Aſhes,
that is, with his immolated Body, beſprinkled and
wet with water iſſuing out of his Side,Joh. 15. all People
and Nations that beleeue in him.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               Of Sacraments ordained by Ieſus Christ
himſelfe.
               
                  THe Law Ceremoniall beeing by
this meanes accompliſhed, not
in Figures, but really executed,
by the Incarnation, Death, and
Reſurrection of Jeſus Chriſt, our
Sauiour, our Mediator, our Eternall
Prieſt and Propitiator;
the infinite goodneſſe of God
was yet further reuealed, by the new Couenant, new
Alliance, and new comming of the Sonne of God, Incarnate:

For,Heb. 9. by his New Teſtament, ratified and
confirmed in the death of the Teſtator▪ He hath conſtituted
vs as heires and coheires to God, in his heauenly
Kingdome.
               For aſſurance of this celeſtiall ſucceſsion,Rom. 8. purchaſed
for vs by grace, after the Conſummation of the Law
Ceremoniall, and the ſame aboliſhed (as we haue formerly
declared) through that perfect Sacrifice of the
Prieſt Eternall; there were left vnto vs two ſacred
Signes or Sacraments, wherein God beſtowed greater
fauour, and more ſpeciall grace, then he had done
before his Incarnation:
                     St. Auguſtine lib. 3. de doct. Chriſt. cap. 9. For hee hath freed vs from
the ſeruile Law of Circumciſion, from the difference
of meates, and diuers Sacrifices ordained in the
firſt Church of the Iſraelites: And by eaſing vs of this
waighty burthen, Hee further conferred vpon vs a
greater comfort; in conſtituting, for a memoriall and
remembrance of our regeneration and eternall life,
two holy Sacraments, vnder two ſacred ſignes; which
are, the water of Baptiſme, and the Bread and Wine
in the Communion of his Body.
               Now,Sacraments of the New Teſtament. that his Grace might be extended to all Nations,
God thought good to make choice of the moſt
familiar and ordinary Signes and Symboles: For
Circumciſion was a ſpeciall marke for Abraham and
his Poſterity;Diſtribution of the Sacraments to all Conuerts. Herod. lib. 2. to which Circumciſion, other Nations
were not accuſtomed; though Herodotus, a Grecian
borne, in an Hiſtory he wrote of the Aegyptian
manners, ſpecifies their manner and cuſtome of beeing
circumciſed, but eſpecially the Prieſts: and
we may eaſily coniecture, that he had heard of it, at
the time when the Iewes dwelt in Aegypt for the
ſpace of 430 yeeres, and obſerued Circumciſion.
               Moreouer, Circumciſion was appointed onely for
the Males, and not for Females: there was a limited
time appointed for Circumciſion; which was, within

eight dayes after the Natiuity; and the cutting of
the fore-skin, was with griefe and paine.
               But the Grace of God,Gen. 17. by his Incarnation and plenary
Sacrifice, hauing aboliſhed the rigor of the Law
Ceremoniall, as well for difference of meates, as of
daies; He left vnto vs by his New Teſtament, and
new Alliance, the ſacred ſigne of Water, common to
all, both Male and Female, without any diſtinſtion of
dayes; and the Infant, by the Sacrament of Baptiſme,
feeling no paine, as it did by the Circumciſion of the
fore-skinne.
               This Signe of Water, intimating vnto vs the purgation
and expiation of our ſinnes, through the Bloud
of Ieſus Chriſt, was common, not onely among the
Iewes, who vſed ordinarily, Water purgatorie, and
of expiation; but the Gentiles alſo, and all other Nations,Numb. 19.
were accuſtomed to a Lotion and purgation of
cleanſing, and purgatorie Water, as we may perceiue
in reading Ancient Hiſtories. Wherefore, to the end
that Gods Grace in Ieſus Chriſt, might generally bee
ſpred oner all the Earth; to all Nations, Regions, and
Prouinces; both to the circumciſed and vncircumciſed;
to the Iewes, and to the Gentiles; God made
election of the moſt common ſigne of Water, the
more freely to expoſe himſelfe vnto Man, and to win
him to His feere and obedience.
               By which Signe, he hath inſtituted his holy Sacrament
of Baptiſme, for an aſſured note and marke of
our regeneration and purification, ſacramentally conferred
by the power of the Holy Ghoſt: In which
Sacrament, God doth warrant vs his helpe and aſſiſtance,
ſo ingrafted and regenerate in Ieſus Chriſt, to
be made and renewed the members of his members;
and to receiue vs,Tit. 3. as clothed anew,Gal. 3. and reincorporated
by and through him.
               The like reaſons may be produced, for the other holy

Sacrament inſtituted by God in his New Teſtament,
which is that of Bread and Wine: Which Signes
Symboles, and externall Elements, all Nations were
accuſtomed to vſe, in their Sacrifices, Oblations, and
Ceremonies belonging to their Religions; both Circumciſed
and vncircumciſed, both Iewes and Gentiles:
As alſo, the two ſpecificall Refections for the
nouriſhment and ſuſtentation of men, are comprehended
vnder theſe ſignes of Bread and Wine.
               Our good God therefore, for theſe reaſons, deſiring
to draw all Nations to himſelfe; to nouriſh, and
miniſter vnto them moſt neceſſarie prouiſions, He inſtituted
the Communion of the Body and Bloud of
our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, vnder the ſymboles, ſacred
ſignes, and Sacraments of Bread and Wine: And
looke how we are aſſured by the outward marke and
Character of Water in Baptiſme, to bee regenerate
and incorporated into the Body and Blood of Ieſus
Chriſt, repreſented in this Sacrament of conſecrated
Water, by the power of the Holy Ghoſt; ſo are wee
nouriſhed by the Communion of his Body and Bloud
really preſented to vs, in the conſecrated Bread and
Wine, for our ſpirituall foode, liuing and eternall, by
the vertue and power of the Holy Ghoſt: Wherein
God hath ſhewed vs this ſpeciall fauour, to diſcharge
vs of all bloudie Sacrifices, ordained in the firſt
Church of the Iſraelites, who were charged with ſundry
and diuers Sacrifices, celebrated with the bloud
of many earthly beaſts ſhed, according to the diuerſitie
of ſinnes and offences, and of perſons that had offended.
               All which Sacrifices were conſummated and aboliſhed,
by ſhedding of the bloud of that iuſt and
Innocent Lambe, IESVS CHRIST; who, by his
perfect Sacrifice, hath abſolutely aboliſhed all other
Sacrifices, reſeruing to himſelfe, the dignity of High

and eternall Prieſt, placed at the right hand of God
the Father.
               But ſo much hee hath fauoured vs, that in ſtead of
aboliſhed ſacrifices, hee hath inſtituted two holy Sacraments
heretofore mentioned, for an infallible aſſurance
of our Regeneration, Purgation, Adoption,
and of our nouriſhment and eternall life beſtowed
vpon vs by the Blood of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               Of the Corruption of the Sacrament
of Baptiſme.
               
                  AS the Iſraelites being too groſſe and
carnall, relyed too much on externall
ſignes, hauing corrupted the
true vſe of Sacrifices, and Sacraments
appointed for them by God;
ſo ſuch like abuſes, yea, farre greater
corruptions haue happened in the two holy Sacraments,Corruptions of the holy Sacraments.
left vnto vs by the New Teſtament of Ieſus
Chriſt. For in the Sacrament of Baptiſme, which
ſucceeded in the place of Circumciſion, man conceiued
of a foule and wicked maſſe, could not bee contented
with the holy Inſtitution from GOD, but
quickly depraued and defiled the vſe of the holy Sacrament
of Baptiſme,Sacrament of Baptiſme corrupted. by Coniurations, Exorciſmes,
mixtures of Salt and Oyle, waxe Candles, Extreme
Vnctiōs, Breathings, Babies, or Puppets, with a thouſand
Cruzadoes in the forehead, in the eyes, on the
backe, on the ſtomacke, on the ſhoulders, and at the
mouth, and all to driue away Deuils.
               
                  
For the Meſſalian Heretikes,
                     Theod. in the booke of the fables of Heretikes. Authors of Exorciſmes
of Cruzadoes, affirmed, that euery borne Infant,
was borne with his peculiar Daemon, or Deuill,
which cannot bee driuen away, but by Coniurations
and Exorciſmes.
               By this meanes the holy Sacrament of Baptiſme
came to bee corrupted,Ca
                        •
                     ſine, & ca
                        •
                     poſiquam de conerat. diſtinct. 4. euen to the adding and annexing
of Syriacke words of Driuell, and Purgatory-Spittle.
               What greater corruption can bee imagined, then
ſuch abominable inuentions;Epheta. Per. Satyr. 2. as if the bloud of Chriſt
Ieſus were not ſufficient for our Regeneration and
purgation; and that God of himſelfe were not powerfull
enough to engraft and regenerate vs, by the
ſacred ſigne of Water, repreſenting the Bloud of Ieſus
Chriſt,Galat. 3. 
                        •
                     pheſ. 4. 1. Corinth. 15. but that there muſt bee exorciſed Spittle,
and Driuell, Oyle, Salt, Puppet-Images, Creames,
Torches, Waxe-Candles, Milke, or Honie, inuented
and deuiſed by other Heretikes?
               Some alſo there bee more ſubtill Magicians, Pithagoreans,
inſtructed in the Meſſalian Hereſie, haue added
to all this, the pronouncing of the Deuils name
twenty times, to exorciſe and coniure him, as 
                     •
                  e that
aſſociates the male Infant when hee comes to be baptized;
and thirty times they vtter it, at the baptizing
of a Daughter. Was there euer ſo deteſtable a corruption
in the Sacrament of Circumciſion?
               Wherefore, O you Meſſalians, haue you foyſted
in Oyles, into the holy Sacrament of Baptiſme; imitating
herein the Hereſie of Marcus, and Marcoſus,
who commanded that Infants to be baptized,Epiphan. lib. 1. tom. 3. haereſ. 38. ſhould
bee anointed? The ſacred ſigne of Water, inſtituted
by the hand of God, was it not ſufficient to ſignifie
the precious blood of Ieſus Chriſt, for our regeneration
and purification, without intruding of Fattes,
Oiles, ſpittle, and other mixtures inuented by the corrupters
of Sacraments?
               
                  
The Body and Bloud of Ieſus Chriſt, wherewith
wee are clothed anew by the ſacred Water of Baptiſme,
was it not powerfull enough, and efficacious,
to preſerue vs from all tempeſts, without borrowing
of your Exorciſmes and Vnctions?
               And yet, for a further corruption and abuſe, Women
were permitted to baptize, conformable to the
errour of the Marcioniſts, Quintilians, Cataphrigians,
Montaniſts,Epipha. lib. 1. tom. 3. haereſ. 42. and lib. 2. tom. 1. haereſ. 49. Pepuzians, Priſcilians, and Artotirites.
Were Women euer admitted by the Law of
God to miniſter the holy Sacraments, or Sacrifices inſtituted
in the firſt Church of the Iſraelites? or in the
New Teſtament of Ieſus Chriſt?
               In the Hiſtorie of Moſes it is reported, that his
wife Sephora excited with feminine furie,Exod. 4. tooke the
ſtone or knife wherewith ſhee circumciſed her
ſonne: But it is not written, that ſhee, or any other
like her, were euer permitted to adminiſter the holy
Sacraments.
               Out of theſe corruptions in the holy Sacrament of
Baptiſme, many Hereſies were raiſed by the Catabaptiſts,
Anabaptiſts, Antipedobaptiſts, with other
Heretikes, and Schiſmatikes, who were not ſatisfied
with Gods pure and ſincere Inſtitution, but regarded
more exteriour ſignes, then that which in
them was ſpiritually repreſented.
               Whoſoeuer deſires to vnderſtand more particularly,
the abuſes and corruptions, inuented and deuiſed
in diuers ages, out of the variable humours of
men, let them read our Eccleſiaſticall Commentaries.
Wee muſt now at this preſent deſcend to the
corruptions in the other holy Sacrament of the Supper,
and Communion of the Body and Bloud of Ieſus
Chriſt.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VIII.
               Of the Corruption of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper.
               
                  WEe may euidently diſcerne by this
ſuccinct Diſcourſe, how weake
and mutable man is, euer abuſing
and alienating the graces of God.
For as the people of Iſrael, from
the beginning of the Law and Inſtitution
to them recommended,
corrupted the true vſe of Sacrifices, ſacred ſignes,
and Sacraments ordained of God, ſo hath it falne out
to the Law of God by Ieſus Chriſt, hauing conſtituted
a forme of communicating his Body 
                     •
                  and
Bloud, vnder the ſymboles and ſacred ſignes of Bread
and Wine: Which holy Sacrament began to bee alienated,
euen in the very times of the Apoſtles, by
the Corinthians;Sacrament of the Supper corrupted. 1. Corinth. 11. againſt whom Saint Paul wrote Epiſtles,
to reduce them to the ſincere and true obſeruation
of this holy Sacrament.
               Wherefore, let no man hereafter thinke it ſtrange,
if the Apoſtles ſucceſſors haue from time to time adulterated
the true Vſe and Rite of this holy Sacrament;
and the further off they were in the preſent
age of their liuing, from the reigne of the Apoſtles
of Ieſus Chriſt, the more eaſily they fell into corruptions;
yea, ſuch as were moſt abominable; hauing
conuerted the ſincere Vſe of this Sacrament,
into a Gulph and Precipice of all Idolatry.
               Firſt of all,Hist. Eccle. what an alteration happened in the

Church, next and immediatly ſucceeding the Apoſtles,
touching a Comprimiſsion of dayes, when this
holy Sacrament was to be celebrated.
               
                  Sabatius the Heretike inſtituted the celebration
of the Paſſeouer,Hiſt. tripart it. lib. 9. cap. 37. & lib. 11. cap. 5. with vnleauened bread, after the
manner of the Iewes.
               Some of his ſect ordained,Euſeb. lib. 5. cap. 24. that this holy Sacrament
ſhould bee ſolemnized the fourteenth Moneth,
as the Iewes did. Policrates, Biſhop of the Epheſians,
was ſaid to bee of this ſect;Hiſt. tripart. lib. 9 cap. 39. & 39. 
                  Philip Hiropolitan, Policarpus,
Truſcas, Melitus, and Narciſſus Biſhop of
Ieruſalem; Victor Biſhop of Rome, Eleutherius his predeceſſor,
and Theophilus Biſhop of Palestina were of a
contrary opinion. This difference continued for more
then three hundred yeeres after the Apoſtles time.
               Others celebrated the Paſſeouer after the Aequinoctiall
ſeaſon, when the ſunne entred into the ſigne
of Aries: and others obſerued the Moneth Xanthicke,
called by the Romanes, Aprill. Some affirmed for
example the Quartodocumans, how they were informed
by S. Iohn, to celebrate it in the fourteenth Moneth.
               The Romanes vaunted that they were taught
by S. Peter and S. Paul, whereof notwithſtanding no
manifeſt proofe appeared. The Phrygian Montaniſts
condemne the Quartodecumans, which obſerued the
fourteenth Moneth; and that they ought herein to
bee gouerned by the courſe of the ſunne, and ſo to begin
it at the ſprings Aequinoctiall: And for this reaſon
they celebrated it the eight of the Ides of Aprill,
which was the fourteenth of the ſaid Moneth, though
it fell vpon a Sunday.
               And there was not a contention onely touching
the adminiſtration of this holy Sacrament,Euſeb. lib. 5. cap. 24. on the
ſeuerall dayes aſsigned for celebrating thereof: but
there was likewiſe a notable deuiſion among the

Chriſtians, about the Ceremonies inuented, whereby
worthily to receyue the ſame. For ſome, as in particular,
the Romanes, obſerued the Faſt, or Euen, three
weekes before the day it ſelfe of Eaſter. The Illyrians,
and all Greece, as likewiſe the Alexandrians, inſtituted
a Quadrageſima, to faſt for ſixe weekes. Some others
ordained a ſeuen weekes abſtinence, with an
Intermiſsion from fiue to fiue dayes.
               Then was another Iewiſh Ceremonie reſtored,Hiſt. Tripar. Chap 38. the
more to corrupt the holy Sacrament of the Supper,
through diffrence and diſtinction of meats. For ſome
prohibited during the Feaſt, the eating either of Fiſh,
or Fleſh: Others forbade the vſe of Fleſh onely, permitting
men to eate Fiſh, or Fowle; which they ſaid,
according to Moſes, did participate of the ſubſtance
of the Water. Some in like manner ordained, that
men ſhould only eate bread and Water: Others faſted
till noone, without any diſtinction of meates. And
to reſolue briefly: there was in the beginning, an infinite
number of Corruptions and Cuſtomes, in the
Communion of the holy Sacrament of the Supper, by
meanes of the Ceremonies renewed, about difference
of daies and meates, abrogated by the Grace and
Law of Ieſus Chriſt.
               But was there any holy Apoſtle of God,Col. 2. Galat. 4. Heb. 7. that euer
left in writing any Law or Cōmandement, for diſtinction
of daies and meates, in celebrating the holy
Supper of Ieſus Chriſt? Their intention was not to
inſtitute a Religion of Feaſts, a diſtinction of dayes
and meates: Their Doctrine onely aimed to inſtruct
men how to liue well; and that one onely God was
to be adored and worſhipped.
               Wherefore, we muſt neceſſarily hereupon inferre,
that the Ceremony and Feſtiuity of the Paſcha, or Eaſter,
proceeded from a cuſtome; for none of the Apoſtles
left any thing thereof in writing.
               
                  
To qualifie ſuch Diſſentions and Corruptions,Hist. Tripar. lib. 9. cap. 38.
many Councels were aſſembled; one, at Sangariae in
Bithinia; by which, to auoid all contentions, euery
man was apermitted to celebrate the Paſſeouer, when
he would.Euſeb. lib. 5. cap. 23 Another Councell was held in Ceſarea, by
Theophilus, Biſhop of that place, and by Narciſſus,
Biſhop of Ieruſalem. Another Councell there was in
Achaia. And another Councell was conuented at
Rome, by Victor, Biſhop of the ſame place.
               After theſe petty corruptions, there ſucceeded
greater from time to time, according to the humors
and affections of the Biſhops of Rome.
                  In the yeere of Chriſt, 114. 
                  Alexander, 1.
of that name, being raiſed to the ſuperintendencie of
the Romane Church; one of the firſt ſucceſſors to the
Apoſtles of Ieſus Chriſt,Tlatina Sabelli. and one of the firſt corruptors
alſo of the holy Sacrament of the Supper; inuented
the mingling of water with Wine, before the
Communion: wherein, hee went about to reforme
the holy Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt, which inſtituted the
Communion of his Body and Bloud, vnder the two
kindes of Bread and Wine; but Alexander added
thereunto a third kind, which was water.
               He alſo renewed the Iewiſh ceremony of vnleauened
bread, wherewith to celebrate the Paſſeouer, as
the Iewes did; following herein the opinion of the
Ebionites, who taught, that the Ceremoniall Law of
Moſes was neceſſary for ſaluation: as alſo, Symmachus
the Hereticke in Paleſtine, taught the like.
               If Ieſus Chriſt was circumciſed to fulfill the Lawe
of Moſes,
                  Euſeb. lib. 3. cap. 27. & lib. 8. cap. 14. muſt it therefore be requiſite to vſe Circum
                     •
                  nmciſion?
As alſo, if it were His pleaſure, for
accompliſhing the Law of Ceremonies, to vſe one
daies appointed vnleauened Bread, muſt wee needs
therefore returne to the rigour of this Ceremonie,
abrogated by the complete Sacrifice of Ieſus Chriſt?
In what place of Scripture did Alexander learne to

mingle water with Wine? and to reſtraine Chriſtians
to vnleauened Bread; as alſo his other inuention,
of driuing away Diuels with ſalt water exorcized?
               As for the Purgatory Water by him ordained, wee
will hereafter deriue the originall thereof from Numa
Pompilius, that great Magician, and Romane Idolater.Cel. li. 39. cap. 21.
But touching the mixture of water with Wine,
he might peraduenture be inſtructed by the ancient
Idolaters; who, in celebrating their ſacrifices, were
wont, in a Chalice, to conſecrate Water with Bread:
eſpecially vpon the Feſtiuals dedicated to the Sunne,
which the Perſians worſhipped, called by them, Mythros.
And in the Feaſt of the Nephalies, they alſo
vſed Water for ſacrifice.
               With this compariſon,Iuſtin. in Apolo. 2. 
                  Iuſtine Martyr relates the
cuſtome obſerued amongſt Idolaters, and by Chriſtians,
in the conſecration of Bread, Wine, and Water:
by the one, which is to ſay by the Idolaters, in the
name of their Idols; and by Chriſtians, in the Name
of their True God.
               And yet this firſt corruption in the adminiſtration
of the holy Sacrament, by the mixture of water with
Wine, perſeuered not without contradiction: For
the Greekes were of a contrary opinion;Inno lib. 4. cap. 5. de officio Diſial. and that it
was not requiſite to brew water with Wine, neither
would they herein follow the Alexandrian corruptions.
               
                  Amarcanus was of the ſame opinion as Alexander;
affirming, that the mixture of water with Wine was
neceſſary. Scotus the ſubtile Sophiſter, abſolutely denied,
that it was neceſſary to mingle the water with
the Wine: becauſe, ſaith he, it cannot then be changed,
nor tranſubſtantiated into Bloud, except the ſame
were firſt changed into Wine.
               Some others, more ingenious, laboured to interpret
this Inſtitution of Alexander, by alleadging, that

the wine was conuerted into blood: but as for the
water, it was tranſubſtantiated into the water that
came out of Chriſts ſide.
               This firſt corruption of Alexanders, gaue occaſion
of many other ſucceeding abuſes: For ſome other
more profound Impoſtors deuiſed to mingle with
the wine, bloud, that was taken from yong Infants,Auguſt. lib. de Haereti. cap. 26. & 64.
wherewith to beſmeare the bread of the holy Supper
of Ieſus Chriſt as the Cataphrigians, who brought
in a kinde of tranſubſtantiation of wine into bloud,
really and corporlly.
               Some others added cheeſe thereunto,Epiphan. lib. 2. tom. 5. haeret. 49. called Artotirites;
which is to ſay, Cheeſe-bread-mongers. Certaine
alſo abuſing this holy Sacrament, in ſtead of
wine, put in water, vnder pretext of the greater
abſtinence. Others had an Inſtitution of ſteeping
bread in the wine, the which cuſtome the Meſſalians
alſo retained in their Miſſall ſacrifices.
               For another deteſtable corruption of this holy Sacrament,
ſome Popes of Rome forbade their Meſſalian
ſacrificers, not to adminiſter to Chriſtian people,
whom they call Lay-men, the Body of Ieſus Chriſt
in both kindes, but onely vnder the ſacred ſigne of
Bread, and not of Wine; which they reſerued for
their Meſſalian ſacrificing Prieſts.
               Is not this corruption directly againſt the holy
Goſpel, and Inſtitution of the Supper of Ieſus Chriſt,
ordained and commaunded, that all faithfull men
ſhould eate his body, and drinke of his blood? When
he tooke the Cup, did he not vſe theſe proper words?
Drinke all of this Wine, in memoriall of my Bloud
ſhed? Vſed hee any other words for the eating of his
Bodie in the ſymbole of Bread, then hee did of
his Blond,Matth. 29. Marc. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Corint. 11. vnder the ſigne of Wine? For if wee compare
the ſacred ſigne, ordained by God in the Church
of the Iſraelites, being a Figure of the Communion of

the body of Ieſus Chriſt, which was the true Paſchal
Lambe, whoſe fleſh was ordained to bee eaten without
exception of perſons, ſo they were circumciſed;
was there euer any difference in the eating of the Paſchall
Lambe, and the celebration of the Paſſeouer among
the Iewes; betweene the Leuites being of the
race of ſacrificing Prieſts, and others of the common
people?
               To bring in another odious corruption, the Meſſalians
inſtituted in their Miſſall-Idolatries, to ſacrifice
and offer the Body and Bloud of Ieſus Chriſt, reiterating
by this means the Sacrifice fully conſummated
by Ieſus Chriſt, which cannot bee reiterated, becauſe
it was, not according to the forme of Aaron,
but of Melchizedec,
                  1. Cor. 11, the Eternall Sacrifizer and
Prieſt, without leauing any ſucceſſor. As alſo when
the Apoſtle admoniſhed the Corinthians to celebrate
ſacredly the Supper of Ieſus Chriſt, were they commanded
to ſacrifice? No; but to eate, and communicate
together of the Body, & to drinke of the blood
of Ieſus Chriſt.
               The beginning of the Supper, was not to kill or
immolate, or to ſacrifice any beaſt, or oblation to
God; but onely to eate and drinke at his holy banquet,
prepared for vs by Ieſus Chriſt, the Eternall
ſacrifice, and Sacrificer; who reſerued onely for himſelfe
this Eternall Prieſthood; yet neuertheleſſe, hee
left vnto vs a ſacred Inſtitution of a banquet, ſet before
vs in the Bread and Wine, which repreſent his
Body and Bloud.
               After theſe aboue-named corruptions, Satan, a
diligent Babylonian Architect, employed all his
power and means, to rayſe an inexpugnable Fort of
Idolatry; to the end that hee might wholly demoliſh
and ſubuert the kingdome of Ieſus Chriſt, when
hee vndertooke to ſuborne the Maſſe, in ſtead of the

holy Sacrament of the Supper, as wee will briefly
produce, and ſo clearely, that the moſt hard-hearted
Pharaohs inueterated in their ancient Idolatries,
ſhall by the trueth of Hiſtories acknowledge their
errours, and abominable Hereſies.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               The ancient Religion of the Romane
Empire.
               
                  BEfore my deciphering of this labyrinth
of Errour,The Romane Emperors and their Prieſts. wherein the Meſſalians
did ſo loſe themſelues, I
thinke it verie requiſite ſuccinctly
to lay open the ancient Religion of
the Romanes, during the reigne of
the Occidentall Empire: and of
the Emperours vſurping both the Temporall ſcepter,
and the dignitie of high Prieſts, ſuperintendents ouer
the Romane Church and Religion.
               All of them, as well as my ſelfe, will confeſſe, that
the ancient Romane Religion was either wholly, or
for the greateſt part inſtituted by Numa Pompilius,
the ſecond King of the Romanes, about ſeuen hundred
yeeres before the Incarnation of Ieſus Chriſt.
Then were your high Prieſts inueſted, which afterwards
were reduced to a certaine number,Titiuill. lib. 1. deca. 1. euen to
foure: then the number was augmented to eight:
and afterwards by Silla to fifteene.
               In the Colledge of Prieſts,Feneſtell. lib. de Magiſt. Rom. there was one Pontifex
Maximus, who was choſen by the other inferiour
Prieſts, of their Order and dignitie; euen as
the pettie Prieſt purple-Cardinals make the election

of their great Romane Pope, out of their place, order,
and dignitie.
               This Pompilian Religion was ſo religiouſly obſerued
by the Romanes from father to ſonne, as it was
neuer poſsible to irradicate, or ſupplant it: but it
continues euen to this day, as euery one ſhall manifeſtly
diſcerne by this ſuccinct Narration.
               To confirme this point, no man can be ignorant, if
euer he read the Romane Hiſtories; but that, before
the Incarnation of Chriſt, there was not ſo much as
one King, Conſull, Dictator, or Romane Emperour,
inſtructed in the Law of God, but all were Idolaters
and Infidels, obſeruing the Religion of that Magician,
Numa Pompilius. For ſince the Incarnation of Ieſus
Chriſt, for the ſpace of three hundred yeeres, or thereabouts,
there was not likewiſe any Emperour, or Romane
Conſull, that changed his Religion, to embrace
the Law of Ieſus Chriſt: but, on the contrary, they
ſtrayn'd all their might and power, to put in practice
what cruelties ſoeuer againſt the Church of Ieſus
Chriſt;Euſeb. in his bookes of the Eccl. Hiſt. Anno Dom. 34. & 68. Anno Dom. 94. 112. & 183. 167. 202. 238. 254. 257. 276. 292. which may bee iuſtified by the Eccleſiaſticall
Hiſtories: wherein are explained, about eleuen ſeuerall
great perſequutions, vnder the Romane Pontifes;
which were, Claudius, Tiber. Nero, Claud. Domitian.
Nero, Flau.. Domitian. Traian. Elia. Adrian.
Antonine the Philoſopher, Septimius Seuerus, Jul.
Maximin. Mar. Quint. Traian. Decius, Licinus, Valerianus,
Valerius Aurelianus, and Diocleſian. All which
Emperours gouerned both the Empire, and the ſuperintendents
ouer the Romane Religion for three hundred
yeeres after the Incarnation of Ieſus Chriſt; and
in their Coynes, Sepulchres, Monuments, Titles, and
Letters Patents, they retained the ſtile of great Pontifes,
and high Prieſts: as is moſt diligently collected
in a booke of the Antiquities of Rome, wherein are
ſpecified the Medails, Coynes, and Monuments of the

ancient Romane Emperours,Pontifex Maximus. all which were enſtil'd
Pontifes, vnder theſe Titles: Iul. Caeſar. Pont.
Max.
                  In a booke intituled, A diſcourſe of the ancient Religion of the Romanes, by William de Choue Bayly of Dolphinois.
                   
                  Tiber. Nero Pont. Max. Veſp. Caeſar Pont.
Max. Marc. Aurel. Antonine. Aug. Ponti. Max. Heliogabalus
high Prieſt: Aug. Adrianus Jmp. Pontif.
Max. Tit. Caeſ. Pontif. Max. Commod. Jmpe. Pontif.
Max. Galerius Maximianus Pontif. Max.
Elauianus Conſtantinus, Aug. Pontif. Max. Beeing
therefore in this manner Emperours, and Romane
Pontifes, they neuer would permit any other head aboue
themſelues, in the Church and religion of Rome,
which in all ages was an enemie to Ieſus Chriſt. For
when the Apoſtles preached Chriſt to bee the High
and Soueraigne Prieſt, the Eternall and Great ſacrificer,
without ſucceſſour, after the order of Melchizedec,
the Romane Tyrants tooke occaſion, or at leaſt
their Lieutenants, to condemne Ieſus Chriſt, for feare
of impayring the authority of the Caeſars high Romane
Pontifes.
               With what fury for the ſpace of three hundred
yeeres,Catalogue of the Caeſars, at the end of Nicephorus Hiſtorie. were they excited againſt Chriſtians, and
the Religion of Ieſus Chriſt, to maintaine their
ancient Pompilian Religion? What anſwere was
giuen to the Emperour Theodoſius,
                  Anno Dom. 410. by the Senate and
Senators of Rome, when they were mooued to change
their Religion, and imbrace that of Ieſus Chriſt? They
ſhewed how they had bin in poſſeſsion of their Pompilian
Religion for more then a thouſand yeeres, and
that the alteration of Religion, was the ruine of Common-wealths.
For theſe reaſons perſiſting in their
old Romane Religion, they forbare to receiue the
Law of Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            
               
               CHAP. X.
               How the Biſhops of Rome began
their Corruptions.
               
                  BY theſe Hiſtories we may eaſily reſolue,
that during foure hundred
yeeres and more,In the Canons collected by Clement Biſhop of Rome, 21. 22. 62. & 95. Anno Dom. 93. the Biſhops of
Rome, who tearmed themſelues
Chriſtians, could neuer draw the
Senate nor Senators of Rome, to entertaine
the holy Goſpel. As alſo they could hardly
conuert the Romane Idolaters from their old and inueterate
Idolatries. For the Biſhops of Rome were too
buſie in reſtoring the Iewiſh and heathen Ceremonies,
about difference of meats, touching ordinances
not to faſt on Sundayes or Thurſdayes;
                     Alexander the firſt, Biſhop of Rome, in the yeere of our Lord 110. to inuent Table-
                     •
                  lothes,
Vailes, Veſſels of gold and ſiluer, on Hangings,
Tapiſtries, and other ornaments of the Altar,
worne out with old age, and to be burned, and the aſhes
to be laid vp in Fonts. Some alſo were mightily
buſied to renew the Iewiſh Ceremonies of vnleauened
bread, hauing their mindes greatly turmoyled to
corrupt the true vſe of the holy Sacraments inſtituted
by God, by the mingling of water with winae, nd ſeaſoning
water with ſalt,
                     Sixtus Biſhop of Rome in the yeere of our Lord 127. to make it purgatory, and exorciz'd
for the repelling of deuils. Otherſome in like
maner tooke great paines to ordaine Ephods of fine
linnen, wherin to wrap the ſacred Hoſt: alſo to conſtitute
Aubes,Sylueſter Biſhop of Rome. and other veſtiments for the Prieſts in
their ſacrifices, of white, & no died colours. Some had
their braines troubled to deuiſe Feaſts of dedication,
and Conſecration with Exorciſmes,
                     Higinus Biſhop of Rome the yeere 140. to driue away
deuills with ſalt: and otherſome to inuent Oyles and
Vnctions, wherewith to corrupt the holy Sacrament
of Baptiſme.
               
                  
Then afterwards during the time of theſe tyrant Emperours,
                     Fabian Biſhop of Rome in the yeare 240.
and great Pontifes, the Biſhops of Rome, deſiring
to perpetuate their names, they wore out their
braines in building of Temples,
                     Pius Biſhop of Rome, in the yeare, 144. not to the honour of
God, but to the names of men, and women, Saints by
them cannonized, at their owne pleaſure.
               Others were occupied in ordaining and decreeing,
                     Z
                           •
                        pherin: Biſhop of Rome, in the yeare 200.
that the conſecrated Bread or Wine falling to the ground,
ſhould be licked vp by the Prieſts▪ and the reſt remaining
to be burnd in the fire: and the aſhes to be reſerud
in a Reliquarie.
               Some looke out for Chalices,
                     Calixtus Biſhop of Rome, in the yeare, 280. that they ſhould be of
Glaſſe, and not of Wood.
               Others inſtituted ſolemne ceremonies for the foure ſeuerall
ſeaſons of the yeare, to bring Chriſtians by this
meanes vnder the ſeruitude of deſtinction of daies.
               Others were ſtudiouſly employed in ordaining the
oblation,
                     Eutiches Biſhop of Rome, in the yeare, 262. and conſecration of Beanes: to ſolemnize Funeralls
with Purple habites, after the forme of a Veſtment
called Trabea,Red roabes of Cardinals. which Idolaters vſed in their Triumphs
celebrated to the honour of their Gods. The like purple
Ornament is in vſe at this day amongſt the Cardinals.
               Others were occupied in deuiſing confirmation for little
Infants, and to conſecrate the Creame for Biſhops only,
alſo to honour extraordinarily the Biſhop of Hostia,
by whoſe hands the Biſhop of Rome is to be conſecrated,
with a kinde of Mantle called Pallium:
                  
                     Silueſt: Biſhop of Rome, in the yeare 314. and to inuent a
number of other vneceſſary Ceremonies, yea ſuch as
were oppoſite to the Euangelicall libertie, ginen vnto vs
by Ieſus Chriſt.
               How was it poſſible therefore, for the firſt Biſhops of
Rome to drawe the Princes and Romane Senators, to the
Law of the Goſpell, for three or foure hundred yeares after
the Incarnation of Chriſt, when they laboured nothing
elſe but to corrupt the vſe of the holy Sacraments,
to reſtore the Iewiſh ceremonies, and the Idolatries

of the ancient Heathen Romanes?
               They may here obiect one Philip, which ſome vaunt,
was conuerted to holy Baptiſm, whoſe depraued māners
gaue occaſion to the moſt authentick Hiſtoriographers,
                     Cronic. of Iohn Baptiſta Ignatius.
to eſteeme him vnworthy of the name of a Chriſtian;
Whereunto they adde Conſtantine the Great, that aſſembled
the Counſell of Nice, but his reſidence was in
Greece, called the Empire of the Eaſt, and yet he would
neuer embrace the Character of Baptiſme, to be regenerate
by the blood of Chriſt, till he was threeſcore and
fiue yeares old, when he was Baptiſed by an Arian Biſhop
of Nicomedia,
                  Hiſt
                        •
                     tripartit: lib. 3. cap. 12. named Euſebius: When the ſame
Conſtantine was at the point of death. Wherefore Sylueſter
Biſhop of Rome need not vaunt of conuerting this
Emperour to the Faith. For the ſame Silueſter likewiſe
would not be preſent in the aſſembly of the Counſell
held at Nice, in the yeare of Ieſus Chriſt 327. Howſoeuer
the matter ſtands, we muſt euer haue recourſe to
the truth of Hiſtories, wherein is recited the anſwer
which the Senate, and Senators of Rome made to the
Emperour Theodofius more then threeſcore yeares after
the death of the ſaid Conſtantine the great: to wit, that
they would not receiue the Law of Ieſus Chriſt, but rather
obſerue their ancient Pompilian Law, to auoid the
ruine of their Common-wealth through a change, and
alteration of Religion: Wherefore it muſt needes bee
inferred, that the Law of GOD was not receiued nor
approued at Rome, by the Senate and Senators.
               Now we muſt come to the ſubſequent times.Paul: Aenul. lib. 1. After
the deceaſe of Theodoſius, the Romane Weſterne Empire
began ſo much to decline,In the yeare 412. that in a ſhort ſpace, it was
cleane extirpated by the Vandales and Alands, who were
the firſt that ſacked Rome,
                  In the yeare 434. in part burned it, and carryed
away the Emperour Theodoſius owne daughter,Blon. lib. 2. D
                        •
                     cad, 2. whom
they married to Atolphus King of the Gothes. Not
long after ſucceeded the Hunnes, and then Attila
                  
King of the Gothes, which vſurped Italie. About this
time the Occidentall Romane Empire was ſtript of
all Germany, Dacia, Sarmatia, and all other tributarie
Prouinces euen to Dannbius. Spaine alſo, Aquitane,
Gaſcoyne, Burgundie, and all the Gaules reuolted from
the Romane Tyrannie.
               Then came the Aſtrogothes with their Kings,
                     Procop. lib. 3. Of the wars of the Vuandales in the yeare 486. 
                  Valamir,
and Theodemir, Theodoric, with other Barbarians
and Infidels, as likewiſe the Viſigothes, all vſurpers ſucceſſiuely
in Italie.
               
               After this raigned Totilas,
                  In the yeare 550. 554. who entred, ſackt and
burnt Rome, and all Sicilia. At laſt the Lombardes came
to raigne, conducted by their King Alb
                        •
                     im, who vſurped
ouer all Italie.
               
               Theſe barberous,
                     Paul Acmil. lib. 1. in the yeare 568. Idolatrous, and Infidell Nations
were as Gods ſcourges, ordained to puniſh the Romaine
Idolaters committed by them, who had receiued
the knowledge of the holy Goſpell: and yet ranne aſtray
from the true adoration and worſhip of God, violated
and corrupted the holy Sacraments by their humane
inuentions and fictions: in like manner to puniſh
the obſtinacie, and infidelity of the Emperours and Senators
of Rome, who firſt by their Officers, and Lieuetenants
Deputies, had cauſed Ieſus Chriſt, and his holy
Apoſtles to bee crucified: daily perſecuted the
Chriſtians, and euer oppoſed the Law Euangelicall, to
maintaine their Pompilian Religion.
               We may therefore reſolue, and conclude, that for
the ſpace of foure hundred yeares, the Romane Church
of Emperours and Senators were alwaies oppoſites
and enemies to the Law of Ieſus Chriſt.
               Afterwards when the VVeſterne Empire was extinguiſhed
for three hundred yeares or thereabouts, that
Rome, and all Italie was rulde and gouerned by Kings,
Princes, and Dukes, that were Infidels, and Idolaters,
which was by the Vuandales, by the Gothes, by the

Hunnes, Oſtrogothes, Viſigothes, and Lumbards, for
the ſpace of ſeauen hundred yeares or thereabouts after
the Iucarnation of Ieſus Chriſt there was no Emperours,
Kings nor Princes at Rome, that would embrace
the Law of Ieſus Chriſt. The which I deſired
briefly to produce, to the end the Reader▪ might not
thinke it ſtrange, though I here ſet downe how the ſacrifice
of the Maſſe tooke originall, from the auncient
Ethnicke Religion, Inſtituted by Numa, more then
ſeauen hundred yeares before the Incarnation of Ieſus
Chriſt: and that ſince alſo the ſame ſacrifice hath beene
continued by the Romane Idolaters, hardened and inuerated
in their Pompilian Religion, which they would neuer
abandon nor giue ouer.
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               The firſt greatneſſe of Popes; prouing Antichriſts,
and bringing in the ſacrifice of the
Maſſe.
               
                  NOw, to the end nothing might be concealed
out of the Romane hiſtories, to obſcure
the cleareneſſe and ſun-ſhine of truth, during
the Tyranny and vſurpation of the aboue
mentioned Nations, there was erected
in Italie a petty Exarcate at Rauenna, which ſtood
for an hundred eighty three yeares,In the yeare, 572. till it was ſuppreſt by
a Pope,Platine Blond: volaterad. who was inueſted in the ſame, & encroacht vpon
St. Peters Chaire, by a Donation or Diſmiſſion wrought
by Pepyn in the yeare 758.
                     Paul: Aemil: lib. 10. Blond: lib. 10. in requitall of the Tyrannie
vſed by Zacharias, a Greeke Romane Pope, who depriu'd▪
the true heires of the Crowne of France, which

were Chilperio, or Childeric, whom hee ſhut vp in a Monaſterie,
to conferre the Kingdome vpon the ſaid Pepyn,
ſonne to Charles Martell the Baſtard.Blond. lib. 1. Decad. 2. This Donation of
Pepyns beſtowed on the great Romane Pontife, was the
firſt Originall of the exaltation and eminencie of the Romane
Popes,Paul. Enul. lib. 2. who to this day remaine the Exarcate of
Rauenna, ſince about eight hundred yeares, with many
Townes along the coaſt of the Adriatick, aſſign'd ouer
to them by Pepyn, againſt the expreſſe prohibitions of
Conſtantine, then raigning Emperour of the Eaſt in
Greece.
               
               While this pettie Exarcate continued at Rauenna a
long time before Pepyns Donation,The firſt apparant Antichriſt. the Biſhop of the
place ſeeing that there were no more Experors at Rome,
tyranniz'd and gouern'd by barbarous and miſcreant
Nations,In the yeare 588. began to lift vp his hornes, ſo as hee would be
preferred before the Biſhop of Rome, and ſtile himſelfe
head of the Church,Sabellic. both he and his ſucceſſours Biſhops
of Rauenna, while the Exarcate laſted. This was the firſt
petty Antichriſt that aſſum'd a Tyrannie in the Church,
purſuing the terreſtriall Tyrannie of his Exarcate.
               After him roſe another great Antichriſt in Conſtantinople,
                  In the yeare 600.
named Iohn, Biſhop of the place: who perceiuing
the Occidentall Empire of Rome cleane extinguiſhed,Blond. lib. 1. and
that of Conſtantinople riſen to a great heigth,Greg. lib. 4. of epiſt. cha. 29. he grew alſo
affected to worldly Tyrannie, and conformable therevnto
erected one Spirituall in the Church of Ieſus Chriſt.
By a Councell held for the purpoſe, hee denounced himſelfe
to be Oecumenicall Biſhop, which ſignifies generall,
and head of all the Church. But preſently after, the great
Romane Pontifes tooke ſo good a courſe herein,In the yeare 604. that by
treaſon the Emperor Mauricius was cruelly ſlaine in Conſtantinople,
himſelfe, his wife, and family, by that wicked
Phocas: who,Platin. Sabellic. for recompence of this abominable Murther
committed, by the notice and intelligence of their Church
of Rome, alwayes contrary to Ieſus Chriſt, cauſed Boniface
                  
the third of that name,In the yeare 612. to be declar'd head, and Generall
of the Church of God, vſurping the Authority of
the great and eternall Sacrificing high Prieſt, the onely
Spouſe, and head of his Church Ieſus Chriſt. Who could
better reſemble Antichriſt then he that aſſumes a Tyrannie
in the Church of God, a Poligamie in the Church, the
Spouſe of Ieſus Chriſt:Math. 26. aſcribing to himſelfe that power,
which Ieſus Chriſt reſeru'd for himſelfe, to reſide perpetually
with his Church, by the power and vertue of the
holy Ghoſt, for the conduct and gouernement of the
ſame.
               May not he rightly be term'd Antichriſt, that labours
directly to oppoſe the holy Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt,Math. 23. Luc. 11. Marc. 2. who
forbad his Apoſtles, when hee ſent them to Preach the
Word, that they ſhould not conſtitute a Monarchie in the
Church, as the Princes, Kings, and Tyrants of the earth are
wont to doe? That none of them ſhould preſume to bee
called head, or greater then the reſt; but that they ſhould
all be humbled as brethren: being aſſured that they had
one onely Head, and one heauenly Father, who would
dwell and continue with them for euer, to conduct and
inſpire them in his holy will?
               Is not he truly an Antichriſt, that will terme himſelfe
to be Ieſus Chriſts ſucceſſour to the chiefe Pontificacie,
and to the ſoueraignty of Prieſthood by him adminiſtred,
which dignity he reſeru'd onely to himſelfe, he remaining
eternall and high Prieſt for euer: Who left no ſucceſſour
in his dignity, as Aaron and his ſucceſſours did, to the
dignity of the Iewes high Prieſthood; but according to
the order of Melchiſedeck, King, and high Prieſt, without
any ſucceſſour in his dignity.
               Wherefore O you Romane Antichriſts, why haue you
aſſum'd the dignity of high Prieſts, as Heads and Soueraignes
of the Church of God, and vſurpe the authority
of Ieſus Chriſt, cauſing your ſelues to be entituled, moſt
happy, and moſt re
                     •
                  erend Fathers, and Popes, hauing

founded a Colledge of petty purple Pontifes, to elect a
great Pontife or high Prieſt: but to the end to renew the
auncient Ethnick Romane Religion of Numa Pompilius,
the firſt founder and erecter of your Pontificall dignities.
               About the ſame time that this cruell murtherer Phocas
ſet vp Antichriſt in the Romane Church,The cauſe of Mahomets originall. 
                  Mahomet
roſe vp in the Church of Arabia, inſtructed by Sergius
a Monke, about the yeare 620. For this Apoſtaticall
Heritick perceiuing the whole Law of God to be corrupted
by humane traditions, and the holy Goſpell contemn'd:
alſo the Sects, and diuers hereſies, planted as well
by the Iewiſh Phariſies, Eſſeans, Saduces, Masbuthians,
Galileans, Hemerobaptiſts, and Samaritanes: as alſo by
Chriſtians, the Symoniackes, Nicolaitans, Cerinthians,
Menandrians, and Ebionites, the Valentinians, Cerdonians,
Marcioniſts, Montaniſts, Cataphrigians, Tatians, Eucratites,
Seuerians,Looke the Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtory. Artemoniſts, Porphirians, Helchefaites,
Nouatians, Sabellians, Chiliaſts, Paulianiſts, Manechees,
Antomouſiaſtes, Arrians, Eunomians, Macedonians,
Eunomiotheophroniens, Eunomeoeutichians, Aetians,
Donatiſts, Luciferians, Patripaſſians, or Theopachites,
Photinians,Hereticks in the Church. Marcellians, Pauloſomoſetans, Apolinariſts,
Iouianiſts, Pelagians, Platirians, Anthropomorphites,
Neſtorians, Sabbatians, Acephalians, Acarians,
Olympians, Quaternians, Monothelites, and other Hereticks,
hauing corrupted the true vſe of the Sacraments
ordayned of God. And ſeeing alſo, that the Sect of the
Meſſalians, eſpecially proſpered in their ceremonies, taken
partly out of the Iewiſh Law, and partly from the
Panyme Idolatries, hee inuented the high decrees of the
Alcoran, wherein hee employed many Chapters and Articles
called Azoares, which are like Canons and Rules
of the Mahumetan Religion.
               This briefe and compendious diſcourſe of the Romane
Hiſtory, I thought requiſite to recite, before I began to

diſcribe the originall of the ſacrifice of the Maſſe,: that
thereby I might induce the Reader no vnderſtand the
truth of the matter: how the Romane Empire was gouern'd
till the declination of the ſame, which was about
the yeare of Chriſt 410. and how the barbarous Idolaters
vſurpt it ſince, for the ſpace of 300. yeares: as alſo
the Antichriſts haue beene rais'd, which ſtill enioy it at
this day, and haue done for ſome fiue hundred yeares
paſt.
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               Of the Maſſe in particular,
with her true Originall.
               
                  FOr beginning to this our briefe Miſſall
Treatiſe,
                  Originall of the Maſſe: with expoſition of the word. we muſt firſt expreſſe this terme
of Maſſe, called by the ancient Romanes
Miſſa. Some haue preferr'd this Miſſall
Sacrifice, to take originall from the Hebrewes:
alleadging that place of Daniell, when he ſpeakes
of Maozin,
                  Dan. 11. as if by Maozin they would ſignifie the
Maſſe. But this word in ſence, ſtands farre from the Miſſa
or Maſſe: and there are ſome Hebrew words which
come farre nearer to it, as Meſſa; which by enterpretation
is Conculcation:4. Kings 11. of which word mention is made
in the Hiſtorie of the Kings of Iſraell. There is alſo an
other Hebrew word very conformable to the vulgar
terme of Meſſel,
                  Meſſa. which is Miſſal, and that is hell, or the
graue. But I ſuppoſe the great Romane Pontifes would
not deriue the originall of the Sacrifice of their Maſſe,
from the Hebrewes, becauſe then they muſt acknowledge
the Maſſe,Meſſell. Hell. or their Miſſell, to be a Conculcation or
extortion, and hell, or a graue. And to ſpeake but truth,

the Author of the Romane Religion Numa Pompilius,
neuer thought of the Hebrewes, when he firſt inſtituted
the Maſſe: neither can this word Miſſa, or Meſſe, take
originall from the Greekes. Becauſe there is no ſacrifice
of this name or title, though ſome haue brought in a colourable
reaſon from this Greeke word Myzein, which
is to ſay in French; to hide or keepe in ſecret: as if the
Meſſalian Sacrificers receiued from the auncient idolatrous
Greekes, to mumble ſecretly the principall words
of their Maſſes, that the Auditors might not heare them:
but they vſed to murmur and whiſper betwixt the teeth,
the Canons, and ſome ſpeciall words, which neither
themſelues, nor they that looke on vnderſtand. Neuertheleſſe,
neither the Hebrew nor Greeke words cannot
properly be applyed to the Miſſall Sacrifice. And therefore
we muſt repaire to the true etimologie of the word
Miſſa,
                  Maſſe drawne from the ancient Latine Romanes. or Meſſe, drawne from the ancient Latine Romanes,
who vſed theſe words, Miſſus, Miſſa, Miſſilis,
and Miſſio: euen as in French we have Meſſager, Meſſage,
and Meſſiues, for letters ſent. Wherefore, when the
ancient Romane Idolaters meant to diſmiſſe the Aſſiſtants
at the Sacrifices celebrated, they pronounced in the end
theſe words.Amongſt the Greekes the Prieſt hauing diſcharged his function, ſpake aloud in this manner. 
                  I. licet Miſſa eſt: depart, tis permitted, and
ſo the Aſſembly was diſmiſt to goe home. But in time,
becauſe this note ſignified a pleaſing releaſe of the people,
to goe home to their houſes, being a chearefull, and acceptable
ſound, it was ſuppreſt, and the Sacrifice honoured
with this terme of Miſſa. To confirme this point,
two thouſand yeares being now come and gone, theſe
words are pronounced at this preſent day.
                     Laiois Apheſis, as if he diſcharged the people. 
                  Ite, miſſa eſt,
which ſignifies a leaue giuen to the company or aſſembly,
to depart: ſo as they themſelues, which frequent
theſe Temples,Apule. lib. 11. de Aſm. aur. ſo ſoone as they heare this pleaſing note,
Ite, miſſa eſt, commonly they skip and leape for ioy, being
aſſured that they are then licenced to goe to dinner.
               The Arabians, and Mahumetiſts, inſtructed for a long

time by the Monke Sergius, as formerly we cited, hold
this word of Meſſa in great eſteeme. By which word they
haue nominated three Townes or Cities called Meſſa,
                  In the booke of the deſcription of Affrick, by Iohn Leo Affricanus.
                  
ſcituated vpon the Ocean ſhore, vpon the Cape, where
Mount Atlas takes his beginning.
               Neere to the ſame Townes, in the Suburbs, there is a
Temple much reuerenced by the Turkiſh Idolaters, becauſe
they beleeue,
                     Meſſa of the Turkes. that from Meſſa ſhould come the
righteous Pontife, promiſed and prophefied of by Mahomet:
they alſo thinke, that about that quarter or ſhore
of Meſſa,
                  
                     Meſſelmans, in the booke of the great Turks Court, by Frier Antonie Geffrie.
                   
                  Ionas was caſt vp againe, after his being ſwallowed
vp by the Whale. Furthermore, they ſo highly eſteeme
this name of Meſſelmans, as we doe the name and
title of Chriſtians. Intimating by this word Meſſelman,
as much as ſaued.
               Moreouer, the Mahumetiſts honoured their Prieſts
with the name of Meſſe, calling them Meſſen, and their
Temples Meſſites,
                  In the booke of the aboue ſaid, Meſſen, Meſſi.
                   or Meſchites: Wherefore, they that
publiſht the Anatomie of the Maſſe, the Centons, the
Foundation, Augmentation, and embelliſhing thereof,
could not but write with ſpeciall reuerence, in reſpect of
the ancient Pompilian Religion and the Alcaron, Inſtitutions
of Mahumet.
               
               After we haue thus decided the word of Meſſe, or of
in the Romane tongue, to be deriued from the auncient
Romane Idolaters, and not from the Hebrewes not the
Greekes: we muſt now diſcend to the veſtments of theſe
Miſſalian Sacrificers.Pontife lib. 1. of Commenta. But by the way, we muſt not omit
the name of Pontife, or Pontifex, taking alſo it's originall
from the Romanes, as we declared in our Commentaries.
The ſtile alſo of Pope proceeding from the ancient Idolaters,
who vſed to 
                     •
                  nſtile their God Iupiter, calling him
Pope Iupiter, but eſpecially the Bithinians and Scithians.
Which word Papa, comes from the Greeke word Papus:
which is to ſay, great Father. As alſo the true title ſubſcribed
to any ſutes preſented to the great Romane Pontife,

is: Moſt bleſſed Father. The next purple Pontifes are
termed, moſt reuerend Fathers, and petty Biſhops, reuerend
Fathers: all of them retayning this word Father, or
Pope,A Curate. Curio, a Prieſt, or Curat, who in his Cure, that is, in his Pariſh had the care of ſacred celebrations. Great Father, which was wont to be a common
name to all Biſhops: but afterwards the great Romane
Pontifes reſerued it onely to themſelues. Another title is
alſo retayned for the Demie Biſhops termed Curates,
who are ſuperintendants in euery Pariſh, borrowing this
nomination, from the ancient Romane Curates: which is
to ſay, a raſing, or ſhauing, becauſe the ancient Curions
and Sacrificers were cut, and ſhauen in their heads, after
the Babilonian manner,Tit. Liui. lib. 1. Decad. or of the Herculean Pontifes, called
for this reaſon Stephanophores, as wearing a Crowne
vpon their heads. Neuertheleſſe, by the reaſon that all the
members of the Miſſall Sacrifice, deriue from the Pompilian
Religion
                     •
                  , wee ſhould wrong the ancient Romane
Idolaters, to take from them the originall of theſe names
Maſſe,Tit. Lini. Feneſt. Pompo. L
                        •
                     tt. Pontife, and Curate, as may be iuſtified by the
Romane Hiſtories.
               As for the veſtment of Miſſall Sacrificers, Numa ordained
that it ſhould be white, called by the Latine word
Alba, an Aube:Aube. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. chap. 17. which name of Aube continues to this
day, for the veſtment of him that ſacrificeth and celebrates
Maſſe. Moreouer, aboue his Aube, the Prieſt was
appointed to weare a Tunickle painted,Super tunicam aeneam pectori regumen. 1. Decad. 1. and aboue that
the ornament of a Pectorall of copper or braſſe, afterwards
changed into gold or ſiluer, which the Miſſaliſts
terme a Chaſuble. They alſo vſed a vaile to couer their
heads, when they ſacrificed called Amictus, firſt inſtituted
by Aeneas.
                  Virg. lib. A
                        •
                     
                     neid. 3.
               
               Theſe are the principall veſtments,Purpureovel are comas ad opertus maictu, ca
                     
                        •
                     ite ante aras Phrigius Velamus amict
                        •
                     . inſtituted by Numa
more then 700. yeares before the Incarnation of Ieſus
Chriſt. Tis true, that ſince, there haue beene many Iewiſh
ornamens added, as the Stole, Ephod, Zone, or Centure,
the Myter or Theare, and ſome other decorations, the better
to pownce, and ſet forth the great Babiloniſh whore.
               
                  
But the Miſſalians deſirous to alter the original of their
Miſſall veſtments,Titilman. in tractat. de expo. Myſter. Miſſae. et Gab. E
                        •
                     el. in lib. de expoſit. Miſſae. pretend that the Aube is a figure of Ieſus
Chriſts conuerſation in the fleſh, or the purity of his
body incarnate in the wombe of the virgine. Others interprete
the white colour, to ſignifie chaſtity and continencie.
Some minding to mocke, and make Playes ſophiſtically
of the Paſſion of Ieſus Chriſt, ſay, that by the
Aube, the white Robe is repreſented, which was offered
by Herod to Chriſt, when he was ſent back againe, like a
foole to Pylat. Philo the Iew, a more worthy Philoſopher,
in his Treatiſe of Dreames, ſubtilly deuiſeth, that the Aube
ſignifies the ſolidity of the moſt reſplendant light of the
Dyetie, which he calls Ens. The linnen alſo whereof the
Aube is made, they expreſſe for the ſubtilty of the Scriptures.
As for the Amict inuented by Aeneas, they adulterate
it, for the Vayle wherewith Chriſt was couered,
when the Iewes mocking him in Caiphas houſe, did ſmite
him. Titilman one of the ſubtileſt Miſſalians, deuiſeth,
that in the Amict, Chriſts Deuinity, concealed in his humanity,
was intimated. Some likewiſe confeſſe, that the
Amict was ſubrogated in ſtead of the Iewiſh Ephod, by
the Zone, Maniple, and Stole, which are three Ligaments,
they vnderſtand the three Cordes wherewith
Chriſt was bound▪ and drawne before the high Prieſts:
and after that, before the Romane Lieutenants in Iudea.
Biel another pregnant Miſſalian, by the Zone, conceiues
the rods wherwith Chriſt was ſcourged: By the Stole, extended
in forme of a Croſſe, there was ſignified the Gibbet
or Croſſe, which Chriſt bare vpon his ſhoulders. The
Maniple alſo which he weares on his left arme, to figure
the band of loue, wherewith Chriſt was bound. Another
Mummerie they haue for the Zone, wherewith the Aube
is truſſed, and this ſignifies the band of Gods charity.
The Stole put ouer the Amict, at the Miſſalians necke▪ in
forme of a Croſſe, deciphers Chriſts obedience, euen to
the death of the Croſſe. The Maniple worne on the left

hand, ſignifies the reward of Chriſts eternall felicitie. Other
ſophiſtries there are vpon the Amict, as that it repreſents
faith: the Stole humility and obedience: the Maniple,
the vigilancie and hearty deuotion of the Miſſalian
Prieſt. Tittilman hath another ſubtle deuiſe for the Maniple
worne on the Prieſts left hand; which as he ſaies,
doth expreſſe the battaile and power of Chriſt, againſt
all viſible and inuiſible dominations, being as a buckler
againſt all temptations: and the Buttons of the Maniple,
portend finall perſeuerance.
               He alſo further ſophiſticates, that by the left hand is
vnderſtood the humane infirmity of Chriſt, which being
tyed with the Maniple, that Chriſt is tyed and bound by
his diuinitie, like a mad man. Brunus another Miſſalian
Doctor, fantaſticates, that by the Maniple is inferred the
Miſſalian Prieſts ſpeciall care to driue away bad affections:
or elſe that it figures the Cord, wherewith Chriſt
was bound by the Iewes; and that the Stole is a figure
of the Lords yoake, which the Maſſe-prieſt muſt
weare garniſhed with the Armes of Iuſtice on the right
and on the left hand. The other painted Ornament inſtituted
formerly by the Magitian Numa, they diſguiſe by
the name of a Planet, as an errant Veſtment; otherwiſe
called a Cap, or Chaſuble, which they ſay reſembles the
Purple Robe preſented to Chriſt, in Pilates Hall, when
they mocked and called him King of the Iewes.
               There is another ſophiſtrie, how this Veſtment implies
the Nature of Chriſt, wherein the Deity was couched.
Philo the Iew immitating Plato, interprets this Veſtment
ſo adorned with colours, to be a Figure of the ſignes, and
coeleſtiall Starres. Now the Maſſe-Prieſt being roabed,
with his Aube, Amict, Zone, Maniple, Stole, and his
Chaſuble, or Cap of diuers colours; he muſt ſtretch out
his armes, to play two parts at an inſtant, repreſented by
the Chaſuble, whoſe quarter before, is leſſe then that behinde,
figuring herein the Primatiue Church, from Abel
                  
till Chriſt, and by the after part more ample, and enricht
with the ſigne of the Croſſe Chriſtian people are ſignified.
This Chaſuble muſt be ioyned to the Amict, which
was in the beginning in the head, to repreſent the coniunction
of Chriſt with his Church. The Aube alſo muſt
be correſpondent to the Chaſuble: to intimate how
Chriſt applied himſelfe to our infirmities.Philo: in lib. de profug. Beſides, the aboue
mentioned Veſtments, Philo the Iew addes a Myter,
to declare the Meſſalians royall Diadem, who muſt
haue their heads annointed with Creame, or ſacred Oyle,
to ſignifie the Prieſts dignitie: which Mytrall Ornament,
is only preſerued for eminent and higher Prieſts.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               The Maſſe diuided, with the true nature of holy water.
               
                  NOw we muſt diſcend to the deſcription of
ſeuerall parts of the Maſſe,Apul. lib. 11. de laſno auri. whoſe head
and originall we will particularly ſet down
according to the truth. Firſt of all in thoſe
which are called high Maſſes, celebrated
on Sundayes, the Miſſalian Prieſts, retaine ſomewhat of
the Pompilian Religion,Proclus in lib. de ſacrafic. & Gag. Procl. Platoni. Catul. Eius aquae aſperſione, peccata, preſertim per iuria, mendati aque dilui credebant. as to exerciſe a luſtrall water,
called holy Water, wherewith to beſprinckle the aſſiſtants
or beholders at the Sacrifice. The coniuration and
exorciſme inſtituted by Numa, was of Sea or ſalt water,
becauſe (ſaid he) ſalt did participate of the fierie Nature,
or of Fire, very proper to purifie. For this reaſon, the
Ancient Romane Idolaters, beſprinckled this ſalt exorciſed
water, as a Mercuriall expiatorie and Purgatory water
for popular offences, eſpecially for periurie and lying.
               To preſerue this conſecrated,Blond. lib. de Rom. trium. Ouid lib. Faſt 3 and exorcizd ſalt Water,
they had two ſorts of Holy water Fonts: One was
large not moueable, but placed at the entrie of their Temples,

where they adored their Images,Fonts of two ſorts. that ſo they might
ſprinckle thoſe which entred into the ſame Temples. The
other was a portable Font,Dijs ſupcris ſacra facturus, corporis ablutione purgabatur: cum vero inferis lijamdum erat, ſola aſperſio ſufficiebat. to conueigh therein Luſtrall
water into any part of their Temples or houſes, that they
might be watered with it, for their expiations, and purifications.
They that were to celebrate Maſſe, if it were
to the inferiour gods, it was enough for the ſacrificing
Prieſt to ſprinckle himſelfe with that Luſtrall water. But
if the Prieſt celabrated Maſſe, to the ſuperiour gods,Blond. lib. 2. de Rom. trium. Ma
                        •
                     r. lib. 3. Satu. chap. 1. hee
muſt bathe his whole body, and waſh all his members
therewith.
               Furthermore, he was prohibited, not to vſe this Luſtrall
water for any other purpoſe,In Delij Apolinis templo praecipua erat aqua ſacrificantium vſui accommoda, quam ad alios vſus hauſiſſe magni criminis inſtar erat. Alex. ab Alex: lib. 4. ca. 17. Platine. but for expiations, &
purgations. Conformable to which Pompilian conſtitution;
Alexander the firſt of that name, next ſucceſſor
to the Apoſtles of Ieſus Chriſt, and one of the firſt corrupters
of the holy Sacraments ordained by God, continued
this Idolatrie, of conſecrating and exerciſing Luſtrall
water with ſalt, to repell deuils. Neuertheleſſe, the
better to maske Pompilian Magicke, he framed this compariſon:
ſo it is, ſaid Alexander, that the aſhes of an inuiolated
red Cow for ſacrifice, mingled with Fountaine
water, purified the people of the Iewes, and therefore
by a more preualent reaſon,Si ciuis vitula aſperſus populum Iudaeorum mundabat, multo magis aqua ſale conſperſa populum ſanctificat, & inſidias Diaboli auertit ea, a quam, de conſecrat. diſtinct. 1. water exorcizd with ſalt,
muſt needs purifie Chriſtians, and driue away deuils.
               Was not this a violating, and corrupting of the holy
Law of God, to content and pleaſe the Romaines, tainted
with the auncient religion of Numa Pompilius the Magician?
If Alexander had not yeelded to the vſe of ſalt,
inſtituted by the auncient Idolaters for luſtrall water, he
would rather haue followed the Iewiſh ceremonie, and
ordained Aſhes to conſecrate the water of expiation. For
if he thought to diſguiſe it by the Miracle of Elizeus,
                  The Law of God corrupted. that
purified the water with ſalt, Moyſes alſo did the like,
with the wood which was brought him, when the people
of Iſrael were diſtreſſed for ſweet water to drinke.Numb. 19. 4. King. 2. But

in theſe miracles no mention is made,Exod. 15. that Elizens or
Moyſes inſtituted any luſtrall water to purifie the people
of the Iewes.Numb. 19. And we cannot finde, that there was euer
any luſtrall water amongſt the Iewiſh ceremonies, but
only with Aſhes of the victime offered for ſacrifice. And
therefore Alexander and his followers muſt needs acknowledge,
that the inuention of ſalt water exorcizd for
the remiſſion of ſinnes, tooke originall from Numa Pompilius
more then 700. yeares before the Incarnation of
Chriſt. This luſtrall water was ſo religiouſly obſerud by
the Romane idolaters, that more then 360. yeares after
the Incarnation of Chriſt, it is related how Valentinian
the Emperour entring into the Temple of the Goddeſſe
Fortune,
                  Hyſto. trip. lib. 6. cap. 35. a Prieſt who was Guardian of the ſame Temple,
ſprinckled ſome of this holy Luſtrall and ſalt water
vpon him,
                     Valentinian the Emperor againſt holy water ſprinckle. which he tooke out of a Font at the going into
the Temple: wherewith the Emperour being angred,
ſtrooke the Prieſt with his Aſperges in his hand, alleaging
how twas rather defiled then purified.
               By theſe true Hiſtories the Miſſalians may boaſt, that
the firſt part of their Miſſall ſacrifice is very auncient indeed;
and that their holy-water Fonts, and their luſtrall
ſalt waters of expiation, proceed from the auncient doctrine
of Numa Pompilius, but not from the Euangelicall
doctrine of Ieſus Chriſt, which they tearme a new Doctrine,
and the New Teſtament differing from the ancient
Iewiſh ceremonies,Salt holy water very auncient. and heathen idolatries. And though
I cannot ſufficiently wonder, wherefore Alexander preſumed
to renew the Pompilian Idolatrie, conſidering he
had meanes to reſtore the water ceremoniall after the
manner of the Iewes; and in this doing, to follow rather
the law of God,Againſt the ſalt luſtrall water of Alexander Pope of Rome.
                   then that of Numa Pompilins: for he had
eaſie meanes to get Aſhes wherewith to compound a luſtrall
water after the Iewiſh forme: nay, pretious and ſacred
Aſhes: which is to ſay, Aſhes reſerud in Reliquaries,
comming from vailes, napkins, and conſecrated veſſels,

which Pope Clement,
                  Ca: Omnes de conſecrat: diſtinct. 4. & cap. Altaria & cap. Veſtimenta: diſtinct. 2. 
                  Alexanders predeceſſor, forbid to
be applied to any prophane vſe, but when they were conſumed
with time to burne them in the fire, and the aſhes to be
preſerued in the Baptiſterie. Yet were theſe ſacred aſhes, to
incite Alexander to reſtore cinderal & luſtral water after the
manner of the Iewes, if he had not bin ſo addicted to ſalt, &
found a better reliſh to maintaine the ancient idolatrous Romane
religion. Alexanders ſucceſſors, might haue gotten other
aſhes, that is, from the round azimall conſecrated Hoſtes,
which the high Pontife Higinus appointed to be burnt,Cap. Altar
                        •
                     s: de confecra: Diſtinct. 1.
if falling to the ground, they could not be lickt vp by the
Maſſe-Prieſt, & the aſhes of the ſaid Hoſtes to be laid vp in a
Reliquarie. He might alſo haue had other aſhes of Ratts or
Mice, or other creatures, when they deuoured the ſaid Hoſtes,
ordaind to be burned,In lib. Cantel: Miſſ: & reſerued in a Reliquary. Wherfore
ſeeing Alexander would not follow the cerimoniall law
of God, to inſtitute a ſalt holy & ex
                     •
                  rciſe water, at leaſt why
did he not emplore the ſalt with the hoſt of the Maſſe Prieſt,
which they ſay they offer to God as a ſauing ſacrifice? In doing
ſo, he had imitated the Moyſaicall ceremonie,Leuit. 2. 5. 6. wherein
they were commanded to offer ſalt in all ſacrifices, and to
ſprinckle therewith the ſacrifices that were emmolated for
ſafetie. But if Alexander & other his ſucceſſors had followed
the law of God, they could haue added nothing of their owne
braine, they could haue no memoriall nor renowne of their
owne Inſtitution. And therefore in this reſpect they would in
nothing follow the law of God, but contrariwiſe, they prohibited
the vſe of ſalt with their round conſecrated Hoſtes,The reaſon why new Idolatries were inuented. to
celebrate their miſſall ſacrifices. They alſo forbid the mingling
of aſhes in their luſtrall waters, that in all their Inſtitutions,
they may not be thought to haue taken any thing from
Gods pr
                     •
                  ſcription, neither from the law of Moyſes, as alſo
much leſſe, from the Law Euangelicall of Ieſus Chriſt: they
thought to attribute theſe inuentions meerely to themſelues,
though they had their originall from the ancient heathen Romane
Idolaters 700. yeares before the Incarnation of Chriſt.
               
                  
To reſolue this firſt Miſſall part, it were much more expedient;
O you Miſſalians,True holy water for Chriſtians. in ſtead of your ſacrifices and exorciſmes
of ſalt water, wherewith you ſprinckle the people, to
preach purely, and cincerely the holy Goſpell, and to teach
Chriſtian people, that the true purification & waſhing away
of ſins, depends on the blood of Ieſus Chriſt, which is powerfull
enough to repell deuils,Heb. 9. to deliuer vs from hell, to preſerue
vs from eternall death, and to wipe out in vs euery
ſpot and blemiſh of ſin: without vſing exorciſmes, or coniurations
with ſalt, to driue away deuils conformable to Pompilian
Magicke,Epiph. lib. 1. tom. 1. ſec. 9. & 17. Cont. haer. & the herefie of the Samaritans, who thought
themſelues purified by thoſe, and waſhing with the ſame euery
day.
            
            
               CHAP. 14.
               The Proceſſion of the Maſſe.
               
                  AFter the Aſperges is ſung,2. Part of the Maſſe, Proceſſion. Platina.
                   the luſtral exercizde
water ſprinckled vpon the Altars, the Images,
and all the aſſiſtants at a Maſſe, then followes▪
Proceſsion,Tit: Liu: in his Decades. Supplicationes, quit▪ nos proceſſiones vocamus, fiebant circa delubra fanaque & puluinaria, in quibus honos dijs dabatur, praecedentibus pueris ingenuis ac Sacer dotibus cora
                     
                        •
                     atis, ac laurean
                        •
                      tenentibus manum, voce 
                        •
                     odulata ca
                     
                        •
                     entibu
                        •
                     . c
                        ••
                     
                     men, ſubſequent maximo Pontifice vel curione: dein. de ſequentibus patritijs ac ſenatoribus cum coniugibus & liberis plaerunque coronatis. which is attributed to Agapet
the Romane Pope: But this was Inſtituted aboue
a thouſand yeares before him; for the ancient Romane
Idolaters called it Supplication. A forme Inſtituted by Numa
to goe on Proceſsion, either to appeaſe the wrath of the
godds, to obtaine peace, or to pray vnto God for the fruits of
the earth; the order was in the manner: Firſt before the Proceſsion
walkt certaine young children, then the ſacrificing
Prieſts clad in white Surpleſſes, ſinging Hymnes, Paeans, and
Canticles to the honour of their gods. Then marched the high
Prieſt, or Curio: Then marched the Romane Senators, with
their wiues and children: and ſometimes the common people
aſsiſted. There was commonly carried about in Proceſsion,
the Shrine or Reliquarie of god Iupiter, or of Anubis, by
ſome Prieſts clad in white Surpleſes, with ſhauen heads, and

thereon wearing crownes. This Crowne was of ſuch reuerence
and eſteeme, that the Emperour himſelfe Commodus
Antonius high Pontifex, cauſed his head to be ſhauen & cut
round, expreſſely to carry the Cabinet of god Anubis. Before
the Cabinet or Reliquarie, went a Cierger, carrying a
light Taper in his hand. When the Proceſſion went along
through the ſtreets, there were ſeats erected, to ſerue for ſtations
or places, where the Prieſts, which caried the relicks were
apointed to reſt & take breath. When the Proceſſion was ended,Apul. lib. 17. de Aſi. aur. Blond. lib. 2. de Rom. trium. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 5. chap. 27.
the Temples were opened, the Altars & Images perfumd
with Inſence, and the reliques of their gods ſhewed. On thoſe
dayes, when the Proceſſion went abroad, a Feaſt was celebrated,
the ſhops were cloſde vp, the Hall of Iuſtice ſhut in,
and the priſoners vnſhackled:In the booke of the diſcourſe of the ancient Romaines Religion. who can better diſcipher the
order of Proceſſions obſerued euen at this day, by the Miſſalians
Inſtructed from father to ſonne in the Pompilian religion.
What other Author can be alleadged touching the ceremonies
performed in Proceſſion, except Numa Pompilius
himſelfe?Lamprid. Apul. lib. 11. de Aſm. aur. If the Miſſalians ſought not out further, for their
crowned ſhauen crownes, and white Surpleſſes which the
ancient Aegiptian Idolaters were wont to vſe: the Prieſts of
the Goddeſſe Iſis,
                  Alex. ab Alex. lib. 50. chap. 27. Herodote in his Hiſtories.
                   or the Babilonian ſacrificers, wearing their
heads and beards ſhauen. As for the Law of God, the contrary
therein was obſerued, and the ſacrificing Prieſts were forbidden,
to cut their heads or haire round,Ierem. in his Epiſt. ad Iudeos in Babylonem abducendos. Neverticem deraditore, noue barbam vollitote. Leuit. 19. and to ſhaue their
heads. And as for the Law of the Goſpel, there is no ſuch like
ceremony commanded by Ieſus Chriſt, nor by his Apoſtles:
they muſt therefore needs proceed from the ancient Pompilian
Religion: For other things in the Proceſſion, they haue
added the carrying of the Croſſe or Banner: this Banner was
tearmed by the ancient Romane Idolaters Labarum: which
was reputed a ſacred enſigne,Nec in gyrum ac rotundum attondebitis comam veſtram, nec radetis barbam. ſo much reueerd by the Dictators
and Emperours, as alſo by the ſouldiers that went to the
wars. Antenor firſt pictured in that Banner a Sow, by reaſon
of the name Troia, which in the vulgar Italian tongue ſignifies
a Sow:Ezech: 44. which enſigne Antenor vowed and dedicated in

the Temple of Iuno, Queen of the heauens: becauſe the Sow,
was the conſecrated Victime to the ſame Goddeſſe.Ex libris Meſſaae ad Octauianum Auguſtum: Apul. lib. 2. de Aſin. aur. The old
Romans afterwards cauſed a Mercurius Caduce to be drawn
vpon the Banner whereon was painted the picture of two
Serpents coupyed together▪ then was an Eagle portraced for
the Enſigne of the Romain Empire: but Conſtantine the
Great, Emperour in Greece, made to be drawne therein a
figure of greek letters,In the ſaid booke of the Religion of the ancient Romaines. a X interlaced with an ę, & on the two
ſides α & ω in this ſigne, α ☧ ω ſignifying thereby this
word Chriſtos, or Chriſt. This Banner was ſpread
vpon a pole or ſtaffe of wood, made in forme of a Croſſe, the
Bāner being foure ſquare, in the faſhion of an Enſigne of crymoſine
violet ſilke, edgd about with fringe of Gold or ſiluer,
& pretious ſtones. In imitation of this, the Miſſalian Prieſts
haue adornd their Pompilian Proceſſions, in which they carry
Banners, as if they meant to goe to the wars, or conduct a
martiall Army: but in ſtead of portraying therin the name of
Ieſus Chriſt, they paint the effigies & Images of diuers gods
and goddeſſes, ſaints, men & women, the Patrons of each pariſh.
This in ſomme is the originall of the Miſſall Proceſſion,
ſtanding for the ſecond part of the Maſſe. Was there euer
ſuch palpable Idolatry vſed by the Iſraelites, when they
would celebrate the Feaſt of vnleauened bread, to eate the
Paſchall Lambe, a Figure of the holy Sacrament of the Supper,
which the Miſſalians haue adulterated by their Miſſall
ſacrifices? Did they euer carry about in Proceſſion the fleſh, or
the bloud of the immaculate Lambe? Did they euer lay it vp
in a Reliquarie to be carried in Proceſsion about the ſtreets?
The Serpent of Braſſe, though they much prophaned and abuſed
it, yet did they at any time carry any part of it in a Reliquarie
vpon the ſhoulders of their Prieſts, wearing their
heads and beards ſhauen, as the Greek Pontife Vrban ordained,
that the round conſecrated Hoſte ſhould be carried in
Proceſsion by the Miſſalians,A
                        •
                     : Chriſt. 
                        •
                     64 & inſtituted a ſolemn Feaſt euery
yeare on holy Thurſday, that ſo he might conuert the vſe
of the holy Sacrament, to a more deteſtable Idolitrie then all
his Predeceſſors?
            
            
               
               CHAP. XV.
               The third part of the Maſſe, that is, the Altar and
Candels lighted.
               
                  AFter the ſprinkling of holy-water, & Proceſſion
performed,The third part of the Maſſe. 
                  Numa inſtituted that the Maſſe
prieſt, to celebrate Sacrifice, being clad with
his Aube, and Chaſible, or painted coate, his
head crown'd,Altar, and Tapers light. & beard ſhauen, that he ſhould
approach to the Altar, prepared for ſacrifice, ſet forth with a
Lamp or light Taper,Omil. lib. 4. de Faſt. which ordinarily was of Tede or Pine.
For without an Altar & fire, no Sacrifice could be celebrated.
He alſo ordained that the Maſſe Prieſt ſhould turne himſelfe
neere to the Altar,Apul. lib. 11. de Aſm. aur. Plut. in Numa. towards the Eaſt. Porphirius the heretick
did not only continue this Pompilean Magick, but further he
conſtituted, that the entry into the Temple, and the Images
ſhold be turned towards the Eaſt, to the end that thoſe which
went into the Temples, proſtituting themſelues before the
Images, might adore & make their prayers towards the Eaſt:
euen as the Perſians did, who worſhipped the Sunne in the
Eaſt. Are not theſe Miſſalian & Pompilian Inſtitutions contrary
to the auncient ceremoniall Law of the Iewes, wherein
they were prohibited to pray towards the Eaſt, that ſo they
might be different from the ancient Idolaters? And therefore
acknowledge,Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17. O you Miſſalians, that your erection of Altars
towards the Eaſt, your Lamps and light Tapers, the Pictures
and Images worſhipped in your Sacrifices, to haue had their
originall from one to another. For thoſe Images and Pictures
wherewith your Altars are enritched and adorned, cannot be
deriued from the law of God: which doth not only prohibite
the permiſſion of any Images in Temples,Exod. 20. but the very hewing
of them out,Leuit. 26. and that they ſhould not be renewed. To
what can God be reſembled?Deut. 5. what Image, picture, or pourtrature
can be deuiſed to his ſimilitude?Eſay 40. And yet neuertheleſſe,
out of moſt deteſtable & abhominable hereſie,Abhominable Idolatry. you (O Miſſalians)
draw the Image & forme of the Trinity, of one God in

3. Perſons, in your round hoſtel, which you cauſe to be ador'd.
               Neuertheleſſe, two Miſſalian Doctors, Titelman & Biel, expreſſe
the Altar otherwiſe, when the Maſſe Prieſt approacheth
with the golden chalice in his hand, they alle adging, how this doth
figure Chriſt, bearing his Croſſe to Mount Caluary. And then
the Prieſts kiſſing of the Altar, to ſignifie the Nuptials and Nuptiaell
ſigne of Chriſt, with his Church. The right ſide of the Altar
to figure the people of the Iewes, and the left the Gentiles. For
this reaſon,Durand: lib. 4. rub. de mutat. 
                  Durand a ſubtill Miſſalian, writes, that the Miſſall
Mummery muſt begin at the right ſide of the Altar, and conclude
in the ſame: neuertheleſſe, all the principall Monkeries are
celebrated on the left ſide of the Altar. As for the fire & light
Taper, they apply them to Chriſt, as being the fire which purifies
the ruſt of our ſinnes: Or otherwiſe, the fire of charity enuironing
all Chriſtian poople: and the light Taper portends the light of
faith, and the ioyfull comming of Chriſts Incarnation. And not
theſe abhominable ſophiſtications, which Numa the Magitian
neuer dreamt vpon, when he inſtituted the Altar, the fire, and
light Taper wherewith to ſacrifice.
               To continue the order of the Miſſall Sacrifice,4. part of the Maſſe. when the
Maſſe Prieſt hath made his approach to the Altar, the Taper
lighted, and he adorned with his Aube, and Chaſible, turning
his face towards the Eaſt,Confiteor. R
                        •
                     m diuinam facturus, ad ſuā leuandam culpam, ſemi primis reum dicere debebat, & noxae poenitere ac fateri admiſſum, Vultum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſubmittere. and contemplating the guilded, and
beautified Images, he muſt ſay his Confiteor, & confeſſe himſelfe,
acknowledging his owne proper offences, and crauing
pardon of the Gods and Goddeſſes, men and women Saints,
requeſting iuſt and reaſonable things, as Pythagor as ſaid in
his golden Charmes, and Orpheus in his Hymnes. It ſeemes
that Numa the Magitian thought the Maſſe Prieſts conſcience
cleared by Confeſſion, and without the Confiteor, that
the Sacrifice could not be worthily celebrated: wherefore
Damaſus and Pontiam Romane Pontifes,Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 37. Bl
                        •
                     nd. lib. 1. de Rom. Triumph. cannot iuſtly take
vnto themſelues the glory, of being the firſt Inſtitutors of the
Confiteor, for the Maſſe Prieſt. For aboue a thouſand yeares
before their time, it was forged by the ancient Romane Idolaters:
being alſo vpheld to this preſent day: for when Prieſts

celebrate their Miſſall Sacrifice, they pronounce or murmur a
Confiteor in a language not vnderſtood by themſelues, nor the
ſtanders by, addreſſing their prayers and ſupplications to the
Gods and Goddeſſes, men or women Saints: in ſtead of reuerencing,
honouring, adoring, and praying to the onely true
and omnipotent God, Creator of all good things.
               Neuertheleſſe Titelmans Alcoran applies the Maſſe Prieſts
Confiteor to the confeſſion of Chriſt for the ſinnes of the people.Chap. 9.
               
               After the Confiteor mutterd; for better obſeruance of the
Pompilian Religion and Ceremonies,Fift part of the Maſſe. the Maſſe Prieſt muſt
wheele and rewheele about, turne and returne along the ſide
of the Altar,Turnings and wheelings about. firſt lifting vp, then abaſing his hands, with prayers
and meditations towards the Eaſt. For Numa the Magitian
held opinion,Hae ſunt vertegines in ſacris, à Numae inſtitutae, dextram ad oſculam ferre, et ſe in orbem circum agere. Blond. lib. 1. do Rom. Triumph. Macro in Saturnali. that there was great ſanctity, in theſe wheelings,
wreathings, and turning about of the Sacrificer: As may
be coniectured, it was an occaſion of adding this pleaſant ſong
to the Miſſall Introduction, when the Prieſt begins to make
his wheelings & turnings, I will goe vp ſaith he, to the Altar
of God, which reioyceth my youth. Hath he not iuſt cauſe to
reioyce, when he ſees the cloath laid, the table ſet, the banquet
prepared, the Muſick of Organs & other Inſtruments to
ſound, Odours & Incenſes, the Chalice full of wine, the Collation
prepared,Introduction to the Maſſe. and chink offertories ready to fill his purſe?
Are not all theſe meanes to exhilerate the Sacrificers youth,
when he goes vp to the Altar to ſay Maſſe, to dance and turne
about, in forme to him preſcribed by the Magician Numa
Pompilius? And not only the Romanes but other Idolaters,
alſo in celebrating their Sacrifices, were wont to turne and
wheele about, lifting vp the hand to their mouth, and then
turning the whole body round about,Plin. lib. 28. which windings and
wreathings were reputed ſacred.
               
                  Titilman in his Alcoran makes mention, that the Maſſe Prieſt
in making his vagaries along the Altar, diſchargeth 7. reuerences
or ſalutations to the aſſiſtants in his Sacrifice: that h
                     •
                   may repell
the 7. mortall ſins, by the ſeuen-fold grace of the holy Ghoſt.
But in performing the 7. reuerences in his Miſſall dance, he muſt

turne about to the ſtanders by except before the Preface, and the
kiſſe Pixe, he being then employd in the fraction of his round hoſt,
to conuert it tranſubſtantiate into an accident without ſubſtance.
               When theſe wheelings,The ſixt part of the Maſſe. The ſecond of the Organes. windings, wreathings, & geſticulations,
are perfor'md by the Miſſalian Prieſt, Numa cōſtituted
the ſound of Organs, Flutes, & Viols, to ſing Hymnes, Peans,
and Canticles, to the honor of the Gods, in whoſe name the
Miſſall Sacrifices was celebrated. This part of the Maſſe hath
bin enritched with diuers Antems & Songs, by many Roman
Pontifes. Some,Antems. Collects. Gradualls. Tracts. Sequences. Hymnorum plures ſpecies 
                        •
                     r a
                        •
                     t, Hyping
                        •
                     s, Dianam, Apollini, P
                        •
                     an, ſit Proſaedia. Dioniſio Dithirambus. Ceteri, Iulus, Vencri, Cr
                        •
                     tyetus, praeter quos fuere, proſaeduri, Hypacthema, et Staſimon. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17. Diuers Maſſes. Dry Maſſes. as Flaman, and Diodorus, inſtituted Antems,
Preleſphorus Collects. Leo, or Gelaſius Graduals. Gregory, or
Gelaſius Tractes. Gottigerus Abbot of Sandal Sequences:
which are ſundry Muſicall Notes, to ſerue for decoration and
ornament to the ſacrifice of the Maſſe. But if the ancient Cō
                  mentaries
of the Romane Pontifes, inſtituted by Numa were
reuealed, wee might finde great variety of Songs, Peans,
Hymnes, Canticles, & Odes, dedicated & conſecrated to ſundry
Gods & Goddeſſes, euen as much diuerſity of Muſicall
ſongs haue bin annexed, by reaſon of different Miſſall sacrifices
ordained for diuers Gods & Goddeſſes, men and women
Saints. For as the old Idolaters celebrated their Sacrifices to
ſundry Gods & Goddeſſes, the Miſſalians alſo perſeuer to celebrate
their Maſſes to diuers men and women Saints: ſome
in the name of our Lady, others of St. Sebaſtian: ſome of the
holy Ghoſt, and others of Requiem, putting a diſtinction euen
betweene dry, and common Maſſes, wherein the ſop is ſteept
in wine: ſo as an infinite company of Miſſall Sacrifices haue
ſprowted out to diuers Saints of both Sexes, wherein are
ſung ſundry Canticles and Sequences. Were not theſe horrible
and abhominable corruptions of the holy Sacrament of
Chriſts Supper, to make an Idolatry of it, after the manner
of the ancient Sacrifices inſtituted by Numa the Magitian?
Wherefore Vitellianus the Pontife cannot glory for hauing
enrich'd the Sacrifice of the Maſſe, with the ſound of the Organs.
For aboue 1200. yeares before his dayes, this Inſtitution
was publiſhed by the Magitian Numa.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVI.
               Of Incenſe and Offertories, with other parts
of the Maſſe.
               
                  BVt to varniſh this Babylonian Sacrifice,
the Alcoraniſt Miſſalians
interpret the variety of their muſicall
Songs by Pythagoricall
Philoſophy. As for the Collects,
that is to ſay, pieced or annexed
Prayers; they co
                     •
                  mand them to
beſung in vneauen numbers: that
is, three, fiue, or ſeuen: three, to intimate the Trinity;
fiue, to repreſent the fiue wounds of Chriſt; and ſeuen,
to ſymbolize the ſeuen words of Chriſt which he vttered
vpon the Croſſe; or elſe the ſeuen gifts of the
Holy-Ghoſt. Furthermore, for the more ſubtill Pythagoricall
Philoſophy, the Maſſe-Prieſt muſt not paſſe
the number of ſeuen, by the ordinance of Pope Innocent
the third of that name.
               The Sophiſter Biel in his Alcoran of the interpretation
of the Maſſe, addes, That the number of the Collects
are equall to that of the ſecrets; which is to ſay,
to prayers ſecretly mumbled by the Maſſe-prieſt, that
they might not be contemned of the people. After the
Collects, the Graduall ſong more ſharpe and graue, is a
figure of the confeſſion of Publicans, when they heard
the preaching of Saint Iohn Baptiſt: notwithſtanding,
this Graduall note is not ſung in the miſſall ſacrifices
from Eaſter till the Feaſt of Pentecoſt, to decypher the
happy eſtate of the time to come.
               Beſides the ſound of the Organs,Seuenth part of the Maſſe. and muſicall ſongs,
the ancient Romane Idolaters were wont to vſe in

their ſacrifices,Perfume of incenſe. the perfume of incenſe which they preſerued
in a little veſſell called Acerra. In this little
Thurall Coffer lay the Odors which the Prieſt tooke to
incenſe the Altars,Blond. lib. I. de Rom. Trium. Images, Hoſte or Victime, eſpecially
in Maſſes celebrared to god Ianus,
                  Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17. and to the goddeſſe
Veſt
                        •
                     ,
                  Iliacus temporibus veteres non Thure ſed Ced
                        •
                     i, & 
                        〈◊〉
                      i fu
                        ••
                     o, deos adolebant. who reioyced in the wine and incenſe offered
to them. For in the Troians time, in ſtead of incenſe
they vſed Cedar or Pomecytron wood for perfume.
Wherefore it was not Leo the Romane Pontifex
that firſt inſtituted the vſe of incenſe,Alex ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17. Platina. and to ſmoake inc
                     •
                  nſe
at the Miſſall Sacrifice: for more then ſeuen hundred
yeares before the incarnation of Ieſus Chriſt, the
ancient Romane Idolaters practiſed incenſe in their ſacrifices.
As alſo the Romanes retained the Latine word
which ſignifices Incenſe, Thus, from the old Greeke
word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,Tit. Liu. 3. Decad. 3. that is to ſay, I ſacrifice: becauſe the idolaters
in all their ſacrifices vſed incenſe, as likewiſe they
had a portable Incenſer,Tit. Liu. lib. 9. D
                        •
                     cad. 3. wherewith to incenſe: Although
ſome haue written, that the ancient Romane
Idolaters celebrated ſacrifices to the goddeſſe Ceres,
and vſed the gum of the Pinetree called Tede, in ſtead
of incenſe: for which cauſe Ceres was termed by the
Poets Tedi
                        •
                     era.
                  O
                        •
                     id. l
                        •
                     b. 3. F
                        •
                     ſt
               
               In Titlemans Alcoran, the incenſe is interpreted for the
prayer of the Maſſe-prieſt, that it may mount vp into
heauen with the odour of ſwauity: euen as the fume of incenſe
ſteames up on high. He ſophiſticates alſo with Biel
his companion, auerring that the Incenſe ſignified the
grace of the holy Spirit. Theſe ſubtill Alcoraniſts alledge
the paſſage of Tobia, who draue away the Deuill by the
perfume of a burnt Liuer. The ſame Biel makes another
interpretation of the incenſe, as that it figures the vnction
of Chriſt by Mary Magdalen, becauſe Chriſt was anointed
twice, the incenſe is alſo twice offered in the Miſſall
Sacrifice.
               For another part of the Miſſall Sacrifice celebrated

by the ancient idolaters,The eight part of the Maſ
                        •
                     e. the Offerto
                     •
                  y of the firſt-fruits
comes in, which were offered to the honour of the
gods,Plin. lib. 11. cap. 3 in whoſe name the ſacrifice was ſolemnized. This
offering belonged to the Maſſe-prieſt, and hee might
freely cary it home vnto his houſe, for the nouriſhment
of himſelfe and his family. Notwithſtanding there
were other offerings diſtributed to ſuch as were indigent.
Afterwards through the Miſſalians auarice, this
vſe was conuerted into an offertory, or offering of gold
or ſiluer to line the purſe, which ſome attribute to Leo
the Romane Pontifex; though this offertory had beene
practiſed more then a thouſand yeares before his time.
And for a iuſtification hereof by the Romane Stories,
when Numa had inſtituted all the Miniſters of his Religion,Blond. lib. 2. de Rom. Trium.
as Pontifes, Augures, Saliens, Fecials, Curioes,
and others, he alſo conſtituted meanes to nouriſh and
maintaine them.Sacerdotiorum ſiue beneficiorum duo eraat genera: vnum, quorum colla
                        •
                     io adremp: aut principem, aut ad pontificum collegiū ſpectabat: alterum, quorum collatio ad aliquam f
                        •
                     mil
                        •
                     am, eiuſque ſucceſſores pertineb 
                        •
                     t: quae benefi
                        •
                     ia 
                        〈◊〉
                      is patronatus cenſebantur. Blond. lib 2. de Rom. triumph. Diſp
                        •
                     nſ
                        •
                     tion to hold many benefices. He cauſed a fundamentall allowance
to be raiſed out of the publike reuennues for the maintenance
and entertainment of religious veſtals.
               After his example, many particular men did the like,
ſo as their benefices grew rich by theſe foundations or
annuities: and theſe benefices were of two kinds; one
at the preſentation and inauguration of a Prince, of the
Common-wealth, or of the Colledge of Pontifes: the
other were at the preſentation of ſome particulars, patrons
of the ſame benefices by them founded, and endued
with great richeſſe. Ouer which ben
                     •
                  fices the
high Romane Pontifes had vſurped a power to giue
diſpenſation for the holding of two together, as in Titus
Liuius it is related of Fabius Maximius,
                  Tit. Liu. lib. 30. who by a
diſpenſation held two benefices when he was created
Pontifex, more then two hundred yeares before the incarnation
of Ieſus Chriſt. This was therefore the firſt
reuennne of Miſſalian ſacrificers to haue benefices richly
founded.Foundation of Benefices. Offertories. Their ſecond reuennue or emolument,
grew by offertories, offerings or oblations. The third

reuennue confiſted of annuall meanes and contributions,Firſt-fruits and vacancies.
as the firſt yeares fruits, which the idolatrous
Romane Pontifes were wont to take,Tertia, Sacer dotiorum opulentia, à ſolutionibꝰ proueniebat, quas inferiores, ſuperioribus Pontificibusim pendebant, quale apud nos eſt, cum Pontifici Romano fructus primos, antiſiites & his minores Sacerdotes ad obtinenda beneficia pecuniam diſſol
                        •
                     unt. Blond. lib 2. de Rom triumph. Viuentes 
                        〈◊〉
                      deos haberent propitios, multa Sacerdotibꝰ largi
                        •
                     bantur faelici
                        •
                     ati animarum conſul turi. Blond lib. 2. de Rom Trium. Cicero in oratione pro demo ſua ad Pontiſi 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Blond. lib. 3. de Rom. Trium. for the vacancy
of benefices in their gift, or that they ſold and diſpenſed
with. The fourth reuennue grew from obſequies,
anniuerſaries, legacies, and donatiues conferred, to
pray to their gods for the ſoules of the deceaſed. All
which is verified likewiſe at this day, by the monuments
and ſepulchres of the ancient idolaters. The fift
reuennue came in by amercements, condemnations,
and confiſcations, which were adiudged by the Romane
Pontifes: As Ciceroes houſe and palace when he
was baniſhed, were confiſcated to the Colledge pontificall:
& ſpecially allotted for ſacrifices to be celebrated
in the Temple conſecrated to the goddeſſe Liberty. I was
deſirous by the way, briefly to recite the reuennues and
ſupportations of the ancient Romane ſacrificers, to the
end that men might more and more diſcerne that all
abuſes and idolatries ſucceeding in the Church of Ieſus
Chriſt, are not new▪ but originally deriued or reuiued
from the ancient Romane idolaters, as the foundation
of Maſſes, Obits, Anniuerſaries, Diſpenſations
for holding ſundry benefices, penſions, vacancies, firſt-fruits,
offerings, and the Miſſalian treaſure, all amercements,
and confiſcations adiudged within the demeans
of the Romane Pontife, with other ordinances reuiued
by new Romane Popes, which haue deſcended
from one to another. To this purpoſe reade in the
Romane Stories, that during the reigne of the Emperour
Valentinian the ſecond of this name, there hapned
a dangerous ſedition at Rome, betweene the Chriſtian
and idolatrous Prieſts, which ſtroue who ſhould amaſſe
or heape vp together moſt wealth in the Church by
grants, teſtamentary legacies, oblations and other inuentions:
ſo as the Heathen and Infidell idolaters, who
retained yet a Temple to themſelues, called at this day

the Church of Saint Peter ad Ʋincula, fought with the
Chriſtians at Rome, who would haue dedicated it to
their deuotion.
               After the Offertory,Chap. 35. 
                  Titlemans Alcoran ſets downe
how the Maſſe-prieſt ſhould bee ſilent for a time, to figure
the flight of Chriſt, or his Diſciples feare to confeſſe
him before the Iewes. Then this being performed,
the Prieſt ſings aloud, per omnia ſecula ſeculorum:
becauſe after Chriſt had hidden himſelfe, he publikely
came forth in Lazarus houſe: Then he ſings Sanctus,
ſanctus, ſanctus; to allude to the Iewes ſong, when Chriſt
entred into Ieruſalem. When this Muſicke ends, the
Prieſt muſt murmur in ſecret, and betweene his teeth,
counterfeiting ſorrow, without any turne-abouts, but
then he muſt expreſſe a kind of mute mummery, by the
making of many reiterated croyſadoes, as ſhall hereafter
be mentioned.
            
            
               CHAP. XVII.
               Of the round Hoſt, with the Conſecration of
the ſame.
               
                  NExt to the Offertory,Ninth part of the Maſſe. we muſt come
to the ninth part of the Maſſe, the
moſt rich and moſt pleaſing for
the Miſſalians.Round hoſt of flower. This is the Hoſt or
victime, which comprehends the
end of all this Miſſall Sacrifice. In
the dayes of Numa the Magician,Plutarch. in Numa.
the Romanes were not yet accuſtomed to kill, and immolate
with the blood of beaſts: but men were appointed
to eate and communicate within the Temple,Pollux. in onom. lib 6 Myſteriis peractis, qui ſacris intererant rotundis panibus quos in honorem Deorum abbibebant ſtan
                        •
                     es veſcebantur, nec niſi ſacrificio perſecto veſci licebat Alex. ab Alex l. 4. cap. 17▪
                   after
the end of the Miſſall Sacrifice, ſmall round loaues
conſecrated to the honour of the gods, in whoſe name
the ſacrifice was celebrated. Theſe little round hoſts of

fine meale, were eaten by the Prieſt, & by the aſſiſtants,
ſtanding vpright, and not ſitting. The flower whereof
they were made, was called Mola, and from thence
came this word immolare. There were diuers hoſts,
that is to ſay, little round loaues dedicated to diuers
gods, as there were likewiſe ſundry Miſſall Sacrifices.
With the ſaid round hoſts they alſo offered wine: the
Altars ſeruing for Tables. While the Prieſts & the aſſiſtants
in the ſacrifice, eate and communicated together
of the ſaid little round loaues conſecrated to the honor
of their gods, hymnes and thankſgiuings were ſung,
and ſome vſed the ſound of the Organs and Cymbals.
               Before the ſwallowing of this round hoſt, printed with imagery,
the Miſſalian Doctors ordained the Prieſt, to vtter
certaine exorciſmes, and coniurations, with many ſignes of
the croſſe. Firſt, hee muſt make three croſſes vpon this
round hoſt, to figure the trinall tradition of Chriſt; that
is to ſay, by the Father, by himſelfe Chriſt, and by the holy
Ghoſt, in pronouncing theſe words; Haec dona, haec
munera, haec ſancta ſacrificia illibata. Some other
Doctors Alcoraniſts and Miſſalians interpret the third
croſſing for Iudas treaſon, who deliuered his Maſter into
the hands of the Iewes. Beſides the aboue mentioned
three Croiſadoes, fiue other follow: to intimate the fiue
dayes ſpace from the day of Palmes, to the day of the Paſſion,
or otherwiſe to repreſent the fiue wounds of Chriſt;
two in the hands, two in the feet, and one in the right ſide.
Of which fiue Croyſadoes, the three firſt muſt be made
ouer the Chalice, and the round hoſt; to figure the deliuery
of Chriſt to the Prieſts, Scribes and Phariſies, or to ſignifie
the price of Chriſts ſale, that is to ſay, three times ten,
which import the thirty pence. The two other croſſi
                     •
                  gs are
made diſtinctly; on which is the fourth ouer the hoſt, and
the other ouer the Chalice diſtinctly, to manifeſt vnto vs
the two perſons, of Chriſt and Iudas: when this is done,

the Maſſe-Prieſt continuing in his fooleries and monckeries,
ſtretcheth out his armes, to delineate Chriſt ſpred
vpon the Croſſe: then, he lifts the round hoſt printed with
imagery on high, that it may be adored: Afterwards, he
returnes to make three croſſes; one ouer the hoſt, another
ouer the Chalice, and a third ouer himſelfe: to play herein
the part of three eſtates or conditions: of thoſe that are in
Heauen, in Purgatory, and in the earth. Then he thumps
vpon his breſt, to play the penitent theefe that was hanged
vpon the Croſſe. This thumping of his ſtomacke muſt bee
performed with the three laſt fingers of his hand, becauſe
the thumbe and the next finger are reſerued to conſecrate
and tranſubſtantiate the round hoſt. Moreouer, he muſt
beat his breſt three times, to figure a triple offence, of the
heart, of the mouth, and of reall act; exalting his voice,
to repreſent the Theefe or the Centurion which confeſſed
God in the Paſſion. Sixe other Croiſadoes are afterwards
reiterated, three ouer the cou
                     •
                  red Chalice, to commemorate
the three houres that Chriſt hung aliue vpon
the Croſſe; and three other croſſes are made ouer the
open Chalice, and the round hoſt, being once more eleuated,
to decypher the three houres, that Chriſt hung dead
vpon the Croſſe. Then does he adde two other croſſes, after
the Maſſe-monger hath kiſt his Chalice, to deſcribe
the myſtery of blood and water iſſuing out of Chriſts ſides.
Beſides all the aboue mentioned mute mummeries, the
Prieſt muſt lift the vaile ouer the Chalice, and releaſe
it from the Plataine, to repreſent the rent vaile in the
midſt, at Chriſts death. This being done, the round hoſt
is laid vpon the Chalice, and couched in the corporall, to
figure the burial of Chriſt. When the Maſſe prieſt hath
plaia the part of the hang'd theefe, of the traitor Iudas, of
Chriſt, of the Publicanes, hee afterwards comoediates
the Centurion, ſinging the Pater Noſter. But Durandus
Alcoran, by the ſeuen petitions in the Pater Noſter, expreſſeth
the ſeuen teares of the Virgin Mary, the ſeuen

vertues; or the ſeuen mortall ſinnes. When this ſong is
ended, the Prieſt remaines ſilent for a while, to repreſent
the ſilence and repoſe of Chriſt in the graue. Another apery
or monckery is plaid by the Maſſe-prieſt, with the
round hoſt, which he layes vpon the Pix, to decypher the
vnion of his diuinity with his humanity: but when hee
plaies the ſecret myſtery, the hoſt is hidden out of ſight.
            
            
               CHAP. XVIII.
               Of diuers parts and ſundry Ceremonies belonging
to the Maſſe.
               
                  WHen the ſacrifice was ended, & the
little round hoſts eaten,Re diuina & ceremoniis celebraetis, Sacerdos tunc, I, licet, ſucclamabat: qua voce illos qui interfuerant, miſſos faciebat. 
                  Numa appointed
theſe words to be ſung, I, licet,
or, Ite, Miſſa eſt: which is to ſay,
go, you are permitted, the aſſembly
is diſmiſt, to repaire home to their
houſes. Are not theſe all the parts of
the Miſſall ſacrifice,Alex ab Alex. lib. gen. dic. 4. cap. 17. moſt of which were ordained by
Numa the Magician aboue 700 years before the incarnation
of Ieſus Chriſt: that is, the veſtments of the
Aube,Maſſe inſtituted by Numa more then 700 yeares before the incarnation of Chriſt. Chaſible, Luſtrall holy exorcis'd water, with
ſalt, to repell deuils: the Altar, the light Taper, the
ſweepings and glancings along the Altar, with prayers
and meditations towards the Eaſt: Proceſſion, with the
Reliques and ſhrines caried on mens ſhoulders by the
Prieſts clothed in white ſurplices; & crowns vpon their
heads: the Confiteor addreſſed to men and women
ſaints; the ſound of the Organs, Canticles, Peans,
Hymnes, and Odes: the incenſer and incenſe: the Offetory,
the communication of little round loaues conſecrated
to the name of their gods; and at laſt the note,
Ite, Miſſa eſt? Will you now at laſt acknowledge, O

Miſſalians, that you borrowed all theſe parts and members
in your Maſſes from the Pompilian religion? Why
retaine you the name of Maſſe, which Ieſus Chriſt called
a Supper,Mat. 27. or the Communion of his body? Why
haue you made choice of the peculiar veſtments of an
Aube,Luk. 20. and painted Chaſible,Mark. 14. from the ancient Romane
Idolaters;1. Cor. 11. which habits were neuer appointed you by
Ieſus Chriſt? Why haue you giuen more credit to
Pompilians Migicke, for the driuing away of Deuils
with ſalt, exorcis'd water, termed holy water, then
to the ſacred Word and Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt,Mark. 16. who
inabled you in his name, to repell deuils, and not with
the Magicke of ſalt? Who inſpired you but the ſpirit of
Numa, to ſhaue your heads round, to put on white ſurplices,
to cary about ſhrines in Proceſſion with a banner?
When Ieſus Chriſt celebrated his holy Supper,
and inſtructed his Apoſtles in the communion of his
body and blood, did hee command them to follow the
rites of the ancient Romane Idolaters? to haue Altars
ſet forth with Images, to vſe windings, and wreathings
along the Altar, to be cut round, to haue aubes
and chaſibles; addreſſing your Confeſſions to men and
women ſaints, to ſound the Organs, to perfume the altars
and Images with incenſe, to gape after the offertory,
to bring money to the Coquille for the Prieſt, to
eate little round hoſts conſecrated and adorned with
imagery, and then after all to ſing, Ite, Miſſa eſt.
               
               But you Miſſaliſts, I fore-ſee your cautels, wherein
(Miſſalians) you wil readily confeſſe that the main body,
and principall parts of the Maſſe, were digeſted
and brought in by Numa Pompilius: the further additions
notwithſtanding and ornaments were inuented
by other Romane Pontifes; and eſpecially by a Monck
called Gregory, the firſt of that name, who attained to
the Papacy: who being inſtructed in Pythagoricall
Magicke and Philoſophy, hauing alſo ſtudied the lawes

of King Tullus Hoſtilius, ſucceſſor to Numa, to the end
to perpetuate his name by ſome new addition to the ſacrifice
of the Maſſe,Platina, Volaterra. Kyrie eleyſon. inſtituted the ſinging nine times
theſe Greeke words Kyrie eleyſon.
               
                  Gregory held this ninth number in great reuerence,Quoties prodigium nunciabatur, ſacrum nouemdiale per nouem dies agebatur.
euen as the ancient Romane Idolaters had recourſe
likewiſe to the Nouemdiall Maſſe, vpon any monſtrous
prodigies or ſights. He alſo ordained, that at the Miſſall
ſacrifice, there ſhould bee ſung two Hebrew words
to accompany the two Greeke words: and on ſome
dayes theſe words to be ſung,Tit. Liu. lib. 1. decad 1. Alleluia. 
                  Alleluia: being on
other dayes forbidden.
               Inſtead of which Alleluia is ſung another ſong called a tract,
with a loud voice, and a protracted note, in a graue kind
of Muſicke, to decypher the miſeries of this age. Now,
hee that ſings the Alleluia muſt ſing with a higher voice
then he that howles the Graduall, as Titlemans Alcoran
makes mention.
               Was there not M
                     •
                  gicke enough in the Miſſalians ſacrifice
without adding theſe Greeke and Hebrew
words? and foiſting in Pithagoricall numbers, and
the ſong Nouemdiall; inſtituting a diſtinction of daies,
where on to ſing the Hebrew words, on other dayes
prohibiting them? and to inuent croyſadoes and mute
mummeries? Are not theſe corruptions of the holy
Sacrament of the ſupper ordained by God? ſome others
augumented this Miſſal ſacrifice,Platina. Sabell. Gloria Patri, Agnus Dei, Kiſſe-Pix, inſtituted.
                   as Damaſus the Romane
Pontifice, with a Gloria Patri: Sergius with the
Agnus Dei ſong thrice:

                     Which Titleman interprets to be a figure of Chriſts Aſcenſion.
                     
                        Innocent with a kiſſing of the Pix by the Prieſt.
                     
                        
Which Pix of gold ſignifies the Diuinity of Chriſt, by the
doctrine of the Alcoran: the Gloria in excelſis by Symmachus,
which muſt be ſung with a low and mild voice,
and it repreſents as Titlemans Alcoran relates,Chap. 15. the weak
and infantine voice of Chriſt while he was yet in the cradle.
O blaſphemous and deteſtable mummeries of the
Sonne of God! Leo the ſecond inſtituted the kiſſing of
the Pix,Chap. 56. & 57. which Titlemans Alcoran ſayes doth ſignifie
the vnion of Chriſtians, and that the kiſſing of the Pix
was ſubrogated in ſtead of the holy Communion obſerued
in the firſt and next primatiue Church to the Apoſtles.
This kiſſe-Pix is ſung by the Maſſe-Prieſt in ſaying;Kiſſe-Pix. 
                        Pax
Domini: and making three croſſes vpon the Chalice,
when the third part of the Hoſt, is put into the Wine, to
intimate the Incarnation of Chriſt, or to ſignifie the triple
peace, of the time, of the Spirit, and of future eternity.
                  
               
               Furthermore,Canon of the Maſſe. there is added the forging of the Miſſall
Canon to Alexander, Gelaſius, Syricius, Leo, and Pelagius.
Theſe be peeces patcht together, according to
the humour of the Romane Pontifes, Authors, Reſtorers,
Endowers, and augmenters of the Miſſall Sacrifice.
               We muſt not omit the greateſt enrichment inſtituted
in this Miſſall ſacrifice,Platina. Sabell. which is, to ſay ſome paſſages
of the old and new Teſtament, called Epiſtles and
Goſpels: which the Miſſalians haue cut out, and mixed
with Pompilian Idolatry, and therein prophane the
Law of God,Epiſtles and Goſpels cut out in the Maſſe. as Sergiu
                        •
                     
                   the Apoſtate Mahomets Doctor
did, who adorn'd the Alcoran with many paſſages
of the holy Bible, and forged a gallomawfry of Fables
and Hereſies, to bee of equall authority with the
ſacred Law of God.
               The Miſſalians for the ſong after the Epiſtles and Goſpels,
conſtituted two perſons, to ſolemnize their Miſſall dance,

which is to ſay, the Subdeacon who marcheth afore, to
play the part of the firſt law of the Iewes; and the Deacon
who comes after in greater dignity, to repreſent the Law
Euangelicall. Which Deacon caries a pillow againſt his
ſtomacke, to figure an humbled heart: The Subdeacon
receiues no benediction from the Maſſe-Prieſt, as the
Deacon doth: becauſe, ſay the Miſſalian Doctors, God
ſent his Prophets inuiſibly: But the Deacon repreſenting
the Euangelicall Law receiues benediction, as being ſent
among wolues, in that Chriſt ſent his Apoſtles viſibly
like men. The Deacon is enioyned to we are a croſt ſtole
hanging downe his ſhoulders croſſe the reines of the backe,
to figure force and continencie ioyned together in the
Maſſe-Prieſt. The Deacon playing his part, and ſinging
ſome abſtracted paſſage of the Gospell, in a language not
vnderſtood either by himſelfe, or the aſſiſtants, muſt
wheele about toward the North, ſtanding vpright: becauſe
ſaith Titleman, the Northerne parts are cold and
abnoxious: for this reaſon he muſt make a croſſe, to repell
Northerne Deuills. Are not theſe more blaſphemous
i
                     •
                  glings and incantations, then all the Commentaries of
the ancient Idolatrous Romane Pontifes.
            
            
               CHAP. XIX.
               Againſt the Idolaters Antiquity, and long
Poſſeſsion of the Maſſe.
               
                  IS not this long Poſſeſſion, to confirme
the Mahumetan Alcoran,Againſt the long poſſeſſion and preſcription of Idolatries.
which the Turks at this day haue
enioyed, for aboue nine hundred
yeares; hauing conquered Countries,
Kingdomes, and Empires,
proſpered in their enterprizes, and

alwaies obſerued that abominable law preſcribed in
their Alcoran.Againſt the Turkes.
               
               Was the people of Iſrael excuſable before God,Againſt the Iſraelites ſacrificing to Moloch. 2 King. 16. and 23. when
they offered ſacrifice of the blood of Innocents in the
valley of Tophet to Moloch, by alledging the long poſſeſſion
thereof and inueterate vſe, for aboue 1200 years
before this idolatry was wholly aboliſhed by good
King Ioſias? Did the Iſraelites murmure aginſt the
vertuous King Ezechias when he demoliſhed the brazen
Serpent,Againſt the idolatry of the brazen Serpent. Num. 27. which was inſtituted by Gods expreſſe
commandement, aboue 900 yeares before? Were the
people themſelues excuſed of their idolatry committed
in the two Temples erected in Dan and Bethel, wherein
were the images of two young Heifers of gold, vnder
the pretext and allegation of long poſſeſſion, for
they had continued this idolatry for the ſpace of three
or foure hundred yeares?Againſt the Iewes infidelity. The Iewes that are at this
day vagabonds, ſhall they be excuſed before the Maieſtie
of God, by preſenting the long poſſeſſion of their
ceremoniall Law, inſtituted euen by God himſelfe
aboue three thouſand yeares agoe? As likewiſe your
ſelues,Againſt the Miſſalians. O Miſſalians, can you alledge againſt God a long
poſſeſſion and preſcription of hauing celebrated Pompilian
Maſſes for a long time, that you and your predeceſſors
vſed it, ſold and ſet to ſale your miſſall ſacrifices?
Is long poſſeſſion a ſufficient and well grounded reaſon,
as your predeceſſors the Romane Senators alledged
to the Emperour Theodoſius, that their Pompilian
Religion had beene obſerued for aboue a thouſand
yeares? The inducing of long poſſeſſion, and vſe obſerued
of long time, will not be a ſufficient reaſon to approue
your idolatries.Preſcription takes no place againſt God. For if God out of his vnſpeakable
mercy and patience, hath tolerated the Iewes in
their infidelity, the Turkes in their Alcoran law, and
Chriſtians in their Miſſalian idolatries, we muſt not argue
nor diſpute of Gods incomprehenſible ſecrets. But

in humility re-enter the way of verity, when he is pleaſed
to point it out vnto vs, after long and palpable darkneſſe,
whereinto people in all ages haue fallen by ſtraying
from Gods true inſtitution and worſhip, as wee
briefly before declared of the Iſraelites an elect people
of God, who though they had Moſes and the Prophets,
which admoniſhed them by many miracles and
comminations how they ought to honour God, and obſerue
his law, yet would they neuer ceaſe idolatrizing
with their owne fond and humane inuentions.
               If therefore during the reignes of Princes, Iudges
of Iſrael, when this people was gouerned as in an Ariſtocracy,
then yeelding to the yoake of Kings, as by a
Monarchy: and at laſt reduced vnder the gouernment
of Prieſts, embracing the ſpirituall and temporall, the
law of God was corrupted, the ſacrifices and ſacraments
adulterated and violated, and idolatry erected and propagated,
for more then ſixteeene hundred years from
the written law, publiſht by Moſes, till the Incarnation
of Ieſus Chriſt; what may be hoped of the people
of Rome, inſtructed and nouriſhed in all idolatry,
like a withered tree, like a baſtard and heathen
people?
               Notwithſtanding that the Miſſalian heretikes may
not vaunt of long poſſeſſion, in their miſſall ſacrifices,
except it be by the reſtauration of the nine parts formerly
deſcribed, borrowed from Numa Pompilius: the
other members of the Maſſe, were inuented at diuers
times by ſundry Antichriſts, corrupters of the holy Sacraments
ordained by God. And to vnderſtand the peculiar
times and ages of theſe famous Architects; Agapit
Romane Pope, reigning in the yeare of Chriſt 577,
added to the Proceſſion inſtituted after the preſcript
forme of Numa, the Confiteor, reſtored by Damaſus,
reigning in the yeare 377: the Kyrie-eleyſon was annexed
by Gregory, reigning in the yeare 593: the Collects

and Tracts by Gelaſius, reigning in the yeare 493:
and the Sequences by Gotherus Abbot of Sandale: the
Gloria in excelſis by Symmachus, reigning in the yeare
508: the Incenſe and Offertory, renewed out of the
ancient Pompilian doctrine by Leo the third of that
name, in the yeare 800: the Kiſſe-pix by Innocent the
firſt of that name, reigning in the yeare 408: the Agnus
dei inſtituted by Sergius in the yeare 697: Dirges for
the dead, were inuented by Pelagius in the yeare 558:
the Canon forged by Gelaſius, Syricius, Leo and Pelagius,
reigning in the yeare 800: Tranſubſtantiation was
inſtituted by the Romane Pontifes, about the yeare of
Chriſt 1062. And therefore what an impudency is it in
the Meſſalian Alcoraniſt Doctors falſely to auerre, that
the holy Apoſtles of Ieſus Chriſt celebrated the miſſall
ſacrifice? conſidering that this ſacrifice was not reſtored
to its integrity ſince the dayes of Numa Pompilius,
but aboue 800 yeares after Ieſus Chriſt. What
approued Hiſtory makes mention that ſuch an idolatry
was committed by the holy Apoſtles of God? How can
we poſſibly beleeue or imagine it, when this great Babyloniſh
Whore was not reſtored to her maske and vizard
of ſanctity but long time after the Incarnation of
Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XX.
               Againſt the Idolatry of the round Hoſt.
               
                  BVt we muſt returne to our Romane
Hiſtory,Continuation of Hiſtories. that wee may more and
more diſcouer the true originall of
the Maſſe. In diſcourſing of the
parts and principal members of the
miſſall ſacrifice, wee related how
the ancient Romanes, before they
were accuſtomed to ſacrifice with
the blood of beaſts, vſed little round loaues conſecrated
to the honor of their gods, which they eate ſtanding
within the Temples, at the end of the ſacrifice.
               Theſe little round Hoſts of wheat floure were taken
by the Miſſalian ſacrificers,Abominable Idolatrie. but they haue augmented
the magicke and idolatry of Numa Pompilius, in that
they beautify their little round Hoſts with pictures and
images printed within the rotundity of the ſaid Hoſts,
to make them the more ſacred, yea that they may bee
adored, out of Honorius inuention a Romane Antichriſt,
reigning in the yeare of Chriſts incarnation
1226, which Numa the Magician neuer practiſed before,
neither grew to this abominable idolatry: what
more deteſtable hereſie can be laid open, then to paint
the Maieſtie of God in the forme of humane ſimilitude
as the Anthropomorphites did? Who taught you, O
Miſſalians,Againſt the idolatry of round Hoſts. to corrupt the holy ſacrament of the Supper
of Ieſus Chriſt, in deuiſing theſe little round loaues and
Hoſts, but the Magician Numa? When Ieſus Chriſt
celebrated the holy Supper with the Apoſtles, did he
appoint them to haue little loaues or round Hoſts, to

print them with humane characters and effigies, to
coniure and exorciſe them with croſſes and croyſadoes
in equall or vnequall numbers, and cauſe them to bee
adored? Confeſſe therefore, O Miſſalians, that the
principall part of your Maſſe, that is, your little round
hoſts, to be originall from the ancient Pompilian Religion,
more then ſeuen hundred years before the Incarnation
of Ieſus Chriſt; who did not inſtitute for you
theſe rotundall hoſts, or that they ſhould bee rather
round then ſquare, tryangle or octangle: ſo farre hee
was from ordaining the round figure correſpondent
to Numaes forme, that on the contrary, when he inſtituted
the Sacrament of the Communion of his body,
he vſed a fraction of bread by morſels, which he diſtributed
to his Apoſtles, for a Symbole, ſigne, and figure,
ſignifying really and ſacramentally his body by the
power of the holy Ghoſt.
               And the Miſſalians haue not onely made choice of
the round forme in their conſecrated hoſts, printed
with Images, to make them be adored after the manner
of the ancient Romans: but moreouer they haue
exceeded all other Idolaters. For in the daies of Numa
and his ſucceſſors, thoſe that were preſent at the
Miſſall ſacrifice, eate ſtanding together the ſaid little
round conſecrated hoſts, they vſing no charity towards
them that aſſiſt in their Miſſall ſacrifices?
               Is this to follow the ordinance of Ieſus Chriſt, who
brake the bread and diſtributed it to his Apoſtles?
Ieſus Chriſt the eternall Prieſt, ſtood he alone neere to
an altar, munching a little round Hoſt, printed with
Images, when he celebrated the holy cōmunion of his
body. O you Miſſalians, more deteſtable, and leſſe charitable
Idolaters, then all the other ancient Romanes;
can you ſo ſophiſticate and iuggle, as to procure your
Miſſall ſacrifice (wherein the Prieſt alone deuoures
the little round printed Hoſt with Images, giuing no

ſhare of it to others) to be taken and receiued as a communion,
cauſing them that are preſent at your Maſſe
by an admirable Magicke to beleeue, that they haue
communicated together with the Prieſt, though they
neither eate, nor receiue any portion of the round
Hoſt.
               
                  And yet further, for a more extreame Idolatry, the Miſſalian
Doctors Interpreters informe, that the round Hoſt
muſt be diuided into three parts, one for thoſe that are in
Paradiſe, another for thoſe that are in Purgatory, to obtaine
remiſſion of their ſinnes, and a third ſteept in wine,
for thoſe that are liuing in the world. But Durands
Alcoran ſets downe, that the three broken portions of the
Hoſt, repreſents the triple forme of Chriſts body, ſleeping
in the graue, lying on the earth, and afterwards raiſed
vp from the dead.
                  
                     Biel another ſubtil Doctor, not to confeſſe the body
of Chriſt to be broken or bruiſed in the round hoſt, deuiſeth
the fraction of the Hoſt to be made of an accident without
ſubſtance. Are not theſe abhominable Hereſies, to make
ſoules that are in Paradiſe, or Purgatory communicate:
inſtituted by Sergius a Mahumetan Doctor, by the
meanes of a round Hoſt deuoured by the Maſſe-Prieſt?
               
               But peraduenture (Miſſalians) you may obiect vnto
me, the vſe of the Primatiue Church obſerued in the
Communion of the holy Supper, where euery one of
the aſſembly in the Temple, tooke a portion of the
broken bread; being alſo conſecrated to eate, and communicate
together: which cuſtome was retained till
this preſent day, in your Miſſall ſacrifices, celebrated on
Sundayes,Communion of holy bread. which you cauſe to bee diſtributed of morſels
of holy bread to thoſe preſent within the Temple.
But this ancient commandement, was maintained onely
in picture; becauſe the Miſſalians abuſing the holy

Sacrament, ha
                     •
                  e reſerued the round little conſecrated
Hoſt to be eaten by themſelues,A notable difference betweene round conſecrated hoſts and holy bread. diſtributing no portion
of it to the aſſiſtants: for whom they leaue morſels
of holy bread, which for the moſt part were foure
ſquare.
               The round Hoſt is azimall, and the holy bread made
with leuen: the round Hoſt is without ſalt, and the
holy bread ſeaſoned: the round Hoſt is printed with
Images, & the holy bread is without characters or effigies:
the round Hoſt is adored, and the holy bread receiued
with thankſgiuing: the round Hoſt is deuoured
by the Prieſt, and the holy bread diſtributed to euery
one of the Aſſembly, to communicate and eate thereof:
the round Hoſt is in part ſteeped in wine, and the holy
bread is eaten dry without wine.
               To conclude, there is ſo great a difference betweene
theſe two ſeuerall Communions, as there is betweene
the law of the ancient Idolaters, and the Law Euangelicall:
but that they iumpe in one point: which is
that both in the one, and the other, there is a corruption
of the holy ſacrament of the ſupper ordained by
God.
            
            
               CHAP. XXI.
               The inuention of Tranſubſtantiation, with
confutation of that labyrinth of Idolatry.
               
                  WE muſt now deſcend to the very bottome
of this Idolatrous Labyrinth:Tranſubſtantiation inſtituted.
we did recite the hiſtory of the people
of Iſrael, who were not content
with the celeſtiall bread, and Manna
giuen vnto them by God, while
they remained in the deſart, but

murmured againſt God, and Moſes his Seruant, they
demanding to eate fleſh: the people alſo of pagan and
infidell Rome, were not content with the Pompilian
inſtitution in the communion of little round loaues;
but that the Romane Idolatrous Pontifes muſt needs
further ordaine the killing and immolating of beaſts,
that they might eate, and communicate of the fleſh of
victimes in their ſacrifices,Blond lib. 1. de Rom. triump. eſpecially the ſheepe, the
Sow, the Goate, and the Oxe: which was firſt inſtituted
by Euander King of Arcadia. Wherefore, that
the Miſſalians might not degenerate from the idolatry
of their predeceſſors, they muſt needs follow this communion
of fleſh: and they are not content with their
little round azimall hoſts, conſecrated, and printed with
images; but with time they haue inuented a new magicke
to tranſubſtantiate their little hoſts of flower,Hoſts made of flower tranſubſtantiated into fleſh, and the wine into blood. into
fleſh and bones, the bread being no more bread, but
an accident without ſubſtance: and by this means to
conuert the round hoſt of flower into a carnall and
ſanguinolent hoſt.
               The wine alſo offred in their Miſſall Chalices to bee
tranſubſtantiated into blood, the wine being no more
wine, but an accident without ſubſtance. Was there
euer a more abominable magicke,Deteſtable Hereſie. or a more deteſtable
Hereſie then this Miſſaline tranſubſtantiation? When
the people of Iſrael murmured againſt God, becauſe
they were weary of eating Manna and celeſtiall bread,
calling for fleſh, was the Manna tranſubſtantiated into
fleſh, bones, and blood? When the ancient Romane
Idolaters,An. Chriſt. 1062, in Chronolog. 10. Volateran. meant to change their round hoſts of flower,
or meale, and grew to eate fleſh in their ſacrifices, did
they vſe this magicke of tranſubſtantiation? Wherefore
I freely auerre, that this Miſſall addition was lately
inuented by the Miſſalians, more then a thouſand
yeares after the Incarnation of Ieſus Chriſt.
               This Hereſie began to ſpread very much of a Nicholaitan

Antichriſt climbing vp to the Romane Pontificacie,
by the monopoly and ſuggeſtions of Hildebrand,
expelling by force the other elected Pope, which was
Benedict the ſecond of that name,Lanfrac: de ſac. in the yeare of Ieſus
Chriſt 1062.
               Afterwards by a Monopoly held in Saint Iohn Lateran
in Rome, it was aduanced during the eccleſiaſticall
tyranny of Innocent the third of that name, about
two hundred yeares after the Palinodie canonized by
Berengarius Deane of S. Maurice in Angiers. Againſt
which abominable magick and hereſie we muſt briefly
by forme of a recapitulation compare the inſtitutions of
the Sacraments ordained by God.
               Firſt of all, the fruits of the knowledge of good and
ill,Againſt Tranſubſtantiation. Tree of life. forbidden to our firſt father Adam, as ſacred ſignes
and ſacraments of feare and obedience, whereon depended
life or death, were they tranſubſtantiated or
conuerted into knowledge or into death, to leaue their
nature of being trees or fruits, reduced to an accident
without ſubſtance?
               The celeſtiall Manna,Celeſtiall Manna. and the Rocke guſhing out
liuely water, Sacraments that had reference to the holy
Sacrament of the ſupper,The Rocke flowing out water. were they tranſubſtantiated
into an accident without ſubſtance?
               The vnſpotted Lambs immolated by Abel,
                  Lambs immolated by Abel.
                   in his
acceptable ſacrifice to God, were they tranſubſtantiated
into any other nature?
               The Fore-skinne circumciſed for a note and marke
of couenant to the good Patriarche Abraham and his
poſterity,Circumciſion. was it conuerted into an accident without
ſubſtance?
               The blood of the Paſchall Lamb,Paſchall lamb. for an aſſurance of
Iſraels ſaluation, was that conuerted into any other
ſubſtance?
               The fleſh of the immaculate Lambe, to bee eaten on
the day of the Paſſeouer, a true figure of the holy Sacrament

of the ſupper, was it tranſubſtantiated into an accident
without ſubſtance?
               The brazen Serpent,Brazen ſerpent which being only beheld, health
was granted to the ſicke, did it not continue a Serpent
of braſſe? was that tranſubſtantiated, being ordained
for a Sacrament and ſacred ſigne to the people of
Iſrael?
               Victimes offered in ſacrifice,Victimes ſacrificed. both of beaſts of the
earth, and azimall loaues, with other ſacred ſignes ordained
by God, for holy ſignes and ſacraments of expiation
and ſaluation for the people of Iſrael, were they
euer tranſubſtantiated into accidents without ſubſtance?
               All ſacred ſignes ordained by God in the Iſraelitiſh
Church, though they really and ſacramently repreſented
that which was by them figured, and not as a ſimple
picture without reall effect, yet did there neuer liue
ſo deteſtable an heretique, which inuented or added
thereunto this Magicke of tranſubſtantiation. And neuertheleſſe,
O Miſſalians, you muſt needs confeſſe that
the good and holy Fathers of Iſrael were adopted, engrafted,
and regenerated by faith in Ieſus Chriſt, begotten
before all ages: that they were nouriſhed, and
purchaſed eternall life by Ieſus Chriſt: that they and
we haue but one God, and one onely Ieſus Chriſt, one
Mediator and Redeeme
                     •
                  : That by faith, they ſacramentally
communicated, and participated ſpiritually of the
blood of Ieſus Chriſt, for their ſaluation and eternall
life:Compariſon of the faith of the ancient fathers of Iſrael with ours. That there is no difference touching God, betweene
them who did precede the incarnation of Ieſus
Chriſt, and vs that were ſince his incarnation: but
both they and wee are equally the Church of God redeemed
by the blood of the iuſt and vnſpotted Lambe
Chriſt Ieſus. For the reſt, they had a faith of the future
promiſe, and obſerued the holy Sacraments and ſacred
Symboles of the Sacrifice which ſhould be conſummated

by Ieſus Chriſt:D. Aug. contra Fauſt. 20. ca. 21. & cap. 14. l. 19. & contra Petilian. lib. 2. ca. 37, 77. and wee in the new law celebrate
the memoriall and remembrance of the ſacrifice now
finiſhed by Ieſus Chriſt, hauing a fruition of the promiſe
accompliſhed.
               If then the Iſraelites eate the ſame celeſtiall bread,
and drunke the ſame ſauing drinke,
                     
                        •
                      Cor. 10. Auguſt. in Pſal. which we doe by
faith in one onely Ieſus Chriſt: If they had ſacred
ſignes to repreſent actually and really the future death
of Ieſus Chriſt, euen as we retaine ſacred ſignes of his
preſent, or paſt death: they for the future, and we for
that which is paſt; why did the Miſſalians inuent this
new magicke, to conuert an holy Sacrament ordained
by God, into a magicke of tranſubſtantiation, and into
an accident without ſubſtance? I God to approue his
power,Againſt miracles alleaged by the Miſſalians. and to manifeſt the hardneſſe and obſtinacy
of Pharaoh was pleaſed to performe wonderfull things
by Moſes and Aaron,
                  Exod. 7. by conuerting a Rod into a Serpent,
water of the riuer into blood,Exod. 8. and into frogs: the
duſt of the earth into lice: and then to make the nauigable
ſea d
                     •
                  y,Exod. 14. performing many other miracles: can
we by this infer a tranſubſtantiation of the little round
azimall hoſt, printed with images, into an accident
without a ſubſtance? In what place of the holy Scriptures,
when mention is made of ſacred ſignes, and Sacraments,
or ſacrifices ordained by God, is it ſaid that
the ſigne or ſacrament was tranſubſtantiated? But on
the contrary, Gods will accommodating it ſelfe to mans
infirmity, he ordained from time to time cōmon ſignes,
for notes & marks of aſſurance of the thing ſignified:
wherein Gods power is the more renowned and exalted,
in really giuing vs, what by the ſacred ſigne is repreſented
by the vertue of faith, and of the holy Ghoſt,
as if the ſigne it ſelfe had beene really tranſubſtantiated
by ſome occular miracle. For the Sacraments comprehend
in them, more ſpirituall then carnall ſenſe. For
this reaſon God by his Prophets euer blamed his people

of Iſrael, for vnderſtanding the ſacraments too carnally,
as ſuccinctly we haue before declared.
               But tell me O Miſſalians, when Ieſus Chriſt made
it knowne how himſelfe was the true bread of life deſcended
from heauen, to conferre life eternall; and how
theſe ſacramentall words of eating his fleſh, and drinking
his blood,The interpretation of Ieſus Chriſt touching the eating of his body. were to be vnderſtood, wherewith the
Capernaits your Predeceſſors were ſcandalized; did he
teach vs in this interpretation, that to eate his fleſh
ſhould be meant, by a little round tranſubſtantiated
hoſt? that the round hoſt of flower, and the wine, is no
more bread or wine, but accidents without ſubſtance?
Is this your abhominable magicke, the doctrine of Ieſus
Chriſt. Nothing leſſe. But Ieſus Chriſt like a true
and heauenly Lawgiuer, who can onely ſincerely interpret
his owne law, made anſwer to the Capernait Doctors,
how they were groſſe and carnall minded,Iohn 6.
minding onely the fleſh, as you Miſſalians doe, though
the fleſh alone profits nothing: alleaging how his ſacramental
words were ſpirituall: The fleſh ſaith he, profits
nothing: but the ſpirit quickens. As alſo, O Miſſalians,
how can you religiouſly accord your tranſubſtantiation
with the doctrine of Ieſus Chriſt, which promiſeth
and aſſureth eternall life to thoſe, that ſhall eate
his fleſh, and drinke his blood, if you conceiue theſe
words carnally? For you cannot be ignorant, but that
your owne bodies when they haue deuoured theſe
round tranſubſtantiated hoſts into fleſh and bones,
drunke and taken downe the tranſubſtantiated wine
into blood, notwithſtanding liue & are mortal through
the neceſſity of the law. Wherefore eternall life promiſed
by this communion, cannot be vnderſtood by a
mortall body, or fleſh. And therefore of neceſſity you
muſt needs acknowledge, for the moſt ſacred interpretation,
that to eate the body and drinke the blood of
Ieſus Chriſt, muſt haue reference to a ſpirituall and

heauenly life: and that the fleſh profits nothing, but
the ſpirituall words; and the communion of the body
and blood of Ieſus Chriſt, by faith and ſpirit giue eternall
life. This interpretation is many times recited by
the holy Apoſt
                     •
                  e St. Iohn, when Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe
vſeth theſe words, Hee that comes to mee, ſhall neuer
hunger; he that beleeues in me ſhall neuer feele thirſt,
but haue eternall life. Are not theſe termes intelligible
enough, to expreſſe this holy ſacrament of the communion
of the body and blood of Ieſus Chriſt, without
running to your magick of tranſubſtantiation?Compariſon of Baptiſme with the Sacraments of the Supper.
               
               Another interpretation of the holy Doctor and
author of the ſacramentall law is deſcribed, when Ieſus
Chriſt was interrogated by Nicodemus, of the meanes
how a man might be regenerated, and borne anew. Is
it poſſible ſaith Nicodemus,
                  Iohn 3. that a man can returne again
into his mothers wombe? Did Ieſus Chriſt anſwer
this demand, by affirming that in the holy ſacrament of
Baptiſme, the water was conuerted into the body, into
fleſh & blood, and tranſubſtantiated in a carnall womb,
to be there againe ingendered and regenerate? Was
there not alſo as great reaſon, according to your Magicke,
to haue returned this anſwer, as well as in the
holy Sacrament of the Supper? for by the one of theſe
two Sacraments, we are regenerated, and by the other
nouriſht. Now regeneration is as admirable to humane
wiſdome, as nouriſhment; for conformable to humane
and carnall iudgement it may ſeeme vnpoſſible, that
we can be twice engendered and begotten. But our
good God vſeth the like interpretation of Regeneration,
as of the communion of his fleſh and blood:
which is, that theſe ſacramentall termes muſt bee ſpiritually
conceiued, and not carnally: for the fleſh profits
not; but the ſpirit quickens. What is of the fleſh
is carnall, what of the ſpirit, ſpirituall.
               The holy Apoſtle,1. Corinth. 11. relating to the Corinthians what

he had receiued from Gods hand, admoniſhed them of
the comming of Ieſus Chriſt: during the expectation
whereof, hee commands them to communicate of the
body, and blood of Ieſus Chriſt, by the fraction of
bread, and the cup of benediction called the new Teſtament,
and new couenant contracted by the blood
of Ieſus Chriſt: wherefore ſeeing wee are aſſured of the
ſecond comming of Ieſus Chriſt, being aſcended vp into
heauen, and ſet at the right hand of God his Father:
till the day predeſtinate that hee ſhall returne to iudge
both the quicke and the dead: how will you reconcile
this paſſage, O Miſſalians, when by the magicke
you vtter, you make him deſcend, and returne the body
of Ieſus Chriſt in fleſh and bone, before the time
preordained for his ſecond comming.
               This Magicke was by you reſtored, ſince the firſt
author of your Miſſall Sacrifice Numa Pompilius: who
by his magicke diuulged, that he made his Nymph and
Goddeſſe Egeria come downe from heauen, as alſo his
Iupiter Elicius, by whoſe meanes there were celeſtiall
ſecrets and myſteries reuealed vnto him. If by your
magicke the round conſecrated hoſt, was tranſubſtantiated
into the true and reall body of Ieſus Chriſt,Numa Pompilius, vt populum Romanorum ſacris obligaret, volebat videri ſibi cum dea Aegeria congreſſus eſſe nocturnos, eiuſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      monituſe, quae accepta diis immortalibus ſacra forent, inſti
                        •
                     uere Valer. Max. lib. 1. cap. 3. the
bread being no more bread, but the true body, how
came you to be ſo preſumptuous, to breake and teare in
peeces the body of Ieſus Chriſt, according to the inuention
of Sergius the ſecond of that name your predeceſſor
Romane Pontife? Are not you farre more
execrable executioners then your predeceſſors, Lieutenants
of the Romane Church, which crucified Ieſus
Chriſt, and yet they neuer tare, nor rent his body in
peeces, as he propheſied? And notwithſtanding you
are not contented to haue broken it into three peeces,
but in your Miſſall ſacrifices you preſume to drowne
and ſteepe one portion in wine,Iohn 19. tranſubſtantiated into
blood,Exod. 12. to be ſwallowed,Numb. 9. and drunke.
               
                  
To confirme your Magick of tranſubſtantiation:Corruption of the holy Sacrament. why
tooke you no order to preſerue from corruption your
little round printed Hoſts, which you keepe and lay vp
ſo curiouſly in reliquaries and boxes, after they are tranſubſtantiated
into fleſh and bone,Againſt tranſubſtantiation. and into the reall bodie
of Ieſus Chriſt? Is it not an abominable hereſie to
beleeue, that the bodie of Ieſus Chriſt is capable of corruption?
Nay, and oftentimes is eaten, by Wormes,
Weaſels, Rats, and Mice? Can you interpret this, to be
an accident without ſubſtance? When your Hoſts become
many times ſtinking and corrupted in your Cybaries?
Many times likewiſe deuoured by bruite beaſts
of the earth, which you cauſe to be burned, and their
aſhes laid vp in Reliquaries?
               When Victor the third of that name,Herman. Cont. 
                  Pope of Rome,
receiued poiſon by your tranſubſtantiated Wine into
blood:Blond. Platin. was this an accident without ſubſtance? Or
when the Emperour Henry the ſeuenth of that name,
was poyſoned, by eating of a little round, conſecrated,
and tranſubſtantiated Hoſt, was it without ſubſtance,
when it procured death? There was much more apparance
for the celeſtiall Manna, giuen to the people of
Iſrael, the which though it corrupted, when it was
kept; yet that which was reſerued in ſecret, within the
Arke of the Lords Couenant,Nehem. 9. was preſerued without
corruption:Pſal. 78. 104. but yet for all this was it tranſubſtantiated
into fleſh,Pſal. 16. and bones, to bee called celeſtiall bread▪
bread deſcending from Heauen,Iohn 6. the Bread of Life, or
the bread of Angels?
               Now it remaines for vs to conteſt with the ſubtill
reaſons of the Miſſalians, who to make a foundation
for their Magicke, inſiſt carnally vpon the word eſt,
ſaying, that theſe words were expreſſely written: This
is my body, this is my blood, when Ieſus Chriſt inſtituted
the holy Sacrament of his Body and of his Blood▪
vnder the Symboles of bread and wine.
               
                  
But I deſire all thoſe that are zealous of the honour
of God, exactly to weigh the ſacred Inſtitution of this
Sacrament, by which God meant to ſymbolize and ſignifie
the communion of his body by the bread, and the
drinking of his bloud by the Wine and Cup. All will
confeſſe, that the true and principall nouriſhment of
mans body, is comprehended vnder the kinds of bread
and wine: ſo that the terme of bread is often taken in
the holy Scriptures for the nouriſhment and life of
Man.
               Let vs enter into an examination of the paſſages of
the Bible.Geneſ. 3. Was not the firſt Man, created after Gods ſimilitude,
for the penalty of his offence, told, that hee
ſhould eate his bread with the ſweat and labour of his
body? Can any man be ſo ignorant as not to confeſſe,
that this was vnderſtood by the liuing and life of
Man?
               When Iacob prayed vnto God to giue him bread and
raiment:Geneſ. 28. did hee not vnderſtand by bread, whatſoeuer
was requiſite for his whole nouriſhment? When wee
heare recited, that God rained bread vpon the people
of Iſrael being in the deſart,Exod. 16. and that the Iſraelites
were repleniſhed with this celeſtiall bread:Nehem 9. This
terme of bread,Pſal. 78. 6. was it not conceiued by the celeſtiall
Manna, ſent by God to ſuſtaine the people of
Iſrael?
               Is this Manna called the bread of Heauen,Sap. 16. and the
bread of Angels,Iohn 6. giuen to the people without labour or
trauaile?
               When Mel
                        •
                     hiſedech meant to furniſh good Father
Abrahams Armie,Gen. 14. did hee not preſent him with Bread
and Wine?
               When Abraham was to gratifie and refreſh three
Angels that appeared vnto him:Gen 18. Did he not expoſe vnto
them bread baked vpon the embers?Gen. 21. Did hee not
giue Agar bread for her nouriſhment?Gen. 27. 
                  Iſaacs Mother

to fauour her beſt beloued ſonne,Gen. 43. gaue him bread. Ioſeph
in Egypt offered bread to his brethren for their
nouriſhment.
               When we goe about to deſcribe a Famine and ſcarcitie
of victuall,Gen. 47. doe we not ſay there wants bread?Numb. 37. When
God promiſed any mercy or fauour to his people that
did keepe his commandements; Did he not giue them
aſſurance of bread in ſufficiencie?Tobit. 4. when hee recommends
vnto vs the poore,Pſal. 104. as his members, commands
hee vs not to giue them bread? It is bread therefore,
which nouriſheth and ſuſtaines the heart and life of
man.
               When Satan enterprized to tempt Ieſus Chriſt,Mar. 4. to
teſtifie that he was true man:Luk. 4. Did hee not make choice
of bread, when hee incited him to make the ſtones
bread?
               When Ieſus Chriſt celebrated his banquets to giue
bodily nouriſhment,Mat. 6. once to fiue thouſand men, and
then againe to foure thouſand perſons:Luke 2. Did he not ſhew
his power vnder the Symbole of bread? When hee
taught vs to addreſſe our prayers to God: Did he not
expreſſely ordaine in the Lords Prayer that we ſhould
requeſt of God to giue vs our dayly bread? And bread
is not onely mentioned in the holy Scriptures for vulgar
and corporall nouriſhment: but alſo in ſacrifices
celebrated by the Hebrew Prieſts, and the preſcript
Law of Sacred bread ordained by God:Exod. 21. that was azimall
bread without Leauen.Leuit. 24. Other bread was tearmed
the bread of propoſition, which the Prieſts euery
weeke renued and eate,Math. 11. which Dauid vſed, preſented to
him by Achimelech the High Prieſt.1. King. 27.
               
               Contrariwiſe the tearme of bread, is appropriated to
the bread of iniquitie, of lyes, of ſorrow, to polluted
bread of Idolaters, to bread of coinquination offered
vpon the Altar;Oſe 7. to bread of mourning, and to bread of
trembling. The Ephraimites alſo called aſhy and vnturned

loaues: that is to ſay, halfe hak't, halfe circumciſed,
and Idolaters.
               And therefore, O you Miſſalian Capernaites, you
muſt not be ſo obdurate, and inueterate in your carnalities,Deut. 8.
as not to obſerue the phraſes of the holy Scripture,Mar. 4.
in which bread is oftentimes taken for terreſtriall
and corporall bread;Luke 4. as when it was ſaid, that man did
not liue onely by bread,Math. 15. but alſo by whatſoeuer proceeded
out of the mouth of God.
               Sometimes alſo bread is taken for the Word of God,
and Doctrine. When Ieſus Chriſt commanded his Apoſtles
to keepe themſelues from eating leauened bread
with the Phariſes:Math 15. theſe tearmes of bread and leauen,Mar. 7.
are they not expreſſed by the doctrine of the hereticall
Phariſes? When the Cananitiſh woman demanded
grace and mercy for her daughters health, detained in
in a long malady of ſickneſſe: did not Ieſus Chriſt anſwer
her, how it was not lawfull to take the Childrens
bread, and caſt it to Doggs? Was not the bread in
this anſwer, taken for life and health, and not onely
for corporall nouriſhment?
               Wherefore if bread bee taken for the life of Man,
which depends principally of Bread and of Wine, and
that Gods goodneſſe, accommodating it ſelfe to our infirmities,
made choiſe of theſe two ſignes and ſymboles,
or notable markes, to ſignifie his body and his
blood; that is to ſay, the bread, the Wine, theſe two
prouiſions being common to all Nations, was this any
reaſon, to build vpon it a carnall tranſubſtantiation, as
if God without it were not mighty enough, really to figure,
and repreſent vnto vs ſacramentally, that life
was giuen vs: yea, life eternall, by the communion of
conſecrated bread,Math. 26. and Wine of benediction; theſe being
figures and ſymboles of his body,Mar. 4. and of his
blood?Iohn 6.
               
               Ieſus Chriſt produced theſe words, that the Bread is

his body, and the Wine is his blood: he alſo ſaid, that
himſelfe was the Bread of Life, the liuing bread, and
that he was the liuing bread come down from Heauen.
Furher hee ſayes, that hee who eates of that bread, ſhall
liue eternally. Doth this inferre by the word eſt, that Ieſus
Chriſt is conuerted and tranſubſtantiated into
bread, and that hee is no more Chriſt, but an accident
without ſubſtance. O abominable hereſies! haue you
any more reaſon, O you Miſſalians, to interpret theſe
words carnally, This is my body, to tranſubſtantiate
the bread into the body, then when hee teſtifies, that
himſelfe was the bread, to tranſubſtantiate him into
bread, conſidering that it is written, how the communion
of this bread giues eternall life? Ieſus Chriſt ſaid,
Hoc eſt corpus meum: he alſo ſayes of himſelfe,Math. 16. 
                  Hic eſt
panis qui de Coelo deſcendit: in both theſe places,Iohn 6. is not
this word eſt vſed? And yet muſt we needs hereupon
inferre a tranſubſtantiation, in ſtead of orthodoxally
interpreting the ſame by a Metonimy and familiar compariſon
of bread to Ieſus Chriſt, that we might apprehend,
how eternall life was giuen vs by him, and likewiſe
by him our ſpirituall food is miniſtred, euen as by
bread, a nouriſhment corporall?
               Howſoeuer, wee muſt alwayes haue recourſe to the
true expreſſion of Ieſus Chriſt, the abſolute Law-giuer,
and Author of this holy Sacrament, who expounding
his owne Inſtitution, ſaith in the firſt place, that hee is
the Bread of Life,Iohn 6. then afterwards hee ſayes, that this
bread is his fleſh and his body, which muſt be offered
for the ſaluation of the world: he ſaith, his fleſh is true
meate, and his blood true drinke; he ſayes, that whoſoeuer
eates of his fleſh, and drinkes of his blood, he will
remaine in him.
               How doth hee himſelfe expound this Manducation?
Ieſus Chriſt by his owne words expreſſeth himſelfe:
Whoſoeuer comes to me,Iohn 6. ſhall neuer hunger; and hee

that beleues in me, ſhall neuer thirſt. Is not this a true
eating, and a true drinking, neuer againe to be hungry,
nor neuer to thirſt? Muſt wee not in this haue faith,
which conſiſts in ſpirit?
               To addreſſe our ſelues to Ieſus Chriſt, our celeſtiall
bread, our ſpirituall drinke, wherewith to bee ſatisfied
for euer, to quench our thirſt of ſinne perpetually, muſt
we runne to the Magicke of tranſubſtantiation, and
forge an accident without ſubſtance? Wherefore, O
Miſſalians, doe you preſume to inuent any other interpretation,
then that of Ieſus Chriſt, who witneſſeth
that the fleſh profits nothing; but the Spirit quickens?
and that his words are not carnall, but ſpirituall, giuing
ſpirit and life, by faith and confidence, that hee is the
Sauiour of the world, incarnate, dead, and crucified, to
purchaſe for vs eternall life: and then raiſed vp againe,
he aſcended into heauen, ſits at the right hand of God
his Father,Iohn 15. remaining an eternall Prieſt, Propitiator,
Mediator, and Redeemer.
               To returne to this terme, eſt, that does ſo moleſt the
Miſſalians braines, that they dreame out of it a tranſubſtantiation.
If Ieſus Chriſt vttered how he was the true
Vine,Iohn 4. that God his Father was the keeper, and that we
are the branches; Can wee hereupon conclude by this
word, eſt, a Magick of the tranſubſtantiation of God,
into the keeper of a Vine, of Ieſus Chriſt into a Vine,
and of our ſelues into branches?
               If Ieſus Chriſt was ſaid to be the immaculate Lambe
that wipes out the ſinnes of the world;Iohn 10. can wee herevpon
induce a tranſubſtantiation? If Ieſus Chriſt ſaid
that he was the doore of the ſheepe-fold, by whom
we muſt enter to be ſaued: And that hee is the good Paſtor,
and wee his ſheepe; muſt we needs ſo ſtraine and
wreſt theſe places of the holy Scripture, as to thinke it
neceſſary, becauſe the word eſt is mentioned, to beleeue
a tranſubſtantiation?
               
                  
When Ieſus Chriſt admoniſhed his Apoſtles,Math. 5. ſaying,
that they were the ſalt of the earth; did hee therefore
tranſubſtantiate or conuert them into Statues of Pillars
of ſalt,Geneſ. 19. as he did Lots Wife? If Ieſus Chriſt ſaid by his
Apoſtles,1. Cor. 5. that we are the Temples of God, in which
the holy Ghoſt inhabits;2. Cor. 6. muſt wee therefore imagine,
that we are tranſubſtantiated into a maſſe of ſtone?
               If the holy Apoſtle writ,1. Cor. 10. that Ieſus Chriſt is the
Rocke, out of whom came liuing water, to waſh and
purge vs from our ſinnes: Muſt we wreſt out of this a
tranſmutation, and tranſubſtantiation of Ieſus Chriſt
into a Rocke, or a materiall ſtone?
               If the holy Apoſtle teſtifieth,1. Cor. 12. that we are the bodie
of Chriſt: may wee by this inferre, that we are tranſlated,
and now no more men, but tranſubſtantiated into
an accident without ſubſtance?
               I readily foreſee, O you obdurate Miſſalians, that
you will obiect all theſe pre-alleadged places: wherein
this word eſt, is, and make no mention of the Sacraments,
which muſt the more exactly bee obſerued, in
that theſe be ſacred myſteries ordained of God: which
is moſt true.
               And this word eſt, is not onely found in the holy
Scriptures formerly cited: but when we ſpeake of holy
Sacraments firſt inſtituted by God for his people of
Iſrael;Gen. 17. is it written, that Circumciſion is Gods alliance
and Couenant?
               In the other holy Sacrament of the Communion of
the Paſchall Lambe;Exod. 10. 13. was it ſaid that the Lambe was
the Paſſeouer, which is to ſay the paſſage? But ſhall we
induce hereupon a Magicke of tranſubſtantiation?
Will you not confeſſe, O Miſſalian tranſubſtantiators,
that in theſe paſſages of the holy Scriptures, ſpeaking
of holy Sacraments, that this word eſt, can not be otherwiſe
interpreted, then to ſignifie ſome reall performance:Gen. 17.
and that Circumciſion was a ſigne and a marke

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
of the Couenant and alliance contracted by God with
Abraham.
                  Numb. 10. The Paſchall Lambe was alſo a ſacred
ſigne of the paſſage,Pſal. 68. 94. for a remembrance of their deliuerie
out of Egypt?Mat. 21. The Arke of alliance for another
Sacrament,Iohn 2. of which it is written, that it is the truth
and power of the Lord: Muſt wee vnderſtand by this,
that it was tranſubſtantiated into the reall Maieſtie of
God? Wee muſt, wee muſt I ſay, interpret the holy
Scriptures with diſcretion, and in humilitie without ſophiſtication,
and without Magicke, ſoundly to apprehend
the conception of words, and not ſticke ſo cloſe
to the letter, which kils: but receiue the Word of God
in liuely ſpirit.
               If then the ſacred Arke is called the Lord, and nominated
God, becauſe in it he exerciſed his omnipotent
power, and declared his Oracles and myſteries, by
exteriour ſignes, to draw the Iſraelitiſh people to bee
mindfull of God, and to feare and obey him: If Ieſus
Chriſt alſo ſaid that hee was bread which came downe
from Heauen, the Bread of Life; and that the Wine was
his bloud: that the Cup is the New Teſtament, by the
externall ſignes of Bread and Wine, to giue vs to vnderſtand,
that our life and ſauing nutriment depended
onely on Ieſus Chriſt, and that by his death & bloodſhed,
we haue aſſurance of eternall life; euen as bread
and Wine ſerue for corporall nouriſhment, and that he
meant and ordained theſe ſacred ſignes, to bee to vs for
Sacraments, to approue and confirme our faith: Did he
determin we ſhould hereby Capernize, & Nicodemize,
to enquire, or make doubt of Gods power how it is poſſible
to eate the body, or drinke the blood of Ieſus
Chriſt: how we can poſſibly be regenerated and borne
anew? Seeing the promiſe was made vnto vs by the
Word, wherefore, haue you, O Miſſalians, conceiued
a carnall tranſubſtantiation, diſtruſting in the incomprehenſible
power of God? May it not ſuffice you ſimply

to beleeue, that the body and blood of Ieſus Chriſt
was really and ſacramentally offered, to communicate
thereof for our ſpirituall nouriſhment, and to grant vs
eternall life, through the Bread and Wine conſecrated,
with giuing of thankes; the bread being truely his bodie,
and the Wine his Blood, which we muſt worthily
receiue by faith, and puritie of conſcience, as ſacred
ſignes and markes of the diuine Character, without
ſearching too ſubtilly after the meanes, other then the
plaine interpretation of Ieſus Chriſt, that the fleſh profits
not, but the Spirit quickens, and that his words
are ſpirit and life? Should wee doubt whether God
hath power, by the ſymboles of Bread and Wine conſecrated
to make vs communicate of the bodie and
blood of Ieſus Chriſt, though the bread remaine bread,
and the wine wine? If it were otherwiſe, this could be
no Sacrament, but rather called a Miracle. As when Ieſus
Chriſt conuerted the Water into Wine, hee then vſed
the miracle of tranſubſtantiation,Iohn 2. changing the Water
into Wine: But hee ordained not this for a Sacrament,
as he did the communion of his body & blood
by the ſacred figures of Bread and Wine.
               Was it not alſo as eaſie for God to change the Wine
into blood,Exod. 4. 7, 8. or the bread into fleſh, as for Moſes and
Aaron, to change the water of the Riuer into blood, to
confirme the hardnes of Pharaohs heart; or when the
clouds were turned into the fleſh of Quailes,Exod. 16. that rained
vpon the people of Iſrael? Neuertheleſſe, God did not
ordaine, that theſe miracles ſhould ſerue for ordinarie
Sacraments: but herein he applyed himſelfe to our infirmitie,
exhibiting to vs ſacred, but not tranſubſtantiated
ſignes, and yet are not vaine nor fantaſticall: but
ſignes externall that we may behold▪ touch, eate▪ and
taſte, remaining ſtill in their ſubſtance: and neuertheleſſe
they repreſent ſacramentally what is by them comprehended,
and intimated, wherein conſiſts the approbation

of our faith, to manifeſt by a ſacramentall worke
and miniſtration, that wee are in the number of the regenerate,
and ſuſtained by the holy Sacraments of Baptiſme,
and the Supper.
            
            
               CHAP. XXII.
               Compariſon betweene the two holy
Sacraments.
               
                  IF wee may preſume to make compariſon
of the two holy Sacraments
of Baptiſme,Compariſon of the two holy Sacraments. and of the
Supper, though there bee a difference
betweene it, and regeneration,
which is not reiterated:
For it ſufficeth that we be once regenerate,
and begotten anew; but this ſpirituall nutriment
is often renued, according to the courſe of nature,
and other differences, very amply deſcribed by
the holy Apoſtles, and Miniſters of Gods Word. Notwithſtanding
the ſame end, the ſame Ieſus Chriſt is repreſented
as well in Baptiſme, as in the Supper. By the
blood of Ieſus Chriſt wee are regenerated,Tit 3. and by the
ſame blood nouriſhed.Ioh. 3 6. By the blood of Ieſus Chriſt
we are renued,Rom. 11. ſett, and engraffed; and by the ſame
blood we are entertained and preſerued from hungring
or thirſting for euer.Iohn 6. By the blood of Ieſus Chriſt, wee
caſt off our old corrupt skin,Gal. 3. and put on his body,Epheſ. 4. from
which likewiſe wee receiue nouriſhment, and eternall
life. By the blood of Ieſus Chriſt, we haue acceſſe and
entry into the Kingdome of Heauen: And by the ſame
blood, we haue fruition of the ſame kingdome.
               In this ſenſe the holy Apoſtle teſtifieth, that wee

were all baptized by the vertue of the holy Spirit,1. Cor. 12. and
we are likewiſe drunke of the ſame ſpirituall drinke,1. Cor. 10. giuen
vnto vs by Ieſus Chriſt. Be not theſe compariſons
drawne out of the holy Scriptures? to witneſſe that Ieſus
Chriſt is the onely aime and ſcope, whereto we muſt
tend both in Baptiſme and the holy Supper? If therefore
that the ſignes of ſacramentall water in Baptiſme, and
of Bread and Wine in the Supper of Ieſus Chriſt, are
ſacred Signes, Earneſts, Gages, Hoſtages, Symboles,
Seales, and Sacraments, inſtituted by God for an aſſurance,
and approbation of our faith: Wherefore,Againſt the Miſſalians. O
Miſſalians, ſeeing you haue inuented a Magicke of tranſubſtantiation
for the Sacrament of the Supper: why
did you not likewiſe with the ſame Magicke ſophiſticate
the Sacrament of Baptiſme? Why haue you
not conſtituted that ſacramentall water, after it is by
you exorcis'd and coniur'd with ſalt, to repell diuels, to
be tranſubſtantiated into the blood of Ieſus Chriſt;
the water being no more water, but an accident without
ſubſtance, as you haue forged by the Bread and
Wine? What difference doe you aſſigne, but Sophiſtries,
Sophiſmes, and Miſſalian ſubtilties? If you perſeuere in
your hereſie,Iohn 3. 4, 7. by reaſon of this word eſt: this word is alſo
vſed in the water of Baptiſme,Tit. 3. which is termed renouation,
and regeneration;Gal. 3. it is named the holy Spirit, and
the Veſtment, by, and with which wee are reueſted, renued,
and regenerated in the blood of Ieſus Chriſt. Seeing
therefore you acknowledge, O Miſſalians, that you
could neuer yet meet with a ſecond Berengarius, to inſtitute
another Decree of a Palinody, for the extending
of your Magicall tranſubſtantiation, to the ſacred water
of Baptiſme, and by the ſame meanes likewiſe to tranſubſtantiate
your luſtrall Plegme & Spittle; your Oyle,
your Creames, your Salt, & other Drugges, wherewith
you haue corrupted the holy Sacrament of Baptiſme;Againſt the corrupters of Baptiſme.
why are you ſo inueterate, and obdurate in your Pompilian

Religion, as to hale Ieſus Chriſt from the right
hand of his Father, to make him in body and blood to
deſcend by your muttered Magick, like another Iupiter
Elicius, before the day preordained for his ſecond
comming?Luke 1.
               
               I may well propound vnto you the ſimilitude of the
Sunne,Mal. 4. called by ſome Apoſtles the Sunne of Righteouſnes
Ieſus Chriſt,Compariſon of the Sun of Ieſus Chriſt, which Iuſtine the Martyr vſeth in his Treatiſe of the Expoſition of faith, chap. 2. becauſe light comes from Heauen,
by this luminous and glorious ſphericall Planet: and ſo
ſpirituall light is exhibited to vs by Ieſus Chriſt, who
out of the night and darkneſſe of ſinne hath brought vs
into the brightneſſe, and cleare ſun-ſhine of his grace.
               You may now therefore vnderſtand, carnall & groſſe
Capernaites,A notable compariſon of the Sunne, to vtterly confute the erroneous doctrine of Tranſubſtantiation. this ſufficient and euident compariſon, to
intimate that the infinite power of God, is much more
compleat and perfect, then your abominable inuention
of Tranſubſtantiation. Will you not acknowledge,
except your eyes be blinded, and obfu
                     •
                  cated with the
palpable darknes of obſtinacie, that the Sunne giues vs
his light, his force, his heat and vigour, and yet neuertheleſſe,
the body it ſelf of the planetall Sunne remaines
and continues in his ſphericall Orbe? Doe you not vſe
to ſay ordinarily in common language when the window
of an houſe is open on that part where the Sunne
ſhines, that the Sunne is come into the houſe, although
the Sunne remaines ſtill in the Firmament? Muſt wee
therefore violently hale and pull the body of the Sun,
to make it deſcend, and bee tranſubſtantiated into this
earthly ſubſtance, before it can affoord its heat, beames,
light and nouriſhment, to Plants, Trees, Herbes, and
Beaſts of the earth? Are you ſo brutiſh, O Capernaits,
as not to recognize that the true Sunne of Righteouſnes
Ieſus Chriſt, hath more power then this Aſtrall
Sunne, being but mortall, and created? If then a mortall
creature hath this power to infuſe into vs the vertue
and efficacie of his body, by his beames, light, and

heate, extended really and effectually ouer the whole
earth, the body remaining ſtill in its heauen: and
ſhall wee not beleeue that God an immortall Creator
hath much more power to grant vs the true Sunne of
Righteouſneſſe Ieſus Chriſt: to giue vs the vertue and
power of his body and bloodſhed for vs by the beames,
light, and heate of his holy Spirit, except hee be by
your Magicke pluckt from the right hand of God, and
his body drawne out of heauen, to be tranſubſtantiated
vpon earth? Why ſhould not Ieſus Chriſt haue this
power to affoord vs his light, and to offer his body
and blood to enter into vs, if by faith and a pure conſcience
wee be ready to receiue him, by the efficacy
of his holy Spirit, as well and better, then the ſphericall
Sunne can enter into our houſes, with his force and
power, and neuer be drawne out of his heauen, to bee
tranſubſtantiated? The Sunne is an entire body created,
reſiding in heauen: the cauſe of the generation of
Plants, Trees, and Herbes, which by his force and calidity,
giues ſuſtentation to whatſoeuer liues vpon the
earth, and in one and the ſame moment, hath power to
quicken, heat, and nouriſh, an infinit number of Plants,
Trees, Herbes, and beaſts of the earth; and yet his body
is neuer ſeparated, diuided, drawne out of his ſpheare,
nor tranſubſtantiated. The body alſo of Ieſus Chriſt
which he aſſumed vp into heauen, ſet at the right hand
of God: hath not that more force, more vertue, more
power, to regenerate, nouriſh and ſuſtaine vs; to giue
vs his vertue, light and beames; to inſpire, quicken, illuminate
and nouriſh vs, and in a moment to make vs all
by faith partakers of his body and bloud: to make vs
members of his members, vnited in, and by him,
through his true promiſe, comprehended vnder the
ſymboles & ſacred ſignes commended vnto vs, till the
ſecond cōming of his humanity be reuealed vpon earth?
Wherefore then O Miſſalians, haue you deuiſed this

Magicke of tranſubſtantiation, to blaſpheme againſt
God, to impaire his omnipotency, and diſable his vertue
more then you do that of the ſphericall Sun, but his
creature? Why ſhould you hale the body of Ieſus
Chriſt out of heauen, before the preordained time, to
tranſubſtantiate it into your little round azimall hoſts
printed with image
                     •
                  y, which you cauſe to bee ador
                     •
                  d,
ſeeing Chriſt as God,Ieſus Chriſt as God aſſiſts all. there aſſiſts his Church perpetually,
and hath the power to regenerate, feed, and ſuſtaine
vs: yea, with an eternall life and nouriſhment,
by his moſt aſſured promiſe, teſtified by the holy Sacraments
of Baptiſme and the ſacred Supper.
               For other more familiar and domeſticall compariſons,
conſider O Miſſalians, how earthly and mo
                     •
                  tall
Princes are reputed, reuerenced and honoured by ſuch
ſacred ſignes as they ordaine; I will onely propound
vnto you two, which is to ſay, waxe and mettals: of one
the Princes ſeale is compoſed, with which grants, pardons,
and remiſſions are ſealed, charters, and priuiledges
by the Prince conferred. He that falſifies this ſeale is
he not puniſht as in caſe of high treaſon, euen as if hee
had outraged the perſon of the Prince? Does not this
ſeale repreſent his owne perſon, euen as if himſelfe
were preſent? Neuertheleſſe the ſeale though it bee
called the ſeale of the Prince, is not tranſubſtantiated,
but ſtill remaines waxe: but otherwiſe hauing receiued
the ſacred character of the Prince,Familiar compariſons of Princes ſeales and coynings, which if they be conterfeited or falſified, the counterfeiters therof are executed as offenders to the Princes perſon. being then no more
called waxe, but the Princes ſeale.
               Alſo the mettals of gold or ſiluer coyned with the
Princes ſtampe, doe ſerue for mony, although they are
no more called gold nor ſiluer; but hauing once exchanged
their names at the Princes wil, they are either
crownes, Angels or Piſtols, or elſe ſhillings, groats or
penies, or other ſuch like names; they are yet notwithſtanding
mettals of the very ſubſtance as they were before,
there is but that difference, that they haue the

Princes impreſſion vpon them by and in which hee is
repreſented really: ſo that whoſoeuer clips or falſifies
that money, is ſorely puniſht by death as a fellon and
a Traitor his Prince, for it is in a manner as bad, and
as if he had offended and conſpired againſt the Princes
owne perſon; by farre greater reaſon the bread and the
wine conſecrated and ordained to bee Sacraments of
the pretious body and blood of Chriſt Ieſus, repreſents
them really,1. Cor, 11. 13. and not by picture. Wherefore whoſoeuer
receiues it vnworthily, commits a haynous crime againſt
the ſupreame and Diuine Maieſty of him, to his
eternall damnation; but tis not to conclude a tranſubſtantiation
by a moſt abhominable coniuration or
witchcraft.
               But if you Maſſalians or Maſſe-Prieſts, Nicholaits
and tranſubſtantiators, be not ſufficiently ſatisfied with
Ieſus Chriſt & his Apoſtles interpretations, as likewiſe
with thoſe ſimilitudes and familiar compariſons,Here is proued by the Doctors the words of Chriſt concerning the Sacrament of his body and blood, to be ſpiritually taken and not carnally, and ſo vtterly Tranſubſtantiation is confuted. to
reduce and bring you to the ſincere way, and certaine
forme ordained of God for to celebrate his holy Sacraments,
in aboliſhing your Pompilian and Miſſafique
Idolatries, eiecting from you your abhominable witchcraft
of tranſubſtantiation. At the leaſt will ye not beleeue
at all the interpretations of the anci
                     •
                  et authors of
the Church: hearken but to the ſayings of St. Auguſtin
againſt Adamantine that notable hereticke: Euen as the
blood, ſaith hee, in many parts and places of the holy
Scripture is ſaid to be the water, the Stone alſo to bee
Chriſt;
                     L. 8. Aug. ch. 12. The authority of ancient Doctors. euen ſo the bread is ſaid to be his body: which
three places muſt be vnderſtood and interpreted to bee
ſacred ſignes and figures, then when this very author
ſaid Chriſt Ieſus vttered theſe words;St. Auguſtines interpretation. 
                  Hoc eſt corpus meum,
this is my body,Lib. 3. de doctr. Chriſt. & in praefat. Pſa. l. 3. in preſenting and breaking bread
to his Diſciples, hee gaue them the ſigne of his body:
for otherwiſe it ſhould ſeeme to bee a thing both inhumane
and vnlawfull, to deuoure the pretious fleſh and

blood of Ieſus Chriſt; if there were not the figure of
the bread and wine for to keepe in memory his fleſh
and blood, the body of Chriſt hauing beene ſacrificed
to God his Father for our life and eternal nouriſhment.Lib. 10. de Cant. des. cha. 5. ca. ſacrificium de conſecr. diſtinct. 2. Tertullian. lib. 1. & 3. 4.
Againe the ſame author vſeth this interpretation, The
Sacrament viſible is the new Teſtament, that is to ſay,
the ſacred ſigne of the inuiſible ſacrifice: the like interpretations
are deſcribed by Tertullian againſt that hereticke
Marcion,
                  Vt quid paras dentem & ventrem? crede & manducaſti, ea. vt quid, de conſecrat. diſtin. 2. Aug. in lib. de remed. paeniten. & in Ioan. tra. 25. cap. 6. 
                  Chriſtus acceptum panem corpus ſuum fecit,
dicendo, hoc eſt corpus meum: id eſt, figura corporis mei.
Wherefore then O Miſſalians, haue you not followed
the authority of theſe holy Doctors, of the Church
which would not blaſphem againſt God by the magick
of tranſubſtantiation, but haue freely and vertuouſly
acknowledged the Sacrament to be a viſible ſigne or
ſacred figure, ſignifying by faith & ſpirit that which is
inuiſible?S Hiero in epiſt ad Ephef. wherefore do you prepare the mouth and the
belly for to deuoure the body and blood of Chriſt corporally,
really and carnally?Ca. dupliciter ead. diſtinct. why offer you not your
ſelues by true & liuely faith for to eate worthily Chriſt
Ieſus?S. Gel
                        •
                     ſe againſt Eutychius and Neſtorieus. Why haue you not vnderſtood the manducation
of the body of Chriſt, by the notable diſtinction of
that learned Doctor S. Ierome,
                  
                     S. Ambr
                           •
                        ſe in the booke of Sacraments, cap. 1. & 11. ſaying, the fleſh of Chriſt
Ieſus is to be vnderſtood carnally, when it is ſpoken of
the ſhedding his blood, and crucifying of his body for
our ſaluation; but ſpiritually, when it is ſaid that his fleſh
is the true meat for vs to eate. For another proofe, I will
alledge that learned Prelate Gelaſe Biſhop of Rome, the
which diſputing againſt the Heretickes Eutichines and
Neſtorians, doth affirme the bread & wine conſecrated
and made Sacraments are neuertheleſſe in ſubſtance
bread and wine, but to be ſignes of the body and blood
of Chriſt Ieſus by the myſtery of the Sacrament. And
if ye deſire larger teſtimonies, Saint Ambroſius vpon
the Epiſtle of Saint Paul to the Corinthians hath explicated
and made manifeſt, that the eating of the bread

and the drinking of the wine doth ſignifie the fleſh and
the blood of Chriſt Ieſus offered for vs.Origen. in Leu. ho
                        ••
                     . 7. 
                  Origen likewiſe
in his Homilies teacheth the Sacraments to be figures,
which we ought to examine really, and not carnally:
becauſe ſaith he, that thoſe words, Hoc eſt corpus
meum, not vnderſtood ſpiritually kils the ſoule, when
he writes to eate the fleſh of Chriſt. Wherefore S. Chryſoſtome
admoniſhed the people to honour that holy Sacrament
in offring himſelfe his ſoule to God, for the
which Chriſt Ieſus was crucified; & that by that holy
Sacament of bread & wine, is ſignified to vs the ſimilitude
of the body and blood of Ieſus Chriſt. For reſolution,
we muſt follow and be ruled, according to the inſtruction
and interpretation of our holy Sauiour Chriſt
Ieſus and his Apoſtles,S. Chryſoſtom. hom. 31. ch. 15. com. 1. to honor and reuerence his holy
Sacraments inſtituted of him by exterior ſignes, to lift
vp our hearts and raiſe our ſpirits and minds to heauen,Pſal. 12.
for to comprehend that which by thoſe ſignes is repreſented
to vs, and not to eſteeme, hold, & account them
as vaine pictures or apparitions; but endeuour to receiue
them worthily by liuely faith and vertue of the
holy Ghoſt, to the end to be fed and nouriſhed with
celeſtiall bread, to the ſaluation of our ſoules thereby
to attaine life eternall.
               Let vs then be aſſured in Chriſt Ieſus as members of
his body that we may be reduced and brought all into
one vnity,1. Corinth. 10. for to communicate and eate the ſame bread
and drink the ſame wine compounded of many graines
vnited together,1. Corinth. 12. to the end that wee may ſay with the
holy Apoſtle, All wee faithfull are the body of Chriſt
Ieſus, ſaued and redeemed by his holy body crucified,
and pretious blood ſhed for vs, and ſo remaining permanent
in faith in Chriſt Ieſus, in eating his body and
drinking his blood, to beleeue firmely to haue beene
crucified and riſen from the dead,D. Auguſt. in Ioan. tra
                        ••
                     . 30. 
                        •
                     rt. 1. & 3. aſcended into Heauen,
and ſitteth at the right hand of God his Father,

vntill that he returnes as he is aſcended with his humanity,
and neuertheleſſe his Almighty power and Diuinity
to be diſtributed to vs and diffuſed in earth, and
in all places, eſpecially in his holy Sacraments,
which he hath left vs for a pledge, and exteriour
approbation of our faith, for
memory and recordation of the
death and paſſion of our Sauiour
Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            To my Noble and moſt learned Author,
on his worthy Name.
            
               I N the Circumference of all Natures frame,
               S O honor'd is (learn'd Caſaubon) thy name,
               A S ſo much need my encomiaſticke lines,
               A S a ſmall Taper when that Phaebus ſhines
               C Leare at noone day:
            
            
               C An this ſo litterate Age afford a breſt,
               A Cloſet where ſuch profound wit doth reſt,
               S Vch abſtruce Learning? theſe he did combine
               A Peerleſſe Graecian, and vnmatcht Diuine:
               
               V Nder the wounds of his Polemicke pen
               B Led the Idolatrous Whore: Rareſt of men,
               O Ver all Nations flies thy far-ſpred Name,
               
               N O angle but reſounds thy dateleſſe fame.
            
            
               The admirer of his works,
ABRAHAM DARCIE.
            
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   