
      
         
            
            A merry nevv catch of all Trades.
            To the tune of The cleane Contrary way.
            
               
                  
               
               
                  ALL Trades are not alike in show,
                  All Arts doe not agrée:
                  All Occupations gaines are small.
                  As héere they all shall sée,
                  As héere they all shall sée.
               
               
                  The Courtier woes, his seruant does,
                  Farre more then he can answer,
                  The Baker weighes with false essayes,
                  The Cuckold's turn'd a Monster. The Cuck. &c.
               
               
                  The Taylor sowes, the Smith he blowes,
                  The Tinker beates his pan:
                  The Pewterer ranke, cries tinke a tanke tanke,
                  The Apothecary ranta tan tan. The Apoth: &c.
               
               
                  The Bricklayer high doth rise to flye,
                  The Plummer oft doth melt,
                  The Carpenter doth loue his rule,
                  And the Hatmakar loues his felt. And the, &c.
               
               
                  The Weauer thumps, his olde wife mumps,
                  The Barber goes snip snap,
                  The Butcher prickes, the Tapster nickes,
                  The Farmer stops a
                        •
                     ap. The Farmer, &c.
               
               
                  The Curryer toyles, and deales in oyles,
                  The Cobler liues by his peece:
                  The Chamberlaine cheates with musty meates,
                  And doth the Countrey fléece. And doth, &c.
               
               
                  The Carter whips, the Begger ships,
                  The Beadle liues by blowes,
                  Yet whores wil be whores at honest mens doores
                  Disphight a'th Beadles nose. Dispight a'th, &c.
               
               
                  The Broome-man cryes, mayd seruants buyes,
                  And swaps with him for wares,
                  The Countrey asse doth to the Cosse,
                  Sell Orchards full of Peares. Sell, &c.
               
               
                  Some Schoole-masters teach beyond their reach,
                  The Mason dealts with his square,
                  The Fletcher doth nock, and workes by the clock,
                  The Beareward liues by his Beare. The, &c.
               
               
                  The Grosers pates 'bout thinges of weight,
                  Is often troubled sore,
                  The Taylors yard is seldome marde,
                  Tho it measure many a score.
                  Tho it measure many a score.
               
            
            
               
               The second part.
               To the same Tune.
               
                  
                     STEPHEN· BROOMEMAN:·
                     BVY·BROOME·BVY·
                  
               
               
                  THe Iron-monger hardly deales,
                  All Fruterers loose by'th rot:
                  The Hagler buyes and liues by lyes,
                  The Drunkard plyes the pot.
                  The Drunkard plyes the pot.
               
               
                  The Collier sweares héele loose his eares,
                  But he will falsly deale:
                  And such are glad as mand the Pad,
                  For trifles for to steale. For trifles, &c.
               
               
                  The Budget-maker oftentimes,
                  Doe deale in brasen nayles:
                  And Tradesmen store, turne Porters poore,
                  When other trading failes. When other, &c.
               
               
                  The Water-man will carry Nan,
                  For two-pence crosse the Riuer:
                  Yet this héele say, if she cannot pay,
                  Her passage free héele giue her▪ Her passage, &c.
               
               
                  The Glouer pokes, the Gallant smoakes,
                  Yet liues in Tradesmen debts,
                  The Drawer thriues by honest wiues,
                  The Cheater liues by bets. The Cheater, &c.
               
               
                  The Cooke doth broyle, the Fencer foyle,
                  The footman be doth sweat:
                  And Apple-Iohn doth vsher Nan,
                  And she giues him a heate. And she, &c.
               
               
                  The Ostler rubs, the Cutler scrubs,
                  The Semsters deale in Ruffes:
                  The smoakie man with his small cole pan,
                  Maintained is by puffes. Maintained is, &c.
               
               
                  The Chandelors déeds great pennance néeds.
                  And Faggots they die beare:
                  The Uintner drawes, yet makes no frayes,
                  The Begger is voyde of care. The Begger, &
               
               
                  The Morris dance doth brauely prance,
                  And about the Countrey goes:
                  And May poles hie shall mount to th'skie,
                  Despight of the Hobby horse nose. Despight, &c
               
               
                  Dissentions séede, the Parators néede,
                  And Scoulds him money giue:
                  And if there were no swaggering Whore,
                  The Pander could not liue. The Pander, &c.
               
               
                  Thus all arise by contraries,
                  Heauen send them crosses ten:
                  Unlesse they all both great and small,
                  Doe liue and dye honest men.
                  Doe liue and dye honest men.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Printed at London for I. Trundle.
            
         
      
   