
      
         
            
            
               
CATO IN ENGLISH VERSE.
            With a three-fold Table directing to varietie.
            
            1. Of Leſſons for all ſorts of perſons.
            2. Of Copies for Writing-Schollers.
            3. Of Poeſies for the Houſe and Schoole.
            The Second Edition.
            With Addition of proper Titles or Heads (anſwering the firſt Table) to euery Diſtich, for the more profitable vſe of this worke, eſpecially in the Engliſh Schooles.
            By IOHN PENKETHMAN, louer of Learning.
            
               LONDON Printed for Richard Hawkins, and are to be ſold at his Shop in Chancery Lane. 1624.
         
         
            
            
               
Ad vniuerſos in regno Britannico, tam probitate quàm doctrina decoratos Ludimagiſtros Tetradecaſtichon, Interpretis dedicatorium.
            
               ARtis Grammaticae doctores atque Columnae,
               O & Calliopes Angligenumque decus:
               Vobis iſta dico, non mores, more Magiſtri,
               Vt vos erudiam, praecipiamue, bonos.
               (Ad mare, tali etenim, latices deferre viderer,
               Officio, gravidis mella apibuſque dare)
               Sed modo deuoti monimentum & pignus amoris,
               Vt maneant vobis diſcipuliſque, mei:
               Quos vero istorum potius protectio tangit,
               Quam qui gymnaſijs ipſa Latina docent?
               
                  Ʋos igitur gratumque ratumque tenete libellum,
               Patroni & proprij protegitote, meum.
               Sub quibus (inuidiae quanquam circundatus armis)
               Mercurij tanquam virga animatus, eat.
            
         
         
            Ad ſtudioſos Diſcipulos Hexaſticon.
            
               SJ dictata probis praeceptis veſtra, vel aptis
               Themmata dogmatibus non decorare piget:
               Si cordi eſt vobis, comptos perdiſcere mores,
               Et bene viuendi noſcere ritè viam:
               
                  Ʋt Cato praecepit Romanis, carmina, verbis,
               Judice, maternis quaerite noſtra, duce.
            
         
         
            
            To all induſtrious Maſters of the Pen.
            
               LOe, you whoſe exquiſite and honour'd skill,
               (A liberall Science worthy to be ſtilde)
               Keeps in renoun'd eſteeme the fether'd Quill:
               By whom great matters from confuſion wilde
               Are brought to order, whoſe recording aide,
               Supports the chiefeſt Calling, Art, or Trade:
            
            
               Loe, a ſententious Treaſure I prefer,
               For needfull vſe to your moſt actiue hands.
               A treaſure, if true Wiſedome do not err;
               Worth more then manual knowledge, goods or lands:
               This then for Copies to your Schollers giue,
               So may they learne at once to write, and liue.
            
         
         
            To all carefull and vertuouſly-diſpoſed Parents and Houſholders.
            
               IF hauing Children, you would wel inſtruct thē,
               And vnto God through vertuous way conduct thē;
               If you with prudent precepts do not ſcorne
               Your Hearts to fill, and Houſes to adorne:
               Or if vnskil'd you couet to diſcerne,
               What good your Sonnes from Latine Cato learne:
               This Booke in price, and in proportion ſmall,
               Yet great in Matter, ſatisfies you all.
            
         
         
            
            The Tranſlators Preface to the Beneuolent Peruſers.
            
               THe Doctrine of Wiſedome (like running water) ought to be common, becauſe, by how much any one inſtructeth others, by ſo much hee multiplieth and acquireth wiſedome to himſelfe, according to that, Qui alios docet, ſeipſum inſtruit, Hee that teacheth others, learneth himſelfe. For knowledge is deſcribed to be an incomparable Treaſure, and a noble poſſeſſion of the minde, which beeing diſtributed by parts, taketh increaſe, and diſdaining a couetous poſſeſſor, without diſtribution quickly decayeth.
            I therefore conſidering that the Morall Diſtichs intituled Cato, beeing in the Latine tongue, were learned and read only in Schooles by Children, and deſiring to ſpend my vacant houres in ſome commendable ſtudie for the benefit of my Countrey, (to which end eſpecially we are born) conceiued it a work of worth to tranſlate the ſame in our mother tongue, both for the Inſtruction of ſuch Parents, and others, as were ignorant of the Latine, and for a generall vſe for which they were intended, as hereafter in this Preface I ſhall declare.
            But firſt let me ſearch into, and expreſſe the foure-fold

cauſe of this worke, that concurreth to the ordering of euery thing, to wit, the Materiall, Finall, Efficient, and Formall cauſe.
            
            The Materiall cauſe or matter of this Booke (which is the ſame) are the foure Cardinall vertues, Prudence, Iuſtice, Fortitude, and Temperance, which are called Cardinall, by a Metaphor or Figure, of Cardo a hinge, becauſe as a doore is turned on the hinges, ſo all other vertues are reduced to theſe foure, as formes to their kindes. The firſt introduceth or bringeth in, becauſe a man through Wiſedome is brought vnto Sciences and Vertues. The Second directeth, becauſe a man is directed by Iuſtice to the kingdome of Heauen. The Third ouercomes for a man is ſaid through Fortitude to ouercome his ſpirituall enemies, the world, the Fleſh, and the Deuill. The Fourth tempereth, for it teacheth vs to liue ſoberly in this world, and to abſtaine from carnall deſires. All which vertues, with their ſeuerall Daughters or Branches are copiouſly handled in this Booke.
            The Finall cauſe is profit; both priuate, as to the Authours owne ſonne; and common, as to vs; for by peruſing this booke like prudent Husbandmen, wee may extirpe or roote out vices, and ſowe the ſeedes of vertues in our hearts, whereby with Gods aſſiſtance we may auoid the calamities of this preſent life, and that to come.
            The efficient cauſe is the Authour of this Booke, which is vnknowne, or very doubtfull, ſo as it may be called Apocryphus, a word ſignifying greatly obſcure: For the famous Philoſopher, and Hiſtoriographer, Plutarch, ſetting fotth (amongſt others) the liues of two vertuous and learned men, bearing the name of Cato, the one Marcus Portius Cato, called alſo Cenſo
                     ••
                  aus of being Cenſor; the other likewiſe, M. P. Cato called alſo Vticenſis, of Vtica, where he ſlue himſelfe, whom he further diſtinguiſheth with the Additions of maior the elder, and minor the yonger, ſheweth that Cato maior died before, and Cato minor in the time of Julius Caeſar, and that (notwithſtanding the ſaying of Iuuenal, Tertius è coelo cecidit Cato) Cato maior
               
had two Sonnes, whereof the one had alſo a Sonne, and that Sonne the like. And the other had two Sonnes, whereof the one was Father of Cato minor. And that Cato minor had a Sonne, the whole Progenie bearing the name of Cato, who were all extinct before the time of Auguſtus the ſecond Emperour of Rome.
            
            But I obſerue in the Preface to the ſecond Booke of theſe Diſtichs, that the Author aduiſeth the Reader, if he deſire to knowe the Romane and ciuill warres, (which were thoſe betweene Iulius Caeſar and Pompey) hee ſhould ſearch Lucan; whereby it is euident that this booke was not before Lucan, who writ his worke after the time of Julius Caeſar, and conſequently none of the Catones could poſſibly be the Author therof. And therefore ſome father it on Seneca, who was Tutor to Nero the fift Roman Emperor; others on golden-mouth'd Chryſoſtome: And it was attributed to the Poet Auſonius, by Baptiſta Pius, (whoſe opinion ſome haue lately followed) whom Joſeph Scaliger in his Auſonian Lectures ſharpely reprooueth, and plainely confuteth. Whereupon may be ſaid,

                  Indiſcuſſa manet, & adhuc ſub Judice lis eſt.
               
               
                  The ſtrife no Iudge did yet decide,
                  But vndiſcuſt it doth abide.
               
            
            Yet ſome ſay it is thus intituled, Incipit Ethica Catonis, The Morall Science of Cato beginneth; not becauſe Cato compoſed it, but to the end it might be of the more authoritie. Others ſay the Title is thus, Incipit Tullius de praeceptis Catonis; and that hee compoſed this worke when hee firſt entred Rhetoricke, but called the ſame by the name of Cato (as his Treatiſe, intituled, Cato maior de Senectute) that it might bee the more willingly receiued: which Tully alſo (as Plutarch reciteth in the life of Caeſar) writ the praiſe of Cato minor, and inſcribed it Cato; and now it is intituled, Libellus elegantiſſimus
               
               qui inſcribitur Cato, that is, a moſt elegant booke inſcribed Cato. And the ſame Scaliger in the afore-mentioned place, ſaith, that theſe Diſtichs were inſcribed with the name of Cato, becauſe the goodneſſe of Cato was knowne to all men by way of Prouerbe; for good men, and of moſt approued manners, in thoſe dayes were called Catones. And ſuch is the cenſure of the learned Eraſmus, expreſt in an Epiſtle prefixed to an ancient Latine Edition of theſe Diſtichs (wherewith the Greeke of Planudes is intermixt) Catonis (ſaith he) ob id tantum arbitror dici, quod Sententias habeat Catone dignas. I ſuppoſe it to be called Cato, becauſe it hath Sentences worthy of Cato.
            
            And this name of Cato was firſt giuen to Cato maior, (as Plutarch affirmeth) for his skilfulneſſe in affaires. For (to Etymologize the word) it may be deriued of Catus a Cat, becauſe he was crafty as that creature, or rather of Catus, an old ſyncopation of Cautus, interpreted, wary, ſubtill and skilfull. Yet Tranquillus makes mention of one Valerius Cato, a Grammarian at Rome, who taught many, and of noble ſtocke, in the time of Scylla, whoſe fame theſe verſes record to vs;

                  Cato Grammaticus Latina Syren
                  Qui ſolus legit, & facit Poetas.
               
Which may I thus tranſlate.
            
               Grammar-learn'd Cato that the Poets readeth,
               Euen Syren-like alone and Poets breedeth.
            
            Whereby it may be coniectured, and it is probable enough, that Valerius Cato, if any of the name, writ this booke, eſpecially for his Schollers inſtruction, and education in vertue, and generally for the benefit of the Common-wealth, as Socrates, Iſocrates, and others inſtructed their Countrey in morall vertues, by way of Precept. To conclude, for my part, ſeeing

the name or perſon is not ſo much to be traced out or regarded as his good doctrine, I wil not certainly aſcribe the penning of theſe Precepts to any one particular man, or more, more then Eraſmus Maturinus Corderius, or any others haue done in their precedent Comments, or Tranſlations, but leaue the deciding thereof, as a Schoole-queſtion, to the deeper Schollerſhip of others.
            Now the Formall cauſe is, the manner of compoſing this Worke, which is two-fold, to wit, in Proſe, as the Preface; in Verſe, as the Execution or Treatiſe; for he vſeth an Hexameter ſtile, diſtinguiſhing his worke into foure parts. Wee muſt note therefore that the Author premiſeth a Preface to his worke, or the firſt booke thereof. In the firſt part of which Preface, conſidering that men beyond meaſure gaped after worldly deſires, and were remote from the way of Trueth, he promiſeth to giue them aide. In the Second he ſpeakes to his Sonne, and all others in the perſon of him, inſinuating vnto them an order of wel-liuing. In the Third, he treateth of Diuine worſhip. In the Fourth, of piety towards our Parents, and Kinred. And in the Fifth and laſt, hee handleth vertues and Sciences, and warnes vs to beware of vices. Which Preface being ended, hee ſets vpon the Treatiſe, where hee executes in Meeter, what he premiſed in Proſe, for profit, delight and ornament, and that it may bee more firmely committed to memory, euery Diſtich, or two Verſes, (for ſo the word ſignifies) containing a Precept, and (for the moſt part) a Sentence, teaching vs our duety towards God and man; as alſo how to demeane our ſelues in all eſtates and conuerſations. So that whoſoeuer was the Author, it worthily deſerues, not onely of all ſorts to bee gratefully receiued, diligently peruſed, dearely eſteemed, and faithfully obſerued; but to be tranſlated into the vulgar tongue of all Nations.
            Neuertheleſſe, let me by the way admoniſh and forewarne you (which Eraſmus hath omitted) to beware of ſome fewe of theſe Precepts, which I haue noted with an Aſteriske thus *

being in part Heatheniſh, & contrary to Chriſtian doctrine or not fully therewith cohering, as their ſeuerall Annotations in the laſt leafe of this Booke, vnder the Title of Neceſſary Notes, &c. doe make manifeſt.
            But all the reſt being iuſt, and appertinent to our faith and good carriage (though they may not bee compared to that Booke of Bookes, the ſacred Scripture) wee are not onely to credit and follow (as Saint Auguſtine teacheth in his Booke De Doctrina Chriſtiana) but to challenge and retaine them euen as our owne, the rather for that the Authour is not knowne, and if hee were, being a Heathen, hee is indeed no right owner thereof. For God made manifeſt his wonderfull power and wiſedome in the hearts of the Heathen or Gentiles, chefly for the better inſtruction and confirmation of the faith of Chriſtians to come, Graces and Gifts being not now ſo plenteouſly beſtowed by him, as in ages paſt.
            Laſtly, for my ſtudy and labour in this preſent worke, not onely by mine owne conſideration and deſire, as aforeſaid, but by the aduice of diuers worthy friends, I was thereunto animated▪ and am now cheriſhed with an aſſured confidence, that you will not reiect nor neglect it, for the vnlearned ſtyle or rudeneſſe of my Pen, but rather louingly accept it, in reſpect of the excellent Counſels and Sentences it containeth, and for my good will and great paines therein expended, as may appeare, not onely in the tranſlation of the Verſe, but in the addition of a Three-fold Table at the end, by mee diligently and elaborately ordred and contriued, both for pleaſure and profit, and for the better vſe of the originall, whereby may bee readily found any Document or Saying therein contained, either for Grammar-Schollers to inſert and apply in their Theames and other exerciſes, or for Children to bee taught and learned both within and without Booke at the Reading-ſchoole, or for their Copies at the Writing-ſchoole, or for Men and Women vnlearned not onely to reade, vnderſtand, and learne, for the furniſhing of their

hearts and behauiours, but to adorne their Houſes with good and godly Poeſies, aſwel for dayly obiects to their owne optike ſenſes, leſt beeing out of ſight, they ſhould be alſo (to vphold the Prouerbe) out of minde, as alſo for the inſtruction of all Commers, or friendly viſitants, that haue not been ſo happy as to reade the whole worke, which repreſenteth both the beauties and blemiſhes of the minde, and manners; as a Chryſtall mirrour or looking glaſſe the conditions of each Countenance, for which cauſe I may iuſtly intitle it, The mirrour of the minde, and ſo leaue it in your hands as A handfull of honeſty; not vegetatiue, like the weede ſo called, but rationall, Philoſophicall, and for the moſt part, Theologicall; wiſhing your eyes may neuer part from it, nor the clapper of your lips take intermiſſion before your hearts, and ſuch, whoſe eares attend you, bee edified by the diſcipline enſuing. And ſo, leſt vnto me yee allude the ſaying of the Philoſopher, when hee cryed, Hoe, Citizens, ſhut your gates, that the Citie runne not out, I heere conclude mine, and giue place to the Authours Preface.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
               CATO his Preface to his firſt Booke of Diſtichs.
            
               PErceiuing how greatly men did erre and goe aſtray frō the Way of well-liuing, I thought good to impart ſome ayde & aduice to their weake vnderſtanding, chiefely, to the end thar they might liue in commendable wiſe, and attaine to honour; Here now (my moſt deare Sonne) I will teach thee by what meanes thou maiſt order the manners of thy mind. Reade therefore theſe my Precepts, in ſuch ſort, that thou maiſt perfectly vnderſtand them: For, to read any thing, and not vnderſtand it, is to neglect what thou readeſt.
         
         
            His ſhort Precepts in Proſe, tranſlated in Verſe.
            
               
                  
                     1 TO God pray humbly.
                  
                     2 Loue thy parents deare.
                  
                     3 Embrace thy kindred.
                  
                     4 And thy Maſter feare.
                  
                     5 Keepe ſafe all matters to thy charge committed.
                  
                     6 And to the pleading place be throughly fitted.
                  
                     7 Conuerſe with men of honeſt conuerſation.
                  
                     8 Come not to counſell without Inuitation.
                  
                     9 Be cleanly.
                  
                     10 And a kind ſaluting ſpeaker.
                  
                     11 Yeeld to the ſtronger.
                  
                     12 And forbcare the weaker.
                  
                     13 Thy goods preſerue.
                  
                     14 Thy chaſtity retain.
                  
                     15 Care well.
                  
                     16 Read books.
                  
                     17 And beare the in thy brain.
                  
                     
                     18 Looke to thy houſhould.
                  
                     19 And be courteous known.
                  
                     20 Not angry without cauſe.
                  
                     21 And mocke thou none.
                  
                     22 None doe thou mocke in miſery or need.
                  
                     23 Lend vpon credit:
                  
                     24 But to whom take heed.
                  
                     25 Thy friend in iudgmēt help.
                  
                     26 feaſt ſeldom.
                  
                     27 ſleep For Natures payment.
                  
                     28 Thy oath lawfull keepe.
                  
                     29 Drinke Wine in meaſure.
                  
                     30 For thy Country fight▪
                  
                  
                     31 And of beliefe in nothing be thou light.
                  
                     32 Aske counſell of thy ſelfe.
                  
                     33 Take counſell ſure.
                  
                     34 Fly harlots.
                  
                     35 And thy mind to learne enure.
                  * See the note at the end of the Booke vnder A.
                  
                     36 Lye not.
                  
                     37 Do good to good men.
                  
                     38 none backbite.
                  
                     39 Thy reputation hold.
                  
                     40 Giue Judgement right.
                  
                     40 By patience winne thy Parents to be kinde.
                  
                     42 And benefits receiu'd beare ſtill in minde.
                  
                     43 Frequent the Iudgement-ſeat,
                  
                     44 & get Law-skill.
                  
                     45 
                     Ʋſe vertue.
                  
                     46 Moderate thy angry will.
                  
                     47 Make paſtime with a top.
                  
                     48 Dice flie thou muſt.
                  
                     49 Doe nothing to thy ſtrength, but what is iust.
                  
                     50 Despiſe not thy Jnferiour.
                  
                     51 Nor deſire The good of others.
                  
                     52 Loue thy wife entire.
                  
                     53 Nurture thy children well.
                  
                     54 Seeke not to breake The Law thou mad'ſt.
                  
                     55. At Bankets little ſpeake.
                  
                     56 That which is lawfull earneſtly affect.
                  
                     57 And vnto others loue beare glad respect.
               
            
            The end of the Preface.
         
         
            
            
               CATO his Diſtichs.
            
               THE FIRST BOOKE.
               
                  1 Sacrificers, or worſhippers of God.
                  
                  SIth God a Spirit is, as Poets write,
                  Him ſerue thou chiefely with vnſpotted ſprite.
               
               
                  Orthus.
                  If God a Spirit be, as what more ſure?
                  Him let vs chiefely ſerue with ſpirit pure.
               
               
                  2 Sluggards, Careleſſe men.
                  
                  Giue not thy ſelfe to ſleepe, watch alwaies more:
                  For too long eaſe encreaſeth Vices ſtore.
               
               
                  3 Babblers, Blabbers, Talkers.
                  
                  Tongue▪rule a vertue principall repute:
                  Hees next to God, that keepes with reaſon mute.
               
               
                  4 Inconſtant men.
                  
                  Take heed thou bee not to thy ſelfe contrary:
                  Who differs from himſelfe, with all will vary.
               
               
                  5 Carpers.
                  
                  If to mens manners thou good heed doſt giue:
                  When they blame others, faultles none doth liue.
               
               
                  6 Trauellers. Couetous men.
                  
                  Leaue things thou knowſt will hurt thee, though thou loue them:
                  Riches are good, but ſafety ſits aboue them.
               
               
                  
                  7 Company-keepers. Politicians.
                  
                  As time requires, be conſtant, or be light:
                  The wiſe, with time his maners changeth quite.
               
               
                  8 Husbands. Maſters.
                  
                  Raſhly, if of thy men thy Wife complaineth,
                  Truſt not: for whom thou lou'ſt, ſhe oft diſdaineth.
               
               
                  9 Friends.
                  
                  When thou warn'ſt any, though he'l take no heed,
                  Holding him deare, in warning ſtill proceed.
               
               
                  10 Company-keepers.
                  
                  Men full of words, with words doe not purſue:
                  All ſpeake, but well to ſpeake, is giuen to few.
               
               
                  11 Friends, Prodigals.
                  
                  Loue others well, but beſt thy ſelfe befriend,
                  So helpe the good, that want thee not attend.
               
               
                  12 Babblers, Talkers, Blabbers, Newes-carriers.
                  
                  News do not ſpread, leſt thou the head be thought:
                  Hurt, not by ſilence, but by ſpeech is wrought.
               
               
                  13 Debtors, Promiſers.
                  
                  Promiſe not ſure, on others if thou truſt:
                  For many men ſpeake much, but few be iuſt.
               
               
                  14 Company-keepers. Praiſed men.
                  
                  When prais'd thou art, thine own Iudge look thou be;
                  Others beleeue, euen as thy ſelfe, of thee.
               
               
                  15 Giuers, Receiuers.
                  
                  A benefit receiu'd, make knowne to many,
                  But when thou giueſt, blab it not to any.
               
               
                  
                  16 Rehearſers of others liues. Old men.
                  
                  Telling (youth ſpent) the acts of many a man,
                  Thinke on thine owne, before old age began.
               
               
                  17 Company-keepers, Suspicious men.
                  
                  Care not, if any whiſpering talke ariſeth:
                  All ſaid of him, the guilty man ſurmiſeth.
               
               
                  18 Careleſs men, Rich men.
                  
                  When riches flow, 'gainſt Pouerty prouide:
                  The laſt and firſt dayes haue not equall tide.
               
               
                  19 Heires.
                  
                  Sith we haue giuen vs a fraile doubtfull breath,
                  Doe not relye vpon anothers death.
               
               
                  20 Receiuers.
                  
                  When thy poor friend giues ought of little worth,
                  Kindly receiue, and fully ſet it forth.
               
               
                  21 Poore-men.
                  
                  Sith God at firſt thee naked did create,
                  Beare with a patient minde thy poore eſtate.
               
               
                  22 Fearers of death.
                  
                  Doe not feare that which doth life's period make:
                  Who dreads to dye, lifes pleaſures doth forſake.
               
               
                  23 Giuers.
                  
                  If for Deſerts no friend pay thee againe,
                  Thy God accuſe not, but thy ſelfe refraine.
               
               
                  24 Prodigals.
                  
                  Leſt thou feele want, thy gettings doe not waſte,
                  Thinke th'art ſtill needy, to keepe what thou haſt.
               
               
                  
                  25 Promiſers.
                  
                  Promiſe not twice, what can be quickly wrought,
                  Leſt thou proue windy, that wouldſt kind be thoght.
               
               
                  26 Diſsemblers, Politicians, Flattered men.
                  
                  * See the note at the end of the Booke vnder B.
                  Who feignes in words, and is no friend in heart,
                  Doe thou the like: ſo Art is foyld by Art.
               
               
                  27 Flattered men.
                  
                  Faire ſpeakers too much truſt not: for meane while
                  Fowlers pipe ſweetly, they the Birds beguile.
               
               
                  28 Parents. Poore men.
                  
                  If you haue Children, but no wealth to giue,
                  Inſtruct them in good Arts, whereby to liue.
               
               
                  29 Houſholders. Niggards.
                  
                  Deare what is cheap, cheap what is deare eſteeme,
                  Niggard or Couetous thou ſhalt not ſeeme.
               
               
                  30 Carpers.
                  
                  Doe not thy ſelfe, what thou art wont to blame:
                  When faults reproue the Teacher, 'tis a ſhame.
               
               
                  31 Suitors.
                  
                  Aske what is iuſt, or what ſeeme honeſt may:
                  For fooles require what rightly ſhould haue, Nay.
               
               
                  32 Inconſtant men. Wauering men.
                  
                  Doe not vnknown aboue things known aduance:
                  The knowne, on iudgement, vnknowne reſt on Chance.
               
               
                  33 Worldlings.
                  
                  In doubtfull dangers ſith our life remaines:
                  Hold thou, that labour'ſt, each day for thy gaines.
               
               
                  
                  34 Contenders. Quarrellers.
                  
                  Thy Mate, whō thou maiſt cōquer, ſomtime ſpare,
                  Becauſe good friends are kept with heedfull care.
               
               
                  35 Suitors.
                  
                  Crauing things great, ſmall, feare not to beſtow:
                  For Thankfulneſſe deare friends vniteth ſo.
               
               
                  36 Friends. Quarrellers.
                  
                  Quarrell not with thy friend, nor anger mooue:
                  Ire breedeth hatred, Concord feedeth loue.
               
               
                  37 Maſters.
                  
                  When ſeruants faults prouoke thee to diſpleaſure,
                  Temper thy ſelfe to puniſh them with meaſure.
               
               
                  31 Conquerors. Strong men. Superiours.
                  
                  Whom thy force can, ſomtimes by ſuffrance quell:
                  Patience all vertues alwayes doth excell.
               
               
                  39 Prodigals.
                  
                  Keepe wel thy labours fruits: wants greater grow,
                  When to repaire our loſſe paines we beſtow.
               
               
                  40 Prodigals. Houſholders. Rich men.
                  
                  When being rich thou mak'ſt thy friends good cheere,
                  Bee alwaies to thy ſelfe a friend moſt neere.
               
            
            
               
               The Second Booke.
               
                  The Preface.
                  If thou wouldſt learne the tilling of the ground,
                  Reade Virgils Georgicks, where that skill is found.
                  But if Herbes vertues thou car'ſt more to knowe,
                  
                     Macer the Poet thoſe in Ʋerſe will ſhowe.
                  The Roman ciuill warres to vnderſtand
                  If thou deſire, take Lucan in thy hand.
                  Or if thou wouldſt performe the Louers part,
                  Repaire to Ouid that doth teach the Art.
                  But to liue wiſely if thy mind be ſet,
                  To me giue eare, this diſcipline to get:
                  By what things man doth liue from vice remote,
                  Come, and what Wiſedome is, by Reading note.
               
               
                  1 Vncharitable men.
                  
                  HElp, if thou canſt, euen ſtrangers, for to gaine
                  Friends by deſerts, is better then to raigne.
               
               
                  2 Aſtronomers, or ſearchers of ſecrets.
                  
                  Gods ſecrets▪ or what Heau'n is, leaue t'enquire:
                  Sith thou art mortall, mortall things deſire.
               
               
                  3 Fearers of Death.
                  
                  The feare of Death, which is meere folly, flie:
                  Life's ioyes thou loſeſt, if thou feare to die.
               
               
                  4 Angrymen. Diſputers.
                  
                  Striue not, for ought vnſure, with angry mind;
                  Toward the truth wrath makes ouriudgmēt blind
               
               
                  
                  5 Friends.
                  
                  Spend quickly, when the cauſe it ſelfe deſires,
                  And ſomewhat giue when time or cauſe requires.
               
               
                  6 Ambitious men, Prodigall men.
                  
                  Make merry with a little, ſhun exceſſe:
                  More ſafe the Ship is, where the waues be leſſe.
               
               
                  7 Blabbers, offenders.
                  
                  Keep wiſely frō thy Mates, what may thee ſhame;
                  Leſt, what offends thee onely, more doe blame.
               
               
                  8 Offenders.
                  
                  Their euill workes thinke not the wicked gaine:
                  Sinnes for a time kept hid, time doth explaine.
               
               
                  9 Little, or weake men. Souldiers.
                  
                  Doe not a little bodies power deſpiſe:
                  Whom Nature hath made weak, he may be wiſe.
               
               
                  10 Clients. Ʋanquiſhed men. Inferiors. Souldiers.
                  
                  Giue place a while vnto thy ſtronger foes:
                  The Vanquiſht oft his Victors ouerthrowes.
               
               
                  11 Company-keepers. Friends Quarrellers.
                  
                  Braule not with him, whō thou doſt louing know:
                  From the leaſt words, great ſtrife doth oftē grow.
               
               
                  12 Fortune-tellers. Searchers of ſecrets. Sorcerers.
                  
                  What God intends, ſearch not in ſorcerous wiſe,
                  Who touching thee, without thee doth aduiſe.
               
               
                  13 Proud men.
                  
                  Enuy, through too much brauery come not neare:
                  Which, though not hurtfull, 'tis a griefe to beare.
               
               
                  
                  14 Clients. Oppreſſed men.
                  
                  Be of good comfort though condemned wrong:
                  Nought by Iniuſtice gotten proſpers long.
               
               
                  15 Remembrers of ſtrife.
                  
                  Of brabbling conflicts to vſe repetition
                  After atonement, ſhewes a bad condition.
               
               
                  16 Company-keepers. Selfe-praiſers, and dispraiſers.
                  
                  From ſelf-praiſe and diſpraiſe thou muſt abſtaine:
                  For Fooles doe that, prouok'd by Glory vaine.
               
               
                  17 Gameſters. Prodigals.
                  
                  Thy gaines vſe ſparing: for exceſsiue ſpending,
                  Goods long in gathering brings to ſpeedy ending.
               
               
                  18 Company-keepers.
                  
                  When time or cauſe requires it, play the Foole,
                  For folly then to feigne, is wiſedomes rule.
               
               
                  19 Couetous men.
                  
                  Shun Luxury and Auarice, for thoſe
                  (As each the other) thy good name oppoſe.
               
               
                  20 Babblers. Talkers.
                  
                  Beleeue not them, that ſtill are babbling much,
                  For little credit is allow'd to ſuch.
               
               
                  21 Drunkards.
                  
                  In drinke-offending doe not that accuſe,
                  The fault's in thee that do'ſt Gods gift abuſe.
               
               
                  22 Friends▪ Sicke men.
                  
                  Commit thy minde to a Companion ſure,
                  To a Phyſician good thy bodies cure.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        3 Poore men. Repiners at others good.
                  At vndeſeruers weale grieue not at all:
                  The bad be cocker'd for their greater fall.
               
               
                  24 Careleſſe men.
                  
                  Arme thee to beare each caſuall diſtreſſe,
                  For what thou haſt foreſeene doth hurt thee leſſe.
               
               
                  25 Poore men.
                  
                  Be not diſmaid, though croſt, but hope retaine;
                  For with all men, Hope doth in death remaine.
               
               
                  26 Careleſse men.
                  
                  Let not that ſlip, which thou ſhalt fitting finde:
                  Time hath much haire before, but none behinde.
               
               
                  27 Careleſſe men.
                  
                  Weighing things paſt, for what's to come prouide
                  Follow that God which lookes on either ſide.
               
               
                  28 Drunkards. Gluttons.
                  
                  Fare ſometimes, to grow ſtronger, with leſſe meaſure:
                  Many to health, few things are due to pleaſure.
               
               
                  29 Company-keepers. Selfe-conceited men.
                  
                  The peoples iudgement ſcorne not thou alone,
                  Leſt, while thou ſcorneſt many, thou pleaſe none.
               
               
                  30 Drunkards. Gluttons.
                  
                  Chiefly regard thy health which is the chiefe,
                  Blame not the times, that wrought'ſt thy proper griefe.
               
               
                  31 Dreamers.
                  
                  * See the note at the end of the booke vnder C.
                  
                  Regard not dreames, for what we wiſh awake,
                  That thing in ſleeping doth our ſences take.
               
            
            
               
               The third Booke.
               
                  The Preface.
                  Thou (Reader) that hereto thy minde doſt giue,
                  Shalt heere learne precepts teaching well to liue:
                  Be ſtor'd with Leſsons, learne while thou haſt breath,
                  Life without Learning doth reſemble death:
                  Much good thou reapeſt, if thou this reſpect,
                  Jf not, thy ſelfe, not me, thou doſt neglect.
               
               
                  1 Well-liuers.
                  
                  LIuing vpright, the ſlanderers words deſpiſe:
                  All tongues to rule, in vs no power lyes.
               
               
                  2 Witneſſes, Friends.
                  
                  Brought for a witnes, thy friends fault conceale,
                  In what thou canſt, yet with thy honours weale.
               
               
                  3 Simple men.
                  
                  Of ſmooth and flattering ſpeeches take thou heed:
                  For Truth is plaine, but lyes doe cunning need.
               
               
                  4 Sluggards.
                  
                  Flie dulneſſe (ſloth of life) for when the minde
                  Growes weake through idlenes, the fleſh is pinde.
               
               
                  5 Labouring men.
                  
                  Mirth ſometimes mingle with thy care and paine,
                  That any labour thou maiſt well ſuſtaine.
               
               
                  
                  6 Carpers.
                  
                  Carpe neuer at anothers word or deed,
                  Leſt the like meaſure doe from him proceed.
               
               
                  7 Heires. Prodigals.
                  
                  Leſt all ſpeake ill of thee, keepe and increaſe
                  Thoſe goods that fall to thee by Friends deceaſe.
               
               
                  8 Couetous men. Old men.
                  
                  If thou be rich in age, before life ends
                  Be liberall, and no niggard, to thy Friends.
               
               
                  9 Masters. Scorners.
                  
                  To no mans Counſell profiting be nice,
                  Much leſſe deſpiſe thy ſeruants good aduice.
               
               
                  10 Husbands. Poore men.
                  
                  If treaſure as thou didſt, thou canſt not hoord,
                  Contented liue with what the times affoord.
               
               
                  11 Bachelors.
                  
                  * See the note at the end of the Booke vnder D.
                  For goods beware thou marry not a wife,
                  Nor keepe her, if ſhe leade a ſhrewiſh life.
               
               
                  12 Politicians.
                  
                  By patterne learne to flie or to purſue;
                  The liues of others teach vs what to doe.
               
               
                  13 Attempters.
                  
                  Try nought aboue thy ſtrength, leſt ouer-ſwaid,
                  Perforce thou leaue thy worke, in vaine aſſaid.
               
               
                  14 Concealers.
                  
                  Conceale not what thou know'ſt vniuſtly done;
                  Leſt thou ſeeme willing the ſame courſe to runne.
               
               
                  
                  15 Clients. Oppreſſed men.
                  
                  Vnder Lawes rigour craue the Iudges aide:
                  For Lawes themſelues with right would be allaid.
               
               
                  16 Offenders.
                  
                  Take thy deſerued penance without grudge,
                  And being faulty, be thy proper Iudge.
               
               
                  17 Readers. Schoole-boyes.
                  
                  Reade much, and dayly more; the Poet ſings,
                  Though not ſtill credible, miraculous things.
               
               
                  18 Babblers. Gueſts. Talkers.
                  
                  Vſe few words at a feaſt, leſt thou be nam'd
                  A prater, while thou wouldſt be ciuill fam'de.
               
               
                  19 Husbands.
                  
                  Thy angry wife's bad language doe not feare,
                  For women worke deceit with euery teare.
               
               
                  20 Prodigals.
                  
                  Thy gettings vſe, but ſeeme not to abuſe;
                  All gone, the ſpend▪thrift others goods purſues.
               
               
                  21 Fearers of Death.
                  
                  Stand not in feare of thy threed-cutting Fate,
                  Seeing lifes euils it doth terminate.
               
               
                  22 Husbands.
                  
                  Thy wife's tongue ſuffer, if ſhe thrifty bee,
                  Elſe doe not beare; yet brawle, is worſe in thee.
               
               
                  23 Children.
                  
                  Entirely loue thy Father and thy Mother,
                  Neither, to pleaſe the one, diſpleaſe the other.
               
            
            
               
               The fourth Booke.
               
                  The Preface.
                  If thou would'ſt liue in quiet, and thy heart,
                  From vices drowning, vertue keepe apart:
                  Theſe precepts throughly reade and beare in minde,
                  Where ſomewhat to inſtruct thee thou ſhalt finde.
               
               
                  1 Couetous men. Niggards. Rich men.
                  
                  IF thou would'ſt be heart-happy, wealth deſpiſe,
                  Which they that dote vpon, liue beggar-wiſe.
               
               
                  2 Couetous men.
                  
                  If that may pleaſe, which doth at need auaile thee,
                  Natures commodities will neuer faile thee.
               
               
                  3 Careleſſe men. Prodigals.
                  
                  If through ill-husbandry thy ſubſtance fall,
                  Blame not blinde Fortune, which is not at all.
               
               
                  4 Couetous men. Rich men.
                  
                  Loue Coine for vſe, not for it's glittering ſight,
                  In which no vertuous man doth take delight.
               
               
                  5 Sicke men. Rich men.
                  
                  Looke to thy health enioying worldly pelfe.
                  The Rich man ſicke hath gold, but not himſelfe.
               
               
                  6 Children. Offenders.
                  
                  Since thou endur'ſt thy Maſters rod at Schoole,
                  Thy Father chiding, gently beare his rule.
               
               
                  
                  7 Attempters.
                  
                  Trade in commodious things, and thoſe eſchue
                  Whereof thou fear'ſt no profit will accrue.
               
               
                  8 Giuers.
                  
                  Giue at once asking what you ſafely can:
                  For 'tis a gaine, if to a worthy man.
               
               
                  9 Suſpitious men.
                  
                  Search out without delay what thou ſuſpecteſt,
                  For oft that hurts, which thou at firſt neglecteſt.
               
               
                  10 Whoremongers.
                  
                  When thou art caught in 
                        Ʋenus pleaſing ſnare,
                  Of Gluttonie, the bellies friend, beware.
               
               
                  11 Careleſſe-men.
                  
                  Of all wilde Beaſts when thou would'ſt be afraid,
                  Take heed leſt man alone doe thee inuade.
               
               
                  12 Strong-men.
                  
                  When as the body doth in ſtrength ſurmount,
                  Be wiſe, and men will valiant thee account.
               
               
                  13 Friends. Grieued men.
                  
                  Repair to him that loues thee, if ought grieue thee:
                  A faithfull Friend can beſt in minde relieue thee.
               
               
                  14 Offenders, Sacrificers.
                  
                  For thy offence why mak'ſt thou beaſt-oblation▪
                  
                  'Tis folly by ſuch meanes to ſeeke ſaluation.
               
               
                  15 Chuſers of Friends, Bachelors.
                  
                  When thou deſireſt a true Friend or Mate,
                  Aske after his life paſt, not his eſtate.
               
               
                  
                  16 Couetous men. Niggards.
                  
                  Shun this name (Niggard) vſe thy gotten ſtore:
                  What good does wealth to him that liueth poore?
               
               
                  17 Drunkards. Gluttons. Whore-mongers.
                  
                  If thou deſire in life an honour'd name,
                  Fly vicious pleaſures that would thee defame.
               
               
                  18 Mockers. Young men.
                  
                  Mocke not old age, thou being wiſe in thought:
                  For man through age to childiſhneſſe is brought.
               
               
                  19 Children. Schoole-boyes.
                  
                  Learne ſomething, for if Riches doe deceiue thee,
                  Art will be firmely thine, and neuer leaue thee.
               
               
                  20 Politicians. Babblers.
                  
                  With ſilence note what euery one doth ſay:
                  The Speech mens maners hides, and doth bewray.
               
               
                  21 Schoole-boyes.
                  
                  Though thou haſt gotten Learning, doe not ceaſe:
                  Practice, as Care the Wit, doth Art increaſe.
               
               
                  22 Fearers of Death.
                  
                  Death feare not much, who holds at little rate
                  This preſent life, dreads not his future fate.
               
               
                  23 Children, Schoole-boyes.
                  
                  Learne of the learned, and th'vnlearned teach:
                  The doctrine of good things ought farre to reach.
               
               
                  24 Drunkards.
                  
                  Thy health deſiring, Nature drinke to pleaſe:
                  Pleaſure exceſsiue breeds an ill diſeaſe.
               
               
                  
                  25 Inconstant men.
                  
                  What thou haſt prais'd in publike, and approou'd,
                  Blame not (I counſel thee) through lightnes mou'd.
               
               
                  26 Poore men. Rich men.
                  
                  When Fortune ſmiles on thee, beware her frowne:
                  Yet hope to riſe, when ſhe hath caſt thee downe.
               
               
                  27 Schoole-boyes.
                  
                  Leane not to learne: Knowledge frō ſtudy ſpringeth,
                  And long Experience rare wiſedome bringeth.
               
               
                  28 Praiſers.
                  
                  Praiſe meanely; for whom thou doſt oft cōmend,
                  Time will declare how much he is thy Friend.
               
               
                  29 Schoole-boyes.
                  
                  Bluſh not to learne, for knowledge doth cōmend▪
                  
                  But thoſe that will not learne, ſhame doth attend.
               
               
                  30 Drunkards. Whoremongers.
                  
                  Strife, oft with pleaſing Luſt and wine is had:
                  What's good in them, embrace: and flie the bad.
               
               
                  31 Company-keepers. Politicians.
                  
                  From ſad and ſtill men thy ſelfe ſafely keepe:
                  Perhaps the calmer water lyes more deepe.
               
               
                  32 Poore men.
                  
                  When want prouokes thee to feele ſorrow▪ſmart,
                  Weigh how much worſe then other men thou art.
               
               
                  33 Attempters.
                  
                  Try to thy ſtrength, for by the ſhore to row,
                  'Tis ſafer, then to ſayle where Seas doe flow.
               
               
                  
                  34 Clyents. Contenders.
                  
                  * See the note at the end of this Booke vnder E.
                  
                  Againſt the iuſt peruerſly ſtriue thou neuer:
                  Wrongfull vexations God doth puniſh euer.
               
               
                  35 Clients. Poore men.
                  
                  Loſing thy goods▪ doe not with griefe complaine,
                  But rather ioy that thou didſt wealth attaine.
               
               
                  36 Friends. Loſers.
                  
                  Our goods 'tis grieuous by mishaps to leaue:
                  Yet loſſe by friends we gently muſt receiue.
               
               
                  37 Worldlings.
                  
                  Truſt not to length of life: where e're we run,
                  Death followes, as our ſhaddowes in the Sun.
               
               
                  38 Sacrificers.
                  
                  * See the note at the end of this booke vnder F.
                  
                  Let Calues grow for the plough, & Incenſe burne:
                  Gods wrath with ſlaughtered Beaſts you cannot
               
               
                  39 Jnferiours, Vanquiſht men, Oppreſsed men.
                  
                  Yeeld, hauing harme, to Fortune and the ſtrong: turne.
                  For he thy cauſe may right that did the wrong.
               
               
                  40 Offenders.
                  
                  Reproue thy ſelfe when thou haſt ought offended:
                  In healing wounds, griefe is by griefe amended.
               
               
                  41 Friends.
                  
                  Thy old Friend altred, doe not thou detect,
                  But the prime-pledges of his loue reſpect.
               
               
                  42 Receiuers.
                  
                  More loue to purchaſe, each good turne requite,
                  Leſt a Looſe-office thou be termed right.
               
               
                  
                  43 Fearers of danger. Suſpicious men.
                  
                  Lodge not ſuſpect, leſt thou ſtill wretched be▪
                  
                  Death with ſuſpicious men doth beſt agree.
               
               
                  44 Maſters.
                  
                  Though Slaues thou cal'ſt all thoſe that thou haſt bought,
                  Of earth, like them, remember thou art wrought.
               
               
                  45 Careleſſe men.
                  
                  The firſt occaſion muſt be quickly taken,
                  Leſt thou too late ſeeke what thou haſt forſaken.
               
               
                  46 Re
                           •
                        oycers at others death.
                  
                  In bad mens ſudden end reioyce thou not:
                  They happy dye that haue no vicious blot.
               
               
                  47 Husbands.
                  
                  If poore, thou haſt a wife of blemiſht fame,
                  See thou abhorre a friends vnfriendly name.
               
               
                  48 Schoole-boyes. Students of the Law.
                  
                  Much hauing learned, ſeeke as much againe;
                  Nor (as vnſitting to be taught) abſtaine.
               
               
                  The Authors Concluſion.
                  49 Writers.
                  
                  That I write Verſe in plaine Proſe, maruell you?
                  The Senſes briefeneſſe bred them two by two.
               
               
                  The Tranſlators concluſion.
                  50
                  And if yon maruell why I theſe tranſlate,
                  Peruſe my Preface, which doth all relate,
                  And ſo theſe Rimes I terminate.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Note, that in all the three Tables following, b. ſtands for Booke of Diſtichs, and d. for Diſtich. So ſp. ſtands for Short Precepts.
            
               The Firſt Table, directing to Leſſons for
               
                  A
                  
                     AMbitious men, b. 2. d. 6.
                  
                     Angry men, ſp. 20. 46. b. 2. d. 4.
                  
                     Aſtronomers, b. 2. d. 2.
                  
                     Attempters, b. 3. d. 13 b. 4. d. 7. 33.
               
               
                  B
                  
                     Babblers, b. 1. d. 3. 12. b. 2. d. 7. 20. b. 3. d. 18. b. 4. d. 20.
                  
                     Backbiters, ſp. 38.
                  
                     Batchelors, b. 3. d. 11. b. 4. d. 15.
                  
                     Blabbers, ſp. 5. b. 1. d. 3, 12. b. 2. d. 7.
               
               
                  C
                  
                     Careleſſe men, ſp. 5, 13, 15, 18, 23, 24, 32, 33, 53, 57. b. 1. d. 2, 18, 40. b. 2. d. 24, 26, 27. b. 4. d. 3. 11, 45.
                  
                     Carpers, b. 1. d. 5, 30. b. 3. d. 6.
                  
                     Children, ſp. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 16, 17, 21, 22, 27, 29, 34, 35, 36, 38, 41, 45, 46, 47, 48, 50, 55. b. 1. d. 1. 2, 3. b. 3. d. 23. b. 4d. 6, 18, 19, 23.
                  
                     Chooſers of friends, b. 4▪ d 15.
                  
                     Clients, ſp. 11, 12, 32, 33, 46, 51, 56. b. 1. d. 1. b. 2. d 10, 14, b. 3. d. 15. b. 4. d. 34, 35, 39.
                  
                     
                     Company-keepers, ſp. 7, 10, 19, 34 b. 1 d. 7, 14, 17, 34 b. 2 d. 11, 16, 18, 29 b. 4 d. 31.
                  
                     Concealors, b. 3 d. 14.
                  
                     Conquerors, b. 1 d. 38.
                  
                     Contenders, b. 1 d. 34 b. 4 d. 34.
                  
                     Couetous men, ſp. 51 b. 2 d. 6, 19 b. 3 d. 8 b. 4 d. 1, 2, 4, 16.
                  
                     Creditors, ſp. 23, 24.
                  
                     Credulous men, ſp. 31.
               
               
                  D
                  
                     Debtors, b. 1 d. 13.
                  
                     Deſeruers, b. 1 d. 23.
                  
                     Disputers, b. 2 d. 4.
                  
                     Diſſemblers, b. 1 d. 26.
                  
                     Dreamers, b. 2 d. 31.
                  
                     Drunkards, ſp. 29 b. 2 d. 21, 28, 30 b. 4 d. 17, 24, 30.
               
               
                  F
                  
                     Fearers of danger, b. 4 d. 43.
                  
                     Fearers of Death, b. 1 d. 22 b. 2 d. 3 b. 3 d. 21. b 4 d. 22.
                  
                     Flattered men, b. 1 d. 26, 27.
                  
                     Fortune-tellers, b. 2 d. 12.
                  
                     Friends, b. 1 d. 9, 11, 36 b. 2 d. 5, 11, 22 b. 3 d▪ 2 b. 4 d. 13, 36, 41.
               
               
                  G
                  
                     Gameſters, ſp. 47, 48 b. 2 d. 17.
                  
                     Giuers, b. 1 d. 15, 23.
                  
                     Gluttons, b▪ 2 d. 28, 30 b. 4 d. 17.
                  
                     
                     Grieued men, b. 4. d. 13.
                  
                     Gueſts, ſp. 55 b. 3. d. 18.
               
               
                  H
                  
                     Heires, b1. d. 19. b. 3d. 7.
                  
                     Houſeholders, ſp 18. b. 1. d. 29. 40
                  
                     Husbands, ſp. 52. b. 1. d. 8. b. 3. d. 19, 22. b. 4. d. 47.
               
               
                  I
                  
                     Imitators, b. 3. d. 12.
                  
                     Inconſtant men, b. 1. d. 4, 32. b. 4. d. 25.
                  
                     Inferiours, ſp. 12 b. 2. d. 10. b. 4. d. 39.
                  
                     Intruders. ſp. 8. Judges, ſp. 40.
               
               
                  L
                  
                     Labouring men, b. 3 d. 5
                  
                     Lawiers, ſp. 5. Lenders, ſp. 
                        •
                     3.
                  
                     Liberall men, ſp. 37.
                  
                     Little men, b. 2 d. 9.
                  
                     Looſers, b▪ 4 d. 36. Lyers, ſp. 36.
               
               
                  M
                  
                     Maſters, b. 1 d. 8, 37 b. 3 d. 9 b 4 d. 44
                  
                     Medlers, ſp. 18. Men, b. 4 d. 11.
                  
                     Mockers, ſp. 21, 22. b. 4 d. 18.
               
               
                  N
                  
                     Newes-carriers, b. 1 d 12.
                  
                     Niggards, b. 1 d. 29 b. 4 d. 1, 16.
               
               
                  O
                  
                     Offenders, b. 2 d. 7, 8. b. 3 d. 16. b. 4 d. 6, 14, 40.
                  
                     Old men, b. 1 d. 16 b. 3 d▪ 8 b. 4 d. 18.
                  
                     Oppreſsed men, b. 2 d. 14 b▪ 3 d. 15▪ b. 4 d▪ 39.
               
               
                  
                  P
                  
                     Parents, ſp. 53. b. 1. d. 28.
                  
                     Politicians, b. 1. d. 7, 26. b. 3. d. 12. b 4. d. 20. 31.
                  
                     Poore men, b. 1. d. 21, 28. b. 2. d. 23, 25. b. 3. d. 10. b. 4. d. 26 32, 35.
                  
                     Praiſers, b. 4. d. 28. Praiſed men, b. 1. d. 14.
                  
                     Prodigals, ſp. 13, 26. b. 1. d. 11, 24, 39, 40. b. 2. d. 17, 19. b. 3. d. 7. 20. b. 4. d. 3.
                  
                     Promiſers, ſp 28. b. 1. d. 13. 25.
                  
                     Proud men, ſp. 10, 19. 50. b▪ 2. d. 13.
               
               
                  Q
                  
                     Quarrellers, ſp▪ 30, 45. b. 1. d. 34, 36. b. 2. d. 11.
               
               
                  R
                  
                     Raſh men, ſp. 32. Readers, b. 3. d. 17.
                  
                     Receiuers, ſp. 42. b. 1. d. 15, 20. b. 4. d. 42.
                  
                     Rehearſers of others liues, b. 1 d. 16.
                  
                     Reioycers at others death, b 4▪ d 46.
                  
                     Remembrers of ſtrife, b. 2. d. 15.
                  
                     Repiners at others good, b. 2. d. 23.
                  
                     Reprouers, b. 1. d 5.
                  
                     Rich m
                           •
                        n, b. 1 d. 18, 40. b. 4. d. 1, 4, 5, 26.
               
               
                  S
                  
                     Sacriſfies, b 1. d. 1. b. 4. d. 14, 38.
                  
                     Schoole-boyes, ſp. 15 16, 17, 35, 47, 48. b. 2. Preface. b. 3. d. 17. b. 4. d. 19, 21, 23, 27, 29, 48.
                  
                     Scorners, ſp. 21, 22. b. 3. d. 9.
                  
                     Selfe praiſers and diſpraiſers, b. 2. d. 16.
                  
                     Selfe-conceited men, b. 2. d. 29.
                  
                     Searchers of ſecrets, b. 2. d. 2, 12. Seruants, ſp. 11. 15.
                  
                     
                     Sicke-men, b 4. d 5. Simple-men, b 3. d 3.
                  
                     Slouens, ſp. 9.
                  
                     Sluggards, ſp 27. b 1. d 2. b 3. d 4.
                  
                     Souldiers, b 2. d 9, 10.
                  
                     Sorcerers, b 2. d 12.
                  
                     Strong men, b 1. d 38. b 4. d 12.
                  
                     Students of the Law, ſp 6, 43, 44. b 4. d 48.
                  
                     Subiects, ſp 11.
                  
                     Superiours, ſp 12, 30. b 1. d 38.
                  
                     Suſpicious men, b 1. d 17. b 4. d 9, 43.
                  
                     Suiters, b 1. d 31, 35. Swearers, ſp 28.
               
               
                  T
                  
                     Talkers, b 1. d 3, 12. b 2. d 20. b 3. d 18.
                  
                     Trauellers, b 1. d 6.
               
               
                  V
                  
                     Vanquiſht men, b 0. d 10. b 4. d 39▪
                  
                  
                     Vncharitable men, b 2. d 1.
                  
                     
                        Ʋniuſt men, ſp 29, 51, 54, 56.
               
               
                  W
                  
                     Wauering men, b 1. d 32.
                  
                     Weake men, b 2. d 9. b 4▪ d 39.
                  
                     Well▪liuers, b 3. d 1.
                  
                     Whoremongers, ſp 14, 34▪ b 4. d 10, 17, 30.
                  
                     Witneſſes, b 3. d 2. Wiues, ſp. 11.
                  
                     Worldlings, b 1. d 33. b 4. d. 37.
                  
                     Worſhippers of God, b 1. d 1.
                  
                     Writers, b 4. d 49.
               
               
                  Y
                  
                     Yong-men, b 4. d 18.
               
               The end of the firſt Table.
            
            
               
               The ſecond Table; directing to Copies, &c.
               
                  A Sp. 32. b 1. d 7, 15, 31. b 2. d 23, 24. b 4. d 34.
                  B ſp. 9. 41. b 2. d 11, 14, 20, 25. b 3. Preface d 2, 12. b 4. d 29.
                  C ſp. 7. b 1. d 17, 35. b 2. d 32, 30. b 3. d 3, 14.
                  D ſp. 29, 50. b. 1. d. 22, 29, 30, 32. b. 2. d. 9. b. 4. d. 22.
                  E b. 2. d. 13.
                  F ſp. 43. b. 1. d. 27. b. 2. d. 16, 28. b. 3. d. 4, 11. b. 4. d. 14, 31.
                  G b. 1. d. 2▪ b. 2. d. 2, 10. b. 4. d. 18.
                  H b. 2 d. 
                        •
                     .
                  I b. 1. d. 1, 5, 23, 28, 33, b. 2, d. 21. b. 3. d. 8, 10, 23. b. 4. d. 1, 2. 3, 17, 46 47.
                  K ſp. 5. b 1. d. 39. b. 2. d. 7.
                  L ſp. 18. 36. b. 1. d. 6, 11, 24. b. 2. d. 26. b. 3. d. 1, 7. b. 4. d. 4, 5, 19, 23, 27, 35, 38, 43.
                  M b. 1. d. 10. b. 2. d. 6. b. 3. d. 5. b. 4. d. 18, 42, 48.
                  N ſp. 22, 47, 53. b. 1. d. 12.
                  O b. 2, d. 15. b. 3. d. 3. b. 4. d, 11, 36.
                  P b. 1. d. 13. 25. b. 4. d. 28.
                  Q b. 1. d. 36.
                  R b. 1. d. 8. b. 2. d. 31. b. 3. d. 17. b. 4. d 13, 40.
                  S b. 1. d. 1, 19, 21. b. 2. d. 4, 5, 19. b. 3. d 21. b 4. d. 6, 9, 16, 30, 37.
                  
                     
T ſp. 1, 13, 25, 56. b 1. d 3, 4, 16, 34. b 2. 3, 8, 17, 29. b 3. d 9, 13, 16, 19, 20, 22. b 4. d 7, 21, 24, 33, 41, 44, 45.
                  V b 3. d 15, 18.
                  W b 1. d 9, 14, 18, 20, 26, 37, 38, 40. b 2. d 12, 18, 27. b 4. d 10, 12, 15, 20, 25, 26, 32.
                  Y b 4. d 39.
               
               For X and Z you may vſe theſe verſes.
               
                  
                     Xerxes a million brought, as Greeces foe:
                  But from a few had ſhamefull ouerthrow.
                  
                     Zaleucus his owne Law to ſatisfie,
                  His ſonne being guilty, with him loſt an ye.
               
               The end of the ſecond Table.
            
            
               The third Table, for the adorning of the Houſe, &c. viz. the
               
                  
                     HAll or Dining-roome, b 1. d 3, 10, 16, 17, 24, 36, 40, b 2. d 1, 6, 16, 17, 19, 21, 28, 30, b 3. d 5, 6, 8, 18, 20. b 4. d 3, 5, 10. 24, 28, 30.
                  
                     Chamber, b 1. d 1, 2, 19, 21, 22, 23, 28, 29, 30, 33, 37, 39. b 2, d 2, 3, 8, 12, 13, 14, 21, 22, 25, 27, 30, 31. b 3. d 4, 5, 10, 12, 21, 22. b 4. d 5, 
                        •
                     0, 13, 17, 22, 30, 32, 34, 35, 39, 44, 46.
                  
                     
                     Study, or Counting-houſe, b 1. d 8, 11, 13, 18, 24, 25, 28, 37, 39. b 2. d 7, 8, 17, 18, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. b 3. d 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 21, 25, 26, 31, 32, 33, 35, 36, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47.
                  
                     Shop or Office, b 1. d 17. b 3. d 4, 14, 16. b 4. d 3, 7, 17, 19, 21, 29, 35, 36.
               
               
                  To conclude, for the
                  
                  
                     Schoole, b 1. d 2, 28. b 2. Preface b 3. Preface d 4. 16, 17, 23. b 4. d 6, 19, 21, 23, 27, 29, 48.
               
               Thus endeth the third Table.
            
         
         
            Such of the ſhort Precepts as are meete to adorne the Roomes before mentioned, and the Schoole, ſelected and orderly compoſed in Meeter for the ſame purpoſe. viz.
            
            
               For the Hall, or Dining-roome.
               AT Banket s little ſpeake. Feaſts ſeldome make.
               Be cleanly, and thy drinke with meaſure take.
            
            
               For the Chamber.
               To God pray humbly, ſleepe for Natures due.
               Loue thy wife truely, and a whore eſchue.
               
                  
                  
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  ke to thy charge, and well thy children breed:
               Liue chaſtly, and to thy affaires take heed.
            
            
               For the Study or Counting-houſe.
               Come not to priuate talke without requiring,
               Saue well thy goods, not other mens deſiring:
               The law thou mad'ſt, to ſuffer be not loth,
               And haue a care to keepe thy lawfull oth:
               Lend vpon Credit, but to whom aduiſe,
               Nor of beliefe be light in any wiſe.
            
            
               For the Shop, or Office.
               Thy Maſter feare, mocke none, to Nature ſleepe,
               What's to thy charge committed, ſafely keepe:
               Be diligent, ſhun Harlots conuerſation;
               Flie doubtfull games, vſe harmeleſſe recreation.
            
            
               For the Schoole.
               Thy Maſter feare, ſleepe, Nature to ſuffice.
               Mocke none, nor meaner then thy ſelfe deſpiſe:
               Thy Parents fauour let thy patience gaine,
               Lie not, reade bookes, and beare them in thy braine:
               To vertuous diſcipline thy minde apply,
               Play with the Top, and games of hazzard fly.
            
         
         
            
            Neceſſary Notes (wherewith I though
                  •
                not to trouble the Margents) which are to be paſſed ouer, vntill ſome of the Precepts in this Booke doe thereunto ſeuerally direct you, as I haue mentioned in my Preface.
            
            
               A
            
            Which counſell is good, but not good enough; for we muſt doe good for Gods ſake, not onely to good people, and ſuch as be thankefull or worthy, or our friends, but alſo to the wicked & vnthankfull, and to our enemies, to the end that we may be the Children and Imitators of our heauenly Father, who cauſeth his Sunne to ſhine afwell vpon the euill as the good, and giueth his raine both to the iuſt and vniuſt.
            
               B
            
            But Chriſtian charity commands that we ſhould not render euill for euill, but contrariwiſe, good for euill, and that we ſhould loue all men truly, and from our hearts.
            
               C
            
            This is meant by ordinary dreames; not ſuch viſions, whereof the Scripture in diuers places

               
                  〈…〉
               ion; for thoſe, in reſpect they are of 
                  〈…〉
                we ought both to regard and beleeue.
            
               D
            
            Nay rather you muſt keepe her till death, if you once marry her; though ſhe proue neuer ſo ſhrewiſh or troubleſome. For by Chriſts Law, a man may not leaue his wife for any cauſe, except adultery.
            
               E
            
            This is well ſayd, but not well enough. For we ought not to ſtriue peruerſly with any man thogh vniuſt, nay, if we will hearken to Chriſt, we muſt contend in no wiſe, neither iuſtly nor vniuſtly.
            
               F
            
            Yet God is not pacified with Incenſe, but (according to the cuſtome in the Old Teſtament) the Church kept this Inſtitution which muſt be referred to another ſignification. For you may not thinke, Almighty God commandeth that Frankincenſe ſhould be brought to him from Arabia: but this Frankincenſe which God requireth vs to offer vnto him, and from which he taketh the ſauour of ſweetneſſe, to wit, prayers proceeding from a true faith and a pure heart, wherewith God is properly delighted and appeaſed.
            The laſt end.
         
      
   