
      
         
            
            
            THE CLEANSING OF THE TEN LEPERS: OR, Briefe notes on Luke 17. verſ. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
            By MATHEVV CAYLIE Miniſter of Gods Word at Maidford in Northamptonſh.
            
            LONDON, Printed by I L. for William Sheffard, and are to be ſold at his ſhop, at the entring in of Popes head Allie out of Lumbard-ſtreete.
            1623.
         
         
            
            
            To the VVorſhipfull, Maſter Richard Triſt, of Maidford in Northamptonſh.
            
            
               WOrthy Sir, (Not to prefixe a tedious Epistle, before ſo ſmall a Treatiſe) hauing a reſolution for the publication hereof, (for reaſons knowne to my ſelfe, and perhaps, not vnknowne to ſome that know mee) I make bold (I hope, not too bold) to preſent the ſame vnto you, to testifie my reſpect of you.

Your Acceptance, Peruſall, Patronage, are the onely things I deſire; though I cannot ſay, as the Iewes concerning the Centurion in the Goſpel, thatLuk. 7. 4. either it, or my ſelfe, is worthy for whom you ſhould doe this. The God of heauen, the giuer of all good bleſsings, bleſſe you, & yours, proſper, and preſerue you blameleſſe vnto the comming of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
            
               A Petitioner for you, vnto the throne of grace, MATH, CAYLIE.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE CLEANSING OF THE TEN LEPERS: OR, Briefe notes on Luk. 17. verſ. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
            
               
                  And when he ſaw them, hee ſaid vnto them, Goe, ſhew your ſelues vnto the Prieſts. And it came to paſſe, that as they went, they were cleanſed.
                  And one of them when he ſaw that he was healed, turned backe, &c.
               
            
            
               IN the three former verſes, where this Hiſtorie of Chriſts cleanſing

the ten Lepers beginneth, the Euangeliſt ſetteth downe: Firſt, the time, and that was, when he went to Hieruſalem, which going is to be referred to his laſt iourney thither; Hee went thither, though he knew (as hee foretelleth his Diſciples in the next chapter Verſe 32, 33.) that he ſhould bee mocked, ſpitefully entreated, ſpitted on, ſcourged, and put to death: that by his going thither ſo freely, hee might ſhew that he ſuffered there willingly. Secondly, the place;

hard by a certaine village, the Lepers being prohibited to enter into any village. Thirdly, the perſons themſelues that were cleanſed, and they are deſcribed: firſt, by their number; ten: ſecondly, by their diſeaſe, which was a leproſie: thirdly, by the place where they ſtood, and that was, a farre off: fourthly, the occaſion: 1. their meeting our Sauiour. 2. their petition, they lifted vp their voices, and ſaid, Ieſus, Maſter, Haue mercy on vs.
            
            
               Now concerning theſe verſes: In the 14. verſe there may be obſerued foure particulars. 1. Our Sauiours compaſsion, when he ſaw them: 2. his commandement, He ſaid vnto them, Goe ſhew your ſelues vnto the Prieſts: 3. the Lepers obedience, they went: 4. their cleanſing, It came to paſſe, that as they went, they were cleanſed. And in the verſes following, there is ſet downe what followed vpon their cleanſing: 1. that one of them, who was a Samaritane, returned, and

glorified God, and gaue thankes: 2. The ingratitude of the other nine, which, how our Sauiour deteſted, hee ſhewed: 1. by his interrogation, Were there not ten cleanſed? but where are the nine? 2. by his collaudation of the other, being a ſtranger: There are not found that returned to giue glory to God, ſaue this ſtranger; Whom therefore he diſmiſſeth with this encomium; Ariſe, goe thy way, thy faith hath made thee whole: ver. 19. Now to ſuch obſeruations as the words will afford.
            
               
               And when he ſaw them.
               
                  Obſer. 
                Wee may here behold our Sauiours eaſineſſe to be entreated, his readineſſe to looke vpon and helpe diſtreſſed petitioners; Theſe poore men cryed & he heard them. He neither (like ſcornefull perſons amongſt vs, who will not vouchſafe to looke vpon a poore bodie) withdrew his eyes from their perſons, for he ſaw them; neither (like our deafe worldlings, who will not heare the cries of the needy) turned he his eares from their prayers: for hee

heard them. Neither like our churliſh Nabals, (who refuſe to releeue the diſtreſſed) denied he their requeſts, for he cleanſed them. Thus the eyes of the Lord are vpon the righteous, his eares are open vnto their cry, and he deliuereth them out of their diſtreſſe
               Pſal. 34. 15..
            The Lord who dwelleth on high, and hath reſpect vnto the lowly, heard Ionah, though he was in the ſea, in a lowe place, euen in the fiſhes belly, when he cryedIon. 2. 1.. Hee heard the penſiue Publicane, (though

knowing his owne filthineſſe by reaſon of ſin, the ſpirituall leproſie, as theſe lepers, by reaſon of their corporall leproſie,) he ſtoode afarre off, when hee prayedLuk. 18. 13▪
               . Surely, The Lord is nigh vnto all them that call vpon him, to all that call vpon him in truth: Hee will fulfill the deſire of them that feare him, hee will heare their cry, and ſaue them, Pſal. 145. 18, 19.
            When the Lord called Samuel, Samuel; Samuel anſwered, Speake Lord, for thy ſeruant

heareth1. Sam. 3. 10.; When a godly man in his minde calleth, Lord, Lord, the Lord will graciouſly anſwer, Speake ſeruant, for thy Lord heareth. Salomon ſaid to Bathſheba, deſiring (as ſhee ſaid) one ſmall petition of him; I will not ſay thee nay; but yet he denyed her requeſt1 King. 2. 20., but the Lord who hath ſaid, Aske and it ſhall be giuen you, he will not refuſe to giue to them that doe aske. Indeede the woman of Canaan cryed, but our Sauiour at firſt anſwered her

not a word; ſhee eryed againe, and ſaid, Lord helpe me, yet he helped her notMat. 15. 23.; but hereby he ſheweth not that he is vnwilling to heare and helpe, but how willing hee is to haue vs holde out in praying. Hee denyeth vs preſent audience to make vs cry with the more inſtance; and they that with that woman, cry inſtantly, and doe holde out perſeuerantly, ſhall at length (as ſhee did) finde, that the Lord, though he be not alwayes preſently entreated, yet is eaſie to

be entreated, and ready to heare, and grant ſuch requeſts as are made according to his will, as S. Iohn ſaith1. Ioh. 5. 14. 15..
                  Vſe 1
            
            Here then may they iuſtly be checked, who, as if the Lord was inexorable, will rather runne to any other then vnto him in the day of trouble. This is the reaſon, why ſo many liue in want, becauſe they will not betake themſelues to the meanes for ſupply; they haue not, becauſe they aske notIam. 4. 2.. In this it is true, Spare to ſpeake, and ſpare to

ſpeede. Firſt, aske, and then (not before) it ſhall be giuen vnto you, Mat. 7. 7.
            2. Heere is comfort for poore Chriſtians: worldlings are vnmercifull, the times are hard, and the prices of victuals high; but yet the Lord is bountifull, and open-handed: As his plenty is not abated, ſo his goodneſſe is not diminiſhed, and he is now as heretofore, eaſie to be entreated. In the ſiege of Samaria, when the famine was ſo great, as mothers made their

children their meate, one of them cryed vnto the king of Iſrael, ſaying; Helpe my Lord, O King; And he ſaid, If the Lord doe not helpe thee, whence ſhall I helpe thee
               2 Kin. 6. 26. 27.? But whoſoeuer cryeth vnto the king of heauen, and ſaith, Helpe my Lord O King, he will ſay, If no man ſuccoureth thee, yet will I helpe thee; He will not ſuffer the ſoules of the righteous (that cry vnto him) to famiſhPro. 10. 3 but will ſatisfie them in the daies of dearth, as the Pſalmiſt ſpeakethPſal. 37. 19; according to his promiſe,

(Heb. 13. 5.) hee will not forſake them, neuer faile them, nor withholde any good thing from themPſal. 34. 10..
            3. But laſtly, although the eyes of the Lord are vpon the righteous, yet his face is againſt them that doe euillPſal. 34. 16. He fulfilleth (indeede) the deſire of them that feare him, but as for vngracious and imprudent perſons, hee will not in fauour be found of them, nor to their benefite heare them: When theſe ſpreade foorth their hands, he will hide his eyes from them;

when they make many praiers, hee will not heareEſa. 1. 15.. More particularly, hee will neither heare the praiers of them that turne their eares from the poore, when they cry; nor of thoſe that liſten not to the word when it is preached: Who ſo ſtoppeth his eares at the cry of the poore, hee alſo ſhall cry himſelfe, but ſhall not be heard
               Pro. 21. 13; And hee that turneth away his Eare from hearing the Lawe, euen his prayer ſhall bee abhominable
               Pro. 28. 9; I wil cloſe vp this point with the words of the man that

was blind, God heareth not ſinners, but if any man bee a worſhipper of God, and doth his will, him he heareth 
               Ioh. 9. 31. Text.
               .
            
               Goe ſhew your ſelues vnto the Prieſts. This commandement our Sauiour gaue vnto them, becauſe (to omit other reaſons) it was ordained, that the lepers in the day of their cleanſing, ſhould bee brought vnto the Prieſt, by whom they ſhould bee diſcerned to be cleane, according to that which wee reade, Leuit. 14. 2. Now hereby 
                  Obſer. 
                he teacheth vs, That

none of the ordinances and rites which were preſcribed by God, were to bee neglected, diſregarded, or diſuſed, vntill the Lord himſelfe who ordained them, did diſanull them. Theſe are the commaundements, the ordinances, and the iudgements (ſaid Moſes) which the Lord your God commanded mee to teach you, that yee might do them Deut. 6. 1: where as by the word (Commandements) is meant the morall Law, and by the word (Iudgements) the iudiciall Law; ſo the

Ceremoniall Lawe is meant by the word (ordinances) all which were to bee reuerenced, and obſerued, vntill the time of reformation, (as the Apoſtle ſaith Heb. 9. 10) that is, of Chriſts reuealing came, who was the body of thoſe ſhadows. Concerning Circumciſion, the Law was, Euery manchild among you ſhall bee circumciſed; of him that was vncircumciſed, it is ſaid, That ſoule ſhall be cut off from his people 
               Gen. 17. 10. 14., Concerning the Paſſeouer, all the congregation of Iſrael was to keepe

it: and whoſoeuer did eate leauened bread for the ſpace of ſeuen daies, wherein leauen was forbidden, euen that ſoule ſhould be cut off from the Congregation of Iſrael 
               Exod. 12. 19. 47.. So Aaron was to make the belles which were vpon his garment, to ſound, when he went into the holy place before the Lord, and when he came out, that he die not, ſaith the text Exod. 28. 35.. And the Prieſts, When they went into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, or to the Altar to miniſter, were to waſh their hands, and
               
               their feete in the brazen lauer, that they die not 
               Exod. 30. 20..
            
               Zachary and Elizabeth are commended for walking, as in all the commandements, ſo in all the ordinances of the Lord Luk. 1. 6.. Yea our Sauiour himſelfe, ſhewing his due regard vnto them, was circumciſed the eight day, preſented vnto the Lord, went to Ieruſalem at times appointed; and (as hee did here) enioyned the lepers whom he cleanſed, to goe ſhew themſelues to the Prieſts.
            
               
                  Vſe 
                The multitude of ceremonies

which were to be vſed before Chriſts comming, the Lord hath now (as it is obſerued) reduced to two Sacraments; And as thoſe heretofore, ſo theſe now are to be reſpected, not diſregarded, not deſpiſed. Farre be it from any man to ſcorne them, becauſe of the meane ſhew they make; or baſely to eſteeeme of them, becauſe they ſeeme weake and ſimple: rather muſt we giue them their due valuation, becauſe they bee of diuine inſtitution. Let vs

reuerence and honour them, feeing that the Lord hath ordeined them. Verily, I ſay vnto you, whoſoeuer ſhall deſpiſe one of theſe (as to the carnall eye they ſeeme) vile Sacraments which Chriſt hath ordained in his Church, it were better for him that a milſtone were hanged about his necke, and that hee were drowned in the depth of the ſea.
            
               As they went. The example 
                  Text. Obſer. 
                of theſe men, teacheth vs obedience to Gods cōmands. When Eliſha ſaid vnto Naaman
               
(who was alſo a leper,) Goe and waſh in Iordan ſeuen times, and thou ſhalt be cleane; Naaman at firſt was wroth, ſaying, Behold, I thought, he will ſurely come out to mee, and ſtand and call on the name of the Lord his God, and ſtrike his hand ouer the place, and recouer the leper; and he went away in a rage 2. King. 5. 10, 11.. But when our Sauiour ſaid vnto theſe lepers, Goe ſhew your ſelues to the Prieſts, they were not angry, neither murmured they and ſaid, Behold, We thought, he

will ſurely come vnto vs, and put forth his hand, and touch vs, (as he did another leper, Matthew 8. verſ. 3:) but they without any adoe, cheerefully went their waies. I might tell you of the like obedience of Abraham, who when the Lord ſaid vnto him, Get thee out of thy countrey from thy kindred & fathers houſe, departed as the Lord had ſpoken vnto himGen. 12. 1. 4.: and of other holy men, all which haue ſaid vnto God, as the people to Ioſuah, All that thou commandeſt vs,
               
               we will doe, and whither ſoeuer thou ſendeſt vs, we will goe
               Ioſh. 1. 16 Vſe 1..
            Now for the vſes of this point. Firſt, theſe lepers beeing commanded to goe, went. There are diuers in theſe daies, who being commanded to goe, goe not; like vnto him in the Goſpel, to whom when his father ſaid, Goe worke to day in my vineyard, went not
               Math. 21. 30.; And, as thoſe idle loyterers, to whom it was ſpoken, Math. 20. 6. Why ſtand ye here all the day idle? they ſtand ſtill, as though they had no

commandement to goe about the works of that vocation wherein God hath ſet them.
            But we are all enioyned to goe; Magiſtrates muſt goe to the gate and iudge the peopleExod. 18. 22.. Miniſters muſt goe and preach the GoſpelMark. 16. 15.: People muſt goe and worke with their owne hands, & do their owne buſineſſe, that is, ſuch as to their ſpeciall places appertaineth1. Theſſ. 4. 11.. As the Lord therfore hath called euery one, So let him walke, as the Apoſtle ſaith. 1. Cor. 7. 17. Thus

much for the particular calling.
            
               
                  Vſe 2 Secondly, for our generall calling. As theſe Lepers went, ſo they went (as it may be well thought) directly; and not as Ionah, who being commanded to Ariſe and goe vnto Nineueh, aroſe to flie to Tarſhiſh
               Ionah 1. 2, 3.. And thus muſt Chriſtians go directly alſo, and make ſtraight pathes to their feete, as the Hebrewes are exhorted, Heb. 12. 13. They muſt beware of circuiting perambulations, & take neede of going about,

and fetching of compaſſe in religion: Their eyes muſt looke right on, and their eye-lids ſtraight before themProu. 4. 25.. Let vngodly men gallop for their pleaſure, or profit, or preferment, in by-pathes and wrywaies; wee muſt with Dauid runne (and that directly) in the way of Gods cōmandements, and turne aſide neither to the right hand, nor to the left
               Deut. 5. 32.. We muſt ſtill be ayming at the marke of the high price of our calling, and haue it alwaies in our eye (as it

were:) and (as Paul went with a ſtraight courſe vnto Coos
               Act. 21. 1.,) ſo muſt wee ſtriue to keepe an euen and direct courſe vnto it.
            
               
                  Vſe 3 Laſtly, Theſe Lepers went, and went on ſtill, till they came to the Prieſts; So Chriſtians hauing once entred the way that leadeth vnto life, muſt not then ſit downe, but be ſtill going onwards. Saint Paul reached forth and preſſed ſtill toward the marke, Phil. 3. 13. And as he did thus himſelfe, ſo exhorted hee others,

ſaying, So runne that yee may obtaine, 1. Cor. 9. 24. Now they that would obtaine, muſt not giue ouer running, till they come to the goale; Though now and then we ſlip and fall, and ſo are ſtaied, yet we muſt not lye ſtill, but vp againe, and make more haſt in our way then before; And to be ſhort, we muſt go from knowledge to knowledg, from ſtrength to ſtrength, from vertue to vertue, from grace to grace, till we become perfect men in Chriſt Ieſus. Thus

much of the obedience of theſe Lepers; Now in the next place let vs goe on to what happened vnto them in the way, as they went: And it came to paſſe, that as they went, they were cleanſed.
            
            
               As they went, they
               
                  Text. Obſer. 
                
               were cleanſed: From hence we may obſerue; that, As we walke according to Gods commandements, it ſhall goe well with vs. If Naaman the Syrian had not at laſt waſhed in Iordan, as Eliſha badde him, hee might well haue beene a

leper vnto the day of his death; but going down, and dipping himſelfe ſeuen times, according to the ſaying of the man of God, his fleſh came again like vnto the fleſh of a little childe, and he was cleane2. King. 5. 10, 11. 14.. And if theſe lepers had not went, as our Sauiour bad them, they might as well haue continued ſtill as they were vncleane; but as they went, according to his commandement, they were cleanſed: As alſo the blind man going and waſhing in the poole of Siloam,

whither Chriſt ſent him, came backe againe ſeeing, and his eyes were openedIoh. 9. 7.. More generally: As Ioſiah did iudgement and iuſtice, as he iudged the cauſe of the poore and needie, it was well with himIerm. 22. 16.; and it was as well with Vzziah, as long as he reigned well: as long as he ſought the Lord, God made him to proſper
               2. Chron. 26. 5.. What the Prophet Ieremy ſaid vnto Zedekiah is worthy the remembring: Obey, I beſeech thee, the voice of the Lord, ſo ſhall it be well
               
               vnto thee, Ierem. 38. 20. And to the ſame purpoſe is that exhortation of Moſes to the Iſraelites: You ſhall walke in all the waies which the Lord your God hath commanded you, that yee may liue, and that it may be well with you, Deut. 5. 33.
            
               
                  Vſe 1 It is not then in vaine to ſerue God, as the wicked imagine; It was not in vaine that theſe lepers went, according to Chriſts commandement; neither will it be in vaine for vs to walke, according to Gods cō
               mandement. As they
               
               went, they were cleanſed; and as we walke, we ſhal be bleſſed. Bleſſed is euery one that feareth the Lord, that walketh in his waies: Happy ſhalt thou be (that doeſt thus) and it ſhall be well with thee, as the Pſalmiſt ſaith, Pſal. 128. 1, 2.
            
               
                  Vſe 2 Secondly, they take but an ill courſe to thriue and proſper, that wander in the by-waies of diſobedience; and they are farre wide, that imagine that it ſhall bee well with them, as they liue ill. It will bee euill with ſuch, and that,

firſt, in regard of their bodies. Our Sauiour cleanſed theſe Lepers that were obedient; but the Lord will ſmite ſuch as are diſobedient, with the peſtilence, with a conſumption, and a feuer, an inflammation, with the botch, and the itch Deut. 28. 21. &c.; As Gehazi was ſmitten with the Leproſie for his falſhood, 2. King. 5. 27. and Vzziah for his pride. 2. Chron. 26. 20. And 2. in regard of their eſtates, for, the treaſures of wickedneſſe will profite nothing: Prou. 10. 2. They may

indeede proſper in the world, but alas, their very proſperity ſhall deſtroy them, Prou. 1. 32. Hence it is, that as the Lord would haue it pronounced to the righteous, that it ſhall bee well with them, for they ſhall eate the fruite of their doings: So hee would haue it denounced againſt the vnrighteous, Woe vnto the wicked, it ſhall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands, ſhall be giuen him, Eſa. 3. 10, 11.
            3. Laſtly, here is encouragement for the

godly to proceede in the wayes of godlines, and (as the Lord ſaid to Ioſuah 
               Ioſh. 1. 8.) if they would haue good ſucceſſe, to obſerue what hee commandeth. Indeede, as the moſt godly faile in their obedience, ſo are they many times corrected for the ſame; but yet ſo farre as they are religious, ſo farre they are ſure to bee proſperous, as farre as they are godly, they are ſure to be happy. Surely I know (ſaith Solomon) that it ſhall be well with them that feare God,

but it ſhall not bee well with the wicked, becauſe they feare not before God, Eccleſ. 8. 12, 13.
            
               And one of them, when
               
                  Text. 
                
               he ſaw that hee was healed, turned backe, and with, &c. From the practiſe 
                  Obſer. 
                of this Samaritane, we may learn our duty, which is this, To glorifie God, and giue him thanks for fauours and benefits receiued from him; This is the expreſſe Commaundement of God; Call vpon mee in the day of trouble, I will deliuer thee, and thou
               
               ſhalt glorifie me, Pſal. 50. 15. Where, as prayer, ſo praiſe for deliuerance is required, euen as the Apoſtle alſo would haue thankſgiuing ioyned with prayer and ſupplication, Phil. 4. 6. So that there is a neceſſary coherence betweene prayer and thanksgiuing: as prayer is the ſending out for thoſe things wee neede, ſo thankſgiuing is for the receiuing of them; hauing receiued the things by prayer deſired of God, we muſt giue him thankes for the ſame. The firſt thing which

wee aske in the Lords prayer, is, to haue grace to glorifie Gods name; and the laſt thing we are to performe in the ſame prayer, is to aſcribe all glory to the ſaid ſacred Name.
            
               Moſes compoſed a ſong for the Iſraelites deliuerance from the Egyptians, Exod. 15. 1. and ſo did Hannah for her ſonne 1. Sam. 2. 1., both in thankfulneſſe vnto God. Dauid calling to minde Gods benefits, and bethinking with himſelfe, what hee ſhould returne for them, What ſhall I
               
               render vnto the Lord for all his benefits towards me? reſolues on this duty, I wil offer vnto him the ſacrifice of thanksgiuing, Pſal. 116. 12. 17. And thus this Samaritane perceiuing that hee was cleanſed, renders this ſacrifice for the ſame, he glorified God, and gaue thankes.
            
               
                  Vſe 1 The Apoſtle foretold that in theſe laſt dayes men ſhould be vnthankfull, 2. Tim. 3. 2. We ſee the truth therof: People haue tongues to aske, hands to receiue, but remember not to glorifie

God, when they haue receiued what they aske. In time of famine, ſicknes, or any aduerſity, they vſually pray vnto the Lord for helpe; but when he deliuereth them out of their diſtreſſe, doe they then (as the Pſalmiſt exhorteth, Pſalm. 107. 6. 8.) praiſe him for his goodneſſe? or may it not rather bee ſaide of them, as it was of Hezekiah 
               2. Chro. 32. 35., that they render not againe according to the benefite done vnto them? I know there are certain words of courſe, as, God bee praiſed, I

thanke God, &c. in moſt mens mouthes. Many there are that giue thanks and glorifie God formally, coldly, and ſuperficially; but few that doe it feruently, & zealouſly (as this Samaritane did) who with a loud voice (which was argumentū zeli, a token of his zeale) glorified God.) Few cal vpon their ſouls to performe this duty, as Dauid did, Bleſſe the Lord O my ſoule, and all that is within mee bleſſe his holy name, Pſa. 103. 1.
            But let vs be exhorted, alwayes in all things to

giue thankes vnto God; As we pray for them, ſo let vs praiſe his Name for them, let vs glorifie him for what hee graciouſly giueth vs; It is a good thing to giue thanks vnto the Lord, and to ſing praiſes vnto thy Name, O moſt High, Pſal 92. 1.
            Thankeſgiuing (ſaith one) was an exerciſe in Paradiſe, and it ſhall be an exerciſe in heauen; It ſhall continue, when others ſhall ceaſe. In the next life wee ſhall not neede the Word, nor Prayer, nor Sacraments, but the praiſing of God

ſhall not ceaſe, beeing a peculiar exerciſe of the Angels and Saints in heauen. Now if wee would euer praiſe him in heauen, we muſt firſt praiſe him on earth; we muſt glorifie him here, if we deſire to bee glorified, and to glorifie him hereafter. I ſay then as the Apoſtle to the Hebrewes, Let vs offer the ſacrifice of praiſe to God continually, that is, the
               Heb. 13. 15 
               fruit of our lips, giuing thankes to his Name; and alwayes remember, that in thanksgiuing as wee glorifie God, ſo wee benefite

our ſelues; The Lord will willingly giue vs what wee doe aske him, when hee ſeeth vs thankefull for that hee hath giuen vs; thankes for former bleſſings is the way to gaine and procure future bleſſings.
            
               When he ſaw, &c. hee
               
                  Text. 
                
               turned, &c. Againe wee may obſerue from 
                  Obſer. 
                hence, That as thankesgiuing is required, ſo it is ſpeedily to bee rendered; as it is not to bee omitted, ſo it is not to be deferred. When Siſera was ouerthrowne, Deborah and Barak, euen

on that day, ſang, ſaying: Praiſe ye the Lord for the auenging of Iſrael, Iudg. 5. 1. 2. And as ſoone as this Samaritane ſawe that he was cleanſed, he turned backe (viz. from the Prieſts) glorified God, and gaue thankes.
            
               
                  Vſe 1 Remember then to doe this preſently after the receipt of any blesſing; As we muſt be ſwift to heare the word of God, 
               Iam. 1. 19 
               ſo muſt we bee ſwift to returne thankes to God. Indeede we muſt (as S. Iames ſaith Ibid. 
               bee ſlow to ſpeake: to wit, againſt the truth that is deliuered,

but not Gods praiſes for bleſſings receiued: we muſt bee as quicke in thanksgiuing, as God is in giuing; as ready to glorifie him, as hee to gratifie vs; to giue him thanks, as hee to giue vs bleſſings.
            
               
                  Vſe 2 Secondly, as thanksgiuing is not to bee put off, ſo neither is any other Chriſtian and religious duty; This Samaritane deferred not his glorifying of God, & ſo we muſt not deferre our ſeruing of God. Dauid made haſt, and delayed not to keepe Gods commandements
               
               Pſal. 119. 60.; No ſooner did Ionah cry in the ſtreetes of Nineueh, Yet forty dayes and Nineueh ſhall be ouerthrowne, but they cryed mightily vnto
               Ionah 3. 
               God, repented, and turned from their euill way. Our Sauiour hauing called Simon and Andrew, they ſtraightway followed him, Mark. 1. 18. And Zacheus made haſte to receiue him, Luke 19. 6. Alaſſe, people in theſe times, who make quicke diſpatch of their worldly affaires, are exceeding ſlow in the moſt important buſines of their

ſoules. Good courſes for the preſent are onely allowed, not followed: Conuerſion and amendment the moſt purpoſe, but yet deferre them, young men till they bee old, old men till they be a dying. But as for young men they muſt remember their creator, feare him, ſerue him, now in the dayes of their youth Eccl. 12. 2, and not put off all this, till their vncertaine old old age: and Audite ſenes 
               Ioel. 1. 2., Heare ye old men, it is ſufficient for you that yee haue ſpent the time paſt

of your life in the baſe ſeruice of the world, ſin and Sathan; now while it is called to day, turne from your ſins to ſerue the liuing God. And let all, both young men and maidens, olde men and children, take heede of this delay and procraſtination; & ſet themſelues about religious courſes, & Chriſtian duties with all ſpeede and expedition. That thou doeſt, doe quickly, ſaid our Sauiour to Iudas, Ioh. 13. 27. As hee made haſte to ſaue our ſoules, ſo muſt wee make haſt to amend our

liues. As Rebeccas friends could by no requeſts hinder Abrahams ſeruant from ſpeedy returne vnto his maſter, ſo let nothing hinder vs ſrom preſent conuerſion to God our Maſter; Make no tarrying (ſaith the Sonne of Syrach) to turne to the Lord, and put not off from day to day; for ſuddenly ſhall the wrath of the Lord come forth, and in thy ſecurity thou ſhalt bee deſtroyed, and periſh in the day of vengeance, Eccleſ. 5. 7.
            
               Were there not tenne
               
                  Text. 
               
               
               cleanſed?) Here we may note, that kindneſſe is ſhewed by God vnto the wicked. Theſe nine vnthankfull lepers were cleanſed, aſwell as the tenth, the thankfull one. Thus wee ſee that true which we reade, Luk. 6. 35. That God is kinde vnto the vnthankfull, and to the euill. And as our Sauiour cleanſed the bodies of theſe vngratefull lepers, ſo filled he the bellies of his carnall and fleſhly followers, Iohn 6. according as the Pſalmiſt ſpeaking of men of the world,

which haue their portion in this life, ſaith, that their bellies the Lord filleth with his hid treaſure, Pſal. 17. 14. As he filleth their bellies, ſo he filleth their barnes alſo: Yea, and ſo loadeth them ſometimes with this worlds good, that their barnes are not large enough to receiue their fruits, and to hold their goods, as appeareth by the parable of the rich man. Luk. 12. 16. Thus corporal and temporall benefits, Impijs impertitur Dominus, the Lord imparteth to vngodly

men. And this he doth: Firſt, that they might bee the more inexcuſable, and haue nothing to alleadge for themſelues at the day of their account. Secondly, that if they haue, or ſeeme to haue any good things in thē, they might not bee altogether vnrewarded. Thus Ahabs temporary humiliation was recompenced with the remoouall of a temporall iudgement: and theſe lepers temporary faith with the remoouall of their leproſie.
            
               Farre be it then from 
                  Vſe 1 any man to imagine that, the enioyment of temporall things is an infallible teſtimony of Gods ſpeciall loue; that the Lord beares entire affection vnto him, becauſe he hath temporall bleſsings beſtowed on him; No man (ſaith Salomon) knoweth either loue or hatred by all that is before him
               Eccl. 9. 1. 2., that is, no man can aſſure himſelfe of Gods loue by the fruition, or of his hatred by the want, of external things. All ſuch things come alike

vnto all (ſaith he) and are common both to the righteous and to the wicked: As is the good, ſo is the ſinner, and he that ſweareth, as he that feareth an oath. The want of outward things, as of health, ſoundnes, wealth, beauty, &c. is not a token of Gods diſpleaſure; neither the poſſeſsion of them, a ſure ſigne of his gracious fauour. A man may be poore, diſeaſed, full of ſores, and yet be regarded by the moſt High here, and eternally beautified hereafter, as

we may ſee in Lazarus. And againe, a man may be healthfull, & wealthfull, cloathed richly, and fare ſumptuouſly, and yet be hated of God in this life, and euerlaſtingly condemned in the life to come, as we may ſee in the rich glutton. Luk. 16.
            Againe, let not any be offended to ſee, profane and vnthankfull perſons luſty and ſtrong, their eyes ſtand out with fatneſſe, and their ſtrength firme; neither be enuious, when he beholdeth the proſperity of the

wicked, Iudge them not to be happy, but goe into the Sanctuary of God, then ſhalt thou vnderſtand their curſed eſtate. Surely, their health will end in vnhappineſſe; their ſoundneſſe and ſtrength of bodie, in deſtruction both of ſoule and body, and whatſoeuer they ſolace themſelues withall, in deſolation.
            
               
                  Vſe 3 Laſtly; As Gods goodneſſe is extended vnto the wicked, who are his enemies, ſo muſt our kindneſſe enlarge and ſtretch foorth it ſelfe

euen to our enemies. If they hunger, wee muſt not thinke too much to feede them; if they thirſt, to giue them drinke 
               Rom. 12. 20.. Wee muſt do good to them that hate vs: That ſo we may bee the children of our Father which is in heauen; for he maketh his Sunne to riſe on the euill, aſwell as on the good; and ſendeth raine (as) on the iuſt (ſo) on the vniust. Matth. 5. 44, 45.
            
               Were are the nine?
               
                  Text. 
                
               There are not found, &c. From hence obſerue, that, The moſtare commonly the worſt: The

feweſt the beſt. Before the flood all fleſh had corrupted his way vpon the earth; onely Noah was vpright, and preached righteouſneſſe 2. Pet. 2. 5. The people of Sodome, were all vicious; onely Lot was righteous, and vexed with their vncleanneſſe. Of thoſe that were ſent to ſearch the land of Canaan, ten were vnfaithfull; onely two, Caleb and Ioſhuah, were faithfull. And of theſe ten lepers, that were cleanſed, nine were vngratefull; one onely a Samaritane, thankfull.
            
               The flocke whereof Chriſt is ſheepheard, is but a ſmall flocke, Luke 12. 32. There were but a few names, that is, a few perſons in Sardis, which had not defiled their garments; that is, which were faithful, and had not beene infected with thoſe ſinnes which reigned in that Church, Reuel. 3. 4. Many are called (ſaith our Sauiour) but few are choſen 
               Math. 22. 14.. If but few, euen of thoſe that haue an outward calling, how much more few, if you conſider the reſt of the world beſide?
            
               
               The way of righteouſnes as it is a narrow way, ſo it hath but few followers; whereas the way of wickednes, as it is of greater latitude, ſo it hath a greater multitude of paſſengers; as it is of larger extent, ſo there are many that walke in it, Math. 7. 13.
            The Apoſtle ſaith to the Philippians, Walke 
                  Vſe 1 as yee haue vs for an example: but wee are neuer wiſhed to walke, as we haue the moſt for an example. Looke vnto the moſt, and thou ſhalt finde them neglecters of

Gods worſhip, prophaners of his Sabbath, contemners of his word wallowing in wantonnes, delighting in drunkennes, liuing in couetouſneſſe, &c. Iudge now if ſuch perſons are fit patternes to follow: the more a man goeth after them, the farther he wandreth from God; whoſoeuer walketh with them in the broad way, it will at laſt leade both them and him to deſtruction. Enter not therefore into the way of the wicked, & walke not in the way of euill men, be they neuer ſo
               
               many 
               Prou. 4. 14. The Lord hath commanded, Thou ſhalt not follow a multitude to do euill, Exod. 23. 2. We muſt not goe after the many. As the Lord ſaid to Ieremy: Let them returnevnto thee, but return not thou vnto them, Ier. 15. 19. So let the moſt follow vs, but let not vs goe after them: though they worke iniquity, yet that is no ground or warrant for vs; rather a warning to vs to flye iniquity; the more they purſue euill, the leſſe muſt we, and the more praiſe ſhall wee haue, if

wee follow after that which is good.
            Secondly, let vs looke, not what the multitude doth, but what wee our ſelues ought to doe; it was worthily ſpoken of Ioſuah vnto the people, If it ſeeme euill vnto you to ſerue the Lord, chuſe you this day whom you will ſerue; but as for mee and my houſe, we wil ſerue the Lord, Ioſh. 24. 15. Though many of our Sauiours diſciples went backe, and walked no more with him, yet his true diſciples cōtinue ſtil with him, and ſay, Lord
               
               to whom ſhall wee goe? Thou haſt the words of eternall life, Ioh. 6, 66. 68 Though theſe nine lepers turned their backs againſt Chriſt, yet this Samaritane alone by himſelfe turned backe vnto him; and thus muſt wee doe our duties, though few beare vs company, wee muſt ſet our ſelues about whatſoeuer is required of vs, though none ioine with vs. And that wee may doe ſo, let vs remember that it is better, far better, to be ſaued alone or with few, then to bee

damned with many.
            
               There are not found,
               
                  Text. 
                
               &c. All theſe lepers began fairely, nine quickly made an end; one onely returned and perſeuered: and as herein hee went beyond the others, ſo for this, he is preferred before the others, and commended by our Sauiour.
            Now obſerue heere 
                  Obſer. 
                laſt of all, that to begin well is not ſufficient, but perſeuerance and conſtancy is required; without continuance faire beginnings and glorious proceedings are nothing

worth. What auailed it Iudas, that he was an Apoſtle, that he preached, that he carryed himſelfe in an outward honeſt, and reformed conuerſaſation a long time, when hee continued not, but by transgreſſion fellAct. 1. 25? What did it profit Saul, that he began to reigne well, when hee turned aſide, and fell away? what, Demas, that hee was a profeſſour: yea, that he went far in his profeſſion, when afterwards hee forſooke it, and fell in loue with the world? And what Iohns
               
hearers, That they reioyced in his light, when it was onely for
               Ioh. 5. 35. 
               ſeaſon a? It was nothing worth, that the Iewes hearing Chriſt ſpeake of bread from heauen, earneſtly deſired it: ſaying, Lord euermore giue vs this bread; when they went backe, and walked no more with himIoh. 6. 34. 36.. And it was nothing worth, that theſe nine lepers began ſo well, that they met our Sauiour, lifted vp their voices, ſaying: Ieſus, Maſter, haue mercy on vs: That they went to the Prieſts, as

they were commanded, when at laſt they ſhamefully forſooke him, and vnthankfully departed from him.
            Righteouſneſſe forſaken or departed from, is vaine and forgotten: When the righteous turneth away from his righteouſnes, and committeth iniquity, all his righteouſnes that he hath done ſhall not bee mentioned, Ezek. 18. 24. Where perſeuerance is not, repentance, obedience, hearing, prayers, yea ſufferings are in vaine, Gal. 3. 4. Yea without it, hope of happines
               
               is loſt; for they onely that are faithfull vnto death, ſhall receiue a crown of life, Reu. 2. 10. And he that ſhall endure to the end, the ſame ſhall bee ſaued, Mat. 24. 13.
            This then muſt teach vs, not to be weary of well doing. Multitudes there are amongſt vs, who (like the Iſraelites, Pſal. 78. 57.) turne aſide like a deceitfull bow; whoſe goodneſſe is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew which paſſeth away 
               Hoſ. 6. 4.. Diuers there are, who, as Iehu marched furiouſly, ſo they
                  a Mal. 1. 13.
               
beginne feruently; but quickly ſay, as the Iſraelites, Behold what a wearineſſe is it a. WhoſeMal. 1. 13. preſent courſes if wee compare with their firſt beginnings, wee ſhall finde that, with Epheſus they haue left their firſt loue, and are come to a Laodicean temper. And becauſe they are neither hot nor cold, the Lord will ſpue them out of his mouth 
               Reu. 3. 16, and caſt them cleane from him.
            But as for vs, we muſt not leaue our former loue, obedience, zeale; but rather labour to increaſe

them: Nor be weary of well-doing, till the day of our dying. Wee muſt not change our good courſes for worſer, till we exchange this life for a better.
            It was Iobs conſtant reſolution: Till I dye, I will not remooue my Integrity from mee. My righteouſneſſe I hold faſt, and will not let it goe. My heart ſhall not reproach mee, ſo long as I liue, Iob 27. 5, 6. Dauid ſaith, I haue enclined mine heart to performe thy ſtatutes alway, euen vnto the end. Pſal. 119. 112. Aſa his
               
               heart was perfect with the Lord all his dayes. 1. King. 15. 14. And Paul finiſhed his courſe, and kept the faith. 2. Tim. 4. 7. And as theſe haue held out, ſo let not vs leaue off. As we haue entred into profeſsion, ſo let vs perſiſt: It is a ſhamefull thing to giue it now ouer. Let vs ſay concerning our religion, as that worthy Thebane ſouldier did concerning his target, I will either defend thee, or dye vpon thee; and as Ruth to Naomi: The Lord doe ſo to mee, and
               
               more alſo, if ought but death part thee and mee, Ruth. 1. 17.
            I conclude all with the prayer of Saint Iude: Now vnto him that is able to keepe you from falling, and to preſent you faultleſſe before the preſence of his glory with exceeding ioy: To the onely wiſe God our Sauiour, bee glory and maieſtie, dominion and power, now and euer, Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   