
      
         
            
            
               
               
                  
                     Preceptes of Cato with annotacions of D. Eraſmus of Roterodame very profitable for all menne
               
            
         
         
            
            
            
               To the right worſhipfull, ſir Thomas Cauerden knight, Robert Burrant wiſheth moche proſperous healthe and wealthe.
            
               
                  RIght worſhipfull ſir, all queſtions ſet a parte, the onely fame & good reporte, whiche ye doe right worthely deſerue of your ſo very excellent giftes and qualities, and eſpecially your vpright iudgemente, with moſte prudent and ſage wiſedome in Marciall affaires annexed, ſeme not vnworthy the patronſhip of the preceptes of the antique & wittie Cato Foraſmoche as ye dooe not onely imitate and folowe like circumſpecte grauitie and pollicie, but alſo dooe with your like factes and propreties reueſt and newly garniſhe the wiſedome of Cato. I ſuppoſe that if the fates and deſtinies would ſuffre Cato to reuiue again, and were certified into whoſe tniciō and ſaufe defence

he were dedicate, he would either coumpt himſelf the moſte fortunate of all other, or els would willingly ſurrender his right and title, that he could claime or demaūde in this his preceptes, vnto your diſcrecion. Cō
               ſideryng that ye were hable to purchaſe vnto him a more ample inheritaunce of fame immortall, whom he would finde ſo legitimate & naturall a ſoonne, and heire of his politique wiſedome, who for his merueilous inuencions and wittie coneighaunce in warrefare, is not onely of auncient Capitaines to bee folowed, and of young warriers to bee practiſed, but alſo of children to bee learned. And finally, for this his excellencie deſerueth not onely of the Grecians, and Latiniſtes to bee read and knowen, but alſo to bee tranſlated into the Oulgare toungue of all nacions.

                  Receiue therefore here your father Catons inheritaunce.
                  And with your like wiſedome, caufe kept his ſubſtaunce.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the reader.
            
               AS often as I dooe by my fooliſhe witte and ſimple brain (moſte beneuolent reader) ſomewhat earneſtly conſidre the wittie, ſage, yea, rather diuine and heauenly then humain and worldely ſciōces of the antique Philoſophers, thei dooe cauſe me not a litle to meruaile at the wounderfull giftes of God. For truely if a manne ſhould iudge them onely in their monumentes and writinges, & there were no perſeuerance of their names, times, or beliefe, I knowe not who would coumpt them vnworthie the names of perfect chriſtians. Foraſmoche as their preceptes and teachynges, their iudgementes and wittes, and (if Hiſtoriographers be to bee beleued) their honeſtie, ciuilitie, and moſte brotherlike conuerſacion, were ſo paſſyng and excellent. what Chiſtian is hable in this our time to comprehende like

woorkes to that very Heathen Plato or Ariſtotle. Would to god (o Plato) thy faith might haue deſerued the name of a diuine philoſopher, as thy writynges did. Shewe me one of vs all (that haue rather the name then the true perfection of chriſtiās) that is like, or in any part reſembleth the humilitie and pacience that Socrates had? Diogenes was called a dog, either for ſome ſluttiſhe cōdiciōs he had, or els for his barkyng at other mennes euill liuyng. But yet where is the perfeicteſt liuer of vs all that can voucheſafe with as glad a wil to forſake the worlde and his delightes and felicities, as that Dogge did? Shall we ſhewe our ſelues to bee of leſſe perfecciō then this dog? truely we lacke ſoche a good barkyng curre now a daies, to barke at theſe miſcheuous theftes, coueteouſneſſe, Lecherie, pride, periurie, and Deuiliſhe Simonie. But leaſt any ſoche banddogge

chaunce to open his mouth at vs now, we will bee ſure to haue in our ſleue either ſome litle corde to tie him vp in a kenell, or els we wil caſt him a gobbet of meate to ſtoppe his throte, that he maie leaue his barkyng. But nothing, no bread or meat no cheriſhyng, or makyng moche of, could make this Dogge Diogenes ceaſſe his barkyng. Oh it was an exceadyng good Curre, and had many good propreties: to baite beares, that is, coueteous, lecherous, and proude perſones, ye might vſe him for a bā
               dogge or maſtife. To kepe wolues, or other rauenyng beaſtes frō our ſhepe that is, extorcioners and oppreſſours from the ſimple people, he was as a good ſhepeherdes curre. To finde and put vp game, and to retrain theſame, that is, to ſeke out euil diſpoſed perſones, and openly to reprehende and rebuke them, there could be no better Spanell. To ouertake his game, that

is, to peruert the naughtie purpoſes of euill liuers, there was no ſwifter Graiehounde. And for to purſue the ſteppes of the wicked, he was a paſſyng good bloudhounde, I praie to God that we bee not founde wourſe, then this dogge, or at leaſt waies hauyng that worſe propretie of a dogge that is, retournyng to the flithie vomite of our ſinfull life. I would to Chriſtes paſſion there were no more deſire of worldelie felicities in the Churche of Chriſt, then was in this ſimple Heathē dogge Diogenes. But yet Diogenes, nor any of all the philoſophers, or of all the wiſe antique ſage mē, had ſo ſinguler & perfeict giftes, nor pricked nigher the ſtreight marke and poinct of a catholike man then this ſeuere and moſte prudente Caton. Whoſe lacke of faithe & chriſtianitie, there is no man of vnderſtandyng and Iudgemente, but 
                  〈◊〉
                moſte penſiuely ſorome and lam
                  〈…〉
               
               
Lette a man onely with good iudgement and ſincere intelligence peruſe this litle woorke of his Preceptes, he ſhall finde nothing to haue miſſed or wanted in this Cato, to the perfeccion of Chriſtes religion, ſauyng the hope and faithe that a chriſtian man ought to haue in the bloudde of Ieſu Chriſt. There is no degree emong mē but here thei maie learne their duetie and office towardes God and mā. All kindes & all ages hath here their leſſon taught thē, how to behaue thē ſelues in all ſtates and cōdicions. So that this litle boke dooeth worthely deſerue to be had in fauour with man woman, and child. Foraſinoche as in it is conteined the good inſtruccion & better reformacion of all their liues. He that will haue good and Godlie poſes and titles, either in his armes badges, cogniſaunces, or in the borders 
                  〈◊〉
               his hanginges, in this booke ma
                  〈…〉
                haue them, whiche bee right

worthie to be grauen & written with goldē letters, or if there be any thing more precious. Howbeit we ſe many yea, to many (if it were the will of god) to ornate and decke their ſhildes armes, and houſes with goodly and gorgeous letters, yet thei thē ſelues neuer a lote the better in their liuing So that thei haue fairer armes & walles, then ſoulles, & mindes. I would not therefore that thou ſhouldeſt painte thy houſe, and floriſhe thy armes, and leaue thy ſoulle filthie. But I would thou ſhouldeſt furniſhe the behauiours of thy minde with theſe good leſſons, and there is no doubte, but thou ſhalt auoide the occaſion of many euilles, and attain to the perfeccion of many Godlie knoweleges and diuine Preceptes, and of no aucthour Heathen, then of Caton, more ſincerely and perfe
                  •
               ctly written.
         
         
            
            
               THE PREFACE OF Cato his Preceptes.
            
               AFter that I perceiued not a few to erre and miſſe in the true trade & waie of good nurtour, I thought to putte to my help yng hande and counſail in the repairyng of the ſame their ruine: for this intēr ſpecially that thei might liue i ſome reputacion and honeſtie, and mighte therby attein and come to ſome promocion and prefermente. Here now (my deare beloued ſonne) I ſhall inſtruct thee how to ordre thy ſelf, and to furniſhe the behauioures and the maners of the minde. Therefore read thou my preceptes and leſſons with ſoche diligence, that thou maieſt thorowly vnderſtande them. For to read any thing, and not to vnderſtande what it meaneth, is none other but theſ
                  〈…〉
                to neglect and deſpiſe.

                  Firſ
                        〈…〉
                     fore I will the God to honour
                  
                     
And nexte him thy parentes haue in honor.
               
            
            The chifeſt loue, zeale, and affeccion that ought (by teachers, fathers, and mothers, and all other bringers vp of youth) to be grauen and liuely fourmed in childrens hartes, ſhould and muſt be the perfeict and feruent pitie and daſire towardes God & godlie thinges. And vnder this precepte is commaunded all vertue, firſt of all to bee infuſed and powred into the newe and freſhe veſſelles of tender Babes hartes. And after this loue ones perfaictly founded and rooted, to learne thē the true fauour and affeccion, with like obedience and humilitie, that ought of children to be geuen and ſhewed towardes their fathers and mothers. Wherein thei ſo brought vp, maie in more age
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  〈…〉
               owlege due reuerēce and duetie 
                  〈…〉
               heir

rulers, ſuperiours and betters.

                  The nexte loue to this, for to be had in dignitie.
                  Is the loue of thy aliance and conſanguinitie:
               
            
            Here is the third loue that oughte to be kindled in childrens ſtomaches that is, the loue of their kindrede. Whiche loue although the Lawe of God had geuen no precept to be obſerued, yet very nature and reaſon would this loue to be had, ſeing that no ſmal bonde of frendſhip is thereby knit. And without it, no litle occaſion of diſſenciō maie be miniſtred For if this precepte were not obſerued and kept: what tragical and miſcheuous diſſencion ſhould there bee while the ſonne reſiſteth the father? the ne
                  〈…〉
               ewe the vncle, the brother his a 
                  〈◊〉
                naturall brother As it appeareth in the hiſtorie of Thyeſtes &

Atreus in Nero, and in other tragedies not vnlike theſe, or as bad altogether. But now it ſhalbe neceſſarie to declare in what thinges theſe thre loues doeth, and ought to conſiſt, and how euery one of theſe oughte to bee reuerenced, and had in eſtimacion. Then the loue of God dooeth conſiſt in geuyng true honour, true praiſe, & true ſacrifice to him, of whom we receiue all thinges that are good. And this ſacrifice canbe no purer, no cleaner, no pleaſaunter, then to yelde vnto him a ſpirite ſory for our offences and fully with a firme purpoſe to retourne no more to the filthe of ſinne. The father and the mother, the ruler and ſuperiour are loued, whē al thinges lawfully and godlie by them cō
               maūded are obeied and folowed. We dooe loue our kinſfolke (emong whō the nereſt kinſman that we h
                  ••
               e, our neighbour is to bee chiefly rekened) when we dooe with mutuall benefites,

offices, dueties, & honeſt familiaritie and cōuerſacion one loue the other, one helpe thother: & one inſtruct the other, in good example of liuyng.

                  Feare thy maſter for to diſpleaſe.
                  And with thy negligence dooe not him diſeaſe.
               
            
            This teare is harde to finde, and chaunceth but to fewe children. And the cauſe theróf is ſometime the maſters negligence. And therefore this feare ought ſo to bee tempred, that it bee not compelled by threatenynges and ſtripes, nor diminiſhed by remiſſion and lenitie. I tought to bee ſoche that the Scholer ſhould more feare the diſpleaſyng and vexyng of his Maſter, then the ſharpeneſſe of the 
                  •
               oode. In the olde time Princes and noble menne toke vnto theim informer 
                  〈…〉
               d inſtructours of their children
                  •
                whom thei called Pedagoges,

and whom wee now call Scholemaſters. Soche a one was Ariſtotle with king Philip, teacher to Alexā
               der. Plinie to the Emperor Traiane And ſoche had Marcus Aurelius for his ſonne Commodus. And many of theſe teachers were but bondmenne, whom noble men boughte to teache their ſoonnes. As it is witneſſed of Diogenes in the Apothegmes, who was bought in the market of Xeniades, & was in the houſe with him teachyng his children to his liues ende, and was of his awne ſcholers buried

                  Whatſoeuer is committed to thy fidelitie.
                  Kepe it priuie, and dooe it not diſcrie.
               
            
            Herein is euery faiethfull frende taught a leſſon and rule how to kepe in truſte, ſcilence and faithfulneſſe, ſoche ſecrete matiers as ſhalbe committed and geuē to his fidelitie: how

be it he maketh not his precepte, thinges to be kepte in Scilence and Huggermugger, but thoſe thinges onelie that ſhal not offende either God, nor his Prince, as Hereſie or treaſon. Yea and beſides theſe, leat a manne haue a iuſte reſpecte to his owne conſcience, ſo that the hiding or the vttering of any ſecrete matier be to the wrongfull hurte of no manne, and ſpeciallie of his owne ſoulle.

                  Be thou at al ſeaſons in a redineſſe.
                  To applie thy market and buſineſſe.
               
            
            ¶ Wheras thenterpretours minde is that a manne ſhould in thoſe ſciences moſte chieflie occupie himſelf, whiche might helpe him to the knowelege of the lawe, foraſmoche as in Catones time, and in our time alſo, the nexte & ſpedieſt waie to promotiō, is by ſoche meanes: Yet I dooe rather folowe his 
                  〈◊〉
                minde and will, that is, for a man 
                  〈◊〉
                applie himſelfe to thinges preſent,

and as the time ſerueth, according to the Prouerbe & common ſaiyng: Take thy market while time is, Leaſt of thy price thou dooe miſſe. And then it be ſaied vnto the, thou comeſt a daie after the Faire.

                  with good menne euer let thy conuerſacion be.
                  And then ſhalt thou get moch honeſtie
               
            
            ¶ It is communelie ſeen, that he that toucheth pitche, is of the ſame defiled, ſpotted, & carieth ſome token of it about him, either in ſauour, or one parte or other of his garmentes is therwith diſtained. So it fareth with them that companie with euill diſpoſed perſones, that haūt ſuſpected places, either thei ſmel of the ſame naughtineſſe, or thei get vnto them as bad a name as though thei were naughtie packes in dede: for no man can let the peoples iudgement, whiche wil iudge

accordyng to the behauiours of theim that thou art in companie withal. So that by the companie of good mē thou ſhalt euer be ſure to leſe nothing, but rather win ſomewhat, either in name or in perfeictneſſe of liuyng.

                  Enterpriſe not to come in preſence.
                  where thou ſeeſt men talke in ſcilence.
               
            
            This leſſō ſerueth not onely to the ignoraunt mindes of young children, but alſo to the rudeneſſe of ſome carterly and loutiſhe felowes, and to the malopert boldnes of ſome Iacke ſauces. Whiche all for lacke of nurture, dooe ſodeinly without all regarde or bluſhyng, thruſt theimſelues into the ſecrete counſall of wiſemenne, and ſo diſturbe them from their earneſt matiers, with their vnlearned rudeneſſe.

                  In thy minde and bodily fauor.
                  Be thou cleane & of an honeſt behauor
               
            
            Surely there is no better token of

the diſpoſicion of the minde inwarde, then is the faſhion and behauiour of the bodie outwarde. And there is no readier meanes to furniſhe the bodie, then firſt to decke & garniſhe the mind with godlie vertues & nurtures. So that the one is in maner ſhapē by the other, and one the fairer for the beautie and ornament of the other. And in this the furniture of both is very expedient and for euery good Chriſtian to be diligētlie obſerued, but alwaies pride is to be abandoned, and to be ouer curious and picked.

                  
                     whoſoeuer thou dooeſt mete.
                  
                  
                     Gentlie & gladlie dooe him ſalute.
                  
               
            
            ¶ There is no redier waie to get the loue & frendeſhippe of many, then in metinges and communinges together, for a manne to behaue himſelfe gentlie and lowlie in his ſpeaking & geſtures of his bodie, ſo moche that manne is of ſoche pureneſſe of nature

that with gentleneſſe he is ſoone pacified though he bee in neuer ſo greate a rage of furie. yea and by gentle intertainmente frendes are long time kept. Whom after we haue ones loſt, is verie harde, yea nothing more harde to finde and get again.

                  
                     when thou hast to dooe with one greater then thou art.
                  
                  
                     Yelde vnto him mekelie, for ſo it is thy parte.
                  
               
            
            ¶ It is no ſmal ſtrength and vertue that maie be ingēdred in the learning, and due obſeruing of this precepte. Therefore it is neceſſarie for al degrees and ſtates to herken vnto it. Learne here thou ſubiecte to forbeare thy rulers & their Officers: thou ſeruaunte, thy maſter: thou Scholar, thy inſtructour: yea, & thou wife thy houſbande. For by contention of inequalities, that is the lower with the higher

the weaker and porer with the richer and mightier, all occaſion of miſchief is wrought and miniſtred.

                  
                     In ſtrief thou that art ſuperiour.
                  
                  
                     Be euer fauour able to thine inferiour.
                  
               
            
            A precepte hauyng no leſſe ſtrength of loue and prefeict amitie, then the other before. And would to God euery one of power and might would with litle childrē learne this leſſō, I would the riche cobbe to fauour the poore ſely labourer in the ieoperdous & peinfull wraſtelyng of the Lawe. And I would to God that there might be indifferent ſticklers ſet betwene theim, that is vpright iudges to ſe the poore man take no foule plaie at the mightie mannes hande. Likewiſe I would haue vſed in ſpirituall iudgementes, whoſe courtes for lacke of ſande bee ſo ſlipperie, that excepte a man be the connynger, he is lightely tripped and laied on the fower quarters.

                  
                  
                     whatſoeuer gooddes, God dooeth to thee ſende.
                  
                  
                     Kepe it, and fooliſhly dooe not it ſpende
                  
               
            
            I am afraied leaſt ſome kepe this rule to ſtraight, and obſerueth it with ouermoche diligence, for ſome there are that bee ſoche hinchers and pinchers, that thei had rather break their necke, then ſpende one ferthyng more then very ſhame driueth them to dooe and ſcarſe then. Other there are, that nede more then one ſoche good leſſon. And thei are thoſe prodigall ſoonnes who will not ſticke to ſpende their whole enheritaunce vpon a foule ſalowe queane, and to haſſarde and dice out at ſixe or ſeuen, their fathers purchaſe in one litle moment of an houre that he laboured for in all his whole life time, and then muſt thei go ſteale or take a ſtaffe and a wallet, and goe begge.

                  
                  
                     whether thou be in the ſtate of wedlocke or virginitee.
                  
                  
                     See that thou kepe thy ſelf in chaſtite
                  
               
            
            ¶ Great hede is to be taken, leaſt this vice of the fleſhe, that is to ſaie, lecherie dooe raine in the tendre age of any childe, or young manne, ſpeciallie for that ſoche age is moſte prone and readie to ſoche maner of vncleaneſſe, and then reaſon & feare lacking, the weake fleſhe of young perſones is ſone by very litle temptacion ouer throwen: Yea leat not the elders diſdaine herof to learne how to leade a life pure and immaculate, frō the 
                  •
               tlthie carreine and ſtencious rotteunes of carnal luſtes.

                  
                     In al thy buſineſſe take good hede.
                  
                  
                     That thou applie the with good ſpede.
                  
               
            
            ¶ The earneſt deſire and prompte wil in a ſeruaunt or ſcholar is moche regarded, for therof it cometh, that be

the matier neuer ſo harde, yet by diligence and good wille it is eaſelis brought about, and with a good lucke ended: Where as by negligence there is nothing that ſpedeth, or is well brought to paſſe.

                  
                     If thou wilt proue to bee a good ſcholer.
                  
                  
                     Be euer reading one booke or other.
                  
               
            
            ¶ Longe life thou maieſt haue and many thinges maieſt thou by experience and practiſe learne, yet peraduē
               ture in reading ſome frutful woorke thou ſhalt perceiue more wit & iudgemente, then euer could by experiēce be attained vnto, or by any man hereafter inuented, foraſmoche as graces and giftes are nothing ſo plentious, as thei were in the beginning of the worlde, when God did make manifeſt his woundreful power and might in the wittes of the Heathē, for the better inſtruction, and confirmation of

the faithe of the chriſtians to come.

                  
                     whatſoeuer thou haſte ſeen beare it in minde.
                  
                  
                     An forgette not thinges that bee behinde.
                  
               
            
            Some are of that opinion that thei thinke the perfeictneſſe of learnyng to conſiſt and be in the ſwift and hedlong readyng ouer of many aucthours There bee alſo ſome parentes of like iudgemente, whiche thinke their ſonnes to haue profited nothing, if thei bee one yere in one booke, or one daie in one leſſon, but both theſe are farre deceiued, for thei profeict in learnyng who dooeth throughly vnderſtande what thei read, and the ſame ſo vnderſtande, dooe firmely and ſurely faſten in their perfeict memorie.

                  ¶ Seke not in another houſe what there dooeth want.
                  
                  
                     
                     But prouide, that in thine awne be nothing ſcant.
                  
               
            
            There is many a buſis bodie that will finde faultes in another mannes dooynges, although he himſelf bee in his awne matiers moſte negligēt and ouerſeen. And ſoche dooeth often times geue better counſaill to other mō then thei can geue vnto theimſelues. But ſurely moſt quietneſſe ſhalbe for euery manne, to haue to dooe in his awne cauſes, and to ſuffre other men to haue their willes and pleaſures in their awne buſineſſe. For brablets & intermedlers were euer cauſers of contencion and variaunce. And many there are that marke how litle meate another man hath in his diſhe, but he findeth no fault with his awne cold coſt at home.

                  ¶ Behaue thy ſelf gently to euery one.
                  
                  
                     And in felowſhip a good companion.
                  
               
            
            
               
¶ The behauiour of a manne or childe is moche commended, and excepted emong men of honeſt reputacion. And more is he ſette by that is poore & gentle in his behauiour, & can plaie the good felowe, thē is the riche churle with his proude and diſdeinful looke. But that is a ſpecial grace, and greatly eſtemed, when that the noble dooe humble theim to the felowelike companie of honeſt poore men: for ſo did King Philip exhorte his ſoonne Alexandre to dooe, whereby he wan the heartes of many a true ſubiecte.

                  without a cauſe, be not thou angrie.
                  Nor for a trifle driuen into a furie.
               
            
            ¶ There is no man, excepte he bee a very blockehead, but he hath ſome mocion and paſſion in him of anger, and diſpleaſure, ſeeing that no man kepeth his nature ſo cleane, but it is corrupte, either with colere, fleume, or els with ſome other corrupte inatier.

And as it is more like a ſtocke then a manne, not at all to be moued: So is it more nearer the propretie of cattes and dogges then men to braule and wrangle for euery wagging of a ſtrawe, yea and ſome time vpō no occaſion: ſoche is the waiewardenes of many frowarde & weiwarde weaſels.

                  Diſdeigne not the poore, no, nor yet ſkorne thou any bodie.
                  Nor for an others miſerie, thinke thy ſelfe more woorthie.
               
            
            ¶ It is a wounderful thing to ſee ſome ſtatelie merchauntes, whō God hath indewed with a ſpeciall gift and qualite aboue many other, how thei abuſe theſame grace in diſdaining their euē Chriſtians & felowes in the faieth and vocation of Ieſus Chriſte, whiche made al of vile claie & duſt, & to theſame hath promiſed vs that we ſhal returne. And then leat theim ſee

how moche thei paſſe by their proude lookes, the pooreſt wretche that goeth by the high waies ſide.

                  when thy neighbour is fallen into miſerie.
                  Reioiſe not, nor haue therin felicitie.
               
            
            ¶ To mocke and ſcorne at naughtie packes and vicious liuers, to cauſe thē to be aſhamed of their leudnes, & abominable life, is to be commended but ſurelie to ſee thy neighbour or felowe in daunger of ſickeneſſe, pouercie, or other miſchaūces of this world thou haſt more cauſe to wepe, then laughe, ſeing that thou maieſt and haſt deſerued a worſe thing to chaunce vnto thy ſelfe. Therefore ſaieth Marcus Aurelius on this wiſe.

                  It is geuen to euerie man of nature.
                  One to augmente anothers hurte and diſpleaſure.
                  
                     
Lende if thou maie any thing ſpare.
                  Yet to whom thou lendest, ſee thou beware.
               
            
            ¶ There is choiſe and hede to bee takē in lending and geuing. For ſome times a manne maie either lende, or geue to his owne hurte, & the borower maie be made his enemie, whiche pretended to be his frende. Therefore to ouerie begger thou muſt not geue, nor to euerie borower & crauer thou maiſt not lende, but vnto a faiethful aſker, or where wretched pouertie is, or vnto theim that thou thinkeſt woorthie, vpon whom a good tourne maie wel bee beſtowed, or elles towardes whom thou beareſt fauour and frendelie affection, there ſticke not to extēde thy liberalitie and charite, leaſt peraduenture otherwiſe thou maieſt bee conſtreigned thus to ſaie.
            
               
               When I lent, I was a frende.
               And when I aſked, I was vnkinde.
               So of my frende I made my to.
               Therefore I wil no more do ſo.
            
            
               when thy clientes matier is in trial of iudgemente.
               Then ſtande faste at the barre & euer preſent.
            
            ¶ I would to Chriſtes paſſion euery atturneie, outter harreſter, councellous ſergeaunt, & iudge of the lawe, would print in their vpright cōſciences this precepte, into whoſe handes is cōmitted the right ſuite, and ſplee of many 
                  〈◊〉
                poore man, the whiche thei ſometimes willinglie (when thei are of the contrarie parte wel bribed) and ſometime neglectlie (when of their clientes thei are not largely and plentifullie rewarded (let the matier grow
                  〈…〉
                to a noneſute, or driue him to ſue 
                  〈◊〉
                commiſſion into the countrie, wher
                  〈…〉
               
               
by frendſhippe and maſterſhippe the poore man betwene .ii. ſtooles lieth flat vpon the grounde. And thus the poore man is vtterly enbarred of his right, either by the negligence of the atturney in callyng ſlackly vpon the counſailers, or els by the coūſailers and ſergeantes abſentyng theimſelues from the courte barre, or els the iudges themſelues in deferryng iudgemente, or at leaſt waie by the corrupt fauour of the countrey.

                  Feaſtyng and bankettyng ſeldome dooe thou vſe.
                  And theim to haunte often, vtterly refuſe.
               
            
            Whether of theſe twoo thou cuſtomablie dooeſt vſe, thou ſhalte bee ſure to haue a ready diſpleaſure and hurte folowyng. As if thou bee a cō
               mune feaſt maker, it ſhall weare the hangelles of thy purſe, and make thy

liuyng full bare. And then loke whē all is ſpent, whiche of thy geſtes wil bid the to ſo many feaſtés again? Alſo if thou bee a commune ſmelfeaſt, thou ſhalte by and by runne in the ſclaunder and infamie of a pinchefiſt and a commune rauenyng dogge that thruſteth his head in euery mannes pot, and licketh of the crommes from euery bodies table. But now & then to feaſt thy frende, and thy frende to feaſt thee, is the ſigne of frugalenes and moche humanitie.

                  Slepe quietly, and take thy reſt.
                  As moche as ſhalbee thought for nature beſt.
               
            
            There are ſome ſoche ſluggerdes, whiche put ſo greate delight & pleaſure in ſlepyng, that thei thinke the onely felicitie & happineſſe of this life to be in ſlepe, wheras thei are in very dede dead images, and the liuely

pictures of death. And their ſaiyng is we thinke no man hurte, as long as we ſlepe ſoundly, although whē thei are wakyng, thei can ſpeake as euill and as ſhreudely as the wourſt.

                  whatſoeuer thou haſte ſworne with thy will.
                  Kepe thine othe and thy promiſe fulfill.
               
            
            Behold chriſtians the preceptes of an Heathen, againſt our cuſtomable and damnable othes and blaſphemie that we vſe. we maie be aſhamed that very infideles ſhall paſſe vs in Godlie conuerſacion of liuyng. Seeyng vnto them was geuen no rule or commaūdement, but ſoche as reaſon and nature did inſtruct them in. But how oft haue we of god himſelf commaū
               dement not to ſweare either in vain, or to the miſcheuous and naughtie purpoſe of any thing? Yea, when we

dooe, or be cauſed of right to ſweare, how litle truth and credence is there founde in our othe? Derely none but periurie aboundauntly. And in our promiſes, bee thei by neuer ſo greate an othe made, we are craftie & ſlowe performers, and ſubtile dealers with our neighbours.

                  Drinke wine with temperatneſſe.
                  And in thy drinking vſe no exceſſe
               
            
            It is not vnknowen how many incommodities haue and dooe daiely enſue and folowe the great exceſſiue bibbyng and bollyng of wine. Some of theſe ſwilbolles haue their yies bleared & winkyng. Some haue rotten tethe and breath ſtinkyng. Some their faces empearied with rubies, & ſaphires of the tauerne. Some blobchekes and puffed faces. Some gore, bellies & ſlaggyng ſtomaches. There bee other that haue goutes, dropſies, their liuers cōſumed, yea, their brain

and wit confounded and dulled And will ye haue fewe wordes? thei ſhorten their life, marre their youth, haſten and bring quickly olde age, and many times ſodein death. And as for youth to drinke wine, is none other, then where there is a good fire and heate ſufficiēt, to caſt in oile to make the flame bigger.

                  If thou wilte needes fight, fight for thy countrey.
                  And trie thy manhode againſt thine enemie.
               
            
            There are many braggers and crakers, that will for euery ſmall trifle laie their handes vpō their daggers and be ready to kill God haue in
                  〈…〉
                vpon his ſoulle, while thei are emōg their awne nacion, and ſhewe their ſtrength like valiaunt and puiſſaunt champions, in defendyng their countrie from forrein enemies: But then

ſoche braggers wilbe readier to crepe in at a bēche hole, then to ſhewe their heades, or bide one ſtroke in a fielde. There bee alſo ſouldiours that will proffer themſelues to goe a warfare more for the lucre and vaūtage of the ſpoiles, robberies, and praies taken of their enemies, then for the loue and affeccion that thei beare towardes the ſaufegarde of their countrey.

                  whatſoeuer thou heareſt, bee it good or badde.
                  Dooe not haſtely beleue it vntill the trueth be had.
               
            
            Suche is the nature and condicion of many one, that thei thinke euery tale of Robinhode and litle Ihon, to be as true as the goſpell. And of this ſort are the common people, who for lacke of reaſon and knowelege, report thoſe thinges that firſte come to their eares as thinges of very truth

when there is in deede nothing more ferther from the trueth. And herof it cometh that tales, rumours, and tidynges bee in ſo ſhorte ſpace conueighed into ſo ſondrie and diuerſe places and farre countries. For if euery man would take deliberacion and aduiſement vpon ſoche thinges, as are tolde them. Newes & lies would not runne abroad with ſoche ſhort ſpede.

                  I thinke many matiers would come to paſſe well.
                  If firſt of thine awne ſelf thou wouldeſt take councell.
               
            
            Many a man runneth from place to place to ſeke helpe and remedy of his griefes and troubles, where as perchaūce if he would ſomwhat depely ponder the occaſions of ſoche vnquietneſſe in his awne minde & conſcience, he might with light coſt and leſſe peines, redreſſe & amende ſoche

his troubles and diſpleaſures, & neuer ſet ſteppe out of his awne doore. It is good therefore firſt to counſaill with the familier ſpirit of a mannes awne minde, & there ſee whether any ferther remedy bee to bee ſought for, or not, and ſo accordyngly to procede.

                  
                     If thou muſte nedes other mennes counſaill take.
                  
                  
                     Bee ſure to folowe the beſt, and the euill forſake.
                  
               
            
            Thou muſte not take euery manne to bee thy counſailer, neither euery mannes counſaill is to bee folowed, but that counſaill muſte thou chiefly ſticke vnto, by the whiche thou ſhalt get ſpedy and ſure remedy of thy buſineſſe. For many there are that can geue counſaill, but fewe geueth coū
               ſaill profitable for their clientes, and many tourneth their coūſail to their awne commodities and profeictes. As

witneſſeth the tale of Eſope, where the Crowe coūſaileth the Egle how to breake his coccle, by fliyng vp an high, and lettyng the coccle fal doune vpon the harde ſtones, whoſe counſaill when the Egle had folowed: the Coccle letten fall and braſt, was by theſame Crowe cōueighed cleane out of the Egles ſight.

                  
                     Eſchue harlottes & queanes company
                  
                  
                     And to verteous lerning thy ſelf apply
                  
               
            
            There is no better meanes to reſtrain and kepe in youth frō the wanton and volupteous luſt of the fraile fleſhe, then earneſtly to occupie theſame in ſome verteous and Godlie exerciſe. And of the contrarie part the onely prouoker, tickeler, and ſetted forwarde of filthie delites, is ſluggiſheneſſe, and idle wanderyng of the minde, who beeyng deliuered of all good and honeſt occupacion, draweth brittle fleſhe to his moſte corrupte

and ſtinchious luſtes and deſires. So that one Egiſtus demaundyng of the Goddes vpon what occaſion he was made an adulter. Anſwere was made him. Marie thou warte euer ſlouthfull and idle.

                  
                     whatſoeuer of the ſhalbe demaunded.
                  
                  
                     By trueth alwaie, let it be anſwered.
                  
               
            
            In all ages, and in all degrees, liyng is a vice moſte odious and deteſtable, and contrarie to the profeſſiō of chriſtianitie: but yet moſte eſpecially in a noble mannes child, whiche ſhould bee the mirroure and example to the baſer ſort: liyng is abandoned as a thing chiefly diſhonouryng and diſtainyng his nobilitie. There is no man that knoweth what a thief and a lier meaneth, and what their qualities bee, but will with all his harte bee ridde of a lier to take a thief, for of the thief he maie bee ware, of the other he cannot.

                  
                  
                     To good me be thou alwaies beneficial
                  
                  
                     And vnto kinde perſones bee thou euer liberall.
                  
               
            
            It would greue the to beſtowe thy benefites, to haue nothing for theim again: but how moche more would it greue thee not onely to leſe thy good tourne, but alſo for theſame, to bee requited and recōpenſed with a ſhrewed tourne, and to haue for thy kindeneſſe and good wille, a churliſhe prāke or ſhrowed touche plaied the? As thou ſhalt be ſure to haue, if thou dooe good for a churle. Therefore, if thou looke to haue good of thy benefites beſtowed, beſtowe theim vpon good men, and vpon ſoche, whō thou knoweſt to haue kinde hartes, and cā beare in minde who haue dooen them good in times paſt.

                  
                     Be thou no common checker nor railer.
                  
                  
                     
Nor of other mennes deedes a ſauci
                        〈…〉
                      deprauer.
               
            
            Good it is, yea and chriſtenlike to moniſhe and warne one another, whē any thing is amiſſe: But to raile at, ſkorne at, diſdainfully to rebuke, or arrogauntly to checke and taunt one another, is not onely vnbeſemyng, but alſo farre from the parte of any good menne, in whom any morſell or crūme of honeſtie or ciuile behauior dooeth abide. And what ſhall I doubt any thing at all, to exempt them out of the numbre of menne, and numbre thē emong the moſte ſauage & bruteſt beaſtes that be, the whiche haue any ſoche cōdiciō. For thei are the diſturbers and breakers of al good ordre & vniformitie of al peace & trāquilliti
                  〈…〉
               
               
                  In what eſtimacion ſoeuer thou bee in
                  Loſe it not, but ſtudie more to win.
               
            
            A good eſtimacion & name paſſeth

               
                  〈◊〉
                numbre of riches, in ſo moche that 
                  〈…〉
               he preciouſneſſe of it, ſurmounteth 
                  〈…〉
               he value of the gooddes of the whole worlde, and no treaſure is to be compared with it. What ſtrong boltes & 
                  〈…〉
               kes, what bulworkes, munimētes 
                  〈…〉
               nd defences, what vigilante & watchefull kepers ought wee then to ſet about this incōparable treaſure? and ſpecially becauſe the loſſe of it cā ve
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
               y hardely be gotten again: & ſeldome 
                  〈◊〉
                is ſeen to be recouered, and to like 
                  •
               ignitie and fauour to be reſtored.

                  Let thy Iuſtice bee indifferent, and 
                        •
                     hy Iudgement right.
                  Iudge wrong to no manne by power 
                        •
                     r might.
               
            
            Oh Cato Cato: if that thou couldeſt 
                  〈…〉
               arke & eſpie this faulte in the Iudges and Iuſtices of thy time, when onely the lawe of nature and reaſon 
                  •
               uled, and not the feare & knowelege

of God: what wouldeſt thou now ſaie if thou ſhouldeſt beholde what falſe accuſyng, what vniuſt pleadyng, and accordyng to theſame, what moſte falſe condemnyng is of poore ſely ſo
                  〈…〉
               lles, and very innocēt perſones?

                  If thy father and mother be diſpleaſed with thee.
                  winne thē again by pacient humilitee
               
            
            Although thy father and mother dooe chaſtice thee ſomewhat ſharplie and extremely, yet it ſhall not be thy part for to behaue thy ſelf ſtubburnely or frowardly againſt theim, or els to go about by any meanes or waies how to exaſparate theim, and to miniſter more occaſiō of diſpleaſure: but with meke, milde, and gentle wordes to molifie, pacifie, and quallifie their angre. For nature abhorreth in the very brute beaſtes, that the yong one ſhould reſiſt or hee in any thing diſpleaſaunt

vnto his damme, no not in the fierce Molues and Tigres, or in the venemous Serpentes.

                  If thou receiue of any man a benefite.
                  Remembre with like kindeneſſe, theſame to requite.
               
            
            I dooe iudge him worthie, to whom not onely any good tourne ought to be geuē at any time after, but alſo to whō greate vnkindneſſe ought to be ſhewed, the whiche will not knowelege himſelf to haue receiued a benefite at his frendes handes, or doth by negligence and ouerſight forgette to requite and repaie, when he is hable, like kindneſſe as he had in his neceſſitie and nede receiued. Surely many there are that remembre very well what thei dooe for other menne, but what other men do beſtowe vpon thē that is quickly forgottē or ſlowly remembred, and nothing at al requited

                  
                  Stande at the barre, herken what is there ſaied.
                  That thou maieſt learne other mennes matiers to plead.
               
            
            A very notable ſcience and a learnyng moche eſtemed was the law in the time of Cato, ſo that the next and the ſpedieſt waie to promocion was then to haue a perfeicte ſighte in the Lawe. And euen in theſe our daies it hath noleſſe, yea, rather more aucthoritie, and is had in farre better eſtimaciō. Therfore this precept of Cato maie be well marked of the youth of this realme, who willeth and exhorteth thē to the knowelege of the Lawes, not for to auenge his awne wronges, with extreme ſute, and not for to woorke iniurie, and to woe diſpleaſure: but to maintein righte, to help the nedy and poore ſely creatures to their true poſſeſſions and enheritaunce

to ſee iuſtice miniſtred, and true cauſes alwaies preferred.

                  Soche gifte and qualite as God hath to the lent.
                  See that with diſcretion it bee ſpent.
               
            
            ¶ If God haue indued the with manhode and corporal ſtrengthe, this gifte is not to be tourned into the vſe of auenging euerie iniurie, and diſpleaſure, not to quareling & fighting for euerie light matier, not to bloudſheding and manſlaughter, but to the defence of thy prince and countrey, to the mainteinaunce of thy wife & children, by dooyng ſoche labours and occupacions as thy ſtrength maie well ſuſteine and beare, yea in whatſoeuer gifte and qualitie thou dooeſt excel, it is not to be vſed for any forceable oppreſſion by might, nor for any diſceitful detruſion by gile and policie.

                  Tempre thine angre, and Lefraine

thy diſpleaſure.
                  And the ſame to auenge, take reſpecte and leaſure.
               
            
            ¶ His councel was heretofore not to be angrie for euerie wagging of a ſtrawe. And now his ferther and better aduiſe is, in no caſe to bee offended, or diſpleaſed; but then to puniſhe and then to auenge, when anger and malice dooeth not blinde reaſon and expel godlie charite.

                  At the toppe & ſcourge let thy plaie be
                  And from the dice, ſee that thou flie.
               
            
            ¶ The toppe & ſcourge is a plate moſte agreable and welbeſeming for children, dicing was of an euil report and moche abandoned emong the very Heathen and Gentiles.

                  Dooe nothing according as thou art of power and might.
                  But lette thy dooynges be of iuſtice

and right.
               
            
            ¶ What can there be more apperteining to a very tiraunte then for a man putte in aucthorite, to haue onely a reſpecte and regarde what he is able to dooe, and not what thing becometh him, or is lefull for him to dooe. And in ſoche a perſone maie well be verified the ſaiyng of the Poete.
            
               For reaſon true and iuſte.
               Standeth his owne wil and Iuſte.
            
            
               Thy inferiour dooe thou not diſpiſe.
               Neither yet him refuſe in any wiſe.
            
            ¶ To beare either hate, diſpleaſure or diſdaine to a manne, being of leſſe abilite and power then thou thy leſſe art of, is a verie euident ſigne & moſte manifeſt token of a proude arrogant and preſumpteous minde and not of a lowelie and kinde harte.

                  An other mannes gooddes dooe thou not craue.
                  
                     
And by vntrueth, deſire not them to haue.
               
            
            ¶ There is no one thing that dooeth more manifeſt and declare the brickle and fraile nature of manne then that he rareth neither what, nor whoſe gooddes thei be, nor by what meanes he hath theim, ſo that he maie gette them ones to be his owne.

                  Loue thy wife with a true affection
                  For at al ſaies ſhe muſt be thy companion.
               
            
            ¶ A worlde it is to ſee the diuerſe affections of menne in choſing and hauing of wiues, but this one thing remēbre that thou oughteſt to take thy wife of loue, and neither for gooddes nor beautie, and then louinglie to vſe her, remēbring that of .ii. ye are made but one bodie, leaſt it be ſaid emōg vs

                  Emong the Heathen Matrimonie was wel eſtemed.
                  
                     
And emong vs Chriſtians litle regarded.
               
               
                  Instructe thy children to vertue, and vnderstandyng.
                  And in ignoraunce and blindnes let them not be wandring.
               
            
            ¶ I dooe not onely marueile, but rather woundre what phantaſed folie reigneth in the heades of many fathers the whiche either altogether witholde their children from the education and bringing vp in honeſt diſci
                  •
                lines and knoweleges, or elles will ſette theim to no other maiſters, but to ſoche as maie and can tendrelie, yea, rather wantonlie and negligentlie inſtructe them and teache them.

                  Loke what thou dooest make vpon other.
                  Be not agreued in thy ſelfe theſame for to ſuffre.
                  
                     
Soche meaſure as thou makest, ſoche looke thou receiue again.
                  when thou art ſitting at thy meate and table.
                  Of diuerſe and many thinges, dooe thou not bable.
                  Talke litle, and let it be with aduiſemente.
                  ¶ Let euer thy ſtudie and endeuer be. About that, that is iust & honestie
               
            
            ¶ Endeuour your ſelues with an earneſt deſire and diligence to folowe and doe thoſe thinges wherof cometh no rebuke, ſhame, or diſhoneſtie.

                  No mannes loue haue thou in diſdaine.
                  But euerie mannes good wil, endeuer to obteine.
               
            
            
               
¶ All meanes and waies are of a quiete harte and minde to bee ſought how to auoide the diſpleaſure and hatred of the leaſt childe that gooeth in the ſtrete. For aſmoche as there is nothing ſo precious as loue, and no manne dooeth poſſeſſe better riches, then he that hath the loue of many.
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  
                  ¶ The preceptes of Cato with annotaciones of D. Eraſmus added therunto.
                  
                     
                        
                           Cato. 1.
                           
                              SYTH THAT GOD IS a ſpirite as writinges dooe teſtifie Then with pure minde honour him effecteouſlie.
                           
                        
                        ¶ Eraſmus. The commune people did reckē that God was pleaſed with ſacrifices of beaſtes, and with ſoche exteriour woorkes. But in aſmoche as God him ſelfe is a ſpirite incorporal, therefore it is moſte likelie that he deliteth in ſoche thinges as he himſelfe is. And therefore ought he chieflie to bee honoured in puritie of harte.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 2.
                           
                              Delight not in ſlouth, but from ſlepe ſoone ariſe.
                              
                              For reste and idlenes is mother of all vice.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ Seing (as Plinie ſaieth) that our life is but a waking time, thē loſe not that time by ſlepe, conſidering alſo that ſlouth is noifull bothe vnto the bodie and vnto the ſoulle.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 3.
                           
                              The chief of al vertues is, thy toung to repreſſe.
                              He is nexte vnto God, that wel can holde his peace.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ The chiefeſt of al vertues is, to refreine thy tounge, and to ſpeake nothing vnaduiſedlie, for god the father of al wiſedome ſpeaketh but ſeldome, and that is neceſſarie, therefore he is accoumpted nerte vnto God, whiche can ordre his ſpeache by ſoche diſcretion.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Cato. 4.
                           
                              Bee constaunt in thy ſaiyng, and dooe not contrarie.
                              A foule vice it is with thy ſelf to varie
                              For nedes thou muſt another offende. when with thy ſelfe thou doeſt contend.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ He that is repugnaunte to himſelfe can neuer agree with other. And he that dooeth not ordre his life according to ſome rule or ordre, is not meete to kepe any mannes companie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 5.
                           
                              Yf thou conſidre wel in thy minde.
                              The faſhion of menne, thou ſhalt truelie finde.
                              How euerie manne, other dooeth defame.
                              For there is no manne, that liueth

without blame.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ Al menne lightelie marke othee 
                              •
                           nennes faultes and looke not vpon 
                              •
                           heir owne. And yet there is no man 
                              •
                           ut and if he were well tried, there 
                              •
                           ight be ſpied enough in him, wherefore he might iuſtlie be blamed.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 6.
                           
                              Yf thou haue a thing though thou 
                                    •
                                 oue it neuer ſo well.
                              And if the hauing therof ſhould 
                                    •
                                 he offende.
                              Rid thy handes of it by my councel.
                              For, for a profeicte thou must ſome 
                                    •
                                 ime thy moneie ſpende.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ Some time it is expedient to 
                              •
                           eparte from thoſe thinges that wee 
                              •
                           earelie loue, if there be ieoperdie in 
                              •
                           he keping of theim, as to geue golde

& ſiluer to ſaue thy life, & to forbeare thy pleaſure to recouer thy health.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 7.
                           
                              Some time be thou merie and ſome time be thou ſad.
                              As place & time requireth to be had
                              For in a wiſe manne, it is no maner of crime.
                              His maners to chaunge according to the time.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ A manne maie wel chaunge his maners as time and place requireth, As ſometime it ſhalbe expedient for the to be hard and ſtiffe in thy cauſe, & another time to be eaſie and ſofte.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 8
                           
                              Beleue not thy wife, if thou wilt liue in reste.
                              when on thy ſeruauntes that ſhe

wil complaine.
                              For loke whom that the housbande loueth best.
                              The wife for the moste parte hath him in diſdaine.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ It is moſte the propertie of all women to ſette their houſbandes at debate with their ſeruauntes. Therefore he warneth them that thei ſhall not beleue to lightly ſoche cōplaintes
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 9.
                           
                              If thou warne any man of his vice.
                              Though with thy warning thou perceiue him grieued.
                              If he be thy frende, yet I the aduiſe. Stint not, but let his vice be repreued.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ If thy frende offende, thou oughteſt not to geue him a light warning, and ſo let him alone, but ſtill to laie vpon

him to amende it, if it bee any ſoch
                              •
                            thing, as dooeth perteine either 
                              〈◊〉
                            his honeſtie, or to his profeicte.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato 10.
                           
                              Striue not with woordes, but rath
                                    〈…〉
                                  holde thy peace.
                              Against them that of woordes neuer wil ceaſſe.
                              For to many menne is geuen th
                                    •
                                  gifte of ſpeache.
                              Yet diſcretion with them perhappe is for to ſeache.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ If thou argue with wiſe-menne thou ſhalt not neede to ſpende manie woordes. But if thou medle with 
                              〈◊〉
                            foole, thou ſhalt neuer haue dooen.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 11.
                           
                              Loue other ſo that vnto thy ſelf
                                    •
                                  thou be a louing frende.
                              
                              Likewiſe be good vnto good menne, least thou come to an euil ende.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ Dooe ſo to thy frendes that thou be moſte frende vnto thy ſelf, & ſo doe for other, that thou lacke not thy ſelf.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 12.
                           
                              Bee thou no forger of tales that bee newe.
                              From all ſoche thinges, looke that thou eſchewe.
                              For it neuer hurted manne to bee in peace.
                              But it dooeth hurte ofte, to putte the tounge in preaſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ Spreade no tidinges nor tales emong the people, for often times he that ſo dooeth, hath cauſe to repente.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 13.
                           
                           
                              Make no promiſe vpon truste of other menne.
                              For thereby thy credēce thou maiest happe to ſpill.
                              For it is the faſhion of many now and then.
                              To promiſe moche more then they wil fulfil.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ That whiche thou haſt thy ſelfe thou maieſt be bolde to promiſe, but if thou truſte to anothers mans woorde, thou maieſt chaunce to bee deceiued, for it is the condicion of many men, to promiſe more in a daie, then thei wil fulfil in a yere.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 14.
                           
                              If one to thy face do the laude & praiſe
                              Bee iudge vnto thy ſelfe of that thing that he ſaies.
                              
                              For thinke thou neuer, that another manne.
                              Can knowe the better, then thy ſelf can
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Beleue not him that ſo will flatter thee, but ſearche thine awne conſcience and ſee whether it bee ſo or no. And if thine awne conſcience ſhewe the that thou art farre other then he maketh the, then beleue not him, but beleue thy ſelf.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 15.
                           
                              If a good tourne, vnto the be wrought.
                              Spare not to vtter it, bothe to leaſt and moſte.
                              But vnto another, if thy ſelfe haſt dooen ought.
                              See in any wiſe, thereof thou make no boaſt.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. If thou haſt doen a good tourne vnto

another man, it is not thy honeſtie to ſpeke moche of it, for that in a maner is halfe a caſtyng in the teth vnto him, to whō thou haſt doen it. But if thou haſte receiued any benefite of another man, if thou ſpeakemoche of that, it is a token of thankfulneſſe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 16.
                           
                              when men be olde, thei vſe oft to tell.
                              Of their deedes paſſed, either good or badde.
                              Therefore in thy youthe, ordre thy ſelf ſo well.
                              That of thy deedes to ſpeake then, thou maieſt be gladde.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Old men that haue ſeen many thinges in their time, vſe oft to ſpeake of ſoche thinges. And therefore wee ought ſo to directe our youth that we maie ſpeake therof in our age, to our worſhip and honeſtie.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Cato. 17.
                           
                              Though that menne dooe ſpeake or mutter priuelie,
                              whatſoeuer thei ſaie, care not thou a flie.
                              But he that is guiltie, in any maner thyng,
                              Thinketh that onely of him is all their whiſperyng.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Although thou ſe men ſpeake ſoftly, or round to other, dooe not by and by imagine that thei ſpeake of thee; for that were a token that thou were giltie in ſome faulte.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 18.
                           
                              whē thou art in welth and proſperitie. Beware of the daungers of aduerſiue.
                              Nor truſt not fortune her chaunces are ſo ſlike.
                              
                              For the beginnyng and endyng is not alwaie like.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. When thou art in moſte proſperitie then beware of aduerſitie, for fortune vſeth euer to chaunge, and of a ioious beginnyng, chaunceth a lamē table endyng. Therefore, when thou art in moſte wealthe, then oughteſt thou moſte to premeditate, how to take aduerſitie, if it chaūce to come: leaſt if it ſodeinly chaūce to the, thou be therwith miſerably oppreſſed.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 19.
                           
                              Sith this life is vncertein here, that we holde.
                              And die we muſt nedes, we cannot other choſe.
                              To truſt to anothers death, then bee not to bolde.
                              For it is euill looking after deadde

mennes ſhoes.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. This leſſon is good for heires and executours, for thei gape after other mennes deathes, for many times it cometh to paſſe, that thei that looke after other mannes deathes, bee the firſt that die, albeit that thei be ferre younger and ſtronger then the other
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 20.
                           
                              If thy poore frende geue thee ought be it neuer ſo ſmall.
                              Receiue it gladly, and thanke him there withall.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A gift ought not to be eſtemed accordyng to the value onely, but accordyng to the minde of him that gaue it, for we read ofdiuerſe princes that haue receiued ſometime alitle water or an apple, or ſoche a ſmall trifle, aſwell and as bemngly as though it had been a greater treaſure.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Cato. 21.
                           
                              If thou bee in pouertie, ſoe paciently that thou take it.
                              And thinke how, into the worlde, thou cameſt all naked.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. If we cōſidre how nature bringeth vs al naked into the worlde, we maie thereby perceiue that richeſſe is not our awne, nor dooeth not of nature belōg vnto vs. If thou ſhouldeſt loſe a membre or a ioincte, thou haddeſt then a cauſe to be ſory therefore, thou haddeſt then loſt ſomewhat of thine awne: But if thou loſe thy gooddes, neuer vexe thy ſelf therefore, for as concernyng thoſe thinges that a mā maie ſaie are his awne, the poore mā hath aſmoche as a King, wilte thou knowe truely what thing thou maiſt cal thine awne? Remēbre what thou haddeſt when thou waſte borne, and that is thine awne and no more.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Cato. 22.
                           
                              Of death hardely, bee not to moche diſmaied.
                              For ſure wee muſt all, needes folowe the trace.
                              But he that of his death, alwaies is afraied.
                              Loſeth of his helth, in the meane ſpace
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He that ſo ſore feareth his death, can therby neuer the ſoner eſcape it, but beſides that he loſeth his health, and the life which he hath: for to liue alwaies in ſoche agonie, it were as good to haue no life at all.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato 23.
                           
                              If thou haue doen good vnto one before
                              And he haue not the gentleneſſe to thanke the therefore.
                              Blame not him for his vnfrendlineſſe.
                              
                              But for ſoche menne; hereafter dooe thou the leſſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. There is nothyng more greuous then ān vnkinde frende, whiche if it ſo chaunce thee, yet that ought not to be imputed to god as though it were his fault, for ſome menne vſe, that if thei be not rewarded for their deedes (accordyng to their mindes by & by) thei blame GOD as though he were vniuſt, and yet the faulte is in theim ſelf, that toke no hede for whom thei did good vnto.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 24.
                           
                              The good that thou haſte, ſpende it not to faſt.
                              For feare leaſt thou chaūce to lacke at the laſt.
                              Therefore to thy ſubſtaūce, loke thou take good hede.
                              
                              And reken euermore, that thou ſhalt haue nede.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Euer kepe ſomewhat in ſtore, for feare of lackyng another daie, & truſt not to moche vnto thy ſelf, but euer reken that thou maieſt well enough come to neceſſitie in thy age.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 25.
                           
                              If thou be diſpoſed, for to geue or lende
                              Many promiſes therof, loke thou doe not make.
                              For where thou coumpteſt, to be taken for a frende.
                              Thei will then ſaie, thou canſt nought dooe but crake.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A mā ought neuer to promiſe more then he can perfourme. And to make many promiſes of that which he wil not perfourme, is but crakyng and

boaſtyng, and no good maner at all.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 26.
                           
                              He that with his flattryng wordes dooeth feigne.
                              For to bee thy frende, and yet he is not ſo.
                              with the ſame ſauce, ſerue him ſo again.
                              For with crafte, to beguile crafte it is but well dooe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Vſe gile with him that vſeth gile to the, for it is better to entertein ſoche a feigned frende with faire wordes, then vtterly to make him thy enemie
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 27.
                           
                              Truſt not him that hath a faire toung. For lightly it is a ſigne of great deceipt.
                              For the fouler with his feigned ſong.
                              Deceiueth the birdes, and bringeth

theim to the baite.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The faire ſpeakers bee euer to bee ſuſpected, nor yet eſteme men accordyng to their faire wordes, but accordyng to their true deedes, for he that ſpeaketh faire goeth about to deceiue the. And remembre that by ſoche diſſimulacion are the poore birdes beguiled. And ſo likewiſe by flatterie is many a man deceiued.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 28.
                           
                              If thou haue many children vpon thy hande.
                              And lackest gooddes wherewith thei maie be founde.
                              Learne them ſome ſcience whereby thei maie.
                              Helpe theimſelues therewith another daie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Science ſerueth not onely in euery

countrey, but alſo it helpeth in euery fortune. Therefore it is a ſure cōcluſion, that whereſoeuer thou come, if thou haue ſciēce thou ſhalt therwith be hable to get thy liuyng. But now a daies many people bryng vp their children like lordes ſoonnes, whereby thei be brought vp in ſlouthe and idleneſſe. Ferthermore, that whiche he here ſaieth to poore menne, that would I counſaill princes to dooe, to bring vp their children in ſome craft or ſcience, wherby thei ſhould attein a double profite, for firſt when youth is vſed to bee occupied, it hath the leſſe leaſure to learne vice, and another is, that if fortune ſhould chaūge and bring theim to pouertie, as it is poſſible to bee ſeen▪ Yet then thei ſhould not bee compelled to begge, nor to get their liuyng vnhoneſtly.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 29.
                           
                              what other menne ſet moſte by, let it be vile vnto thee.
                              
                              That other men ſet leaſt by, eſteme it beſt of all.
                              So to thy ſelf, thou ſhalt no nigard be
                              Nor other menne ſhall not the coueteous call.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Deſpiſe thou, that other menne delight moſte in. And ſet by that, that thei leaſt ſet by, ſo ſhalt thou not bee a nigarde to thy ſelf, for that that a manne ſetteth not by, he forceth not how ſone he ſpendeth it, nor other mē ſhall not thinke the to bee coueteous when thou dooeſt not couet, nor art gredie of ſoche thinges, that thei would ſo fain haue, for cōmonly the people ſet moche by riches, and care litle for vertue and learnyng, for euery thing is valued accordyng as mennes mindes liſt to take it, but be thou of contrary Iudgemente to the comon ſort, as for example: the moſte part of people eſteme Pheſante, and

Partriche to be a very deintie diſhe, but eſteme thou theim but for groſſe and reken thou that egges, milke, and theſe be the deintieſt meat, that thou canſt finde. And ſo thou ſhalte liue a pleaſaunt life thy ſelf, ſit he thou haſt that, which thou demeſt beſt, nor thou ſhalt neuer care to take other mēnes pleaſures from them, in ſo moche as thou accoumpteſt thē nought worth.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato 30.
                           
                              That thing whiche in another thou art wont to blame.
                              Bee well ware that thou offende not in the ſame.
                              For it is very ſhame, when a manne will preache.
                              If that his deedes, againſt his wordes dooe teache.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. It is a foule faulte for a manne to blame another for ſoche thinges as he himſelf moſte vſeth, for the ſinfulneſſe

of the preacher miniſheth greatly the aucthoritie of his woorde.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 31.
                           
                              If thou require aughte, ſee that thy demaunde bee.
                              accordīg vnto right, & to good honeſtie
                              For doubtleſſe, he were a very foole in deede.
                              Soche thinges to demaūde, as he ought not to ſpede.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Euery man is not to be required but he that in maner ought to graunt thy requeſt, nor euery thing is to be craued, but ſoche thinges as a man maie aſke with honeſtie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 33.
                           
                              Forſake not thoſe thinges whiche thou knoweſt of olde.
                              For thinges which thou doeſt not knowe
                              For of that thou knoweſt thou maieſt

be ſure and bolde.
                              But of ſoche as bee newe thou canſt be nothing ſo.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Chaunge not thold for the new, neither thy old frend for a newe, nor thy old trade of liuyng for a new, whiche thou knowſt not, for that which thou haſt already tried, thou canſt tel how to vſe thē. But as for the newe, thou woteſt not how thei will proue, for often it happeneth, that thoſe which at the beginnyng ſeme very good, in the ende will proue the contrarie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 33.
                           
                              Seyng how fraile the life is that we haue.
                              And through how many ieopardies daiely we runne.
                              Euery daie that thou haſte eſcaped well and ſaue.
                              
                              Accoumpte it firme and ſure, that it is wel wonne.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ Seing our life is ſo vncerteine, and ſubiecte to ſo many daungers, we maie reken euerie daie well wonne that we haue freelie eſcaped, for there paſſeth vs no day, in whiche we might not haue chaunced to die, nor we had neuer no warraunt of our life. Therefore feeing there hāges ſo manie ieopardies ouer vs, it is meruaille that we eſcape any daie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 34.
                           
                              Though thou of thy power maiest haue althy wil.
                              Folowe it not alwaies, but ſometime geue place.
                              For if thou of gētleneſſe dooe other mindes fulfil.
                              So ſhalt thou best ſtande, in thy

frendes grace.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ This ſaiyng is as true as can bee for if thou ſometime breake thy owne wil and folowe other mennes mindes thou ſhalt acquire great beneuolence. But ſome be ſo ſtiffe minded, that thei wil contende & ſtriue with their frendes, and that for a matier of no weight and had rather bee at vtter deſtaunce with his frende, then ones breake his wilful minde.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 35.
                           
                              As thou wouldest that other men ſhould geue vnto the.
                              So to geue to other thou must contented be.
                              For ſoche mutual beneuolence euer.
                              Cauſeth menne in frendſhippe long to perſeuere.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ Frendeſhippe muſt be vſed vpon

bothe ſides, for as the common Prouerbe ſaieth.
                        
                           One good turne asketh another.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 36.
                           
                              Beware that thou engendre no debate.
                              Nor kindle no malice betwixte thy frende and the.
                              For wrath engendreth ſtrife and hate.
                              And concorde euer cauſeth loue and charite.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ Bee well ware, thou fall not out with thy frende, for ſoche diſſention breadeth great hatred, therefore to thy frende thou oughteſt to vſe all gentleneſſe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 37.
                           
                              ¶ when thy ſeruauntes offence

dooeth moue the vnto ire.
                              Loke that with diſcretion thou moderate the fire.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ Beate not thy ſeruaunte in thy angre, for ire can dooe nothing well. Therefore firſt tempre thy wrathe, as a Philoſopher ſaied ones to his ſeruaunte, & I were not angrie (quod he) I would ſurelie now walke thy coate. And ſo vpō a time Plato was angrie with his ſeruaunte and he tooke vp a ſtaffe: one aſked him what he would dooe: Marie, quod he, beate this intemperate perſone, meaning himſelfe that was ſo ouerſeen by angre.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato 38.
                           
                              with pacience and ſufferaunce dooe thou thine enemie winne.
                              And conquere him, not by force and violence.
                              For emonges all other vertues that

here been.
                              Pacience euermore hath the preheminence.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ It is one of the chiefeſt verities to ſuffre thine aduerſarie, when thou maieſt ouercome him, for emonges al vertues, that is one of the greateſt.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 39.
                           
                              If thou with thy labour hast gotten ought at al.
                              In ſpending therof be not to prodigal.
                              But if that thou laboure, to an euel entente.
                              Thoſe gooddes ſo euil gotten must needes be euil ſpent.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ It is good to labour and gette to haue wherwith no liue honeſtlie, for he that truelie ſo getteth his liuing, 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            into neceſſerie,

but he that laboureth for the entent, that he would after liue the more prodigallie, maie ſone be oppreſſed with pouertie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 40.
                           
                              when thou art welthie, make good chere.
                              But ſee vnto thy ſelfe, that thou be moste nere.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ When thou art riche, ſpende ſome of thy riches vpon thy frendes, but yet ſpende ſo, that thou lacke nothing thy ſelfe another date, and be a frende to thy frende, but yet ſee that thou moſt of al be thine owne frende.
                        ☞ The ende of the firſt booke.
                     
                  
                  
                  
                     ¶ The ſeconde booke of Cato.
                     
                        
                           Cato. 1.
                           
                              
                                 IF thou wouldest learne how to til the grounde.
                              Virgil wil the teache, the feate of housbandrie.
                              The propretie of herbes, in Macer maie be founde.
                              Alſo the Romaines warres Lucane dooeth verſifie.
                              And in declaring louc, Ouide beareth the masterie.
                              But if thou list to learne wiſedome and Sapience.
                              How to gouerne thy life wel and vertuouſlie.
                              Drawe nere then and harken to my ſentence.
                           
                        
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ Euerie diuerſe aucthour teacheth diuerſe thinges, as Virgill in his boke of Georgikes, teacheth the feacte of houſbandrie. Macer the Poete writeth the propretie of al maner of herbes, Lucan writeth of the euil warres betwixte, Ceſar and Pompeie. Ouide teacheth of all matiers apperteinyng vnto loue with her daliaunce. But if thou liſt to learne the crafte or ſcience how to liue wel and verteouſlie, then read this litle booke whiche teacheth the no trifling matiers, but the very waie and meanes of verteous liuing and high perfection.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 2.
                           
                              Dooe good to ſtraungers euer, by mine aduiſe.
                              For in ſo dooing, thy honeſtie ſhal ariſe.
                              For why: it is a farre better thing. For to haue frendes, then to bee a king.
                           
                        
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ We ought not onelie to dooe for our frēdes, but alſo ſometime to dooe for ſtraungers, and to endeuer our ſelues to gette their keneuolence, for it is better to gette the many frendes, then to winne a whole kingdome, as for a kingdome a man maie loſe, but a frende wil helpe a manne in his neceſſite. And ſurelie thoſe perſones ſhalbe more ſtedfaſt vnto the, that thou winneſt with gentleneſſe and beneuolēce, then thoſe whiche thou conſtreigneſt with power and might.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 3.
                           
                              Let God alone with his ſecretes all.
                              Nor of the heauen, enſearche not the priuitie.
                              For ſithe thou arte, but a man mortal:
                              Medle with ſoche thinges, as mortall be.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. 
                           
As Socrates writeth, that whiche is aboue vs, belongeth not vnto vs. Wherefore this aucthour here willeth that we ſhould leaue the high ſtudie of natural Philoſophie, and ſtudie thoſe thinges, whiche belōg vnto our owne life, as to vſe good & verteous waies and to pourge our mindes, from all euil affectes.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 4.
                           
                              The feare of death, hardelie lette it paſſe.
                              For he maie bee called, well a verie Aſſe.
                              That of his death, is afraied ſo ſore.
                              That he can take no ioie, in his life therefore.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Theſame ſentence is in the firſte booke, he that is euer in ſorowe for thinking of his death, dooeth fooliſhlie, for firſt by his feare he cannot amende

it, beſide that he looſeth all the pleaſure of his life in the meane while.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 5.
                           
                              As long as thou art in thy angrie mode.
                              Beware thou ſtriue not, with no maner wight.
                              For in caſe thy witte bee neuer ſo good.
                              In thy wrath, thou ſhalt not ſee the right.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Pyrrhus wonte to warne the young Souldiours, that thei be not angrie, then moche more ought thei to auoide anger, that ſhal diſpute any cauſe, for he that is without anger, ſhal the better iudge. And on the other ſide, anger blindeth the right iudgemente of the minde.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Cato. 6.
                           
                              Laie out thy moneie gladlie, in the time of nede.
                              For ſometime thou must ſpende, if thou wilt ſpede.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ That coſt whiche muſt nedes be dooen, doe it with good wil, ſeme not for to grudge at it, for ſometime a mā muſt needes dooe ſome coſt, as at feaſtes, buriynges, or weddinges, and alſo vpon thy frendes.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 7.
                           
                              Flee euer from thinges, that be to high And bee content with a meane estate.
                              For ſurer are the ſhippes, whiche in the riuers ligh.
                              Then thei that bee ſailyng, in the Sea ſo greate.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. 
                           
¶ A meane fortune is ſurer, then is a high eſtate, like as the ſhippes be ſurer, that are in the ſmal riuers, then thei that bee toſſed vp and doune in the maigne Sea.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 8.
                           
                              Beware to thy felowes, how thou dooest ſhewe.
                              Any of thy actes, that maie putte the to ſhame.
                              For that whiche no manne, but thy ſelfe dooest knowe.
                              In diſcloſing therof, let no man the blame.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ If thou haſt dooen amiſſe, make no boaſt of it, & if thou dooe any thing whiche thou wouldeſt bee aſhamed to haue it knowen, let no other ſee it nor knowe therof. But in thy dooing any ſoche thing, looke that thou be prudēt and ſecrete therin.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Cato. 9.
                           
                              In thy minde, neuer thinke that thoſe.
                              whiche be wicked ſhall euer ſcape free.
                              For though for a time, that it bee kepte cloſe.
                              Yet at the last, it ſhall open be.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Thinke not that the wicked ſhalbe vnpuniſhed, for thei maie well for a time hide their wickedneſſe; but at lengthe it wil be knowen, for time at the laſt openeth euerie thing.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato 10.
                           
                              Though that a manne, of ſtature be but ſmal.
                              Yet for all that, contemne him not at all.
                              
                              For though a man, nature ſtrength denighe.
                              Yet ofte dooeth ſhe helpe him, with witte and pollicie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Deſpiſe not thine enemie, though he be but ſmall of ſtature, for many a time, he that is weake of ſtrengthe, is of great wit and ſapience. And therefore we muſt not eſteme a manne according to the robuſtiounes of his bodie, but according to the cleareneſſe of his vnderſtanding.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 11.
                           
                              Striue not with him that is aboue thy might.
                              But for the ſeaſon, geue him the masterie.
                              For he that ſometime is ouercome infight.
                              
                              Another time again, getteth the victorie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ If thou perceiue that thou haſt to dooe with him, that is ſtronger thē thy ſelfe, then geue him ouer a while, & ſuffre him for a ſeaſon, to haue the victorie, for another time maie come, when thou ſhalt bee euen with him again, for ofte it chaunceth that he whiche before was ouercome, maie haue aftrewarde the vpper hande, and ſometime the weaker ouercometh the ſtronger. But ſome be ſo ſtiffe harted, that either thei wil winne al, or elles loſe all at once.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 12.
                           
                              with woordes with thy frendes striue not at all.
                              For great debate riſeth, of woordes that be ſmall.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. 
                           
He taught thee theſame leſſon before, when he warned thee, that thou ſhouldeſt not ſtriue with thy frendes for ſometime for a fewe wordes, thei that were frēdes fall at great diſcord
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 13.
                           
                              Labour not to knowe, thy fortune or deſtinie:
                              By craft, or els by ſome Nicromācie
                              For looke what thing, is ordeined thee vnto.
                              without thy counſaill, God full well can it dooe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Enquire not to knowe thy deſtenie neither by witchecraft, nor by other vnlawfull actes, for GOD will not haue a manne, to knowe his ſecretes, nor yet calleth he thee to counſaill, when he ordeineth any thing to thee. And if his wil were, that thou ſhouldeſt knowe it, he would then haue

called thee to counſaill therin.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 14.
                           
                              Be not to pompious in thine eſtate.
                              To cauſe other to haue enuie therat
                              For though enuie, no harme to thee can dooe.
                              Yet thou wart as good, to haue their loue as no.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Go not to proudely, nor ſhewe not thy ſelf to ſtately, to cauſe other to haue enuie at thee, for though their enuie cannot hurt thee, yet it is a diſpleaſure, to haue the euill will of menne, and it is a greate coumforte to haue the good will of men, though there come no profite therof.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 15.
                           
                              Bee thou of minde, bothe conſtaunte and ſtrong.
                              Though in thy cauſe, the iudge dooe

thee wrong.
                              For ſurely thy aduerſarie, ſhall not long poſſeſſe.
                              That whiche he winneth, by ſoche vnrighteouſneſſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Be not cleane diſcomforted, if thy aduerſarie ouercome thee in the lawe by vnrighteous iudgement, for ſurely, he ſhal not long enioie it, for god ſhall reforme ſoche wicked iudgemēt
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 16.
                           
                              All diſpleaſures, before paſt and gone: Out of thy minde, ſe that thou doo caſt For it is the condicion of an euill one.
                              Olde malice to remembre, that is dooen and paſt.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. If a concorde and a louyng ende be ones made, thou oughteſt to forgette all the old debate, for when the cauſe

is ones determined, then ought alſo the malice to be finiſhed, for he that dooeth otherwiſe, is alwaie called a man of a doggiſhe minde
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato 17.
                           
                              Praiſe not thy ſelf in any maner wiſe.
                              And to diſpraiſe thy ſelfe, is as foule a vice.
                              For either of theim, from reaſon are farre wide.
                              And often to vſe theim, is a ſigne of pride.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Neither praiſe, nor diſpraiſe thy ſelf for in dooyng of either of theim, is a ſigne of him that coueteth vainglory for he that dooeth diſpraiſe him ſelf, doeth it becauſe he would haue other men to praiſe him.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 18.
                           
                              Spende meaſurablie thy gooddes, that God hath ſent:
                              
                              For that whiche was long in gettyng full ſone wilbe ſpent.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. When thou haſt ſubſtaunce, waſt it not ſo ſone, for a thing is euer ſoner ſpent then gotten.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 19.
                           
                              Set a ſide wiſedome, when time requireth.
                              For ſometime to plaie the foole, is a poinct of wit it.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Sometime a manne muſt ſet a ſide grauitie, as in ſportes and plaies, where ſometime a manne muſte geue ouer wiſedome, and plaie the fooles parte, and ſpecially emong fooles, a manne muſt plaie the foole, and yet ſhall not be afoole in deede, for it is an high poincte of wiſedome, for a manne to applie himſelf, accordyng to the time.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Cato. 20.
                           
                              Flee coueteouſneſſe, and alſo from prodigalitie.
                              For neither of theim, agreeth with honeſtie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Prodigalitie and coueteouſneſſe be twoo vices, wherof either is repugnaunt vnto other, therefore, he that will haue a good name, muſt eſchewe them bothe, for the coueteous menne be called nigardes, and the prodigall ſpenders, be called vnthriftes.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 21.
                           
                              Of thy credence hardely, be not to light when the toungues that moſte bable, ſpeake leaſt of right.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Faithe is not by and by, to bee geuen vnto thoſe menne, that bring alwaie ſome newes, and tell ſomewhat of other mennes deedes. Thei are

ſcarſly to bee beleued, that bable of many thinges, for becauſe that vanitie was wonte to bee coupled vnto this vice.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 22.
                           
                              Pardone not thy ſelf, when by drinking thou art an offender.
                              For the faulte is not in the drinke, but in the drinker.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The common ſort of men is wont after this ſorte, to excuſe their faultes. The wine was thoccaſiō or cauſe I ſaied this, when I was well whitled: But dooe thou impute it to thine awne ſelf, and not to the wine, whiche fault was by thine awne naughtineſſe, and not of it.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 23.
                           
                              If thou haſt any ſecrete councell:
                              Diſcloſe it to thy felowe, that canne kepe it well.
                              
                              If thy bodie nede any remedie.
                              Commit that to a Phiſicion that is trustie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. In thinges ſecrete, and to be kepte in ſilence, beware thou aſke not euery mannes counſaill, but his onely, whoſe truſtineſſe in ſecrete matiers thou haſt righte well approued, leaſt he dooe not onely helpe thee, but alſo hinder and ſlaunder thee: Nor yet ſhewe thou the infirmities of thy bodie to euery one, but vnto a Phiſiciō of an aſſured and knowen faiethfulneſſe, whiche maie kepe thy diſeaſes priuie and heale theim.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 24.
                           
                              At the good chaunces of the vnworthie, take no grief.
                              Fortune flattreth euill perſones to dooe them ſome miſchief.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. 
                           
Lette not the proſperitie of other greue thee, whiche hath often chaunced to the vnworthie. For Fortune dooeth not fauour theim, but lieth in waite, and ticleth theim forwarde, that afterwarde, ſhe maie dooe them more hurte and diſpleaſure.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 25.
                           
                              Marke afore what chaunces fall, that muſt be ſuffred.
                              For that hurteth leaſt, whiche thou hast afore conſidered.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Whatſoeuer maie happen vnto mā pondre theſame with thy ſelf, before it dooeth chaunce, that it maie not be ſodein, if at any time it ſhall happen. For thoſe euilles dooe leſſe trouble, whiche dooe not chaunce to a mā vnawares.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 26.
                           
                              In thinges aduerſant and vnluckie.
                              
                              Diſpaire not, nor be in harte heuie.
                              But haue a good hope, for hope onely, Doeth neuer for ſake a mā, vntil he die
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. When fortune wexeth cruell, ſtrengthen thy ſelf with a good courage, & ſaue thy ſelf for thinges proſperous and luckie, & caſt not awaie thy hope which forſaketh not a mā euē diyng. For as long as there is life within the bodie, there is hope. And in the boxe of Pādora only hope did cleaue in the brimme. And Ouide ſaieth.
                        
                           I did ſee a man liue by hope, whom death euen now was readie to grope.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 27.
                           
                              A thing that thou knoweſt mete for thy purpoſe.
                              See in no caſe, thou dooeſt it loſe.
                              Occaſion in the forehead hath heare
                              
                              And the polle, balde and bare.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. As often as fortune doeth offer the any commoditie, whiche is meete for the, ſtreighte waie take it: for occaſion hath an hearie foreheadde, ſo that in that part, ſhe maie be holden faſt, but if ſhe ones tourne her backe, behinde in the polle, ſhe is as bare as a 
                              •
                           oote, that a man maie haue no hand faſt in her. That is, oportunitie whē it chaunceth, it maie bee holden and kepte, verely, it dooeth not retourne, when thou wouldeſt, if thou regardeſt it not.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 28.
                           
                              Take heede what will folowe her after:
                              And what hangeth ouer thy head, dooe thou afore ponder.
                              Folowe the God, as nigh as thou maieſt whiche had twoo faces, looking Eaſt and weſt.
                           
                        
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Surmiſe and gather of thinges preſente, what are to come. Take counſaill of thinges, either good or euill, paſt and goen, how thou maieſt with ſtande thoſe that are to come. After thexample of that Romiſhe God Ianus, whō the antiques did feigne to haue had twoo foreheaddes or faces. For aſmoche as it behoueth a wiſe man, to haue yies in his forhead, and behinde in his polle. Theſame thing truely dooeth folowe vs, whiche is alreadie paſt and goen.
                     
                     
                        
                           Caio. 29.
                           
                              To kepe in health that thou maieſt be the more hable.
                              Sometime to thy ſelf, bee the more fauourable.
                              To a mannes pleaſure, fewe thinges are required.
                              But in a mannes healthe, many

thinges are deſired.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Diete the maner of thy liuyng, rather after the meane & waie of helth and good welfare, then of pleaſure. For we muſt not onely in diſeaſe and ſickeneſſe, beware of intemperauncie but alſo when we are in good health we muſt vſe all thinges meaſurably, as ſlepe, drinke, meate, the pleaſure of the bodie, plaie, leaſt wee fall into ſickeneſſe. Although ſome thing is to be geuen to pleaſure, yet moche more is to be geuen to health, whiche ones loſt, all pleaſure periſheth withall.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 30.
                           
                              The iudgemente of the people, dooe not thou deſpiſe onely.
                              Leaſt thou pleaſe no manne, while thou wilte reproue many.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The beſt thinges dooe neuer pleaſe the common ſorte, yet it is wiſedome

for a man alone, not to ſtriue againſt al. For he is wiſe to no purpoſe, whiche is alone, and to himſelf wiſe, where as he ſemeth to all others, to date and plaie the foole.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 31.
                           
                              Aboue all other thinges, ſee to thy welfare.
                              The chiefeſt poinct, is for health to care
                              Blame not the time, if thou diſeaſed bee.
                              where as thou thy ſelf, art cauſe of thine infirmitie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Before all thinges haue regarde of thy health, leaſt that if through thine intemperauncie and euill diete, thou fallyng into any diſeaſe, afterwarde for very ſhame, dooeſt put the blame in the vnwholeſomeneſſe of thaire or place, as the common ſorte of people is wont to dooe. For the moſte parte

of ſickeneſſe, dooe chaunce vnto vs, through the euill dietyng of our bodies.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 32
                           
                              Of dreames and phantaſies, no care take.
                              For what mannes minde wiſheth while he dooeth wake.
                              Truſtyng his purpoſe to obtain.
                              Seeth the ſame by dreame, but in vain.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Some with ouermoche ſuperſticion obſerue and marke their dremes, and of them doe iudge of thinges to come Where as the dreames of theim that ſlepe, come of themſelues, when thei are wakyng. Thei dooe not ſignifie what is to come, but thei dooe repreſōt vnto thee ſleping, what thou haſt before thought.
                        ¶ Thende of the .ii. booke.
                     
                  
                  
                  
                     ¶ The .iij. booke of Cato.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 1.
                           
                              THOV reader that deſireſt to knowe this bookes meanyng.
                              Here ſhalte thou haue leſſons, to good life beſt pleaſyng.
                              Garniſhe thy minde with theim, and to learne dooe not ſwage.
                              For our life without learnyng, is but deathes awne Image.
                              Thei ſhalbe to thy great profite, but if thou dooe them reiecte.
                              Not me the writer, but thy ſelf thou ſhalt neglecte.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. This is in the ſtede of a Proheme or Preface. Without the waie and reaſon how to liue well & godlie our life is no life, but the image and picture of death. Theſe verſes do teache

the, verie profitable and neceſſarie rules, how to liue vprightelie, if thou haſt any affection and wil, to learne & vnderſtande. But if thou regarde them not, thou ſhalt contemne and deſpiſe thy ſelfe, and not the writer. For the matier perteineth vnto the, and not vnto him.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 2.
                           
                              while thou dooest liue wel, care not what euill menne ſaie.
                              For to vs the tounges of all menne will not obeie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. If that euil diſpoſed perſones ſpeake not well of the, when thou dooeſh no hurte, holde thy ſelfe contente, with the vprighte conſcience of thy good doinges. For in the it lieth, that thou dooe well: but in thy power it is not, how and what, this, or that, men ſhal talke of the.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 3.
                           
                           
                              Brought foorth for a witneſſe, ſauing their owne honestie.
                              As nigh as thou canst, kepe thy frendes faulte priuie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. If thou be called for a witneſſe, in thy frendes cauſe, thou ſhalt to thy power concele and hide his euil deede, but to that thou hurte not thine owne good name. And thou ſhalt geue aſmoche ſcilence vnto amitie or frendeſhippe, as thy honeſtie, and thy othe of teſtimonie and witneſſe, will ſuffre and beare with the.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 4.
                           
                              Remembre to beware, of woordes gloſed and faced.
                              The trueth is whole, and nothing backed.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The communication of trueth, is

ſimple and plain. The faire & ſmoth ſpeaker, is ful of deceipte. Therefore it ought of wiſe menne alwaies to be ſuſpected.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 5.
                           
                              Auoide ſluggiſheneſſe, and idleneſſe refraine.
                              There is no greater enemie, then an idle braine.
                              For the idleneſſe of minde bringeth the bodie out of courſe.
                              Eſchewe it therefore, for there is nothing wourſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A ſlothful and an idle life, is to be abandoned. And the imperfectnes of the minde, dooeth alſo bring an vnluſtineſſe & febleneſſe vnto the bodie. Alſo the exerciſe of the minde, dooeth help moche to the health of the bodie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 6.
                           
                           
                              Itermedle thy cares now and then, with pastime and ſporte.
                              That in all thy trauailes, thy minde maie receiue coumforte.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The minde weried with ſerious and earneſt buſineſſe, is ſometime to bee ſolaced, with honeſtie & moderate pleaſures & paſtimes, ſo that the ſpirite quickened and refreſhed, it maie be able to ſuſtein al maner of labours
                        For that, that lacketh now and then the quiet reſt.
                        Is not able to endure al of the beſt.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 7.
                           
                              Another mannes woorde or deede, dooe thou not checke or mocke:
                              Least in like maner, another dooe make the his gesting ſtocke.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Whatſoeuer thou dooeſt to other, of other theſame ſhalbe dooen to the

again. If thou can gladlie reproue other mennes deedes or woordes, other will vſe thine awne example againſt thy ſelfe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 8.
                           
                              whatſoeuer is geuen the, by any bequeſt.
                              Encreaſe it, and vſe it, euer to the best.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Whatſoeuer dooeth happen vnto the, by the Teſtamente and bequeſt of thy frendes, that keepe, leaſt euery mannes mouthe be ful of the. For the common people is wonte to mutter againſt theim that come ſodeinlie by their gooddes and poſſeſſions.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 9.
                           
                              If thou haue riches, in thy olde age plentie.
                              See thou liue liberallie, and to thy frendes be not ſcantie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. 
                           
This fault is peculiar to olde men that the more nerer thei be to deaths dore, the more catching and hauing thei bee. Therefore dooe thou then geue vnto thy frendes, that thei maie nouriſhe, and helpe the with their almoſe deedes.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 10.
                           
                              Deſpiſe not (thou master) thy ſeruauntes good counſel.
                              No, nor any others iudgemente, if thei frame wel.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. For the baſeneſſe and vileneſſe of the aucthour and geuer, good & wholſome counſail, is not to bee deſpiſed. Nor it is not to bee regarded, who ſpeaketh it, but what the thing is that is ſpoken.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 11.
                           
                              If thou haddest moche, and after become poore.
                              
                              Liue according, and be thankefull therefore.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Thy fortune or eſtate diminiſhed & made leſſe, thou maieſt not vſe like galauntnes as afore. But thou ſhalt be contente with that kinde of life, that thy preſente fortune, and degree dooeth geue the. And thou ſhalt take that wel a woorthe, that now is preſente.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 12.
                           
                              Beware thou marie not a wife for her dowries ſake.
                              And if ſhe be ſhrewiſh, ſoone her from the ſhake.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Take hede thou wed not a wife for the ſake or cauſe of her dowrie. And if thou dooe marrie one riche and wel dowred, reteine her not for the reſpecte of her dowrie, if ſhe be a ſhrewe

but her dowrie ſet a parte, thou ſhalt forſake her. How be it emong Chriſtē menne this precepte is not to bee folowed, nor ought to be allowed.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 13.
                           ¶ By the example of many learne whom to dooe after.
                              And what thou must flie: others life is thy maister.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Thei that learne by their owne pecilles & loſſes what is mete for them: thei paie beare for their learning. A wiſe man doeth take counſail of anothers liuing how to liue. This deede gotte him an euil name, I ſhal beware leaſt I dooe a like. This thing framed wel with him, I wil folowe and dooe after him.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 14.
                           
                              Aſſaie what thou art able, least being ouerburdened.
                              
                              Thou be constrained to leaue of thinges in vaine attempted.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Firſt proue what thy power and ſtrength is, before thou ſetteſt vpō any buſineſſe, leaſt aftrewardes being ouermaſtered with the difficultie and hardenes thereof, thou ſhalt forſake that to thy ſhame, whiche ſo vnaduiſedlie thou tokeſt vpon the.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 15.
                           
                              That thou knowest to be dooen euil.
                              To tel it dooe thou nothing ceaſſe.
                              Least thou be thought, to haue a wil
                              Naughtie compactes to folowe, by holding thy peace.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Diſſemble thou not, if thou knoweſt any thing not to be wel doen, for thou ſhalt bee thought to allowe it, when thou kepeſt it priuie. For cloking and ſcilence keping doeth ſometime ſeme

to be conſenting and agreing.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 16.
                           
                              Aske the iudges helpe, if thou bee wrongfullie iudged.
                              Yea the lawes themſelues deſireth with right to be ministred.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. If thou bee oppreſſed with a wicked lawe, that is with a ſtreight and vngētle lawe. Fle to the iuſtice of the iudge. For this is not againſt the lawes, but is the minde and meaning of the lawes, that thei be reduced and tempered by iuſtice. It is an vniuſte lawe; when it is ſued to the extremitie. As if a poore manne ſhould be caſt into priſon becauſe he doeth not finde his father, wheras the lawe ſaieth. Let the children mainteine, and kepe their fathers and mothers, or els let them be committed to warde. Some time the lawe is the ſtreighter for to caſt men into a feare. In theſe thinges

the iudge (that is) the maiſter or chief gouernour maie helpe and be a meane.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 17.
                           
                              That thou dooest ſuffre woorthelie, remembre there with to be contente.
                              And when thou findest thy ſelfe giltie, thy ſelfe reproue by thine owne iudgemente.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A diſpleaſure that chaunceth vnto the, through thine owne faulte, thou ſhalt impute it to none other then thy ſelfe. And when thou feeleſt thy ſelfe giltie, reproue thy ſelfe, and bee thine owne iudge, & thinke thy ſelfe woorthie of that puniſhemente.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 18.
                           
                              Loke thou reade many thinges, thei readde, reade many moe.
                              For thinges wounderous, although

vntrue, Poetes dooeth ſhowe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ Reade thou many and ſondrie thinges, but yet with a iudgemente. For al thinges are not true, the which thou dooeſt reade in Poetrie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 19.
                           
                              Among gestes at the table be thou of ſpeache ſobre.
                              Least where thou wouldest be taken manerlie, thou be called a chatter.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. In the courte of lawe is a place of eloquence, in the chambre of ſcilēce in feaſt and at meate, it is comelie and meete to vſe moderate communications one with the other, and thei alſo pleaſaunte and merie. Some mē while thei goe about to bee ſeen curious, be troublous to the other of the geaſ
                              •
                           es with their babling, to whom thei dooe leaue no ſpace and time to commune.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Cato 20.
                           
                              Feare not the woordes of thy wife beyng angrie.
                              For while ſhe weepeth, ſhe woorketh ſome ſubtiltie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Women haue their teares in a readineſſe. With theim thei ouermaſter their houſbandes. Therefore he geueth councel that thei be nothing moued with ſoche maner weping & wailing. For thei dooe often times faine theim, that thei maie deceiue their houſbandes. As women deſſemble thē ſelues to bee greued with Ialouſie, that thei maie cloke their owne alnoutrie: or els when thei faine theim ſelues to be angrie with him, whom thei entirelie loue.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 21.
                           
                              Vſe thinges gotten, but to miſuſe them, be thou not demed.
                              
                              Thei that lacke, ſeke other mennes, when their owne is conſumed.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Vſe and occupie ſoche thinges as thou haſt gotten, and dooe not abuſe them, leaſt when all thy gooddes are waſted and ſpent, thou be conſtrained either to aſke other mennes ſhamefullie, either to liue of anothers mans in bondage, or elles to ſteale other mennes gooddes, not without thy great peril and daunger.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 22.
                           
                              Feare not death, come when it will.
                              For death endeth al thine euil.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Death, and it be but for this thing onely, is not to be feared, foraſmoche as ſhe is the ende of euilles of this life.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 23.
                           
                           
                              Haue pacience with thy wife if her tounge walke.
                              Chiefelie if ſhe be good, grudge not at her talke.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ Litle trifling faultes, are to be borne withal in our frendes, if thei be in other poinctes good. As in the wife if ſhe be any thing talkatiue, or of her tounge any thing ſaucie, it is to bee ſuffred, if ſhe bee in other condicions chaſt and profitable (that is) dooing the duetie of a good houſwife. Speciallie for becauſe the diſeaſe of the tounge is propre and naturall to that kinde. He is a frowarde perſon, that cannot kepe ſcilence, ſpeciallie ſeeing it is a light and eaſie thing for one to holde his peace, for by this meanes thy wife ſhall ceaſſe to chat and prate, if thou geueſt her neuer a woorde to aunſwere, as Socrates was woont to dooe.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Cato. 24.
                           
                              Towarde thy father and mother let not thy loue be ſlender.
                              Nor offende thy mother, if to thy father thou wilt be tender.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Mercie, loue and reuerence is due vnto thy parentes, thy countreie, to God, & any that ſhal occupie the place of thy parentes. There are ſome that loue their parētes as though the lawe conſtrained them therto, but loue thou them dearelie, & not fearefullie, that is conſtrainedlie or for veraie ſhame, but chearefullie and with good harte. And if there fortune any ſtrife betwene thy parentes, bee thou ſo diligent to pleaſe the one that thou offende not thothen, that thy gentleneſſe maie remoue all griefes and troubles.
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            The ende of the thirde booke.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶The .iiij. booke of Cato.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 1.
                           
                              THou whatſoeuer wilte leade a life vpright and ſure:
                              Set not thy minde on vice, the whiche hurteth good nurture.
                              And theſe leſſons to read bee euer diligent.
                              That thou maieſt bee a maſter and come to gonernement.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. This is the Proheme or preface to the .iiii. booke. If thou wilte be free and voide frō all vices, and wilt liue guiltie to thy ſelf of no faulte, haue thou theſe preceptes alwaies ready and at hāde. In the whiche thou ſhalt finde wherin thou maieſt vſe thy ſelf for a maſter and teacher, that is, how thou thy ſelf maieſt rule and moderate thy ſelf, beyng holpē with theſe preceptes.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 2.
                           
                              Deſpiſe richeſſe, if thou wilte be in minde happie.
                              For thei that make moche of them be alwaies crauyng and nedie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He biddeth vs not to caſt awaie richeſſe, but not to make muche of thē. For thei that dooe enhaunce theim, that is, highly eſteme and regard thē while thei dare not vſe, and occupie thoſe gooddes that thei haue: And dooe alwaies heape vp ſomewhat, yet dooe thei alwaies begge, that is, thei be pinchyng and crauyng.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 3.
                           
                              The commoditie of nature, thee neuer faileth.
                              If thou bee contente with that that nede requireth.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus.  If thou dooeſt meaſure thine expē
                           ſes,accordyng to thy nede, that is, to thy neceſſitie, and not to thy ambiciō nor yet to wanton pleaſure, the commodities & pleaſures of nature ſhall neuer faile thee, whiche nature is cō
                           tent with fewe thinges, wheras carnall luſtes and delites deſire out of meaſure.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 4.
                           
                              where thou caſteſt no feare, neither ruleſt thy matier by reaſon.
                              Call not fortune blinde (as ſhe is not) for thine vndiſcrecion.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. If thy matiers come euill to paſſe by thine awne negligence, dooe not put the blame in fortune, that thou maieſt call her blinde, where as thou thy ſelf tookeſt but ſmall hede.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 5.
                           
                              Loue money, but for the coigne dooe thou litle craue.
                              For no verteous, nor honeſt manne

dooeth deſire that to haue.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. To loue money for mannes vſe and nede, is the poinct of a wiſeman: To loue it, that the coigne therof maie fede and delite a mannes yies, is the ſigne of a coueteous and a mad man. All menne would haue money: euill men onely deſire the coigne therof.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 6.
                           
                              when thou art riche, prouide for thy bodily wealth.
                              A ſicke man beyng riche, hath money, but lacketh health.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. When thou art in ieopardie of the healthe of thy bodie, dooe not then ſpare thy richeſſe and gooddes. For he that dooeth not finde a remedy for his diſeaſe, leaſt he ſhould diminiſhe his money: Soche a one hath, but he hath not himſelf, wheras he is ſicke and euill at eaſe. He had rather haue

his money ſaued then himſelf, & to haue the vſe and occupiyng of them, then of himſelf.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 7.
                           
                              If at Schole, ſtripes of thy maſter thou didſt ſuffre.
                              Moche more thou muſte forbeare thy father in his angre.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Thou werte beaten of thy Maſter whē thou diddeſt go to ſchole. Moche more it becometh thee to ſuffre, whē thy father doeth chide the with wordes. Thou diddeſt take well a worthe the tirannie of thy Teacher, beeyng moche more cruell: Forbeáre the rule or Emperie of thy father, who although he be angrie, yet he woeth refraine from fightyng.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 8.
                           
                              Dooe thinges that profite, to eſchewe remembre again.
                              
                              Frōthinges of errour, without hope of gain certain.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Of what thinges thou art in doubt dooe them not, dooe thoſe thinges of whom thou dooeſt truſt for a gain, in thoſe thinges by whom thou maieſt be deceiued, and is in doubt whether thei will dooe good or euill, with thē dooe thou not medle.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 9.
                           
                              what thou maieſt geue, geue freely to the asker.
                              For what thou dooeſt to good menne is thine awne lucre.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Geue willingly if thou maieſt geue any thing. For it is gaines, & no loſſe what thou dooeſt beſt owe vpon good men. And he in beſtowyng taketh a good tourne, whiche geueth to one deſeruyng it. For it cometh again with an ouerplus the whiche thou beſtoweſt

vpon good men.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 10.
                           
                              That thou dooeſt ſuſpect, what it is diſcuſſe by and by.
                              For thinges not regarded, are wonte to hurte chiefly.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Soche thinges as haue any ſuſpicion of euil, thoſe ſet thou not light of, but ſtraight waie examine them, & ſerche theim out what maner thinges thei are. For in the beginnyng thou ſhalt eaſely finde remedie, if there bee any euill: but a thing not regarded, doeth wexe more and more, and dooeth afterward moſte hurt of all. As if thou ſuſpecte thy frend to be of a ſtraunge minde towardes thee, ſette not thou light of it, what it ſhould meane, but trie out wherof this thing did firſt ariſe. And if there bee any ſoche thinges, by and by ſtoppe the diſpleaſure while it is yet in growyng.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 11.
                           
                           
                              when damnable luſtes thy fleſhe do occupie.
                              Geue not thy ſelf to gluttonie frende to the bellie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Beware thou double not thy grief for one maie ſomewhat bee ſuffred, twoo at ones cānot be borne. To liue fleſhely is a damnable thing, and dā
                           nable is gluttonie. That if at ones thou be troubled with bothe euilles, it remaineth that thou bee broughte ſtraighte waies to pouertie. He calleth gluttonie, the ſtudy and affecciō of deintie meates, & theſame he calleth the frend of the bellie, for by her the bellie is fatted, and the ſubſtaūce and good name diminiſhed.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 12.
                           
                              when naturally thou thinkeſt all wilde beaſtes to be feared.
                              I tell thee, manne onely is moſte to

bee dreaded.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Foraſmoche as thou dooeſt thinke in thine awne minde, all wilde beaſtes to bee feared, by my counſaill thou ſhalte chiefly feare one beaſte (that is) a manne. For no wilde beaſt dooeth more hurte and diſpleaſure, then one man another.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 13.
                           
                              where as thou haſte in thy bodie ſtrength mightie.
                              wexe wiſe withall, and ſo maieſt thou be coumpted manlie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. It that nature hath geuē the ſtrēgth of bodie, thou ſhalt not be a ſtrōg mā by and by, excepte thou ioigne therevnto witte & diſcrecion, that is wiſe dome, by the whiche thou maieſt vſe well the ſtrength of thy bodie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 14.
                           
                           
                              Aske counſaill of thine acquaintaunce if any thing thee offende.
                              For there is not a better Phiſicion then a truſtie frende.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Thou dooeſt open vnto the Phiſiciō, the diſeaſes of the bodies, ſhew vnto a faiethfull frende the griefes of the minde. That man that is the Phiſicion dooeth heale with medicines, and this manne (that is thy frende) with wordes: or els if any ſickneſſe happē rather call thy frend then a phiſicion
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 15.
                           
                              where thou art in thine awne conſcience guiltie.
                              why dooeth Sacrifice for thee die.
                              It is fooliſhneſſe by anothers ſlaughter.
                              Health and forgeueneſſe to hope after.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The people of old time did beleue a

miſcheuous deede, to be purged with killyng of a beaſt, the which had doen no faulte. And an innocent creature was poniſhed for anothers offence, when he rather oughte to haue been ſlain whiche did offende, then the beaſt offred vp in Sacrifice. Truely thei did fooliſhly hope and truſt that anothers death ſhould be their helth, wheras euery man ought to poniſhe his awne miſdeedes of himſelf.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 16.
                           
                              when thou dooeſt ſeke vnto thee a frende to be truſted.
                              Not the fortune of the perſone, but the good life is to be deſired.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A frende whom thou wouldeſt take vnto thy familiar acquaintaunce, is not to bee eſtemed by his ſubſtaunce, but of his good maners. Theſame muſt be dooen in choſyng wiues.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 17.
                           
                           
                              If thou haue gotten gooddes, beware of nigardie.
                              For what dooe thei auaile thee, if thou liue in beggerie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Thou haſte gotten thy gooddes in vain and to no purpoſe, that dareſt not vſe and occupie theim, and emōg greate ſubſtaunce and treaſure, thou liueſt bare and nedie. For it auaileth the nothing to haue, if thoſe thinges whiche thou haſt, dooe profite thee neuer a deale the more, then thoſe whiche thou haſt not.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 18.
                           
                              If vnto honeſtie thy minde be bente and ſette.
                              Eſchewe vain pleaſure, leaſt thei dooe thee lette.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. If thou be willyng to ſaue vpright

thy honeſt and good name, loue not thou vnhoneſt, and filthy deſires and pleaſures, as gluttonie, lecherie, and ſoche other like.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 19.
                           
                              Mocke not old age, if thou be wiſe.
                              For it is propre vnto age to bee a childe twiſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. When accordyng vnto thy age, thy witte and policie of minde is quicke and pregnant, ſcorne not old age, the whiche is not ſo ripe & ready in wit and vnderſtandyng, for euery old mā dooeth dote, and retourne to his childiſhe fooliſheneſſe. Therefore, the fault of old age is to be borne withal and not to be mocked and ſkorned.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 20.
                           
                              Deſire to bee learned whatſoeuer thee betide.
                              For cunnyng remaineth when richeſſe

cannot abide:
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Some chaunce or other, doeth many times plucke awaie richeſſe from a man, as by fire, thefte, warre, ſhipwracke: but cunnyng cannot be takē awaie. Therefore, that is the ſureſt poſſeſſion, the whiche maie alwaie and euery where maintein thee.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 21.
                           
                              Marke priuily all thinges what euery man dooeth ſaie.
                              For ſpeache declareth mennes maners and alſo theim bewraie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Nothing doeth more ſhewe and declare the life and diſpoſicion of man then his communicaciō. That is the ſure and ready glaſſe of the minde. Therefore if thou wilt knowe a man what maner of felowe he is, ponder with thy ſelf what his talke is. The ſpeche doeth open the maners of the

mā, if he ſpeake hartly. And theſame dooeth hide and couer them, if either he holde his peace, or ſpeake faintly.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 22.
                           
                              Exerciſe thy ſtudie, although thou haſt learned a ſcience.
                              As diligence dooeth helpe thy witte ſo dooeth the hande experience.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. As diſcipline and learnyng doeth vaniſhe awaie, except thou confirme thē by experience, ſo a crafte muſt be ſtabliſhed by practiſe leſt it be forgottē.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 23.
                           
                              Regard not moche the times to come of thy deſtinie.
                              He feareth not death, whiche dooeth his life defie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. If thou wilte be from the feare of death, learne not to make moche of thy life. And as Ariſtotle doeth clerkely teache, the fruicion and hauyng

of nothing is not pleaſaunt, excepte that after a ſorte thou haſt deſpiſed the ſame already.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 24.
                           
                              Bee diligent to learne of theim that haue learnyng.
                              And be ready to teache them, that lacke teachyng.
                              For like as learnyng is a thing moſte excellent.
                              So to teache the ſame is very expedient.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Learne not of euery bodie, but of them that can teache thee. Alſo what ſoeuer of other thou doeſt learne, the ſame to other teache thou again. The knowelege of good & profitable thinges, is not to be kept in huggermugger, but is to be deliuered.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 25.
                           
                              Drinke as thou maieſt if thou wilte

liue wel at caſe.
                              Many times a mannes pleaſure, is cauſe of an euill diſeaſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. So that ſhorte pleaſure, and felicitie of this bolling and bibbing doeth often times gette vnto a manne a greuous and a long diſeaſe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 26.
                           
                              whenſoeuer any thing thou dooeſt openlie either praiſe or commende.
                              See that the ſame by any faulte of lightneſſe, thou dooest not reprehende.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Thou ſhalt be thought light and inconſtant, if that thou haſt praiſed before many, theſame that afterwarde thou dooeſt reproue. Therefore if thou haſt chaunged thy minde, ſee thou holdeſt thy tounge.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 27.
                           
                           
                              In proſperite, beware of thinges aduerſaunte.
                              Again in aduerſite truste to haue the time more pleaſaunte.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Be thou not without al feare, and care when fortune is good and luckie but take hede of a ſtorme to come. Again when fortune is cruel, faint not, but be of good harte, vpon hope of a better chaūce to come. In thinges proſperous and luckie, aduerſitie is to be feared, leaſt a manne ſhould be careles. In aduerſite, thinges more pleaſaunte are to be truſted for.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 28.
                           
                              Ceaſſe not to learne, for by diligence, and hede wiſedome dooeth augmente.
                              By long vſe and time is geuen prudence excellente.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. 
                           
According to the ſame minde of Solon we muſt were older, alwaies learning one thing, or other, for ſingular & excellent wiſedome dooeth chaunce to a manne by longe vſe, that is by longe experience of age or yeres. Howbeit it pleaſeth me better, that this bee the meaning or vnderſtanding. Learne alwaies, for by ſtudie wiſedome encreaſeth, for there are fewe that proue wiſe by experiēce of thinges, either becauſe it dooeth happen fewe to liue long, or elles for that, that very fewe extirpe, and putte of their fooliſhneſſe by this waie of experience. The moſte ſureſt & readieſt waie to wiſedome is learning and knowelege.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 29.
                           
                              Seldome praiſe any manne, for whō thou dooest ofte commende:
                              In a daie it wilappeare, how wel he is thy frende.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. 
                           
Praiſe not thy frende ouermoche of whom thou haſt made no proufe, for he being often times praiſed of the, in one daie or other, he ſhall ſhewe himſelf to haue been another maner of felowe, then thou haſt praiſed him for.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 30.
                           
                              Shame not to learne, and deſire to be taught.
                              But be aſhamed of ignoraunce, for that is naught.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Some of a certain fooliſhe ſhame had rather alwaies to bee ignoraunte then ones to learne any thing. Whereas to knowe, is a faire thing, and a ſhame to wil to learne nothing. Therfore it is an honeſt poincte to deſire knowelege.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 31.
                           
                              with lecherie and dronkeneſſe, ſtrife and pleaſure be tangled.
                              
                              what coumforteth the minde that take, let ſtriffe be auoided.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Picke out what is good, flie whatſoeuer is euil therunto coupled, drinke and good chere maketh a man merie, & putteth awaie cares, vſe this commoditie. But again dronkenneſſe prouoketh to brauling and chiding, that beware. And lecherie delighteth, but it hath with it wrangling and quareling Loue therefore without ſtrife & debate.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 32.
                           
                              Beware of him that is ſolemne, and ſitteth like a ſleper.
                              For where the floode is calmest, the water is the deper.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Eſchewe theſe ſolemne and ſtill felowes, for thei ſeeme to cōpaſſe ſome great thing. Like as the floud is to be auoided in that parte, where it is moſt

calme. For that is woont to be depeſt. So Ceſar did more feare Brute & Caſſy being pale & ſtil, then dronkē Anthony.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 33.
                           
                              If fortune happen, to yelde the diſpleaſure.
                              with anothers mannes chaunce, doe thy ſelfe meaſure.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. As often as thou art werie of thy ſtate and condicion, matche it with other mennes fortunes, and thou ſhalt perceiue thy ſelfe, neuer a deale the wourſe, that is more vnhappie then many other.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 34.
                           
                              Deſire rather, by the ſhalow ſhore to rowe:
                              Then to hoiſe vp the ſaile, into the depe flowe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. 
                           
Set vpon, and goe about ſure matiers, rather then great. For it is more ſafegarde and ſuretie to rowe by the ſhore, & to vſe oares, then with broade ſailes to bee in ieoperdie in maigne ſeas. Nor truelie the windes of good chaunce and fortune dooeth fauour euery manne.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 35.
                           
                              Against a good and iuste manne, be thou no quareller.
                              For of all ſoche, God is the auenger.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Striue not peruerſlie, that is, maliciouſlie and frowardlie with a iuſte manne, for God doeth neuer leaue that vnauenged.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 36.
                           
                              wepe not, neither waile, if thou haue loſſe.
                              But rather reioice, and bee contente with thy croſſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. If riches dooe happen vnto the, be glad therof, if thei be taken from the, be not thou vexed and troubled, but then vſe wiſedom & diſcretion. Truelie thei haue not ſo moche goodneſſe, that thei neede greatlie to be ſorowed, if thei be loſt, nor again ſo moche euil, that thei be not to be receiued, if peraduenture, thei happen to the.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 37.
                           
                              That loſſe whiche happeneth by negligence:
                              Is to the loſer, a great offence.
                              But ſome loſſes happen very crokedly.
                              whiche yet with thy frende ſee thou beare pacientlie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. If a frend be diſpleaſed with ſpeaking a woorde, it is to be ſuffred, but the damages & loſſes of thinges, fewe can ſuffre paciētlie. Therefore in ſoche

a caſe, it is to be taken hede of, leaſt we hurte our frende.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 38
                           
                              Promiſe not thy ſelfe long time of liuing:
                              Death foloweth at the heeles, thy bodie euer ſhadowing.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. No man can promiſe himſelfe long life, ſeeing that death dooeth folowe a man, wherſoeuer he goeth none otherwiſe, then the ſhadowe foloweth the bodie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 39.
                           
                              Pleaſe God with incenſe, and let the caulfe for the plough increaſe:
                              And thinke not by killing of beaſtes Goddes wrath to ceaſſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. God reioiſeth not in the ſlaughtee beaſtes, therefore Sacrifice is to bee

doen vnto him with frankencens, that is, with a thing that offendeth not, & is of litle coſte. But now a daies, the moſte parte of Chriſtien men, although the maner of offring beaſtes be take awaie from emōg them, yet thei thinke God and his ſainctes, in maner to bee bounde vnto them, if their hange vp before them precious ſtones, golde, ſiluer, and ſilkes, either onely to ſhewe, or els to be tourned into the riote of a fewe, remembring not theſe thinges alwaies, of holie menne to haue been deſpiſed, and if peraduenture any ſoche thinges did chaunce, ſtraight waie thei would beſtowe theim to the vſe, & behoufe of the poore and needie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 40.
                           
                              If thou be afflicted, by one that is riche Either be vexed, by a manne of might To ſuffre it quietlie, thinke not moche.
                              For oft by ſuffring, menne come to their right.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He that hath to dooe with greate menne, foraſmoche as thei maie dooe a manne pleaſure many waies, it is neceſſarie that ſometime he huſhe iniuries doen vnto him: that is, that he ſuffre thē pacientlie, making no woorde. For ſome time men of aucthoritie doe diſpleaſure, and vſe to deale truelie. Heare therefore, a wiſe man ſhal geue place vnto him, that aftrewarde he maie profite him. For if by his wraſteling with them, he make them his enemies, ſhe ſhalbe able to doe good, neither to himſelf, nor to any of his.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 41.
                           
                              Correcte thy ſelfe when thou dooest offende.
                              For ſharpe correction wil thy life amende.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Whereas thou dooeſt perceiue thy ſelfe to haue dooen amiſſe, by and by

puniſhe thy ſelfe, and forgeue not thy ſelfe. Chide thy ſelfe, and ioine thy ſelf in penaunce to dooe ſome labour. For in curing and healing woundes, one grief is healed by another grief, ſo leaſt the wooundes ſhould ake, thou poureſt in ſharpe and bitter thinges whiche doe gnawe and bite. So thy reprouing and rebuking, although it bee bitter & greuous, yet it dooeth heale the vice of the minde.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 42.
                           
                              Thy frende that hath been of long continuance:
                              Though he chaunge, or his maners dooe altre.
                              Cast him not of, but haue in remē
                                 braunce:
                              His first frendſhippe, and not that chaunced after.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. With whom thou haſt had long familiar

acquaintaunce, perchaunce he is wexen another maner of felowe, & hath chaunged his olde condiciones, thou ſhalt attribute that to the neceſſitie that thou haſt been in, in times paſt leaſt thou rebuke him, although he bee not woorthie to be beloued.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 43.
                           
                              That thou maiest be the better beloued:
                              For thy benefites and good tournes bestowed.
                              Be no chorle, but kinde and amiable:
                              And vnto al menne gentle, and fauourable.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. That thou maieſt bee acceptable to al menne, be thou kinde and thankeful in offices, that is, in benefites & good tournes. For the name of a churle is hated with al menne. For ſo menne cal him, vpō whō a good tourne beſtowed

is loſt. Surelie nothing is ſo euill loſt, as that whiche is beſtowed vpon a
                              •
                            vnkinde perſone.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 44.
                           
                              Beware thou be not ſuſpicious and euer mistrusting:
                              Least thou be a wretche, al thy daies liuing.
                              For to perſones fearful, and alwaies ſuſpecting:
                              Death of al thinges is best agreing.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He whiche dooeth imagine & ſurmiſe, ſome peril towarde him, he liueth al the daies of his life a wretche. Nothing therefore is more meter for him, then death, for aſmoche as he can not liue a merie daie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 45.
                           
                              where thou buiest ſlaues to thine owne vſe.
                              
                              Remembre thei are men, and dooe them not abuſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. So vſe and handle thy ſeruauntes although thei bee bought, that thou haue in minde, that thei are menne, & no beaſtes. That thei bee bought, it was through chaunce & fortune, that thei be menne, in this poincte thei be thy equalles and felowes.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 46.
                           
                              Furthwith take the first occaſion profred.
                              Lest thou deſirest again, that thou afore refuſed.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Oportunite and occaſion, whom before Cato ſaied, to haue an hearie fore hed, is ſtreight waie to bee ſnatched vp, leaſt it withdrawe it ſelfe, and thou dooeſt aftrewarde to no purpoſe ſeeke for that, whiche before thou

diddeſt not regarde, or paſſe of.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 47.
                           
                              In the ſodein death of ſinners, haue no felicitie.
                              Happie is their death, whoſe life is without iniquite.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ If euill liuers and vicious perſones die ſodeinlie, it is a thing rather to be lamented and forowed, then to be laughed, and reioiſed at. Wee ought ſooner to be glad, & merie in the death of good menne, whoſe death is happie and fortunate.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 48.
                           
                              To the that art maried, this I ſaie.
                              If after thou fortune, for to decaie. Bragge not of frendes great nor ſmal.
                              But vtterlie forgette them, as thou haddest none at al.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. 
                           
If thou beyng a poore man, haſt a wife, of whom men ſpeake ſhreudely ſuppoſe the name of a riche frend, to bee auoided as enemie to thy good fame and honeſtie. For thou ſhalte ſeme vnder this cloke, to ſet out thy wife to plaie the harlot, for ſome lucre and gaines. And by this meanes dooe riche men allure vnto theim the wiues of poore men.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 49.
                           
                              If thou by ſtudie, haſt learned any thing.
                              Learne more ſtill, that thou lacke not vnderſtandyng.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The more thinges thou haſt learned, bee ſo moche the more ſtudious, to learne and knowe mo thinges, leſt thou ſeme vnapte to bee taughte any thing.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cato. 50.
                           
                           
                              Maruaill not, that in fewe woordes my verſes I write.
                              For in ſhorte ſentences, my purpoſe was to endite.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A ſentence or vnderſtandyng of a thing, is to bee expouned with plain woordes. For we dooe better cary awaie in our remembraunce, thoſe thinges that bee brief and ſhorte. Therefore it pleaſed the aucthour, to comprehende one precept, in euery twoo verſes, in plain wordes, that it might be the more open and brief.
                        ¶ The ende of the preceptes of Cato.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           ¶ To his louyng frende, Robert Burrant, William wright ſendeth greting.
                        
                        WHen I had read the Prudent woorke of aunciente Cato, with the annotacions of the greate Clerke Eraſmus vpon theſame, (my louyng Burrāt) whiche into our maternall and Engliſhe toungue, by you tranſlated of late, you ſente me, and whiche ye haue with no leſſe labour, then politique profite, ſet forth and cauſed to bee diuulgate, whereby many take not onely pleaſure in the readyng thereof, but alſo learnyng, wiſedome, and ferther vnderſtandyng yet thei maie not onely learne, how to teach other: but alſo how to frame and order themſelues in euery condicion: I thought it mete or rather neceſſarie, to moue you to ſet your ferther induſtrie and diligence, to communicate therwithal, the ſage ſaynges of the ſeuen wiſemen, whiche if

thei he in like ſort ſet foorthe, in our vulgare toungue, thei ſhall not onely ſtirre men (for the greate poinctes of wiſedome therein conteined) to like wiſedome, knowelege, and good maners: but alſo to inſtructe them in diuerſe feactes of worldely pollicies, whereby thei maie auoide daiely, diuerſe and ſondrie daungers, as theſe wiſe menne haue proued, whiche had long experience of the ſame.
                        In conſideracion wherof, when I had pondered this with the commoditie of Philoſophie, whiche in their ſaiynges, is full plentie: & perceiued how that in all troubles, it is a preſente remedy: and an inwarde liuely coumfort, to haue the poſies & dicties of wiſedome, afore mennes yies, as that excellent Philoſopher Ariſtotle in his pollitiques dooeth teſtifie, ſaiyng: if a man deſire by himſelf to bee coumforted, let him ſeke that remedy from none other where, then of Philoſophie. And how that theſe preceptes

of wiſedome and good nurture (as Fauſtus and other dooe teſtifie) was brought by Socrates firſt vnto light emong men, wherby men be brought from carnall and ſenſuall affeccions to a humain & honeſt trade of liuyng: I thought it my part to ſignifie vnto you, of theſe .vii. wiſemen, their coū
                           trey, nature, and behauiour, to the intent you ſhould bee more willyng to ioigne them with your former boke, whiche thing I dooe not ſo largely amplifie and ſet foorthe in length, as I mighte dooe, or as hereafter (if it ſhalbee thought expedient) maie bee dooen, for becauſe that it might bee thought of ſome other, not ſo neceſſarie, or els to tedious.
                        But to ſpeake of our .vii. wiſemen, whoſe names after the common ſorte and acceptacion bee theſe, Thales Mileſius, Solon Salaminius, Chilon Lacedemonius, Pittacus Mitileneus, Bias Prienenſis, Cleobulus Lindius, Periāder corinthius. Theſe

be the .vii. wiſemen, that commonly be ſo named, although that ſome writers (as Hirnippus in his booke de Sapientibus) dooeth adiotgne vnto theſe aforeſaied, Epimenidem, Anacharſim, and other mo. So likewiſe Hippobotus in his deſcripciō of philoſophers, dooeth numbre & accoūpt, Orpheus, Linus, Epicharmus, and Pithagoras with other mo, emong theſe ſeuen. Neuertheleſſe theſe ſeuē firſt named haue gotten the garlande, and are as chief allowed & receiued.
                        Thales named Mileſius, was called the firſt wiſeman (as Plato doeth teſtifie) as afore the other, and hath his ſurname of Miletus, a Citie in Grece, from whence the moſte precious woulles and felles doe come: beyng of a noble family and ſtocke, called familia Theledarū, he was after a Citezen of Miletus, a Citie in the borders of Ionia in Grece. This Thales, after long experience, had in the affaires of the citie, gaue himſelf to

the ſtudie and contemplacion, of naturall thinges, a man excellētly learned in Philoſophie and Aſtronomie, whiche wroughte of the progreſſion and mocion of the ſunne. &c. And the Equinoctiū, the firſt emong thē that ſearched out the ſecretes of Aſtrologie (as ſome dooe write) whiche was the firſt likewiſe, that comparing the Moone & her ſubſtaunce to the ſunne affirmed the Moone to bee the ſeuen C.xx. part of the Sunne. The firſt alſo eſtemed of them, that diſcribed the triangle: the firſt that founde out the courſe and time of the yere, diuidyng it into .iii. C. lxv. daies, as ſome dooe affirme and ſaie, with other thinges mo. This Thales affirmed himſelf moche bound to fortune for .iii. thinges. Firſte, that he was borne a man, and not a beaſt: the ſecond, a man and not a woman: the thirde a Greke and a free man, and not a Barbarous or bonde man. He floriſhed aboute the ſeuen .C.xl. yere afore the birthe of

Chriſte. And in long experience of worldly wiſedome, and knowelege of naturall thinges exerciſed, after died beyng of the age of .xc. yeres as Socrates dooeth write.
                        Solō called Salaminius of Salaminia an Iſlāde in the ſea called Euboice, of the whiche Virgill in the firſte twoo verſes of the .vi. booke of Aeneidos, maketh mencion, directly almoſte againſt Athens. This Solon ordred moſte holie and godlie lawes emong the Atheniens, & moſte abhorred tirannie, & decreed that thei that did not coumforte and fede their parētes, ſhould be takenfor caſtawaies likewiſe thoſe that ſold their landes and patrimonie: And that the childrē of all ſoche, as did die and periſhe in battaill for the common wealthe, ſhould of the communes be broughte vp and nouriſhed: whereby men were wonderfully animated and couraged to fight for their countries. He floriſhed aboute .vii. C. xiiii. yeres, afore

Chriſtes birthe, and was a while Prince of Athens: At whiche time he gaue and ordred certain Lawes emong thē full of wiſedome. He liued lxxx. yeres, and died in Cipres, an Iſlelande of greate fame, ſette in the ſea, betwene Cilicia and Siria about iiii. C. xxvii. miles in compaſſe, commaundyng his folkes (as Diogenes dooeth teſtifie of him) to cary his bones into Salaminia his awne countrie, there to burne theim to Aſhes, and to caſt them abroade therin.
                        Chilon called Lacedemonius, of a toune in Peloponeſt, made very good Preceptes, whoſe counſaill ye ſhall reade herafter. He was brief in ſpeakyng and ſentencious, and ſo of him came the Prouerbe, Chilonia Breuitas, he was about ſeuen hundred and xiiii yeres before Chriſt.
                        Pittacus called Mytileneus, of Mitilene, a citie in the Iſlelande of Leſbos, of which citie now the whole coūtrie of Leſbos is called Mitilene

after that citie. He was ordeined of them of Mitilene his citie, the chief gouernour thereof, whiche when he had gouerned .x. yeres, he gaue it ouer frely. When his ſoonne Tirrhous by chaunce, ſat in a Barbours ſhoppe at Cumes, & by an axe caſt at him was ſlain: the partie ſo taken and bounde for a murderer, was brought to this Pittacus his father for iudgemente: whiche lo
                              〈…〉
                            him and let him go, ſaiyng, pitie is to be preferred afore vē
                           geaunce: ſhewyng in this and other like, greate clemencie and pitie, to be ſhewed in factes ignorauntly dooen. He was ſeuen .C. yeres and mo afore Chriſte, and liued the full age of. lxx and ſo died, and at Leſbos is buried.
                        Bias called Prienes of Priene, a water toune, ſometime vpon the ſea ſide ſituate. This Bias of ſome is preferred for wiſedome afore the other. This Bias wrought for the defence of his countrie and citie this feacte. when that his countrie was beſieged

of one Aliaet, he cauſed twoo Mules to be throughly fed, and ſo preſented thē to Aliaet the king, whiche wondered that thei had yet beaſtes lefte emong them ſo fatte, wherby he was minded to leaue his beſiegyng therof And ſēt a ſpie into the citie, to view their ſtate & condicion, whiche, whē Bias perceiued a ſpieto come emong them, he cauſed greate heapes of grauell, to be couered with wheate, and ſhewed theim to the kinges meſſenger. Then the king therupon entered with theim, and concluded together a peace, and ſo by his policie the citie was ſaued. He was a very earneſt Orator, and medled but in good cauſes he died in the lappe of his nephewe, whom the Citie honourably buried: whoſe counſailles are many and full of witte and prudēce. He was in the time of the other aforeſaied.
                        Cleobulus an Aſiā, borne in the citie of Lindus in Caria, a Region of the leſſer, Aſia, betwixt Liſia & Ionia, beyng

in the middeſt of the Sea. As in his awne Epiſtle directed to Solon (as in Diogenes ye maie reade) he plainly declareth. He was a cleane perſone of ſtrength and comelineſſe, he wrote (as Diogenes teſtifieth) iii. C. verſes and ſentences of wiſe doine. He liued ſeuentie yeres, full of experience and humain wiſedom, leauyng many monumentes & teſtimonies of his wiſedome behinde.
                        Periander Corinthius, borne at Corinthus a citie of Achaia in the Eaſte. There were three of the name (as Apollidorus doeth write) the firſt in Theſſalia: The ſeconde in Epiro now called Albania, & ſometime Me loſſa: the thirde in Elide, nobilitated greatly by the Epiſtles of S. Paule directed to the menne therof, a citie ſometime of greate fame and richeſſe This Periander of great fame emōg them, wrote two hundred verſes and ſentences of prudēce, a man of great power. He liued (after ſome writers)

fower ſkore yeres, and then deceaſſed whoſe diuerſe ſentences Diogenes dooeth ferther at large deſcribe and gather.
                        Thus partly I haue opened the condiciō of theſe ſeuen wiſemen: to you reſteth onely their prudent counſailes, to bee diuulgate, wherein if you take peines, as you haue dooen with prudēt Cato, you ſhall not onely get your ſelf a name immortall: But deſerue of God merite, and of learned and vnlearned worthie thankes, for ſo commune and publique a benefite.
                        Thus fare you well, from Chepyng Wichambe the firſte daie of Marche,
                            
                           by your olde louer William Wright.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                     ¶ The ſage and prudent ſaiynges of the ſeuen wiſemen, and firſt of Periander.
                     
                        
                           Periander. 1.
                           
                              PRofite from honeſtie, dooeth neuer diſſeuer.
                              Theſe twoo from eche other, doo neuer differ.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. As who would ſaie, thei are to bee ſuppoſed and coumpted no true gotten gooddes, that are not gotten by honeſt meanes and waies. And their vſe and poſſeſſion to be vnprofitable for aſinoche as their winnyng was vnhoneſt. Whereof ye maie learne, that nothing is profitable, excepte theſame alſo be honeſt.
                     
                     
                        
                           Periander. 2.
                           
                              The richer a man is in ſubſtaunce. Of cares the more is his abundance.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. That is, the more richeſſe and ſubſtaunce,

a man hath in his poſſeſſion the more hede and care he taketh, how he maie beſtowe them, to his beſt aduauntage & lucre, or els how he maie theſame ſaufly kepe from theues and other daungers.
                     
                     
                        
                           Periander. 3.
                           
                              To wiſhe to die, is an euill propretie. And to feare death, is more miſerie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. I coumpt that perſone a deſperate wretche, who for any trouble & miſerie in this world, be it neuer ſo great or painfull, will wiſhe willingly his death, as though the grace of God, were not hable to deliuer him, if it ſo pleaſed his godhed. But yet of bothe he is the more wretche, whiche is alwaies in feare of death, and doeth not willingly depart from the filthie carcaſſe, whē his ende & deſtinie is come.
                     
                     
                        
                           Periander. 4.
                           
                              Gladly and willingly dooe not refuſe.
                              
                              Any thing to dooe, if thou canſt none other chooſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           burrant. It is a worlde to ſee, the frowarde condicion of ſome churliſhe and croked perſones, who although thei ſee none other remedie, but that thei muſt nedes do the thing put to their charge, yet will thei with a ſhreude loke & a peruerfe anſwere do theſame and that alſo to no purpoſe, when it ſhould tourne more to their commē
                           dacion and profite, to do it willingly.
                     
                     
                        
                           Periander. 5.
                           
                              If thou be terrible to many men.
                              Then of many beware again.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. He that is in aucthoritie and power, and by crueltie and tirannie cauſeth many, whiche are his ſubiectes, to dread and feare him, ſoche a one hath good cauſe to feare & take hede, leaſt ſome or other of theſe many, or els

al thei together conſpire his deſtructiō
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Periander. 6.
                           
                              If fortune helpe the, be thou not haultie.
                              If fortune harme the be thou not heuie
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. None other thing in this is ment, but that in thinges proſperous and luckie we ſhould be neuer a deale the prouder, then if thei had not chaunced ſo happelie. And again when our matiers and buſineſſes frame not as we would haue them, we ought not to bee diſcomfeited. But to take a good harte vnto vs, and to hope that the worlde wil amende with vs, and were better.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Bias. 1.
                           
                              
                                 I Praiethe, what is the chiefest of al goodneſſe?
                              A minde that alwaies knoweledgeth vprightenes.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. 
                           
This is aſmoche to ſaie, as that if a manne would demaunde of me what thing were beſt and moſt principall to bee deſired of God, whereby he might be counted happie in this life. An anſwere I maie well and diſcretly make him, an vpright and true dealing conſcience.
                     
                     
                        
                           Bias. 2.
                           
                              what is to manne his greatest deſtruction?
                              Onelie another manne, his daielie companion.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. A, ſee here how an Heathen hath lefte in writing the greateſt miſchiefe that reigneth emong vs Chriſtians, that is lacke of Charitie, through whoſe defaulte by backbiting, ſlaundering, falſe accuſacion, extorcion, and by oppreſſing of the poore ſimple people, one manne ſemeth to deuoure another like rauing woulues.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Bias. 3.
                           
                              who is riche? He that nothing coueteth.
                              who is poore? He that euer deſireth.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. What a poore worlde is this then that we are in now, in whom all degrees of men are wholie ſette in couetuouſneſſe, no one holding him ſelfe content with his ſtate and condicion but euer hinching and pinching, catching, and crauing of the filthie mucke of this worlde, not perceiuing that the true treaſure and riches ſtandeth in the good diſpoſition of theſame, and not in the vnlawefull poſſeſſion of it, and that he is onely riche, whiche can thā
                           kefullie walke in the vocation wherunto Chriſte hath called him.
                     
                     
                        
                           Bias. 4.
                           
                              Of a woman what is the fairest dowrie?
                              
                              To haue ledde her life in chastitie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. ¶ If this be true (as it is in dede) then how ſhamefullie are thei deceiued, who thinke themſelues to haue had a riche mariage in wedding an olde ſhrifolde trotte with .ii. or .iii. C. poundes, hauing manie a leude condicion & qualitie & not without many a ſoure looke and croked woorde. And ſhal I thinke any leſſe of him whiche for like lucre, wil not ſticke to taſt of thoſe veſſels the whiche another hath broched to his hāde alreadie? But that wife ſemeth to me wel endowed, who is louing and obedient to her houſebande, wel mannered, and in like wiſe chaſt and continent.
                     
                     
                        
                           Bias. 5.
                           
                              whom ſhal I deme to liue in chastitie? Of whom fame is afraied to make a lie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. 
                           
If thou wilt knowe how the markette goeth, thou muſt learne that of theim that bought and ſolde in the market. So in likemaner if thou wilt knowe the qualities and conuerſaciō of a woman, aſke of her neighbours that dwelle about her, or of her familiars that are daielie contierſaunte with her, for that woman is ſhreudelie to be ſuſpected whiche of many is euil reported.
                     
                     
                        
                           Bias. 6.
                           
                              what is the woorke of a wiſe man?
                              Not ones to wil to dooc hurte when he can.
                              what is a fooles guiſe and propretie?
                              To wiſhe to dooe hurte, not hable to dooe any.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. How neceſſarie is it then that diſcretion and wiſedome bee in a prince and ruler hauing aucthoritie & power. For aſmoche as in ſoche degree he is

of might and habilite to auenge his owne quarel vpon whom he liſte, and to hurte and diſpleaſe whom he liſt, if reaſon and wiſedom would not otherwiſe rule him. For what would a malicious and a fooliſh catiefe dooe if he had might and power, whiche when he hath none, wil wiſh al the diſpleaſure that he can to a manne?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Pittacus. i.
                           
                              HE to ſpeake wel ſhalbe nothing conning.
                              That wil not knowe to leaue his babling.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. I dooe thinke it no leſſe, yea rather more conning in charming of a mans toungue, in being ouermoche liberall and talkatiue, then in farmyng of theſame to ſpeake in place and time conuenient.
                     
                     
                        
                           Pittacus. 2.
                           
                           
                              I had rather of one good manne to be praiſed.
                              Then of many euill menne to bee commended.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. It pitieth me to ſee the vaine glorie of ſome fooliſh perſons, who be readie to flie ſtraight into heauen, becauſe thei are of many praiſed and commē
                           ded, when peraduenture thei are but idiotes themſelues that praiſe theim. Therefore regarde is not to bee had how many geue praiſe, but what perſones, whether thei be wiſe or fooliſhe, good or bad. For it is a great reproche for an honeſt manne to be praiſed of vnthriftes.
                     
                     
                        
                           Pittacus. 3.
                           
                              He is a madde manne that will haue enuie.
                              At any proude perſones proſperitie.
                           
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                         
                           Burrant. 
                           
I counte him not onelie fooliſhe, but a very madde mā, and a brainſicke felowe in dede, that will any thing at al bee vexed or moued with the good ſucceſſe and chaunce of leude perſons. For a wiſe man maie wel vnderſtande that if there wer any goodnes in ſoche happineſſe (if I maie ſo cal it) euil diſpoſed perſones would not ſo earneſtlie deſire it, for good thinges thei alwaies abandon and reiecte, and euill thinges as treaſures thei enhaunce and magnifie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Pittacus. 4.
                           
                              Madde is he that taketh any pleaſure At anothers griefe or dolour.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. Should I not counte him as mad, and as fooliſh that reioiſeth at anothers mannes miſfortune, when he knoweth that it maie aſwel fal to his lotte to be in the ſame daunger? As if one being in the ſea, ſawe another in ieoperdie of drouning, Were it not a

madneſſe for him to laughe at the others dooinges, he being in the ſame ſea, and nigh the ſame peril? We haue more nede to lamente foraſmoche as we haue deſerued far greater diſpleaſures, then thei whiche are fallen into them alreadie. And again miſfortunes are not ſo rare now a daies, that thei ſhould cauſe any laughter, for the multitude of them dooeth cauſe many a ſore weping yie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Pittacus. 5.
                           
                              To obeie that lawe, be not agreued. whiche vpon other menne, thou hast decreed.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. ¶ There is nothing that geueth as more readie occaſion to breake any lawe or ordinaunce, then for the lawe maker himſelf the ſame firſt to violate. For if it were reaſonable & iuſt, why ſhould he ſticke to doe it for the good enſample of other? If it be vniuſte, & unreaſonable, then dooeth he not the

office and duetie of a good gouernour ordeined by God, to rule in al equite his people.
                     
                     
                        
                           Pittacus. 6.
                           
                              Many frendes ſhalt thou get in thy proſperitie.
                              Fewe frendes ſhalt thou finde in thine aduerſitie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. It is a thing by daielie experience proued, than while we haue of al thinges plentie, and thinges frame well with vs, euery manne wilke readie to ſhewe vs pleaſure, euery manne wilbe our frende, and call vs couſins. But if it happen otherwiſe then wel with vs thei flie awaie from vs, as from their enemies, & looke ſtraungelie on vs, as though thei neuer had been acquainted with vs. Wherefore let a man eſteme him for a perfeicte and truſtie frende, that will in ſoche caſe ſticke by him. Ouide cōpaueth ſoche flattering frendes

vnto Pigions, who as long as the doufehouſe is freſhe and newe, thei abide and haunt there, but if it beginne ones to were olde and rotten, thei witflie a waie from it to another.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Cleobulus. 1.
                           
                              HOW moche the more thou art of abilitie.
                              So moche the more restrain thy libertie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrart. ¶ I would that all that are ſette in power and aucthoritie, would daielie haue before their yies, yea rather in their hartes and mindes, this ſaiyng writen, for euery litle faulte is ſoone ſpied in them, and that to the great example of other inferiour perſones to dooe euil. He is woorthie to bee a gouernour, who can withdrawe his own deſire, and rule his affection, when he hath moſte libertie to dooe naught.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cleobulus. 2.
                           
                           
                              It is imputed to fortunes hatred. when a good manne is in trouble vndeſerued.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. It is a commune thing emong men when a poore honeſt manne hath ſuffred any wrong or diſpleaſure at the mightiers hande, to ſaie, ſoche was his fortune and chaunce. Thei might rather ſaie, ſoche was the vnmercifulneſſe of the mightie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cleobulus. 3.
                           
                              He that is made happie by any crime
                              His happines he enioieth no long time.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. Howe long dooeth the thefe enioie his robberie? What long pleaſure hath tha fornicatour and adulterar? the periured perſon, doeth he long proſpere? what ſaie ye to the glutton and dronkarde, is not their delightes ſoone enbed, when thei are with ſome greate diſeaſe moleſted, or with ſodein death

choked? Take what kinde of ſinne ye wil, and ſee whether the felicitie and ioie therof is not ſodeiulie, and with a trice finiſhed.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cleobulus. 4.
                           
                              Forgeue other to the ofte offending.
                              But they ſelfe forgeue not in any euill dooinge.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. In dede ſo ſhould wee Chriſtians doe, but we rather dooe the contrarie, reuenging al that wee can our neighbour offēding againſt vs, not diſpleaſed a whit with our own faultes. And wee can quickelie eſpie a litle offence dooen by another, but our owne treſpaſſed, be their neuer ſo heinous & abominable, we wil winke at them, cloke thē, & be nothing haſtie to amende thē.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cleobulus. 5.
                           
                              whoſoeuer wil good men fauour.
                              Of euil perſons, he wil be a perſecutour
                           
                        
                        
                        
                           Burrant. Loke whatſoeuer thing a man entirelie loueth, he will theſame ſaflie kepe, and defende from ſoche thinges as maie deſtroie and hurte it. As if 
                              〈◊〉
                            man loue gaie appearel, he wil prouide a medicine for mothes. If he ſette by moueie, he will make it ſure from theues, and dooe all that he can to hange them. If he loue the trueth of Goddes woorde, and the profeſſours of Godlie doctrine, he wil be an earneſt perſecutour of Idolatours, Papiſtes, Heretikes, & ſchiſmatikes. For he truelie and vnfeinedlie fauoureth good men, who take awaie that whiche moſt offendeth them, that is euil diſpoſed perſons.
                     
                     
                        
                           Cleobulus. 6.
                           
                              For thy fathers merites, no manne will the commende.
                              But for thy fathers euil dedes, thei wil the reprehende.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. 
                           
If thy father and mother were good and honeſt, & thou thy ſelfe art a leude perſone and an vnthrifte: Here the goodneſſe of thy parentes dooeth nothing commende the, and no man will ſet the more ſtore by the for that cauſe. But if thy father were a cockolde, or thy mother a cockequeane, perchaunce ſome would not ſticke to cal thebaſtard or whoreſoonne, caſting in thy teethe thy parēties faulte, when thou couldeſt dooe nothing therewithal.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Chilon 1.
                           
                              
                                 I wil not the leſſer to feare me in any wiſe.
                              Nor the greater me for to deſpiſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. Great hede is to be taken in whatſoeuer ſtate & condicion a man is conuerſaūt, how he maie ſo ordre and moderate his faſhion of liuing, that he by his tirannie and cruell dealing dooe

not alien from him the hartes of his ſubiectes. And again that he diſpleaſe not the higher powres, whereby he maie bring him ſelfe in an hatred and diſdeine, and alſo be had in litle reputation whiche wil cauſe a manne to wiſhe himſelfe out of his life.
                     
                     
                        
                           Chilon,. 2
                           
                              Liue alwaies, death ſo remembring.
                              That of thy health thou maiest not be forgetting.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. How careles are wee now a daies whom no plage, no peſtilence, no mur
                           
                              •
                           en, no kinde of death at al being neuer ſo frequent and oft before our yies, can cauſe vs to remembre our ſinfull life? Mee wholie forget our health, ſeking after our continual death & euerlaſting miſerie. I would euery Chriſtian would ſo forſake ſinne, asthough he ſhould die within an houre, and ſo to applie his earneſt ſtudie to earneſt occupacions, as though he ſhould alwaies

liue.
                     
                     
                        
                           Chilon. 3.
                           
                              Either with a mery harte ouercome all heauineſſe.
                              Or with a faithfull frende riddeal carefulneſſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. If a greate burden were laied vpō my backe, that muſt nedes be caried, were it not more to praiſe, either to deſire ſome other to helpe to beare with me, or els with all the might I haue ſtrongly to go through with it, then like a wretche to lie donne vnder it? Euen ſo in like caſe, better it were and more wiſedome for a man, that is in ſorow and care, either with the familiaritie and companie of his frende, through his counſaill to eaſe theſame, or with a cherefull harte to beare it out, and make lighte of it, then like a mecoke to ſhrinke, or bee in any deſpaire.
                     
                     
                        
                           Chilon. 4.
                           
                              If thou haſt dooen a benefite.
                              To rehearſe the ſame it is not mete.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. This leſſon is good for all churles who will be ſure to dooe to no man a good tourne, but either thei bee with like or better required, either els thei to whom thei haue dooen good, ſhalbe ſure to heare of it. Mee haue like almoſe men, whoſe left hand doeth not onely knowe what the righte hande dooeth, but as ſeldome as he doeth it, all the worlde knoweth it, or els how ſhould thei be coūpted goddes men.
                     
                     
                        
                           Chilon. 5.
                           
                              when olde age is like youthe frolike and luſtie.
                              Then is it pleaſaunt and louyng.
                              when youthe is like olde age, frowarde and crabbie.
                              
                              Then is it dumpiſhe and lowryng.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. And hereby he dooeth ſhewe that olde men beyng mery and cherefull, are more to be eſtemed, then a young man teſtie and frowarde. For moche bigger and longer is the harte of a young oke, then of an olde beche. And ſo ſharper and ſourer are the lokes of a young manne, then of an olde, and longer doeth the ire of thone endure, then of the other.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Solon. 1.
                           
                              THen I coumpt our life bleſſed and happie.
                              when we haue ended our fate and deſtenie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. Wonderfull it is to ſee with what ſtudie and laboure many a fooliſhe perſone goeth aboute to make himſelf happie in this tranſitorie life, & thinke to get a quiete place and time

to reſt. And whē thei haue toiled and laboured all that thei maie, the greateſt happineſſe that maie poſſible in this life be atteined to, is very miſerie, & the quieteſt reſt moſte troubleſome pein and vexacion, in cōpariſon of that thei ſhal haue after their deth if thei die well and like chriſtians.
                     
                     
                        
                           Solon. 2.
                           
                              Marrie a wife that is thine equall. The vnequall dooeth at variaunce fal
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. If thou marieſt a wife richer then thy ſelf, remembre that ſhe will vpbraied thee of beggerie, and auaunce her habilitie. If thou marieſt a poorer, ſhe will anone bee cockyng with thee, and be ready to bee maſter ouer thine awne gooddes. And will not ſticke to ſaie that although ſhe had no ſubſtaunce, yet her good qualities deſerued a better then thou art. But one poincte for thy learnyng in this caſe take of the Ploughman, whiche

yoketh his oxen by like couples, leaſt one ſhould be a let vnto the other by inequalitie. The perfeicteſt and the ſureſt loue and frendſhip that is, cometh together by equall matches.
                     
                     
                        
                           Solon. 3.
                           
                              Honors ought neuer to come by chaūce
                              But by vertues awne procuraunce.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. Many a one cometh to promocion and dignitie, euē by very chaunce of the worlde. As ſome by falſe diſyng come to riches, ſome by flattryng to honor and dignitie, ſome by mariage of an olde riche widowe, to great ſubſtaunce: But how many come to any good eſtimacion by good feactes and qualities, by godlie liuyng & wholeſome doctrine? For the true honour ought to be the reward of vertue and not of fortune, who oftimes extolleth, and magnifieth the moſte lewdeſt perſones.
                     
                     
                        
                           Solon. 4.
                           
                           
                              Rebuke thy neighbour priuely.
                              And theſame dooe thou praiſe openly.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. Maie not we chriſtians be aſhamed to haue the writinges of Gentiles & Heathens reprouyng, and condemnyng the ſpitefull ſlaunders, and enuious backbitynges of one neighbor of another, and how ſeldom it is ſeen one to ſaie well by another, or one to praiſe another: and can bee imputed to none other cauſe, then the lacke and wante of Charitie, and the great abundaunce of plentifulneſſe of malice and enuie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Solon. 5.
                           
                              It is a Godlier thing nobilitie to winne.
                              Then to be borne of a noble kinne.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. The vnlearned people when thei ſee a man of baſe birthe, and lowe degree to come to any promocion and

dignitie. Their ſaiyng is, beholde, a newe founde gentleman now of late promoted & exalted, how is he come a lofte, and had in greate eſtimacion, and gladly enterteined bothe with lordes and ladies, whoſe father beeyng a poore ſely ſoulle, full many a time hath ridde into the fielde in a doung carte, and there laboured full ſore for his liuyng, carpyng and caryng night and daie to bring him vp. But if thei had any vpright or good iudgemente, thei would rather more reioice in theim, who by their manifolde and ſingular vertues, and honeſt qualities, haue ſo attained and come to ſoche promocion and high aucthoritie, from ſo lowe and baſe degree, then ſoche, who nature onely by ſucceſſion in enheritaunce, and birtheright, hath brought foorthe a gentleman. But thei endued and garniſhed with like qualities, and vertues dooe double their nobilitie, for then thei are not onely gentlemen borne, but

alſo through verteous & good behauiors, procure vnto a higher eſtate then their aunceſtours euer had.
                     
                     
                        
                           Solon. 6.
                           
                              If fortune haue this or that ſo decreed,
                              Then to beware, or take hede what ſhall it nede.
                              But if all thinges (as thei are) bee vncertain.
                              Then to feare, and dreade it is but in vain.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. If thou mighteſt know preciſely and certainly that thou ſhouldeſt be hanged or drouned (but let vs refer that to the ſecretes of God to be determinable with him onely) it were but foly then for the to ſeke any waies and meanes to ſaue thy ſelf from ſoche daunger. But foraſmoche as thou art vncertain what thy deſtinie ſhalbe, it were a fooliſhe thing to bee in feare

and care of thy ende: and ſo by this a chriſtian maie learne to geue himſelf wholy to the mercie of God, and to put a perfeicte truſt and hope in him, that he will diſpoſe the ende to his ſoulles beſt health.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Thales. 1.
                           
                              FEare thy ſelf, although without witneſſe.
                              Thou art ſo bolde, to committe vnclenneſſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. As in the plaie of tiktacke, if the table men ſtand vpon a ſingle poinct he is in daunger of leſyng: Euen ſo euery perſone diſpoſed and beyng not a feard to dooe ſinne and naughtineſſe while he is alone, the deuill will bee buſie to tempt him, and putte him in daūger of leſyng of his ſoulle. Wher as in doublyng of his poinct, that is, in takyng ſome honeſt and godlie cō
                           paniō with him, he ſhall ſaue his mā
                           
that is to ſaie, his ſoulle, from deadly ſinne, into the whiche he had been ready to fall, if the witneſſe had not been with him.
                     
                     
                        
                           Thales. 2.
                           
                              The life of man dooeth ſone periſhe.
                              But the glorie of his death dooeth neuer diminiſhe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. Some compare the life of man to a bubble, ſome to the lightneſſe of a fether, ſome other to the gliding of a ſhadowe. And again, other there are that feineth it to hang by a heare, or a twined threde. But let theim compare it to what brittle thing ſoeuer thei wil, very ſhort it is in deede and ſone gone. Therefore, if a man will by his godlie cōuerſacion of life, and by his good dedes procure to himſelf an honeſt fame & good name, he maie liue long by the glorie of his good dedes emong men here in yearth, and through Chriſtes demerites reigne

with God euerlaſtingly.
                     
                     
                        
                           Thales. 3.
                           
                              If thou entendeſt to dooe any ſecrete thing.
                              Kepe it to thy ſelf and be not therof bablyng.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. The nature of man is now adaies ſo ſubtile, the ſtudie of euery man is for his awne profite ſo great, and ſo rare a thing it is to finde a true and a truſtie frend, that it is to harde to truſt any bodie, yea, the wiſeſt poinct of al is, for a manne entendyng any ſerious and ſecrete buſineſſe whiche ſhal tourne him to any profite, to kepe it cloſe to himſelf, and to make no man of his counſaill, leaſt he bee preuented by him, to whom he truſted beſt, and ſo be beguiled of his purpoſe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Thales. 4.
                           
                              It is a tormēt that thing to be dreaded

whiche by no meanes can be auoided.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. A thief beyng vpon the gallowes, and perceiuyng that there is no waie but one, & that there is no other reme dy, but that he muſt hang and ſwinge in an halter, if he feare in this caſe, he doeth none other but make to him ſelf a newe paire of galous while he hangeth, his minde beyng in doubte and feare of that thing that cannot be remedied, and ſo hangeth himſelf twiſe, doublyng his ſorowe & grief.
                     
                     
                        
                           Thales. 5.
                           
                              when thou dooeſt chide earneſtlie.
                              Thou dooeſt litle helpe an enemie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. As who would ſaie, it is better for a man, to haue a good cuffe of the eare of his foe, then the flattryng kiſſe of his feigned frend: for the open warre and debate, that I haue with mine enemie, is a good helpe and meanes, how to learne to beware of him, and

how to kepe my ſelf, that I come not into his reache. And ſo cā I not of my diſſemblyng frend, whiche like a venemous ſerpent, ſtingeth priuely.
                     
                     
                        
                           Thales. 6.
                           
                              Any thing to litle, is not ſufficient. But all is to litle, if thou be not content
                           
                        
                        
                           Burrant. A meane in all thinges is good and commendable. For if the thing be ouermoche and ſuperfluous, then is it not ſufficiente, foraſmoche as it cannot ſerue our tourne, and the abundaunce of it, dooeth rather hinder vs then ferther. Of the contrarie, if the thing ſhould bee ouer ſcant and litle, then are wee newe to ſeke. So that if the thing had been meane, betwene ouermoche and to litle, it had fitted vs very well.
                     
                  
                  ¶ The ende of the ſaiynges of the ſeuen wiſemen of Grece.
               
               
                  
                  The ſaiynges of Publius.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Publius. 1.
                           
                              THat perteineth to the nothing. whiche chaūceth by wiſhyng.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The meanyng of this ſaiyng is this. That whiche is gotten by oure awne labour and induſtrie, it is truely ours: but that is none of ours whiche chaunceth vnto vs by wiſhyng, foraſmuche as euery miſchaūce maie plucke it from vs again.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 2.
                           
                              Looke what thou haſt dooen to other.
                              Theſame be content, again to ſuffer.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Like as thou art vnto other, ſoche ſhall other be towarde thee.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 3.
                           
                              He that hath wit, a daunger to ſuſpect Hath knowelege enough, his awne matter to correct.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. 
                           
He that vnderſtandeth and perceiueth perill and daunger, he alſo knoweth how to beware of the ſame. For fooliſhe hardineſſe, truely doeth daū
                           gerouſly goe aboute affaires and buſineſſes. The cauſe is, ſhe knoweth not how to caſt any perill.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 4.
                           
                              That whiche is ſmall and ſlender.
                              By concorde is made ſtrenger.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Concorde and vnitie, dooeth make thinges ſtrong, yea, euen thoſe thinges that bee very weake and ſlender: of the contrarie, diſcorde and debate doeth diminiſhe very greate richeſſe and ſubſtaunce.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 5.
                           
                              Loue by the iudgement of the minde is taken.
                              But by the ſame, it is not ſo ſone forſaken.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. It is in our power, not to begin to loue, but when a man hath ones begonne, then he is as a bondman, vnto it, for he cannot ſhake it of, when he would.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 6.
                           
                              Extreme is the loue or hatred of a woman.
                              A thirde thing to bee meane, to finde no man can.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A woman is ouer vehement of bothe partes, as a beaſt alwaies ſubiect and vnder the rule of affeccions. How be it, a manne maie finde menne of ſoche condicion, and of theim not a fewe, whiche are of bothe ſides, out of meaſure extreme.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 7.
                           
                              Thei that be in pouertie and miſerie. Be alwaies ſuſpected of iniquitie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Thei that are poore and nedie, bee in the more ſuſpicion.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 8.
                           
                              Loue thy father, being gentle & kinde. If he be not ſo, obeie with harte and minde.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Loue thy father and mother, being good and louing: & ſuffre theim if thei are any thing harde and ſharpe, yea, and it be but for this cauſe onely: that thei are thy parentes.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 9.
                           
                              Conſider before, and take good hede:
                              That thou loſe by nothing, that is thy deede.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Loke what thou wilt not to be loſt the ſame ſaue and kepe. For truelie the forecaſt of the, is the beſt ſauer and keper of a thing that maie be.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Publius. 10.
                           
                              If thou ſuffrest the faultes of thy frende:
                              Then thou thyſelfe dooest offende.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. It ſhalbe imputed to the, whatſoeuer thy frende dooeth otherwiſe then wel, whereas thou geueſt him no warning therof.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 11.
                           
                              It is death to a free nature and courage:
                              To liue in another mannes bondage.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ It were an harde & a ſtraung caſe to him, to bee a bonde ſeruaunte, and gage to other, whiche is a free manne borne, and was wont to be a Maiſter ouer other.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 12.
                           
                              He dooeth a manne abſent harme:

That contendeth with a dronken man.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. For the right wittes of a dronken perſone are not preſente; with the whiche a manne maie comon. Therefore it fareth as though he were nor there himſelfe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 13.
                           
                              A louer that is moued and angrie.
                              Dooeth with himſelfe, many thinges phantaſie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. For he dooeth purpoſe many thinges in his minde, whiche he doeth not afterwarde. Burrant: As that louer Phedria did, whiche ſpake bloudie woordes, as though he would neuer haue retourned to his louer again, ſaiyng: Shal I loue her? That loueth not me? whiche loueth ſoche a one? whiche ſhutte me out of the doores? whiche would not let me in? let her goe to the Deuil, I had rather die, then loue her

again: ſhe ſhal perceiue what a felowe I am. And yet afterwarde, he was as farre in a fooles paradiſe, as euer he was before.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 14.
                           
                              The coueteous perſone, that is alwaies nedie:
                              Is himſelf cauſe of his owne miſerie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. For it cometh of himſelfe, and that willinglie, that he is poore and needie Burrant: Soche euer lacketh and wāt in greate aboundaunce, who knoweth not, how to vſe wel their ſubſtaunce.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 15.
                           
                              A louer doeth ſee, what thing to couet:
                              But that whiche is wiſedome, he ſeeth no whit.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A fonde louer dooeth deſire without iudgemente, neither pondreth nor cō
                           adereth, whether it bee profitable or

hurtful, whiche he coueteth to haue.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 16.
                           
                              A louer what he ſurmiſeth in his braine.
                              The ſame waking dreameth in vaine.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Thei whiche are in the traunce of loue, dooe of thēſelues imagine phantaſies and dreames, and flattereth thē
                           ſelues with vaine hope. Burrant. Suppoſing that for their louing hartes, thei are loued again entirelie, when peraduēture thei are hated extremelie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 17.
                           
                              If any thing chaunce, otherwiſe then wel:
                              Euery manne is readie the ſame to tel.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Sorowefull and heauie tidinges are ſoone ſpred abroade emong thecō
                           mon people. Thoſe thinges whiche are good and honeſt, with moche a doe

are beleued.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 18.
                           
                              Loue ſodenlie cannot be put awaie:
                              But by litle and litle it maie decaie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Sodeinlie and with feare, loue can not be expulſed, but it maie by leaſure ſlide and ſlippe awaie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 19.
                           
                              with a fewe teares of a louer:
                              Thou maiest ſone redeme his angre.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A louer diſpleaſed and angrie, is ſoone pacified by putting thy finger in thine yie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 20.
                           
                              Onelie a good woman thou maiest knowe:
                              when ſhe dooeth openly plaie the ſhrewe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. 
                           
¶ A woman is a wilie and a ſubtle beaſt, and for this cauſe ſhe can dooe but litle harme, when ſhe is moſte ſhreweſt and curſt opēlie. Herin he declareth none at all to be good.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 21.
                           
                              Thou maiest ſoone perceiue a perſone auaricious:
                              If thou thy ſelfe be not coueteous.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. One coueteous perſone cannot abide an other. Or elles thus: thou ſhalt not lightelie deceiue a coueteous perſone: except thou be the ſame that he is, that is, a coueteous perſone thy ſelfe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 22.
                           
                              To be wiſe, and alſo to loue:
                              Is ſcant geuen to God aboue.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. It lieth not in ones power, to loue and to be wiſe at one time. As though a manne would be madde with reaſon.

                           Burrant: For as long as a manne is in that foles paradiſe of loue, his wittes are wholie rauiſhed, his reaſon blinded and fareth like a manne that is frantique and lunatique.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 23.
                           
                              A coueteous perſone dooeth nothing wel.
                              Vntil he paſſe, either to heauen or hel.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. For when he dieth, then at length he ſuffreth other, to occupie his riches.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 24.
                           
                              Age, be it hidde neuer ſo priuie:
                              Yet at length it dooeth it ſelf diſcrie
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Olde age cannot be hidde, for time dooeth ſhewe and open al thinges.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 25.
                           
                              A coueteous manne, if he loſe any thing:
                              
                              Dooeth moche more ſtirre then one that hath vnderstanding.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A wiſe man is not diſquieted with the loſſe of gooddes, but he whiche eſtemeth and ſetteth moche by moneie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 26.
                           
                              To the coueteous manne what euill wouldest thou deſire?
                              Onelie that he might be a long liuer.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Foraſinoche as he liueth very wretchedlie. Therfore he wiſheth to a coueteous perſone, a ſhreude turne in dede: who would him long life. For the longer he liueth, the more are his troubles and cares.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 27.
                           
                              Trust not, nor haue any beliefe,
                              In thy minde, when it is in peine and griefe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ As long as thou art in anguiſhe and ſorowe, haue no confidence in thy ſelfe. For griefe and peine can in no thing geue vprighte, and indifferente counſail. Pauſe vntill the ſorowe bee ſlaked, then purpoſe and decree with thy ſelf, what thou intendeſt to ſpeake or dooe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 28.
                           
                              we delight best, with that that is others:
                              And that pleaſeth them, whiche is ours.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Euery manne is wery of his owne ſtate and condicion. He eſtemeth woū
                           derfullie that whiche belongeth to an other manne, and that in woordes onelie. But if it ſhould come to the deede dooyng, fewe would willingly chaung with other.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 29.
                           
                           
                              For a young manne to loue, it is pleaſure and pastime:
                              And for an olde man, it is a foule faulte and crime.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Loue in a young manne is a pleaſure, ſo it be honeſt and godlie. And in an aged perſone, it is an heinous vice and no pleaſure at al. Burrant. For it is one of the three thinges, that the wiſe man hateth in his ſoulle: An olde manne to be lecherous.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 30.
                           
                              An olde woman, when ſhe dooeth leape and daunce:
                              Vnto death ſhe maketh mirth and daliaunce.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Skipping and daunſing becometh not an olde woman, beeing at deathes doore, for ſhe dooeth ſeeme that ſh

would geue death a fitte of mirthe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 31.
                           
                              That whiche is the cauſe of a louers wounde:
                              Theſame again, dooeth make it whole and ſound.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The wounde and grief of a mannes hartes deſire, the very ſame perſone dooeth heale, that made it, if he ſuffre himſelf to bee wonne, alluding to the tale of Telephus. Burrant; who being wounded in the thigh, with the darte of Achilles, was by a medicine made of the ruſtineſſe of theſame darte, cured and healed again.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 32.
                           
                              He dooeth ſoone himſelfe repente:
                              whiche geueth quicke and light iudgemente.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Geue not ſentence and iudgement

ſtreight out of hande. For a man doeth often times repente, and is ſorie for his raſhe and haſtie iudgemente.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 33.
                           
                              Proſperitie dooeth gette vnto the a frende:
                              And aduerſite trieth who is vnkinde.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Proſperitie dooeth procure and get a man frendes, aduerſitie dooeth trie and ſearche out, whether thei are feigned, or true harted frendes.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 34.
                           
                              The deſire in his harte, how moche he is the cunninger:
                              In his demeaner, ſo muche he is the leuder.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. In an euill thing, how moche the more thou dooeſt excell and paſſe, ſo moche the more vnthrifte thou art. As a ſouldiour, the more feactes of warre

he hath, ſo moche the more rediar he is to dooe miſchief.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 35.
                           
                              A bowe is destroied with ouermoche bending:
                              And a mannes minde with ouermoche ſlacking.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A Bowe is ſoone broken, if thou geue him moche bent. The ſpirites of the minde are quickened, by exerciſe of good thinges, and by idleneſſe thei are confounded and dulled.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 36.
                           
                              That thing is twiſe welcome in deede:
                              whiche is voluntarilie profered in time of neede.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ A good turne with moche praier, and ſuite extorted, and hardlie obteined, hath loſt a great many of thankes. That whiche is proffered willinglie,

& by a mannes owne accorde, is twiſe welcome.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 37.
                           
                              He vniustlie dooeth a good turne deſire:
                              That knoweth not to dooe good for other.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He ought not to haue the vſe of others benefites, whiche dooeth good to no man himſelfe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 38.
                           
                              It is good by anothers mannes miſerie:
                              To learne what is best for vs to flie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Plautus in like maner ſaieth. He is wiſe happelie, whiche learneth wit by anothers miſchaunce and daunger. What thou oughteſt for to flie, that learne not of thine owne hurtes

and harmes, but take an example of anothers diſpleaſure.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 39.
                           
                              He of his owne libertie, ſale dooeth make:
                              whiche of another a good turne dooeth take.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. It is more happines for a manne to geue, then to take. For he leeſeth his libertie, whoſoeuer hath the vſe & occupiyng of another mans good turne.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 40.
                           
                              There cometh to no manne, ſo good an houre:
                              But it is to one or other, cauſe of doloure.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. No man hath any chaunce ſo luckie & fortunate, whiche dooeth not happen to ſome others hurte and diſpleaſure.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Publius. 41.
                           
                              That kinde of death is doubled.
                              whiche by another is adiudged.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Men dooe ſomewhat with a willyng and glad harte, ſuffre naturall death, but when thei are compelled to die, that death thei ſuffre grudgyngly and heauilie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 42.
                           
                              Good tournes he taketh many me.
                              That knoweth a good tourne to beſtowe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. No manne dooeth any more to them, whom he hath founde to be churles. But whom wee haue tried and proued kinde and louyng, vpon them we beſtowe greater benefites.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 43.
                           
                              Thou doeſt a double ſinne & iniquitie
                              when thy ſeruice to an offendour, thou dooeſt applie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. For thou dooeſt bothe helpe him, and alſo makeſt thy ſelf guiltie of the ſame faulte.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 44.
                           
                              A good harte, if it be diſpleaſed. It is moche more greuouſly offended.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A gentle and meke ſtomache, when it is moued and wexeth angrie, it is more earneſtly agreued (Burrāt) then a curſt harte, to whom all diſpleaſures naturall, are as a nouriſhemente and a pleaſure. For aſmoche as ſoche an harte, of nature worketh and willeth all diſpleaſure.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 45.
                           
                              That death is good and to be wiſhed.
                              By the whiche all euill is extinguiſhed
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Unto wretches and miſerable perſones, death is euen to be deſired and wiſhed for, as that whiche doth make

an ende of al their miſeries together
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 46.
                           
                              He dooeth receiue a good tourne by geuyng.
                              whiche dooeth beſtowe it vpon one deſeruyng.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Let him thinke himſelf well requited, whiche dooeth geue or beſtowe a good tourne vpō him whiche hath deſerued it. For that is neuer loſt whiche is beſtowed vpon an honeſt good felowe, in ſomoche as he wil requite thee with a like, or deſerued a better.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 47.
                           
                              The loue of a woman is ſwete and pleaſaunt.
                              wonne with faire meanes, and not by conſtraint.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. It is a gaie and pleaſant thing, whē a manne is loued again hartely, and not when a womannes good will is

obteined, by long and hard woyng.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 48.
                           
                              A good diſpoſed minde, dooeth neuer himſelf geue,
                              To their ſeruice that in ſinne doth liue.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He that is an vpright liuer, doeth neuer condeſcēde, and agree to him that is an vnthrift. Burrant. And a good cauſe why: for their condicions and qualities are repugnaunte, and their ſtudies are not like.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 49.
                           
                              To haue doen a good tourne, he that himſelf reporteth.
                              Theſame to be doen again, he ſhamefully asketh.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The remembraunce and puttyng in minde of a benefite geuen, is the condicion of him that aſketh or looketh for God haue mercies. Burrant. Yea,

and the rehearſall of a good tourne, is an vpbraidyng of a man of his vnkindeneſſe, in geuyng no thankes for his good tourne receiued, and ſo it is worthie no God haue mercies at all.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 50.
                           
                              There is the nereſt and greateſt kinred where .ii. faithfull mindes are coupled.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The mutuall beneuolence and kindeneſſe of men, doeth oft binde their hartes nerer together, then any affinitie of bloude.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius 51.
                           
                              Often times to geue a benefite.
                              Is to teache how theſame to requite.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus He that doeth many good tournes to many one, doeth with a continuaunce of dooyng good, prouoke theſame to kindeneſſe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 52
                           
                              To counterfact the wordes of goodneſſe
                              
                              Is to bee taken of moche more leudeneſſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He that is euill of conuerſacion, and in woordes Pope holie, he is more then a leude perſone. (Burrant.) For he is a very hipocrite and Phariſie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 53.
                           
                              A good name to a man is more ſure.
                              Then any worldly richeſſe or treaſure.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. It is moche more ſaufegard, to haue an honeſt good name, then worldely ſubſtaunce. Burrant. Of the whiche twoo, the one forſaketh not a manne when he is dead, the other is ſhaken of with euery light blaſt of fortune.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 54.
                           
                              Goodneſſe although it bee for the time ſuppreſſed.
                              Yet it is not for euer extinguiſhed.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. 
                           
Truthe and Iuſtice, maie for a time, be kepte vnder, but it dooeth appere at length. Burrant. As the true preachyng of Goddes woorde, hath often times been kepte in hugger mugger, and the true preachers therof put to ſilēce, yet it hath come to light again and other true Prophetes haue riſen when the olde hath been by Papiſtes and Phariſies perſecuted and ſlain.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 55.
                           
                              He hath a double victorie.
                              who ouercometh himſelf & his enemie
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He that dooeth ſoberly vſe his victorie, is twiſe a conquerour: firſte of his enemie, and then of himſelf.
                        Burrant. And this laſt victorie is the more honourable and manly, for ther is no harder thing nor better, then the ſubduyng of a mannes awne ſenſuall will.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 56.
                           
                              He that is free harted and liberall.
                              
                              Seketh an occaſion to be beneficiall.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus That man that is liberall, doeth not loke to bee deſired: but willingly and of his awne accorde, ſeketh an occaſiō to geue. Burrant. And beſtoweth his Charitie. But ſoche liberalitie now a daies, is tourned into nigardie or prodigalitie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 57.
                           
                              He is twiſe ſlain and murdered. whiche with his awne weapon is killed
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. That grief is moche greuous vnto vs, wherof we our ſelues haue miniſtred the occaſion. As if a man ſhould promote one to an office, or high dignitie, and might of theſame afterwarde be deſtroied.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 58.
                           
                              He ſlepeth quietly and at reſt. who feleth not how euill is his neſt.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Where all felyng and perſeuerance of euill is awaie, nothing there is euill, or founde a miſſe. As if a man bee fallen into a ſounde ſlepe, he feleth not the hardneſſe, or other in 
                              〈◊〉
                            commoditie of his cabon or couchet
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 59.
                           
                              That an honeſt mā is in wretchedneſſe
                              The faulte thereof is in his awne goodneſſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. If he bee in wretched caſe and miſerie, whiche liueth wel and vprightly, this thing is to bee imputed, and adiudged to his verteous liuyng, to whom (menne ſaie) that euill fortune and miſchaunce, is alwaies aduerſaūt and againſt. Or eis on this wife in theſe verſes folowyng.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 60.
                           
                              It is to good men, a greate diſhoneſtie:
                              To ſee an honeſt man liue in miſerie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. When an honeſt and vprighte man dooeth nede of thinges neceſſarie, to the ſuſtentacion and maintenaūce of his life, this tourneth to the reproche and rebuke of good menne, who haue no better regarde vnto vertue and good liuyng.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 61.
                           
                              A good name, although it bee vnknowen and in darkeneſſe.
                              Yet it kepeth ſtill, his awne cleare light and brightneſſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The praiſe and good report of good dedes cannot be hid. For it appereth in the harte it ſelf, although it liketh or pleaſeth no thing at all the opiniō and iudgement of the cōmon people.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 62.
                           
                              Good thoughtes, if thei fall out of memorie.
                              
                              Yet thei periſhe not, nor vtterly die.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Whatſoeuer good thing thou haſt purpoſed & determined in thy minde, although for the time it be forgottē, yet it dooeth not for euer periſhe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 63.
                           
                              He well and wiſely leſeth his monie when he geueth it to a Iudge, beyng guiltie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He whiche corrupteth a iudge with money, where as he is guiltie of the matier, he leſeth theſame, but yet to his awne auauntage. Therefore it is well loſt.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 64.
                           
                              Good menne he dooeth bothe hurte and greue:
                              whoſoeuer dooeth euill menne pardone and forgeue.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Greate iniurie and wrong is doen

vnto good men, when euill men art of their faultes forgeuen, and perdoned. For we ſhall haue fewer good, if it be lawful thus for vnthriftes and naughtipackes, to ſcape ſcotfree and vnpuniſhed.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 65.
                           
                              Next to the vertue of iuſtice & equitie Is cruell dealyng, and ſeueritie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. For ſeueritie and hard dealyng, is ſomwhat ſharper and ſtreighter then Iuſtice, leanyng to inclemencie, and vnmercifulneſſe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 66.
                           
                              A good mannes angre and furie, A man maie ſone alaie and pacifie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. With malicious and enuious perfones, wrathe dooeth very ſlowely weare awaie, but with good men, 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              •
                           s ſone out of minde and forgotten.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 67.
                           
                           
                              That is an honeſt and good ſhame. That ſheweth vs to auoide blame.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. It is better for a man to bee aſhamed to dooe a faulte, then after it is dooen to loth theſame, and to bee ſorie for it. That ſame is profitable by the whiche wee are reſtrained from thoſe thinges, whiche we haue daungerouſly dooen.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 68.
                           
                              For a man to haue mercie and pitie. Is to himſelf a good helpe and remedie
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He that is mercifull towardes other dooeth deſerue that other bee faudurable towardes him again, if any thing ſhall chaunce vnto him, other wiſe then well.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius 69.
                           
                              Soche thinges as men haue by them daiely.

Be litle eſtemed, and litle ſet by.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. That is of litle reputacion & naught ſet by, whiche beginneth to bee common. Nothing ought to be more precious and better regarded, then good thinges. And that truely is eſtemed, whiche is rare & ſcarſe. Burrant And this cauſeth men to make ſo moche of good wiues, and ſeruauntes, thei are ſo ſeldome and hard to finde.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius 69.
                           
                              whē thou art to the worthie beneficiall
                              Bythy goodneſſe, to the, thou bindeſt al
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A good tourne is geuen to the vertue of the perſone, and not to the perſone himſelf. And a good man dooeth vſe and occupie thy benefite, to the commoditie of all other.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 70.
                           
                              It is coumpted for a very crueltie.
                              To chide a man in aduerſitie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Our frende fallen into any greate pouertie, or hauyng any miſchaunce, is to be comforted and cheriſhed, & not to be chidden and brauled withall.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 71.
                           
                              To whom thou haſt euer geuen, and dooeſt now him deme.
                              Thou commaundeſt him to take frō thee violentlie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He whiche was wont to take rewardes and giftes, thinketh that as due debt vnto him, whiche is geuen, in ſo moche that if thou denie him, he is to ready to plucke it from the by force. This perteineth proprely to catchepolles.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 72.
                           
                              The pacientes euill diete and intemperauncie.
                              Maketh the Phiſiciō to handle him more vngentlie.
                           
                        
                        
                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                        
                           
The euill rule of the pacient, dooeth cauſe that the Phiſicion can none other chouſe, but to goe vnto ſharper remedies, as cuttyng, ſearyng, and ſoche like.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 73.
                           
                              His life to his frendes is odious.
                              who of his death are deſirous.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. His life muſt nedes be hatefull & ſpited, whoſe death, his awne frendes deſire and wiſhe after. Burrāt. As many an vnnaturall ſonne willeth the ſpedie death of his father, for becauſe he might come by his landes. And many an vnlouyng houſbande, the death of his wife which is old & crabbed, that he might haue a younger in her place
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius 74.
                           
                              No manne dooeth ſone come again into fauour.
                              with his enemie, that waiteth him a

diſpleaſure.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. An enemie is not by and by to bee truſted. The beneuolence and frendeſhippe of menne is ſoone ſette aparte, but it is not ſo lightelie made at one again. And anger of all other thinges dooeth moſt ſlowelis weare awaie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 75.
                           
                              A manne cometh the ſooner into an haſarde.
                              when of the ſame he hath no regard.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A miſchaunce dooeth rather hurts and harme them, who dooeth litle regarde it, then thoſe who take hede, and be therof ware.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 76.
                           
                              Of her housbande, a chast wife and continent:
                              Dooeth obteine her purpoſe, beyng obedient.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A chaſt wife doeth obteine this by hee gentleneſſe, that loke whatſoeuer ſhe wōuld her houſbande to doe, he doeth it. Burrant: And ſhe dooeth ſooner obteine, when ſhe is obedient, then whē ſhe requireth or demaundeth, being in obediente.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 78.
                           
                              The proude mannes pompe and glorie:
                              Is ſoone tourned into ſhame and ignomie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. An euill reporte and name dooeth alwaies enſue and folowe, ſtatelineſſe and pride, and he that inſolentlie and proudelie dooeth vſe his renoume and praiſe, theſame dooeth ſtumble & fall into ſhame and rebuke.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 79.
                           
                              Thou ſhalt more winne by good counſailing:
                              
                              Then thou ſhalt by brauling and chiding.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Anger is euer haſtie and hedlong: wiſedome and good aduiſemente, is peaceable and colde. By her thou ſhalt ſooner woorke thy wil, then by raſheneſſe and furiouſneſſe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 80.
                           
                              Sufferaunce and pacience:
                              Is to euery grief a defence.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Euery anguiſhe and peine, is eaſed by pacience. Diſeaſes haue ſome one remedie, & ſome another. But pacience is the cōmon eaſement of al euilles.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 81.
                           
                              wheras vice with vngraciouſneſſe auaileth.
                              There he that dooeth wel, offendeth.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Wheras it is neceſſarie for menne

to plaie the knaues, there it woulde hinder them, to ſhewe themſelues honeſt men. And where vnthriftines is rewarded, there goodneſſe is puniſhed.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 82.
                           
                              It is eaſier to be diſpleaſed for goodnes:
                              Then to be beaten for fooliſhneſſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Better it is for a manne to be diſpleaſed for vertue and honeſlie, then to dooe any fooliſh poincte: for the one he ſuffreth vniuſtlie, and for the other he is puniſhed woorthelie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 83.
                           
                              A mery companion, that can talke and clatter:
                              Vpon the high waie is in ſtede of a horſelitter.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A iocant and a merie talker dooeth cauſe that a manne dooeth not fele the werineſſe of the waie, euer
                              •
                            as though

he were caried in an horſeliter, or chariot.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 84.
                           
                              The welfare of a wicked perſone:
                              Soone cometh to confuſion.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The felicitie and proſperous eſtate of euil perſones dureth no long time.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 84.
                           
                              He to life laieth a fault and blame:
                              whiche by death would be ridde of the ſame.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He ſemeth to blame his life, whiche deſireth to die. Burrant. Howbeit, the fault is not to bee laied vnto life, but to our ſelues, whiche liue ſo wretchedlie, that we be wery of our life, & deſire rather to bee quicke vnder the yearth, then to liue in ſoche miſerie, whiche we haue righteouſlie deſerued, for our iniquitie and ſinne.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Publius. 86.
                           
                              He that aboue the lawe hath might wil borowe a litle more then right.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ To whom is ſuffred more then right and lawe, he taketh more vpon him, then either he ought or hath nede ſo to dooe. This maie be wel applied to tirauntes and wiues. Burrant. For the more that a Tiraunte is ſuffered, and not withſtande, the more cruell he is. So of a ſhreude wife, the longer her toung is vncharmed, and her fooliſhe paſſions not ſuppreſſed, the more ſhre wiſhe and curſt ſhe is. Wherefore, happie and alſo wiſe is he, that can take her vp in her wedding ſhoes, leaſt afterwarde, ſhe taking a litle harte of grace, bee without al hope of amendemente.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 87.
                           
                              The daie that cometh nexte after:
                              Is to the daie before as a ſcholer.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. By daielie experience of thinges, we bee made euery daie wiſer and wiſer. Burrant: For loke what we did amiſſe this daie, wee maie learne how to amende the ſame the nexte daie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 88.
                           
                              To chide a manne, when he is in aduerſitie:
                              Is to hurte him, when he hath nede of remedie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. When our frende is in trouble, and needeth helpe, then to chide and braule with him, is no helpe, but harme vnto him. Firſt he is to bee quieted out of his trouble, and aftrewarde to be rebuked, that through his owne follie he fel into ſoche buſineſſe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 89.
                           
                              Battail is to be prepared leaſurlie:
                              That thou maiest the ſooner ouercome

thine enemie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Thei, who in attempting affaires and buſineſſe, make ouermoche haſte, dooe ſometime very ſlowite bring to paſſe their matiers, wheras leaſure in a prouiſion, is no leſſe, but quickelie & with ſpede to conclude the matier.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 90.
                           
                              To cal a manne a churle, who ſo dooeth enterpriſe:
                              Dooeth cal him al the euil woordes that he can deuiſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Unkindneſſe dooeth conteine in it ſelf al kindes of vices. Therfore there cannot bee ſpoken, a more ſhamefull checke. Burrant: then to call a manne 
                              〈◊〉
                            churle, or a ſnoudge.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 91.
                           
                              Dooe not ſpeake euil of thine enemi
                                    〈…〉
                                  Howſoeuer thou thīkest of him priueli
                                    〈…〉
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ If thou thinkeſt to dooe thine ennemie a pleaſure, beware of euil communication, for that is the thing that he would haue. It is a very fooliſhnes therefore, to ſpeake euill of any man. For if he bee thy frende, thou dooeſt not well, but if he bee thy fooe, thou ſhalt the leſſe hurte him.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 92.
                           
                              Vpon thinges profitable, take good aduiſemente:
                              Leaſure and reſpite, are the best aſſuremente.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The beſt waie is, that thy counſailles be ſoberlie & leaſurelie taken. For raſheneſſe and heddines, without aduiſemente, be often times vnluekie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 93.
                           
                              Grief and ſorowe dooeth then ceaſe:
                              when thou dooest nothing, theim to

encreaſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. When an euil or miſchiefe cometh to the wourſt, then it muſt needes amende. Burrant. Excepte it kepe at the poincte of extreme naughtineſſe ſtill, and yet then there is good hope of amendemente, foraſmoche as there remaineth no ferther matier, or occaſion to make it wourſe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 94.
                           
                              I had as leue thou toldest me a very leaſing.
                              As to ſaie that a woman ſhal forgette her weping.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. And that is no more to ſaie, then that ſhe ſhall neuer forget it. Burrant. This paſſion is ſo naturall in theim, that if thou wilt teache her to forget it, thou muſte firſt learne to make her forgette that ſhe is a woman, but remembre

this one thing, that thou then muſt leaſt beleue her, when ſhe ſhereth her teares moſte plētifullie. For if ſhe ſhould forget weping, ſhe ſhould forgette to cloke and hide her ſubtletie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 95.
                           
                              By debate and ſtriuing:
                              Frendſhippe is made more louing.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Thee falling out of louers, is the renuing of loue. Burrāt. Yea, thei are moſte commonlie the perfeicteſt frendes and louers, whiche before were very extreme enemies: and it is often ſeen.
                        Thei afterwarde to be manne and wife,
                        Whiche heretofore haue been at great debate and ſtrife.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 96.
                           
                              Vpon that thing take thou reſpite, and leaſure:
                              whiche if thou ones promiſe, must euer endure.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Of whatſoeuer thing thou canſt but ones for al determine and purpoſe vpon, as of Matrimonie and Prieſtehode, of the ſame thou muſt take long deliberation, before thou ſet vpon it.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 97.
                           
                              A man ought to be harde of hearing:
                              Onelie to anothers mannes cōplaining.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Dooe thou not by and by, geue credence to him that accuſeth any man. Burrant; For by this meanes many an innocente hath been falſelie condemned. And many a true heire hath been wrongfullie diſherited.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 98.
                           
                              when our life is moste delectable:
                              Then the ſtate of death is most acceptable.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Then is the beſt time of all to die

when it is yet pleaſaunt to liue.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 99.
                           
                              That is to be called hurte and diſpleaſure:
                              whiche with an euil name is gain and lucre.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Lucre and vantage, with the loſſe of a mannes good name, is an hinderaunce, and no gaines.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 100.
                           
                              The ſtrengthe and manhode of the ſouldiour:
                              Is the good counſail of his Capitain and gouernour.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Souldiours are mightie & ſtronge to no purpoſe, excepte thei be ruled by the wiſedome, and pollicie of their Capiteine.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 101.
                           
                           
                              Feare, least what to the is geuen this daie:
                              Another daie wil come and take it awaie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. That whiche doeth chaunce ſodeinly, fortune doeth ſodeinlie take awaie again. Burrant. As this daie to atteine to great riches and promocion, and tomorowe of theſame to bee ſodeinlie & with a trice, depriued and benummed.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 102.
                           
                              That whiche without knowlege is diminiſhed:
                              Is for no loſſe to be ſuppoſed.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. That is no hurte or loſſe, whiche a man feleth not. Burrant. The knowelege and remembraunce of any loſſes doeth cauſe a mannes harte to ſorowe

although it bee but a trifle, whereas if it had neuer come to his knowelege, he would neuer haue miſſed it, or paſſed vpon it.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 103.
                           
                              A very innocent being in tormente and peine.
                              Is constrained to lie and feine.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. In tormente very innocentes dooe often times lie, being cōſtrained therunto by puniſhement & extreme pain. Burrant. Alas who is of ſo bolde and hard harte, but when he is laied in the racke, and his ioinctes extracted and, ſtretched foorth, but wil for very pein and anguiſhe, ſaie whatſoeuer he thinketh maie pleaſe, although it were neuer dooen or thought, whiche he dooeth then ſpeake.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 104.
                           
                              In very ſinne and naughtineſſe.
                              
                              It is mete to perfourme faiethfulneſſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ Faieth and trueth is after ſoche ſorre to be kept, that it is in very euil thinges ſometime to bee perfourmed. Burrant: Ah ſee an Heathē, how greatlie he eſtemed in euil thinges the obſeruing of that, whiche we in the beſt thinges that be, deſpiſe to perfourme: for that dooe we ſooneſt of al neglecte that we doe moſte faithfullie promiſe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 105.
                           
                              About that thing whiche we deſire to gette.
                              The moste ſpede that maie be, is a ſtaie and lette.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. To one that is deſirous, or would fain obteine a thing, yea, all the haſt poſſible, is tariaunce vnto him.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 106.
                           
                              In that man is wiſedome & happineſſe
                              
                              whiche his awne faulte by anothers can redreſſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A wiſeman dooeth gather by anothers faultes and offences, what he himſelf ought to beware of.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 107.
                           
                              Men in miſerie are of wit very ſcant And of the ſame thei are alſo abūdāt.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Wit is ſcant, foraſinoche as thei ſee not how to remedie, & redreſſe their miſfortunes. And wit is abundante, for thei now vnderſtande & perceiue, what thei ſhould haue been ware of.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 108.
                           
                              what a manne knoweth and hath in memorie:
                              the ſame to forget is ſomtime neceſſarie
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Some thinges are of ſoche ſorte, that thei are to be forgotten, and vnlearned

again.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 109.
                           
                              Deſire of lucre and very coueteouſneſſe
                              Made fortune an heauenlie goddeſſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The ſtudie and deſire of worldly lutre dooeth cauſe, that men thinke fortune to be a goddeſſe in deede, whiche fauoureth and helpeth them.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 110.
                           
                              He that doeth coueteouſneſſe auoide and flie.
                              Conquereth an whole countrie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. To ſubdue coueteouſneſſe or angre, is more then winnyng of an whole realine and kingdome.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 111.
                           
                              He that hath no houſe wherin to put his head.
                              Is as one without a graue when he

is dead.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. That is to ſaie, a baniſhed mā whiche hath no where a dwellyng place, is like one that is dead and vnburied and lieth without a cophine or graue For baniſhement is a ciuil death. For none of them for the moſte part (and ſpecially in thoſe daies) retourned to their countrie, duryng their life.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 112.
                           
                              Euen thei that dooe wrong and iniurie
                              Do hate the ſame in another extremely
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. No, not ſo moche as thei themſelues that do iniurie or wrong to other mō wil haue theſame to be doen vnto thē
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 113.
                           
                              To take awaie a weapon it is meter.
                              Then to an angrie perſone theſame to deliuer.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. An occaſion to hurte or diſpleaſe,

is not to bee geuen to an angrie perſone, but it is rather to bee taken awaie and auoided.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 114.
                           
                              A man, his awne countrie to denie:
                              Is aſmoche, as to ſuffre baniſhement willinglie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He that hideth his head in an hole, and is not occupied in the affaires of the commune wealthe, is a baniſhed man wilfully.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 115.
                           
                              Euen one very ſmall heare:
                              His ſhadowe with him doeth beare
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. There is nothing ſo ſmall and litle, whiche ſerueth not for ſome vſe or other. Burrant. As the very litle heates of the browes and yie liddes, dooe ſhadowe and defende the yies from duſt, and other inconuenience.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 116.
                           
                           
                              Alas, it is a very wretched thing.
                              To wexe elder by feare and trembling
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. It is a miſerable caſe to be ſore broken, and ſtriken in age, by the feare of miſchaunce, whiche hath not yet happened.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 117.
                           
                              He is rightfull euen vnto his enemie,
                              whiche taketh counſaill of fidelitie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He that foloweth after that thing whiche faithe, and not grief and ſorowe dooeth appoinct him, he ſhalbe vprighte and indifferente, euen vnto his very enemies.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 118.
                           
                              A miſfortune dooeth hurte theim very lightlie.
                              whiche be promoted to high dignitie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Like to them that fall from an high

place, their fal is more daungerous & the ſoner taken. So with more perill and ieoperdie a man himſelf caſtetly doune frō an high fortune or dignitie
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 119.
                           
                              he that hath loſt his credēce & fidelitie what hath he left to ſaue his honeſtie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He whiche leſeth his money, hath ſomewhat yet left to truſte to, but he whiche hath broken his promiſe and loſte his credence, hath no yearthly thing to take to.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 120.
                           
                              whē fortune is fauorable & flattryng Then will ſhe be pollyng and ſhauyng.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Fortune when ſhe is pleaſaunt then ſhe worketh ſubtleties. So that then ſhe is chiefly to bee miſtruſted, when ſhe is moſte gaie and floriſhyng.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 121.
                           
                           
                              Thou maieſt fortune, ſoner to finde and obtein.
                              Then thou maieſt theſame kepe & detein.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. It is a very difficult and hath thing to retain fortune, leaſt ſhe be chaunged or altred. And it is a greater vertue ſaufly to kepe and defende ſoche thinges as we haue gottē, then thoſe ſame to get and winne.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 122.
                           
                              A faire face & beautifull phiſnomie.
                              Is a domme praiſe and commendacion priuie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Fauour is ſhewed vnto them that be faire & beautifull, although thei ſaie nothing. Burrant. And for this gifte we dooe ſee a very ſtrumpet to be cō
                           mended, although in all other thinges ſhe ought daiely to be hated.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Publius. 123.
                           
                              we dooe in vain aske his charitie:
                              whiche cannot finde in his harte to haue mercie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He that cannot be entreated by faire praier, what boteth it to deſire his helpe. (Burrante.) For vncharitable perſones are like vnto a blocke or a ſtocke, which haue the ſimilitude and proporcion of a man, yet haue no mocion, or ſenſual vnderſtandyng in thē
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 124.
                           
                              It is deceipt to take that awaie.
                              whiche thou art not hable to repaie
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. It is very guile and deceipte, to take a benefite of any man, to whom thou art not hable to reſtore aſmoche, or a like good tourne.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 125.
                           
                              Looke whom fortune dooeth fauour

and nouriſhe.
                              Theſame ſhe dooeth make to proude and fooliſhe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Fooliſhneſſe & pride be the waityng ſeruauntes of greate riches and ſubſtaunce. Burrant. For the greate poſſeſſors of worldly gooddes are ſo rauiſhed with the abundaunce of them, that euē like very fooles and idiotes thei are ready to hold their fingers in an hole, if their riches ſo willed thē.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 126.
                           
                              He, the fault openly dooeth knowlege.
                              whiche refuſeth to abide a Iudge.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus He which refuſeth to come to be iudeged, dooeth ſhewe, that he miſtruſteth himſelf to bee guiltie. Burrant. For truth yet was neuer afraied to ſhewe her face, & to abide the trial of iuſtice.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 127.
                           
                           
                              Vnthriftes and naughtie packes 
                                    〈◊〉
                                  bee happie.
                              Is to a good man greate calamitie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. As often as good lucke and fortune dooeth fauour and helpe leude perſones, it is to the extreme calamitie and high diſpleaſure of good men.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 128.
                           
                              That is to bee ſuffred and not to bee blamed.
                              whiche can by no meanes be auoided.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. That whiche cannot bee altred or chaunged, is priuely in a mannes minde to be paciētly ſuffred, and not to be blamed.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 129.
                           
                              Euilles whiche are yet to come reſiſt not ſo ſtifly.
                              But that a man of them maie haue

the victory.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Miſchaunces and daungers yet to come, dooe not ſo importunately and buſily ſette vpon and inuade vs, but that thei maie by wiſedome and pollicie be ouercome and auoided.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 130.
                           
                              very paciēce that is bothe meke & ſoft
                              Into a furie is tourned, beyng greued oft.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Theſe ſoft perſones when thei are many times prouoked and ſtirred to anger, at length beyng moued in dede are ferre angrier then other men, for aſmoche as thei are very ſeldome, and that to earneſtly vexed.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 131.
                           
                              Thinges counterfaicted with paintynges and coloures.
                              Dooe ſone retourne again to their awne natures.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Counterfaicted and feined thinges

dure no long ſeaſon, accordyng to the ſaiyng of Flaccus.
                        Although nature with a forke thou dooeſt expell.
                        Yet will ſhe retourne to her place where ſhe did dwell.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 132.
                           
                              He that hath loſt his faith & fidelitie.
                              Hath nothing els that is in icopardie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He hath loſt all that he hath, whiche hath loſt his credence. (Burrant). As who would ſaie, the leſyng of a mannes credence is more then the loſſe of all other thinges beſide, for it is the onely protectour and keper of all the treaſure that manne dooeth poſſeſſe. So that when it is loſt, it is euen as good to loſe all that we haue.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 133.
                           
                              The mindes facilitie and lighteneſſe.
                              Dooeth drawe towarde ſome parte of

fooliſheneſſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He is lightly enticed to vice and vnthriftineſſe, who is of alight wit and brain. As that felowe Mitio, of whō Terence writeth, who beeyng .lx. yeres of age, was now become a newe maried man.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 134.
                           
                              Faith, as life, from whence it departeth thether afterward it neuer retourneth
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. As our life ones goen and loſte, is neuer retourned, ſo likewiſe is oure faith, accordyng to the commune ſaiyng. He whiche is ones become an vnthrift, will ſcaſe at any time after proue a good houſbande.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 135.
                           
                              No man euer looſeth faith.
                              But he whiche the ſame neuer hath
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. No man leſeth money, but he whiche

had it. But he is ſaied to haue loſte faith, whiche neuer had it, that is to ſaie, he was euer an vntrue & vntruſtie ka
                              •
                           tife. Burrant. He leſeth it for lacke of grace to vſe it. As he leſeth his time whiche will not applie him ſelf to occupy it while, it is yet preſēt
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 136.
                           
                              Fortune is not ſatiſfied or contented. Any man but ones to haue offended
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. No euill and miſchief dooeth come or chaunce to any man, but theſame hath another ſtreighte waies folowyng by the necke.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 137.
                           
                              There is bothe thunder and lightnyng where angre with power is inhabityng
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A man of power and aucthoritie whō he is moued to angre, he ſemeth to lighten and thunder, rather then to be angrie. Burrant. For as the lightenyng

goeth before thunder. So in a manne of power, after braulyng and angrie wordes, folowe hard and vncharitable dealynges.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 138.
                           
                              Thei whiche are now olde men.
                              Doo in vain deſire to be young childrē.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. We can by no maner of meanes poſſible were young again. Therfore an olde man muſt be content to dooe and handle ſoche thinges as pertein to an olde man.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 139.
                           
                              A checke or a rebuke geuen falſly.
                              Is a malicious and enuious lie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He whiche rebuketh or checketh, and that falſly, dooeth ſpitefully and maliciouſly feigne and lie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 140.
                           
                              All men dooe vtterly deſpaire.
                              To kepe a woman in rule and feare
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. There is no man but doeth deſpaire that he is hable to rule and gouerne the nature & diſpoſicion of a woman. Burrāt. This beaſt is ſo vnruly, that there are ſome whiche haue had the matier ſomewhat in practiſe that wil vndertake ſoner to ſubdue and tame the fierceneſſe of a Lion, or the churliſhe nature of a beare, then the ſhre, wiſhe & froward affecciō of a womā.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 141.
                           
                              Hard thinges dooe thou manly ſuffer
                              That thou maieſt beare light thinges the eaſier.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Exerciſe and cuſtome thy ſelf in thinges that are ſome what hard and weightie, that thou maieſt bee hable to ſuſtein other thinges that are light and eaſie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 142.
                           
                              Fortune cannot preuaile ſo moche to

any manne.
                              As right and iudgemente and good counſailcan.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Good counſail & aduiſemente doeth farre better then good lucke & fortune. Burrant. For good counſail maie make a manne alwaies happie. And ſo cannot proſperite, and luckie chaunce.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 143.
                           
                              Britle fortune when ſhe dooeth glitter:
                              Like a piece of glaſſe is ſoone broken a ſunder.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Glaſſe when it glittereth and ſhineth moſte gaie, then it is ſooneſt broken in pieces. So in like maner the faireſt and moſte goodlie fortune is not of any continuaunce.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 144.
                           
                              Suffre that whiche is dammigeable:
                              
                              That thou maiest ſusteine that whiche is profitable.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ That thou maieſt obteine a profeicte ſuffre a deſpite. Burrant. And that thou maieſt haue a pleaſure, ſuffre a peine. And to gette and winne ſticke not to ſpende, and to put thyſelf in haſarde and daunger.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 145.
                           
                              Fortune dooeth make him welbeloued to be.
                              whom fortunate no manne dooeth beholde and ſee.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Fortune dooeth make a manne to bee enuied, excepte ſhe kepe herſelfe cloſe. She is therfore to be diſſembled with. Burrant. So that I count thoſe not vnwiſe in this poincte, whiche wil goe in an olde torne cote, that wil ſeace harbor a louſe, and feede vpon a

piece of bread and cheſe, and a gaclike heade, and yet are not without three or fower hundreth poūdes in a bagge.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 146.
                           
                              Although it is a good name to be called frugal.
                              Yet there is ſome miſerie ioigned withall.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. To be frugal & plaie the good houſbande, although it bee an honeſt name and a good reporte, yet it is thoughte miſerable. And it is litle commended emong the people, whom prodigalitie and waſte dooeth more delight and pleaſe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 147.
                           
                              That foreiudgemente is ſore and vehemente.
                              whiche hath not an after iudgement.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. 
                           
Greuous and dreadful is that fore iudgemente, whom a ferther ſentence dooeth not folowe, but theſame ſtandeth for a determinate and finall iudgemente. As if a prince ſhould beare a grudging minde towardes any one, there is no iudge that dare otherwiſe to pronounce and geue ſentence.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 148.
                           
                              There cannot be a diſpleaſure higher:
                              Then to haue a good mannes anger.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A good manne, as he is not ſo ſoone angrie and offended, ſo he is the ſorer moued, if his goodneſſe be ouercome and pacience ones broken.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 149.
                           
                              Of the minde it is an harde puniſhemente:
                              whom to haue dooen amiſſe it doeth repente.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. 
                           
¶ He hath ſore puniſhed himſelfe whom it repenteth of his euill deede dooen. Burrant. And this is the beſt token of the conuerſion of a ſinner to perfeicte Chriſtianitie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 150.
                           
                              A minde that is conſtant and ſtable:
                              Hath not a iudgement variable.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A ſadde and conſtant manne hath certain and ſure counſailles. Burrant. And he determineth & adiudgeth nothing, but ſoche as is righte & equitie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 151.
                           
                              Greuous is that euil to be ſuppoſed whiche vnder a good pretence is gloſed.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. That euill and miſchiefe is vncurable, whiche is contrefaicted vnder the pretence of a good hope and coumforte.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 152.
                           
                           
                              That hurteth more greuouſlie.
                              whiche chaunceth to a manne vnaduiſedlie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ Newe and ſtraunge griefes and diſpleaſures dooe grue a manne the more. Burrant. Foraſmoche as he hath not prepared the minde pacientlie to ſuffre theim, nor yet knoweth how to ſhifte them.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 153.
                           
                              That is the extremest enemie. whiche woorketh in the harte priuilie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A naughtie and a cankarde affection or ſtomacke dooeth chiefelie hurte a man. But that ſo hid in the harte can not be tried or ſearched out.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 154.
                           
                              The greuoust rule and kingdome, Is that whiche is confirmed by cuſtome
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Cuſtome dooeth plainelie obteine a certaine tyrannie in the worlde, in ſo moche that the moſte fooliſhe thinges, if thei haue ones growen into a cuſtome, thei cannot be plucked backe or called in again. Burrant. As, how great a dooe is it to withdrawe the vſurped power of the Biſhop of Rome and to redreſſe his naughtie lawes & tradicions, whiche were onelie by cuſtome confirmed. And the onely refuge and defence of his fautours is cuſtome, ſaiyng. So haue our fathers vſed. So thei beleued. And (excepte the more mercie of God) ſo thei are damned.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 155.
                           
                              A greate rebuke although it bee ſpoken merelie.
                              Yet many times it hurteth greuouſlie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. As emong Engliſhemen, if a man

cal one or other traitour but in ſporte he is in daunger of a blowe, or ſome woorſe diſpleaſure, the treſpaſſe is ſo heinous.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 156.
                           
                              Alas how harde is the custodie,
                              Of renoume and glorie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. An honeſt name & fame is lightlie defiled and contaminate. And it is a more harde and buſie thing to defende and kepe theſame, then to get it.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 157.
                           
                              A manne is beſide his bodie:
                              when he is furious and angrie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He is beſide himſelfe, and not his owne man, whoſoeuer is angrie and throughlie vexed. According to this ſaiyng afore. He ſpeaketh to one that is abſente, that communeth with an angrie perſone.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 158.
                           
                           
                              Alas how greatlie is he to be feared.
                              To whom death is nothing dreaded.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ He that paſſeth not vpon death ſoche a one is greatlie to bee feared. Foraſmoche as he is lorde and ruler of another mannes life, whiche doeth litle ſet by his owne. Burrant: As who would ſaie, he litle paſſeth to kill and ſlea, who careth not for the leſing of his owne life.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 159.
                           
                              Vpon a wretched perſone, he that hath pitie:
                              Of himſelfe he hath memorie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. For ſoche a one dooeth vnderſtande that the ſame wretchednes maie chaūce vnto him, wherupon he ſhould neede of ſoche helpe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 160.
                           
                              That is a ſhame not without honestie
                              
                              In a rightful cauſe for to die.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ That euil name and reproche is praiſeful, for a manne to leſe his life in the waie of right. Burrant. As to be hanged is a villanous death, yet is it glorie to him whiche is hanged gilteleſſe, or is taken priſoner and ſo putte to ſoche kinde of execution emong his enemies.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 161.
                           
                              He hath helpe in aduerſitie:
                              who lendeth his helpe in proſperitie
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Who when he is well at eaſe, and welthie, dooeth helpe other, other doe helpe the ſame again in his aduerſitie. Burrant. But foraſmoche as fewe dooe obſerue this leſſon, therefore the leſſe pitie menne haue of theim when thei are fallen in ſoche neceſſite and nede.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 162.
                           
                              ¶ Of him to be harmed alas what

miſerie is it.
                              Of whome thou canst not complaine or requite:
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. It is an harde caſe for a manne to be endomaged or diſpleaſed, either of his frende or elles of a greate manne. For as of the one it is litle honeſtie to complaine, ſo of the other it is not the ſureſt. And ſo he ſhoulde bring himſelf into a ſhreude picle, if either of theim would goe about to requite him with like diſpleaſures.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 163.
                           
                              Extreme nede and wretched pouerte.
                              Cauſeth a manne to auenture in great ieopardie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Pouertie is wittie and full of innencion, and a finder out of crafte and ſubteltie, and euil and naughtie thinges dooe many times ſtirre and moue

a mannes braine, according to the ſaiyng of Naſo. Burrant. As in ſome Idolatrie, in ſome thefte, in ſome other lecherie, and ſo all kindes of vices, pouertie dooeth cauſe to bee attempted and approued.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 164.
                           
                              Alas how miſerable is that peine:
                              whiche in tormente maie not complaine.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The trueth is tried out in tormentes and puniſhementes. But ſome bee ſo tormented, that thei dare not tel the trueth, knowing what he would haue kepte priuie and nor to be vttred, that dooeth tormente and puniſhe them.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 165.
                           
                              Alas in long life how many dooeth chaunce.
                              That cauſeth a manne to take great repentaunce.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Many thinges dooe happen by liuing long whiche thou wouldeſt not to happen by thy wil. Burrant: Foraſmoche as the life of manne is neuer without miſerie and wretchedneſſe, & euer in ſubiection to the haſardes and daungers of fortune.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 166.
                           
                              Pleaſaunt and ſwete communication:
                              Hath his veneme and poiſon.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Faire ſpeache is ful of ſubteltie & deceipte, and a ſwete honied poiſon. Burrant: Whoſe taſt is pleaſaunte and delectable, and yet the operacion and woorking of the ſame is moſte noiſos and deadlie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 167.
                           
                              So often times a manne dieth.
                              How often as he his frendes leſeth.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Death is a certain bunumming, or

lacke of a mannes beſt iuelles. As his wife and children, his father and mother, or any other of his familiers, or whom he derely loueth.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 168.
                           
                              A man alwaies beareth one thing in himſelf priuilie:
                              And thinketh towarde another cleane contrarie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Euery manne is a diſſembler. Burrant; There is not the perfeicteſt frēde and louer, but he will diſſemble and gloſe, and wheras he doeth beare him ſelfe out wardelie to be a frende yet he thinketh otherwiſe in his harte.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 169.
                           
                              A good reporte of a mans honestie: Is another inheritaunce and patrimome.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A good name and honeſt reporte is

almoſte aſmoche woorth as any gooddes or landes that a man hath by his enheritaunce. Burrant. Yea whoſoeuer hath a good name, hath purchaſed to himſelfe a more ample and ſure ſtate of enheritaunce then can by any gifte or natural diſſent, or by any other earthelie thing be obteined.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 170.
                           
                              A manne perceiueth not any grief or peine.
                              As long as by good fortune he doeth gaine.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. That peine and grief is not felte nor perceiued, wherewith any commodite or profeict is gorten. Burrant. For the ſwetenes and pleaſure of the one, dooeth alaie the bitternes and peine of the other.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 171.
                           
                              He with moche honestie ſerueth.

That to time alwaies obeieth.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶It is an honeſtie for a manne to ſerue and applie himſelf according to the time, and to geue place to fortune for a ſpace. Burrant: For ſhe is not ſo continuallie cruell, but that ſhe will chaunge her ſelfe into a better mode.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 172.
                           
                              Man is lent but for a time to liue: For euer this life God did not him geue.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Life is geuen but for a ſeaſon, in ſo moche that he whiche gaue it maie require it lawefully, and as his of right whenſoeuer it ſhal pleaſe him.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 173.
                           
                              It is better to knowe thine owne heire.
                              Then for thine enheritaunce to ſeke a ſtraunger.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. 
                           
It is more profite for thee to haue children of thine awne, to whō thou maieſt leue thy landes and gooddes, then to looke and ſeke for ſtraungers children, to whom thou maieſt leaue thine enheritaunce.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 174.
                           
                              At his fathers death, the heires wepyng.
                              Is but a very counterfeict laughyng
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The weping of the heire is but a feined and a diſſembled laughter: for he reioiſeth & his glad, although he, put his anger in the yie. (Burrant.) And this is the propretie of an vnnatural ſoonne, who loueth more the enheritaūce, then the life of his father, and a very litle time (God wotte) he weth enioie theſame.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 175.
                           
                              A woman that dooeth ofte marie, Hath for the moſte part an infamie
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The common people doeth thinke and iudge full ſhreudely of that woman that-dooeth mary many houſebandes. (Burrant.) For ſome with Paule will thinke her incontinent, and other will iudge her coueteous, or els very fooliſhe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 176.
                           
                              The inferiour and ſubiect abhorreth, In whatſoeuer the ſuperiour offendeth.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Whatſoeuer thing the princes and gouernours dooe amiſſe, theſame falleth to the miſchief and deſtruccion of the commons. Burrāt. As if Princes fall at contencion, and ſo moue battaill, the commōs buieth the bergain and ſmart therfore in the meane time and many a man leſeth his life before he hath deſerued to die.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 177.
                           
                              To auenge thine enemie after lōg ſtrief

Is the beginnyng of a newe life.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The pleaſanteſt thing in the worlde is to be auenged of a mānes enemies and it is as a newe kinde and maner of liuyng. Firſt, he doeth defende his awne life, and moreouer he reioiſeth of his querell auenged.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 178
                           
                              So vpright alwaies, let be thy dooyng.
                              That no manne hate thee, for thy awne deſeruyng.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. We cānot auoide, but we muſt be hated & enuied of one or other, but wee maie take hede and beware, leaſt any man hate vs worthelie, accordyng to our deſertes.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 179.
                           
                              whō thou kepeſt ī whether he wil or no. Thou prouokeſt the ſame abroade to go.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He whiche is not willyng to tary,

the more thou dooeſt hold him backe, the more deſtrous he is to departe.
                        Burrant. And Terence dooeth note this propretie, to bee in a young man ſpecially. And my opinion is, that it is geuen to women naturally, their willes and thoughtes are euer ſo 
                              〈…〉
                           owarde, and contrarie to their houſebandes commaundementes.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius 180.
                           
                              Thou dooeſt diſhonour thy dignitie. while thou dooeſt aske of the vnworthie
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. It is a villanie and a very ſlauerie to become a ſuiter to an vnworthie perſone. Therefore his worſhip is diſgraced. Burrant. Whoſoeuer beeyng of nobilitie, is a peticioner to a ſlaue or a villain.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 181.
                           
                              The coueteous man is towardes no man beneficiall.
                              and towardes himſelf, he is worſt of al
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A coueteous perſone dooeth good to no man, as long as he liueth, & moſte ſpecially himſelf, he doeth bothe vexe and trouble, by the carefull kepyng of gooddes.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 182.
                           
                              He geueth twiſe to the nedie. whiche geueth ſpedelie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A good tourne is twiſe welcome, whiche is geuē by and by, and out of hāde, to him that hath nede of it. Burrāt. For it ſerueth his tourne, ſaueth his credence, and kepeth his honeſtie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 183.
                           
                              Coueteouſneſſe in moche plentie. Is a well furniſhed pouertie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. To couete when thou haſt plentie, is as a certain nedines and penutie, no
                              •
                            free and ſimple, but well furniſhed and ſtored, and as who would ſaie, a

riche pouertie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 184.
                           
                              who at a faulte winketh.
                              To dooe another he prouoketh.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He whiche diſſembleth a fault, doeth prouoke and allure to doo another offence. Burrāt. As the maſter to ſuffer the ſcholer ones to bee negligent, he will be the more bolder to bee negligent another time. No forgeueneſſe ought to bee in ſinne, in whom there is no hope of grace or amendement.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 185.
                           
                              Gentle bloude or nobilitie.
                              Can take no reproche or villanie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Either, becauſe it is the condicion and propretie of a gentle and noble harte to ſet naught by, or litle to regard a rebuke or checke. Or els foraſmoche as an haughtie courage cānot abide to be checked or reproued.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Publius. 186.
                           
                              He that ſeldome is an offendour.
                              Deſerueth to haue the more fauour
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. As the more frequent and oft a fault is doen, the more ſtreight correccion ought to be miniſtred and geuen. So the more ſeldome a man doeth offende the more fauour ſhould be ſhewed.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 187.
                           
                              One perſones churliſheneſſe and leude demeaner.
                              Dooeth make many a poore wretche to fare the worſer.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The vnkindeneſſe of one perſone doeth cauſe, that thei that be louyng and kinde, bee not holpen, although thei haue neuer ſo greate nede.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 188.
                           
                              In euils to truſt & hope for amēdment
                              No man is wont to dooe, but an innocēt
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A good and vpright conſcience doeth cauſe, that in euil thinges we do hope and truſt, that God will be our helpe and ſuccour. Burrāt. And a naughtie and corrupte conſcience, is wonte in this caſe to diſpaire, for that he hath no remorſe of his iniquitie. And the greatneſſe of his ſinne, doeth ſo croke his vprightneſſe, that it cauſeth him to haue miſtruſte of the goodneſſe of God.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 188.
                           
                              In auenging of thine enemie.
                              It is blamed to be to haſtie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Be thou not haſtie and raſhe, either to auēge thy querell, either els in geuyng of Iudgemente. (Burrant.) For bothe theſe twoo requireth good aduiſement and leaſure: for the one is not ſo lightly corrected, and the other is not ſo eaſely redreſſed.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 189.
                           
                           
                              Of learnyng and witte, he that hath the grace,
                              will feare his enemie, bee he neuer ſo baſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. It is the poinct of a wiſeman, not to ſet light of his enemie, be he neuer ſo vile & poore: for he maie by ſome occaſiō or other waite him a diſpleaſure Burrant. As the Scarabie or Bitell, who beyng at cōtencion with the Egle, and of theſame for his litleneſſe nothing dreaded. In thabſence of the Egle he crepeth into her neſt, and tū
                           bleth her egges out of theſame.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 190.
                           
                              To a miſerable & awretched creature
                              Scoffyng is an high diſpleaſure.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The ſely and miſerable creatures be offended & diſpleaſed, with laughyng and ieſtyng. And thei who are in a wretched caſe and miſerie, do wreſt

wordes ſpoken by very chaunce and vnaduiſedly, to the ſuſpicion of ſome hurte or euill meant towardes theim although a man neuer ſo thought.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 191.
                           
                              The Iudge of his corrupt conſcience, is condemned.
                              when the guiltie from his faulte is pourged.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus When the guiltie is acquited, then the iudge muſt nedes be no innocent. (Burrant.) For it is a ſhreude token, that the iudge is corrupted or bribed when he that hath deſerued the puniſhment of the lawe, is by the ſame clered and acquited.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 192.
                           
                              To forgeue, it is good humanitie.
                              when the partie is aſhamed of his iniquitie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. No forgeueneſſe at all ought to be but where the partie repenteth himſelf

of his deede doen. Burrant. For in ſoche a caſe thamendement of his life ſhal bee more pleaſure vnto vs, then his death. By his death we ſhall winne nothing, & by his life he maie recompenſe vs for our goodneſſe ſhewed in ſoche diſtreſſe and exigent.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 193.
                           
                              In thinges doubtful & ful of ieopardie Moche auaileth boldnes & audacitie
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. When a matier is in a haſard of winning or loſyng, audacitie and the bearyng of a good face therupon, helpeth greatly. Burrant. The commune ſaiyng is, ſpare ſpeache, and ſpare ſpede For many one, through a litle daſtardneſſe of harte and blouſhyng, leſeth many a good chaunce and fortune, whiche thei mighte haue had if thei had put themſelues forwarde.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 194.
                           
                              A ſinner the ſame daie himſelf condemneth,
                              
                              In the whiche, by any meanes he offendeth.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus Whoſoeuer dooeth a miſcheuous deede, is ſtraight waie condemned to himſelf, his awne conſcience beeyng iudge, although no other Iudge geue Sentence. Burrant. I would to God that euery manne would conſider this iudgement, and put his naughtie life to execucion, and ſtrangle his ſinne, with a ſtrong halter of repentance, neuer willyng to come to that iudgement again.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 195.
                           
                              To rebuke him that is an euill liuer It is coumpted for no ſlaunder.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. It ſemeth no ſlaunder, whiche thou ſaieſt againſt an euill and an vnhappie perſone. Barrāt. For thoſe reportes that thou makeſt of him are true, and thou lieſt neuer a deale vpon him.

And if thou ſhouldeſt ſaie otherwiſe, thou ſhouldeſt not ſaie truthe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 196.
                           
                              Fewe thinges dooe want vnto pouertie, And all thinges do lacke vnto auarice
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Many thinges there are, whiche a poore man dooeth nede, to the neceſſitie of his life, but a coueteous man dooeth nede many thinges mo, whiche hath not ſo moche as that, whiche he hath in his poſſeſſion.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 197.
                           
                              Toward thy frende, behaue thy ſelf ſo, that thou thīkeſt that he maie bè thy fo
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. So loue, as thou maieſt cōueniently hate. So ferre truſt thy frende, that if he be made thine enemie, he maie bee hable to do thee litle harme. Burrant For there are many falſe flattryng frendes, who, when thei haue cropen into a mannes boſome, and knowen

all his ſecretes, thei woorke moche villanie and miſchief againſt him.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius 198.
                           
                              No man can better abide enuie.
                              Then a ſtrong man, or an happie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus Fortunate and luckie perſones dooe ſet naught by enuie, and a ſtrong and hardie mā doeth vtterly de
                              ••
                           e it. Bur. Thone is hable to withſtande malice with his ſubſtaunce, hauyng good lucke on his ſide, and thother is hable to fight it out with cleane ſtrength.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 199.
                           
                              Grief and angre, emong theim that be louyng.
                              was euer yet founde gloſyng, and diſſemblyng.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. And this is commōly ſeen in woyng for where the parties loue one another entierly, yet wil thei oftē times fall out & be at de
                              •
                           iaunce, wheras all the worlde is not hable to ſunder thē
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Publius. 200.
                           
                              Enuie is moued priuelie:
                              And for a thing of naught it is angrie
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. An enuious perſone is not without angre, but yet diſſembled & cloſe, for a triflyng matier ſcarce worthe three ſkippes of an olde Dogge. Burrant. Soche perſones that be enuious and melancholious wil be angrie & frette within theimſelues, for their na
                              〈…〉
                            pared a wrie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 201.
                           
                              An angrie perſone thou maieſt auoide lightlie.
                              But hatred thou canſt not, till thou ſhifteſt thine enemie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Angre doeth coole anone, but hatred and malice dooeth dure long, he verely dooeth hate, whoſoeuer is an enemie. Take heede of him therefore

a long time, yea, alwaies. The very ſame thing doeth the wiſeman of the Hebrues put in knowelege, ſaiyng.
                        To an enemie reconciled and receiued Into fauor again, take thou great hede
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 202.
                           
                              Of a diſpleaſure and iniurie.
                              Forgetfulneſſe is the next remedie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Auengement doeth not helpe and remedie iniuries dooen vnto thee, but forgetfulneſſe and the puttyng them out of minde, can dooe it very well. Burrant. For by auengemente, wee maie worke our ſelues more diſpleaſure, but when we haue putte theim quite out of our memorie, our mindes are quiete. And this ſhal moue our enemies hartes, to be ſory for dooyng of ſoche iniuries.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 203.
                           
                              who vpon his angre, hath the victorie.
                              He hath ſubdued a ſturdie enemie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ It is an euident ſigne, and moſte perfeicte token of a righte valiaunte champion, when a manne ouercometh his angrie paſſion. This could not the ſame victorious and moſte valiaunte Alexander, the moſte mightie & great conquerour of the whole worlde dooe. Burrant. And no more can any other manne now in this our time dooe, & yet thei thinke themſelues mannelie and hardie capitaines, mete to be ſette ouer a great numbre of men, not being able to ſubdue a litle ſenſual will in themſelues.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 204.
                           
                              To thy frende, haue ſoche faieth and credite.
                              That he maie haue no occaſion to be thine enemie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A like ſaiyng to this, is there afore rehearſed, where he geueth like counſail,

for a manne ſo to behaue himſelf towardes his frende, that he take no vantage of him, to doe him a diſpleaſure, if he chaunce at any time, to fall at debate with him.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 205.
                           
                              An angrie perſone thinketh it an heinous thing:
                              To haue good counſail, or a gentle warning.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A wriniſhe & curſte harted felowe thinketh himſelfe to be ſhreudlie hurte of him, who geueth him good counſail. Burrant: And ſoche felowes that be ſo ſelfe willed, bee it neuer ſo moche for their commoditie and profeicte, that a manne counſaileth them, yet wil thei folowe their owne ſenſual appetites and frowarde willes.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 206.
                           
                              He wickedlie god blameth & accuſeth
                              
                              who the ſeconde time ſhippewracke ſuffereth.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He that hath been ones in ieoperdie, and dooeth aduenture himſelfe in like daunger again, he dooeth ſhamefullie blame fortune. Burrant: If any thing goe amiſſe with him: As thei whiche haue ones eſcaped drouning, will putte themſelues in theſame haſarde again. It were great wickedneſſe for theim, to laie the faulte in GOD, who hath geuen them a faire warning before, to be ware and take hede.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 207.
                           
                              It is a reproche and an ignominie:
                              For an vnwoorthie perſone to bee in dignitie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Honour and promocion geuen to the vnwoorthie, dooeth not make him an earneſt man, but doeth moche more

diſhoneſt and ſhame him. Burrant. For whereas before his vnwoorthineſſe was but of a fewe knowen, now it is lifte vp in the ſight of the wide world to bee ſeen of al menne. And by this meanes he getteth to him, more ſhame then dignitie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 208.
                           
                              where newe praiſe dooeth ſpring and growe:
                              There the olde praiſe is allowed alſo.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. If thou ſhalt happen to dooe well the ſeconde time, thou ſhalt cauſe that menne will the better beleue the good reporte that went of the before.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 209.
                           
                              He is wel eaſed of his owne griefe.
                              who hath dooen his enemie like miſchief.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He leſſe feleth his owne hurte and

diſpleaſure, who is hable to requite & auenge his enemie, with a like ſhreude tourne. Burrant. As if one haue taken a broken headde, that the bloude runne about his eares, yet if he be hable to dooe aſmoche again, he wil count him ſelfe cured of his woounde.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 210.
                           
                              Fortune is bothe light and wauering:
                              That ſhe hath once geuēn, quickelie again crauing.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Vnconſtante and vnſtable fortune dooeth by and by fetche again, & take awaie, if ſhe haue geuen any thing.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 211.
                           
                              This lawe is to all men vniuerſall.
                              whiche biddeth vs to bee borne and die.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The neceſſitie to bee borne and to his, dooeth touche al menne in general

                           Burrant: And where there is no lawe of neceſſitie, theſame muſt needes bee obeſed, for there is no waies to auoide or correcte it.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 212.
                           
                              Euery mannes auauntage or further aunce:
                              Cannot be without anothers hinderaunce.
                           
                        
                        
                           Braſmus. The lucre and winninges of one manne, is the loſſe and diſprofite of another. But not like in thinges of the minde. Burrant If the buier haue a greate peniewoorth in his merchaundiſe, the ſeller muſt nedes ſuſtein loſſe. And ſo likewiſe in all other worldlie thinges. But in vertue & cunning it is not ſo. For in theim, that whiche one win neth & gaineth, is no hinderaunce to another, of whom he getteth ſoche vertues or qualities:
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 213.
                           
                              
                                 
wantonnes and commendacion:
                              Could neuer yet agree as on.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Intemperauncie and vnchaſt liuing is alwaies ſubiecte to an euil manne. Burrant: For wheras other kindes of vices, although heinous, yet thei are many times borne withal, but riotous liuing and carnall delightes no good manne can allowe or commende.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 214.
                           
                              The giltie perſone, feareth the daunger of the lawe:
                              And the vngiltie, of fortune ſtandeth in awe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The innocente & giltles, although he ſtande in no droade of the lawes, as the offendour or giltie dooeth, yet he feareth fortune, whiche many times doeth oppreſſe and wrong the iuſt and vpright liuer. Burrant. For ſhe hath no

reſpecte of perſones, but aſwell the good as the euill, ſhe dooeth honour and diſhonour, and make highe and lowe at her wil.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 215.
                           
                              To the riotous manne many thinges dooe want:
                              And to the niggarde, all thinges are ſcant.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The prodigal and waſtful ſpender dooeth nede many thinges, and the coueteouſe perſone doeth lacke at thinges. He hath neede of many thinges, whiche ſpendeth moche, to the other there is nothing enough, foraſmoche as he is inſaciable & neuer ſatiſfied.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 216.
                           
                              Churles and vnthankeful perſones moste of al,
                              Dooe teache a manne, to be harde and vnliberal.
                           
                        
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Unthankeful perſones dooe cauſe that thei whiche haue been kinde and beneficial, dooe now withdrawe their liberalitie, and to geue more ſeldome then thei haue dooen heretofore.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 217.
                           
                              He who dooeth to one manne an iniurie.
                              Dooeth threaten to dooe the ſame to manie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Euery manne dooeth loke to haue a ſhreude tourne or iniurie at his hāde whiche hath dooen theſame to one alredie. Burrant. Litle is his conſcience to bee truſted, but that he will in like caſe dooe wrong to all menne, if he maie haue like auauntage of theim, if he ſticke not to dooe one man diſpleaſure wrongfullie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 218.
                           
                           
                              Leaſure in all thinges we hare and deſpiſe.
                              But yet it is that, whiche dooeth make vs wiſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ Troublous and greuous is tariaunce in euery matier, yet theſame dooeth make vs wiſe and wary, leaſt we dooe any thing raſhe and vnaduiſedlie. Burrant: And here upō is a true ſaiyng emong the commune people. Haſtie menne neuer lacke wo.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 219.
                           
                              That is an euil cauſe to be iudged.
                              For the whiche mercie is required.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Innocencie and vprightneſſe of lining needeth no fauour or mercie, but deſireth the iudge to be indifferent and righteouſe. But wheras all the truſte and hope of the matier reſteth in the mercie of the Iudge, the cauſe is verie

euil.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 220.
                           
                              His death is to bee thought more happie:
                              whiche dieth, before he dooeth deſire to die:
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He dieth then happelie, who dieth while his life is yet pleaſaunte vnto him. And dooeth not as yet, through the werineſſe of theſame, wiſhe to die. Burrant. Like ſentence hath he before where he rekeneth no death ſo happie as that whiche taketh a manne in his beſt ruffe, and when he moſte deſireth and delighteth to liue.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius 221.
                           
                              To be constrained to holde thy toū
                                 gue, it is miſerie.
                              when thou wouldest vtter thy minde willinglie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. It is an harde caſe, when it is not lawefull for the to ſpeake what thou wouldeſt. For there thou ſhalt haue libertie, muche leſſe to dooe what thou deſireſt, if it be not lawefull for the to ſpeake thy minde freelie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 222.
                           
                              The chaunce is moste miſerable and vnluckic.
                              whiche dooeth want alſpite and enuie
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Happineſſe dooeth ſtirre and prouoke hatred and malice. Therefore, whom no manne dooeth hate, muſte nedes be moſte wretched of al other.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 223.
                           
                              Him ful euil maie I cal:
                              who for his owne profeicte is beneficial.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He that dooeth a good turne for his

gaines ſake, he doeth euil. Burrant. As many a manne woulde bee coumpted, greate and ſpeciall good frendes, for lending their neighbour in his neceſſitie a ſumme of moneie, whē thei receiue it with an ouerplus, and to their moſte auauntage. I maie rather call them Vſurers, then frendes: for if thei ſhould haue no gaines, thei would lēde no moneie, nor dooe any other dede of charitie, and after this ſorte it is no charitable deede to be ſuppoſed.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 224.
                           
                              A leude perſone, when he dooeth countrefaicte goodnes:
                              Then he is diſpoſed, to moste vnthriftines.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A diſſembled and a cloked malice and miſchiefe, is wourſt of all other. Burrant. For ſoche are like vnto ſerpentes and Adders, that ſting priuely who in their outwarde behauiours,

are as meeke as lambes, and in their harres rauening Wolues and ſubtle Foxes, then moſte purpoſing michiefe and naughtineſſe, when thei pretende moſte holineſſe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 225.
                           
                              When that feare vpon manne doeth come:
                              Then ſhal he ſlepe but very ſeldome
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Feare dooeth driue awaie ſlepe. Or elles a manne ought not to ſlepe, whē he is in daunger. Burrant. Like reſte taketh he, whiche is beſieged with his enemies, or that is toſſed in the middle of the Sea, emong the ſtormes and tē
                           peſtes, where is but a thinne borde betwene him and his death.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 226.
                           
                              Death of neceſsitie, no manne can refuſe:
                              
                              But to die when thou wouldest not thou ſhalt not chuſe.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶Sometime menne wiſhe to die, when thei cannot die, and thei would neuer ſo fein. And ones we bee ſure to die for all together. For there is no power geuen vs, to riſe from death to life at our pleaſure. This is ſpoken againſt thoſe perſones, whiche as often as there chaunceth any griefe or diſpleaſure in their life, by and by thei wiſhe them ſelues raked vnder the yearth, as though thei might relieue when thei woulde.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 227.
                           
                              That is euil dooen and vncertainlie: whatſoeuer is dooen vpon fortunes fidelitie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Whatſoeuer dooeth hange of Fortune, that is nothing ſtedfaſt and ſure. Burrant. Let not a man haue to moche

confidence in fortune, for ſhe will ſodeinlie vnwares deceiue him. It is no wiſedome to ſet all vpon ſixe & ſeuen, and to ſtande at haſarde, whether to winne, or loſe all. Sooner chaunceth ſeuen then ſixe, there come more after loſſes, then gaines. Wherefore let thy dooing ſtande vpon the will of God, and good counſail, leſt otherwiſe thou wrappe thy ſelfe into daungier.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius 228.
                           
                              who to the dedde dooeth any gifte geue:
                              Geueth him nothing and himſelfe dooeth bereuc.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. In the olde time thei were wont to dooe ſacrifice to the deadde. This is loſt and doeth periſhe from the liuing and the deadde dooeth receiue no parts therof. Burrant. The cuſtome emong the Panimes, was to ſhed wine vpon the graues & burialles of their frendes

beeyng dedde, whiche thing the very Heathen did abhorre and eſteme for a ſuperſticion, and a thing that profited neither the liuyng nor the dedde.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 229.
                           
                              That maſter is worſe then his ſeruant. whom to diſpleaſe he dareth ſcant:
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He is ſubiect and inferior to his ſeruauntes, that feareth thē, for becauſe he knoweth himſelf guiltie and an offendour. Burrant. As that Maſter, who hath made his ſeruaunte priuie to his whoredome or thefte, or ſoche another vice, dareth not putte awaie his ſeruaunt, or diſpleaſe him in any wiſe, leaſt he bewraie his vnthriftie liuyng. In this caſe the maſter is become the ſeruaūtes bondman or ſlaue and is at his ſeruauntes becke and commaundement.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 230.
                           
                              More faithfull is the heire of thy

bodie begettyng.
                              Then anyſtraunger, that thou ſhals aſſigne by writyng.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Thy child is borne ſhine heire, but the ſtraunger can be but thy baſtarde heire. This maketh againſt thē, whiche diſenherite their awne childrē or right ſucceſſours (whom very nature hath bounde them vnto) for any treſpaſſe or offence doen by thē & tranſpoſe and geue the ſame title of their gooddes & poſſeſſions to ſtraungers.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 231.
                           
                              In geuyng a ſhreude woorde, or an euill councell.
                              The women their houſebandes, dooe ferre excell.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. In euill thinges, the women haue ferre paſſyng wittes aboue mē. Burrant. Yea, no mannes reaſon or cunnyng,

is hable to mitigate or ſearche out the craftie inuōcions and ſhiftes that women haue prompt and ready, in excuſyng & mainteinyng of their wickedneſſe. And that the deuill ſone eſpied. For the feacte to defraude man of his bleſſed ſtate of perfeicte felicitie, was wrought by a wilie and ſubtle beaſt (a woman).
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 232.
                           
                              It is an euill pleaſure and felicitie. Another ſtraunge thing to occupie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Another manues meate is ſwete and pleaſant, but that pleaſure is naught for a man to frequente and accuſtome himſelf to ſtraunge thinges whatſouer thei bee. Burrant. As for one alwaies to thruſte his legges vnder another mannes table, and to bee euer beggyng and borowyng this or that and neuer to recouer himſelf out of anothers daunger, there can bee no more diſpleaſure wiſhed to him truly

for it is a very bondage.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 233.
                           
                              That is kept with moche perill and ieopardy.
                              whiche delighteth and pleaſeth many.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. It is hard to ſaue and kepe that whiche many men deſire, as money and a faire wife. Burrant. For theſe twoo are as buttes and prickes, at whom euery mannes yie dooeth ſhote. And I would thei did ſo well prouide for the remedie of the one, as of thother. Thei locke vp their money in their cheſtes, ſo I would thei ſhould kepe their wiues out of their Shoppes, where thei ſitte as ſtales, and allure mennes yies paſſyng by. In Denice and other tounes beyonde the Sea, ſingle women and queanes, dooe after ſoche ſorte ſitte in windowes and Shoppes, and chaſte Matrones and wiues, kepe them ſecret in their halles and parlours.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Publius. 234.
                           
                              That medicine is very euill. whiche dooeth nature deſtroie & ſpill.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The medicine that hurteth nature is hard, as that whiche taketh awaie any membre or limme of the bodie.
                        Burrant. As I haue knowen a Phiſicion, whiche did miniſter a medicine to heale a mānes yie, and vtterly periſhed his ſight by the ſame. Likewiſe a Surgion, who tooke vpon him the cure of legges, and now the partie is not hable to ſet a fote vpō the groūde
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 235.
                           
                              He that is of an euill diſpoſicion. Nedeth no leude inſtruccion.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. To naughtineſſe, yea, without any teacher, we are apt and ready, but vertue muſte haue a Scholemaſter.
                        Burrant. Or els it will not at all bee learned. And when it is with moche

trauaill gootten and obteined, it is with one euill vice or qualitie polluted and deſtled.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 236.
                           
                              To knowe no parte of miſerie.
                              Is to liue without all icopardie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He who liueth without daūger hath an happie life. A ſure life and a quiet although poore and bare, is the moſte pleaſaunt and happie life. Burrant. Appliyng to the tale of Eſope, of the Mouſe of the countrie, that was led into the citie, by the Toune Mouſe, and of the ſame Mouſe feaſted, and whē thei were in their chief banquetyng, one ruſhyng at the locke of the doore, made thē bothe ſeke their heles Wherupon the countrie Mouſe ſaid. I had rather haue my poore chere at home, in ſaufegard & quietneſſe, then to haue all theſe delicate diſhes and ſumpteous cates with ſoche feare.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 237.
                           
                           
                              Thei liue full vnthriftely.
                              who thinketh to liue continually.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. For ſoche felowes prolong alwaies vntill to morowe, as long as there is any pleaſure or good thing. Burrant Theſe litle rēmēbre what night bringeth with him, whiche dare promiſe themſelues to morowe daie. So did the fooliſhe richeman in the Goſpell promiſe his Soulle many yeres of worldly felicitie, & yet the deuill fet his ſoulle the ſame night folowyng.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 238
                           
                              By expounyng of a worde ſlaunderous.
                              Thou ſhalt many times make it wours
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Some go aboute to excuſe an euill worde ſpoken, by qualifiyng or by interpretyng of the ſame, and ſo make more debate. Burrant. For a fooliſhe interpretacion bredeth a ferther matier, and cauſe of contencion.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Publius. 239.
                           
                              He is not like long time to proſpere.
                              who maketh a Phiſicion his heire.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. For he dooeth prouoke and entice him to kill him out of hāde. Burrant He wer as good to deliuer his ſworde into his enemies hande, and bid him ſtea him, and I thinke his enemies would haue more compaſſion vpon him: for he were like to winne nothing by his death.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 240.
                           
                              He is not long deceiued.
                              who is quickely deneied.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He hopeth the leſſe while in vain, that is quickely denighed & miſſeth of his purpoſe. Burrāt There are ſome that will promiſe a man many good morowes, and that thei will dooe the beſt, whē thei thinke ferre otherwiſe But I take him to be a plain dealer,

who wil tel ané wherunto I ſhal truſt
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 241.
                           
                              A mannes goodneſſe is chaunged.
                              If with a diſpleaſure he be greued.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Good men be ſhrewes, if thei be a litle moued. Burrāt. We cal and iudge many good men, whiche bee yet vnknowen vnto vs, with whom, when we bee throughly acquainted, & then thei a litle diſpleaſed, wee ſhall finde as curſt as the beſt.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 242.
                           
                              A womā whē ſhe ſitteth alone muſing.
                              She is euer ſome miſchief or other imaginyng.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. A womā that ſitteth muſyng & ſtudiyng by her ſelf, caſteth ſome vnthriftineſſe or other, in her mind. Burrāt For ſhame refraineth that kind, whiche ſhame, when thei are in ſolitarineſſe, & alone by themſelues, is awaie

cleane and nothing at al remembred.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 243.
                           
                              He that is willyng to woorke miſchief and confusion:
                              Of euery trifle, he taketh an occaſion.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. To euill diſpoſed perſones, there neuer wanteth an occaſion to dooe miſchief. Burrāt. As he who is diſpoſed to fight, & is ready to drawe his dagger at one frowarde or croked worde, but many of thē buieth often times, their haſtineſſe full dere.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 244.
                           
                              A miſcheuous perſon & euil diſpoſed
                              Is alwaies with his awne nature delited.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Although he haue no vauntage or rewarde of his miſchief, yet a wicked perſone delighteth in his awne vnthriftineſſe, and is euill vnto theim

that are louyng and kinde.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 245.
                           
                              He muſt nedes many feare.
                              Towardes whō, many dread do beare.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Whō many dooe feare and dread, him fewe dooe loue and beare fauoure to. Therfore, he again of neceſſitie muſt feare theim, of whom he is dreaded. Burrant. For the harte of man is ſo free, that he will ſeke all the meanes poſſible, to be ridde of feare, and beareth a priuie grudge towardes him, whom he feareth, and ſercheth how to diſpleaſe him.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 246.
                           
                              By rulyng and reignyng wickedly.
                              Many times is loſt a greate empery.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. It is a great dominion and a mightie Empire, to rule wel: and cōtrart wiſe the ſame is loſt by euil gouernaunce. Or els this. There is no kingdome ſo

mightie and full of power, whiche is not loſt, if thou reigne by tirannie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 247.
                           
                              That womā whiche many doeth mary
                              The ſame again pleaſeth not many.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Thei haue an euill report emong the people, whiche chaūgeth many houſbandes. Either thei bee vnhappie or vnconuenient, or inconſtant or very ſhrewes, for whatſoeuer ſhe bee that marieth the ſeconde houſeband, ſurely ſhe did ſome vnhappineſſe to the firſt, whō thei forſoke. Burrant. And this alſo maie be well applied to thē who when thei haue buried the third the fowerth, yea, the fifth houſebande wilbe nothing aſhamed, bethei neuer ſo old trottes, to take another houſeband, either for incontinencie, or els for auarice.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 248.
                           
                              That is an euill counſaill taken.
                              whiche cannot be changed nor forſake
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Neuer wrappe thy ſelf in ſoche a bād that thou canſt not wind thy ſelf out again. Burrant. Like vnto them that vpon light coūſaill, without caſtyng the weightineſſe of the matier, dooe make theimſelues to bee Prieſtes, or marie a wife.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 249.
                           
                              It is beſt for the vnfortunate and vnhappie,
                              In no maner of matiers, themſelf to occupie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Who hath no lucke in dooyng of buſineſſe, it is beſt for him to be quiete and at reſt. Burrant. For the more he medleth, the more miſchaunces come vnto him, and into the ferther daunger he runneth: wherefore, to haue a doo in no matier, is moſte eaſe for an infortunate perſone.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 250.
                           
                           
                              The yies can offende in nothing.
                              If a good minde haue them in rulyng.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Me blame our yies, as though thei miniſtred an occaſion of euill luſtes & deſires. But the minde is in the fault whiche beareth no rule ouer the yies.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 252.
                           
                              Coumpt not that vnto thee as proper. whiche fortune maie chaunge & alter
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Suppoſe nothing to be truely thine and euerlaſtyng, whiche maie be takē awaie. Burrant. And ſo wee can take no yearthly thing as our awne, but heauenlie thinges we maie truſte to be ours for euer. If we haue the grace of God, ones to obtein them.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 253.
                           
                              Thei whiche feare to take good hede Dooe not ſo ſone fall and ſlide:
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. 
                           
That is to ſaie, he is not ſo quickely oppreſſed with a miſfortune whiche weth take hede & beware of the ſame. And he is not lightly encōbred with any ieopardie, who weth obſerue and marke the daunger therof.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 253.
                           
                              Thou knoweſt not what to wiſhe, or what to flie.
                              The courſe of time dooeth ſo alter and dallie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The time and courſe of fortune weth in ſoche ſorte dalie, that often times thoſe thinges, whiche thou thinkeſt beſt, thou ſhalt perceiue to hurt chiefly, and ſo of the contrarie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 254.
                           
                              He that will a daunger flie.
                              Muſt put himſelf in ieoperdie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Thou muſt by ſome meanes or other

aduenture, if thou couette to auoide daunger. For he that feareth al thinges, ſhall neuer rid himſelf out of all ieopardie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 255.
                           
                              There is no fortune ſo good and certain Of the whiche thou canſt not complain.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Some diſpleaſure or other, is alwaies coupled to happineſſe. Burrāt As there is no man ſo healthfull, but he hath a diſeaſe, yea, he ſhould not perceiue whether there wer any pleaſure, without he had felte ſoure pein or miſchaunce withall. As Philippe King of Macedonie, coumpted him ſelf vnfortunate, becauſe he felte no calamitie emōg all his luckie ſucceſſes of fortune.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 256.
                           
                              we men, dooe no where die better.
                              Then wher to liue, we haue moſt deſire
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. There is beſt diyng, where we liuermoſte

pleaſauntlie. Burrant. For there ſhal a manne be beſt putte in remembraunce what his pleaſures were, wherin he delighted moſte, how vaine his felicities were, and how ſhortely thei are ended.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 257.
                           
                              Cauſe and occaſion to denighe.
                              In a coueteous perſone is alwaies readie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ Thei, who geue not willinglie, doe alwaies finde ſome occaſion, or other, why thei might not geue. Burrāt. As if their poore neighbour come and aſke their almoſe, thei aunſwere: Wee are charged with a greate houſeholde. The Kinges moneie muſt be paied. Al thinges are deare. As though thei wer well excuſed before God, in that thei haue not releued their poore neighbour, in ſoche nede and ſcarcitie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 258.
                           
                           
                              By oucrmoche babling and alteracion.
                              The trueth leſeth his ſolucion.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. By ſober diſputing and reaſoning the trueth is boulted out, but it is loſt by immoderate faining, the whiche thing dooeth chaunce to ſome Sophiſtical and brauling diſputers.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 259.
                           
                              He alwaies, his damnacion with him dooeth beare:
                              who is in continual dread and feare.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. He, who knowelegeth himſelfe in his owne conſcience to be an offender dooeth alwaies feare puniſhemente, and is alwaies as a manne damned. Burrant. As a thefe fearing the galous loketh euery houre, when he ſhall goe to hanging, as though he coumpteth himſelfe halfe hanged alreadie.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Publius. 260.
                           
                              The more and greater euil alwaie.
                              Is the lenger and later daie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Our life and age weareth wourſe and wourſe, that is to ſaie, the maners and condicions of menne dooe daielie more and more degenerate, and goe from all kinde of vertues and goodneſſe.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 261.
                           
                              It were very fooliſheneſſe for the vngiltie.
                              To leſe and hurte his owne innocencie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. It is fooliſhneſſe after ſoche a ſorte to hate ſinne, that thou thy ſelfe doeſt ſinne: as if a manne for the vnchaſtitie of his wife doeth poiſon an adulterer, and ſo puniſhe adulterie, that he himſelfe maie be made a poiſoner.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Publius. 262.
                           
                              It is parte of a good turne, fetelie to denighe,
                              That whiche is asked earnestlie.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Some doe ſo hardelie and churliſhe lie geue, that thei leſe the thankes of their benefeicte. Some dooe denighe ſo fetelie and gentlie, that thei ſeeme in a maner to haue geuen.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 263.
                           
                              It is fooliſheneſſe that of the to bee feared.
                              whiche by no meanes can bee auoided.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. As death or other incommodities appoincted to a man by deſtinie. Burrant; For feare in ſoche caſe dooeth nothing, but double the ſorowe or griefe: whereas a good harte and coumforte taken, would cauſe the thing, that ſemeth

harde to be eaſie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 264.
                           
                              He that is fearful, ſaieth he dooeth beware.
                              And the nigarde ſaieth he dooeth ſpare.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. Euery manne flattereth his owne ſinnes and offences, and dooeth extenuate and make leſſe the ſame, by countrefeicting the names. Burrant. And this we ſee ſo putte in commune practiſe, that a deteſtable ſwerer & blaſphemer is called a luſtie bloude, and a r
                              •
                           oteouſe perſone and a whoremonger is ſtained a good felowe. And ſo vice is mainteined by very flatterie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 265.
                           
                              In ſuffering an olde diſpleaſure.
                              Thou dooest a newe prouoke and allure.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. 
                           
If thou ſuffre a ſinne vnpuniſhed, thou ſeemeſt to allowe that it were laweful for him to offende again. Burrant. Euilles are alwaies to be remedied in the beginning, for if thei ones take rote, it is hard to remoue them.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 266.
                           
                              The coueteouſe dooeth lacke aſwell that he hath got:
                              As that thing whiche he hath not.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. The niggarde dooeth no more vſe his owne gooddes, then a ſtraungers. Therefore, he lacketh aſwell the one as thother. Burrant. For although he hath plentie, in that he laieth it vp in hugger mugger, and dareth not vſe it, yet he ſemeth verie poore and nedie.
                     
                     
                        
                           Publius. 267.
                           
                              O how long is the life of him in miſerie?
                              
                              And how ſhorte is the time of the happie?
                           
                        
                        
                           Eraſmus. ¶ Vnhappie and miſerable perſones, bee throughlie wery of their liues. To the fortunate and wealthie perſone, death dooeth ſeeme to come before her daie, for becauſe he feeleth no werineſſe of life.
                     
                  
                  FINIS,
                  ꝙ Burrant.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     
                     LONDINI, IN OFFICINA RICHARDI GRAFtoni, Typographi Regii excuſum.
                  
                     ANNO. M. D. LIII. Menſe Iulii.
                  
                  
                     Cum Priuilegio ad Imprimendum ſolum.
                  
               
            
         
      
   