
      
         
            
            
            GERARDO
THE
VNFORTVNATE
SPANIARD.
            OR
A PATTERNE FOR
LASCIVIOVS LOVERS.
            Containing ſeuerall ſtrange miſeries of looſe
AFFECTION.
            Written by an ingenious Spaniſh Gentleman, Don
Gonçalo de Ceſpedes, and Meneçes, in the time of
his fiue yeeres Impriſonment.
            
            Originally in Spaniſh, and made Engliſh by L. D.
            London printed for ED. BLOVNT.
            1622.
         
         
            
            
            
               TO
THE RIGHT
HONORABLE,
IN NAME AND NOBLENESSE
Brothers, WILLIAM Earle of Pembrooke, Lord
High Chamberlaine of his Maieſties Houſhold,
And PHILIP, Earle of Montgomerie,
Baron of Shurland, Knights of the
moſt Honorable Order of
the Garter:
His GERARDO and Himſelfe, with his
trueſt wiſhes for all increaſe of felicitie to
both their Lordſhips,
               D. D. L. D.
            
            
               Right-Noble, My Lords:
            
            
               
                  TRanſlations (as ſayes a
witty Spaniard) are, in
reſpect of their Originals,
like the knottie
wrong-ſide of Arras-Hangings: But

by his wits leaue, as the faire out-ſide
could ill be ſeene, without helpe of the
knots within; no more can the fame of
a wel-deſeruing Author be far ſpred,
without the labor of a Tranſlator. This
made me, for the preſent Spaniſh Author
his ſake, venter to make him ſpeak
Engliſh, and to do a publike good, by
publiſhing the morall Examples contained
in the preſent Tragicall Diſcourſes.
Now, that I preſume to offer
my weake endeuours to the view and
protection of both your Lordſhips,
I ſhall no way deſpaire of a pardon;
ſince the world, that takes notice of
your Noble Goodneſſe, (the firſt, beſt
of your honour'd Titles) giues me aſſurance,
that (though a ſtranger, rather
then an intruder) I ſhall be eſteemed
            
               To your Honors both, a deuoted
Seruant,
LEONARD DIGGES.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               Gentle Reader,
            
            
               I Preſent to thy view ſixe exemplarie
Diſcourſes of Gerardo the vnfortunate
Spaniard, written originally by
Don Gonçalo de Ceſpedes a Spaniſh
Gentleman, who in the time of fiue yeres
of his Impriſonment, vnder the borrowed Name of
Gerardo, perſonates himſelfe in his owne misfortunes.
And ſo partly with truth, partly with fiction, makes vp
a firſt and ſecond Part. Something there may bee in
the weauing and contexture of the Worke, that may
giue thee delight: ſure I am, thou ſhalt find profit in it;
eſpecially, if thou be ſuch, as hath any way beene ſubiect
to wanton luſt, or looſe affection. The beſt is, if the
Worke fall ſhort of expectation, let the Authors credit
looke to it; for a Tranſlator hath no commiſsion to better
(ſuffice to come neere) his Originall. Some of the
Verſes in the Spaniſh Copie, I haue purpoſely left out,
as being (in my iudgement) vnworthy to bee ranked

with the Proſe; others I haue altered, to make them
more ſutable to an Engliſh Reader. One by-diſcourſe
I haue left wholly out, as ſuperſtitiouſly ſmelling of Papiſticall
Miracles; in which I haue no beleefe. To
foreſtall thee no longer, Begin and reade; and
though I vndergo thy hard Cenſure,
yet I will not be ſo vncharitable,
as not to bid thee
            
               Farewell.
L. D.
            
         
         
            
            THE TRAGICKE POEME
            To the READER.
            THou that art taken with a female ſmile;
            Thou, whom a looke, a ſigh, or teares beguile
            Of Wind-like Woman: Thou, that at firſt ſight
            Part'ſt from thy thoughts, and giu'ſt thy mayden-right
            To irreligious Man, whoſe ſmooth-tongu'd Art
            Made vp in Oathes, ſteales on thy fooliſh heart:
            Both you, and all inthralled Louers, reade,
            Whether my teares may iuſt acceptance pleade.
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  〈2… pages missing〉
               
               
               Still the frightfull noyſe increaſed, and the Shepheards
their feare; till one more heartie then his fellowes,
taking a Box out of his Scrip, with Flint and
Steele ſoone kindled the Tinder, and lighted ſome
ſhrubbe ſprigges, though wet, by reaſon of Raine that
fell, and bidding his companions follow him, taking
their Slings and Sheepe-hookes, they m
                     •
                  rched
downe the Hils ſide, and with their lighted Stickes (ſeruing
them for Lanternes) guided toward the dolefull
ſound: Soone they approached, where in an intricate
thicket of Buſhes and Bryers, they might heare a voice
wrapped vp, as it were in ſighes, bringing them ſo
fearefully on, that though they drew neere, they made a
pawſe; till hearkening more wiſtly to the ſad complaints,
they plainely gheſſed them to proceed from ſome wretched
creature, and the rather, ſince they might heare
the Author of that ſorrow, craue aide and fauour of iuſt
and compaſſionate Heauen: Whereupon (laying all
feare aſide) they ruſhed through the rude Buſhes, and
buſhy Trees, at one of whoſe ſtrong Trunkes (by the
helpe of their lighted ſhrubbes) they might behold a
(dead as it were) diſmayed Youth laid on the withered
Graſſe, his face pale and wanne, his teeth faſt cloſed,
and his eyes eclipſed, onely now and then with a dolefull
ſigh he would accompany his mortall pangs, which
ſpringing from a wofull cauſe, and in the dead of night,
might doubtleſſe occaſion the fearefull effect here related.
               The ſad ſpectacle ſtirred vp the poore mens compaſſion,
which they ſhewed and celebrated with their pittying
teares. The wounded partie had dyed the neere
thicke graſſe with his bloud, in which the rage and torment

he felt, made him furiouſly welter, his paine ſeeming
to bee ſuch, that after each grone, they expected
his lifes end. The Beholders, though they intreated
him of his diſaſter, could know nothing, for much loſſe
of bloud had made the partie quite ſenſeleſſe; ſo that
ſeeing it booteleſſe to ſatisfie their deſires, they ſought,
if it were poſſible, to helpe his hurts, to which purpoſe
they began gently to vncloath him: and vnbuttoning a
thinne Tyſſue Doublet he wore, perceiued two wounds
in his breſt, which (though bloudy, deepe) yet appeared
not to be mortall; beſides which, he had other three
(leſſe dangerous) in ſeuerall parts of his body: by all
which, they might perceiue, that the Authors of them
were moſt willing, not to haue left their worke vnfiniſhed.
Their beſt and wholeſomeſt purpoſe was to cut
down boughs, which tying and fitting together, as well
as the ſhortneſſe of time would permit them, they made
a carriage like a Beere, on which as the compaſsionate
Swaines were about to haue laid the diſmaid body, ſo
to haue conueyed him to a neighbouring Village their
habitation, the trampling and neighing of a Horſe, that
ſeemed to be neere, ſtayed them; and being as yet ſcarce
free from their former feare, a ſmal matter was ſufficient
to affright them: for imagining ſome came backe to
diſpatch the bloudleſſe Corps, without expecting the
certaintie; cold in their commenced charitie, they
ſwiftly tooke them to their flight. But the ſame effect,
which the Horſes noiſe cauſed in them, frighted the
ſame Horſe, who yet had not forſaken his wounded
Maſter, till now that they with their lights flew thorow
the thicket, ſo amazed the ſwift Beaſt, that he (like
winde) making contrary ſpeed, they ſoone loſt ſight of

him, which made them thinke, that hee whom they left
among the Trees, was ſome perſon of qualitie, and owner
of that Horſe, which made them afreſh deſirous to
put their pious intent in execution: and ſo turning back,
and not once ſuffering the wounded perſon to come to
himſelfe out of a deepe Trance in which he lay▪ putting
him vpon the Boughy Coffin, and rearing him on their
ſtrong ſhoulders, they went toward their Village.
               In this manner they marched through the intangling
Wood, till ſuch time, as (skilfull) they got out of it, and
willing to take a narrower path, which ſerued them as a
ſhorter cut to the neighbouring Village, ſomewhat out
of the rode way, they might heare great cryes, humming
of Slings, barking of Dogs, ſuch a noiſe as made
them thinke verily all the Mountainous Inhabitants
were vp in Armes.
               But firſt let mee ſhew the cauſe of this notable Vproare,
which, though needleſſe, ſuffice proceeded from
thoſe rude and barbarous Mountainers.
               You heard how the three Shepheards with their fearfull
flight, frighted the ſwift Horſe, who by his Maſters
hard fortune, was there looſe, grazing in the Deſart
Mountaine. It hapned next, as theſe charitable mens

                     〈◊〉
                   luckes would haue it, that the furious ſpeed of the
ſwift Beaſt awoke certaine Keepers, that belonged to
the Woods, to looke to the Game, and ſuch recreations
as were committed to their charge▪ who ſtraight
ſtood on their Guard, ſuppoſing ſomewhat elſe to bee
the cauſe and breaker of their reſt: when (
                     〈◊〉
                   riſen
from the ground, and looking what way the bloudleſſe
body was brought toward them) ſeeing ſo many lights,
(
                     〈◊〉
                   doubtleſſe their feare made them ſeeme flaming

                  Aetna's to them) and not knowing what might bee the
cauſe, or who ſhould vvalke in that vnſeaſonable time
and manner, full of aſtoniſhment, and, like mad-men,
(though wanting courage to expect the iſſue) not ſtaying
one for another, they ranne to the neereſt Village to
cry out for help: and this with ſuch howling and ſtrange
clamour, that they raiſed all the neighbourhood and
adioyning Farmers vp in Armes: and the hurry was ſo
much the greater, at what time (crying out for help) the
fearefull name of the King and his Iuſtice was interpoſed;
for then, Men, Women and Children, ſome
with Halberts, others with Launces or Swords, (at the
Bels ringing) ranne which vvay the Keepers affirmed
there were ſome ſetting the King his VVoods on fire;
who conducting the troupes, brought them ſpeedily to
the place, from whence the poore careleſſe Shepheards
were vvalking faire and ſoftly in proſecution of their
charitable office; ſometimes exchanging their burdens,
otherwhiles reſting vpon the bare and naked Rockes,
ſo that ere they could get to the Village, theſe cruell
people were ready to encounter them: and theſe were
the cries and noiſes the ſecure Shepheards heard, vpon
their ſally from the incloſed Mountaine. No ſooner
ſaw the Sauage Crue thoſe ſtrange lights, when ſtraight
(as by aime) they diſcharged a thicke ſhowre of ſtones,
making the hollow Valley reſound with their wouen
Slings: wherefore the poore men (ſeeing themſelues ſo
hardly intreated, and that though they cryed out to the
others to hold their hands, 'twas but in vaine, ſince
they could not bee heard) left their burden, and fell to
their defence, at what time it grew to bee toward day-breake.
               
                  
                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
againe reſtore; and, ſo with ſome comfortable remedies
the Surgeon applide, the Gentleman came a little to
himſelfe; onely for feare of the worſt it was ordained,
that none ſhould trouble him with ſpeaking to him, till
hee might more ſtrongly recouer his Sences, vvithout
which he remained moſt part of that day. When hee
grew at laſt to be better, and conſidered in how different
a place he now vvas, from that, vvhere hee receiued
his vvounds, he could not but extremely vvonder, and
(calling to minde his misfortunes) grew ſomewhat paſſionate,
and addreſſing himſelfe to the Noble Gentleman,
that neuer ſo much as once parted from his beds-head,
requeſted him to tell him, in what place hee was,
or how brought thither: In which, the Noble Leriano
(for ſo was the compaſſionate Gentleman called) louingly
ſatisfide him, deſiring him withall not to grieue
himſelfe with the thought of any thing ſaue health,
which hee and his ſeruants were as carefull of as their
owne. At which the vnfortunate Gentleman vvas
ſomewhat more couragious, and yeelding his due
thankes, thought fit to be ſilent, and ſo as much as his
wounds would permit him, reſted ioyfull, ſeeing his loſt
and dead hopes of recouering new life, ſo much bettered.
               It pleaſed Heauen after to reſtore him wholly, reſeruing
him to other innumerable vnfortunate accidents
and misfortunes; and now within ſome few dayes hee
vnderſtood more largely from Leriano in what manner
hee found him; vvho told him likewiſe, that himſelfe
was a Branch of that Ancient Stocke of the Noble Perafanes
de R
                        •
                     bera, and borne in the Royall Citie of Seuil
(Spaines Babylon) from whence he was trauelling about

certaine Law ſuites to the Citie and Court of Valladolid,
which voyage he now more willingly deferred out of
the care of his health, then vndertooke, that hee might
be feaſted and welcomed by his kindred and friends:
Heere the vnknowne Youth was as thankefull, as contented
at ſuch true and faithfull profeſſions, thinking
now his miſeries and wounds well inflicted, ſince by
their ſad occaſion, they acquainted him with ſo worthy
a friend.
               Not long after, he was able to riſe, but not ſo boldly, as
to venter out of his Chamber, where hee wanted nothing
to entertaine time with, or diuert Melancholly,
which by fits exceedingly afflicted him: and at one time
amongſt the reſt in Lerianos abſence (who was walked
into the Towne) falling into his ſad Dumpes, and willing
to beguile his fancy, he called for a Lute, (which
cunningly tuned) with a cleere Voice and pleaſing Dittie
he muſtered vp his lifes former paſſages, in the inſuing
Verſes.
               
                  
                     Soule. Since ſhe hath prou'd vntrue,
                  Leaue to loue her, bid, Adieu:
                  Hope, for nought from ſuch an ill,
                  But to be a Priſoner ſtill:
                  Can ſhe euer be reclaim'd,
                  That hath thus her honour ſtain'd?
                  Vaniſh, vaniſh, (my deſire)
                  Loyall thoughts (like lingring fire)
                  You conſume me. Hence, Away,
                  Since your Miſtris went astray.
               
               
                  
                     Soule. Remember to forget
                  Her, whoſe falſhood haunts thee yet:
                  
                     
Try no more, nor longer prooue,
                  What it is to liue in Loue;
                  Leaſt, ſo, (like a ſuddaine Theefe)
                  Thou bee'ſt ſeiſ'd by winged griefe.
                  Say, with ſorrow ſhee ſhould pine,
                  'Twas no baſe neglect of thine
                  Cauſ'd it: her fault ſets thee free:
                  Reaſon bids, Take libertie.
               
               
                  
                     Soule. Thou mai'ſt forget, I know,
                  Iuſtly, her, thy cauſe of woe,
                  Who abhor'd thee; Nature weake,
                  Paſsion (though) would gladly ſpeake,
                  Sayes, I lou'd her once: Tis right:
                  But, then, wanton appetite
                  More, art thou (my wronged ſoule)
                  And maiſt fleſh & blood controule.
                  They are mortall, but thy name
                  Still must haue a purer fame.
               
               
                  
                     Soule. No longer weepe: forbeare,
                  (Patience bids) to ſhead a teare.
                  Cruell ſhe that loſt all troth,
                  Well may teach thee now to loath.
                  Blame no birth or croſser Starre,
                  But their ſexe that faithleſse are:
                  
                     Soule! yet weep (though) ſtillament
                  (All my life) in woe be ſpent:
                  Leaſt (forgetting to complaine)
                  Thou be drawne to Loue againe.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Soule. Clarinda, and ſad moane,
                  You that ne're leaue me alone,
                  You, to heare me, weary ſtill:
                  But content and pleaſ'd to kill.
                  Now you heare a grieued Louer
                  (All his former hopes giu'n ouer)
                  Promiſe to forget: which way,
                  Shall I t
                        •
                     en forget, Soule? Say!
                  I: beginne: for that's the moſt
                  Leaue to Loue; ſince all faith's loſt.
               
               Whil'ſt he was yet euen in the middle of his Song,
Leriano entred, but loth to interrupt him, ſtaid, till by a
ſcorching ſigh, with which his Song had end, he knew
the Muſicke had wrought in him, her accuſtomed effect
of ſadneſſe; ſo he came neerer, where he found him laid
on his bed, and his eyes diſtilling teares: which in vaine
he ſought to hide from his deare friend, who comming
toward him with open armes, ſaid; There is no reaſon,
gentle Sir, that from a ſtranger, and one that ſhewed ſo
much good will as my ſelfe, you ſhould conceale that
griefe, which, by vvhat now, and at other times you
haue demonſtrated, I conceiue to be very great: and if
I, till now, haue not beene very earneſt to demand the
cauſe, you may know it was not willingly to reduce ſuch
pittifull accidents to your memory, as might happely
haue endangered your health, in which you are
now ſo forward. You muſt not but ſatisfie me, and let
mee know vvithall, who, and whence you are: For I vow
to Heauen and you, that bee it neceſſarie for your ſake
and reuenge, I vvill hazzard Honour, Life, and Fortune.
I reſt fully aſſured (replide the concealed Youth.) Noble

friend Leriano, of the pure affection you haue ſhewed
me, mouing you to ſaue my life, by reſtoring it, and giuing
me the being I now enioy, which, next Heauen, I
owe to your ſelfe; and though the remembrance of my
paſt diſaſters be moſt grieuous to me; yet in reſpect of
my engagements to your ſelfe, and becauſe I would you
ſhould perceiue how much I deſire to fulfill your commands,
though I renue old ſores, vnrip auncient
wounds, I will ſatisfie your wiſh, giuing a ſhort account
of my inward thoughts, youthfull dayes, and yong imployments,
as forerunners of my preſent ſtormes and
ſhipwracke.
               I cannot ſufficiently expreſſe Leriano's gratitude, to
heare his friends willingneſſe to the thing he ſo heartily
deſired, and thinking each minute an Age till he began
the promiſed Diſcourſe, he commanded his ſeruants to

                     ••
                  ue them, and with a cheerefull countenance and ſtill
attention gaue eare to what followeth.
               My name, worthy Friend, is Gerardo: The great and
famous Village of Madrid (moſt vvorthy Manſion of
our Catholike Monarks) my loued Country, the common
generall Mother of different people, and remote
Nations. Neere her high-reared walles, by whoſe
ruines her ancient ſtrength is yet ſeene, is the houſe of
my Anceſtors, ennobled as well by their births, as it's
owne Antiquitie; there was I borne, there firſt bred. It
vvere needleſſe to enlarge my Diſcourſe, by recounting
the tender exerciſes of my infancie, therefore I will begin
from my yeer's of fifteene, which accompliſhed,
I was forced to obey my Father, by accompanying him
to one of the beſt places of Gouernment in Caſtile,
which his Maieſty had as then newly beſtowed on him.

My elder Brother Leoncio went alſo along with vs, a valiant
yong fellow of towardly hopes; all of vs were moſt
iocund with our Fathers new fortunes, our iourney vvas
ſhort, for in foure dayes we arriued, where (according
to cuſtome) we were ſolemnely welcomed. My Father
tooke poſſeſſion of the Gouernment, and to the general
ſatisfaction went on in his Triennium.
               
               This was the famous City of Tal
                        •
                     ora, one of the beſt &
moſt populous in the Kingdome of Toledo; whoſe ſituation
is fructified with the ſiluer ſtreames of gold-bearing
Tagus, and makes it one of the moſt pleaſant and
delightfulleſt vpon all his Bankes: the Inhabitants are
louing, courteous, and affable, particularly the Gentry
(of the beſt qualified houſes of Spaine) moſt worthy
Pillars to ſo ancient a foundation.
               Here (me thought) I was euer at home, vvith friends
of mine owne Age and ranke: our exerciſes for the
moſt part were riding, running at Buls, at the Ring,
Maskes, Barryers and the like, with (which delighting
the multitude) wee made our ſelues cunning practitioners.
In the field, Hawking and Hunting vvere our
ſports, for both which that Country is plentifully prouided.
Theſe, & the others, that took vp our whole times,
were my chiefe delights, to a heart yet vntouched by
loues flames: which made me as contented, as free; as
ſatisfied in my ſelfe, as by others enuied. Yet not long
could I ſo boaſt, not long was I thus ioyfull: how ſoone
from a freeman became I a bondſlaue? From merry to
melancholly; from tractable, to the contrary; from
happy, to vnfortunate? Sooner then I could with
(deare Leriano) ſhall you heare the change. Amongſt
many other ſhewes and Triumphs we vſually had, one

drew neere, appointed by our Citie in honour and commemoration
of the bleſſed Virgin Maries happy Nuptials,
much celebrated throughout all Caſtile, at which
time, an infinite number of common people, and great
concourſe of Gentry reſort thither, as well from the
Court and the Citie of Auila, as the Imperiall Toledo,
and other parts of the Kingdome. The wiſhed day
came on, being the ſixe and twentieth of Aprill, duſkiſh
and cloudy, a ſeaſon naturall to that Climate, or
belike Phoebus knew his beames might well bee ſpared,
where ſo many, ſo beautifull lights would appeare. We
were two and thirty Gentlemen, that in ſeuerall colours
entred the Market-place: my ſelfe performed the office
of Stickler betwixt my Father and Brother Leoncio. The
ſport began, the Bulles were let looſe and chaſed, the
whole ſolemnitie, to the generall good liking and applauſe
of the Spectators, ended in a well-ordered skirmiſh
of Canes on Horſebacke, there hauing hapned no
diſaſter or miſchance at all, ſaue mine, which conſidering
the ſtate it hath now brought me too, was the greateſt
could arriue.
               At my firſt paſſing ouer the place on horſebacke, my
careleſſe eyes chanced to glance at a Bay-window,
(where certaine Gentlewomen ſtrangers were placed)
they pawſed a little as being attracted, no leſſe by the
noueltie, then the goodly preſence: Backe I went with
ſome other friends and Gentlemen, that I might reenioy
a ſuller ſight of 
                     •
                  hoſe beauties, and faire and ſoftly,
as prauncingly as our Horſes could pace, we drew
neere, paſſing to and fro, with more turnes and windings,
then doth a poore priſoners reſtleſſe imagination
in a loathſome dungeon. Neither had we (thinke I) till

this time quitted the place, had not the Gentlewomen,
ſeeing all ended, raiſed themſelues vp to goe downe to
their Coaches that attended them beneath. Heere my
foundation failed, and from this inſtant beganne the
ruines of my fiered Troy.
               
               One there was amongſt thoſe Ladies, that till the preſent
ſtill masked, diſcouered ſo rare a beauty in ſo yong
a body, that wee were all ſuddenly aſtoniſhed. Me
thought (vnaccuſtomed to ſuch brunts) the faire creature
euen tore and parted my heart, to make it part of
her tender owne: For ſure I am, by the effect, any one
might iudge how ill I was wounded, ſo powerfull piercing
was the ſoueraigne glaunce of her eyes. At her
riſing vp, ſhee approached ſo neere the iron window,
that ſ
                     •
                  eing her lay her faire hands on the fore-part of the
Bay, 
                     •
                   was bold to tell her, The hardnes of thoſe barres
(faire Miſtris) is not ſafe, from being ſoftned by thoſe
ſnowy hands, if happely they partake with the vertue
of your ſcorching eyes, ſince with their rayes, you melt
the moſt obdurate flinty-hearts.
               Theſe, and ſuch amorous flaſhes, I imperfectly blundered
out: ſhe onely anſwered with a gracious ſmile,
and paying our ſalutations with a Curtſie, followed her
company.
               At entring her Coach, I alighted to haue held
the Boote, to vvhich, neither her ſelfe, nor another
Dame (I knew ſince to bee her Aunt) would by any
meanes conſent: onely as they entred, I paſſed a complement,
and they returned thankes. I asked them
whence they were? They told me of Auila: had it not
beene for being noted, I ſhould haue knowne their lodging,
the end and limit of their Voyage. I could ſcarce

take leaue, that Angell had ſo tranſported me: but ſeeing
there vvas no remedy, was forced to patience. They
were gone, and left me ſo amazed, that I had ſcarce memory
to get to Horſe, or to perceiue that my friends
expected me. Yet vp I got, and gaue order to a ſeruant,
to watch where the Coach ſtopped, and to learn truely
who they were that went in it. This done, wee gaue a
turne about the ioyful City, though the diſtemper, (cauſed
by the late accident, I felt within me) made me weary
of my friends irkeſome company, of whom (faining
my ſelfe not well) I tooke leaue. By the time I got home
it was night; ſo I ſhifted cloathes, and (my minde brooking
no delaies) went into the ſtreet, and Senabria with
me, ſo was the ſeruant priuy to my ſecrets, called; him
I vvilled to direct me to the houſe of my beloued ſtranger,
and likewiſe to tell mee what hee had heard of her
qualitie: vvho ſaid, ſhe lay in one of the richeſt mens
houſes in the Citie, whoſe Neece ſhe vvas, and that ſhe,
vvho accompanied her in the Coach, vvas her Aunt,
that they vvere within two dayes vpon a iourney of Deuotion,
to the Monaſterie of Guadalupe. So that now
thinking I had relation enough for my purpoſe, I would
needs fetch a turne in the ſtreet, hoping that the very
ſight of thoſe walles that concealed my Sun from mee,
might giue me ſome comfort. But one of my neereſt
friends preuented mee, who hearing I vvas not vvell,
came to viſit me: wee ſtraight ſaluted, imbracing, as if

                     〈◊〉
                   long time wee had not ſeene each other. Hee vvondred
at the noueltie, and hauing power of commanding
friendſhip on his part, ſoone forced from mee the
cauſe of my malady.
               
                  Fernando (ſo vvas my beſt friend called) was glad in

his ſoule, that my ſickneſſe vvas no other then vvhat I
made knowne; and indeuour vvith his beſt perſwaſions to
diuert me from my purpoſe, telling me by vvhat I had let
him know of the ſudden departure of thoſe Dames, how
ſmall hope there vvas to obtaine my deſire. But finding
me fixed, it behooued him to giue vvay: ſo together vvee
went to the ſtreet and houſe of vvhich Senabria had informed
me; and paſſing vnder the vvindowes, I might ſee
at one of them, being the lower-moſt, the North-Starre
that guided mee; her eyes contending to giue light vvith
thoſe rayes that ſhewed in the ſtill night: She and another
Dame of like ſtature, and (in likelihood) yeeres, were diſcourſing
together: that partie vvas knowne by Fernando, to
be Franciſca, Daughter to Segundo Octauio, owner of the
houſe, vvhoſe qualitie vvas before mentioned.
               Faine vvould I at the inſtant haue ſpoken; but Fernando
thought it not fit too ſuddenly to affright the game; ſo wee
drew neerer by degrees, onely ſo long, till we thought vvee
might be diſcouered by the Moones light: and they ſeeing
vs make a ſtand, vvould haue broken off their Diſcourſe,
clapped to the vvindowes, and retired, had not Fernando
(as hauing more freedome) ſtayed them, by ſaying, Let
not our boldneſſe (hauing ſo good a diſcharge as the 
                     •
                  ight
of your beauties) interrupt your pleaſing Conference; or
if this may not ſerue for an excuſe, you may puniſh vs, as
you vvould houſhold ſeruants.
               
                  Franciſca, a little frighted, thus anſwered; If it vvere
lawfull for vs to make longer ſtay, wee ſhould not greatly
complaine of your boldneſſe; the rather, ſince your humilitie
hath thus ſatisfide; onely the growing late, makes vs of
force retire. Nay, but ſaid I (remouing vvith this occaſion)
you cannot but leaue vs doubtfull of your diſpleaſure,
vvhich I ſhall eſteeme as my greateſt vnhappineſſe.
               
                  
All this while my Diuine ſtranger was ſilent, vvhen, applying
my ſelfe to her, I thus ſaid; I beſeech you, faire
Miſtris, be not you of that Ladies rigorous minde: ſince
your ſweetneſſe is ſhortly to leaue vs, to make ſo long ſtay
from this Countrey.
               Doe you know me, quoth ſhe, vvith a gracious diſdaine,
or that my departure ſhall be ſo ſoone? Franciſca now demanded
of Fernando (vvhom ſhe knew) vvho I was; and ſo
I had leiſure, to ſpeake more freely to my Miſtris, ſaying, If
(faire creature) you remembred but ſo well him that this
afternoone kiſſed your hands, and to them rendred a heart
more firme then theſe irons, as he in his inflamed breſt hath
the rare image of your face engrauen; ſure I am, you could
not ſo neglectfully anſwere me.
               I vnderſtand not your meaning (ſaid ſhee) though (me
thinkes) euer ſince your beginning to ſpeak, I ſhould know
you: but the habit you now weare, is ſo different from
vvhat you had on in the afternoone, that you neede not
ſuppoſe me to be forgetfull. Loth I vvas to ſpend the ſhort
time in fruitleſſe Diſcourſe, and therefore to the purpoſe
demanded, ſaying, When is your ſad departure? or to ſay
truer, my ſuddaine death? and this vvith ſo faint and pittifull
a voice, that my Miſtris touched vvith my feeling, with
ſome little earneſtneſſe, (though ſmilingly) anſwered, I
ſhould thinke you vvere ſorry for my departure, but that I
gheſſe you can diſſemble. I haue neither time, nor place,
faire Dame, ſaid I, to expreſſe my iuſt ſorrow in, which is
ſuch, vvhen I thinke of your abſence, that if I follow you
not, the being mine owne deſperate executioner, muſt be
my lateſt refuge, ſeruing as an Antidote againſt the poiſon
that burnes and conſumes me.
               You doe much endeere your ſickneſſe, ſaid ſhe, (giuing
as it were to vnderſtand that I flattered her) vvhich if it be

ſuch as your preſentment ſhewes, my knowledge is ſmall,
and my abilitie leſſe to apply a briefe remedy: though I
ſuſpect, that as you grew quickly ſicke, you will the ſooner
recouer: for it is the faſhion of you men, to make things
farre difficult vvith vs, and for your aduantages to facilitate
and leuell Mountaines of impoſsibilities. Let's haue
plaine Song, if you wil haue me agree in the tune; & that
you may know, I vvould not vvillingly contradict you, nor
proue nice to the much good wil you profeſſe vnto me: you
ſhall vnderſtand, that two dayes hence I am for Guadalupe,
and hope my returne may be this way; and both now and
then, if 
                     〈◊〉
                   any thing I may ſerue you, beleeue, and command
me, and ſee whether I be thankefull, or neglect your
vowes, though perhaps they be but flatteries.
               Thus farre held on our Diſcourſe, (my ſelfe the ioyfulleſt
man aliue) when ſome one calling from within, they
were forcſt to be gone; & Franciſca only ſtayed to vtter this.
Fernando tels mee, you haue an excellent Muſician ſerues
you; & I hauing extolled our Country voices to my Couſin
Clara, deſire you that ſhee may be ſatisfied in hearing,
and I proue no Lyer in relating: and to morrow about this
time we will heere expect you. Faine would I, with the
greateſt thankes that might be, haue kiſſed her hands for
the fauour ſhe did me: but her farewell was ſo ſudden, it
was impoſsible: and ſo Fernando and my ſelfe paſsing
thorow the ſtreet, hauing appointed to meete againe next
night, tooke leaue and departed.
               The remainder of the night I ſpent in a thouſand ſeuerall
imaginations, all proceeding frō the difficultie of the enterprize
I had in hand; till the cleere morning giuing truce to
my confuſed thoughts, I got out of their Labyrinth, and
from home likewiſe: and hauing notice where my Miſtris
vſed to heere Maſſe, I and my friend Fernando were there

preſent, where I receiued from my lifes Owner, in as much
as her amorous but warie, lookes, would permit rich and
ineſtimable fauours.
               Thus paſſed we the morning, and the afternoone in often
walking thorow her ſtreete, till night came on: and
being fit time, with my deare friend and the Muſicke wee
drew neere: and finding all huſht and quiet, ſtanding
where we did the night before, my Muſician began to ſing
what I had inſtructed him, to the ſweet melody of a vvelltuned
Violl.
               If, like Phoebus, in the Weſt,
               Now thy fairer eyes at reſt,
               Wearie, longer, are to ſee
               One, that dyes for want of thee:
               Then, muſt I of force (my Deare)
               Hope the morne will ſoone be heere:
               And a Truce to ſlumber giue,
               So ſhall I returne to liue.
               Shall I; of thoſe Sunnes, thine eyes,
               Be the flow'r that at Sunne-riſe,
               Spreds with him, and ſhuts againe,
               When he diues into the maine?
               But, thine eyes might plainely ſee
               Yeſterday that truth in me,
               Since, when they were preſent, I
               Liu'd; (but they being gone) now dye.
               So that now, at thy command,
               Life and death are at a ſtand:
               Doubt not, Coward: her good will
               How can a good Angell kill?
               If, a wretched Priſoner, whom
               Law and a foule fact doth doome,
               
               Once, by chance, ſpy but the face
               Of his Prince, he hopes for grace.
               Iuſtlier may thy beauty giue
               Me aſsurance, then, to liue:
               Since I happy was, to view
               That: no guilt or crime elſe knew.
               Eagles by the Sunne doe proue
               Right, or Baſtard brood; ſo Loue
               My amazed daz
                     •
                  ling eyes
               Of thy ſplendour purifies.
               Loue, that ſafely doth incline
               Me to trace thoſe eyes of thine:
               Fearing not what e're betides,
               Once to loſe my ſou'raigne guides.
               And, although thoſe North-Starres now
               Darkned are, and thy faire brow;
               Yet, my Loue, the Loadſtone, may
               Soone diſcouer lightſome day.
               Iuſt as he began, the window opened, but not a creature
to be ſeene, which made vs not a little wonder, (ignorant
who within might keepe my Miſtris and her Couſin from
appearing) but the Muſician with that ſweet Sonnet following
which he ſung, interrupted our doubtfulneſſe.
               Whether, or fix't, or wandring, Lights of Heauen!
               (Though leſser Tapers, to the Moone, you be)
               Bright Scutcheons of the gods, and Planets ſeuen
               Whoſe cheerefull influence doth best agree
               With am'rous mindes: a breſt moſt pure and euen
               Inuokes your faire aſpects; Looke downe on me,
               And (as your powr's, me power to Loue haue giuen;)
               Light her I loue, that ſhe my thoughts may ſee.
               
               And oh, thou cold and more then ſober night!
               That in dull calm'neſſe ſleep'ſt vntill cleere day,
               In abſence of thy Sunnes all-glorious light.
               Wert thou like me (ſad night) to goe thy way
               By abſence grieu'd, to loſe ſo rich a ſight;
               Teares, ſorrowes Tribute; and not ſleepe, thoul'dst pay.
               This Sonnet ended with ſo ſweet a cloze, that ſoon the
Ladies ſhewed themſelues, and from the window willed
vs to come neerer, ſaying, From the very beginning
Clara and I haue hearkened to your ſeruants admirable
voice, and deferred our being ſeene, for feare of marring
the Song.
               
                  Fernando replide with thanks: and I turning to my Clara,
asked her how ſhe liked the Voice? to which with a pretty
ſmile ſhe anſwered; 'Twas harmonious enough, but that
the Muſician, in declaring ſo liberally his Maſters paſsion,
had ſomewhat more enlarged himſelfe then was there expected:
Why, ſweet loue (ſaid I) doe the ſcorching amorous
effects of my heart offend you? If ſo, my breſt from
henceforth ſhall like another A
                        ••
                     na boile inwardly, and
my tongue, in ſtead of expreſsing paine, turne Marble.
               I blame you not, Gerardo, ſomewhat milder now ſaid
ſhe; but ſince your affection is ſuch, I could haue wiſhed
that neither my Couſin, nor your friend, ſhould be priuy
to it: For the returne on my part, I know not what to ſay,
but would God I had neuer left Auila. (This ſaid) her right
arme ſet on the windows great Barre, and her cheeke reſting
vpon the white hand, with a gentle ſigh, I might perceiue,
that her eyes trickling ſome drops, dryed, or rather
caught the cryſtall pearles in an olorous Handkerchiefe.
I preſumed, ſuch an accident could bee no leſſe then fauourable,
and ſo vrged the reaſon of the ſudden paſsion, withall

making large proteſtations of my loue and ſeruice, that in
it I would ſpend my life, though I hazzarded it in any kind
of death. To which, in the moode ſhee was, thus ſhee replide,
Haue I not reaſon, thinke you, Gerardo, to be troubled,
in ſeeing my ſelfe thus eſtranged from mine owne affections?
and by caſting my ſelfe ſo looſely vpon yours, to
know (to my vnhappineſſe) that I haue no command ouer
my free wil, and that in this reſpect, I am forced to part
(though my heart and life be parted) ſince my Couſin and
her Parents cannot with infinite intreaties obtaine of my
Aunt to leaue me with them, perhaps as preſaging my deſires?
Oh know, mine eyes doe but counterfet my hearts
griefe, & the greateſt affliction which that can feele, is the
impoſſibilitie (in abſence) to repay the affection you beare
me. And ſo ending in teares and ſighes, turning to her
Couſin without expecting my anſwere, ſhe ſaid; I thinke
'tis time to retire for feare wee be miſſed. Franciſca was about
to haue anſwered, when Fernando croſſing Trumpe,
preuented her, ſaying to Clara, Your deſire, faire Dame,
cannot as yet take effect: for, if you want ſleepe, Franciſca
muſt make good the field alone, til we determine a certain
doubt, in which there muſt be a knowne Victor, or elſe it
is not to be giuen ouer.
               'Tis the beſt in 
                     〈◊〉
                   world, quoth Franciſca, but ſo tediouſly
controuerted 
                     •••
                  weene a number of people, that
ſhould we ſet it afreſh on foot, 'twere neuer to end. Well,
it muſt be reſolued, ſaid I, and Miſtris Clara with her wiſedome
ſhall arbitrate for the more certaine concluſion of
your opinions. Why, none may deny, ſaid Fernando, but
that mine is true: for what reaſon is it, that our conſtancy
ſhould bee paralel'd with that of women, paſt or preſent?
and certainely, my ſo reaſonable earneſtneſſe in this point,
ſhall laſt with me as long as life. And I (ſaid I) will reenforce

it to the laſt gaſpe. Well then, ſaid Franciſca, there
is no more to bee done, but ſet vp the Liſts. What need
you, quoth I? the iron barres of your window already
ſerue in their ſtead. But leauing this, as a thing ſettled in
our fauour, the Inſtrument with ſome pleaſing Ditty ſhall
make our peace.
               The two Couſins were pleaſed with my motion, eſpecially
when they might ſee me take the Violl from my man,
and ſettle my ſelfe to ſing theſe Verſes:
               Stay, bold thoughts, refraine your 
                     •
                  ill,
               Silent be and ſuffer ſtill:
               What? not ſpeake if ſhee be by?
               Torment: if you doe, you dye.
               Say, the flame to riſe begin,
               Teares without, may quench within.
               Better die in eaſie paine
               (Suff'ring) then (if not) be ſlaine.
               Is there (though) no remedy?
               Silence, then; I'le welcome thee:
               And thou, tongue of mine, conceale,
               What the heart muſt not reueale.
               When I had ende
                     •
                   the faire 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  eganne highly to
commend the Ditty▪ 
                  
                     •
                  ut ſo to 
                     〈…〉
                   ſinger, that had
not chaſte Lucina loſt her 
                     〈…〉
                  , they might haue
ſeene ſhamefaſtneſſe in the 
                     〈…〉
                   cheekes. Leauing
this, I began to offer my ſelfe 
                     〈…〉
                   their ſeruice, and to
Clara thus ſpoke, that both 
                     〈◊〉
                   heare me: We ſhall be
very ſolitary (your 
                     〈◊〉
                   being ſo ſudden as laſt night
you told me:) but indeed this Countrey cannot containe
ſuch a treaſure long; beſides, the place of your birth is ſo
eminent, that it muſt needs as equally attract you, as your

kindred or friends. I know what it may doe, ſaid ſhee, my
will is now my Aunts, whilſt I am with her; though let mee
tell you, that for my Couſin here, (whom I loue equally
with my ſelfe) I could bee content to leaue not onely mine
owne Countrey, but forget my neereſt friends. And ſo ſhe
ended, beholding mee ſo amorouſly, that I plainely perceiued
to whom her ſpeech was directed, which intangled
me wholly in her pleaſing Labyrinth, in ſuch ſort, that before
I got free, it coſt mee much time, and many misfortunes.
               But now ſeeing day come haſtily on, we tooke leaue, and
I of Clara, as if it had beene my lateſt; indeed to both our
griefes we parted, which I in melancholy expreſſed: vvhich
when Fernando ſaw, hee could not but breake into this
ſpeech vnto mee: It much troubles mee, friend Gerardo, to
ſee you thus droope: what doe you want? what is not abounding
to you? yeſterday you were not acquainted; to
day, you haue Caeſars Vici: Clara loues you, how much
your ſelfe and I well perceiue. She goes to Auila, the iourney
is not ſo long, nor your meanes or mine ſo ſhort, but
that we may be Gheſts any where as well as at home. And
ſince this is ſo, ſince you take me to bee your friend, there's
no more to be done, but take courage; and, like a man of
Valour, withſtan
                     ••••
                   difficulties.
               Ah my louing friend ſaid I, your noble breſt at no time
euer failed mee: your Diſcourſe reuiues my afflicted heart;
you raiſe my dead hopes, which were euen now giuen ouer,
ſo that I am now wholly diſpoſed to the preſent occaſion
you vrge; and if ſo you pleaſe, to morrow, (when wee
ſhall heare that Clara hath left the Cittie) wee will ſecretly
follow to the Bridge, and ſo take the lower way of the Riuer
(being out of the high way thither) where they will vndoubtedly
lodge: and for feare of being benighted, make

it their firſt daies iourney. You ſay well (quoth Fernando)
and perhaps we ſhall haue a ioyfull returne; onely (for the
maine) it behooues vs to bee ſecret. That concernes mee
moſt, ſaid I, and therefore my aduice is, that without more
company then our ſelues, we goe both diſguized: In which
reſolution, we bade Adieu till the next day, that knowing
my Miſtris with Franciſca and her Aunt were to depart after
Dinner; I vvent to Fernando's lodging, vvhere I vvas
againe incouraged by him; who ſhewed his Noble deſire
in the following Sonnet.
               A brazen heart, an Adamantine minde
               (Doubtleſse) had he, whoſe reſtleſse working Braine
               First launcht our mo
                     •
                  uing houſes to the Maine,
               And ſlippery hindges gaue to waues and winde.
               Fanaticke fury, zeale, aſpiring blinde,
               Had he, who raſhly ſought to fly (in vaine)
               But raſher he, that heau'ns bright Carre, ſo faine,
               Downe headlong droue (againſt his fathers minde.)
               A daring Act, a pretty enterprize
               'Twas, to deſcend and conquer Erebus,
               
               To binde the Triple-Porter in a Chaine:
               But to preſume to venter on her eyes,
               Without more note or merit court th
                     〈…〉
                  t thus,
               (As greater madneſſe) ſo, a greater gaine.
               And next hauing cloathed our ſelues in the beſt manner
vve thought fit, vvee departed out at a backe doore of his
houſe; and by the Riuer ſide, with coole trauelling, and
good diſcourſe, about Sun-ſet wee arriued at certaine houſes,
not paſſing halfe a League from the Bridge; and alighting
wee layd vs downe vpon the greene Graſſe behinde
certaine ruinous mudde Walles, where wee reſolued to expect

my Miſtreſſes paſſing by: which hapned not long after:
and knowing the Coach, in which ſhe went, giuing it leaue
to go on before, we followed ſoftly after, & kept the noiſe of
it ſtil in our eares, though ſee it we could not, by reaſon the
darknes of the night began more & more to thicken vpon
vs. So we came to the towne, and marking what Inne they
took, entred into another, where, alighting, I deliuered my
Horſe to the Oaſt, and Fernando turning back againe vpon
his, we went out into the ſtreet, where I clapt a Hunters Cap
on my head, and an open Caſſocke at the ſides, of which I
came prouided ouer my ſhoulders, & taking off my Spurs
and Sword out of the Hangers, caried it vnder mine arme,
liuely reſembling one of our Mul
                        •
                     tiers; I deſired Fernando to
follow, who was ready to burſt with laughter: & in this diſguize
we came to my Miſtreſſes Inne, her (as we entred) I
ſaw ſet very ſorrowfully in a Chaire by her Couſin. I demanded
a chamber for my new Maſter, which whē we had
ſhewed vs, in a ſpacious Court at hand, I gaue order for
prouendring my Horſe, which done, whilſt ſupper alſo vvas
making ready, confident in my Liuery, I went where my
deare Pledge was ſitting, ſomtimes croſſing from the ſtreet
to the Court; otherwhiles, from the Court back againe; and
then drawing neere to her preſence, ſought by the brightnes
of a candle, that lighted al the forepart of the houſe, to make
my ſelfe knowne to her faire eyes: all which endeuours had
bin vaine, had not Franciſca, that kept her company, left her
alone, by going into another roome where her Aunt was
reſting her ſelfe: and thus acknowledging the opportunitie
heauen beſtowed vpō me, I quickly made my approch, ſaying▪
Is it poſſible, light of my darknes, that this your Slaue
hath bin ſo vnknowne to thoſe cleere eyes? when ſhe amazed,
I ſeized on her white hand, and taking off my Cap and
diſguize, made my ſelfe better known: So that when ſhe was

fully ſatisfide, out of pure aſtoniſhment, long it was ere ſhee
would leaue croſſing her ſelfe, and with the ſudden alteration
this vnexpected change had cauſed, ſaid, Are you Gerardo?
in beholding you, ſure I become blind.
               Who ſhould it be, deare ſweet (ſaid I) but he you name,
who transformed into your precious ſelfe, am neuer abſent
from you? Lord, my beſt Sir (quoth ſhe) how came you hither?
What baſe attire is this concealed your Noble being
frō me? whither do you go? Do you think I meane to vndoo
my ſelfe, or feare that my being ſo ſlightly guarded, may
make mee a prey to bloudy Robbers that frequent the vncouth
Mountaines? I cannot thinke, ſaid I, North-ſtarre of
my deſires, that there can be ſo cruell a Thiefe, who, ſeeing
thoſe diuine lookes, would not caſt his armes at your ſnowy
feet; touching my cōming hither, know: Fernando my friend
(worthy al confidence) and my ſelfe haue thus on horſeback
followed after you; and if you pleaſe to giue a reward to my
ſmall labour (though to beare the name of your Seruant, is
ſufficient) vouchſafe that I may this night ſpeak to you, ſince
if you be willing, no occaſion can bee wanting. I willing
(ſaid ſhe?) if that be all the difficulty, neuer go from me. Oh
no, that were vnfit, Mris ſaid I, your Couſin will come out;
and though my diſguize might excuſe her, not knowing
mee, I am loth to put it to the venter. Well, a Gods name
leaue me a while, ſaid ſhe, & expect me ſomewhere, where
we may not be ſeene. Thus I returned to my friend, and
making known my ſucceſſe vnto him, withal the fright my
diſguize put my Miſtris in, it gaue him notable content.
And ſo as well to beguile the time of my expectation, to
ſee my Miſtris, as alſo to excuſe the transformation of my
baſe diſguize, in imitation of the valiant Hercules, giuen ouer
to the vnbridled Loue of Iöle; by way of alluſion hee
tooke a ſubiect in theſe following Verſes.
               
                  
                  
                     〈…〉
                   that ſtrong Club of his
               (
                     〈…〉
                   feet the twelue ſad labours laid)
               That 
                     〈◊〉
                   (a glorious Conſtellation made)
               Whoſe Owner (
                     〈…〉
                   high mounted) is;
               With Iöle doth change: 
                     〈…〉
                   of this,
               Giues him her Reele and Spi
                     •
                  dle (womans Trade)
               With which the Semi-god growes 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  paid;
               And to her worke to fall, thinkes not amiſse.
               She like a ſecond ſterner god of Warre
               Appeares; and he of wanton Venus ſhewes
               A perfect draught, fond Louers to deſcry.
               Yet I not wonder, ſince I know there are
               Stranger effects that Cupid doth diſcloſe
               With Bloud, Stars, Words, and pow'rfull Sympathy.
               Whilſt we diſcourſed of theſe and other matters, Clara
and her company were gotten to Supper; and ſhe, ere the
Cloth was taken away, faining an excuſe, with her Maid
onely accompanying her, came thorow the Court by our
Chamber, and going toward the fartheſt part of it, ſent her
backe, onely bade her call, if ſhe ſhould be miſſed: I perceiuing
the deuice, ſoone followed after; and though my
feete had wings, yet Clara fained the neceſſitie of her returne,
hauing ſtaid ſo long: onely ſaid, Now, Gerardo, you
haue no reaſon to complaine, ſince you ſee how true I am to
your deſires.
               When, ſaid I (owner of my life) 
                     •
                  an I forme complaints
of you that may not proue vniuſt; ſince with this preſent
fauour onely my reward is more, then had I vndergone an
Vliſsian Nauigation?
               You doe ouer-much indeare it, ſaid ſhee; but tell mee,
Thinke you to ſee me at Auila, if, to my griefe, my Aunt
change not her minde? though doubtleſſe, in this I

hope Heauen will be propitious to me. To this I anſwered,
From the very houre, nay inſtant, mine eyes beheld you,
and my ſoule made election of your rare perſonage, I determined
to follow you, not to Auila, which is ſo ſhort a
ſtep, but euen the whole world ouer: and of this pure truth
(deare Pledge) reſt aſſured and ſatisfied.
               Tis well (ſaid my Miſtris) I am alone, and like a vveake
veſſell acknowledging the aduantage of your ſtrength, am
therefore forced to beleeue you, confident, that time at
length muſt beſt diſcouer your conſtancie, and my affection.
Yet tell me, meane you now to accompany me to Guadalupe?
No (my beſt Miſtris) ſaid I: for though I cannot
enioy a greater happineſſe; yet I feare, beeing miſſed at
Talbora, it might happely breed ſome ouer-curious ſuſpition:
to excuſe which (as loth to hazzard your reputation)
I had rather loſe my longing. Your warineſſe doth
much pleaſe me (ſaid ſhe:) continue it ſtill, and when you
heare of our returne, neglect not, but that very night come
to the vſuall ſtand; and till then, farewell, for I feare I haue
ſtaid too long. You muſt not ſo part, quoth I, to leaue mee
in ſo long abſence, without a fauour from you that may
cheriſh my hopes of ſeeing you; and in ſo ſaying, with all
my might, I tooke her about the necke, and to her ſeeming
anger, and my glory, gathered the ſweet flowers from her
rare lips: at which, I cannot ſet downe, how altered, how
angry ſhee was at my licentious boldneſſe. But in ſuch
warres, peace is ſoone made: ſo loue, to whom we became
both ſubiects, eaſily forced her to pardon my boldneſſe,
and confirme our friendſhip, by hanging a rich chaine about
my necke, and precious iewell at it, which formerly
ſerued to adorne her owne breſt, ſaying, Though you haue
angred mee, yet in hope of your repentance, receiue this
pledge, in remembrance that ſhe that now parts from you

to Guadalupe, beares you with her, ſet in the ſecret Relicke
of her heart. Faine would I haue replide, but the comming
of her Maid hindered me; wherefore ſlipping into a
corner, Clara paſſed on, and my ſelfe ſoone went backe to
my Chamber, where Fernando and I with equall content
tooke our reſts, ſeeing my ſuite ſo much bettered by theſe
proſperous beginnings: which being the Originals of my
preſent ills, 'twas neceſſarie (my good Leriano) I ſhould be
thus prolixe in recounting them.
               Wee neuer ſo much as ſtaid for day-light, but taking
horſe, with good ſpeed, in few houres, Fernando got to his
lodging, and I to my Fathers houſe.
               Fifteene dayes my inflamed heart ſuffered in the torment
of my Miſtreſſes abſence; and vpon the ioyfull night of
her arriuall, like a moſt punctuall Louer (Fernando in my
company) ſome houres before the vſuall time, I expected
the vp-riſing of my bright Sunne, which at length, more
glorious then he that vſually giues his light, appeared from
her accuſtomed window. Exceſſiue ioy, they ſay, oft cauſeth
ſudden death: and though by heauens particular goodneſſe,
in me it wrought not that ſorrowfull effect; yet it ſo
troubled me, that I was ſcarce able to ſend forth thoſe effectuall
reaſons, Loue and deſire prompted me with. What
my tyed tongue made difficult, I remitted to the action of
my eyes & hands; with which laying hold on thoſe whiter
then ſnow of hers, imprinting my lips in their pure Chryſtall,
my outward actions, declared my inward motions.
In no leſſe ſuſpence was my loued Pledge, till Fernando
with his accuſtomed freedom, looſing the knot of our
amorous ſilence, kiſsing Clara's hand, and animating me to
doe the like, I bade her welcome home, to which ſhee returned
thankes, and ſtraight ioyfully told me, that her ſtay
in Talbora was now effected with her Aunt, at the importunate

ſuite of her Couſin Franciſca; which when I heard, I
was euen tranſported vvith gladneſſe: and as things ſtood,
nothing could ſucceed more luckily to my purpoſe. I aſked
after her Couſin; ſhe told me, wearineſſe had ſent her
to ſleepe; beſides, ſhee meant not to make her acquainted
with their loues: at which, I receiued no ſmall content, as
well in reſpect of ſecrecie, as that I might more freely conuerſe
with my Miſtris.
               Many a night we conferred in this cloſe manner, ſo warily,
that (excepting my friend) none elſe was priuie to our
affections. Two yeeres were expired in theſe amorous
meetings, in all which time I could neuer arriue at the
wiſhed end of my hopes, or obtaine a recompence for my
long ſeruice. My heart was euen tired with the delayes and
obſtacles Clara laid in my way, but the hopes ſhe mingled
with theſe diſtaſtes, drew me on to be ſtill conſtant.
               And now the Feſtiuall of our glorious Patron S. Iames
was at hand; againſt which time great triumphes were preparing
in the Citie of Auila, which poſſeſt her with much
feare, and mee with no leſſe trouble, to thinke, that her
friends, deſirous happely to ſee them, would haue her along,
whereby her returne might be vncertaine: And
though this our doubt came not to be put in execution, yet
ſerued as ſpurres to my liuely heate, and ſo with more violent
importunitie, I preſſed to be admitted into my Sweet-hearts
chamber, against which, the difficulty was; That
Franciſca lay there, though this might be remooued by the
experience of her ſound ſleeping; and withall, there wanted
not good conueniencie, by reaſon of a window without
grates, which opened to the roome next Clara's chamber;
(a little doore being onely betweene) informed of which
from her ſelfe, I requeſted her to giue mee a print of the
Locke in ſoft Waxe, that by this deuice I might haue a

Key made to ſerue the turne. With much ado, (after many
ſighes and teares, and continuall intreaties, her flintie
heart ouercome) my plot tooke effect: and aſſoone as the
Key was made, I deliuered it to her, to trie the certainty of
it; which was ſuch as my heart could wiſh, though for 
                     〈◊〉
                  
returne of it, I needed more effectuall teares and ſupplications;
ſo ſtiffe vvas her obſtinacie, or rather honeſtie. But
vrging ſtill my affection, and how much ſhe vvas indebted
to my loyall conſtancie, ſhe could not but at laſt reſtore it:
vvhen I had it, I could vvillingly haue made ſpeeches to it,
but for deferring my glory; and ſo clapping wings to my
feet, like a ſecond Icarus, with Fernando's helpe, I mounted,
and lighting on the doore, gently opened it, and went in,
where I ſoone found my lifes comforter: I embraced her
often, and leſt her Couſin might ſpie vs, we got within the
Curtaines of my Miſtreſſes Canopi
                     •
                  , and quickly without
more conditions, ſaue onely her modeſt contention, before
I left the roome, I might reckon my ſelfe amongſt the happieſt,
reaping at length the ioyfull fruit of what I had ſowed
with ſo much ſorrow and labour. 'Twas now with me another
world, and a new content: I had now poſſeſſion of a
fort, which I held once inexpugnable; I now feared no
ſtorme, ſince I was gotten to the hauen: So ignorant was
I in the changes of blind Fortune. For her, I may well affirme,
ſhe was no leſſe pleaſed then I, and at parting, with
a vvorld of teares, ſhe beſought me not to forget her (which
how farre vvas I from thinking of?)
               From the very houre that I made her ſole Miſtris of my
thoughts, (vvithout boaſt bee it ſpoken) neuer-certaine or
vnſure ſuſpition kept me vvaking; or iealouſie, vvatchfull:
ſo true vvas ſhe, though tractable to all, yet vvas there neuer
any ſo hardy, as to offer ſo much as a daring thought to
her beauty, euen to the time that I predominated in my

loues height, and had abſolute command, there beeing
none but mine, no vvilling or nilling but vvhat I pleaſed.
Thus liued I ſo comforted; confident, that no night-walkes,
Letters, Tickets, Meſſages, Maskes, Ring-running, or Barriers,
performed in her ſeruice, could make me once thinke
that ſhe would looke aſide to wrong me.
               At this time a Gentleman of our citie vſed almoſt hourely
to frequent my Miſtreſſes ſtreet; a young Gallant (though
elder then my ſelfe) rich, an heire, and my eſpeciall friend,
vvhom I likewiſe often ſaw (though ſuſpecting nothing) at
the Church vvhere Clara vſed, vvhere he vvas ſtill one of
the firſt, and that neuer 
                     •
                  ailed: yet for all theſe fearefull motiues,
the leaſt malicious pricke neuer touched my heart;
not dreaming of any diligence of his toward my Miſtreſſe.
Many a time (I wholly ignorant) vvould Fernando aduertiſe
me of this ſuſpition, as foreſeeing how much Rodrig
                        •
                     
                  
(for ſo was the Gentleman called) vvould puzzle vs. But
as I vvas in the midſt of my happineſſe, and abſolute ouer
my Clara's vvill, nothing could make me carefull, or thinke
of a competitor.
               Amongſt many gladſome nights I paſſed in her cheriſhing
embraces, one (the firſt that ſtung me vvith ielouſie) in
midſt of my iollitie, ſhe (firſt coniuring mee, and earneſtly
facilitating the diſtaſte I might receiue, and I aſſuring her
not to be angry, greedy of the deliuery this mountaine of
pregnant diſcourſe promiſed) beganne the enſuing Diſcourſe:
               The feare I haue (my deare Gerardo) at any time to offend
you, or giue a iuſt occaſion, to make you ſuſpect my
loyall faith, enforceth mee to giue you early notice of the
obſtinate pretenſion of one, your neere friend. Heauen
knowes, if, when Clara proceeded hither, my heart were
not ready to burſt within me. Shee went on: Rodrigo (my

choler now at full) that againſt my conſent employes his
fooliſh thoughts in my ſeruice, as you may haue ſeene in
diuers occaſions: of which, if I till now forbore to giue
you account, it was, that I thought my diſdaine, and the
ſmall comfort he receiued, might make him deſiſt from his
purpoſe: but ſeeing that from my deniall his intent takes
greater hold, I could no longer conceale thus much: nor
this paper, which to day I receiued from the handes of a
maid of my Aunts, who colouring her boldneſſe, with telling
me, it was from my father, made me take and reade it,
deſiring after an anſwer; which ſhe had, ſuch as her ſhameleſſe
proceeding deſerued. This is the perfect truth, that
the Ticket, I ſhe, that receiued it, but free from a thought
of offending you, which I ſhall neuer haue as long as heauen
ſhall pleaſe to keepe mee yours. And giuing mee the
paper ſhe was ſilent, and I leſſe confident in my ſecuritie,
reſoluing thenceforward to be more warie, as hauing to
contend with a powerfull oppoſite.
               I could not but chide her for deferring the aduice, for the
inconueniencie it might haue cauſed, ſince the carefull ſollicitation
of a new Suiter, might eaſily diſcouer the affection
of ſecure Louers. But wee were ſoone friends, and I
ſomewhat calmer, demanded what anſwere ſhe ſent by the
Meſſenger; who replied, that firſt drawing another paper,
fained to be the Letter out of her pocket, ſhe tore it, threatning
the wench withall, that her Aunt ſhould puniſh her
lewdneſſe: with which ſomewhat ſatisfied, I tooke leaue,
and going out, went to Fernando's Lodging; who when he
had left mee with my Miſtreſſe, vſed to returne home. I
came to his doore as he was newly going to bed, to his no
ſmall admiration to ſee mee ſo haſtily with him, though by
the ſadnes of my looke, he conceiued ſome ſudden change
in my affaires: After wee had ſaluted, and ſate downe in

his chamber, taking out Rodrigo's Letter, by the light of a
white Waxe candle, I read it to my friend, and which I
can neuer forget, theſe enſuing contents:
               
                  
                     
                        
                           RODRIGO to CLARA.
                           My minde fearing (as in reaſon it may) a iuſt puniſhment
for my boldneſse, (yet confident in the clemencie of your noble
breſt) expects a definitiue ſentence of life or death, either to periſh
in the waues of your diſdaine, or by your gracious hand to be
raiſed out of a ſea of troubles that oppreſse mee. I ſhall receiue
comfort, if you ſtrike the ſayles of your rigour, which hath beene
ſo cruell as my affection constant, which ſprings from a heart
that offers it ſelfe to your mercie: receiue it, faire Dame, but with
more compaſsion vſe it then the afflicted owner; whoſe life and
death reſteth to the arbitrement of your glad or vnhappy anſwer.
                        
                     
                  
               
               I thinke (noble friend) neither venimous troden Viper,
or poyſonous Serpent in ſandie Africa, were euer ſo ſtirred
with rage, as my enflamed breſt, by that time I had ended
my aduerſaries Letter: and certainly, had not my friend
caught hold on me, I had then ſought him, and reuenged
my furious ielouſie. But my friend with reaſons, worthy his
wiſedome and diſcretion, ſtayed mee, mitigating my violent
paſſion. Hee firſt throughly vnderſtood the cauſe of
my diſtaſte, and next the Papers owner; both which conſidered,
he proceeded thus: By heauen (Gerardo) when I
ſaw you ſo full of furie, I verily ſuppoſed, you had found
this Letter vnwittingly about Clara, and that on her part
way had beene made to ſome greater miſchiefe: But beware,
be not too raſh, the fort is better defended then you
can wiſh; ſhe her ſelfe is her owne guide, her owne guard,
what would you more? Why complaine you? Clara is

faultleſſe, Rodrigo not to be condemned: for, for each man
to good himſelfe the beſt he can, where hee knowes no detriment
to parties, or preiudice of friends, I thinke 'tis tolerable.
Not hee, nor any, ſaue my ſelfe alone, know your
thoughts; ſo he is blameles. It concernes you to be careful,
that ſince you haue more eyes added to your waking care,
you muſt take heed, and for a time leaue the enioying your
Miſtris, till you may with more quiet obtaine your pleaſure.
               Theſe and the like reaſons Fernando knew ſo well to lay
before me, that he conuinced me to him: ſo (determined
to follow his aduice) we tooke
                     •
                   leaue, and I betooke mee to
my home and reſt. Euer after (conſidering how waightie
an occaſion I had in hand) I went alwaies well armed, and
hauing a new enemie, vvas not too ſecure in the defence of
my perſon, purpoſing (if ought ſhould happen) by way of
anticipation, to be ſtill before-hand. Fernando and I often
met Rodrigo in his amorous purſuite in Clara's ſtreet early
and late, vvhich made vs for feare of being diſcouered, vary
more ſhapes then Proteus. One night amongſt others,
(the firſt of my misfortunes) Fernando and I vvere neere
the windowes, and hauing taken ſtand, expected the houre
to come that I might enter, at ſuch time as two, muffled
came towards vs; and drawing neere, were knowne to my
friend; vvho turning to me, ſaid: There goes your Riuall
and his man, vvho meane to take notice of vs, (as indeed
they went about it:) So that ſuppoſing it was beſt for vs to
be gone, for feare of ſome ill accident, I told Fernando ſo
much; who, though hee liked my counſell, yet was vnwilling
vve ſhould forſake the place, fearing leſt Rodrigo might
at the inſtant poſſeſſe it, and that Clara vnaduertiſed, opening
the window to call mee, and ſeeing two men there,
vvithout diſtinction might make the ſigne, whereby Rodrigo
                  
happely would fall into the right ſuſpition, which was ſufficient
to make vs ſtill keepe our place. A good while wee
remained thus diſcourſing, and Rodrigo appeared not; till
at laſt, when leſt we thought of it, we might 
                     •
                  ee him paſſe
by: for hauing fetcht a large compaſſe, hee came at our
backes thorow the ſame ſtreet; which much diſtaſted mee,
and Fernando no leſſe; for wee were now engaged, and
though we might haue departed without beeing knowne,
(diſguized) yet the aforeſaid occaſion enforced our ſtay.
The time of my Miſtriſſes approach was now neere, which
Rodrigo (it ſeemed) little dreamt of, and made mee as
fearefull as impatient, and perceiuing the like paſſion in
my friend, ſeeing withall how dangerous it was for my loue
to be diſcouered 
                     •
                  nd yet how hardly it could bee auoyded
without ſome 
                     ••
                  lence, we determined by dint of ſword to
rebate their vn
                     •
                  annerly proceeding: and vvith this reſolution,
without giuing a word, clapping aſide our Clokes,
and laying hands to our ſwords and targets, wee ſuddenly
flue vpon them; who perceiuing our intent, with no leſſe
forwardneſſe met vs in the encounter. Rodrigo I hated deadly,
who falling to my lot, without warding the point of his
ſword I ran on, and luckily clozing, (not fauoured by my
aduerſaries weakneſſe, for to ſay truth, hee was a valiant
Gentleman) gaue him ſome wounds, at which he fell, crying
out for confeſſion: which aſſoone as I heard, ſuppoſing
I had made ſure worke, I returned where I had left Fernando
and the ſeruant, but found them retired further into the
next ſtreet, (purpoſely done by my friend) where making a
ſtand, he quickly ran my youth thorow the ſword arme, and
with a back-blow, ſliced him ouer the noddle, leauing him
to cry out as his Maſter had done before him. The noyſe
had raiſed many perſons, as well at Segundo Octauio's windowes,
as at the reſt of the neighbourhood; from whence

ſeeing ſome iſſue out, croſſing thorow by-Lanes, and flying
from thoſe that followed, wee ſoone (without beeing
knowne to any) got to our Lodgings.
               
                  Rodrigo (as you heard) was a gentleman wealthy, and, well
allied by blood in the Citie, ſo that by morning nothing
was in mens mouths but this buſineſſe: the ſorrow was generall,
each man heaping vp confuſed coniectures, but none
could hit vpon the right: from himſelfe nothing was to be
gotten, for his wounds had made him yet ſenſleſſe, which
(as we cunningly learnt) were diuers and dangerous; two
eſpecially, one that was thorow the right ſide of his bodie,
and the other in his throte, accompanied with a terrible
gaſh ouer the face.
               My father vſed extraordinary diligence to finde out the
authors, and ſo to puniſh them, but Rodrigo's man declaring
the place, diſguize, and diſpoſition of the actors, hee
was wary in his proceeding, as gheſſing the buſineſſe to
haue bin premeditated, and the defamed honour of ſome
perſon of equall merits intereſted in the ſame. Whilſt this
buſineſſe was thus in the heate, by Fernando's aduice, in the
night time, we came not into my Clara's ſtreet; and if in
the day time, for my comfort I deſired but to paſſe that
way, 'twas like Capuchines, our eyes fixt on the earth; though
now and then loue ouercame my feare, and would force
me ſometimes to looke vp for a ſight of my Sunnes comfort
from her Eaſterne window.
               Within ſome twenty dayes Rodrigo being vpon the mending
hand, gaue way to his friends to viſite him: Fernando
and my ſelfe (by good prouidence) beeing not the laſt, nor
which leaſt frequented his Lodging: and one time amongſt
others, finding him alone, wee earneſtly requeſted him to
make knowne to vs the cauſe of that vnluckie accident; and
this aſwell to bee aſſured of Clara's loyaltie, as alſo to diſſemble

the matter. But Rodrigo in a manner refuſing, yet
ſeeing my earneſtneſſe and my friends deſire, at laſt he began:
Though it grieue me to the ſoule to renue the occaſion
and motiue of my wounds, yet relying on your ſecrecie,
I will make it knowne vnto you. It is now fully ſixe
moneths, that I haue beene a true frequenter of Segundo
Octauio's ſtreet, and a Suiter to his Neece Clara at his houſe;
who, in reſpect of her rare beauty, I ſuppoſe, is not vnknown
to either of you: in all which time, I haue vſed many ſeuerall
diligences to make knowne my affection to her, which
though ſhe might eaſily haue read in my eyes, that haue expreſſed
my inward paſſion, (beſides the ſhewes and triumphes
which I haue publikely for her ſake ſet forth) yet my
paines haue beene all bootleſſe, neither had I euer ſo much
as a looke from thoſe faire eyes for a recompence. Who
but a Prodigie of nature could haue neglected thoſe liuely
and feruent demonſtrations of mine? Who but ſhe, blind
to the teares that I haue ſhed, and deafe to my parching
ſighes, vvhich for her cruelty I haue ſcattered to the vvind?
To bee briefe, all my hopes haue produc't no other fruit,
then vvhat you now behold in me: for hauing aſſayed by
diuers meanes, particularly by the ſollicitation of a maid of
hers, to effect my deſire, I wrote vnto her by that partie,
Lines, vvhich had you ſeene, might haue deſerued ſome
compaſſion, euen from a breſt of Adamant. This Rodrigo
ſo feelingly vttered, as might haue cauſed pitie in any leſſe
intereſted then my ſelfe in the buſineſſe: and ſo to a different
intent, I interrupted him, ſaying; And receiued you
Sir, any anſwer? if you did, me thinkes your ſuite ſhould
not haue beene ſo deſperate. Marry did I, quoth he, and
ſuch an one as my ſeruices did merit. At this I quite loſt
footing, my iudgement was cleane rent off the hindges,
ſuppoſing Clara now prooued falſe to me: but Rodrigo did

ſoone ridde me of that doubt and iealouſie, ſaying; Theſe
wounds, whoſe skarres you ſee, were my anſwere, and that
which euer I expected: for the Meſſenger I imploide, hauing
told mee I ſhould repaire ſome certaine dayes after,
for the reſolution of my buſineſſe to one of Segundo's windowes
(as my vnfortunate Starres would haue it) going at
the appointed time, I found two men at a corner of the
ſtreet, muffled, whom I could not by any meanes I vſed
force from the place, till fetching a compaſſe backe vpon
them, I came ſo neere, that doubtleſſe they knew me, for inſtantly
they ſet vpon me, and gaue me theſe hackes, and had
certainely ſooner put their buſineſſe in execution, if they
had ſooner knowne me, for it muſt needs bee, that they
lay purpoſely in waite for me. By their valour (though it
were darke, and they diſguiſed) I gheſſed them to bee perſons
of quality▪ Since my hurts, I came to notice of my Letters
hard vſage, and how Clara threatned the Maid that deliuered
it; wherby I ſuppoſe, that Segundo Octauio hauing notice
of what paſſed, cauſed ſome of his kindred to watch me.
But heauen hath been pleaſed to free me from their murderous
intent, and ere long I hope to be abroad, & not to want
the help of friends that may returne them the like.
               Gentle Sir, ſaid Fernando, 'tis no fit circumſtance you
haue declared, to confirme your raſh determination; for
Segundo Octauio (beſides his pacifique goodneſſe) is diſcreet
(as we all know:) and put caſe Clara ſhould informe,
or he beleeue his Neece, hee is not a man to bee moued ſo
ſlightly, to the execution of ſuch bloudy rigour; beſides,
neither he, nor any one vvould preſume that you vvould
make court to any Pledge of his, otherwiſe, then to make
her a Wife: & therfore giue no credit to a raſh opinion, or
ill grounded ſuſpition. I am at ſuch a paſſe (quoth the ſicke
vvounded Gentleman) that though I haue had theſe, and

other conſiderations I am not to bee blamed, if I thinke or
ſpeake what you haue heard. In fine if vvhat I haue told
you, touching Segundo, ſhould be otherwiſe; it muſt bee,
that either this Dame, or her kinſ-woman had their Gallants
vvhom it concerned, to turne mee out of the ſtreet;
and it ſhall goe hard, (if Heauen fauour me) but one day I
may meete vvith them. Ah (thought I to my ſelfe) 'twas a
vviſe fellow therefore, that ſaid; Better kill an enemy, then
let him liue with a wrong: and had I (as lay in my power)
done ſo, I had neuer (friend Leriano) ſeene my ſelfe in this
lamentable vvretched plight, in which your charitable preſence
found me. And before we left Rodrigo, he thinking his
owne diſtaſtes were irkeſome to vs, deſired to giue vs a
pleaſing farewell in this following Sonnet, vvhich hee had
made to expreſſe the rigour of his danger.
               If, of a wretched ſtate and all forlorne,
               That be the wretched'ſt; not at all to be:
               (Since in condemned Priſ'ners, we may ſee,
               Though they muſt die, they l'd not, not haue beene borne.
               Then, (by obliuion) to be ſlowly torne,
               Or vext with abſence in extremitie,
               Or plagu'd with rage of reſtleſse iealouſie,
               Theſe nothing are to not being lou'd (a ſcorne:)
               He that's forgotten, yet, a being had;
               He that is abſent, may returne againe,
               He that is iealous, may finde conſtancie.
               But ſtill to follow ſhadowes, loue, in vaine:
               Still to be hopeleſse (worſe then to be mad)
               That neuer was, is, or, ſhall happy be.
               In theſe Diſcourſes we paſt a great part of the afternoon;
when at length, taking leaue of Rodrigo, my deare friend and
I marched to my Miſtreſſes ſtreete; debating by the

way, of the miſchiefe our enemie might doe vs, in the curiouſneſſe
of his reuenge, if happely time did not alter his
minde. For this cauſe therefore, ſaid Fernando, it vvere fit
you talked vvith Clara, and contriued ſome better courſe
for the priuacie of your ſecret meetings. This, (ſaid I) and
my not knowing vvhether the paſt skirmiſh haue cauſed any
alteration in Segundo Octauio's houſe, makes mee melancholly,
and vnſauoury to my ſelfe; this night therefore
without doubt muſt I be reſolued.
               'Twere well (ſaid he) your deſire could take effect, though,
for Clara to come to the window, vvithout any aduertiſement,
I hold it very difficult. Let vs but goe thither (quoth
I) and perhaps my deſire alone may bring her, and that
which fals not out to day, may to morrow happen better.
               Without thinking on our way, and buſie in diſcourſe,
wee vvere (ere aware) got into my Miſtreſſes ſtreete,
when my ſelfe (not thinking to be ſo happie) lifting vp my
eyes toward the window, might ſee my Miſtris leaning on
the grate as ſad and penſatiue as I vvas vpon the way: ſhe
beckened me with her hand to ſtay; wherefore moſt ioyfully
obeying, Fernando and I ſtood talking, and making as
if we looked another way, till Clara returning to the vvindow,
brought a paper in her hand, and looking to ſee if the
ſtreet were cleere of Spies, caſt it downe; when taking it vp,
and withall a ſhort leaue, we got vs two or three ſtreets off,
where opening the Ticket, I might reade theſe Contents.
               I know not (deare loued Sir) what excuſe you can make,
for ſo long forgetfulneſse; neither can I attaine to the cauſe,
that your moſt firme and true Slaue hath giuen you, worthy
ſuch rigour, ſo great crueltie. 'Tis now twenty dayes
ſince I last ſaw you, and two thouſand yeeres that my ſoule
longs for you. May I deſerue this night to ſee you, and know
from your owne lips, what mortall diſlaſte keepes you from me.
               
                  
Scantneſſe of time (quoth Fernando) hath made her forget
to firme her name: to which (ſaid I.) Thinkes my beſt
friend, that theſe lines haue not fuell ſufficient to adde to
the flame that conſumes me? I am all ſadneſſe, till I ſatisfie
her for my ſlackneſſe. I vvonder (replide hee) that Clara
ſhould be ignorant, how important our abſence is, though
loue be painted blinde, and a very child, runnes thorow all
hazzards, euen to caſt his followers headlong.
               By this time it grew to be night, and Moone-ſhine; ſo
by the accuſtomed time, we went toward the ſtreet, where
we found my Miſtris in expectation; and looking about
vs, to ſee if all were ſure, with my friends vſuall helpe, I
mounted, and taking my afflicted Miſtris in mine Armes,
ſoone ſatisfide her vniuſt complaints; telling her withall,
how impoſſible it was, to auoid the late encounter. Shee
gaue me to vnderſtand how much that buſineſſe had ſcandaliz'd
her friends, and how vehement Segundo's ſuſpition
was, that the cauſe of Rodrigo's vvounds liued in his houſe,
and other matters to this purpoſe that much troubled me:
though deſperate loue that bereaued me of my vnderſtanding
faculties, made me ſet ſlightly by all accidents, and
determined ſtill to goe on in my loue, tooke leaue for the
preſent, willing her thence-forward (to excuſe ſuch another
bickering) that though ſhe chanced to ſee any body vnder
her window, ſhe ſhould neither call, nor make ſigne, till
ſhe perceiued the pulling out of a Handkerchiefe: ſo finding
Fernando, who ſtayed for me, we returned to our ſeuerall
homes.
               In this manner, I repaired many nights after to my Miſtreſſes
ſhelter: but variable fortune, that began to ſhew her
vſuall condition, holding it high time to caſt me from the
Throne, whither, to make my fall the greater, ſhe had raiſed
me, would not that my delights ſhould any longer proceed

in the ſame calmeneſſe, that hitherto, and therefore bred a
curious itching in the imagination of ſome neighbour,
who, buſied with thinking of the paſt conflict, his ſuperfluous
diligence gaue him an open view of my night-walke,
and frequent entrance, which ſoone after, began to be common
talke in euery mans mouth; howſoeuer, I preſumed
vpon the ſecret: and one time amongſt others, being careleſſe
enough of any ſuch matter, my good friend, taking me
by the hand, told me how neceſſarie it was, to endeuour by
all poſſible meanes, that the proſecution of our loues might
be by ſome more hidden place; or, if this could not bee,
that I ſhould reſolutely ſuffer; or altogether retire my ſelfe
from Clara's friendſhip: for in the contrary, he fore-ſaw a
Tragicall euent.
               I much wondred, and was not a little angry at the ſpeech:
and ſo requeſted him to tell me plainely the cauſe that moued
him to this harſh counſell, to forget her, without
whom it was impoſſible for me to breathe a minut longer:
and ſpeaking this ſomewhat paſſionately: Fernando perceiuing
my ſudden alteration, with his accuſtomed diſcretion
thus ſtayed me: Friend Gerardo; If my true affection,
and that you are perſwaded of it, did not fully credit my
intention, I would not ſo (rudely as you may thinke) diuert
you from the dangerous courſe you hold; nor giue you
thoſe particular motiues I haue for doing ſo. If your loue,
egreſſe, time, place, and each circumſtance were not publike,
I ſhould not aduiſe you againſt what were iuſt & due
to your Miſtreſſes faith. Your loues, indeed (that you goe
in & out at Clara's Chamber) are euery where notorious:
Many haue told me ſo much, (though I fained to know nothing;)
we are both forewarned, you are wiſe: thinke this
to be a happy lot: and chiefly, my Gerardo, beleeue that
my care is onely of your ſafety: for, for mine owne part,

if your minde bee to proceed, I muſt not leaue you till
death. So he ended, leauing me in the confuſion you may
wel imagine. Doubt of my friend I had none, no more had
I any anſwer. I heard how reaſonably he ſpoke, and perceiued
how fit it was I ſhould follow reaſon: on the other
ſide, her affection was ſo rooted in me, that but to thinke
time might (as a thing mortall and periſhable) conſume
it, ſtrooke me into an Extaſis of extremities. It was (mee
thought) impoſsible to leaue her; nay, the leaſt thought of
her: ſo with a deepe ſigh, ſprung from my ſecret ſoule, I
thus anſwered. My heart (beſt friend) hath not felt a blow
of more wounding paine, then your reaſons haue giuen it;
beſides, the deſpaire of remedy, hath brought mee to that
wofull paſſe I know not what to ſay. I ſee a miſerable and
aduerſe ruine threatens my affaires, nor finde I ſo much as
a Prop, to ſtay vp my weake frame. I ſee I runne headlong,
that my thoughts, my diſcourſes, are all to pieces, and my
cleere Iudgement, formerly guided by reaſon, now faint
and feeble without a Superiour power: though I know this
to be moſt true, yet know I not how to follow what you
aduize.
               Well, this night will I ſee whether Clara can light vpon
any better ſally for our buſineſſe, and accordingly muſt we
ſhape our courſe. With this reſolution (day paſsing on)
Fernando tooke leaue till the prefixed time, by when wee
came better prouided, then formerly to my Miſtreſſes
ſtreet.
               The night was as cleere and calme as might be; ſo deafe
and huſht, as bred in me a moſt ſecure confidence. Euery
thing (me thought) fadged to the meaſure of my deſire, as
hauing neuer found leſſe lets, fewer inconueniences: for
where misfortune muſt come, till ſhe be euen at hand, all is
broad high-way, and delightſome paſſage. Clara ſtayed

longer then ſhe was vſed to doe; inſomuch that I was once
about to haue turned back; but the Dice were caſt, and I
muſt ſtand to my vnluckie chance. So at laſt ſhe appeares,
and (the Signall giuen (vp I got; and being with her, without
ſcruple gaue my ſelfe to her embraces, & thoſe Armes
whoſe cloſe culling made mee mad with ioy. Yet I haue
ſince thought with my ſelfe how diſquieted and troubled I
found her when ſhe would ſpeake to mee; for ſhe would
breake off abruptly in the midſt of her diſcourſe: Or when
I asked her a queſtion, ſhee would anſwere quite from the
purpoſe. Yet blinded with my too true affection, I perceiued
not her deceitfull hugges, nor marked thoſe cunning
accidents. At firſt ſhe deſired mee to vndreſſe my
ſelfe; and this, more earneſtly then at other times, yea, with
ſuch importunitie, that any one, not mad like mee, had
doubtleſſe knowne her diuelliſh minde. A while (ſeeing my
vnwillingnes) ſhe left importuning, but plyed me againe, &
not long after deſired to take of my ſtrong, ſure (which ſhe
called troubleſome) Coate of Maile; for her eaſe (forſooth)
and though in theſe, and other ſtrange demands, I ſatisfide
her, my breſt could not harbour the leaſt ſuſpition, to think
they were in my preiudice. When I conſider this Womans
baſe intention, it maketh me rage like a mad-man, and
call on Heauen for vengeance, for my ill recompenced affection.
But aſſuredly (friend Leriano) ſhee will not faile
of a due reward, that hangs ouer her diſloyall treacherous
head.
               To returne to my Story, not paſſing halfe an houre had
I beene with her whom I tooke to bee my greateſt treaſure,
ſureſt refuge: when with an vnlookt-for noiſe I might heare
the doores fly off the Hindges, and ready to ſtart vp at the
ſudden accident (as thinking now what might be the matter)
it might well haue gone ill with me: for Clara cloſely

imbracing me, (I at length perceiuing her treacherie) before
I could vnfaſten my ſelfe from her, her Vnkle, and
moſt of his ſeruants, were vpon mee, with more Armes
and noiſe, then were fit to endanger a tender Youth of
eighteene: So, that perceiuing the extreme danger I was
in; and thinking to haue laid hold vpon a Piſtoll at my girdle,
I might ſee Clara haue it in her hand; wherefore knowing
my ruine, and hearing her Vnkle cry, Kill him, Kill
him: drawing my Sword, and recouering the doore by
which I was to paſſe, in ſpight of all that withſtood mee, I
leaped out of the window into the ſtreet, helped onely with
the butt of a Halberd, that made me come ſooner to the
ground, leauing my Hat, Cloke and Piſtoll as ſpoiles behind
me. As ſoone as I got vpon my legges, I bade Fernando
(who heard all that paſſed) follow me; and in a trice
Bird-like wee vaniſhed.
               I could not bragge of my eſcape, hauing layne in afterwards
almoſt a moneths time of my hurts, with a cut in
my Head, and a thruſt into the Groine, which growing
as then cold and ſtiffe vpon me, Fernando was forced to
take me on his backe, and like another Anchiſes, conuey me
to a Monaſtery of Dominican Fryers, where I was charitably
receiued, and cured. Fernando at my requeſt (for I feared
to make him acceſſarie) went home to his lodging.
               When this misfortune hapned, my Fathers trienniall
Gouernment was expired, and hee ſummoned to giue account
of his behauiour to a ſeuere Iudge, appointed (as
the manner is) by the ſupreme Counſell. This party cauſed
much ſearch to be made, for the finding me out: and
after many diligences vſed, there wanted not a Spy to informe
him of the truth; ſo that notwithſtanding the breach
of Sacred priuiledge; and the proteſtations the Fryers
made againſt him, he cauſed me to be fetcht in, and in a

cloſe Chaire, conueyed to a ſtrong hold, where with ſufficient
guard he left me Priſoner. My louing Father much
reſenting this affront (though ſetting a good face on the
matter) procured by aggrauations, cenſures, and excommunication,
that I might be reſtored again to the Church,
againſt which, much was alledged; and what in proofes
and ſeuerall orders, I endured a tedious impriſonment.
               All this while I could not light vpon the true cauſe, that
ſo ſeduced Clara againſt me, whoſe declaration firmed vnder
her owne hand, was ſhewed me by my Brother Leoncio
to my greater confuſion: in which, ſhee not onely accuſed
me, but pretended alſo a Rape; and that (becauſe ſhee
ſought to defend her ſelfe) I had violently ſet a Dagger to
her breſt; for feare of which (promiſe of marriage preceding
on my part) ſhee was content to condiſcend to my
pleaſure; (a thing ſo contrary as you haue heard, and Heauen
can witneſſe from the truth.) To this was added the
breach of the houſe, and other circumſtances, that left my
buſineſſe vpon ſo foule termes, that had not the holy
Sanctuarie beene interpoſed, my life had been dangerouſly
hazzarded.
               The depoſition of that rauenous Viper, was moſt fearfully
cruell, intended onely to glut her ſelfe with my
bloud. The Paper I had in mine owne hand, and though
I knew it to bee hers, I could ſcarce giue credit to mine
eyes, as thinking they wanted their viſible facultie. I vvas
aſtoniſht, amazed, my Iudgement vtterly loſt, and in this
moode requeſted thoſe that vvere in my company to
leaue me; and caſting my ſelfe on my Bed, the moſt part
of that day I ſpent in pittifull lamentation, growing vvith
my griefe ſo deſperate, that had I not ſtood in awe of a
more eternall puniſhment, I ſhould haue made quicke riddance
of this fraile mortall life. At length conſidering I

was a Christian, and how vnworthy ſhe was of this my reſentment,
I determined for euer to blot her abhorred remembrance
out of my thoughts, as you may well perceiue
in the inſuing Sonnet.
               
                  Babel and Syren in thy tongue and tone,
               
                  Chymaera in each monſtrous diff'rent part;
               
                  Hyena, Crocodile, in v
                     •
                  ice, in mone;
               
                  Sphinx in thy cruell and ambiguous Art.
               Thou Caue and Circes, Hearbe to wound the heart,
               Hoſt Diomed quiet (till trod vpon
               Serpent vnſeen in flow'rs, we feele thy ſmart.)
               Faire Spring to ſee to, that turn'ſt flickes to ſtone:
               Now I thy double-dealing plainely ſee,
               And like Vlyſſes, fixe on reaſons Tree.
               Some two moneths after my impriſonment, my father
vnderſtanding the change of my affection, leauing my buſineſſe
vpon indifferent termes, and my Brother Leoncio with
me, with his ſeruants and the reſt of his Family went back
to Madrid.
               
               My ſtormes & ſhipwracke ceaſed not heere, rather from
this inſtant took new beginning: for within a while after my
Father came to the Court, it pleaſed Heauen to take him to
mercy, bereauing me of my greateſt worldly felicitie. As
ſoone as newes was brought vs, my Brother ſtraight tooke
Poſt. And though now in Talbora wee had many friends,
whom as wel my Father, as Leoncio and my ſelfe had purchaſed:
yet I ſoone felt and bewailed his abſence; for when
he was gone, Rodrigo declared himſelfe my open enemie,
and my Brother and me for Authors of his wounds. There
wanted not ſome friends of mine, that mightily oppoſed
him, and he that neuer failed me, was the good Fernando, in

whoſe diſcreet conuerſation I found comfort in midſt of
my extremities; it was not the leaſt that afflicted me, that
Clara ſhould againe put me in minde of her, by vvriting a
Letter full of deceitfull excuſes, & reaſons wanting all foundation.
Shee would haue indeed qualified her proceeding,
and the manner of her confeſsion. For the firſt, that ſhe was
betrayde by her kindred, who perſwaded her, that, to be the
onely way to ſoulder her loſt honour, and to make mee her
Husband, which I had promiſed her, as ſhe (though falſely)
affirmed. For the latter, ſhe was enforeſt for feare of death,
if ſhe did not ſomething to mitigate her paſt fault, by confeſſing
in that manner againſt me. Yet the circumſtances of
my wounds, & her diſpoſing them, on one ſide diſ-arming
me, on the other with new extremes ſecuring me, the better
to betray me into her friends clutches; theſe ſhe could neither
ſalue, nor free her ſelfe from a vehement ſuſpition; that,
either frighted, or conuinced by her friends, ſhe conſented
with them to my death, and the reuenge of her amorous
wrong; whicſt failing in the effect, accommodating themſelues
to the time, they were forced to direct her in the way
of my impriſonment: And though as yet this my ſuſpition
may ſeeme ſlight, by what followes you ſhall bee ſatisfide;
ſince Clara in her after actions not onely confirmed it, but
gaue further teſtimonies of her incontinency: for had ſhee
been loyall, nothing could haue made her ſeeke my deſtruction;
and were this pardonable, her libidinous leuity, how
can that free her from blame? I will not (Noble friend) anticipate
my griefes, with thoſe wofull Lawes, you ſhal heare
in my Relation; and therefore haue patience, till each circumſtance
come in it's proper ranke and place: Let mee
onely tell you, that her Letter ſo ſtirred my offended breſt,
that hurried on with ſuch a violent choler, I ſent her a perpetual
abhorring anſwer on the back ſide of it, as followeth.
               
                  
Baſe Pandora! thy curſt minde
               Is nor loftie, nor vnkinde,
               Nor will I a frowne allow
               Once, vnto thy falſer brow:
               Theſe were termes might wel appeare
               Where true loue, juſt dealing were.
               (Language for the chaſter fit)
               Such as you deſerue not it.
               Wool
                     •
                  iſh woman farewell: Place
               Where I firſt her falſe embrace
               Felt, farewell: Awake then, Fame,
               Lowdly my affront proclaime:
               What though her laſciuious Fire,
               Kindled once my raſh deſire,
               And bereau'd my ſoule? Alas!
               I like Flaxe or Paper was,
               Or Bay-leaues that 
                     •
                  indged were:
               Yet, their Victors wreath I beare:
               Once, (Adonis-like) mine eyes,
               Luſtfull Venus, were thy prize:
               And, as ſhe, the bloodleſſe youth,
               Redder flow'rs beheld in ruth.
               So thou ioyd'ſt when as each vaine
               Flow'd from me, and earth did ſtaine.
               But at length in ſafety, I
               Swifter thee then Daphne flie.
               I know, ſuch an enemie might deſerue the bittereſt farevvell
that could be, at leaſt what I wrote, was enough to deterre
her from proſecution, or perſecuting vvith her vexing
Lines. Not long after, my brother Leoncio ſeeing how
ſlowly my affaires vvent on, determined at laſt to put in execution,
vvhat he had long before purpoſed, but for diſquieting

my mother: and ſo hauing beforehand giuen mee
notice, vpon Twelfe-dayes Eue, he came vvith a couple of
horſes to the Caſtle gate, and leauing a truſtie ſeruant to
tend them, came vp ſtaires, vvhere I was expecting: and
hauing ſeene him, nothing ſlacke to fetch a ſword ſecretly
hidden in my chamber; and ſo amongſt the Keepers wee

                     〈◊〉
                   from whom vve ſoone freed our ſelues; for they vnwilling
to hazard where the profit was ſmall, and the danger
great, calling out for helpe onely in the Kings name,
ranne haſtily into the ſtreet: So leaping into our Saddles, we
ſoone left the Citie behind vs, onely I got my man vp behind
me: at what time the Towne was euen now comming
to the Keepers ayde vpon vs. That night, by the vvay toward
Toledo, before morning vvee got to a Village called
Ocea, where my brother had the greateſt part of his Lands
and inheritance. There, more ſecurely, and free from the
delayes of a lingring ſuite, ſome perſons of qualitie mediating,
we began to take the ſpeedieſt courſe to end my buſineſſe;
and being in ſome likelihood of agreement, the ſudden
death of Captaine Eſcobar, Clara's father, marred all,
our treaties and conditions for the time (as then) breaking
off. Some moneth after this, I vnderſtood by a Letter from
my loyall Fernando, how Clara one night had ſtolne out of
Segundo's houſe, to the old Gentlemans great ſorrow, and
whole Cities ſcandall; and the more, vvhen (all diligence
vſed) there could be no tidings had of her. Touching this
vnexpected accident, my friend vvrote mee diuers aduertiſements,
vvhich bred no ſmall trouble to me, muſing what
violent fancie might mooue her to ſuch a leuitie and madneſſe:
neither vvas I perfectly my ſelfe, ſuppoſing, that
vvhen I leaſt ſuſpected, I ſhould ſee her enter my Lodging:
ſo that fearing ſuch an accident, vvithin two dayes after, I
reſolued on a iourney to the Citie of Valldolid; whither

ſome yeeres before, the Court vvas remooued, from the
ancient ſeat, my loued Countrey. The aforeſaid doubt
clapt quicke ſpurres to my deſire, vvhich made mee leaue
Ocea, taking a faithfull ſeruant Senabria vvith mee, vvhom I
much affected. I omit ſome ill-boding ſignes that that day
happened to mee: and though I vvere neuer that vvay ſuperſtitious,
yet had I obſerued, that vvhen being out of the
towne in a plaine field, my horſe ſtumbled and threw mee,
I had neuer falne into the cruell and trecherous hands of
mine enemies. But returning to my iourney, about Sunſet
we trampled on the fiery flints of the ancient Mantua,
leauing behind vs, on the fertile bankes of golden Tagus,
and hidden Xarama, that rare celeſtial Aranjuez, viewing
by thoſe famous and Chriſtall ſtreames, the dry and withered
flowers, how as well they, as the other, accompanied
the ſwift and celebrated Manſanares, vvho in his low ſiluer
margent, ſtrewed in his parched Priuet, Trifol, Iuniper, and
Veruine, the teares hee had diſtilled for the abſence of his
great Maſter: The very ſnowie cragges, and ſtaring mountaine
Guadarrama tearing it ſelfe; for euen rockes and inſenſible
creatures, vvith their mourning made knowne their
ſorrow for ſo vndeſerued a change. And to deale truly, my
eyes accompanied the ſad ſtreames with teares: which effect
was increaſt, by ſeeing the deſart ſtreetes, vnfurniſht
Market-places, doores turn'd to mud-walles, houſes diſinhabited,
Barres broken, and Bay-windowes dammed vp,
all topſie-turuie, all euen a Chaos of frightfull confuſion;
mourning, farewels, ſighing and grieuing: ſo that I ſtood
vpon thornes till I was gotten from my ruined Troy: And
hauing ſeene my mother and home, the next day by Sunne-riſing,
I turned my backe to the Village, trauelling on faire
and ſoftly, accompanied with a world of people, that left
the motherleſſe forſaken Court: for ſo in miſery, mens

owne children, euen their owne fleſh leaue them.
               No ſooner was I out of the intangling Groue of the
Kings royall Houſe called Del Campo, when one of a reaſonable
handſomneſſe ouertooke mee, riding vpon a wel-paced,
flea-bitten horſe; who ſaluting vs, asked mee, if I trauelled
toward Valladolid; and telling him, I did: expreſſing
ſome ſignes of gladneſſe, he told me he went the ſame way;
and that (if ſo I pleaſed) would bee glad of my company. I
that deſired nothing more, (for hee ſeemed a good fellow
by his faſhion) with no leſſe courteſie returned my acceptance,
and we agreed. That day we dined at a little Village;
where finding houſe-roome and Victuals ſcarce, after
we had a little reſted, (fearing to light vpon no better conueniencie
for lodging at night) I commanded Senabria to
make haſte before to the Hill-towne, and take vp lodging
early for vs: and my companion that counſelled him to
this, haſtening him forward, obteined his deſire: ſo wee
two remaining alone in the coole of the euening, then took
horſe & went on our way: and amongſt other diſcourſe, my
companion demanded accidentally (as it were) of me, if I
had euer trauelled that way before. I anſwered, not; not
dreaming of the plot prepared for mee; which fell out pat
for him, as to mee vnfortunately. It grew to bee towards
night, when my guide leading on in a blind path, I ſuppoſing
we were out of the rode-way, told him ſo much: his
anſwer was, that this was a ſhorter cut to the Towne whither
we were to goe; with vvhich way, out of long experience,
and often iourneying, hee was vvell acquainted. Behind
me I might heare ſome trampling of horſes; and therfore
thought what he affirmed vvas true, and ſo beleeued
it. This fooliſh confidence made mee vvholly loſe that
ayme, which one encompaſſed with ſo late troubleſome affaires
might haue had: for in ſtead of that warineſſe with

vvhich I vſed to be fore-armed, not conſidering now with
vvhat vigilancie mine enemies might come vpon me, I ran
my ſelfe into a thicket with one I knew not, and in a Countrey
I was vnacquainted with. But my misfortune was directed
by a ſuperiour power, and it was not poſſible for me
to auoid it. Let mee tell you, Signior Leriano, wee had
ſcarce trauelled a ſhort league in the narrow path, when
three on horſebacke ouertooke vs; which, to my ſeeming,
were the ſame that a good while followed vs behind. My
companion went ſomewhat aloofe, ſo that I remained in
midſt of the foure, encompaſſed on both ſides with the
cloſe darke Mountaine: and thus we went ſilently on, till
night came on vs; and when I leaſt thought of the future
ſucceſſe, I might heare my ſelfe called by my name: and
certainely (were it not ridiculous to thinke ſo) I ſhould
ſweare, it was the very voyce of Clara I heard; and with the
ſudden alteration this apprehenſion begat in me, about to
turne my horſe, my trecherous companion turned his vpon
me more nimbly, and before I was aware, ſtrucke fiercely
at me: the blow (doubtleſſe) ſaued my life; for cutting my
horſes raines, when I looked about, I had nothing left to
guide him with, ſo the other three had leyſure to faſten
ſome wounds vpon me: yet ſtanding with my ſword to my
defence, as well as I was able, one of the three (whom by
the falling off of his Vizard, I knew to be Rodrigo) diſcharged
a Piſtoll; but Heauen was pleaſed to keepe the bullet
from me; which (I ſuppoſe) wounded my horſe: for the
beaſt at the very inſtant, (I vnable for want of a Bridle to
rule him) like a whirl-wind ruſht into thoſe brakes and thickets;
and (though they followed) ranne ſo faſt, that 'twas
impoſſible to ouertake him: or happely they imagined his
owner was deadly wounded; for I my ſelfe too thought ſo,
perceiuing my ſpirits faile me, and my extreme fainting,

with which (I remember) I fell from my horſe, and ſo remained,
till ſuch time as I found my ſelfe in your company:
and that which makes mee moſt wonder, is, you
                     •
                   finding
me ſo farre from the Mountaine, in the mid-way to this citie,
on ſuch a kind of Cariage as you deſcribed: whereby
I gheſſe, that ſome or other before your arriuall, began to
do me that charitable office, though to be left in ſuch maner,
quite paſſeth my intelligence; onely aſſured I am of
your moſt affectionate care, for which I owe the ſeruice of
my vnfortunate life, as reſtored by your ſelfe (next heauen)
to your vnhappy ſeruant. Here Gerardo ended his dolefull
relation, whom Leriano re-embrac't, and condoling with
him his hard ſucceſſe; teares ſtanding in his eyes, hee thus
cuts him off: No more ceremonies betwixt vs, deare Sir,
your miſhaps make me as compaſſionate, as deſirous
to helpe you (as I haue promiſed) in your reuenge. Certaine
I am (quoth he) that be it neuer ſo bitter on the traitour
Rodrigo, none will condemne mee, time onely muſt
produce the euent; for as yet, I think it beſt to diſſemble
my wrongs.
               
                  Gerardo's long diſcourſe had made it time for his friend
and him to ſuppe; which ended, and they paſſing the reſt of
the night in ſleepe, aſſoone as it was day, their Oaſt awaked
them, wiſhing them to get vp, if they pleaſed to ſee the
execution of three famous priſoners in the Citie: which
when Leriano heard, hee demanded what their crime was,
but the Oaſt could giue them no certaine knowledge; only
he ſaid, the common report was, that for a ſtrange robbery
they had committed: vvhereupon the two calling a
ſeruant for their Clothes, and mine Oaſt ſeeing their care
to riſe, told them they need not make ſo much haſte, for
that they were to paſſe by his doore, and hee would giue
them notice: not long after they might ſee an infinit number,

and ſome religious perſons, paſſe by the window; and
amongſt them, the wretched delinquents; behinde them
followed a reaſonable handſome Youth well clad, making
moſt extreme moane: and the two Gentlemen looking
ſomewhat wiſtly on him, he vvas preſently knowne to Gerardo:
for you muſt know, that this vvas the loued Senabria,
vvhom (if you remember) the afternoone before his misfortune,
he ſent before to take vp lodging; vvhich when he
had done, and ſeeing his Maſter came not, neither imagining
vvhat might cauſe his ſo long ſtay, preſaging ſome
diſaſtrous accident, before day-breake, hee returned backe
the vvay he came; asking as many as he met withall, for his
loſt Maſter. As fortune vvould, at length a poore ſhepherd
croſſed the ſame way that Senabria came; vvho hearing
his demand, to his no ſmall admiration, told him, that
not paſſing an houre before, he ſaw certaine men dragged
out of the Mountaine, and carried by a troupe of Keepers
and Country fellowes, with their armes bound (as priſoners)
to a Village ſome two leagues from that place; and
the reaſon (as hee heard) was, that in the thicket they had
killed a Gentleman for his Mony; who (it ſeemed) had ouer-night
loſt his way on horſebacke: which vvhen the afflicted
Youth vnderſtood, crying out like one diſtracted, &
beleeuing 'twas his Maſter they had ſlaine, without more
enquiry of the ſhepherd, he ſpurred his horſe what vvay he
with his hand directed him. The fellow that thus informed
Senabria, was not miſtaken, if you call to mind the three
compaſſionate ſhepherds, that in the beginning of this
Diſcourſe, vve left ruſhing into the thicket, followed by
thoſe rude and ſauage Mountainiers: they could not ſo
nimbly eſcape, but that before day-breake, (being ſhrewdly
baited) in ſpite of their teeths, they were by their perſecuters
taken; and ſome of theſe barbarous people that

were ſcattered to and fro in queſt of them, lighted on the
horſe, which the night before had frighted the poore priſoners,
and others returning to the ſelfe-ſame place, where
Gerardo fell, ſeeing the ground and green graſſe enamelled
with freſh blood, could not but be troubled at the nouelty:
and deſirous to know more, prying about the neere trees,
they found a laced Cloke, and faire embroidered Hat, with
a naked hackt ſword; at which their wonder increaſing,
vvithout farther ſearch, they ranne to the reſt of their company,
who by this time with much ado, had ſeized vpon
the poore horſe; which they might eaſily doe, by reaſon of
the Piſtoll-ſhot and wound that now grew ſtiffe vpon him:
they alſo vvere amazed to ſee the ſpoyles that their cōpanions
brought, & were now all of opinion, that their priſoners
had robbed & ſlaine the owner of them for his goods; and
though the poore innocent men with the truth would haue
giuen their diſcharge, 'tvvas but loſt labour to thoſe barbarous
people; and though ſome vvere their kindred and allies,
yet for feare of the Keepers, and the hainouſneſſe of
their crimes, they durſt not ſet them at libertie: ſo that,
deafe to all pittie, vvith cryes and outrage, they dragged
them on, at what time the vvofull Senabria, haſting as ſpeedily
as his ſorrow would permit him, hearing the noyſe, and
directed by thoſe raſcals clamours, without the thicket ouertooke,
and hauing ſaluted them, asked the hindermoſt
touching his charge; but he ſtraight knew the ſwift horſe,
that was now led by one of them, and with a grieuous
ſcrieke, bereaued of his ſences, he fell to the ground, inſomuch
that ſome of them which vvere neereſt, going to
helpe him, flew backe; ſeeing that, quickly raiſed, with his
ſword in hand, he ranne towards them, crying out to ſhew
him the villaines that had ſlaine his Maſter. Whereupon
the Keepers had no ſmall ado to pacifie him: but at laſt

with foure of thoſe fellowes that were skilfulleſt (hauing
promiſed to reward them) he went backe to looke for him
whom hee now accounted in another world: but vnable to
finde the leaſt tracke of him, he tooke his way toward Segouia,
where giuing notice to the Gouernour of the Citty,
of what paſſed within his iuriſdiction, and alſo making
knowne who the murdered party was, without taking any
reſt, hee trauelled all that night, and the next day arriued
at the widdow Gerardo's mothers houſe, who (as you heard)
liued in Madrid. Heere was mourning indeed, true ſorrow,
penetrating ſighes, ſad groanes, from the wofull Gentlewoman,
whoſe heart euen bled, while others eyes ran
teares.
               With all ſpeed ſhee diſpatcht a Meſſenger to her valiant
ſonne Leoncio, who was ſtill at his Village of Ocea, where
hee and all thereabouts with new teares celebrated their
ſorrow and the ſad newes: but the louing Brother, knowing
that ſuch tenderneſſe vvas not the vvay to his reuenge,
vvith infinite ſpeed taking continual Poſtes, arriued at Segouia,
where he was by Don Manuel de Oxanto, the Cities Gouernour,
more particularly informed of the Tragicall ſucceſſe,
and alſo that the homicides (innocents indeed) were
in faſt hold. Leoncio now preſent, and ſtrong euidence
brought in againſt them, ſhortly after they were put vpon
the Racke, and their courages failing, all three plainly confeſſed
as much as was required of them, and were legally
condemned to ſuffer for the fact, and carrying them
thorow the ſtreets to the place of execution, as their good
lucke, or rather innocency vvould haue it, the vvounded
Gerardo knowing his truſty Senabria, aſtoniſht at his vncredible
moane, cauſed a ſeruant with all haſte to call him;
vvhich vvhen the afflicted Youth heard, (for hee well knew
Gerardo's tongue) hee caſt vp his eyes, and ſeeing him in

the window, ſtood ſtocke ſtill, like one in an extaſie, ſtirring
neither hand nor foote. But comming quickly to himſelfe,
leauing hat and cloake in midſt of the ſtreete, hee ran
and proſtrated himſelfe at Gerardo's feete, who was now
gotten downe to the Inne dore, vvhere an infinite company
of people were flocked about them, that drawne thither
by the nouelty of Senabria's extremes, drew neere to ſee
what would bee the iſſue of the matter. And is it poſſible
(ſaid the faithfull ſeruant, crying out) that you are my beloued
Gerardo? Is it true that my eyes behold you, my
hands feele you, and eares heare your loued voyce? Oh
deare Maſter, and are you that dead hee, whoſe loſſe hath
beene ſo much deplored by your kindred, ſeruants and
friends? Yet why doubt I, ſince theſe hands touch, and
eyes not blinde really behold you? Heauen, that hath had
compaſſion on your misfortunes, hath diſcouered the traytrous
villaines that vvould haue ſlaine you, allotting a iuſt
puniſhment vnto them.
               Theſe, and ſuch Phraſes vſed Senabria, moued by extremity
of ioy, at the ſight of his Maſter, who vvondring to
heare vvhat hee ſaid, touching the Authors of his wounds,
thinking they were apprehended, retyring to his Chamber
with the noble Andaſuſian Gentleman, his friend; hee demanded
more particularly of him vvhat hee knew touching
the buſineſſe? who declaring to him all that hath been
formerly related, knowing in vvhat danger the poore innocent
men vvere, vvith teares in his eyes, full of ſoft compaſſion,
hauing (as well as his vvounds vvould giue him
leaue) gotten on horſebacke, and Leriano likewiſe, they
haſted out of the Inne, and galloping on, with their good
ſpeed ſaued the poore Shepheards liues, that were now at
the Gallowes foote.
               When the Officers of Iuſtice ſaw this troope with ſeruants

and others that followed them, thinking they meant
to haue diſturbed the fatall execution, crying out for
helpe in the Kings name, they went to oppoſe them, wherby
no ſmall vproare aroſe in the Market-place, and whole
Cittie; which comming to the Gouernours eare, he came,
accompanied with many Gentlemen; and amongſt them,
the noble Leoncio, into the place; where hearing the iuſt
demand of the two friends, they began to bee in more
quietneſſe, and Leoncio hauing knowne his Brother with
open armes, bathing his cheekes in ioyfull teares, on
horſebacke all as he was, ran to imbrace him, and after him
the diſcreete Don Manuel, and the reſt of the Gentlemen in
order: and ſo Gerardo's declaration being taken (in all ſaue
diſcouering Rodrigo) and the Shepheards alſo telling in
what manner they found him, and vpon what termes they
left him: Their innocence knowne, to the great ioy of the
two Brothers, as alſo of the worthy Gouernour, and whole
Citie, they were ſtripped out of their mournfull weeds,
and were carried to Don Manuels houſe, where Leoncio alſo
lodged, and by Gerardo's bounty, they were carefully cured
of the hurt they receiued vpon the Racke, and after by
him plentifully rewarded for their trouble, and loſſes. The
two Brothers conſulted next how they might be reuenged;
but thought it beſt to deferre it for the preſent, giuing their
enemies firſt leaue to bee ſecure. And taking leaue of the
Gouernour and the Gentlemen of that famous Citie, they
trauelled toward Madrid, (where by this time the happy
newes was diu
                     •
                  lged) and with them the good Leriano,
who importuned by his friends could not but conſent to
the Iourney.
               Being arriued, conſider how her fortunate Gerardo might
be welcommed by his Mother, who hugged him like one
newly raiſed from death, and with no leſſe loue, at leaſt,

with like demonſtration his Andaluzian reſtorer, to whom
the whole family with vnſpeakable ioy applide themſelues.
But fortune that loues no long quiet, would not that this
ioy ſhould long continue in Gerardo's ioyfull manſion, who
with his deare friend was the happieſt man (as he thought)
aliue, expecting ſhortly the returne of his Brother Leoncio,
that with ſome friends and kinſmen of his, were gone to the
Village of Ocea, to prepare ſome ſports and paſtimes for
Leriano's entertainment.
               One night amongſt others, the two friends wanting Leoncio's
company hauing retired to bedward ſooner then
their accuſtomed houre, about the dead of night, (the
whole houſhold aſleepe) the two, vvhen they leaſt dreamt
of any ſuch thing, were beſet and apprehended by a Iudge;
vvhō, with ſtore of officers, the ſupreame Councel had ſent
to that purpoſe; which exceedingly amazed them, though
their innocēce made them couragiouſly to ſuffer the blow.
The ſubtile Iudge ſtraight beſtowed thē in ſeuerall Priſons;
and to auoid delayes, without giuing them time once to
deliberate, examined Gerardo, laying to his charge his enemy
Roderigo's death, and his intent likewiſe to haue ſlaine
Clara, with ſuch ſharpe and bitter language as extreamely
troubled the poore Gentleman, not ſo much for the bloudy
crime laid to his charge, as for that the Iudge told him
Clara had beene married to his trecherous enemie; for
though hee were dead and ſhee long agoe giuen ouer, yet
ſuch was his rage and vnreaſonableneſſe of iealouſie, a paſſion
that pardons not the dead. To vvhat was vrged againſt
him, hee knew no better anſwer then the ſtory of
his owne wounds and Roderigo's treachery, alleaging withall
how much more iuſtly he might haue vſed his beſt diligence
againſt the other, ſince his wickedneſſe and baſeneſſe

deſerued it: theſe and the like reaſons hee vttered, which
euen ſatisfide, or at leaſt ſomewhat abated the ſeueritie
of the rigorous Iudge.
               Touching Clara he ſpoke indifferently, as not onely ignorant
of her marriage, but whether ſhe were aliue or no:
yet he was ſtill kept in ſtrong hold, with ſtore of Keepers about
him, whilſt the cunning & actiue Iudge in the meane
time buſied himſelfe in priuy ſearches, ſifting of witneſſes
and the like. But theſe exquiſite endeuours had all proou'd
fruitleſſe, if heauen (when they leaſt expected) had not maruellouſly
diſcouered the whole buſineſſe.
               The loyall Fernando, Gerardo's intimate friend, arruing
with heauy newes, he brought from Talbora, diſperſed theſe
clouds, that thus blinded them in amazement and ignorance;
who caſting his valorous armes about his impriſoned
friends necke; and with his ancient paſt loue, arming
him to patience, ſitting him downe betwixt the compaſſionate
Andaluzian, and the Noble Leoncio now returned from
Ocea, with his knowne ſtayedneſſe and modeſtie, hee thus
began:
               As ſoone, my Gerardo (as you had left my Country and
me) I endeuoured like a true friend, to doe my beſt deuoir
in your abſence and ſeruice, ſeeking to pierce and diſcouer
the impenetrable deſignes and ſtratagems of your Aduerſaries,
chiefely Rodrigo, and to giue you frequent aduertiſement
by Letters; and amongſt other things (if you remember
I wrote you of the dayly viſits, night-walkes, and extraordinarie
diligence he vſed in Clara's ſeruice, more eagerly,
and with more paſſion, then at any time formerly. Wherevpon
Captaine Eſcouar her father dying, to the whole Citties
great admiration, one night ſhee was miſſing in her
Vnkles houſe, and conſequently Rodrigo in his, ſome nine
or ten dayes after this, hapned the ſorrowfull newes of your

treacherous death was bruted in Talbora for certain, which
I at that time much bewailed, ſuſpecting no other to bee
the Author of it then Rodrigo: and to this preſumption, the
ſhortneſſe of his returne ſerued as a ſtronger motiue, together
with his marriage: for, taking Clara out of a Monaſterie,
where he gaue out ſhe was put by his order; ſeeking to
effect his deſire, he was much withſtood by all his friends:
but he ſaying he married Gerardo's widdow, paſſing through
all inconueniences, made vp the match, and all vs his acquaintance
to wonder, conſidering what wee knew of her
infamie: Some ſixe weekes ſince wee heard of your recouerie,
and not paſſing three, Rodrigo was found dead in his
bed, with ſeuen deepe and dangerous wounds, and his wife
by him with two in her breſt, crying grieuouſly out, that
you vvere, the bloudy homicide. All Rodrigo's people were
preſently clapt vp, and the High-wayes laid for you; the
poore ſeruants had the Rack, to know vvhich of them gaue
you entrance into the houſe. Neither had they till this
time ceaſed tormenting them, had not Clara, finding her
ſelfe mortally vvounded (willing to excuſe the neuer-dying
death of her ſoule, aduiſed by her Confeſſor) told the

                     〈◊〉
                   cauſe of that horrible diſaſter, and the reſt; of which
ſhe made an admirable declaration, beginning from your
firſt loues, and proceeding to the cauſe for vvhich with ſo
much rigour you left her, ſhe ſaid, That ſeeing how much
ſhe vvas by you deſpiſed, and how impoſſible it vvas for
her to returne to your fauour (theſe things forcing her to
a deſpaire) ſhe conuerted that loue and affection, which
till then ſhe had borne you into mortall hatred (ſo much
the greater, by how much our loues are violent) and ſo
looking to nothing more then a bloudy reuenge, ſhee vſed
as an inſtrument, the bold breſt of the offended Rodrigo, of
vvhoſe loue ſhe vvas confident, being as then more earneſtly

then euer courted by him: and therefore ſending ſecretly
for him; (all comforts, promiſes, and teares that
his deſire could vviſh preceding) ſhee propoſed the buſineſſe,
telling him how much ſhee was bound to him, and
onely deferred her recompence, till ſhee ſaw what might
become of her Husband Gerardo, (that name ſhe ſtill afforded
you) ſaying, that you (as the onely let remoued) ſhe
forthwith proteſted to bee his Wife, giuing him her hand
to boote: beſides this (though to ſo blinde a Louer any
part of this had been ſufficient) ſhe put him in minde of his
diſgracefull hurts, the more to incenſe him, and withall of
your ſecureneſſe that made the matter ſo much the more
facile: which effected, without preiudice to her honour, ſhe
might yeeld her ſelfe to his pleaſure.
               At this Rodrigo ſufficiently incited, and ſtirred vp
with the remembrance of his wounds, without further delaies,
& with a determined courage, promiſed to fulfil her
commands, though in the accompliſhment hee loſt both
honor, life and fortunes: and ſo thorowly agreed, ſhe reſolued
to commit her ſelf to Rodrigo's company, as the inſuing
night ſhe did; and a few dayes after with three ſeruants,
tall fellowes, and well-armed, they rode towards your Village
of Ocea, where hauing enquired after you, and hearing
you were to goe to the Court, keeping alwayes in kenning,
they followed you to Madrid, which place you left, after
you had ſeene and taken leaue of your loued Mother; and
being on your way, neere the Kings Houſe Del Campo, one
of the ſeruants came into your company, whom truſting as
your guide, you were by him conducted that night, into
the traine that was laid for your death, (her husband and
the reſt of his ſeruants, ſetting vpon you in that rough
and thicke Mountaine) where (ſhe alſo preſent) they left

you, to their thinking, ſlain with many cruel wounds, which
vvas alſo ſoone publiſhed thorow all the Prouince, as ſoon
as they arriued at Talbora. The marriage was after ſtrooke
vp betweene them, and the Traytor receiued the reward
of his bloudy ſeruice: but not long after, he had one more
deſerued; for (the ſad newes of your death cryed downe
againe) when Clara heard it, ſhe vvas ready to haue killed
her ſelf▪ ſuch was the dolour of her afflicted heart, to think
that for the price of your death (vneffected) ſhe was now
married to one ſhe euer mortally abhorred: and thus cheated,
her rancour more increaſed, making her fall vpon a
piece of the moſt barbarous inhumane crueltie that hath
beene inuented, to kill her Husband, and wound her ſelfe;
that with that diuelliſh deuice, ſhe might, without all ſpot
or taint, free herſelfe from the indiſſoluble knot, and likewiſe
be reuenged on you, with ſaying, Gerardo hid within
the Curtaines, ſtabbed her husband and her; but the diuine
iuſtice (for an exemplary puniſhment) brought her by
her owne hands to this end, which ſhe confeſſed; and cloſing
vp her Diſcourſe, a while after, her wounds fiſtulated,
and their venome pierced euen to the ſecret vertue of her
afflicted macerated heart, at what time the vitall ſpirits failing,
weary of ſtruggling with her lateſt pangs, that Gallant
ſprightly corps gaue vp the reuengefull ſpirit, vvhoſe ſad
and ſpeedy report no ſooner came to my notice; vvhen
knowing how much your life depended vpon the Narration,
I tooke this Poſting-iourney.
               Here Gerardo with true ſignes of ſorrow, and ſoules torment,
ſhewed the pure and effectuall loue hee once bore
her, that was his Clara, ſince all thoſe rude wrongs vvere
not ſufficient yet to change him, rather as ſoone as euer hee
heard the fatall report of her miſerable vntimely end; his

tender heart vnable to ſuſtaine ſuch a tormenting ſtroke;
and his ſtrength failing, with a pittifull profound grone,
in the ſight of his friends, none able to relieue him,
diſmaid and ſwouning, hee ſunke downe
to the cold earth.
               Here ends the firſt Tragicall Diſcourſe.
            
            
               
               GERARDO:
THE
VNFORTVNATE
SPANIARD.
               The ſecond Diſcourſe.
               
                  LIke ſome happy Paſſenger eſcaped from a
violent ſtorme, our Gerardo at length came
to himſelfe out of a deep trance, into which
the ſad and Funerall newes of the deceaſed
Clara had caſt him, once his ſoules ineſtimable
pledge; but now the Originall of all
his woes, impriſonment, fetters and chaines that incompaſſed
him; from which, yet in ſhort time (the truth of all
diſcouered) to the great reioycing of his kindred, friends,
and his much loued Leriano, hee was at wiſhed libertie;
though extremely oppreſſed with melancholly, which
made him wholly ruine himſelfe, which hee ſo wilfully affected,
that his amiable and pleaſing condition was quite
chang'd, being burdenſome to his very ſeruants and whole
Family, which bred no ſmall griefe to his Mother, Brother

and friends, that intirely loued him; euen ſo Leriano, who
in midſt of the triumphes that were prepared for his entertainment
(leauing his friends) returned to his formerly
commenced Voyage; the like did Fernando, to his Cittie,
where leaue we them, till ſwift time reſtore vs, the one with
an end no leſſe Tragicall then the preſent. Time, that muſt
now ſerue as a wholeſom Phyſician, blotting with his various
courſe out of Gerardo's remembrance, the torment that ſo
rigorouſly poſſeſſed him, time onely could conſume, and
extinguiſh it in him; yet not ſo thorowly, but a long time
after, the aſhes of his former fire ſent forth ſome ſmoke.
               
                  Gerardo now vndoubtedly beleeued, that in Clara, all the
Treaſons and deceits of women were deciphered, but
his want of yeeres, and ſhallow experience, ſooth'd him
on in this opinion. Time brought him further on ſhore, and
at euery ſtep, made him diſcouer new and greater precipices,
beſet with flatterie, vaine ſhewes, falſe dealing, and
diſſembled affection; which ſeruing to coole his youthfull
bloud, and hot affections, with new misfortunes, gaue
matter to this ſecond Tragicall Diſcourſe.
               Long the late accident of his ſad loue kept him in this retirement,
in which he longer had remain'd; but that the
generall noiſe of extraordinarie triumphs at Court, rowzed
vp his drowzy ſpirits. 'Twas now in the yeere ſixe hundreth
and fiue, the eighth day of Aprils moneth, when our
wiſhed Prince, Don Philip the fourth, of this moſt famous
name, was borne, to the wonderfull ioy of the third Philip
his Father, and no leſſe of that ineſtimable Auſtrall Margaret
his Mother, and in generall of all their Subiects, vvho
with ſumptuous preparations, ſet forth their true affections,
by celebrating the birth-day, with what ſhewes of vnfained
loyaltie their hearts could excite them to. To theſe vniuerſall
ſolemnities, the forgotten Gerardo, accompanied by his

Brother, ſome kinſmen and other friends arriued at Valladolid,
moued as well through his owne deſire, as importuned
by his friends and allies; or indeede by his melancholly
thoughts, which by the greatneſſe of that renowned
Citie were diuerted, drowned in the tempeſtuous
Sea of his paſt misfortunes; for here euery looke, each ſtep,
preſented him with new and ſeuerall obiects. I omit the
deſcription of thoſe Feſtiuall Triumphs, as magnificent as
ſtately, worthy a nimbler quill then mine, my wings dare
not ſoare to ſo high a pitch: onely the preſent ſubiect, forced
me to touch vpon this Summarie Relation and mention.
               
                  Gerardo liued neere that ſtreet, which takes name from
the ancient ſtocke of the Illuſtrious Ziungas, in an honeſt
priuate lodging, together with the reſt of his company,
where, by their diligent and carefull Oaſt, they were obſerued
with particular reſpect (no ſmall happineſſe in ſo great
a concourſe to bee ſo well accommodated.) One time amongſt
others, Gerardo, after he had dined, finding himſelfe
not halfe currant, excuſing him to his kindred and company,
laid him downe to reſt: his indiſpoſition though vvas
not ſo great, but that within an houre or ſo, beeing better
refreſhed, he could get him to one of the iron grates of his
Chamber window, where, to his no little admiration, to the
found of a ſhrill Harpe, he might heare (though vndiſtinctly)
ſomething ſung with a voice, whoſe melody euen rapt
his ſences, yet he was not able to gheſſe from whence thoſe
celeſtiall notes ſhould proceed; nor the place, or beeing,
that concealed this Angelicall Orpheus that thus attracted
him; till the ſuddenneſſe of it paſſing ouer, with more vigilancy
he might perceiue, that it came from a neighbouring
oppoſite window, but 'twas not poſſible to ſee the party, by
reaſon of a cloſe greene Lettice that was betweene the

barres & the inſide: yet he gheſſed it vvas a vvoman, as well
by the ſweetneſſe of her trebble, as a kinde of bluſh of her
preſence, vvhich he might confuſedly behold.
               The pleaſing tone ended; at what time Gerardo more
violently longed to re-enioy it; and hauing a glimpſe yet
of the Harpe, and preſuming that in ſuch occaſions 'twas
no impudence to begge a curteſie, he was bold by an amorous
ſigne to re-ſollicite the celeſtiall harmony. The hidden
Dame was nothing ſqueamiſh; ſo for his ſigne, returning
him a condiſcending nod, with a ſprightly careleſnes,
ſhe once againe ſtrooke vp the Royal Inſtrument, and to it
as to Gerardo's incredible delight, ſuted this excellent Sōnet.
               Wingleſse to mount, or ſaile' gainſt winde,
               Extract from Worm-wood Nectar pure,
               Impriſon'd in a Caue obſcure,
               Or thinke the Sunne's light we ſee (blinde:)
               An Antidote in priſon finde,
               In midst of danger moſt ſecure,
               (Laughing) the Torture to endure,
               To ſay that Lightning's light is kinde,
               Or that dead men do liue:
               Such pow'r ſole Loue can giue.
               The vnknowne courtly voice had cleane tranſported
him, and ſuſpended the very ſtreetes paſſengers; but ſomething
in the Song inwardly affected him, as if he ſhould be
the ſubiect of it: but (being a ſtranger) it ſtraight ſeemed
impoſsible. He could not but ſhew himſelfe thankefull, as
the ſhortneſſe of time, and diſtance of places would permit
him; for iuſt now his Brother and Kinſmen were gotten in
vnto him, ſo he was forced to an Adieu, for feare of being
by them eſpied, and the concealed Lady, anſwering with

the like, he turned backe to Leoncio, whom onely hee acquainted
with what hapned, whereat hee receiued no ſmall
content, (as deſiring infinitely to ſee him ſome way diuerted
from his former griefes) though whither, or to whom
the preſent ſuite was directed, hee was vtterly ignorant.
Some three or foure dayes next following, Gerardo, by reaſon
of ſome vrgent occaſions, was ſtill from home, till one
faire and cleere morning (as hee was dreſſing himſelfe at
his window) he might heare one in an amorous Key, with
a low Hiſt call him; and looking vp, ſaw (though a little
imperfectly) yet better in reſpect of the Sunne-beames
then the firſt afternoone, a well-ſhap't-bodied Dame, and
to his ſeeming, a liuely countenance; whom with a low
obeyſance, ſaluting, ſhe returned him her curt'ſie. He was
perſwaded, that though hee wanted either Voice or Muſicke,
the party could not but be the ſame; eſpecially when
peering from an Alablaſter hand, hee might perceiue two
ſmooth (like-Art-turned) fingers, which was the moſt reall
ſight the wood-wouen net would affoord him: ſhee beckned
him to deſcend to her window, which hee did; when
taking vp a Paper ſhe dropped, with vnſpeakeable ioy returning
to his Chamber, he opened it, and viewed the following
Contents.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           'Tis now a moneth ſince my happie Starre (I careleſse of the
bleſsed occaſion it reſerued for mee) brought mee to this Grate,
from whence I ſaw you alight at your lodging doore, and from
that very inſtant (though it may ſeeme looſeneſse, thus ſoone to
declare my ſelfe, and a thing ſo contrary to our ſexe) you had free
admiſsion into my tender heart, which, whether I would or not,
you poſseſt as abſolute ouer it; and the Owner, who moſt earneſtly
deſires you, to accept of her affection with like recompence.
                           
                              Your IACINTA.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               Much was required of GERARDO in this preſent

Ticket, of whoſe Contents as careleſſe, as loth to equall
the affection the Letter charged him with, hee had recourſe
to his paſt misfortunes, and ſo feared to intangle
himſelfe in others that might proue of like condition.
Yet in reſpect his anſwere was required, more for Courtſhip
then neceſſitie or obligation, after hee had dined, taking
pen and Inke, he framed this reply:
               
                  
                     
                        
                           'Tis not the leaſt part of my debt to gracious Heauen, for induing
me with ſome meaſure of humilitie: for had the Superiour
powers been ſcarce in this to me, well might the ſoothing of your
diſcreete Letter, faire Miſtris, haue made me arrogant. But I
acknowledge my meane parts, and ſo rather in carteſie, then fooliſh
confidence beleeue you. Yet let me requeſt your beliefe of this,
that beſides your obliging me by the preſent fauour, ſuch a treaſure,
and ſo admirable a Voice hath heretofore wholly ſurprized
me. And therefore ſince I am your Priſoner, let me be ſo happy as
to haue a ſight of the Soueraigne Iaylor that muſt guard mee, otherwiſe
it had beene raſhneſse to ſubmit my ſelfe voluntarily to
the danger, and you your ſelfe would impute my determination to
madneſse.
                           
                              Your GERARDO.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               Such was Iacinta's Letter, and ſuch Gerardo's anſwere,
which ſhe receiued, tyed to a ſlight Ribbon caſt downe
from her window, that ſerued as a Meſſenger to theſe
new Louers, and vvithout helpe of any third partie, they
made frequent vſe of this deuice.
               
                  Iacinta was much importuned by her Louer to be ſeene;
but it was long ere his deſire could take effect. Some daies
after, as he was greedy of a ſight of her, hee might heare a
voice againe to the Harpe, with theſe Verſes.
               
                  
How doe I liue, if I haue loſt my heart?
               If I liue not, whence feele I all this fire?
               If ſo much heate torment my forc't deſire,
               Why, of my glory doe I make it part?
               If I be all on fire, what need I Art
               To dry my teares, or make wet griefe retire?
               Or if a Sea of Teares, what, to require
               Water, to quench the flame made by Loues dart?
               If looking and a ſight may ſatisfie,
               Why doe I then ſo much abhorre the light?
               If I abhorre, why doe I ſeeke it ſo?
               Mirac'lous Loue; the more (in vaine) I trie
               To looſen the hard knot, thy cunning ſlight,
               The more I labour mine owne ouerthrow.
               And the end of the Song was quauered out with an harmonious
ſigh, which Gerardo at the inſtant could ſpeedily
anſwer with no bad Eccho; as one that had beene well beaten
to ſuch paſſion. But night comming ſwiftly on, threatened
to part them, which awhile after it did; and giuing a
pauſe to their outward ſences, though not to their inward
thoughts, brought on day and morning: at which time
comming both early to the vſuall ſtands, after their mutuall
ſalutations, Gerardo taking a paper out of his pocket,
went downe and tyed it to the String at her window, and
ſo left her to reade the gladſome enſuing Verſes:
               Sweet Voyce! I heare thy pleaſing harmonie,
               Though Aire reſiſt it, and rebellious winde:
               O that the glorious Angell I could ſee,
               That thus inchants mine eare, ſuſpends my mind!
               Loue, ſure, is no bare Voyce, no fancie blind,
               
                  
Nor fain'd intention, but realitie;
               A ſubſtance and ingendred Deitie,
               'Twixt Mars and Venus in adult'rate kind.
               Then, if not wholly Voyce, ſince Body too;
               Or, yet, if Eccho, hearke: ſo may thy faire
               
                  Narciſſus ſoft relent and learne to woo:
               But why concealed thus do'ſt thou declare
               Thy ſelfe like him, ſelfe-louing? if not ſo,
               Why art thou nought but Voyce wrap't vp in ayre?
               Sure I am, that, could Iacinta conuert her ſelfe into
tongues like Eccho, or into eyes like Argus, ſhee would not
haue ſpared theſe transformations, the more to haue obliged
Gerardo with them: but now day was ſpent, and night
came on, that forced them to part, and giue way to the priuacy
of their amorous thoughts; in which, paſſing the greateſt
part of darkneſſe and the enſuing day, they returned toward
the ordinary ſtand; and after their vſuall louing ſalutations,
Iacinta (taking a paper out of her pocket, and making
ſignes to Gerardo to come downe: he did ſo, and receiued
it with his vſuall content, and (Iacinta going in) opening
it, he read theſe following Contents:
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Your importunity, loued Gerardo, to ſee me is ſuch, that I am
willing at length to giue you the content, (confident) that when
you haue beheld my meane parts, your woorth and my affection
must make vp their defects. At this Grate it is not poſsible,
without the danger of our iealous houſhold; you muſt of force turn
then to the next ſtreet, to which the great doore of our houſe opens,
where to morrow in the afternoone at the Bay-window you ſhall
ſee me, clad in the colour that my heart affects, which ſhall aſſure
you, I am there the ſame that here tels you ſo.
                           
                              Your Iacinta.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
               With exceeding gladneſſe Gerardo read the paper, and
ſatisfied with the promiſe, the briefe minutes vvere long
dayes; and the ſhort houres, laſting ages; till time, not varying
his naturall courſe, though hee thought him ſlower,
brought on the prefixed moment; by vvhen, mounted vpon
a goodly vvell-rein'd Bay, ſet out and trapped vvith rich
furniture, and himſelfe clad in freſh brauery, vvith a heart
ſuteable, aduanced toward the next ſtreet; vvhere hauing
turned, he ſoone tooke notice of the Grate and Bay-vvindow
before him; though as then he ſaw not his Miſtris in
the appointed place; vvhereat his mind vvas not a little diſquieted,
and hauing placed a prety way on, hee thought to
returne in deſpaire to his Lodging; and putting it in execution,
as he came backe iuſt againſt Iacinta's doore, looking
vp, he might ſee where, at the guilded Barres ſhe expected
him, accompanied vvith ſo ſingular Beauty, as might
haue amazed the ſtrongeſt-hearted beholder; an aſpect ſo
awfully maieſticall, as might breed an amorous fearefull reſpect,
as of ſome powerfull Deitie; the effect beeing ſoone
manifeſt in Gerardo: for no ſooner by the cut-greene of her
attire, had hee a view of her celeſtiall countenance, when
looſening the reines, and his legges looſing the ſtirrops, he
remained like Iaſper, or an Image; ſo depriued of memory,
that he wanted it to ſalute her: neither had his fault ſo ceaſed,
but that the free Ginet, finding the flexible reines at libertie,
without leaue of his bereaued Maſter, trotted on
ſomewhat faſter then the ſtate of his vſuall prancing required;
at vvhoſe vneaſie pace Gerardo awaked, and himſelfe
extremely abaſhed, drew vp the reines, and re-ſettled in his
ſtirrops, performed (though a little vnſeaſonably) a courtly
ſalutation; and taking a turne backe againe, meant fully
to recompence that amorous neglect, (if vvhere loue
raignes, any may be ſo termed.) It grew toward the Euening,

ſo our new Louer glad with the ſight of his Miſtris,
and his good dayes worke, returned home, and many a
time after vvas fauoured in this kind, as alſo with her Letters
and Songs full of ſweetneſſe and conceited harmonie.
Many a time after he ſaw her at a Monaſterie, vvhither ſhee
vſed to repaire, accompanied vvith her mother and family.
All this vvhile he had leyſure to informe himſelfe ſecretly of
her friends qualities and meanes, vvhich he vnderſtood to
be ſuch, and her ſelfe euery vvay ſo complete, that the happineſſe
of his loue began to delude his hopes: though the
gentle Iacinta, vvith her many fauours, more and more encreaſt
and nouriſht them. The greateſt part of the Summer
vvas ſpent in this contemplatiue affection, he as carefull to
conceale it frō his friends, as ſhe frō her houſhold ſeruants:
for this ſecret vigilancie vvas the Sanctuary of their reputation,
indeed of both their liues, as ſhall farther appeare in
this Tragicall Relation; vvhich euen now drew on, vpon the
ſmall hope Gerardo conceiued of his happineſſe; ſince too,
vvhen he leaſt ſuſpected, hee vvas aſſaulted vvith one of the
accuſtomed thwarts of his aduerſe fortune, vvhich raiſed a
new trouble, Iacinta giuing him to vnderſtand by a Letter,
that her Parents in all haſte meant to marry her, perhappes
preſaging ſome vnluckineſſe to betide her. The knowledge
of this filled Gerardo vvith feare, as her with griefe, though
ſhe were reſolute to oppoſe her parents deſires, ſince hers to
Gerardo vvere ſo ſettled, that ſhe would rather endure a torturing
death, then make any other the Owner of her life.
And though with this newes, and with what was added by
her, Gerardo's paſſion daily increaſed, yet he neuer vſed ſo
much as the leaſt perſwaſion, to diſſwade her from a iuſt filiall
obedience: for beeing altogether vnreſolued yet to
turne married man, he would not openly hinder the partie
that pretended, neither yet till he ſaw the iſſue, deſiſt from

his owne loues pretenſion. Iacinta's parents were ſo bent
vpon the match, that without her conſent, the vnhappy
nuptials with a kinſeman of hers were to be performed: to
which effect the day of the Ann
                        •
                     nciation of our Lady was
appointed.
               I cannot (though with ſome digreſſion) but here take notice
how fooliſhly ſtupid thoſe parents are, that ſo raſhly
thruſt their children into an eſtate, that onely death can ſeparate
them from; ſince ſuch matches haue ſeldome produced
other then ſome pitifull end, or ſhamefull effect, as
the preſent will demonſtrate, making the faire Iacinta ſo
deſperate, as rather reſolue to die then to marry; of which
her purpoſe, though ſhe gaue daily notice to Gerardo, yet
he, ſeeing things come to that extremitie, giuing ſmall credit
to his hopes, endeuoured now by little and little to
weane himſelfe from his affection; which coldneſſe of his,
his Miſtris perceiuing, and the vngratefull requitall; her
teares and moanes ſtrongly increaſed in ſuch ſort, that
voide of all comfort, with the reſentment of her new griefe
and iealous torment, taking pen and inke, accompanied
with the flowing ſtreames of her faire eyes, ſhe thus writes
to her forgetfull Louer.
               If the facilitie with which thou becameſt Lord ouer my life,
haue made thee ſo hard-hearted, as neglectfull to forget me, falſe
and vnconſtant man! thy proceeding is as baſe, as needes muſt
be thy birth; ſince, if thy diſsembling breſt did nouriſh any noble
blood, reaſon would teach thee to repay my affection, laying before
thee my true and constant loue, which onely forced me to ſo ſudden
madneſse, that by my licencious doting on thee, our ſexe
ſhould loſe their principall glory and ornament. But, ay me, feoliſhly
blind! I my ſelfe gaue thee power, and thruſt thoſe armes
into thy hands, that will be my death, which euery moment threatens

me; ſince I ſhall be forced, rather then any poſſeſse that place
which my heart firſt gaue to thee, with my owne hands to inflict
it on my ſelfe; and reſt aſſured, that though my vnfortunate
marriage bee vpon the neereſt termes that may bee, neither
friends, kindred, or parents ſhall make it on my part take effect,
nor ſhall that falſe faith, with which thou haſt ſold me, make mee
leſſe vnderualew thee firme and loyall mine Owne.
               Largelier would ſhe haue written, but it ſeemed, the violence
of her paſſion both tyed her hands, and troubled her
inuention: poore creature! ſhee weepes, ſighes, and laments,
and ſuddenly refraining ſuch paſſion, checkes thoſe
teares, and her ſorrow propoſeth and diſpoſeth herſelfe to
forget; and in an inſtant abhorres, and repenting her lightneſſe,
(reſolued now on a permanent affection, and determined
on a more ſettled eſtate) meanes to obey her parents
ſtraight againe. Without conſulting with her laſt
purpoſe, ſhe outragiouſly cries out vpon her ſelfe, and as if
ſhe were really transformed into her Gerardo, as effectually
alledgeth for him, excuſeth his forgetfulneſſe: and concluding
thus (fearefull to offend her Louer) teares the Letter
ſhe hath written: not long after, all in a rage, puniſhing
the Starres, ſhee curſes their influence; and bepearling the
ſmooth Criſtall of her face, bedewes the paper ſhe writes,
and the wrought Ebone Yuory Deske on which it reſted,
with her teares; from whence ſpeedily ſtarting, and reſolued
laſtly on her iuſt choler, ſhee went to the window, from
whence ſhe might eſpy Gerardo; who with like care ſtood
at his, and ſo without expecting the leaſt ſigne, or lifting
vp her grieued countenance, ſhee let fall a Paper without
further ſtay; and by the ſhutting of her window gaue ſufficient
teſtimony of her paſſionate diſtaſte. All which Gerardo
felt within himſelf, and fearefull of ſome new change

in his Miſtriſſe, hauing ſoone caught vp the Letter, and as
haſtily read it, the angry contents gaue him rather content
then trouble, ſince thoſe rigorous Lines aſſured his hopes,
which was the ground of his anſwere to Iacinta, whereby
her iealous ſorrow was well abated.
               But now the appointed time came on, as acceptable to
Iacinta's parents, and the whole houſhold, as miſerable and
bewailed by her in ſuch extremitie, that vnable to ſuſtaine
her woes, ſhe fell into ſeuerall ſwounings, into her mothers
lappe, and armes of diuers Dames her kinſwomen and
friends, that were then aſſembled to ſee her nuptials performed;
which by reaſon of her indiſpoſition were then neceſſarily,
till the next day deferred.
               Theſe things paſſed in Iacinta's houſe, whilſt the afflicted
Gerardo, vnable to reſt in any one place, with vnquietneſſe
of his thoughts, one whiles on horſebacke takes ſeuerall
turnes in his Miſtriſſes ſtreet, and then returning home,
gets him to his window another vſuall way to his Loue; till
night comming on, with his owne habite and darkeneſſe
doubly masked, without feare of being knowne, hee might
ſafely enter into the ouer-ioyed houſe of Iacinta, which was
now all feaſting and muſicke: and increaſed in Gerardo's
breſt a more ſtrong ſuſpition, that his Miſtris at length, like
a very woman, had beene wanting to her word and promiſe;
and ſo with a careleſſe carefulneſſe, he ſought to informe
himſelfe of an old ſeruing creature, (whoſe vnpleaſing
age had freed him from being one of the Iouiall company)
ſate downe in a chaire, who hearing Gerardo demand
the occasion of their iollitie, told him in his ſlow manner,
the whole matter; confirming his former ſuſpition: for indeed
Iacinta ouercome by the continuall importunities of
her Parents and kindred, did as at that time yeeld her hand
and conſent to her Couſin and husband. Scarce had the

melting Gerardo heard the laſt accents of the tedious Seruingman
his diſcourſe; when, his faint body couered all ouer
with a cold ſweate, he was forced to leane to the neere
wall; diſſembling as much as in him lay, his ſad paſſion, but
perceiuing the violence of it to increaſe, leauing the houſe,
he returned to his owne, where his brother Leoncio expected
him, with the ſame care, and equall deſire to know the ſucceſſe
of his affaires. But he needed no further information
then Gerardo's lookes; ſo ſhutting the chamber doore, comforting
his brother with a cheerefull countenance, thus he
begins to ſet vpon him.
               Deare Brother, 'Tis needleſſe to increaſe your diſtemper,
this day we expected the euent of Iacinta's vowes, in
which, if, (as I ſuppoſe) ſhe haue failed, 'tis right Woman.
If well you note, vvhat becomes your griefe, you may make
your comfort; for being now reclaimed, you ſhall ſee, heauens
bleſſing, breaking with the frailty of an vnconſtant opinion,
the ſtrong chaines of your oppreſſed liberty, an
eternall ſlauery, perpetuall, euer-liuing, neuer-dying griefe,
ſubiect to the vngrateful proceeding of a light houſe-wife,
whoſe moſt common practice, is, to recompence our loue
with change, our remembrance with neglect, toile with
diſdaine, truth with falſhood, and our firme good-wil with
their fading affection; all their thoughts, words, and deeds,
full of continuall mutabilitie, tending to our lateſt deſtruction,
that being the ayme and ſcope of all their naturall
diſſimulation And this truth, the preſent caſe may make
you not deny, nor due thankes to heauen for ſo remarkeable
benefit; take comfort then, ſince no reaſon it is, ſo happy
a ſucceſſe ſhould depriue you of it. The afflicted Gerardo
vvas about to haue replide ſomething; at what time one
of his ſeruants interrupting him, ſaid; There vvas a ſtranger,
at doore would ſpeak with him, which made him (breaking

off the diſcourſe) goe out; where when hee came, hee
might ſee one with his face muffled in his Cloke; but by
the habit ſeeming ſome perſon of qualitie, and commanding
his man to leaue them, deſirous to know the party, and
what his occaſion was, courteouſly demanded the one and
the other of him. But in ſtead of an anſwer, the concealed
Gallant threw himſelfe forward to haue embraced him;
which beeing ſudden as vnexpected, might haue coſt him
deare; for at the inſtant Gerardo fearing to be clozed withal,
drew backe his left foot, and his ſword with his right hand,
and the point clapt forward, miſſed little of running the
other thorow; beſides, Leoncio (ſuſpecting ſomething) by
this time was come, if need had beene, to his brothers defence.
And doubtleſſe it had gone heauily with the diſguized
partie, if, ſeeing what happened, and Gerardo's miſdoubt
of him, he had not vnmasked himſelfe, and retired,
ſaying; How now, Gerardo? is this the entertainment you
giue me? is this the harbour I finde in your breſt? haue I
this contradiction from your Armes? is my loyalty thus recompenced?
my dangerous boldneſſe thus? Ah, deceitfull
man, that I ſhould thus be caught by thy flatteries! but, farewell:
I may arriue in ſome place, where perhaps I ſhal haue
entrance. And the party abruptly breaking off, vvould
faine haue departed; which when Gerardo ſaw, (for no ſooner
had the diſguized perſon diſcouered that faire face,
when it was knowne, for no leſſe then the rare Originall of
the moſt beautifull Iacinta) & into what errour (though vnwillingly)
he had falne, haſtily ouertaking her, he brought
her backe to his chamber; and there with his Brother, priuately
locked themſelues together, Leoncio deſirous to bee
rid of the doubt, with which the ſtrangeneſſe of this ſucceſſe
had poſſeſt him. Gerardo thus infinitly obliged to his
offended Miſtris, falling paſſionately at her feet, begs humble

pardon for his fault and forgetfulneſſe, ſince his owne
vnworthineſſe of ſo great a glory might ſerue for his excuſe.
And though this and other ſpeeches paſſed, yet he
ſtill thought himſelfe in a dreame, which onely repreſented
to him ſuch a fantaſticall ſhape, as vvas indeed really before
him: and in this ſleepie frenzie, he could doe nothing but
feele Iacinta's body with his hands; who in no leſſe content
and exceſſe of ioy, raiſing her Louer from the ground, and
ioyning lippes, could hardly beleeue it was Gerardo ſhe had
in her armes.
               A prettie while theſe two Louers remained in this amorous
conflict, their content making them minde nothing
elſe, till Leoncio ſatisfide by theſe extremes in the truth of
which he was before doubtfull, wondring at Iacinta's reſolute
determination, approched, diſſoluing the ſtreight knot
that bound them in their cloſe embraces, and though hee
could not but apprehend much hazard from this act of
hers, yet beheld ſuch beauty and attractiue merit in her
perſon, that Gerardo's affection, which before to him ſeemed
blinde, vvas now blameleſſe: and conſidering that in
ſo dangerous a buſineſſe it was fit to take a mature courſe,
without more delay, he deſired to know of Iacinta, vvhat
ſhift ſhe had made to get thither, that accordingly their after-proceeding
might ſucceed the better. To which the
faire Dame made anſwer, aſſuring him ſhee had no other
counſellour, but her owne ſecret thoughts, to which no
creature was priuy; wherefore by mutuall conſent it was agreed,
that Gerardo and Iacinta ſhould take a iourney towards
Arragon, and in the interim, Leoncio to aduize them
of the proceeding of her friends; who, hauing inſtantly (as
ſhe was wanting) miſſed her, vſed all diligence round about
the houſe in her ſearch, where they leaſt ſuſpected the
miſchiefe, in the garden they found a little doore that opened

to the ſtreet; and neere it a table couered with greene
and wouen myrtles, where her Gowne and Clothes lay,
which ſhould haue beene the ornaments of her Nuptials,
but were now the Reliques of a ſad remembrance: For
know, that as Iacinta, at the fond importunity of her Parents,
had vnwillingly giuen her hand to her offended
Spouſe; ſo repenting as quickly, and in an amorous vehemency,
ſhutting the eyes of reaſon to all inconueniences,
diſſembling her diſcontent, by ſaying ſhe was not well, ſhe
betooke her ſelfe to her chamber, and ſtealing from thence
by a lower window into the fore-mentioned Garden, and
ſuddenly clapping on the mans attire which ſhee had in a
readineſſe, leauing her owne in the place, ſhee vnder-went
the courſe here related; ſo much preuailed the memory of
Gerardo in her tender heart, and the wrong done him, by
giuing her word to another.
               'Twere needleſſe to deſcribe the whole families lamentation
for the loſſe, or the exquiſit paines vſed in her ſearch:
ſuffiſe it, vve bring theſe Louers to a ſafe and quiet Port;
vvho now vpon their haſty departing, by the good care and
ordering of the prudent Leoncio, before midnight, without
beeing by any eſpied, well furniſhed with Iewels and
Crownes, tooke their way from that populous City, toward
the auncient vnconquered Numantia, vvhich they
thought at preſent to be the ſecureſt way, and in few daies
after, they ioyfully there arriued; and hauing reſted awhile,
returned againe to their trauell, and at length came to their
iourneys end, the deſired City of Zaragoſa, to the no little
ioy and comfort of the two Louers.
               So many and excellent gifts of nature adorne this great
City, that deſeruedly, aboue the moſt famous of the renowned
ſtyle, it merits the royall name of Caeſar Auguſta. Here
Gerardo for ſome yeeres was ſettled, and in reſpect of the

content he enioyed in his loued company, would not haue
changed his condition of life for a farre greater; ſo conformable
were both their affections, or indeed ſo ſuperiour Iacinta's,
admitting no compariſon.
               
                  Gerardo had with his noble and generous carriage, in
ſhort time gained on the beſt affections in that City, wherby
he was as equally beloued, as the beſt of the Gentry or
Inhabitants: to expreſſe it, in all their Meetings, Maskes,
Shewes, and what euer Solemnities, aſwell priuate as publike,
he ſtill made one, and was choſen as an Vmpire or
Stickler amongſt all his friends: his moſt eſpecially profeſſed,
was one Don Iayme de Aragon, a worthy branch of that
royall Name, and landed in the beſt part of that Kingdom;
from whom Gerardo concealed not his inmoſt thoughts,
nor the occaſions about Iacinta, (parties onely ſpared.) This
Gentleman, amongſt other poſſeſſions that were of his inheritance,
not paſt ſeuen leagues from Zaragoſa, had a pretty
Village, as well peopled as moſt in that Countrey, and
the beſt for Summer and ſhade abounding in dainties, of
all Arragon; where for his recreation, and freſh cooleneſſe,
he oft vſed to paſſe the ſcorching heates: and purpoſing
a iourney thither, with much intreaty, or rather daily importunity,
he wonne Gerardo at length to accompany him:
which chiefly in reſpect of the great obligations he had to
his friendſhip, he could not but conſent to, though it were
not poſſible that Iacinta ſhould be left one minute alone,
ſo that after ſome debating, it was reſolued, that all three
ſhould goe the iourney. The ſame day they parted, in delightfull
conuerſation they at night about Sun-ſet arriued
at a Caſtle which belonged to a Kinſman of Don Iayme's,
where alighting, they were heartily welcommed, iuſt at
the inſtant that by another way two Pilgrims alſo entred,
vvho by their faſhion and manner of ſalutation, ſeemed to

be others then what their courſe habits made ſhew of, who
in reſpect they were like to haue beene benighted, vvere
forced to intreat the Owner of the Caſtle to bee pleaſed to
affoord them for that night a lodging; to which he willingly
condiſcended, and ſhewed the way in to the whole company.
Gerardo demanded of them (for they ſeemed to be
Caſtilians) of what part they were, and which way their Pilgrimage
lay; to which, one of them anſwered, that they
were of Andal
                        •
                     zia, and Inhabitants of the famous Citie of
Seuill, from whence they trauelled purpoſely on Deuotion
to the beſt Churches and Monaſteries of Spaine, vvhoſe
Patron, they had already ſeene at Compoſtella, and were going
at preſent to the miraculous Lady of Zaragoſa.
               
               When Gerardo heard him name Seuil, he would not (as
hauing the good Leriano in mind) but ask if they knew ſuch
a one, preſuming that a Gentleman of his qualitie, could
not but haue come to their notice. But no ſooner had
Gerardo breathed out the final accents of his friends name,
when the Pilgrim that had ſpoken to him, vnable to refraine,
burſt into teares, and with weeping 
                     •
                  ighes made
him ſee, what paſſion the name of Leriano had ſtirred
in him, which alſo cauſed no leſſe alteration in Gerardos
miſ-giuing breſt: and ſo ſitting him downe in the fore-part
of a goodly Bay-window looking to the Garden, whilſt
Supper was preparing (together with Don Iayme & the reſt)
he earneſtly requeſted him, whoſe griefe made him ſhead
thoſe freſh teares, to declare the cauſe of ſuch diſtaſtefull
ſorrow, ſince it muſt needs be extraordinary, by the reſentment
it had forced him to.
               The wofull man hearing himſelfe thus importuned, with
a deepe fetcht groane (true ſigne of his interiour anguiſh)
thus vvent on.
               Wonder not, gentle Sir, nor thinke it vvomaniſh in me,

that mine eyes ſhew this preſent weakeneſſe, ſince the party
you mentioned, vvhom I aboue the world affected, may
with his remembrance cauſe in mee▪ farre greater effects:
and therefore I moſt humbly beſeech you, not to
afflict my wearied ſpirits, by any further inquiries into that
particular: when ending, vvith a new beginning of teares,
his griefe ſerued as ſharpe 
                     •
                  purres to haſten Gerardo's deſires,
vvho for the ſame cauſe that retarded the Pilgrims
Narration, was more earneſtly perſwaded, that ſome diſaſirous
accident had befalne his old acquaintance: and with
the like ſorrow (though diſſembling it in his lookes) hee
once againe aduentured. The ſtrict friendſhip which hath
beene betwixt Leriano and my ſelfe, more then impertinent
curioſitie, obligeth me, that (not obeying your command)
I re-intreat you, to deliuer mee from the mortall doubt in
which I remaine, by ſatisfying mee, (though it bee ſomething
painfull) ſince I dare aſſure you that to giue you eaſe,
I would hazard my perſon for you, as alſo for my deare and
louing friend I aske for; and let mee tell you that Leriano
hath not a greater in the vvorld them my ſelfe, nor one that
more vnfainedly owes him ſeruice; for ſuch are my engagements,
as extend to no leſſe then debt of life.
               If that be ſo, ſaid the ſad Pilgrim ſomewhat more cheerefully,
you are (doubtleſſe) Gerardo, of whoſe maruellous
Story I haue often heard our deare friend make mention.
Though I purpoſed (ſaid Gerardo) whilſt a ſtranger in theſe
parts, to haue concealed my name, (beeing but in Pilgrimage
as it were like you) yet that you may not deny me the
fauour I require, I muſt not hide the truth from you: and
therefore you may know mee for the ſame party, your
ſeruant; and ſince wee are both true profeſt friends to Leriano,
I ſhould be glad you would eſteeme me ſo, and not
excuſe what I haue ſo earneſtly entreated. Here the Pilgrime

roſe vp, and with a leſſe cloudy countenance, ſpredding
both Armes, came toward Gerardo, ſaying, Beleeue
me, Nobleſt Sir, As great was my deſire of knowing, as
the happineſſe comfortable of ſeeing you; giue mee thoſe
valorous Armes of yours, let mee embrace the liuely Repreſenter
of my true Friend, whom, booteleſſe I at preſent
bewayle; 'twere idle in mee now not to obey before you
ſhould command (though I muſt indure a rigorous Torment
in the recounting of paſt accidents) and the greater,
ſince of neceſſitie: for introduction to your friends ſad diſaſter,
I muſt mention one of the wofulleſt Tragedies that
hath truely and really happened to mortall man in theſe
times: and ſo ſaying, ready he was to haue begun, but notice
being giuen that Supper was comming, by common
conſent, the ſtory was deferred till after, to the ſuſpitious
Gerardo's griefe, and the reſt of the companies, though in
different reſpects. So ſupper ended, the boord taken away▪
and all of them attentiuely ſilent, the mournefull Pilgrime
thus began:
               Though I may well (illuſtrious company) bee diſcouraged
to proceed in my promiſed Enterpriſe, as well for renuing
my immenſe ſorrow, as alſo for the danger I may vndergoe,
there beeing ſome one amongſt you, that may
iuſtly for his friend taxe me of wrong; yet relying on the
innocence of mine owne breſt, and the nobleneſſe of
yours, I ſhall make good my purpoſe, giuing a ſtrict account
of my vnfortunate ſucceſſes; yea, the whole progreſſe
of my life, euen to the inſtant you behold me in.
               Firſt, know then, that my Mother in her vnhappy labour,
after her deliuerie of me, dyed: (I not deſeruing to know
her) ſo from my tender infancy, I was ſubiect to all the diſcommodities,
that children are, wanting the carefull eye of
a louing Mother, howſoeuer my education beeing in the

plentifull houſe of Angelo Milanes my father, that want
was vvell qualified. The hearty affection hee euer bore his
loyall Spouſe, produced ſo heauy effects in his ſad remembrance
by her fatall abſence, that no company or entertainment
able to yeeld him comfort, he became (like one
of another world) extremely penſatiue; but finding that the
place where he was, where he had paſt his youth with a louing
Wife, might bee the chiefeſt renuer of his frequent
ſorrow; he determined with himſelfe to haue this inconuenience
farther off, by putting the ſpacious Ocean betwixt
him and home: for hauing ſold the beſt part of his
rich poſſeſſions, and turning the monies into Merchandize,
he imbarqued himſelfe in a tall well-rigged Ship for the
Weſt-Indies, and ſo to the rich Prouince of Peru, where
being with proſperous Gales, after a double Voyage, ſafely
arriued, landing his commodities, hee made of them a
ſtrangely gainefull returne, and loading his Ship backe
(himſelfe remaining behinde) he conſigned her to Seuil,
where the goods aboord, the remainder of his Eſtate at
home, and my ſelfe, were committed to the charge of a
Brother of his my Vnkle; and now (by reaſon of his riches
& content in thoſe remote parts) we deſpaired of his
returne for a long time; and ſurely there he might haue till
this time ſtaid, if heauen had not changed his purpoſe, as
you ſhall ſee the occaſion of this alteration proceeding
from a certaine Caſtilian Gentleman, of the Imperiall Citie
of Toledo (called Leonardo Argentino) who, hauing prodigally
waſted a faire Eſtate his inheritance, ſeeing himſelfe
almoſt ruined, and his Noble Family haue ſcarce wherewithall
to paſſe a moderate being (taking vp in time before
all was conſumed) with good (though neceſſitous aduice)
he reſolued vpon the ſame Voyage that my Father had
formerly done before him, leauing the loued company of

his Wife, with a grieued heart for his departure, and a
beautifull young Daughter called Iſdaura, the onely Pledge
and comfort of his cares; and though her teares and tender
ſighes might in the occaſion haue melted euen Marble;
yet, in the reſolute Leonardo, they workt no effect; ſo
his afflicted Wife was forced to licence him, for a limited
time of ſeuen yeeres: and then putting the halfe of his eſtate
into ſtocke and goods, the reſt with his Wife and
Daughter, he made ouer to the charge and fidelitie, of an
old truſty ſeruant, whom hee loued as an adopted ſonne,
which, and the being a loyall Biſcayner by birth, made the
diſcomfortable Gentleman rely the more vpon his faith
and honeſty.
               His good fortune afterward, or rather my ill ſtarres,
brought him to the end of his intended Voyage: and hauing
made ſale of his few commodities, ſeeking vvithall
ſome kinde of imployment, as preſuming vpon the ability
of his good parts, he came in a fit coniuncture, at ſuch time
as my Father (hauing loſt his Bailiffe and Ouerſeer of his
Herds, newly dead) was hearkening after another, and by
accident they both met (my Father as well ſatisfie vvith
Leonardo's perſon and preſence, as the other with his affable
and generous diſpoſition:) wherefore ſtriking vp on
both ſides, for the manner of ſeruice and recompence, he
remained with him, and ſo carefully diſcharged his dutie,
that in ſhort time my Father might ſee the increaſe of that
eſtate that was vnder his hands, with ſo plentifull an income,
that now he himſelfe (though preſent) began to forget
and giue ouer all toile, diſ-burdening his cares vpon
Leonardo's ſhoulders, with whoſe vigilancie hee liued at
eaſe.
               All this while our Bayliffe forgets not the intent of his
Voyage, nor thoſe Pledges that expected him at home;

for with his owne ſtocke, together with my Fathers bountie,
he had now gotten a good eſtate of money and goods
together, multiplying the ſame yeerely, by the great and
rich fraights that yeerely paſſed betwixt Spaine and the Indies:
ſo that before his ſeuen yeeres were accompliſhed, he
was eſteemed one of the richeſt men in the Kingdome,
which made him thinke vpon his returne and Countrey:
and in this minde, one-day as my Father and he were alone,
he made knowne his purpoſe vnto him; which vvhen hee
heard, I cannot expreſſe the reſentment it cauſed in his paſſion;
and hoping yet that his entreaties might diſſwade
Leonardo, he ſought all he could (all in vaine) to diuert him:
and yet the other fearing to bee thought vngratefull for ſo
many benefits receiued, if he ſhould not ſomething ſatisfie
with the iuſt cauſe of his departure, after hee had made
knowne his right name and qualitie; withall, what Pledges
he had left behinde, that long looked for his returne; ſo effectuall
and powerfull were his reaſons, that my Father had
not a vvord to reply againſt them: and the diſcharge hee
gaue, cauſed not this effect alone in my Father, but obliged
him alſo to beare him company, awaking in his heart the
dead affection of his houſe and home. And ſo reſolued on
their Voyage, againſt the going of the next Fleete; in the
Interim, they had leiſure, to exchange, ſell and put off, all
their goods and cattell, which to an incredible number
they had in thoſe parts; ſo that not long after, with two
Ships richly laden, and a proſperous Voyage, they arriued
at the famous Port of Saint Lucar, of which we his kindred
hauing had former notice, by the arriuall of a Barke of aduice,
vvere there in a readineſſe to receiue him. My Father,
before they came on ſhore, taking him, whom hee held as
his beſt friend, to him in priuate thus diſcourſed:
               Moſt aſſured I am, friend Leonardo, that you are ſufficiently

perſwaded of my loue and affection, as I of yours, in
which particular you cannot exceede me; I would therefore
that no humane accident ſhould diſ-linke this our amity,
or that by abſence it ſhould any way be ſlackned. To
make it the more laſting and perfect: I haue thought vpon
a meanes, your ſelfe conſenting, that ſhall make that, not
onely whilſt we liue, firme, but ſtrengthen it in our poſterity,
by mixing our blouds, and conforming with my deſire, by
giuing your only daughter to my only ſon Roberto Milanes
(for ſuch is my vnfortunate name) to Wife; which may
ſoon take effect, if Heauen haue been pleaſed to bleſſe theſe
our Pledges, with the life that we deſire: I ſhall bee glad
herein to receiue your reſolution.
               
                  Leonardo's anſwere was, to caſt himſelfe at my Fathers
feete (his eyes ſtarting out teares of content) and muſtering
vp the ſeuerall delights of his ſoule, with words worthy his
nobleneſſe, after he had extolled my Father in his actions,
he not onely offered him his onely Daughter, which he demanded
for me; but ioynd to it a new & tranſcendent proteſtation,
of goods, life and honour: and ſo embracing each
other, on ſhore they came, to our infinite content that expected
him, who had now beene eighteene yeeres from his
natiue ſoyle, my ſelfe being about ſixe yeeres of Age when
he left Spaine. I forbeare to expreſſe my owne ioy, which
he may onely conceiue, that knowes what it is to bee the
ſole ſonne of a Father.
               Wee ſtayed not long in the Port; for ſuch was my Fathers
longing, to ſee his deſired home, that we were quickly
at Seuil, where, I being acquainted with his minde,
touching the match, diſpoſed my ſelfe like a dutifull ſonne,
to obey his command, preparing my ſelfe, vvith all alacritie
to the iourney; in the meane time, that a Poſt was now
returned, ſent by Leonardo, as ſoone as he came on ſhore, to

his City, and home, with the newes of his landing, and the
Poſts returne as it gaue my Father-in-Law infinite content
by hearing of his deare Wife and Daughter; ſo it
cauſed no leſſe in me to bee informed by the Meſſenger
to the full of my deſire, of my Spouſe her excellent parts,
and admirable beautie; which made mee ſtand vpon
thornes till I might depart, though my Father-in-law loſt
no time for vs both: and ſending before him the beſt part
of his goods and treaſure, and after taking a paſsionate
leaue of his dearely intimate friend my Father, ſetting
downe the day of my ſetting forward, by ſuch time as we
ſhould heare of his arriuall at home, hee betooke him to
his way; and comming in few dayes to his iourneys end.
Conſider, worthy Gentles, if, at his welcomming, thoſe
ancient teares for his departure might be renued, though
producing at preſent a more different effect.
               My Father-in-law with the generall encreaſe he found
in his houſe, aſwell of the ſmall eſtate hee left, as the rare
beauty and diſcretion of his beloued Iſdaura, health, and
content of his Wife, ſeruants and whole Familie; Iudge
whether he could chuſe but reſt moſt thankefully obliged
to gracious Heauen, to whoſe goodneſſe, yeelding a due
acknowledgement, he gaue notice to his Wife, of the intended
match; and finding her, conformable to his wiſh, to
the generall gladneſſe of his houſhold, and friends, hee began
to prepare for the enſuing Nuptials. The day of my
departure now at hand, with my Fathers bleſſing, and a
leaue taken of yours and my deare friend Leriano, accompanied
with a ſeruant or two, in foure dayes Poſts, I came
in ſight of the ancient walles of Toledo, my Wife and her
Father, Countrey and Manſion, where beeing arriued and
at the houſe, in ſtead of a ioyfull receptable, I found it nothing
but a harbour of griefe, teares, and confuſed ſadneſſe

(a thing that cauſed great amazement in mee) though
when the owners knew of my arriuall, I was by them ioyfully
welcomed (my preſence being an euident comfort to
the ſorrow that afflicted them) of which I needed no other
information, then to ſee the dead body of their old
ſeruant, the truſtie Biſcayner ſhewed me, which was laid vnder
a blacke Herſe, ſtrooke thorow with fiue cruell wounds,
found early that morning, laid at the ſtreet doores threſhold,
and wrapped in a bloudy ſheete, not any ſo much
as imagining, who, how, or when hee ſhould be thus lamentably
butchered, though extraordinary ſearch had
been made to finde out the Author. They told mee how
they had brought him vp from a little one, how much
they loued him for his good ſeruice, how faithfull hee had
beene in his Maſters abſence, and what a miſſe by his death
they were like to haue of him; ſo that (all conſidered) me
thought their griefe was not exorbitant, and ſatisfide, for
that which otherwiſe had been ſomewhat of the ſlighteſt,
my welcome. Thus by this accident, my marriage was two
dayes longer adiourned, which to me were yeeres of tedious
prolixitie: for hauing gotten a gracious ſight of my
new Miſtris, my ardent deſires, incited by ſo much beauty,
increaſt in me with more violence.
               At length the prefixed day came, together with the wiſhed
night, in which hauing to my vnſpeakeable ioy reaped
from my Bride the ſweet fruit, amorouſly paſſing the
reſt of it, at length (out bodies mutually in each others
Armes enterlaced) we fell aſleepe. But not long were our
weary limmes laid to ſoft reſt, when my Wife with her
hands and ſudden affrighting ſhriekes awoke mee, and
lowd lowd cries raiſed mee to the helpe of her Fathers
houſe, that was now all on a light flame; at which I was ſo
aſtoniſht, that without ſo much as a queſtion, taking my

night-gowne, I nimbly leapt out of the Chamber, vvhere
the ſmoake and ſparkles of the vntamed Element, that
euen now mounted vp to it's owne Sphere, euen blinded
me; and running vvhere the flame was greateſt, I might
ſee my Father and Mother gotten thither, and the reſt of
the houſe alſo, by which time the Bels had giuen their accuſtomed
ſignall of the danger; whereupon (the neighbourhood
and Citie all in a confuſed vptoare) vvith their
helpe, the mercileſſe flames vvere ſoone humbled. All our
houſe vvas nothing but noiſe, vvringing and wailing; in
midſt of vvhich, I might moſt lowdly heare my wiues
ſcrieches, that, fearing leſt ſome diſaſter had befalne her,
finding her quickly out by the eccho of her ſhrill cryes, I
might view her ſupported by her Mother, hauing falne in a
deepe ſwoune into her Armes, not farre from a deep Well,
about vvhich, diuers of the ſeruants were gotten together
vvith much ſtirre; vvhereupon, ſeeing my Iſdaura in ſo ſad
plight, my torment increaſt, and the more, vvhen they told
me the cauſe of her ſudden diſmaying, no leſſe vvofull
then the lamentable end of the vnhappie Biſcayner; for a
handſome diſcreet maid-ſeruant of hers, following his vnluckie
fate, a little before I came, hauing been earneſt to
draw water to quench the fire (whether vvith ſome fright
or other accident falling in) in an inſtant (there being no
meanes to ſaue her) vvas drowned: and beeing within a
vvhile after drawne vp, my Wife and Mothers moanes
were againe renued, and ſo extremely, in reſpect of their
loue to the poore Wench brought vp frō a child by them,
that I thought it impoſſible to comfort them, eſpecially for
me, that in ſuch caſes needed it as vvell, as much my ſelfe.
               But time cured in them their griefes, though with mee
they are ſtill preſent; neither can I forget thoſe propheticall
boadings of my vvretched marriage (vvhich thus accompliſhed)

and not long after, my Father with diuers Letters
haſtning our departure, taking leaue of my Iſdaura's
friends, with much griefe wee parted, hauing the good
Leriano in our company, who vvas now (returned from
Court) bound vvith vs for Seuil, from whence ſome little
vvhile after me, he had formerly abſented himſelfe. Hee
came thus ſeaſonably to Toledo, and ſo we had a moſt pleaſing
iourney, vnderſtanding from him, by the vvay, your
vnhappie misfortunes. At laſt wee arriued at our home,
where we were ſtill expected, and by my Father welcomed,
vvhere Iſdaura, with the dainties and varietie of the place,
quickly forgot her abſent Parents and kindred.
               And hauing for our better freedome taken a houſe to
liue in apart from my Father, we vvere often viſited by my
worthy friend Leriano: ſo vvell and happily liued I with my
loued wife, that I could ſcarce be from her ſight a minute;
thoſe faire eyes beeing the Adamants that attracted my
vvhole content. But cruell fortune would not allow mee
many yeeres of this proſperous eſtate, as, enuious of the
firmeneſſe of our amorous quiet.
               At this time Leriano's friendſhip and mine vvas as
ſtrict, as on both ſides equally requited, not a day eſcaped
vs, in which one of vs ſaluted not the other, either he comming
to my houſe, or I going to his lodging; our loue ſo
reciprocall, as had one vvombe at firſt owned vs, or the
ſelfe-ſame blood giuen vs nouriſhment.
               One day amongſt others, in which it was not poſſible
for Leriano to ſee me, or for me to meete with him, each
of vs (Louer-like) iealous of each other, and both attributing
to neglect, were willing with the ſame intent to
meet in our obligations.
               So ſomwhat late at night, I went to ſtay for him at his lodging,
& he to my home to expect me, where he found that

my loued Iſdaura, hauing not beene very well, was gone
to bed, and entertaining the time with her in my abſence,
ſtayed thus expecting mee till night beganne to bee very
farre ſpent; when I (perceiuing alſo his ſtay) remitted
for that time my hope of ſeeing him; and returning to
my houſe, found the doore locked, (a thing vnuſuall, I
from home) and hauing diuers times knocked, wondring
at the delayes, and ſuſpitious for ſo ſlight a matter, I peeped
at a ſmall chinke of the doore to ſee what might bee
the cauſe: but would Heauen, I had beene blinde, vvhen
I was thus curious; a ſhee ſlaue I might ſee comming
downe ſtaires to let mee in, and behinde her a man, vvho
being beneath, croſſed toward my Garden doore, which
bred ſuch an aſtoniſhing alteration within mee as you
may eaſily ſuppoſe; in this amazement, as ſoone as I was
entred, I ruſhed after into the Garden, where I might perceiue
the partie running to hide himſelfe amongſt certaine
thicke Myrtles, which ſooner then my ſpeed were the cauſe
of his vntimely death; for being intangled in thoſe thicke
boughes, vnable to ſtand vpon his Guard, with my ſword
drawne, I gaue him three deſperate thruſts, not heeding
his calling me by name, or crying out to hold, till falling
to the ground, I knew him, whom ſo inhumanely I had
laid at my feete to be my beſt of friends, my Leriano. And
being fully aſſured of it, letting fall the weapon from my
angry arme, I remained as neere death, as hee that lay before
mee, who now with a faint and languiſhing voice,
deſired me to get a Confeſſor to him; I loſt my ſences,
and with the wicked Act was readie to runne madde, at
ſuch time as in theſe laſt accents of his, I might heare
mine owne miſchiefe, and my friends innocence.
               How hath heauen ſuffered, deare Roberto, that at this
time your friendly ſword ſhould become my homicide?

in what had your Leriano offended you, that you ſhould take
ſo raſh a reuenge on him? But alas, why complaine I of
you, whom I pardon my death? an vnneceſſary diligence of
mine owne gaue way to it, ſprung from a wary care of your
vvife, vvhoſe faith to you hath equalled my loyalty, the
vvhich, (heauen can witneſſe) towards you, hath euer been
inuiolable. But his ſwift Fate, allowing him not a minute
longer to expound his intricate meaning, clozing his eclipſed
eyes, he gaue vp his ſpirits in my armes, mine being
ſo much tormented, that ſure I had then followed him, had
I beene fully ſatisfied in the iealous doubts that afflicted
me; to vvhich end leauing my dead friend, to my Wifes
chamber I went, whom neither there, nor any where elſe I
could find, onely the ſqueaking and noyſe of her maydes
euen rent my heart, who crying out on their Miſtris, doubled
my diſtraction, and ſtill increaſt it, when one of them
ſaid, Iſdaura had caſt her ſelfe out of the vvindow in her
ſmocke, aſſoone as ſhe heard the good Leriano cry out, and
the vnhappy newes of his innocent death, fearing iuſtly her
owne, from my indignation, vvhich (though faultleſſe)
might light vpon her. I began to demand the cauſe, why
Leriano hid himſelfe: they told me, 'twas at her inſtance; for
being (as you heard) in diſcourſe vvith her, when ſhe heard
me knocke at the doore, knowing it to bee ſhut (though
through the forgetfulneſſe of her ſeruants) thinking the noueltie,
and Leriano's vnreaſonable company might ingender
ſome baſe ſuſpition againſt her honeſty; not calling to
mind, that brotherly affection betweene vs, ſhe grew ſo timerous,
that (vvithout better aduice) by pure intreaties ſhe
commanded the vnwilling Leriano to that miſerable ſhift:
for thus euer raſhneſſe drawes on ſuch heauy miſchiefes.
Conſider, Gentlemen, I beſeech you, whether my hand
were faulty, or his indiſcretion rather, that vvould ſuffer it

ſelfe to be guided by the fearefull counſell of an afflicted
vvoman.
               Heauen can witnes for me, that as oft as I reſolue in my
ſad fancie, the diſaſtrous end of my deare friend, I am willing
to inflict the like on my ſelfe, (though in all equity and
rigour I am reſerued from it.) But the loue I bore him, obligeth
me to ſuch a determination, ſince I may truly affirm,
that the knowne affection I ought my louing vvife, had no
aduantage ouer his and mine: of her I neither heard or
knew any thing; and for inquiring was ſaued a labour, being
neceſſarily inforced to ſhift for mine owne life; which I did,
getting aſſoone as I could, out of my troubled houſe into a
charitable Couent of Carthuſian Monkes; by whom I was
moſt courteouſly receiued; aſſuring mee, that I ſhould remaine
in quiet Sanctuary with them, free from any trouble
for my misfortune. There I was for ſome dayes viſited by
my friends, aſwell as ſpyed and hearkened after by mine enemies:
for though euen in their paſſion my innocence
might haue ſaued me, yet they would not affoord mee the
leaſt credit in my accidentall miſhap.
               A while after I had thus reſted in Sanctuary, my wife I
heard had alſo taken refuge at a Monaſtery of Nunnes,
called Bethlem; for hauing (as you heard) that night leapt
into the ſtreet, not knowing whither to go, ſhee entred the
firſt houſe ſhe ſaw open, and being receiued by the owner,
when they knew her, and vnderſtood of the pitifull accident;
and vvithall, the ſtrict ſearch, that aſwell by my order,
as neceſſary obligation of Iuſtice was made for her, they
thought beſt to conduct her to that Monaſtery; from
whence I had preſent notice, and then my mind began to
recouer ſome ſmall reſt; though it continued but awhile,
conſidering how my hard fortune began againe to torment
me. Theſe grieuous, and ſcarce to bee imagined diſaſters,

ſo vvrung the tender heart of my beloued Iſdaura, that haſtened
by the terrible bruiſe ſhe receiued in her fall, vnable
now to auoid Heauens decree, ſhee fell into a deſperate
ſickneſſe; vvith vvhich, and the continuall remembrance of
her tormenting thoughts terribly aſſaulted, conſidering
her ſelfe now in the tongues of the giddy Multitude, her
honour and reputation in the duſt, the pangs of death haſtened
vpon her; a little before her end ſhe called the Abbeſſe
to her, and giuing her a Letter cloſely ſealed, earneſtly deſired,
it might be ſafely conueyed vnto me, vvhereſoeuer I
vvere; vvhich came to my hands, iuſt as the newes of her lamentable
death to my eare. I need not here paint out my
ſoules griefe, or loſſe of ſences; for certainly the beeing depriued
of them, vvas the defence of my life, vvhich as yet
is but a liuing death, for the owners greater puniſhment:
and now to giue ſome reliefe to my memory, vvith the deſired
end of this miſerable Story, the remainder you ſhall
haue in theſe laſt Lines of hers; vvhich Paper, for a deare
pledge, in remembrance of the Writer, ſhall ſerue me as a
companion, till Deſtiny vvith her mortall ſtroke diuide vs.
And this ſaid, to the wonderfull cōpaſſion of the ſuſpencefull
Auditors, vnbuttoning his coorſe haire-cloth weed, he
drew out of his boſome, a neatly-wrought ſiluer Boxe; and
from within that, a Letter; vvhich vnwrapping, and vvith
ſome ſad teares kiſſing, he read out in this manner following:
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Iſdaura to Roberto.
                           THe time at length is come, Deare Spouſe, that I muſt
pay that vnpardonable debt, from whoſe rigorous execution
none can be exempted; and though (as mortall) I
feele and feare the affrighting trance, yet he knowes, vvho

expects to be my Iudge, that the for-euer leauing your amiable
company, is the greateſt torment that on earth afflicts
my ſoule, vvhich vveepes at this bitter farewell, it cannot
ſee yet, and a little inioy your ſelfe; the better to ſatisfie
your doubtfull opinion, and confirme my inculpable loyalty,
vvhich from the firſt houre of our Matrimony hath euer
beene inuiolable. And ſince it is now high time to deliuer
truthes, (the diſcouery of my ſad hearts ſecrets being
ſo neceſſary to my ſoules ſaluation) it ſhall be fitting, loued
Owner mine, that the vvorld and you, now at length, be priuy
to a ſecret; which, to the too long preiudice of my ſoule
and conſcience, I haue hitherto concealed. Paſſe but your
eyes ouer theſe laſt Lines, and you ſhall be ſatisfied touching
an offence of mine, (if that might be thought ſo to your
honour, vvhich was executed againſt my will and conſent,
and without the interuention of Matrimony) though I part
aſſured of your good conſtruction, and mine owne innocence
in this particular; for vvith you and the world, mine
honour ſhall reſt in its true worth vnblemiſhed.
                           I preſume, loued Roberto, you haue not forgotten your
firſt heauy welcome to my fathers houſe, (the ſad forerunner
happely of theſe preſent ills.) You may alſo remember
what diligence was vſed to find out the murderer of our
Steward and ſeruant the Biſcayner, though to ſmall purpoſe,
ſince it was neuer knowne, nor would till the day of
Iudgement, if mine now, ſwiftly approching, did not menace
me; for this laſt eternall danger enforceth mee to declare
my ſelfe his murdreſſe. I ſhall carry to the Soueraigne
Tribunall for my diſcharge, (though my repentance be the
greateſt) his bold and trecherous attempt: Know then, my
beſt Signior, that no ſooner came the arriuall of my Father,
together with the reſolution of my intended Matrimony to
that mans notice; vvhen, to our no ſmall admiration, he fell

ſuddenly ſicke in bed of a ſlow, but tormenting Feuer: my
Parents, that loued him as their owne, perceiuing his danger,
ſought to get him ſome helpe, though no Phiſician in
Toledo could apply the leaſt remedy: they concluded, that
his ſickneſſe was onely of Melancholy, vvhich making vs ſo
in generall for him, increaſed in the ſicke man more and
more, till the night before your arriuall, he broke his mind
to me, and to my coſt, made knowne his infirmity.
                           About midnight, mine eyes willing to reſt, as being long
kept waking with the thought of your arriual, I might heare
ſome paces in my Chamber, and calling my drowſie ſences
together, lifting vp my face, it had like to haue encountred
with the ſicke mans; at whoſe ſudden approch, I was
nothing diſmayed, as nothing miſdoubting his intents, rather
like a ſiſter I fel a chiding him for this exceſſe (ignorant
of his purpoſe) to which, with an inward grone, and furious
lookes nail'd to my eyes, he thus anſwered:
                           Howeuer, Iſdaura, there be no helpe for mee, but what
muſt come from thoſe tender hands, (my life lying in them)
thou that oweſt me ſo much, wilt not prooue vngratefull to
my good deedes and ſeruice, though thy cruel parents thus
hardly intreat me. Who would haue thought of thy Father,
that hee ſhould ſo vnthankefully haue recompenced
the paines, which in thy education, and honeſt ſuſtaining
his family in his abſence, I haue vndergone: onely becauſe
I hoped to reape the benefit in thy amiable deſired companie,
which vniuſtly, my Iſdaura, he depriues mee of? This
is my torment, the miſchiefe and ſickneſſe that afflicts me;
which, as time runnes on, ſo that increaſeth; and the more,
by thy growing neerer to bee in anothers power: I come
therefore, prepared, not to leaue this roome, till I haue
health, by hauing thee for mine, though it coſt me my life,
if in thy preſence I muſt loſe it, which is the antidote and

wholeſome Phiſician to my mind. Thy husband I muſt be,
ſince Heauen to mee alone hath reſerued the happineſſe:
thy faire hand muſt be the anſwer, deferre not then my bleſſing,
for I feare no refuſall, ſince in mine owne will lies the
ſatisfaction of my deſire. I ſhall make no doubt with this
Ponyard to kill you, if I perceiue but the leaſt contradiction;
and drawing a ſharpe Dagger, claps it to my breſt, to
my no ſmall amazement: for ſcarce could I giue credit to
the ſucceſſe of what I ſaw before me: the very Chamber
ſeemed to ſhake with my feare; and long it was, ere my
tongue could vtter ſo much as the leaſt Syllable: on one
ſide mine honours danger tormented me, on the other, a
female cowardize: I began to thinke on ſome ſleight that
might either deferre my death, or preſerue my chaſtity:
and to this purpoſe ſought to diſſwade him from his, not
ſo much as vilifying his treachery, rather making him a
thouſand promiſes, with fained oathes, to be his wife, and
ioyntly (becauſe I ſuppoſed that might content him) gaue
him my hand; which he no ſooner got, but mee withall in
his armes; till at laſt, wanting breath and courage to defend
my ſelfe, he had his will, making mee ſubiect to his
luſt. But iuſt Heauens, to whoſe ſoueraigne goodneſſe the
dumbe complaints of my wofull heart had now aſcended,
would not permit a due puniſhment for ſo baſe a fact to be
deferred; of which, my hands and his dagger were the executioners:
for no ſooner had ſoft reſt taken truce with his
laſciuious fury, (ſecure that hee ſlept in his wiues armes)
when, ſtrengthened by my diſhonour, and the dolorous reſentment
of my Parents, my feminine feare putting on a
maſculine courage, and wholly diſpoſed to a bloody reuenge,
taking the ſharpe dagger, which before was a bridle
to my reſiſtance, and thruſting him to the heart, thwarting
alſo his body with many other wounds, I opened a wide

paſſage to that infidell ſoule; and dragging the wretched
bodie, weltring in goare-blood, wrapping it (as well as I
could without being perceiued) in a ſheet, left it vpon the
threſhold of our ſtreet doore. My misfortunes ſo ſtopped
not, rather with your comming they increaſt, in ſuch maner,
that but for feare of hell fire, I had ſacrificed mine
owne life, ſeeing my ſelfe ſo neere a knowne infamy. But
the comfort of a maid of mine, changed that deſperate imagination;
one, that was my companion from a child,
and as then Secretary to my moſt hidden thoughts:
though this (as being of ſo great conſequence) I feared to
make knowne vnto her; but ſhee perceiuing my extreme
vexation, wondred much, (as thinking I had now moſt
reaſon to be ioyfull) and ſo with louing intreaties requeſted
the cauſe of my griefe, and I (for now neceſsitie had
no law with me) making choice of Iulia for a dead lift, ſatisfied
of her true affection, told her the occaſion of my
diſtraction, but without any mention of the Biſcayner, laid
my diſhonour to anothers charge, relying wholly vpon
her perſon for my liues remedy; and ſo with the pittifulleſt
reaſons that the neceſsity of time would permit me, I reduced
her to my will, preparing her to make good my defect,
with the integritie of her honeſty, which (I nothing
doubted) but was entire. Iulia could not but refuſe the
danger, aſwell for her loſſe, as other vncertainties of the
ſucceſſe. But to free mee (out of her loue) from ſuch a
ſtrait, made her ſhut her eyes; and ſo my plot tooke effect:
for hauing the night of our marriage, placed Iulia behind
our bed Curtaines, and faining modeſtie, commanded the
lights to be put out, darkneſſe fauouring, and Iulia ſupplying
my roome; neither was the deceit knowne, nor you
perceiued the exchange.
                           Not long after, ſhe belike either wearied, or taken with

the ſweet of ſo much pleaſure, contrary to the order I had
giuen, fell aſleepe, and now I knew not which in mee was
moſt, my iealouſie or feare, and my rage increaſed the
more, when (hearing the Clocke ſtrike three) I ſaw ſo little
memory in her of my danger. This and the difficulty
of waking her, without being perceiued by you, made me
vndergo as deſperate a courſe, as that of the Biſcayner: for
without better aduice, or more delay, beginning at the dining
roomes Tapiſtry, with a Torch, I by chance found
lighted, I ſet it all on fire, til it was almoſt conſumed; and hoping
that with the vprore, (my Father and the whole houſe
raiſed) you would take no notice of ought but my cries,
embracing you cloſely, and crying, Fire, fire: you awoke,
and frightfully leapt out of your bed and the chamber; leauing
me with Iulia, and ſo ſenſible of the miſchiefe, that (by
her neglect) I was forced to, that I was ready to haue runne
her thorow with your ſword. This iuſt anger of mine was
furthered with the remembrance of what might hereafter
enſue, to thinke I ſhould haue her a Corriual in my deſires,
and (taking her to be too ſhallow a veſſel for my ſecrets) the
matter at leaſt was doubtfull, and I like to become a ſlaue
to her litle conſtancie, which neceſſity had made me ſubiect
to. This ſorrowful thought ſtill purſued me, whilſt you and
the reſt of the Family were quenching the violent flames;
and ſo vnder colour of helping, taking Iulia by the hand, we
went downe, vvhere the ſeruants were haſtily drawing vvater;
and as they went and came, laying hold vpon a fit opportunity,
to be free from the confuſion I was in, bidding
Iulia draw me a little water; whilſt ſhe vvas performing it,
with a ſmall puſh I toppled her into the deepe Well; where
giuing her leaue awhile to ſtruggle with her laſt agonie,
when I ſuppoſed her to be throughly dead, diſſembling my
cruell ingratitude, crying out vvith fained teares, aſwell to

my parents, as your ſelfe and the reſt, I made Iulia's misfortune
as caſuall, and my ſorrow to bee true, infallibly beleeued.
This diuelliſh act, this horrid ſinne, is that which now
lights to her ſhame, and heauy diſhonour, on your vnfortunate
vvife, vvho hath euer truly loued and obeyed you,
as Heauen can witneſſe. And therefore vvith this laſt Adieu,
deare Signior, liue happy and aſſured, that by mee,
your honour hath no whit beene blemiſhed; rather, notwithſtanding
my affront, I haue giuen this lateſt teſtimony,
deſiring aboue all things, that you ſhould be fully ſatisfied:
which if you be, (if in this grieuous departure there may be
comfort) my ſad ſoule ſhall haue it; the care of which I recommend
to your loue and Chriſtian zeale, by giuing the
cleareſt ſatisfaction you can, for the two former murders,
as alſo for the laſt accident which not leaſt torments me.
                        
                     
                  
               
               Here ceaſed that happy ſoule, here it left the rare and
beautifull Vrne her Corps: and here, noble Gentlemen,
my patience quite ſpunne out, in this habit you ſee, and this
company, I left Seuil, determining in this peregrination
to end my loathed life; if, worthy Gerardo, you pretend not
to reuenge your deare friends misfortunes on my head, that
willingly layes it ſelfe at your feet. With theſe words the
griued Roberto ended his mournfull tale, vvith ſuch plenty
of teares, that the ſpectators could not but beare him a little
company with theirs; till awhile after, Gerardo, drying
his eyes, vttered theſe words:
               You haue taken, Signior, ſo cruell a reuenge vpon your
ſelfe, with ſo lamentable ſucceſſe, that, had you beene moſt
faulty in Leriano's death, you haue left no one part about
you whole, where a ſatisfaction may be had: For my part
reſt ſecure, that though my friends ſad fate haue grieued
my very ſoule, yet your griefes are ſo great, that I had rather

ſeeke to aſſwage them, then adde more affliction to
you: Heauen comfort you, and giue you eaſe to your woes:
and ſo retiring heauily out of the roome, hee gaue way to
the reſt, to entertaine and comfort the poore Pilgrim, who
paſſed a good part of the night with him in diſcourſe, till it
was time to betake them to their reſt.
               The next morning the two Pilgrims taking their leaues,
went on, and Don Iayme and Gerardo did the like, ſtill wondring
at the pitifull relation they had heard. That day they
came to a pleaſant Village to paſſe the heate, where they
agreed to leaue Iacinta (as being the iuſt halfe way of their
iourney) in a Monaſtery of Nunnes, of which Don Iayme's
Aunt was Abbeſſe, till ſuch time as they had cleared a certaine
doubt; which was, that hauing met a ſeruant ſent to
Don Iayme purpoſely from his owne towne, they vnderſtood,
that as that day, a Commiſſioner arriued there, ſent
from the King, in great ſecrecy to performe ſome piece of
diligence: a thing that much perplexed theſe Gentlemen;
the one, in reſpect of the dangerous party that came with
him; the other, for the confuſion hee was in, ignorant of
what that diligence might produce in his Lordſhip. And
though the occaſion was after knowne to bee little concerning
either of them, (for that the Iudge was ſent by the Supreme
Councell of Orders, concerning a certaine Order of
Knighthood) yet they thought fit, till they were fully ſatiſfied,
to leaue Iacinta there: who when ſhe heard it, ſuſpecting
ſome other intent, grew to ſuch extreme contradiction,
and pitifull intreaties, that her Louer ſeeing them accompanied
with her teares, vvas ready to haue returned
backe with her, but that Don Iayme, ſomwhat diſcontented,
diſſwaded him: and ſo being vnable to reduce her to their
aduice with her good-will, againſt it (Don Iayme making
knowne the reaſon to his Aunt at the Couent) they there

left her; ſo grieued, as were ſhe to haue taken her lateſt leaue
of her Gerardo, or had ſeene him ſtrooke dead with wounds
before her. This was the firſt breach that diſlink't theſe
two affections: Iacinta perſwaded that Gerardo had forſaken
her; a ſuſpition that (take it but once hold) can neuer
be remooued; as from this inſtant, this Dames example
will plainely demonſtrate. The enamoured Gentleman
was no leſſe troubled, till he came to the end of his iourney,
though they were not ſlacke to returne, hauing beene firſt
ſurely informed of the occaſion of the Commiſſioner,
which was the ſame formerly ſet downe: ſo the next morning
by tenne a clocke, they were backe, and alighted at
the Monaſtery doore, with ſuch feruent deſire in Gerardo
to ſee his Iacinta; that euery minute of deferring it, ſeemed
an age of abſence, and laſt, calling in the Porch at the Grate,
the Abbeſſe hearing of their beeing there, came foorth;
whom, when they had ſaluted, they requeſted, the faire Iacinta
might be called; which, when one of the Nunnes went
to performe, returning a pretty while after backe, and with
the Abbeſſes leaue, turning to Gerardo, ſhe thus ſaid: Howſoeuer
I being but a meſſenger and commanded, might be
freed from any diſtaſte I am like to giue, yet I beſeech your
pardon, Signior Gerardo, in reſpect of the meſſage I returne
you, vvhich will neceſſarily offend you. The faire Iacinta,
whom I went to call, requeſted mee on her behalfe, to intreat
that you would be pleaſed to condiſcend to her will;
which is, reſoluedly to remaine in this Monaſtery, and with
the habit of our ſacred Order. Shee likewiſe willed me to
beſeech you, to vouchſafe, ſince you haue Gold and Iewels
of hers to good value, to ſupply with part of them her
wants, and withall, to pay a portion for her admittance into
the holy Houſe, that ſo ſhe may be quietly ſettled to her
deuotion and prayer for your ſoules health. This ſhee

wiſhed me to make knowne vnto you; you, Signior, like a
Chriſtian, and a Gentleman, may now determine on what
this Dame demands, and ſo much concernes her felicitie.
Here the religious Nunne ceaſed, neither did Gerardo's ſudden
paſſion allow her a further preamble: for his heart ready
to burſt within him, and his very eyes ſending foorth
ſparkles of liuely fire, turning to the Abbeſſe, he ſaid, It is
not poſſible, Lady, that ſuch diſcourſe could proceed from
my Iacinta, neither can I from ſo long, ſo true a friendſhip
as hath beene betwixt vs, beleeue ſo ſlight, ſo forgetfull a
farewell; ſo aſſured am I of her firmeneſſe, that though
mine eares were witneſſes to the ſound of ſuch words from
her ſelfe, I ſhould hardly giue credit vnto them: I cannot
but thinke her too innocent of ſuch a noueltie, and therefore
beſeech you to reſolue me in the truth of this buſines,
though indeed Iacinta's ſight will be my hearts more effectuall
ſatisfaction. Here Don Iayme taking his turne, (no
leſſe angry then his friend) deſired the ſame of his Aunt;
who told them, that what they heard of Iacinta, was infallibly
true; and withall, how no longer agoe then laſt night,
ſhe receiued ſo much from her owne mouth; and ſhee requeſted
her alſo, not to ſuffer her to be taken out of the Couent,
which in all religious and Chriſtian obligation ſhee
was tyed not to conſent to. But neuertheleſſe importuned
by the two friends, ſhe endeuoured to haue her appeare;
and ſo leauing them in the porch, where at the doore their
ready horſes awaited them, ſhee went to make good her
promiſe, though it tooke no effect; or perhaps her ſelfe was
vnwilling, that Iacinta ſhould come to Gerardo, whom ſtriuing
with her beſt language to comfort, ſhee endeuoured
withall to blot his Miſtris out of his remembrance.
               But ſo forcible was this diſdainefull blowe in his ſad and
ſicke fancy, that regardleſſe of lifes danger, heauens offence,

and the hazzard of his honour, hurried on with furious
rage, not once conſidering the ſacrilegious act hee attempted,
(turning to Don Iayme, his right foot clapt to the Monaſterie
doore) he vſed this ſuccinct Diſcourſe:
               Companion and friend, the fire that flames within mee,
is immenſe, my paſſion terrible, Iacinta's wrong aboue
both. I haue oft counſelled her to this courſe, when had ſhe
heretofore taken it, my weary life had been ſecured, and
her friends with the glad newes comforted, but I could neuer
get her conſent; which aſſures me, that her leauing me
now, is other then Deuotion: I muſt not therefore giue way
to it: you are a Gentleman, and I am your friend, and ſuch,
that vpon any occaſion of yours, would hazzard a life at
leaſt once for you. Let this engage you to make good the
entrance at this doore, whilſt I enter in and effect my purpoſe,
or dye in the demand. Which ſaid, not expecting
any anſwere, nor ſo much as harkening to the exclamations
of the Nunnes, taking her in one hand that brought him
the meſſage, and his ſword in the other, he caſt himſelfe into
the forbidden Couent; where quickly, with his Guides
helpe, comming into a ſpacious Cloyſter, he ſaw the occaſion
of his crime, ſet very iocundly amongſt ſome others of
the Nunnes. They that were with her, and ſhee that came
with Gerardo, ſeeing him ſo outragious, in a moment vaniſhed:
but Iacinta had not the power to follow, not ſo much
as to ſtirre from her feare: for Gerardo's ſudden ſurpriſall
and ſight had left her euen now like a dead body, who lifting
her vp by one arme from ground, his tongue vnable to
expreſſe the leaſt part of his minde, without ſpeaking one
word, the way he came, but more ſpeedily, he conueyed her
out: for by this, the noiſe and clamour of the Nunnes increaſed
ſo fearefully, as if the walles or whole building had
beene ready to come vpon them: whereupon the vproare

of the neighbourhood and Village was no leſſe, and in an
inſtant, almoſt a hundreth perſons were gotten to the doore
that Don Iayme kept: though moſt, or all of them vnarmed,
with ſmall defence the two friends made ſhift to get to
Horſe: Gerardo ſetting Iacinta (who was euen in a dead
traunce) on the ſaddle Bow before him: and the valiant
Aragonian breaking thorow the preſſe that hindered him,
made way with his ſword, enlarging an open paſſage to his
friend that came after, and none able to ſtop or ſtay them,
they galloped on; and ſeeing ſome follow, mended their
pace, and betooke them to their full ſpeed (Gerardo now
got formoſt) till ſuch time as they might bee ſomewhat
freer from the danger: but in this diſtracted flight, as in all
things elſe, Gerardo was infinitely vnfortunate: for night
ſhutting in darke vpon them, Don Iayme loſing ſight of
him, and he his way, they were both vnluckily ſeparated,
neither could after, ſo much as by Letters meet.
               
                  Gerardo, that had thus loſt his friend, though not his
iourney (for now all the world was his way) perceiuing
Iacinta's weakeneſſe, ſettled her as eaſily as he could, and
faire and ſoftly, not knowing whether he went backward
or forward, rode on till the next morning, till ſuch time as
he found himſelfe incloſed in a rough & thick Mountaine,
in which hauing deſ-piteouſly wandred, til towards noon,
(Iacinta now extremely heauy with drowſineſſe) at length
as good lucke would, hee came to a Shepheards cottage,
where both being welcomed by the owners, alighted,
and Gerardo endeuoured all he could, to giue eaſe and
refreſhment to his vngratefull Miſtris; whoſe wearineſſe
as much afflicted the poore Gentleman, as the apprehenſion
of his danger; though from that, hee were ſecure enough,
as well in reſpect of the deſart Mountaine, as for
that he was farther frō the Monaſtery then he imagined:

for in this yet he was happy, that knowing no foot of the
way, he was from thence, at leaſt ten leagues diſtant: and
Iacinta that afternoone being ſomewhat more cheerefully
reuiued, taking direction for the neereſt good towne, they
returned to their iourney, and that night arriued where
they deſired, where Gerardo tooke a priuate lodging, that
he might the better and more commodiouſly cure his Miſtreſſes
indiſpoſition, which was not ſo ſlight, but it kept
them almoſt a moneth from a iourney hee intended to the
Citie of Valencia; at length they ſet forward againe, and
trauelled toward that pleaſant and plentifull Citie. So
when they were gotten within a dayes iourney, the two
(as ſeemed to GERARDO, but not to the warie Dame)
as louing a couple as euer, (the morning beeing freſh) to
preuent the Sunnes heate, they were on horſebacke before
day-breake. They treated of ſuch ſucceſſes as came
into their mindes, and Gerardo thus diuerted in the ſweet
(though diſſembled) conuerſation of his Iacinta, looking
about, ſaw he was out of his way, got into a thick Groue
of ſtrong Oakes, from whence willing to get out toward
the loſt path, he was more cunningly intangled in this other:
ſo that riding on, thus loſt and melancholly, it was
not long ere certaine ſad and pitifull groanes came to his
eares, which by fits and ſhort intermiſſions ſtrooke him to
the heart.
               The further he went on, the neerer hee grew to this
moane; ſo ſuppoſing it muſt needs not be farre off, he haſtened
all he could, though now broad day was come vpon
him; by whoſe ſplendour, hee might plainely ſee all
round about him; as alſo a little brooke, on whoſe Margent
he trauelled, part of which was ſtained with ſome
freſh drops of bloud, the red framing in that greene, various,
(though fearefull) formes of enamelling: at which

he and Iacinta were not a little amazed: but calling to
minde thoſe former ſucceſſes of his owne Tragicall Story,
conſtant to all danger, he kept on his way, led on by
the ſound of the voice, euen to the very ſource of the water;
till beeing come amongſt certaine thornie Bryers
(within which was a little Meddow) he might ſee in midſt
of it a confuſ'd ſhape and Bulke, that onely by the groanes
it ſent forth, he gheſſed to be a humane creature. It lay
there without motion in a very Lake of bloud, with which
all the neere graſſe was ſprinkled, and the Riuer participated
of the improper tribute.
               The Noble Gerardo was ſo affected with the ſight, that
he threw himſelfe in an inſtant from the Saddle, and Iacinta
alſo leauing hers, they made toward the wounded
corps, which they found left naked, and ſaw that ſhee was
a woman, which made their compaſſion the greater. She
ſeemed to them (though now pale and disfigured) young
and handſome: though they were much troubled and
hopeleſſe of her lifes remedy: her body was full of
wounds, (and which cauſed moſt horrour) left barbarouſly
diſrobed. The tender eyes of the two Louers could
not but ſhead teares, and wound the ayre with their ſighs.
But ſince griefe was but a meane remedy to the preſent
miſchiefe; Gerardo, ſuppoſing they were not farre from
ſome towne, determined to conuey the bloudy creature
to the neereſt place: and to this effect taking off his riding
Coat) which he wore ouer a ſtrong Buffe Ierkin (and Belt of
Piſtols, together with ſome of her owne cloathes laid by,
lapped her in them, and as eaſily as he could, ſate her vpon
his Horſe, on which hee and Iacinta ſuſtaining her on both
ſides vp, they went faire and ſoftly, getting out of the thick
Groue, Heauen ere long permitting them to fall into the
high-way, from whence they might eſpy (to their ſeeming)

a good populous towne, about ſome halfe a league from
them. Gerardo was much grieued to ſee the parties continuing
loſſe of bloud; and ſeeing how ſoftly they went, fear'd
ſhee might dye before they could get her a Confeſſor:
Whereupon he determined to leaue her with Iacinta; to
whom making knowne his intent, and ſhe approuing it, leaping
into the Saddle, and taking the neereſt way to the
towne, in all diligence he haſtned toward it.
               About this time (the Sunne newly mounted (two Religious
Ieronimite Fryers came riding toward him vpon their
ſtrong & luſty Moyles, whom, whē he ſaw, he fancied them
to be rather then humane ſoules, Cherubins; and ſo, with
a ioyfull countenance, ſtopping his Horſe, he ſtayed till
they approached: and hauing courteouſly ſaluted them,
intreated them to goe with him not farre off, where, by
their helpe, in a caſe of neceſſitie, they might gain a Soule,
whoſe ſaluation conſiſted in their briefe approach: but in
ſtead of an anſwere, hee might ſee that both Maſters and
men, looking and ſtaring vpon each other, were all dumbe:
which, being duely weighed, they were not to bee blamed
for their ſlackneſſe; for who would not (conſidering his
Armes) but at the leaſt haue ſuſpected him to haue been a
Captaine of ſome Theeues, frequent in that Prouince, notwithſtanding
the care of our Viceroyes to ſcowre the
coaſt?
               But returning to my purpoſe, thoſe Religious men did
verily beleeue what is rehearſed; and ſuppoſing his crue
not to be farre off, cryed out for mercy, and lifting their
hands to Heauen, requeſted him that vvas farre from a
thought of wronging them, to haue pitie vpon them, laying
before him their profeſſion, and how much hee ſhould offend
God in iniuring them: and laſtly taking their wellſtuffed
purſes out of their pockets, & ſome of their cloathes

to boote, they offered them vnto him, vvho was aſhamed
of their baſe feare; and yet on the other ſide, not knowing
how to perſwade vvith them; and ſeeing the fellowes that
came with them runne ſpeedily backe toward the towne,
more fearfull though of the poore wounded creature, then
his owne danger, ſhewing more fury and indignation, then
his pious minde vvas willing, he threatned to kill them, if
they performed not his requeſt, and facing one of them
with his Piſtoll; ſo terrible were both their feares, that without
a word anſwering they now followed him; vvhich they
had done, euen to Hell it ſelfe, could he haue conducted
them, ſuch vvas their miſerable cowardize: ſoone vvere
they come to the place where Gerardo leſt the bloudleſſe
Trunke, vvhich they found as yet ſtruggling vvith Deſtiny.
Heere one of the Fryers alighting began to ſpeake to her,
when Gerardo's heart (vvho in all this vvhile had not diſcouered
Iacinta) vnable to be at quiet vvithin him, thinking
perhaps ſhe had hidden her ſelfe neere thereabout, not willing
to be ſeene by any paſſengers, vvithout bidding the
Friers Adieu, hee began to ſearch her out, not leauing an
inch of ground in all thoſe quarters vnſought; ſo that after
much time ſpent, and ſmall hope of recouerie, the poore
Gentleman ran vp and downe ſome two dayes, raging in
the Mountaine like a mad-man, ſtill crying and calling on
Iacinta, vvhoſe remembrance onely was ſufficient (as appeared
by the following Stanzes) to keep him ſo long faſting.
               
                  If the hard flint ſteele-ſt
                        •
                     ucken vomit fire,
                  (As if it lifes bloud were,
                  And wounded with complaints) thoſe ſparkes expreſse
                  In the blinde body, eyes, red-ſwolne with ire,
                  Eyes, more of rage then feare;
                  Why then breathe not I flames? (my wound no leſse)
                  
                     
Since griefe and blacke diſtreſse
                  (Steeles) ſtrike my captiue heart?
                  Griefe, to be all forlorne in abſence thus,
                  From whence, all ſorts of miſchiefes venimous,
                  Beyond the cure of Art,
                  Loue to a pow'rfull quint-eſſence hath brought,
                  Either by fire of Hell, or abſence wrought.
               
               
                  Goe, ſpirits of fire and poiſon then, prepare
                  To mount with ſpeedy flight
                  Some into Tongues, but moſt, to ſearching eyes.
                  Viſit thoſe winged dwellers in the Aire
                  O're you faire Region quite;
                  And each wilde Beaſt that in his darke den lyes,
                  And thoſe dumbe ſleepers (eyes:)
                  Lull'd by the bubbling brooke,
                  In Cryſtall Couches ſoft and naturall:
                  Perceiue the aquall ſacrifice may all,
                  That he (whom Loue forſooke)
                  For Holacauſt of blinde affection,
                  Smoke offers in his ſighes, flames in his moane.
               
               
                  Mount then, and ſcale that fourth laſt Element,
                  (But oh, thei'le be too ſlow!)
                  For hauing beene the matter to my paine.
                  (I feare) backe to my thoughts incontinent
                  They'le fly, whence now they flow;
                  And ſo conuert themſelues to bloud againe.
                  No: eu'ry my full veine
                  Runnes in bad humours high,
                  From the continuall current of my ill,
                  So that, for want of roome let vm ſoare ſtill
                  Vp to the lofty sky.
                  
                     
Or, with their torrid heate (where they forſake
                  Their wings) a ſecond fi'ry Region make.
               
               
                  If thus the wounded Aire on a light blaze,
                  Some thunderbolt chance frame,
                  Vn-er
                        •
                     ieg let it ſtrike (where euer fall)
                  
                     Iacinta; Ah no: but may the noiſe amaze,
                  As if it ſpoke her name:
                  Or backe againe did warne, or lowdly call,
                  And flaſh on her withall.
                  Birds, change your warbling notes,
                  That, as my ſighs oretake you in the aire,
                  Leauing thoſe chirping Songs: you may prepare▪
                  
                  Your more vn-tuned throates
                  With ſadder accents, as you fly along,
                  To publiſh the curſt Author of my wrong.
               
               
                  You quiu'ring Leaues, that ſhaken with the wind,
                  Each other gently kiſse,
                  While the Sunne enu'ous to behold your ſhade,
                  Pries to and fro, till (for his beames) he finde
                  Where freest entrance is:
                  Then, way from bough to bough his rayes haue made,
                  Though ſome boughes thicker, ſtaid
                  And ſtopt his piercing eye:
                  Grieue with your murmure, at my wretched moane,
                  When with the frequent hoarceneſse of your tone,
                  (Beſt, leſse melodiouſly:)
                  You boughes; when Zephirus doth make you meet,
                  And (twinde) each other, with your kiſſes greete.
               
               
                  You, little Peebles of the Fountaine, late
                  Teeth, of Narciſſus, white;
                  
                     
Then, Iuorie, but hard'ned now to ſtone,
                  Now are you no Tongue-helpers to relate,
                  Ought of that cruell ſight:
                  How, by red veines turn'd to a ſpring, was ſhewne
                  A fault, ſelfe-loue to owne.
                  (Beauty) ſhort Tyrannie;
                  Oh let the Eccho's of your Center cold
                  Repeate no ſtranger griefes, but mine vnfold,
                  My loſt felicitie.
                  Without Iacinta, iealouſie, diſdaine
                  My preſent ills, make all paſt goods ſeeme paine.
               
               Thus he lamented the abſence of his fugitiue Miſtris, till
ſeeing his folly, and the impoſſibilitie of finding her there,
he determined to goe backe to the place where he miſſed
her, where when he came, he was as farre to ſeeke: but at
laſt caſting more temperately with himſelfe, hee ſuppoſed,
that the morning he left her, ſhe ſeeing his long ſtay, her
womaniſh feare in that diſpeopled place might cauſe her to
retire to the towne, there to expect her Gerardo, whither
with this new vnprofitable gheſſe of his, he reſolued forthwith
to go (and putting it in practiſe) about Sun-ſet arriued
there, and in the diſtraction you may imagine, left not a
ſtreet or houſe vnasked for his Loue, till weary of trudging,
or rather of knowing no more then hee did, his faint body
forcing him to deſire ſome reſt, hee alighted at an Innedoore,
within which, he was no ſooner entred, whē ſuddenly
at leaſt twenty men grappled with him, and crying out
for more aide, without hearing him a word, dragged him
along to a ſtrong Priſon; where when he came, the cauſe of
his apprehenſion was made knowne, and imputed to him
that he was not onely a high-way Robber, but particularly
the Author alſo of thoſe cruell and barbarous wounds, giuen

the poore woman, whom he left in confeſſion with the
Fryers: they, ſeeing he returned not, aſſured of their ſuſpition,
reſolued to conuey her to the towne: and to giue account
to the Iuſtice of what hapned: which they did, leauing
all the people thereabouts much ſcandalized with the
terrible fact: though iuſt Heauen permitted not that the
poore Wench ſhould dye of her wounds, ſince they alſo
of the towne cauſed her health to bee carefully looked to.
And ſo as Gerardo, leſſe carefull of his preſent danger then
his former afflictions, went to and fro, enquiring thorow
the vproar'd towne for his Miſtris, and many knew, by the
Fryers Relations, the ſignes and habit he wore (his enquiry
too being for a woman
                     •
                  ) one ſuſpition ioyned with another,
gaue them warrant enough to lay wait for, and, as you haue
heard, apprehend him.
               
                  Gerardo was much troubled at his new impriſonment,
not ſo much for his lifes danger, as being hindred from his
ſearch and inquirie. But ſince there was no helpe for his
misfortune, (a puniſhment hee acknowledged due for his
ſacriledge) he endeuoured the beſt hee could to giue his
diſcharge, and not to ſuffer himſelfe periſh in that vvretched
manner; but his endeuours had been fruitleſſe, had
the wounded Maid dyed in this occaſion of her misfortune:
but heauen giuing her life, his trouble ſoone ended,
and the cauſe was knowne by her declaring two of her Brothers
acceſſarie to the wounds, who angry that a fellow of
meane condition had enioyed their Siſter, and after, to their
publike affront, demanded her to Wife, bent wholly to reuenge,
the better to effect their purpoſe, drew their Siſter
from the Citie frō 
                  Barcelona (of whence they all were) to go
with them towards Denia, to ſee (as they pretended) certaine
kindred of theirs; and comming one night to that
Mountaine, ſtripping her there naked, they performed that

barbarous piece of crueltie related. For all this, the Iudges
would not giue Gerardo preſent libertie, rather (beſides making
him purge himſelfe cleerely of the ſuſpitions his habit
and Piſtols of being a Thiefe brought againſt him) they
to his coſt enforced him (for the verifying her confeſſion)
to ſend to Ca
                        •
                     aluni
                        •
                     , which being not long after confirm'd
for certaine, by the abſence of her Brothers from Barcelona,
they thought fit to ſet him at liberty. Heere hee remained
foure moneths in this lingring, in which time, all hee had to
any value, was conſumed and ſpent: ſo that being to depart,
hee could hardly make ſhift for ſo much money as might
fit him with a Moyle, which hauing at length euen ſcarcely
effected, propoſing his iourney to ſome friends he knew, at
a place not farre off, called Denia, one morning he forſooke
the towne, ſufficiently warned by the wracke of his fortunes
there; and though hee were on his way, hee could ſcarce
thinke himſelfe yet thorowly at libertie. All that day hee
went on with a Boy his Guide, till the next (that neere a
lone Inne) he ouertooke one, who alone was trauelling, his
way; ſo after they had dined, and paſſed the dayes heat together
in that houſe, they kept vpon the way in good conuerſation,
and hoped that night, by ſpurring a little the harder,
to arriue at their iourneyes end Denia.
               
               In all that way (as being indeed no great Roade) they
met not a creature, till towards foure of Clocke in the afternoone,
in midſt of certaine thicke Brambles (as they careleſſely
rode on) two men ſtept before them, who as well by
their perſons, as faſhion and Armes, ſoone made knowne
what they were. One of the two, that indeed ſeemed rather
an infernall Miniſter, then a mortall man, bade ſtand: and
faſtning on Gerardo's reines, with his Piſtoll clapt to his
breſt, gaue way to his companion to doe the like to the other.
When the foot-boyes ſaw this, & perceiued the danger

of their Maſters, not expecting the euent, they betooke
them to their flight. The good Gerardo, doubtleſſe,
(though in ſo knowne a hazzard) would haue aduentured
his perſon, if at the very inſtant hee had not ſeene other
ſixe riſe out of the thicket of thoſe buſhes; one of which,
as vvell by his difference of habit, as goodly preſence, ſeemed
to be the Captain of the reſt, vvho thinking the poore
trauellers vvere ſomewhat of the ſloweſt in forſaking
their Saddles, with a hoarſe and diſmall voice, turning
to the two firſt, ſaid, Raskals, what doe you with thoſe
wretches? do you carry your Piſtols for ſhew only? would
you haue me kill the poore ſnakes? And thus ſaying, and
aduancing his Petronell in the ſame inſtant, the poore couple
tumbling at thoſe ſpeeches to the earth, gaue way to
thoſe furious men to diſarme them, with ſuch violent ſearch
alſo, as had they beene their mortall enemies: laſtly, they
ſtripped them euen to their ſhirts. Yet this cruell proceeding
neuer ſo much as wrought the leaſt impreſſion of reſentment
in Gerardo, who now as much deſired to die, as to
liue in his miſeries; and in this hardie reſolution, concealing
his preſent hard vſage, with a firme and conſtant behauiour,
expected the iſſue of this ſad accident: all which in
his companion was quiete contrary, who in a thouſand wofull
extremes (his eyes flowing teares) ſought to mollifie
the bloody flint-hearted Captaine, who looking ſomewhat
wiſtly on his face, ſtraight knew him; and ſeeing him proſtrate
at his feet, vvith an arrogant and haughty licence
bade him riſe, ſaying: Art not thou happely Vincente Arbias?
for if mine eyes do not deceiue mee, I haue here before
me the party to vvhom I owe no leſſe then life. To
this the quiuering Valencian, like one raiſed out of a trance,
lifted vp his eyes, and hearing himſelfe called by his name,
ſomewhat more encouraged, vvith a faint voyce made anſwer,

that he was that party, and by profeſſion an Atturney
for Cauſes in Valencia; though in all this while it vvas
not poſſible for him to call to his remembrance him, that
ſpoke thus to him: vvho obſeruing his feare, replied, Let
not the ſeeing me affright thee, nor the beholding theſe
my companions, for thou mayeſt ſafely go thy vvaies: And
know, that now thy friend Pedraſa, hath (for it is hee that
ſpeakes to thee) complied vvith the obligation he had, ſince
by thy honeſt care hee vvas freed from priſon in Valencia:
take thy garments, and turning to his company, proceeded:
And you, returne him the money taken from him to a denier,
and accompanying him to his ſafety, leaue mee to
your recompence. Theſe words vvere like Angelicall ſalutations,
in the fearefull Vincente's cares, and vvanting ſufficient
phraſe (as he thought) for his greatefulneſſe, he recaſt
himſelfe againe at the Captaines feet, and in a trice clothing
himſelfe, got afterward to his Moyle, and returned
to his iourney, accompanied part of his way by thoſe miniſters
of Cacus.
               
               
                  Gerardo thought verily, that ſince thus they retained
him, they meant to make a bloody ſacrifice of his youth,
and in this imagination, lifting his eyes to all-pittying Heauen,
vvith his heart hee begged mercy and releaſement
from thoſe preſent miſchiefes: and hearing thoſe men
command him to follow them, he began to goe after, thorow
the thicket, and rougheſt part of the Mountaine, iuſt as
the Sunne was declining to the Weſt. They had ſcarce
gone halfe a League in that Deſart, vvhen comming to a
deepe and hidden Brooke, that on one ſide ſerued as a ditch
to a clouen Rocke thereby, and keeping their vvay on the
brinke of the ſame, vvithin a while they entred into a Strait;
from vvhence croſſing a little, they mounted the ſtaring
Rocke, in midſt whereof vvere certaine thatched Cottages,

which ſerued them as a harbour and bulwarke againſt all
weathers. Aſſoone as their trampling and noiſe was heard
by thoſe vvithin, there iſſued out ſome doozen perſons of
the ſame hiew and profeſſion vvith the reſt; and foremoſt
mongſt theſe, one of a briske and liuely preſence, who with
his pleaſing ſight gaue no ſmall comfort to Gerardo, though
as then hee could not vvell perceiue whether his countenance
vvere anſwerable to his preſence; for beſides the
broad brimme of a military Hat, that ſhadowed his face,
the being darkiſh too did hide it.
               The party was clad in a rich cloth of ſiluer doublet, and
ouer it a Gaberdine of greene Veluet, ſet thicke vvith Buttons
and Loopes of ſiluer, ſuteable, hauing on the top of his
right ſhoulder ſloping, a faire Belt ſtudded and embroidered
with Gold, two curiouſly vvrought Petronels hanging
at it, his Breeches were ſuteable, Damaske, his Stocking,
ſhooe and garter, white, Plumes of feathers white and
greene: all which ſo ſet out his gracefull perſonage, that,
Gerardo, forgetting his troubles, vvas now wholly fixt vpon
the gallant obiect. To whom the Captaine with open
armes directing himſelfe, the pretty Youth offering his
hand, with a kind of neglect, at his breſt, ſtopping his proceeding,
ſaid, Why how now, Pedraſa, ſo empty, and craue
an embrace? Forbeare: for ſince you returne without a
Prize, I am not indebted the leaſt fauour. To this hee ſmilingly
replyed: No more, my Generall, be not too rigorous
till you heare my diſcharge, and turne but your eyes to my
company, in their increaſe you ſhall ſee a ſpoile, from whoſe
woorth, I dedicate to thoſe faire fingers, a rich Ruby. At
this, the comely Youth more heedily looking backe, might
perceiue the vnfortunate Gentleman; who from the inſtant
that he heard that voice, ſuppoſing he knew it, his ſorrowfull
heart was ready to leape from his breſt. But when hee

plainely ſaw, the diſguized Youth was his Iacinta, hee had
like to haue falne to the earth, where (as his couragious
mind was deeply ſtrucke) he but (faining wearineſſe) ſate
downe. The vngratefull cruell woman had not forgotten
the countenance and preſence of him ſhe once loued, Lord
of her affection: but ſhe made no ſhew of change at all, rather
ſeeing him thus diſroabed, halfe naked, was not a io
                     •
                  
mooued; but making as if ſhee had not knowne him, turning
to her new Louer, ſaid, I like him well, 'tis a good
handſome ſtrippling; your gaines will bee the greater, and
our friends that buy him, will haue no, bad penniwoorth;
Away with him to the Caue, in the meane time let vs thinke
of ſupping. And ſo taking the Captaine by the hand, they
returned to Kennell together.
               Oh, paſſe not on, compaſſionate Reader, but ſuſpend
a while thy grieued eyes; and now that with thy preſence it
is impoſſible, ſupply yet with thy imagination, ſo great
woe, as at preſent, the ſad and diſ-conſolate Gentleman
might feele. Thinke but how baſely now, his once beſt
treaſure is imployd: Behold him poore, diſrobed, deiected,
in the hands of homicides, bloud-ſuckers, Land-Pyrats:
apprehend but truely this, and each line, nay, each letter
may attract a teare.
               Many a time was Gerardo ready to haue flung himſelfe
amidſt that brutiſh rowt, and could haue torne them peicemeale
vvith his teeth for reuenge, were it not that deſpaire,
more then feare, ſtopped his reſolution, preuented alſo by
foure of thoſe fellowes, who raiſing him from the place
vvhere he ſate, carried him along with them, and deſcending
towards the bottome of the Rocke, one of them diſioyning
a broad blacke Slate, which ſerued as a ſtopple to
the Caues mouth (though ſo euen ſet in, the cunning, could
ſcarce be perceiued) commanding him to enter; they, without,

ſhutting the doore, returned from whence they came,
leauing Gerardo in that darke and diſmall den, ſo ſtraightned,
and afflicted, that he verily ſuppoſed they meant there
to ſtarue him to death: which made him heartily repent he
had not put his vengeance in execution. Thus he remained
a long houre at leaſt vvithout paſſing on, thinking there was
no more danger ſaue vvhere he vvas. But at the inſtant hee
might heare ſome ſpeaking further in; and vvithall, a voice
fearefully reſounding thorow the whole Caue, inſomuch
that he verily beleeued himſelfe to be at Hels mouth. The
voice ſeemed to come neerer, ſo that hee might more diſtinctly
heare theſe vvords:
               To all this howling, Captiue, miſerable man, giueſt thou
no anſwere? why com'ſt not downe vnto vs, ſince thy vnhappy
ſtarres directed thee to be our vvofull companion?
what doeſt thou, what canſt thou expect? hath thy vitall
breath failed thee? or beginneſt thou to repine at the taſte
of ſuch bitter foode, as is our beſt comfort in this blacke
manſion? Wonder not, for this is but a beginning of miſery,
yet thou ſhalt haue the chiefeſt comfort, companions.
Theſe finall accents of the voice came to Gerardo's eares,
iuſt as a man appeared before him, vvith a lighted Brand
of Roſind▪ Pine in his left hand flaming, and a ſmall-fruit
Reede in his right, that ſerued him for a Reſt and Guide, ſo
leane, pale and altred, that the ſuddenneſſe amazed him.
Hee thought verily the Ghoſt of his dead enemy Rodrigo
was transformed into that Goblin: for in ſuch caſes, feare
doth neuer preſent leſſe horrid affrightments to the imagination.
Hee knew not what to anſwere, neither could hee
vnfold his lips; which hee that roſe from the Caue perceiuing,
and how much he was aſtoniſht, beholding him with
ſome pitie, drew neere, and taking him by the hand, ſaid;
Let not my faint preſence, vnfortunate Young man, diſmay

you: for how-euer you ſee me in this moſt miſerable
plight, not long ſince you might haue known me as ſtrong,
as able as your ſelfe: but the wretched Manſion where wee
liue, and the barbarous crueltie and ſcarſitie with vvhich
the curſed Owners entreat vs (who by ounces giue vs a miſerable
and naſty ſuſtenance) doth cauſe in me, and twenty
others that there below expect vs, the ſame effect that
your eyes behold.
               Blame me not (replide the vnfortunate Gerardo) that your
preſence hath ſo daunted me, ſince the nouelty of this place
may well excuſe me: & therfore pardon me I beſeech you,
the trouble I haue put you to in calling me; & ſince (as you
ſay) I haue ſo many companions in my miſery: let vs (on
Gods name) goe where they expect vs.
               This ſaid, they both began faire and ſoftly to deſcend,
paſſing at leaſt twenty winding ſtaires, ere they came to the
Caues bottome: in which ſpacious dungeon, Gerardo ſaw
at leaſt twenty perſons of the ſame hiew, and in no better
plight then hee that accompanied him: (all of them ſet about
a poore, almoſt extinguiſht fire) by whom (if any ioy
may be in ſuch griefe) he was ioyfully receiued. Euery one
particularly demanded his ill fortune, Gerardo ſatisfide all:
vnderſtanding from them likewiſe their vnhappy ſucceſſes,
which had brought them to ſo great extremitie; hee likewiſe
knew of them how they came ſo ſpeedily to heare of
his impriſonment: (being ſo farre as he perceiued from any
commerce) which was, that receiuing at a ſmall hole, from
the top of the Caue, their ordinarie allowance of Ryebread
for their ſuſtenance, there beeing a Loafe extraordinarie,
they knew they had ſome new companion; and now
the time of reſt drawing neere, all of them lay downe on
certaine heapes of ſtrawe, that ſerued them in ſtead of daintier
beds; onely Gerardo, though he moſt needed, yet ſlopt

not, nor tooke any reſt in all that night, the moſt tedious
that euer he paſſed.
               There vvanted not one to accompany him in this waking,
and in a manner with equall ſorrow, one of his moſt
vnderſtanding companions; whom (as it oft fals out) by
particular ſimpathy he did moſt affect. Hee then, that lay
neereſt our poore Gentleman, ſeeing him much diſquieted,
moued to pitie, and interrupting his owne calamities,
ſaid, 'Twere fondneſſe, my new friend, and companion, to
demand the cauſe which keepes you thus waking: for
where there are indeed ſo many, euident it is, that, any one
were ſufficient to breed the greateſt diſcomfort. I am onely
deſirous to know, if any particular accident doe adde to
this your knowne misfortune; if ſo, by communicating the
ſame, the greateſt inconuenience, that can happen, is, to oblige
me to your ſuccour, as much as lies in this poore and
weake abilitie of mine: therfore let me requeſt you in ſome
ſort to grant my deſire. With which the captiue was ſilent:
when Gerardo, not a little admiring his piety and good
language (with a low voice, not to diſturbe ſuch as tooke
their re
                     ••
                  ) thus anſwered, Diſcreet companion, though our
fortunes be equall in the preſent miſery I bewaile, yet aſſuredly,
in the circumſtances that brought me to it, they
are farre different; theſe make me madde, impatient, full of
griefe, ſoule and body, ſo increaſing vpon me, that nothing
but death may ridde me of my paines. I giue you all poſſible
thankes for your deſires: God giue you your merits, and
ſo you ſhall be ſure not to want.
               In him (ſaid the Priſoner) I am onely confident; though
when I conſider that this puniſhment is iuſtly for my ſinnes
inflicted, doth cauſe in me a ſad diſcomfort, and perſwades
me that the qualitie of them being ſo odious, they are paſt
all helpe.
               
                  
Theſe laſt words he vttred ſo paſſionatly, that the curious
Gerardo laying hold on them (as thinking them to ſauour of
deſpaire) cut him off, ſaying, The opinion of your vviſedome
yet wils me to deſire you not ſo ſpeedily to forfet the
ſame: and it is much more neceſſarie for your ſoules health,
not to be caſt headlong with ſuch thoughts, for relying (as
you firſt noted) on heauens mercy; from that let me ſafely
promiſe you (as a remedy to greater misfortunes) pardō for
very great ſinnes: repent the committing them, that truely
performed, Heauen will diſpoſe all for the beſt. Heauen
comfort you, ſaid the Priſoner, as I am by you comforted.
And Gerardo willing to know more of his griefes, extended
his comfort, by giuing him a Summary Relation of his
owne, as thinking by that meanes, diuerting and cheering
him ioyntly, he might oblige him to make knowne his life
vnto him, as indeed his diſcreet preſumption ſucceeded
right: for hauing paſt ſome time in his owne briefe diſcourſe;
the afflicted Captiue wondring at ſuch remarkeable
euents, after hee had with no ſmall commiſeration endeared
Gerardo's miſhaps, inuited by them, hee could not
but begin to ſet forth his owne, at ſuch time as the calme
night was in the midſt of her ſad courſe; and ſo drawing
neerer to Gerardo with his faint limbes, he began:
               When it were not as congruous as vſuall for poore Priſoners
in ſuch occaſions, my good friend, as the preſent to
giue each other account of their misfortunes in generall
(as by this meanes beguiling ſolitude, and diuerting the
memory of their griefes) the noble freeneſſe you haue ſhewed
in the diſpoſing your Story, might iuſtly engage me
to the like, to repay the debt I owe; and therefore if you be
pleaſed to ſupply my weake ſtile in my lifes deliuery with
your attention, I ſhall venter to giue it, beginning, where
the Barbarian Moores of our Spaine had ending.
               
                  
My Anceſtors ſerued our firſt (ſo ſtiled, Catholique
Princes) Founders of this great Monarchy, ſo valiantly in
their laſt conqueſts, that for a Noble recompence, they beſtowed
an inheritance vpon them, in the flouriſhing Citie
of Granada, where my houſe, or rather of my Parents at
this day ſtandeth: Gentlemen, (though for me in this miſery
to ſpeake it, may ſeeme vaine-glory) as well knowne for
nobleneſſe of bloud, as wealth, and charitie to their poore
towne-borne neighbours: happy enough, though doubtleſſe
ſince this misfortune of mine, that happineſſe is much
diminiſhed: for beſides that, it hath fallen vpon their heire,
I am their onely ſonne and child, vvhom as the light of
their eyes, their ſole darling, they brought vp in all laudable
qualities, as a ſonne of ſuch Parents.
               About twenty yeeres was I of age, vvhen the beſt part of
Spaines Nobilitie, mooued to ſerue our Great Monarch
in that firſt iourney of Alarache (incited by friends, and
chiefely licenced by my vvilling Parents, to their great contents,
gallantly furniſhed with Armes, brauerie and ſeruants)
I made one of the Troopes. The effect and taking
that towne, or rather buying of it, you vvell know, and ſo
the companies were diſſolued; but before I would returne
home, I ſpent a little time with ſome kindred of mine in the
Citie of Cadiz, which was then, as, plentifull in prouiſions
& dainties, ſo populouſly furniſhed with valiant Souldiers,
and frequented by faire Dames; whereby (Mars taking
truce) Venus began her pleaſing warres; at whoſe fire in part
I vvarmed my ſelfe, for one day ſome ſlight diſcourſe paſſing
betwixt me and a Dame of Seuill, the flaxe taking hold
ſo inflamed, that within a vvhile I found my ſelfe all in a
light fire.
               I conſidered not, that (as ſhe was a Curtizan) I poſſeſſing
her, in ſuch a concourſe alſo others might doe the

like) but, watched and iealouſly hid her, as warily as if wee
had long liued together man and wife. The Lady vvas
not vſed to ſuch wakings, and therefore my girdle ſoone
waxt too little for her waſte; ſhee grew to a loathing, ate
little, forbore her comming to my lodging, in fine, purpoſed
to giue me the ſlip, as indeed ſhe did, though left in my
cuſtodie two Trunkes of her apparell. I cannot expreſſe
how much I was grieued: for, theſe kinde of creatures, beſides
their ordinarie ſweetneſſe of Diſcourſe, haue a ſtrange
kinde of faſcinating, that makes them to bee affected: I
ſought her, and ſo did ſome friends of mine, with no ſmall
diligence: but (for ſhee reſolued not to appeare) all vvas
bootleſſe. Howſoeuer, thoſe pawnes I had, gaue mee ſome
hope to heare of her, as after it fell out; for the next day,
next my heart, in ſtead of breakfaſt, I receiued a Challenge,
which, a certaine Gallant, vpon whoſe account my woman
was kept, ſent me; in which he demanded the Trunkes, or
in caſe of rebellion, that we ſhould meet, (the place appointed)
where he would expect me: whither, carried with deſire
and gladneſſe to heare of my Miſtris, together with
iealouſie that fired me, raſhly all alone I went. And too't
we went (our bodies the markes) each aiming at his contrarie,
I quickly had the aduantage: for mine enemy ſtumbling,
fell flat along backward; but two friends of his, ſallying
inſtantly out of certaine neere Trenches, crying out
to me to hold, I obeying he riſing vp in the Interim, and
violently flying at me, on the ſudden reached mee a cut
vpon one ſide of my face. The haſte that I made to be reuenged
vpon ſuch cowardize, was the ſame that my Aduerſaries
vſed for their ſafety; who thinking their friend
had left me for dead, ſoone vaniſht out of ſight, and (I beleeue)
out of the Iland. I afterward, to the generall ſorrow
of my friends, cauſed my ſelfe to be cured, and for the

preſent diſſembled the receiued iniury; whoſe Author I
knew to be a Seuillian Gentleman, that had long kept my
laſciuious Curtizan, whoſe loue I quickly forgot, yet ſent
her, as ſoone as I knew where, for feare ſhe had taken Sanctuary,
her Trunkes.
               And now I returned toward Granada, where I was ſometime
before expected. Where when I arriued, the firſt few
dayes (with the licence that the name of Souldier giues to
the variety of colours, Skarfe and Feather) I walked in ſome
friends companies, tacking and ſteering about the Citie;
neither know I whether in this time my militarie brauerie,
or perhaps contrarie fortune inclined the eyes of a certaine
Dame to look vpon me, one, faire in extremitie, & alike Noble,
as I ſoone learnt; but a ſtranger, that accompanied her
Parents, who had an important Law-ſuite in this Citties
Chancerie. My new loue tooke hold as did the former,
and as that increaſt, and my experience ſuting but with my
yeeres, I inconſiderately caſt my ſelfe after my blind affection;
which though it receiued not ſo ſoone, my pretended
recompence, yet in leſſe then moneths was ſo cheriſhed,
that few nights I was abſent from Felicianas ſtreet (ſuch was
my Dames name) and at laſt I aduentured to ſend her a
Letter vvith the following Sonnet:
               Raſh Phaeton, more bold then wiſe, or bleſt;
               Once long'd the reines and Dayes bright Coach to guide:
               But, for a puniſhment to empty pride
               (Setting) he fals in his vntimely Eaſt:
               Young Icarus mounts to the burning Sphere,
               Forc'd by the winde that his Art's wings deth driue,
               T
                     •
                  ll, when he once to the Sunnes height would ſtriue;
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  , for his downe-fall melted were.
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     oues Thunderbolt daſht Phaetons deſigne
               
                  
Which into nothing with the owner fell:
               Blinde Icarus the Sea Waues waſht to death.
               Aye me! euen ſo, you lofty thoughts of mine
               Like Phaetons, my loue-flames are your hell,
               And like Icarian ſeas, griefe ſtops my breath.
               In ſtead of an anſwere, ſhee willed me by word of mouth
the night following, to ſpeake with her beneath a Bay window
ſhee appointed. This happy comfort begot ſwift
wings to my deſires, which (contained in the limit of her
promiſe) the enſuing night, were accompliſhed: at which
time I enioyed my miſtriſſes ſweete conuerſation. I ſhall
not need to relate what amorous fopperies I vſed, and the
forcible perſwaſions of my loues diſcourſe, together with
the returne of her fauours: onely let me tell you, my hopes
had more encouragement from her, then either I could expect,
or ſhee in honeſty promiſe; telling mee withall, that
the feare of her houſhold ſpies, was the cauſe of her former
ſuſpenſion and not ſpeaking with me: ſo that now (wholly
inflamed in her loue) I tooke leaue, our conuerſation holding
conſtātly many a night after in the ſame place; til when
I leaſt ſuſpected any ſuch intent, in mid'ſt of our greateſt affection,
not knowing the cauſe, (as not hauing on my part
giuen any) ſhee wholly retired her ſelfe, from either ſeeing,
or ſpeaking with me.
               What could you haue thought, noble Sir, of this new
diſdaine? or what ſhall I tell you of my extreames? my
anguiſh? my diligence? aboue all, the firmeneſſe of my affection;
which more violently encreaſed then her vniuſt
forgetfulneſſe; from whom I could not ſo much as vnderſtand
the leaſt occaſion of my miſhap: though for all this, I
forſooke not the ſtreete, but the moſt nights with muſicke,
and voices in ſome pretty ſonnet, gaue a touch vpon her

ingratitude: for as my intent was directed to an honeſt end,
which ſhe had diuers times formerly vnderſtood from me,
I was not nice to conceale my priuateſt thoughts: but none
of all theſe left the leaſt impreſſion in her ingratefull breſt,
which made mee not a little ſuſpicious, that this ſudden
change might proceed from ſome new affection; ſo like a
ſecond Argus watchfully waking, I played the carefull
Sentinel, and one night among the reſt, conforming my
voice with a viole, I tooke occaſion to expreſſe the ſoftneſſe
of my affection, and the flintineſſe of her rigour, in the following
Sonnet, which you may not repent to heare.
               How art thou, Loue, a childe, if Giant tall?
               How, watchfull Lynceus, if ſtill painted blinde?
               How, ſometimes frozen, if, all fire by kinde?
               How, Wax, ſince hard as Diamond withall?
               How, Atlas art thou, if of ſuffering ſmall?
               How, tyrannous, if of ſo ſoft a minde?
               How, abſent, if we ſtill thee preſent finde?
               
                  How, Mydas? Alexander liberall?
               
               
                  Loue then, if Loue thou be? why ſelfe-ſame Loue?
               
               Louing and loue-leſse art thou? (contraries)
               That one ſhould hate, when th'other doth adore!
               Darke thy Aenigma's are, Let none then prooue,
               What thy confuſed Babel myſteries
               Be, ſince who knowes thee moſt, needs know thee more.
               But all my labour was vaine, as being neuer able to finde
the leaſt ſhew of diſhoneſty, or ought illicite throughout
that ſo great familie: and this the more emboldened mee,
that ſometimes I freely entred euen to the ſecretſt parts of
the houſe, and one night among others, that I inconſiderately
deſired to ſee my Feliciana, I entred at a garden

doore, whither ſhee vſed much to deſcend, and whither I
might ſoone approch, as being neere the houſes court: So
when I leaſt dreamt of it, I might ſee, that in the middeſt of
a great Parlor, ſhe was ſet vpon the knee of a yong gallant,
and (to my ſeeming) louingly courted by him. This was an
ouerture, that had I not ſpared to raiſe the whole houſe,
would haue incited mee to a violent courſe; and in my raging
iealouſie I drew neere to a grate, whereby I might the
better heare their diſcourſe: in which (though confuſedly)
me thought the names of brother and ſiſter paſſed betwixt
them: here my heart was a little more reuiued, and not
long after I vnderſtood the truth, that the Gentleman was
newly arriued from Seuil, where before this occaſion, I
knew hee was, as receiuing it from my Miſtris her owne
mouth.
               The houſe vpon his arriuall was leſſe heeded, and with
greater concourſe frequented, though I for my part, knowing
how little ſecurity I had there, would haue ſlid faire and
ſoftly away: to which purpoſe I had ſcarce turned my back,
when, I might behold how two men croſſing from the
ſtreete doore towards me, came leading a woman betwixt
them; ſo that ſhunning the being eſpied by them, I was forced
to get me on one ſide, ſhadowing my ſelfe in an entrie,
till ſuch time as they were paſt: one of them ſtepping before,
went to the garden window, and called (as I might
plainely heare) my miſtriſſes brother, who inſtantly came
into the court, and with open armes receiued that woman,
with whom, (the whole family being retired to reſt) hee aſcended
into certaine higher roomes, in likelyhood, his
owne lodgings: and I ſeeing all huſht and quiet, meant to
haue returned vnto mine, but being come to the ſtreete
doore, to my greefe I found it ſhut, which much troubled
me; and ignorant what courſe to take, at laſt I looked about

mee, and in a neere entrie might ſee a ſtable doore open:
ſo without more delay I entred there, and kept companie
with three or foure horſes, taking vp my lodging betwixt
one of them and the wall, where I was no ſooner laide
downe, and reſted vpon my buckler, when a fellow comming
with a light in his hād, the horſekeeper belike, without
ſpying me, firſt barring the doore, began next to vndreſſe
himſelfe, and by vertue of the light before me, I might ſee
the partie a luſty Barbarian Mu
                        •
                     atto, that was ſlaue to Felicianas
father; for her ſake I was forced to paſſe a hard night
thus, as I had often done. Whileſt I was buſied in my
thoughts, the ſlaue had got him to his bed, a poore one
(heauen knowes) which ſtanding againſt a lath-wall right
oppoſite to me, I might perceiue him ſoftly liſten to heare
what paſſed on the other ſide thereof: and not long after,
(being ſtill attentiue to his care,) might ſee that leauing to
hearken, riſing haſtily vp, and kneeling vpon his bed, he began
to take out ſome bricks which had bene ſet into the wal,
and afterward, one within asking if there were roome to
enter at, and he anſwering yes; by little and little, I ſaw him
helpe in a woman, and (being entred) claſpe her faſt in
his armes. My ioynts began preſently to tremble, and
my heart furiouſly leapt within mee, as if it meant to haue
left my breſt: and not long after, my ſad ſoule fully knew
the cauſe of theſe effectes; for the luſtfull woman not contented
with embraces, but longing to ſee her barbarous leacher
naked, taking the candle from whence it hung, ſhee
no ſooner beheld her tawnie ſweet-heart, but I in her, the
faire foule-minded Feliciana (to my ſorrow,) the baſe ſubiect
of this ſlaues luſt. But the home drawne arrow, flyes not
ſo ſwift from crooked bowe of the fierce Canibal, as powerleſſe
I with furie ſtarted from vp the horſes feete, and
ſetting vpon the worthleſſe couple with my dagger, bent

wholly on reuenge, and blinde with confirmed iealouſie,
without reſiſtance thruſt the poniard foure ſeuerall times
thorow the Moores body: and ſeeing that in the interim, Feliciana
ſtroue to be gone, leauing him, and thinking with my
ſelfe, that the intent of making her my wife, obliged me to
as much as had ſhe beene ſo, catching hold of her arme, I
ſtabbed her in as many parts of her body as I could reach,
and (doubtleſſe) had there ended her life, if the cries of both
(for the ſlaue by this time made ſhift to get into the entry)
had not preuented mee: for inſtantly at the vprore all the
ſeruants were gotten to the ſtable doore, which I (to my
ruine, quickly perceiuing) reſiſted and their entrance, hauing
the ſlaue now dead at my feete for a bulwarke.
               In mid'ſt of this confuſion came my miſtriſſes brother
with lights before him, whom I no ſooner fully ſaw, but
knew to be the author of my former wound: and hee likewiſe
beholding, knew me, whereby ſuſpecting that I (hauing
notice of his arriuall) came to kill him, hee began lowdly to
make it manifeſt. No leſſe by this time was the noyſe and
howling where Feliciana was: which, her brother fearing
would be a cauſe of raiſing the watch, in reſpect of the partie
in his chamber, (for hee was ignorant of his ſiſters miſhap)
hee commanded his ſeruants to ſhift her away; but
their lucke was ſuch, that at going out of the ſtreete doore,
they met with the Conſtable, who drawne by the noiſe he
heard, was newly come thither; ſo that my ſelfe now (ſeeing
my miſtriſſes brother for his wenches danger gotten amongſt
the watch,) laying hold vpon the oportunitie, with
incredible haſte mixing with the troupe, freed my ſelf from
danger, leauing the maſter and ſeruants there to ſhift as
well as they could for their faire Ladie, whom with ſorrow
(hauing once loued her) I beheld to bee the Seuillian Dame
of Cadiz. But time haſtening mee on, in a trice I was got

out of the ſtreet, paſſing as I went vnder Feliciana's bay windowe,
by whoſe groanes, accompanied with the noiſe and
howling of her mother and maides, I might plainely heare
ſome crying for Phiſicians, others a Confeſſor, which made
me, without more delayes, get me out of the Citie, and before
day-breake, aduance two leagues vpon my way, to a
towne that belonged to an eſpeciall good friend of my Father,
from whom, receiuing a horſe and ſome moneies,
(conſidering my danger) I haſted ſpeedily, and croſſing the
Alpujaran mountaines, came to the Kingdome of Murcia,
and at laſt to the Citie of Valencia, where (my ſoule full
of bitter and intolerable ſadneſſe) without further conſultations,
I turned Frier, and betooke my ſelfe to one of the
moſt retired orders of that Citie, where hauing remained
ſome nine moneths of my Probationerſhip, time curing me
of my amorous ſore, and vveary of that ſtrict life, vvith as
eaſie a determination as I vndertooke it, I quickly left it, and
ſome month ſince, returning tovvard Andaluzia, deſirous to
ſee in vvhat ſtate my affaires vvent, vvhen I leaſt thought of
it, by the vvay theſe Sbanditi fell vpon me, and taking my
monie and a Pilgrims vveede vvhich I vvore (for my more
ſafetie) from mee, brought me to this place, vvhoſe extremitie
makes mee thinke this vvretched misfortune hath befalne
me, not more for my former offences, then cutting the
thred of the Religious profeſſion I made choice of.
               This vvas the end of the poore impriſoned Gentlemans
ſad ſtory, vvhich accompanied vvith Gerardo's ſorrow,
to his ſighes comforting each other, and re-eſtabling
their commenced friendſhip the neceſſitie of the time;
made them by mutuall accord addreſſe themſelues to
ſome reſt.
               Some fifteene dayes remained theſe poore Gentlemen
after in this place; in vvhich time Gerardo vnderſtood

from his Camerada's, the intention of their keeping in this
darke Priſon, vvhich was, to ſell them to the firſt Barbarian
Frigot that ſhould arriue vpon the Coaſt, vvith whoſe
Owner Pedraca had made agreement, and ſold his Priſoners
for ſome twenty, ſome thirty crownes a man. This
not a little comforted Gerardo, the ſale aſſuring him of his
libertie, ſince he preſumed his Brother or friends would
ranſome him; and with this new hope, giuing more alacritie
to his late deſpiſed life, hee diſpoſed himſelfe with a
manly and couragious heart, to expect the end and vpſhot
of his misfortunes: ſeeking withall to ridde and blot out
of his minde, the loathed remembrance of the vile Iacinta,
who now knew how ſhee came amongſt thoſe Rogues:
for one of his companions informed by one of the other,
told him, that foure moneths ſince, they met her, loſt or
rather flying in a Mountaine (as ſhee gaue to vnderſtand)
from a Brother of hers; and that their Captaine enamoured
on her beauty, tooke her along with him, cauſing
her to change her womans habit, and his followers to obey
and reſpect her equally as him their Maſter: and ſurely
this was the Religious Order ſhe ſo truely longed after. A
ſtrange kind of change & variety in womā was this, a lightneſſe
beyond beliefe, where my vnderſtanding hath quite
loſt footing, and my iudgement is paſt wading. I thinke
it needleſſe to ſearch curiouſly into the reaſon, why this
creature grew ſo prodigall of her honour: for ſince Gerardo,
whom it moſt concerned, could not vnderſtand it,
it may vvell bee let alone; yet it is not amiſſe to ſet
downe his deſcription of vvomans various condition in
this briefe Sonnet.
               
                  
He, in a Viol the Sunnes Atomes takes,
               Retorting ech raylingly offends,
               To tame with flatt'ring, high growne ſeas pretends,
               Or nimbler winde with running ſwift oretakes,
               Or whips, to ſcourge the flames, his hands he makes,
               Clouds in a Net to catch, time precious ſpends,
               Or in a circle lookes (where none are) ends
               In Aetna weepes and thinkes that heat he ſlakes:
               A mad-mans counſell, or a dumbe t' expreſse
               A ſmile from death, from fortune conſtancie,
               Truth from a Poet, from a ſicke man taste,
               Quiet from Priſons, troopes from Wilderneſse,
               From Angels teares, from dreames a certaintie,
               Askes he, Shat toyles, to finde a woman chaſte.
               To turne to the preſent: Some fifteene dayes after he had
remained in this Cauerne, himſelfe and his enforced company,
being one night faſt aſleepe, with a huge noiſe of people
that ſeemed to deſcend the Caue, ſuddenly awoke, and
ſtraight imagining their enormious ſale was contriued
with ſome Mooriſh Pyrate, each man began to prepare
himſelfe. They were no whit deceiued, as being ſoone beſet
with Mooriſh cryes, and Arabicke Souldiours, that
with their drawne Scimitars, together with a confuſed babbling,
began to faſt binde, and (turning them out of their
Dungeon) to guide them toward the Sea-ſide, vvhere they
imbarkt them in a well-man'd Frigot, that lay there hid in a
cloſe creeke.
               But ſcarce had Gerardo ſet foote a-boord, when hee ſaw
moſt of the Theeues, and their Captaine, together with the
vngratefull Iacinta, well fettered and manacled, whereat he
was not a little aſtoniſhed, though, to ſee her and that baſe

crue in ſuch eſtate, tempered with ſome ioy, his admiration
aſſuring himſelfe that iuſt Heauen had reuenged him ſufficiently
on his enemies. For you muſt know that Alibraem
a famous Pyrat, and Pedraça's diſſembled friend, hauing
that afternoone arriued on the coaſt, and landed on the neereſt
ſhore a hundreth of his beſt Souldiers, he reſolued like
an Infidell as he was, to breake his word and promiſe; or
happely, incited by the Diuine Prouidence, that his Infidelitie
might be a due puniſhment to theirs, that being Chriſtians,
ſold their deare Country-men to the barbarous enemies
of our Sacred Faith: and ſo in the night ſtole vpon
their Cabbins, when they were moſt ſecure, and ſeized on
them and Pedraça in Iacinta's imbraces; and notwithſtanding
their complaints, and threats, leauing them well bound
and ſure in the Frigot, the ſubtill Pyrat returned with one of
them for his Guide, to ſhew him the Caue where the Priſoners
were; and ſo clapping his whole booty a-boord, before
day he ſet ſayle, ſteering toward the clayie Wharſe of
Argiers; which courſe to their great content, but our poore
Chriſtians their greater diſcomfort, with a proſperous
gale they held on, till towards nine of clocke the next morning;
at what time a forcible Leuant encreaſing vpon them,
the sky was inſtantly couered with blacke clouds, threatning
thoſe that cut the ſurging waues, with an approaching
ſtorme: the angry vvinde ſtill re-inforcing, and the pregnant
clouds, ſpowting out ſtreames of water, the skie
likewiſe with confuſed claps, Thunder and Lightning appeared
all on a light flame. Here, thoſe that ſhould haue
gouerned the ſtorme-drouen Frigot, ſeeing their danger,
and wanting all courage, clapping vp their Oares, and turning
the Sailes to their Stead, they yeelded themſelues to
the fury of the mercileſſe Windes.
               Euery minute the brackiſh waues, gaping to the Seas

very center, ſeemed to ſwallow the vngouerned Barke; in
which, nothing was now heard, but moane, vowes and
promiſes, aſwell from the Pagan Turkes, as miſerable Chriſtians,
increaſing with the night, that now with ominous
darkneſſe came vpon them, together with a terrible diſtruſt
in their afflicted hearts, eſpecially in the faire Iacinta's, who
ſo tooke on (as might haue prouoked Marble to pitie) and
indeed all of vs pittied her, ſuch exquiſite force and vertue
hath beauty, that as well from foes as friends, in the cuſtomary
Lawes of Nature, findes pitie in extremities. Gerardo's
chiefe care in this confuſion, was to quit himſelfe
of a great chaine which he was tyed with, that if the worſt
ſhould happen, whether beeing out of their courſe they
ſhould ſplit vpon Rockes, or being neere the Coaſt, runne
on a Shelfe, he might freely ſhift for himſelfe.
               In this manner, and hurried on with the ſwift Leuant,
with much danger they ſailed backe againe in the Straights
(not being able to helpe it) till towards day-breake; and
ſo the ſtorme a little ceaſing, doubling a point and Cape
called Gata, vpon a ſudden they fell vpon three Ships of
the Armada Royall of Spaine, who toſt vp and downe in
that ſtorme, came alſo thither to take ſhelter. But no ſooner
tooke the Frigot notice of the danger, when preſently with
Oares in hand, they began to tugge amaine from the enemie,
who alſo began to giue them chaſe, the Admirall formoſt
which was one of them. But ſeeing the Prize almoſt
ready to outſtrip them, giuing them a Peece from her forecaſtle,
it lighted ſo happily vpon the Frigot, that together
with the Seas violence in the ſtorme, that made her in many
parts leaky; in a trice the hurt ſhe receiued by the bullet
was perceiued: for the water entred her ſo faſt, that for all
the pittious cryes they within her made, & before the Ship
could come to her ſuccour, in a moment ſhe began to ſinke,

and as many as were in her to periſh; at leaſt all ſuch as with
the affrightment of the ſtorme, had not the happineſſe, to
get into the Shallop; in which, ſome of the Captiues, with
the Barbarians, eſcaped the ſhips danger, & preſent death.
               
                  Gerardo might alſo haue ran the ſame hazard, had he not
couragiouſly foreſeene it; for wiſe men in neither fortune
are depriued of prouident foreſight. But he (as Heauen permitted)
laying hold vpon a Cheſt that was next him, kept
himſelfe vpon top of the ſalt waues, till ſuch time as the Admirall
drew neere; and caſting out a Ropes end, he and the
Granadinian Gentleman were ſaued.
               
                  Gerardo could no longer ſupport the iuſt anger of his
wronged heart, but ſuffered himſelfe at laſt to be vanquiſhed
by his amorous reſentment, by ſeeing her, whom hee
once feruently affected, before his eyes (helpleſſe) periſh:
and though her hatefull leuity worthily deſerued a more rigorous
puniſhment; yet this laſt, which he thought heauen
inflicted by the deuouring waues, ſo compaſſionately moued
him, that he could eaſily haue followed her fate, were it
not too great an ingratitude to his miraculous deliuerance,
from a ſudden death, or at leaſt ſeruile bondage. It was no
ſmall comfort to ſee himſelfe now ſafe amongſt ſo many
valiant Souldiers of his Nation; who, out of a Noble generoſitie,
ſeeing him as it were naked, taking ſome of their
owne cloathes from their backes (not knowing who or
whence he was) clad and vſed him as a Brother or particular
friend: till arriuing at the Port of Saint Lucar, taking
leaue of the Generall & his Noble company, as
alſo of the Granadinian Gentleman, who trauelled
another way, he went on ſhore, as
full of interiour ſorrow, as void of
comfortable reliefe.
               The end of the ſecond Diſcourſe.
            
            
               
               GERARDO:
THE
VNFORTVNATE
SPANIARD.
               The third Diſcourſe.
               
                  THE Tragicall end of Clara, and the lamentable
ſucceſſe of Iacinta, had
brought the vnfortunate Gentleman
to ſuch a miſerable paſſe, that he was
now wholly determined to conclude
the remainder of his vvearied life in
the barren ſolitude of thoſe vntilled
fields, refuſing for euer in his free choiſe, the entiſing and
dangerous aboade in great and populous Cities, ſhunning
and retiring himſelfe from their very names, as the peſtiferous
occaſion and contagious venime, from which his
minde and bodie both ſo worne eſcaped. And certainely
let this reſolution of his be duely weighed, any one may
eaſily conceiue how happily Gerardo fell into ſuch conſideration,
ſince to auoid his diſaſtrous fortune, hee could not

chuſe a fitter remedy, nor on his owne behalfe, take a courſe
more worthy his manly reſolution. But vvho can preuent
his owne vnhappy fate or fortune? who can reſiſt what high
Heauen hath once ordained? So that Gerardo, where hee
moſt forcibly ſtroue to ſhunne the Diuine Planets, there he
grew neereſt to their maleuolent influence, and his owne
misfortunes.
               He ſeemed to be transformed into another Epimetheus,
or one that had taſted of Pandoras box. Well, he had ſcarce
imprinted his ſteps in the ſiluer Sand and Margent of that
Port-inundation of the famous and ſwift Betis, when led by
his ſolitary cogitations, leauing the Citie on his left hand,
he proſecuted a way, in which his free will (an vncertaine
guide) cōducted him ouer Vallies, Paſtures, vn-euen waies,
Hils, and vnacceſſible high Mountaines: till one afternoone
about Sun-ſet (after he had ſpent ſome two dayes
in this kinde of wearineſſe) deſirous to giue a little refreſhing
to his tired Body, and prying to and fro for a conuenient
ſhelter to paſſe the approaching night in, (careleſſe of
any mortall encounter) it was his chance to eſpy a Shepheards
Cottage, which ſeated at the foote of a ſpreading
Oake, made the place and ſituation more delightfull.
               
                  Gerardo was nothing ſorry to haue lighted on ſo good a
harbour, rather out of gladneſſe, willing to draw neere, he
went on, but quickly made a mannerly ſtand, fearing to interrupt
the ſweet Voice of a comely Swaine, that ſat vpon
the euer-greene fruitfull graſſe, was at this time ſinging, or
rather cloſing vp of the Song, to the Muſicke of an ill-ſhap't
Rebecke.
               When fixt Caliſto giues vp her cleere light,
               And Courtiers lye like Lead
               In ſinking Featherbed;
               
               Then make I ready nets for my delight;
               And with the ſmiling morne take glad ſome flight:
               Setting each bait and ginne,
               That Fiſh and Fowles doth winne,
               To nibble (caught and coozen'd with my ſlight.
               Then doe I finde and follow too,
               Grey hound and flying Hare; Ho-loo
               Grey-hound) that ſcarce leau'ſt print in graſse;
               Let then th'ambitious flatt'rer his time ſpend,
               (Waiting) on foote: ſo (like a Taper) end.
               He enuies me (I know) poore Aſse.
               The Song ended, had not our Gentleman beene on his
legges, his eyes broad-waking, and his whole ſelfe leaning
to the Barke of a greene Willow, doubtleſſe his fancie
might (as a fained dreame) haue ſhaped, the Cottage,
Shepheard, Voice, and Song, which ſuted well to his liking,
as hearing it conclude with the praiſe of a Country▪
life: but this was not the greateſt effect it wrought, for
he, tranſported with the tones eleuation, beganne to fall
backe into the remembrance of his paſt misfortunes, and
loſing himſelfe, as being wholly intangled in them, without
all helpe (vanquiſhed by the oppreſsion of his woes)
fetching a deepe ſigh, his ſences forſaking him, hee fell
downe vpon the ſpringing Graſſe; cauſing no ſmall alteration
in the careleſſe Swaine, with the ſudden noiſe of his
fall; who after ſome pawſe, and thinking on the cauſe of it,
caſting the ſhrill Inſtrument away, ſtraight ranne to him
that was falne, and (ſettling his head on his knee) conſidering
withall his goodly preſence, ſolitarineſſe and diſmaying,
could not but much relent, and deſire to know the
party, together with the cauſe of his malady: and ſo leauing
him a while vpon the ground, entring his Cottage,

and bringing out with him, a neat cup of Red Tamari
                        •
                     ke, he
filled it from the Criſtalline Fountaine, which not farre off
ſprung frō the center of a ſtony Rock: and turning ſpeedily
to the fainting Gentleman, ſprinkling part of the water on
his meager cheekes, hee brought him by degrees to himſelfe,
crying out with inward grones, and this following,
with a faint voice. How long, confuſed thoughts! will you
torment my ſad ſoule, repreſenting ſtill her paſt griefes?
More he would haue ſaid, if, taking notice of the charitable
company, and vvondring at his owne ſucceſſe, he had not
turned his commenced ſorrow into gratitude for his ſuccour,
giuing the Swaine due thankes, who with the following
diſcourſe, and a ſmiling countenance, cut him off, ſaying:
Truely, Gallant Youth, your ſudden diſtemper hath
cauſed ſuch a reſentment in my heart, that I could well
beare a part with you, ſo I thought it might any way eaſe
you of the inward griefe, with which I ſee you afflicted:
take courage, man, and (if poſſible) expell the originall of
your ſad complaints; for knowing how hurtfull they are,
you doe ill to admit of their vniuſt company: and (if you
pleaſe) let vs in, to my Cottage; where, as well to me, as to
the reſt of my company (who wil not be long from vs) with
our homely plaineneſſe, you ſhall be heartily welcome, and
this I can freely promiſe.
               
                  Gerardo was not a little pleaſed with ſo louing an offer;
and therefore returning his beſt thankes, to ſo worthy a
courteſie, he thus made anſwere:
               Impute not (courteous Shepheard) my hearts weakeneſſe,
any way to want of courage in my minde; nor that
my late accident grew from a corporall neceſſitie: for ſuch
(were they neuer ſo painefull) my patience vvould weare
them out, or time might in time happely relieue them.
               Onely beleeue and pardon this as a paſſion and infirmity

of my ſoule, in which it is ſo anciently rooted, ſo entirely
the very ſelfeſame thing with it, that it is paſt all remedie,
euen growne eternally incurable. But not all the griefe I
feele, or ſorrow I muſt laſtingly endure, ſhall make me euer
forget: how much I owe to your fauour done me; though
my ſlender abilities muſt leaue to the Superiour powers the
due recompence and ſatisfaction for your good will, in offering
me your company, or rather accepting mine; which
ſince you pleaſe to eſteeme of, my faithfull proteſtation
ſhall be to ſerue you as long as you like to admit me. The
ouer-ioy'd Shepheard would haue replide, when not farre
from the Cottage, fiue men appeared, who drawing neerer,
all gaue a kinde of reuerence to him that was with Gerardo,
which made him perceiue hee was their chiefe (as
true it was) for he had many great flockes, to vvhich thoſe
fiue looked too; and many Herds of Cattell, that grazed vp
and down in the Forreſt where they were. Now all of them
beeing ſet at the doore of the thatcht Cottage, hauing the
naturall pleaſant greene, in ſtead of more olorous Diaper,
they fell cheerefully to Supper, ſo merrily welcoming their
new gheſt, as, his fare had beene leſſe contentfull at a great
mans Table.
               
                  Celio (for ſo hight the worthy Shepheard) could not ſuppoſe,
that ſuch a ſubiect as Gerardo (being adorned vvith
ſo good parts of humanitie) could want the knowledge of
delightfull Muſicke: and therefore offering, when Supper
was ended, the Rebecke to his hand, ſaid, It is not poſſible,
good Sir, that he who is ſo complete, ſhould bee defectiue
in this worthy qualitie; and therefore let mee requeſt you
on the behalfe of theſe preſent, that you be pleaſed to giue
vs a touch of your Muſicall skill and Voice, ſince you haue
heard mine already, and remaine my debtor.
               Here Gerardo ſeeing himſelfe ſo reaſonably obliged, returned

to Celio this anſwere: How-euer my freſh affaires
rather prouoke my minde to dolorous ſighes, then to
ſuſpend them with ſweet accents; yet the deſire my heart
hath to bee confirmed in your friendſhip, ſhall vvinne
ſomething from my griefes to obey you with, confident
that your loue will make vp what wants in skill; and ſo tuning
firſt the Inſtrument, and after his Voice, he ſung this
Dittie, including ſomthing to the company, and the reſt to
his owne miſhaps.
               The rugged Mountaine from a friendly veine,
               yeelds to the greedy Merchant, plenteous ſtore,
               (Eu'n till his bagges be full) of prec'ous Ore,
               Or the Red bloud he drinkes till burſt againe.
               The knottie-footed corne of golden graine
               From yellow neck, and pregnant eare, yeelds more
               To the glad husband-man, then fils his floore:
               (Reward to former paines in plowing tane.)
               Yet doth not gold, the crauing appetite
               Of Merchant cram, nor wheat of grumbling clown:
               For theſe, the more they haue, more couet ſtill.
               Like ſuch, am I: their ſteps I tread a-right.
               For though I reape deſires fruit, yet (caſt downe)
               My good is leſsen'd with increaſe of ill.
               The Song ended, and the ſhort mention of his griefes ſo
begat true ones in him, that, though hee meant to haue
gone on vvith ſome other more pleaſing Ditty, for his new
friends, it was not poſſible for him, (beſides) that they alſo
much taken with his ſweet voice, deſired to re-enioy it. But
ſeeing the iuſtneſſe of his cauſe, they would not ouer-preſſe
him; ſo that growing now ſomewhat late, they betook them
to their reſt; and the next morning, the Shepheards roſe
early, each one to his ſeuerall charge, ſaue Gerardo & Celio,
                  
who preparing Nets for fiſhing, Dogs and Ferrets for hunting,
in ſuch delightfull exerciſes ſpent this day, and alſo
many more.
               
                  Gerardo had cauſed to be made for him, a curious field-garment
of painted wilde-beaſts skins, and now to Celio's
infinite content, liued in thoſe Deſarts as happily, as vvilling
neuer to forget them; till one euening toward night,
leauing Celio toward the higheſt of the Mountaine, driuing
his flockes to ſhade; himſelfe hot and vveary, returned all
alone backe to the Cottage: at vvhich time, amongſt the
thicke ſpreading Trees, there appeared a Woman, vvho
comming neerer to him, made him not a little wonder at
her ſight, as well in reſpect of her tender age and beautie,
as to ſee her all blubber'd, ſad & afflicted, vvhich made him
ſuſpect, that ſomething (ordinarie to vvomen that frequent
Woods) had hapned vnto her, though her true ſignes of
griefe made him thinke it might bee againſt her conſent:
vvhich egged him on the more to know the occaſion that
brought her thus ſolitarily, on foote and ful of ſorrow: and
ſo comming neerer, before he could ſpeake, ſhe firſt ſaluted
him; and Gerardo returning, with his accuſtomed courteſie,
deſired her to ſit downe, and grieued to ſee her ſo diſquieted,
ſitting by her, with gentle ſpeech hee began thus to accoſt
her:
               I ſhould be glad (faire Gentlewoman) that vnlading
ſome part of the ſorrowes that o'reflow your breſt, you
would giue mee an account of them, and the cauſe that
makes you wander in theſe remote deſarts, ſo, without company,
though accompanied with ſuch ſad ſignes, as by
their ſhewes make your griefes moſt important.
               Whilſt the good Gerardo vttered this to the afflicted
Dame, her cleere eyes ceaſed not to ſhead frequent teares,
and her panting heart to ſend forth ſome groanes, till at

length, willing to yeeld an anſwer to him that ſo willingly
expected it, drying the drops from thoſe criſtall ſtreames,
and getting ſome ſhort leaue from her afflictions, with a
ſigh ſent from her hearts bottome, and mournefull tone,
ſhe began.
               If the immenſe ſorrow that euen bereaues me of my ſences,
vvould giue way to my tongue, to expreſſe the cauſe
of it, ſure I am, courteous friend, that your compaſſionate
heart, vvould vvith a new and equall feeling, beare a part
in the preſent paine, vvith which my ſoule is tormented;
and therefore let me requeſt you, for your owne ſake, not
to importune me to the narration; for vvhere all humane
reliefe failes, that can be but fruitleſſe; onely let me intreate
you at the preſent to let mee know how neere I am to any
habitations, and how farre it may bee from this ſhady Valley
to the towne of Ceſarina, vvhere it is fit (for the reſtoring
of my ſad life, if it be poſſible) that I this night arriue. To
vvhich Gerardo, ſomewhat abaſhed at her diſtruſt, replyed:
Moſt beautifull Miſtris, 'twere eaſie to all-pitying Heauen
to effect, that vnder this courſe Weed, and ruſticke Skins
you ſee, ſome noble blood might be incloſed; and a heart,
not onely longing to receiue the demanded fauour, but
prompt and prepared to hazard a life vpon any occaſion, in
which you ſhall employ it; and perſwade not your ſelfe, neither
ſo much as imagin, that the ill you ſpeake of, is ir-remediable;
ſince, liuing, though it vvere in the higheſt extremitie,
there is hope of comfort and reliefe; nor miſprize not
him that thus vnknowne ſhewes you ſo meane an outſide,
ſince many times there is found in the forſaken and wilde
hearbe of the field, that true and healthfull antidote, that
oft in the precious Treacle is vvanting: touching the places
diſtance you aske for, you are much vvide of it; for beſides
the not being able to get, till darke night, into the high way,

you haue from thence a long League and more to Ceſarina:
your beſt courſe therefore, (if you pleaſe) is, to be my gheſt
till morning, and in yonder thatcht Cottage, you ſhall bee
as, vvell entertained; honeſtly welcome. The afflicted
Dame could not ſuppoſe ſuch Phraſe did proceed from leſſe
then a well diſpoſed perſon; and in this thought caſting her
faire eyes vpon him, conſidering well of his ſhape and modeſt
countenance, ſhe gaue credit to her ſuppoſition, and
not diſliking his offer, determined to accept it; and ſo her
bitter moane ſomewhat qualified, ſhee vſed theſe amorous
ſpeeches: Your diſcreet language hath vvrought ſo notable
an effect in my heart, that, vvith it you haue not onely
giuen me incouragement, but vvithall obliged me to what
is ſo conuenient, and (night approching) would haue enforced
me to beg, vvhich I ſhall be glad to receiue, vpon
the aſſurance of the inuiolable good vſage you promiſe me:
and in lieu thereof, that you may not thinke me ſome ſtraggling
houſe-wife, I ſhall knowne make vnto you, the occaſion
of my loſt peregrination through theſe wilde deſarts:
for though the principall motiue admits no earthly comfort,
yet ſure I am the reſt, as acceſſaries, ſhall finde it in
your iuſt commiſeration.
               The noble Citie diuided from her Suburbes by the ſwift
Streame of the renown'd Guadalquibir, is my natiue ſoyle;
where, to my owne proper and others miſaduentures, I
was borne: in my tender infancie. I was bereaued of both
my Parents, yet not wholly an Orphan, hauing in ſtead of a
Father, his Brother (to whom I vvas left) my louing Vnkle,
married at this preſent to a Dame of the Prouince; one,
that as ſhe is well deſcended, and endowed with the beſt
naturall gifts, ſo, ambitious of her infamy and looſe condition;
a very idolatreſſe of her owne luſt, inclined to that only
and her wanton freedome: her diſorderly courſes came

to that ſcandalous paſſe, as gaue ſufficient matter and beginning
to the affliction you now behold in mee: for the
proſecution of her laſciuious appetite, could not ſo ſecretly
be handled, but that the luſtfull and raging loue, ſhe bore
a handſome young Gentleman our neighbour, came to my
Vnkle his notice, and no longer ago then yeſterday, I being
all alone in my chamber, not dreaming of the ielous rage
that poſſeſſed him, (it growing now towards night) I might
ſee him in a ſtrange diſtraction entred where I was, ſo enraged,
that aſwell by his fierie eyes, as bloodleſſe viſage, hee
made knowne ſomething had bred him much diſtaſte; and
I riſing in no leſſe feare to ſalute him, (hauing ſhut my
chamber doore too) and vnſheath'd a ſharpe Ponyard hee
had on, laying next faſt hold vpon me; now almoſt dead in
his armes, ſetting the point of it to my throat, he proceeded
to this frightfull diſcourſe: Were it not for a more vrgent
reuenge I haue in hand, doubt not, vngratefull Clori, (for
this, gentle Shepherd, is my name) but this Dagger ſhould
let out thy accurſed life; and with it that baſe and counterfet
blood of mine, which lurkes in thy ignoble breſt: but
be aſſured of a preſent diſpatch, if inſtantly thou reueale not,
what thou haſt long concealed, the being a worthleſſe witneſſe
of my diſhonour and affront. There is no faining of
excuſes, or pleading ignorance can ſerue turne; ſuffice it, I
know the truth, and not any thy diſcharge can preuaile, nor
will I euer beleeue thee to bee ignorant of the baſe wrong,
thy Aunt, my trecherous wife hath done me; diſpatch therfore
and loſe no more time, then what may be ſpent in my
iuſt ſatisfaction; telling me truly who is the bold adulterer,
that ſpotting the puritie of mine honour, hath robbed mee
of my fame, diſgraced my houſe, ruin'd my reputation, and
bereaued me of my beſt life, by inflicting an euer-laſting
liuing death of diſhonour. My ſoule hearing this, was ſo

amazed, that vnable to reply, or to vnfold my lippes, or
mooue my tongue-tyed Palate, I ſtood a good while in
this aſtoniſhment, till hearing my Vnkle beganne with new
fury to threaten me, caſting my ſelfe at his feet, and crauing
pardon for my ſlackneſſe, (the pale aſpect of my inexorable
Fate blinding mine eyes, and clouding my vnderſtanding)
without more delayes I at length reuealed, what my heart
ſo long before had layed vp in ſilence, by ſatisfying his moſt
certaine ſuſpitions, not hiding the leaſt circumſtance, as wel
touching who the Gallant was, as alſo his egreſſe, and the
laſciuious conuerſation in their diſhoneſt loues. Hauing attentiuely
heard me out, without ſo much as a words reply,
going out by the way he came, and ſhutting my doore on
the other ſide after him, he left me ſo confuſedly penſatiue,
that, fearing ſome wofull end, (for by what I had diſcouered,
I could expect no leſſe) ouercome with this feare, I reſolued
not to expect the euent; and therefore taking the richeſt
of my Iewels, by a window, which (without Grates)
looked to the ſtreet, (the ſheetes of my bed ſeruing mee in
ſtead of a Ladder) without being ſeene by any, I got out of
the houſe and Citie likewiſe in this manner you behold,
with a purpoſe not to haue reſted, till I came to the deſired
Gates of Ceſarina; a towne which belonged to my deceaſed
Fathers elder brother, where I had often beene in the company
of a Couſin-Germane of mine, ſole daughter and inheretrix
to the Owner, whoſe beauty, (thus little to digreſſe
from my Story) hath the iuſt title of moſt exquiſite in all
this Prouince, fertilized by the ouerflowing Betis. But my
cruell Fates would not that this boldneſſe ſhould remaine
vnpuniſhed; and ſo hauing ſome halfe a League from the
Citie, met with a man that was going thitherward, wondering
to ſee me alone, and at ſuch a time of night in the wild
high way, and comming neere vnto me, (repreſenting then,

me thought, my feare of the angry arme and Ponyard
anew) asked, which way I trauelled without company, and
in a Countrey ſo dangerous; and other matters, that neither
my feare ſuffered mee to take notice of, or make anſwer;
till ſuch time as he perceiuing my alteration, comforting
me the beſt he could, vnderſtood of mee which way I
was to go; to which purpoſe moſt honeſtly hee offered mee
his company and ſeruice: ſo bent vpon it, that notwithſtanding
all my refuſals and intreaties, hee would needes
turne backe with me: and ſo going on, began to beguile the
way and tedious night, with merry tales ſo proper, that I
was then glad of his ſoone vnluckie company: for my content
was quickly turned into ſuch a griefe, as will neuer, as
long as life laſts, forſake me. Here the wretched Clori more
outragiouſly falling backe into her former moane, breaking
off (without hearing or admitting the leaſt comfort) ſhe began
to weepe and ſigh afreſh; her teares in Gerardo bred
the like effect, and vnable to abſtaine, he accompanied her
in the ſame paſſion. But ſeeing with the nights approach,
the comming home of the Shepherds might interrupt her
diſcourſe, hee more earneſtly importuned her to the concluſion:
ſo perceiuing the obligation ſhe had to her voluntary
promiſe, with freſh teares, ſhe entred where ſhe left.
               Scarce had we gone two leagues, (as ſaid my trecherous
guide) when finding by my wearineſſe the neceſſity I had of
ſleepe, or perhaps the better to put his damnable purpoſe
in execution, taking mee by the hand, vnder colour of hauing
mee reſt my ſelfe, and bidding mee follow him, wee
ſtrucke out of the way: I (not knowing whither hee would
carry me, nor hauing ſo much courage as to giue him the
ſlip) walked on a good way, till at laſt comming to certaine
breaches of earth, and deepe pits, I might heare the melancholy
noyſe of a Brooke running amongſt the craggie

Rockes, which ſo afflicted my diſconſolate minde, that I
forthwith preſaged to my ſelfe the lamentable ſucceſſe that
did attend me; and in the ſudden apprehenſion of my feare,
turning to my companion, I intreated him, we might paſſe
no further; which indeed ſuted better for his purpoſe then
her ignorance, that ſo fooliſhly truſted her ſelfe with one
ſhe knew not. And this plainely appeared; for aſſoone as
euer he ſaw mee layd downe on the ſandy ground to take
ſome refreſhing, without beeing able, with all my weake
womans defence to helpe my ſelf, or to preuaile, with noyſe,
teares and intreaties, at laſt (the reuengefull ſword of iuſt
Heauen all the while (I know not for what ſecret cauſe)
ſheathed againſt ſo great an offence, and deafe to my hoarſe
cries) I was by him rauiſhed. Neither ceaſed the barbarous
executioner of mine honour ſo, but hauing diſrobed
me of ſome of my beſt apparell, and robbed mee of the
Iewels I inconſiderately carried about me, leauing me as it
were at the laſt gaſpe of my wearied life, he fled, and left me
alſo to my freſh complaints, to demand iuſt vengeance of
heauen and earth for my wrong. But woe is me, my griefes
were ſcattered in the Ayre, or like Characters written on
thoſe Sands, ſince he was gone without puniſhment, and I
remained loſt in this wildernes to bewaile my misfortunes;
which ſhall euer be before mine eyes▪ to cry for reuenge,
and my death to giue them end. And ending her ſtory, ſhe
began againe to ſolemnize it with her teares, Gerardo's diſcreet
perſwaſions not able to dry them; who ſenſible of her
griefe, endeuoured all he might to giue her comfort.
               By this time with darke cold night, the gentle Celio and
his Shepherds approched to the pleaſing ſhelter of their
thatched Cottage; whom, when our Gerardo heard, with a
cheerefull heart he went out to meet them; and giuing them
notice of the new-come Gheſt, they all went with him to

ſalute and welcome her, vvith no ſmall admiration at her
beauty and attire, and (to ſay true) none of them gaue any
great credit to Gerardo touching the cauſe of her arriuall:
rather taking Clori for his Paramour, diſſembling the buſineſſe,
after ſupper they left the Cottage free to them both.
But Gerardo perceiuing this their knauiſh courteſie, began
with deepe proteſtations to ſatisfie them to the contrarie;
but none of all could once preuaile with Celio and the reſt,
to make them in any wiſe returne againe to the Cottage:
ſo Gerardo ſeeing no remedy, making (as well as he could)
a hard Bed, intreated the grieued Clori, to lie downe and
giue her wearied body ſome reſt. But his intreaties could
doe no good vpon the wofull Dame, which much troubled
him; ſo that hopeleſſe of her receiuing comfort by his
meanes, night growing further on, and his eyes ſomewhat
drowſie, he fell faſt aſleepe by her; but had not taken a full
houres reſt, when (the liuely image of Iacinta repreſented
to his dreaming fancie, iuſt as hee ſaw her ſtruggling with
the furious waues:) the heauy ſlumber ſo wrought vpon his
ſences, and his diſquietneſſe was ſuch, that it awoke him,
with the horror and affright that ſuch a ſad remembrance
might produce; in which anguiſh ſitting bolt vp in his bed,
and looking about him for the paſſionate Clori, hee found
her wanting, vvhich not a little affected his mind, doubtfull
whether (belike carefull of her honeſtie, as miſdoubting his
promiſe) ſhe might chance to haue hid her ſelfe amongſt
the neighbouring trees, he ran haſtily out of the Cottage
to ſeeke her, carrying onely with him a ſtrong ſheep-hooke
for his Armes and defence. But no ſooner got hee out of
the ſtrawie Lodging, when he heard the trampling of footſteps,
guided (as he ſuppoſed) toward the high Rockes and
Spring-head of a neere-running Fountaine: Gerardo haſtening
thither, a pretty way from him, eſpied a Bulk going

apace downe toward a Brooke; to which all thoſe running
Springs of the hilles pay their tribute, giuing it the name
of a goodly Riuer, and withall, looking more warily, as
hauing the bright ſhining Moone to helpe him, he might
plainely behold by her womans Garments, that it was
Clori, who made ſo faſt away; and that though he lowdly
called on her, ſhe ſtill held on her courſe, without affoording
an anſwer: which made him (not a little amazed)
mend his pace; and ſo breaking thorow the intricate
boughes, and rough thicket, in a trice hee ouertooke her,
but ſo out of breath, that vnable to ſtay himſelfe, ouerthrowing
her, they both came tumbling downe together;
neither had they ſo ſtopped from falling into the Brooke,
but that Gerardo, ſeeing himſelfe almoſt loſt, with incredible
celeritie maruellouſly recouered himſelfe: yet ſeeing
Clori ſtirred neither hand nor foot, fearing the ſuddenneſſe
of the fall might cauſe this trance, taking her in his armes,
he returned to the Cottage; where laying her on bed, and
kindling ſome dry ſtickes, before the reſt of the company
might be raiſed with the accident, hee brought her againe
to her ſences; but opening her eyes, it was with ſuch grieuous
ſighes, and extraordinary affrightment, that the
poore Gentleman himſelfe euen ſuffered with her: and
thinking verily, that all this in Clori, proceeded from ſome
deſpairefull imaginations, with the beſt language that his
wiſedome could preſent to memory, hee indeauoured to
cheare her, till at length her body wearied, with the continuall
toyle of her mindes burdenſome ſorrow, her delicate
necke ſubiect to the pillow, and her ſelfe to ſoft reſt,
ſhe gaue way to Gerardo (though with more warines then
formerly) to do the like.
               Towards morning they awoke, and being day, roſe; at
what time the faire Clori deſirous to return to her way, and

taking thankefull leaue of Celio and his ſhepherds, accompanied
onely by the ſolitary Gentleman, till ſuch time as
he might ſet her directly for Ceſarina; they both left the
Cottage, and being not long after arriued at the parting
place, Clori would let him go no farther, to the no little
diſcontentment of his noble heart: and ſeeing him ſtil obſtinate
to goe with her, ſhe aduertized him of the danger;
which, by beeing ſeene with her, might happen to him,
if ſo be by thoſe (that in all likelihood were ſent after her
from Seuil) he ſhould be found in her company. Wherefore
Gerardo acknowledging her good aduice (though
much againſt his wil) followed it, taking leaue with teares;
but firſt thorowly inſtructing her, that ſhe might not miſſe
her way; and returning with a ſlow march to his owne,
ere long they loſt each others ſight. Gerardo hauing his
mind ſtill buſied in the poore Dames wracked fortunes,
could willingly haue wiſhed them (if poſſible) added to
his owne, rather then haue heard them as he did, to bee
hers, or now, ſeene her againe all alone, perhaps, ſubiect to
the like miſhap. And in the midſt of theſe pious conſiderations,
vpon a ſudden, her laſt nights fearefull flight came
to his remembrance, and her ouer-earneſtneſſe, to haue
him at preſent leaue her company, (all this reſolued in his
noble breſt; beſides, condemning his vn-manly cowardize,
that for a little feare or reſpect of his owne ſafety, he
ſhould leaue her thus deſperately to her ſelfe) his reſentment
was ſuch, that (ſetting all inconueniences aſide) hee
reſolued to follow, till hee might ſee her ſafe at her iourneys
end: and with this deliberate purpoſe turning backe,
in a moment he got to the place where they tooke leaue;
and paſsing a pretty way further, ſeeing that (as farre as
euer he might diſcerne) he could get no ſight of her, beeing
much troubled, and thinking it vnpoſsible, ſhe ſhould

be gotten ſo farre of her way in ſo ſhort ſpace; ſo blaming
his owne ſlowneſſe; and looking more narrowly vpon the
troden path, he might ſee the print of Clori's little foote;
which hauing traced, as a Guide to his iourney, hee ſoone
perceiued by the Tracke, that ſhee had turned out of the
right way, to a thicket of tall Oakes, neere certaine old and
ruinous walles: wherefore, he falling likewiſe into the ſame
path, had not gone farre in it, when the skie beginning to
waxe cloudie, there aroſe a ſudden and furious guſt of
wind, which blew ſo forcibly towards him, that hee was
ſcarce able to keepe on his way. But he more couragiouſly
animated by ſuch violence, without reſiſtance went on,
and quickly got to the decayed building; where, by one of
the lowermoſt walles, he found ſome of Clori's apparel; and
paſſing further, more, euen all, to her very Smocke: which
he no ſooner beheld, when his grieued eyes began to runne
ſtreames of teares, his heart preſaging ſome diſaſter, and
looking towards heauen, he might ſee before him the wretched
naked body of the mournfull Dame, that as then newly
had deſperately caſt her ſelfe from a ſpreading Oake,
hung in the ayre, by meanes of a ſtrong nooze made by a
ſcarlet Swath-band, that girded her tender Waſte, which
performed the ſtead of a halter.
               Bleſſed heauen! cride Gerardo, with a fearefull voice, Let
not thy clemencie permit ſuch a loſſe of this faire Soule:
and in ſo ſaying, he inſtantly got to the trees top, where vnſheathing
a ſhort wood-knife hee had on, he cut the mortall
knot, and Clori now in her laſt agony fell to the earth,
whither, her fortunate reſtorer comming ſoone after to her,
found that her breath was quite departed, the white and
red of her cheekes turned into muddy, green, pale and bloudie,
and her goodly eyes, euen ſtarted out of the Chriſtall
frame of the ſmooth ſnowie Forehead; the ſoft skeines of

her flaming haire entangled and promiſcouſly diſordred,
and the pure Alablaſter of her yuory necke, breaſt, and
hands, vn-naturally enamelled with her big blewe ſwolne
veines; in fine, ſo ſad and horrid a ſpectacle, as might haue
moued euen thoſe guiltie Rockes, and the wilde Beaſtes
whoſe prey ſhe might haue beene: how much more then,
the amorous heart of Gerardo, who like a Lioneſſe that
would roare life into a dead whelpe, with teares and mourning
ſought to reſtore the deſperate Clori to her ſelfe, Long
hee ſtroue with her, but (in vaine) as he thought, ſince hee
ſawe little hope or poſſibilitie of fetching her, and ſo willing
to celebrate her funerall obſequies with his laſt farewell, he
came ſome-what neerer with his teares vnto her, which (as
Heauen ordain'd) were turned into teares of ioy, for Clori
now opened her eies and (wholly her ſelf) with a weak voice
craued pardon of her Maker, with euident ſignes of a true
ſorrowfull repentance: which the more increaſed, when ſhe
might beholde the Inſtrument of her remedie, who fetching
her Garments to her, and helping her to put them on,
ſhe caſting her ſelfe at his feete, aſhamed of the diſmall accident,
without daring once to looke vp, remained thus
kneeling, forcing Gerardo to the like, who ſeeing her now
in perfect memorie, with a cheerefull countenance entred
into this pious diſcourſe.
               The preſent ſucceſſe, faire Clori, hath ſo amazed me, that
I know not what to conceiue of your deſperate boldneſſe,
which, when I conſider, I cannot but thinke, that, either
you are no Chriſtian, or not the child of Noble Parents; for
the horrour vvhich yet affrights me, giues contradiction to
both: and certainely it can not bee, but your iudgement is
quite loſt, for had it not been plaine diſtraction in you, you
could not haue changed a momentarie diſhonour, for
an euerlaſting immortall infamy, a ſlight diſtaſte, for an eternall

miſchiefe, and your owne weake paſſion, for an inſupportable
puniſhment. For tell me, pray▪ had you thus
died? was your honour one iot the more reſtored, or the
loſſe of your chaſtitie at all ſoldred? the ſtaine, you ſo much
deplore, fetcht out? rather contrary, and with your
worthleſſe dying, your owne honour, and of your whole
ſtocke and linage, had beene irreparably forfeited: and
which ſhould make you moſt ſenſible, is, the danger to
which you expoſed your ſelfe, euen to the very brinke of eternall
baniſhment from the diuine preſence, to a fearefull
Abyſſus, where in immortall flames, you muſt haue paid
the price of your deſperate attempt; from which compaſſionate
Heauen hath beene pleaſed to free you; looke vp
then, vvith grieued eyes, and your hearts inward humility,
returne your deuout thankes for ſo eminent a benefit, ſuch
true Deuotion may giue an end to your miſeries, which
hath oft comforted thoſe, that in others haue beene more
lamentable and grieuous.
               And finiſhing his Diſcourſe, perceiuing that Clori remitted
her anſwere to teares and ſilence, hee thought beſt, not
to giue vvay to any new accident; and therefore intreating
her to take comfort, cheering her vp all he might, and giuing
her his arme for a reſt, they faire and ſoftly walked on
toward Ceſarina, where, by that time the morning was well
ſpent, vvith greater ioy in Clori then might haue been expected,
they arriued; and ſo, hauing not hitherto ſo much
as ſpoken a word to Gerardo, moſt glad to ſee her ſelfe in
her Vnkles towne, ſhee requeſted him to leaue her in ſome
(the neereſt) houſe; and withall to giue him notice of her
arriuall; which Gerardo hearing, not thinking that to be ſo
fitting for him; conſidering in vvhat manner Clori came,
he onely obeyed her in the former, leauing her vvhere ſhe
deſired; and ſo taking his leaue, without further ſtay in

                  Ceſarina, by the vvay hee came, hee went backe to the
Cottage.
               This feare of his, not to ſee Don Antonio (ſo was her Vnkle
called) was not vaine; for though his accompanying
her (conſidering all circumſtances) were worthy of perpetuall
thankes; yet to any that were at firſt ſight ignorant, it
might breed ſuſpition, that it were not to any good intent;
and her Vnkle in likelihood giuing no credit to Gerardo,
ſome great diſaſter happely might haue enſued, though no
ſmall one it was hee ſuffered in recompence of the ſeruice
done the faire Dame; who, hauing cauſed ſpeedy notice to
be giuen to the Lord of the place; and hee hauing vnderſtood
(as you ſhall quickly heare) of her being abſent from
Seuill, immediately with ſome of his ſeruants, came where
his faire Neece expected him: and hauing imbraced her
(diſſembling his ſorrow to ſee her thus alone) he tooke her
into his Coach, and together they went to the Caſtle of
Ceſarina, where, his ſprightly Daughter Niſe ioyfully vvelcomed
her loſt Couſin, renuing with this meeting their
teares for long abſence, which the ſuſpitious Vnkle thought
were ſhead for ſome other occaſion then what was commonly
knowne (though not to Clori) but vnwilling at preſent
more to afflict the ſorrowfull Dame, he forbore to giue
her any account, of the diſaſtrous ſucceſſe of things in Seuill:
that night ſhe fled from thence, where (if you remember)
we left the iealous and cholericke Don Henrique, vvho
hauing ſhut vp Clori in her Chamber, fearing leaſt his
diſhonour by loſing time, ſhould remaine vnreuenged, determining
in his violent thoughts a quicke diſpatch of his
adultrous wife; and finding her careleſſely ſleeping on her
couch, being all alone with her, firſt, he ſtopped her mouth
with a Handkerchiefe, and next, with two penetrating ſtabs
left her breathleſſe. So ſecretly laying her on bed, and drawing

the Curtaines cloſe, hee went downe and commanded
his ſeruants to their beds: and himſelfe faining to doe the
like, accompanied with a valiant truſty Slaue, hee got him
into the ſtreet, leauing firſt a little window in his own chamber
open, the ſigne which as Clori informed him, the deceaſed
Dame vſed to her careleſſe Louer, when ſhe meant
to haue him come to her by a certaine trap doore; to
which he had alſo now gotten a falſe Key: not long after
the luckleſſe Youth, by the ſigne of his owne miſhap was
brought to the ſecure trap, and (ignorant of his Miſtreſſe
and her Fate) was no ſooner entred, when ſurpriſed by
the wronged Don Henrique and his ſeruant, whom till then
lying cloſe he ſaw not, vnable (for they gaue him no time)
for his defence; the ſtrong Slaue laying faſt hold on him,
his Maſter might at pleaſure take his reuenge, who quickly
left him in ſuch eſtate as his Wife, and ſpeedily fetching a
turne or two in the ſtreet to diſſemble the matter, as they
were comming in againe, they ſaw ſheetes hung at the window,
by which Clori had ſlipped downe: vvhereupon haſtning
to her Chamber, miſſing her, her Vnkles heart vvas
vvonderfully afflicted, as thinking that her flight muſt of
neceſſitie diſcouer the fact; ſo, hauing ſecretly ſent out diuers
wayes in her ſearch, and taken ſome of his beſt Iewels
and ſtore of money, he and his Slaue vpon ſeuerall Horſes
tooke their way toward the Kingdome of Portugall; and
with ſuch ſpeed, that though next morning as much vvas
vſed for their apprehenſion, 'twas bootleſſe, as alſo that of
the ſeruants in Cloris ſearch, by vvhom Don Antonio vvas aduertiſed
of the ſucceſſe; vvho at this time leauing her in
his faire Daughters company, going backe to the houſe
where ſhe firſt entred, vvas informed in what manner Gerardo
came with her, and of his garment of painted skins:
Niſe at this time as earneſtly ſought to know from her

Couſin the manner of her vnfortunate iourney, who largely
ſatisfied her, not ſo much as concealing her diſhonour,
onely kept ſecret her deſperate attempt you before
heard of.
               The two couſins were not ſo priuate in their Diſcourſe,
but that a little Page of the houſe, vvas not farre off from
them; who, when Don Antonio returned, told him their
whole conference, ſo that his exorbitant griefe and paſſion,
tranſporting him beyond all iuſt reaſon, without expecting
to be confirmed by Clori, he was fully perſwaded, that he,
vvhich brought her to Ceſarina, vvas Author of the Rape;
wherefore blinded with rage, accompanied by ſome of his
ſeruants lightly mounted, he vvent out after him, and all of
them taking different wayes, they ſcowred the whole country,
bearing perfectly in memory thoſe ſignes that were giuen
them of Gerardo, whom ſome of them ouertooke not
farre from the Cottage, and hauing ſeene him, were ready
to haue trod him to pieces with their horſes (ſuch was their
indignation) but deſirous to bring him aliue to their Mr
they only ſeized vpon him, and bound him faſt with ſtrong
cords: neither could the poore Gentleman by entreaties
learne the cauſe of this their anger, which yet his minde euen
preſaged vnto him, as ſoone as he had parted from Ceſarina;
vvhere (being now carried by theſe men) when he
arriued, he might ſee the whole towne in an vproare, as if
an enemy were neere, and paſſing thorow, they reuiled
him as he went by to the Caſtle, where Don Antonio, without
giuing eare to his diſcharge, or to what Clori would alledge
to free him, (as thinking it was her goodneſſe to ſaue
his life) in ſpight of her and the faire Niſe, that knew well
enough his innocence; he commanded him to be faſt ſhut
in a ſtrong Tower, in the greateſt extremitie that might be.
Here hee remained all the next day, and part of the darkeſome

night, as ſad and mournefull as in any his former miſfortunes;
yet the ſorrow of the two kinſwomen was not inferiour;
and Clori ſeeing that for her ſake Gerardo was in ſo
much danger, could not abſtaine from weeping, in lieu of
that gratitude in which ſhee ſtood engaged; neither could
the louely Niſe affoord her the leaſt comfort: but ſhe her
ſelfe, gouerned by a more particular accident, was not altogether
a ſtranger to Gerardo's miſery; rather (making it
partly her owne) and affectionate to that noble and generous
proceeding of his toward her couſin, more then any
the good parts of his perſon, whom as yet ſhee had not
ſeene or knowne, accompanied her in her dolorous reſentment,
and with a minde as compaſſionate, as a heart reſolute,
not to let him periſh, bidding Clori follow her (hauing
ſignified her intent) ſhe went into the roome vvhere
her father lay, and ſtealing the Keyes of the Priſon from his
beds head, prouided alſo with ſome Viands, to refreſh the
captiue Gentleman, they aſcended to the Tower; and hauing
ſoftly opened the doore, perceiuing their forgetfulneſſe
to come without lights, Clori was forced to go down
for ſome; and in the meane time, Niſe ſitting downe to expect
her, might heare Gerardo with a ſweet voice, and diſtinct
notes, tune this Dittie to the ſound of a great chaine
to which he was tyed, in which he cleerely chanted the tenor
of his misfortunes.
               When yong Aprill once a yeere
               doth with Em'rald face appeare▪
               
               Then giues he to each Riuer he can ſee,
               By Winters froſt impriſon'd, libertie▪
               
               White and yellow flowers are ſeene,
               Trees and Fields are clad in greene:
               The wilde beaſt leaues his den,
               
                  
And Snakes grow young agen.
               Then the mournefull Nightingale
               Sings, or ſweetly ſeemes to rayle
               On him that baſely in a Brothers ſhape,
               Transform'd her by his well-reuenged Rape.
               Thus Beaſts, Birds, and euery thing,
               Ioyes vpon th' approaching Spring:
               But, I, the more reliefe
               I ſeeke, the more's my griefe.
               To vvhich, and his ſad complaints, ſhe gaue an amorous
liſtening: and as his Song ended, Clori was come backe,
vvith a vvhite Waxe Light in her hand, and ſo ſhutting
the doore to them, they both entred in vvhere our paſſionate
Gentleman had newly made an end of his ſinging lamentation;
vvho when he ſaw ſuch comfortable companie
approach, riſing vp vvith all reſpect, vvondring at Niſe's
extreme beauty, but more at her boldneſſe, (yet ſuſpecting
Clori to be the cauſe of her comming thither) turning firſt
to her, he thus began: Neuer, O gracious Clori, could my
minde thinke, that in the troubled Sea of my preſent misfortunes
(you liuing) my lateſt ſhould arriue: eſpecially, hauing
ſuch a Protectreſſe, as ſhee that accompanies you, in
whoſe bleſſed appearance, I am confident, my life ſhal haue
a ſecure Hauen: Onely at preſent, I beſeech you, let mee
know what hath cauſed my impriſonment: for if it be (as I
may gheſſe) for hauing done you ſeruice (though perpetuall)
I ſhall hold it welcomely imploide.
               The moſt beautifull Niſe, all the while Gerardo vſed theſe
ſpeeches to Clori, ſtirred not her faire eyes a minute from
looking on him; and now felt her ſelfe ſo wholly his, that
(feareleſſe of the incōueniencies that might happen, as the
not knowing what he was, & then the vncertainty of his libertie)

loſing all reſpect of honour or reputation, ſhe determined
with her ſelfe to hazzard life a thouſand times for
him: and with this amorouſneſſe, preuenting Clori, ſhe firſt
made anſwere:
               The noble and courteous diſpoſing of your good works
hath ſo much engaged vs; as I on my behalfe, and ſo likewiſe
on my Couſins doe aſſure you, that did not your innocence
make vs doubtleſſe of your good ſucceſſe of libertie,
this very night it ſhould bee beſtowed on you, though
ſome one perhaps might ſmart for giuing it; but you muſt
perforce haue patience, till ſuch time as my Father, her Vnkle
(leſſe paſſionate) allow of your diſcharge, and bee thorowly
informed in the infallible truth; for the ſuſpition only,
that you are the Author of my Couſins wrong, hath
moued him to this hard vſage towards you: wherefore I
moſt earneſtly intreat you, that you be not troubled in any
wiſe; for your griefe (as long as you remaine in this eſtate)
will be as much ours as your owne: to which purpoſe, the
gentle Clori, vſing alſo her beſt Rhetoricke, deſired him to
fall to & eat ſome of thoſe iuncats they brought him, and ſo
leauing him the light, ſomething to leſſen the places diſcomfort;
fearing to be miſſed, they returned, (Gerardo remaining
moſt thankefull for the pleaſing viſitation, which
he alſo had two other nights inſuing) there hapning after
betwixt him and the diuine Niſe, moſt amorous and wittie
paſſages.
               But neither of the gentle Dames could bee ſo gracious
with the incenſed Don Antonio, as to perſwade in the truth
of the Priſoners innocence; rather, hee vvas prouoked to
more choller and fury, by ſeeing in Clori ſo earneſt a deſire
of his freedome; and therefore purpoſing to make
ſhort worke, conferring with a Iudge, whom hee had appointed
for the buſineſſe in Ceſarina, by his aduice (by reaſon

there came no proofes againſt him) they reſolued hee
ſhould be racked; and ſo the fourth day of his impriſonment
hee was brought out; and hauing firſt cauſed the
frightfull engine to be ſet before him, and the accuſtomed
Interrogatories to be read, notifying withall that he ſhould
(if he meant to eſcape the torment) plainely confeſſe the
truth of vvhat he was charged vvithall ſeeing their intent
failed them, and that he profeſſed innocence, they began
to haue him ſtripped out of his cloathes: but vvhen the
newes was brought to the Gentlewomen, their griefe vvas
ſuch, eſpecially Niſes, that ſhee could vvillingly haue inflicted
a deſperate puniſhment vpon her ſelfe, as thinking ſhe
was the cauſe of Gerardo's, for not giuing him his libertie
vvhen ſhe might; ſo inward was the paine they both felt for
him, that his feeling of vvhat vvas threatned by the pittileſſe
Executioner, could not exceed it. But that vvas preuented,
by the opportune and vnexpected arriuall of Don
Henrique; vvho hauing, as he entred the towne, informed
himſelfe of what paſſed at the Caſtle, deſirous to ſtop the
iniuſtice, (ſince by what followes, you ſhall know Gerardo's
innocence) and comming to his Brothers preſence,
(vvith his Slaue that had a man vvith him faſt bound and
manicled) hauing louingly embraced one another, without
proceeding further, hee deſired that his Neece Clori
might be brought vnto him; vvho fearefully trembling,
though incouraged by Niſe, came and threw her ſelfe at his
feete.
               I omit for breuity the reſentment on both ſides; ſo Clori
looking about her toward the Slaue, and the fore-mentioned
party brought Priſoner, as ſoone as ſhee viewed, knew
him to bee the Author of her diſhonour: whereupon vnable
to reſerue, till ſome fitter occaſion, the expreſsion of
her ſtrong paſſion, with a lowd and fearefull ſhrieke ſhee

would haue flowne at the Raſcals face, had not her louing
Vnkle kept her in, and deferred her weake reuenge, till by
Iuſtice it might be inflicted on him, that for ſo deteſtable an
act thorowly deſerued it; to which, iuſt heauen and his offence
brought him, by the way that hee thought beſt to
haue eſcaped; which was, by going toward Portugal, whither
(if you remember) the wrong'd well-ſatisfied Don Henrique
held alſo his courſe; whom this wretched Villaine
meeting neere the Riuer that diuides the two Kingdomes;
and Don Henrique appearing to him to be a perſon of worth
and quality, that in ſuch an occaſion might beſt ſupply his
wants, without more ado, he reſolued to ſell him ſome of
the Iewels he had taken from the abuſed Clori; and in this
thought ſtepping forward, hee propoſed his intent to
Don Henrique, telling him, that want of money forced him
to ſell ſome things of good value, if he pleaſed to buy them:
to which, he, as attentiue as vvilling to haue a good bargaine,
vvhich aſwell in reſpect of his Merchant, as the occaſion
he might expect, in ſuch manner anſwered, That
the traitour ſatisfied, firſt ſhewed him an enamelled neck-Lace
of Gold and Pearles, and next, two curious eare-Rings,
ſet and bordered with rich Emeralds and precious
Rubies, with other pieces neatly wrought; all which, vvithout
further vvitneſſe or information, Don Henrique much amazed,
inſtantly called to mind, to haue ſometime belonged
to his loued Clori: and the ſuddenneſſe of the matter
did ſo perplexe him, that ſuppoſing her vntimely end for
certaine, vvhich that fellow, after hee had abuſed and robbed,
might haue brought her to; vvithout enquiring a
vvord more of him, crying furiouſly out, and ſetting ſpurs
to his ſwift horſes flanke, (the Villaine vnable to auoid him)
he ranne him ouer and ouer; and turning the reines, vvith
the ſame ſpeed the ſecond time trampled on him; leauing

him ſo bruiſed and vvounded, that he vvas not able to ſtirre
hand or foot: and ſeeing him in this taking, vnwilling, till
he knew vvhether he had left Clori aliue or dead, to make
an end of him, commanded his faithfull ſlaue (vvho aſtoniſht,
beheld vvhat paſſed) to alight and bind him ſtrongly;
and ſo leauing the maine rode-way, & ſhadowing thēſelues
amongſt certaine ſpreading Okes, Don Henrique threatning
the fellow to kill him, if he confeſſed not the truth, demanded
of him, vvhat became of the Owner of thoſe Iewels;
vvhich the fearefull vvretch ſatisfying, telling him all that
paſſed, and how Clori purpoſed to goe toward Ceſarina,
vvithout ſtaying a minute longer; the valiant ſlaue by his
Maſters command, ſetting the fellow athwart the Sad
                     •
                  le
before him, they returned in all haſte thitherward, and in
three dayes came to haue a ſight of Clori. And now Don
Antonio's cruelty vvas vvell aſſwaged, & knowing the originall
of the offence, he thought fit to abſolue the poore priſoner
of his vniuſt accuſation: ſo Gerardo (after he vvas free)
giuing due thankes to Heauen for the fauour done him,
making firſt his excuſe to Clori, taking both her Vnkles aſide
in priuate, he gaue them, vvithout any reſeruation, entire
notice, of the horrid and ſtrange ſucceſſe of her deſperate
reſolution in the ſolitarie Forreſt, deſiring them in
fine, that out of the care of their pure affections, they would
take ſome courſe for their Neeces important remedy, from
her ſelfe he vnderſtood, that ſhe would be willing to end her
dayes in ſome religious Monaſtery.
               When the two louing brothers heard this, acknowledging
how much they ſtood indebted to Gerardo, and the
harſh recompence he had receiued, with noble and compaſſionate
teares, ſtriuing who might firſt imbrace him,
they heartily craued pardon: the like alſo did Clori, as hauing
moſt reaſon to be ſenſible of his misfortunes: in the

meane time they commanded, that the wretch ſhould bee
put in Gerardo's Tower, from whence hee was not many
dayes after brought out, and diſpatcht to his Graue. And
dinner being now ready, with equall ioy on all ſides, eſpecially
of the peereleſſe Niſe, they ſate downe to the Table,
giuing the beſt place to the vnknowne Gentleman, ouerruling
his refuſall with their courteſie; which the thankefull
Brothers in ſuch manner expreſſed, that both at dinner time
and afterward, they extraordinarily importuned him to remaine
in their company, and to leaue the ruſticke Shepherds,
and rurall life: the gracefull Niſe too, adding her intreaties,
wrought ſo effectually, that with the ſweetneſſe of
her earneſt courteſie, ſhe brought him from his ſolitary reſolution:
and therefore, obliged aſwell by thoſe ſeuerall
inuitements, as ſuppoſing alſo, that as much in Countrey
as Citie, his misfortunes were euery where the ſame; he accepted
the fauourable offer, giuing from this inſtant, new
beginning, to his third laſt Tragicall Diſcourſe, of his Hiſtories
firſt Part.
               To the ſeuerall ioy and applauſe of Don Antonio, his Brother,
Clori and Niſe, was the pleaſing intertainment of their
new Gheſt admitted, who to giue ful content to thoſe Gentlemen,
(that though they knew him not, gheſſed at his
woorth) muſt needes now change his paſtorall Weedes,
and ſute himſelfe to the faſhion of the preſent times; with
which ſudden, and wel-ſhap't brauerie, hee increaſed in the
gallant Niſe her pre-inflam'd affection; whoſe Father with
all poſſible demonſtrations of loue, wiſhed him to make vſe
of him, his houſe, and all his as his owne; but the preheminence
in this particular belonged more to the affectionate
gentlewoman, which Gerardo perceiued wel in her cōtinuall
care of him, though he thought beſt not to take any notice
to her of her kindneſſe, and his owne obligation, as long as

the iuſt eſtimation of both liued thankfully within him, and
ſo outwardly (yet vnwillingly) preferred Don Antonio's
offers: which faſhion of his, by her that ſo much affected
him, was held but for a cold, if not vngratefull, correſpondence.
               This honeſt wary proceeding of Gerardo's, ſtirred vp in
the blind enamoured Niſe, a vehement ſuſpition, that
(doubtleſſe) the vnfortunate Clori, being her Louers hearts
treaſure, was alſo the occaſion of his diſſembling, or (which
ſhe no better eſteemed) deſpiſing contempt; which ielous
thought, without further ground, ingendred in her vnquiet
boſome, finding the flame to increaſe, and wholly confirming
her opinion, ſhee determined to make knowne her
beguiled imagination to Gerardo, who (as you heard)
ſought by all meanes to baniſh his mind from any ſuch imployment,
diſpoſed rather to his own death, then to proue
the executioner of his reputation; and therefore forbore
all he might all incounters with Niſe, but ſo many were
preſented by her, that in the end her importunate deſire
vanquiſht him in a place and occaſion as forcible, as neceſſarie,
to declare himſelfe in. Niſe helping on with her diſcretion,
by the meanes of a wittie inuention of paſſe-time,
which we call Purpoſes: as ordinarie, as generall, eſpecially
in ſuch frollicke and mirthfull aſſemblies, as that which was
at length gotten together, in a faire cleare night, about
ſome two moneths after Gerardo had paſſed part of the tedious
cold Winter, in ſuch like amorous paſſages at Ceſarina:
about which time Don Henrique with good aduice,
hauing taken a Iourney, and preſented himſelfe at Court,
(which not long ſince, by his Maieſties reſolution, was reſettled
in the more auncient and better ſeat Madrid) Gerardo
thought fit, making him acquainted with his loued brother
Leoncio, to write alſo by ſo ſure a meſſenger, and giue

him notice of many troubles and misfortunes; which
newes was no leſſe welcome to him, then that, of finding
him aliue in the firſt Diſcourſe at Segouia; of whoſe brotherly
gladneſſe Don Henrique reaped the beſt fruit: for
Leoncio, willing as well for his owne deſerts, as his brothers
ſake, to ſhew him courteſie, vndertooke his buſines, which
he purſued with ſuch care and diligence, that in a ſhort
time (though not without great oppoſition) he abſolutely
got him freed: where leaue we them, and in the interim,
proſecute the mentioned intent of our ſport, in which the
waggiſh Louer cunningly kindles the ſoft fire, that at laſt
ſcorched the melting Niſe's heart; who hauing (as is ſaid)
on Purpoſe formed the Play ſo called, ſetting Gerardo betwixt
Clori and her, and other three Damoſels her maides
in the like ranke, the ioyfulſt that might be, to ſee her ſelfe
ſo neere her ſoules Owner, turning to him, and telling the
Purpoſe ſoftly in his eare, ſhe gaue beginning to the ſport,
Gerardo and Clori ſeconding, and ſo the reſt of the company,
till (hauing gone round) it came to the gracious Niſe's
turne; who reuealing alowd the Purpoſe, diſpoſed it thus:
               
                  If euer I my Purpoſe firme
                  Change, may Loue of life bereaue me.
               
               And Gerardo with a wel-becomming neglect, in like maner
alowd made anſwer:
               
                  His fierce torments neuer leaue me,
                  If that opinion I confirme.
               
               And the iocund Clori, with a countenance (differing
from her vſuall looke) ſmilingly vttered the two enſuing
verſes:
               
                  Thoſe perſons that vngratefull be,
                  What puniſhment haue they deſeru'd?
               
               
                  
To which, the firſt Damoſell thus:
               
                  Such as a curſt frowne hath reſeru'd,
                  Forgetfulneſſe and Ielouſie.
               
               And the ſecond more pittifull, ſmilingly ſaid:
               
                  Grieuouſly hath he offended
                  Againſt Loue, whom you ſentence thus.
               
               And the third replying, concluded the Purpoſe:
               
               
                  Nay, neuer be propitious
                  Vnto them, will not be mended.
               
               
                  Gerardo well perceiued, how for the nonce they had
contriued the artificiall ſport; but ſeeing the paſſionate
Gentlewoman, prepared to a ſecond bout, giuing his eare
to her, his thoughts left roaming for the preſent; ſo the ſecond
Purpoſe began, which paſsing round as the former,
the carefull Niſe declared alowd, ſaying:
               
                  With Loue, Faith, Hope, ſhall you obtaine
                  Soone, a glorious victorie.
               
               To which, the pre-experienced Gerardo, thus:
               
                  I, but with in my memorie,
                  A bloody change doth yet remaine.
               
               And Clori that ſmelt their drift, went on:
               
                  Harbours are not euery one
                  Vnto ſtormes ſubiect: ſome are bleſt.
               
               And the firſt Damoſell ſeconding her, ſaid:
               
                  Thoſe that I eſteeme the beſt,
                  Are Good-will, and Occaſion.
               
               And the ſecond thus proſecuted:
               
                  I know who by the locke of haire,
                  Captiue comes to ſet her free.
               
               To which, the third replying, concluded (as formerly)
the ſport:
               
                  Let ſuch a one ſeeke death for me,
                  Like Abſalon hang in the ayre.
               
               
                  
And prolonging the ſport yet a little more, ſhe that began
the Purpoſe, hauing paſſed it round, ſpoke out:
               
                  Deſire in me a Martyr is,
                  Loue, the Executioner.
               
               And Gerardo anſwered with his wonted careleſneſſe:
               
                  Let me die, if I once auerre,
                  What the moſt conſtant 
                        •
                     old in this.
               
               Then the ſprightly Clori:
               
               
                  In the ſelfe-ſame opinion,
                  Mens reputations ſtill ſhall liue.
               
               The firſt, next anſwered in her ranke:
               
                  But we are faultee, ſince we giue
                  Them hopes by fond affection.
               
               To which, the ſecond ſatisfied with her owne opinion,
with a pleaſant ſmile thus replied:
               
                  The remedie for this is plaine;
                  Let vs our paſsions not reueale.
               
               And the third purſuing, thus clozed vp the whole ſport:
               
                  Ah, but, a Loue-thought to conceale,
                  Nothing will ſerue, no helpe humane.
               
               In this manner they ſpent the greateſt part of the night;
in which, and the artificiall vaile of the Play, there happened
betwixt Gerardo and Niſe remarkable paſſages, ſhee
continuing her affections more ſecurely, leſſe ielous of her
Couſin, and he his wary behauiour, to Niſe's no leſſe torment,
to ſee her ſelfe treated with ſo free a neglect, without
receiuing in a long time, the leaſt ſhew of comfort, or
any occaſion to make her thinke Gerardo awhit ſenſible of
her paſsion for him: and at this time the deuoted Clori,
preſsing her Vnkle Don Antonio to the accompliſhment of
her religious deſire, to her Couſin Niſe's exceeding ſorrow,
(in reſpect of the ſolitude ſhe ſhould by her abſence
ſuffer) was carried to a Monaſtery of Nunnes in Seuil, in

which iourney our Gerardo was to accompany her, together
with her loued Vnkle; and before his returne from
thence, the deſired, and no leſſe gratefull newes of Don
Henrique his liberty came to his notice, written by the noble
Leoncio, who alſo prepared himſelfe, to returne with
him to Andaluzia; inuited, not onely by the gladſomeneſſe
of ſeeing his Brother, but alſo to render his due
thankes to the noble Don Antonio, for his free entertainement;
who now hauing ſeene his Neece placed, made no
longer ſtay in Seuil, but returned to his Caſtle, to make preparation
to receiue the new-expected Gheſts: and Gerardo
alſo (by mutuall conſent) meant to remaine awhile after
him in the Citie, to prouide himſelfe of ſome neceſſaries
for certaine feſtiuall Triumphes they ordeined: which effected,
and ſummoning ſome kinſmen and friends of Don
Antonio's, that vpon notice giuen them of the time, they
might repaire to Ceſarina; one after-noone about Sun-ſet,
he began his iourney thitherward; but had ſcarce trauelled
a flight-ſhoot from the Cittie Gates, when, foure men
croſſing his way, and one of them clapping faſt hold on the
reines of his Nagges bridle, bade him alight; letting him
know, that they were Searchers belonging to his Maieſties
Cuſtomes in that place, and that they were to performe
their Office; which he hearing, preſently forſooke his Saddle,
giuing them leaue to view his Port-manteau; but they
demanded to haue it opened, and conſequently the key;
which he (ignorant of the Cuſtome) was ſomewhat ſlacke
in deliuering. But conſidering there was a neceſſitie of ſo
doing, and loth to reſiſt their Authority, (though he might
thinke it to be ouer-rigorous) hee beganne to vnbutton his
Doublet, diſcouering a faire Chaine of Gold; at one of
whoſe Linkes the key was faſtened, which cauſed no ſmall
couetouſneſſe in the promoting beholders, that ſtraight

willed him alſo to take that off too, and this with ſuch
haughty language, and imperious proceeding, as the vnſufferable
moleſtation cauſed the good Gentleman, careleſſe
of the aduantage of their oddes and Office, retiring
two or three ſteps backe, to remit to his hand and
Sword, the correction of their inſolent behauiour.
But they beeing foure, and (as ſuch knaues vſe to bee,
ſtrongly armed) Gerardo's life vnder-went ſome hazzard.
All that from the beginning paſſed, a yong Gentleman, no
leſſe in wardly couragious, then outwardly to ſee to, not
farre off beheld: who, ſeeing the equitie and iuſtice of Gerardo's
cauſe, withall, his danger, inſtantly made vp cloſe to
him; and nimbly folding his Cloake ouer his left arme,
vvith his Sword in the other hand, ſo animated Gerardo
with his aſsiſtance, that hee, with new and freſh Valour
(though wounded) ſeeing his friend like a ſecond Alcides
beſtir himſelfe among the Searchers, recouering his loſt
ground, and ſticking cloſe vnto him (they quickly put my
Gentlemen to flight:) and hauing hurt three of them
ſhrewdly, the reſt ſhewed them a faire paire of heeles. So
for feare of the worſt, the vnknowne friend cauſing Gerardo
to ſheathe his Sword, taking his Horſe by the reines
bade him follow him (which he did, and ſo ſpeedily) that,
though the field was ſoone full of people got together in
an vprore, they were in ſafety, by croſsing the Riuer in one
of the many paſſage Boates, that ordinarily attend thereabouts.
               
                  Gerardo was not a little ſatisfide; for though he had loſt
what he carried about him, yet it could nothing haue grieued
him, in reſpect of hauing gained ſuch a friend as was
with him: and by this time ſeeing themſelues a good diſtance
from the famous Sub-vrbs of Triana, and free from
all danger, hee claſped his thankefull Armes about his

friends necke, and with a gladſome countenance thus
(proceeding) ſaid, Truſt me, Valiant Sir, I may well preſume,
to haue in mine armes at this inſtant, the greateſt
courage that mine eyes haue beheld; and to which, with
iuſt reaſon, I muſt acknowledge my ſeruice and ſelfe perpetually
bound; and therefore I beſeech you, that to deliuer
me of my ignorance, I may know, by knowing you,
to whom I muſt owe the life I at preſent enioy. So ſlight
a courteſie (replide the valiant Gentleman) deſerues not
ſo high an extolling: it is ſo ordinarie and naturall to my
condition, to take part with the weaker party (chiefely
where there is right) that had you knowne mee longer,
you might before now haue beleeued it; neither need you
therefore be now curious of thankes, for what is no noueltie,
but cuſtomarie; rather omitting this, I ſhal eſteeme
as a fauour, that reckoning this vnluckie day, for no beginning
of your iourney, you vvill deferre it, and returne vvith
me, where at a poore lodging of mine in this City you ſhall
be (howeuer entertained) faithfully welcomed. And ſo perceiuing
Gerardo's face all bloudy, thinking him to be much
vvounded, he preſſed him with his intreaty more earneſtly;
and he vvas no whit miſtaken, for the other had in the late
skirmiſh, receiued a cut in his head, at vvhich he voided ſo
much bloud, that he began to finde himſelfe ſomewhat ill
at eaſe with it, vvhich inforced him to accept of his new
friend his noble and courteous offer; vvith vvhom (after
thankes giuen) he returned to his friendly manſion, where
by a dainty Dame (vvhom hee after vnderſtood to bee his
friends Miſtris) he was louingly welcomed, ſoftly lodged,
and his wound cured as carefully, as had he beene with his
abſent Mother.
               Here Gerardo reſted fifteene dayes; in which time hauing
ſufficiently diſcerned the good parts of his new friend, and

ſatisfide with them, diſcoured his paſt diſaſters, and being
more importuned, gaue him a ſtrict account of all the particulars,
inuiting with this freeneſſe Arcenio (ſo was the noble
Gentleman ſtiled) to the like, and to muſter vp the ſucceſſes
of his life, ſo many, ſo miraculous, that were they
proper to this Tragicall Hiſtory, would proue no leſſe pleaſing,
then pittifull.
               But, my principal ſcope of breuitie being to goe on with
our maine Subiect, the Reader may diſpence with my
ſlackneſſe: onely bee pleaſed to know, that the beeing a
branch of one of our Spaines Nobleſt Families, was the leaſt
of Arſenio's excellencies: for his perſon, hee was valiant,
wiſe, quicke of wit and apprehenſion; one, that by reaſon of
many notable miſaduentures, and thwarts of Fortune, had
euer liued from his natiue Countrey, and as concealedly as
in the ſame kind our Gerardo. The two hauing now ſettled a
ſtraight League of friendſhip, Gerardo making knowne his
abode in Ceſarina, and the future triumphs that were there
preparing; together, how ill his abſence would bee taken
by Don Antonio (though he had ſent him word of the paſt
accident) ſorry to leaue his friend, taking firſt leaue of the
diſcreet Amaranta (ſo was Arſenio's Miſtris called) hee was
by him accompanied a long mile out of the Citie; vvho
after ſeuerall proteſtations for their due correſpondence, returned
thither; and Gerardo, where he was iuſtly expected,
eſpecially, by the faire diſdained Niſe.
               
               Some three dayes after, he arriued at Ceſarina, vvhither
alſo came iuſt at the time Don Henrique and Leoncio, vvith
whoſe ioyfull meeting the true brotherly affection of the
foure Gentlemen was really deciphred; but more exquiſitely
in Leoncio and Gerardo, who now wholly bent vpon
the approaching Shewes and Triumphs, to the generall
mirth and gladneſſe of all, accompanied by Leoncio, the

two affectionate brothers, and many other Gentlemen
their friends, that at ſuch ſolemnities vſe to reſort from the
remoteſt parts, hee rode out of the Caſtle one faire cleere
night amongſt others, hee and the reſt in an Encamiſada or
Night-Maske, attended with many ſhrill-ſounding Inſtruments;
to whoſe ſound (after the Troope had each paſt his
Carreere) a Page that went before him in the fitteſt and
moſt eminent part of the great Market-place of Ceſarina,
ſet vp a bright ſhield, at which the enſuing Challenge was
fixed.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           THE CHALLENGE.
                           The vnfortunate Knight, alias, Spaniſh Gerardo, to all
Knights to whoſe notice the preſent Challenge ſhal arriue, makes
knowne, that, within twenty dayes, from this preſent, he will in
this place, and in publike Carreere with three courſes at the
Ring, maintaine; that the fraile change and inconſtancie of women
paſt and preſent, hath beene, and is, greater then their
firmeneſse, and that this he will make good with the conditions
following, (viz.) That the Knight, who by ſentence of the Iudges
ſhall loſe, be bound to ſubſcribe to this his Tenet: and that
the Knight likewiſe, or Aduenturer, to whoſe good fortune the
Prize and Victory may happen, ſhall receiue from him, as a due
reward for his merit, a rich Diamond.
                        
                     
                  
               
               (This done) in the manner they came, with great ſolemnitie
they returned; accompanying the Challenger to his
lodging; where leauing him, all of them went ſeuerally to
their owne, to prouide themſelues againſt the prefixed
time, being the firſt of the flouriſhing moneth of May; till
when the carefull Niſe ſpent the ſhort houres in workes and
imbroideries, enriching with her owne nimble hand, diuers

conceited pieces of brauerie for her ſqueamiſh Louer; who
hauing alſo neere the time cauſed the Liſts to bee ſet vp in
the place; (and all things neceſſarie performed) he ſpent the
moſt part of the dayes in practiſing to make himſelfe
cunning, and aſſure the honour of the triumphs to his victorious
Arme, which being at length at hand, there wanted
no concourſe of the better ſort, and infinite numbers of others,
as had they been in ſome great and populous Citie,
euen in the Court it ſelfe of our moſt Catholike Monarch.
               'Twas towards the midſt of day, when from the high
Caſtle of Ceſarina, a peale of great Ordnance beganne to
let fly, with ſuch a frightfull thundering noiſe, that a leſſer
made in the ſightly place by two hundreth Harquebuziers
could not be heard, nor the cheerefull Volley, that after a
well ordered skirmiſh, they beſtowed vpon the luſty Challenger:
vvho attended with the ſound of diuers lowd Inſtruments,
was now making his approch and entrance.
               There paſſed before him in comely array an hundreth Ginitiers
of the braueſt on all that Coaſt, armed in their
Steele-coates, white Shields, ſmooth Taffata Skarfes, liſted
with ſiluer, and their Launces with little ſtreamers of the
ſame; all which, the Infanterie hauing cleered the Place,
began another no leſſe well-performed skirmiſh, and concluding
it, with a winding wheele-about, diuided in two
ſquadrons and ſeuerall Rankes, they gaue way to twelue
huge Sumpter-Moyles to come in, which were loaden
with curious Launces, their cloathes which couered them,
being Ruſſet Veluet, embroidred with ſiluer, with Gerardo's
Armes in the middeſt: and hauing paced about, they made
a ſtand iuſt before a Tent of Ruſſet Damaske, neere vvhich
the Launces were taken, and reared vp, and ſo the beaſts
making roome by their abſence, the place was taken vp by
twelue well-ſhap't light Horſe, that with their ſumptuous

furniture had each a Lackey to attend them; whoſe Liueries
were Ruſſet Sattin, Pane-hoſe with white Leather, ſleeueleſſe
Ierkins, and doublets of the ſame colour'd Satten, Ruſſet
Hats, feathers white, after whom came in foure and
twenty Gentlemen extremely Gallant that accompanied
the Challenger: before him (as Sticklers) went his brother
Leoncio and Don Henrique, both clad in rich Tiſſue, the
ground Ruſſet, Plaine Caps, and Plumes white and Ruſſet,
in ſuch ſtate, as ſeemed to obſcure the couragious Challenger,
who came in vpon a Damſon blacke Steed, like another
Caeſar, clad in the Roman habit like one of them, his colour
Ruſſet, Sattin richly embroidered with ſiluer, ſo
curiouſly interlaced and wouen, as more could not from
Art be expected: in his right hand he bore a ſhort Truncheon
ſtudded with ſiluer, and on his lofty vncouered
browe, wore a Crowne of mournefull Cypreſſe, his Horſe
Trappings were alſo Ruſſet, imbroidered as aforeſaid, his
bitt Maſſie ſiluer: no leſſe, his head Armour: Plumes ruſſet
and white, with a praunce ſo light and ſo lofty, that he ſeemed
to be rather all Aire, then to giue the leaſt touch to the
earth. Then followed ſixe other cole-blacke Horſes, that
drew after them a glorious Triumphant Chariot, behinde
which came ten or twelue Gentlemen, that in equall brauery,
being the Rere-ward of the Stately Troope, ended that
ſhew. The Chariot was blacke, diapred with Starres (as
bright as the mornings) ſiluer both within and without; in
midſt of which, on a high Throne that tooke vp the whole
Chariots breadth, and within that, vnder a Triumphant
artificiall Arch, was a goodly Statue of a moſt beautiful woman,
clad in a long Aegyptian Robe, ſet and garniſhed with
a world of Crownes, Scepters, Myters, and Perſian Tiaras,
ſo linked and wouen together, that framing a moſt curious
piece to the eye, plainely appeared to bee the feared and

adored Deity, which the Idolatrous Gentiles call Fortune,
as her Motto gaue to vnderſtand, which ſhe held in her left
hand, written in a Red and ſiluer Streamer, as thus:
               
                  I, vnconſtant Fortune am
                  Changeable, becauſe a Woman,
                  Euer falſe, but true to no man.
               
               Her right hand was fixed; and hanging at it a Siluer
Wheele, ſhe ſeemed to raiſe vp toward her, a dead Knight,
clad in the ſame colours that Gerardo; the Motto or Epitaph,
which in a thinne parchment hee carried in his right
hand, was ſuch:
               
                  Of my fall I reſt aſſur'd,
                  And had therefore rather dye,
                  Then, to fall againe, mount high.
               
               This Motto was throwne in ſeuerall Parchments vp and
downe the place, though none ſo well vnderſtood the
meaning, as the apprehenſiue Niſe, who betwixt Celia and
Leonora, two of her kinſwomen of wonderfull beauty, together
with many ſtranger Dames, and of Ceſarina, ſate in
a coſtly hung roome; and (though the weather were parching
hot) of it ſelfe ſhadie, or as if whilſt Niſe was there,
Sol were not willing to approch, leſt from an eye of hers,
his ſplendour might receiue a taint. Clad ſhe was in ruſſet
Sattin cut; but ſo, that through each of the ſlaſhes, the
inſide and lining ſhewing to be rich Cloth of Siluer, made
them ſeeme Artificiall flowers, whoſe midſt of each was
as it were budded with a fine Pearle; the lacing and Borders
were ſubtilly inter-wreathed with ſiluer Purle, and
the Pearles in conuenient ſpaces ſet betweene. Her head
                  
                     •
                  yre
no leſſe curious then coſtly, diſcouered the moſt, and

hinder part of her haire, kept ſmooth, in ſtead of a Hairelace,
with a rich border of precious Stones; and thoſe golden
skeines, ſuppli'd the want of a Caule, which had ſhee
worne, Phoebus might haue miſſed thoſe Locks of hers to
enuy at.
               The deiected Niſe was ſo melancholy, diſtaſted with her
cruell Louers opinion, that the braue Challenger, in her
ſorrowfull countenance might eaſily reade the Story of her
woe: and ſo (though hee knew not how any more to loue)
yet as oft as he looked vpon her ſadneſſe; his heart vvould
prompt him to ſome new way of reſentment: he could not
but inwardly accuſe himſelfe of ſome cruelty, in vvhich new
entertain'd thought, paſſing round about the place; and
hauing performed the accuſtomed ſalutations to the Ladies,
he made a ſtand at his faire Tent; directly oppoſite
to which, on a large Scaffold, couered with rich pieces of
Tapiſtry and Damaske, of ſeuerall colours, ſate the Iudges,
to vvit, Don Antonio and two other Gentlemen of his kindred;
and ſomewhat beneath them, vnder a State of Cloth
of Gold, ground Ruſſet, ſtood a goodly Cup-board, beſet
with many rich Iewels, and on the vpper part, a garniſh of
Siluer and gilt Plate, and aboue that vppermoſt of all, the
rich Diamond ſet in a ioynt Ring of Gold, as the Victorious
Aduenturers knowne reward. And in the meane time,
till ſome one might approach, Gerardo, alighting, ſate him
downe in an embroidered Chaire, which was placed ready
for him at his Tent doore, to the no ſmall blitheſomeneſſe
of thoſe that beheld his ſtately entrance.
               The foure and twenty Gentlemen, and twelue laſt, that
accompanied him, ſettled themſelues in order by the Tent
ſide, forming a beautifull and goodly ſquadron, hauing behinde
them the Muſicke and lowd-ſounding Inſtruments,
which came in vvith the Challenger.
               
                  
And not long after a noiſe of Drumme and Trumpets,
they might behold a troope of Gallants entring at one ſide
of the place, all well mounted, but with their ſtirrops at
length contrary to the Ginetiers, and armed like men at
Armes, their armour ſo bright-carued and cunningly
wrought, that each appeared a moſt cleere Criſtall looking-glaſſe:
Their Standerd was carried before them,
whoſe colour and ſtuffe vvas blue Damaske, the fringe
Gold, with a ſmall Scutcheon in the midſt, and in that,
embroidered, the knowne Armes of Ceſarina's Lords, being
two Caſtles in a field Azure, a ſtrong chaine of Gold,
hanging from each, to which a Lyon Rampant crowned,
was faſtened by the gorge. Next, followed a triumphant
Chariot, ſo wrought, that it ſeemed to be really pure gold,
in whoſe corners & quadrangle were liuely ſet out the metaphoricall
loues of the nice Daphne, and god Apollo: within
the Chariots ſelfe was heard a ſweet conſort of well-tuned
Inſtruments, whoſe pleaſing ſhrilneſſe much gladded the
hearers; and on the top of a middle Arch, was placed a
Globe or world of Gold, and vpon it the feared little-Wagge
Cupid, iuſt as the Ancients paint him, naked, blind-fold,
in his hand a Turkiſh Bow with a ſharpe Arrow, that
drawn to the head, ſeem'd to aime at the breſt of a Knight,
that came after the Chariot, muſtring out the ſeuerall braueries
of his gallant perſonage, vpon a ſwift Dapple-grey.
He was cladde in a ſtrait Cote of Cloth of Gold azur'd, ſet
thicke with Buttons and Loopes of Gold, a Walloon Hat
of blew Taffata, couered with Gold-Twiſt, and high blew
Martinet feathers; with which, and other Plumes the Horſe
had his proud forehead neatly tricked vp, his Trappings
being ſutable in ſtuffe and colour with his Owner: who was
ſoone knowne to be the valiant Lauro, Nephew to Don Antonio,
deſigned by him to be his daughters Bridegroome,

though ſhee at preſent were farre enough from ſuch a
thought. Lauro preſumed vpon being her true Louer, and
his owne affection; and the more, by how much he perceiued
Niſe ſought to blot him out of her remembrance,
whoſe contemptfull neglect, wrought matter ſufficient of
raging ielouſie in his inflamed breſt, which was now grown
to a height, by ſeeing her weare the ſame colours with Gerardo.
Lauro was accompanied by twelue other Seuillian
Gentlemen, that rode vpon their dapple Ginets, with Trappings
and Plumes ſutable to thoſe of their Aduenturer;
and they in their paned Hoſe of blew Sattin, the ground,
Cloth of Gold; Ierkins, Clokes, and Cappes, of the ſame
coloured Veluet, laced, & fringed with Gold; who as they
paſſed vp and downe the place, caſt this Motto from them,
being the ſame that Lauro wore on the midſt of his breſt, ſet
in a little Plate of Gold:
               
                  This day, the firmeneſſe I defend
                  Of my faire Miſtris, though ſhe be
                  Firmer to kill, then pittie me.
               
               With great acclamation the giddie Multitude celebrated
the gallant Lauro's ſolemne entrance; who after performance
of Ceremonies, leauing the golden Chariot on one
ſide of the place, came where the Challenger was, and hauing
courteouſly ſaluted him, thus proceeded: You already
know, Sir Knight, the intent of my comming, and I
promiſe you, this very minute of time, that (the not putting
it in execution, ſlips from me, ſeemes a laſting Age:
(aſſured) that the vvrongfull cauſe you maintaine, vvill affoord
me the Prize, and deſired Victory; and if I prooue ſo
vnfortunate, as to be forced to ſubſcribe to your opinion,
I vvill loſe this Chaine to boot, vvhich comes not ſhort in

valew of your Diamond. And (this ſayd) hee tooke from
off his owne necke, a maſſie enamelled Chaine of extraordinary
vvorkemanſhip, and giuing it to the Iudges, the
Challenger, vvho was now mounted and heard him, replied,
That he was wel contented; and in ſo ſaying, tooke a big
Launce, vvhich ſeemed to be in colour of varniſhed Ebonie,
and ſtraight ranne his Carreere, vvith ſuch courage,
and ſo comely a pleaſing ayre, as cauſed a generall longing
in the Spectators for his Victory. And beeing come to the
limited place, taking his Arme and Lance out of his reſt, he
carried it ſo ſtedfaſt and euen, that without the leaſt touch
of the Ring, he tooke it away vvith him vpon his point: and
ſtopping his horſe, encouraged by the confuſed ſhoutes
ſent out in his fauour, he began to expect the fortune of his
contrary; vvho, more confident then cunning, taking his
Lance, began, and ranne his Carreere vvith ſuch furious
ſpeed, that he vvas ſcarce heard or ſeene; but ſtretching out
his Launce, 'twas not with that certainty that he could take
the Ring, though he touched vpon the Circle of it. Gerardo
was as glad and ſatisfied, as the Aduenturer ſad and paſſionate;
yet he diſſembled his griefe, and prepared himſelfe to
the ſecond courſe, which the Challenger now began vnto
him; in vvhich when hee came neere the Ring with his
Launce, he bore it ſheere away, giuing a greater motiue to
the loude cries in the spatious place. Lauro paſſed his Carreere
very gracefully, and more vvary then before, tooke
the Ring this bout aſwell as Gerardo; who now changing
both Horſe and Launce, ranne the laſt courſe, and toucht
the Ring, in midſt of the vpper part of it, almoſt in the ſame
place that Lauro firſt did: vvho, thinking the Victory now
would not be very doubtfull, mounted vpon a well rein'd
Corduba browne-Bay, paſſed (like Lightning) the Carreere,
but miſſed quite the Ring; at which he was angry, and out

of countenance, as the Challenger pleaſed and contented,
on vvhoſe part the Iudges declared the Victory, ſending
him the vvaighty Chaine, and commanding Lauro alſo to
ſet his name vnder Gerardo's Challenge, which grieued him
farre more then his loſſe. But of neceſſitie he muſt approch
the great Tent; out of which the Shield was brought him,
and the opinion of him, in whoſe hands, hee firmed to it;
who ſeeing Lauro ſo paſſionate, caſting his armes about
him, ſaid: Let not Fortunes various euents, diuide, friend
Lauro, our affections, and depriue me of the fauours I haue
ſtill receiued from you, and from which I acknowledge the
preſent Victorie proceedes: and to confirme you in this
truth, behold here the reward, appointed by your ſelfe, to
whom, it is fitter to returne it: and ſo taking the Chaine
out of a great ſiluer Baſon, he put it about his necke, Lauro
vnable to reſiſt his noble courteſie. To which, (thankefull,
as he had reaſon) the other anſwered, Certainly, Signior
Gerardo, you haue this day gained on my thankefull mind
a greater victory, then that which ſhould haue redounded
by this onely exerciſe of Iuſt, by your courteous proceeding:
and ſo from hencefoorth in all occaſions, I profeſſe
my ſelfe, Yours by Conqueſt: and ſince, touching the
Chaine you haue wonne, you will (without beeing one)
make your ſelfe a loſer; leſſe reaſon it were, I beeing really
ſo, ſhould poſſeſſe it; if therefore you pleaſe to giue mee
leaue, my opinion is, that it bee beſtowed vpon the Dame
that beſt deſerues it. It ſhall infinitely content me, replyed
Gerardo, that you pleaſe ſo well to employ it; at what time,
the paſſionate Lauro leauing him, directed his way toward
the louely Niſe, that now expected what would be the iſſue
of the two Knights their Complements: and comming
neere, with a low obeyſance, as well to her, as the reſt of the
Ladies and Dames alſo, he tooke the Chaine, (firſt kiſſing

it) and putting it on the point of his Launce, and lifting it
vp toward his faire Couſin, vſed the enſuing Phraſe:
Though the hauing ſo meanly defended your cauſe, may
make me ſo great an vn-deſeruer, that you (to fauour mee)
might refuſe this ſmall trifle from me; yet that pure affection
of mine, and the deſire I know, he that gained it, hath to
ſerue you, may haply ſupply my defects, if you will vouchſafe
to honour the poore pledge with your faire necke.
Here he ceaſed, expecting Niſe's anſwer; who, diſſembling
the more ſuſpitious point of his ſpeech, yet cheereful, made
him vnderſtand his bold exceſſe, ſaying: Truly, Couſin, if
our firmeneſſe be but all this day, as well defended, as hitherto,
the Challenger may rue his boldneſſe, and his raſh
opinion will be ſufficiently puniſhed: and therefore in ſatisfaction
of the ſeruice you haue done all theſe Ladies and
Dames preſent, I will receiue from you the Chaine, but ſo,
that when you ſhall thinke fit to aduenture it againe, you
may know where to find it. Here, a fire of paſſion breaking
out of his countenance, Lauro had not the heart to reply a
word, but got him ſhamefully out of the place, iuſt as from
another ſtreet there entred in the lofty and flaming mount
Aetna of Sicily, vomiting at a huge mouth or breathing
place made at the top of it, ſo many ſeuerall flaſhes and
flames, together with ſuch hideous noyſe, as if all Hell had
beene vvithin it: the reſt of the Mount was all of an aduſt
burnt browne; the vvhole, moouing moſt ſlowly on vvith
notable artifice, not leauing ſo much as the leaſt ſigne or
tracke of it on the ground on vvhich it went; till comming
neere the vvindowes, vvhere the Iudges and Ladies ſate,
the Engine ſtood ſtill, and the flames increaſed ſo violently,
that the ayre condenſed all on a thicke ſmoake, the people
could hardly ſee one another; till the cloud and vvhole
Aetna vaniſhing together, in the ſtead, there appeared two

Gentle and gallant youths, differently mounted, who incloſed
in midſt of twelue fierce Saluages; their braue and
ſightly colours cauſed great content in as many, as admiring
alſo their inuention, pleaſingly beheld them. They
were Moore-like clad, in Cloth of Siluer Caſſocks wrought
vvith crimſon flowers, and long Robes of red Sattin, vvith
white flowers both ſo artificially drawne, as if the flowers
had beene naturall and onely ſtrewed on them: their bonnets
were red Veluet, and Hat-bands twiſted ſiluer, their
high Plumes of feathers in colour ſutable, and their ſleeues
of delicate tranſparent Sendall, embroidered and ſet with
rich ſtones, their horſes Swan, or ſnow-white, with clothes
and Capariſons of Crimſon Sattin, vvith all their embroidery
of Siluer, Scarfes, and Feathers ſutable to thoſe of
their Owners, vvho iuſt then mooued on, moſt artificially
encompaſſed by their twelue Saluages, vvho caſt round about
the ſeuerall papers, and this 
                     •
                  ame-following Motto:
               
                  If, as equall we appeare
                  In our valour, in our blood,
                  Loue would work vs equall good,
                  Then, we both immortall were.
               
               Hee vvho ſeemed elder of the two, (though both
young enough) carried at the end of a big Launce, a ſmall
red and vvhite Streamer; in midſt of which was this Motto
embroidered:
               
                  If death muſt be my remedie:
                  If loue that muſt procure me her:
                  Long he, her comming doth deferre.
               
               The ſecond alſo had in the little Streamer of his Launce
this ingrauen Motto:
               
                  
                  From Loue, my life beginning takes:
                  Therefore to Loue my life I giue,
                  Since without Loue I cannot liue.
               
               Foorthwith the luſtie Saluages began to play vpon diuers
Inſtruments, which they carried in ſtead of their heauie
Clubbes, whoſe ſound and harmony gaue motion to
the Knights. But no ſooner were they gotten to the Liſts,
when by all that beheld them, they were knowne to be the
two renowned and valiant Sayavedra's, brothers and branches
of that illuſtrious Stocke, which hath many Ages giuen
Owners to the Towne of Caſtellar; who willing with
their preſence to honour Ceſarina, thus expreſſed their valour
and themſelues; whom when our Challenger ſawe, he
was not a little doubtful of his Victory: and ſo hauing done
the accuſtomed reuerence to the Iudges and Ladies, the
elder Brother taking the firſt occasion, began in this manner
to him: The opinion, Sir Knight, you hold, I might
perhaps with as much iuſtice on my part maintaine: the forfeit
therefore, if I for want of skill chance to loſe, ſhall not
onely be barely firming to a Tenet I already approoue, but
you ſhall alſo gaine this precious Emerald. Though this
(replied Gerardo) might haue beene excuſed, yet to animate
me to gaine the pledge of ſuch a Knight, I accept willigly
the condition; and ſo the Aduenturer hauing deliuered
the rich Emerald in a little Ring to the Iudges, they
returned backe, each of them chooſing the beſt Launce he
could light on: and Gerardo comming to begin the Carreere,
parted like winde, running the point of his Launce,
vpon the vpper part of the Ring; that though hee tooke it
not, it was euen as well; for nothing but taking it could win
frō him: & ſo turning to his Tent, from thence he expected

the ſucceſſe of his Contrary, who couragiouſly ſpurred on,
but miſſed his marke; for he ſtrooke ſo bunglingly vpon the
ſides of the Ring, that it was as much as nothing. The Conqueror
Gerardo was nothing ſorry for his misfortune, who
turning to the Carreere, paſſed on ſo happily, that he fairely
tooke the Ring, (which hung againe in its place) hee returned
againe to his, giuing leaue to the angry Aduenturer
(not a little diſtaſted) with new courage to begin the known
Carreere; in which, hee alſo bore the Ring, and paſſed on
moſt iocund with his good fortune: and perceiuing the
Challenger prepare himſelfe for the laſt Courſe, himſelfe
did the like, changing both horſe and Lance, iuſt as the skilfull
Challenger with his in his third Carreere had re-taken
the Ring, the people with confuſed cries extolling his good
fortune: whereupon the other carefully paſſing his Carreere,
ſaw the Ring alſo vpon the point of his Launce. The
difficultie was, and they were all in an vprore about deciding
the Victory: Gerardo and his Sticklers alledged, and
that iuſtly, that the firſt touch (ground of their difference)
was not equalled, ſo long as the Ring remained firme; to
which, the two brothers Aduenturers replied: That (howſoeuer
(the Ring being vntaken) there could be no loſſe, and
ſo the victorie was indifferent on both ſides, or to make it
otherwiſe, they muſt at leaſt runne another Courſe: this
and much more was added, but the Iudges vnwilling to
haue them grow to further conteſtation, commanded the
Aduenturer to retire, ſince indeed hee had loſt: wherefore
the Seuillian Knight obeyed, confident, that his brother
might redeeme his ill fortune, who as angry as a troden Viper,
thus ſaid to the Challenger: Beleeue mee, Sir Knight,
I know not how heauen grants you ſo great a victory, defending
ſo vniuſt a cauſe, whoſe vnreaſonableneſſe mooues
me to requeſt you, that we limit the future ſucceſſe, to one

onely briefe Courſe, and the reward on my part, if I bee
perſecuted with my Brothers ill fortune, ſhall be this ſwift
horſe and furniture vpon him: and if victory be declared
on my behalfe, you ſhall foorthwith depart the Liſts, forbearing
for euer to maintaine ſo vn-aduiſed an opinion.
Without preiudice to mine honour (ſaid Gerardo) I might
well deny your demaund: but becauſe your confidence
ſhall not eſcape vvithout due puniſhment, I confirme your
propoſition: and ſo their Diſcourſe ended, Gerardo more
warily then before, made choyce of a ſtraight ſmooth
Lance; vvith which, and on a well-ſhap't Roane, he ranne
his Courſe, ſetting forward ſo gracefully, that the general
wiſhes beſpoke him good ſucceſſe, which by taking the
deſired Ring, he had. The Aduenturer alſo performed
his Carreere with a good grace, but his ill lucke made him
onely touch vpon the vpper part of the Yron leſſe cunningly,
then his preſumption promiſed, which cauſed in
both the Brothers an equall deſpight, though they were
forced to diſſemble it, and the Aduenturer not ſo much as
expecting to be bid alight, of his owne voluntary motion
did it, deliuering his braue horſe to Gerardo, who with a
ſmiling looke, ſayd: That the loſſe of ſo faire a beaſt, may
make you know in vvhat errour you haue hitherto liued,
he ſhall now be mine; onely, you ſhall pleaſe to accept of
this other, which I thinke comes not ſhort in goodneſſe:
which words, and the forſaking his Saddle, made but an
inſtant, to the great admiration of the Spectators, eſpecially
the two Brothers, who with ioyfull acknowledgement
accepted the noble offer, and ioyntly ſubſcribed to the
Challengers opinion. By and by, at the broadeſt part of
the place, there entred, diſcharging of Artillery, a great
Caſtle, founded vpon a high Rock, it was foure-ſquare,
with many ſightly Turrets, and goodly Barricado's: in

the Homage Tower, for a Pinnacle and extreme part of
Architecture ſtood the winged Fame, with a Trumpet in
her left hand, and in the right, a large Flagge of Cloth of
Gold, Tawnie and Carnation, in which were tenne ſmall
embroidered Scutcheons, onely one higher and bigger
then the reſt, with a great Key hanging at it in a golden
String, the knowne Armes to the loyall Citie of Gibraltar:
the other nine belonged to the following Reſtorers of the
ſaid Citie. The firſt on the right hand, was, of the Mendoza's,
and the next conſequently, the Luduenia's, Buſto's,
Caſtillo's, Pinia's, Natera's, Meſa's, Caluo's, Benites. All the
Battlements, Turrets, Walles, and Pinnacles, were ſet and
beautified with painted Flagges, and Streamers wauing
with the aforeſaid Armes, and thoſe of the Crowne likewiſe,
in an embroidered Standered of Cloth of Gold, and
Yellow: ſome likewiſe vvere placed vpon the Frame and
Maſon-worke of the Caſtles yron Gates. And now the
whole Frame by an ingenious Deuice and helpe of thoſe
within, began to mooue, and the Artillery ceaſing, a baſtard
Trumpet was heard; at which ſhrill ſignall, the Caſtle
and Rocke being now gotten vnder the Iudges window,
ſtayed: and the Artillery beginning to diſcharge afreſh, at
the ſound, after i, tof ſome wel-tuned Inſtruments, the ſhut-Gates
flew ſuddenly open, from whence a draw-Bridge
was caſt, all couered with Tawnie Damaske, and preſently
after, a proper comely Youth came marching ouer it in
Cuerpo, clad in the military Faſhion of Spaine: his Doublet
& Breeches, cloth of Siluer were cut vpon Orenge-color'd
Taffeta, with a ſtrong Ierkin of impenetrable Buffe, trimmed
with Parchment Gold-lace, Loopes, and Buttons anſwerable,
Stockens, Orenge-colour, Shooes and Garters,
white; falling Band, French; and a Bone-lace edging, Flemiſh:
his plume of Feathers, Gold and white, and his Hat

Ermines, to ſuit in colour with them: his ſword hatcht, and
Hangers, Siluer: in his right hand he bore a Leading-ſtaffe,
repreſenting the militarie Office of a Commander. Thus
attended by eight Pages in their glorious Liuery alſo, hee
came to the Challengers prefence, and after vſuall Ceremonies
of courteſie performed, with an audible voyce, that
the Iudges, and all preſent might heare, he vttered the following
words: In that famous caſtle of Gibraltar before
you, there are nine Knights, deſcended from her moſt noble
Conquerours, from whom I am ſent, to intreat you to
be pleaſed, that vpon the conditions you maintaine, each
of them, may runne one only Courſe with you; which they
haue deſired, to excuſe you from the trouble; not that otherwiſe
running the three would bee any at all to them.
Heere Gerardo, when the gallant Captaine had ended, with
no leſſe gracefulneſſe made anſwer: Conſidering, worthy
Captaine, that I am here to no other intent then what you
mention, the famous Aduenturers might well haue excuſed
their ſending, and your paines, to whom I requeſt you
make knowne, that I moſt willingly obey their commands:
and ſo with a low Reuerence to the Challenger, Iudges, and
Ladies, the braue Souldier returned into the Caſtle, leauing
all the Spectators, well pleaſed with the courtly deliuery
of his Meſſage: and not long after, (the Artillery diſcharging
afreſh) to the ſound of Trumpets, and Mooriſh
Hau-bois, a comely Knight came marching ouer the ſame
Bridge, and at the inſtant, a ſecond Gate opening at the
lower part of the Rocke, there ſallied out two luſty bigbon'd
Slaues, handſomly clad, one of them leading a leere
goodly Cheſt-nut Horſe; which the Aduenturer nimbly
mounted, without ſetting foot to ſtirrop. His garment
was a long coat, jagged with yellow and Roſe-colour'd
cloth of Gold, the yellow embroidered with ſiluer-Twiſt,

and the Roſe-colour with Gold: his horſe Trappings and
Capariſons were the ſame, and a great Plume of Martinets
decked as well the Aduenturers Hat, as the Horſes proud
head, (a gentle winde curling as it vvere their tips into
knots:) vpon his Breſt hee bore a Scutcheon or golden
Plate, in which were carued the ancient Armes of the
Buſtos, by which hee was knowne to deſcend from that
Noble houſe, and this Motto ſerued for the Scutcheons
Border.
               
                  My valiant Anceſtor,
                  By conqu'ring Gibraltar, renowne
                  Gaue it, to him, Victory a Crowne.
               
               He no ſooner approached the Liſts, when the Noble
Challenger, thinking there needed no further conditions,
addreſſed himſelfe to the courſe, and ſetting Spurres to
the free Beaſt, droue on like a tempeſt, and in the midſt of
the Carreere (to preuent mens wiſhes) bore away the eaſie
Ring; and returning contentedly to his Tent, ſtayed to
expect the iſſue of his contraries ſucceſſe, which, no leſſe
lucky then his, not a little troubled him; but the next ſecond
Aduenturer eaſed him of his diſtaſte, who hauing the
ſame Colours and Motto, but not the ſame fortune, onely
touched part of the hoope, and in this maner they all ran
to the ninth and laſt Aduenturer, whom I would not paſſe
ouer in ſilence, as vvell in reſpect of his difference of colours,
as the Motto caſt about the place. He vvas mounted
vpon a Swartie Bay, himſelfe clad in Cloth of gold, ground
white, cut, and the ſlaſhes edged about with gold Lace, ſet
with buttons of fine Rubies in the middeſt: his Hat was of
Taffata pleited and white, with a curious band of Gold
Purle embroidered, and in the Roſe of it hee wore a precious

Brooch, bordered with ſmall Rubies, his Plumes were
Martinets, as alſo the Horſes, vvhoſe trappings and Capariſons
were ſutable of Cloth of Gold and white, variouſly
embroidered with Gold, which ſhewed moſt richly vpon
the white; but indeed a colour more proper to ſuch as are
affected to ſterne Mars, then the tender Infant, Loue. By
his Armes he was knowne to be the Heroicke Mendoſa, and
his Motto thus:
               
                  My affections are ſo free,
                  That, whilſt thus I liue alone,
                  None ſhall me (but my ſelfe) owne.
               
               Hee made ſhew by his Robuſtious preſence, of a vvonderfull
ſtrength, which appeared by preſsing the faint
Beaſt that ſeemed to yeeld vnder the Burden, ſo hee paſſed
thorow the ſpacious place; whoſe Spectators (hauing giuen
a turne about it) he left moſt gladſomely full of expectation,
and drawing neere to the Challengers Tent, vvho
attended him, he began the enſuing Diſcourſe:
               All my friends and companions (as I vnderſtand) haue
runne, each, a Launce with you: but for my ſatisfaction, and
that none may thinke my comming hath beene to contradict
your iuſt and true opinion, which againſt the conſtancie
of women you maintaine; I ſhall (and if you pleaſe)
freely ſubſcribe to it before there be a neceſsitie, that (you
remaining conquerour) I bee compelled: for let mee ſay
that not in ieſting paſtime as the preſent, but with ſingle
Valour, I will euer make good and maintaine this vvholeſome
vn-erring opinion.
               
                  Gerardo with notable content, gaue eare to the determination
of the reſolute Knight, and with a cheerefull aſpect,
returned him this anſw
                     •
                  re: Securely may you, Sir Knight,

this day allow your ſelfe a promiſe of Victory, which cannot
bee wanting any way to him, that abounds as you doe
in the knowledge of the certaine truth I ſuſtaine. I am content
to runne a courſe with you, and to giue you the Conquerors
reward. (Which ſaid) bowing his head to him in
token of courteſie, hee paſſed on to the accuſtomed Carreere,
and quickly tooke the Ring; and putting it in the vſuall
place, the Aduenturer came on, with ſuch ſpeede and
comely grace (as none before him had done the like) and
with his Launces point fetch off the Ring as Gerardo had
done, whom, in his ioy, for the good ſucceſſe, hee came
to embrace, deſiring, that they would fetch him out the
Shield, that hee might ſubſcribe to the Challenge; for
though he needed not ſo to haue done, yet Gerardo importuned
by his entreaties, commanded it to be brought forth,
but would not ſuffer him to firme his name, amongſt the
reſt; ſo he wrote it cloſe by the Challengers.
               Foure of the nine Knights had Prizes, (viz.) Iewels, which
they beſtowed vpon the Dames they there liked beſt: onely
the laſt Aduenturers was the richeſt, vvhich, thinking by
reaſon of his cruell opinion, no Dame would receiue from
his hand, he deſired the Challenger to giue it as from himſelfe
to the faire Celia; who, to ſatisfie Gerardo, accepted of
it, at ſuch time, as to the ſound of Drumme and Trumpets
ſempiternall Fame, that appeared from top of the Homage
Tower, vnwrapping the flagges golden folds, waued by
her powerfull right hand, diſplaide in the inſide theſe foure
Verſes ſet out in golden Letters.
               
                  This day with voice of mettall Fame ſhall enter,
                  Theſe hon'ring Spaines illuſtrious Families,
                  Their names and glorious Acts t'
                        •
                     eternalize,
                  From the cleere Zenith, to th' obſcurer Center.
               
               
                  
And thus the gallant Aduenturer withdrawing himſelfe
into the Caſtle, with a terrible thunder of great ſhot, it voided
the place: and in the roome twelue goodly Sumpter-Moyles
entred, all loaden with ſtraight greene Reedes, and
couered with rich Sumpter Cloathes, which were followed
by two and thirty Knights, vvith their Shields and Lances
fitted to them, and in the midſt, a ſtately Triumphant Chariot,
drawne by ſixe ſpotted Pye-bals, vvith an Arch in the
midſt of it of moſt curious Architecture, whereon were artificially
ſet out and carued, the memorable exploits,
which at the ſiege of the famous Citie & frontier of Xeres
by her Noble conquerours were performed. Amongſt
which, the no leſſe feared then bold enterprize of the couragious
Herrera, was moſt eminent, who in one of the rich
Arches ſquares, with a manly preſence, ſtretcht forth his
Arme and Dagger, dyed in the Royall bloud of the Barbarian
enemy King, ſlaine in his owne Tent by that inuincible
hand. On top and vppermoſt part of the Arch, hung wauing
to the Aire a great Enſigne of blue Damaske, embroidered
with Gold and Pearle, and in the midſt a faire
Royall Scutcheon, whoſe Armes in a field white, were the
waues of the ſtormie Sea, anciently proper to the City of
Xeres: and for Border it had twelue other ſmall Scutcheons,
with the famous Armes of the following Gentlemen
Inhabitants of the Citie: (viz.) Herreras, Villa vicencios,
Camachos, Ponces de Leon, Varga, Rendones, Gallegcs, Cueuas,
Auilas, Morales, Valdeſpinos, and Eſpindolas. Vnder the Arch,
but immediately ioyn'd to it, there hung a moſt beautifull
white Cloud, which tooke vp in Ouall circle the vvhole
breadth of it; from whence a moſt delightfull ſweet Muſicke
of Sac-buts, Cornets, Viols, Lutes and Harpes, was
heard, ſo acceptable and pleaſing to the hearers, as formerly
the frightfull noiſe of the Caſtle vvas troubleſome; behinde

the Chariot came twelue Moores of equall ſtature
and proportion; marked and branded in their faces for
Slaues, all clad after the Barbarian manner, in long Mantles
of white Cotton, Caps of Scarlet, with their crooked
Semitars, and Date-colour'd Corduba Buskins, each of
which had in his left hand a little ſiluer Scutchcon with his
Maſters Armes, and led leere alſo his ſwift Horſe by him,
whoſe Capariſons and Trappings were Damaske, but by
reaſon of the thicke embroiderie of Gold, the ground was
ſcarce diſcerned to bee blue: their Plumes and Skarfes
were blue and yellow, which colours were likewiſe worne
by the two and thirty Knights. Beeing all entred into the
place: and hauing by two and two in payres moſt gracefully
paſſed their Carreeres, forgoing their ſharp Launces,
and diuiding themſelues into two Squadrons, they began
face to face, and according to their cuſtome, a wel-ordered
skirmiſh with their Reedes, which laſted all the time that
the Chariot took vp in paſſing about the place, ſo that they
of the skirmiſh hauing alſo taken a turne and view of the
Spectators, returned neere the Chariot to their Stand,
where the Muſicke againe ſent forth a moſt melodious
ſound, at which the white Cloud began to open and ſpread
in twelue diff'rent parts, diſcouering within, a moſt cleere
Turqueſſe sky, enamell'd with bright radiant Starres, all
which ſhaddowed a rich Throne of fiue degrees, adorned
with ſtraw-coloured Cloth of Gold, and at the Baſis that
ſeemed to be maſſie on the laſt degree, were ſet two goodly
Images in Bult, curiouſly framed hand in hand: the one
held in her left, a bough of ſpredding Oake, and on her
lofty front, ſhee wore a Tyara or Coyfe, on vvhich this
Motto was vvritten:
               
                  
                  Without me there's no Victory,
                  Since that in my performance lyes
                  All honour, and each glorious Prize.
               
               This Valorous robuſtious Dame ſufficiently expreſſed
her renowned name, as alſo ſhee that accompanied her,
with a faire Lawrell-wreathe repreſented Victory, gilding
her happy Temples, with a precious Imperiall Crowne, and
about it theſe ingraued Verſes:
               
                  I equally doe fauour ſtill,
                  (As the bold aduent'rous Spirit)
                  Wiſedome for her chiefeſt merit.
               
               In the fourth, third, ſecond and firſt degree, were ſeated
by three and three the twelue Knights, all richly ſet out in
their colours of Damaske, blue and yellow, imbroidered
with Siluer, Gold, and ſtones of good value (their plumes
ſutable) and each had in his left hand a little ſtreamer of
Cloth of Gold with blue, with the Armes of his Houſe, and
blazoned with the inſuing Motto:
               
                  Victory certaine and ſecure,
                  I promiſe, we propitious
                  Shall haue, ſince her we bring with vs.
               
               The three of the firſt degree, after the ſound of Trumpets,
Shalmes, and diuers other Inſtruments, deſcended
from the Chariot (their tall Slaues expecting them vvith
their ready Horſes) on which moſt gracefully mounted,
they aduanced towards the Challenger; to whom one of
them thus ſaid: On the behalfe of theſe Knights, and others

in the Chariot, as alſo on mine owne, I requeſt you, Sir
Knight; Be pleaſed, that each Aduenturer may runne but
his ſole courſe with you: for (beſides that the limiting thus
the hazzard of victory, which will make your honour, obtaining
it, the greater) we ſhall receiue particular fauour in
the courteſie demanded.
               With a very good will (ſaid Gerardo) I accept it, and the
demand indeed is wholly in my fauour, and ſince you will
eaſe me of ſo much paines, let vs loſe no time. Content,
ſaid the Aduenturer: when Gerardo (leauing him, and paſſing
his Carreere) ſo happily guided the point of his
Launce, that he tooke the Ring: and the Aduenturer too
performing the like: ſeuen of the twelue gained Prizes,
which they beſtowed vpon the faire Dames there preſent,
returning after to the Chariot, vvhither they were welcomed
with Muſicke, and ſo they all voided the place.
               And as the Chariot went out, there entred in at the
ſame gate, a little vgly Dwarfe Poſt-like, winding a Horne,
vpon a pretty Nagge, with falſe gallop, which raiſed a generall
laughter in the Spectators, as well in reſpect (as of
his ill-fauouredneſſe) his worſe ſuted brauerie, vvhich
made him ſhew much more monſtrous. In this manner, he
rode on to the Challengers Tent, before whom (nimbly
alighting) he drew out of a Cloth of gold Purſe, a Letter,
which (hauing kiſſed it) hee preſented with a low obeyſance
to Gerardo; but firſt in the deliuerie vſed this
ſpeech:
               Sir Knight, My Maſter (whom you ſhall better know by
the Contents of this Letter) willed mee (beſides the deliuerie
of it) to ſollicite mine owne quicke diſpatch, which I
earneſtly on my behalfe too requeſt of you. You ſhall haue
it, ſaid Gerardo, and an anſwer alſo if the Letter doe require
it; and in ſo ſaying, he broke it open, and paſſing his eyes

ſlightly ouer it, read alowd, that al might heare the Dwarfe's
Knight's demand.
               The Caſtillian Knight, alias fortunate, to thee, Noble: but,
vnfortunate Gerardo, ſends greeting and health, ſuch as thou
needeſt to make good the errour thou maintaineſt: Know, that
(hauing notice of the ſtrange opinion thou holdeſt; and confident
that it is vniust) I haue taken a long iourney in thy ſearch, and
am (as iuſt now) newly alighted at this Townes gates, and deſire
to weane thee from ſo deſperate a Tenet; and conſidering that I
am for my perſon diſappointed, as well of Inuention, as the Oſtentation
befitting theſe Triumphs; I haue thought good to
make it my requeſt, that (admitting my forcible excuſe, which
may ſerue a ſtranger) thou be pleaſed alſo, that whether I winne
or loſe, I may freely depart the Liſts, without making my ſelfe
knowne, ſince being but an obſcure perſon, it were more fit to depart
with ſilence, then ſubſcribe a name, whoſe Owner is of ſo
meane qualitie.
               And hauing read the Letter, not ſo much as expecting a
conſent from the Iudges, turning to the Dwarfe, hee thus
ſaid, Get you to horſe, and tell the Knight your Maſter,
that vpon my word and aſſurance, he may enter vvhen hee
pleaſeth, with all the conditions of his Letter obſerued,
to which I ſend no written anſwere, in reſpect of the more
ſpeedy diſpatching of your little ſelfe. The Dwarfe moſt
iocundly ſpurred on where his Maſter expected him; and
not long after, entred in foure Dwarfes with Trumpets (the
Meſſenger making vp the fourth, and of equall low preſence
with the reſt) and after him eight masked Knights,
whoſe Robes were long Coates of Tawny Veluet, curiouſly
wrought, and ſet out with little bright Looking-glaſſes,
whoſe Ouall frames were of maſſie Siluer, their horſes

trappings and furniture of the ſame Veluet, with their little
Glaſſes likewiſe: the Knights Hattes were garniſhed vvith
ſutable colour'd Bugles, their owne Plumes, and their
horſes Tops, were tawny, white, and Carnation. Their
Launces had a certaine bright Varniſh that made them
ſhew like Ieat. Behinde them came nine Dames vpon
their white-ſpotted Palfrcies, cloſe masked, and clad in the
ancient Roman manner, ſo rich in different colours, gold
and precious ſtones, that (though that Mountain of Gold,
which the vnhappy, yet renowned Ingan Atabalina offered
for his vngranted ranſome, had beene disburſed to array
them) it muſt haue come farre ſhort of their exceſſiue coſt.
Theſe Nymphs browes were girt with Diamonds, Rubies,
and Emeralds, and their heads ſtucke with an infinitie of
different colour'd Plumes: each of them bare in her
hand a neat-wrought, vvell-tuned Inſtrument, with which
(as Viols, Violins, Theorbo, Lute and the like) they accorded
in a celeſtiall harmony.
               Behinde theſe nine (the Muſes) came a Knight and
Lady, both masked, ſhe, as braue and comely, as hee
gallant and ſprightly. Himſelfe vvas mounted vpon a
goodly vvhite Steed in vvell-placed diſtances ſpotted
with blacke: The trappings and other furniture, vvere
Cloth of Gold Tawnie, imbroidered vvith Siluer in equall
ſpaces from the Looking-glaſſes, which were ſomewhat
leſſe, more cutious then the fore-mentioned. The Knight
his garment vvas a cloſe Coat, (but for length exceeding
the Challengers:) of the ſaid tawny, emboſſed
with knots and flowers of Siluer wire; in midſt of which
the little Glaſſes were ſet, ſending forth a moſt radiant
brightneſſe: that (as the Sunne now neere his iourneyes
end reflected on them) the vvearer by their dazling ſeemed
another ſecond Phaëton. The Plumes that adorned his

Hat, imbroidered with ſiluer Purle, were white, red,
and Tawny, as alſo the Horſes. The gentle Dame had
on her a gowne of white Sattin, ſo thicke and curiouſly
imbroidered, that the white was ſcarce diſcerned, and
the diſcouered ſpaces were almoſt couered vvith gold
Buttons, whoſe Pyramicall ends were tipped with admirably
cut Diamonds, which, in lieu of the Looking-glaſſes,
ſent forth a purer ſparkling then their Criſtall.
Her haire was caught and ſhut vp in a Net of Gold, a
Cawle, faſtned on her head with a Fillet of the richeſt
Stones. From that well-dreſſed head too there ſeemed
to grow, ſome white, greene and blue Feathers, which
gaue the more luſtre to her ſmooth and riſing forehead.
Shee was mounted vpon a white-pyed flea-bitten Mare;
which, as neatly paced vnder her, as the Aduenturers luſty
Courſer proudly praunced vnder him, whoſe breſt wore
on a golden Scutcheon, the inſuing Motto:
               
                  If with the faith of my Miſtris
                  My loue may be equalized,
                  'Tis the greatest to be prized.
               
               And the faire Dame caſt from her the following
Verſes:
               
                  If his firme loue, whom I adore,
                  Admit may a compariſon,
                  I loue with like affection.
               
               With this graue as glorious Company, they both together
gaue a turne about the place: after which, the Aduenturer
taking a ſhort leaue of his Miſtris, (the Trumpets and
Muſicke ceaſing) went toward the Challenger, and courteouſly

ſaluting him, thus ſaid: By the many Iewels on that
Cup-board, I vvell perceiue, how few the ſeuerall Aduenturers
haue from your valour gained, notwithſtanding ſo
good a cauſe as they had in hand (The conſtancie of Ladies.)
This acknowledgement, I ſuppoſe, is onely awanting to
your ſelfe, to make you conſummately deſerue the name of
a Victorious Knight; for, otherwiſe, I repute you worthy
all honour and eſtimation: and therefore let mee requeſt
you, (ſetting your Tenet aſide) you vvould be pleaſed, that
we may runne our three Courſes wholly for the honour of
Knighthood, vvithout any further Prize. Gerardo, whilſt
the Aduenturer was ſpeaking, ſtood (as attentiue) ſo, ſuſpitious,
that this was not the firſt time he had beene acquainted
vvith that voyce: and in this anxietie hee replied, how
happy he ſhould be to receiue his commands; though, if
the Aduenturers good lucke vvould make him Victor, hee
muſt not but receiue the appointed Prize. And in ſo ſaying,
he firſt ran the Courſe, and in it tooke the Ring; and
falling off, left the Carreere to the vnknowne Aduenturer,
who paſſing on like a Flight, roundly tooke the Ring alſo:
and their ſecond lottes in like manner vvere both alike equall.
But the ouere confident Challenger addreſſing himſelfe
to the laſt Courſe, vvas not in that ſo fortunate; for, he
onely touched vpon the Circle, and paſſing on, with no
ſmall diſtaſte, afterward viewed how his Contrary, like another
vvatchfull vvary Argus, in midſt of his Courſe tooke
the Ring vpon his Launces point, vvith ſuch acclamations
and noyſe from the whole multitude, that nothing elſe was
to be heard; till ſuch time as Drumme and Trumpets, together
with the Artillery out of the Caſtle, with hideous
thunder declared the Victory of the braue Aduenturer;
(whom the Iudges ſummoning to them) deliuered him
with exquiſite ceremonies the Ring and rich Diamond, as

the iuſt reward of his dexteritie; which, he no ſooner receiued,
but (accompanied by his owne Knights, and diuers others
enamoured, as it vvere, on his ſtrange vertue) came
where his dainty Miſtris expected him, and taking the
Ring from off his finger, thus proceeded. You might iuſtly
(faire Owner) reſt aſſured, that to do you ſeruice, I ſhould
gaine the honor and Prize of theſe Triumphs: ſo that, your
ſelfe now being the moſt loyall and conſtant of the Dames
and Ladies preſent, is beſt vvorthy to honour the valew of
it vvith your Lilly-hand. The gracefull Dame was readie
with an anſwer; vvhen by miſchance the ſtrings of her
Maske ſlipping looſe, made it fall to the ground, and Gerardo
diſcouering the faire face before him, might behold no
leſſe then the liuely Originall of the moſt beautifull Amaranta.
It is not poſſible to expreſſe his inward ioy, confirming
his mindes ſuſpition, that the Victor was her deare
Louer, his vvorthieſt friend, the moſt valiant Arſenio,
(vvhich being a ſufficient comfort to his loſſe) he went towards
him, and taking off the Maske from his face, cloſely
embracing him, ſaid: Why (famous Arſenio) and would
you be ſo cruell to me, as to returne vvithout making your
ſelfe knowne, to leaue me by your victory in ſo great a confuſion?
Beleeue me, Sir, were it not for the honour I receiue,
in hauing beene foiled by you, (vvhich doth temper
my diſtaſte) it vvere impoſſible for you to obtaine a pardon.
Maruell not, friend Gerardo, ſaid Arſenio, at my ſlackneſſe:
for ſtill me thinks as I behold you, I cannot perſwade
my ſelfe you ſhould be the ſame Gerardo, that tooke leaue
of me at Seuil; nor dare I preſume, that hee vvould maintaine
ſo rigorous a Theame againſt Ladies, as you here
haue done. 'Tis very vvell (quoth Gerardo) you ſpeake with
the freedome, your fortunate ſtile giues you; all men are
not borne vnder your happy Conſtellation, neither doe all

liue ſo ſecure, as you in the loyalty of the faire Amaranta:
to vvhom turning, hee kiſſed her ſnowie hand, rendring
courtly thankes for the honour ſhee had done thoſe Feſtiuals
by her arriuall; and beeing by her diſcreet language,
payed in the ſame coyne, all three of them entred the ſumptuous
Tent, iuſt as the Sunne began now to decline to the
Weſt. And the Iudges (knowing all vvas ended) commanded
Gerardo to retire, (allowing him the glory of the
day) and ordering, that the Plate and Iewels ſhould bee
taken downe, left their ſtandings, and (mounted on horſebacke)
placed Gerardo, and his Victor friend in the middeſt
of them: and in this manner, together vvith all the Knights
and Gallants, they gaue a ſightly turne about the Place,
accompanied vvith an infinite diuerſitie of muſicall Inſtruments,
that had formerly entred. The Challenger too
(though a loſer) might heare a thouſand ioyfull congratulations,
from the confuſed rumour of the Spectators, and
comming to the Standing vvhere the Ladies and Dames
were, himſelfe with the reſt, accompanied them to their
Carroches, and ſo to the Caſtle: the faire Niſe carrying
with her the beautifull Amaranta; each of the two equally
emulating the others matchleſſe perfections. All the Aduenturers
vvere inuited by Don Antonio to ſupper: (which
ended) the rewards vvere to be diſtributed for the beſt Inuention,
Launce, Motto, and Brauerie: ſo that (all the
Gheſts aſſembled together at the Caſtle) foure magnificent
Tables vvere ſpread vvith great ioy and mirth, in the large
ſpacious Hall, vvhere to the ſound of loude Muſicke, at the
firſt and chiefeſt Table ſate the Iudges, Stickler, Challenger,
and victorious Arſenio: at an oppoſite Table the Ladies
and Dames; on the right hand the Aduenturers, and
at the left, the laſt, the reſt of the Knights and Gentlemen
that had beene onely Spectators. And, hauing all plentifully

ſupped, the clothes were taken away, and the Reuels
began; in which, many of the Ladies danced with the
Knights of the Ring. Lauro with his Couſin daunced the
Torch-daunce, not without ſome diſtaſte to the offended
Challenger. A ſtrange force it is of that execrable tormentour,
Ielouſie: Niſe's moſt tender expreſſing her affections,
could ſtirre vp none at all in his vngratefull heart;
yet the but ſeeing her now mooue in a ceremonious
Daunce, and onely ciuilly ſerued by her affectionate kinſman,
makes Gerardo ſenſible of diſtaſte, which kindling
ſome little Ielouſies, by little and little raiſed ſuch a blaze in
his intrals, that the ruines of his former flames, were quite
conſumed with theſe latter. In ſuch ielous fancies Gerardo
paſſed a good part of this night; in which (when the Reuels
had end) by mutuall conſent of the Iudges, two rich Emeralds
were beſtowed vpon the two gallant Seuilian Sayauedra's
brothers, as a reward for the beſt Inuention. On Arſenio,
for Brauerie, was beſtowed a wel-wrought Chaine of
Gold, with a curious enameled Harpy hanging thereat.
Lauro for the beſt Motto, had a golden Gilly-flower, whoſe
red, for enamel, was Rubies: which (though hee would
gladly they had beene ſet in his Couſins diuine forehead)
he durſt not offer, for feare of a repulſe; in which hee was
not deceiued, conſidering her diſlike of his former boldneſſe.
Laſtly, to the Challenger, as to the beſt, and gracefulleſt
Launce, was allotted by generall approbation, an equall
reward. So that the iuſt vprightneſſe of the Iudges
flying amongſt the people, the Artillerie from the Towers,
Battlements, and Rauelins beganne to thunder; and from
the Windowes a pleaſing ſound of Muſicke was heard.
And ſo for this night the Knights returned to their Lodgings.
Next day new Solemnities began, by the letting
looſe ſome twelue fierce Tarifa Bulles; to which many terrible

wounds were giuen by the horſe-men; ſome particularly,
by the valorous Leoncio, whoſe ſtrong arme prooued
the fatall executioner to two of them, by ſtriking the one
(a furious beaſt) into the necke, and ſo to the fore-legge of
his monſtrous body. With which, and other ſucceſſes the
Triumphes ended, to Don Antonio's, and all the reſt of the
Gentlemens extraordinary content; who together with
the Ladies and Gentlewomen retired home, to their ſeuerall
dwellings and houſes; all, but the valiant Arſenio, and
his beſt-beloued Amaranta; who, importuned by Lauro,
Leoncio, and Gerardo, were forced to ſome longer ſtay,
which time they ſpent in the chace of wilde Beaſts, with
which, the vaſt Forreſt neere Ceſarina doth plentifully abound.
And now thoſe fauours which the tender Niſe expreſſed
to her Gerardo, more euidently increaſing, and her
loue acknowledging ſome acceptance from his thankefull
breſt, to the ſame height kindled a fire of enuious raging
ielouſie in Lauro's heart. But Niſe without wrong to her
hearts Owner, could take no notice of his griefes, much
leſſe apply her Couſins remedie; (who all on fire) ſeldome
could the two Louers, ſo much as exchange a looke, but
his eyes would ſtand Sentinels; which in ſo tender a ſubiect
as Niſe's paſſionate heart, cauſed no ſmall diſquiet, neither
had ſhe concealed it, or her diſtaſte from Lauro, had not
the prudent, Amaranta perſwaded, preuailed with her: for
ſhee was her onely comfortreſſe in her torment, to whom
ſhe would diſcouer her ſecrets, her whole ſelfe. And that
they might at preſent more freely conuerſe and communicate
their thoughts, (hauing in a cleere calme Euening ioyned
hands) they deſcended to a pleaſant Garden; which,
beautified with the varietie of Trees, Flowers, and fruitfull
Plants, ſerued as a comely ornament to certaine grated
chambers of the Caſtle, where Arſenio, Leoncio, and Gerardo
                  
were lodged, who from thoſe faire Barre-gilded windowes,
(for at that time they were taking 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     ••
                  ghts freſh ayre)
might perceiue how the two ſprightly Dames, ſecurely
careleſſe of a diſcouerie, were bathing their Alablaſter feet
in the bubbling Currents of a perpetuall Fountaine, that
payed tribute to the neighbouring riuer Betis, which Gerardo
tooke for a ſubiect of the following Verſes and Sonnet,
he ſung to his Viole, to the great content of his friends,
but moſt, of the ſurprized Dames.
               
                  Betis! whilſt pretty Philomel doth ſing,
                  And to thy ſiluer noyſe her treble raiſe:
                  Whilſt gentle Zephyrus his wings diſplayes,
                  'Mongſt well-tun'd leaues with whiſtling murmuring,
                  Combe ſmooth thy Sedge, thy red ſands freely ſting
                  On the greene banke, that thy o'reflowing ſtayes
                  Caſt them in golden knots, through all the wayes
                  My Niſe treades: when ſhe doth neerer bring
                  Her clearer (then thy Criſtall) limbes: chaſtize
                  Thy ſwifter courſe, and may no mutinous ayre
                  Then blow, but let the ſtreame glide gently by.
                  But, draw that Yu'rie Curtaine from mine eyes:
                  Vn-vaile thy Alablaster (Goddeſſe faire,)
                  Though I Actaeon, thou, Diana be.
               
               Scarce had Niſe heard the accents of her Louers voyce,
when with admiration in her ſelfe, and pleaſure in Amaranta,
they ſuſpended their preſent diſcourſe, diuerted with
the amorous notes, which when Niſe more diſtinctly heard,
ſhe thought (ſuch was her paſſion) that ſhe had beene in a
dreame; yet little dream't, that ſhe was become the ſubiect
of Gerardo's affection; who ſung not ſo low, neither ſo warily,
but that the Eccho of his voice reached the liſtening

                  Lauro's eares: to whom a very ſmall matter was ſufficient
to raiſe him from his bed; and getting to one of his chambers
Grates, which directly vnder Gerardo's Bay-window,
looked into the Garden, he might plainely heare thoſe amorous
expreſſions: and hereupon, confirmed in his ſuſpitions,
he fell into ſuch a furious paſſion, that had not the
violence of it broke into ſome ſhort-winded ſighes, hee
might haue happely beene ſtifled in his owne ſorrow. His
tender groanes being (as ſo neere them) by Gerardo heard,
his old experience of ſuch Corroſiues made him gheſſe at
the cauſe of them; and therefore he retired, together with
his brother and friend to bed, fearing, leſt if the gracious
Niſe ſhould by miſ-chance, vſe the leaſt ſpeech to them,
ſome inconuenience might enſue, in reſpect of the ielous
Lauro, who ſeeing the two Dames, that had alſo eſpied
him, retire, did the like, but both parties with different effects:
for he, out of the diſtraction of his thoughts, could
take no reſt; but the other two well ſatisfied in their loues,
ſlept quietly all the reſt of that night. And not many after,
Niſe and her Louer obtained a priuate meeting; which wel
they might, whilſt Lauro was in bed, and then (no doubt)
theſe two affections mutually diſpoſed, the blind-god
would produce his vſuall effects: incouraging the one, and
cowardizing the other: ſo that Niſe became ſubiect to her
Louer, who with his new and momentarie delight, eſteemed
himſelfe poſſeſt of a Treaſure of more valew then the
double Indies.
               
               But, Lauro, how haſt thou beene to thy deare preiudice
ſo careleſſe? how haſt thou laid vp this ineſtimable Iewell,
reſerued for thee onely? who durſt beare the ſad tidings
to thy ſoule? None, but thine owne heart; nor could that
heart but miſ-giuingly preſage: for, doubtleſſe conſidering
the two Louers warineſſe, impoſſible it was to be certaine

of their amorous ſtolne meetings, more then by the
preſumptions of a ielous breſt. And now to Lauro's eyes
his couſins faire face was become vgly and monſtrous, his
loue turned ſtrangely to ſtrong hate, and his former good
will into reuengefull wiſhes; the ſucceſſe of which he forthwith
began to contriue, and thinking that the bloodieſt reuenge
he could take of the abhorred Niſe, was to remooue
Gerardo from her ſight, he began inſtantly to deuiſe how he
might compaſſe his death.
               'Twas now ſome time, that Arſenio & Amaranta had bin
abſent from their city and home, and ſome friends of theirs
earneſtly ſollicited their returne, which made them carefull
(though ſorry) to take leaue of thoſe Gentlemen. Gerardo
with Niſe's conſent, (much to her ſouls ſorrow) in reſpect of
his obligation to the departing couple, was neceſſarily to accompany
them, & Leoncio in that reſpect could do no leſſe.
The noble Ceſarinian 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   others would willingly haue pleaded
the ſtay of the other two; but conſidering their reſolution,
were forced to giue way, only inioyned them to a ſpeedy returne.
To expreſſe Niſe's ſorrow were needleſſe, or rather
ouer-difficult, ſince neither her Gerardo's loyall promiſes,
nor the faire Amaranta's vowes to her to haſten him, could
affoord her the leaſt comfort or content: beſides, his
paſſing afterward the limited time of returne, bredde no
ſmall torment in her; ſo that her tender griefe vnable
to ſupport this exceſſe of her Louer, and withall fearing
leſt ſome diſaſter might haue befalne him, ſhee reſolued
(treading downe all inconueniencies of honour) to declare
her griefe to a Barbarian, a Slaue, in whom (as hauing
had his breeding in her Fathers houſe) ſhe had good confidence;
and withall giuing him ſome rewards in preſent, and
promiſing him for his ſecreſie, more; ſhe diſpatcht him to
Gerardo with a Letter. The Slaue willing to obey his young

Miſtris, made good ſpeed, arriuing at Seuill and Arſenio's
houſe in few houres, where hee found Gerardo in his
Amaranta's pleaſing company, to whom hee deliuered the
Letter, which Gerardo receiued with inward ioy, though
(happely) his Miſtreſſes hazzarding buſineſſe of ſo great
conſequence, did ſomewhat leſſen that (vvhich might haue
otherwiſe been exceſſiue) content. But ſeeing there was no
remedy, he muſt ſet a good face vpon the matter; ſo, commanding
the Meſſenger to reſt himſelfe, opening the Letter,
he might view the inſuing Lines.
               Not the feare that your promiſe can euer bee defectiue, is the
cauſe that thus, to mine honours hazzard, I commit this Letters
important ſecreſie to ſo meane a bearer: onely I haue hereunto
beene mooued, by the infinit deſire I haue that theſe weary eyes
may ſee you, which ſhall neuer yet be weary of ſhedding teares for
your abſence, till your returne dry them (my lifes ſole remedy)
to keepe it from ſad torment. NISE,
               
               A thouſand times ouer, kiſſed Gerardo the paſsionate
Paper, and as oft had he read it, had not the ſighes which
loue made him offer as a ſacrifice for his delay, kept him
in ſome ſuſpence: and ſo, loth (by further ſtay to adde
new difficulties,) he briefely diſpatcht the Meſſenger, telling
him by word of mouth (beſides a ſhort Letter hee
gaue him for Niſe) that himſelfe would that following
night be vpon his way.
               At this time the offended Lauro ſlept not, whoſe angry
and reuengefull thoughts increaſed more and more ſtill
fiercely vpon him: ſo that his minde brooking no longer
delayes, he reſolued to put a bloudy purpoſe in execution:
which was, To kill Gerardo ere he departed Seuill, (the
fitteſt place for the accompliſhing ſuch a deſigne.)
               
                  
And ſo taking a luſty tall ſeruant (on whom hee much
relyed) along with him, without making either of his Vnkles
priuy to their iourney, they tooke their way towards
the mentioned Citie; whither Lauro's auerſe Fate permitted
him not to arriue; for that very night as hee rode on
(careleſſe of the mortall diſaſter) diſcourſing with his ſeruant,
touching the vehement ſuſpitions he had of his Couſin)
and alſo their bloudy purpoſe vpon Gerardo; before
they had paſſed on halfe their way, the Slaue that io
                     •
                  und
and merry, was returning with Niſe's Letter met them▪
(who knowne by Lauro, but Lauro knowing nothing of his
ſhort abſence) ſomewhat troubled at it, began to demand
angrily of him the cauſe of his iourney; which bred no
ſmall amazement in the quaking Slaue (as beeing ſo ſuddenly
ſurprized.)
               But another more deſperat accident interrupted the preſent
Inquiſition; for they were ſet vpon by foure fugitiue
Soldiers, who (ſtolne frō their Regiment, bound with the
Weſt-Iudian fleete) with their charged Muskets robbed all
Paſſengers they met with; which clapping now to Lauro
and his Companies breſts, they demanded withall their
Purſes. The vnfortunate Lauro fared worſt of the three,
for ſtanding to his defence, they ſhot him thorow the body
with a brace of Bullets; and falling from his Horſe, in
great fury, they diſpatcht him with their Swords, to the
ſeruant and Slaues no ſmall ſorrow, though ſeeing their
owne danger, and how vnable they were to reuenge his
death, they thought beſt to ſhift for their owne liues, (that
the bloudy Theeues might not ouertake them) neither
durſt they returne to Ceſarina with the newes, each of them
iuſtly fearing his owne danger, for hauing ſo coward-like
forſaken their ſlaine Maſter: wherefore they thought it ſafeſt
to get vp into the Country, as farre from Ceſarina, as

poſſibly they could: whither (as now) Gerard
                        •
                     
                   was vpon
his way, neither could hee at this time haue thought that
he was euer vnfortunate, ſince Heauen ſo miraculouſly
pleaſed to free him from a two-fold danger: for hee had
been ſure (comming alone as he did vvithout his brothers
company, vvho for ſome priuate reſpects ſtay'd behinde
him) either to haue periſhed by the iealous Lauro's hand, or
beene murdered by thoſe bloudy Homicides, who buſie about
the wretched Lauro's ſpoyles (hauing retired his body
out of the high-way into the Thicket) gaue meanes to
Gerardo that night to conclude his ſhort iourney, and arriue
by Sunne-riſing at Ceſarina, where (alighted) he was
told, that not three houres before, the two Brothers were
ridden abroad, to kill a huge wilde Boare, that was ſaid to
haue beene ſeene grazing not farre off to the Countries
great detriment.
               This newes much gladded him, that he might now with
the more freedome enioy the company of his ſoft Miſtris:
and ſo he went towards her Chamber, where (though it
were but early) he found her not: and asking more carefully
of her, one of her Maids told him ſhe was in the Garden,
to vvhich way he inſtantly haſting, might ſee how amongſt
the Flowers, ſhe was with her white hand framing
a pretty painted wouen garland of Myrtles, Gilly-flowers,
and different Violets, and in the interim hee might heare
ſome Contents of her ſolitarie thoughts, expreſſed by her
melodious Voice, in this ſhort Ode:
               
               Thou Ruſset and knot-wreathing Snake,
               Nature allowes,
               Thy barren Spouſe,
               And both, embraces cloſe to take.
               And thou, high Elme; thou and the Vine,
               
               In Hymens rite,
               Ioy day and night,
               And inter-lacing kiſses ioyne.
               So may you liue, and flouriſh ſtill,
               Free from curſt Hynde,
               From fierceſt winde,
               Thou, on the graſſe; Thou, on the Hill.
               As you by ſuch ſweet ſympathies,
               Examples proue,
               For him to loue,
               That (thankeleſse) my embraces flyes.
               The Ditty ended, Heauen forbid (ſuddenly ſurprizing
her, ſaid Gerardo) that my firme affection receiue ſo hard an
attribute. What Art-full Penſill could here ſet out to the
life the countenance of the ouer-ioyed Niſe, expreſſing a
world of gladſomeneſſe, when the wiſht accents of her Louers
voice, toucht in her rauiſht eares (ſo that feareleſſe of
all danger to be eſpied) ſhe ranne, and with open Armes
threw her ſelfe vpon his necke, crying out, If for ſo tedious
and grieuous a neglect, I ſhould take the reuenge on
thee that thou deſerueſt, theſe Armes, (that as bonds) now
enfold thee, might iuſtly retire from ſo cloſe an embrace:
but ſo fearefull am I of thy crying quits in another kinde,
that, to giue thee leſſe freedome, (then I feare in this abſence
thou haſt had) I am forced to locke thee in with theſe
Armes.
               Truſt me, deare Owner of my life, ſaid Gerardo, I had rather
be ſtill ſo impriſon'd, then by looſing of thoſe Armes,
inioy my leſſe eſteemed liberty: and ſince from my neglect
ſo great a glory proceedes, what iuſtice haue you to call
me yet neglectfull? This onely vvas wanting to my misfortune
(ſaid Niſe) that from my fauours thou takeſt occaſion

to torment me. Gerardo, at this and other amorous diſcourſes
ſmiling, led her by the hand, and going to the priuateſt
part of the Caſtle, after they had diſcuſſed together
(not without ſome miſdoubt) of the Slaues long ſtay, as
well as of Lauro's vnexpected abſence, (taking leaue of her
ruddy lips) hee betooke himſelfe to his Chamber, where
reſting after his weary iourney the greateſt part of that day,
the two following nights he paſſed in the embraces of his

                     •
                  ole loued Miſtris; till ſuch time as her Father and Vnkle
were returned, for then their delights were leſſe ſecure.
               The two Noble Brothers were much gladded with Gerardo's
returne, though Leoncio's ſtay behinde did ſomething
leſſen that ioy in Don Henrique's breſt, which vvas ſtill
gratefull, ſo long as Lauro's death was concealed. But not
paſſing ten dayes after, a Meſſenger was purpoſely diſpatcht
from the Gouernour of Corduba, to Don Antonio, to
let him know, that a Slaue of his was there in hold, flying
(as ſeemed) hs Maſters anger, and that for the ſuſpition
they had of him in reſpect of the iron markes in his face,
they thought fit to ſtay him. The newes much pleaſed the
Brothers, though Gerardo and Niſe, for the ſecreſie of their
affaires, would rather he had neuer bin heard off. Don Antonio
(ſenſible of his Slaues loſſe) inſtantly ſent one for him;
and the very ſame day came the newes of his Nephewes
death, which (to his ſoules griefe) made him extremely
paſſionate. It was knowne, by a Letter brought him from
Lauro's ſeruant, who remained in a Village of Portugall, called
Mora, the ſad Contents were theſe:
               Though the ſad and certaine ſorrow you ſhall receiue, might
haue excuſed theſe Lines, yet the loue of a dutifull ſeruant to his
deceaſed Maſter, hath more preu
                     •
                  iled with me; ſo farre, as to
giue you an account of your deare Lauro, whoſe reuenge hath

mou
                     •
                  d me to let you know the vehement ſuſpition I haue of his
Murderers, in this Village of Mora in Portugall, from whence
I write, and whither I addreſsed my ſelfe the ſame night that
my Maſter and I were abſent from Ceſarina, hauing left him
ſlain in the croſſe-way neere the Pits by Mare-Woods, where
foure men ſet vpon vs, and ſo, diſtreſsed, I and your Slaue were
forced to ſaue our ſelues by flying; your Slaue, who was happily
then preſent, that ſo bloudy a crime might not eſcape without
puniſhment. You ſhall vnderſtand, Sir, that the intent of our
iourney (though the ſucceſse were contrary) was, to haue ſlaine
Gerardo, the cauſe ſufficient to engage my Maſter, your daughters
honour: which, the ſaid Gerardo ſought by illicite affection
to depriue her of; from whence and vndoubtedly I collect, that,
he, gheſsing at my Maſters thoughts, by way of anticipation
meant to ſtrike first. And this doth the more confirme my ſuſpition;
for that the next morning, at Seuill, I vnderſtood from
Leoncio, that ouer-night this Brother had departed towards
Ceſarina, where, if at preſent hee bee; you may by legall inquiſition
ſift out theſe, more certaine then fained probabilities.
               Scarce had Don Ant
                        •
                     nio read theſe laſt lines, when, his
couragious breſt vnable to ſupport ſuch a waight of ſorrow,
he remained ſenceleſſe, and letting the Paper drop, fixt his
ſad eyes vpon it, with ſuch ſhewes and ſignes of inward
Torment, as cauſed no leſſe in the pittifull Don Henrique
(none elſe by) who, fearing his Brother might fall into ſome
helpleſſe agony, ſtepping to him, and taking him by the
hand, ſo dealt with him, that he called backe his remembrance
(though the wofull accident made him ſpeake nothing
but groanes:) (which perceiued by Don Henrique)
himſelfe was almoſt brought to that heauy paſſe. For beſides
that the deceaſed Lauro was eſteemed as ſole ſonne,
and wholly heire of both, the ſuſpition of Niſe's diſhonour,

did more aggrauate the ones rage, and increaſe the others
ſorrow. But the latter (accuſtomed to ſuch brunts, and,
reaſon mitigating his paſſion) began more temperately to
treat with his Brother, touching theſe affaires (which caried
with all ſecrecie) they mutually agreed, that Gerardo ſhould
be apprehended, and that, ſpeedily, before hee might haue
notice of their purpoſe: which, to the poore Gentlemans
admiration, was ſuddenly effected, by taking him at vnawares
in his Chamber; and from thence he was conueyed
to the ſtrong Tower, with which hee had beene formerly
acquainted; and (leauing two truſty ſeruants for his Iaylors)
with three or foure others, they rode to Mare-Woods,
where neere the fore-mentioned Pits, they found the vnhappy
Lauro's body; but, ſo ſwolne, diſ-figured and putrified;
that as well in this reſpect, as alſo that (the fleſh being
naked, it was in many parts eaten and deuoured by vvilde
beaſts) they doubted whether it were the ſame they looked
for: till looking more narrowly vpon the corps, it was
knowne to thoſe that paſsionately bewailed the Owner, by
a certaine marke it had, which parted the left ſide of the
beard. So, without more adoe, wrapping the body in a
blacke Herſe, they returned backe to Ceſarina, where, when
Gerardo's ſecret impriſonment was knowne, the whole town
vvas in an vproare, eſpecially the grieued Niſe's trouble
was incomparably the greateſt; when, comming to the
Tower to ſpeake with him, the carefull Warders hindered
her, and withall ſaid, they were chiefely charged to deny
her entrance: which made her thinke all was betraid vnto
her Father and Vnkle; whoſe rigour, for her offence, ſhee
began not without cauſe to feare: yet, loue to Gerardo animating
her tender heart, gaue her valour to expect for his
ſake a thouſand deaths, reſolued to die rather with him for
company, then for any liuing reſpect to forſake him. (a determination

in woman brauely Maſculine, if in the performance
the vſuall variable condition of her ſexe had not intermeddled.)
               
                  Gerardo in this extremitie ſtood vndaunted, for (innocent
of Lauro's death) for any other ground of his impriſonment
he reioyced; that, by his danger Niſe might know
his affection, and at how low a rate in reſpect of that he valewed
life. (The two Vnkles arriuing about midnight with
their Nephewes bodie) the two ſad Louers vvith the frightfull
newes, gaue reſpite to their wandring imaginations, and
Gerardo was now openly pronounced the bloody homicide,
who (innocent) ſeemed not to be much ſenſible of his
impriſonment, ſaue, of the vvrong thoſe Gentlemen did
him, to diuulge him the Murderer throughout all Andaluzia,
vvanting proofes for it; vvhereas, indeed, in all equity
(conſidering the Lawes of friendſhip, & his former wrongfull
impriſonment) they ought now to haue proceeded
with more reall iuſtification. This not a little troubled him,
though, neither from Don Antonio, or his Brother, he could
receiue the leaſt ſatisfaction, vvho onely ſought to ſatisfie
themſelues with his bloud; and, ſo, hauing ſpeedily cauſed
Lauro's body to be interred, they diſpatcht a Meſſenger to
the Village of Mora, for the ſeruant that wrote the Letter;
and another to Corduba, for the Slaue (deferring in the
meane time a more important diligence.) Theſe things
were not ſo ſeuerely carried, but that vvithin three dayes
Leoncio had notice of his Brothers danger: whereupon, accompanied
vvith ſome of his kinſmen and friends, he tooke
Poſts for Ceſarina; Arſenio onely, abſent then from Seuill,
came not; or rather an vnluckie chance, as diſaſtrous as the
preſent of Gerardo, kept him behinde; the which, before the
end of this firſt parts laſt Tragicall diſcourſe, we ſhal onely,
to auoid prolixi
                     ••
                  e touch at.
               
                  
                  Leoncio and his friends as ſoone as they came to Ceſarina,
alighted at the firſt Inne they met with not holding it ſafe
to accept of the Caſtle offered by the two Brothers vnto
them: from whom Leonci
                        •
                     
                   vnderſtood the cauſe of his Brothers
impriſonment, without any mention of Niſe, vvhich
more for infamy then vncertainty was pretermitted.
               
                  Leoncio vvas inwardly glad to conſider how weake proofes
they had againſt his brother: but this he kept ſecret; and rather,
in words and geſture expreſſed great ſhewes of grieuance,
vrging how ill they had complied with their loues
to his Brother and him, ſince, ſo ſlightly, onely with a Letter
and bare preſumption from one that in more likelihood
might be guilty, they had moued the poiſe of their iudgement.
To this he added more reaſons, ſo bitter and full of
indignation (as made Don Antonio ready to haue clapped
him vp with his Brother) which had they done, all had
beene marred, conſidering how vvell Leoncio and his friends
came prouided; ſo, Don Antonio comming neere vnto him,
ſaid; Looke you, Signior Leoncio, if your Brothers impriſonment
ſo much diſtaſte you: thinke you my Nephewes
bloudy murder as much grieues not vs? The truth ought to
be ſifted out; neither take I your ſelfe to bee ſo cleere, as to
ſpeake ſo freely in ſo weighty a cauſe. Gerardo is your Brother,
and vvho knowes whether his intents were made
knowne or not to you? and therefore reſt contented; for
hitherto there hath been no indirect proceeding: and perhaps
what may ſeeme but ſlight and triuiall to you, may er
                     •
                  
long put you to your Pecke of Troubles.
               More vvould the paſſionate Gentleman haue ſaid, and
worſe had hee beene anſwered, but that Don Henrique,
leſſe blinded vvith choller, & that more eſteemed of Leoncio
for his friend, preuented them by ſtepping betweene.
               And Leoncio, without further ſtay, went to his lodging,

(where thorowly conferring touching the buſines vvith his
friends) the vpſhot was, that according to cuſtome in matters
of conſequence, they ſhould petition to the great and
feared Tribunall of Iliberis, to haue the cauſe and tryall remooued
thither, (aſſured that if the iuſtice of it were left
to Don Antonio's arbitrement, it would haue but a diſaſtrous
iſſue) ſince he being abſolute Lord ouer ſuch as hee might
name for Iudges in Ceſarina, they would doe nothing but
what he ſhould direct them in. The aduice ſeemed good
to all, and was quickly put in execution (Gerardo firſt appealing
from his vniuſt impriſonment, and ſome neceſſarie diligences
vſed after in that High Court of Chancerie) hee
was by order of thoſe ſupreme Iudges ſent for thither. In
the meane while, he that went for the Slaue was returned;
and hauing brought him in ſure hold, as ſoone as hee was
come into Don Antonio's preſence, not once expecting to be
demanded the cauſe of his flight, falling proſtrate at his
Maſters feete, and deſiring his eare in priuate, he plainely
deliuered as much as he knew of Niſe's ſecret affection, and
of the Letter committed to his truſt for Gerardo: (an Act
fit for ſo baſe a creature, and worthy to light heauy on her,
that would commit ſo important a ſecret to a Slaues
breſt.)
               Here Don Antonio ſeeing how impoſſible it was that his
diſhonour ſhould now any longer be concealed, like a Tormented
Bull toared out alowde his hard misfortunes: his
Brother alſo ſuſpecting the worſt, grew almoſt to as badde
plight: & Niſe no ſooner heard of the Slaues arriuall, but,
fearfull of the danger, & forgetting her amorous reſolution
ſuddenly fled from her Fathers houſe, taking Sanctuarie at
a Nunnery (which had in former times beene founded by
her Anceſtors) from whence ſhe gaue notice to the angry
old man, of the Change; who, now with extremitie of ſadneſſe

had no ſence of feeling left of his diſgraceful troubles.
But ſince their Cauſer was in his power, the certainty of his
Reuenge did a little reui
                     •
                  e him, which was alſo increaſed
by the comming of Lauro's ſeruant, whoſe declaration taken,
agreed iuſt with the preſumptions of his former Letter:
and though by the Slaues depoſition there were a plaine
difference & contradiction between them (ſince the one ſaid
he left Gerardo in Seuil; and the other, that hee appeared to
haue beene one of the Homicides) yet the buſineſſe had
danger enough to haue daunted the moſt couragious
heart.
               On the other ſide, Gerardo's ill ſucceſſe in his loue quite
ſtained his reputation, branding him with the breach of
faith and friendſhip: yet ſuch errours, not vtterly vnpardonable,
might haue admitted ſome diſcharge. Many wayes
our vnfortunate Priſoner aſſay'd to know Niſe's determinate
will, in whom, as his lifes comfortreſſe, hee had fixed the
remedy of his preſent mis-fortunes, thinking the vpſhot of
all muſt be, to take her as his own & happy coniugall companion.
But his enemies looked ſo narrowly to him, that it
was not poſſible for any Letter of his to this effect to come
to Niſe's hands: for Don Antonio aymed wholly at his life;
ſo that, as well himſelfe in perſon, as alſo, by his meanes, the
Nunnes laboured his daughter, that in any caſe, ſhe ſhould
deny to haue had other then a lawfull acquaintance vvith
Gerardo, aduertizing her, that hee was infallibly to die; ſo
that ſhould ſhe ſay otherwiſe (beſides looſing him) her honour
vvould be ruinouſly loſt; and other matters to this purpoſe;
which (ſomtimes gently, other-whiles rigorouſly propoſed)
were ſufficient to reduce her minde to her ſterne Fathers
will, and to make her forget that immenſe affection,
with which of late ſhe had reſolued to dye for her Gerardo.
But Niſe made no new book of her variable inconſtancie,

which incident to the whole ſex, little needs he to wonder
at theſe changes that ſhall marke their end. Thus Niſe, before,
determined to ſuffer thouſands of deaths for her Louer
(cutting now the thred of her firme intent) ten onely
dayes abſence of impriſonment, and a few poore threats,
alter her mind, conforming it (againſt Gerardo) to her Father
and Vnkles pleaſure.
               This new and ſudden change (as bad newes is vvont)
came laſt of all to Gerardo's eare, cauſing within him ſo
raw an operation, that the paſt Tragedies of his former
dead Loues, were nothing in reſpect of this, and but as
ſmall additions to this laſt great Torment. In the heat of
theſe affaires, the valiant Leoncio returned againe to Ceſarina,
and his Brothers preſence; whom, by his afflictions
ſtrangely metamorphoſed, he ſcarce knew: but hauing in
fine giuen him the beſt comfort hee might, on the other
ſide he required Don Antonio by vertue of a Scedule Royall,
that his Brother might be deliuered vp for the famous
Citie of Iliberis, which (to his griefe) he was forced to obey,
& the Priſoner was with a ſtrong Guard conueyed as
the buſineſſe and Gerardo's perſon well needed, who now
ſomewhat well cheered with his Brothers preſence, prouided
himſelfe for Iliberis; and ſtraight hee was vpon his
way, turning for euer (in his determined thoughts) his
backe to Caſarina.
               
               About mid-day (growing too extreme hot to paſſe further
to any Towne) comming to a pleaſant flowery Valley
(that lying vnder certaine huge Rockes, made the
greene ſeate more delightfull) by generall conſent they
choſe that freſh coole place to giue their wearied bodies
ſome refreſhment: and ſo alighting, whilſt their Horſes
grazed, cauſed their dinner prouiſions to be taken from off
a great Sumpter-Moyles back, that was their Cup-boord,

and hauing alſo the flower-enamelled field for their Table-Cloth,
and the tranſparent ſtreames of the neere running
Brooke for their Baſon (downe they ſate, and with much
content fell to their victuals:) which alſo was ſo much
the more by the addition of a cleere Voices ſweete
accents, which in midſt of Dinner they might diſtinctly
heare to the ſound of a Rebecke in the following
Song.
               
                  At the foote of a Mountaine white
                  Clad all in ſnow,
                  That doth melt with the Sunne-beames bright,
                  
                     Celio as in a Dreame,
                  Beholdeth how the ſtreame,
                  Driues to and fro.
                  Little Pibbles, white, red and blue,
                  then doth he ſee,
                  And preſented are to his view,
                  Sands like Arabian Gold,
                  Neere which he may behold,
                  Apollo's Tree.
                  
                  Inſtead of Fiſhes, Nayades
                  
                  In Criſtall vailes,
                  Lift vp their heads from thoſe freſh Seas,
                  with diff'rent garlands crown'd,
                  Sad Cygnus ſwimming round,
                  His loſse bewayles.
                  Yong Hyacinthus groweth neere:
                  Adonis too,
                  
                  
                     Acanthus the Boy doth appeare,
                  In a flow'r of his name,
                  
                     Narciſſus loſt his fame,
                  That ſcorn'd to woo.
                  
                     
The Thracian Minſtrell riſeth then,
                  His Harpe he brings,
                  That attracts birds, beaſts, fiſhes, men:
                  With the ſweet ſound he cheares,
                  The liſtning Shepherds eares,
                  And thus he ſings:
                  
                     Feniſſa the faire now is come,
                  (Swaine) weepe no more:
                  With little foot of Snow,
                  She trips it to and fro
                  On graſsie ſhore.
                  Come then Feniſſa, faire Feniſſa come,
                  Come to the ſhade,
                  By coole leaues made.
                  Sing, Celio: Valley, make Feniſſa roome,
                  And let Eccho ring,
                  Shee's the Valleys Spring:
                  
                     Feniſſa come.
               
               With this Song all were ſtrucke ſilent, and leauing both
victuals and diſcourſe, gaue vvilling attention. And Gerardo,
vvho in the midſt of his troubles kept euer a good
memorie, forgot not his old friend Celio, aſſoone as hee
might know him by his voyce, yet, ſee him he could not, by
reaſon of a winding thicket, through which his eye could
hardly reach to the gentle Shepherd: ſo, one of the company,
to do Gerardo ſeruice, roſe vp and meant to ſeek & bring
Celio to him; vvhen by chance hauing heard Gerardo name
him, he ſoon came out of the thicket, vvhither, to enioy the
coole ſhade, he was gotten, and leading a Nymph as beautifull
of face, as himſelfe comely of perſon; drawing now
neere, and to his no ſmall admiration, knowing the Priſoner
Gerardo, he ranne to him, and vvith open armes (his

eyes ſhedding teares for ſo long abſence) imbraced him,
that with no leſſe paſſion vvelcommed the others approch;
and forcing the good Shepherd to ſit next vnto him, recounted
the vvhole Story of his late laſt misfortunes; which
he cloſed vp with ſome ſighes; to which Celio and his Shepherdeſſe
prooued the Eccho's in their anſwer. To her, Gerardo
applying himſelfe, thus ſaid, By your louely preſence
and ſome part of my friends Ditty, I ſuppoſe, faire Miſtris,
you are the ſhrine, to vvhoſe Deitie Celio hath deuoted all
his affections; the which (time was) I knew to be otherwiſe
employed, when his thoughts and mine were then equall:
but as the vvitchcraft of a paire of blacke quicke eyes,
wrought a change in me, that ought by ſad experience to
haue beene more wary; what vvonder, if my friend, taught
by no experience nor rigour of Fortune, ſhould ſuffer vanquiſhment
from ſo rare a ſubiect? That onely, noble Gerardo,
(ſaid Celio, before the willing Shepherdeſſe could reply)
excuſeth me, and ſatisfies for the breach of ſingle life.
I am onely ſorry, that I had not long ſince beſtowed my
whole life vpon Feniſsa's ſeruice; vvhoſe ſweet preſence (after
a tedious abſence) hath, as this day deſcended hither,
to giue new life, ſhadow, colour, to theſe Plants, Valley,
and Flowers. Shall I ſtill be angry, my Celio, replied the
ſmiling Shepherdeſſe, at your offending flattery? For, there
beeing ſo many witneſſes here preſent of my meane parts,
how dare you extol them ſo, or rather, mocke me with ſuch
fawning attributes? Rather, ſaid Gerardo, with all Celio can
ſay, he muſt come ſhort: in which, and other pleaſing diſcourſe,
(time drawing neere, and the Sunnes heate ſlackning)
they made ready to take horſe: ſo all tooke leaue,
and Gerardo was very much pleaſed with Celio's happy encounter,
taking it as a preſage of good ſucceſſe, though a
tragicall accident that befell the valiant Arſenio, changed

this mirth into a mournfulneſſe, equall to that for his owne
misfortunes: for aſſoone as he was entred into the Iliberian
priſon, he found Arſenio there for his companion. The
cauſe of his apprehenſion was not much different (as being
bloody) from his, yet the effects were quite contrary: ſince,
to the charge of our vnhappy Gerardo, the death of one
onely perſon was wrongfully laid, but the killing of three in
ſingle combate were ſufficiently prooued againſt the other.
Actes (had they beene in warre) worthy Lawrell, as now
like to produce ſome exemplary puniſhment: ſuch actes,
as were they not ſomwhat too aberring from the promiſed
breuitie of our neere ending Hiſtories firſt Part, might affoord
a curious eye no leſſe pleaſing then profitable entertainment.
With Arſenio's diſcreet loued company, Gerardo
was by little and little diuerted from his ſorrowfull fancies,
and began to thinke vpon ſome needfull courſe for his
liberty; though had not high Heauen now (as at other
times) mooued with his innocence, deliuered him from
danger, his life had beene vtterly loſt: for, ſome fiue moneths
after Gerardo had thus beene Priſoner, by a ſecret
and vn-expected chance, Lauro's murderers were in fine
happily diſcouered.
               So it was, that the fore-mentioned Souldiers you read
of, roaming vp and downe in their bloody exerciſe, vvere,
vpon ſome ſlight preſumptions, laid hold of in a certaine
little Towne of the Duke of Medina Sidonia's, where (being
put to the Racke) they not onely confeſſed the fact, for
which they ſtood accuſed, but diuers thefts, robberies, and
murders, as amongſt others, Lauro's death; and another equall
in execution, though in the manner and performance
more hainouſly beaſt-like, the father hauing prooued the
Filicide of his owne ſonne; the father, vvho was named
Don Iohn Ponce, a Tarteſian Gentleman; in my opinion, one

of the moſt barbarouſly cruell actes it was, that either in
Spaine, or elſe-where in any Age euer truly happened, as
well in reſpect of the beginning and motiue, as that the
principall authour and actor in it, was (as is ſaid) the father:
and the rarity of it vvill not let me paſſe it ouer in ſilence,
but ſet it downe as ſuccinctly as I can to a tittle, according
to the true Relation giuen; vvhich, to enſuing times,
and perpetuall memory, ſhall bee imprinted in theſe laſt
Leaues of my blacke Lines, as followeth:
               There liues in the City of Tarteſia a vviddow Dame, called
Fabia, whom, Heauen in her younger yeeres, endued
with more beauty, vertue, and goodneſſe, then goods of
fortune, or nobleneſſe of blood and birth. To her, one of
the prime Gallants of that Citty made court; vvhoſe amorous
thoughts vvere ſoone by her perceiued, and ſo diſcreetly
auoided, that ſhe neuer ſo much as tooke the leaſt notice
of them; till time and his importuning preſents, vvhich by
vnexpected vvayes ſtill came to her hands, made her ſhew
her ſelfe ſomewhat leſſe coy, though neuer the more comming;
yet he obtained with much ado, ſome ſpeech with her
from a vvindow, but farre off, and ſmall hopes of enioying
his ends and her; only a litle to diſ-oblige her ſelf, ſhe afforded
him that poore content of ſpeech, vvhich neuertheleſſe
was not carried vvith the ſecrecie it ought: for, comming
to an Aunts notice of hers, ſhe vvas by her Aunt ſo roughly
reprehended, that hauing out of her anger learn't a vvarning,
ſhe from that time forward ſhut her Window againſt
her burning Louer. But his flame the more increaſed, by
how much his deſire to ſee her, and her vigilancie not to
ſee him, was augmented. Loues eyes are like piercing Lynceus;
and ſo, Fabia's care vvas loſt, ſince her Louer would
not loſe his ſeeing her, but like a diligent Sentinel, was alwaies

vvaking: and one time amongſt others, viewing, how
his faire Miſtris, careleſſe of a ſurprizall, vvas ſet at the
ſtreet doore, laying hold on the bleſſed opportunitie, hee
came neere, and began to lay ſuch effectuall amorous reaſons
before her, that ſhe had neither the power to turne her
backe, nor obſtinacie to ſtop her cares; and ſo gaue a way
to his Loues enchantment, to vndermine her conſtant purpoſe.
But hearing his diſcourſe tend wholly to complaints
of her vnkindneſſe, not willing that he ſhould proceed, ſhe
abruptly thus cuts him off: The fauour, Signior, you doe
me, extending beyond the limits of ordinary courteſie, enforceth
me to deſire your forbearance; and (for I haue often
told you my will cannot conforme it ſelfe with yours) mee
thinkes it might ſatisfie you: ſince it ſo much concernes
my honour, and no reaſon is it, that he, who pretends hee
loues me, ſhould ſtriue to bereaue me of that, which (once
loſt) is neuer to be reſtored. My Parents are about to beſtow
me, and I am willing to obey them, by vndergoing
that eſtate which they hold ſitting for me. And ſince my
birth hath made me too vnequally meane for your deſerts,
that in this reſpect I can be no lawfull recompence to your
deſires, I moſt humbly beſeech you to forget me, and caſt
your eyes vpon ſome nobler ſubiect, that for blood may
deſerue that, of which my lowneſſe hath made mee an vndeſeruer.
Here, inflam'd with ielouſie, the reſolued Gentleman
replyed: So cruell a Treatie, to me ſo preiudiciall,
loued Fabia, ſhall not proceed, if I can helpe it, neither wil
I longer deferre the remedie that lies in mine owne hand,
which I forthwith giue, and a firme promiſe to be your huſband;
and that you may be the better aſſured, theſe foure
ſeruants, with Heauen and me, ſhall be your witneſſes: and
this ſayd, without expecting the leaſt anſwer from her, that,
ouercome with ſudden ioy, could hardly haue giuen it, hee

gaue a call to his ſeruants; and before them, turning to his
Fabia, (whom he ſaw with the vnlook't-for accident, turned
into bluſhing crimſon) proſecuting his intent, hee ſaid,
Deare Miſtris, why are you thus ſilent, or deferre that I,
which I expect from your ſweet lippes? I ſay once more,
nay, a thouſand times, but, a ſhort once for all, I am your
Husband: of which, Heauen and theſe ſhall bee my witneſſes;
giue me then that white hand, with which, and in it, I
ſhall enioy more happineſſe then in the worlds Treaſure.
And ſo ceaſing, he gaue way, that the modeſt Fabia might
with leſſe trouble frame this ioyfull anſwer: Wonder not,
deare Signior, that a fauour ſo aboue my daſtard thoughts,
ſhould thus amaze me; your offer I moſt truly eſteeme of,
and muſt, by being your Spouſe, receiue with you my ſole
happines: & ſo, ioyning hands they embraced, remaining
alike linked in the vnion of their affections, whoſe effects
were that very night accompliſhed, to the no ſmal content
of Don Iohn, that onely at parting deſired Fabia to conceale
and content her ſelf with his promiſe, till ſuch time as their
marriage might be effected without diſtaſte to his friends
and kindred: to which ſhe eaſily condeſcended, as willing
in all things to ſatisfie him like an obedient wife. With this
warie ſecrecie the Louers held on in their priuate meetings,
till ſuch time as Fabia grew to be with child, and her Gallant
(without all feare of heauen) to a treaty of marriage
with a dainty Dame and neere Kinſwoman of his, which in
ſhort time without Fabia's notice was effected. But what
hand may rule my weary Pen, if I ſhould goe about to ſet
downe the mocked Fabia's griefe? What tongue would
without faltring expreſſe her ſoules immenſe ſorrow, as
ſoone as ſhe heard the bitter newes of his faiths breach, that
was her onely Owner? 'Twere to take freſh breath, to begin
a new Tragedy: may her teares and ſighes then reſt in

the Readers conſideration; which, as abundant and continuall,
ſo, hard they were to be concealed from her parents;
to whom, as her womaniſh feare would permit her, ſhe diſcouered
the ſtate ſhee was in, of being two moneths pregnant;
they accompanying in her mournfull diſcomfort,
ſought rather wiſely to marry her, then by impoſſible pleas
more to defame her: And therefore without many delaies
married her to a perſon of their ranke, but one that had
good meanes: with whom (her defect one way, and exceſſe
another, vn-noted) ſhee paſſed for a maid; and ſome
eight moneths after, was deliuered (as legitimate) of a luſtie
Boy; and ſo quickly with the Infants pleaſing company,
ſhe blotted out of her mind the abhorred remembrance of
the true periur'd Father.
               Some ten yeeres vvere expired after the childs birth, in
all which time, iuſt Heauen bleſſed not the vngratefull Don
Iohn with any iſſue, to his no ſmall griefe: for that one of
his brothers, whom he deadly hated, was neceſſarily to ſucceed
him in the Eſtate. And now quite deſperate of any
fruite by his wife, he propoſed to himſelfe the Boy hee had
by Fabia for his heire: and hereupon not content to haue
moſt trecherouſly wronged her, but truſting to wealth and
friends, inſenſible of the poore Fabia's diſgrace, hee ſought
by Law to recouer his ſonne; and to this purpoſe petitioned
to an ordinary Iudge; who, for admitting ſo ſcandalous a
demand, deſerued an extraordinary puniſhment. And ſo,
his ſeruants bringing in witneſſe of the cloſe meetings that
were betweene them, as alſo of the iuſt computation and
time of her deliuerie, by ſentence of Law the Iudge diſpoſſeſt
him that loued the Boy as his owne, and adiudged him
to be reſtored to the periur'd, falſe, yet true Father. With
the affront done him, Fabia's poore husband and fell into a deſperate
ſickneſſe, and ſoone after died: ſo ſhe, poore ſoule,

remained without honour, ſonne or husband, ſuch are the
cruell effects of an vnrelenting proceeding.
               The wicked Sire was now moſt iocund in his new
ſonne, called likewiſe Don Iohn, and cauſing him to bee
moſt tenderly cockered and brought vp: but the Boyes
owne good inclination to all vertuous qualities, made him
in few yeeres grow to that towardlineſſe, that hee was generally
beloued, and ſo highly commended, that euen in
his owne father it begat enuie. For the ſtep-Dame there
needes nought bee ſaid, ſince their hatred and malice is
their generall inheritance: yet the prudent Don Iohn as diſcreetly
boare his mother-in-lawes ill-will, as from ſo tender
yeeres might bee expected; neither did hee in all the
plenty and fortune of his new Eſtate, ſhew the leaſt forgetfulneſſe
of his old habitation, where euery day once at
leaſt, his owne poore Mother was by him ſeene and ſerued;
but his father and ſtep-mother ſo much ſtomacked
this, that they wholly repented them of claiming him;
and next, making little or no reckening of him, withdrew
all manner of allowance either to ſuſtaine, or clothe him:
whereupon the young Gentleman was forced to ſue them
(according to Spaines cuſtome) for meanes; which, by
ſentence were allotted him, to the value of ſeuen hundred
Crownes to bee annually payed him. But, the vertuous
youth conſidering his mothers wants needed more reliefe
then his owne, was content to part with his annuity to
her; which done, he went with a kinſman of his fathers,
that dearely loued him, to the City of Lisborne, where that
party was prouided of a place of good credit in the Kings
Gallies. There Don Iohn in his kinſmans company liued
happily enough, till, vnderſtanding by Letters from his
mother, how hardly his cruell father proceeded in the paiment
of her monies, his duty haſtening him, hee returned

thither. Well knew he that begat him, the cauſe of his ſo
ſuddaine arriuall, neither did his wife ignore it; who, like
a curſt ſtep-Dame, deſired nothing more then the poore
young mans ruine, which was ſoone after effected: for
her diuelliſh intent finding ſufficient admittance to her
husbands diſ-affection, was made knowne, and finding in
him no leſſe deſire of his ſonnes riddance, they both reſolued,
and the future Filicide, parted with this bloody purpoſe
toward the great City of Seuil, where he might without
any difficulty, finde choice of murderers to diſpatch
his onely ſonne. And ſo hauing by chance lighted on the
foure fore-mentioned Rogues, agreeing with them to kill
him for two hundred Crownes; of which, fiftie were to
be payed in earneſt: they returned backe together, and entred
that night Tarteſia, where the diuelliſh father, informed
of the ſonnes being in his mothers houſe, inſtructed
them for the manner of his diſpatch; and ſo, leading them
on to the vnfitting ſacrifice and houſe, thus ſayd, That before
is the doore, there's no more to bee done, but one of
you knocke, aske for Don Iohn; and as hee comes out, the
reſt may ſo deale with him, that he may ſaue himſelfe a reuenge,
and giue mee ſatisfaction. There wanted not, by
Heauens prouidence, ſome one to ouer-heare theſe laſt
words, and witneſſe againſt this accurſed Iudge, that pronounced
ſo ſharpe a decree vpon his owne blood: and
this was a poore old woman, who, not dreaming of any
ſuch accident, ſtood as then at a cloſe Lattice-window,
from whence ſhe might alſo view, how, that hauing (as
they were inſtructed) asked for the innocent Youth, iuſt
as he came out of his mothers houſe, they gaue him his
deaths wound. But he died not very ſoone after, which
bred no ſmal diſtemper in his trecherous father, as fearing,
his wound was not mortall enough, or belike, his pleaſure

done, he repented him of the fact; but from hence he tooke
occaſion to pay with ſome twenty Crownes ouer-plus, the
inhumane murderers; telling them, he agreed for his ſonnes
death, which they had not effected, but onely giuen him
ſome ſlight hurts, for which they had already receiued ſufficient
recompence. There wanted no replies from the impatient
men, who now repented them they had not firſt

                     •
                  laine him by the way. But ſeeing how much it concerned
them all to be ſecret, curſing his baſe proceeding, the next
day they left Tarteſia. The wofull Fabia euen diſtracted
with her ſonnes danger, informed by the ſaid old woman,
of the truth of what ſhe before more then halfe ſuſpected,
accompanied with ſome of her neighbours, (a raging mother)
ſhe ranne and caſt her ſelfe at the Gouernours feet, (a
noble and vpright Gentleman) calling out for vengeance,
requiring with her dolorous clamours, Iuſtice; and with
her teares and wringing, prouoking Heauen it ſelfe to pitty.
Scarce had the cruell father notice of her ſorrow, the peoples
curſes, and his ſonnes danger, when, all in a cold ſweat
and frighting feare, the offence gnawing his conſcience,
without more adoo he withdrew himſelfe to a Monaſtery,
whereby without further proofes, himſelfe declared himſelfe
to be the guilty actor. And therefore the ſeuere Gouernour
cauſed him to be taken forcibly out, and conſulted
earneſtly with the Iudge his Aſſiſtant, for the manner of his
puniſhment. About this time Don Iohn ended his vnhappy
life. Now the father being wondrous rich, and powerfully
allyed, was able to ſtop and coole a little the Gouernours
feruent proceeding. For by Order from the Inquiſition,
(by reaſon of the ceſſation from diuine Seruice, till the Sanctuary
man were brought backe againe to the Monaſtery)
it was commanded he ſhould be reſtored.
               In the beginning of this buſineſſe, he thought fit for ſome

reſpects, to conceale a certaine quantitie of Monies and
Iewels he had to the value of thirty thouſand Crownes,
which he committed (as to ſafe cuſtodie) to his Brothers:
but the preſent trouble hauing conſumed moſt of his
meanes, made him rely now vpon the reſt of that wealth,
and to this purpoſe demanded his owne of his Brothers:
by whom (as Heauen iuſtly ordained) he was not onely forſaken,
but laughed to ſcorne for ſo ridiculous a demaund,
they vtterly denying to haue receiued ſo much as a denier
from him; which, in the wearie worne Gentleman, bred
ſuch a ſudden paſſion of choller and diſdaine, that his vitall
ſpirits ſtifled with the venime of his rage, made him fall flat
dead before the Spectators; aſtoniſh't with the fearefull
accident, which is euer incident to thoſe that giue ſo bad
an account of their liues. And with his death I thinke it fit,
clozing vp this bloody Story, to returne towards the end
of our preſent Narration.
               I told you, how vpon the Racke the Souldiers confeſſed
Lauro's death, which computed with the time, place, and
occaſion, was true, and Gerardo falſely accuſed: ſo that, the
buſineſſe thorowly ſifted by the Court of Iuſtice, to the ſingular
content of his brother and friends, Gerardo was to be
freed. His enemies no leſſe tooke on, who on one ſide were
aſhamed of their blind proceeding; yet on the other, ſenſible
that the honour of a daughter and Neece, was now left
to the wide worlds arbitrement, they reſolued, that Don
Antonio, contrary to his former purpoſe, ſhould demaund
Iuſtice for the wrong done to his houſe, and that the forgotten
Niſe ſhould require performance of marriage,
which, indeed Gerardo neuer ſo much as promiſed, though
ſhe affirmed, that vpon ſuch ſecuritie, ſhe had deliuered vp
her perſon vnto him. Leoncio was much troubled with this
new demand againſt his Brother; who, determining to die

a thouſand deaths, rather then admit of Niſe's loath'd embraces,
reſolued with himſelfe to remaine a perpetuall priſoner,
before he vvould be chained, and indiſſolubly tyed
to the irkeſome captiuity of an vnconſtant vvoman; and his
vnmooued purpoſe knowne to her father and friends, hee
was by them ſtrangely perſecuted, though in all his troubles,
his valour no one iot declined from his firſt ſettled reſolution.
               But 'tis now high time to giue ſome reſt to the continuall
labour of my pen and ſpirits, till other ſucceſſes in Gerardo,
for a ſecond Part of this Worke, may giue a lofty ſubiect
to my quill, and new matter to the world, for example and
inſtruction from Gerardo's misfortunes. 'Mongſt which,
thoſe of his friends Fernando and Don Iayme, ſhall be of no
little variety to the Reader, nor of leſſe admiration, the recouerie
of one of the moſt eſſentiall Actors in this great
Tragedy, whoſe ſad Obſequies (though erroneouſly)
Gerardo in the end of this
firſt Parts ſecond Diſcourſe,
bedewed with mournfull
teares.
            
            The end of the firſt Part.
         
         
            
            
            THE SECOND PART
OF
GERARDO,
THE
VNFORTVNATE
SPANIARD:
            
               The firſt Diſcourſe.
               
                  As a poore Barke diſtreſt by Waues and Winde,
                  When this growes angry, and the Sea
                        •
                      goe high,
                  No eaſe, nor ſafety, (rudely toſt) can finde
                  (By Compaſſe ſteere ſhe ne're ſo cunningly)
                  But needs muſt ſuffer in a double kinde
                  By Aire, if ſhe the helpe of ſayles apply
                  By raking Seas, if vp thoſe helpes ſhe binde:
                  So (an vnheedy Veſſell) doe I liue
                  
                     
Reſtleſse, n
                        •
                     ere ſhipwracke, ſince, I ne're was well,
                  Till I (a-freſh) had launch't into the Ma
                        ••
                     e,
                  Where, what ſoe're reſistance my Barke giue,
                  From the white froth I mount, then fall againe;
                  Then riſe, then tumble downe as low as Hell.
               
               
                  TO the Viols ſound, and his owne harmonious
Voice, the Spaniſh Gerardo
diuerted the memory of his paſt misfortunes,
and the affliction of his preſent
impriſonment. And at this preſent,
the Sunne newly peeping into
thoſe cloſe dungeons, a man long
toſſed as it were in the Gulfe of his libertie, by each vnfortunate
waue, was now at length caſt vpon the priſon of Iliberis.
The eccho of his clinking ſhackles (the firſt ſteppe
euer into that miſerable Manſion) drew Gerardo to a window;
from whence beholding the new-come Gheſt, and
well pleaſed with his manly preſence (which is ſtill a ſtrangers
beſt Letter of re-commendation) hee curſt in his
mind the Tyrannous Officers that brought him within the
Gates. From thence he was led farther on, to a little Wicket,
where the Hammer ſtriking there, ſignified by that

                     •
                  range cuſtome, that their Priſoner was apprehended for
reſiſting the Conſtable. I ſhall not neede to de-cypher this
kinde of dumbe Language frequent in Priſons, ſince being
ſo, no man may wonder at the ſame. Many who now went
by the names of old ſoakers were now gotten round about
the new Priſoner, from whom Gerardo had no ſmaladoo to
get him out of their fingers; yet at length they gaue vvay,
and reſpected him as their Ancient: who tooke the party
by the hand, and led him aſide with him to certaine ſpacious
entries, where, perceiuing he was quite diſ-heartened,

encouraging him the beſt hee could, hee vſed this Phraſe
vnto him:
               All theſe fellowes you ſee here, about, and in yonder little
Court, not farre from vs, lye in Priſon for farre greater
offences then yours, and yet make no difficulty of fauour
from the Iudges; Be of good cheere then, and aſſured, that
if the matter of your impriſonment be of no greater importance
then a reſiſtance, your deliuery may be ſpeedier then
you are aware of. Somewhat leſſe afflicted, though ſtill penſatiue,
the ſorrowfull young man interrupted Gerardo, ſaying,
If that were onely the occaſion which hath brought
mee now to your acquaintance, I acknowledge (and thankfully)
I ſhould haue beene moſt happy in ſuch company,
(happen what might.) But woe is me, Noble Sir, that now
loſe my liberty, when I moſt need it: would Heauen had
pleaſed, that my baſe enemies weapons had firſt ended my
abhorred life. More had he ſaid, and more amazed Gerardo,
had he not beene preuented then, by one that clapping
him with his hand vpon the ſhoulder, as if they had beene
old acquaintance, ſaid, What, are you here Sir? aſtoniſhing
the poore Priſoner with this kinde of demaund: vvho
vvith ſome admiration, yet anſwered him in his own ſtrain,
You may be ſure I am here, if you ſee me; though the queſtion
had been more proper, if I had voluntarily come hither.
To this, vvithout more pawſe, the party added, I know
indeed you are heere for a reſiſtance, and therefore might
haue ſaued a labour of asking: but if that bee all, Laugh at
it, Peace, Giue me money and I'le free you inſtantly: The
Notary is my Friend, and the Iudge my Goſſip, wee are all
in all.
               No ſooner had hee ended, when another Youth of his
owne ranke and profeſſion cut him off from further ſpeaking;
vvho without any reſpect to the by-ſ
                     •
                  anders, looking

ſcuruily vpon the th'other, and plucking him by the Cloake,
proceeded; 'Twere fitter, Goodman you —: you vvould
let alone my Priſoners, and meddle vvith your owne, ſince
you know (according to our agreement) this Gallant belongs
to me. I marry (quoth his oppoſite) if it were matter
of accident, but the caſe is altred here, for this Gentleman
is an eſpeciall friend of mine, and no man ought to
haue intereſt in him but my ſelfe. So they grew (to the Priſoners
no ſmall admiration) to ſome words, and from
thence to blowes, biting and banging each other in ſuch
pitifull ſort, that in a trice, there was neither Hat, Cloake,
nor Ruffe, that (partly trod vnderfoote, or wholly rent to
fitters) acted not a part in the Tragi-Comedy.
               
               The noiſe, Peace-makers, and skirmiſh, as pleaſant as
well performed, might haue ouer-madded a modeſt man,
and burſt him with as outragious a laughter as it drew from
Gerardo; vvhich vvould haue beene farre greater, had not
his long being vſed to theſe kinde of bickerings, depriued
him of the nouelty. Hee had ſeene a hundreth of them, and
now thought beſt to retire vvith the innocent party, which
they did into his Chamber: leauing the others and their
owne vvearineſſe to be their beſt Vmpires; yet there vvere
ſome Priſoners vvho tooke no little paines to part them
(each threatning with a criminall accuſation his Contrary)
and ſo after the ſhort ſpurt of paſſe-time they departed. I
ſhall onely (touching theſe fellowes) giue the Reader a
briefe Item, as firſt; That their ſtile is no other then, Priſon
Droanes, their practiſe meerely to cheate, in which they are
ſo cunning, that no ſooner is a poore Priſoner entred, but
they haue his name, his Birth, Offence, Notary, Iudge, and
what not? Whereupon, with this ſtrange phraſe of, Are
ye here? Laugh at it, Giue me money, I'le free you: by little
and little they ſucke the poore Nouices dry with ſuch their

ſweet and ſauourie language: and then vaniſhing out of
ſight, they ſee them no more, till (happely) their friends or
kindred, effecting their liberties, they then draw neere, and
tell them that by their care and diligence they haue beene
freed; but, if they chance to lye longer, they ſtraight alledge,
that the Notary was not well pleaſed, or the Iudge
ill informed, ſtill, by one means or other, wringing iuice out
of very Rocks, and ſo, eſcape and laugh at the wretches
they haue thus betray'd. They deſerue not ſo much as the
names of Sollicitors, but meerely the former title; and may
this ſuffice, to ſee the extremitie to which poore Priſoners
many wayes are ſubiect.
               The deſire Gerardo had to cheere vp his new Gheſt, made
him preuent dinner time, by prouiding it the ſooner; to
which (together with part of his lodging) hauing inuited
him, & he with more acknowledgement of gratitude then
preſumption, accepted the courteous offer, they ſatisfied
their hungry neceſſitie: and afterward Gerardo, hauing as
vvell by intreaties, as gifts, preuailed with the Iaylor, that
they might remaine together, diuided with him his
owne Bed, and affoorded him all his beſt comfort. In this
manner they remained ſome dayes, in one of vvhich, as
their priuacy gaue fitteſt occaſion, Gerardo deſiring to know
the cauſe of his Camerad's impriſonment, earneſtly intreated
him to communicate it to him, furthering his wiſh, by
giuing the other, firſt a Summary Relation of his owne
miſhaps, and for vpſhot of all, making knowne his name
and quality vnto him: but without theſe reſpects, his owne
merit had wonne ſo much from the Priſoners affection, that
leſſe entreaties might haue ſufficed to grant ſo friendly a
requeſt; and therfore without more adoo gladly condiſcending
to his friends will, a gentle ſigh only (the Auant-courrier
to his truth) he began:
               
                  
'Tis now iuſt ſixe moneths ſince I left the Citie of Corduba,
my natiue ſoyle, where, by the name of Leandro, I am
knowne, as by a reaſonable good Eſtate the Inheritance
my Father there left mee: the forſaking my Countrey was
cauſed thus: The Young fry and Gallants of our Cities
quarter where I liued, did vſually after Maſſe reſort
to certaine Portals and Seates in our Pariſh, to diſcourſe;
in which wee moſt commonly limited the power and actions
of the Great Turke, the Forces of the Hungarian, vvith
the ſeuerall ſtates of Italy and Low Countries: nothing vvas
amiſſe, wherein we might cenſure and gouerne the whole
World according to our fancies. But one time amongſt others,
a different Card prooued Trumpe, and (obuious enough
to our youthfull conditions) the conuerſation grew
hot, about the chiefeſt beauties of our Spaniſh Dames, each
vſurping to himſelfe the priority of place, which might
moſt ſuite to his owne aduantage. Some ſaid, the Granadinians
were extraordinarie faire, but theſe were by others
contradicted, who to the Toledanians gaue the Superlatiue,
as well for beauty and feature, as ſharpneſſe of wit and
diſcretion; others there wanted not, that, to make good a
partie, would preferre the careleſſe quicke ſprightfulneſſe
of our Court Dames before all. This was the more generall
opinion, and yet another not much inferiour, of the Seuilians,
whoſe naturall and ſweet browne complexions, ſet
out by their curious neatneſſe, made no ſmall adoe for abſolute
deciding of the Controuerſie; which was ended by
one, that in all our opinions, was thought to haue the beſt
Iudgement, moſt modeſty, and ſtayed aduiſedneſſe in his
conuerſation, who offering to ſpeake, forced vs all to ſilence,
with the following Diſcourſe.
               What neede you weary your ſelues with vaine contradictions,
or mee, who know, that all the perfection and

beauty in the world liues within twelue Leagues of this
place not in any great Citie, but in a ſmall Village of Andaluzia,
called Oſuna. There liues the rareſt Creature this day
in Spaine, in which happy ſituation (not ſo much as knowne
to the towne-dwellers, her warineſſe with her Husbands
iealouſie, equall to her beauty) this miracle is incloſed. He
that will ſatisfie his owne minde, let him ſee her, and then he
ſhall perceiue withall, how ſhort my tongue comes of her
praiſe, and then my truth ſhall preuaile, to bring him out of
a former errour.
               The Speaker, had hee not beene in ſo good a Predicament
amongſt vs, wee ſhould (doubtleſſe) all haue contradicted,
and laughed at his exorbitancy: but the credit hee
had gotten, and his ſeldome growing to ſuch height of exaggeration,
ſufficiently vnder-propped his reputation.
Wherefore, ſome, bending their browes, others, re-queſtioning
him touching the rare Piece, wee made it partingtime,
cutting the thred of our pleaſing conuerſation. My
ſelfe went to dinner, and after would haue lyen downe to
ſleepe away ſome part of that afternoone, when vnexpectedly
to keepe me waking, my memory ſuggeſted to me the
aforeſaid Controuerſie (a deſire ſtealingly diuing into my
heart to ſee that woman;) and this in ſuch extremitie, that,
though I purpoſely diuerted my ſelfe; yet, as often as I went
about to doe ſo, ſo often the nouelty of the matter, and my
friends endeerement ſet vpon mee. But not willing to bee
thus vanquiſhed (though all wauering & penſatiue) I curbed
my deſires, and ſtrooke the ſailes of their vnbridled courſe:
which reſiſtance yet ſpurred mee ſo much the faſter, ſo that
in fine now wholly impatient, and fully reſolued and bent
vpon the mad enterprize, I firſt ſettled my houſe, and being
thorowly informed of this Dame, & her parts, putting two
thouſand Crownes in Gold in my Purſe, betooke my ſelfe

to a lone iourney: for though I had ſeruants at command,
the ſecrecie with which I diſpoſed my affaires, would not
admit of any.
               That night I arriued at the place, and hauing taken a
Chamber, after I had a while reſted, I called the Oaſt of the
houſe to mee, and warily endeuoured to know from him,
who, in all the Towne, was of greateſt Authoritie, beſt Life,
and moſt Reputation; which (firſt reckoning vp diuers
perſons) at laſt he reſolued to beſtow vpon the Vicar, and
all the Attributes that might be propoſed; inſomuch, that
the election falling out pat for my purpoſe, and the tedious
night ouer-paſt, taking a ſeaſonable time, I departed from
my lodging to the aforeſaid parties houſe, where I found
Maſter Vicar in his blacke Damaske Gown, with an Indian
Cane, that ſerued him for a Walking-ſtaffe, paſſing to and
fro in the Court before his doore. As hee ſaw mee come
neere, he began to make a Stand, and I, not once asking
whether he were the partie I ſought (in reſpect of the Relation
and ſignes giuen) courteouſly ſaluted him, and drawing
a Letter out of my Pocket, framed for the purpoſe, with
the outſide all collied, deliuered it to him, the ſuperſcription
directed to himſelfe, he deſired me to bee couered, and
withall demanded from whence the Letter was. I told him
from Noua Hiſpania: ſo, he, without mo
                     •
                  e adoe opened it,
that, I might heare him reade theſe Contents:
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Since my arriuall from Seuill to theſe parts, I haue written
diuers Letters vnto you, but as yet receiued no anſwere of any;
and although ſo great forgetfulneſse might cauſe a want in my
due correſpondence, yet the deſire I haue ſtill to ſerue you, muſt
more preuaile with me: and therefore with the preſent occaſion
offered, I am willing to craue a continuance of the fauours
which I haue heretofore receiued from you, and doe recommend

my ſonne Leandro the bearer to you; with requeſt, that hee may
be admitted in that Vniuerſitie, till ſuch time as I ſhall arriue at
home, which ſhall be (God willing) with the next Fleet: This ſole
kindneſse ſhall ſupply the want and your ſlackneſse in not anſwering
my Letters: and ſo God keepe you.
                           
                           
                              Yours, DIEGO TAVIRIA.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               In reading theſe ſhort Lines, he could not but (with the
doubtfull admiration of what he beheld) ſhew ſome change
of countenance and behauiour; ſometimes writhing his
mouth, then vvrinkling his forehead, now putting his finger
to his noſe, ſtraight clapping himſelfe vpon the pate,
and ſcratching his noddle, till finally ſhrinking vp his ſhoulders,
and goggling his eyes, he concluded, ſaying, Doubtleſſe,
Signior, you are miſtaken; for though this Letter bee
directed in the ſuperſcription to me, and that there bee no
other of my name in the towne, I muſt freely confeſſe, that
I neither haue now, nor euer had, any correſpondence from
thoſe remote parts, much leſſe any the leaſt acquaintance
with your father: but ſetting this aſide, if in any thing I
may ſtead you, I ſhall be moſt willing to doe it, out of the
deſire I haue to performe all good offices to ſtrangers.
With this, my honeſt Prieſt was ſilent, and I falling now
into my Stratageme, made anſwer: Troth, Signior, 'tis
ſtrange, my father ſhould bee ſo miſtaken, I was in good
hope you had beene the party. The truth is, my father for
ſome particular motiues, pleaſed to ſend mee before his
owne departure for Spaine, and (knowing, as he ſaid, of your
abode in this Village) with order to be wholly directed by
you, deliuered me two thouſand Crownes in Gold, vvhich
I haue here: now though your ſelfe bee not the party to
whom I was recommended, the ſatisfaction I haue of your
woorth, doth oblige me to requeſt you, to take the money

into your cuſtodie, onely deliuering me at times what I ſhall
ſtand in need of for my occaſions: for out of the deſire I
haue to obey my father, I am reſolued howſoeuer, to expect
him in this place. Scarce had I made an end of theſe laſt
words, vvhen my Vicar falling into a ſuddenneſſe of admiring
clamour, and giuing himſelfe a good thumpe on the
breſt, ſaid to me, I cry thee mercie, good Youth, and pray
thee pardon my forgetfulneſſe; for now (with the reflexion
of my memory) I fall into thy fathers remembrance: He?
why, he vvas one of the onely moſt intimate friends I had,
and ſole companion in my youthfull dayes. Tell me, Lad,
is he not very old now? who did he marrie? how many brothers
are there of you? Honeſt, honeſt Tauiria! who would
haue thought, to ſee a ſonne of thine ſo tall and wel growne?
Truly, Leandro, thou maiſt thinke thy ſelfe happy, in that
Heauen was pleaſed to giue thee ſo worthy a father; as, to
me, the beſt friend that euer I had. Well, till hee come,
here you ſhall be, and haue ſuch lodgng and reſpect as befits
our friendſhip: let me otherwiſe know, vvhat manner of
admiſſion is deſired in the Letter, that accordingly, his will
and your conuenience may be effected. Obſerue here, noble
Gerardo, what doubts and difficulties this golden baite
in an inſtant remooued from the old Vicar. Well did I
gheſſe before-hand what my intent would come to, and
therfore the noueltie, which to another might haue ſeemed
ſtrange, bred no admiration at all in me. I went on with
my plot then, and courteouſly thankfull to his kind offer,
deliuered him (taking firſt a Bill of his hand for the receipt,
to ſecure me from his couetouſneſſe) the two thouſand
Crownes; and reſeruing onely ſuch a quantitie as I thought
fit, aduertized him alſo, that hauing beene reaſonably trained
vp in the Ciuill and Canon Lawes, I deſired much to
better my knowledge, by being Clerke to ſome Lawyer in

that Towne, till ſuch time as my father ſhould arriue. My
purpoſe much pleaſed him, and with his approbation, I
went to hearken after ſome one vvhom I might beſt like,
and with him to make my agreement. You muſt ſuppoſe,
Signior, this Machine wanted not foundation, and no leſſe
then fully ſuting to my purpoſe: for the Dames husband
that brought me to Oſu
                        •
                     a, (though none of the beſt or richeſt)
vvas one of the Lawyers that liued there, newly maried,
and hauing a faire vvife, extremely vvarie and ielous of her
honeſtie; ſo that quickly you ſhall perceiue, the planting my
ſelfe by any kind of meanes there, vvas not the leaſt important
ſteppe to my enterprize, vvhich vvas well furthered, by
ſome little learning I had of both Lawes, vvhich to my parents
their great reioycing, in my younger daies I ſtudied;
who purpoſed to haue directed my life to ſuch Courſes, as
by their death and my new inheritance prooued fruſtrate.
At length (informed thorowly of my Lawyers houſe) thither
vvent I, where I found him buſily turning ouer Bartolus
and Baldus, drawing and framing certaine Petitions: I ſaluted
him: he vvilled me to ſit downe, taking me (it ſhould
ſeeme) for ſome Client that needed his aduice: ſo hee demanded
vvhat my buſineſſe vvas; to vvhich, I, vvith a well-premeditated
diſcourſe, made him this anſwer: Signior, I
was borne (ſo pleaſe you) in Noua Hiſpania, though my parents
were of theſe parts, and this Andaluzia, by vvhom I
am particularly ſent to this Vniuerſitie, till ſuch time as they
ſhall land in Spaine, to exerciſe my ſelfe in the Studie of the
Lawes, vvhich courſe I began not long ago in the citie of
Mexico. And that this their deſire might obtaine ſome
reaſonable effect, they thought fit to remit it, and me withall,
to Maſter Vicar of this Place, vvith vvhom they profeſſe
ſo ſtrict a league of auncient friendſhip, that I may indeed
better giue it the title of alliance. Hee knowing their pleaſure,

and my purpoſe, hath made particular election of
your ſelfe, your vertue, learning, and houſe for the accompliſhment;
ſo great is his ſatisfaction of you, neither vvere
not I (as I ſay) limited to his opinion in this point, ſhould
I for my part ſeeke any further for my owne benefit. (This
preſuppoſed) I ſhall eſteeme my ſelfe moſt happie, to be not
onely inſtructed, but much profited alſo by you. And if
there be no preciſe cauſe to hinder it, I beſeech you, let me
be admitted into your Company, till ſuch time as my father
arriue; in which, I vvill not onely endeuour to vndergo
ſome part of the burden of your continuall buſineſſe, but
vvill alſo obey you as a ſeruant, vvithout any recompence
more then your good inſtruction; rather, you ſhall haue
monethly of me thirtie Crownes, to further your paines in
the performance: for vvhich, I will giue ſuch ſatisfaction
and ſecuritie as you ſhall pleaſe to demand. All this I huddled
vp as ſpeedily as I could deliuer, vnto him; not willing
to giue him the leaſt time of pauſe to conſider of it, for
feare of the worſt. To which (after ſome little ſuſpence,
turning his eyes to me, and doubtleſſe the profit conſidered
which came in ſo eaſily to him) hee thus anſwered:
Though (forewarned by many vnluckie accidents) I haue a
long time made choice rather of liuing alone, (though diſcommodiouſly)
then ill-accompanied▪ yet your honeſt preſence,
and mine owne wiſh, that Maſter Vicar ſhould
prooue no liar in my commendation, doe leuell all difficulties
with me: and therefore you may preſently ſettle your
ſelfe in my houſe, giuing firſt ſecuritie (as is fitting) for the
promiſe and offer you haue made. You ſhall haue (quoth
I) the beſt you can deſire; and ſo without more words (verie
iocund) hee tooke his Cloke, and (heauen knowes if
fearefull to loſe the good bargaine) hand in hand wee went
to the Vicars houſe; who ſpying me, came out to welcome

vs, ſaying, To know your ſure election, 'tis ſufficient, that I
behold the perſon vvho accompanies you, on vvhom you
may ſafely rely for your beſt aduancement, vvhich exceedingly
glads me, on your father my beſt friend his behalfe.
To this vve both returned our thankes, onely my Lawyer
propoſed the ſecurity for my perſon, vvhich was yet wanting.
To which, the good Prieſt replied what I could wiſh,
extolling my fathers abilitie, and my meanes; ſo much, as
if we had beene all daies of our liues familiarly acquainted;
and clozed vp his ſpeech with this: That he would truſt me
with all his wealth, and if need were, inſtantly depoſite a
thouſand or two of Crownes for me.
               Much leſſe would haue ſecured the hungry Lawyer, who
thinking he had now diſcouered the riches of Peru (the ioyfulleſt
man aliue) taking our leaues, he brought mee home
to his houſe with him; and there hee cauſed to bee chalked
out, as it were, for me, a certain miſerable Cabbin on top
of the Staire-caſe going towards his owne Chamber, and
cauſing as wretched a Bed to bee brought in, I placed it to
mine owne beſt liking, contented with any thing, in hope
of effecting my deſire. I cannot deſcribe to you, how ioyfull
a man now I was, thinking that the greateſt part of my
iourney was paſt: for certainly it may well be thought, that
had not hope of gaine vanquiſhed mine Oaſt, it were impoſſible
for mee to haue gotten ſo much as ouer his
threſhold.
               And now for my diet, faring as I would haue done at
mine owne home, I endeuoured all I could, to make much
of my Lawyer, not eating a bitte, of which he had not (in a
manner) the one halfe: our meat was dreſſed by a wench
of ſome doozen yeeres of age, the onely creature his ielouſie
would allow him for a ſeruant. For other things, in my
apparell, as in my behauiour, I was meane and ſimple, and

alwaies moſt of all vvarie in my lookes or queſtions: with
theſe, I by little and little gained vpon my Maſters affection
and auſtere condition, and ſo liued many daies moſt
conformably with him. In all the time, I was ſo farre from
ſeeing her that had thus transformed me, that I could not
ſo much as heare the leaſt treading or motion, to make me
thinke there was a creature more then the two-mentioned
in that enchanted houſe. Oh, how often (full of confuſion)
doubted I of the credit of my abſent friends relation! how
often with a ſcalding ſigh my heart reſolued to breake that
ſilence, by mounting the few Staires, vvhen ſuddenly an amorous
feare of marring the vvhole enterprize, turned mee
backe againe like a Coward to my Chamber; vvhere framing
complaints againſt her I knew not, and louing one,
whom mine eies neuer ſaw, ſometimes I grew into deepe
Melancholy; otherwhiles better pleaſed, I expected the
Sundaies approach, by vvhich time my Miſtris beeing neceſſarily
to goe to Maſſe, could no longer be concealed? But
the expected day, as it came, ſo it vaniſhed, leauing me no
more comfort, then ſight of her; and to remaine ſtill in my
doubt with greater torment: ſo to frame new fancies and
Chymaera's to my thoughts. Yet the next Holy-day before
Sun-riſing, being vvatchful, (mine eares ſpurred, as it were,
and my ſences broad waking) I might heare ſome perſons
ſtalking before my Chamber doore; vvhich paces, ſeeming
to me by the ſound and noiſe to bee of Chapins, ſo altered
me, that naked as I was, I leap't out of my bed, and opened
the doore, but ſo vnluckily, that I could but onely get
a ſight of my Miſtris, vvith her backe turned as ſhee went
paſt me. Here I was quite tranſported, and had (doubtles)
laid hold on her Mantle, had not her husband accompanied
her: what, I could then make gheſſe at, was, a gallant
and ſprightly perſonage, whereby ſomewhat more heartened

and warned to be more watchfull againſt another opportunitie,
I began to dreſſe mee, (my comfort now more
and more increaſing from that happie minute) I began to
promiſe my ſelfe ſome good effect out of the increaſe of his
loue to me, which was ſtill fed and augmented by my continuall
preſents: which prooued ſo happie and ſeaſonable,
that when (vnexpectedly) I leaſt dream't of any ſuch matter,
my ſeruices obtained their deſired acceptance: for one
day after dinner he came into my Chamber, where ſitting
him downe by me, he fell abruptly into this diſcourſe: My
Leandro, when good deedes receiue not an equall guerdon,
(according as the Maſter of the Sentences in our Ciuill
Law doth tell vs) fit it is, that our good will at leaſt expreſſe
a thankfulneſſe in words; to which, Leandro, I am ſo much
an enemie, (following in that the opinion of our Bartolus)
that, I had rather by ſilence confeſſe wherein I ſtand obliged,
and how much thou haſt ingaged mee. This I had
ſooner made knowne, had not the nice condition, and retiredneſſe
of my wife Violante beene a barre vnto it; otherwiſe,
I might offer you henceforward my Table, that ſo you
might be eaſed of ſo much care and expence as you are at:
but ſhe is ſo loth and vnwilling, that any but my ſelfe ſhould
be ſeene in our priuate roome, that I haue not beene able
once to induce her to accept of thy quiet modeſt companie.
Accept therefore my good wiſhes, and as thou loueſt
me, hence-forward limit thy exceſſefull prodigalitie towards
vs, ſince what hath hitherto beene receiued, obligeth
me whilſt I liue, to a thankefull acknowledgement. Theſe
formall ſpeeches with all plaineneſſe and ſinceritie my Miſtriſſes
husband vſed to mee, to which I (quite contrarie,
much ouer-ioyed) returned others, beſt ſuting to my cautelous
intention; giuing him to vnderſtand, that thoſe
poore trifles he pleaſed to accept of, proceeded from my

naturall condition, and that hee needed not expreſſe the
leaſt thankes for ſuch ſlender toyes: this, ſent him away
much more obliged then he came (my hopes beginning
now to bud ſome good ſucceſſe:) howſoeuer yet I vvanted
the ſight and maine marke I aimed at; though, ſome
ſixe dayes after theſe Clouds were diſperſed from mine
eyes: for as I ſtill continued my preſents, one (as good
lucke would) fell out pat for me, ſince being ſo acceptable
and welcome to my Maſter, it made him (ouer-ruling his
wiues niceneſſe, and diſpenſing with his owne iealouſie)
ſend for me to his Table, where they both ſate together at
dinner, and this in ſuch haſte, that I had ſcarce leiſure to
ſettle my countenance, ſo frighted, as if I were to expect a
ſentence of death, which made me come euen trembling
into his preſence.
               Without Hyperbole may I tell you, mine eyes till that inſtant
neuer beheld ſuch beauty, neither could fancies ſelfe
frame a more abſolute feature to my deſires. I know not
how to paint her out, but my tongue muſt fall ſhort, and
the rare Originall complaine of my defect herein. To
make Simile's, or rackt Alluſions, of Emeralds, Diamonds,,
skeines of Gold, flakes of Snow, Corrall, Criſtall,
Alabaſter; theſe (beſides meane and baſe to equall her
perfections) might rather make the Author in your Iudgement
poeticall, then truely expreſſe her peereleſſe Image;
and therefore you may onely thus farre beleeue and credit
me, that the leaſt I could diſcerne, was vnder a white
ſmooth front, crowned with the treſſes of her neat and
well-growne Cheſſe-nut haire, two Saphires, two Morning-Starres,
two Sunnes, two, but why vſe I ſuch ſtrange
Compariſons? A paire of Azure, cheerefull, honeſt eyes;
in whoſe midſt a wel-proportioned Noſe, ſerued as a border
to the lilly roſiate cheekes, and as a ſiluer threſhold to

to the ruddy gates, her lips: as, they, for Iaylors to the treaſure
of her thicke-ſet, white, ſmall teeth. Briefely, the leaſt
of thoſe parts, whoſe all were then liuely repreſented to
my imagination, were worthy more then humane loue or
regard. I was ſtrooken Dumbe as a Statue, inſomuch, that
(had I been ſo happy as to haue deſerued but a glance of
her bright eyes) ſhe might haue ſeene how I was troubled,
and conſequently ſome part of my affection: but, they ſtirred
not: for in all the time of my ſtay there, I could not
collect, that ſhe ſo much as once lifted her ſight from her
Husbands boſome; who turning to me, thus began:
               Firſt and foremoſt, Leandro, you are to take it for an eſpeciall
fauour, that I ſo freely giue you acceſſe hither,
where, (I may truely profeſſe) no liuing man but my ſelfe
ſince our marriage hath entred: And next, that is, henceforward
you muſt eate with me adayes, for I am reſolued
not to let you waſte your money ſo exorbitantly: and
therefore without reply, you ſhall do as I would haue you
in a matter that is ſo fitting and reaſonable: beſides, I ſhall
be the more beholding to you, that, ſo, we may liue together
like Father and Sonne: for ſuch is my eſtimation now
of you. I knew not how to meet him with a fitting reply,
my powers and ſences were ſo confounded: but fearing
to incurre his ſuſpition, re-collecting my ſelfe as well as I
could, I thus made anſwere: Sir, the ſelfe-ſame reaſon
you haue to command me for the obeying your will, enforceth
me to contradict it: for, it were no part of manners,
much leſſe thankefulneſſe, in mee; if knowing the
quietneſſe of your diſpoſition, & the priuacie, with which
my Miſtris Violante delights to liue, I ſhould for my benefit
interrupt it: the fauour you would herein doe me, I ſhall
eſteeme whilſt I haue life, and therefore humbly beſeech
you to mention this particular no further; for this I tell

you, not to obey, is my vtmoſt determinatiō: My pretence
was with this diſſembled backwardnes, to lay vp a good
opinion in his ſuſpitious breſt, & with it to weare out all
tracks of diſtruſt, & ſo to aſſure my ſelfe againſt a fit oportunity:
this it was made me refuſe my kind Lawyers offer.
               
                  Gerardo ſo much longed for the end of this ſtrange Story,
that I dare affirme, he was ſorry Leandro embraced not
the offer, as thinking it the beſt way to make ſhort worke;
and though hee were willing to haue let him knowne ſo
much, yet fearefull to interrupt, hee forbore: eſpecially
hearing the diſcreet Leandro thus proceed:
               My Maſter wanted no replyes, and ſtiffe intreaties, but
all were vaine, conſidering, that in my modeſt warineſſe,
all the hopes and good ſucceſſe of my Loue conſiſted:
and yet from that time forward, I had courage enough to
continue my ſeeing the faire Violante, alwayes taking my
times when both of them were together; for, indeede, I
durſt doe no otherwiſe, neither gaue me my Maſter other
opportunity, and his dainty, too-honeſt Wife leſſe; from
whom, in all this time, I neuer ſo much as heard, not only
the leaſt word proceed frō her, that might open a way for
any diſcourſe of mine vnto her, but neuer beheld her ſo
much as caſt vp her eyes from worke: whereby you may
conceiue what a confuſed, watchfull life I had, ſince that,
and my want of conuerſation with any liuing Soule, muſt
needs keepe me in a reſtleſſe torment.
               But the accompliſhment of my deſire was not long deferred,
though it might well haue coſt mee my life, ſince
by it I was in hazzard to haue loſt it: for, as my fortune
would, one afternoone amongſt others, my Maſter and his
Wife were paſſing the time at Cheſſe, and I onely preſent,
that (ſometimes ſetting vp the men, otherwhiles, ſeeing
my Miſtris with her faire hands nimbly remoouing

them vp and downe) was better diuerted. Her Husband being
at laſt called to a Client that was come to him, and neceſſarily
to ſpend ſome time in his ſtudy, was forced to
leaue the game, ſaying to me very iocundly before his going
downe, Leandro, thou ſeeſt how neere loſing Violante
is; Prethee, looke ſhee ſtirre not the men, for I had rather
then any thing beate her this time. I promiſed I would;
whereupon he, as ioyfull as I ouer-ioyed, went his way and
left vs. But now, deare friend, began the timorous panting
of my heart, and my tongue to bee tyed with the ſudden amazement
of my ſences; and indeed, I was not able (though
I firmely reſolued it) to forme in my braine the leaſt Introduction
to my amorous purpoſe, though the opportunitie
were maruellous, till the faire Violante ri
                     ••
                  ling mee of this
confuſion (though to a different purpoſe) with a ſmiling
countenance thus demanded of mee: Doe you know this
play, Leandro? for if (as I thinke) you doe, you may do me
a good turne with your helpe, and on my word I ſhould be
much beholding to you, if you could teach me how to ſaue
the Checke-Mate my Husband thinkes to giue me.
               No vvords could here expreſſe my hearts ioy, which had
now an open vent made to let out my amorous reſentment,
and thus I made anſwere: I haue long knowne this
game, which hath coſt me much monies loſſe and labour;
and though want of skill might make me diſtruſtfull, yet at
preſent, I beleeue I can ſhew you ſo cunning a tricke, that
you (pleaſing to make vſe of it) ſhall not onely ſaue the
Checke-Mate, but in ſtead of receiuing from my Maſter,
you ſhall put it vpon him. Violante vvas the moſt rauiſhed
creature aliue, to heare this; and thinking it long to bee ſatisfide,
replide, My Husband will be here preſently, and
therefore, good ſweet Leandro, tell me as ſoone as you can,
or elſe we ſhall vvant opportunitie.
               
                  
Theſe laſt words gaue fire to my boldneſſe; vvherefore
laying hold vpon her, and no longer deferring my intent,
with a new faltring I began thus to accoſt her: The ſame
feare, my deareſt Miſtris, which in ſo ſmall a matter you
expreſſe, enforceth mee (deſirous not to loſe the coniuncture)
that, without expecting a further occaſion, I lay hold
on the preſent: and therefore I beſeech you know, that
your ſelfe onely, Deare ſweet, hath beene powerfull to reduce
me (being one of greater qualitie then you take mee
for at preſent) to this meaneneſſe and low Eſtate, into
which I haue put my ſelfe to ſee and ſerue you (the Relation
a neere friend of mine made of your rare parts, drawing me
from my Country and home) and ſo without ceaſing, euen
ſo that very time▪ from the inſtant that I had firſt notice of
it in Corduba, held on my Diſcourſe with ſuch painefull
ſighes, as might haue melted flint or Adamant. But vvhat
thinke you was the anſwere to my tenderneſſe? the very renuing
it doth affright me; for I no ſooner made an end of
declaring my paſsion to her, when the bloud in her faire
cheekes turned to yellow paleneſſe, full of ſudden fury, her
lips vnfolded me this anſwer. It is not poſſible, falſe hearted
Leandro, that thy breſt can nouriſh better bloud, then
what thy baſe purpoſe hath diſcouered, ſince, wert thou (as
thou ſayeſt) nobly borne, thou wouldeſt rather ſeeke to honour
one that ſo well deſerues it of thee as my Husband;
then depriue him of it, by attempting his diſhonour. And
her choller here boiling vp, ſhee concluded the reſt, vvith
the Cheſſe-Boord, diſcharging with both hands that and
her anger to boot on my head.
               The ſudden accident quite bereaued mee of my vnderſtanding,
ſo that now I was vtterly loſt, & the rather, when
I might heare her Husband come vp ſtaires, and ſee his alteration
at his entrance, cauſed with the noiſe, which the

blowe and rattling of the men had made.
               My Maſter looked blanke, when hee ſaw the faſhion of
his game marred; and turning ſmilingly to me, willed mee
to reſolue him of his doubt.
               But Violante, who perceiued by my troubled countenance,
the poore ſatisfaction I was then likely to haue giuen,
taking vpon her my part, deliuered this harmeleſſe
anſwere:
               You need not bee troubled to ſee the Games thus turned
Topſie-turvy, for I haue the worſt of it, I am ſure, and yours
was in a great deale of likelihood to be loſt; ſince, beeing
deſirous to ſtead my ſelfe from Leandro's skil, he had taught
me ſo ſubtill and cunning a tricke, as, that I might not only
haue ſaued the Mate, but put it vpon you alſo; though my
gowne and careleſneſſe together (as I was remoouing) ended
our ſtrife, throwing downe the Cheſſe-boord, vnder
which (at our firſt ſitting downe) a piece of it neglectfully
was left.
               With this admirable euaſion, ierking as it were at my
intent and weake confidence, and withall diſſembling no
part of the truth, ſhe ended the confuſion, and her Husband
was well ſatisfied, who louing her moſt tenderly, and
that being an occaſion of paſtime, attributing all to ieſt
and ſport, he himſelfe grew very pleaſant.
               When the heart, Gerardo, is full of paſsion, ill can the
eares hearken to reaſon; my ſoule was all now on a light
flame, and it had beene impoſsible for any counſell or aduice
to haue diuerted mee, much leſſe could I bee blamed
for my perſeuerance in loue, ſince I had not any friend to
weane me from my headlong deſires, ſo that I could not
giue them nor my affection ouer. After this hapned, I
was no ſooner gotten from my Miſtreſſes ſight to my
Chamber, and laid downe on my bed to take ſome little

reſt, when, after a terrible pain within me, and a cold ſweat
all without, inſtantly a raging fit of a Calentur
                        •
                     
                   ſeiz'd me,
which holding on me a good ſpace, bereaued mee of all
appetite, and in foure dayes brought me to extreme danger,
and the fift, being giuen ouer by Phyſicians, I began
to thinke my fatall houre was at hand: My Maſters griefe
was farre greater then the cauſe of my infirmitie deſerued,
in all the time of ſickneſſe he did not once ſtirre from me, rather
(neglecting all his affaires, he was only carefull of cheriſhing
me, and applying the beſt helpes for my recouery:
but (both he and the Doctors ignorant of my malady) the
remedies they vſed put me into more danger: for no drugs
are able to reſtore Loue (an ill incurable, that onely wants
an Auicen.)
               In fine towards night (which prooued to me the ſaddeſt,
gladdeſt that hitherto I enioyed) the Lawyer hauing moſt
vrgent occaſion to be from home, becauſe hee would not
leaue me all alone, as fearing the ſwift approach of my fit,
calling his Wife moſt louingly to him, he intreated her to
keepe me company till his returne.
               With much perſwaſion, ſhe grew (as I might heare) at
laſt contented; for euen in occaſions of charitie, ſhe loued
to ſhew a nice-rigorous diſpoſition. Though my ſickneſſe
were terrible, yet had it not captiued my ſences; for they ſtil
free, might now perceiue, how neere they were to their cruell
Owner, who at length (Heauen willing to preſerue my
life) either pittying to ſee me brought to this low weakneſſe,
and my frollicke youth turned to a ſad picture of death; or,
belike acknowledging the pureneſſe of my loyall affection,
or for both: (for indeed, no woman loathes to bee loued,
and few or none there are which at laſt yeeld not) ſending
foorth moſt tender ſighes, and ſitting her downe vpon my
bed, taking in her faire hands, mine; ſhe beganne to powre

this balme into my wounded heart: Is it poſſible, diſcreete
Leandro, that hee, who for an vncertaine Relation of my
poore beauty, tooke on him the hardineſſe of hoping to
poſſeſſe it, ſhould in the firſt onſet faile, and ſhew ſuch
weakeneſſe in the firſt reſiſtance? Beleeue mee, Sir, did not
your generous proceeding lowdly publiſh your nobleneſſe,
this preſent cowardize would make mee much doubt
it. Take courage, Leandro; for, if when firſt you declared
your amorous intent to me, I ſhould haue been wonne, or
ſhould my words or countenance haue giuen the leaſt
ſtrength to your imagination; ſhe that is now affected by
ſuch a facilitie and lightneſſe, might haue been iuſtly reiected:
for that Fort which with valour and perſeuerance
ſuffers one and many aſſaults by an enemie, ought to bee
more prized then that which yeelds vpon a bare Parley:
neither could you haue made a conqueſt, where you ſhould
haue found no painefull reſiſtance to make your glory the
greater. For the Torments you haue vndergone in my affection,
I am as well ſatisfide, as a gratefull acknowledger
of the debt, for whoſe paiment, I deſire no longer forbearance,
then the time of your healths recouerie. More
would my faire Miſtris haue ſaid, but that ſhee was cut off
by the vnexpected returne of her Husband (an occaſion
that turned my ready anſwer into weeping eyes.) He found
me (notwithſtanding, contrary to what he looked for) much
reuiued ſince the little time he left me, perceiuing my weak
colour ſtrangely bettered, which, I ſuppoſe, he attributed to
ſome more miraculous cauſe. But what wonder? if to my
poiſ'nous infirmitie, that Superiour Antidote were oppoſed
as a vvholeſome remedy, which might onely preuent
it.
               Now, friend Gerardo, my happy life, or fatall deſtiny vvas
ſubiect to the faire Violante's abſolute commaund: and

her crueltie, that brought mee almoſt to deaths doore,
at this time with her compaſſionate diſcourſe (ſo farre
beyond expectation) not onely reſtored my vvaſted body
to health; but left alſo my minde full of vnſpeakeable
content: wherby within a few dayes, though faintly, I was
able to riſe out of my bed, my deſired and deſerued reward
adding courage to my feeble ſpirits. This inward amorous
deſire of mine, often drew me from my Chamber, and
ſent me, not without my accuſtomed feare, into my Miſtriſſes
preſence to enioy her pleaſing ſight; yet neuer had I the
heart to put her in mind of her promiſe: for ſtill the awfull
reſpect ſhe had gotten from me, ſeiz'd on my tongue, cauſing
(as ſince I haue found) the ſame trouble and baſhfulneſſe
in my Violante: but my paſſion making me conceiue, it
was the vſuall puniſhment of her rigorous diſdaine, was like
to haue driuen me into a relapſe of loſing, by ſuch coldnes,
the little health I had gotten from the comfort of her promiſed
recompence. In this time of my conualeſcencie, it
grew to be Sunday; when, by reaſon of ſome indiſpoſition
of body, or other important occaſion, my Lawyer could
not ſtirre from home, nor Violante conſequently goe to
Maſſe at her early accuſtomed houre: wherefore the Morning
being ſomewhat ſpent, it ſeemed good to her huſband
to beſtow for once his owne Office of Squiring her,
vpon mee; and willing to make knowne his intent, ſaid:
Friend Leandro, my not beeing well all this night hath kept
me within doores, and Violante too, from going to Church,
which troubles her; and I cannot helpe it, except thou wilt
doe ſo much as ſupply my want, by vſhering her: Prethee
take ſo much paines, and, giuing her thy hand, ſhe may alſo
ſerue for a ſtay and proppe to thy weakneſſe.
               It was ſcarce poſſible for me here to diſſemble my exceſſe
of ioy: well, I obeyed, and with vnſpeakeable content,

tooke my Miſtris by the hand, and now promiſed full libertie
to my cares. By the way I reſolued to ſignifie the iuſt
complaints that my ſoule might forme for her neglect; to
which purpoſe (mee thought) I was rarely prouided to
make her relent. But ſcarce durſt my daſtard breſt ſend
forth a ſigh; fearing more to anger her with my ſpeech, then
to ſee my ſelfe by her coldneſſe irremediably periſh. With
this grieuous reſeruedneſſe I accompanied her to Church,
and in the ſame manner had returned home, if an vnexpected
fauour of hers had not emboldened me the more; that
as vve came backe, my Miſtris looking now more comfortably,
and faining an occaſion of taking off her Gloue, without
it, returned me her beautifull white hand: the ſudden
(but ioyfull) aſtoniſhment I eſteemed a ſufficient recompence
for all my former diſtaſtes. I vvas now ſo heartened,
with ſeeing my ſelfe Owner of that criſtall piece, that I could
not chuſe but vvring her hand vvith mine, (the amorous act
anſwering ſo happily to my intents) that I no ſooner put it
in execution, vvhen my Miſtris paying mee in the ſame
coyne, ſaid: How long, loued Leandro, ſhall your ſlackneſſe
and my modeſtie be thus at oddes? or doe you expect with
dumbe ſilence, and froſtie proceeding, that my perſon
ſhould firſt carouſe to you? this is more proper to men,
then practiſed amongſt vs. I know you vvill excuſe your
fault, by laying it vpon my rigorous condition; and though
not long ſince your ſeeing me leſſe cruell, might preſerue
me in your better opinion, yet in reſpect of the firſt occaſion
you had, I admit for once of the excuſe; but doe
henceforward aduertize you, that, ſecure of my correſpondence,
you may goe on in your loue: ſo that (vnderſtanding
our ſelues better for the time to come) there may want
no opportunities for the effecting our vviſhes; and that
you may be ſure, my promiſes are not onely verball, I will

this night ſo contriue and handle the matter, that you may
enter my Chamber.
               Thus farre held on Leandro's amorous ſtorie, to Gerardo's
no ſmall amazement, vvhen ſuddenly it vvas interrupted,
by the ſudden approach of a troupe of Officers, vvho
(accompanied by the Iailour) broke in vpon the two impriſoned
friends, ere they were aware. The noueltie ſomthing
troubled them; Gerardo eſpecially, vvhen hee vnderſtood,
they came vvith order to remooue him from the priſon
where he vvas, to one of the ſtrong Towers of Alhambra:
a Fort ſomewhat diſtant from the famous Cittie: and
though this had beene often before ſollicited by his enemies,
yet could it not till now be effected. Their principall
ſcope vvas, to ouercome vvith ſuch kind of vexations his
reſolution; a remedie which the ſeuere Iudges in two occaſions
ſtill lay hold on, either, when the qualitie of the priſoner,
and nature of the offence, admit no ſtricter puniſhment
then cloſe impriſonment; or when with the diſcommodities
of that, or depriuing him frō his friends and kindreds
conuerſations, they would faine reduce him to their
purpoſe, which ſtill falles out to be the ſureſt. This laſt concluſion
they tried in our afflicted Gentleman, which was
not by him held for one of the lighteſt misfortunes in his
Captiuitie: but reſoluing to feare no colours, he prepared
himſelfe with a chearefull countenance for his departure;
taking leaue of his noble and ancient friend Arſenio, vvho
with incredible reſentment wept, (his manly heart not able
to keepe in his teares) the new Leandro too accompanied
them with no leſſe lamentation; whoſe pleaſing ſtorie
(though he came not to the end of it) left Gerardo paſſionately
full of admiration.
               The famous Citie of Graenada is ouer-topped by a high
Mountaine, whoſe ſuperiour height ſhewes on Cock-horſe

to the ſame: part of which is clothed vvith ſhadie Elmes,
and another part girt and encompaſſed vvith ſharpe rockes,
and ſmoothe Cliffes, vvhoſe clayie bottome the riuer Dauro
bathes, famous for his golden ſtreames; in which (to the emulation
of no few maine Riuers) hee paies a tribute to the
criſtall current of Genil. In the higheſt part of this Mount,
appeares a goodly ſpacious piece of ground, in which, on
certaine former ruines, the petty Mooriſh Kings, (and
heretofore for our ſinnes, the rigorous Scourges of our
Kingdome) founded their loftie Palaces, which they enuiro
                     •
                  ned
vvith ſtrongeſt Walles, high Towers, Barricada's,
Ditches and Bulwarkes, leauing the eminent ſeate equally
prouided both for ſafety and habitation: and ſo they beſtowed
on the whole Edifice the name of Alhambra, that to
this day is ſtill ſo called, and conſerues the auncient Splendour:
for our Kings and powerfull Monarkes, doe not onely
cauſe the old Arabicke Structures to be kept vp, but with
others more ſtately and magnificent Fabrickes, daily adde
to, and ennoble them; hauing likewiſe for perpetuitie, a
continuall Garriſon, and all things neceſſarie (as in a towne
of Strength) to defend the ſame: In the circuit of it there
are Churches and Monaſteries, and neere-vpon two hundred
houſes, in which the Kings Officers, Souldiers, and others
dwell, that hold it for a more healthy Seate then the
Citie; from whence it is, not paſſing a quarter of a Mile in
diſtance. Hither then (when his impriſonment might rather
haue ended) vvas Gerardo brought, and committed to
one of thoſe many Towers, that looke toward the ſpacious
Plaines, vvhoſe delightfull Proſpect, in any other leſſe vnfortunate▪
might haue cauſed great content: but ſuch occaſions
vvorke a contrarie effect in the party, that is denied
the full enioying them; for conuerting into Tantalus his
fruit, (as it were) the pleaſing obiect, it rather torments,

then any vvay comforteth; and iuſt ſo it happened vvith
Gerardo, vvho clogged vvith Yrons and ſure Bolts, could
but onely ſtretch his vvearied eyes to thoſe large Walkes,
(enuying the free ſteppes of the moſt miſerable day-labourer)
and at this time hee would haue beene moſt happie in
the meane conuerſation of ſome ruſticke Shepherd. The
wiſhed ſight of a friend or kinſman hath the ſame operation
with a priſoner, that the Phiſicians preſence in a fainting
Patient; but (Gerardo barred of this comfort) well may
it be thought, how hardly he might ſuffer his torment; yet
his wiſdome predominating, made his conſtant ſpirits patiently
beare vp, (Fortune ſtill with freſh varieties ſtrengthening
his vndaunted determination.)
               Some two moneths after this remoouall, and one night,
being the firſt of Aprill, after he was a-bed, ſomething late
in the night, a pleaſing Conſort of different Inſtruments of
Muſicke, not farre from his Tower, cunningly plaid on,
awoke him; and ſo, inuited, aſwell by the nouelty, as deſirous
alſo of ſome more pleaſing harmony then the noyſe
of his ſhackles, he went to his window, from whence (the
night pretty cleere) he might diſcerne fiue or ſixe perſons,
who (leaning to the Towers foundation) two of them accompanying
the ſweetneſſe, grauitie, and conſonancie of
a Cornet, Harpe, and Lute, beganne to ſing this enſuing
Dialogue.
               
                  1. Faire Enemy! once, ere I goe,
                  Yet curſe, or kill me, with a No:
                  To this ſay, I,
                  Then, then I die.
                  Then hauing ſtop't my lateſt breath,
                  No more thy rigour after death,
                  Or ſadder ill,
                  Shall haunt me ſtill.
                  
                     
2. No. 1. Is it ſhe that mockes me? 2. Try.
                  1. Shall I awhile be abſent? 2. I:
                  1. 'Twould double woe
                  (Made greater,) 2. No:
                  Take heart; reſolue to liue againe:
                  Abſence beſt cures a Louers paine.
                  1. Her crueltie
                  Helpe abſence? 2. I.
                  1. But abſence (as moſt Louers know)
                  Forgetfulneſse begetteth. 2. No:
                  'Tis preſent ſight,
                  Gluts the delight,
                  And thence obliuion riſeth; where,
                  Deſires, in Abſence beſt appeere:
                  As want of meat
                  Doth ſtomacke get.
                  Then bid Adieu to thy Vnkind,
                  Since Abſence most doth eaſe the mind.
                  1. But ſhall I flie
                  2. To Abſence? I.
               
               The ſweet Muſicke bred in Gerardo no ſmall admiration,
and though in part it diuerted his ſorrowfull remembrance,
yet his curioſitie to know the cauſe of it, not a little troubled
him, muſing extremely, that in thoſe ſolitarie fields,
no neerer the Cities concourſe, and in the height and ruggedneſſe
of thoſe Towers and Walles, there ſhould bee
any occaſion of ſuch obſeruant watchfulneſſe; as alſo, the
preparation of the Company, Voyces, and Inſtruments ſeemed
to him to bee more then ordinary. Each particular
was a noueltie to him, and the whole duely waighed and
conſidered, a particular aduenture. In theſe and the like
imaginations was he buſied, all the while that the Muſicians

ceaſed, till (hauing new Order) tuning afreſh, they
played diuers Leſſons, and ſung ſeuerall Ditties of pretty
Inuentions: but at length Gerardo might perceiue one of
the Squadron, (leauing them) draw neere to a neighbouring
Wall. He could not view the end of his intent and
voyage, in reſpect of a ſmall Skonce of the Tower vvhich
hindered him, vvhich forced him to leaue the Window
where he was, and goe to another, in the next open roome
to him, vvhich was directly oppoſite; from whence hee
might more plainely perceiue, that the party made a ſtand
at the foot of the other Tower; vvhich being nothing neere
ſo high or ſtrong as his, yet (adorned with many faire Bay-windowes,
Grates, and Galleries) was neere enough to the
roome where he vvas impriſoned; inſomuch that ſpeaking
but indifferently lowd, the voice might reaſonably vvell be
heard. There (aſſoone as Gerardo looked) he might ſee the
liddes of a lower Window ſet open, and a woman alſo appearing
at it: but his eyes vvere no Lynxes, nor the diſtance
of places ſo very ſhort, that hee could gheſſe at features,
and therefore his ſole care was, to hearken to the end
of their intentions; vvhich he did, and their diſcourſe, (the
ſureſt Clue to guide him out of the Maze and Labyrinth he
now remained in.) At firſt, a few ſighes and grones, which
the vnknowne Amouriſt ſent foorth, held the hearers in ſuſpence,
till breaking out from the middeſt of them, with an
afflicted, changed Tone, he fell into theſe words: In fine,
diſcreet Aminta, your Siſter, or (to ſpeake more properly)
my cruell Liſis, giues you leaue to come hither all alone; a
ſure ſigne, that her rigorous and rough condition is ſtill the
ſame: an vniuſt puniſhment to one that ſo firmely loues
her, and in lieu of reward, an vnequall recompence to my
ancient affection. Here, Gerardo might perceiue that hee
was interrupted by her, whom he called Aminta, that thus

replied: I muſt not permit you, worthy Liſeno, with ſo little
reaſon to complaine of Liſis or her coldneſſe, ſince you
neuer at any time, found her more tractable, nor my ſiſter
leſſe wary of her honour: ſo that, hauing giuen you no incouragement,
you neither iuſtly can taxe her of cruelty,
nor may ſhe vniuſtly bee offended with you, that by this
meanes giue the world to thinke, there hath beene ſomething
more then ordinarie betwixt you. Suffice it, Liſeno,
I am come to you, without any diſtaſte to her, and though
ſhe giue not that entertainment which your affections deſire,
yet (which might be to her reputations coſt) ſhee forbids
not your care, nor theſe your ſeuerall louing demonſtrations.
That is it (quoth hee) that augmenteth my torments,
and whereon the Iuſtice of my complaints and reſentment
is grounded, to haue ſo long ſerued and obeyed,
is that which maddes me, to conſider how vn-pittifull Liſis
hath beene to my ſighes, how ſilent to my papers, flinty to
my teares, ſcoffing at my loue, and angry that I am ſenſible
of it; theſe doe quite confound mee in my beſt of iudgement.
This kind of deſperation, Liſeno, (ſaid ſhe) is like to
profit you little; for, in matters of this difficultie, wiſedome
ſhould rule our actions, which are then beſt gouerned, when
by skill and induſtrie, not outrage and violence. Suffer, Liſeno,
beare, and yet forbeare not your amorous purfuite;
follow the path you haue begun, and bee not wearied; nor
cloudie, when her frownes doe raiſe a ſtrome: for let mee
tell you, (that better know then you, our generall naturall
conditions) long perſeuerance in the end vanquiſheth: but
if your impatience be ſuch, as not to withſtand a little croſſe
fortune, the fitteſt aduice I can giue you, is, to make to the
wholeſome Port of Abſence, (the beſt Letter of credit to a
Louer) as ſure to be payed at home: ſome few moneths,
and a mountaine or two put betwixt you and Liſis, may

chance to effect more then many daies, many yeeres preſence
vvould bring to paſſe. Here Liſeno more greedily anſwered,
Sure, faire Aminta, your eyes haue penetrated my
hearts intent, if ſo be the counſell you giue me, proceed not
from the ſubiect of thoſe Verſes you heard the Muſicians
ſing; for know, that I am now reſolued, no longer vvith my
wearied voice to torment theſe fields, nor with the venime
of my enflamed ſighes to parch their plants and flowers. I
will not onely leaue theſe Walles in quiet peace, but get me
farre off from this Kingdome; that, ſo diuiding the cauſes,
that (vnited) torment me, their effects may in part or wholly
ceaſe, diminiſhing the fire that conſumes my ſoule. I
ſhould be happy, if Liſis by her preſence would animate me
to this laſt ſad farewell, but my hardineſſe is not ſo preſumptuous,
as to thinke, that either your intreaties, or my importunitie,
may obtaine that of her, neither from my impatience
can I promiſe any toleration that may ſecure my
tongues ſilence; for I ſhould ſure ſpeak to her, that ſo vniuſtly
inforceth me to leaue the quiet of my natiue Countrey,
and therefore I had rather deſiſt from my-vaine purpoſe.
Adieu, Aminta, Heauen giue you better ſucceſſe in your affections,
and temper the ſad influence of my vnhappie
Starres. Theſe laſt words vvere accompanied (as I might
gheſſe) by ſome teares and ſighes, and ſo not ſo much as expecting
a reply from Aminta, he turned his backe, and came
where the reſt of the Companie with the Muſicke expected
him; and commanding them to follow, they vvent toward
the Citie: but paſſing vnder Liſis her Tower, ere they ſheathed
vp their Inſtruments, they ioyntly ſung the following
Sonnet.
               The Sunne is ſet, gone downe to the cold ſhade,
               (The miſ
                     •
                  ed brightneſſe of his piercing eye,
               
                  
Couer'd with blacke Clouds the red Eaſterne sky:)
               My cruell faire, to restfull ſleepe hath laid.
               Now murd'rers walke, and ſuch as are afraid
               Of dayes cleere light: now chanteth mournefully
               The Turtle chaſte, complaints to multiply,
               'Gi
                     •
                  s ſhe, whom crafty Tereus once betraid.
               O night! thou Image of ſad abſence, tell
               My Liſis, her two Sunnes are ſet from me
               For euer: If it chance, that ſhe doe ſleepe,
               (May Morpheus wake her with a dreame from Hell)
               Tell her, of her diſdaine, my Iealouſie;
               That though I preſent am, I (abſent) weepe.
               
                  Gerardo reioycing much at this vnexpected paſſage, returned
to his bed; there forming to himſelfe notable digreſſions,
touching Liſeno's ſtrange loue, Amintas wiſe diſcourſe,
and the ſeuere condition of Liſis, from whence, all
he collected (after an houres watchfulneſſe) was; an extraordinarie,
and more then curious deſire, to ſee and know
the well-painted cruell picture of Liſis, and the pleaſing perſonage
of Aminta, thinking, that if his good fortune might
make him gracious with either of the two, (the neighbourhood
being ſo cōmodious) they could not but exceedingly
diuert his cares, which thing in this wretched impriſonment
he much needed; for that which doth moſt diſquiet
and diſ-harten a poore Priſoner, is, his own ſolitarineſſe, and
the barrenneſſe of occaſions to diuert his griefe. With this
new hope Gerardo ſlept out that nights remainder, ſo ſoundly,
that, till the Iaylor came in the morning to ſee how
he did, he had no more to doe with his wandring imaginations.
As ſoone as the Iaylor had bidden him, Good morrow;
the firſt queſtion he asked was, if he had heard the laſt
nights Muſicke; which wonderfully reioyced Gerardo, (as

being now reſolued, cunningly to informe himſelfe of the
two Siſters; and ſo, ſeeing occaſion offered, and making
ſomewhat ſtrange of the matter, he replide, asking, vvhether
he mocked him, or dreamt of ſome ſuch thing in his
fancy? Rather, Sir, ſaid the Iaylor, becauſe you haue ſlept
ſo ſoundly, you attribute to me the effects of drowſineſſe:
but this which I tell you hath really paſſed: though indeed
I cannot be perſwaded, that ſo many Inſtruments and Voices
could otherwiſe chuſe then come to your eares.
               
                  Gerardo ſeemed much more to wonder at this ſecond reply;
and ſo faining a greater earneſtneſſe, proceeded; Prethee
Keeper; who in theſe fields can your Cities Gallants
make court to, but their Elmes or other Trees? Except
happely ſuch be my happineſſe, that the Nymphs and Goddeſſes
of the neighbouring Mountaines, or ſome enchanting
Syren of the famous Dauro, left the wilde Cliffes and
Criſtalline Vrnes, to offer vp to mee this their ſolemnitie.
Then ſaid the Iaylor, ſmiling, I vvonder not, Signior, that
(vnacquainted with the faire Dames your oppoſite neighbours)
you thinke I ieſt with you; or imagine, this place
can produce no occaſion for ſuch, as the paſſed accident:
let mee therefore tell you, that you are not (as beeing the
onely Non-Pareils of theſe parts) far from the faire Liſis, and
diſcreete Aminta, Dames, whoſe beauties, together with
their good names, long ſince famous in this Citie, are now
celebrated thorow the whole Kingdome.
               Theſe and the like extolling ſpeeches vſed the earneſt
Iaylor, giuing Gerardo alſo ſtrict account of many other
particulars: as, not onely telling him who their Parents,
were but withall hee made knowne Liſeno's cares, ſhutting
vp his Diſcourſe with this, that the cauſe of them proceeded
from hauing once ſeene Liſis in a Monaſterie, where
her Parents in her yonger yeeres had placed her, and where

                  Liſeno then enamoured on her, (ſhee beeing now come
home) proſecuted his ſuite night and day vpon all occaſions:
and yet though hee be a Gentleman of very good
qualitie, and euery way meriting, hee is by her but coldly
reſpected.
               
                  Gerardo hauing now enough, would bee no farther curiouſly
inquiſitiue; and ſo (the conuerſation diſſolued) the
Iaylor went his way, giuing the Priſoner opportunitie to
goe to the window, that from his Tower was iuſt oppoſite
to his faire neighbours. His beginning was ſo ſucceſſefull,
that he had no ſooner opened his Window, when the two
Siſters were gotten to a Bay-window of theirs neere the
Tower, where they ſate them downe to their worke, but
little dreaming they vvere ſo carefully eſpied.
               Neuer ſaw Gerardo's eyes a Flanders Picture or Romane
Piece vvith ſuch curious Art, and goodly perſpectiues, as
vvas the linnen of that louely Tower ſet out vvith. The Bay
was of white and blacke Marble, diuided by two ſmall Arches,
and a Pillar of painted Iaſper, whoſe ſmooth ſtones alſo
ſerued as a Carpet to faire Liſis and her Siſters Cuſhions.
Aminta, that ſeemed ſomwhat the yonger of the two,
vvith her twinkling eyes, gaue the more cheerefulneſſe to
her pleaſing countenance, vvhoſe complexion vvas neerer
browne then white; her mouth and Noſe moſt perfectly
proportioned, with two blacke burniſht Arches, that (being
the Diadems of her eyes) made vp together an abſolutely
round Ebon Circle. Liſis, who differed but a very
little in yeeres from Aminta (for from both, time might
ſcarce challenge a Tribute of thirty) was ſomewhat of a
more awfull maieſticall aſpect, but cleerer countenance;
exceeding faire, that, the threds of her ſmooth-combed
haire, falling with a kinde of gracefull neglect vpon the
Margent of her ſnowie forehead, ſhewed like the ſtrokes of

a Pen made in the fineſt Paper; ſo perfectly white was ſhe,
ſo incōparably black the reſplendent Treſſes of her well-ordered
haire, from which her eyes were no vvhit differing in
Colour, in Proportion, neither neere great, nor any way
yet too ſmall (no expreſſion able to paint out the quickneſſe
of their alluring motion.) Her lip and cheeke were of equall
tincture, ſuch, as (they preſent) Vermillion were but muddy.
Her hands, which, embroidering vpon a greene Sattin
frame, danced to and fro, ſhewed like Snow, melted by the
Sunnes of her eyes, which (though blacke) more inflamed
me then the tothers yellow beames. In fine, the vvhole, and
all of her was a miraculous draught of her diuine Painter,
vvhom Gerardo in his perfect workes, with all reuerence
could not but adore.
               A vvhile he remained ſomewhat doubt-ſtrucken, but moſt
ioyfull with the gracious ſight before him, till the two Siſters,
aware of his carefull eying them, hee beſtowing a low
ſalutation on them firſt, returned him an equall courteſie;
yet, he durſt not ſo much as offer the leaſt ſpeech, as fearing
their vvarineſſe vvould affoord him but a ſlender warrant.
He ſuppoſed, the nouelty of his preſence would cauſe them
to retire: and therefore loth to bee troubleſome, ſhutting
the vvindow cloſe to, as he found it, he got him back to his
Chamber, yet from the ſame place many a time after hee
participated of that content (the two Siſters growing euery
day more free, leſſe ſtrangers on his behalfe.)
               'Twas not baſhfulneſſe in Gerardo made him forbeare
to ſpeake to them, for he wanted not language, nor courtly
boldneſſe, and aboue both, experience, to make good his
Diſcourſe: but, to ſpeake ſomewhat lowder then ordinary,
by reaſon of diſtance of places a little troubled him, fearing,
that (howſoeuer they in courteſie might make him anſwere)
yet, the raritie might raiſe ſome needleſſe curioſitie

in the neighbours, or an angry diffidence in his own houſe.
               And therefore purpoſing to attain by ſome other meanes
to his purpoſe, he reſolued to write to them, and ſo ſteaded
himſelfe with the carefull diligence of a ſhee-Slaue that belonged
to the Iaylor, whom, by gifts and larger promiſes,
he made ſure to him for that, or, a greater enterprize. Hauing
firſt therefore inſtructed her what ſhe ſhould doe, bidding
her deliuer the Letter to Liſis or Aminta's own hands,
with no ſmall care of the ſucceſſe, he diſpatched her with it,
whoſe Contents were theſe:
               
                  
                     
                        
                           If, faire Ladies, you ſhall blame this preſumption and boldneſſe,
ſure I am, I ſhall want it to returne any excuſe; for, to
rely vpon mine owne forces (vtterly vnequall) to reſiſt your
beauties, were rather a raſh folly, then ſufficient diſcharge:
ſince, the ſelfe-ſame cauſe ought to ſtrike dumbe my ſences, reſpecting
your faireneſſe as a Deitie; and therefore I reſolue to
vſe no ſtronger ſhield for my defence then your diſcretion: to
which with a proſtrate affection, I conſecrate a firme heart, a
loyall and noble minde, which ſhall euer acknowledge the beeing
your creature; if raiſing it from ſo miſerable a being, you ſhall
receiue it as a vanquiſhed ſpoile of him, that adores your miraculous
parts and vertue: Heauen protect you.
                           
                           
                              GERARDO.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               From the time of deliuering of this Letter, and the
Slaues leauing him, he gheſſed euery minute an Age, that
paſſed: but for all his watching, hee remained three dayes
in this confuſion; in all which time his ſhee-Meſſenger
could finde no opportunitie, to put her matter in execution.
At length ſhe got meanes to ſpeake to Aminta, who,
being ſtrangely importuned by her, at laſt tooke the Letter.
This ſucceſſe was preſently made knowne to Gerardo;
                  
who now confidently promiſing great matters to his
hopes, expected the reſolution of the two Dames; whom,
neither in all that day, nor the next following, he could ſo
much as once eſpy at their window; whereupon (what
you haue heard, being all that paſſed) his ſolitarineſſe did
more (then might well be imagined) afflict him, as thinking
this their abſence and retiring, was a kinde of giuing
him to vnderſtand, how much they were offended with his
boldneſſe.
               But the true cauſe of it was, that they had occaſion to
accompany ſome kinſwomen and friends of theirs to certaine
ſhewes and ſolemnities in the City, which ſeemed ſo
much the likelier; when, preſently in the Euening, after
they were returned home, they appeared both together at
their window, more frollicke and liuely then they euer hitherto
vſed to doe, all the while that Gerardo ſtood at his:
which made him ſleepe peaceably that night, expecting
Morning; at which time going very early to the grate of
his Window, he might pereiue Aminta at the vſual Stand;
from whence, when ſhee ſaw Gerardo drawing a Paper out
of her boſome, and making ſignes to him, to ſend ſome ſeruant
for it, ſhe let it fall into certaine high graſſe that grew
at the foot of the Tower, and without expecting farther,
onely ſhutting to the leaues of her Bay-window, ſhee
went in.
               
                  Gerardo was much aſtoniſhed at the accident, imagining
by the manner of Amintas action and retirement, that
the Paper ſhee caſt downe, was the ſame that he had ſent;
and therfore in maruellous anguiſh for the contempt, longing
to bee reſolued, and calling a ſeruant that was there
ready to attend him, hee bade him goe downe and looke
for the Letter, which he ſpeedily did, and deliuered it vnto
him; but opening, he knew it to be none of his owne

hand, which made him with leſſe feare venter vpon the
Contents.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           If the commiſerating your painefull impriſonment, did not
giue a ſufficient diſcharge for our facileneſse of anſwering you; beleeue
it, Gerardo, theſe lines had beene excuſed, though wee
might haue been held diſdainfull: but our brests are ſo open to
honeſt pitie, and your ſelfe ſo well deſerue it, that when the heauy
occaſion of your thraldom, might not induce vs; your own diſcreet
cariage, would lay a tye vpon vs to alter our determination. And
that you may reſt fully aſsured, that our conditions are not ſo rigorouſly cruell, as (happely) there they may haue informed you;
Know, that Liſis and I, are reſolued, (not to let you paſse your impriſonment ſo ſolitarily) to giue you all the comfort we are able, to
diuert your ſorrowes. And though (I preſume) you may equally
diſpoſe of our affections; yet, leaſt you may thinke wee both ioyne
in bare complement, wee from this inſtant reſigne our good wils
to your liking, that is, that ſhe, whom of vs two you ſhall make
choiſe of, will moſt accompany you in your misfortunes.
                           
                              LISIS, AMINTA.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               More comfort then this was not poſſible to haue befalne
our Gerardo, and therefore extraordinarily gladded, taking
Pen, Inke and Paper, in proſecution of his happy pretenſion,
thus he ſent his reply to the gracious Dames:
               I know not how to extoll ſufficiently in theſe lines my great
good fortune, by ſhewing in them, the leaſt ſhadow of my true
thankefulneſse, with which my minde is wholly yeelded and rendred
vp to your mild and pittying diſpoſitions. The beſt way (not
to come ſhort) is to be altogether ſilent; onely this I muſt acknowledge,
that the fauour you offer, is more to be eſteemed then my liberty:
the which I ſhall hence-forward leaue to hope for; or if I
                  
at all deſire it, it ſhall be little for mine owne ſake, more then to
employ both that and my life in your ſeruice. The way you haue
giuen to my happineſse, hath brought mee into ſuch a confuſed
Labyrinth, that it will be impoſsible for me get out, if you pleaſe
not to change your intents, by reuoking the election you remit to
my opinion, which may vnwittingly hurt me (as ignorant) which
of you is freeſt to fauour me. This inconuenience may eaſily be remoued,
by your owne conſents in appointing which ſhall bee the
Owner I must obey, ſince, in the reſt of your parts and perfections,
there is no knowne aduantage in either, but a moſt harmonious
ſimphonie worthy eternall eſtimation.
               
                  Gerardo was not a little in the right, with this diſcreet reply;
ſince, ſo, he not onely aimed at the abſent Liſeno, but reſigning
vp alſo the election to them, ſecured his feare from
any other powerfull emulator; and beſides, ſhee that had
beene left out, muſt needs haue beene much diſtaſted: for
euen in matters of ieſt, the imperious (though weake condition
of females) loues no declared neglect. And ſo to
giue order for the deliuerie of his Letter, he got him to his
window, from whence hee might alſo ſee Liſis at hers, as if
her thoughts had promiſed to her, his comming thither.
               
                  Gerardo had not, till this preſent, ſeene the faire Dame alone,
whom cheerefully ſaluting, by ſome amorous ſignes
he ſent her thankes for the ſingular fauour ſhe ſhewed him:
At which, Liſis ſmiling, gaue him in the ſame dumbe language
to vnderſtand, that it was not her ſelfe, but her Siſter
Aminta he meant, ſhewing in her clouded eyes a kinde of
irkeſome iealouſie, that Gerardo made more court to Aminta
then her; a ſuſpition that he (like an olde weather-beaten
ſouldier) ſoone perceiued; and willing to haue fully expreſſed
himſelfe) the approach of Aminta hindered it; ſo,
drawing onely a Paper out of his boſome, and (they who

vnderſtood his meaning, caſting downe a long String, the
Counter-ſigne) it was his part to ſend one to tie his Letter
to the ſame, vvhich ſpeedily done, Aminta hoiſſed it vp, and
both taking leaue of Gerardo, left him more perplexed then
euer: for now new cares began to keepe him vvakefull, and
one of the louely Dames, by a particular ſympathie of ſtars,
had abſolute power and dominion ouer him, in whoſe pleaſing
remembrance he vvaſted the tedious darkneſſe, and by
morning early hee receiued this enſuing anſwer to his ſecond
Lines.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Liſis and my ſelfe, Gerardo, with notable content read your
Letter, which would haue beene greater, if (taking the freedome
we gaue you) you had not with ſo vnneceſsarie circumſtances refuſed
it, but now (ſuch is our determination) you muſt not deny:
and therefore, let not the doubt of our freedomes trouble you,
ſince aſſuredly neither of vs that were pre-ingaged, would be ſo
light, as to ſeeke a new Owner: wherefore there needes no more▪
but to end the ſtrife, and to make choice of Aminta—or Liſis;
for (ſecure) that your diſcretion will make a fitting election, we
haue ioyntly wagered; and it now reſts in your power to make either
a winner, or vnhappy loſer.
                           
                              AMINTA.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Gerardo well perceiued by this Letters ſhort Contents,
how the vvorld went: fearefull therefore to offend by chuſing,
and yet more fearefull of an offence to both in not obeying,
he made choyce of the former; but as warily as hee
could, that one of them might not haue too iuſt a cauſe of
reſentment. With this good forecaſt, (though ſhe, whoſe
ſecret influence attracted him, vvas already ſet downe in his
heart) he ſent theſe laſt Lines to the faire Dames, who with
much ioy gaue them welcome and a view, as followeth:
               
                  
Heauen knowes, faire Liſis and Aminta, I had rather diuide
my heart, and lay it at both your feete, then ſee my ſelfe in this
confuſion I now am in: but the neceſsitie of obeying you, beates
downe all difficulties of feare, obliging mee to the performance of
your forcible commands. My affections (I know not by what happie
Starre conducted) are particularly inclining to the miraculous
ſubiect of—But paſse not on, my Quill: how my hand
ſhakes, and my heart trembles, timorous of the incertaintie of
this matter! Pardon me, ſweet Pledges, that I ſuſpend my cowardly
determination in a buſineſse, whoſe important well-ſpeeding
doth ſo much afflict me: let me onely firſt perſwade you, that
you both being euery way equall and conformable, as well in the
maruellous parts of minde, is rare and excellent features of body,
no ſingularitie that way hath mooued mee, to make choyce of one
more then the other, but onely the performance of your willes:
and beleeue therefore, I beſeech you, that as it happens when wee
ſee Gameſters, we deſire ſome one, whom we know not, or (happely)
neuer ſo much as ſaw before, ſhould winne; ſo, my ſoule and all
her faculties are ſtrongly inclined, and wholly yeelded vp to—
The diuine Liſis. And thus haue I, deſiring to appeare worthy
of her noble thoughts, declared mine, and complied with your
commands. I begin then from this inſtant, faire Liſis, to ſerue
you, proteſting on my part, a moſt humble permanent ſlauery, a
ſingularly inuiolable faith, and a minde euer ſubiect to Loues
lawes, whilſt life ſhall laſt moſt thankefull.
               
                  Aminta vvas ſhe of the two, whoſe hard fortune it vvas
to read the Paper, but ſo lothly, that as ſoone as ſhee came
to Gerardo's declaration, vnable to diſſemble longer, her
trickling teares made knowne the inward ſorrowes of her
heart; vvherewith retiring to her Chamber, ſhe left her Siſter
alone; but ſo glad and ouer-ioyed a creature, as if Gerardo
had obtained her ſome famous victorie, whom ſhee
determined to reward vvith the glory of her conqueſt-expreſſing

thankfulneſſe, by inſtant vvriting how pleaſed ſhee
was vvith his election; enlarging her Lines vvith frequent
iterations of gratitude, in ſuch diſcreet Phraſe, as made Gerardo
reſt moſt confident of his happineſſe. A ſucceſſe, that
amongſt all thoſe which I haue ſet downe of this Vnfortunate
Gentlemans, ſeemes to me worthy of the greateſt admiration:
for though the inconſtancie of his proſperous
and aduerſe fortunes, vvith their incredible euents, doe oft
amaze me, yet this eaſineſſe in Liſis, and her facile inclination
doth ſtupefie my conſideration; there being no reaſon
to proppe with reaſon ſo inordinate an affection. Liſis was
courted, long ſerued, loued by Liſeno, yet ſhee could neuer
affoord him (though a deſeruing Gentleman) the leaſt
looke of acknowledgement; this day, ſatisfied vvith two or
three ſmooth papers, her open minde is vvholly giuen vp
to a man incompaſſed vvith chaines and bonds, vvhoſe liberty
is as vncertaine, as his conuerſation vnſecure; from
which conuerſation, they that are beſt acquainted vvith
loue, ſay, the firmeſt loue is ingendred: but alas! vvhat
conuerſation haue they had? vvhat actes, either to oblige
or to perſwade? from vvhence ſhall we conclude this affection
to proceed, or whereon happened this Loue, the firmeſt
that hath beene knowne, as vvill appeare in this Diſcourſe?
There is no way to know, no way to ſearch or penetrate
the cauſe of womens wilde and violent affections.
In fine, from this moment, (the happieſt for Gerardo that
might be) in ſtead of darkneſſe that obſcured his ſad Priſon,
Liſis her two Sunnes, with their powerfull rayes enlightned
it, turning his night alſo into brighteſt day: and now vvith
his preſent glorie, he forgat all his former miſeries; and this
fortunate employing his affections, not onely bettered his
Eſtate, but totally (as you ſhall heare) occaſioned his deſired
freedome and libertie.
               
                  
Thus diuerting himſelfe with the ſight of Liſis, hee paſt
the greateſt part of the daies; and Time, which before in euery
minute of his ſeemed too prolixely tedious, was now
in-ſufficient with his ſhort houres, for anſwering his Miſtriſſes
amorous Tickets; with which (though they wanted
meanes of neerer diſcourſe) his affection moſt pleaſingly
encreaſed; and, howſoeuer the limitation and curbe of his
impriſonment, kept him from expreſſing the great ſeruices
he deſired to performe, yet he laid hold vpon all good occaſions
to expreſſe his loue and gratitude: and to this purpoſe,
vnderſtanding that Liſis was exceedingly affected to
the ſweet delightfulneſſe of Muſicke, many a night paying
from his Window, the humble tribute (as it were) of his
voyce, he ſought to increaſe it: though the vnſauourineſſe
of the matter was ſuch, that he muſt not expreſſe the leaſt
part of his affection in Poeticall amorous Conceits, in reſpect
of the warineſſe it behooued him to haue in his proceedings;
and ſo he durſt not once offer at a Loue-ſtraine, for
feare of giuing any motiue of ſuſpition to ſome ouer-curious
liſteners, which made him for the moſt part ſing ſome
ſhort Satyricall toyes: and one night amongſt others, for
want of better matter, (hauing firſt tuned his Violl) he ſung
theſe enſuing Couplets, whoſe contents were to diſſwade
an old Dotard from marriage.
               
                  Wool't, old Colt? what, all this while
                  Single, now at length beguile
                  Age, and after Sixtie odde,
                  Serue the little blind-fold god?
                  Well, ſince truſt thou wilt no friend,
                  No ſharpe knife, or ſtrong ropes end,
                  Goe, for once, be youthfull; Woo
                  Speedily, and marry too.
                  
                     
But thy fortune, truth muſt tell;
                  Shee's no Gypſie, liſten well.
                  Is the party faire and young,
                  From a noble Kindred ſprung?
                  Beauty much may comfort thee.
                  I, but youth will ne're agree
                  Long with Age, to whoſe cold roome,
                  Quickly ſhee'l prefer the Groome.
                  Birth, to thy poſteritie,
                  Luſtre addes, and dignitie.
                  I, but breake her of her will,
                  Pow'rfull friends ſhee'l mention ſtill.
                  Or, when thou to ſleepe art laid,
                  Thee with fortunes ſhee'l vpbraid.
                  Is ſhe one of tougher yeeres,
                  Thirty vpward that appeeres,
                  One, (ſince firſt ſhe new was nam'd)
                  Frequent child-beds well haue tam'd?
                  Or withall, the neighbours knew,
                  She to firſt good-man was true?
                  Is ſhe loyall, is ſhe chaſte,
                  (Neuer ſo) too much embrac't?
                  I, but ſilence go along
                  Muſt: for chaſte with too much toung,
                  That's as thou ſhouldſt in thy meat
                  Three parts Gall, one, Sugar eate.
                  Still ſhe wrangles, ſtill ſhee'l ſcould,
                  Brawle, and word it (vncontroul'd.)
                  Nay, when thou the Act hast done,
                  There's a quarrell new begunne.
                  Sweet-hearts keepe ſhe two or three,
                  Know not thou the myſterie:
                  Be ſhe any thing allowd,
                  
                     
Whore, ſo ſtill; not honeſt loude.
                  Is ſhe one cal'd doubly good.
                  Chaſte and ſilent vnderſtood:
                  More then birth, or to be faire,
                  Meerely toyes, and termes of ayre?
                  I, but though her tongue lie ſtill,
                  She hath hum'rous trickes at will,
                  Which wil vex thee more, then flowres
                  Often wet by April ſhowres.
                  Is ſhe widow that is knowne,
                  Ioyntures two or three to owne,
                  Old and rich? (good ſignes of health)
                  Soule be merry, thou haſt wealth.
                  I, but hard it is to ſift
                  Her Eſtate; who, Deed of gift
                  Made before to kindred; they
                  Carry coyne and mirth away.
                  Say, thou die firſt, (no ſuch art)
                  She will of thy goods haue part;
                  And out-liue ſhe muſt, to bring
                  Euery ioynt a wedding Ring.
                  Goe, be youthfull then, and woo
                  Speedily, and marry too.
               
               As vvell had Liſis, her Louers preſence imprinted in her
heart, as the pleaſing ſound of his voyce engraued (as it
were) in her eares; and therefore though ſhe vvere aſleepe,
(awaked by the Ecchos of that) ſhe vvould inſtantly get to
her Window, accompanied by Aminta; vvho, now leſſe
paſſionate, vvas well enough ſatisfied vvith her ill fortune.
Gerardo well perceiued the fauour ſhe did him, and vvould
willingly haue expreſſed his thankfulneſſe, but fearing leſt
ſome ouer-buſied eare might hearken, he refrained; the like

alſo happened in the beautifull Siſters, in reſpect of their
parents and family, by vvhom they vvere not cauſeleſly obſerued,
and the more at this time, by reaſon of the enſuing
accident.
               
                  Liſeno, vvho grieued with the rigour of Liſis, (as you
heard) left his home and Countrey, ſome foure moneths
after (the time that Gerardo ſpent in his amorous conqueſt,
with the ancient infirmitie renued by his abſence) returned
againe to Granada, and conſequently to his pre-accuſtomed
watchfulneſſe, and ſo continuing his night-walks about Liſis
her vvalles, and Gerardo's Tower, his care was by Gerardo
ſoone diſcouered, and himſelfe alſo and his pretenſion
quickly knowne, vvhich made the impriſoned Louer not a
little ſuſpect and feare; and the more diſtaſtfully, vvhen his
reaſon repreſented to him, the aduantage Liſeno might
haue ouer him for a Corriuall, (he free to proſecute his ſute,
and himſelfe with his hands bound, without freedome to
make his party good with him.) Beſides, it did not a little
torment him, to thinke, that Liſis in honeſtie and loyall affection,
had preciſe obligation, to make the relapſe of Liſeno's
affection knowne vnto him, (in which hauing failed)
his ſcrupulous thoughts formed no ſmall exceptions: which
Liſis vnderſtood by a Letter from him, though beeing (as
indeed ſhe was) faultleſſe, ſhe eaſily ſatisfied with her innocencie:
the aſſurance of which ſo long reſted with Gerardo,
as the paſſionate Liſeno appeared not: but hee once returning
to his old haunt, the ſuſpitions increaſed, and ſhe was
ſtill put to a freſh purgation. So that in ſhort time, Gerardo
had many diſtaſtes againſt the poore harmeleſſe Dame,
thinking it impoſſible for Liſeno (without ſome incouragement
from Liſis) ſo long to continue his ſute. Hereupon
it happened, that as the two Louers were after this both at
their windowes now better reconciled, (for the cauſe of Gerardo's
                  
diſtaſte had beene ſome time abſent) vpon the ſudden
they might ſee Liſeno mounted vpon a luſtie dapple
Courſer, ſo gallant, as might well haue bred ſtrong ielouſie
in the braueſt Competitor. Gerardo was ſomewhat aſtoniſh't
with the vnexpected ſight: which when Liſis perceiued
and his trouble, ſhe grew to ſuch an outragious diſtemper,
that hurried on with the blindneſſe of paſſion, not once
conſidering, how much ſhe might preiudice her ſelfe and
her poore priſoner, minding nothing though but his ſatiſfaction,
and beholding Liſeno with the terribleſt aſpect that
Diſdaine could frame, ſhe thus ſets vpon him: How long,
foole-hardy Liſeno, ſhall this vnmannerly preſumption laſt?
how long ſhall my fond ſilence ſuffer your infamous pretenſion
to be the motiue to my diſhonour? Betake your ſelf
the ſooner to ſome other courſe, or (beleeue it) I ſhall not
want ſome that will reuenge the iniurie you goe about to
doe me: And ſo, furiouſly clapping too the leaues of her
Window, in ſhe went, leauing the good Gerardo all huſh't,
confuſedly timorous, and the vnfortunate Liſeno quite bereaued
of his ſences: and the poore beaſt his horſe too, it
ſhould ſeeme, was charmed, when ſhe began to ſpeake, neuer
ſo much as ſtirring all the while the ſtorme laſted. But
when the forſaken Louer perceiued, that aſwell at his Miſtriſſes
Window, as many others of the neighbours, there
appeared diuers perſons incited by the loudneſſe and noiſe,
vnwilling to prooue a ſpectacle to the ſtreet, all baſhfull and
aſhamed, he returned backe againe toward the Citie; leauing
now his amorous ſute behind him in the hands of her
cruelty and contempt, ſo that, within awhile after (an effect
euer incident to ſuch caſes) Loue, which brought him to
theſe hard extremities, was turned to mortall hatred and
deepe deſire of reuenge; and therefore ſupſecting the good
parts and neighbourhood of our Priſoner, as alſo hauing

at times ſeene him narrowly prying at Lyſis her window,
and hauing found them (ſurprized vnawares that very
day in the ſtealth of ſome amorous ſignes) made him reſt
fully aſſured, that, her deſire onely, the more to oblige her
Louer, and no other cauſe had incited his Miſtris to her
heauy rigour and diſdaine.
               This and his iealous rage together blinding him, he was
now reſolued to vn-piece the amorous engine, and to ſeuer
the couple, chuſing (as the ſureſt means thereunto) to make
knowne to her Parents what paſſed, by the ſtratagem of a
fained Letter, in which, ſetting down the whole ſtate of the
buſineſſe as dangerouſly and bloudily as hee could, hee
cauſed it to be deliuered, but without ſetting any name vnto
it; ſo that this and ſome other ſuſpitions of the Parents of
Liſis conferred together, they made meanes to haue Gerardo's
recourſe to thoſe windowes hindered, which, accordingly,
when hee leaſt ſuſpected any ſuch matter, were dammed
vp; which was to him ſo ſtrange a nouelty, as (beſides
his feare that their other conueyances of Letters were made
knowne) bereaued him almoſt of his vnderſtanding.
               Touching Liſis, no more needs bee ſaid, but that poore
ſhe, like one vn-accuſtomed to theſe brunts, grew to ſuch
extremes, that had not Gerardo plyed her with fained hopes
of his liberty, ſhee had quickly made an end of her ſelfe.
There is nothing more cheeres a paſſionate ſoule, then the
diuerting her reſtleſſe vnſettled faculties; for, with the variety
of ſeuerall entertainments, ſhee is much diſ-burdened,
and miſeries make no ſettled impreſſion in her: all which, to
one depriued of theſe, ſucceed quite contrary; as appeared
in Gerardo, whoſe blinde loue had turned his heart wholly
into Liſis; that, forgetting with ſtrange neglect, the importance
of his liberty, all hee ſpoke or thought, was no other
thing but his Liſis, finding no content at all in any thing,

now he was depriued of her deare and precious ſight. The
deſire of which, (hoping it might attaine to ſome good effect,
though he was farre from dreaming a more happy one
drew neere) made him one day deſcend into certain lower
roomes, that (in the midſt of the Tower) ſerued to keepe
filth and rubbage which was caſt into them, gheſſing that
ſome of the lights thorow thoſe Chambers, might happely
looke towards his Miſtreſſes window: and ſo, fitting ſome
ſtones together, that he might the better clime vp to them,
being mounted, ſeeing there was little hope of his purpoſe
that way, going angrily downe, as he laid hold vpon one of
the iron grates barres, to keepe himſelfe from falling, the
one halfe of it ſlipt from him: at which ſtrange accident
ſomething troubled, yet looking more narrowly vpon the
broken barre, he might ſee that it was cunningly filed, and
as it ſeemed, to diſſemble the matter, neatly giued together
with ſoft Waxe, and ſome other bituminous matter, that
the filing might not be perceiued.
               Whereupon leauing it ioyned as hee found it, vvithout
being by any body eſpied, he went vp againe to his Chamber,
but not ſo ſatisfied with the matter, and ignorant of the
Author, made him thinke it miraculous; though conſidering
his owne looſe life, he thought himſelfe altogether vnworthy
of ſo celeſtiall a fauour. But (as afterwards he came
to know) not Angels, but mē were the Authors of the ſame;
for, there hauing been not long before, two Gentlemen Priſoners
in that Tower, and in ſome danger of their liues, they
tryed that remedy: and the very ſame day they thought to
haue effected their liberties, they were vnexpectedly (as was
Gerardo) remooued to another leſſe cloſe Priſon, whereby
defrauded of their hope, the fruit of their vnperceiued
handy-worke remained to the good fortune of our Priſoner,
to which hee ſpeedily prepared his nimble apprehenſion,

as alſo his bold courage (all little enough in an occaſion
ſo deſperately hazardous:) and taking with a little clue of
thred (that ſerued him for making vp his Letters) the depth
from the light to the ſquare of the Towers foundation, hee
found ſome ten fathom, but from the ſquare to the ground
he could not meaſure, by reaſon of the maine ſtones that
ietted out: yet his principall intent, beeing but to quit the
Tower, made him to take no care for a ſecond leape; and
ſo, without more adoo, tying the ſheetes of his bed and a
thinne Quilt he had together, which might make in al ſome
ſixe or ſeuen fathom, remitting the reſt to the nimbleneſſe
and actiuitie of his body, and taking away (when it grew
towards night) the barre, ſure that the Iaylor was abroad,
before it might grow darker, and he returne, he recommended
himſelfe to heauens protection, and ſo determined his
ſally, though, ſeeing the depth he had to paſſe, wrought no
ſmall feare in him, howſoeuer the hope of his liberty and
his loue more then life (making him boldly winke againſt
all danger) he inſtantly began to let himſelfe downe, croſſing
his legs and armes ſtrongly in the ſheets, from the end
of which, fetching a ſudden friske, hee alighted without
any danger vpon the Square; and from thence by certaine
old ruinous walles ſcrambled to the ground, giuing Heauen
infinit thankes, that with ſo little labour, and without making
any humane creature priuy to his purpoſe, hee had ſo
vnexpectedly eſcaped.
               
                  Gerardo knew not his Brother Leoncio's lodging, nor
where any the reſt of his friends lay, ignorant of the Iliberian
ſtreetes, as hauing neuer been there before the time of
his impriſonment. And therefore not to hazzard his good
beginning, by giuing cauſe of ſuſpition to any that ſhould
meete him he got him the ſureſt way as he thought, by
fetching a tedious compaſſe about) into the Citie: when

he ſuppoſed himſelfe at the farther end of it, hee enquired
after a certaine Friarie in the Sub-vrbs, in which, a neere
friend of his, one of the Religious Order at that time liued;
where he arriued, but by reaſon it was now vvaxed ſomewhat
late (though he knocked and called lowd in the Porch)
yet no body came, as (belike) not willing to heare, at leaſt
not to open to any that knocked at that time of night, which
made him (not daring to returne againe into the Citie, or
paſſe further on) reſolue to climbe the Garden wall; and as
he propoſed to himſelfe, hee forthwith put it in execution:
but this boldneſſe might very well haue coſt him his life,
for hee was no ſooner gotten vpon his feete on the other
ſide, when ſuddenly, with the noiſe his fall made, two fierce
Maſtiues, the Gardens keepers, ſo vnexpectedly clozed with
him, that without giuing him leaue or leiſure to help himſelfe,
they tumbled him flat vpon his backe.
               
                  Gerardo had about him a knife of about his hands length,
(the onely weapon allowed him in the Priſon:) and ſo ſeeing
himſelfe halfe woorried, hee couragiouſly drew it out,
and inſtantly thruſt one of them into the ſhort ribs, who,
with the paine he felt, leauing him, hee might the better
grapple with his companion, that hauing but onely faſtned
vpon the folds of his Cloake, gaue Gerardo leaue to get vp,
and with incredible nimbleneſſe to skippe into the neereſt
tree, but ſo bitten and wounded, that hee verily thought
the anguiſh and cold aire would kill him before morning;
but by that time it began to be light, his comfort was to
ſee one of the fierce Curres weltring in his owne bloud:
but, ſorry though, and vnwilling to make himſelfe Owner
of the diſtaſte, which the good Friars were like to receiue
with this accident, eſpecially in ſuch an occaſion when he
came to be protected by them; hee thought fit to get him
from thence; and ſo, hoping the fore-gates might bee open,

going out the ſame way he came, hee came without
being by any ſeene, to the Porch, where asking for his
friend, the party was quickly brought vnto him: who not
onely ioyfully and charitably welcomed him; but ſeeing
how the Dogges had in ſeuerall places of his body bitten
him, he was very carefull to get his wounds healed. Some
few dayes after, by aduice of both, the good Friar with
another his companion, was to goe into the Citie, where
(inſtructed well what he ſhould doe) hee diſcreetly learnt
the whole ſtate of Gerardo's buſineſſe; beeing informed,
that, at the inſtant when hee was in the Tower miſsing,
there were ſeuerall ſearches made for him, and the Iudges
alſo cauſed his Brother Leoncio to bee apprehended together
with his ſeruants, ſuſpecting that by his meanes his
brother had eſcaped: ſo they went very cunningly to work
to ſift out the truth; but the new Priſoners beeing found
innocent enough of the matter, Leoncio tooke no great care
of it, onely that which troubled him moſt; was the vncertainty
of his brothers welfare, touching which, the Friar
ſoone ſatisfied him, by letting him know (though not
where) that his Brother was very wel and in ſafety, ſo that
hauing left him much contented, within a few dayes after,
(himſelfe with his ſeruants at liberty) he might ſee his loued
Brother, and with his comforting wiſedome giue him
the ſureſt aduice for the diſpatch of his affaires. That
vvhich moſt of all afflicted our Gentleman, was, abſence,
and the remembrance of his gracious Liſis; for the gladſomeneſſe
of his libertie made not him a whit forgetfull,
neither could the feare of her dangerous conuerſation one
iot awaken his ſtupid ſences, rather, hee deſired nothing
more eagerly, without all apprehenſion of misfortunes to
ſucceed. And ſurely in theſe amorous cares, he had not
the aduantage ouer Liſis, who that very night of his fortunate

eſcape (vncertaine whether ſhee might reioyce, or be
ſorrowfull) indured a kinde of liuing death, moſt irreſoluedly
perplexed, as altogether ignorant what was become
of her Louer; or if he were in ſafety, whether hee would
ſtill loue her. She knew of Leoncio and his ſeruants their
impriſonment, and therefore conſidering that amongſt
them, there was one that had beene often the bearer of
their amorous Letters, ſhe could not, nor durſt ſhe blame
Gerardo's loyaltie, from whom, the ſame day that Leoncio
and his ſeruants were at liberty (the occaſion ſeruing, and
the Meſſenger too free) ſhe receiued a large Ticket from
him, wherein he promiſed her, that when the heat of his
enemies and troubleſome affaires might bee a little ouerblowne,
hee would ſee her: but her Poſting deſires could
brooke no delayes; and therefore contriuing that an Aunt
of hers might ſend for her out of the Citie, (it being effected)
ſhee perſwaded her alſo for particular Deuotion to
heare Maſſe one morning at the Monaſterie, where Gerardo
had taken Sanctuary: and giuing notice of it beforehand
to him, without her Aunts ſuſpition who knew not
him, they had ſome ſhort conference together, and the
tender Louer ſeeing himſelfe ſo neere that mirrour of
beauty, holding himſelfe too vnworthy ſo rare a piece,
grew more and more enflamed.
               
                  Liſis (no leſſe ſatisfied) tooke leaue, and from hence (I
ſuppoſe) the force of their loues grew to a further height,
ſo that ſhe returning now with her Aunt, and ſhortly after,
to her owne home, beganne to thinke vpon ſome poſſible
meanes, that her Gerardo and ſhe might haue a priuat meeting:
and by him, (ſtrange raſhneſſe!) ſhe was many nights
after viſited, he being onely accompanied with one truſty
ſeruant, and in that manner he reſorted to that ſide of the
Tower where her window looked to the fields. But ſo

troubleſome it was to them, to vnderſtand each other, being
ſo farre diſtant, that (incouraged by the conformity of
their own willing minds, that equally mett in their deſires)
they at laſt reſolued, that Gerardo cauſing an artificiall
thred-Ladder to bee made) Liſis ſhould on the night of
their agreement caſt downe a Rope from her window,
vvhich faſtened to the barres aboue, and the Ladder tyed
to that beneath, he might without any difficultie get vp
into her Chamber. All this ſo happily reſolued on, and
the prefixed time ſet downe againſt the ſecond enſuing
night, Gerardo returned to his Sanctuary, and Liſis to her
bed.
               It was not for nought, that the two enamoured Louers,
in all their proceedings were ſo vvary; for you ſhal know,
that the night, when their agreement was made about the
Ladder, the Father of Liſis (to her ill fortune) lying awake,
and hearing, (if not dreaming he heard) ſome noiſe and
ſound of Voices very ſoftly, not once making his Wife
priuy to his purpoſe, ſtealing out of his bedde and Chamber,
and drawing neere to the window where ſhe was, he
might diſtinctly heare all that paſſed betwixt them, and
their ſettled agreement: wherfore returning from whence
he came, and craftily concealing his intent, hee determined
againſt the time to take Gerardo in the manner, and
before the matter ſhould bee ſpred abroad, either to kill
him, or, cauſe him in the occaſion to be apprehended. He
knew well enough of our Gentlemans ſuites, and the
cauſe of his impriſonment; and thinking it booteleſſe to
treat with him in the way of marriage, in his blinde paſſion,
careleſſe of his owne and his daughters infamie, incited
onely to reuenge, hee would not, or could not lay
hold vpon ſome more conuenient remedy. Whereupon
giuing notice to ſome kinſmen of his, that they ſhould

againſt ſuch an houre bee in a readineſſe, making knowne
no further his intent, nor they curious to enquire more,
but vvilling to obey him, all of them in expectation of the
buſineſſe vvere well prouided. Now the danger thus ſurely
carried, much threatned the life of our ſecure Louer, who
wholly ignorant of any ſuch preparation, onely minded the
accompliſhment of his loues deſigne, and in the interim,
tooke order, to haue the Ladder made euery way fitting for
his purpoſe.
               The wiſht for night approached, in which (that his feruant
might more ſecurely croſſe thorow the Citie) hee
ſent him before with the Ladder, vvilling him to expect
him at the Orchard gate, which belongs to a Religious
Order of the Monaſtery of the Holy Martyrs: (vvhich
done) not long after, himſelfe tooke the ſame way, comming
to the Mountaines top about eleuen of the clocke,
and to the gate where he bade his man to expect him, but
found him not there, neither, looking all round about him,
could he get ſo much as a ſight of him. The raritie much
troubled him, and made him ſuſpect ſome miſchance had
happened to his ſeruant; yet, thinking with himſelfe, that
happely the fellow might haue miſtaken him, and vnderſtood
(in ſtead of the Orchard) the Church doore made
him without delay goe thitherward, and looke round about
him as he went.
               In this manner hee drew neere the Monaſtery, whoſe
high walles hee no ſooner touched, when without ſeeing
or hearing any thing that might affright him, vpon the
ſudden, his heart beganne to tremble, and his eyes to
dazle, that (his haire ſtanding on end, and his courage
and ſtrength vtterly failing him) he fell down in the field;
from whence (taking heart to haue riſen) a blacke and
diſmall apparition kept him backe. Here his horrour increaſed,

and in ſtead of calling on Heauens ayde hee
was quite tongue-tyed; but, at laſt his manly reſolution
expelling and getting the maſterie ouer his feare (groping
on forward) he found a reſt for his body and hands; and
his amazement now prettily well ouer, opening his eyes,
which with the gaſtly affrightment of the ſhadow hee ſaw,
were before cloſed, hee perceiued hee was now at the
Church doore: ſo that, leaning vpon the iron railes before
it, and afterward ſitting him quietly downe in the
Porch, he might heare a huſht, and confuſed ſound of Voices,
and frequent blowes by intermiſſions, to which ſomewhat
more liſtningly hearkening, hee might plainely
know that all of it was cauſed by the Religious men of
that Order, who at thoſe houres certain nights of the weeke
vſed to ſcourge and diſcipline themſelues; vvhich in this
occaſion, ſerued as an alarme to Gerardo, to rowze vp his
drowzy ſpirits, and vvorke a feeling compunction in his
hardened heart, as from his eyes it drew compaſſionate
teares.
               And inſtantly the prodigious paſſages of his life were
repreſented vnto him, his diſordinate affections likewiſe,
and the danger into which by Niſe and her friends he was
drawne; together with his no leſſe happy eſcape from
impriſonment. After this, hee began to conſider the ſinfull
courſe he was now in, which hee ought rather to leaue,
or indeed conuert his life into a deuout and Chriſtian profeſſion.
Laſtly (weighing with himſelf) that happely all thoſe
Religious ſoules were not indebted to ſuch bitter ſacrifices,
nor worthy for their crimes of the torments they put themſelues
to, that his iuſtly might merit; yet notwithſtanding,
they (poore men) tearing their macerated fleſh, held on that
ſtrict courſe; his contrition was ſuch, that without further
expectation ſhutting the doores of his deſires, and retiring

his vvearied remembrance from the intimate affection of
Liſis, he reſolued to leaue her and it in the ſtate it now was:
and vvith this happy determination, about to returne, he
ſtumbled and had like to haue fallen vpon his man, who
careleſſe enough of any ſuch accident, lay faſt aſleepe vpon
the cold earth, not hauing in all this vvhile once perceiued
his Maſter, vvhich made him not a little vvonder, but awaking
him, he bade him follow; and ſo they held on their
way, faire and ſoftly to the Citie. So farre backe on his
vvay was hee gotten, as to come iuſt euen vvith Liſis her
Tower and Bay-window; vvho no ſooner ſaw one paſſe by
(as being ſure it could be no other then her Louer) but with
a tender and pittifull voyce ſhe began to call him; which
notes, touching Gerardo's eares, (like Syrens accents) worked
in him the effects, that they in the heedleſſe Mariner,
depriuing him ſo ſtrangely of his remembrance, as if there
neuer had beene any ſuch things as vvhat formerly befell
him: ſo, vnable to go further on (the ſtrong Remora of his
diſordinate luſt ſeizing his ill-gouern'd Barke) hee returned
backe where his Miſtris expected him: excuſing as well as
he could, his ſtay; but ſhe (deſiring more neerely to bee ſatisfied)
caſt downe the Rope, to which as hee would haue
tyed the Ladder, foure men roſe haſtily vp, out of thoſe ouer-growne
weedes that encompaſſed the walles, and with
drawne ſwords ſet vpon him and his ſeruant. It may well
be ſuppoſed how much the accident amazed him, but perceiuing
the certaintie of his danger, he fell as ſpeedily to his
defence. Gerardo (by reaſon of the Ropes ſhortneſſe to faſten
the Ladder to it) had gotten vpon a little dung-hill,
which ſtood to more aduantage then the reſt of the ground,
ſo raiſed by ſome traſh that was ordinarily throwne out of
the windowes, whereby his enemies (not able to incompaſſe
him round) were forced to come all before, which

made his reſiſtance ſomewhat the leſſe difficult; though all
had beene inſufficient, if at the ſame inſtant, with the noiſe
and claſhing of weapons, ſome other company had not iſſued
out of the houſe, who came in to the hotteſt of
the skirmiſh. Theſe were the Father of Liſis and his
Kinſmen, who lying in cloſe ambuſh to effect their purpoſe,
and ſeeing by the other vnlookt-for occaſion their reuenge
was preuented; yet thinking that now with leſſe danger
they might apprehend or kill the partie, they made forward
to the euent: but heauen was pleaſed to free Gerardo from
that extremitie, and to permit, that they, who fought with
him, ſuppoſing theſe new commers were of his partie, began
to retire, ſo that he encouraged too by the approch of
the latter, (preſuming vpon what his Contraries imagined)
began now with his ſeruant to let flie at them amaine, laying
manfully about him, as they in like manner ſent their returne
of blowes; till at length the one partie preſſing forward,
and the other, flying backward, they were gotten as
low as certaine Elmes that adorne the Valley, where (inuironed
with darkneſſe) one of thoſe that firſt ſet vpon Gerardo
fell downe, crying out for confeſſion; which Gerardo
no ſooner heard, but calling to his man to make away, they
both by helpe of the thicke-growing trees hid themſelues,
and fetching a wide compaſſe, returned to the Citie, and
himſelfe to Sanctuary.
               At this time Liſis, (who ſeeing the mortall danger her
Louer was in, was falne into a faint ſwoune, and new come
out of it) no ſooner tooke notice of her father and kindred,
when, perſwaded verily that they knowing of her affection,
meant by that cruell meanes to preuent her, and ouercome
with this miſerable imagination, fearing the like ſacrifice
ſhould be made of her; and at laſt hearing that pittifull
voyce from amidſt the armed troope call for confeſſion:

withall, that her father and friends returned haſtily into the
Fort, her amorous paſſion ſuggeſting to her, it was her Gerardo,
ſurprized with her ſudden griefe, and none neere to
comfort or hinder her, (hauing the Ladder in her hand)
without farther delay ſhe ſtepped vpon it; but had ſcarce
gone foure ſteps downe, when intangled in her coates, and
weakened by the ſudden affrightment, or the ſecret iudgement
of high Heauen ſo diſpoſing it, ſhe tumbled downe
to the ground, at the inſtant that her father arriuing in the
height of his reuengeful furie, to his ſad griefe & ſoules torment,
became a witnes of the lamentable diſaſter; the bitternes
of which bereauing him of iudgement, he was euen ready
to haue accompanied his vnfortunate child: they that accompanied
him too, came out with Torch-light; but going
to the place where Liſis fell, found her not, for (by reaſon
of the hilles ſlopeneſſe thereabouts, and the force of her fall
with her owne forgetfulneſſe) ſhee was ſent as farre as the
thicke Elmes, where the party fell, that the wretched Dame
tooke for her Louer; and (though pitifully bruiſed with her
fall) it ſeemed ſhe would be a ſharer with him in his mortall
agonie. Here then with extremity of anguiſh, the diſcomfortable
father found her, and though the vitall breath had
not quite left the pale disfigured Trunke, ſhee was as good
as dead; whoſe miſerable body the father taking in his
armes, and ſprinkling her wanne face with his teares, acknowledging
(too late his raſh proceeding) ſuch and ſo
great were his wofull lamentations, as might haue turned as
Niobe to ſoftneſſe: but his griefes did not ſo end, for his
kinſmen going to ſee the dead Gerardo that lay in thoſe
gloomie ſhades, (reſolued of their doubts) to their ſtrange
admiration, might perceiue the death-ſtrucke bodie of the
gallant Liſeno, whoſe reuengefull mind had hurried him to
that end, he (you may remember) offended with Liſis, and

enuying the happineſſe of her new Louer, not onely contriued
the Letter, and aduice giuen to her father, but aſſoone
alſo as he had notice of the Priſoners eſcape, ſuſpecting,
and not without likelihood, that at one time or other hee
would not faile ſhortly to ſee his Miſtris, (his opinion not
deceiuing him) hee purpoſed ſo to handle the matter, that
Gerardo might no longer follow his pretenſion; and thinking
that to take reuenge cruell enough of Liſis, vvas, to remoue
from her the cauſe of her affection: vvith this intent hauing
ſeuerall nights vvatched Gerardo, this (his owne laſt) hee
tooke three of his friends vvith him, (ſure friends indeed,
that ſo baſely forſooke him vvhen he had his deaths wound)
that hiding themſelues in the ouer-growne Weedes, ſet vpon
Gerardo, vvith the ſucceſſe here ſet downe. Now Liſis
her father and his kindred fearing the generall danger, that
might befall them, returning to the ſad Manſion, they indeuoured
all they could for ſome time, to conceale the wofull
Tragedie; but it was not poſſible for them to do ſo, in
reſpect of the noyſe and ſhriekes of the mother and her
maides, together vvith the lowde exclamations of the pittifull
Aminta, that breaking thorow the ayre, made known
the vvhole proceeding: ſo that now euery man began to
ſhift for himſelfe the beſt he could. All the reſt of the night,
and part of the next day, vvas the vnfortunate Liſis dying,
and at laſt in the morning, in the Eaſt of her age, her life
was ſet, and ſhee expiring, gaue vp her noble ſpirit to her
pious Maker.
               Farre from the leaſt thought of his Miſtriſſes ſudden end,
(vvhilſt theſe things paſſed) was Gerardo ſecure in his Couent,
now in contemplation of his incredible accidents,
and rendring high Heauen condigne thankes, that pleaſed
to free him from the danger. In fine (his night paſſing on
in ſuch profitable watchfulneſſe) day approched, by what

time Liſeno's bloody end was diuulged thorow the whole
Cittie, and conſequently the vntimely death of the faire Liſis
came to her Louers eares. At firſt the vnlikelihood baniſhed
all credit from Gerardo's breſt, but beeing viſited by
his brother Leoncio, he not onely told him the certaintie of
that, but vvithall, that Gerardo vvas made a principall actor
in the buſineſſe; vvhich at firſt ſo diſmayed, and next, caſt
him into ſuch an outrage, that had not his brother more by
plaine force, then forcible reaſons, detained him, hee had
(doubtleſſe) crying out like a mad man, ran into the Citty,
and committed himſelfe into the hands of the Iudges; who,
now extremely incenſed at the hapleſſe accident, (and as if
the poore Gentleman had beene guilty of all) they cauſed
extraordinary ſearch to be made for him, as vvell in particular
houſes, as Churches and Monaſteries, (which knowne
to the diſcreet Leoncio, and vviſely apprehended by Gerardo)
the danger forced him to ſhift for himſelfe; and ſo to his
griefe he diſpoſed of his flight, and vvithin two dayes in an
Euening, he left the famous Iliberis, reſolued to bid his natiue
Countrey Spaine Adieu for euer; vvith which purpoſe
embracing his brother, and vnwilling (for the ſecrecie of
his affaires) to make vſe of any ſeruant, hee tooke his vvay
toward the next fitting Sea-Port: but yet before hee went,
hee left and performed the laſt funerall Obſequies, due to
the ſacred Memorie of his luckleſſe Liſis, in theſe Elegiacall
Verſes:
               
                  Pure ſpirit! that leau'ſt thy body to our mone,
                  From whence, now diſ-impriſon'd, thou art gone
                  To thy more happie Region; where, each Field,
                  Eternall Aprill of faire flowres doth yeeld.
                  Looke, if the Soule can downeward looke, and ſee
                  A Soule (once thine) all teares, for want of thee:
                  
                     
When I was doubly pris'ner by thine eyes,
                  How little dream't I of, Here Liſis lies?
                  
                  Or, when a ſmile would her Gerardo bleſse,
                  Little, that earth, thus early ſhould poſſeſse
                  So faire a Casket. Little thought indeed,
                  Baſe wormes on ſixteene yeeres ſweet fleſh ſhould feed.
                  So, fruites are in their bloſsomes nip't by froſt:
                  So, a tall ſhip, that oft the Seas hath croſt,
                  At laſt, when gladſome Port ſhe leaues behind,
                  How the ſmooth waters court her, and falſe wind,
                  Till, when a ſudden guſt and ſtorme doth riſe,
                  Rocke-daſhed, ſhe becomes the Oceans prize.
                  Liue (yet) my Liſis, on thy Marble Tombe,
                  Whilſt Time beares date, free from Obliuions doome.
                  That, when the world's laſt paſſenger drawes neere,
                  In in-corrupted letters may appeere:
                  Here Liſis lies, that leap't from vitall breath,
                  To meet a Louer in embrace of death.
               
               Hauing trauelled all night, day came on, vvith vvhoſe
approach and cleereneſſe, he vvas a little reuiued; yet holding
the light leſſe ſecure for the ſafety of his trauell, vvithout
delay, (to auoid the danger of ſuch as might follow
him, leauing the roade) he got into the thickeſt and vvildeſt
parts of the famous Alpuxarran Mountaines. His nights
waking and vvearineſſe made him drowzie, ſo that looking
about him for a fit place to giue his body ſome reſt in, vpon
the ſudden a noiſe and hollow murmure of ſome perſons
neere hand diuerted him from his purpoſe. Many times
the very ſhaking of leaues cauſeth ſuſpition in thoſe that are
(like Gerardo) flying; and ſo a ſlighter cauſe might haue
troubled him. He vvas euen about to haue turned backe

againe, but (ere aware) he vvas too farre engaged, and gotten
ſo neere, that ſtirring either forward or backward, hee
muſt needes be diſcouered; vvherefore confirming his vvauering
reſolution, he determined to goe on; and ſo tying
his horſe to a Maſticke tree, he alighted, and taking his Petronell,
that hung at the Saddle-bow, in his hand, the better
(if need ſhould be) to defend himſelfe, hee vvent very gingerly
on, toward the place, from whence he heard the noiſe:
and vvilling to approch as neere as was poſſible, by and by
a lamentable voyce increaſing by degrees vpon him, made
him at length take ſtand, and giue eare to the enſuing dolefull
expreſſions.
               Is it poſſible, Don Diego, that ſo beaſtly and luſtfull a paſſion
ſhould thus brutiſhly depriue thee of all humanitie?
and if for thine owne ſake thou bee not at all mooued, yet,
can the blood of thy noble Kinſman, and the knowing mee
to be his, preuaile no more to ſtay thee from thy barbarous
attempt? To theſe complaints, he might alſo by the changing
of the voyce, heare this reply: 'Tis vaine (faire and
cruell Owner mine) with lowd words to hinder my pleaſure,
there being nothing to keepe me from the ſatisfying that,
from vvhich (had my Couſin, as thou denieſt, enioyed thee)
'twere impoſſible to diſſwade me; and therefore protract
not, Sweet, my glory, by enforcing mee to loſe all pittie.
Ay me! what ſhall I doe? replied the other, with a mournfull
grone: Cannot my teares, Don Diego, make thee relent?
nor the forc't pleaſure of a rauiſh't creature? well, ſince my
curſt fortune hath brought me to this ſad paſſe, be aſſured,
that before thou execute thy luſtfull purpoſe, it ſhall bee
firſt with my death. Here the afflicted voyce gaue ouer,
leauing Gerardo in deepe ſuſpence with her wofull complaints:
who perceiuing that they beganne to grow now to
extremitie, determined rather to loſe his life, then not releeue

the diſtreſſed party; and thinking it to bee the act of
Heauen, to guide him to ſo neceſſary a remedy, ruſhing
forward with his Petronel aduanc't, hee came to the place,
where he might ſee two men ſtruggling on the graſſe, (one
of them (as it ſeemed) the partie, that vanquiſhed, ſent out
thoſe grones) which ſpectacle ſo mooued Gerardo, that extremely
inraged, clapping his Piſtoll to his girdle, and
drawing his ſword, he made to the Couple: but no ſooner
got the guiltie party a ſight of him, when letting looſe the
other, that lay quite breathleſſe vnder him, he auoyded the
firſt blow; but running to lay hold on his weapon that lay
by the reſt of his Clothes, hee was preuented by a ſecond
from Gerardo, who (reaching him with a terrible ſlaſh in the
head) made him tumble ſenceleſſe to the ground; where he
had preſently diſpatch't him, (ſo much had his baſeneſſe incenſed
him) had not the other ſtepping betweene with
teares begged his life. Gerardo till then had not ſeene that
face, nor the intangled treſſes of haire, which were looſened
in the aforeſaid contention; and therefore perceiuing
his miſtake, and that the party (though diſguized) was a
woman, he granted her requeſt, and time to him that lay on
the ground, to riſe; but ſo ſhrewdly hurt, and diſ-heartened
with the loſſe of much blood, that minding no other reuenge
then the ſauing his life, he asked leaue of Gerardo to
depart; who (reuiling him a little for his vn-worthineſſe)
ſoone condeſcended, and courteouſly firſt helped him to
mount vpon one of the two horſes that ſtood tyed vp to
the hedge.
               
                  Gerardo was not ſo heedleſſe, but that (ſeeing in what
manner this man parted) he ſought to preuent all danger,
and making knowne ſo much to his new companion, helping
her withall to horſe, and mounting his owne, they haſted
to the high-way, riding ſpeedily on, till ſuch time, as

(ſuppoſing they were far enough from the former place)
they alighted to paſſe the heate of the day, each of them
chuſing in the pleaſant ſolitude of thoſe Mountaines a conuenient
ſhelter.
               The earneſt deſire Gerardo had to haue full notice of
this paſt Aduenture, bred no ſmall care in him, maruelling
as well at the vnexpected chance, as the ſingular beauty
and good parts of the afflicted Dame; who, conſidering,
in what hazzard ſhe had been, and the danger from which
Gerardo freed her, extremely thankefull to his Noble proceeding,
was ledde on with the ſame thoughts touching
him, deſiring by all meanes to know, who it was to whom
ſhe vvas ſo much obliged: wherefore, vnable to reſiſt longer
her affectionate longing, ſhe firſt of the two, with this
ſpeech to Gerardo, broke ſilence.
               When your generous proceeding, worthy Sir, might
not warrant my curioſitie, your vndaunted valour ſhewed
in hazzarding your life, to repaire my honour, would tye
me to requeſt your name; ſince, knowing that, together
with the noble parts wherewith Heauen hath bleſt you, I
ſhall at leaſt acknowledge with them the Owner of my
life, to whom, for the reſtoring of mine honour it is indebted.
               Leſſe earneſt intreaties would haue ſerued Gerardo, and
made him paſſe by all difficulties or dangers to obey her;
and therefore (loth) to loſe aduantages, euen in courteſies,
with a pleaſing countenance he thus anſwered; Omitting,
faire Gentlewoman, the ſmall ſeruice I haue done you
(which deſerues not to call you a Debtor) the merit of ſo
great beauty, and the diſ-agreeing habit you weare, together
with the late accident, make me ſo deſirous to know their
Originall, that I ſhould be moſt willing to obey your command,
if in exchange, I might vnderſtand it: and, confident,

that you vvill herein fauour me, referring my ſelfe to your
courteſie; you ſhall know, that my Country is Caſtile, my
birth-place Madrid, and my name (the firſt time happely
you will haue heard it) Gerardo, Gerardo (ſaid ſhee) if that
be ſo (with a bluſtering alteration ſhe interrupted him) either
you are he, whom of all the men in the world, I moſt
deſire to ſee, or there be more of the name: yet, to reſolue
my doubt, be pleaſed, I beſeech you, to let me know, if you
haue at any time beene a Priſoner, in the famous Citie of
Iliberis. Well might Gerardo haue feared no few inconueniences
by confeſſing this truth, but his free condition neither
could nor would diſſemble it; which the faire Dame
no ſooner vnderſtood; when (her eyes ſwimming in teares
of ioy) ſhe ranne haſtily to imbrace him, ſaying, 'Twas not
poſſible for my remedy to proceed frō any other hand: and
certainly to yours, Heauen hath reſerued the cheering and
eaſe of afflicted hearts: for, firſt you were not onely a comfort
to my beloued Leandro, in that miſerable eſtate of his
impriſonment, but alſo, in theſe deſarts, by your ineſtimable
valour, you haue ſuccoured me his wofull Pledge. Heauen
that reſerued you in both occaſions for a remedie to
our misfortunes, recompence what you deſerue from Violante
and Leandro, and ſo leauing her words, ſhe beganne
greedily againe to caſt her armes about Gerardo, whoſe admiration
I can hardly deſcribe. When he heard this, and
knew that ſhee before his eyes was the diſcreet Dame that
coſt his friend Leandro ſo many watchfull moments (as in
the Hiſtory ſo ſtrange and notable you heard, vvhich vvas
interrupted by Gerardo's remoouall to new impriſonment,
that broke off the Tragicall Narration: and therefore maruellouſly
reioyſing now with ſo admitable a ſucceſſe) hee
began with more liuely affection, and courteſie, to offer his
ſeruice, telling her, how much hee eſteemed Leandro, and

how glad hee was at preſent (had the danger beene farre
greater) to haue aduentured himſelfe for one that ſo neerely
concerned his friend: but withall his curioſitie a-freſh
inciting him (for Violantes ſtrange diſguize, and the vnexpected
knowing her, equally moued him) he could not but
requeſt her to leade him out of that Labyrinth, by letting
him know how ſhe came to her extremitie.
               The faire Dame willing to expreſſe her gratitude, and
hearing likewiſe from Gerardo's mouth, the moſt eſſentiall
part of that pleaſing Story of their loues, was glad (though
to her honours coſt) to afford him that ſmall content; and
therefore taking her beginning, where Leandro ended, (not
without a few teares, effects of a bitter remembrance) ſhe
began the reſt of the Hiſtory in this manner: There hath
neuer beene enterprize ſo difficult, but perſeuerance hath
attained vnto it; whether Leandro's then were worthy a
more glorious conqueſt, your ſelfe, Beſt Gerardo, ſhall bee
Iudge, determining in your honoured breſt, whether my
reſiſtance could haue beene greater, ſince it proceeded ſo
farre, as to make me almoſt deſerue the rigorous ſtile of a
cruell Anaxarete.
               
               Indeed (vanquiſht at laſt) I reſolued to equall his loue
with like affection; and (to this purpoſe) inſtructing him
what he ſhould doe, that wee might as that night enioy our
ſelues; the greateſt part of the afternoone being ſpent, Leandro
(for ſo we agreed) faining himſelfe ill at eaſe, and
telling my Husband hee would goe to bed, made as if hee
went to his Chamber for that purpoſe; but from thence
(my good-man yeelding a fit opportunitie) hee went out,
leauing his owne doore but pulled too, and ſo came to my
Chamber, where, for more aſſurance, I made him get betweene
the bed-Curtaines and the wall.
               This diligence was of neceſſity to be vſed before-hand,

for my wary Owner at night vſed to locke our Chamber
doore, and that which was neereſt Leandro's who (by the
way) had alſo deſired my Husband, that hee ſhould by no
meanes awake him, becauſe (as he ſaid) his want of reſt
was the cauſe of his indiſpoſition: but this was to preuent
any longing deſire to ſee him: my heart was at this time in
a ſtrange diſtraction of ioy and feare; for, vnaccuſtomed to
ſuch cares, the expectation of my pleaſure was much
leſſened, and happely this vnquiet alteration in me, might
bee the fore-runner of the ſad ſucceſſe you ſhall ſtraight
heare.
               I know not how it came to paſſe, but from the firſt day
of my Leandro's being with vs, there was a great league of
friendſhip, betweene him and the Vicar of our towne, by
whom he was for his vvants ſupplyed vvith moneyes, and
now and then viſited.
               This Vicar hauing been abſent from him all the time of
his ſickneſſe, comming home as that night from a iourney,
and vnderſtanding by his people in how great danger Leandro
had been, ſuppoſing he performed not the part of a
good friend, if he did not (as ſoone as he had knowledge of
his ſickneſſe, ſee him) leauing his owne houſe, immediately
he came to ours, vvhere (though the doore was ſhut) hee
called out, and my Husband hearing his Voice, preſently
roſe and opened vnto him. I could not in any time know
vvho it vvas; for careleſſe too of any danger, the deſire only
of ſeeing my good-man laid to reſt, kept me awake, and
thus I wanted meanes to ſhift Leandro away; for whom the
Vicar asked, and for all his ſickneſſe and deſire of reſt vvas
made knowne vnto him, yet he would not be ſatisfide nor
away, vvithout ſeeing him: whereupon my Husband not
vvilling to gaineſay his will, was glad to obey him; vvhen
(calling at the Chamber) he no ſooner touched the doore,

but he might ſee it open, and Leandro miſſing, ſo that with
no ſmall alteration hee vvent downe and told the Vicar ſo
much, & aſſuring himſelfe he muſt needs be within doores,
beſides, his iealous condition eaſily egging and perſwading
him on, at laſt he traced out the truth, and our hard fortune;
and ſo haſtily diſpatching away the Vicar, vnable
longer to keepe in his torment, he inſtantly came running
into our Chamber; vvhere finding me at my wits end, and
my colour quite loſt (for the diſcouered buſineſſe had left
me like a dead body) confirming his ſuſpition, he began to
pry vp and downe the roome. Imagine, good Gerardo, to
vvhat extremitie I was brought, that though my imminent
danger was ſo neere, I had not the power or ſtrength to
runne into ſome place of ſafety. My husband hauing eſpied
Leandro, ranne at him with his ſword: but hee perceiuing
before-hand his danger, had preſently gotten to the light;
and (putting it out) had meanes to ſlip by the thruſt; but
his perſecutor running blindly on, ſtopped not, till hee had
clozed with him, ſo that I might now perceiue they vvere
both grappled together, though my faint heart durſt now
no longer ſtay to expect the iſſue; and ſuppoſing the worſt,
running ſuddenly down to the ſtreet doore, I left my houſe,
and ſtopped not, till I was gotten into the fields (fortune
being in this more fauourable to me, then my misfortunes
could expect) for falling accidentally vpon the high-way to
Ilberis, a Coach paſſed by thitherward with paſſengers,
who (when I had recommended my miſeries with a world
of ſighes and teares to their pitties) were ſo compaſſionately
charitable, as to take me along with them to the aforeſaid
Citie; whither as ſoone as I arriued, making ſale of thoſe
few Iewels I wore at my eares, necke and hands, with the
moneyes, I might for ſome time relieue my neceſſities.
Heauen likewiſe was pleaſed to affoord me the happineſſe

and company of certaine vertuous Gentlewomen, with
whom after I had ſome few dayes remained, I diſpatcht a
ſecret Meſſenger to Oſuna, charging him, ſtrictly to inform
himſelfe of my vnfortunate affaires, and giuing him likewiſe
a Letter for my Leandro, if (to my griefe and ſuſpition)
he had bin that night taken Priſoner, which indeed could
not otherwiſe be, conſidering how ſubiect I left him to
my Husbands clutches and cryes. (All which effected,
and the Meſſenger returned) I vnderſtood by Leandro's
lines, what had paſſed from the very inſtant, that my fright
ſent me packing: at which time, as my husband and hee
were ſtuggling together, Leandro perceiuing, that if either
he got the aduantage, himſelfe was ſure to be ſlain, or, that
the other with his noiſe might call vp the watch, ſo that
his danger vvas euery way equall, relying wholly vpon
his naturall defence of life, and forced as it were to a deſperate
courſe, he ſtabbed my Husband with a Ponyard he
had on, whereof vvithin few houres he dyed. Leandro
tooke Sanctuary in the firſt Church he could finde open:
where being by diuers perſons laid vvait for, as a ſtranger
they perſecuted him, and the Iuſtice of the place taking
notice of the buſineſſe, cauſing a ſtrong Guard to watch
about the Church, hindred his ſally: yet his friend the
Vicar ſtucke cloſe to him, as had the caſe beene his owne,
reſiſting their going about to take him from the holy refuge,
vvhich, indeed at firſt they ſought to haue done de
facto. My ſoule euen melted vvhen I read theſe wofull
paſſages, as well for hauing liued ſo long in my Husbands
company, as in reſpect alſo of the tender affection hee alwaies
bore me: and laſtly, conſidering him by my light
proceeding, ſo vnhappily made away, could not but in a
breſt of Marble haue cauſed a lamentable effect.
               
                  
But my paſſion ſhall not prolong my Story, which
(not longer to trouble you, or afflict my ſelfe) I much deſire
to end. And therefore, Noble Sir, conſidering my
being alone for want of my Louer, and the impoſsibilitie
of ſouldring my errour, determining to ſeeke his
protection that was the cauſe of it, I vvrote to him a ſecond
Letter, deſiring him by all meanes to leaue the
place vvhere he was, and come to me, making knowne
vnto him (the better to diſpoſe him to the iourney) my
great affliction; which he no ſooner receiued, when, not
without great danger, furthered by his friend the Vicar,
he accompliſhed my deſire. But Heauen or my aduerſe
fortune permitted not that it ſhould take effect: for Leandro
had no ſooner ſet footing on the threſhold of my
doore, when, encompaſſed by officers (though he did all
he might to defend himſelfe) he was ſeized on and carried
to Priſon: ſo farre preuailed the vigilant ſagacitie of my
Husbands kindred, who following him that night hee left
Oſuna,; and keeping aloofe till hee was alighted, had leiſure
to prepare Officers, that, following him to my lodging,
he was no ſooner come thither (I hearing his voice, &
riſing to let me in) but hee was beſet with clamour and
noiſe. Wherefore ſeeing my new danger, inſtantly croſſing
our Turrets and Tyles of houſes, I got mee into ſafety,
in which I was not a little happy, for they left no place
in my houſe vnſearched, induced by their ſuſpitions of Leandro's
comming thither.
               To declare the torment this ſecond diſaſter bred in me,
were to begin a new Tragedy; and therefore leauing it as
ſuperfluous, you ſhall heare the reſt of our ſucceſſe. My
courage was not loſt, rather, after ſome few conſiderations,
began more to increaſe, ſince, now in perſon I might

ſee my Leandro, and by comming diſguized, and at vnſeaſonable
times to one of the Priſon gates, ſpeake to him;
where I had full notice of all theſe particulars: withall he
told me how contentedly he liued, and was lodged vvith
you in your Chamber, till ſuch time as your remoouall
from Priſon, made vs both (without flattery) leſſe happy.
               With this poore comfort at the aforeſaid place, we gaue
ſome little eaſe to our griefes, though fortune, not ſatisfide
with what wee had already ſuffered, ſo diſpoſed our affaires,
that our enemies had notice of our priuate conference,
yet there wanted not ſome friends, who, by way of
anticipation did let Leandro know, how fit it was for him
not to let me periſh, but prouide for my ſafety: which he
preſently put in practiſe, taking order to ſend me as ſecretly
as might be with this Letter of his to the Citie of Almeria,
with which (re-commending mee to the care and
company of certaine Gentlewomen his kindred) he committed
me to a Couſin-germanes of his to accompanie
me in the iourney, and ſerue mee in any occaſions by the
way; who performed the truſt giuen to his charge ſo
faithfully, that, had I not, by Heauens good prouidence,
and your noble courage bin relieued, I had either by this
time been by him ſlaine, or depriued of mine honour by
his barbarous luſt.
               Here the diſtreſſed Violante ended her ſo long-wiſht-for
Story by Gerardo, which made preſent vvay to his thankes,
who, as full of admiration, as the ſtrangeneſſe of thoſe accidents
required, perceiuing the gracefull Dame begin to
ſigh a-freſh, commiſerating her ſolitude, and the being by
her ba
                     •
                  e companion left, his noble heart not ſuffering him
to doe leſſe, regardleſſe of lifes hazzard, hee reſolued to accompany
her, till ſuch time as ſhe might ſafely arriue at her

wiſhed iourneys end. Within a day or two they came to
the Citie of Almeria, where, Violante, deliuering the Letter
of her impriſoned Louer to his Kinſwomen, was by them
ioyfully receiued: and Gerardo thinking now hee had fully
complide with all humanitie, (not without teares and a louing
imbrace from the ſad Dame) tooke leaue, and parted:
And hearing that in the next Port-Towne a Ship was
ready to ſet ſayle for Genoa, glad of his paſſage, agreeing
with the Maſter, he purpoſed with the next
dayes faire winde, to leaue Spaine, and
begin his Voyage.
               The end of the firſt Diſcourſe of the
ſecond Part.
            
            
               
               THE SECOND PART
OF
GERARDO,
THE
VNFORTVNATE
SPANIARD.
               The ſecond Diſcourſe.
               
                  GERARDO with the nights approach
withdrew to his Chamber, where his memorie
renuing paſt diſaſters, and wandring
in their vvretched contemplation, with this
vvatchfulneſſe hee ſtole ſome howers (before
it vvas due) vpon ſoft reſt: and ſo, vanquiſhed
vvith leaden ſlumber, he committed his wearie eies
to ſleepe. But not long had hee beene ſettled to this ſlumbring,

bring, vvhen his fancie falling to vvorke, made him
dreame, that his Lodging was beſet with Officers, who
comming to apprehend him, had broken the doore vpon
him. This fright toſſing him to and fro, ſoone awoke him,
ſo that opening his eyes, and looking about him, he might
by the ſnuffe of a candle left burning by him, ſee a white
Bulk ruſhing in at a window, that not farre from his beddes
head was violently puſhed open, which cauſed ſuch a ſudden
alteration in him, that though hee had it faſt in his
armes, he could hardly beleeue it was a naked man, that in
one hand carried a ſmall fardle, and in the other his ſword;
on whoſe Hilts the warie Gerardo caught hold, and was about
to haue raiſed the houſe, had not the vnexpected
Cheſt with gentle intreaties, and this enſuing diſcourſe kept
him from it: For Heauens ſake, noble Signior, diſcouer
me not, ſince my comming hither was no way to wrong
you, but onely (to my griefe) to flie a moſt vnluckie danger:
and hauing climbed from houſe to houſe, I could not till
this time find a doore or window open, whereby I might
eſcape thoſe that I ſuppoſed followed mee. Pardon, deare
Signior, my forc't rudeneſſe, and giue mee your ſuccour,
ſince Heauen and my good fortune haue impoſed a neceſſarie
obligation on you. The courteous Gerardo was ſtrucke
dumbe with this language, though re-collecting himſelfe,
not any way doubting the party, hee gaue him full credit,
and (more compaſſionate) his armes to boote: whereby
the other now ſomwhat ſecure, vnlooſing preſently his fardle,
began to clothe himſelfe, and ſoone appeared as gallant
to Gerardo's ſight, as hee had (but euen now) ghaſtly;
who fel into a new admiration alſo by the following euent.
The equall fright that poſſeſſed both, had hitherto robbed
them of their better heed; but beeing each now more quieted,
they no ſooner tooke a freſh view of one another, when

                  Gerardo was knowne by his new companion, and he alſo by
Gerardo; who with no ſmall amazement, firſt breaking ſilence,
ſaid, If I dreame not, and my eyes be not inchanted,
this is not the firſt time they haue ſeene you. You are in the
right, worthy Gerardo, ſaid the other; for, time was, when
wee were companions in miſerable impriſonment, from
whence I by a heauy ſentence was freed, the ſame day that
your ſelf was remooued to the ſtrong Fort of Alhambra; frō
thence (as ſince alſo I heard) you fortunately eſcaped. Gladder
would Gerardo haue beene that his misfortunes had
beene leſſe publike; but making no ſhew of diſtruſt in his
friend, hee roſe vp, and cheerefully embracing, throughly
knew him to be Claudio Alcino, a Gentleman of good qualitie
of Almeria; who from thence, after long impriſonment,
vpon ſome offences was remooued to Granada: hee returning
the like courteſie, and infolding Gerardo in his claſped
armes, ſayd, In theſe armes I may reſt well aſſured of my
ſafetie, which are ſufficient to free mee from a greater danger
then the preſent, though this bee not ſo ſmall, but it
might much trouble ſome other, deſtitute of your valorous
companie. Your courteſie preuents the phraſe that I ought
rather to vſe, quoth Gerardo, but our danger is equall, and
therefore let vs equally comply vpon all occaſions with our
obligation. From this they paſſed on to other diſcourſe,
till by little and little they fell vpon the occaſion that
brought Claudio to the narrow ſtrait. Gerardo deſired to
know it, not ſo much out of any curioſitie, as to giue his
friend the beſt aduice he could, for preuenting growing inconueniences;
who gheſſing at Gerardo's intent, though the
night inuited them to a more quiet diuerſion, ingaged in
the buſineſſe (the other attentiuely liſtening) he thus began:
Though you may haue heretofore knowne the cauſe of my
impriſonment, as beeing the originall of this preſent ſucceſſe,

it ſhall be neceſſarie, that I refreſh it here againe, but
with all the ſuccinctneſſe that may be. Some ſixe yeeres
ſince, from the Cittie of Murcia, to this place where now
we are, to diſcharge an Office which the King had conferred
vpon him, there came a Gentleman with his houſe and
family; and amongſt them a faire daughter, vvhoſe rare
perſonage hath beene and is, the chiefe ſubiect of my misfortunes:
her name, for ſome reſpects, I conceale, though
to make good the Story, wee will ſupply it with Siluia, to
whom my cruell lot ſo violently deſtin'd me, that from the
very firſt moment in which I beheld her, neither tedious abſence,
nor infinite troubles, haue once beene able to temper
the heate of my burning affection; which from the very
firſt inſtant increaſing, continuing more and more, grew to
be a flame. The firſt time I ſaw her was at a Bull-running,
where hauing vpon a goodly Ginet performed ſeuerall luckie
exploites, I began to be gratefull to her eyes; and vpon
a ſecond encounter, as ſhee was comming from Church,
more gracious; at which time I was bold to ſpeake to her,
and finding encouragement not long after, I vvrote, and to
her liking proſecuted my loue, with ſuch continuance, but
warineſſe withall, as that, obliged by my frequent importunitie,
ſhe came many nights to her Window to diſcourſe
with me; theſe treaties gaue ſtronger nouriſhment to my
wiſhes, which by my faithfull perſeuerance alſo were maturely
ſeaſoned: In ſo much that when nothing (not Siluia's
affection) but the manner was to my happy poſſeſſion wanting,
my vnfortunate ſtarres prouoked the forwardneſſe of
a proper Gentleman of Genoa, one of the beſt qualified perſons
naturalized amongſt vs in this Cittie, to be my Riuall:
and when I doubted no ſuch matter, he began to court my
Miſtris, who gaue me preſent notice of it, vnwilling to incurre
my ſuſpition, rather ſo preuented it: well might this

faithfull proofe of her loue excuſe her; but vnſatisfied, opened
the gates to infernall Ielouſie, which euen ſcorched
my very ſoule. Oh, how oftentimes, friend Gerardo, in this
hard plight, would I contemne and ſlight my oppoſite?
how oft, confident of my Siluia's loyalty, was I comforted
in my paine? which inſtantly (fearing the remembrance of
womans frailtie) was encreaſing: thus fell I from one
thought to another; and then refuſing all, ran blindly on in
the confuſed maze of my cares, driuen on by differing
gales of winde; for, miſerable is the nauigation of a ielous
Louer. Long ſuffered I in this infirmitie, which is ſcarce
yet remooued, but cleaueth to my very intrailes: and
though the remedie lay as then, in mine owne hands, yet
my loue to Siluia, and the reſpect to her reputation, held me
backe; (the vnwiſer I) for had I happely taken that courſe,
my affaires not once comming to this paſſe, might haue had
better ſucceſſe. Euery day my loue produc't new changes:
for with Aſcanio's continuall walkes and watchfulneſſe (for
this is, if not the right name, that which at preſent onely I
muſt declare) I neither could ſpeake to Siluia, nor ſhee ſee
me, with the priuacie we were wont; and ſo, many a night
his importunate care broke off our diſcourſe in the midſt
of our moſt pleaſing conuerſation; whereupon, my deſpite
increaſing, and my patience by little and little wholly diminiſhed,
being one day in conuerſation amongſt friends,
I grew, for a very ſlight matter, in choler with him, and ſo
from words to blowes, we fell to, and I on a ſudden raught
him a cut vpon the head. The Spectators (ignorant of the
myſterie) ſome of them accuſed me of Hare-brain'd raſhneſſe,
but others leſſe paſſionate, who affoorded mee their
better cenſures, ſounding the matter, found the full depth
of it: and as in theſe leſſe populous places, ſuch circumſtances
are hardly concealed, there wanted not ſome, who

made relation of what happened, to Siluia's parents and
mine, and gaue notice likewiſe to Aſcanio of their doubts,
though I preſume for him the labour might well haue been
ſpared; for ſure he could not be ignorant of vvhat hee had
deſerued. My parents hereupon thought beſt to ſecure
their feares; for ſeeing mee ſo ingaged in Siluia's affection,
they vvere afraid leſt I vvould marry her, for their mindes
were much againſt it; as being now alſo in treatie with the
friends of a Kinſwoman of ours for me: and therefore they
ſent me away cunningly to Seuil, telling me, that it was for
my ſafetie; vvhich I beleeued, and ignorant of their purpoſe,
eaſily condeſcended, taking firſt leaue of my Siluia,
who, though ſhe much grieued, yet aſſured of my loue, preferred
my good, before her owne content.
               In this abſence, by meanes of a ſeruant, I receiued my
Miſtriſſes Letters, and ſent their Anſwers; vvhich beeing
faithfully put into the Poſt-houſe, came ſafely to each of
our hands; yet, one amongſt the reſt I receiued, turned my
ioy into mournefull teares. About a moneth after I had
beene abſent, Siluia vvrote to mee, that her parents, after
long deliberation, at the intreaties of ſome principall interceſſors,
had promiſed her to my enemie Aſcanio in marriage;
and that though ſhee refuſed it by might and maine,
(knowing the cauſe of her contradiction) they kept her ſo
cloſe and afflicted, that ſhe vvas almoſt become deſperate,
and reſolutely determined rather to loſe her life, then mee,
pleaſed I to accept of her as a vvife; and ſo accordingly ſhe
expected my anſwer, and vvith her amorous concluſion,
left me on ſuch termes, that vvithout any delay, baited by
my terrible feares, I got me a good Mule for my iourney,
as thinking, the ſureſt anſwer would bee my ſelfe in perſon.
But my contrarie fortune diſpoſed more croſſely of
my happineſſe, then I expected; for hauing made vvhat

ſpeed I could, paſſing neere the Cittie of Antequera, and
croſſing ouer a Foord careleſſe, that by the extraordinarie
ſhowres that had falne, vvas riſen, my beaſt at her very firſt
ſtep tumbled ouer head and eares, and caught by the Current,
vvas after drowned, hauing left me cruelly wounded,
by a blow ſhe lent me, for a farewell, vvith her heeles: in
vvhich mortall danger I had there ſuddenly periſhed, had I
not beene drawne out by certaine men that iſſued out of a
Water-mill hard by, though in ſo bad plight, that hauing
quite loſt my ſences, after I had remained ſome two dayes
in this manner, awaking out of the drowzie aſtoniſhment,
I might perceiue my ſelfe in bed at an Inne of Antequera;
vvhere, after many fittes and changes, now in health, and
then vvithout it, I vvas euen giuen ouer for a dead man, till
at laſt vvithin ſome forty daies I recouered; in vvhich time,
though I vvrote to Siluia and my friends, yet, vvhat by careleſneſſe
of meſſengers, or my ill lucke (the more likely)
would ſo haue it, not a Letter came ſafe vnto them, neither,
with the forgetfulneſſe my hurt cauſed in mee, had I the
braine to ſend them by an expreſſe bearer. At length making
vſe of a Chaine of God I had, vvhich my diſaſter yet
had left me, I payed for my Cure and other charges, and ſo
held on my voyage, comming (as ill lucke vvould haue it)
to this Cittie, the very ſame day, that my Miſtris, ouercome
by the perſwaſions or her friends threats, but moſt of all by
the neglect and ſmall eſtimation, vvhich I (in her opinion)
made of her Letters, and ſuſpecting (more then ſhee needed)
that I had forgotten her, ſhee gaue her hand to my
Contrarie; vvho, not able to deferre his happineſſe, vvould
needes the very ſame day to Church; and ſo, about ten of
Clocke in the morning, as I entred the high ſtreet of the
Cittie, paſſing before the Church doore, I became a miſerable
vvitneſſe of the preſent ſolemnitie; ſeeing my beloued

Miſtris, in the midſt of a great troope, hand in hand with
her new Spouſe.
               Here, friend Gerardo, as if heauen and earth ſhould come
together, I forſooke the Reines, and (a ſpectacle of miſery)
was with the vnexpected accident, transformed (as it were)
into an vn-mooued Image: but calling preſently againe to
mind my former loue, paſt pleaſures, and my paines taken,
to ſee another now Owner of the fruit, ſo horrible vvas my
ſoules anguiſh, that (void of all conſideration) my iudgement
quite gone, and nothing left, but a deſire to ſatisfie
my griefes, from the Saddle flue I, and vvith my drawne
ſword, in midſt of the preſſe, ſet vpon him; vvho, in all probabilitie,
to be reuenged on me, had demanded Siluia to
wife, and crying out like a mad man, before hee could defend
himſelfe, or any other aſſiſt him, he receiued (if not ſo
many as I could haue wiſhed) wounds ſufficient to lay him
along; where I had alſo diſpatcht him, had it not beene
more needfull for mee, to looke to mine owne life. And
though I vvas hard beſet by ſome Kinſmen and friends of
his, yet ſome acquaintances of mine running in to the
noiſe, by their helpe I eſcaped the danger: but not ſo ſurely
euery way, ſince before I could get the Church for my
Sanctuarie, ſome Officers ouertooke mee at the very
doore. They preſently conueyed me to ſtrong hold, and
the ſucceſſe diuulged, that Aſcanio was dying; his kindred
fearing my friends would be too powerfull for them in this
place, repaired to the Royall Chancerie, by which meanes
(though the wounded partie were out of danger) I was remooued
to the Priſon of Granada, where your ſelfe and I
grew firſt acquainted: in vvhich Cittie, not long after, Aſcanio
perfectly recouered, purſued the matter ſo eagerly againſt
me, that had I not found eſpeciall friends, it might
haue gone but ill with mee: but hee at laſt was forced to

reſt ſatisfied, onely with my baniſhment from this Kingdome,
not to returne againe on paine of death▪ 
                  Siluia, whilſt
I remained thus Priſoner, ſtill continued her affection, and
(by meanes of the aforeſaid ſeruant) to write to mee; diſcharging
her ſelfe from all blame, by alledging the violence
of Parents, but chiefly my neglect: ſo that, conſidering ſhe
had reaſon, I, without it, began againe to plunge my ſelfe
as deepe as euer, (her Letters beeing the principall comforts
to my fetters.) So blinded was I with this womans affection,
that (though any mans elſe, as hauing loſt her,
might haue beene cooled) I quite contrarie, for the ſame
reaſon Aſcanio enioyed her, more violently loued her then
euer; and was now ielous of another mans vvife. And
not paſſing ſixe dayes ſince, I receiued this Letter, vvhich
Claudio drawing out of his Pocket, Gerardo approching
neerer to the dimme light, might view the following
Contents:
               Our ſad fortune, my Claudio, doth n
                     •
                  w abate her rigour,
ſince at this time ſhee offers vs a ſo long wiſhed opportunitie: my
husband is abſent, and will bee yet ſome dayes from home; ſee,
whether the occaſion would be loſt, or if Siluia deſerue to ſee thoſe
eyes. Omit not then the faire coniuncture, and comming warily:
on Thurſday at midnight I will expect you at my doore. When
theſe Lines ſhall come to you, you will not fayle. Farewell, deare
Owner mine: Heauen ſend you ſafely hither.
               This Letter (proceeded the tender Louer) I receiued in
Granada at a Friery, where I had taken Sanctuary, and inſtantly,
with what content you may imagine, I fulfilled her
deſire: arriuing punctually as yeſterday in the euening at a
Village, ſome halfe a League ſhort of this place▪ vvhere
leauing my horſe, I came on foot, vnknowne, and vn-accompanied,

ſaue by mine owne raſhneſſe, and quickly touched
my Miſtreſſes happy threſhold, who there expected
me. But the ioy my heart was poſſeſt with in ſeeing her, was
quickly daſht by a luckleſſe accident, which as then hapned;
for, after a noiſe and claſhing of ſwords, iuſt as the doore
opened to let mee in, one of the parties of the fray, flying
backe, fell at my feete, crying faintly out he was killed. I
perceiued my danger, if I ſtayed longer there; and therefore
quickly got me in with Siluia, where (that hauing been
the firſt time we euer met ſo neerely) I was ſo out of countenance,
that I knew not vvhich way to begin to ſpeake to
her: (experience then teaching me how much, ouer-ioyed
paſſion doth tongue-tye our expreſſions:) but at laſt with a
tender ſigh, forcing a way from my ſilence, I thus began:
               What greater proofe of my affection and fidelitie could
I render, ſince forgetting my iuſt exceptions, I come thus
dangerouſly to your preſence? where though death ſhould
ſeize me in midſt of my effected deſires, I ſhould not thinke
my ſelfe at all vnhappy.
               To this, Siluia with teares replyed, To ſuch loyaltie, all
that my affection can anſwere, is; To runne thorow all the
hazzards that may befall a woman (to her mis-fortune) in
anothers power, to be euer truely yours: and thus both our
affections ſhall ſtill be equall: but (leauing this) my preſent
griefe is, that, our content is like to laſt leſſe time then I ſuppoſed,
ſince, this day I receiued a Letter from my Husband,
in which he writes, his returne is like to be very ſpeedie;
though for the time of his abſence, neuertheleſſe (beſides
that I haue alwayes beene yours) I ſhall more freely
now be ſo.
               Theſe laſt words and her newes, were like croſſe-barres in
my ſoule; yet, (making a vertue of neceſſitie) hand in hand,
we walked towards her Chamber, where I no ſooner offered

to take poſſeſſion of what I longed for, vvhen preuented
from the ſweet occaſion, wee both were equally affrighted
vvith a terrible noiſe and knocking at the houſes fore-doore
and backe-gate.
               At firſt I could not but thinke it was Aſcanio; and, ſo,
whilſt my Siluia ranne fearfully to the window, I was about
to haue dreſſed me: but, the ſudden ſurpriſall neuer gaue
me the leaſt aime; onely my memory ſerued me to make
my cloathes vp in a bundle, and being ready to runne out
of the roome where I was, Siluia laying hold on me, began
to cry out more cheerefully then I could expect: Whither
are you going, Sir? will you vndoo your ſelfe and me? 'Tis
the Round that thus knockes in ſeuerall places, whom
(doubtleſſe) either your ſmall heed, or my misfortune
haue brought hither. In hearing this, I was quite out
of my vvittes, and in two ſo imminent dangers vvholly
vn-determinable, conſidering the breach of my baniſhment,
and Siluia's infamy; who, bidding mee follow
her, hearing lowder knocking, with her Maids helpe and
hers, I got vp into the Chimney ſtocke, in midſt vvhereof,
finding an iron barre athwart that ſerued to the Pot-hooks,
I ſtood vpon it, whilſt Siluia getting on her Gowne, bade
open: ſo that inſtantly, they of the Round were come vp,
where I might heare what they would haue. The chiefe of
them very ciuilly deſired my Miſtris to pardon their vnmannerlineſſe;
for though her Husband was abſent, yet
they vn-willingly were forced to this diligence, by reaſon
there was a man ſlaine at her doore; and, as ſome of the
neighbours declared, the murderer at the inſtant when hee
fell, ran in there.
               My heart with this was not a little reuiued, but ſtill ſome
feare of my misfortune remained: and that, I hold to bee
the ſeuereſt, when vpon miſtake, worſe faults are diſcouered.

My Miſtris with more confidence bade them ſearch
all the Chambers: for (beſides that ſhe was ignorant of the
partie) ſhe aſſured her ſelfe he durſt not abide in her houſe,
and therefore ſhe willed them to look into all the Roomes,
and not to leaue the leaſt moate vnſearched. I, in the meane
while, like a forlorne Sentinell, pierſt thorow with the
nights ſharpe aire, and my feete galled with the narrow
barre in extremitie of torment, knew not how longer to endure
it: but perceiuing now by the hurry and ſhuffling of
legs, weary of farther ſearch, they took their leaues, I began
to take heart, and faire and ſoftly to deſcend; which, that I
might (wanting helpe) the better be able to performe, I
ſought to quit my ſword; willing to faſten: it ſome-where
by the Hilt, and groping in the wall, I found a hole about
the opening of the Plaiſtred-worke and the Brickes, into
which I thruſt one of the croſſe-barres, and ſo, leſſe cumbred,
returned to my intent: but my hard fortune not content
with the former ſurpriſall prepared for mee, brought
on a ſecond incomparably farre more frightfull: for no
ſooner was the Round got out of the ſtreete, vvhen her
Husband newly arriued from Seuill, and wondring to ſee his
houſe at ſuch an vnreaſonable houre beſet with troopes,
entred.
               Conſider, friend Gerardo, my feare as ſoone as I beganne
to heare his voice; yet Siluia (though the ſuddenneſſe amazed
her) cunningly diſſembling her diſtaſte, and giuing him
notice of what paſſed, brought him leiſurely on into the
roome, where I was, not dreaming till then of this ſecond
traunce. And certainly, had not ſhee by her purpoſed diſcourſe
giuen me a lowd warning, I had beene diſcouered,
and both of vs ruined: for (ignorant of what paſſed) I was
gotten more then halfe way downe, vvhen, taking notice of
the preſent danger, not without infinit paine I turned back

againe; and had much adoo (conſidering my fright) to
keepe my ſelfe from falling. Her Husband with much perſwaſion
ſatisfied (for the rudeneſſe of the Officers much
troubled him) by reaſon of his weary iourney, would needs
goe to bed; but the ſeruants that came with him, called for
their Supper. Siluia, though ſhe were with Aſcanio, hearing
them, fearing (as I ſuppoſe) leaſt they would make fire to
dreſſe ſome victuals, commanded that they ſhould haue
onely cold meate to ſtay their ſtomakes till morning; but
they grumbled in that ſort, that, her Husband hearing the
noiſe, gaue new order, that (conſidering their wearineſſe)
they might haue ſomething hot; ſo that clapping wood to
the chimney, I was inſtantly nothing but ſparkes & ſmoke.
This danger being almoſt helpleſſe, made me madde, and
therefore I reſolued vpon a deſperate courſe, rather to caſt
my ſelfe into mine enemies hands, then to be ſtifled in the
vn-mercifull ſmoke and flames; and (ready to effect it) heauen
that had not vtterly forſaken me, permitted, that, drawing
out my ſword where I had faſtned it, vſing with the ſuddenneſſe
more ſtrength then needed, there dropt out a
huge ſquare Bricke, inſomuch, that diſcouering now goodly
broad Moone-light (a new remedy offered) I chang'd
my purpoſe; and, for all the ſeruants below were in an vproare
with the Bricke that fell; I beganne notwithſtanding
to vndoo ſome more, and to make way in the wall: from
whence skipping vpon the Tyles, for their noiſe below haſtened
me (crying out, Here's the Murderer the Round
ſought for) I croſſed from houſe to houſe, till at laſt, finding
this window open, I caſt my ſelfe (as you ſee) into your protection.
               Here, Gerardo hearing the end of this deſperate ſtory,
with admiration and new embraces gaue thankes to the Reator;
and incouraging his friend withall wiſely (for his

more conueniencie, and leſſe danger) diſſwaded him from
an enterprize, which, it ſeemed, Heauen it ſelfe ſo manifeſtly
contradicted. And continuing in their Diſcourſe til day-breake,
Claudio, with good aduice, determined to returne;
and ſo hauing eſcaped the danger, with Gerardo in his company,
they paſſed on to the firſt Village, and there friendly
parted. He went toward Granada, and the ſame day in the
afternoone, our Gerardo beeing imbarkt with fauourable
wind ſet ſaile for the Straits. Much ioyed hee was, to ſee
himſelfe, after ſo ſtupendious miſeries, now free and ſecured
from his powerfull enemies, though the remembrance
of Liſis and her diſaſtrous end, did ſomthing ſowre his contentedneſſe.
The pittifull ſucceſſe indeed deſerued a farre
greater reſentment, and therefore (no maruell) if his ioy
and griefes were thus intermingled.
               In this manner, ſometimes reuoluing in his ſad minde
an infinitie of misfortunes, and then againe, hoping that
thus leauing his natiue ſoyle, their wofull remembrance
would leaue him, Gerardo ſtroue to beguile the prolixe wearineſſe
of his Voyage, and the diſcommodities of being at
Sea: and thus they launcht (beeing gotten from ſight of
their Port) into the maine, ſteering their courſe directly for
Italy.
               
               The Maſter Marriners and Paſſengers were all generally
filled with ioy, for the ſmooth calmneſſe of the
weather did almoſt aſſure them a happy paſſage: and ſo
by Sunne-riſe, they were gotten aboue threeſcore miles
from the Coaſt.
               The affaires of humane frailetie haue their ends as vncertaine,
as their ſtableneſſe vnſure (a good fore-warning
to our vaine confidence, & a true expreſsion of the poore
validitie and weake ſtrength of mens deſignes.)
               
                  Gerardo well perceiued this truth, and his companions

with him taſted of fortunes heauy indignation, feeling the
power of her inconſtancie: for before it was fully foure of
the clocke, the ſhip-Boy with an out-cry from the Maine-Top
had diſcouered fiue Sayles, and not long after, to the
terrible affrightment of the hearers, he replide they were
Veſſels of Barbary, Frigots of that Coaſt. The poore Paſſengers
grew ſtraight into a cold ſweat, which, changing
their bloudleſſe colours into pale white, left them all equally
amazed: but fore-warned by the certaintie of the
danger, incouraging one another, and truſting to the Ships
ſwiftneſſe, with the faire winde they hoped to eſcape, and
yet made ready for their defence.
               
                  Gerardo in this diſtreſſe made known to the whole company
the nobleneſſe of his courage, by his reſolute alacritie.
By this time the Frigots that had a pretty while giuen
the Ship chaſe, ſeeing her with the windes helpe gaine of
them, mad to looſe their booty, and ſcourging the waues,
with the violence and fury of their Oares, they ſtroue to
equall their ſpeed; but they had infallibly loſt their labour,
had not the winde ſcanted vpon the poore Ship, leauing
her by that meanes quite diſtreſt, which the others perceiuing,
ſoone fetcht her vp, incompaſsing her now vvith
ſhoutes and noiſe. They within her, changed their firſt
reſolution; for, ſeeing themſelues ſo ſuddenly becalmed,
and conſidering the aduantage of their enemies, and that,
though they neuer ſo well defended themſelues, they
could not auoid either being taken or ſunke, to Gerardo's
great griefe, who would rather haue dyed then yeelded,
they ſtrooke ſaile, without expecting ſo much as a ſhotte
from the Enemie: which as ſoon as the Pyrats perceiued,
they boorded her, & diſ-arming them that were a-boord,
(who with Mariners and others might bee ſome fortie
perſons) they alſo diſtributed them to their ſeueral Veſſels,

and now, wonderfully gladded with their prize, towing
her on with two of their Frigots they made for Barbary.
The fiue Veſſels had each of them foure and twenty
Oares on a ſide: two of them belonged to one Ferru a
Turke by Nation, and the reſt to Ali Mami a Renegate
Greeke: who (beſides the preſent booty) had in this Voyage
mett with many more of goods and Priſoners on the
coaſt of Spaine, whom, in reſpect there wanted roome
vnder hatches, ſome of them they kept chained on one
ſide of the ſterne: theſe were Gerardo and ſome fiue or ſixe
more, to whoſe lots it fell, to bee in the ſelfe-ſame Frigot
where Ferru vvent, who, ſeeing Gerardo's goodly preſence,
(beſides his being well clad) queſtioned much with him,
till ſuch time as hee was interrupted by a ſudden balling
noiſe which the Turks and Moores made, crying out that
the Chriſtian Rowers were vp in Armes, and meant to
force away the Frigot. Ferru himſelfe all in a fright, preſently
ſought to appeaſe the tumult, frō whoſe beginning
reſulted the pitifull ſucceſſe you ſtraight ſhall heare: which
(the better to expreſſe, and the barbarous cruelty of thoſe
impious Infidels, becauſe it is the firſt torment that in this
captiuitie afflicted the good Gerardo's heart) I will particularly
ſet down the beginning and motiue of it. The Barbarians
for ioy of their Prize, had licenſed the poore Chriſtian
Slaues to reſt, as hauing been wearied with their continuall
former rowing; eſpecially, with the laſt ſpell to ouertake
the Ship: and being in this quietneſſe, a Chriſtian
found, that one of two Turbants was miſſing, which amongſt
other things were committed to his charge (as the
manner is) that the Turkes euer vſe to commit their things
to the cuſtody of ſuch Chriſtians as row at the Oar
                     •
                  
where they ſit:) wherfore the poore man much troubled,
for feare leſt the Turke would baſte him, ſought vp and

downe euery where to find it, but all in vaine: his feare increaſing,
he deſired ſome fellowes of his, that rowed neere
him at the ſame Oare, that giuing the word, they would alſo
paſſe frō one to another the Turbant that remained, to
ſee if any had found the other which was loſt; & doing this
ſimply without any ill intent, one of the Renegates noted
it, and giuing notice to the Turkes and Moores, vvith
the ſuſpition and doubt it cauſed, they beganne to cry out.
The Chriſtians roſe, and that the Turbant vvhich paſſed
from hand to hand, vvas the counter-ſigne of their intent:
the reſt vvere in ſuch an vproare, that they forced Ferr
                        •
                     
                   in
a hurrie, vvithout expecting any further diſcharge vvhich
the Chriſtians offered to giue, to haue them puniſhed; and
therefore like ſo many rauenous Woolues, they ſet vpon
him that ſought for the Turbant, ſtripping him, and binding
his hands, and tying a huge ſtone at his feet, and him
at the Maine-yard, ſnatched vp by a Pully, they ſo cruelly
racked him, that his very ſinewes were plucked from his
limbes, and his bones broken, and the poore ſoule left euen
for dead: though in all his paine the Chriſtian was ſo honeſt
and conſtant, that for all the demands they made touching
the Authours or Conſpiracie, they neuer could get
other from him then the truth, rather faithfully calling on
Heauens fauour, he freely and boldly ſaid, they were baſely
and maliciouſly accuſed: yet all would not ſerue to mollifie
the obdurate hearts of theſe bloody miſcreants; and ſo
they cauſed the reſt of the captiue ſlaues to be ſtripped, and
ſtretcht from Poope to Prow, cruelly whipped; but when
freſh Executioners were ready to haue renued the fearefull
ſacrifice, a Turke looking by chance into his bundle of
Clothes, found the Turbant which the miſerable Captiue
ſought for: whereupon perceiuing the innocencie of the
Chriſtians, crying out to looſe them, hee ſtept in, and told

the occaſion; declaring, that neither he whom they had firſt
racked, nor any of the reſt were in any fault at all: and ſo
with much adoo, by theſe and the like reaſons, which made
ignorance appeare in the one, and no purpoſe of commotion
in the other, he appeaſed his angrie companions, who
had well-nigh with ſtripes and laſhes torne the miſerable
Chriſtians.
               A ſad and horrid ſpectacle indeed, worthy of more then
humane commiſeration, vvhich vvrought in Gerardo's tender
heart ſo ſad an effect, that vnable to refraine, the trickling
teares dropped downe his manly cheekes, his couragious
ſpirits drooping, to ſee himſelfe in the power of ſuch
barbarous enemies. The ſhip vvas towed ſtill on by the
Frigots, that were garniſht and ſet out with their Banners,
Flags, and little Streamers; and ſo they steered towards the
Cittie of Argiers, vvhere the next day they eaſily arriued;
and ſcarce had their cutting Prowes toucht in the quiet harbour,
when opening, and lifting vp their hatches, they began
to diſcouer a great number of captiues taken from ſundry
Parts and Prouinces, of both Sexes, all ages. Our ſorrowfull
Gerardo was with the diſcomfortable ſight ſtrangely
daunted, and the more, when hee might ſee the poore
creatures runne to imbrace each other with weeping eyes;
for hauing beene vnder Decke, and in ſeuerall Veſſels, they
had not, ſince the time of their beeing taken till now, ſpoken
to one another; and now aſtoniſht and bereaued of
their ſences, to ſee ſuch multitudes of Turkes, and Moores,
as ranne to the Wharfe to view them, their grones began
afreſh, and Gerardo's dolefull reſentment to increaſe, by ſeeing
the diuiſion that was made in the midſt of the harbor,
ſeparating children from parents, parents from their children;
brothers and ſiſters rent from each others embraces.
Here, the afflicted wife ſends foorth a ſigh parted from her

vnfortunate husband; there, the diſconſolate mother, embracing
her little chickes; (ſo much the more vvretched, by
not apprehending their owne vvretchedneſſe) ſome hanging
at her amorous breſts, others at her armes, the reſt
(poore fooles) tyed to her coates, vvho lowdly crying out,
and beſtowing her laſt farewell-kiſſes vpon thoſe deare pledges
of her intrails, beholds them, vvithout all pittie, leſſe
hope of remedie, ſnatcht from her eyes, ſhe remaining like
a ſenceleſſe Statue, condemned as it vvere, for euer ſeeing,
neuer to enioy againe thoſe ſweet comforts of her life. Amongſt
the reſt, Gerardo expected vvhen his turne would
come to be diſpoſed of: but not long after in the diuiſion,
he fell to Ferru his ſhare; ſo to his great griefe and diſcomfort,
he vvas conueyed, vvith others that fell to the Turkes
lot, home to his houſe.
               His manly preſence had much pleaſed his barbarous
Owner, who promiſing to himſelfe, that Gerardo muſt
needes be ſome perſon of qualitie, hee made ſure alſo of a
large Ranſome, at leaſt a good Compoſition; for the beſt
part of their gaine conſiſting in Priſoners, the Turkes of
ſmall matters make mountaines, boaſting (though they
know the contrarie) that their Priſoner is ſome Prince or
Lord: ſo, they that buy a Slaue of them, firſt informe themſelues
what he is; and though ſome pre inſtructed, conceale
their condition, yet it little auailes them: for inquiring, if
the day they were taken, they were well clad, let them bee
otherwiſe neuer ſo truly informed, they ſtraight baptize
them for Titular perſons: and the ill lucke is, that ſo a poore
Cobler, if he were but indifferently clothed at his beeing
taken, paſſeth for ſuch: and ſtraight-way they call him, tell
him, they are well inough informed of his qualitie, and
know him to be Brother or Kinſman to ſuch a Duke, Marqueſſe
or Earle, (which comes firſt into their heads) and

that therefore 'tis bootleſſe to deny it; which done, they
preſently clappe a ſtrong Chaine, or Shackles vpon him,
in ſuch manner that he can ſcarce ſtirre. And if, ſeeing himſelfe
in this extremitie, the poore ſlaue make anſwere, proteſting
they are deceiued or miſ-informed, it nothing helpeth;
for they, ſtill obſtinate, will haue them to bee ſuch as
they fancie them, whereby many are for euer depriued of
libertie, wanting meanes or ability to pay the price of the
others vaine eſtimation: in which theſe Barbarians many
times ſettled, are not aſhamed alſo to ſend young Youthes
to Conſtantinople, preſenting ſuch to the Grand Signior and
his Baſha's, or other Viceroys, and great Potentates in thoſe
remote parts, giuing out, that they are the children of great
Perſonages, and ſuch as will bring huge Ranſomes. Thus it
happened in the time of Gerardo's C
                     •
                  ptiuity with three
poore Souldiers, who taken priſoners in certaine Veſſels of
Raguſa, and comming into the Viceroy of Argiers his
hands, the one a Spaniard, and the other two Flemmings,
he ſent them to the Turkes Generall his Patron, with the
titles of great Perſonages: but the ieaſt beeing by him diſcouered,
he cauſed them to be ſent backe againe to Argiers,
writing ioyntly to the Viceroy, that ſince thoſe Gentlemen
were ſo noble, and their Ranſomes like to be ſo great, hee
ſhould ſuffer them to be redeemed, and ſend him the monie;
(a tricke, that for a long time after much diſgraced and
ſhamed the poore Viceroy:) but with many other Captiues
it falles out leſſe happily, ſince with this tyrannous vanitie,
they are oftentimes perpetually baniſht from their natiue
Countries: for hauing once ſuch titles beſtowed on
them, they are kept vp cloſe in their Bathes, Priſons, or
Towers of the Blacke-Sea, from whence they neuer come
out againe; rather, baited with the intolerable waight of
their Chaines, hunger, miſerie, and deadly ſtench, and

where none can know or relieue them, they end their ſad
and loathed liues.
               
                  Gerardo paſſed not this ill fortune yet, though in part, he
had ſome taſte of the vnſauourie afflictions, that in ſuch occaſions
oft torment a noble and generous ſpirit: for in the
night of that bitter day, he was equally ſhut vp with his other
companions in a diſmall obſcure Dungeon, in which,
he till next morning remained, accompanied aſwell by vncleane
and naſtie creatures, as ſad and lamentable cares:
now conſidering with what barbarous rigour he beganne to
to be treated, and then acknowledging, that if hee ſhould
make knowne what he was, the price of his Ranſome would
be ſo enhaunced, as ſhould bee impoſſible for him euer to
procure it: ſo that determining till ſome happier time, to
diſſemble and conceale what he was, in the midſt of theſe
afflicting cogitations, the Dungeon was opened, and hee
(remooued) carried to the preſence of his new Maſter;
whom he found dreſſing himſelfe, in certaine ſpatious vpper
Roomes, but void of any furniture or houſhold-ſtuffe;
for euen the beſt and richeſt of thoſe Barbarians neuer vſe
any; all their mooueables and ornaments, conſiſting onely
in a Bed, with two or three hard Quilts, foure Sheetes, two
Blankets, two or three Cuſhions, and three or foure Shirts
a man, with as many paires of linnen Breeches, a couple of
Towels, three Handkerchiefes, a Carpet or two, and as
many Mattes to ſit downe, lie or eate on; a couple of Turbants
the men, and as many Coyfes after their faſhion the
women: and with ſome ſcrappes and pieces of different
colour'd Silkes, the Roomes are hang'd, where they ordinarily
ſit vpon two Cuſhions. This (as I ſay) belongs only
to the beſt and richeſt of them; for, for the reſt, there needs
no longer deſcription, then, that moſt penuriouſly baſe,
they liue promiſcuouſly like beaſts.
               
                  
                  Gerardo here making a low obeyſance to his Maſter, ſtanding
aloofe, expected his pleaſure, by whom hee was preſently
in reaſonable good Spaniſh demanded, who and
vvhence hee vvas, adding vvithall this following ſpeech:
Chriſtian, from the very houre that thou waſt taken, I had
a purpoſe (thy preſence liking mee) to haue thee for my
Slaue, though (for the effecting my deſire) I vvas, in exchange,
forced to forgoe two others for thee; in vvhich, I
ſuppoſe, I haue not done amiſſe; for if thy gentle preſence,
and good Clothes deceiue me not, thou art (doubtleſſe) a
Gentleman of vvoorth: if ſo, 'tis in vaine to deny it, for beſides
the incurring my iuſt diſpleaſure, thou vvilt alſo be the
cauſe of thine owne ruine, by beeing either bound at an
Oare, or put to ſome other moſt laborious toyle. This I am
willing to make knowne vnto thee, becauſe, knowing my
mind, thou maiſt alſo procure thine owne good and Ranſome
accordingly: I ſay accordingly, for I am not ignorant
of thy qualitie, and the Maile that was found with thee in
the ſhippe, as the Maſter of her, and ſome of thine owne
companie confeſſed, vvas of good value in Iewels and Apparell,
vvhich clearely teſtifie the truth. Beſides, diuers letters
and papers found in the ſame, not onely declare thee
to be a Gentleman vvell deſcended, but likewiſe thy name,
calling thee, The Spaniſh Gerardo.
               
               Here Ferru ceaſed, and our ſad Gentleman much wondred
at his ſtrange and craftie diligence, and therefore ſeeing
how bootleſſe it vvas to deny himſelf, he neither would,
nor durſt conceale the truth, though (diſguizing it all hee
might) informing his Owner largely of his life, and long
impriſonment, he told him alſo, that by meanes of that, he
and his kindred were vtterly impoueriſhed; but in concluſion,
put him in hope, that if he would be pleaſed to come
to reaſonable agreement, he could make meanes in Spaine
                  
for his ranſome; at vvhich the Turke much pleaſed, looking
more cheerefully vpon him, replied, that hee vvas glad of
his reſolution, and that they would not diſagree of price;
and ſo cauſing a great vvhite loafe to be brought out, with
ſome fruites, and hony cakes, he bad him fall to: and commanded
alſo, that two of the oldeſt Captiues ſhould goe
abroad with him into the Cittie, to ſee it and recreate himſelfe.
Gerardo vvondred not a little at his new entertainement,
vvhich ſeeming to him (by what he had heard) very
vnuſuall amongſt thoſe Infidels, hee could not but in his
mind render thankes to high Heauen: and much more
might he haue wondred at this ſingular proceeding, had he
knowne by what meanes the higher Powers guided his affaires,
and the manner how his Owners brutiſh and cruell
mind, vvith ſuch contrary teſtimonies of his bloody nature,
vvas made thus tractably propitious. The barbarous
Pirate had, in diuers Dungeons, Bathes, and places of Tillage,
aboue three hundred Chriſtians, and within the
houſe where he liued, almoſt an hundred more; who hearing
of Gerardo's courteous vſage, incompaſſing him round,
thought they could neuer haue ſight enough of him, nor
time to demand the cauſe of this noueltie. For they who
had a long time beene ſubiect to his more tyrannous condition,
could not but thinke in what he now did, there was
ſome particular myſterie.
               Theſe and other extremes pondered thoſe poore ſoules,
as they gazed vpon the afflicted Gentleman, and not without
cauſe; for none of them (doubtleſſe) had receiued, not
onely no ſuch fauours, but, not a word that ſauoured of the
leaſt humanitie from his vnhallowed lippes: nor was he accuſtomed
to make knowne at all, to the partie hee would
haue ranſomed, his pleaſure: they rather ſeeme to faine an
vnwillingneſſe, to the intent there may bee interceſſion

made, and ſo they more largely enhaunce the price; which
if the parties accept not, or flie backe from their promiſe,
they double their Chaines and Yrons, increaſing more and
more their torments and miſeries.
               So that, they thought this proceeding quite contrary to
their Maſters fell diſpoſition, and therefore their admiration
was not to be wondred at, which might very well too,
be ſo much the more, when they vnderſtood, he had a reaſonable
handſome Chamber furniſhed to his mind, appointed
for his Lodging.
               The next day after dinner, Ferru commanded two Chriſtians
to goe out with Gerardo, and ſhew him the moſt remarkeable
things of the Citie, and cauſing likewiſe his Bolts
to be knockt off, he made him put on ſome of the Clothes
which had beene formerly taken from him; this, increaſing
in his poore companions their former aſtoniſhment, the
leaſt they could coniecture, was, that the Turke enamour'd
on his goodly preſence, would with that gentle vſage diſſwade
him from the Chriſtian Faith, that ſo he might turne
Infidell: but others of more ſettledneſſe, remitted all to the
ſucceſſe of Time. Gerardo, not a little comforted with theſe
fauours, went ioyfully out with his two new companions to
ſee the Cittie; of which (hauing preciſely viewed and obſerued
it) he might eaſily in his remembrance ſet downe a
briefe and exact deſcription, aſwell of the forme, ſituation,
and edifices, as Inhabitants, their habits, and the Strangers
of different Nations; which for the Readers more delightfull
varietie, I haue thought fit, not to paſſe ouer in ſilence.
               The City of Argiers being the chiefeſt, and of moſt fame
in all Barbary, hath in it ſome thirteene thouſand houſes, incloſed
with a ſtrong wal, and is in manner of a ſtrung Crosbow.
The Fore-front, Harbor, Turrets, and Galleries ſtand
expoſed to the North-wind. The hinder-parts (which make

the aforeſaid Bow) ioyne to a huge hill, partly ſteepe, part
otherwiſe; in ſuch ſort, that, as the houſes are built in aſcents,
they ſtand ſo one aboue the other, that the firſt,
though ſpatious and high, hinders not the proſpect of the
reſt, the latter.
               The lowermoſt part of the Cittie becomes the String
of this Bow, which ſtands ſo neere to the Sea, that the waues
furiouſly beat againſt the Walles.
               There reacheth naturally from thence a long necke of
Land into the Sea, vvhich inuited Cairadin Barbaroſſa, to
build a Harbour there, to make the hauen more ſecure, and
ioyne to it a little Iſland neere the Cittie, vvith a goodly
Rampire.
               The whole Circuit is of moſt ſtrong Lime and Stone,
and (after the ancient manner) battlemented, and in height
it hath ſome thirtie handfuls, yet towards the Sea (as being
founded vpon high Rockes) it is much higher. In thickeneſſe
it may be ſome three yards and a halfe; and beſides,
vpon the Rampire, that cuttes off the diſtance from the
Cittie to the Iſland, there is another ſtrong Curtaine of a
Wall about ſome three hundred paces in length. This
Counter-circuit was built, to reſiſt the ſwelling furie of the
deuouring waues, vvhich beate terribly on that ſide, when
the Weſt, and North-weſt windes doe blow: to the intent
alſo, that they hinder not thoſe paſſengers that walke vpon
the ſecure Wharfe.
               The Cittie hath nine goodly Gates to it, and vpon them
and the reſt of the Wall, Watch-towers and Bulwarkes, in
which there is vſually great Artillerie, though the chiefe
defence relies not on them, but conſiſts moſt in three Fortreſſes,
which the Turkes haue made: the firſt, neere the
Gate called Babaluete, founded by Vthali: the ſecond, vpon
a little raiſed Mount neere the Caſtle, made by Mahamet

Baſha: and the third and laſt, neere the very ſelf-ſame place,
where that renowned Prince and Emperour Charles the fift
in his vnluckie enterprize, pitcht his Royall Pauillion, at
what time he layd ſiege to that denne of Raſcals; a ſiege
(though memorable) vnfortunate for the ſucceſſe.
               Within the Cittie, all the houſes, poore and rich, one
with another, may containe vpon the aforeſaid number:
for, though the circuit bee not very ſpatious, and that no
houſe hath paſſing one court to it, yet the ſtreetes are ſo
ſtreight and narrow, that a man on horſe-backe can hardly
paſſe them, or for two a-breadth on foote it is vnpoſſible:
except in the Market-place, the principall ſtreet called the
Coco, that thwarts the whole Cittie.
               In fine, the whole and all of it lies ſo compactly cloſe,
and in-wouen together, that it rather appeares a confuſed
Maze, then humane habitation. They haue neither Baywindow,
or any other that lookes into the ſtreet: for their
ielouſie ouer their wiues and daughters permit not the vſe
of ſuch.
               The Inhabitants are Turkes, Moores, Renegates, Iewes,
beſides the greateſt part, Chriſtian captiues, which are
ſometimes (a ſtrange number) neere fiue and twenty thouſand
perſons.
               The naturall Inhabitants, are, ſome of a reaſonable good
complexion, but the moſt ſwartie, all paſſing well fauour'd.
The vvomen are generally white, and many of them braue
and very handſome; all of them clothing themſelues (according
to their calling, or indeed rather, their abilities) ſomtimes
in died Linnen, cloth of ſeuerall colours, Silkes and
Taffeta's, and otherwhiles in Damaske or Veluets. All
which, when Gerardo ſawe, together with an innumerable
number of poore Chriſtian ſlaues, that dragging their long
Chaines after them, and buſied in baſe drudgeries, couered

the very ſtreetes and Gates, his heart could not but yerne,
conſidering how God, for our ſinnes, had ſo long permitted
that Neſt and Sanctuary for Pyrates, from whom Chriſtendome
hath, and daily doth receiue ſo continuall dammages.
               In all former Ages, Africa, the Worlds third part, where
this barbarous place lies, hath beene (as all Writers teſtifie)
taxed of periurie and baſeneſſe. And the reaſon is, becauſe
the property of the Climate, and natiue condition of
the Soyle is ſuch, that it ſeemes to haue no other vertue
more eſſentiall, then to produce wild Beaſts, frightfull
Monſters, peſtilentiall Serpents, deadly and effectuall poyſons;
and by reaſon the Ayre here was ſo vnwholeſome, Lucan
counſels men to liue farre enough from ſuch a Countrey,
vvhere the drowzie Aſpis, the inconſtant Cherſidros,
the ſpotted Cenchris, the ſandie Amodites, the diſ-ioynted
Ceraſtes, the drie Dipſas, the Scitalis that caſts her skinne in
Winter, the heauie double-headed Amphisbaena, the great
and venimous Dragons; and laſtly, the murdering Baſilisk,
King and Monarch of thoſe fearefull and frightfull Goblins,
were not ingendred, but to the deſtruction of mankinde.
               So that, of neceſſitie, men borne vnder ſuch a Conſtellation,
and participating of the qualities, muſt needes bee
barbarous, rude, diſcourteous, inhumane, and conſequently,
they who haue to doe with them, miſerable and wretched;
and not ſuch alone, but their ſeruants and poore
ſlaues, aboue all others moſt vnfortunate. Wherefore, no
reſentment might ſeeme exorbitant in our ſad Gentleman,
conſidering himſelfe now gotten into their clutches. The
two captiues his Guides, were in ſome comfort, and Gerardo,
to ſute with their good courage, diſſembled all he could
his owne ſad diſquietneſſe, by diuerting himſelfe with the

different faſhions, ſhapes and ſeuerall complexions, that, at
each ſteppe of his, were to his eyes preſented: till comming
to the Market-place (the Cities chiefe ſtreet) in
midſt of it, he might ſee certaine ſmooth ſtones, all couered
and ſpotted with freſh bloud; at which, amazed, he
asked one of his companions if▪ he knew the reaſon: who,
not without aboundance of teares, made anſwere; That,
not paſſing three dayes ſince, the Viceroy of Arg
                        •
                     ers had
commanded a valiant Chriſtian, by Nation a Spaniard, by
Country and Birth of Castile, and Toledo, to be dragged at
a wilde Horſes tayle, and afterwards put to the horribleſt
death, that barbarous fury could inuent; ſuch, as his inhumanitie
will neuer be forgotten, as long as there is an eyewitneſſe,
or an eare to heare it left.
               The compaſſionate Gerardo was ſtrooke dumbe with
this dolefull Preface; and at laſt infinitely deſired to
heare the whole Story; and (if it might not bee too troubleſome
to them) the Originall occaſion of this bloudy
ſpectacle. Al which, both his Companions equally willing
to ſatisfie, that it might the ſafelier be done, they thought
good to retire themſelues into the fields, which they ſoon
did; and ſitting them downe vpon a hard Rocke, hee that
firſt gaue notice of the Tragedy, began thus to make his
Relation.
               I would not, worthy Countri-man, that your ſelfe or any
other that ſhall heare this wofull Story from my mouth,
ſhould owe the leaſt thankes to my ſlender paines in reciting
it; ſince the cauſe and motiue of recounting, muſt be
to me ſufficient ſatisfaction; which is, the exalting Gods
glory, and his inſcrutable Iudgements, which, in the deeds
and actions of this moſt happy, moſt excellent Martyr, ſeem
with particular admiration to ſhine bright: whom, hauing
firſt, by incredible meanes deliuered from many mortall

dangers, in which he might haue been irremediably ruin'd,
at laſt he brought him to this happy end, and to the greater
aduancement of our faith, and reproach of Mooriſme, his
diuine Maieſtie permitted, that in this rare man ſhould bee
ioyntly ſeene the Conſtancie and Valour of all the ancient
Martyrs, the contempt of temporall riches, of life,
which naturally wee ſo much deſire to nouriſh and conſerue.
               In the yeere ſixe hundreth and three, this valiant famous
Toledanian was taken Priſoner by Iafer Baſha, Vice-roy of
this Citie, his name was Fernando Palomeque, who came to
his ſlauerie in this inſuing manner.
               To begin firſt neceſſarily with his life, he was, in his yonger
dayes, guiltie of the death of a certaine Officer of Iuſtice
in Toledo, that for ſome diſorderous ryot would haue
apprehended him and others: but himſelfe, knowing his
companions were taken, and willing to eſcape the danger,
retired ſecretly into the Kingdome of Valencia, where, hauing
liued ſome yeeres (age and change of manners comming
vpon him) an occaſion offered, he married neere the
Sea ſide, and with ſome ſmall wealth hee had in portion
with his Wife ſhortly after, ſet out a Brigantine Veſſell
with fourteene Oares to a ſide, to Sea, which (manned with
tall fellowes that had long been vſed to Roue vpon ſeuerall
Coaſts) held her courſe for Barbary, and all that Coaſt ouer
he vſed to doe notable hurt to the Moores, bringing
home with him diuers booties and Priſoners, ſo that in
time, the valorous Palomeque grew to be ſo couragiouſly hazardous,
that landing often at this Port, he would march vp
to the very gates: and from thence carry away the Mooriſh
Peſants, that (as their manner is) draw thither to reſt more
ſecurely vnder ſhelter of the Courts of Guard, and ſometimes
hee would leaue his Dagger ſticking in the gate, called

                  Babaluete (which looked towards the Harbour) and the
Turkes in the morning finding it without farther enquirie,
ſoone preſumed whoſe doing it was: ſuch was the opinion
they had of his valiant courage, which made his name terrible
ouer all that Coaſt; inſomuch that the Mooriſh women,
when they would ſtill and quiet their little ones, vſed
in their language to cry out vnto them, Accute, caychi Palomeque,
that is, Peace, or Palomeque will come.
               Proceeding thus in this Rouing Trade in the beginning
of the aforeſaid yeere (beeing winter time) hee left the
Wharfe of Valencia, hauing now alſo another Brigantine,
which, by meanes of his gaines by ſeuerall booties gotten,
hee had with valiant Souldiers manned out; and now hee
began to plot and lay about with himſelfe, how hee might
performe in this Voyage ſome notable ſtratagem: and with
that intent lanching into the deepe, and (ſuppoſing, like
one cunning in the Trade, that Winter being now ſo farre
entred, all the ſhipping of Argiers would bee in cloſe Harbour)
hauing the wind fauourable, and not paſſing two hundreth
and fifty miles from Valencia hither, in leſſe then two
dayes hee got ſight of Barbary, where one night about a
League to the weſtward of this Citie, hee tooke a Moore,
who told him, that moſt of the Pyrats Veſſels were in the
Harbour vnrigged, as well of their Frigots, as Brigantines;
wherefore, Palomeque, thinking it very facile for him to
effect his deſigne (which was, to enter the Port and fire the
ſecure Veſſels) without more delay, taking his truſty companions
aſide, he made knowne vnto them his intent, and
finding their willingneſſe anſwerable, by midnight (that
being the fitteſt ſeaſon) he ſet the Prowes of his Veſſels to
Argires, and vn-perceiued, boldly entred the Port, inſomuch,
that he preſently grappled with the enemies Frigots,
amongſt a world of Turkiſh Shippes hard by at Anchor:

And (his companions inſtructed) their order was this:
               
                  Pernando had charged all his Souldiers, that they ſhould
be very circumſpect in caſting fire into all the Shipping; to
which purpoſe, he deliuered them ſtore of wilde-fire balles,
and other ſuch materials, of which he was plentifully prouided;
and himſelfe, whilſt this was effecting, leaping on
ſhore, would goe to the Bulwarke or Citties Gate towards
the Sea-ſide, on which (as a token of his valour) he would
(according to his cuſtome) faſten his Ponyard, but not
without much hazzard, in reſpect, that the Turkes kept
Watch and Ward all night long, as well in the Harbour
which he was to croſſe ouer, as at the Bulwarke and Gate,
whither he meant to goe.
               With this reſolution, the valiant Toledanian got on ſhore,
and marching boldly on to the place, ſtrooke his Dagger
in three ſeuerall times, leauing it at laſt faſtned in the nailed
Boords. In the meane time his companions with all the
ſpeed and cunning they could, caſt their wilde-fire into the
Turkiſh Ships; but ſuch was their ill lucke, that (doe what
they could) the fire would neuer once take hold: vvhich
when the inraged Chriſtians ſaw, ſome of them leapt aboord
the Frigots, doing all they might to burne them; and
beeing (though to ſmall purpoſe) buſie in this worke, the
Turkiſh Guard about the Harbour and Bulwarkes, as alſo
ſome Moores that lay a-boord the ſeuerall Veſſels, awoke,
and tooke notice of the Chriſtians and their intent, which
made them cry out to thoſe within the Citie, whereby, in
an inſtant, both within and without, there aroſe a terrible
noiſe and vproare. By this time Palomeque was comming
backe from the gate, and hearing the Turkes and Moores
in alarme, running in to his Souldiers, hee began to encourage
them not to deſiſt from the commenced enterprize,
and giue fire againe; which, notwithſtanding, to their common

amazement, would neuer burne; wherefore he, mad
with what he ſaw, not fearing the infinit numbers of Barbarians
that ſtood before him, with his ſword in hand made
way, caſting himſelfe amongſt the formoſt, and ſatisfying
his anger with the deaths of ſome two or three of the
Watch-men, he got ſafely aboord his owne Brigantines;
and ſeeing the Moores now flocking together from all
parts, hee commanded his men to weigh Anchor and to
Sea. In this manner got Palomeque out of the Port, and
his men tugged as faſt as they could at their Oares; but
he himſelfe was ſo ſadde and penſatiue, that, after he had
gone fifty miles, hee vvas vpon reſoluing (as hee told vs
ſince) to returne, within three dayes againe to his enterprize.
               Whilſt theſe things paſſed, the Viceroy had notice of
the ſucceſſe; and therefore (though it were night) he willed
that fiue of his beſt Captaines ſhould come to him:
whom he preſently commanded, that they ſhould with all
ſpeed, diſperſe themſelues ſeuerall wayes in purſuite of the
Brigantines, and though they rowed themſelues to death,
not returne without them. The fiue Maſters hauing heard
the Viceroys pleaſure, were willing to effect his deſire: and
ſo, ſuddenly manning their Gallies, one of them held his
courſe Eaſtward, and the other Weſt: two others North;
and the laſt Greeke No-North-Eaſt. And hauing luſtie
Rowers, and a ſtrong deſire to ouertake the Chriſtians,
they droue amaine. The Pyrats that went Northward
directly for Valencia, rowed ſo fiercely, that, the next morning
before noone, they deſcried the two Brigantines, that
had now alſo kenned the Gallies: and ſuſpecting the worſt,
began to fly, and the Turks to giue them chaſe aboue forty
miles; till at length, the Gallies hauing too great an aduantage,
ouertooke the hindermoſt, in which our valiant

Spaniard went; which, beeing boorded, but not without
many wounds, deaths and braue reſiſtance, was at length
taken, and the men in her, Priſoners, whilſt the other in the
meane time eſcaped.
               The Turkes were not a little glad of the good ſucceſſe,
and ſo much the more, when by the Chriſtians they vnderſtood
the famous Palomeque to be one of them, and alſo
the intent of his Voyage: wherefore with wonderfull
reioycing they came back to this Citie; vvhere they were
no ſooner landed, when (his Captiuitie being knowne) all
the Harbour and Sea-ſhore vvas couered with Turkes,
Moores and Renegates, deſirous to ſee vvith their eyes,
him, vvhom formerly they ſo much feared in their hearts.
The Viceroy was exceedingly gladded, and thanking the
Maſters, for hauing ſo well diſcharged his commands, hee
willed that Palomeque ſhould be carried to his Bathes, and
there placed vvith the reſt of his Slaues, whither by next
day a huge rabble of Mooriſh boyes were gotten together
to behold (as a Prodigie) the diſtreſſed Palomeque
tyed with a long Chaine, and marked in the face for a
Slaue.
               The Viceroy longed for examples ſake to performe
ſome notable piece of Iuſtice vpon him, and ſo, without
deferring his purpoſe, commanded, that ſetting vp a Gallowes
in the place where the Spaniard was landed, hee
ſhould bee taken, and as chiefe Ring-leader of ſuch bold
enterprizes, bee hung by the heeles at a Tenter-hooke,
till with that miſerable torment he dyed.
               This barbarous intent was euen ready (to the whole
Cities reioycing that went out to ſee it) to be put in execution;
but Heauen, that had not yet determined the happy
accompliſhment of his martyrdome, permitted, that (comming
to notice of ſome of the Captaine Pyrats, how hee

ſhould be put to death) they thinking it too great a cruelty,
and conſulting amongſt themſelues, they reſolued to
preſent their ſupplication to the Viceroy, and deſire him
to reuoke the ſentence: and amongſt many forcible reaſons
they alledged, the chiefeſt was, the cuſtome of good
Warre, to procure what ſpoile they could to an enemy, in
goods, lands, or ſhipping: but not to puniſh the perſons
with death: and the former they did, as, likewiſe the Chriſtians
to them, by deſtroying and pillaging all that came in
their wayes: but ſuch cruelty, they ſaid, was vnfitting;
for that haply the Spaniard might requite them in the
like kinde, if they (as it was likely enough) ſhould at any
time be taken Priſoners: and they that inſiſted moſt vpon
this, were the two that had taken him: wherefore the
Viceroy, much againſt his will, was forced to giue order
for vn-hanging him, and (hauing remained ſo a long
houre) to be returned to his bathes to the reſt of the Captiues,
by whom he was moſt louingly comforted, and by
a very good Surgeon then amongſt them, cured.
               A long time after his recouerie hee remained in this
Captiuitie, the Viceroy not once offering to treat of his
Ranſome; though, diuers, at Palomeques inſtance and intreatie
propoſed it: but hee to auoid thoſe frequent perſwaſions,
towards the end of his Gouernment, in exchange
of other Slaues and handſome Youths, which hee
hearkened after to preſent to the Grand Signiors Fauourites,
gaue him to one of the Gouernours of Tremeſin; to
which place Palomeque was ſhortly after (to his no ſmall
griefe) carried: and now all his meanes being gone by the
loſſe of his Brigantines, he was vtterly deſtitute of all his
hope; which yet at Argiers he had, that by helpe of the
Trinitarian Friers, who collect and carry charitable Ranſomes
for diuers Captiues, as alſo by the goodneſſe of

ſome other Chriſtian Merchants trading in thoſe parts,
his libertie might be effected: but wanting both theſe
in Tremeſine, he altogether deſpaired of remedy; beſides,
his miſery was more increaſed; for his preſent Maſter, no
ſooner had notice of the Viceroy his leauing Argiers (for
feare of whom he durſt not ſell him) when, he cauſed him
to leade the wofulleſt life that was poſsible, all to the intent
that the poore man ſhould procure him a round ranſome,
beeing impoſsible for him to effect, as you haue
heard. In fine, ſeeing himſelfe ſo ſtrangely afflicted, and
miſſe-vſed by his cruell Owner, he was forced to demaund
of him, in how much hee eſteemed the price of his liberty;
telling him withall, that though himſelfe were extremely
poore and wretched; yet, if his demand vvere any thing
reaſonable, he vvould write to ſome friends at Argiers and
others in Spaine to relieue him; which, when the Barbarian
heard, he made knowne vnto him, that hee eſteemed his
ranſome at two hundreth Ducats, which hee would haue
paid downe vpon the naile (threatning a moſt horrible
death withall vnto him, if hee did not ſpeedily prouide the
aforeſaid ſumme:) Whereupon the poore Captiue, not
daring to reply, thought vpon ſome meanes for his liberty,
and to this purpoſe, wrote to many Chriſtian Merchants,
as alſo to the Bathes and Captiues of Argiers, in which, for
his great Valour, he was well knowne and eſteemed, giuing
them particular account of the infinit miſeries he endured,
and requeſting them for his ranſome: ſo that at laſt, againſt
all expectation, the redeeming Friers helping, the two
hundreth Ducats were ſent him, vvhich hee forthwith deliuered
to his curſt Patron; who very leiſurely fell to telling
the money, and hauing done, without a word ſpoken,
laid hold vpon a knotty Truncheon, & catching the poore
Slaue by the Collar, gaue him diuers bangs, crying out as

then, Traitor, Dogge; Is this all I asked for thy Ranſome?
To this the miſerable Chriſtian, not a little afflicted, made
anſwere: Why, Sir, are not the whole two hundreth there?
perhaps, there may two or three be wanting. Good Maſter,
be not angry for ſo ſmall a ſumme, ſince it ſhall goe
hard, but I will make them vp. Whereto the Infidell ſtriking
him a-freſh with the Truncheon, replide; Dogge, I
demanded no leſſe then two hundreth and fifty; which
when Palomeque heard, and perceiuing withall the Barbarians
villany, he was glad to write againe in the ſame ſtile for
the other fifty, that were wanting, which, being not long after
remitted vnto him, moſt iocund now, as thinking the miſeries
of this captiuitie might haue end, hee preſented them
to his Patron, which was no ſooner done, when, that Infernall
Monſter, caught hold on him againe, and with
blowes and buffets moſt ſhamefully intreated him, ſaying,
he was to giue him two hundreth and foureſcore Ducats,
or he ſhould dye for it.
               What ſhould the vnfortunate man doe in this caſe? ſeeing
himſelfe ſo cauſeleſſely tormented; and on the other
ſide, conſidering, that, that cruell beaſt had neither word,
nor honeſty to rely on? Poore ſoule! hee accuſed his hard
fortune, bewailed his miſery, importuned Heauen, melted
himſelfe to ſighes and teares, and wounded the very aire
with ſad grones: but ſeeing there was no other remedy, he
durſt not reſiſt the infamous minde of his barbarous Maſter;
and, ſo, re-ſoliciting his charitable benefactors, by giuing
them to vnderſtand of his ſtrange misfortunes, he ſo
mooued ſome of their hearts to compaſſion, that, in a ſhort
time they furniſhed him with the thirty Ducats that were
yet behind: and, ſo, carrying them to the Gouernor, he deſired,
that his Letter of freedome might be drawne, ſince he
had now gotten him the reſt of his money.
               
                  
Who could haue thought, but that all was here ended,
and that the Barbarian was throughly ſatisfied? but nothing
leſſe: he rather (ſhameleſſe) tels him, he muſt make vp the
price of his Ranſome, to iuſt three hundred Ducats; for
that he, vvho could ſo ſpeedily find two hundred and fourſcore,
might eaſily procure the reſt. And to force him to
this, ſweares by his Prophet, that if he did not comply, he
vvould burne him aliue. When the valiant Palomeque had
heard out this incredible wickedneſſe, and that the inhumane
Rogue, had neither feare of God, faith nor reaſon,
conſidering alſo how much paines and ſhame that money
had already coſt him; that, with the importunitie of his
ſtrange, ſeuerall new demands, hee had vvearied all his
Chriſtian friends; and that now no place vvas left from
vvhence to expect further remedie, (his patience quite giuing
him ouer, and his loathed life growne deſperate) in an
inſtant he ran to a ſword, vvhich hung in the Chamber
where they vvere, and clozing with his Patron, thruſt him
(vnable to defend himſelfe) ſo often thorow the bodie, that
he tumbled to the ground; and there, cutting and hacking
him, at euery blow vvith furious indignation repeates,
There, Dogge, take and ſatisfie thy inſatiable auarice of
money.
               There were preſent towards night when this vvas done,
two of the Gouernours Renegate Boyes, (or Ingles rather)
each being about a ſixteene yeeres of age. Theſe, when they
ſaw their Maſter thus ſlaine, began to enforce their cries,
but Palomeque quickly ouertooke one of them and ſlue him,
the other vvas too nimble for him, who had now raiſed the
neighbours well-nigh, ſo that Palomeque ſeeing his danger,
was faine (the beſt he could) to ſhift for himſelfe, and vvanting
no courage, vvith croſſing three or foure Lanes, thorow
an open Gate in one of them, hee got into the fields,

and running vp and downe there, at length (vneſpied) hee
made to the chiefe Gouernours Garden, in which he knew
a captiue Countriman of his ſerued as Gardiner. To him
then Palomeque addreſſing himſelfe, made knowne his diſtreſſe,
and conſidering how ſtrict a ſearch vvould be made
for him, by mutuall aduice of both it was agreed, that Palomeque
ſhould be locked into a Vault, vvhich ſtood in a ſecret
part of the Garden, where for his ſafety hee remained
fifteene dayes, without comming day or night out of that
diſmall obſcuritie, till at laſt hoping the worſt was paſt, hee
determined to flie by land to Oran, a Garriſon towne in
Barbary belonging to the King of Spaine. To this reſolution,
though full of danger, (as being his laſt refuge) he was
forced; and ſuch was his ill fortune, that the ſecond day of
his trauell, before he was aware, hee lighted vpon certaine
wilde Alarbes Cottages, and perceiuing his danger, about
to haue retired; they ſeeing him, and he defending himſelfe,
and withall offending thoſe which followed him, vnable
long to reſiſt their violence, eſpecially by beeing ouerturned
by a horſeman, that pittifully rode ouer him and bruiſed
his face; and wounded in his body, with ſome Arrowſhots,
hee was forced to yeeld. Not many daies after the
misfortune, this Arabian, whoſe priſoner our Palomeque was,
comming to the Port of Sargel, a towne not paſſing twenty
Leagues to the Weſtward of this; he ſold him to a Tagarin,
or Moriſcan Pyrate of Andaluzia, who ſtraight ſet him to
the Oare, with the reſt of the Chriſtian captiues that were
in his Frigot, where (though his face was bruiſed, and hee
disfigured) yet hee was by many knowne, who had beene
formerly acquainted with him in this Cittie; where the occaſion
of his flight was by this time diuulged. Well knew
the ſorrowfull Palomeque the danger he was in, and therfore
very ſad and penſatiue, not knowing what courſe to take,

he iuſtly feared, that if the Frigot went to Argiers, he ſhould
there be put to death: which made him reſolue to ſet vp his
reſt vpon his valour and induſtry, either nobly to die, or
brauely to eſcape.
               It ſeemed that Fortune dallying with this man, preſented
him with all the occaſions he could wiſh for, that ſhe might
in the accompliſhment, the better ſhew her wauering inconſtancie;
and ſo in midſt of this troubleſome confuſion,
ſhe offered him this laſt meanes, in which he ſhewed to the
world his couragious mind, vndaunted courage. Argiers
was at this time much afraid, leſt the forces of men and munition,
which our King Don Philip the third cauſed to bee
in a readineſſe, (for the more ſafe expulſion of the Moriſco's)
in the moſt important Ports of Spaine, were meant to
her; and therefore one of her Viceroys cares was, to commaund,
that all the Wheat which might bee had in the
Territory, and other parts of Africa, ſhould bee brought
hither; to which effect, he ſent to Sargel, giuing order to the
aforeſaid Tagarin, Owner of our Caſtilian, to repaire to the
Citty of Bona for prouiſions; which hee accordingly effecting,
aſſoone as he came thither, landed Wheat, Butter,
and other prouiſions, euen till Midſummer Eue, at which
time all the Turkes and Moores went on ſhore, each deſirous
to buy ſome things for his family at home, ſo that, not
paſſing twelue or fourteene Souldiers left now aboord, the
couragious Palomeque intimating thus much to his companions
that carried Victuals and burdens to and fro from
the Towne to the Frigot, they perceiuing the ſlackneſſe of
their Maſters, began to lay hold vpon the vvondrous occaſion
that was offered, to ſeize the Frigot. Palomeque too ſo
helped on, that at length they reſolued at their next vnloading
to effect their purpoſe. The Chriſtians vvere in all, of
thoſe the Viceroy ſent, and thoſe that belonged to the barbarous

                  Andaluzian, ſome ſixty and odde perſons; and being
thus reſolued, as they entred vvith their Clothes and Victuals,
the Steward of the Frigot, vvho vvas alſo one of the
conſpiracy, gaue them foure Turkiſh Semitars, which hee
had kept ſecretly hidden; and the reſt that had no ſwords,
layd hold vpon Plankes, Billets, or any kind of Armes that
came next to hand, which fury or neceſſity miniſtred to
them; and this done, they as ſuddenly ſet vpon the Turkes
that remained in the Frigot: Palomeque ruſhing amongſt
them, gaue one a terrible cut in the head, and hee and his
companions ſo outragiouſly beſtirred themſelues amongſt
the reſt, and ſo furiouſly oppreſſed them, that they forced
foure of eight Turkes which defended the Sterne, to caſt
themſelues ouer-boord into the Sea. They that remained
fore and off, ſought all they could to hinder the Chriſtians
frō cutting the Cables, in which all their hopes coſiſted;
for they were ſure (if they could keepe the Chriſtians from
making to ſea from their Anchors) their own companions
would ſoone from Land giue them ayde: which fell out as
happily for them as they could wiſh; ſince their enemies
vnable to withſtand, gaue leaue to the multitudes of Turks
and Moores that euery way beſet them, to come aboord to
their fellowes; who with their ſhot made ſuch a ſlaughter
amongſt the poore vnarmed, naked Chriſtians, that hauing
ſlaine moſt of them, they now entred all in at the fore-Caſtle,
which they compelled the Defendants to yeeld vp.
               The Tagarin thus re-poſſeſſed of his Veſſell, the firſt
thing he did, was, to clappe ſuch (as hee thought fit) vnder
Hatches, and threatning the reſt with grieuous torments,
he began to inquire out the author of this rebellion, (which
vnderſtood by ſome) their baſe feare made them not onely
confeſſe the truth, but deſiring alſo to gaine their Patrons
good will, they made knowne vnto him, (which they might

well haue concealed) that the cauſer of this ſedition, was,
the famous and feared Palomeque: with which, he extremely
inraged, though in part well pleaſed to haue that partie
in his power, of whom ſo many wiſhed to bee reuenged,
cauſed him to be kept in ſure hold, and being arriued at Argiers,
he gaue the Viceroy account of the vvhole ſucceſſe,
and the Author of it: deſiring him for cloze and vp-ſhot
of his diſcourſe, that he vvould bee pleaſed to haue ſome
exemplarie iuſtice inflicted vpon him. The Baſha, from the
firſt time of his arriuall from Conſtantinople, deſired much
to know Palomeque, as, beeing extraordinarie affectionate
to his ſtrange valour and courage; and ſo vnable to diſſemble
his longing, hee commaunded to haue him foorthwith
brought to his preſence, vvhere hauing vviſtly eyed him,
and duely conſidered, that if this man vvould turne Mahometan,
(beſides the great good ſeruice he might do his Prophet)
hee ſhould alſo gaine the Grand Signior an excellent,
important Souldier; after hee had a little queſtioned with
him, he propoſed at laſt his intent: ſometimes ſeeking by
faire meanes, and then againe by threates to reduce him to
his purpoſe; and not onely aſſured him (if he would fulfill
his deſire) his life, but with great oathes and offers obliged
himſelfe, to chuſe him a vvife that ſhould bring him large
poſſeſſions, vvherewith he might liue nobly, and maintaine
himſelfe in all plenty. To all vvhich, our honeſt Spaniard,
with much freedome anſwered, That his Highneſſe needed
not ſo vainely trouble himſelfe, to perſwade him to ſo deſperate
a madneſſe, from the accompliſhment of vvhich he
was ſo farre, that with the trial, hee ſhould better perceiue
by his conſtant reſolution: for that not only the riches and
earthly fortunes propoſed, vvere inſufficient to make him
forſake his Religion he profeſſed; but from that inſtant alſo
he promiſed to ſuffer for it an infinitie of Torments, death,

and Martyrdome. But for all this anſwer, the Viceroys
hopes, nor their perſwaſions preſent ceaſed not; though
neither one nor other, nor the Racke ſet before him, vvere
once able to mollifie his firmeneſſe, rather with an inuincible
courage, when they moſt threatned, hee (leaſt caring)
ſmiled: wherefore the Viceroy, as well vexed with his perſeuerance,
as importuned by a great number of Turkes and
Moores, that cried to haue him put to death, without more
delay, cauſed him to be deliuered to the kindred of thoſe
that were ſlaine by him, that they might take what reuenge
they thought fitteſt on him: and ſtraight this newes was
blowne throughout the whole Cittie, ſo that (being known
who it was that ſhould die) the ſtreets were in a trice euen
ſtrewed with people; and the women vnaccuſtomed to bee
ſeene, got to their doores, and vpon their Turrets with confuſed
ſhowtes of gladneſſe to be ſpectators.
               Whilſt theſe things paſt in euery corner of the vproard
Cittie, the Turkes and Moores that were with Palomeque in
the Palace, wearie of reuiling, commaunded a vvild horſe
to be brought, and tyed him with cords to his taile: and in
that manner he was dragged to the Market-place, where
thoſe dogges perceiuing, that if they paſſed farther on, the
Priſoner dying in that torment, might eſcape others more
cruell and bloody prepared for him, mooued with their rauenous
deſires, they made him to bee vnbound, and a baſe
Moore, that was to be his Executioner, ſuddenly ſtepped
out; who fixing on the ground a paire of Stockes neere Palomeque,
of ſome yard long, he layd hold on his left legge,
and putting it thorow a hole of the logge, proceeded in his
Office, ſaying, Faithleſſe Chriſtian, is it poſſible that (the
Viceroy hauing pardoned thee, by offering thee life, if thou
wilt turne Moore) perſiſting ſo obſtinately in thine errour,
thou wilt rather ſuffer thy ſelfe to be torne in pieces? Conſider,

wretched man, whilſt yet thou haſt breath, and time
to repent thy folly, beſeeching his Highneſſe to vſe his accuſtomed
pitty and clemencie to thee. To this not falling
one iot from his high courage, with an angry tone Palomeque
ſuddenly replied: Wretched Barbarian, thou, and all
thoſe of your damned Sect that behold me, are thoſe that
blindly erre, and are moſt miſerable; ſince following the
ſenſleſſe abuſes of a curſed Impoſtor, you ſuffer your ſelues
to run headlong into damnation: and therefore I neither
feare the torments of ſo loathſome, naſty a generation, nor
make any other reckoning then thou haſt ſeene of their menaces.
Cut, diuide, teare, and diſ-ioyne this wearied
Trunke of mine: vvhen you haue done all, and that this feeble
body periſh by your miſcreant hands; yet my ſoule, neuer
forſaking her true Creator, ſhall mount to heauen, and
his diuine goodneſſe ſhall (I doubt not) giue mee courage
and ſufferance for the extremeſt tortures you can inflict:
and with this, raiſing a more then manly voyce, he concluded,
crying out, A Chriſtian I am, and a Chriſtian I will
dye, maugre your powers, and Hels together. No ſooner
had he ſo ended, when the mercileſſe Hang-man at foure
or fiue blowes cut off his ſtirrop legge cloſe by the knee,
and ſome Moores holding him from falling, gaue order to
the ſame Barbarian, that as hee had cut off the legge in the
ſupporting place, he ſhould do the ſame to his ſword-arme,
ſeruing both members alike, vvhich had beene the cruell
terrours to their nation. This was (as the former) fulfilled,
and our valiant Spaniard now turned into a double Spring
of blood, the griefe and torment of his diſmembred corps,
could not but be euen inſupportable; but heauen gaue this
bleſſed Soule ſtrength and courage to ſuffer, filling with amazement,
all the Turkes, Moores and Renegates, by
whom in infinit numbers this horrible ſpectacle was incompaſſed.

After this, the body vnder-propped by foure perſons,
they expected till the Gibbet was ſet vp, where he was
to bee hoyſted, and faſtened vpon Tenter-hookes, which
was ſoone done, and his body caught vp in the midſt by a
Pully, to the higheſt part of the Gibbet, and being furiouſly
let downe againe, fixed vpon the Yron hookes, which were
ſet vpon the fearefull Engine, and ſo the expiring body
was ſtrooke thorow by thoſe ſharpe points: but the bleſſed
Palomeque in midſt of that dolorous Traunce, loſt not the
leaſt part of his manly courage; rather, in all thoſe cruell and
fearefull torments, the marueilous ſplendour of his true
faith, and firme affection to his Redeemer, ſhined more
gloriouſly; vpon vvhom calling vvith miraculous perſeuerance,
he gaue vp the ghoſt, after hee had remained almoſt
foure and twenty houres in that terrible anguiſh, to the generall
aſtoniſhment of a vvorld of barbarous Turkes and
Moores preſent at his glorious departure. The next morning
vpon the Boord, to which his arme and hand was nailed,
appeared an Epitaph in Verſe, written in a faire ſheete
of white Parchment, which beeing read by many Chriſtians,
before the Moores could take that and the member
downe to burne them; and my ſelfe hauing beene one amongſt
the reſt that had a ſight of it, I thinke it not amiſſe,
for the goodneſſe, to make repetition of it vnto you.
               
                  Fixe, Chriſtian Paſsenger, thine eyes
                  On this braue hand: that Trunke, that lyes
                  Now, (a void Carkaſe,) prey to Fowle,
                  That late inclos'd a glorious Soule.
                  Weepe not for him, that ioy'd to dye,
                  To liue a Martyr laſtingly:
                  Dry vp thy teares, for him; who (blest)
                  Pitties our woes, that want his reſt.
                  
                     
Let ſuch as loue their Countries good,
                  Dye Skarfes in Palomeque's blood,
                  And weare the Red; that, when ſome he
                  Halfe Barbary in Armes ſhall ſee
                  Hereafter, with the Skarlet ſight,
                  Whole Squadrons he may put to flight.
                  You Captiues, home to Spaine that wend,
                  Thoſe golden Sands bid Tagus ſend
                  His Ranſome; and, Granada's Towne,
                  Thy ſacred Mount, this Martyr, crowne.
               
               Here ceaſed the compaſſionate Chriſtian, leauing Gerardo
to equall pittie, but with much more admiration at
the ſtrange ſucceſſe, and now before their Patron ſhould
bee at home, to finde fault with their long being abroad,
they were willing, by way of preuention, to returne to the
Lodging.
               You heard before, how Gerardo had a Chamber appointed
by himſelfe, where ſeparated from the other Captiues,
he might with ſome cheerefulneſſe paſſe the irkeſomneſſe
of his ſlauerie. Hither (taking leaue of his companions)
he entred, and ready to ſit him downe in a little corner
where his bed ſtood, vpon the Couerlet (contrary to
his expectation) he found his ſupper wrapped vp in a poore
courſe linnen Clowt; which was, a loafe of bread, and ſome
little fruite; and giuing thankes preſently to his diuine Maker,
who in ſo great miſerie had granted this particular fauour
vnto him; about to cut the bread, hee found a piece
of paper, which (to conceale the bulke and bigneſſe of the
ſame, was oft folded) ſtucke in it; which held him in no
ſmall ſuſpence, till vnwrapping the folds, hee might ſee a
womans hand (as he geſſed) in Spaniſh Characters, which,
though an ill one to reade, yet looking more warily vpon

the Letters, he might make a ſhift to collect out of them
the inſuing Contents.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Chriſtian, Heauen that hath permitted thee to come to ſo
great misfortune, comfort thy afflicted heart; be of good courage,
and deſpaire not of thy remedy. If the Patron this night ſet a
price vpon thy ranſome, and it may ſeeme exceſsiue to thee, be
not troubled with his exorbitancie, nor diſquiet him with thy excuſes:
rather (becauſe thou canſt not help it) yeeld to his demand,
asking firſt, ſufficient reſpite. In which time, if, from Spaine
thou ſhouldest not be relieued, God Almighty may be pleaſed, that
here thy wants ſhall be ſupplide. I enioyne thee no ſecreſie, ſince
thine owne affaires will well repreſent vnto thee how much it imports
thee.
                        
                     
                  
               
               Whom would not the Contents of theſe lines haue rapt
with admiration? and, who againe, in ſo ſad an eſtate could
but haue receiued comfort, with ſuch hopes? which, though
doubtfully fantaſticall; yet, did much rowze vp Gerardo's
afflicted ſpirits, who (it may well be ſaid) neuer found himſelfe
more wauering and irreſolute, then with the preſent
ſucceſſe: for, though on one ſide his willing confidence
might giue ſome credit to it; yet, on the other, his iudgement
and good aduice obliged him to a heedy feare of his
barbarous Maſters ſubtiltie, whoſe ſtratagem he might well
ſuppoſe this was, to make him yeeld to his demand, (which
once performed) it would be altogether impoſſible for him
to be againe freed from it.
               In this manner he reſted, betwixt two opinions, vncertaine
in his election, till, ſuch time as Ferru, beeing come
in, he was called to goe to him; ſo that vvith this ſhortneſſe
of time, hee now at length reſolued to conforme himſelfe
to the inſtruction of the Letters vnknowne Owner.
               
                  
                  Ferru, had but as then newly ſupped; and, therefore
(though he found him alone) hee well perceiued, that iuſt
as he came in, ſome women had retired newly out of his
company, for his eyes got a ſight of them, as they drew
certaine Curtaines that ſerued for the roomes partition.
               
                  Gerardo had many times heard, that the Mooriſh women
were neuer ſo nice, as to hide them from being ſeene
by their Slaues; and therefore this ſeemed the ſtranger nouelty
vnto him: but without conſulting further with his
ſuſpitions, hee hearkened to his Patrons diſcourſe, who,
hauing courteouſly asked him of his health, and he anſwered
as reſpectiuely to his Maſters content, hee heard him
on, in this manner: Eſteeme it, Chriſtian; for no ſmall
happineſſe, that thou art come into my power: for (let me
tell thee) hadſt thou beene in any of our hands elſe, thy
captiuitie would haue beene ſo inſupportable to thee, that,
thou wouldeſt not onely not haue expected thy Maſters
pleaſure, but thou thy ſelfe wouldeſt haue propoſed thine
owne liberall Ranſome, though it might not haue been accepted:
which we vſe to doe often, not, that any of vs
are vnwilling to ranſome our Priſoners, but that they with
ſeeing how difficultly their liberties are obtained, may
make the greater eſtimation of them, and accordingly
their owne offers voluntarily the larger. I, Gerardo, omitting
this common cuſtome, haue beene willing to excuſe
towards thee, all prolixe ſuſpenſion of miſery; and haue
therefore left thee free to exempt thy ſelfe from my other
Captiues, which I ſhall continue ſo to doe, if thou reſolue
to pay mee for the abſolute cleering of thy perſon
and ranſome two thouſand Ducats, which price, meaſured
with moderation, I demaund: and, that, being no greater
a ſumme, thou maiſt cauſe it to bee the ſooner raiſed in
thine owne Countrey. Thus, thou haſt heard my laſt reſolution:

goe then to thy Chamber, and bethinke thee of a
fit time and reſpite for the accompliſhment (which beeing
not ouer-tedious) thou ſhalt the better pleaſe mee: but
withall know, that it is in vaine, and to thy preiudice, to
reply vpon the ſaid quantitie; for (not to weary thy ſelfe)
I am aſſured thou art well able to pay it.
               
                  Gerardo, as ſoon as euer he heard the exorbitant ſumme
named, would willingly haue anſwered the Patron, making
knowne his impoſſibility of payment, neither had he
omitted ſo doing (knowing the ſcarcitie and ſhortneſſe of
his owne fortunes, which by his ſuite and long impriſonment
had beene decreaſed;) but that, iuſt as he was ready
to vnfold his lips to ſpeak, he might ſee one of the women
from the Curtaines becken with her hand from her, giuing
by that dumbe language to vnderſtand, that he ſhould
be gone: (which increaſing his care) yet he immediately
obeyed, and left the roome, extremely ſorrowfull; for
his Patrons wilfull obſtinacie wonderfully afflicted him,
and more, the difficulty of the accompliſhment; wherefore,
his captiuitie now like to be more tedious then hee
thought for, he could not but fall into afreſh reſentment of
his calamities.
               Plunged in theſe cares, Gerardo paſſed all that night, and
part of the next day, when about dinner-time a Chriſtian
ſhee-Slaue brought him his ordinary ſuſtenance, and leauing
it with him, he found, as the firſt time, a Paper, vvhich
(opened) ſhewed him theſe lines:
               
                  
                     
                        
                           She, who to day and yeſterday wrote to thee, is the ſame, who
last night made ſignes, that without replying to the Patron, thou
ſhouldest turne thy backe: Take it not ill, Gerardo, for the experience
of his condition, forced me to it, and haddeſt thou contradicted,
the leaſt of thy danger muſt haue beene to lye in a

cloſe dungeon, which might haue croſsed and daſhed many good
proiects wee muſt ſet on foote: Arme then thy ſelfe with patience,
and demaund of Ferru ſixe moneths reſpite (foure at leaſt
hee will be ſure to grant thee) for thy ranſome, in which time
thou maiſt ſend and heare from Spaine; and I, by heauens
helpe, may thinke vpon ſome conuenient generall remedy for
vs all.
                        
                     
                  
               
               The greateſt light that this Letter gaue to Gerardo, was,
to increaſe in him a greater aſtoniſhment and confuſion,
but, diſpoſed wholly to follow the aduice of that inuiſible
Counſellour, he put it in execution: and, iuſt as the Paper
fore-ſpoke, it befell him with his Patron; and therefore
from that very moment, he purpoſed to write to his
Brother Leoncio & his deare Mother, giuing them notice of
his miſerable captiuitie, conueying his Letters by means of
ſome Chriſtians ranſomed, by the Trinitarian Redeeming
Friers, who returned for Spaine; where they with the
newes no ſooner were landed, when (for his Tragicall
ſucceſſes had made him famous) his Captiuitie was
ſpred thorow all thoſe Prouinces; I will not (for breuities
ſake) cumber my ſelfe, with deſcribing the freſh teares
of his loued Mother, or the iuſt griefe of his good Brother,
his beſt friend Leoncio, and kindred: onely I muſt not
ſlightly ouerpaſſe the ſadde moane and amorous reſentment
of the faire ill-recompenced Niſe, who ſtill ſhewed
to the world her firme and loyall affection, ſince neither
Gerardo's obdurate hardneſſe, his diſdainfull proceeding,
ſtrange forgetfulneſſe, nor time, that makes all thing to be
forgotten, could one iot diminiſh her affection, nor laſtly,
excuſe her afflicted amorous heart, from the griefe and
torment that ſeized it, as ſoone as ſhee vnderſtood of the
bondage of her deare deſired Owner.
               
                  
She had (if in this Hiſtories firſt part you remember) taken
Sanctuary at a Nunnery, from whence (conforming
her ſelfe to her Fathers will) ſhe attended the proſecution
of her ſuite with Gerardo, which ſhe had ſoone giuen ouer,
but that a filiall reſpectfull feare, and the hope of obtaining
him for a Husband, detained her: and therefore the
firſt happy newes of his liberty, ſhe bore with equall ioy
and ſadneſſe; though in her Father it made a deeper impreſsion:
for as in mens noble breſts ſuch hurtfull accidents
haue a more powerfull operation, then diſeaſes or
the bodies infirmities: ſo, the conſidering himſelfe and
his childe diſhonoured, (hopeleſſe of amends) ſhortened
his dayes, and quickly ended his life; inſomuch that Niſe's
diſcomfort and ſolitarineſſe was increaſed, and the more,
with the care of her eſtate and Family: though none of all
theſe were ſufficient to drawe her from the Monaſtery;
where, many a time, ſhe would profeſſe, that, liuing without
her Gerardo, ſhe would there end her weary life. Here
then the newes came to her eares, and with notable ſorrow
to her ſoule, the diſcreet conſideration of what difficulties
might be oppoſed to his liberty, (ſhe lighting on
the very ſame, that there troubled Gerardo in his captiuity)
ſure too that his ſuite & former impriſonment could leaue
him very ſmall meanes, and on the other ſide ſhee was no
leſſe afflicted in being ignorant of the place where hee endured
his miſerable ſlauery, for till then, ſhee had receiued
no more then a kinde of confuſed knowledge of ſuch a
thing: ſo that, deſirous to be certainly informed, ſhee purpoſed
to ſend one of her ſeruants to Madrid, vvho might
there ſecretly vnderſtand the whole buſineſſe.
               Theſe things thus paſſed in Spaine, whilſt Gerardo expecting
in Barbary his Mother and Brothers Letters, wore
away the tedious time of his impriſonment, ſometimes, in

part diuerted, by the ſeuerall tickets hee receiued from the
vnknowne Writer, and otherwhiles with the hope of his
expected ranſome. But that was long delayed, till at laſt,
when euen vveary with gaping attendance, hee had reckoned
dayes, meaſured houres, and numbred minutes: the
time drew neere, in which, by all probability, (his Letters
deliuered) he might expect an anſwere: After this, all hee
receiued vvas onely a poore Letter, from his poorer Mother,
as full of comfortable words and ſorrow for his misfortunes,
as void of ſatisfaction for his Patron, concluding
at length, with letting him know, that his Brother Leoncio
had beene abſent from her, and that to effect his deſire, ſhe
had carefully diſpatcht one to him; but it ſeemed Gerardo's
ill lucke was ſuch, that though his ſorrowfull Mother vſed
her beſt diligence, ſhe could not ſo ſpeedily as the limited
time required, prouide his ranſome, by reaſon of Leoncio's
dangerous ſickneſſe, which was neceſſarily firſt to bee looked
into, that with the recouery of his health, his captiued
Brothers liberty might the better be effected.
               
                  Gerardo altogether ignorant of what paſſed at home, fearing
leaſt the limited reſpite once expired, the Patron would
change his ſtile, falling to his vſuall rigour, grew extremely
melancholly, in ſuch ſort, that one of thoſe Captiues vvho
firſt bore him company, and with whom he moſt of al conuerſed,
perceiuing his griefe, mooued with pitie and compaſsion,
endeuoured what he might, diſcreetely to incourage
him, & eaſe his forlorne hopes; and one day amongſt
others, in which he ſaw him moſt heauy and ſorrowfull, taking
him by the hand, and leading him into a by-Court
(leſſe ſuſpitious place) he beganne thus to ſet vpon him: I
much vvonder, Signior Gerardo, that with ſo great vnquietneſſe
you thus goe about to hurt your ſelfe, not onely in
diſcomforting your ſecret heart, but in making known your

griefes alſo to vs that conuerſe vvith you; ſo that, by meanes
of ſome one leſſe truſty, when you leaſt thinke of it, they
may come to the Patrons notice, and giue him inducements
to fore-ſtall his ſuſpitious condition, and gheſſe that
your ſadnes proceedes from ſome impoſſibility of attaining
your Ranſome, whereby you may fall into his extreme
indignation. Theſe two yeeres haue I put him off in the like
kinde, giuing him, as, To day, one excuſe, to morrow another,
faining ſtill ſeuerall inconueniences; and though my
limited time hath often paſſed, yet I ſtill beare him in hand
with new hopes: beſides, his barbarous condition is not
now ſo fierce and bloudy (as formerly it was vſed to be) to
which maruellous alteration, the affable, amorous conuerſation
of a Spaniſh ſhee-Slaue of his hath reduced him,
whom he hath married, and (ſtrange amongſt theſe Infidels)
ſo truely and tenderly adores, that for her ſake he will
doe any thing, a ſtory (that if time would permit, and our
companions at hand were farther of) I infallibly perſwade
my ſelf, would be of no ſmal entertainment to your ſelfe, &
diuerſion to your eares. There could nothing in the world
haue offered it ſelfe more happily in this coniuncture to
Gerardo's knowledge; ſo that the Captiue no ſooner touched
vpon that ſtraine, when, full of ioy, as thinking (doubtleſſe)
he could not but meane the party whoſe frequent Letters
himſelfe had receiued, he moſt cunningly ſaying hold
vpon the occaſion offered, cut him off, ſaying:
               Gods prouidence, gentle friend, neuer inflicts greater
miſeries vpon vs, then we ſhould be willing to beare: I confeſſe
(for my part) I haue ſtrength for heauier burdens, if
he pleaſe to loade mee, how bee it my ſadde countenance
may perſwade you the contrary; and, though I might
iuſtly be excuſed for this ſmall ſhew of weakeneſſe; yet, accommodating
my ſelfe to your diſpoſition, from hencefoorth

I ſhall grieue no more, onely I deſire, that my ſo willing
embracing your profitable counſel, may be recompenced
with the Relation of that womans fortunes, ſince the
priuacie of my Chamber may keepe others from ouer-hearing,
and the affection I beare you, excuſe my bold demand:
this I ſhall acknowledge for a moſt fauourable courteſie,
(amongſt many others I haue receiued from you)
and Heauen may ſo order our affaires, that this vnfortunate
man may one day ſtand you in ſome ſtead. Gerardo
vſed no further intreaties, and indeed leſſe might haue preuailed
with the affectionate Fulgencio, (ſo vvas the Captiue
called) and hauing ſignified ſo much vnto Gerardo, towards
his Chamber they vvent; where, beeing ſet, the other thus
beganne:
               There is none (I may well aſſure you) in all this Cittie,
can giue you ſo faithfull a Relation of the preſent buſineſſe,
as my ſelfe, ſince Fortune ſtill made mee an equall companion
in all the circumſtances of it.
               The ſecond yeere of ſeuen, (in which I haue beene Captiue)
Mahomet Zanaga, (my Maſter that then was) a famous
and moſt cruell Pyrate, ſet ſaile from this Port in a Frigot,
(where I was bound to an Oare) to his accuſtomed Trade
of Rouing, and hauing taken ſome Prizes about the Iland
of Maiorca, and done wonderfull dammage all thereabouts;
being at laſt ſet vpon by a ſudden terrible ſtorme, wee were
all likely to haue beene caſt away; and vnable to reſiſt the
violence of it, ſuffered our ſelues to be hurried on by a forcible
Leuant wind, (which beginning though in ſome few
houres to ſlacken) wee found our ſelues a great way diſtant
from the place where it firſt tooke vs: ſo, wee diſcouered a
Coaſt, and willing to make to the Land, by reaſon the Seas
went yet very high, at laſt we put into a little Creeke, whither
(iuſt as we entred) a ſmall Shallop had got from the

ſtorme to ſhelter. We could not very ſpeedily take notice
what paſſengers were in her, till ſuch time as our Frigot
drawing neerer, we might ſee that all in the Boat (being to
the number of ſome twenty perſons) were furiouſly in a
bloody conflict together by the eares, and ſome amongſt
the reſt were tumbled into the Sea. But Mahomet came in
ſo opportunely, that (beyond expectation) hee freed eight
or tenne Moores that were yet aliue, and captiuated ſeuen
Chriſtians, who fought in that deſperate manner with the
others for their liberties: but this their purpoſe ſo vnluckily
fruſtrated, our Captaine without difficultie ſeizing them into
his power, deſirous to be informed of the ſucceſſe, vnderſtood
from ſome of the Moores in the Shallop, that hauing
in the late ſtorme loſt a Frigot, in which their Captaine,
and many others, with a great booty of Spaniſh
Goods and Priſoners, periſhed; at the inſtant when ſhe was
ſinking, hauing the Shallop ready, and taking ſome of the
Chriſtians for companie, they caſt themſelues into it, and
made to that place for ſhelter, where they had beene thus
furiouſly ſet vpon by thoſe they ſaued; that had they not bin
ſo fortunately by him ſuccoured, not a man had eſcaped
with life.
               This ſucceſſe (though told with many other circumſtances,
vvhich I haue quite forgotten) much pleaſed our Captaine,
aſwell for hauing ſuccoured and deliuered his
Countrimen, as to haue remained by this meanes with the
Chriſtians, they carried for his owne; theſe hee tooke with
him, leauing the Shallop to the Moores, to bring them in
ſafety afterwards to this Cittie. Himſelfe the next day ſafely
landed here; where making ſale (as the manner is) of his
Priſoners, amongſt others, he parted with this woman wee
now treate of, vvho by reaſon of her diſguize in mans apparell,
vvas not preſently knowne, till ſuch time as our Patrons

affection diſcouered her: ſo hauing bought and
brought her home vvith him, putting her into a Mooriſh
habit befitting her Sex, he himſelfe grew (vnexpectedly)
to be as well captiu'd by her beauty, as ſhe his Slaue by couetous
purchaſe. At this time too Zanaga ridding himſelfe
of ſome vnprofitable perſons, vvho by reaſon of ſickneſſe
were no longer able to ſerue at the Oare; my ſelfe, one of the
number, vvas ſold to our Maſter here, by which meanes it
was not difficult for me to know, vvhat became of the faire
Chriſtian; and by degrees I came to vnderſtand more, then
I ſhould haue preſumed on, as being not only told of Ferru
his violent affection, but alſo of her ſtoute conſtancie, with
which (feareleſſe of death oft mentioned vnto her) ſhe reſiſted
his barbarous luſt: vvhereupon he moſt cruelly treated
her, and his rigorous vſage was ſo extreme, that fearing
to kill her, and ſo to loſe the mony ſhe ſtood him in, he purpoſed
at laſt to let her be ranſomed. At this time the Redeeming
Friers were here, (who told of this Chriſtian woman,
and fearing her Soules perdition, vnderſtanding the
Turkes mind, they dealt with him about the price: which
(with ſome difficulties, at laſt being agreed on) he receiued
his money, and ſhe vvas committed to the cuſtodie of a
Iewiſh Merchant, with whom the Friers had alſo placed
many other Chriſtian women they had ranſomed. Within
ſome few daies after, the deuill had ſo vvrought in her Maſters
imagination, that preſenting afreſh vnto him the remembrance
of his late affection, he repented him of hauing
ſold her; and therefore in a furious and raging madneſſe,
void of all ſhame, he ranne backe to the Friers, ſaying, that
when they ranſomed his ſlaue, he was out of his wits, and
that now therefore (being better aduiſed) hee had brought
them their money, and they ſhould returne her vnto him againe;
and the rather, becauſe beeing turned Mahometane,
                  
ſhe was not to be redeemed. The compaſſionate Friers extremely
wondred at the Patrons baſe proceeding; but that
which moſt grieued them, was, the manifeſt danger of this
Chriſtian foule, by returning againe to his power: and
therefore firſt they went about to perſwade with the barbarous
Turke, but ſeeing all their labour was but vaine towards
him that was ſo reſolutely bent, ſo blinded by paſſion,
they hoped that the Law (as their laſt remedie) would on
their ſides decide the controuerſie. The Iudge, whom they
of Argiers call, The Cadi, commaunded the Slaue to bee
brought before him; where being come, our Patron began
diſorderly to cry out, he would haue his owne: the Friers
Redeemers alledged his owne voluntarie ſale; ſo, debating
the matter on both ſides to and fro, the Turke perceiuing
his cauſe like to goe hard with him, vrged, that the woman
had turned Mahometan: which when the poore ſoule heard
(trembling for feare) yet, vnable to ſuffer ſo manifeſt a falſhood,
ſhe cried out many times together alowde, that ſhee
was a Chriſtian, and had neuer beene otherwiſe, and would
die in that profeſſion: which the angrie Turke no ſooner
heard, but fiercely ſetting on her with his fiſts, he alſo ſaid:
Thou ſhalt with me, thou damned Bitch, ile pay thee for
thy impudence. Some there preſent were much offended
with this boldneſſe, and chiefly the Cadi himſelfe, who ſeuerely
commanded him not to miſ-vſe the woman, but firſt
to preſent witneſſes to make good his cauſe. Ferru madde
with choler, went ſtraight out, and not long after returned
with two as baſe periur'd Moores as himſelfe, who came in
and depoſed, that the captiue woman was turned Mahometan;
which the poore creature hearing, beganne to cry out
lowder, they were falſe Villaines to teſtifie ſo notorious an
vntruth; and in ſo ſaying, her many teares mooued the Spectators
to compaſſion: onely this monſter ſtood like a ruthleſſe

Rocke, and hearing her ſay all this, catching hold on
her, (the ſtanders by not once offering to helpe it) hee gaue
her a terrible buffet on the face, which hee had ſeconded,
had not one of the Redeeming Friers put himſelf betweene;
who laying hold vpon his Coate, told him how much hee
forgot himſelfe, to wrong a Chriſtian woman, and one
that was no Slaue, in a place of ſo great reſpect. But the
Barbarian with this temperate and ſober reprehenſion, was
not onely not mollified, but, in ſtead of relenting, hee began
fiercely to cry out, ſaying, Why permit you this Frier
to lay violent hands (a moſt manifeſt lye) vpon a Turke, and
one that is a Ianizarie? and that therefore according to the
Lawes, and their preheminences, he was either to bee executed,
or at leaſt, his right hand to be cut off. And that you
may perceiue what a damned Nation they are, there were
at leaſt forty Moores preſent, that ſwore it was true; and
perſwaded the Cadi, that the Turke was ſtrucken, and that
therefore he was to doe him iuſtice vpon the Frier: wherefore
the Iudge tormented with their cries and noyſe, commanded
his hand ſhould be taken off, as the inſtrument of
the diſgrace.
               Then a number of other Turkes and Moores began to
lay hands vpon the innocent Frier, to haue executed the
ſentence; when a Turke aſſiſting the Cadi in his place, (a
great Lawyer) ſtayed their furie, commanding them not to
inflict ſo rigorous a puniſhment, ſince thoſe kind of Friers
were priuiledged perſons aboue other Chriſtians; but, that
becauſe the Frier had ſtrucken a Turke and Ianizarie, which
was vnlawfull, they ſhould all there preſent inflict the like
puniſhment with their fiſts vpon him, and ſo there might be
quid pro quo, one for another.
               This then grew to bee partly a matter of laughter and
mirth, but 'twas mournfull indeed, to ſee how vnmercifully

thoſe baſe vn-manly Infidels layd vpon the poore Frier; euery
one of them reaching him ſuch knockes, that had not
ſome few of them (better minded) ſhifted him away, hee
might very well haue beene banged to death.
               Thus the diſtreſſed vvoman was left all alone, like a ſilly
ſheepe in midſt of thoſe inſatiable Woolues, who preſently
adiudged her to go along with her Owner, and ſo to be
a Mahometan perforce.
               Certaine it is, that the compaſſionate Frier vvould not,
for feare of his life haue thus returned, had there beene any
poſſible hope of recouering her. God ſure had a hand in all,
of whom none ought to demand a reaſon, who doth nothing
without it. Our Patron hauing her home againe,
began to exerciſe his former crueltie; by vvhich ſhee vanquiſhed,
but chiefly by ſeeing her ſelfe thus vnfortunately
abandoned, began to grow leſſe coy, more pliant; which he
perceiuing, a little alſo ſlackened his hard vſage: and to
make ſhort, (a thing common amongſt them) turned off
his other vviues, thinking by this demonſtration of his, he
might the better attaine to his Slaues affection: vvhich indeed
fell out accordingly, ſhe reſoluing (vnable longer to
reſiſt) to free her ſelfe from the intolerable miſery ſhee
endured.
               Three yeeres haue they liued in this ſort, ſo contentedly,
as that this change of his, hath not onely cauſed a ſingular
admiration through all this Cittie, but with an extraordinarie
conformitie of manners, hath wrought maruellous
effects in him; turning him from rude and beaſt-like, to ciuill
and affable, as your ſelfe beſt of all can iudge, hauing
had experience; and which may moſt of all be wondred at,
in all his actions, hee is wholly ruled and gouerned by the
aduice and counſell of his faire wife, who is onely wayted
on by women captiues, ſaue two Eunuch Renegates, that

you may haue many times ſeene ouer-ſeeing vs.
               Here Fulgencio finiſhing his relation, Gerardo doubled
his thankes, but thence-forward his cares increaſed the
more, by hauing now more notice of her that wrote his
former Letters; but the care of his Ranſome was incomparably
greater, and the lingring of that leſſe to be indured. It
grew now towards Supper time; ſo his captiue friend taking
leaue, gaue way to Gerardo to receiue another Ticket; which
hauing opened, he read it with the content you may by and
by perceiue.
               At length, Gerardo, the day I moſt wiſhed to ſee, ſince I firſt
ſaw you in Captiuitie, is at hand: I (noble Signior) am a Chriſtian,
and one, that were ſhe knowne to you, your pittying heart
would helpe bewaile her ſad misfortunes; which, ſo publikely notorious,
cannot but in part haue come to your notice: as alſo the
cruell affliction by which my frailtie was at laſt vanquiſhed,
though I was neuer deſperate to forſake my Faith; wherefore heauen,
I truſt, taking compaſsion on my Soule, will affoord me ſome
remedie; the which with confidence I rely vpon, helped by your
valorous determination, and of that I haue had ſome experience,
as you ſhall know in a fitter occaſion. Looking accidentally int▪
ſome Papers of yours, which were taken with the reſt of your
Clothes a-ſhip-boord, I eſpied your name; ſo that (knowing you)
I cunningly dealt with the Patron, that giuing you good vſage,
he ſhould likewiſe propoſe the price of your ranſome: I prepared
you in like manner to what you ſhould doe, to giue him all the ſatisfaction
poſsible in your anſwer, that ſo your perſon might in the
Interim of your monies not being payd, enioy the greater liberty.
Touching my preſent purpoſe, it is, ſo to diſpoſe and gouerne our
affaires, that without their preiudice, we may once out-liue this
miſerable Captiuity; for which, I haue waited till this preſent occaſion,
which is, (the Pyrates and ſhipping wintring now in ſafe

harbour) our Patron goes to his Tillage, where he is like to buſie
himſelfe for ſome twenty dayes at leaſt: and with this happy coniuncture
(notwithſtanding our Renegate Guardians remaine
behinde) I haue ſo well ordered the matter, that, your induſtry
helping, it ſhall (doubtleſſe) obtaine the ſucceſſe wee would wiſh
for; and therefore (for more ſecuritie) my opinion is, that
you communicate the buſineſſe with ſuch of the Christian
Captiues, as you may beſt truſt, in this manner and forme
enſuing.
               Firſt of all you may let them know, that they ſhall not onely
haue all Ferru his Armes that are heere remaining, but the
keyes alſo of his chiefest roomes; that ſo, beeing furniſhed with
all neceſsaries, the reſt may be by your ſelfe and them performed:
to which purpoſe, it would be in the next place fitting to know, how
we might rigge and ſet out one of the Frigots that lyes naked in
the Hauen; for (this once compaſsed) it will not bee difficult for
vs to get from Argiers, by letting our ſelues downe from that
part of the wall, that ioynes to our houſe; and ſo, hauing our victuals
ready (of which our warehouſe hath plenty enough for many
Ships) we may ſet ſaile and away to Sea.
               Well know I, Gerardo, that, if my deuice ſuite with your diſcretion,
and our companions conſider the facilitie that is offered,
there will be no inconuenience in the effect: or, ſay, there ſhould be
ſome little, let no ſmall doubt hinder vs; and ſuffer not for heauens
ſake, your ſelfe, me, and ſo many poore Chriſtians, that languiſh
in this miſerable thraldome, to miſse the bleſsed opportunitie
of their deſired liberties: let mee therefore, by the Captiue
that brings your meat, know your reſolution, her I haue ſtill truſted,
and I know you may do the like; for to ſpeake to mee is as impoſsible,
as mount the clouds; ſo warie and watchfull are our ſuborned
Keepers. Heauen keepe, direct and incourage your Noble
generous heart.
               
                  
Hardly could Gerardo keep in his ioy from breaking into
lowdneſſe, as ſoone as hee had read the maruellous Contents
of this diſcreet Letter, in whoſe conſideration buſied,
and mincing (as it were) each particular, reſtleſſe, he ſpent
the laſting night, and longing to impart the important buſineſſe,
making firſt choiſe of the well-knowne Fulgencio his
breſt, he vp, and told him all, from the firſt letter to the laſt;
and hauing giuen him ſo ſtrict an account, he found as willing
entertainment of the braue exploit in his couragious
heart, as he could poſſibly expect: who, thanking his friend
with teares of his gladneſſe, for imparting ſo great a good
vnto him, deſired him to leaue the ordering of it, to his
care and induſtry, as being better experienced in the Countrey
humours and conditions of the Chriſtian Captiues,
and therefore, beſt knew to ſelect thoſe, which might be fitteſt
for the turne; and alſo the beſt meanes for the furtherance
of their attempt. Gerardo vvillingly reſigned the
vvhole buſineſſe to Fulgencio, vvho hauing made it knowne
to as many as he thought good, to the generall approbation,
their flight vvas reſolued on againſt the ſecond night
after their Patron his departure.
               Their reſolution, if it bee noted, was not raſh; for according
to the couragious ſhee-Captiues aduice, with the opportunity
offered, they might eaſily effect their deſigne,
ſince Winter vvas now vvell entred, at vvhich time all the
Pyrats and Rouers retire themſelues higher into the Countrey
from Argiers (ſauing ſome few Ship-boyes, who lye aboord
the diſ-armed Veſſels) ſo that they might, vvithout
being perceiued, at leaſt ouer-taken, eſcape from any that
ſhould follow them.
               The expected day being come, the faire Chriſtian giuen
to vnderſtand of the prefixed agreement, and Ferru abſent
at his Countrey Farme, about eleuen of the clock at night,

a ſhee-Chriſtian Captiue, on vvhom they alſo relyde, carried
the keyes vvith all ſecreſie to Gerardo, and preſently after,
by degrees, ſome forty Semitars, halfe-Pikes and the
like weapons: and (this done, conducting him to a roome
where one of the Renegates lay) ſhee (knocking at the
doore, and the Eunuch frightfully anſwering) ſecured his
feare, ſaying, 'twas ſhe, ſuch a one: and that her Miſtris
vvould haue him preſently goe to her about a buſineſſe of
great conſequence; ſo that hee, thinking no leſſe, beganne
haſtily to dreſſe himſelfe, and no ſooner opened his doore,
but Gerardo vvas ſtraight vpon him, and in a trice claue his
head with two ſudden blowes of his Semitar; and ſo luckily,
as he ſent not out the leaſt groane.
               This good beginning adding double vigour to his courage,
did the better aſſure the ſucceſſe of the maine buſineſſe:
and therefore (loſing no time) downe he went vvith
his truſty guide, who brought him euen almoſt to the ſtreet
doore, neere vvhich the other Renegate lay, that kept the
keyes of the dungeons and cloſe priſons vvhere the poore
Chriſtians remained; vvhere, the wench vſing the ſame
ſlight that before, he comming out, but leſſe careleſſe, then
his dead companion, vvas ſet vpon by Gerardo, ſo greedy of
diſcharging his blow, that his ſpeedy haſte had like to haue
marred all: for the Renegate ſlipping aſide, ſeeing himſelfe
in that diſtreſſe, beganne to cry out, and vvithall to cloze
with Gerardo: but he that beganne now to carry more heed
about him, redoubling his force, with a wheeling cutte of
his Semitar, diuided the Eunuchs winde-pipe; vvhich was
done with ſo good a will, that the other had not a note left,
nor voice to expreſſe his diſaſter: ſo, getting into his chamber,
he brought out the bunch of keyes, vvhich were laid
vnder his beds-head, and opening the ſeuerall doores, hee
vn-ſhackled as many of the Chriſtians as were able to follow

them (to the number of ſome threeſcore.) And this
done, vvith extraordinarie diligence and ſilence, diſtributing
the weapons amongſt them, he went next (by helpe of
his guide) to the Ware-houſe, where ſome beganne to fill
ſacks and bags, with Bisket, Butter and Fruits; and others,
barrels of Water for their vſe: a third ſort, took the cordage
and Candles which the Patron had there laid in ſtore for
the prouiſion of his Frigots.
               In the meane time the beautifull Chriſtian, who onely
expected, when her maid, below with Gerardo, ſhould giue
the word, extremely ioyfull to ſee how well their buſineſſe
began to fadge, hauing not in all the while heard any of the
reſt of her women the Captiues, ſo much as once ſtirre, taking
firſt the richeſt and moſt precious things that Ferr
                        •
                     
                  
had, to beſtow vpon the Chriſtian Captiues to encourage
them, being called, ſhee went downe into the Court, clad
in the Barbarian faſhion, but ſo admirably becomming
her, that (though I may a little digreſſe) I cannot but let
you know in what manner ſhee appeared, by the flaming
lights to Gerardo, and the reſt of the Captiues that expected
her.
               Shee had on a tranſparent Smocke of pure Lawne,
(whoſe ſeames, wriſts, and Collar, were curiouſly wrought
in different Silkes and Gold) a cloſe Horſe-mans arming
Coat, which reached to her mid-legge, of Carnation Veluet,
faſtened at the breſt with goodly great Buttons of
Gold maſſie and enamelled; ouer which, ſhee woare a
skarfe in the Romane manner, with the knot gathered and
tyed vpon the tip of her ſhoulder, which falling partly
downe to her waſte, and drawing vpward againe ouer her
head, an end of it came to bee doubled vnder her right
arme, which kind of dreſsing moſt beautifully ſhaped and
ſet her out. From her necke, eares and haire, hung Pearles,

round, orientall, ſo naturally as if they grew there: her
hand-bracelets were Gold ſet with rich Stones and Diamonds,
as her ſmall fingers with ſeuerall faſhioned Rings,
and that euery part of her might ſuite, it ſeemed her Mooriſh
Owner would haue her ſtill remember ſhee vvas his
Priſoner, by making her weare ſhackles of gold about her
armes and legs, which he called, The brauery of Argiers.
She had laſt of all a delicate Vaile of Tiffany, whoſe ends
caught by certaine Buttons ſet with Saphires & Emeralds,
were faſt, and vpon her head ſo artificially, that no part of
her face elſe, but the beſt of it, a paire of pleaſing eyes, were
ſhewne; with whoſe admiring cheerfulneſſe the thankefull
Chriſtians extraordinarily taken, as well as the ſhortneſſe
of the time would giue leaue, profeſſed they vvere
now entring into a new Slauery, Hers: and next, without
more delayes, by two and two to auoid noiſe, they went
into the ſtreet, and after, to the wall that was neere at
hand.
               You muſt note, that the principall diligence conſiſted in
getting Oares & a Rudder that the Frigot wanted, which
vvas (as you ſhall heare) by Gerardo's friend (who diſpoſed
the whole buſineſſe) happily effected: for firſt, Fulgencio
got from the top of the wall, and whilſt the reſt were deſcending,
he (all alone) went toward the vvater ſide; and
ſo (vvithout being perceiued) to the Bulwarke neere the
Harbours Gate, where the Oares, vvhich he was to procure,
vvere vſually kept; and thus he made a ſhift to ſcramble
vpon the wall (which vvithout helpe ſeemed a thing
impoſsible) and vn-heard by the Warders now in a dead
ſleepe, knowing where the Oares lay, downe hee vvent;
but ſuddenly two Dogges, vvho winding him, began to
barke, had like to haue marred all; which made Fulgencio
vvarily turne backe againe to his friends, the greateſt part

of whom were by this time gotten down, but much troubled
to know his ſucceſſe; who, as wiſhfully now came in
vnto them, ſaying; Loued Companions, be of good courage,
and giue God hearty thankes; for let mee tell you,
our intent goes happily on: and ſo making known what he
had done, he told them the Oares might eaſily be had. So,
leauing them with greater hopes of their liberty, he returned
with three or foure of the Chriſtians, taking alſo two
loaues of bread, to ſtay the Dogs from baying.
               Towards the Bulwarke they went, where Fulgencio with
leſſe adoe by the help of his companions might get vp: &
caſting firſt ſome pieces of bread to the Dogs, he quickly
ſtayed their barking, and whilſt they fed, let downe ſome
thirty of the beſt Oares, which his friends below receiued.
This done, hee boldly croſſed ouer the Bulwarke, and
without being eſpied, went downe to the farther ſide of
the Citie, and there, in a Plaine betwixt two of the wall-gates,
he tooke a Frigots Rudder, drawing it from vnder
certaine Raiſin Frailes, whereon three Moores at the inſtant
lay aſleepe; which thing to ſeem credible, muſt needs
haue been miraculous. And with the ſame ſpeed & boldneſſe
he went againe to the Bulwarke, and from thence let
himſelfe downe to the ſhore: and leauing the Rudder
vvith the reſt of the Oares, he gaue Gerardo and his company
diligent notice that the maine difficulty was ouerblowne;
ſo that they who were gotten downe, began to
ſtriue who ſhould faſteſt carry Barrels, Sacks, Bags, Candles,
Ropes, Cordage and binders for the Oares.
               And being thus in the midſt of their preparation (ſome
nine or ten Chriſtians being yet to let down) there chanced
to paſſe by vnluckily (on the Citie ſide of the wall) a
Turke, that liued in the ſame ſtreet, who going careleſly
homeward, they that were vpon the wall, hearing his

ſteps, began to feare and thinke he muſt needs eſpy them;
for, beſides his approaching neerer to them, hee carried a
Lanterne to light him in reſpect of the nights darkneſſe:
vnable therfore (as they thought) to preuent the miſchiefe
otherwiſe) they reſolued to cloze with him and to kill him
(if it were poſsible:) which one of them willing to effect,
ranne him thorow the body with a halfe Pike, but (not
deadly wounded,) he cryed fearefully out, inſomuch that
ſome Moores comming to the noiſe, ſeeing what had hapned,
began to proclaime from the wals, that the Chriſtians
were vp in Armes: which exclamation ſeconded by the
Warders of the Bulwarke, and Shore, the vnfortunate
Captiues about the Wall, diſperſing themſelues diſorderly
vp and downe the Citie, gaue ouer their hopes of libertie:
for hearing all that hurry, they much doubted the good
ſucceſſe of their friends: who, on the other ſide taking
vp their Oares and Rudder, and in midſt of their determinate
ſquadron, the faire Captiue and her Maid, went towards
the Sea-ſide where the Frigot was, which Fulgencio
kept ſtill in his aime, where ſetting the women a-boord
and the moſt of the luggage; ſome of them reſiſting the
on-ſet of the Warders, others fitting to the Oares, and a
third ſort weighing Anchor, in ſpight of thoſe that went
about to hinder them, Gerardo's exhortations and entreaties
giuing new life and courage, with maruellous valour
and celeritie they put to Sea; where (truſting to their good
fortune) they began to row ſo ſtoutly, that in a very little
time they were gotten two Leagues a-head the land; and
ſetting vp Maſts and Sayles with a proſperous gale of
winde they ſailed on till morning, by when they might ſee
themſelues (to their no ſmall ioy) gotten neere fifteene
Leagues to the Eaſt of Argiers. Our Gerardo grew to be
extremely deſirous of knowing who the faire Chriſtian

might be: but the winde (as God would haue it) beginning
to change into North-Weſt, the fury of it increaſing, and
the Seas beginning to goe very lofty, eaſed him quickly of
that care, and made him more carefull with the reſt of his
Companions, to looke to the ſafety of the Veſſell, they
(poore ſoules, moſt ſorrowfull to ſee their contrary fortune,

                     •
                  owing with all might and maine) laboured to reſiſt the
force of the vn-mercifull windes; but being altogether vnable
to preuaile, were forced backe to the ſhore-ward: and
ſo endeuouring to ſhelter themſelues in a Creeke, ſome
twenty miles Eaſtward from Argiers, they ſet their Prowes
thither-ward, at the iuſt time, that two other ſayles in the
ſame danger deſigned themſelues to their courſe: but our
Frigot in ſome doubt (for feare of a worſe matter) what to
doe, at laſt (euen deſperate) ſuffered her ſelfe to bee forced
on by the winde, in great danger of being ſwallowed vp by
the waues, till ſeeing the two Veſſels ſteere towards them,
they were forced to prouide for their defence; ſuſpecting,
as by and by they might plainely ſee, they were enemies.
               The two were Frigots, who the day before laden vvith
fuell for the Viceroy of Argiers his prouiſion, had ſet ſaile
from Sargel: and though they thought at firſt to coaſt along
by the ſhore; yet fore-thinking they might haue ſome
foule weather, they gheſſed it more ſafe to keep the maine;
and ſo driuen on by a ſtrong Leuant that turned after to
Nor-weſt, they were glad with the Chriſtians to direct their
courſe to the ſame ſhelter; whom ouer-taking and ſeeing
what they were, vvith terrible noiſe and barbarous outcries
they ſet vpon them; and beeing two, well manned againſt
one poore vnprouided Veſſell, getting her in the
midſt of them, they furiouſly ſought to lay her a-boord: but
the Chriſtians fighting with equall courage, and (more deſperate)
were not ſo ſpeedily boorded, but making braue reſiſtance,

vvounding and killing the Barbarians, they yet
made a party good with them; but at the inſtant that the
Chriſtians beat off the Turks, and kept them from entring,
it happened that an vnlucky Arrow ſhot Fulgencio, and ſtriking
him to the heart, layd him a-thwart one of the Frigots
Benches; vvith vvhich diſaſter Gerardo beeing much
in his mind griefe-ſtrucken, and his courage failing him to
cheere vp his companions, that fainted with the misfortune,
the enemy perceiuing their deiectedneſſe, re-beſet, and
furiouſly at laſt began to boord them: yet here the battell
at the laſt puſh, ſeemed to bee againe renued, and with
ſtreames of blood that increaſed, the Chriſtians ſhewed
moſt remarkable valour, chiefly the vndaunted Gerardo,
vvho vvith his ſure Semitar (once his Patrons) ſcowring
the Decke fore and off, more fierce and furious
then a Quartanary Lyon, dealt fearefull blowes on all ſides:
the bloody skirmiſh held on a pretty vvhile, till ſuch time
as freſh Turkes comming on by heapes, and diſcharging
their ſhot and Arrowes like Haile, ſeuenteene of the Chriſtians
fell, and the reſt remained in wofull plight.
               But in this miſerable ſtate, Heauens Creatour, (whome
the diſtreſſed ſoules ceaſed not to inuoke) taking compaſſion
on their extremitie, when it ſeemed moſt impoſſible for
any to eſcape from death, with his powerfull force, againſt
which the fury of the Elements is nothing, moſt miraculouſly
ſuccoured them, by affoording as a miniſter of his
pleaſure, the vnexpected helpe of a tall Ship, which at this
time weather-beaten, came where the fight was, and no
ſooner diſcouered the Barbarian Sailes, and the lone Frigots
danger, when preſuming vpon the truth, ſhee began to let
flie a Chace-piece, and after, played vpon the Turkes ſo furiouſly
with the reſt of her Artillerie; that ſeeing themſelues
in danger of ſinking, they were glad to quit the yeelded

Chriſtian Veſſell, to looke to the ſafety of their owne: and
ſo, quickly turning their Prowes to Barbary with loſſe of
ſome thirty perſons, they betooke themſelues to flight. The
luſtie Ship was not forward to follow them, as fearing the
danger and neereneſſe of the Coaſt, but they within her
were glad ſo to haue freed the hard-beſet Frigot, whoſe
Paſſengers hauing ſung thankes to Heauen for their bleſſed
deliuerance, Gerardo amongſt other things was firſt of all
moſt charitably carefull, to ſee, whether in all this bickering
either of the Chriſtian women had receiued any hurt: and
no ſooner turned he himſelfe about to the effect, when (for
her masking Vaile in midſt of the fright was falne off) hee
might diſcouer in the gallant Captiue no leſſe then the
dainty, cruell Iacinta's face. The vnexpected ſight cauſed
ſuch an amazedneſſe in his afflicted ſpirits, that hee verily
thought hee had ſeene ſome infernall ghoſtly apparition:
wherefore he ranne amongſt his companions, and as farre
backe as he could, out of her ſight, whom he long ſince had
giuen ouer for dead, and drowned in the raging waues (as
the firſt Part of the Storie mentions) therefore he thought
this to be ſome diabolicall Viſion.
               The Spectators were more then he aſtoniſht, with this
ſudden accident, and much more, when they might ſee the
faire Dame, with eyes guſhing foorth teares, runne to Gerardo,
and caſting her ſelfe at his feet, heare her breathe out
theſe lamentable words:
               Whither, Oh whither, valorous Gerardo, flieſt thou, from
this wretched, aboue all that euer liued, moſt vnfortunate
woman? No more, deare Signior, refraine your iuſt diſpleaſure;
permit not (though I deſerue farre heauier puniſhment)
that, abhorred as I am by all the world, abandoned
by thee, my life come to ſome deſperate end; by
throwing my ſelfe into the deepe Sea, that heretofore with

more pittie, then thy preſent lookes promiſe, preſerued me.
Suffice, what is paſt; and may thy killing indignation at
length ceaſe, ſtriking the Sailes of thy reuenges deſires,
which Heauen hath thorowly inflicted on mee in thy behalfe,
reducing me to all the extremities that barbarous Infidelity
could inuent; from which thy hands haue beene inſtruments
to free mee: and not without particular prouidence;
that for the ſmall ſeruice I haue alſo done thee in recompence
of thy wrongs, I might be reſtored to my country
and quiet, by him for whoſe loue and affection I firſt
forgot and left it. 'Tis nothing elſe, Oh noble Gerardo, I
deſire of thee, to no other happineſſe doe I aſpire; this onely
good I expect, that grace I beſeech thee grant; and that,
by the true affection I once bore thee, by all that is amiable
and deſired by thee, and laſtly, for his ſake, God his
ſake, who hath ſo miraculouſly freed our liues. Here, vndone,
melted in teares, confounding her intreaties with
ſad grones, the poore diſconſolate Iacinta ceaſed; leauing
the ſence-bereaued Gentleman, ſo indeterminably metamorphoſed,
that nailed to the place where he ſtood, a great
while, he had neither tongue to ſpeake, nor hand to rayſe
the grieued creature from the ground. Neither ended the
ſtrangeneſſe of this dayes ſucceſſes thus; for iuſt as theſe
things paſſed in the Frigot, they in the ſhip, deſirous to ſee
who they were they had ſo luckily ſaued, commanded to
grapple with her; whereby it was not difficult for them, to
heare the faire Dame make her moane, at whoſe tender and
dolorous lamentation, ſome of the Paſſengers getting a-Sterne
into the Gallerie; and amongſt them two women,
they might heare Gerardo's name ſeuerall times repeated,
which made the one of them, with extraordinarie ſhewes
of gladneſſe, deſire the Pilot and Mariners to hang out a
Ladder, that they might the better paſſe into the Frigot▪
                  
which, by helpe of the Saylers they did; where comming
towards our Gentleman in the midſt of his confuſed
dumpes; ſhe of the two, whoſe exceeding faireneſſe the
Chriſtian Captiues moſt admired, ſpreading her armes,
wound them about Gerardo's necke, who, as if he had really
awaked out of a drowzie Lethargie, finding himſelfe girt
with no leſſe then thoſe ancient amorous kno
                     •
                  s, with which
the diuine Niſe once held him her captiue, acknowledging
her preſence, and ruminating on ſuch ſtrange vnheard-of
accidents, wholly ſtupified, hee ſtood ſtocke-ſtill like an vnmoouing
Image. Indeed ſuch ſucceſſes beyond either hope
or beliefe, might very well bring him into this deepe enchantment.
And becauſe it is fit, that the Reader, by my
Pens lazineſſe, run not into the ſelfe ſame credulitie, let me,
before Gerardo be deliuered from his, reconcile the ſtrangeneſſe
of theſe marueilous euents.
               Touching Iacinta, a very ſhort recourſe to our Stories
firſt Part, may cleare the doubt: for (you cannot forget) how
we left her at the laſt caſt in the Storme, vvhen her Frigot
willing to take ſhelter at Cape Gata, was ſunke by the Spaniſh
Admirall; in vvhich misfortune, (Gerardo ſuppoſing
ſhe had vvith the reſt periſhed) heauen diſpoſed otherwiſe,
and gaue her helpe in the Shalloppe, vvhich ſome of the
Turkes and Chriſtian captiues hoiſted into the Sea (as
vvas there ſet downe) in vvhich the poore men vnable to
reſiſt, in reſpect that the Turks vvere well armed, and more
in number then they, vvere forced to row on for Barbarie,
ragaining the firſt Creeke they could diſcouer vpon the
Coaſt for ſhelter: vvhere, the Chriſtians, ſeeing that the
Turkes and Moores, wearied with the late Storme, and
their continuall labour, fell to ſleepe; thinking they had
now a happy opportunity to make their eſcape, they began
to ſet vpon ſome of them that ſeemed to ſleepe ſoundlieſt,

and wreſting their weapons from them, the reſt awaked, and
amongſt all, there paſſed a well-fought Skirmiſh: but the
Chriſtians by the ſlaughter of many Turkes, hauing gotten
the better of the Battell, vvere vnluckily ſurprized by a Frigot,
the ſame in which Mahomet Zanaga went, the reſt happening,
as was formerly recounted by Fulgencio to Gerardo.
The faire Niſe hauing had notice of his captiuitie, and (as
you heard) ſent a ſeruant to Madrid, to be informed of the
whole buſineſſe: and aſſoone as the partie returned with
the certaintie, the place of his abode, the price of his ranſome;
and withall, ſignifying what diligence his Mother
and Brother vſed for the effecting his liberty, ſhe, without
more adoo, mooued by compaſſion and pittie, but chiefly
incited by the firme and loyall affection ſhee alwaies truly
bore him, began with all ſpeed to make ready monies: and
ſo, greedy to giue the world, but more particularly to her
Gerardo, a Teſtimonie, by this noble act, of her firme conſtancie,
as alſo an humble diſcharge, for following (like an
obedient child) the will and pleaſure of her deceaſed Father:
leauing the Nunnery, where till then ſhee had ſtill remained,
her friends, kindred, ſeruants, and aboue all, a
world of hazardous inconueniences, nothing able to perſwade
with her, ſhe held on her fixed determination, and
taking onely a waiting-woman and three men with her, ſhe
tooke a iourney to the Port of Cartagena, vvhere being arriued,
and reſolued to be the principall Actoreſſe in Gerardo's
redemption, fearing leſt his mother or brother might
preuent her, ſhe imbarkt her ſelfe foorthwith in a ſhip, laden
with powder and vvarlike Munition, for the Garriſon
of Oran in Barbarie: her purpoſe vvas there to demand ſafe
conduct of Count Aquilar, Viceroy and Captaine Generall
in thoſe Parts, for her going by land to Argiers, that ſo,
ſhe might procure her Louers libertie: to which the ſtormie

vvind and weather vnexpectedly now brought the ſhip
and her, as alſo to giue life and ſuccour to ſo many valiant
diſtreſſed Chriſtians.
               Such and ſo admirable, oft times, are the happy ſucceſſes,
to vvhich in part the affaires of our more wretched life
are now and then ſubordinate; or to ſay truer, ſo incomprehenſible
and miraculous is the diuine Prouidence, which
diſpoſeth things (when vve leaſt imagine) for the beſt. This
waighty conſideration tooke vp Gerardo's vvhole vnderſtanding,
and his ſences left him doubtfull in the certaintie
and claritie of what he ſaw before him. Iacinta, ſhe tenderly
lay weeping at his feet, ouer-ioyed with the ſight of him
that was once her Louer: Niſe (clung to his necke and
breſt) hugged him ſo cloſe, that hee could ſcarcely ſee her
face, much leſſe heare the words that ſhe thus ſmootheringly
cloſe deliuered:
               I wonder not, my beſt loued Signior, that (ſo doubtfull)
you make difficultie of giuing credit to your knowledge,
ſince the ſmall loue you bore mee, may haue eaſily
blotted Niſe out of your mind and memorie: but, not the
experience of this truth that coſts mee ſo dearely; not, the
moſt cruell rigour, wherewith I haue beene wofully treated
by you; not, the long forgetfulneſſe, diſdaines, abſence, (affections
bittereſt tormenter) none of theſe, not all together,
haue beene able to alter my loyaltie, or alienate my
affection, or laſtly, to leſſen the leaſt part of my happieſt
wiſhes. Theſe, my Gerardo, haue made me ſeeke thee out,
thus, nigh loſt, hazarded amongſt bloody Turkes and barbarous
Pyrats, who vniuſtly detained thee: this care alone,
hath made me forget ſo many iniuries, brought me thorow
dangers, to leaue my Monaſterie, prouide thy ranſome, to
trauell day and night, tread downe all difficulties, to no other
end but to obtaine (finding thee) thy loſt, by me moſt

of all earthly goods deſired, liberty. May then, my beſt
Signior, this amorous demonſtration deſerue your
admittance, by recompencing the firme loue of her that
hath vndertaken it: and if it find not in your boſome equall
reception, at leaſt, permit, that my wearied toung may with
your good liking publiſh, that Niſe hath only beene (howeuer
wronged) for euer true, and her vttermoſt affections
wholly, ſolely her Gerardo's.
               
               Amazement here left him, and it ſeemed, paſſed into
the hearts of the Spectators: for Gerardo, like one ſprightfully
returning out of a heauie trance, moſt compaſſionately
tender, and with a more liuely admiration at Niſe's
ſtrong affection, and equally pittying the poore Iacinta's
croſſe fortunes, now comforting with noble intrailes, the
afflictions of this; then drawing neere with affectionate
gratitude to that partie; ſometimes mollifying his rigorous
remembrance towards the one, and then forgetting his iuſt
indignation for wrongs from the other, vnable without
teares to diſſemble his paſſion, hee raiſed Iacinta from the
ground, and claſped the diuine Niſe about the necke: and
baſhfully aſhamed, craues her pardon, freely confeſſeth his
hearts hardneſſe, and blameth his vngratefull proceeding:
then turning to the vvretched Iacinta, vvith like ioy comforts,
and promiſeth her, not to forſake her, till with deſired
reſt, ſhe may arriue to the ſhelter of her friends, or a
more peaceable harbour. And vvith this determination,
whilſt the two Dames, more cheerefully, with equal emulation
admited at each others Beauty, he beganne to giue order
for their returne for Spaine. Niſe vvas dumbe and ielous,
though confident, as beeing ſo neere her Louer. Iacinta
diſſembling her trouble, as one that knew her ſelfe too
vnworthy to enioy him, to bring her out of her dumpes,
broke the yce and ſilence by ſpeaking firſt, and they vvere

then mutually courteous, both willing to bee acquainted
with the cauſes of each others peregrination.
               
                  Gerardo fearefull of another Storme, had deſired that the
Frigot might ſaile vnder the Ships protection, till ſuch time
as they ſhould land at Oran, and from thence meet vvith
more conſorts for Spaine: ſo they agreed, that for their
more conueniencie, the two Dames alſo ſhould goe together
in the Ship, till they came thither; to vvhich purpoſe,
they both vvere helped vp by Niſe's ſeruants and Gerardo:
vvho thought fit not as yet to leaue the company of his
good friends, and therefore taking leaue of Niſe and Iacinta,
(vvho ſeeing the reaſon hee had, vvould not contradict
it) he vvent backe into the Frigot. But that we may more
euidently perceiue the frailty of momentarie delights, and
vvhat little aſſurance is to be expected from their vncertain
beeing, let vs, in theſe enſuing Lines, note the laſt ſucceſſe,
that befell Gerardo and the faire Dames in this fortunate,
vnfortunate day.
               All the vvhile that the former matters paſſed, the Ship
and Frigot vvere ſtrongly faſtened together, aſwell for their
more conueniencie of conuerſation and keeping company,
as the raking of the vvaues, which as yet went ſomewhat
high; and (increaſing more) the Maſter and Mariners
fearing leſt beeing ſo neere, the Frigot, as the weaker Veſſell,
vvith the Seas fury might ſplit; and thinking Gerardo
had beene in the Ship, the Frigot fell off; but it was iuſt at
the inſtant, that he beeing in the Ship-boate, thought to
haue gotten out of it into the Frigot; vvhich being now vnder
Saile, and the Boat notable to ouertake it, hauing broken
the Rope, by which ſhe was tyed to the Ships Sterne,
to the terrible griefe of the beholders, caught by the ſwelling
waues, and violently carried on, was like to bee ouerwhelmed;
where a long time Gerardo was ſeene to be in manifeſt

danger, though for all he was ſo farre off, hee might
heare Niſe and Iacinta's cries, vvhoſe eyes prooued vnwilling
witneſſes of the ſad diſaſter.
               
                  Gerardo's valiant companions were not awhit diſmayd in
the Frigot, to ſee him in this conflict; but tugging at their
Oares till they were ready to burſt, at length they fetched
vp the Boat, and caſting out a Ropes end, on which he laid
hold, by little and little (quitting the Boat) hee ſwamme to
the Frigots Oares, and taking a little breath, holding by
their broad feet, at laſt he was lifted into the Frigot; where,
after he had ſhifted and refreſhed himſelfe, his Company
began to ſteere the Ships courſe, till ſuch time as the billowes
riſing more and more, they had quite loſt ſight of her.
It was then about one of Clocke in the afternoone, at what
time the wind enlarging, they ſet Saile, and might haue ſaued
their Oares, in reſpect of the faire wind; but they vſed
both, and ſo made on to the Weſt-ward of Oran, whither
the Shippe was bound; and not ceaſing to row, (freſh men
ſtill helping) before darke night they were gotten aboue
threeſcore miles from the place where the fight was: but
ſince none of them knew to take the Altitude, and night
came darke on them, vncertaine of their courſe, they yet
held on Weſt-ward, that being the ſafeſt; and ſo after the
nights ſecond watch, they found that they were neere a
Coaſt, and the wind ſitting a ſterne, they were ere long driuen
into a faire and well-ſheltring Harbour, on whoſe
land ſtood a ſtrong Caſtle, that was founded
on a ſure high Rocke, vnreſiſtable limit
to the Seas ſalt waues.
               The end of the ſecond Diſcourſe of the ſecond Part.
            
            
               
               THE SECOND PART
OF
GERARDO,
THE
VNFORTVNATE
SPANIARD.
               The third and laſt Diſcourſe.
               
                  GERARDO, with the capacitie of his fraile
vnderſtanding, meaſured (though temperately)
the powerfull greatneſſe of heauens
prouidence: which made him a little ſtumble
at the truth ſo full of ſtrange diuerſitie:
till comming neerer to himſelfe out of this
miſt of ignorance, his minde ſubiected his doubtfull credit,
and his couragious heart, tranſcending all earthly hopes,

promiſed a happy end to thoſe aduerſe meanes which
brought him into ſo many narrow Straites. The preſent
confuſed accident doth well and euidently paint out this
truth.
               The poore Chriſtians, how-euer free from all Sea danger,
yet were now in worſe taking then euer, gheſsing, that
by the land they plainely ſaw, they were in ſome Port of
Barbary, which made their danger irremediably certaine:
our Gentleman for his part, was more troubled now, then
he had beene formerly for the loſſe of his liberty, to ſee that
by the former miſchance hee was ſeparated from the faire
Iacinta, but chiefely, firme and loyall Niſe, whoſe notable
reſolution (duely conſidered by him, all ancient paſsion ſet
aſide) he could not but affoord it a worthy eſtimation in his
affectionate thoughts (ſome dead Embers of thoſe fires
which once inwardly ſcorched him, lighting and nouriſhing
his gratefull heart:) and, as his reuengefull deſire could
worke no greater effect in his noble breſt then pitie, that
taught him to bewaile the loſſe of Iacinta, fearing from her
naturall weakeneſſe ſome other relapſe, that would quite
fruſtrate her, by him promiſed, remedy.
               Theſe iuſt and more then amorous cares, as much afflicted
his wearied mind, as any feare of imminent danger;
though deſiring too to auoid it, ſeeing that hitherto they
had not bin at al from any on ſhore diſcouered. Taking aduice
with his companions, it was concluded, and amongſt
them agreed, that ſome two of them landing, ſhould with
all poſſible vvarineſſe informe themſelues of the place,
and accordingly, they might ſet downe ſome conuenient
courſe.
               Here, each Chriſtian began to haue within himſelfe a
ſeuerall faction, diſſwading alſo his beſt friend from the enterprize;
but Gerardo, who vvas, as it vvere the Preſident of

this counſell, to whom they remitted the election that hee
pleaſed, not willing to cauſe any difference, and truſting to
his owne good courage, named himſelfe for one, and one
of the weakeſt perſons in the Frigot beſides for a Companion;
and therefore being all fully ſatisfied, they ſet the two
on ſhore as farre off as they could from ſight of the Caſtle,
for feare of danger. They now on Land clambered vp certaine
Rocks, and being got neere the top of them, might
heare a noiſe of Horſemen, which made them ſtop. The
leaſt they could in this occaſion feare, was to light vpon
ſome Alarbian Cottage; and therefore hearkening ſomewhat
more wiſtly, they might heare voices and talking: but
perceiuing thoſe ceaſed (for they had a pretty while liſtened
from behinde the Rocke) and thinking that the parties
had made a ſtand thereabouts, without more adoe, they
ſtole creepingly on, till they came to a ſpacious Plaine (as
it were) which were the Mountaines Toppe, from whoſe
craggie precipices, they might plainely diſcouer two men
on horſebacke armed, with their Launces in their hands,
and Shields at the Saddles Pumels: who, diſcourſing (as it
ſeemed) ſomewhat earneſtly, cauſed the noiſe, which ſo
carefully did leade theſe two on. Gerardo verily beleeued
they were Moores, which his fearefull Companion was eaſily
alſo induced to, though gathering ſomewhat neerer
cloſe by the ground, to auoid being perceiued, they might
heare the one of them vſe theſe angry words to the other:
               Goe to then, Don Martin, no more words, 'tis now no
time to delay my reuenge; now you muſt ſatisfie the
wrong'd Iſmenia, with the price of your blood, in dying by
my hand; for to this purpoſe alone was the drawing you
from Oran contriued: and ſo ceaſing, they might likewiſe
heare his Aduerſarie reply in this manner: Rather, baſe Cauallier,
theſe Rockes of Maſſalquibir ſhall prooue the eternall

ſepulchre of thy vaine arrogance, which, how little I
eſteeme, thou ſhalt quickly perceiue, and how much fitter
it had been for thee, not to haue owned anothers iniuries:
and with this, both of them falling backe to come on vvith
more force, wheeling about to take field-roome enough, began
to ſet ſpurres to their horſes.
               It is not poſsible to expreſſe our Gerardo's gladneſſe, as
ſoone as by the two Gentlemens diſcourſe, he knew the ſecure
Country where he was; & willing to free both of them
from each others danger, but not daring alone to venter
vpon two horſemen, hee inſtantly diſpatcht his Companion
to the Frigot with the happy newes, willing him to
make all haſte, and bring foure or fiue of the company with
him, that, by their helpe, the furious couple might bee parted:
who at this time (the Moone ſhining bright) making
the ſtaring Rockes dumbe witneſſes to their valour, and the
deſert ſolitude their quiet Sticklers, with vndaunted ſpirits
moſt deſperately with their Launces ruſhed together.
Gerardo could not ſo perfectly note (by reaſon of the diſtance)
each particularitie of that bloudy combate, whoſe
diſaſtrous end he fearing, and that his friends would ſtay
too long (ſetting his owne danger aſide) he ranne in to part
them: iuſt at the very inſtant, when both, with the violent
ſhocke of their Horſes, came together to the ground: when
ſuddenly (one of them couragiouſly leaping vpon his feete,
and about to haue ſet vpon his oppoſite with drawn ſword)
Gerardo ſtept betweene, and rebating the furious offers of
his Semitar, deſired him likewiſe to forbear; but the enraged
Gentleman was ſo blinded with reuengefull madnes,
that, without either hearkening to the requeſt, or leaſt mitigating
his fury, ſeeing his Contrary ſtill laid along, cryed
out to Gerardo, to ſuffer him to make an end of the Traitor.
By this time (for doubtleſſe otherwiſe theſe two might

haue fallen foule vpon each other) came in Gerardo's
companions, but ſo ſpeedily and fiercely, ſeeing him in
that manner, that, had not he, very warily preuented their
fury, the impatient Combatant might haue been in a great
deale of danger; who, amazed with the vnexpected ſight
of ſo many, would faine (to haue auoided the hazzard)
haue ſeized on his Horſe: but Gerardo, preſuming, his feare
was the ſame, that his owne not long ſince ſatisfied it, by
crying out to him, that they were not Moores, but Chriſtians:
with which, leſſe troubled, they began now to approch
neerer to one another.
               But no ſooner began they to treat in colder blood, when
our Caſtillian by his voice remembred the preſent party, to
be Don Iayme the Arragonian, his ſingularly intimate
friend, whoſe company Gerardo loſt (as you finde in the
firſt parts ſecond Diſcourſe) when by his help they forced
Iacinta out of the Nunnery. Hee was a little troubled
with the vnexpected accident, as thinking it a dreame: but
(his ſecond cogitations working better in his noble breſt)
caſting by his damasked Semitar, hee threw his armes about
the others necke. His old friend was no leſſe mooued;
for Gerardo's habit, and the improper Moone-light,
did much make difficult the knowing him, ſo (the truth
vncertaine) his confuſion was at a ſtand, & the rather when
he might heare theſe enſuing words:
               Why, how now, Don Iayme, Valorous Sir, lift you your
angry ſteele againſt your greateſt friends? Hold, ſtay that
arme; for, if Gerardo, in appeaſing your wrath haue offended
you, as repentant as humble, he layes his head at your
feete. This melting language called backe Don Iayme's
remembrance, and repreſented to him the voice and preſence
of his old acquaintance Gerardo: whereupon ſtraight
enſued his thankefull acknowledgement, making him ioyfully

admire at the ſtrangenes of the accident. By this time
ſome of the company, got in to the Gentlemen that lay
on the ground, whom they found (weltring in his bloud,
thorow-dead) run thorow the body with a Launce: which
they made knowne (for feare of what might enſue) to the
new friends: the newes was very vn-pleaſing to Gerardo,
in reſpect of his friends danger; who, now nobly compaſsionate
of his enemies mortall hap, made one to helpe
to hide him in the ſecreteſt part of the Rocks: and (determined
wiſely to ſtay no longer there, informed of their
Frigot in the Hauen) he reſolued with them to imbarke
himſelfe in her. This indeed was the ſafeſt courſe; and ſo
both theſe Gentlemen longing to know the occaſion of
each others encounter in thoſe parts, went backe with the
company to their Veſſell; where entring, by that time it
grew to bee day, diuers perſons, that deſired paſſage for
Spaine, repaired thither.
               
                  Gerardo had formerly deſired to expect ſome newes of
the two Dames and their Ship; but ſeeing as yet they were
not arriued, fearing leaſt ſome ſiniſter chance might hinder
Don Iayme his Voyage; and preferring his friends ſafety,
before his owne ſatisfaction, hee was rather content
that they ſhould hold their courſe for Spaine; and hauing
by the way recounted to the valiant Aragonian, his ſtrange
fortunes ſince the time he ſaw him: one day (his owne
diſcourſe ended) deſirous to know the cauſe that brought
Don Iayme to ſo remote hazzards, he made bold to motion
an account of it, which the other moſt willingly granted,
not ſo much importuned by his friends requeſt, as by
his owne free deſire to giue him greater content: and ſo,
ſitting them down vpon the Sterne, with ſighes that drew
on the paſt-future Story, Don Iayme thus began:
               Not long before your comming to Zaragoſa, ſome

Gentlemen and my ſelfe beſtowed the ſetting foorth of
certaine ſhewes and triumphs; in midſt of which and the
ſolemnitie, a diſtaſte aroſe, cauſed by Liſauro (whom you
well knew) as a principall Motor, and my Vnkle Don Iulio
de Arragon, was hee that moſt oppoſed him, and conſequently
my ſelfe was forced to make a party, maugre Liſauro
and his friends. It imports not much to know the
particulars, I may onely tell you, that the maine matter
was, about a buſineſſe deciphered but to no ill intent, by
the aforeſaid Don Iulio, wherein Liſauro made conſtruction
of a wrong done to him. From this ſlight beginning, greater
combuſtions aroſe, nouriſhed by the vnquieteſt ſpirits
of both factions, and thus they grew to bandy together,
and a long time after, with many fraies and brabbles to infeſt
one another.
               In the very heate of this feude, my Vnkle being neceſſarily
to take a iourney out of towne, and I, to accompany
him, this accident you ſhall heare hapned vpon our returne.
As wee came merrily riding homeward, within
ſome three Leagues of Zaragoſa, a ſudden ſtorme came vpon
vs, in ſuch violent manner, with Thunder-claps, Lightning,
Winde, and ſtreames of water that guſhed out of the
Clouds; that (though the tempeſt caught vs not in the
gulph of Narbona, but in a Valley of the Riuer Hebrus) we
alike feared drowning: and therefore ſpurred on as faſt as
we could, till ſpying certaine habitations, and amongſt
them a good faire houſe of pleaſure, which ſeemed to belong
to ſome Gentleman; ſtriking out of the high-way, and
guiding our Horſes thither-ward, we got to the place, iuſt
at the inſtant that a Coach entred in at another gate, driuen
(as it might ſeeme) by the ſame neceſſitie that we.
               Heere mine Vnkle and my ſelfe, with the reſt of our
company, ſtayed a long houre, expecting when the ſtorme

would ceaſe, but with different intents, for mine Vnkle
onely longed to be at home; but I, (as a thing more proper
to my Peeres) deſired to ſee what company went in
the Carroach; ſuppoſing (for the Bootes were very cloſe
ſhut downe) they muſt needs bee women within, (as indeed
true it was) though the ſearching out of this truth
had like to haue coſt my boldneſſe deare: for I had ſcarce
offred to lift vp one of the boote lids and looke in, when,
out iſſued two men; who laying hold on their ſwords, as
they ioyntly blamed my vn-mannerly act, obliged mee to
the like; and the rather, knowing them to bee no other
then Liſauro and his kinſman Tirſo, both, our vowed enemies:
and though my youthfull raſhneſſe might ſomething
haue beene excuſed; yet the matter proceeded now
ſo farre (choller and late enmitie depriuing vs all of reaſon)
that our ſeruants came in too to mend the buſineſſe.
I much feared, that (any miſchance hapning, wee beeing
more in number) it might bee after imputed to vs for cowardize:
which made me altering my purpoſe, ſeeke to
ſhelter them, by cauſing our people to retire, and to lay
the blame vpon my owne fooliſh curioſitie.
               And certainely the two Kinſmen, knowing how little
there was to be gained from vs, would gladly haue accepted
my Apologie, if at this time foure or fiue of their ſeruants
had not entred newly in; who (it ſeemed) loytered
behinde their Maſters, that with their comming changing
their notes, broke off all parley, and ſo the fray began, our
ſide as willingly anſwering, that in a trice here was the battell
of Agrimant, nothing was heard but claſhing of ſwords,
noiſe, cryes, and groanes of ſuch as vvere wounded on euery
ſide.
               No leſſe were the out-cryes within the Carroach, neere
which the hotteſt of the skirmiſh was. My enraged Vnkle

willing to end all diſtaſtes betwixt Liſauro and him, moſt
eagerly followed him, till ſuch time, as he, ſtumbling at one
of the Carraoch Cuſhions, fell ouer and ouer: and Don Iulio
with haſte had like to haue falne vpon him: which it ſeemed
Tirſo had markt, and the aduantage made him approach:
but I fearing mine Vnkles misfortune, beat by two
fierce thruſts that Tirſo tilted at him, and with my Sword
and Dagger croſſe-warded, bore off a willing blow he made
at me, for my charitie to ſaue another: by this time Liſauro
was gotten vp; ſo that leauing Don Iulio and Tirſo, to begin
againe vpon euen termes, my fury, or rather good fortune
guided me to a new encounter with Liſauro: for with
the firſt back-blow dealt, I left him without defence, ſince,
the blade flying out of his hand, he remained onely with
his ſwords hi
                     •
                  t. I then tooke notice of the good ſucceſſe;
and ſure our old enmitie had here ended, had it not beene
for the interceſsion of two Dames; one of which laying
hold on my Contrary, all blubberd and afflicted, and the
other comming towards me, ſought to aſſwage my anger,
and to mediate for the diſ-armed Gentleman: ſhe that ſpoke
to me, had her face all couered with Tiffany, which ſeruing
as a Maske, onely diſcouered two faire eyes, but at this time
clouded with ſome pittifull teares, which accompanied
with ſighes and diſcreet phraſe, not onely reined in my vnbridled
fury; but alſo (ſeeing Tirſo on one ſide wounded by
mine Vnkle, fly backe, and on the other their ſeruants driuen
vp to a corner, labour in their defence) made me to ſecond
Tirſo, and re-bating Don Iulio's blowes and his, cryed
out to them to hold: and by this time ſome other indifferent
parties came happily in and parted vs all. I ſignified to
the vnknowne Dame, that her diſcreet and noble carriage
gained me to be her ſeruant, as farre as the ſauing her kinſman
or friends life, and ſhould command mine owne. So

that at laſt my Vnkle conſtrain'd by my entreaties, got to
horſe, and the like did I; and with our haſte, I forgot to take
ſo much as a bare leaue of the Gentlewomen, onely commanded
our ſeruants to follow; with whom, (as vvell to
take order for what had paſſed, as to cure ſome that vvere
wounded) we returned to Zaragoſa with ſuch ſpeed, that
before night we were gotten to our lodgings, though I
ſtayed not long in mine, rather following my Vnkles aduice,
abſented my ſelfe for at leaſt twenty dayes in a Village
ſome dayes iourney off, which was the cauſe I could
not (to my deſire) informe my ſelfe of the Dame that ſpoke
to me, whom I much longed to know.
               The Officers of Iuſtice hauing vnderſtood from Don Iulio
the late accident, with all the circumſtances, fearing the
reſulting of ſome greater inconueniences from it, ſought to
pacifie all parties, which they ſo diligently laboured, that
with much adoe a generall concord was effected, and all
were publikely made friends.
               Then I returned againe to my home and former care,
but ſo vnluckily, that doing what poſſibly I could, I was not
able to learn who the two former Dames were, or whether
they went; which difficulty was the more encreaſed by the
feare I had, leaſt my iealous enemies might fall into ſome
new ſuſpitions; if, haply they ſhould come but to the leaſt
notice of my curious intent: wherefore deſiſting, I tooke
truce with my deſires.
               Thus paſt I on ſome two moneths and better, in vvhich
time new inuitements, different occaſions, and ſeuerall varieties,
made mee forget the former buſineſſe quite, till one
morning amongſt others, being to meet ſome friends, who
had appointed the venturing of a Reſt at Primera, as I was
going out of my lodging, a Woman masked, came, and
ſuddenly conueyed a Letter into my hand, ſaying, To morrow

morning, Don Iayme, you ſhall haue mee here for the
anſwer, and without another word, left me, as full of trouble,
as longing for the contents; and ſo opening it, I read,
if not the ſame words, at leaſt the matter you ſhall heare.
               My fathers lingring ſickneſſe, and former troubles, haue made
me deferre, though not forget, the acknowledgement of a particular
obligation, in which (Don Iayme) for your nobleneſſe not
long ſince to Liſauro, I am ingaged to your valour. Let this
iuſt motiue, worthieſt Signior, be a ſufficient warrant to excuſe
my looſeneſſe; rather, in your honour'd thoughts, affoord it a better
title, ſince, though I preſume as a ſtranger now, I doubt not
but time and our correſpondence, may make me worthy of a reaſonable
eſtimation in your affection; of which when I may haue
ſome ſufficient proofe, you ſhall know who I am: in the meane time
I humbly beſeech you ſuffer like your noble ſelfe, in which confidence
Heauen protect you.
               Here ended the pithie Letter, whoſe contents equally amazed,
and gladded me, to haue gotten at length ſome
(though confuſed) notice of the countrey Dame, whoſe
Letter (infinitely contented) I anſwered, and fully ſatisfied
for my neglect of not taking leaue of her, when our bickering
was, by letting her know the exquiſit ſearch I had made
to excuſe my ſelfe, and expreſſe how much I was her ſeruant;
vrging withall, my deſire with all earneſtneſſe to ſee
her, though in concluſion I cloſed vp all, with ſubmitting
my ſelfe to her will, without ſeeking to know or enquire any
thing that might contradict her pleaſure; and what I wrote,
I made good, giuing my Letter to the diſguized partie, that
the next morning came punctually for it, without daring
to demand ſo much as her Miſtriſſes name, or the leaſt circumſtance.
               
                  
In this manner, I continued a good while; but to deale
plainly, though her diſcreet Letters promiſed a ſubiect of
much woorth and goodneſſe, yet the want of knowing her
did more diſperſe my affections.
               'Twas now about the gladſom time of Shroue-tide, more
ſolemnely kept in Zaragoſa, then any other citie of Spaine;
at which time, with ſome friends and kinſmen of mine owne
age and condition, clad in colours, and Vizards, wee marched
vp and downe the ſtreetes, enioying many a mirthfull
opportunitie: for at this time of yeere, our women haue
full libertie, and diſpence with their ordinary reſeruedneſſe.
In the heate of our paſtime, on the Sunday night, hauing
notice of certaine Reuels that were kept in priuate houſes,
vvilling to affoord our eyes the content of ſeeing, vvee viſited
all: till ſuch time, as at laſt, comming to the houſe of
one Signior Bellides; vvhere, all the youth, brauerie, and
beauty of the City vvas, we purpoſed to enter, but moſt
vvarily, in reſpect that the aforeſaid Gentleman was of a
contrary faction to vs; for (though vvee had beene before
made friends) yet we ſtill kept aloofe.
               Neuer, ſince I vvas man, ſaw mine eyes a rarer Beauty,
nor a more troubleſome obiect to my ſoule, then one, amongſt
the Dames there; and although there were few
preſent, that deſerued not a particular commendation, yet
ſhe, who fell to my lot, (I meane) ſhee vvhom I ſet by, was
ſo admirably beauteous, that the reſt, in compariſon, were
but ſwartie Egyptians.
               The ſpacious Hall was ſet round with Torches, and
Lights of ſeuerall inuentions; and many of the Gallants
and gallant Dames of the Reuels beganne to foot it, to the
ſound of harmonious muſicall Inſtruments; ſo that all the
Spectators eyes beeing faſtened vpon them, I might the
more freely employ mine, nail'd (as it were) to that beautifull

obiect. And (but falteringly) ſomething I would
haue ſpoken, when mine eyes with their earneſtneſſe better
ſupplied my tongues defect, by ſhewing my hearts cares.
               I know not whether the knowledge of my voyce, or the
lifting vp my Vizard to wipe my face, made her the more
attentiue to my words; but drawing cloſer to mee, with a
ſoft and low voyce ſhe beſtowed on mee this anſwer: I am
much indebted to Heauen, Don Iayme, for my good fortune
in ſeeing you, wherein my deſires are accompliſht,
which ſhall euer be ready, ſeruiceable to your happineſſe,
though you may happely want good will to repay their affection:
at which you may not wonder, when hereafter
you ſhall vnderſtand how much they eſteeme you. And
willing to haue gone on in this diſcourſe, (which ſtrangely
amazed me, not knowing what ſhe meant, and therefore
troubled to anſwer) one of the Gallants of the Reuels interrupted
vs, who inuiting her out to a Galliard, left me without
her, and another Dame to take her place; whither, after
ſhe had moſt gracefully danced, about to haue returned,
ſeeing the Roome filled, ſhee was conſtrained to make
choice of another; ſo that, to my ſoules griefe, not knowing
how to get out of that aduenture, into which I was
thus imbarked, hardly could I diſſemble my diſtaſte, at leaſt
I made it knowne to one of my greateſt friends there with
me, propoſing to him, if he knew the occaſion of it: he told
mee ſhee was daughter to the Gentleman of the houſe,
which made me much more wonder at the ſucceſſe, and
ſorrowfully deſpairefull, leſt the differences betwixt her
friends and mine, would quite daſh the proſecution of that
amorous fire, which by little and little had wholly ſeiz'd my
heart.
               In theſe carefull imaginations my affections wauered in
their beginning, when (the Reuels growing to an end) being

late, euery man went home, and my ſelfe, and company
vnknowne, (as we came) and hauing reſted that night,
we returned to our diſguizes, and the paſtimes: and though
the ſight of this faire Dame beſet mee in diuers places,
where the Shrouetide ſports were, yet I could neuer after
get a fit opportunitie to ſpeake to her: ſo theſe merry daies
paſſed away, and many others, in which, frequenting both
day and night her ſtreet and houſe, and otherwhiles comming
punctually to the Church where ſhee vſed to heare
Maſſe, I tempered with the fauours ſhe ſent from her eyes,
the amorous ardour of my deſires, mitigating with ſuch
poore comforts, the reſtleſſe torment that afflicted me.
               Howſoeuer this new affection might haue beene ſufficient
to diuert me from all other, yet it blotted not out of my
remembrance, how much the Country-Dame had ſhewed
in her Letters, who vnderſtanding (I know not by what
meanes) of my new vvatchfulneſſe and cares, vvhen I leaſt
expected, by the vſuall ſeruant ſent mee a Ticket, in which
ſhe not onely ſignified her ielous complaints, but particularized
alſo the moſt ſingular acts and ſignes, euen to the very
Phraſe I vſed to the Dame of the Reuels, ſo right, that I
was exceedingly aſtoniſht, not geſſing how it vvas poſſible
for her to come by that punctuall knowledge of hers; and
therefore vvilling to diuert her, I reſolued to deny all, requeſting
likewiſe moſt earneſtly to ſee her, that by laying
ſuch a neceſſarie obligation vpon me, ſhe might make ſure
my correſpondence, and ſecure her owne ielous ſuſpitions:
and in concluſion, though in many other Papers of hers,
ſhe ſeemed to be leſſe ſatisfied with my excuſes, yet ſince
hers, for the accompliſhing my deſire of ſeeing her, vvere
farre more, wanting a ſight of her, mine eyes were not to
be blamed, if they were bent vpon a ſubiect leſſe diſdainful
and coy: ſo that ſlackening my returne of anſwers to her

Tickets, I began to re-proſecute my amorous intents with
the ſprightly Dame of the Reuels: And deſiring nothing
more, then that ſhe might truly know my affection, and how
much the difficulty of conuerſing with her, troubled mee, I
vvas bold to requeſt that my mind might be ſignified vnto
her in a Song; and giuing her notice of the time, with her
conſent, accompanied with that friend, to whom (the night
of the Reuels) I made knowne my thoughts, about Midnight,
at the appointed time, vve went into her Street; where
hauing taken Stand right oppoſite to my Miſtriſſes Window,
the Muſicians began to touch their Strings, and one
of them to warble out a Dittie in the following Verſes, hauing
for ſubiect my impoſſible Loue.
               
                  Thou rotten Veſsell, that each furious Waue
                  Meaſur'st, with little force, as dammage great,
                  Where thy weake ribs weather and water beate,
                  Stopping thoſe open mouths that fauour craue:
               
               
                  Thou, that enforc't, the Current do'ſt diuide,
                  Fly now to Heau'n, then to Abyſſus fall:
                  Strike, now on Flats, then on high Rockes withall;
                  Caſting out bodies from each ſplitted ſide.
               
               
                  Yet happy, thou, whoſe Paſſenger ſtill liues
                  In hope of calmer Seas, and ſlacker Wind:
                  But, ay me! hapleſse, that a Loue-ſicke mind,
                  Impoſsible to cure, no calme relieues.
               
               All the while the Muſicke plaid and the Song laſted, not
onely the Windowes of Signior Bellides, but the reſt of the
whole neighbourhood were ſtucke with auditors, to heare
the Song, and many other toyes and fancies, till ſuch time

as day-breake being neere, we returned homeward, where
I remained, taking reſt vntill day was well come on, and going
after dinner to haue a reuenge for my loſſes at Primero,
to the accuſtomed meeting, the ſeruant that vſed to bring
me the Tickets from the Countrey-Dame, met mee vpon
the way, and deliuering a Paper from her Miſtriſſe, left me
to reade the enſuing Contents:
               I know not, Don Iayme, how you can excuſe your proceeding;
for though my ſlackneſſe to ſee you may ſeeme to diſcharge you, yet
that is but a poore euaſion, to matters of greater conſequence, ſuch
as the promiſed vowes of all your Papers ſent me: wherefore finding
at preſent (witneſse your laſt nights Muſicke to Signior Bellides
his daughter) your falſe dealing with me, no maruell though
my complaints (how iuſt ſoeuer) be ſhunned by your eares. But
that you may know, what you contemne in me, is not inferiour to
ought of that Dames, as well to do my ſelfe right, as to make you
ſee your owne loſſe, (though you vniuſtly deſerue the fauour) I
ſhall this night giue you leaue to ſee me. The Bearer, if you list to
expect her late at night at your owne houſe doore, ſhall conduct you
where we may ſpeake together. Heauen keepe you, and make you
acknowledge how much you owe to my affection.
               No ſooner, my Gerardo, had I read theſe laſt Lines, when
I was much more confounded, then pleaſed, with the receiued
promiſe: ſo exceeding was my trouble, to ſee how
ſmall credit was giuen to my truth, howſoeuer I determined
to obey; expecting the night, by which time my Guide
was come, who taking me by the hand, willing me alone to
follow her, (the Clocke then ſtriking newly ten) wee went
croſſing the greateſt part of the Citty, till comming to a
narrow Lane, without any ſallie at the other end, drawing
neere to certaine ruinous white Walles; when we were iuſt

vnder them, ſhe left me to expect, till ſuch time, as ſhee by
another vvay returned to giue notice to her Miſtris; and ſo
trudging apace from me, I waited the euent, vvondring as
much at the manner and contriuing of it, as vvary and armed
to preuent all hazard or inconuenience. In this confuſed
ſort, I attended a long houre at leaſt, by when I might
heare a Window not farre from the Wall open, at which
a Woman appearing; for though the darkneſſe hindred my
ſight, yet her voice made me eaſily perceiue it vvas the party
vvhich brought me thither, and ſo drawing neerer, ſhee
bade me get to the top of the broken Wall, from vvhence
they might conueniently ſpeake to me. That vvithout difficulty
I performed, and being nimbly mounted, ſhe bade
me there ſtay awhile, and ſhutting the Window I went in,
(my mind beeing now in ſuch trouble, as if vvillingly it
would haue forſaken my body) and my deſires hung on euery
the leaſt noyſe, iudging each breath of ayre to bee my
Miſtriſſes vvary ſteppe, vvhom at laſt I might heare gently
open the Window and preſent herſelfe. The Wall where
I ſtood vvas ſo high, that it well-nigh raught to the Yron
Frame of her Bay-window; and ſo, together vvith the
glimpſe of a Light in the chamber, I could quickly take notice,
that the faire creature preſent, vvas no other then the
gallant daughter of Signior Bellides; vvhich ſo vvonderſtrucke
me, that though I had bethought me ſufficiently of
vvhat I meant to ſay, yet, in reſpect the reaſons I had forged
in my breſt, were more for ſatisfying the ielous complaints
of the Countrey-Dame, then for courting the preſent
ſubiect; my tongue waxing dumb, I grew to that paſſe,
that had not the faire Dame (perceiuing my alteration) laid
hold on me, the Wall and my countenance had been much
of a complexion, but feeling my ſelfe reuiued by her ſoft
touch, recouering my loſt ſpirits, I might heare her proceed.

Why, how now, Gallant, vvhat fright is this? afraid
of a Woman? or doth my preſence make you feare the
iuſt puniſhment due to your inconſtancie? I am ſhe whom
you ſo vnkindly vſed for Signior Bellides his daughter, and
yet (obliged for the ſeruices you did her) muſt pardon greater
iniuries: I, Don Iayme, am ſhe, that in the Country and
company of Liſauro, your noble courteous behauiour won
vnto you: the ſame ſhe that enioyed your gladding conuerſation
at the Reuels; laſtly, the ſame Iſmenia, Signior
Bellides his daughter, and whilſt life ſhall laſt, maugre the
Worlds contradiction, Yours. Knowing, my beſt loued
Signior, that the inuetrate enmitie of our houſes, might
croſſe my deſignes, I deferred our meeting, expecting, till
ſome of times vnexpected ſeaſons, might (as at the preſent)
facilitate our deſires; which I truſt are now accompliſht,
ſince you are diſpoſed to loue Iſmenia, one of your Houſes
greateſt enemies. That this is true, your laſt nights Muſicke
perſwaded mee; vvhich fauour, for the paines it coſt
you, I eſteeme with equall recompence, as my determinate
reſolution hath well expreſſed by this nights meeting; the
diſpoſing of vvhich, hath not beene vvithout ſome difficulties
and no leſſe hazard. Heauen grant, my good Don Iayme,
that you acknowledge better then to the Country-Dame,
how much Iſmenia's loue and loyall affection merits; and in
ſo doing, I ſhall liue moſt happy, neither ſhall your ſelfe
complaine at all of our not mutuall correſpondence.
               And ending her diſcourſe, ſhe gaue vvay to my vnlooſened
tongue, to ſatisfie her amorous obligation: with the
beſt diſcourſe therefore my Soule could on the ſudden
frame, ſhe made knowne her gratefull and greateſt ſecrets:
laſt of all I excuſed the errour of my inconſtancie againſt the
Country-Dame, attributing it to the rare beauty, attractiue
power of Iſmenia; ſo that, the diſtaſte I before was guiltie

of, turned ſtraight into mirthfull paſtime, in vvhich wee
ſpent moſt part of that pleaſing night; at vvhich time I vnderſtood
from my Miſtris, that the reaſon of her comming
with Liſauro and Tirſo to the Country-houſe, was, to auoid
the Storme which that afternoone tooke them, as they were
going from Zaragoſa to a Village, vvhere at the ſame time
her father lay very ſicke; for whom, together with her mother,
(the fore-mentioned woman in the Fray) they went
to bring him more commodiouſly home: and that afterward
returning to the Cittie, inforced, as ſhe ſaid (but more
by her owne generous condition) by my courteſie, ſhe endeuoured
by her truſtie maid, to giue me notice of her affection.
               So that after all this (both of vs extremely ioyfull) day
comming on, ſhe quitted the Window, and I leaped from
the Wall, agreeing onely ſtill to continue our amorous
night-meetings at the ſame place. The next day paſſed on,
and night vvith my ioyfulneſſe being come, at our prefixed
houre, I vvent towards my Iſmenia's Street, and from
thence to the vſuall Stand; which, as I might now (leſſe
troubled) plainly perceiue, was the backe-ſide of Signior
Bellides his houſe, though the former night little dreaming
of any ſuch thing, I took no notice of it. Here ſtood I cloſe
expecting when the Window would open; when, about to
climbe my Wall, I might vpon a ſudden perceiue three or
foure enter the Lane, and making a ſtand in the midſt of it,
heard them cloſely whiſpering: ſo that the deſired inſtant
too for my approach, being come, I was in a double feare,
either of hauing the act (if I mounted) diſcouered, or if not,
my ſelfe: both which, and either of them might make mee
equally thereabouts ſuſpected.
               In midſt of this confuſion, the worſt that could bee, fell
out: for Iſmenia at her Window taking no notice of thoſe

men, out of her greedineſſe to ſpie, and onely gueſſing it
was I, called out, ſaying, Hiſt, why come you not, Don
Iayme, at which call, the parties in the Lane began to draw
neerer, but I (fearing leſt by comming too neere they
might know me) without a word ſpeaking, let flie at them
ſo outragiouſly, that at the very firſt encounter one of them
fell downe ſure enough; and his companions frighted with
the miſchance, inſtantly turned their backes, crying out for
helpe ſo lowd, that I durſt no longer expect the iſſue; which
was, that I had no ſooner ſlipped out of the Lane, when another
troope of men entred into it, whom afterward I vnderſtood
to haue beene all of one partie, Officers appointed
purpoſely to apprehend ſome ſuſpicious perſons thereabouts.
Conſidering then my danger, before any one
might follow, I haſtily tooke flight to my Lodging, remaining
all that night as ſad and penſatiue, as the night before
merrie and ioyfull. As ſoone as it was morning, I receiued
a Ticket from my Miſtris; in which, excuſing with her ſhallow
experience, the inconſiderate neglect, cauſe of our diſquiet,
ſhe concluded, aduertizing me, how fitting it was for
the ſecuritie of our loues, to deferre priuate meetings, in
reſpect of the carefull watch which was kept, as well, as
without doores, in her houſe, being it was publikely reported,
that an Officer of Iuſtice was ſlaine in the night-time,
for no more then hauing taken ſome notice of a Gentleman,
that ſpoke to ſome-body at her Window.
               I well perceiued the inconuenience with Iſmenia's reaſon,
and how important therefore it was for me to follow
her aduice, ſince the danger, (my pretenſion to her kindred
knowne) was no leſſe hazzardous then irremediable:
and though the loſſe of her ſight tormented me to the very
ſoule; yet, the feare of her ruine, more then mine own,
kept my affection at diſtance, and the better to diſſemble

the matter, I abſented my ſelfe from Zaragoſa. Iſmenia ſatisfied
with my intent, by her leaue, I tooke a iourney to a
towne of mine, your ſelfe at that time and Iacinta going
along with mee; the accident in our iourney falling out,
which enforced you to take her out of the Nunnery,
where by my order ſhe was left, and likewiſe of loſing our
ſelues in the darke night, I arriued by morning at my own
home; and hauing cauſed all poſsible ſearch to be vſed after
you, hearing no newes, I endeuoured to pacifie matters
in the Nunnery, which I might eaſily doe, conſidering
the neereneſſe of alliance betweene the Abbeſſe and my
ſelfe; who, vnwilling to bring me into danger, was contented
to diſſemble the outrage.
               At this time (though farre off from my Miſtris) yet ſtill
wee held correſpondence by meanes of my truſty friends,
whom (as you heard) I made priuy to my ſecret: and ſo,
Iſmenia's Maid deliuering her Miſtreſſes Letters into his
hands, they came ſafely to mine. But at laſt my heart vnable
to ſupport longer abſence, at two moneths end, I returned
to Zaragoſa, and there to my former cares. Iſmenia ſoone
knew of my arriuall; for (to deale truely) no leſſe was I ſollicited
by her Letters and perſwaſions, then mine owne ardent
deſires; and ſo the enſuing night, in company of Don
Martin de Vrrea (this being my friends name) I went to the
vſuall place; where I remained in louing conuerſation with
my Miſtris, till towards morning, and thus many a night
after continued our affections: which at laſt grew to
that height of increaſe, that neither of vs, powerfull to reſiſt
their inflaming effects, vve at length determined to giue a
ioyfull conſummation to our paſſions. And Iſmenia vanquiſhed
by my entreaties for the appointed night, taking
firſt Heauen and her true ſeruant to vvitneſſe, of my hand
and faithfull vow to be her Spouſe; ſhe conſented I ſhould

by the window enter her Chamber, though for ſome neceſſary
reſpects, the reward of my labours vvas deferred till
the next night: from vvhich time I vvas able to take no
reſt at all, but toiling vp and downe from one place to another,
at all, but toiling vp and downe from one place to another,
thought euery minute a long Age, till the vviſhed moment
approached; ſo that, vvhat ſhould haue beene my
greateſt ioy, bred me greater diſquiet, in vvhich I paſſed the
greateſt part of the day, till viſited by my friend Don Martin,
to the intent that he might not diſcouer my vveakneſſe,
I forced my ſelfe to as much cheerefulneſſe as I could
(which being forced, and I but counterfetly diſſembling
my inward trouble) he might vvell perceiue my alteration.
This he made knowne vnto me, and vvithall requeſted to
know the cauſe of my diſcontent: vvhereupon, I, that had
formerly truſted him vvith my boſomes greateſt ſecrets,
thought it no raritie now to diſcouer the preſent; and therfore
made knowne vnto him (vvould God I had dyed firſt)
our agreement: and indeed, Gerardo; though (as then) I
tooke not the notice I ought to haue done of his lookes, by
vvhat afterward hapned (too late to bee helped) I called to
minde, how Don Martin became ſuddenly ſad, as ſoone as
euer I had made knowne vnto him the cauſe of my vnquietneſſe,
but mine eyes were ſo blinded from his paſſion, that
they neuer ſo much as marked the leaſt part of it, nor
(though they had) might I haue iudged it to redound to my
preiudice.
               Laſtly, I requeſted to haue his company (as I was wont)
which he eaſily agreed to; and ſo (faining a leaue to prepare
himſelf) home he vvent; and within a few houres after,
when it was time, came backe againe to mee: and before
we went out, he was deſirous we ſhould change Cloakes, by
which meanes (ſaid hee) vvee ſhall the better diſguize our
ſelues: in this manner then comming to the lane and place

(being ſomewhat late) I might perceiue that Iſmenia expected;
ſo that with my friends helpe I got ſpeedily vpon the
wall, from whence, about to haue climbed to the window,
I no ſooner went about it, when, two fellowes newly ruſhed
into the Lane, beganne haſtily to ſet vpon Don Martin,
vvith vvhom (though to my ſeeming by him valiantly reſiſted)
they began ſuch a bickering, as (the night you vvot of)
hapned vnto me; but, ſuſpecting as then no other, then that
we were laid wait for, I leapt to the ground, and ſeconding
Don Martin, we eaſily droue them out of the Lane, and I,
deſiring no more then to ſet my Contrary from thence, ſeeing
him begin to turne tayle, following ſomewhat hard to
remoue him a good way from my Miſtreſſes danger, after I
had effected my deſire, ſomewhat weary and breathleſſe, I
returned againe to my ſtand, where finding no Don Martin,
nor any ſign of the paſt skirmiſh, thinking the ſame chance
had happened to him, that to me; meaning not to expect
him longer, I ventured once againe to the top of the wall,
to effect my deſires: but hauing found the window cloſe
ſhut, thinking verily the fray and claſhing of our ſwords, for
more ſecurity had cauſed it, I turned backe againe, though,
ſo perplexed with the vnlookt for accident, that, I could willingly
haue ſacrificed my ſelfe.
               In all that enſuing night, I could not affoord my diſtracted
minde one minutes reſt, whoſe morning comfort it fits,
you next heare. About ten of the clocke the next morning,
my Iſmenia's Wench, as frollicke as 'twas poſſible,
comes into my Chamber, and giuing me a Paper from her
Miſtreſſe, asked me, if I were more liuely and leſſe maidenly
then ouer-night? I vnderſtood not her meaning, and therefore
making no direct reply, onely demanded, whether
we had been perceiued? who anſwered, Not. At laſt, ſomewhat
more contented, I diſpatcht her; but no longer laſted

this contentedneſſe with me, then mine eyes were running
ouer theſe Lines.
               As in all my life I neuer had happier night, ſo, my delight neuer
paid greater abatement; for, as wel your ſtrange ſilence made
my ſoule ſorrowfull, as the danger alſo in which I firſt ſaw you: I
am yet fearefull, not knowing whether yeu arriued ſafely at your
lodging, which doth mortally afflict me; and therefore, loued
Spouſe, I beſeech you, faile not to ſee me this night, ſince you are
now obliged to know, how ill I ſhall paſſe the tedious minutes,
without re-enioying your deſired preſence.
               Euen yet, Gerardo, the affrightment of theſe Lines ſtill
haunts me; which, hauing as then ſundry times read ouer,
and comparing the Wenches former queſtions with them,
I could not tell what to imagine: but knowing that, till I
ſpoke with Iſmenia, my labour was vain, I was forced to patience,
and expectation of nights approach, by when and
before my accuſtomed houre, I went to Don Martin his
lodging, aſwell with purpoſe to haue him along with mee,
as to know alſo how he had ſped the laſt night: but, though
I bounced and often called at his doore, no anſwere was
made me, which cauſed me to goe alone; and comming to
the place, vp I got, where Iſmenia expected me.
               Me thought as then, deare friend, my diſ-ioynted lim
                     •
                  
were ſhattered from my bodie; and, that my afflicted
heart oppreſt with ſome future miſchiefe, leaping within
me, began to rent and teare: in fine, neuer ſuch a ſtupid
ſadneſſe poſſeſt mans faculties, though at the preſent I enioyed
all the happineſſe I could in this world deſire.
               
                  Iſmenia ſoone tooke notice of my trouble, though no
other light was by, then what might haue been ſent from
her ſparkling eyes; and ſo, with equall aſtoniſhment, and

ſome few ſighes, ſhe ſaid: Is it poſsible, Don Iayme, that
your extraordinary ſadneſſe thus ſhould leſſen our ioyes?
laſt night you would not haue me ſo much as ſee you, neither
could I obtaine an amorous word from you, in ſtead
of many, that one who ſo freely deliuered vp the poſſeſsion
of her ſelfe, might haue expected: and now you proceed
againe with the ſame ſtrangeneſſe: for Heauens loue,
loued Sir, leaue this irkeſomneſſe, the occaſion of which I
am wholly ignorant of, at leaſt hide it not from me, ſince
fit it is, that your Iſmenia ſhould now bee partaker both of
your good and bad.
               What griefe (thinke you) could here bee equall to that
my ſoule indur'd, hearing ſuch bitter, vn-imagined misfortune?
What tongue or words might expreſſe the raging
torment of my griefe-ſtrucke heart; ſeeing Iſmenia
with ſuch ſimplicitie to treat of my weightieſt lifes affaires?
But, for all this, not bending a iot vnder my paſsion,
I reſolued to try whether ſhe ieſted; and after, perceiuing
her to be terribly altred, when I denied my hauing
been at all with her the night before, knowing then plainly
that there had been ſome miſtake, and that ſome other
had been my ſubſtitute, ſo powerfull was the anguiſh of
my heart, that, my ſpirits failing, I ſwouned in Iſmenia's
armes: who, preſently cauſing her Maid to bring a light,
and perceiuing in my loſt colour the truth of her ill fortune,
not any way ſuſpecting my affection, which ſhe euer
held to be vnfained, ſhe began by degrees to feare ſhe had
been beguiled, and with one experiment was quickly ſatisfied
that ſhe was: for remembring her ſelfe at that inſtant,
of a little Relicke and Purſe, which was found vnder
her Pillow, ſhe knew it was left by him that poſſeſſed the
place and her honour; within the Purſe alſo there was a
little Booke with Pictures, in whoſe firſt leafe the Owners

name, the falſe Don Martin was written: which her Maid
no ſooner heard, when roaring out, and turning to the afflicted
Iſmenia, and me that had now my ſences better about
mee, ſhe ſaid:
               You need not, Maſter and Miſtreſſe, trouble your imaginations
longer, or ſearch for farther euidence of the
truth: for vndoutedly the treacherous Author of this villanie,
is Don Martin; which, heauen knowes, I might (beaſt
that I vvas) haue helped, if the feare of ſome greater misfortune
had not forced me to ſilence; howſoeuer, I could neuer
be perſwaded, that his baſe thoughts would euer haue
aimed at ſuch an end: Know therefore, vvorthy Sir, that,
as ſoone as you had abſented your ſelfe from this Citie, leauing
(for better conuenience) your conueyance of Letters
to the ſaid party, as ſoone as I had carried my Miſtreſſes firſt
vnto him, after ſome ſpeech, he broke at laſt with mee, ſaying,
My Miſtris was much deceiued in affecting you, to
thinke to receiue the like recompence, for that your returne
of loue was not onely contrarie, but that, by your diſſembling,
you ſought too to reuenge the enmitie of your houſes
vpon her honour: and that (to confirme this to bee ſo)
vnmindfull of her, hauing violently ſtolne a certaine Dame
from a Nunnery, you liued laſciuiouſly with her at your
owne home. This he told me, but ſo weakely hiding his
owne paſſion, that I well enough gheſſed at the falſhood,
by perceiuing the Owners infirmitie: his cares ended not
ſo, but with all opportunities hee returned to the former
theame, declaring himſelfe at laſt ſo far as to offer me ſome
gifts of value, if I would make knowne his affection to my
Miſtris, inſiſting alſo to haue me perſwade her (how treacherouſly
you dealt with her) and the aime and intent of
your fained affection: but, the loue I euer bore to your
noble proceeding, & the loyall ſeruice I owe to my Miſtris,

made me not onely ſhut mine eares to ſuch baſe offers, but
deſire her to ſollicite your ſpeedy returne: which Don Martin
no ſooner heard, and that you would bee backe, when,
with a falſe ſmiling countenance he made me beleeue, that
all his former endeuours were onely to try my fidelitie, as
well as my Miſtreſſes conſtancie; and though I perceiued,
this was, but (like the Lapwing) crying out in the falſe
place, yet I durſt not make it knowne to my Miſtris, as
thinking, that if ſhe ſhould diſcouer it to you, there muſt
needs be ſome breach betwixt your ſelfe and Don Martin,
which might in the end light heauily vpon me, to my Miſtris
and her friends diſhonours.
               This (though well pondered) ſilence, is that, which hath
wrong'd you both; and if the honeſt end for which it was
meant, cannot free the Owner from puniſhment; Loe,
here's the party before you, inflict what reuenge on her
you pleaſe.
               Thus ending, and all of vs falling into an exact conſideration
of each circumſtance in this wofull misfortune; as
firſt, how vnſeaſonably Don Martin vrged our exchanging
Clokes, next the beeing ſet vpon by thoſe fellowes iuſt at
the inſtant when I was to get to the window, and my Contraries
eaſie retiring, comparing alſo the time that my
falſe friend had to get into Iſmenia's Chamber, his ſilence
all the while hee was with her, with his commanding the
lights to be firſt remooued, and laſtly his feare and fright;
by all theſe wee not onely knew Don Martin to bee the Actor
of the Villany, but the Author of the fray alſo, plotting
it with ſome friends or ſeruants of his, in the manner
related, that whilſt I ſhould hazzard my ſelfe in his defence,
he might effect his treacherous purpoſe: all theſe
ſtrong preſumptions confirming poore Iſmenia, no humane
thoughts can conceiue her infinite teares, equall ſighes,

hearts oppreſsion, ſad groanes, and frequent diſmaying.
Many a dead traunce ſhee had in my armes, and as often
certainly had I ſeconded her, if the raging deſire of reuenge
had not couragiouſly ſtrengthened me. In fine, conſidering
that for my ſake ſhee had ſuffered ſo great an iniurie,
and how much alſo I was in point of honour obliged to
mine owne ſatisfaction, giuing her the beſt comfort that
griefe would permit, with a louing embrace I tooke leaue,
promiſing her faithfully not to bee at quiet, till her honour
were fully ſatisfied, if not reſtored.
               The next morning in the Torment you may well ſuppoſe,
I priuily lay in wait for my treacherous friend: but after
I had long and to ſmall purpoſe watched, I vnderſtood,
that the day before, he was ridden out of towne; ſo that
now it appeared plainely, that hauing miſſed his Purſe,
and knowing by it his villany muſt needs bee diſcouered,
his guilt made him fly, as hauing neither heart nor face
to ſhew himſelfe to a friend whom hee had ſo baſely
wronged.
               This abſence of his ſomewhat troubled me, as well, in retarding
my reuenge, as being ignorant of his abode: but
iuſt Heauen prouoked by his wickedneſſe, was pleaſed, by
the meanes (that hee thought was his ſecureſt) to make
knowne vnto me where he reſided; putting into my minde
to goe to the Poſt-houſe, where hauing ſundry times looked
ouer the Letters from all parts, at laſt I lighted vpon a
ſuperſcription to a kinſman of his, which I broke open, and
reading it, perceiued it came from mine enemy who wrote
from Oran in Barbary, requeſting his kinſman to take order
for the ſending certaine moneyes and trunkes of apparell.
This ioyfull newes I made knowne to Iſmenia, and taking a
ſpeedy leaue, addreſſed my ſelfe for Oran, determined, if I
could, to kill mine enemie; and about ſome ſixe dayes agoe

I arriued in a ſmall Barke at the Port of Maſſalquibir,
where, fearing to be diſcouered, I came not till yeſterday
abroad, informing my ſelfe as diligently as I could from
one of the Souldiours of the Fort, whether one Don Martin
de Vrrea were not in the Citie.
               As ſoone as the fellow had reſolued me he was, giuing
him ſome pieces of Siluer to drinke, that hee might the
more willingly take ſome paines for me, I deſired him to
let Don Martin know, that in the Barke (which I fained to
be mine) there came certain Trunkes directed to him from
Zaragoſa, for which he muſt of neceſſitie come a-boord to
fetch them that night, becauſe with the firſt faire vvinde
the Barke was to ſet ſayle for Spaine. All which the glad
Souldier willingly beleeued; and ſo promiſing to himſelfe
a new reward for his good tidings, he effected my will (as
by the ſucceſſe here you haue ſeene:) for before Sunne-ſet
my Meſſenger returned with Don Martins anſwere, that
he was preparing to come, only ſtayd to prouide himſelfe
of a Horſe, and deſired mee therefore to expect him: for,
though it were late firſt, hee would not faile to fetch his
Trunkes that night away.
               So leauing my Souldier, and prouiding my ſelfe of a
reaſonable good Horſe I bought of a Moore (of thoſe that
peaceably traffike amongſt vs) and well inſtructed in the
vvay to the Citie, I betooke me to my fortune: and hauing
(as I ſuppoſed) rode on the better halfe of the way, and
expected vnder theſe Rockes before vs ſome two or three
houres, hearing none paſſe by, I began to grow doubtfull
of the Souldiers diligence, and hopeleſſe of any good ſucceſſe,
was ready to haue gone backe againe: but in the
midſt of theſe imaginations, I might heare a horſes trampling
not farre from me, and by and by perceiued a horſeman
comming ſomewhat towards me, and (as that Country

manner is) armed as I was, who comming cloſe vp to
me, ſaluting mee, asked whether I trauelled towards the
Citie or the Port. My heart betwixt trouble and ioy was
ready to haue burſt within me; and 'twas maruell, hauing
knowne the Traitor by his voice, I affoorded him any other
anſwere then with my Launce: but though his treacherie
deſerued no courteſie, I, not knowing how to bee
baſe, yeelded him this reply; Thy ſelfe, falſe Don Martin,
art the Port and Hauen to which I goe, at which the ſatisfaction
of my reuenge muſt ſafely land; and to no other
am I bound; and therefore ſpeedily defend thy ſelfe; for,
know, I haue not croſſed the ſtormie Seas, to returne to
the vvronged Iſmenia, with leſſe then thy lifes reuenge. I
ſuppoſe, my Contrary vvas not altogether pleaſed with
this note: from whom, though I receiued diuers replyes,
yet aſſured of his wickedneſſe, my angry ſpirit could not
deferre a vvrathfull execution, remitting to my hand the
iuſt Reuenge, which Heauen hath pleaſed I ſhould take,
before ſuch witneſſes as your ſelfe, and your valorous companions.
Of Iſmenia's goodneſſe as confident am I, as ſatisfied
with the deſeru'd chaſtiſement of her wrong, which
I purpoſe to ſolder (ſince with honour I now may) by accompliſhing
my wedlocke vow. This, Gerardo, is my
intent, this reſolution carries me for Spaine, more ioyfull
then vvhen I left my Country, for I ſhall not onely comply
vvith my loues obligation, but with a greater, my
ſoules.
               Thus farre held on the generous Aragonian his Relation,
and (that ceaſing) Gerardo began with his thankes, no leſſe
ioyfull for the ſucceſſe, then approuing Don Iayme's neceſſarie
reuenge; hee applauded his laudible and noble purpoſe
alſo: and ſo, within a few houres after, they put ſafely
into the ancient and famous Port of Cartagena, vvhere, to

the addition of Gerardo's ioy, they found the Ship, vvhich
vvith Niſe and Iacinta he thought was loſt: wherefore, deſirous
to heare further newes, the firſt thing he did (gotten
on ſhore) vvas to ſeeke the Maſter of her; whom hee ſoone
found out, vvho vvondring extremely to behold Gerardo,
hauing giuen him for a dead man, informed him of all that
had paſſed euen to that very inſtant; how that after they
vvere parted, the Ship vnable to hold her courſe for Oran,
vvas forced backe to Cartagena; from vvhence, the faire
Niſe verily perſwaded, that Gerardo vvas caſt away, bitterly
bewailing her misfortune, accompanied by her ſeruants,
meant to returne to Ceſarina; and that Iacinta with her
Chriſtian woman too, returned towards Caſtile, but he knew
not to what place there they vvould go.
               This information (ſauing the ſorrow of thoſe Dames
for him) in another reſpect much ioyed him, as knowing
for certaine they had ſafely eſcaped the dangerous ſtorme
in which he left them; and imagining that Iacinta (according
to her purpoſe) was gone towards Caſtile, deſirous to
make good his promiſe to her, he determined to ſeeke her
out; and though he ſhould miſſe of her, at leaſt he might be
in his way to his Mother and Brother Leoncio, to vvhom he
reſolued to make knowne his laſt mind, vvhich vvas: To repay
vvith vvorthie recompence the daintie Niſe's firme and
loyall affection: and making Don Iayme acquainted vvith
this reſolution, they both a-freſh exchanging promiſes and
vowes of loue and affection, with an imbrace tooke leaue
of each other, as alſo of the reſt of the captiue Chriſtians:
the Aragonian going towards Zaragoſa, and our determinate
Gentleman making what haſte hee could, for Caſtile.
The third day of his trauell hee was forced to lie ſome ſixe
Leagues ſhort of the Imperiall Cittie of Toledo, at a Venta,
that is, a lone Inne vpon the way; where hauing alighted, (in

ſtead of a better Lodging) he was carried into an vgly cloſe
dog-hole, where he was forced to bee contented, and ſo reſolued
to lie in his Clothes, that hee might the ſooner bee
vpon his way, and the earlier in the morning enter the City
of Toledo. His hard riding exceedingly wearied him, ſo
that going ſupperleſſe to bed, before it grew thorow darke,
he was well entred into his firſt ſleepe; from which, within
a few houres after, the ſollicitous care of his iourney awoke
him, together with the Cockes crowing, which vn-tuneable
Muſicke was his Alarum, and made him iudge the time to
be about midnight; wherefore thinking it was too ſoone to
ſtirre out of the houſe, hee ſettled himſelfe once againe to
reſt: but his confuſed thoughts would ſcarce allow him a
winke, keeping him in this manner ſo long waking, till
neere his beds head he might heare ſome talking; ſo that
with the ſuddenneſſe, and thinking it to haue beene in his
Chamber, hee inſtantly roſe vp, and groping about the
doore, feeling that to be ſhut, he returned with more quiet
to his bed; where hearing the noyſe againe, hearkening
more calmely to it, he might eaſily diſtinguiſh it to bee in
the next roome, diuided onely by ſome few boords, and an
old painted-cloth from his; thorow which, by the glimpſe
of a candle he might perceiue two men, who appeared to
him earneſtly contending: for thus he might heare the one
ſay to the other, In all the time of our acquaintance I neuer
knew thee ſo faint-hearted as now, which I am aſhamed of,
and ſorry theſe gheſts came to thy houſe; for any where elſe
I had ſped better, and not loſt ſo good a bootie.
               To this, Gerardo might heare the other, whom hee ſaw
to be the Inne-keeper himſelfe, thus reply: Looke you, Signior
Iſaguirre, 'tis not faint-heartedneſſe which you ſee in
me at preſent; for had I euer beene ſo, I could neuer haue
thriued ſo well, as to be reputed reaſonable wealthie, and

ſtill to maintaine my houſe and family by the meanes chiefly
you know; and therefore you may thinke there is more
in it then ſo: theſe Gheſts (I much doubt) whether they
be vvorth our venturing on, for I ſuppoſe they haue but little
money, ſince they ſupped ſo poorely, and beſides, offered
to abate of their reckening: why then belike (quoth Iſaguirre)
you haue forgot what I told you, or you beleeue it
not. I ſay againe vnto you, that vvith theſe eyes (though
warily) I beheld very good Iewels of theirs, which they
brought on ſhore vvith them at Cartagena, and euer ſince I
haue followed them to an inch I am ſure; and therefore ſince
time hath offered vs a fit occaſion, vvee may this one time
grow both of vs rich: and beſides, to ſaue vs harmeleſſe,
look you, there is another Gheſt in the next roome; there's
no more to be done, but conuey ſomething of theirs thorow
the cloth and boords into his Chamber, and vve ſhall
eaſily make him thought to haue beene the authour of our
handi-worke; your ſelfe and I, with our people, vvitneſſing
what vve pleaſe.
               With this diuelliſh reſolution finiſhing his diſcourſe,
mine Oaſt vvas vanquiſhed; and ſo, not deferring the leaſt
minute their miſchieuous purpoſe, one of them taking in
his hand the Light, both vaniſhed out of Gerardo's ſight,
leauing him in the ſtrangeſt confuſion that might be, conſidering
the danger vvhich on euery ſide encompaſſed him:
but reſoluing vvith himſelfe, that the leſſer (though more
hazardous) of the two, vvas to hinder their villanous enterprize,
he ſtraight moſt couragiouſly diſpoſed himſelfe to
ſet vpon them: and ſo taking his Piſtoll charged, and his
ſword in his right hand, hee ſtept out of his Chamber, iuſt
as theſe Rogues vvere lifting a doore at the further end of
the entry off the hindges, where from within he might alſo
heare a terrible ſcrieking and noiſe (as hee gueſſed) of women:

wherupon the good Gentleman, without delay, clapt
in to the couple, who void of cowardize, (which ſuch people
are commonly accuſtomed to) like rauenous beaſts, ſeeing
their trecherie diſcouered, ſought to haue clozed with
him, but Gerardo had too much aduantage ouer them, aſwel
in reſpect of his owne perſonall valour, as hauing alſo the
better Armes: and ſo, diſcharging his Piſtoll at one of
them, the bullet of it quickly diſcouered the certainty of the
hurt; for hauing ſtrucke the partie in the right arme, his
ſword fell from him, and himſelfe likewiſe with the griefe,
tumbled to the ground, yet at that time his companion
vnluckily raught Gerardo a wound, and cut him ouer the
forehead; which he feeling, his fury had ſoone guided him
to a reuenge vpon his Contrarie, had the Light beene more
propitious to his indignation; which (he that ſtood againſt
Gerardo, hauing on purpoſe or accidentally troden vnder
foot) was extinguiſhed, and ſo the darke preuented his puniſhment,
at the inſtant, that with much knocking and noiſe
ſome company at the doore called to bee let in. The clamors
within doores, what with the wounded parties howling,
the Inne-keepers roaring, the womens wailing, and
the whole houſes affrightment, were ſo terribly outragious,
that neither the one nor other could diſtinctly be heard: till
ſuch time as he that had beene Piſtol-ſhot taking ſome courage,
(which he might the better do, in reſpect Gerardo in
the darke retired further from him) groping about the
doore, and putting backe the Bolt, he ſtraight-way opened
it; and ſeeing fiue or ſixe perſons (thoſe that called) without,
he cried out to them not to enter, for feare of a deſperate
theefe within: whom he and the Inne-keeper (he ſayd)
hauing reſiſted to keepe him from robbing two women
that lay there, he ſet vpon them, and diſcharging a Piſtoll,
wounded him pittifully in the arme: ſo that ſome of the

companie compaſſionate towards the party, ſought to help
him; and the reſt thought fit to beſet the houſe, and not to
enter, that ſo the theefe within might not eſcape.
               All this while, they within kept vvary ſilence, for Gerardo
feeling himſelfe vvounded, and knowing not how to be
reuenged, was onely carefull in the darke to ſtop his wound
cloſe, to keepe it from too much bleeding. And honeſt,
mine Oaſt, for feare of another bickering, ſquatting downe
as cloſe as he could, and as round together as a third-bottome,
ſtirring neither legge nor arme, vvas ſettled vnder
the Table; and the poore vvomen that firſt cried out, knowing
their good or bad fortune depended vpon the dayes approach,
vvith vviſhes and prayers expecting it, had hidde
themſelues in ſeuerall places. They without, thought it no
whit ſecure for them to runne into darkneſſe, nor in the behalfe
of ſtrangers, to vndergo a certaine danger; and therefore
both the one and the other waited for day, and Sunriſe;
whoſe rayes not long after crowning the Mountaine
toppes, (all being now viſible) the falſe Inne-keeper came
leaping to the doore, crying, Theeues, theeues! whereuppon
the Trauellers hauing got ſight of Gerardo, called out
to him to yeeld; and by this too, the fearefull women alſo
were gotten out with their noiſe, the whole houſe appearing
to be rather an inchanted Manſion, then receptacle for
Gheſts.
               The good Gerardo, with this roguerie of the Inne-keeper
and his companions, was as much afflicted, as doubtful
how to behaue himſelfe, his noble mind hauing neuer before
beene plunged into ſo diſgracefull an accident, but referring
the ſucceſſe of all to his innocencie, and relying altogether
vpon heauens prouidence, he determined to ſtand
foorth; and being come to the dores threſhold, was ſcarce
ready to haue begun his ſatisfaction to thoſe that incompaſſed

him, when in the midſt of them hee might perceiue
his brother Leoncio, whoſe vnexpected ſight ſo amazed him,
that (not knowing what he did) his ſword and Piſtoll dropt
from him, which no ſooner happened, but the Inne-keeper
and the reſt thinking that to be a ſigne of yeelding, clozed
with him; ſome laying ſure hold, and others ſeeking for
Cords to binde him withall; and this, with ſuch outcries
and balling, that though Gerardo cryed out vnto them, he
was Leoncio's brother, he could not be heard, leſſe knowne,
by reaſon his face was all ſtained with the blood that ranne
from his wound; till Leoncio himſelfe taking more carefull
notice of thoſe loued Eccho's of his brothers voice, which
pierc't his very heart; cauſing alſo ſome that laid hands on
him to ſtand off, (though all bloudy and disfigured) hee
foorthwith knew him, and with incredible aſtoniſhment,
and ioyfull teares embracing him, thought hee ſhould neuer
enough claſpe him in his armes, breeding much amazement
in all the beholders.
               
                  Leoncio's ſeruants were euen madde with ioy, when they
ſaw the ſo-much-bewailed Captiue now returned: and the
wretched Women hearing what paſſed, rendring due
thankes to Heauen, for beeing freed from their great danger,
drying vp the remainders of their former ſorrowes,
went out to ſhew themſelues; and (though clad in ſtrange
array) no ſooner were they ſeene by the two Brothers, when
Leoncio firſt knew Iacinta's face, and Gerardo both of them;
for the other was the Captiue that acccompanied her from
Argiers.
               
               The afflicted Dame was ſo troubled at Gerardo's ſight,
that had it beene in the dead time of night, it might (poſſibly)
haue ſtrucken her dead: for perſwaded (as you heard)
that he was caſt away, at ſuch a time, her amazed ſences
muſt needes haue failed her, ſince euen Leoncio with her

ſight in broad day-light (for all his courage) was aſtonied,
as if he had beheld ſome apparition, till Gerardo awoke his
confuſion, vvho amorouſly embracing her, ſatisfied his
brother.
               The next buſineſſe vvas to hearken after mine Oaſt and
his friend, but their care of themſelues, ſaued the others a
labour; for no ſooner ſaw they this change, and heard the
name of Brother paſſe to and fro, vvhen they ſhifted themſelues
away: and Gerardo now vnderſtanding from his brother,
that the cauſe of his iourney vvas onely to haue carried
Monies to Valencia for his ranſome, (there beeing no
need of his paſſing further) they returned all together ioyfully
toward Madrid vvith the faire Iacinta vvhom they had
along vvith them.
               They thought it not fit to ſurprize their mother with Gerardo's
vnexpected ſight; and ſo they commanded a ſeruant
to goe before to prepare her firſt by degrees vnto it: letting
her know, they vvere faire and ſoftly vpon their way towards
her, ſome two dayes iourneys behind: in which time
Gerardo giuing his brother particular notice of all that befel
him in his captiuity; Leoncio alſo quitted his Relation, by giuing
him to vnderſtand what paſſed at Granada in his abſence,
and that which was of moſt importance and greateſt
griefe to him, his friend Arſenio's death, Heauen pleaſing
to remooue him from earth, before the arriuall of his deſired,
deſerued liberty: and alſo the ſentence of Violante's
Louer the new Leandro, whom, after a tedious impriſonment,
the incenſed Iudges at laſt ſentenced to end his life
in our Kings ſeruice at the Garriſon of Larache. This newes,
eſpecially that of Arſenio, to ſaue his hearts ſorrow, hee
could willingly haue wiſhed to be ſpared: but this diſcomfort
of his was quickly ſweetned with the ſight of his moſt
louing Mother, to whoſe preſence the ſame day they arriued.

Here the whole company reſted ſome little time,
before any mention was had of Iacinta's affaires, vvhom
(knowing that by her meanes Gerardo obtained his freedome)
the Mother as louingly entertained as her ſonne, and
(ignorant of their firſt more illicite acquaintance) ſhe complied
with her iuſt obligation, till time paſſing away, the
faire Dame carefull of her owne buſineſſe, by good aduice
conſidering that, giuing her Parents or friends notice of
her abode, and her husband too liuing, her life and honour
might be endangered, deſiſting from that, ſhee dedicated
the reſt of her daies to a religious retirement; to vvhich,
without any help, but of the Iewels brought vvith her from
Argiers, ſhe might eaſily attaine, hauing not only in them
enough to make vp her owne portion for the Nunnerie, but
for others alſo as vvell borne, and of as good quality as her
ſelfe: and ſo, making Leoncio and Gerardo priuy to her intent,
they vnanimouſly approued it, onely were a little troubled
for the place, vvhich at length they agreed ſhould be
at a Monaſterie in a Village, not paſſing ſixe Leagues from
the Court; vvhich being thus neceſſarily reſolued on, and
all things fitting prouided, taking Iacinta, the Captiue that
would neuer forſake her, and another poore maid that Gerardo's
Mother recommended to her, along vvith them,
they accompanied her till ſuch time as ſhee was admitted
and ſettled in the Nunnerie, where after ſo many ſtrange
and different ſucceſſes of her life, in ſingular abſtinence, and
auſtereneſſe of deuotion ſhe to this day remaines.
               This then to Leoncio's ioy, and Gerardo's comfort happily
effected, home they went, and beeing now at full leiſure,
treated about the particular of moſt conſequence, touching
the faire and diſcreet Niſe, whoſe firme and conſtant
thoughts maturely waighed by Gerardo, and the new flames
of his old Loues remembrance breaking out, ſollicited his

care ſo much, that at laſt hee reſolued to recompence her
affection, by beſtowing himſelfe vpon her: and ſo communicating
the buſineſſe with the reſt of his friends and
kinſmen, accompanied (to their good liking) by them and
his Brother, he purpoſed to ſet forward to Ceſarina, where
he doubted not, but (as the Pilot told him) to finde his
Niſe: ſo, fitting all things for a iourney, he began the ſame,
onely for Deuotions ſake meant to take the famous Monaſterie
of Guadalupe in his way, which was indeede the
ſhorter, ſaue that it was not ſo full of good Townes and
Innes as the other more vſuall; which defect was well enough
ſupplide by their owne mirth, and varietie of company.
Gerardo had a purpoſe, that Niſe's ioy might bee
the more complete, to take her vn-awares, that (ſuppoſing
him long before dead, ſeeing him now againe beyond
all hope or expectation) her affectionate content muſt
neceſſarily be augmented; and therefore hee would not
that any notice ſhould bee carried to her before they all
arriued.
               The ſharpeſt of Winter was at this time quite paſt,
though in the beginning of March, it ſeemed to bee retrograde:
for the tender ſprigs and graſſe vvere couered with
hoare froſt, as in Ianuary, and the ſtaring Mountaine Tops
with condenſed ſnow; ſo that by the fourth day of their
iourney, all the Gentlemen, wearied and toiled out, with
Raine, Snow, and other diſcommodities in the midſt of
thoſe wilde Mountaines of Guadalupe, deſired (the euening
drawing on) to reſt themſelues at the neereſt lodging they
could come at; and to this purpoſe willed their Muletiers
to guide them to a knowne Inne in that way, called, The
Mary Magdalen; but the poore fellowes were ſo wet and
weary, that, though they laboured what they could, to bring
their Maſters thither, yet night and darkneſſe ouer-taking

them, they loſt their way, and the horſemen had much adoe
to keepe themſelues from tumbling headlong: ſo ſteepy are
the Cliffes and dangerous precipices of thoſe Mountaines.
All of them well perceiued the misfortune, and fearing yet
ſome greater, if they ſhould all night long remaine thus to
the inclemencie of the weather; conſidering their danger,
they trooped together, till, at length, when they leaſt
thought of it, not knowing how or which vvay, they were
gotten to the foote of the Mountaine; and being now in a
Valley neere certaine mudde walles, that ioyned (as they
might gheſſe) to a houſe: drawing neerer to it, they might
perceiue it had ſome cloſe entries on euery ſide; ſo, thinking
they had met with no bad ſhelter, all of them alighted.
And Gerardo ſuppoſing there wanted not ſome inhabitant
there, who, taking pitie vpon their diſtreſſe, might yet affoord
them a better welcome; about to knocke at the gate,
going as neere as he could, hee might by the manner of the
building (hauing ſome ſmall glimpſe of it) perceiue it to be
a Hermitage; whereupon, forſaking his intent of knocking,
as (perſwaded that in ſo deſart a place there could bee no
body to open to them) he turned back to the company. But
he vvas deceiued in his diſtruſt: for no ſooner was he beginning
to vtter his minde, vvhen, perceiuing the Hermitage
doore open, they might alſo ſee a venerable ancient
man vvith a light in his hand come out, whoſe long ſiluer
Lockes, gray beard, as well as his Religious habit, moued
the by-ſtanders vvith a kinde of deuout reſpect to draw
neere.
               The good old Father vvondred at the raritie, though,
with gentle phraſe he ſaluted them, and cheerefully demanded
the cauſe of their vnſeaſonable trauelling thorow thoſe
vncouth parts: of vvhich being by Gerardo ſufficiently ſatisfied,
and of the neceſſitie they were driuen to, with moſt

charitable entrailes he offred them his Cell for a Harbour:
where all of them entring, more ſpeedily then from his
vveake Age might haue beene expected, hee made them a
reaſonable good fire, with whoſe warmth (which they eſteemed
as an extraordinary dainty) they by little and little
dryed themſelues; and they that had beene before almoſt
frozen vvith cold, and ſicke with wet, were now newly reuiued;
and making ready their ſupper (which was the Relikes
of ſome dinner meates that their ſeruants carried in
their Wallets) together with ſome little fruit the old man
ſet before them, giuing God thankes that affoorded them
ſo good a ſhelter, they began to fall to. All thoſe Gentlemen
were maruellouſly taken with the reuerend preſence
of the holy Man, who at Gerardo's requeſt ſate with them
for company, to whoſe vvords and graue diſcourſe they
were more attentiue, then ſollicitous to taſte of the Cates
ſet before them. So, Supper ended, Leoncio and Gerardo
would haue begunne to renue their thankes for his curteſie:
which hee preuented, vvilling them to attribute all to the
higher powers, to whom their thankes were ſolely due.
               And ſo leading them by the hands (the reſt following)
they came to the foote of an Altar, where, by the light of a
ſmall Lampe, they might behold a Crucifix, to which they
all kneeled, and after their Deuotion, were about to haue
returned to their former ſeates; when, Gerardo, riſing vp,
perceiued, that the ground where hee had kneeled, vvas
ſomewhat looſe, and as if it had beene but that day newly
broken vp for a graue (as true it was:) at vvhich maruelling,
and that any ſhould be buried in ſo remote a deſart; or thinking
perhaps they might be neere ſome towne, deſirous to
be reſolued; he demanded the cauſe of the Reuerend Hermite:
from whom, in ſtead of an anſwer, he might ſee, how
vvith thoſe hoarie skeines of his, he wipte his grieued eyes,

to conceale their teares: at vvhich vnlookt for reſentment
not a little wondring, and much greedier to know this and
the former cauſe, he began with this effectuall entreaty thus
to mooue him:
               Honeſt Father, though the demonſtration of your eyes
might interrupt my purpoſe, ſince I preſume by my queſtion
your teares haue been occaſioned: yet the force of my
deſires vvilleth me in the behalfe of this vvorthy company
to importune your ſatisfying my requeſt, and making
knowne the reaſon of your ſudden ſorrow, that, if any here
may giue you eaſe or comfort, it ſhall be no trouble or difficulty
for him herein to ſerue you: and therefore the ſooner
you declare your griefe, the neerer growes your remedie.
               Further had Gerardo proceeded, ſo much vviſhed he to
diſpoſe the Hermit to his vvill, but, perceiuing, that by the
others beginning to ſpeake, himſelfe vvas cut off, with care
and ſilence he gaue eare: In all the time, my loued Sonne,
that in this ſolitarineſſe my wretched life hath been dedicated
to Heauen, I may ſafely promiſe you, that neither
temporall goods haue diſturbed my mindes quiet, nor
worldly cares my penitence or ſoules ſaluation; for which
I muſt inceſſantly praiſe my Creator; yet, I cannot but acknowledge
and eſteeme as an eſpeciall obligation vvhat
your nobleneſſe hath impoſed vpon me, which I ſhould
moſt heartily repay in the kinde you demaund, vvere not
the time more neceſſary for your reſt, then my ſmall paines
for your ſatisfactions. Reſt your ſelues all therefore for the
preſent, for your weary trauell hath much need of it, and to
morrow morning, I ſhall accompany you (God vvilling) to
Guadalupe; at which time I not onely promiſe to fulfill
your command, but ioyntly for your better edification to
recount vnto you the ſtupendious life of that Graues Owner.

Here, with a relenting groane, hee finiſhed his ſpeech,
though, in the hearers their deſires began a-new: and therfore
falling againe to importune him, they requeſted him
not to deferre his Relation, laying before him the hardneſſe
of their lodging and tediouſneſſe of the night, which would
be the better beguiled, by their being by him kept waking;
ſo that, at length loth to be held too obſtinate, hee was willing
to obey: but firſt he renues their fire with ſome pieces
of dry logs, and then the Brothers and whole company
round beſetting the good old man, hee thus ſets vpon their
attentiue ſilence with the following Tragedy.
               All wounds (an effect of the ſoueraigne ſalue) are leſſened
by their cure; but if any careleſſely touch them, ſuch
rubbing encreaſeth their dolour, and their recouery is ſo
much the longer deferred; the ſame now befals me: this
laſt night I loſt my beſt friend; and though my Soule,
Gods creature, be comforted; yet, her affection cannot
but reſent the blow that was inflicted with your demand;
I obey notwithſtanding, ſacrificing my will to your wiſh;
and though it may bee ſome eaſe to my paine, to diuert
your wearineſſe, yet I muſt deſire more, that is, to haue
your attention beare a part in my Diſcourſe, and your
ſelues to giue to the truth of this accident, the credit and
applauſe it iuſtly deſerueth.
               To prouide my ſelfe of ſome ſuſtenance (the in-excuſable
Tribute to our wretched bodies) I vſe weekely to importune
certaine poore Villages within a foure Leagues
compaſſe of this Valley with my neceſſities, from whence
about ſixe yeeres ſince, returning to this Hermitage, forced
as well by Iulies ſcorching heate, as my weakeneſſe of
Age by the way, I ſate me downe to reſt my ouer-wearied
limbes, on the ſhady brinke of a ſwift running Spring, the
briefe Originall of the neere Brooke: here then my

thoughts found a waighty ſubiect, in which they might
(conſidering the beauty, fragrancie of different Plants, ſhadie
Trees, enamelled Flowers, ſpringing Graſſe, and cryſtall
ſtreames, mounting euen to the very foote of their
glorious Artificer) reuerence in them the excellency of
his Diuine handy-worke.
               In this eleuation was I, when turning mine eyes towards
certaine Bryers, there appeared from them a kinde
of glimmering brightneſſe, that almoſt dazled them, and
altogether amazed me. At firſt I thought it to bee ſome
reflexion of the Sunne-beames, which ſhined into that
thornie ſhade: but making ſeuerall trials with my ſight, I
might perceiue the ſame light to remaine ſtil fixed and immooueable
in one place, which made mee ſuſpect greater
matters, promiſing to my worldly deſire ſome ſtone of
price, or metall of equall value.
               With this imagination, vp got I; and comming to the
Buſhes, with helpe of my Crab-tree-ſtaffe, I began to put
them by, and ſo, quickly diſcouered the occaſion of my
ſearch, which was, a Ginet Saddle of maruellous neat
workemanſhip, embroidered, with all furniture to it, in ſeuerall
colours; at the Bow hung the bit, head-ſtall & Reines.
The Stirrops and Poitrall were fairely gilt and enamelled.
The accident made me ſomewhat wonder, yet the gilded
irons vvhich made that ſhining, ſatisfide my firſt doubtfull
imagination. The myſterie of the Saddle, being thus left
I was vtterly ignorant of; and therefore not once ſearching
into the cauſe, couering the vvhole furniture, I left it to
the Owner in the ſame manner I found it; and ſo walked on
to my Cell; where (my minde better emploide) my
thoughts had no leiſure to wander.
               A weeke paſſed on after the accident, in whoſe laſt day
(I being retired, my doore cloſe ſhut) the sky couered with

clouds, not without Lightning and Thunder, there began
a terrible ſtorme (which are in this Valley, though not laſting,
yet as frequent as frightfull.) The violence of it much
afflicted me for the hurt it might doe the Countrey; and ſo
I made the matter of my Oraiſons for more moderate weather,
praying to God to protect the earths increaſe: but at
the inſtant, the trampling, neighing and ſnuffling of a horſe,
ſuſpended my pious Zeale, and cauſed me to approch neerer
to the Altar, thinking verily ſome ſpirit had beene
neere.
               And wonder not at it: for I tell you true, the noiſe this
night of your Moyles and Horſes worked no leſſe horrid
effect at firſt: for, now, as then, it ſeemed impoſſible to mee
to heare any creature come neere this place: which (though
not farre from habitations) yet hath euer beene, by reaſon
of the dangerous narrow wayes ſo inacceſſible, and indeed
ſo vn-promiſing a ſally to Horſemen, that it makes me think
your comming hither miraculous; and therefore with theſe
circumſtances, you need not thinke my feares then triuiall.
So I ſtayed a pretty while within my doores, not once ſtirring
from the Sacred refuge that protected me: but perceiuing,
as ſoone as I began to heate the noiſe, the weather
grew calmer, and the ſtorme ceaſed, together vvith the
Horſes neighing, I got me to my doore, from whoſe open
grates I might ſee a dainty Bay-horſe, with blacke feet, and
of a very handſome ſhape, but without any furniture at all
vpon him.
               At firſt with much admiration I could not tell what to
imagine of the ſight; till, calling to mind the Saddle found
by me, I began to thinke, it might happely haue belonged
to that Horſe, and that ſome misfortune had befalne his
Owner, either by falling headlong from the ſteepy Mountaine,
or being ſlaine by Theeues in the maine high-way,

not paſſing a League from this place: though the manner
of the Saddles beeing as it were carefully laid vp, and the
Horſe left fo free, quickly made fruſtrate this opinion alſo.
               At laſt (not to weary you) reſoluing my ſelfe, that the
Thunder and extremitie of weather had forced the poore
beaſt to ſeeke ſome ſhelter, I purpoſed to ſeize on him,
thinking it better for mee to keepe him for his Maſter, then
to leaue him as a ſtray in thoſe deſarts: and fo, opening my
doore, the Horſe no ſooner heard the creaking of it, when
ſuddenly he ſtartted back. The ſhowres were quite ouerpaſt;
and therefore though the Beaſt fled from mee, yet I
left not to proſecute my purpoſe, and ſo fetched a compaſſe
to run before him, that I might make him turne backe
againe: in this manner as well as mine Age and weakneſſe
would permit me, I was gotten at leaſt halfe a League from
the Hermitage after him. But growing weary, at length I
I was forced to reſt, where I remained ſome little while refreſhing
my ſelfe, and keeping the Horſe ſtill in ſight; and
longer had I there ſtayed (ſo out of breath was I) but that
the clouds againe thickning, I was compelled to ſeeke out
ſome place leſſe ſubiect to the violence of a ſtorme, ſo that
riſing vp, not farre off, I made choiſe of the ſtrong Trunke,
and broad boughes of a wilde Walnut-tree, whoſe height
reaching euen to the Mountaines Top, gaue ſhade & ſhelter
to the ground. Where being arriued, I no ſooner purpoſed
to enter the hollow of it (cauſed either by Art or Antiquitie)
when, I perceiued a man who by way of preuention
was gotten into it before me. This kept me from my
intent; for the noueltie ſurprized mee, and the more, in reſpect
that hauing heard me, hee did not once offer to ſtirre,
but, onely hiding his face, now & then ſent forth a mournefull
ſigh. His attire and cloathes by their goodnes ſhewed
the Owners quality; and the liuelineſſe of his well-fauour'd

countenance, no ſtore of yeeres. All which (beſides admiration)
cauſed a curious deſire in me to know more; and
accordingly I expected a while, to ſee if the party would
forſake his dumpes: but ſeeing his behauiour was ſtill the
ſame, taking the name of Ieſus in my mouth, I ſaluted him
alowd; vvho, as if he had beene awaked out of a dreame,
looking vp, replyed: For euer bee my Sauiours glorious
name praiſed; and truning about, re-ſaluted mee, asking
what I would haue? To which, not a little aſtoniſht, thus I
replide:
               I know not, Chriſtian Brother, what auſtere Cinicall
perſon in the vvorld there may bee, that, beholding you
in this manner, would not deſire to be informed, and to
know the cauſe of this your ſolitarie being; and therefore I
moſt earneſtly requeſt you, to make knowne vnto me, not
onely your griefe; but, vvithall, whether you bee the Owner
of a goodly Horſe, in vvhoſe purſuite, I haue left my
harbour: and hearing this, hee anſwered me in this calme
manner:
               Though the power of ſo courteous a Requeſt might enioyne
mee to obey; yet, many times, ſuch are the misfortunes
of our life, as, oblige rather with vvarie ſilence to
leaue the deſire vnſatisfied: So now it fares vvith me, that
deſiring to giue your demaund content, the quality of my
miſhaps doth contradict my deſire: Pardon, if this diſcharge
ſerue not, for impoſſible it is to obtaine other from
me: though, not to bee altogether harſh or vnſauourie,
touching my beeing in theſe Deſarts, I vvill reſolue your
doubt, vvhich is, to end my dayes in them. I was not
willing to importune him vvith farther queſtions, taking
this his laſt anſwere for a ſettled reſolution; neither would
I on the other ſide ſo leaue him; but ſeeming to bee ioyed
with his intent, replide:
               
                  
Theſe forty yeeres haue I liued in theſe Mountaines,
and though I haue met with many, in their rough and rugged
pathes, yet neuer before with ſuch determinate reſolution
in any: for, I ſuppoſe, the extremities of this Wilderneſſe
are much more difficult to bee tolerated, then
pleaſing to bee deſired; and therefore wondring at your
ſingular election, I cannot but reioyce, and giue you my
beſt aduice, ſince this kinde of lifes experience giues me
freedome, and may deſerue credit for it: yet, if you would
ſo pleaſe, I ſhould thinke it farre better, for the vndergoing
ſo much hardneſſe, that you vvould accept of my company.
Conſider vvell of it; and if you thinke good, I now
preſently offer it, together with my ſhelter, which is a poore
Hermitage ſeated in the ſecret'ſt part of theſe Mountaines,
ſufficient to containe vs both.
               Here (after ſome little pawſe) vvithout expecting further
entreaties, vp he roſe, ſaying; Come on then, Father
mine; Goe on, I follow; for it muſt needs bee, that God
taking compaſſion of my ſoule, by this wholeſome courſe
diſpoſeth of her remedy: 'twas he, that brought me thorow
theſe vnuſuall wayes; he, that hath now twelue dayes miraculouſly
ſuſtained mee with the plenty of theſe Hearbs,
preſeruing me onely to deliuer me to ſuch a Maſter.
               What ſtay we for, reuerend Father? let vs goe: for from
henceforward, I ſubmit my affections to your graue aduice;
and from this inſtant, euen till death, doe dedicate my life
vnto the Almighty his ſeruice; and ſo getting out of his
hollow ſeat, he followed mee; and by that time wee were
gone ſome few paces, the horſe that was before ſo wilde, as
gentle now as any lambe, came to his Maſter, and ſuffering
himſelfe eaſily to be laid hold on, we brought him along to
the Hermitage; and being here, I perceiued him to be his
Owner: for hauing changed his apparell, and putting on

ſome of mine, he deſired me to take the clothes, with ſome
Iewels and Monies that he had, and in his name offer them
to our Ladie of Guadalupe; which I did, together with the
faire Horſe, Saddle and Furniture, which he himſelfe told
me, he had hidden formerly in the Bryers.
               So that now in a poore Hermits Weed, in heauenly meditations,
he ſo ſhined in a ſhort time in pious exerciſes,
that, anticipating my yeeres, he left me behind: ſuch and
ſo ſtrict were his faſts, ſo rigorous his penitence, and ſo continually
feruent his meditations; all which, chiefly the macerating
his fleſh, had beene much more outragious, if my
perſwaſions had not ſomething mitigated his feruorous
ſpirit. In this manner he went on ſixe yeeres together, in
which time, hee would many a time and oft freely recount
vnto me the rare and admirable euents of his life; the which
(ſtealing ſome houres from him) for an example and warning
to others, I haue as exactly as I could, (which you ſhal
ſee) ſet downe in theſe Lines; and drawing out a little Tiller,
and out of that a Paper-booke, opening the ſame, and taking
ſome freſh breath, he beganne with the enſuing Contents:
               In the Kingdome of Toledo, not farre from the Royall
Citties ſelfe, is ſituated the famous Talbora, qualified as well
for her owne Antiquitie, as knowne by her noble and ancient
Gentrie. Here, a Gentleman ſprung from worthy
Anceſtors, called Fernando, vvas borne; vvhoſe childhood,
(though with maruellous forwardnes it gaue a ſtrong likelihood
of his more flouriſhing maturer yeeres) I paſſe ouer,
as little ſuting vvith our purpoſe, and come to his ſixteenth
yeere of age, at vvhich time, his parents dying, hee
being left free and rich, the diſpoſition of his noble mind
might the better be declared, in which his generous vertues

poſting, as it vvere, in a ſhort time, made him the moſt
loued by the vulgar, and moſt emulated by his equals, that
might be. Hee vvas not guiltie of the leaſt habituall noted
vice, nor diſpoſed much to that youthfull wantonnes moſt
proper to young Gallants of his age: or, though his naturall
frailtie might happely ſomething incline him that way,
yet his proceeding was ſuch, ſo warie, as eſcaped (at leaſt)
publike notice: which retiredneſſe in his actions, made him
ſingular in the generall opinion. In his expences hee was
moſt prouidently regular, though farre from pinching; for
in point of honour, vpon himſelfe, his family, and friend,
in any good occaſions, hee would expreſſe a liberall bounty
neerer prodigalitie; being then the moſt forward, moſt
braue, moſt liberall. To ſtrangers hee was vvonderfully
courteous, in defending or protecting them in extremities,
carefull for the aduenturing in the behalfe of friends too,
his wealth, life, or what deareſt, reputation. To make this
good, you ſhall clearely perceiue it in the courſe of his life,
ſince his greateſt troubles tooke their beginning from this
cauſe.
               
                  Fernando at this time exceedingly affected a certaine
Dame, who, had his parents liued ſome longer time, might
haue beene his wife; and though this loue of his were gouerned
with the vſuall warineſſe that the reſt of his affaires,
yet it could not ſo bee concealed from ſome of her friends
and kindred, but by meanes of a Damozell of hers, to
whoſe notice it came, it was diſcouered to the others: and
although the alliance diſpleaſed them not, they cloſely diſſembled
their knowledge, expecting when himſelfe ſhould
firſt become an open ſuiter; which had doubtleſſe beene
effected, were it not that in the Interim a croſſe buſineſſe
worthy your obſeruing happened; from whence much vnquietneſſe
aroſe, and indeed the breach of theſe amorous

proſecutions: and therefore though it bee to enter into a
different matter from the preſent, I cannot but make a ſuccinct
mention of that, to giue the better light to our Story.
Fernando proceeding in his noble conditions, grew into a
ſtreight league of friendſhip with a Gentleman, a ſtranger,
one that alſo extremely loued another Dame of Auila,
both of them (vpon ſeuerall occaſions) then reſiding in Talbora,
ſhe with her Kinſman Segundo Octauio; he, with his father,
Gouernour and chiefe Iuſtice of the place.
               
                  Gerardo from that very moment that the Hermit named
Fernando, expected ſome more euident token in his knowledge,
but now thorowly ſatisfied, crying out, interrupting
the relation, and pittifully fixed vpon thoſe hoarie lockes, he
ſaid: Peace, good Father, for Heauens ſake forbeare the
proſecution of my lifes torment: Wretched and vnfortunate
man, that at length art arriued to ſuch growne ills;
to be a witneſſe, if not of thy beſt friends death, yet at leaſt
of his grieuous diſaſters, of his tragicall ſtory, and ignorantly
with thy rude foot-ſteppes to preſſe his quiet Graue!
               He could no more for teares: but his brother Leoncio, who
with better temper vnderſtood the ſucceſſe, perceiuing
plainely that the deceaſed Hermit was their ancient friend
Fernando, hee could no leſſe then hold fellowſhip with his
brothers ſighes; they alſo that were ignorant of the firſt
Parts ſucceſſes, were ſtrucke into greater confuſion, but not
long remained they in theſe dumpes; for the godly old
man, gheſſing as well by the ſad extremes of both, as the
ſpeech of Gerardo onely, that they two were (doubtleſſe)
the Gentlemen, of whom he had heard ſo many things from
his dead companion, he requeſted them, that mitigating
their paſſion, they vvould affoord him a ſecond, better attention;
vvhich they agreed to, ſo that ſeeing them in more

quiet, this following diſcourſe he firſt framed to their comfort.
               Scarce could I this night (conſidering your vnexpected
arriuall ſo full of deſperate paſſages) credit mine eyes in the
truth before them: but hauing this preſent occaſion to know
you, I am not onely vvell apaid, but reſt alſo moſt aſſured
and ſatisfied, that God Almighty was pleaſed out of a particular
goodneſſe to direct you to this houſe, that the prodigious
life, and late death of this Gentleman comming to
his chiefeſt friends notice, might not be buried in the obſcure
ſilence of theſe remote Deſarts: and therefore, though
hitherto I not condemne your iuſt reſentment; yet from
henceforward it were a fondneſſe to embrace it: for knowing
his valorous determination, holy election, and happy
ending, theſe ſhould rather make you reioyce at his maruellous
actes and vertues, ſince they are rather vvorthy of admiration
and enuie, then lamentation and teares; ſuch are
fitter to be vſed to the Author of his happineſſe, to be ſorry
that we liue behind him in a world of miſeries: vſe teares to
him, or rather feruent prayers, to make you like your dead
brother; and beleeue for certaine, that this arriual of yours,
guided againſt a naturall and ordinary courſe, hath beene
diſpoſed to the intent, that hearing theſe your friends admirable
ſucceſſes from my mouth, they may ſerue you as
examples, ſhunning their bad, to attaine by his like repentant
penitence, ſo happy an end as that of his life, in which
I now with your good pleaſures will proceed, and ſo much
the more willingly, ſince I ſuppoſe the Relation may not be
vnprofitable for ſome one preſent among you.
               
                  Leoncio and Gerardo had no replies left, which made him
the more contentedly turne to his Storie, and ſo rehearſing
the greateſt part of that amorous, tragicall Diſcourſe

of Gerardo and Clara mentioned in the firſt Part, and pointing
at the actions, (in which Fernando as his familiar friend
ſhewed himſelfe on his behalfe) at length hee concluded
them, ſaying, that the parents and friends of Fernando's Miſtris
allied to the deceaſed Don Rodrigo and Segundo Octauio,
ſeeing him ſided with their contrary Faction, not only contradicted
his ſuite, but altogether auerſe from what ſo much
concerned them, the more to ſpight him, they wrought ſo
effectually with her, that in fine they perſwaded her to a
Nunnery; where, though Fernando laboured by all poſſible
meanes to diſſwade her, at the end of her yeeres Probationer-ſhip,
taking the holy profeſſion vpon her, ſhee cut the
thred of his intents.
               This wound of Fortune (ſayd the reuerend Hermit) our
affectionate Gentleman ſo painefully felt, that his griefe
now deſperate, without all conſideration hee ſuffered himſelfe
to be carried headlong on, in ſuch ſort, that with the
continuance of his paſſion, his complaints comming to
Camila's notice, (ſo hight his quondam Miſtris) perceiuing
(though late) better then formerly her loſt Sweet-hearts affection,
and calling to mind ſome ancient paſſages of their
amorous meetings, vnable to reſiſt the ſtrong temptation
of her thoughts, ſhe at length vvilfully plunged her ſelfe into
them, and ſent theſe following Lines vnto Fernando:
               
               Though well I might (had you any reaſon to blame my determination)
find a iuſt excuſe from the neceſsarie obedience due to
my Parents; yet it ſhall be needleſse, (there being no occaſion) that
I deſire you to admit any; ſince you can neither haue the face to
deny your ſelfe to haue beene the cauſe, nor can I want courage to
complaine of your coldneſſe. Your friend Gerardo was more happie,
whoſe affaires ('tis well knowne) you preferred before our
affection, ſmoothing all difficulties, to make his party good againſt

my friends and Allies; who, not vniuſtly (that beeing the greateſt
harme they meant you) haue taken what reuenge on you they
might. Conſider then, whether I haue not reaſon to bee ſenſible
of what is paſt ſatisfaction, and you ſhall ſoone perceiue that my
complaints are more warrantable, then thoſe of yours (I am told
of) which might better be concealed; which that they may, I ſhall
not much need, I preſume when you ſhall haue read theſe Lines,
to requeſt you; my deſire is onely to ſee you, and receiue my ſatisfaction,
which Camila better then your ſelfe deſerueth.
               Any Medicine comforts and reioyceth the poore ſicke
man, that panting for deſired health, oft couets thoſe moſt
hurtfully preiudiciall. Fernando's heart was vvrung by his
blind paſſion, and ſo (though his cleare vnderſtanding
might haue preuented a greater danger) the ſharpe pricke
of his ſcorching affection, checking the free vſe of reaſon,
ſpurred on his ſwift determination, and oppoſitely croſſed
his more conſiderate iudgement, vvhich made him, to gaine
an amorous conqueſt, aduenture at one bold Vye, his ſoules
perdition.
               But Religion had little to do, vvhere Fernando ſtill ledde
by blind paſſion, followed his affection; vvho, by Camila's
order, vvent often to the Nunneries Grate to viſit her, and
had thoſe cold Barres in ſtead of hardneſſe, tongues, they
vvould (no doubt) haue lowdly vvarned him from the deteſtable
purſuite of that ſubiect, in that place. At this time
(he before an afflicted Louer) had leſſe cauſe to complain;
for Camila with his preſence had more ſatisfaction then euer,
vvhich made them fall backe into their former loues,
or (to limit my ſelfe) to a kind of new deuotion, vvhich long
(diſpoſed warily) might haue laſted: but as ſuch ſtations
are much in fauour of our common Enemy, ſo is hee more
carefully punctuall, more ſtrong and powerfull, to enflame

the mind, trouble the ſences, and adde Fewell to the fire.
It ſeemed, his ſubtiltie found beſt acceſſe to the vveaker veſſell,
by the readier way Camila's heart, which hauing (heauen
ſo permitting) poſſeſt, ſtirring vp by degrees her brutiſh
appetite, and fyring her inward concupiſcence, ſhee
was at laſt quite vanquiſhed. No longer could her determinate
will, for any danger of her cloſe retirement, deferre
the vnchaſte execution: for the Diuell doth eaſily facilitate
ſuch difficulties, and till a ſinne bee acted, all is plaine and
ſmootheſt way.
               Onely a ſhamefaſtneſſe of her perſonall honour, pinched
at the infamous price, though by Fernando ſhe was anticipated
in that point; ſo that the conſideration of her Louers
modeſt behauiour, (from whom, or in him, in all the time
of their conuerſation, ſhe had not ſo much as heard a laſciuious
word, ſeene a luſtfull action) perplexed her ignorance
for want of meaner: but he, whoſe craft (as is ſaid) mooued
the whole engine, fearing the loſſe of ſo likely a bootie
with new deuices and ſtratagemes forced this laſt Bulwarke
to yeeld.
               How farre at this time (though amorous) was Fernando
from a carnall thought? he, onely ſatisfied with the ſight of
his Votareſſe, deſired no other happineſſe, neither could
his warie condition hurry him to more vn-limited bounds:
he vſually conuerſed with her, and indeed, beeing a moſt
punctuall frequenter of the Grate, not an hower paſſed him
without a ſight of her, nor a day, in which ſhe receiued not
ſome dainty or other from him, holding the expence of his
eſtate vpon Camila, as a gaine and harueſt; though ſhe now
burning in the flames of luſt, beeing one day alone with
him, meant thus (as you ſhall heare) to breake her mind
vnto him.
               The better to declare it, I muſt firſt aduertize you of this

neceſſary point. Camila, when ſhe heard Fernando one day
was come to ſee her, had purpoſely (longer then ſhe vſed)
deferred her comming to him; inſomuch, that ſenſible of
the noueltie, his heart began to miſ-doubt ſomething; and
in this trouble, deſirous to know the cauſe of her ſtay, glad
would he haue beene, that the Nunnes ſight might haue
preuented his asking: now ſhee that vſed this fit occaſion,
the better to order the Dance, vvhen ſhe came, fained, that
as ſhe was comming to her vſuall Grate, a friend of hers by
the way entertaining her Votary at another, had called her;
the cauſe proceeding from a certaine nice doubt which the
two were ſifting, in which, (making her, whether ſhe would
or not, their Iudge) ſhee was to heare their allegations,
which was the reaſon of her (more important) not ſeeing
him.
               Here, Fernando much longed more originally to know
the propoſition; whoſe deſire, Camila not ouer-ſqueamiſh
to be intreated, as one well ſtudied in the thing, moſt cheerfully
fulfilled.
               
                  Clemencia and Fauſto (ſaid ſhee) both vvhom you well
know, haue falne into a deepe controuerſie, and into a tickle
point: Fauſto maintaines, that in all kinds, Poſſeſsion of a
thing is the chiefeſt good; vvhich opinion Clemencia contradicts,
who holds, that Hope: to vvhich ſhe attributes the
greater excellency; and hereupon grounds her Tenet, ſaying,
That this is ſo much the more to be eſteemed, by how
much neerer it is to Ioy and Pleaſure, and conſequently diſtant
from ſorrow and repentance; but Hope is neerer Content,
and hath leſſe neighbour-hood with diſtaſtes: whereas
in Poſſeſsion happens the quite contrary; which alwaies, or
for the moſt part, is accompanied with griefe and affliction:
and with all (ſuch is our naturall frailty) things once
poſseſsed, grow to leſſer eſtimation: for there is no Beauty on

earth ſo rare, which once enioyed, becomes not (if not
loathſome) yet leſſe prized then before: wherefore too, it
muſt needes be euident, that the time we ſpend in our pretenſions
is incomparably better, then when accompliſhed
with poſſeſsion, it is leſſe lookt after: for ſo, hee that hopes,
doth carefully deſire, couets with delight and pleaſure, that,
which he who poſſeſseth, wants; ſince in the glutted ſtate he
liues, hee neither likes, deſires, or eſteemes: and thus ſhee
clozed vp all, alledging, that Hope by it ſelfe alone, hath
much more excellency and perfection, then Poſſeſsion of
what is hoped for: for the thing deſired, is in a manner
ioyntly poſseſsed as hoped after: when he that poſſeſseth, hath
onely the dominion of the thing he attaines to, and then his
hope finiſheth.
               But now you muſt marke, that Fauſto wanted no reply,
for the making good of his part, and therfore inforcing the
ſuperiority of his opinion, he goes on, ſaying, The whole
life and encouragement of Hope, is in reſpect of Poſſeſſion: ſo
that the good which redounds from Hope, is not in it ſelfe,
but in the thing hoped for; whereby the thing it ſelfe deſired,
is better then the hope of it: for the end is euer more to
be eſteemed, then the meanes, which are onely diſpoſed to
the ſame.
               The ſecuritie and ſafeneſſe of a good conſiſts in the greater
perfection of it, and this, he onely that doth poſſeſſe, not
he that hopeth, hath: who (held he Hope to be the better) neuer
caring to come to Poſſeſsion, he might, not onely expect,
but alſo, not call that expectation Hope, rather, mortall deſpaire;
for ill could he bee ſaid to deſire a good, that declined
ſo much from the Poſſeſsion: ſo that the perfection conſiſts
in the reality and accompliſhment of the deſire,
and not in the appetite it ſelfe: therefore laſtly, he that comforts
himſelfe with bare Hope, muſt needes bee caſt, ſince

plainely, hee affects that which is moſt profitable: liking
rather to liue in a continuall warfare, then ſettled quiet
peace, which is onely found in quieteſt Poſseſsion. They
vrged many other reaſons to this purpoſe, but theſe are the
moſt materiall; and though they haue named me for their
Iudge Arbitreſſe, yet I confeſſe my ſhortneſſe of vnderſtanding;
and therefore, Fernando relying on your diſcretion,
I meane to take you as an Aſſiſtant to ſentence this cauſe
before we part.
               
                  Fernando gaue pleaſing attention to the whole diſputation,
and thorowly ſatisfied, thus replied to Camila: Beleeue
me, deare Votareſſe, the parties (though to my coſt) may
render you many thankes, as not needing to complaine for
want of attention in their Iudge, nor to diſtruſt the iuſtice
of their cauſe: for it is not poſſible, that ſhee, vvho hath ſo
well related each point, and duely conſidered euery circumſtance,
ſhould erre a iot in the ſure determination; and
though I be well enough aſſured of this truth, yet, ſubiecting
my ſelfe to your commands, I muſt obey: and therefore
reſoluedly ſet downe, that you may ſentence on Fauſto's behalfe,
of vvhoſe right ſo confident am I, that had not he to
my liking ſufficiently made good his opinion, I ſhould with
freſh reaſons endeuour to vnderprop it. Then belike (replied
Camila) vvhoſoeuer is of that mind is vviſeſt, and conſequently,
he that is againſt it, peruerſe and ignorant: To
which Fernando, ignorant of her purpoſe, ſayd, for his part
he thought no leſſe; vvhen, vvithout more adoo the reſolute
Dame in this manner proceeded: Go to then, Fernando,
either you or I loue not; or, if the greateſt good bee in
poſſeſſion, and this wanting, vvhy ſpend vve all our time thus
fruitleſſe to no purpoſe? Our Gallant hearing his Camila,
was ſtrucke ſpeechleſſe, and though at firſt he had ſuppoſed
all to haue beene paſtime and merriment, yet looking neerer

into the matter, and perceiuing thoſe Arguments to
haue beene before-hand premeditated, he fell into the purpoſed
ſtratagem. It oppreſſed him ſtrangely, for his
thoughts had neuer been ſo outragiouſly boundleſſe: hee
wiſely feared the greatneſſe of the danger; and yet the being
inthralled by his amorous paſsion, made him confuſedly
wauer in his anſwere; which at laſt was the ſafeſt, indeuouring
to diuert her from the impoſſibility of her deſires,
framing greater difficulties in the obtaining them,
then Camila could euer haue imagined: but ſhe reſolutely
bent vpon her will, not onely deſiſted not from her purpoſe,
but angrily diſdained his coldneſſe, attributing it to
cowardize, and ſo was about to haue turned from him.
               But thoſe fained ſhewes of leauing him, ſo much preuailed
vvith the Captiue Louer, that inconſiderately hee condiſcended
to her pleaſure; and reconciled, they agreed vpon
a meeting, which ſhould be, that Fernando might enter
the Garden by climbing the Wall, where (as the enſuing
night) ſhe would expect him.
               
                  Camila affoorded him no longer time, fearing leſt vvith
more, he might repent; and ſo the prefixt limit drawing
neere, Fernando hauing prouided himſelfe of a ſtrong-corded
Ladder, made knowne his intent to a kinſman of his
that liued with him; & finding ſufficient company in him,
both wel-armed, prepared themſelues to the exploit, which
heauē auerted by more different means then they imagin'd.
               
                  Fernando had at this time cauſed certaine Scutcheons of
his Armes, grauen in Marble, to be ſet vpon the Arch of his
Doore, and to his purpoſe the Workemen had raiſed
ſcaffolding; ſo that, as he was going out to the ſaid intent,
dazled, as it were, vpon a ſudden, he ſtumbled vpō the Timber,
which fell downe ſo forcibly, that it brought down one

of the Poſts that ſuſtained the boords aloft, one of vvhich
vvanting the proppe, or not vvell faſtened, or (which vvas
likelieſt, Heauen ſo permitting) falling downe, lighted vpon
his foote, which, ('twas maruell) cruſhed it not to pieces,
though notwithſtanding it ſhrewdly bruiſed him: his
kinſman and companion was farther behinde him, and
therefore hauing no ſhare in the blow, might the better help
and lift him vp, which hee did; and knowing his hurt, vvas
forced to carry him to his Chamber, where he kept his bed
a long time after.
               This accident ſomewhat troubled Fernando, not that
his blinde affection vvould let him fall into the true conſideration
of the cauſe of this effect; but how hee might
giue Camila ſatisfaction; for, for this he had much to doe,
neither vvould ſhee giue credit to his hurt, till ſhee had
procured ſome truſty perſons, to bee eye-witneſſes of the
ſame.
               At length, after hee was recouered, they fell backe into
their amorous purſuite; and Camila re-ſolliciting her Louer,
a new appointment was made, againſt which time
the two kinſmen prouided, came faire and ſoftly to the
Garden wall: where, vpon the loweſt part of it they caſt
their Ladder; and Fernando began to mount iuſt at the inſtant
that, about the Nunnery gate, not farre from them, a
great noiſe and claſhing of Swords was heard, which made
him (fearing to be ſeene) ſtep downe againe; and paſſing
forward, he might perceiue three men (to his thinking two
againſt the third) together by the eares. Fernando ſeeing ſo
manifeſt oddes, and the poore ſingle party begin to giue
ground, could not containe; but, leauing his kinſman to
looke to the Ladder, in a trice he ranne in to the lone mans
aide, but his charitie came ſomewhat of the lateſt; for the

others Contraries hauing found their Aduantage, gaue
him ſeuerall wounds, vvherewith fainting, he fell downe at
Fernando's feet: which the two perceiuing (though hard
laid to by the new-comer) betooke them to their heeles;
leauing him to looke to their enemy that was falne. So
that now giuing ouer the principall buſineſſe for which he
came, both he and his kinſman vvholly intended the poore
wounded man; whom, becauſe hee cryed out for Confeſſion,
they tooke vp betweene them to haue conueyed him to
their owne home.
               Yet carefull they were to auoid meeting with the Watch,
and therefore went thorow the leaſt frequented and by-Lanes;
but in one of thoſe (their endeuours miſ-carrying)
they met with thoſe they ſhunned: it was not poſſible for
them to haue eſcaped, neither thought they fit, by running
away, to make themſelues delinquents in a matter
vvherein their charitie was ſhewne. So the Gouernour
of the Towne, meeting and knowing them, ſorry to ſee
their carriage (though they truely related what paſſed) and
obliged by his Office, could not but commit them both to
ſure cuſtody.
               
                  Fernando, though his innocencie might haue prouoked
him, was little ſenſible of this vvrong; rather for feare of
falling into a new ſuſpition with his Votareſſe, hee vvas ſo
much afflicted, that his blinded heart bereaued him of all
other conſiderations; as alſo of the dangerous illicite buſineſſe,
into which he was ſo wilfully imbarked. In fine (glad)
the Officers had not ſeen their Ladder, they ſuddenly conueyed
it from them, and now expected the wiſhed day; by
when Fernando's impriſonment knowne and publiſhed;
ſome, approouing it, did much aggrauate the matter, others
gentler minded, blamed the Gouernours haſty proceeding,

as ſuppoſing that to a Gentleman of his quality better reſpect
might haue been had, if not entire credit giuen vnto
him; and paſſionate in the caſe, thought his impriſonment
was too rigorouſly inflicted. The whole buſineſſe at laſt
was cleered; for the wounded party before he dyed, declared
the truth, accuſing one of the two, who firſt ſet vpon
him, about a difference at Play, to haue with the others help
ſlaine him; which appearing plainely by the Homicides
their flight, Fernando was out of hand ſet at libertie, and
Camila now fully ſatisfied, more earneſtly then euer, inſiſted
in her purpoſe: yet they reſolued for more fittingneſſe,
to put it off for one three or foure dayes more, ſince,
in reſpect of the late vnluckie accident, the Watch would
bee ſure to walke more carefully, or ſome curious buſie-bodie
might haply prie into his actions, being knowne to
walke ſo late, till ſuch time as the noueltie was a little ouer-blowne
and paſt.
               In this they were not vnwiſe, for in ſmall or leſſe populous
Citties, where other varieties are wanting, ſuſpitious
perſons lay hold vpon all occaſions, maliciouſly to pry
into their friends or neighbours actions. But the difficulties
of their meeting ceaſed not thus; for againſt a new
prefixed time by them, Fernando's kinſman fell deſperately
ſicke of a burning Feuer, which much hindered their
buſineſſe, in reſpect that the Phyſicians now had wholly
giuen him ouer.
               
                  Fernando made Camila acquainted with the miſhap,
but ſhee would not beleeue or admit of his excuſe, the
which her hardned reſolution more plainely appeared in
theſe briefe Lines:
               I well ſee, Fernando, by this laſt fained inconuenience,

what all the former haue beene: Let your dallying ceaſe; for
if this night you fulfill not your promiſe, I ſhall bee ſatisfied,
and your ſelfe forbeare to bee ſo hardie as euer againe to
ſee me.
               It ſeemed that the deadly ſinne of ſacrilegious luſt guiding
her hand and ſtile, framed for Camila theſe Contents:
ſo her owne hand was made the Sentencer of that deſtruction,
which Heauen had fore-decreed to the Owner.
               The blinde Louer receiued this Ticket, and as the rigorous
verdict of his death, ſo feared hee his Miſtreſſes complaints,
and ſo diſpoſed to obey her: all alone towards
midnight he got him to the Nunnery wall. He had no ſooner
climbed to the top of it, but hee might heare a voice
iuſt vnderneath him, calling out, Is it Fernando? Who replide,
'Tis I, ſweet, I come. But with this, I come, and
his ſudden haſte to faſten the thred-Ladder, for his better
getting downe on the other ſide, with the darkneſſe of the
night together, and his owne want of heed, hee ſtumbled
vpon a great looſe ſtone which fell from the wall and him,
& (it ſeemed) guided by Camila's deſtiny, or higher Prouidence,
lighted vpon the vnfortunate Creatures head; the
waight of it was ſuch as gaue her no leaue to cry out, onely
Fernando might heare by one ſoft mortall groane, the
execution done, and his bitter loſſe. 'Twas in vaine for
him to leape downe; for the misfortune was helpleſſe, but
vainer to waſte time there in teares or ſorrowfull exclamations,
ſince dayes approach would but pull an irremediable
danger vpon his owne head: euery way he was miſerable,
all he could doe (hoping yet to heare ſome comfortable
newes in the morning) was to make to his lodging:
which he did, though there with the amazement of

his griefes he had much adoe to liue. His family and ſeruants
were not a little troubled at the ſtrange accident, inſomuch
that ſome thought beſt to haue his Confeſſor to
him, others began to thinke of Phyſicians. Fernando had
one onely Siſter, very faire and equally diſcreet, and betweene
both, liuing thus priuately to themſelues, there was
an extraordinary tenderneſſe of affection: ſhe was priuy to
her Brothers cares, and therefore gheſsing that his infirmitie
was more of Loue then more mortall danger,
would not for the preſent that her ſeruants ſhould call
for any helpes without; but, making no noiſe, left him to
his reſt.
               Towards eight of the clocke in morning (after hee
had long conſidered his misfortune, and at length taken
ſome ſleepe) he awoke: and ſomewhat better recouered,
at what time they in the Nunnery (little knowing what
ſtate Fernando had been in, or that hee knew of Camila's
death) ſent him word of the lamentable ſucceſſe; how (it
ſeemed) the laſt night going late into their Garden to her
Deuotions, walking vnder part of the wall, a looſe ſtone
had falne downe and daſhed out her braines; in which lamentable
manner they found her, being firſt found miſsing
in her bed in the morning.
               This aduice (though wofully ſet downe in writing) could
adde nothing to Fernando's extremitie, vvho vvas full enough
of miſtruſt before: and yet though he ſuſpected the
worſt that might be, his humanitie could not but take one
wailing leaue more: and now in midſt of his mournefull
grones he craues pardon of his diuine Maker; and ſo from
that inſtant, with new and freſh vowes hee propoſed in his
heart, not onely neuer to haue further conuerſation with
Religious Women, but for euer to abandon their houſes,

and Monaſteries, which afterward hee ſhunned as his mortall
bane.
               With this happy intent (ſaid the good Hermit turning
to Gerardo) he remained in Talbora, till ſuch time as your impriſonment,
and Clara's fearefull end, comming to his notice,
mindfull of your ancient friendſhip, hee left his Country,
and ſoone effected your liberty, being then ſome moneths
abſent, till his Siſters carefull ſolliciting his returne,
made him, to giue her content, come backe, where new ſucceſſes
began, ſuch as follow.
               Many matches had beene ſeuerally both to Brother and
Siſter propoſed, and ſome conuenient enough, though
Fernando excuſing himſelfe, refuſed all, by ſaying he would
firſt ſee his Siſter beſtowed; ſhee flying likewiſe from all
Treaties, as mannerly retorted her Brothers courteſie: ſo
that each gaue colour of deniall of marriage to the other,
and matter to the buſie world to cenſure both: yet ſome
there vvanted not, to affirme, that Alcina, ſo was the Dame
called, was vvilling enough to marry, might it ſtand vvith
her owne liking, and not her Brothers choiſe; their malice
alluding to one Tirſo whom ſhe much affected, but in reſpect
he was Brother to Rodrigo, and conſequently enemy
to hers, he durſt not demand her to Wife, nor ſhee owne
him for Husband. Theſe and the like ſpeeches flew about
Talbora, though no man willing to aduertiſe ſo much
to Fernando, he (ignorant) was obſtinate in his reſolution,
and Alcina vvarie and circumſpect leaſt her amorous wakings
might come to his notice, vvhich heauily ended (as
you ſhall heare:) but firſt it is neceſſarie for you to know
ſome other circumſtances, before that diſaſter was compaſſed.
               About this time there arriued a dainty Granadinian Dame,

that, for ſome priuate reſpects, at the inſtance of her kindred
and friends, was dedicated to the Religious retirement
of a certaine Couent there; vvhither, at the day appointed
for her receiuing the habit and holy Order, all the
Gentry, and beſt of the Citie, were ſolemnely inuited: only
Fernando, mindfull of his Vow, in not going was ſingular;
though, to comply with the faire Dames kindred his friends
of one faction, he ſent his Siſter Alcina to ſupply his place
at the ſolemnitie. Which ended, and (the New Nunne generally
extolled) ſhe remained in the Monaſtery, and all the
gheſts returned to their ſeuerall homes, wonderfully pleaſed
with the ſight, eſpecially Alcina, and ſo enamoured on
the new Nunne, that ſhe thought all poſſible commendations
muſt needs come ſhort of her due praiſe: which went
on in ſuch height of endeerement, as at length bredde an
inward longing in Fernando, to ſee ſo much beauty, though
hauing barred himſelfe the meanes, he was forced to giue
ouer his difficult curioſitie.
               Some there are ſo particular in their actions, ſo ſtrange
in their affections, that many times vvithout all foundation
or ground, they fall to like or hate ſomething, forno other
occaſion indeed, then to haue their opinions generally
vpheld, though moſt commonly they prooue erroneous:
ſuch in extremitie vvas Alcina, a vvoman that wholly taken
with her owne iudgement, deſired that her thoughts ſhould
haue in euery thing precedency, which made her vnproperly
lay hold on Eliſa's beauty (that beeing the Granadinians
name) labouring all ſhee might, that her Brother Fernando
with his eyes might qualifie her election.
               To which purpoſe, going to viſit ſome of her owne kinſwomen
in the Nunnery, ſhe deſired Eliſa's acquaintance,
making ſuch ſhewes of loue or Court-ſhip to her, that, but

for the vvarrant of her ſexe; the other might haue ſuſpected
a hazzard to her retiredneſſe.
               This acquaintance of theirs beganne ſo to kindle betwixt
them both, as it grew to an exceeding height of affection;
by which meanes Eliſa alſo, from his Siſter, came to haue
ſome notice of Fernando, whoſe parts and merit being cunningly
ſet out by the ſhee-relator (no maruell if haply Eliſa
might couet an eyeſight of the Owner.) The Nunne, beſides
many excellencies in which Heauen was propitious
to her, had a moſt ſweet and pleaſing voice; and of her equall
skill too (though more warily, in reſpect ſhe was but
in her yeere of approbation) Alcina now and then participated,
giuing afterwards (but with circumſtances more flouriſhingly
ſurpaſſing all that hitherto) notice to Fernando, of
that and other rarities; which doubling the former itch of
deſire in him, made him plainely declare his minde: which
vnderſtood by Alcina (but to no other intent more then the
confirming her opinion) ſhe quickly ſo contriued the matter,
that without publike note it might be effected: and ſo,
ſending a warning to her kinſwomen to prouide her a ſeat
neere the Nunnes Grate, ſhee went alſo thither before, agreeing
onely with her Brother, that he ſhould ſtand cloſe,
and not ſhew himſelfe, till ſuch time as ſhee had intreated
Eliſa to begin to ſing, which (becauſe ſhe was not yet a profeſſed
Nunne) was very difficult; and ſhould Fernando bee
ſeene, or any other man, altogether impoſſible.
               The buſineſſe ſuited iuſt to her wiſh: and her Brother as
ready, as vnmindfull of his Vow, went thither, and came ſo
opportunely, that both his eye and his eare were quickly
beleeuers of Alcina's truth. Eliſa (that knew nothing of his
comming, for Alcina fained it to haue been caſuall) eſpied
him, and bluſhing, would faine haue hid her ſelfe, but that

the reſt of the Nunnes kept her backe, and the new-come
Gheſt making himſelfe knowne to her, (a hardineſſe in him,
conſidering her modeſt compoſedneſſe was not inferiour
to that rare beauty that aſtoniſht him) they grew to ſome
complementall acquaintance; and before they parted, himſelfe
vvas caught a tender louer as euer, and ſhee (but vvith
more chaſte intentions) leſſe coy and diſdainfull, which ſhe
better expreſſed, by not ſuffering the Couple to returne
empty home, without a full ſatisfaction of Natures beſt Muſicke,
her voyce.
               This Gentlemans relapſe doth ſo at the preſent vexe my
conſideration, that me thinks I euen vvith my wiſh foreſtall
the puniſhment that after happened vnto him, which I ſhal
briefly come to: but this enſuing circumſtance muſt firſt be
the Prologue or Introduction.
               
                  Fernando, after many a ſight of Eliſa, was ſo extremely
gone in her affection, that at laſt (the end of her yeere drawing
on, at which time, if ſhee profeſſed there was no helpe
for him) cauſed his ſiſter Alcina to put in for his marriage.
She made knowne his mind, but Eliſa deferring her anſwer,
and wiſely diſſembling her intent, ſhewed little will: rather,
a ſtrong inclination to that deuout life ſhe had made choice
of: which might haue ſufficed to haue kept him from moleſting
her quiet profeſſion; but this, which hee thought diſdaine,
ſo blew the fire of his growing loue, that not now
ſecretly, but in publike he proſecuted it, and made meanes
to Eliſa's kindred, who ioyned as ſuiters with him, and vſed
ſuch diligent perſwaſions, that at laſt they wonne her to
conſent.
               They eſteemed themſelues moſt happy in the alliance,
and no leſſe honoured: and ſo, notice alſo was giuen to her
Parents, and in the interim of their anſwer, Fernando as one

ſure enough, began to make ſeuerall preparations of brauerie
for himſelfe, and the future Bride; and turning night into
day with Maskes, Muſicke, and ſeuerall delights; and day,
into Bull runnings, Canes-ſport, and Dancing: the time
paſſed on in mirth and paſtimes, till at laſt the anſwer of the
Nunnes parents was, that themſelues were vpon the way:
which generally reioyced the Bridegroome, Bride, and their
kindred. So their arriuall, and the time happily meeting, the
deſired Nuptials were ſolemnely performed; which, and
ſome weeks ouerpaſſed, the Parents returned to their home
at Granada, leauing their ſonne-in-law with his Spouſe as
contented, as themſelues ioyfull with the match. Eliſa was
no leſſe inwardly vertuous, then faire without; ſo warily
modeſt, that her Fernando might iuſtly eſteeme himſelfe
fortunate in her; who being himſelfe alſo ſuch, as wee haue
formerly deſcribed him, knew how ſufficiently to account
of thoſe good parts in his Spouſe; and therefore giuing
himſelfe wholly now to be guided by her will, he liued moſt
happy and contentedly: which to conſummate and make
vp, the beſtowing Alcina onely kept him wakefull, to procure
her a deſeruing husband, and ridde himſelfe of the
carefull burden of their double honour. Indeed Fernando
was ignorant of his Siſters ſecrets; vvho, though ſhee were
in loue, yet fearing the awfull auſtere condition of her brother,
diſſembled all ſhe might her affection: and now with
Eliſa's free conuerſation and companie, ſhe was leſſe ſolitary,
more then formerly at liberty.
               In this manner, two yeeres from Fernando's marriage
were accompliſhed, at the end of which, his wiues father,
and ſoone after, an onely brother of hers dying, ſhee remaining
ſole Inheretrix of a good Eſtate, and her husband importuned
by her mothers Letters, was forced, for ſettling

of the new Inheritance, to repaire to Granada: and though
it much troubled him, to be thus for ſome long time abſent,
yet the neceſſity compelled his patience to ſubmit, leauing
his houſe and domeſticall affaires (for the better gouerning
them) to his Kinſmans carefull ouerſeeing, whom hee
loued dearely: and hee hauing beene long maintained by
him, relying with good ſatisfaction vpon his honeſty, he betooke
himſelfe the more cheerfully to that vn-willing iourney
and buſineſſe, which kept him almoſt halfe a yeere: in
which time, though Fabricio (ſo was the kinſman called) had
at the beginning beene very ſollicitous, at the firſt, perceiuing
the retiredneſſe of Eliſa and her ſiſter-in-law, thinking
his watchfulneſſe and labour vaine, by little and little
hee grew careleſſe, and ſo paſſed on ſome dayes, till at
length in one ſtormy Winters night, when he was faſt and
ſecurely ſleeping, a ſeruant that lay in his Chamber, awoke
him, ſaying, hee heard Muſicke and ſinging neere Eliſa's
Window; wherupon ſuddenly, and deſirous to be ſatisfied,
Fabricio got him to a low Grate which lookt that way: from
whence hee might ſee one walke to and fro in the Street,
which made him expect what the iſſue would be: and the
Inſtruments ſounding, he might at another corner perceiue
a company together, who in three Voyces began ſweetly
to ſend foorth this following Ode:
               
                  When thou in natiue thoughts didst imitate
                  the ſimple Turtle Doue,
                  And conſtant wer't, I ſtill did conſecrate
                  to thy true faith, firme loue:
                  (That rurall Bird doth neuer range,
                  Fixt to her Mate, affects no change.)
                  But ſince thy former plainneſſe to diſguize,
                  with Art thou do'ſt contriue,
                  
                     
And firſt affection leſse do'ſt equalize,
                  why do I longer ſtriue?
                  For Loue that doth excuſes frame,
                  Either is none, or not the ſame.
               
               This Ditty madded the waking Fabricio: for coniecturing
he might know the ſubiect to whom it was meant, yet
his ignorance of the certainty robbed him of vnderſtanding,
though on the other ſide obliged by his care, he muſt
proceed in his attendance: yet comforted he was, as imagining
the Muſick might be giuen to ſome other in the Street,
and out of his loue to his kinſman, he would not raſhly ſuſpect
his chaſte Spouſe, till ſuch time, as the new Eccho's
of thoſe Voyces began againe in the following Song to encreaſe
his doubtfull feares.
               
                  Vaniſh Hope, expect no more;
                  Ayrie Promiſes giue o're.
                  Where the re
                        •
                     ll Act doth want,
                  Meane intentions are too ſcant.
                  Let, no longer, words or wind,
                  Dull, and wronged Patience blind:
                  Outward fauours from the tongue,
                  When the true ones we prolong
                  Pinchingly, diſcouer plaine,
                  'Tis but manners with diſdaine.
                  Toyling Clownes that ſow the Land,
                  Ha
                        •
                     row, plough with weary hand,
                  Bodies to the cold i
                        •
                     ure,
                  Wind and Winters froſts indure;
                  Yet at length their ſuffring reapes
                  Ioyes, with corne and fruit by heapes.
                  
                     
All Loues ioyes, his bleſſedneſſe
                  Is (the Harueſt) To poſſeſſe.
                  
                  Other hopes, our feares, or care
                  Prooue but barren, deepe deſpaire.
                  Can deafe doore, dumbe locke, or words
                  Two or three, dead faith affoords,
                  (Oppoſite, with Loue at ſtrife)
                  Hinder vs the act of life?
                  Or Boords chinke, whoſe new-cut rinde
                  Not leaſt ſight admits, ſcarce winde:
                  Or, is this the ayme and ſcope,
                  Now, of all my lingring hope?
                  Is the Bed leſſe ſecret (Fie!)
                  That ſo ſtiffely you deny,
                  Then a window, wall, or ſtreet,
                  Where a thouſand hazards meet?
                  Each of theſe with trait'rous eye,
                  Will, thus open Loue deſcrie:
                  Then, to eaſe your honours doubt,
                  Let me in and locke them out.
               
               With greater confuſion the Sentinels eares turned into
hollow trunkes, impatiently heard out the Ditty, and with
more torment, vvhen hee might heare a Window open in
Eliſa's Chamber, and the vnknown Gallant drawing neere,
beginne to diſcourſe.
               The two ſiſters in Fernando's abſence lay together, but
Fabricio, ignorant of that, no ſooner ſaw this, vvhen vvithout
diſtinction he condemned Eliſa's luſt and falſhood towards
his kinſman. Impoſſible it was for him from where he was,
to heare their vvhole Dialogue, though by ſome anſwers of
the one, he might gheſſe at the demands of the other. And

hearkening with all attentiueneſſe, he might heare the man
thus proceed: You cannot at laſt deny my iuſt complaints;
for after ſo many vaine ſhifts and delayes, I cannot but bee
wearie, though (as I am a Gentleman) vvere your excuſes
grounded vpon any the leaſt reaſon, I ſhould ſtill willingly
ſuffer and expect, as I haue hitherto done, and you know
how patient I haue alwaies beene: but, if I ſee what a happy
occaſion vve loſe in Fernando's abſence, what may I thinke,
but that I am abuſed, and that with your falſhood you
mocke my vnfained affection? Here Fabricio vnwilling to
hearken longer, vvas thorowly ſatisfied with what hee had
already heard: and though his indignation egged him furiouſly
on to haue runne into the ſtreet, yet his more diſcreet
vnderſtanding, ſuggeſting vnto him his kinſmans honour,
vvhich might not haue beene ſo publikely wronged,
by laying open a vviues infamie, reined in his courage, only
from that time forward made him more circumſpectly wary
about the houſe.
               But impoſſible it is to ſet ſufficient guard vpon a diſſolute
woman: Luſt (though locket vp like Danaë) will finde way:
ſo his vvatching was vaine; for (to his griefe) not long after
he came to the knowledge of more miſchiefe; there beeing
ſome in the houſe, who pittying their poore abſent Maſter,
told Fabricio not onely of night-walking and Muſicke, but
vnlawful egreſſe and regreſſe too: and that at the ſame window
where he heard diſcourſing, a man moſt nights at vnſeaſonable
houres mounted by a Ladder, whom the partie
that gaue the more certaine notice of it, beeing an old ſeruant
of Fernando's, many nights ſaw from his owne houſe,
which was directly oppoſite.
               
                  Fabricio ſeeing the matter ſo openly ſcandalous, could
no longer conceale his reſolute purpoſe; ſo that though the

reuenge belonged not to his hands, he with them prepared
it, by writing to Fernando; that without all delay hee ſhould
immediatly returne to Talbora, for as much as it concerned
his honour ſo to do.
               Any noble heart may eaſily ſuppoſe without my relation,
the effect that this Letter wrought in Fernando's breſt; who,
not without ſome ſiniſter thoughts, ruled by his kinſmans
aduice, tooke ſpeedy Poſts, and vvithin foure dayes arriued
at his houſe, to his Alcina's no little admiration; vvho
not ſo ſoone expected him, vvhich made him the more ioyfully
welcomed, eſpecially by the faire Eliſa; and next, longing
to be reſolued of his doubt, with a conuenient opportunity,
he vnderſtood all that had paſſed in his abſence from
his carefull Kinſman; who, conſidering Fernando's diſhonour
and affront, vvas ready to haue ſlaine himſelfe. The
other after he had pawſed a little with himſelfe, made no
difference or diſtinction of the vvrong; for whether Alcina
or Eliſa, one of the two he was ſure had defamed her ſelfe
and him: his vvife was moſt deare to him, for which reaſon
his ielouſie led him to ſuſpect rather her falſhood: for it
is a naturall effect of this hel-bred Paſſion, that where wee
moſt naturally loue and affect, there we moſt carefully feare.
I
                     •
                   his ſiſter were in fault, why, the grieuance was as equall to
his blood, which equally prouoked his reuenge. But after
he had waighed with himſelfe all and ſundry particulars, he
beganne to thinke of firſt ſatisfying his owne eyes, not wholly
relying vpon the relation of another, in a matter that ſo
neerely concerned his honour. And ſo much the rather inclined
he to this reſolution, by ſeeing his wiues behauiour
and carriage in the ſame equall ballance he left it; her obſeruance
punctually the ſame; her honeſt looks and ſhamefac't
bluſh no way diminiſhed; her affection equally compoſed,

and her embraces as louing, as loyall as euer. But
if this relenting conſideration would preſſe too much vpon
his ſomewhat mollified mind, the bitterneſſe of the
wrong would call backe his furious remembrance, and ſhut
the doores to all commiſeration: and then thinking there
was nothing but falſhood and diſſimulation in woman, hee
fell paſſionately backe into his watchfull diligence. Moſt
deſirous was he to ſatisfie his ſight, but the actors too cunningly
deferred their dangerous pleaſures. Fernando ſtill
haunted with his ielouſie, thought this was but a tricke, and
therefore with a counter-plot, hee fained a new occaſion to
returne to the proſecution of his buſineſſe at Granado, and
putting his intent in practice, without note or leaſt ſuſpition
of his houſe and family, cauſing Fabricio and the ſeruant
priuy to the ſecret, to be in a readineſſe, who (as is ſayd) had
ſome of his windowes iuſt oppoſite to his; in concluſion, all
things cunningly handled, their deſigne was quickly effected.
               But although he lay all that night, and the next following
in waite, with more care then Argus, yet hee neither ſaw
ought that might trouble him, nor heard any noyſe that
might increaſe his ſuſpition, which made him, a little heartened,
now beginne to wauer in the truth and credit of the
matter, blaming go himſelfe his kinſmans too raſh and eaſie
being perſwaded; (a fault that ſometimes the moſt carefull
are lyable to:) yet his ielouſie ſtill prompting him with miſdoubts,
the third night came on, in which (then thorowly
ſatisfied) he ſaw no viſions; no: but about midnight two
men plainly walking in the ſtreet, who hauing fetcht a turne
or two, perceiuing the coaſt was cleare, one of them whiſtling,
gaue the ſigne, at which, the feare-cloth leaues of a
Bay-window were opened, and a woman appearing vvas

his anſwer. The Moone ſhone brightly at that time, ſo that
though Fernando could neither heare the voyce, nor vvell
know the face, yet by the apparell ſhee wore hee might
perceiue it was Eliſa, the ſtuffe of her Gowne ſiluer Tinſall,
vvith the Lace and trimming ſutable, giuing his eyes an apparent
Teſtimonie. The vnfortunate Gentleman was with
the accident extremely heart-ſtrucken, though without any
ſudden haſte he quietly attended their ſhort diſcourſe: after
vvhich he might ſee (vvhich he thought vvas a preparation
to the mans getting vp) a String, and to that a Ladder
faſtened at the Window, by which the Gallant nimbly
mounted, and ſtraight the Window-leaues were clapped
to.
               
                  Fernando more enraged then any angry Lioneſſe that had
loſt her young ones, could no longer forbeare, but taking
the ſpeedieſt vvay, returned in by his owne doore, where
finding his kinſman, and two of his ſeruants ſurely armed,
hauing giuen them inſtructions vvhat to do, he left them to
make good the Street, if happely the adulterer ſhould eſcape
him vvithin: vvhich done, with a falſe Key he opened the
ſtreet doore, and ſoone after got into his owne Chamber,
where vndauntedly ruſhing in, though the cloſe roome
were darke, he furiouſly lighted vpon the bed, and finding
firſt the vvretched Eliſa, haſtily beſtowed three or foure
ſtabbes vpon her: at the very firſt the poore ſoule awoke,
ſecurely ſleeping, and not thinking her lateſt houre was ſo
neere: and ſeeing her ſelfe ſo bloodily handled, all amaz'd,
not knowing the Homicide, threw her body out of the bed
with the mortall pangs.
               
                  Fernando next of all carefully groped about with his
hand for the adulterer, and perceiuing ſome ſtirring vnder
him, thinking he was ſure there, drawing the Curtaine, he

directed his ſword and rage thitherward; where he had no
ſooner ſeconded his thruſt, vvhen knowing the voyce of his
ſiſter, crying out, Enough, deare Signior, oh I am ſlaine,
made him hold his hand, ſuſpended by the frightfull Eccho's
of his owne blood, yet he could not ſo much as imagine
her to haue beene the ſole cauſe of his diſhonour: and
now too he might heare the Window-leaues pulled open,
at vvhich the fearefull Gallant had meanes vvith the darke
to leape into the ſtreet; vvhich vvithout Fernando's hinderance
he did: but his feare making him loſe his ayme, together
vvith the height, vvhen hee came to ground, hee
broke his legge with the fall; howſoeuer his eſcape had bin
beyond poſſibility, in reſpect of the three armed that there
waited for him, who quickly in the ſtate hee was in, vvith
their ſwords diſpatched him. By this time Eliſa's maides,
hauing heard the deadly grones of their Miſtris, were gotten
into the Chamber with Lights; vvhere beholding the
bloody ſpectacle, they quickely ranne to hide themſelues
from their Maſters angry preſence; vvho, ſeeing how vvell
his kinſman and ſeruants had behaued themſelues, yet, not
wholly ſatisfied, taking a Light from one of the vvomen,
with it ſoone vnderſtood his bitter misfortunes: finding his
Eliſa with dolorous grones, clung to an Yuory Crucifixe,
that hung before, at her beddes-head, euen giuing vp the
ghoſt, and by her, his only ſiſter weltring in the gore-blood
of her two deadly wounds. His wife was not quite dead,
with nothing but her Smocke vpon her: but Alcina clad in
her faire ſiſters Robes, in perfect ſence and memory, fully
ſatisfied her wronged Brother, by letting him in her laſt agony
know, that Eliſa died innocently, as hauing not ſo
much as beene a partaker of her wakings; for, tempering
her ſupper with drowzie Opium, which prouoked her to

deadly ſleepe, ſhe made ſure of beeing ſeene or heard by
her ſiſter; ſo that ſhe her ſelfe alone iuſtly deſerued the fatall
puniſhment: ſince ſo againſt her honour and ſhamefaſtnes,
ſhe had admitted the embraces of her Houſes enemy, with
whom, without her brothers knowledge or approbation,
ſhe had beene pre-contracted. And ſo ceaſing, oppreſſed
by her mortall pangs, ſhe yeelded vp her ſpirit; leauing the
miſerable brother that heard her, amazed with griefe, and
ſorrowfull aboue meaſure, when repentance came too late;
for Eliſa too was now ſtarke dead in his armes. His tongue
was faſt tyed, which ſilence wrought in his mind in ſuch
manner, that his vitall ſpirits euen failing him, hee might
ſuddenly haue followed his deare Spouſe, but that Fabricio
comming haſtily vpon him, rowzed him vp, by telling him,
the party whom they had ſlaine below, was no other then
Tirſo, Don Rodrigo's brother, one of his greateſt enemies.
The noyſe alſo began to increaſe within doores, and to bee
ſeconded without: ſo that ſeeing ſo many, ſo vnexcuſable
miſchiefes before him, to adde no more (by his owne for
vpſhot) to the number, hee was forced to prouide for his
owne ſafety, deſperately leauing his houſe and houſholdgoods
to the arbitrement of a diſtracted family.
               With this reſolution accompanied only by his kinſman,
mounted on horſe-backe, they left the Towne, poſting on
all that night, and the next following, till ſuch time as Fernando
laying hold vpon a fit opportunity, gaue Fabricio the
ſlip, and croſſing by a Bridge the Criſtalline ſtreames of
Tagus, turning toward the rugged mountaines of Guadalupe,
in a ſhort time he got into the ſecretſt and wildeſt parts
of thoſe rockie Deſarts, where euen ſpent almoſt by the vanquiſhing
oppreſſion of his diſaſters, he had by degrees waſted
away, had not Heauen that helped him, and enlightned

his vnderſtanding, made him fall into this conſideration,
that his preſent euils were but ſlight puniſhments for his
paſt crimes, which hee aboundantly in teares bewayling,
not to be vngratefull to his diuine Creator, that had but ſuperficially
chaſtiſed him, reſolued in my company vpon a
rigorous penitent life, in which after he had remained ſixe
yeeres, three dayes ſince, with maruellous tranquillitie of
ſoule, betooke himſelfe to his lateſt reſt.
               Thus ended the long, but not tedious Story of the deuout
Hermit, with no leſſe attention then ſorrow from the
Auditors, eſpecially the two Brothers his deareſt friends;
though conforming themſelues to the diuine pleaſure, his
happy ending was a comfort to them; in whoſe lifes circumſtances,
and diuers other matters they ſpent the nights
remainder; & in the morning accompanied by their good
old Oaſt, betooke them to their way, and in the beſt part of
it, viſited the famous Monaſterie of Guadalupe: and afterward
taking leaue of the Reuerend Hermit, and holding on
their iourney, within foure dayes they came in ſight of the
ſtrong walles, and Towry Caſtle of Ceſarina; and arriuing
about Sun-ſet, aſſuring themſelues Niſe muſt be within, they
all alighted.
               
                  Gerardo had no ſooner ſet footing on the threſhold, when
knowne by ſome of his Miſtreſſes ſeruants, not without
extraordinarie ſhewes of admiration, they ranne greedily
to haue imbraced him; for as the newes which Niſe had
divulged held currant, he was in all thoſe parts giuen for a
dead man, ſo that wholly amazed, though they felt him,
they doubted; and (though they ſaw him) whether he were
the obiect of their eye-ſight. Theſe extremes filled Gerardo
with no leſſe wonder, though at laſt informed of the cauſe,
his deſire increaſing to ſatisfie his Miſtreſſe, hee could not

be at quiet till he had ſeene her; but manifeſting his minde,
he was by one of thoſe ſeruants told the occaſion why Niſe
was at that time out of the Caſtle, which was, that perſwaded
verily that hee had beene caſt away vpon the Coaſt of
Barbary, ſhe returned to the Nunnery where ſhe had before
liued; and leauing her poſſeſſions (againſt all perſwaſions
of her kindred) meant to take vpon her the Religious
habit of Saint Clara, and to liue and dye in that
profeſſion.
               The gheſts at the vnexpected Relation were much troubled,
though, in Gerardo, this vvas not onely an effect of
trouble; for his eyes, vvithout vvagging their lids, ſtaringly
fixed vpon earth, he ſtood as immoueable, as if he had been
a Statue of braſſe, rather then a man of fleſh.
               
                  Leoncio vvell noted the ſudden alteration, and expecting
a little to haue him come to himſelfe, thinking it too long
for a muze: about to haue giuen him a ſecret iogge, hee
had like to ſet him off his legges to the ground. Gerardo's
paſſion vvas not ſo ſlight, nor the Torment he endured ſo
tolerable as his Brother imagined, his heart quite failed
him; and therefore applying new helpes, and cauſing a
bedde ſuddenly to be made, they laid him in it, his Brother
and kinſmen in this ſtrange accident round beſetting
him.
               Theſe things paſſed not ſo couertly (the diſtance being
not much) but that the fame of them in an inſtant flew to
Niſe's eares: who though at firſt (relying wholly vpon her
owne thoughts) ſhe could giue no credit to the newes; yet,
vvhen at laſt ſhee heard it ſeuerally confirmed, no tongue
can expreſſe her ioy, though indeed her Louers preſent danger
mingled it with ſome ſorrow: to whom, ſhee carefully
diſpatched ſundry meſſages, diſpoſing them ſo, that one

came in the necke of the other, yet all were anſwered by
Leoncio: for the brother lay yet in a profound Extaſis, which
made her ready to haue forſaken the Nunnery; which ſhe
had ſtraight performed, leauing her holy habit, but that
ſuch an Act might haue been imputed to much leuity. But
Leoncio with the reſt of the Gentlemen, not long after went
to viſit her, by whom ſhe was told (to her no ſmall ioy and
comfort) that Gerardo amended: and after ſome ſpeech betwixt
them the agreement was, that the next day (ſince the
onely cauſe of her retirement, vvas, thinking that Gerardo
vvas dead, and that the contrary at preſent appearing,
ſhee might, without her honours hazard, quit the Order)
their ſo long deſired Nuptials ſhould in the Monaſteries
Church be ſolemnized.
               This newes was quickly ſpred about the Village, and ſo
heartily celebrated, that ere night, all the Turrets, Battlements
and walles of the encloſure; as alſo, Streets, Marketplace,
Doores and Windowes, were full of Lights, Torches
and Bonefires, nothing was heard but noiſe of ioy and
Muſicke. The better ſort of the Gentry likewiſe, with the
Ginetiers of the Coaſt, then in the Village ranne their ſeuerall
Carreeres before the Nunnery & Caſtle Gates: where,
though Gerardo were now ſomewhat better come to himſelfe,
yet hee could not thorowly bee comforted, neither
could his kinſmen or Leoncio know what to attribute the
cauſe of it to, who much afflicted to ſee him ſtill in that
manner, importuned him all he might, to know the ground
of his ſtrange diſcontentment.
               
                  Gerardo, out of the mutuall affection betwixt them, would
ſoone haue ſatisfied his Brother, but that hee iuſtly feared,
Leoncio's perſwaſions might preiudice his ſecret intent:
wherefore, diſſembling the true cauſe, hee told him that the

vnexpected newes of Niſe's Religious eſtate (preſuming his
owne to be deſperate, his ſudden griefe allowing him no
time to weigh the matter) had ſo much hitherto oppreſſed
him; but that, vnderſtanding now the truth of her affection,
he vvas better pleaſed and contented. So vvas Leoncio
vvhen he heard this, and aſſured that his Brother concealed
not his cares from him, his, were to prouide againſt the prefixed
time; and ſo taking order to haue all things, and the
Bridegroomes brauery in a readineſſe, they all, that night,
the better to cheere vp his brother, ſupped in Gerardo's
Chamber. And toward midnight euery one withdrew to
his lodging, and all, vvhen day came, went downe into the
Caſtle yard; where, with ſhewes of noble emulation, in rich
embroideries, an Epitome of our Weſt-Indies might bee
ſeene: and in this manner (hauing ſent word firſt to Niſe)
Leoncio with them vvent to fetch the gallant Bridegroome
out of his bed: but finding the Chamber doore ſhut, and
his ſeruants attending his awaking, wondring at his drowzineſſe
(though ſome imputed it to the late accident) they
knocked aloude; but hearing no anſwere, Leoncio haſtily
vvith his foot ſhoued the doore open, which was but only
cloſe put to; and himſelfe with the reſt entring in, thinking
Gerardo vvas yet aſleepe, they drew the Curtaines, but neither
found Gerardo in bed, not ſaw any of his apparell;
wherfore Leoncio much troubled, and fearing ſome diſaſter,
cauſed ſearch to be made for him all about, and willed that
they ſhould ſee if his Horſe were miſſing, which vvas as he
miſ-doubted; and therefore his kinſmen called to haue
theirs ſaddled, with purpoſe to ſeeke him out: but a Letter
which one of them found vpon one of the Pillowes, ſtayed
their intent. The hand was knowne to be Gerardo's, and
ſeeing the ſuperſcription to Leoncio, he taking it, not without

ſome teares read it ouer firſt cloſely to himſelfe, and
then aſſwaging his paſſions as vvell as he could, in preſence
of them all, he read alowd the enſuing Lines.
               Deare Brother, that this vnexpected Act of mine, eſpecially in
an occaſion ſo vrgent, muſt of neceſsity cauſe in your Noble breſt
(if not alſo compaſsionate) a ſtrong diſtaste againſt your Gerardo;
I cannot doubt; yet must I likewiſe, relying vpon your
wiſedome, duely weighing the reaſons thereunto mouing me, hope,
your puniſhment may be turned into the pardon I preſently deſire:
but firſt let me requeſt you, that, calling to your remembrance
my paſt life ſo full of affrighting, dangers and hazzard,
you would alſo conſider the miraculous meanes and wayes, by
which Gods goodneſse hath freed me from them: to whom I muſt,
beſides the generall obligation of my Redemption, owe a more particular
dutie, which, his vnſpeakeable bounty, in raiſing me from
the bondage of a vicious life, hath impoſed vpon mee. This truth
then granted, had you your ſelfe receiued ſome eſpeciall benefit
not from an equall friend, but ſome meane ſoule, could you bee otherwiſe
then thankefull for it? And, tell me, inſtead of beeing
ſo, were it fit with vile ingratitude, to goe about to bereaue him of
his onely Iewell? What pittying brest would not reuile you for ſo
loude a crime? which out of louing gratitude, or modeſt feare,
you ſhould not dare commit, or leſse imagine.
               If then, oh Brother, ſuch be now my caſe; If this haue hapned
in my lifes whole courſe: why ſhould not I, by falling into the reckoning
of my ſinnes, ſtriue to expiate ſomeone, by leauing to the
quiet poſſeſsion of my gracious Maker, a Spouſe, admitted to his
Hymenean rites? And this, if not for infinit bleſsings and mercies
beſtowed, at leaſt for the iuſt feare (Fernando's example my
wofull Preſident) of an equall puniſhment. And thinke not you or
any elſe, that, that ſtupendious accident which befell vs, was only

caſuall (farre be it) To looſe our ſelues in a high-way, to deſcend
with ſuch ſure and certaine danger, a ſteepe craggie Mountaine
at midnight, to finde in ſuch a wilderneſſe ſo good ſhelter and
company; and our old true friend, (though dead) proclaiming
lowdly in his life ſuch ſucceſſes. All this (beleeue mee) was not
without ſome myſterie, or gouernment of Gods most liberall hand.
Niſe to me ſhall be no Eliſa, neither will I to niceties with heauen,
or quiddities of her profeſsing or not profeſsing: whether ſhe
may, ought or will accompliſh my wil (though now it be different:)
for ſhould you ſay; 'Twere fitter too to ſatisfie her; and that if
Fernando wooed Eliſa, 'tis otherwiſe with mee: I wooed not
Niſe, rather, there is a neceſsitie to pay the forcible debt of honour;
my anſwere is, That the diuine prouidence, from which nothing
is hidden, fore-knew all this; and notwithſtanding that I
was ſafe from the Seas danger, diſpoſed her heart and whole affection
to ſo ſure a choiſe, Wherby I collect, that that was fitteſt for
her, and moſt profitable for both our ſoules, which, mine, by Heauens
fauour, ſhall follow, and I hope the diſcreet Niſe will admit
of the reaſons of this Letter, and my reſolution, which I requeſt
you make knowne vnto her, and withall, that none of you trouble
your ſelues in my ſearch; for, doubtleſſe, in worldly affaires wee
ſhall neuer meet. And thus my only Brother, and you, the reſt, my
Kinſmen, Friends, receiue my laſt beſt wiſhes for embraces; in
exchange, if euer I were acceptable to your hearts or eyes, comfort
my abſent, poore afflicted Mother; and laſtly heauen giue—
               But here Leoncio's tongue was knotted, and the Paper
dropping from him, the paine he was in, bereaued him of
his ſpeech. The reſt of thoſe Gentlemen bore a part alſo
with him: ſo that nothing was heard amongſt them, but a
confuſed murmure of inward ſighes, which grew quickly
to ſad groanes, with whoſe noiſe Leoncio awaking out of

his paſsionate ſlumber, cryes out outragiouſly; Oh my
Gerardo! And ſo his whole cōtent melted into bitter teares,
and the cauſe of them was ſtraight diſperſed about the
Village.
               'T was not the leaſt of the good Leoncio's afflictions, to
conſider in the midſt of his griefes, Niſe's iuſt ſorrow,
which made him, as if he were within her boſome, proclaime
her complaints, fearing in himſelfe, that not without
cauſe ſhee might exclaime of her double iniury, and
being twice abuſed by his Brother; and calling to his
mind withall, that Maſculine exploit of hers, when for his
libertie ſhe left her home and Countrey, expoſing her life
to a fraile piece of wood, and the Seas danger, aſhamed
then, he durſt not looke vpon her. But knowing how preciſe
a neceſſity there was of ſeeing her, deferring it no longer,
accompanied by his Kindred, hee went to the Monaſterie.
               Here, though he might haue ſuppoſed all things to be in
a readineſſe, and at the firſt ſight the Wals clad with Arras
or Tapiſtrie, he ſaw no more alteration then the day before,
nor the leaſt noyſe or ſtirring, that ſuch a ſolemnity might
haue required: wherefore with more admiration he deſired
tha the faire Niſe might be called: and thinking (according
to the laſt agreement) to haue ſeene her in all her Iewels
and brauery, he found himſelfe beguiled, and Niſe, as formerly
in her Vaile and religious habit.
               Accompanied ſhe was by ſome other Nunnes, her face
and countenance, more awfully graue, leſſe cheerefull then
the day before: which perſwaded them that ſhee was acquainted
with Gerardo's abſence: and therefore Leoncio preſuming
that it was ſo, turning to the faire Dame, framed
this diſcourſe:
               
                  
Conſidering you know of my Brothers vnexpected accident,
I may ſaue a labour to giue you notice of it, complying
in the reſt, with what he hath committed to my truſt
and charge. Niſe's heart was much oppreſſed with hearing
this, and cutting him thus paſſionately off, anſwered; How
ſaid you, Sir? Alas, what ſhould I know, that know nothing
of his diſaſters? Is he dead, or vvhat doe you meane? If ſo,
ſaid Leoncio in more confuſion, I may proceed, though
Gerardo's abſence, and the finding you ſo careleſſe of theſe
Nuptials (ſince ouer-night to your liking they were agreed
on) cannot but containe ſome eſpeciall myſterie: ſo, without
more pawſe he told her the vvhole buſineſſe, as alſo of
the Letter: at all which, her compaſſionate eyes ſent foorth
their teares, and the afflicted Gentleman making an end,
Niſe, not ſo much troubled (as might haue beene feared)
made this modeſt anſwere: When Heauen ſo cleerely
ſhewes his wonders, 'twere needleſſe to make ſtrange my
thoughts, or longer to conceale my intention. Your noble
Brother, Leoncio, hath diſcreetly in fine made the happieſt election:
in which (though you may thinke hee preuented
me;) I gain'd him by the hand and elderſhip; for I no ſooner
yeſterday departed from you, reſolued to be his Spouſe,
when my heart beginning to ponder, and my affections altering,
God Almighty was pleaſed to illuminate better my
weake vnderſtanding; and, conſidering I left cleere light
for laſting darkneſſe, choſe momentary ioyes for eternall;
and laſtly, the Creature, in ſtead of my Creator, ſeeing the
manifeſt errour I was in, my ſorrow & repentance brought
me to this wholeſome remedy of holy retirement: from
which, not all worldly reſpects, or aboue all other, that
powerfull loue I once bore to your Brother, muſt euer remoue
mee: and therefore, I vndoubtedly inferre that two,

ſo equall determinations, two ſo mutually concurring affections,
haue been by Gods particular prouidence diſpoſed,
whom I profeſſe in this Religious Order to obey, as long as
vitall breath ſhall—
               In the midſt of this valour ſhe was drowned in teares, as
accompanied by the Spectators, and vnable to vtter a
word more, with a farewell courteſie, ſhee meltingly left
them, went into her Cell, and Leoncio with his kinſmen
backe to the Caſtle; from whence that very afternoone,
not once looking after Gerardo, willing to obey his laſt commands,
they returned to the famous Village of Madrid:
where theſe paſſages cōming to my knowledge, I thought
good to publiſh them: deſiring that for example and
memory of men worthy to be immortalized
in the Preſſe, they may laſt to
future Ages.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   