
      
         
            
            
            ¶ THE HARVEST IS AT HAND, VVHERIN THE TARES SHALL BE BOVND, AND caſt into the fyre and brent. Math. xiii. D. G
            
            VUherfore here the worde of the Lorde (O ye gentiles) preache in the iles that lie farre of, and ſaie he that hath ſkatered Iſrael, ſhall gether hym together againe, and ſhall kepe him as a ſheperde doeth his flocke, for the lorde hath redemed Iacob, & tidde hym from the hand of the violent, & they ſhall come and reioyce vpon the hils of Syon, and ſhall haue plentiouſneſſe of goodes: whiche the lorde ſhall geue theim, and their conſcience ſhalbe as a well watered garden, for they ſhall no more be hungrie, and whan it is new builded and ſet vp on this facion, it ſhall neuer be broken nor caſt downe any more. Ieromi. 31. B. B. Neuertheleſſe wo be vnto them that calle euill good, and good euill. whiche make darkeneſſe lyghte, and light darkeneſſe. Eſaie the .v. D.
         
         
            
            
               
               The contentes of this voke wherin is mē
               cioned, the policy of popyſhe Preſtes, & what wee oughte to pray fore, and a compariſon betwen them & the preſtes of baal alſo diuers textes and ſentēſes of the holy ſcripturs, to put mē in remembraunce of the wrath of god to com agaynſt al vngodly people. declarynge alſo what man is of him ſelfe in the olde Adam. what ye Lawe is, & wherfore it was geuen. what Chriſt hath done for vs, what promys he hath made and to whom, and who be the true miniſters of his goſſple. and alſo who be the deceyuers of the people. and an hū
               ble peticion deſyred of ye kynges maieſtie, and a diſcouerynge of

titud of antichriſtes & likwiſe abrefe declaracion of ye Ioyfull tyme to come. with ageneral abſolucion for oure fayned ſperitualtie, whome I doo moſt cō
               monly name in the proces here of markt mene or marckt mōſters, not onely becauſe they are marcked in their bodies & ſomtimes weare diſguyſed mōſtrus garmētes, but becauſe their doctrine is marked alſo, for yt that they wold haue the people to beleue part of the holy ſcriptur as it was ſpoken and writtē vnto vs, and ſom other partes therof they wolde not haue them to beleue in the true litterall ſence, but wolde haue the people to beleue it & receiue it, only as they do marke it & appoynt it out vnto thē, and wher as ſoumtimes

do alſo name them marked mō
               ſters, it is becauſe they are ſoo ſhamles & ſo far waxen in their abhomynacions, that they dare do al vnſpekable myſchefe. Oſe. vi. c. wherfore becauſe no man knowyng the word of god, may iuſtly & withe out offence name thē to be any of ye people of god, therfore I name them by ſuche names, as be moſte agreable to their conuercaciō, know ynge yt all they whiche hath bene of the marke, and be nowe truly cōuerted, perceiueth this to be true, wherfore none of them, whiche knoweth true godlynes ☞ wylbe offended ☜
         
         
            
            ☞ To the reader ☜
            Groſely compyled withoute any clearkly Eloquēce by Iohn Champneys, an vnlearned laye mane borne in the countie of Somerſet, alytyl beſydes bryſtowe, haueynge more affection in the playne ſettynge fourth of y• troth, then in alonge Sophyſtycall Ipocryſtiſhe tale craftily vttered. wherfore I deſyre you to beare with my rudenes, in that yt I haue ſo groſly gathered certayne places of ye holy ſcriptures, and haue euen ſo lykewyſe written thē herein, to put ſuch men in remēbrance as be of god, and yet dothe not muche excerſyſe thē ſelfues neither in readyng nor hereyng of the holy ſcriptures, that by the

mean hereof I mai partli moue them to vſe more diligence ther in and alſo to be more earneſte to god in their faythful prayer, for the aſſiſtaunce of his grace, both to attayne ſpiritual power therby to lyue acordenge to the true relygiō of ye goſple of chriſt and alſo to haue the true vnderſtandynge of his worde, by the gyft of the holy goſte, in aperfyt fayth, beynge eſtablyſhed in anvndouted hope, of all thynges promyſed therein, and not to be of awauerynge mynd, and ſo be deſceaued by the ſophiſtical ipocrytiſhe doctrine, wt our markt monſtres of their owne mindes doth ſet forth, but vtterly to abhōre and dyſpyſe it. gal.
         
      
      
         
            
            Lyke as all men which be of god moueth and procureth one another to ſeke the true knowleage of all godly leuynge onely of god by aſſiſtaunce of his grace in ye holy ſcriptures, other in hearynge or readynge therof, accordyng to y• cōmānde ment of god both in the old teſtament and alſo in the new. Eſai. xxxiiii. Iere. ii. f. Iohn. v. c. Col. iiii. d. Tim. ii. a. and iiii. b. So likewiſe our ſhameles mōſters wolde haue men to beleue, that their clerkly ſophiſtical doctrīe ſhould ſufficiently inſtructe the people, in the knowlage of the holy ſcriptures, for they them ſelues know not what the regeneracion of ye ſpirite of chriſt is, but what the deuel and the ſubtiltie of mans wit by out warde

nynge knoweth, yt many of thē be perfect in, and therby they ſet foorth their doctrine. Wherfore I haue rudly in this litill botke ſet furth the trouch as it is written in the holy ſcriptures, in a witnes againſt their clerkly ſophiſtical cōueiaunce, knowyng perfectly yt all people whiche be of the elect of god & regenerate in chriſt, doth delit more in eueri part of the truth being neuer ſo rudely writen or ſpoken, then they doo in aclerkly ſophiſticallye, although he be neuer ſo pleaſantly vttred, how be it our markte men ſet them foorth apaſe, for now that they perceiue yt the highe powers, wyll not ſuffer them to vſe their old abhominacions, they ſet foorth newe Ipochritiſh doctrin to bringe their

children aſlepe, and ſo to kepe them out of the way, how be it if the childern did knowe perfetly what nurſcis thei be that rocke them, they wolde ſlepe no more in their cradels, but wolde rather ly in ye bare playn groūd wt the electe people of god i chriſte, amōg whom god ſayth bi ye prophite Eſai. xxxiii. c. ye ſhall not ſe people of aſtrange tounge, to haue ſo diffuſe alangauge that it may not be vnderſtande neyther ſo ſtrange aſpeche but that it ſhalbe perceued, for al that be the true miniſters of chriſt and haue his ſperite in thē as ſaint paule and wother the appoſtles had, diſpiſe their out warde holynes and clerckly lernynge as ſaint paul did. philipp. iii. b. for ſainct paul beynge lerned wold

in no wiſe precahe or wryte any thynge cōſernynge the goſple of chriſt, after ye maner of outward lernynge. i, cor. iib. and gala. i. c Wherfore be ware of y• doctryne that is be ſyde this, for to make mani bokes it is an ēdles work. preacher. xii, d. but all ſcripture geuen by inſpiration of god, is profitable to reach, to improue, to amend, & to inſtruct, in rightuouſnes, that the mane of god may be perfite, & prepared vnto all good workes. the ii timo. iii. d. for all the wordes of god are pure & cleane, and he is aſhelde vnto all them yt put their turſt, in hym. Wherfore friſte knowe this that no prophicy in the holy ſcripture hath any priuate interpretation, for the ſcripture cam not by the wyll of man, but

holy mene of god ſpake as they were moued by the holy goſte. y• ii. peter. i. d. and euen ſo nowe ye thynges of god knoweth no māe but y• ſperit of god, which ſperit ſercheth althynges euen the bottom of goddes ſecretes, wherby we knowe the thynges that are geuen to vs of god, whiche thynges alſo wee ſpeake not withe wordes whiche mans wyſdome or lernynge teacheth, but withe wordes which the holi goſt doth teache. i. cor. ii. c. praynge alway in ſperit for grace merci & peace from god our father, and frome our Lorde Iheſus Chriſte. to be with all them whiche loue the profeſſion of his goſple vnfaynedly. Wherfore oure faythfull prayers beynge mad to god, for the vnyerſal aſſyſtaunce of his

                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
graces, our moſte bounden duty is, to pray, for the preſeruatyon of the moſte Royall eſtate of the Kynges maieſte, my Lord protectors grace and all other of y• kinges moſt honorable Coūſell that the kynges highnes procedynges maye proſperuſly take good effect to ye glory of almyghty god, to the kynges honor and to the encreaſe of all godlynes, in ye vtter dyſtructiō of y• whole Incorporatiō and power of all marckt preſt hod, and to reſtore the people of god within all his realmes and dominions, again frely in to the true lebertie of ye goſple of chriſte, lyke as the godly Kyng Ioſias beyng yong of age in the begynynge of his time, diſtroyed all the preeſtes & prophites of baall, & of other

falſe goddes, and alſo reſtored the people beynge Iewes to the true worſhippynge of god after the lawe of moyſes. As we reed the iiii kynges xxiii. and the  .ii. of cronicles xxxiiii. Wher with al god was well pleaſed, and is alway with all Kynges & hygh powers, which ſeke his glory, and the depoſition & vtter ſuppreſſion of all ſuche tirannous Ipocrires as all our markt mē be, which in tim paſt hath cauſed Kinges & other high powers to aſſiſt thē to execut their abhomīable deueliſh tirani, & to maī
               tayne al other of their abhomynations, which doth fare exced all other abhominations, yt any man mai read of in ye holy ſcriptures ye hath beenn ſence ye begynynge of the worlde, both for

long continuaunce and alſo for great deluſion, namely it doth fare exceed the abhominations of the preſtes and prophites of baal, for wher baales preſtes be fore the raygne of the ſayd godly king Ioſias, cauſed y• people to worſhipe Idoles, our markt men haue bothe cauſed y• people to worſhipe many mo Idoles, then euer baalles preſtes did, & be lyke wyſe worſhipped themſelues as Idoles, and be alſo named the miniſters of the goſple of chriſte, although they delite in habōndance of temporal poſſeſſiones, hauynge names of dignitie lyke tēporall Princes and rulers, cleane contrary to the doctrine of chriſte. math xx. d. &. xxiii. v. mark. x. 
                  •
               . luke. xxii. c Iohn. xiii. v. Pet. v. a. Whiche

is an open preſūptuōs blaſfemi of ye goſple. and like as baalles preſtes procured ye death of many of the true prophets of god, ſo haue our markt mē procured and ſougth the death of all maner of people whiche profeſte ye true religyon in chriſt, & lyke as baales preſtes dyd cōtrary to ye ordynancis of god wrytten in the lawe of moyſes, ſo haue our marked mōſters don & yet dayli doth ſo fare forth as thei dare for fere of the temporall power cleane contrary to all the ordynaūcis of chryſt wrytten in the goſple. and yet wold ſtil be naēd to be the miniſters of chriſte, be cauſe they can talke of goddes worde, and haue many crafty argumētes & ſophyſtycall dyſputations therof, and therfore

thei ſay thei know god, but with their dedes thei deny him. Cit. the fyrſt chap. b. hauynge but a ſimilitude or vayne ſhadowe of godlyneſſe, but haue openly denied the power therof, the  .ii. of Cim. iii chap. a. wherby they ar plainly knowne to be the chyldren of the deuyll and dampnacion. Ihon. viii. f and the firſt epiſtle of Ihon. iii. b. Wherefore God ſayth by the Prophet Eſa i the  .xiiii. chap. e. Let there be a waye ſought to deſtroye theym which be in their fathers wyckedneſſe that they come not vp agayn to poſſeſſe the land. And it is alſo writē in the Pſalmes. cxxxvii. b O daughter of habilō, happie ſhall he be that rewardeth the as thou haſt ſerued vs: bleſſed ſhall he be that taketh

thy chyldren, & throweth theim againſt the ſtones: for the tyme is come that whoſoeuer wil not receyue the trewe doctrine of Chriſt ſhalbe deſtroyed from amonge the people. Actes. iii. d. And the vngodly tranſgreſſors & ſuche as are become vnfaithfull vnto the Lorde, muſt all together be vtterly deſtroyed. Eſa. i. g. For the Lorde Iheſus ſhal ſhew himſelfe from Heauē with the Angelles of his power with flamyng fyer, which ſhall render vengeaunce vnto theim that knowe not God, and that obey not vnto the goſpell of our Lorde Iheſus Chriſt, whiche ſhall be punyſhed with euerlaſtynge dampnacion, frome the preſence of the Lord, and from the glorie of his power. The ſeconde

to the Theſſalonyans the fyrſte Chapiter. d. In whiche power he is now come in ſpirit to be glorified in his Sayntes, and to be magnified in al them which beleue. The ſecond to the Theſſaloniās, the firſt chap. d. which is the bynding of Satan and the fyrſt reſurrection ſpoken of in the Apocalipſes the xx. chapiter. a. b. that is, where as the trewe profeſſyon of the Goſpell hath ben ſo moche perſecuted & hated euer ſynce the Apoſtelles tyme, that no man myght be ſuffred opēly to folow it. Now God wyll glorifye all theim that loue it, for euer and euer, thoroughoute all poſterities. Eſai. lx. c. And wyl clerely deſtroy the whole power of all the enemyes thetof. Eſay. lx. b.

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
O conſyder this, ye that forget God. Pſalm, l. d. And holde you ſtyll in the Lorde, & abyde paciently vpō him yet a lytle whyle, and the vngodly ſhall be cleane gone. Pſalm. xxxvii. b. wherfore put nothyng to the woordes of God leſt he reproue thee, & then thou be founde a lyer. Prouerb. the  .xxx. a as all our markt men be, therfore kepe alwayes in remembraunce, and ſubmyt your ſelues to the cōmaundementes of god. Deut. iiii. a. xii. d. where he ſayth: you ſhall put nothyng vnto the wordes which I commaūde you, neither take ought therfrom: for if any man ſhall adde any thīg to the holy ſcriptures, God ſhal adde vnto hym the plages that ar writtē therin: And if any man ſhal miniſh

any parte therof, God ſhal take away his parte out of the boke of lyfe. Apoc. xxii. d, Neuertheleſſe ſuche is the diſpoſicion of man: for the fyrſt man Adam Man. bare a wicked hert, trāſgreſſed and was ouercome, and ſo be al they that ar borne of hym, The iiii of Eſdxas the  .iii. chap. c. for the imaginacions of mans hert is euyll euen frō his youth, Gene. viii. d. And is but earth, earthly. i. Corin. xv. f. Endued with wyt and reaſon. Geneſ. i. And ſubiect to affection & luſt. Gene. iii. And no man hath attayned to the whole knowledge of his owne ſynne. Pſal. xix. d. For in the fleſh of man remayneth no good thyng. Roma. vii. d. Wherfore thoſe thīges which men haue in hygh eſtimacion be

abhominable in ye ſight of god. Luke. xvi. d. For the naturall man perceiueth not the thinges whiche belong to the ſpirite of God. i. Corin. ii. chap. d. Wherfore it is vndoubtedly to be beleued, that all people remaynyng in the olde Adam, beyng of naturall diſcreſſyon, whiche be not yet regenerate of God, with the ſpirite of Chriſt, are thus farfurth vntyl this tyme. the ſubiectes of the deuyll & abiectes from God. Roma. viii. b What wiſdome or learning ſoeuer thei haue, or what outward lyfe ſoeuer thei lyue, & knoweth nothyng of the thynges of god. i. Corin. ii. c, the  .iiii. booke of E
                  •
               dras the  .iiii. b. Neuertheleſſe reaſon and learning by the workes frō the creaſion declareth

and confeſſeth God, ſo that they are without excuſe that ſo know God, and glorifye hym not as God. Romayns the firſt c. Howbeit no man, by any gyft of nature may glorifye God, or do any thyng which is godlye: for it is God which worketh al goodneſſe in vs, bothe the wyll, and alſo the deede, the Philippians the ſeconde. c. Wherfore, the onely trewe & perfect remedy is for all reaſonable people to ſeeke of God in prayer, the regenaciō promyſed in Chriſt. Eſaie. liiii. d, Ihon vi. c. Mat. vii. chap. b. and Luke the  .xi. b. Wherby they ſhal haue both the true vnderſtāding of his word, & alſo power in ſpirite to lyue alway accordyng to the trewe profeſſyon of the Ghoſpell: for

otherwyſe no mā may be acceptable with God and a partaker of euerlaſtyng lyfe with Chriſt. Math. xiii. c. and Luke. viii. b. For neither reaſon nor learnīg can declare the true religion in Chriſt wherwith onely God is pleaſed and pacified by Chriſt: wherfore wo be vnto them that are wyſe in their owne ſyght, & thynke themſelues to haue vnderſtanding. Eſay v. e. And precheth or ſetteth furth anye doctryne of the holye Scriptures, without the ſpirite of god, Eſai. xxx. a. And curſed be ye mā that putteth his truſt in man, & that taketh fleſh for his arme: & he whoſe hert departeth from the Lorde, he ſhalbe lyke the heath that groweth in the wildernes: and as for the good thyng that

is for to come, he ſhall not ſee it. Ieremy. xvii. b. But ſhall be as ignoraunt of the comyng of the glorye of the Goſpell, as the moſt parte of the Scribes and Phariſeis were of Chriſt: for God hath wrapped all nacions in vnbeliefe, that he might only haue mercye on all his electe. Romaines the  .xi. Chapiter. e. for in the tyme of the Law, the Lawe. hygh learned Scribes & Pharyſeis beyng ignoraunt of God for their vnthankefulneſſe ſake thought to eſtablyſh their owne righteouſneſſe by the law. Romaines the  .x. chapiter. a. Lyke as our marked men now beyng deſtitute of the ſpirit of Chriſt, thynketh to miniſter the goſpel by their outward learnyng: for other knowledge thei haue not,

but doo therin now lyke as the Scrybes and Phariſeys dyd, which knew not that the lawe was ſpirituall, and that it required more perfectiō then mai be obſerued of any erthly man, namely in that that it cōmaundeth, that we ſhoulde not luſt. Exodus. xx. chap. c. Deut. v. b, For who ſoeuer luſteth or deſyreth in herte any thyng whiche is his neyghbours, is condemned by the law. Math. v. c. For they knewe not that the lawe was geuen to vtter ſynne, and to ſhew the imperfection of our fleſh, and that therby no fleſh ſhall be iuſtified in the ſyght of God. Rom. iii. c. Wherfore they were ignoraunt alſo of the promyſe made to them in the law: for there was neuer no promiſe

of euerlaſtyng lyfe made vnto man therin, but only that thoſe Iſralites which dyd the thīges of the lawe, ſhould lyue therin, Gal. iii. b. Receiuyng the benedictions promyſed in the lawe. Exo xxiii. d. Deau. vii. b. where Moyſes ſayde vnto them: if ye hearken vnto theſe lawes & obſerue & do them, the Lorde thy God wyll loue thee & bleſſe thee and multiply thee, and he wyll alſo bleſſe the fruit of thy wōbe, the fruit of thy land, thy corne, thy wyne, & thyne oyle, & the encreaſe of thy oxē, & the flockꝭ of thy ſheepe, & ce. Theſe & ſuch other lyke were the benedictiōs promyſed of GOD to theym, which lyued in the law, ſo that the receiuyng of theſe benedictiōs declared what righteouſneſſe was in theim concernyng

the law, neuertheles the doinge of the thynges of the iawe dyd not helpe them to euerlaſtynge lyfe, for that was geuen before to Abraham, & his ſeede by promis, Gen. xii. a. the  .xviii. c. xxii d. ſo that all people after that tyme, which were partakers of euerlaſtyng lyfe, dranke of the ſame ſpirituall rocke of faithe which Abraham did, i. Cor. x. a. both in the tyme of the law and alſo before the lawe, for the inheritaunce of euerlaſtynge lyfe, commeth to all people onely by grace, through fayth, Ephe. ii. b for the law was but only added becauſe of tranſgreſſiō, tyll the ſeed came to whom the promiſe was made (whiche is Chryſte) Gal. iii. c. So that what ſo euer the law ſaithe, it ſaithe to them

whiche are vnder the lawe, Ro. iii. c. for the lawe was a ſcolemaiſter, till the tyme of chryſte, but ſyns that tyme, all people whiche be regenerate in chryſt, are no lenger vnder the lawe, galath. iii. d. for the lawe is not gyuen to no perſonne whiche is made righteous in chryſte, by a true faith, hauyng the power in ſpirite by the gyfte of the holy ghoſt, to loue al the elect people of god, accordynge to the commaundement of chryſt, Ioh. xiii d. for the hole commaundemēts of the lawe are included in the perfection of loue, out of a pure heart, and of a good conſcience, and of a faythe vnfayned from the which thinges becauſe the whole multytude of our markt men haue erred, thei are turned

to bayne iangelynge about the law, & would be techers therof, & yet vnderſtand not what they ſpeake, neither wherof they affirme. i. Tim. i. chap. b. But be euen ſuche lyke teachers, as we reade of Act. x b. that troubled the cōgregaciō in the Apoſtles tyme, which wold haue had ſircumſicion & the cōmaūdemētes of Moſes law kepte, which neuer no man els in his fleſh was able to kepe, but onely Chriſt: wherfore the Apoſtles by one aſſent, wrate a cōtrary cōmaūdement that we ſhoulde beleue no ſuch doctrine, but to abſtain frō thynges offred to ymages, & frō fornicacion & ſuch vnclennes, & that ſo doing we ſhould do wel. for our markte mē which teach the lawe, obſerue not the lawe.

Gala. vi. c. Neither they know not that Chriſt is thendt of the lawe, to iuſtify all that beleue. Rom. x. a. But they be very deſyrous of the benedictiōs of the law, & thynke them ſelues to be in the fauor of god, becauſe they haue habundance of al worldly thynges, the fyrſt of Tymothy the vi. chapiter. b. Unto whom ſaynt Paule ſayth. Galat. v. a. That al thoſe which truſt in the law (and ſeke the beuedictions therof) are fallen from grace, & woulde that all ſuch teachers were clearely ſeperated frome the companye of all Chriſten people. Galathas the  .v. chap. b. For they are the enemies of the croſſe of Chriſt, whoſe ende is damnaciō, whoſe belly is their God, and glory to their ſhame,

whiche are worldelye mynded, philipiās. iii. d, wherfore let vs wholly depend of Chriſt, which hath fulfilled all thynges that 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                was written of hym, in the law of Moyſes & in the prophetes, and in the pſalmes, luke. xxiiii. E. which alſo hath all power in heauen and in earth, and hathe made a generall peace betwene god the father and vs, and hath alſo put away through his fleſh the cauſe of hatred euē the lawe of commaundementes, conteyned in the law written. ephe. ii. c. ſo that he hath clerely put out the hande wrytynge that was agaynſte vs, conteyned in the law wrytten, & that hath he taken out of the way, and hath faſtened it on his croſſe, colloſ. ii. c and hath alſo eſtabliſhed a new

teſtmaent, not lyke vnto the old accordynge to the promyſſes of god, ſpoken of by the prophetes Ieremye. xxxi. f. xxiiii, b. xxx. d. Ezechiel. xi. d. xxxvi. e. where he ſaythe, I will put my lawes in their myndes, & in their hertes I wil write them, and I wilbe their god, and they ſhall be my people, and they ſhal not teache euery man his neighboure, and euery man his brother, ſayeng: knowe the lorde, for they ſhal al knowe me, from the leaſt to the moſt of them, Ebre. viii. c. & x. c. Here ye mai ſe & perceiue plainli that the promiſe of this teſtament, is made onely to thē that be regenerate in chriſt, & therby knoweth ye true profeſſiō of ye goſpel, accordyng to the doctryne of chriſt, mat. xiii. c. luke. viii. b

For whoſoruer knoweth it not beyng of naturall diſcreſſion, hath no promyſe made within any parte of the new teſtament to be ſaued by Chriſt, if he departe this preſent lyfe in ſuche ignoraunce: wherfore god ſayeth by the Prophet Eſay the  .ix. chapiter. c. All they whiche enforme the ignorant people, that they be in a ryght caſe, they be diſceiuers, and ſuche as men thynke to bee perfecte amonge thē, are but caſt awayes, For it is alſo wrytten. Eſay the, liiii. d That all thoſe people whiche ſhalbe ſaued in Chriſt, ſhall be taught of God, which wordes Chriſt himſelf doth alſo verify. Ihon. vi. b. and ſayth lykewyſe, that they ſhall be all taught of God. And ſaynt Paule ſayth. ii.

Corin. iiii. a. That the Goſpell is not hydd, but onely amonge them that are loſte, whom the deuyll hath deluded. Wherfore Knowſege to know who theibe that knoweth the goſpell, and who they be that knoweth it not, & wherby ye ſhal know them, as the ſcripture teacheth: ye ſhal haue it expreſt in this treatyſe hereafter folowyng, ſpecially who be the true miniſters of the goſpell of Chriſt, and alſo who be the diſceiuers of the people: for Chriſt ſayeth. Math vii. c, A good tree can not bring furth bad fruyte: neyther can a bad tree bringe forth good fruyte: wherfore he ſayeth, by their fruytes ye ſhall know thē: for either the tree is good & his frute good, orels the tree is euyll and his fruite euyl

Math. xii. c. for it is not a good tree that bryngeth furthe euell fruite neither is that an yll tre that bryngeth furth good frnte luke. vi, g. wherefore it is expedient and neceſſary to knowe, firſt what fruites theſe be that chriſte ſpeketh of, whereby all people may be knowen, that is to know, what good dedes they be which an euil mā cannot do, and alſo what euill dedes they be which a good man cannot do Firſt chriſte ſaith Iohn. xiii. E, that all his electe people ſhalbe knowē bi loue, which thei haue one to an other, and ſaithe alſo luke. xiiii. f. If a man come to me and hate not his father, and mother and wyfe and children, and brethren and ſiſters, yea, & his owne lyfe alſo, he cannot be

mi diſciple, and whoſoeuer doth not beare his croſſe likewiſe & com after me, can not be my diſciple. And furthermore ſaithe luke. xviii. d, who ſo euer receyueth not the kyngdom of heuen as a childe, ſhal not entre therī. And ſaith alſo. mat. xviii. a. Except we turne & become as children, we ſhal not enter in to the kyngdome of heauē, wherfor by theſe thynges before reherſed both ye people of god & ye people of ye deuil, are perfitly knowen, Fiyſt all the elect people of god, are knowen by godly loue, one to an other according to the ſaienges of chriſt before mencioned, which godly loue commeth only by the gift of the holy goſt. Rom. v. a. And falleth neuer away from them which be regegenerate

in Chriſt. i. Corin. xii. b. So that enuye and malyce be ſynnes which the people of God beyng regenerate in Chriſt, can not be infected with all: wherfore they be the principallyſt euyll fruytes that Chriſt ſpeaketh of. Math. vii. c. whiche no good tree can beare: for the ſpirit of God remaineth alway in theym that be regenerate in Chriſt. Eſay lix. c. Ihon, xiiii. b wherefore they can not do contrary to the cōmaundement of Chriſt. Ihon. xiii. e. whiche is loue, becauſe they are borne of God, & his ſeede remaineth alwayes in theym, the Epiſtle of Ihon. iii. chap. b. But the people of the worlde can haue no ſuche perfection of loue to the people of God. Ihon. x. c. For perfecte

loue is the moaſt principalleſt gift of the holi ghoſt. i. Cor. xiii. c. wherfore it is alſo the principaleſt good fruyt which Chriſt ſpeaketh of. Mat. vii. c. Whiche no yll tree can beare: & likewiſe as ther remaineth in the people of God a perfect loue to al them that be obedient to the Goſpell of Chriſt, ſo is there alſo in thē a ſpiritual hatred according to the ſaiyngs of Chriſt. Luk. xiiii f. Agaynſt all worldly affectiōs & lnſtes, both in them ſelfes & in al other people, but ſpecially againſt the whole conuerſaciō of almarked mē, & other which diſpyſe or refuſe the true doctrine of the goſpel. ii. tim. iii. c. ſo that ye vnfained hatred of al worldly affectiōs & luſtes, & the hole conuerſaciō of al merkt mē & other

which refuſe ye true doctrine of chryſt, is alſo a gyfte of the holy ghoſt, onely to theym whiche be of the electe people of God, for worldly people can not hate all worldly affections and luſtes, wherfore the vniuerſall hatred thereof is alſo an other good fruite whiche no euyll tree can beare, howbeit by this fruit the electe be not perfectly knowen but only to them ſelues, neuertheleſſe by doyng of the contrary, as by louyng and delyting in worldly affections & luſtes: the people of the world ar plainly knowen to be the ſubiectes of the deuil, for who ſo euer loueth the world, or the thinges of the worlde the loue of god is not in him, the firſt epiſtle of Ihō. the ſeconde chap. c. And as for the

bearyng of the croſſe of Chriſt before mencioned, whiche is to haue alwai a ſpiritual pacience in all aduerſyties, tribulacions and perſecucions, & to reioyce only in them. Gala, vi c, Beyng therbi aſſured in a ſtedfaſt hope the ſecoud of Tim, ii. chapter. b Roma. v. a, Knowyng alſo vndoubtedly the occaſyō why god ſendeth ſuch aduerſyties, tribulacons and perſecuſyons to all his electe people, is lykewyſe a principall gyft of the holygoſt, and alſo the ſpirituall conforte and ioye which the elect people of God haue therin, vnto that tyme the goſpell be fully glorified, is cleane contrarye to the natural diſpoſiciō of al worldli people: wherfore it is lykewyſe an other good fruyte whiche no

yll tree can beare. And where Chriſt ſayth. Luke. xiii. d. That who ſo euer receyueth notte the kyngdome of God as a chylde, ſhall not enter therin: & ſayeth alſo. Mat. xviii. a. Excepte we turne & become as chyldren, we ſhal not entre into the kingdom of heauē. This doth manifeſtly declare vnto vs, that all people which ſhal be ſaued in Chriſt, & receyue euerlaſtyng lyfe, ſhall receiue it only by grace geuē of God, in the mercifull promyſe made in Chriſt, without any aſſyſtance ther vnto of any of our owne workes. Ephe. ii. b. For euery one that entereth into the true reſt of the Saboth of God, ceaſſeth frō doing of their owne woorkes. Ebrues iiii. b. And ſubmitteth them ſelfes as elect

chyldren, wholly to be taught & lead in their conuerſacion only by the ſpirite of Chriſt, vnto whom they geue the honor of al godly enſtructions, ſo that thei do not after their owne ymaginacion, neither ſeke their owne wyll, nor ſeke their owne wordes. Eſay the  .lviii. d Which the Scripture ſayeth, Apoc. xiiii. a In ſuche a ſonge as no earthly perſones could learne ſynce the tyme of Chriſt, but onely the nombre appoynted, of whome there bee ſome reſerued by the mercifull goodneſſe of God, to declare the trewe euerlaſtynge goſpell of Chriſt, to the glorye therof through out the vniuerſal world. Apo. xiiii. b. wherfore it is alſo a principal gyft of the Holy goſte, whiche no worldly perſon hath neither knoweth of

Thō. xiiii. b. And an other good fruit which no yll tree can bere, ſo yt by theſe fruites before mencioned and not otherwyſe by any other outward appearaūce, both the people of God, & alſo the people of the deuyll be perfectly knowen to all theim that knoweth the trewe doctrine of the ſpirite of Chriſt. Howbeit the worldly people which worſhip the beaſt & his ymage, yet vnto this tyme, thynkethe to know & to deſerne what ſortes men be of by other outward hipocritiſh workes, wherfor they condempne the people of God in their iudgementes, as the ſcribes & phariſe is dyd Chriſt. Tho ix. c Becauſe thei ſeme not to theym to be ſo holye in their outwarde appearaunce, as the

worldly hipocrites do. Howbeit the beſt meane & way to knowe who be the true miniſters of the goſpell, and who be the diſceyuers of the people, if they bee ſtraungers vnto vs, ſo that we can not know them by their ſpiritual fruites before mēcioned: then the ſureſt way is to ſerche diligently whether they preach the goſpel in lyke maner as the Apoſtles of Chriſt dyd, and as Chriſt cōmaunded al his electe miniſters to do, that is only by the inſtruction of the holy goſt, & not otherwyſe. Luke. xxiiii. e. For that, that the excellency of the power of the miniſtraciō of the goſpell myght be Goddes, & not ours. ii. Corin. iiii. chap. b. So that all the elect miniſters of Chriſt, geue the glorye and

praiſe of the miniſtraciō of the goſpell, wholly to the ſpirite of Chriſt, which is geuen to euery one of the electe people of God, which ſhall be ſaued in Chriſt. Act. ii. f. & the fyrſt. Corin. xii. b. Wherfore whoſoeuer preacheth the Goſpel after any other maner then onely by thinſtruction of the ſpirite of Chriſt, is a diſceiner, whom the ſpirite calleth Ihon. x. a. A theife and a murtherer, for that that he taketh vpō him to entre into the ſheepe folde of GOD, whiche is his woorde conteyned in the holye Scriptures, by another meane and waye then by the moſt holy Spirite of Chriſt, which is the only dore wherby all the electe people of GOD entre into the trewe knowledge of the holye

ſcriptures, ſo that all our marked men which preach without his ſpirite, are ſpiritually both theues & murtherers: for they are theues, becauſe they take from Chriſt that which is his, that is the miniſtracion of the woorde of God, whiche ought onely to be miniſtred by the power of the ſpirite of Chriſt: for otherwyſe as by outward learnynge, or anye other meane or waye, no man can miniſter it purely and truly, the firſt to the Corinthians, the ſeconde chapiter. b. c. Accordynge to the Commaundement of Chriſte. Wherefore, oure Markte men are alſo Murtherers, becauſe they dooe as moche as in theim lyeth, ſpirituallye to murther all thoſe ſoules to whome they

haue ſo preached. For likewyſe as we haue but one Chriſt, ſo is there but one trewe doctrine of Chriſt, and but one ſpirituall conuerſacion for all people to keepe, whiche be regenerate in Chriſt. Ephe. iiii. a. Phil. iii. c. For all our marked men which inclyn not vnto ye good wordes of our Lorde Iheſus Chriſt, & to the doctrine whiche accordeth to godlyneſſe, are pufte vp with the deluſion of the deuyll, and knoweth nothyng that is good, but waſteth their braines about queſtions & argumentes & ſtryfe of wordes, with many vayne diſputacions after their corrnpte myndes, beyng clerely deſtitute of all true knowlege. i. Tim. vi. a. Neuertheleſſe all true miniſters of the goſpell of

Chriſt, ſeketh with moſt diligence to haue all people to come to Chriſt: that is, to beleue all the promyſes made in Chriſt, and to ſeke of God by Chriſt, all thinges that he hath promiſed. Whereof the mooſte principall thing is to be regenerate of god with the moſte holye ſpirite of Chriſt, without the which ſpirite no man can entre the kingdome of God. Ihon. iii. a. That is, no man can know the thyng that is godly, nether wherwith GOD is pleaſed. i. Corin. ii. c. Wherfore it is moſt nedefull & expedient for all people hauing the gyfte of naturall reaſon to examyn their conſcience ſurely and plainly by Goddes worde, either in hearynge or readynge therof, & ſo to know them ſelues

what eſtate they be in: or who ſoeuer hath not his conſcience agreable ther vnto, wholly & directly without other wreſtyng or writhyng thereof, hathe no promyſe made within any part of the holy ſcripture to be ſaued in Chriſt, but the wrath of God remaineth vpō him. Ihon. xii. g For although that the apoſtles woulde that the Elders of the congregaciōs in the primatiue Church of Chriſt, ſhould be are with the wekenes of the Iewes whiche receyued the Goſpell at the begynnyng of their conuerſion in their ſcrupuloſytie for etyng of meates and other lyke thinges, yet neuertheleſſe they would not ſuffre any of them to continewe in the congregation which conuerted not, after certayne

admonicions frō al kynd of ſuch bondage. Tit. iii. c. But vtterli expulſed them out of the congregacion, & al that taught any ſuch doctrine to lai any maner of yoke of bondage vpō any of the congregacions. Gal. ii. a. more then that which the Apoſtles theim ſelues had taught: wherfore thei cōman̄ded, that if any mā preached or taught any other doctrine although it wer ā Angel from heauē, we ſhould hold him acurſed. gal. i. b Wherfore here is to be noted, that all thei which miniſh ani thing fro or addeth any thynge more to ye Apoſtles doctrine, then yt which they and the Euāgeliſtꝭ and the Patriarkes & prophites haue written vnto vs, ar accurſed of God. Apoca. xxii d. which ſaynt

Paule calleth other doctryne, becauſe there is other thingꝭ in it, then that which the holygoſt teacheth: For the Apoſtles of Chriſt wer the laſt people that God appoynted to write ſcripture, whoſe doctrine ſhall remayn to the worldes end. Act. i. a. Roma. x. d Wherfore, whoſoeuer beleueth any mans imaginaciō conſernīg the doctrine of the holy ſcripture, thinkyng that by anye expoſicion, other written or preached, he maye haue the true vnderſtandynge therof, may be well lykened to ſuch a blyude man, which being withoute eyes thynketh to ſee with an other mans eyes if thei were ſet in to his head, and conſydereth not that the ſyghte of the eyes is a gift of nature, only

to theym, in whome naturally they be, & that no mans cūning can do any ſuch workes: muche leſſe then maye any mans doctryne either writtē or preached make them whiche be but naturall men to ſee & perceyue the ſpirituall lyght of gods worde. Before that tyme they be regenerate of God, & after regeneraciō, all thoſe people in whom the ſpirite of Chriſt remaineth, haue no more pleaſure in mans clerkely curioſytie in the doctryne of the holy ſpirite, then a naturall man hathe beyng vnlearned, & is very deſyrous to haue the knowledge withoute boke by hert, of ſome thing that is written, & one that ſhoulde reade it: & ſo teache him, dothe ſyng it to hym in prickeſong,

hanyng much fyne deſcant ther in, by the meane wherof he doth not perceyue the wordꝭ perfectly whiche he deſyreth to learne by hert: in this caſe he that wer ſo taught, would thinke that he had a frowarde ſcolemaiſter, & euen ſo lykewyſe do al the electe vnlearned people thynke, when any man maketh long clerkely proteſtacion & ſircumſtaunces in the doctrine of the holy ſcriptures, becauſe it hindreth them from that whiche they woulde learne by hert, that is the true literall ſence of the holy ſcriptures as they be written. For the true vnderſtandyng therof is geuē them of god. Eſa liiii. d Ihon. vi. e. and. x. a. whenſoeuer they heare the true literal ſence ther of ſpokrn, being written for

our inſtruction. Wherfore they delyte not in ſuche clerkely curioſitie of men, but do vtterly abhorre it, becauſe ſo many mē haue ben diſceyued by it, and do note alſo much preſumption in all theym that vſe it, becauſe ſaynt Paule & all other whiche were godly refuſed it, the fyrſt to the Corinthians the ſeconde chapiter. a b. and to the Galat. the fryſt. b. c. For lyke as the naturall reaſon of man diſcuſſeth all reaſonable erthly thynges, ſo doth the ſpirite of Chriſt only diſcuſſe all godly thynges neceſſary to be knowē vnto Galat. the fyrſt Epiſtle of Ihon. ii. c d. & the fyrſt to the Cort̄. the ſecōd Chapi. c. Wherfore lyke as reaſonable men do not cōmenly vſe to ſhutt the dores & wyndowes

of their houſes in the middes of the fayre day lyght, & ſo burne candles and other lyghtes: no more do the electe people of god beyng regenerate in Chriſt, refuſe the ſpirituall lyght which they haue of Gods worde by the ſpirite of Chriſt, and ſeke it by mens ymaginacions. And furthermore, lyke as reaſonable people thynke it foly to burne candles & other lyghtes where the day lyght maye ſufficiently ſerue: So lykewyſe all people which be regenerate in Chriſt doth thinke it deueliſh madnes for any man to truſt in mans doctrine, becauſe Chriſt hathe promyſed. Mat. vii. b. Luke. xi. b. Ihon. xvi. f. a good ſpirite, & all thinges els nedefull for our ſaluacion, to euery man whiche

ſaketh it in faythfull prayer of his father in his name: wherfore it ſemeth to vs which be regenerate in Chriſt, that al ſuch men which ſaketh it not of god, according to the doctrine of the goſpell, do not regarde the lyfe to come, orels myſtruſt the promyſes of Chriſt. & beleue men better then they do Chriſt: For no man lyuyng is able to proue that he hath ſought it of God in a true fayth which hath it not: for at this preſent tyme god is ſo mercyfull too offre it to all people, which haue not openly blaſphemed the holy ghoſt, and yet but a ſmall nombre in compariſon to the multitude do receyue it, wherfore his wrathe wyll ſhortly be knowen. Howbe it, in all thoſe people whiche be

be regenerate with the ſpirit of Chriſt. the wonderfull workes of God are ſene at this preſent day. For what is a gretter miracle then the whole & cleare alteraciō of the hert of mā, which may vndoubtedly be perceyued in al them which be regenerate in Chriſt: For the olde ſtonye heart is cleane taken out of all the people of God, & they haue a new hert geuen them of God, which is always obe diēt to the ſpirite of Chriſt. Ezechiel. xi. d. & the  .xxxvi. l. & the Ebrues the viii. c. and the x. c. So that in whome ſo euer the Spirite of Chriſt is, that perſone can not be vnfruitful: For by their ſpirituall fruytes that they miniſter one to another, whiche is loue, ioye, peace, longſuffryng,

gentleneſſe, goodneſſe, faythefulneſſe, mekeneſſe and temperancy, they maye bothe knowe them ſelues, & alſo be knowen to all other godlye people, and not otherwyſe. For no man is knowē by any outward appearance after the fleſh. Ihō. vii. c. ii. Corin. b d Therfore if any man be in Chriſt, he is a newe creature. ii. Corint. v. d. whoſe whole delyte and conuerſacion is in heauen, frome whence we looke for oure Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, Phillippians the  .iii. Chapiter. d. For wee confeſſe our ſelues to be as ſtraungers in this lyfe, vſyng the thynges of the worlde as though we vſed them not, the firſt to the Corinthyans the  .vii. Chap. e. Not doyng our bodely labour with

the reſpecte of our owne lucre, but for that we woulde not lyue idely, & alſo to haue wherwith to help the impotent membres of Chriſt, neyther louyng the worlde, nor the thynges of the worlde, but receiuyng all nedefull neceſſyties of the bodye in worldly thynges, geuyng God thankes, withoute any ſcrupuloſytie or grudge of conſcience: For al the creatures of God ar good, & nothyng to be refuſed, if it be receyued with thankes geuing. i. Timo. iiii. a. For lyke as God doth forbyd all men from the louyng & inordinate vſyng of worldly thinges, ſo lykewiſe dothe hee permit all his electe people their bodily neceſſities of all worldly thynges, & when ſoeuer of two euyls, the one can

not be auoided, God permitteth the leſſe for the eſchewing of the greatter in all earthly thinges. Mat. xii. a. Mar. ii. d. Luk. vi. a Gen. xix. b. Wherfore the ſcriptures ſayeth. i. epiſt. of Ihon. ii. chap. e. If ye know that Chriſt is righteous, ye know alſo that euery one which foloweth righteouſneſſe; is borne of hym: for euery one which loueth Chriſt, loueth alſo all people whiche be regenerate in Chriſt. Ihon. v. a not only in wordes, but in actu all deedes. ep. Ihon. iii. c. for all people which doth the contrary be the children of the deuyll. ep. Ihon. iii. b. By whoſe deluſyon our Markte men haue ſo long diſceiued vs: for the iuſt proufe whereof, if it maye pleaſe the Kynges maieſtee, by the godly

godly aduyſe of my lorde Protectors grace and other of his Pelicion. honorable coūſel, to graunt and permit like libertie to ſome one of them being of ſmal reputaciō & learnyng, which be now regenerate with the ſpirit of Chriſt: as was graunted to Elias, in the tyme of Ahab, Kyng of Iſrahell, as we reade the thyrde boke of Kynges, the xviii. chap. That lyke tryall as was beetwene the ſayde Elias, and all Baals prophetes, bi the offring of ſacrifice, may be now openly and only by the holy ſcriptures written, after the trew litterall ſence: betwene one ſuche of the elect in Chriſt & the whole multitude of our markt miniſters: that lykewyſe al the multitude of them, nowe may confer their lernyngꝭ together: or ſeuerally

whether thei lyſt, & then to be openly & plainly knowen & ſene, whether thei can ſhew the word of God written after the trewe litteral ſence, for the cleare diſcharge of their conſcience, for their doctrine & conuerſacion, ye or no: and if they can not, all men ought to refuſe & to diſpiſe their doctrine, how clerkely or eloquently ſoeuer it be vttered: and none otherwyſe to accepte them but as the myniſters of the deuyll and the Beaſt, whoſe marke thei beare. ii. Corin. xi. c. Iude. c. d. e. And on ye other ſide if the cōpiler hereof, a poore lay man, & of ſmall litterature, be not able by godꝭ aſſiſtaūce, only by the power of the Spirite of Chriſt, to ſhew the word of God writtē in the true literal ſence,

both for the cleare diſcharge of his owne conſcience & conuerſacion, & alſo of all other that be regenerate in Chriſt, let it bee death vnto him. Wherfore in ſo muche as the people beyng preſent with kyng Ahab, conuerted, & confeſſed God, when they ſaw that he ſent fyer from heauen to conſume that Sacrifice which Elyas offred, & wereful certified that he alone was the true Prophet of God, and that Baals Prophetes beyng. ccccl. were all falſe teachers, becauſe their Sacrifice which they had offred remayned whole vnbrēt. Howe muche more then nowe ſhoulde the worde of God written, be a ſure vndoubted tryall in the playne literall ſence for all Chriſten men to beleue, and

ſo therby alſo to knowe, who be the true miniſters of the goſpel of Chriſt, & who be the diſceyuers of the people. Wherfore if ſuche tryall may be permitted in maner afore ſayde, who ſo euer ſhould then miſtruſt it to be a good & a ſure tryall, & worthy to be belened of all people, his blyndneſſe were very wonderfull, becauſe wee haue no certaintie of the trut he but by the holy ſcriptures as thei be written vnto vs, and by the gyfte of the holyghoſt. Wherfore if our marked men, hauyng much lernyng, had alſo the gyfte of the holyghoſt in them, as they haue not, it were not poſſible for any man to diſproue their doctrine and conuerſacion with the holy ſcriptures written, which wer

ordeyned & preſerued vnto vs by the holy ghoſt Wherfore the cleare confutacion of them and alſo of their doctrine & conuerſacion, with the holy ſcriptures written, by one man of ſmall literature, ſhall manifeſtlye declare the incomprehenſible power of God. Deuteron. xxxii. e. agaynſte whom nothynge can preuayle, & in whoſe doctrine lyke as he that fulfylleth the whole lawe, & yet fayleth in one poynte is gyltye in all. Iames.. ii. c. So lykewyſe he that hath a faythe to beleue parte of the holy ſcriptures in the literall ſence as they bee written vnto vs, & beleueth not all his faythe is vnperfecte. For Chriſt promyſed not that any man ſhould be ſaued for the belenīg of parte

of the goſpell, but for the beleuyng of all thynges whiche he promyſed therein, dooyng all thynges alſo in ſpirit which he cōmaūded in the eſtabliſhment therof. mat. xxviii. d. Whervuto the promyſe of euerlaſtyng lyfe is made, and not otherwiſe: for God doth abhor all vaine hope, Ieremy. ii. g. which is not eſtablyſſhed in a perfecte faythe, wholly agreable vnto hys word Epheſians the  .iiii. chapiter. c. Wherfore if we ſhoulde beleue any mans opinion to be good & godly doctrine, in any thynge more or leſſe then is written within the holi ſcriptures, or in any thing contrarye to the true literall ſence thereof, whereby ſhuld we know whoſe opiniō we ought to beleue. For euery part

of the holy ſcripture ſpoken by the holigoſt. for our inſtructiō is of lyke aucthoritie. and may no more be altered from the literall ſence in one place then in an other. But I ſpeake not of the parables which chriſt ſpake to the hygh learned Scribes & Phariſeys, the predeſeſſors of our marked men, to whom thei do ſuccede in lyke power of the Beaſt, beyng of a long tyme aſcended oute of the bot homleſſe pit. Apoca, xiii. a. and. xvii. b. But I ſpeake of the plain declaraciōs which Chriſt made of al parables to his Diſciples: For he declared all thynges plainly vnto them. Mar. iiii. c. And ſo lykewiſe all other partes of the holy ſcriptures be euident and playne to all them whiche haue

the ſame gyſte of the holyghoſt, which the holy ſcriptures were ſpoken by. Ihon. xvii. c. d. Howe beit if any parte therof be altered from the true meanyng of the literall ſence, we are vncertayne what to beleue more of it, for becauſe that then diuerſe men might make diuerſe interpretacions, as thei haue doone in tymes paſt. And few of them agree one with another, & yet euery man coloured his opiniō with the holy ſcriptures. And he that had moſt ſophiſtical conueiaunce & temporall power to maintain his opinion with all, was beſt beleued: So that our marked men hauyng the vpper hand, ſuppreſt the truth alway by terible impriſonmente and death: For they made the fyer

to defend them agaynſt al thoſe people which profeſſed the true religion of the goſpel of Chriſt. Wherefore whoſoeuer beleueth any part of their doctrine to be good & godly in any thīg which is contrary to that that is written within the holy ſcriptures after the playne literall ſence thereof, is clearely deſtitute of al true belefe. For no man hath aucthoritie to alter the literall ſence of the holy ſcriptures contrary to ye other manifeſt ſcriptures written. For that was the inuention of the deuyll, and executed by our marked men, & other ſuch his miniſters: wherby they deluded all people. For of the holy ſcriptures there is but oue true ſence whiche is directly & plainly expreſſed in the

letter thereof, beyng compared together: ſo that ther is no part of it repugnant one agaynſt another. But becauſe that naturall men can not do that which the ſcripture cōman̄deth in the letter, therfore they beleue not that the literal ſence is always true: For thei eonſider uot that there is a new creacion by God aboue nature, and yt euery man whiche in Chriſt is a new creature. ii. Corin.. v. Chapiter. d. ſhapen and fourmed in righeteouſneſſe and trew holyneſſe, to the Epheſians the  .iiii. Chapiter, c. And that thereby they doo that which the letter of the holye Scripture cōmaundeth. For they vnderſtande not that Article of their faythe, that the true catholyke people in Chriſt

do the wyll of God by the power of the holy goſt. Ihō. iiii. c. And that onely by that lawe of the ſpirite of lyfe, Chriſt hath delyuered vs from the lawe of ſyn & death. Roma. viii a. Neither they perceyue not the deuiſion betwene the ſpirite & the fleſh, becauſe ye ſpirit of Chriſt is not in theim. For it is not poſſible for any mā to diſcerne the operaciō of that which he knoweth not of: Wherfore that was the moſt principalleſt parte of our markte mēs doctrine, to make the people to beleue that there was no ſuch ſpirite geuen vnto man wherby he ſhould remaine righteous alway in Chriſt, the Epiſtle of Ihon. iiii. a. Whiche is the moſt deuelyſh error that maye be, becauſe it breedeth a

a doubte in all them that be infected there with, whether the Holy Scripture be true or not, beyng written by men hauyng but the very ſelfe ſame Spirite of Chriſt that all other reaſonable people hath, whiche ſhall be euer laſtingly ſaued in chriſt. Act. ii. f. the firſt Corin. xii. b. Notwithſtandyng in outward miniſtracion, the Apoſtles had power to doo that whiche other membres of the ſame miſticall body of Chriſt can not doo: as in doyng of miracles, & other thynges. Lyke as in a corporal bodye, euery membre hathe not one office, neither one membre can doo the offece of an other, neuertheles, euery liuely mēbre of a corporall bodye hath lyfe & felyng in them. And euen ſo lywyſe

euery membre of the miſticall body of Chriſt hath one ſpirite & one intelligence of the worde of God and one purpoſe of herte in all godlyneſſe, the fyrſt to the Corinthiās the xii. chapiter d. Epheſians the  .iiii. a. c. Ezechiell. xi. d, aud. xxxvi. f. So that, aduiſedly & willyngly they dooe nothyng agaynſt the wyll of god. the Epiſtle of Ihon the  .iii. chapiter. v. Therfore the holy Scriptures in the trewe literall ſence is ſufficiente for their outwarde inſtruction in all godly doctrine. For within the letter of the New Teſtamēt there is ſufficient inſtruction concernyng the true Religion of the goſpell, among all them which beleue it to be true in the literall ſence. And who ſo euer

dothe not ſo beleue it, beleueth nor knoweth nothynge that is good. Luke. xvi. g. i. Tim. vi. a. but may goloke for vnwritten veryties among theſe vnnedefull miniſters oure Marked Preeſthod. For what leſſe deueliſh preſūption is it to thinke the holy ſcripture vnſufficient or vnperfect in the literal ſence for all godly inſtruction, but euen a playne deniall of Chriſt. For Chriſt is included in the worde, and the word in Chriſt. Ihon, the fyrſt chap. a. Wherefore to thynke the worde inſufficient, is to thynke Chriſt is inſufficient, & alſo the holy goſt to be vnperfect, which wrought alwayes in them that wrote it. by whō alſo it hath ben alwaies preſerned, & ſhalbe to ye worldes

ende. Ihō. xv. c. Act. i. a. Ro. x. d. Which ſcripture doth alſo manifeſtly & plainly declare vnto vs, that the Apoſtles lefte nothynge vnwritten whiche was proffitable to oure faythe, but haue declared the whole coūſell of God, beyng nedefull for vs to know. act. xx. d. e. g. neuertheles lyke as wee haue promyſes of mercy in Chriſt, ſo haue we war nyng by Chriſt. Math. xxiiii. Marke. xiii. Luke. xxi. that many ſhould come in his name ſaiyng: I am Chriſt: & ſhoulde diſceiue many. & cet. Wherfore note this, that Chriſt ment not that many ſhoulde name them ſelues Chriſt, as it wer by their proper names: but this worde Chriſt hath this ſignificacion, to be anoynted of GOD, or to

haue a godly power: For Ieſus was anoynted of god: and had alſo the godlye power in hym. Wherfore he is called Iheſus Chriſt, an only ſauyour anoynted of God, for the iuſtificacion of all his elect people from ſyn. Mat. i. So that all thoſe men, which hath taken vpon them any parte of his office in remiſſion of ſynne, ſaiyng they haue power geuē them ſo to do, hath in ſo ſaiyng ſaid thei were chriſtes theim ſelues, becauſe they take that vpō them which was appoynted by GOD onely for Chriſt to doo. Neuertheleſſe by the regeneracion of the ſpirite of Chriſt, all the electe people of God haue power to knowe & to declare whoſe ſynnes GOD hath forgeuen in Chriſt, & alſo

whoſe ſynnes he dothe retayne to iudgement. For the Spirite of Chriſt is the onely key of the Kyngdome of Heauen, whiche was promyſed to the faythe of ſaynt Peters confeſſion. Mat. xvi. c. For fayth is the gyfte of God & maketh vs righteous. And the gyfte of the holy ghoſt which is the Spirite of Chriſt, maketh vs perfecte bothe in knowledge and power to dooe the wyll of God in ſpirite. But faythe of it ſelfe hathe neither perfecte knowledge of the holy Scriptures, neither power to doo that whiche the Scripture cōmaundeth: for that cōmeth onely by the gyfte of the holye ghoſt after fayth, ſometime immediatly, as we reade. Act. x. g And of the good theife, Luke.

xxiii. d. and ſome tyme longe after. For there were dyuerſe congregacions in the Apoſtles tyme whiche were baptiſed and receyued faythe in Chriſt, long before they receyued the gyfte of the holy goſt, as we reade in the Actes the  .viii. chapiter. c. the xix. a. Howe be it, their knoweledge was alwayes vnperfecte vntyll that tyme they were regenerate wyth the Spirite of chriſt. i. cor. iii. a. viii. a. For his Spirite is the oyle whiche the wiſe Uirgins ſhal take in their lampes of fayth, to meete with the trwe Bridegrome Chriſt. Mat. xxv. a. And is alſo ye oyntmēt, which techeth vs all godly knowledge. Ep. Ihō. ii. d. wherfore. ſ. Iames. v. c. wold that the people which wer diſeſed, ſhuld

anointed ther with, which ointment cometh moſt comenly vpō the elect people of God, by praier in fayth, and by laiyng on of handes of the electe miniſters of God in Chriſt, in lyke maner as we reade, Act. viii. chapter. c In which chapiter is alſo mencioned the requeſt of one Simō which offered the Apoſtles money, to haue had lyke power to haue geuen the Holy Ghoſte to whom he woulde, by the laiyng on of his handes. Notwithſtandyng the Apoſtles refuſed hys money, and alſo declared vnto him that he had no part of that miniſtraciō. Neuertheles ſynce that tyme, our markte mōſters hauynge the full power of the Beaſt in theim, haue ordeyned other thynges in ſtede therof to

miniſter to ſycke people, & aſke ye miniſters of Chriſt no leaue. And doo vſe alſo to miniſter to theim in chyldhod, a certayne oyle or greaſe, which is cōmenly called the Confirmacion of their Baptyſme, makynge the ignorant people to beleue that that is the gyft of the holy goſt, lyke as Mahomet made the people to beleue that the holy goſt in the lykenes of a doue. taught hym what doctrine he ſhoulde teache the people. Howbeit, the deluſion of Mahomet ꝭ preeſtes now at this preſent tyme is not ſo muche to be merueyled at, as the deluſiō of our markte men. becauſe Machometes preeſtes doo liue according to their profeſſion, & alſo th
                  〈…〉
                doctrine is agreable to thoſe Scriptures

whiche bee written vnto them: but our marked mē liue cleane contrary to the true profeſſiō of the goſpell, and contrary to the example of Chriſt, & of all his Apoſtles, & alſo miniſtreth crafty doctrine, cōtrary to the holy Scriptures written. Wherfore the acceptyng of them as trew miniſters of the Goſpell, is not onely a declaracion of ignorance in godly knowledge, but alſo a declaracion of blyndneſſe of naturall reaſon. For howe may reaſon conceyue truthe to be in them, in whome ſo muche falſhed is founde. Wherefore what worldly affectiōs ſo euer we haue to them, we ought only to be ruled by the worde of God written, vſyng them but lyke as natural mē do vſe the membres

of their naturall bodyes. For a natural man which hath rotten teethe in hys head, that dothe neuer reſt from paynfull ache, wyll ſeeke a remedy: but if he canne haue none, he wyll haue hys rotten teethe drawen out of his head, rather then to haue all his bodye continuallye diſquyeted. And euen ſo lykewyſe our Marked men are lyke vnto rotten teeth: for they can not miniſter the woorde of God as they ought to doo. And as for the ſpiritual ache, which al godli people haue bi them, we ſee playnly that the hyghe powers haue ſoughte as muche the reformaciō of them as may be, & yet they be as craftye as euer they were, diſguiſyng themſelfe

with ſophiſticall hipocriſy, either new or olde, as faſt as euer thei did, & the deuyl is as familier with them as euer he was: Wherfore God ſend vs remedy of them ſhortly. Howbeit, moſt men be in lyke caſe with theim as women bee with their Parrottes: for women vſe muche diligence to make theire Parrottes to ſpeake, & yet with all their diligence. they canne not make them to talke ſo reaſonabli as a reſonable creature can. And no more can no man make thoſe miniſters which be onely appoynted by mē to declare the true meanyng of the woorde of God, ſo playnly and truly as it ought to be, whatſoeuer be deuiſed for them. For the true vnderſtandyng of the holy ſcriptures

is as dyffuſe to theim, as the wordes of a claſped booke, which no man openeth. Eſaie. xxix. c. For God hath ſent them ſtrong deluſiō, that they ſhould beleue lyes, becauſe they receyued not the loue of the truthe, but had pleaſure in vnrighteouſneſſe. ii. Theſſ. ii. chap. c. For they ar cloudes without water & trees withoute fruyte at gatheryng tyme, beig twiſe dead. wherfore god ſhal plucke them vp by the rootes: For they are lyke the ragynge waues of the ſea, fomynge oute theire owne ſhame: They ar the wandering ſtarres, to whome the myſte of darkeneſſe is reſerued for euer. Iude. d. For in ſo much as God promyſed but one Iheſus to be Chriſt. Gala. iii. c. A full ſatiſfaction,

redemption and ſuſtificacion of all his electe people from ſynne. Ebrues. x. c. As is before mencioned, all men may ſee and perceyue playnly, what ſhameleſſe Antechriſtes all our Markte men bee, whiche haue taughte the people to beleue in others ſatisfactions, other inſtificacions, and other remiſſiō of ſyn, deniyng alſo the power of the Holy Ghoſt, ſaiyng that the ſpirite of Chriſt was inſufficient without outwarde learnyng, to diſcerne the true meanyng of the holy Scriptures, when the electe people of God dyd heare them or reade them, whiche is an open blaſphemy of the holy goſt, which Chriſt ſaith ſhall neuer be forgeuen. Mat. xii c. Marke. iii. b. Luke. vii. b. Wherfore, whoſoeuer truſteth

vpon their conuerſion, ſheweth himſelfe to miſtruſt the trew literall ſence of the holy ſcriptures ſpoken by Chriſt, & written for our inſtruction. For lyke as God is mercifull, accordyng to his promyſe, ſo is he righteous accordyng vnto his worde, and thereby ſhall iudge the worlde. Ihon. xii. g. And by his worde declareth alſo al thinges nedefull to be knowen to his people before it come to paſſe, Amos. iii. b. iiii. d. Whiche the worlde canne not perceyue. For what worldly man in the Primatiue Church dyd beleue that it was the wyl of god, that al his elect people in Chriſt, ſhould be perſecuted & hated of all nacions of men, vntyll that tyme wherin God wyll glorifie the goſpel: whiche tyme is alſo manifeſtly

declared in the holy ſcriptures, both by the Prophetes and alſo by the Apoſtles, neuertheles all worldly people bothe learned & other, are as ignoraunt therof, as the hygh learned Scribes & Phariſeis were of Chriſt. For the deuyll being chaunged into the likenes of an Angel of light bath geuē his power vnto marken men hys miniſters. Apoca. xiii. a. By whome all earthely people haue bē diſceiued, whoſe incorporacion and power, the holy ſcripture calleth the beaſt, becauſe the ſpirituall whore of Rome, which corrupted all the people of the earth with her fornicaciō, dyd ſyt vpon their doctrine, & was maintayned therby Apo, ca. xvii. a. Whoſe abhominacion God hathe diſcloſed

to dyuerſe Kynges and hyghe powers, and hathe put in their hertes to abhorre & diſpyſe her. Neuertheleſſe they haue geuen her kyngdome and power vnto the Beaſt, vntyll that tyme the wordes of god be fulfilled. Apo. the  .xvii. d, That is nowe in the dayes of the voyce of the ſeuēth Angell, whiche begynneth to blowe, in which tyme, the miſtery of God ſhalbe openly publyſſhed, as he preached by hys ſeruantes the Prophetes. Apo. x. chap. b. That is, that the elect people of God ſhall onely with the ſpirite of Chriſt & the worde of God written, clearely confute and confound the abhominable cauteilous deluſion of all markte men. ii. Theſ. ii. chap. b. Whoſe power aſcended oute of

the bothomleſſe pytte, and ſhall nowe be diſtroyed with all the glori therof: for the whole beaſt ſhall be taken and confounded and come to nought, Eſaye, the xxviii. a. and the Apocalipſes the  .xix. Chap. d. So that they ſhall be hated and abhorred of all fleſh. Eſaie. the  .lxvi. g. For the tyme is come that God wyll vtterly diſtroye theim, becauſe they haue diſtroyed the godlye people of the earth, the Apoca. the  .xi. chap. d. Wherfore they ſhal be caſt into the great wyne fat of the wrathe of almightye god. Apo. xiiii. d. For their cauteilous deluſion ſhall preuayle no longer, but ſhall be vttered to all men, the ſeconde of Tim. the ſeconde Chapter, v. For the lyght of Iſraell ſhal be the fier,

and his Sanctuary ſhall be the Flame, and it ſhall kyndle and burne vp his thornes & bryers in one day, Eſaie x. d. That is, that the ſpirite of Chriſt, which is the onely true lyght of all the electe people of GOD, ſhall ſo lyghten and kyndle knowledge in his electe high powers & miniſters, that with the holy ſcriptures written, whiche is their onely ſanctuary, thei ſhal clerely confute and confounde all imaginacions of Marked men, which is ſignified by the bryers and thornes, becauſe thei be the moſt noious & vn pfitable trees that groweth, lyke as Marked men be the moſt falſeſt and deueliſh people that lyueth. And where it is ſaid that they ſhalbe burned in one daye: that ſignifieth that they ſhall be vtterly

confoūded now at this preſent tyme, in the appearaunce of the ſecond comyng of Chriſt, accordyng to the ſaiyng of ſ. Paule, ii. Theſſ. ii. chap. b. And alſo agreyng to the other ſcriptures before mēcioned in that he half, ſo that iniquitee ſhalbe taken a way out of the earth, and righteouſneſſe Ioyfull tyme. ſhall reigne amonge the people, the  .iiii. of Eſdras xvi. e Pſal. xlvi. b. lxxvi. a. For God ſayth by the Prophet, Eſai ii. chap. a. and Micheas. iiii. a. In the later dayes it wyll come to paſſe that the hyl of the Lordes houſe ſhall be ſet vp hygher then any moūtaynes or hylles: yea, the people ſhall preaſſe vnto it, and the multidude of the Gentyles ſhall haſt theim thyther, ſaiyng: Come let vs go vp

to the hyll of the Lorde, and to the houſe of the God of Iacob, that he may teach vs his ways, and that we may walke in his pathes. This ſhall the Heathenyſh markte men ſee, and be a ſhamed Micheas. vii. c. For the earth ſhalbe full of the knoweledge of the Lordes honor, Abucuc. ii. c. And all the Ilandes of the people ſhall worſhip him euery man in his place. Sophony the  .ii. c. And God wyll make his people to haue a good name and a good reporte amonge all people of the earthe, Sophony. iiii. d, Therfore thus ſayth the N
                     •
                  t
                     •
                  
                Lorde of hoſtes: let your handes be ſtrōg, you that now here theſe woordes by the mouthe of the Prophetes, and be lyuynge in the earth in thoſe dayes. zachari,

viii. v. For the power only of the ſpirite of Chriſt ſhall reigne ouer al the earth, ſo that ther ſhalbe none other ſauyour named vpon the earth but only Chriſt. Wherfore men ſhall go about the whole earth, as vpon a fielde. zachary the  .xiiii. chapiter. c. And as for all rule, power, and myght that is vnder heauen, it ſhall bee geuen to the holye people of the moſte hygheſt, whoſe kyngdome is enerlaſtynge. yea, all powers ſhall ſerue and obey hym, Danyell the  .vii. Chapiter. g. For God wyll make his people glorious for euer and euer, and ioyfull thoroughoute all poſterities. Eſaie. lx. c. Thus ſhall the hand of the lorde be knowen amongeſt his electe people, and

his indignacion among hys enemyes, Eſaie. lxvi. e. For all maner of people which by grace haue gotten the victorye of the beaſt, & of his image and of his marke, & of nombre of his name ſhal ſyng the ſong of Moſes the ſeruaunt of God, and ſhall alſo ſyng the ſong of Chriſt, ſaiyng: Great and merueilous are thy workes, lord God almigty, iuſt & trew ar thy wayes, thou king of ſayntes, who ſhall not feare the, o lord, & glorify thy name, Apo xv. a. For al thendes of the world ſhal remembre themſelues, & be turned vnto the lorde, & al naciōs ſhal worſhip before hi, Pſal. xx. f. Wherfore, be glad ye righteous and reioyce in the lorde, & be ioyfull all ye that be of a true hert. Pſalme. xxxii. c.

For the Temple of God ſhalbe open, and the Arke of his Teſtament ſeene therin. Apo. xi. d. That is, that the people ſhall conuerte to the Goſpell. & haue cleare conſciēce to god, hauyng his worde for a wytneſſe, which is the Arke of Chriſtes Teſtament. For vnto theim whiche haue the Lorde before theire eyes, ſtrength ſhalbe increaſed Eſay. xl. g. Wherefore God ſayth alſo by the Prophet Eſay, to all Markte men, the  .xli. f. Stand at your cauſe, and bring furthe your ſtrongeſt grounde, & ſhew openly what ſcriptures ye haue in the true literall ſence, to deferde your doctrine and cōuerſacion with all. For your ſubtyl argumentes maye take no longer place, becauſe the ſcripture

ſayeth, the fyrſte of Timothie the  .vi. chap. d. your ſtudy therin is a falſe ſcience and nought, and ſo be al you that vſe it, in any thynge concernynge the doctryne of the holye Scriptures. Wherefore nowe ſhewe your ſelues as cōfirmable to the plaine truthe of the holye Scriptures written, when ye ſhall fortune to comen thereof, as the deuyll your fyrſt prouincial dyd, when he was confuted by chriſt, mat. iiii. v. For in ſo muche as he beyng the aucthor of that profeſſion of your incorporacion, dignitee, and power, confeſſed the truthe of Chriſt & of his Apoſtles. Mat. viii. d. Luke. viii. d. Actes. xvi. d. after that he was ones confuted with the ſcriptures written. Be not you no longer

more comberous and obſtinate agaynſt the truthe therof now, then the deuil was at that tyme, and alleged other thynges to be ment in the holy ſcriptures, then is expreſſed in the true literall ſence therof. For if ye do, all men wyl know ſhortly that you ar worſe, & more worthy of condempnacion then the deuyll is: for belyke he had not ſo muche falſhed, orels he was not ſo folyſhe when he tempted Chriſt by the ſcriptures, to allege other meanynges therin, then was expreſſe in the letter therof: neither he defended not his owne imaginaciōs agaynſt the holy ſcriptures written, as all you markte men haue done a longe tyme. Wherefore nowe frō hencefurth ſuffer the people

of God, wholly to pourge oute your olde rottēleuen, for other wiſe we can not be new dowe in Chriſt: for a lytle of your leuen Ab
                     •
                  oſucion ſowreth a great peece of dowe. i. Corin. v. b. For your ſalte hathe loſt his ſaltnes, wherfore there may nothing be ſeaſoned therewith: for it is neither good for the lande, nor yet for the donghyll. Luke. xiiii. g. That is, that all you markte men which haue taught and affirmed doctrine agaynſt the power of the ſpirite of Chriſt, whiche all the electe people of God dothe receyue, ſhal not be forgeuen, neither in this lyfe, nor in the lyfe to come. Mat. xii. d. Mark. iii. d Luke, xii. cha. b. Which is ment by youre ſalte that hathe loſte his ſalteneſſe. And where the

Scriptures ſayeth, that it is neither good for the lande, nor for the donghyll. By the lande is ſignified, doctrine for the people: and by the donghyll, is ſignified temporall worldly buſineſſe: ſo that your doctrine & counſell is not good nor meete to be receiued amōg the people, neyther in the doctrine of the goſpell for their inſtructiō, neither yet in temporall matters: For Chriſt ſayth, Mat. v. b. It is good for nothynge, but to be caſt out and trodden downe of men. For who ſo euer fauoreth any of you, which blaſphemeth the ſpirit of chriſt, is a partaker of your yll. ii. Epiſt. of Ihon. c. Wherfore God cōmaundeth all his electe people to departe out of your company, & to ſeperate

them ſelues clearely from you, and not to touche any of youre vnclenneſſe. Eſaie. lii. c. ii. Cor. vi. c. the firſt. Timo. vi. b. Apo. xviii. b. For your ſhame ſhall be diſcouered, and your preuye abhominable deluſiō ſhalbe ſene. For God wyll aduenge hym on you, and wyll ſhew no mercy to you, as he doth to other people, Eſaie. xlvii. a. For you are the people whom god hath appointed to his wrath, within the Ilādes of this part of the world, wherby the name of the Lorde myghte be feared, Eſaie. lix. b. Wherfore we ought to haue no more in nombre of you, to remayne as miniſters of the goſpeil, but euen ſo many as Elias ſuffered of Baals Prophetes to liue when he had confounded

them, by offeryng of Sacrifice, the thyrd of the Kynges. xviii. g Howe be it, it is to be thought, that Baals Prophetes had not ſo much ſophiſticall conueiance to make theire excuſe at that tyme, as you Markte men haue now, orels ſubtyll excuſes were les regarded at that tyme, then they be nowe: for your abhominacion & crafty deluſion, dothe farre excede, and is much more then hath ben found in any maner of people, ſynce the begynnyng of the worlde. The particulers partly wherof, by Gods aſſiſtence, ſhalbe more playnly expreſſed in another booke here after this.
            Finis.
            The worde of the Lorde remayneth for euer.
☞ ✚ ☜
         
      
      
         
            
            God ſaue the Kyng. my Lord Protector, the Nobilitie, and all thoſe, which vnfainedly loueth the goſpel: The grace of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt be with vs all. Amen.
            Imprintyd at London, by Humfrey Powell, dwellyng Aboue Holburne Londuit.
            
               Cum priuilogio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
            
               AN. Do. 1548.
         
      
   