
      
         
            
            
            A TRVE RELATION of two most strange and fearefull Accidents, lately happening, The one at Chagford in Deuonshire, by the falling of th
                  •
                Stanary Court-house, the 6. day of March last.
            The other at Branson within a mile of Burton vpon Trent in Staffordshire, this present yeare 1618.
            
            
               LONDON, Printed for H. G. and are to be sold by I. Wright, at the signe the Bible without New-gate. 1618.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            GODS ANGER AND fearefull Iudgements, shewed in two places of this Land: the one at Branson within a mile of Burton vpon Trent, in Stafordshire in Lent last, the other at Chagford in Deuonshire this present yeare of our LORD GOD, 1618.
            
               THe anger and terrible countenance of God, of late shewed in this Land here amongst vs, may awaken vs from the fast sléepes of security, and turne vs to the Lord by true repentance. Therefore least his heauy Iudgments in like maner come vpon vs at vnawares, and we be taken sodainely sléeping, let vs with the wise Uirgins in the Gospell kindle our Lampes, that we may be found ready when our Bridegroome commeth in great glory, to giue euery one as his works shall be.
            For we are to acknowledge and consider, that the Lord hath not ceased from time to time, at his good will and pleasure, to send prodigies and wonders in euery age, to forewarne and forearme vs of his Iudgements hanging ouer our heads for sin: as appeareth by the late examples declared amongst vs.
            In the County of Stafford in the parish of Burton vpon Trent, dwelled of late a frée houlder of good lands & means,

named Thomas Henworth, as well stored with money and other houshold goods, as any one of his rancke and calling in that Countrey. Amongst which temporall blessings, God bestowed vpon him two sonnes, but not so happy in the elder as in the younger: for the first borne, which by succession should haue béene his heyre, and possessor of his lands, was from his mothers wombe borne both deafe and dumb, and withall, so silly and simple, that he had not that sufficient reason of gouernment as the younger had: by which meanes the old man, as it were offended at Gods prouidence disinherited the elder, and by will gaue his whole meanes to the younger, vpon condition binding him to giue yearely a certaine stipend to his dumbe brother.
            This condition stood at the old mans death as a legasie, the younger inherited, the elder dispossessed: the younger commanded, the elder obeyed: the younger rich, the elder poore.
            This was the partiall policie of worldly wisedome, but God the giuer and bestower of all good things, hereat much displeased, gaue but small blessings to the possessor of these riches. For this young Heyre in the midst of his ioyes being richly marryed, was visited with sicknesse, and being struck (by the hand of God) euen vnto death, called then to minde the wrongs done to his poore dumbs brother: and therefore fearing a deserued iustice in the world to come, he returned backe some part of his brothers right, and by will gaue him one halfe of his lands and goods, and shortly after dyed.
            Thus the younger brother in the height of his prosperitie taking his last leaue of the inconstant vaine pleasures and profits of this incertaine world, left his wife sole Executrix to performe his will & testament ordained in behalfe of his wronged brother: but she (as many Executors and Ouerséers doe) regarding neyther right nor equitie, neglected to performe the will of her deceased husband: and to make her vniust dealings the more strong, within short time she married another husband named Richard Crispe, a man

as it séems contented to take what he found and perceiuing the dumbe fellow to be destitute of friends, became his owne caruer, and most vniustly kept the dead mans will vnperformed: by which meanes the dumbe fellow was kept in his former pouerty, and forced to relie still vpon the bare allowance of his brother and sister in law, which was almost nothing at all.
            These vniust dealings passed on, vntill such time as the eye of heauen looking downe and espying the vnconscionable dealings of this Richard Crispe, and vniust wrongs sustained by the dumbe wretch, became a gentle Iudge, and tooke the matter into his owne hands, before whose face goods vnlawfully gotten and detayned, together with their owners, are consumed as stubble in the fire, and scattered abroad as dust in the winde.
            So happened it with this Richard Crispes estate: for in Ianuary last, hauing his goods and cattle about him in abundance, his garners and barnes well stored with corne, his ricks and stacks of pease and hay furnishing his yards, and little remembring from whence it came, nor from whom it was wrongfully detained, in the midst of this plenty the righteous Iudge of Heauen and Earth, before whose All-séeing Eye not onely the words and workes, but the very thoughts and imaginations of all men lie open and naked continually, suffering now no longer the wrongs of this dumbe creature to goe vnreuenged, sent a most fearefull and strange iudgement, for all others, who in like manner make no conscience to leaue the wils of the dead vnperformed, to take example by.
            In Ianuary last, as I said before, there beganne a most secret and strange fire in the middle of a Pease Ricke or Houell, standing in the yard of this Richard Crispe, consuming the stalks and straw, but leauing the Pease vnburnt: afterward with great violenes it flew to a hay stacke, in like manner wasting downe the same with such eager fury, as it was most terrible so sée, leauing standing vpright in the middle of the hay, a long pole vnconsumed, also an

Ash trée growing close by the same, which was not so much as once scorched thererewith, after this immediatly the fire flew as it were with burning wings into a corne barne where it kindled very strangely on the top of a beame in the middle bay, consuming and burning inwardly the timber, and straw of the sheafe likewise, leauing the corne vntouched, as it excéeded all wonder to behold.
            Therefore I am héere to insert a likelihood, that it was not the negligence of man, but the angry hand of God, that wrought this fiery example, for wheresoeuer this Crisp went, the fire as it were followed him, and séemed to flye from others that sought to quench it, nine seuerall times began it againe to renew, and would not quite bee extinguished, vntill such time as Crisp departed his dwelling and went to remaine with a friend at the other part of the parish: in whose absence, the pease and corne thus strangely left vnconsumed, was sifted and gathered together, but good for no vse, no not so much as féeding for hogges, for they would neither eate nor come néere it: yet let vs iudge the best and censure as mortalls may doe, and conclude that it was onely the will of God, and a casualty procéeding onely from his diuine prouidence.
            But againe to our matter: This Richard Crispe, within a while after, hauing repaired what the fire had wasted, returned againe to his dwelling house, yet nothing at all remembring she poore dumbe fellowes wrongs, which sate still in the bosome of heauen soliciting reuenge, whilst he both careles and dreadlesse of any further mishap ensuing, went with his wife safely (as hee thought) to bed, in the middle of night, the fire began to kindle in a chéese-house ouer his bed-chamber, and increased so sodainely, and with such raging fier cenes, that it quickly ouer-matstred mans helpe, and in a very short time consumed the place ouer which it first tooke hold, with other roomes adioyning to the same, burning inwardly, leauing the thatch of the houses vntouched which lay as couerings ouer the same, where not the least part thereof was wasted

with the smallest sparke: which was as is it séemes another iudgement of Gods anger laid vpon this man, if without offence we may so speake it.
            Yet for all this was his hard heart no whit mollified▪ but growing still blind in his owne conctous desires, vntill such time as a third accident affrighted him more then the former two, which hapned some month after, and thu
                  •
                it befell: his losses being repayred the third time he came to dwell in the same house againe, where within a day or two after his comming, the fire began as before, to kindle and take hold of a certaine out-house, where his empty, wains or carts stood for shelter of foule weather, but such was the raging fury thereof, that it sodainly grew past all helpe of sauing the same, and withall a further Iudgement hapned thereon, for these empty waines or carts which before were wont to bee drawn
                  •
                forth by one or two men at the most, were at this time growne so heauy, that ten or twelue were not sufficient to doe it, by which meanes they were quite consumed as they stood and burned into ashes.
            Surely this was the worke onely of Gods hands, the third time effected to the great feare of all the beholders, let no man therefore thinke to escape vnpunished, nor by any pollicy frée himselfe from Gods Iustice, that thus makes an intended purpose, to defeat the helplesse innocent, Orphan, or Widdow, or by power and authority goes about to contradict the Testament of the dead, for there can be no more shame, nor greater iniury to a countryes gouernment, then in so doing; and in so dooing, the poore are oppressed and the rich not blessed.
            As for example, this vnfortunate man whose estate being thus much impouerished, is now become (as it is reported) sorrowfull and repentant, and most willing to satisfie to the vttermost of his power, all the Legacies giuen and bequeathed by his predecessor his wiues former husband, and is most willingly contented to performe all dues and rites belonging to the poore dumbe Creature,

whose wrongs no doubt haue entred heauen gates, and procured gods Iustice to stand his best Arbitrator.
            Thus by all humane reason can we no otherwise thinke, but that these fore-passed accidents & strange Iudgements of God, are sent vs for examples of punishment, to driue all other from the like wickednes, yet some there bee (I doubt) will giue but small credence, and hardly beléeue the testimony by which they are published: which incredulity and contempt of Gods wrath, procéedeth from our sinnes, our sléeping sinnes, from which our dreaming worldlings might be rouz'd vp if we would but relent at these and such like fearfull menaces, and thus much for the first.
            And now for my second, which hapned at Chagford in Deuonshire, where by the fall of the Stannery court house, many good and worshipfull Gentlemen receiued their doomes of hard misfortune, as is verified, which through the cursed imprecation of a periurd wretch fell vpon them-therefore with your patience, I will insert some few ex, amples of like feare and mischance, to make the matter it selfe bring with it a truer touch of trembling terror.
            AS the name of God it selfe is most glorious, so should we not vse it but with trembling and feare, for the Lord saith he, shall be pronounced guilty that taketh his name in vaine.
            As for example, I haue read of two young men, making but a iest of Gods most glorious name, striued whether of them could sweare most terriblest, or curse most horriblest, but their iesting was so odious in Gods sight, that one of them was presently stooken with madnesse, the other with sodaine death.
            There was another within these few yeares in the North of England, that deuised new oathes, such as were not common in vse, wherevpon the Lord sent a canker, that soone eat out his tongue▪ euen the very instrument wherewith he blasphemed God, therefore wee 
                  〈◊〉
                that it

is euill ieasting with Gods reuerence, for they that vse it cannot escape due punishment.
            Diuers other fearefull iudgements against this most vild sinne of cursing, swearing and forswearing, are left recorded for examples to vs: as of a certaine Maid, who disobeying her Mothers commandement, her Mother cursed her saying: The Diuell take thee. And the same houre the Diuell entred into her and shee fell madde.
            In like manner there was a man in Friburg in Misnia, who commanded his sonne to goe about some businesse, but he neglected to go with such spéed as his Father commanded him, the Father sell to banning and cursing him with these or the like words. Did I bid thee goe in hast, and standest thou still? Now still mayst thou stand I pray God, and neuer mayst thou stirre out of that place! And presently a heauy iudgement fell vpon the Sonne, so that he was not able to goe nor to be drawne away by any strength, but there he abode for thrée whole yeares.
            I haue likewise read that for taking Gods name in vaine some haue beene blasted with fire from heauen, some stricken with long and strange diseases, some possessed of the Diuell, some haue had their mouths as black as coles, and some such fiery tongues that they could not close their teeth, which they had so often opened to blaspheme God.
            Thus haue you heard the reward of prophane swearing, and bitter curses, whereby Gods holy name is much dishonoured, and the speaker in danger of damnation, where vnto I w
                  •
               ll now adde the late accident hapning at Chagford in Deuonshire vpon Friday the 6. of March last past, vpon which day his highnes Court of Stanneryes being holden the Court set, and great assemblies of Esquires and Gentlemen there present the Iurors cal'd, sommond forth and sworne vpon their oathes, without partiality to giue vpright verdict: being thus charged, falshood must néeds be odious hath to God and man, and none but gracelesse wretches will be so impious as to prefer the same vnto the seat of Iustice.
            
               But now marke the effect: There was (as it is reported) an euidence brought in by a fellow, to which the Iury gaue but little trust, the matter for some speciall occasion I leaue concealed, and therefore most fitly to be omitted: but too true it is the euidence giuer brought in, vpon his oath a false accusation, in whose mouth, as it séemd, a forged lye was ready, and there told such an vnlikely tale, that not only the Iury but the whole bench thought it to be most fabulous, and therefore with good admonitions desired him to bee carefull, and to take good héed vpon what grounds hée tooke his oath, yet notwithstanding this audacious fellow destitute of all grace and goodnesse, thus tempted the Lords anger, saying, if I sweare amisse, (quoth he) or if I speake wrongfully, let God I beséech him make me a fearfull example to all periur'd wretches, and that this house wherein I stand, may sodainely fall vpon my head, and that the fall thereof may bee seene to bee the iust iudgement of God vpon me: Oh wofull wish! Oh cursed desire! Oh periur'd homicide! Oh vild tempter of Gods anger thus to solicite heauen to black vengeance! For no sooner were these words spoken, but in short time after, the timber and walls of the house (though séeming strong) the weather faire and cleare, without either storme or tempest) sodainely fell downe, where by the fall and ouerthrow of this large timber building, this gracelesse varlet with diuers others, were sore bruised and beaten to death, and the number of sixteene or seauentéene more grieuously hurt and wounded, some in their armes, some in their legges, some on their heads some on their backs, and other parts of their bodies, to the great danger of their liues, and that which is more lamentable to tell, certaine Esguires and Gentlemen of good calling, by the fall of the said walls and timber, were sodainly strooke dead, and their limbes almost beaten in peices, which sodainnesse of death, not onely amazed the whole Towne, but strooke a trembling feare throughout all the neighbouring villages.
            
               The principall of these Gentlemen which thus taffed of this rigorous hard misfortune, I will here make knowne. As first, Master Nicholas Eueleigh Esquire, steward of the Court, a Gentleman of much vertue, and wel beloued in that Country: also his two Clerkes, Iohn Cleake and Richard Beere, for whom is made much moane. Likewise one Master Richard Cottle Esquire, and Councellour of the middle Temple in London. In like manner two Atturneyes of the Law, Master Timothy Moule, and Master Robert Milford, with some certaine others, which felt the heauy burden of Gods Iudgements, and had their bodies euen bruized to pieces, through the inuocation of this wicked wretch thus incensing Heauens anger, whom GOD forgiue.
            Onely, I must now speake of a wonderfull thing there happening. In the midst of this confused heape of timber, stone and earth, vnder which so many lay slaughtered, there was a young Childe miraculously preserued, for in the midst of these men of more able strength, which lay bruized and beated to death, as it were with their braines dashed out, was the same Childe found safe and sound, whereon appeared not so much as the smallest hurt that might be: yet iudge we charitably, God onely knowes the meanes of this Childes preseruation, and the cause of his heauy punishment shewed vpon the others.
            But now so strike terrour into the harts of the Readers, neuer was so great woe made in Chagford, for so many good men couered ouer with the ruines of earth and stone: neuer were so many Gentlemen of account, Counsellours of worth, Atturneyes and Clerkes of the Law, thus at one time brought to vnhappy destinie. Some lay starke dead closed vp in dust and earth: some wounded with bruized and broken bones: some crying and calling for helpe: yea, such amazed feare thundred about the whole Towne, that it was maruellous to heare. The neighbouring people came from all the adioyning villages, some crying for one friend, some for another, fathers for children, children for

their fathers, husbands for wiues, wiues for husbands, brothers for brothers, yea nothing but lamentations rung peales of woe, and such a confusion of sorrow possessed the people, that it was pittifull to sée.
            Thus haue you heard how God cast downe his irefull hand in this vnhappy towne, as once hee did at Oxford Sises, whereas in like manner, there was one Rowland Ienks, that for speaking certaine blasphemous spéeches against God and his sonne our Sauiour, procured his indignation by raysing of a sodaine stinking dampe amongst them there present, that both the Iudges of the Bell and Barom were immediately stifled and strook dead, with many other Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen of good rancke and calling, not one of the Iury but there dyed immediatly, with many others, to the number of thrée hundred at the least; beside, the stench thereof bred such an infection in the Country, that in fiue monthes following it was scarce cleared. These, and such like wonders God can doe, and where hee pleaseth to strike with his Iron hand, it bootes not vs weake worldlings to resist, therefore let vs with humble supplications, make our sutes vnto God, that he would kéepe vs from sodaine death. and that we may haue time of repentance alwaies in readines, and that the vntimely confusion of these héere gone before vs, may bee a continuall example, to put vs in minde of Gods anger threatned against vs, so may we be all ready against his most glorious comming.
            What great cause haue we that are heere liuing to giue God thankes for thus warning vs by other mens harmes: What louing and gentle admonitions haue we receiued from the Counsell of Christ, that we should not take his name in vaine, yet neither his counsell▪ the Patriarches, the Prophets, the Euangelists, and Apostles, nor the examples of vengeance, as haue béene héere shewed vnto vs, can worke happy amendment: how much more iustly then may the Lord poure out his hot wrath and heauy displeasure vpon vs, then on nay other Nation about vs.
            
               These forepassed Iudgements are heere recorded onely for our instruction and spéedy amendment, shall wée then be carelesse? shall wee thou be sencelesse? shall wee goe to Law, and forsweare our selues for a little worldly pelfe? shall wée speake warily for feare of offending man, and not keepe our tongues from offending heauen? Leaue off I say, this vile vice of Swearing, it neuer did good to any, giue it ouer in time, deale iustly in all things; sweare not at all, and you shall neuer be forsworne, which God grant for his glorious Names sake. Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   