
      
         
            
            
            A fruitfull Sermon,
vpon the 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. & 8.
verses of the 12. Chapiter of the Epistle
of S. Paule to the Romanes:
Very necessarie for these times to be read of all
men, for their further instruction and edification,
in things concerning their fayth and obedience
to Saluation.
            
               GOD IS MY
HELPER.
            
            AT LONDON;
Printed by Robert Walde-graue. 1584.
         
         
            
            
            
               The chiefe heades of the
Sermon.
               AN interpretation of the beginning or enteraunce.
page 2.
               VVisedome and discretion obtayneth credite
and auoydeth suspicion page. 3.
               English ministers must imitate it, either voluntarily,
or by compulsion. page 5.
               The ministerie is a grace, page 6.
               It must not be abused: this water must not be stopped.
page 7.
               The persons commanded all goe generally. page 9.
               Magistrate, people, minister, must come vnder it, to
approoue their consciences, and stop the aduersaries
mouth. page 9. 10.
               The law and two applications▪ page 10. 11. 9 &c.
               The exposition and excellencie, vvorthinesse and
profit proued out of the 3. of Numbers pag 11. &c.
               God nor onely did institute it, but punished the
breakers as Azaria, Vzza, Corah. page 14.
               It serueth vnder the Gospell 1. Cor. 7. page. 15.
               Obiection, aunswered, so ordaine I in all Churches. 1.
Cor. 7. therfore euery one must keepe it, none breake
it. page. 16.
               He vvisheth for this lavv. page 17.
               The vvant is the cause of all disorder in the land &
euils, page 18.
               The contrary to the lavv is: pride, ambition. pag. 19.
               Brasen vvall▪ page 19.
               Ambitiō hurteth both the cōmon vvealth & Church.
               It is the cause of discord in the church. page. 20.
               Diotrephes. page. 21.
               Scribes, Pharises. page. 22.
               

                  
Iames and Iohn mooue their mother. page. 22.
               Preach to add affliction. page. 22.
               It hurteth common vvealth. page. 23.
               Histories diuine, Moses, Ioshua, ibidem.
               Humaine in England. 24.
               Exhort to mortifie them. ibidem.
               Exhort magistrates to roote out euill, and to establish
the lavv. page. 25. 26.
               
                  As the Lorde hath delt, &c. the exposition. page. 27.
28. &c.
               The abuse tendeth to the hurt of the bodye: it is
shevved in the naturall body. page. 28. 29.
               It is applyed to our Church. page 29.
               Ignorant ministers dishonour God. page. 30.
               Discredite the Gospell, confirme aduersaries, incorage
rebels. page. 31.
               All magistrats must looke to it and ministers. page.
32.
               The similitude containing fovver. 1. Cor. 12. page.
33.
               First rule: many members. 1. Cor. 12. what a member
is, hovve named, nothing vvanteth. page. 33.
34.
               Applied to the Church vvhich vvanteth her members:
euery perticular hath but tvvo members, the pastour
and the sheepe. page. 34.
               She hath too much by Archb. Lordbish. as is novv
espied. page. 37.
               Tvvo rules: distinction of gyftes. 1. Cor. 12 page. 30.
               Ob. ans. in person distinguished, applied, and shewed
in our Church, desired to be refourmed. page. 39.
40.
               3. Rule one head: vnion: he the vine: the cause of vnion
Christ, by the ministerie of these, vve are lead to




the vnitie of faith: to haue triall, rule, gouernment, for
and in Christ, not by Pope, Archb. or Bish. page. 41.
43.
               Appeal to their honors. pag. 45.
               Protestation of the author, and in the name of the
Godly brethren, of their loue tovvards her maiesty.
page. 45.
               Euery member must serue others. page. 46.
               There must be loue to performe duties. pag. 46.
               To approue and like one of another. pag. 47.
               The maimes of our Church greate, and no man lamenteth
them. pag. 49.
               A speciall lavve appertaining to some. pag. 50.
               The rule knovvne. pag. 51.
               Perpetuall, and not to be broken. pag. 51.
               A commandement to keepe them. pag. ibid.
               They are giuen of God. Ephes. 4. 1. Cor. 12. 52.
               
                  
                     Graces giuen:
tvvo notes cō
                        cerning
them
                     1 Euerye calling must haue a grace.
pag. ibi.
                     2 The giftes, are the graces of God.
pag. ibidem.
                  
               
               Proportion of Fayth, vvhat it is. pag. 53.
               A prophet vvhat. pag. 56.
               Office hovv taken. pag. 56.
               A Doctor vvhat. pag. 57.
               The proofe of euery part. pag. 57.
               Canonical Scriptures only to be read in the Church.
pag. 58.
               A Doctor must teache purely and continually to his
ovvne Schollers. pag. 59.
               An obiect: concerning the doctors office. pa. 60.
               The aunswere. pag. 60.
               Pastor, vvhat. pag. 60.
               Of all the parts. pag. 61.
               

                  
Note the vvisdome & mercy of God. pag. 64.
               These gifts giuen in the day of Christes coronation
pag. 65.
               Deacon vvhat, and the proofe. pag. 65.
               Elder vvhat. pag. 67.
               They must be obeyed. pag. 68.
               They are necessary. ibid.
               To preuent offences. ibid.
               Difference betvveen the elder & the deacon. pa. 69.
               Shewer of mercy what. 70.
               Many dye and perish for lack of these offices. pag. 71.
               Good statutes inacted, but because they are besides
the word, they doe no good. pa. 72.
               VVant of al these, the cause of al euils. pag. 72.
               The fruit of this gouernment. 73.
               Enemies to the realme, to the common wealth. ibid.
               Secrete deuises against all good, might bee easilye
knowne. ibid.
               Prodigall maintainers of popish honour. pag. 74.
               Preuented conspiracies. ibid.
               Good lawes should be kept. ibid.
               Pastours, Doctours more fruitfully discharging their
duties. 75.
               Their duties. ibid.
               Reasons to prooue, that the offices appointed in the
primatiue Church, are perpetuall. pag. 77.
               They are sufficient. pag. 78.
               The conclusion. pag. 79.
            
            
               
               The parts and order of the Sermon.
               These sixe
verses, necessarily
inferred
of the former,
contain
a perpetuall
lawe, touching
the gouernment
of
Christes
Church; the
cōtinual keeping
wherof,
as it is the
safetie of the
body, so the
breach of it,
is the destruction
therof.
The same is
eyther
  
                     Generall, appertayning
  to all the members of
  the Churche, declared
  by two familiar argumentes.
    
                           One of the contrary vnto
    the law, for the clearer
    vnderstanding therof,
    vers. 3. ioyned in the
    same sentence with the
    Lawe.
                           The other, of a similitude,
    wherein as in a
    glasse, wee may see the
    trueth and necessitie of
    this law, taken from the
    naturall disposition of
    the bodie, vers. 4. 5.
                        
                     
                     Or it is
  speciall
  belonging
  only to publike
  persons;
  that is, eyther
  to
    
                           1. Prophetes,
    the disposers of
    the worde and
    secrets of God,
    whom he diuideth
    either into
      
                                 1. Doctors: as
      in the latter end
      of the 7. verse.
                                 2. Pastors, as in
      the beginning
      of the 8. verse.
                              
                           
                           2. Officers occupied
    aboute
    other necessary
    duties, diuided
    into,
      
                                 Deacons,
      Rulers,
      Attenders on
      the po
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A Godly Sermon
made vpon the 3. 4. 5.
6. 7. and 8. verses, of the 12. Chapiter
of the Epistle of S. Paul
to the Romanes.
            
               
                  3 For I say, through the grace which is giuē
vnto me, to euery one that is among you,
that no man presume to vnderstand, aboue
that which is meet to vnderstand: but that
he vnderstande according to sobrietie, as
God hath delt to euerye man the measure
of faith:
                  4 For as we haue many members in one body,
and all members haue not one office:
                  5 So we being many, are one body in Christ,
and euery one, one an others members.
                  6 Seeing then that we haue giftes that are
diuers, according to the grace that is giuen
vnto vs, whether we haue prophecie let vs
prophesie according to the proportiō of faith.
                  7 Or an office, let vs wait on the office: then
hee that teacheth on teaching:
                  8 Or he that exhorteth, on exhortion: he
that distributeth, let him do it with simplicitie:
he that ruleth with diligence: he that
sheweth mercy with chearefulnesse.
               
            
            

               
               THese sixe verses, necessarily
inferred of the former, containe
a perpetuall Lawe,
touching the gouernement
of Christes Church: the continuall
keeping whereof, as it is the safety
of the bodie, so the breache of it, is the destruction
thereof. The same is either generall,
appertaining to all the members of
the Church, declared by two familiar argumentes.
One of the contrarie vnto the
law, for the cleerer vnderstanding therof,
verse. 3. ioyned in the same sentence with
the law. The other, of a similitude, wherin
as in a glasse, we may see the trueth & necessitie
of this law, taken from the natural
disposition of the bodye, verse. 4. 5. Or it
is speciall, belonging onely to publique
persons; that is, to Prophetes, the disposers
of the word and Secreates of God:
whom he deuideth either into Doctors,
as in the latter ende of the 7. Uers. Pastors,
as in the beginning of the 8. verse.
& officers occupied about other necessarie
duties, diuided into Deacons, Rulers, Attenders
on the poore.
            This generall law, thus inferred necessarily
vpon ye former exhortation, as a most




readie way and ordinarie meane whereby
to haue certaine experience and triall,
what the good, acceptable and perfect wil
of God is, teacheth the duetie and way of
all Christians, wherin they ought to walk
continually without wearinesse. The giuer
whereof is, not man, but God. For albeit
Paule writ those wordes and this Epistle
to the Christian sainctes at Rome,
yet he was but onely the pen man of the
Lordes inditement, or (as Moses was) the
writer of the Lordes lawe and commaundement.
For he saith not, I by mine owne
authoritie, or by any gift and grace in me:
but I saye thorough the grace that is giuen
to me; meaning, no doubt, that grace
of his Apostolical authoritie,Acts. 9. which he, being
a blasphemer, had receiued of God, to
publish by word and writing, his will and
counsel to the Gentiles, that their faith &
religion might not be groūded & builded
vpon the weake sand of humaine traditions,
but vpon ye commandemēt of Christ,
the strong rocke and euerlasting foundation.
Where it is said; I say, it is all one
in effect, as if he should say, I commaund.
For this Uerbe Lego in Greeke, as also
the Hebrue verb equiualent to the same,




especially beeing ioyned to the infinitiue
Mood without an article, is often vsed in
that sense, importing not a bare saying or
affirmation, but (as here of necessitie it
must, seeing the Apostle sheweth not what
hath beene, is or shall be, but what ought
to be) a flat law and commaundement. So
that for a more plaine demonstration of
the truth, it maye be thus expounded and
resolued: for I Paule, by the authoritie of
my Apostleship, beeing a singular grace
receiued by the free gift of God, giue vnto
euery one of you this generall lawe, in
the name of him whose Apostle I am, inuiolablie
and perpetually to be kept, euen
to the comming of Christ.
            Thus the Apostle maketh his enterance
vnto the law with great wisdome and singular
discretion: for in that he sheweth his
law not to proceede from himselfe, or any
other mortal man, but onely from the lord
of hostes, whose apostle he was; it doth not
onely purchase great reuerence & credite
vnto it: but also remoueth al iust occasion
of enuy, wherof he might haue bin suspected,
& of vsurped authority, wherwith the
enemies of ye gospell might haue charged
him, if he shold not thus haue dō. But now




considering this law is his, who only is the
lawgiuer, which is able to saue & destroy:
no man can iustly contemne it, or think it
of small importance. Also, seeing the minister
heereof was called and commaunded
of this lawgiuer to write and preach it: no
man can safely enuy and contemne him, or
suspect him arrogantly to haue vsurped any
vnlawful authority ouer the Romans,
or the Church of God. Nowe then, if Paul
who was not in any spirituall gifts necessary
for his calling, inferior to the cheefe
Apostles, thought it a necessary point of
wisdome and Christian duety, both in respect
of him selfe and of the Church, here &
else where, plainly to declare, as wel who
was this lawgiuer, as the authour of his
function and Apostleship: how much more
necessary (deare brethren) ought you to
thinke it is for the Ministers in our time,
whose giftes in comparison of Paules are
very fewe and small, to let vs see, both the
authour of their doctrin and laws, and also
of their particuler function? For, if they
commaund vs any thing, hauing not receiued
it from this Law-giuer, by whose
spirite wee must liue in all obedience of
his will, why shoulde we obey? Nay why




may we not cast it from vs, as a vayne
and fond tradition of man? Againe, if they
cannot shew vs the authour of their Ministery,
and the grace they haue receiued for
the godly and acceptable discharge thereof:
why may we not iustly iudge them to
be either prowd vsurpers of vnlawful functions
inuented of man, or couetous intruders
of them selues into the lawfull callings
for the which they are vnmeete? I
would all those which haue any publique
place in the Churche of England, seeing
they will not voluntarily follow this wisdome
of Paul, might be compelled by the
godly wise Magistrates, to shew the proof
of their ministerie out of ye word, and the
gifts which God hath giuen them, meete
for the discharge of their calling. For thē
I assuredly perswade my selfe, that the
Lord iniustice and mercy would so direct
their sword, that it would cut off not onely
the head, shoulders, armes, legges, and all
the rotten members of popish religion: but
also shred of from the true Church of God,
and the beloued spouse of Christe, all ignoraunt,
idle, wicked, and hurtfull hirelings,
with all the reliques of Antichristian
vsurped power, which nowe to the




greate and present perill of the Lordes
Uineyarde, do occupy the place and roome
of most faithfull and painfull work-men.
But a fitter place for this matter shall be
offered hereafter.
            It is not to be omitted that Paule tearmeth
his Apostolical function, A grace giuen
of God. For herein he giueth the Romans
& vs in them to vnderstand, that if
they shall reiect, or lightly regard his function,
and the precepts he giueth to euery
one of them, by the vertue thereof: That
then they openly shew thēselues reiectors
or light esteemers, not onely of him & his
word, but also of the grace and gift of God
which after this manner appeareth in him
for their saluation. The which cogitation
might breede in them a reuerent opinion
of his person, being the Ambassadour of
Christ, a godly care diligently to receiue,
and louingly imbrace the grace of God
giuen him, and by him offered vnto them.
Here then we learn what to iudge of those
functions, with their gifts which Christe
hath giuen for the perfect building vp of
his Church: to wit, as of the excellent and
singular graces of God. For the office of
the Pastor, and Doctor, and Elder, the




Deacon, the attender vpon the poore and
impotent, togeather with this of the Apostle,
are all Streames, flowing from one
spring or head, by the which the manifold
graces of God, and waters of eternall life
are conuayed into his Church, that euery
member drinking thereof, shoulde neuer
thirste againe, but haue full fountaines
issuing out of him to eternall life. Wherefore
let all men of what calling or authority
soeuer they be, take heed least by them
selues, by others, or by any other meane,
they stop and damme vp these heauenlye
streames of waters, which should run into
the Lords vineyard to water it: or else
least they defile and corrupt these waters
with casting into them, & mingling with
them the dregs and filthy puddle waters
of mans inuentions, & popish traditions.
For assuredly all the ordinarye graces of
God giuen to vs, are such, & so, yt they cannot
abide either addition, detraction, or
change: Such also is the giuer hereof, yt as
he is ielous ouer them, so he will moste seuerely
reuēge him selfe of all those yt shall
add, detract, or any manner of way corrupt
his gifts against his will & written word.
Thus we see what profitable instruction




may be gathered out of this former part,
touching the person of Paule, the minister
or publisher of this generall Law, as
also of that special which followeth. Now
let vs heare to whom this generall Law
was giuen. To euery one of what estate &
vocation soeuer, that was among the christians
at Rome, and in them, to all that
then were, or are now of the houshould of
God. For hee saith, To euerye one that is
among you: Which is as if hee shoulde
say, whether you be pastors or Teachers,
Elders, Deacons, or prouiders for the impotent
and sicke, Fathers, Children, Masters,
Seruants, bond, free, Iewes, Gretians;
publique or priuate persons: I giue
vnto all in generall, and to euery one in
particuler this general law & rule of life,
charging euery one in the sight of God, to
keepe it vndefiled to the comming of the
Lord & Sauiour Christ. Hereby it is manifest,
that the law or Precept following
is generall, not speciall: appertaining to
al, not only to some: necessary & profitable
for all times, not onely conuenient for
that present estate of the christian church
at Rome: and therefore perpetually to
hee taught and practized of Gods Ministers,




learned and obeyed of his people,
vrged and established by the power and
authoritie of the Magistrate his heauenly
ordinaunce. And in so doing the Magistrate,
the Minister, and the people shall
by their humble seruice and subiection
vnto God, both approoue their pure consciences,
their sound and vnfained faith to
all that feare God: and also stoppe the
mouth of the aduersarie which speaketh
euill of the truth, because manye which
outwardly professe it, either haue not learned,
or will not obey this commandement
of the Lorde. Now, seeing we know the
commaundement is from God, and that
the Minister hereof, is the chiefest Apostle
that euer was, and that as it concerned
the Romanes, so now (they beeing a sleep
in the Lorde) it appertaineth to all and euery
one of vs, which are here assembled:
let vs mark first what this generall Law
is, then according to the Apostles order,
what is the speciall deriued out of the generall,
and to whom it is giuen.
            The Law is this, Phronein eis to Sophronein,
that is, as if he shoulde saye, I
command, in the person of God, euery one
that is among you, to the wise, or to vnderstand




according to sobreity, as it is translated.
As for the wordes that goe before
these, and that follow in this vers, they are
no part in this law, but rather a more full
and familiar declaratiō therof. For wheras
it is saide, That no man presume to vnderstand,
aboue that which is meete to vnderstand,
it is a manifest prohibition by a
negation of that which is commanded by
an affirmation. Againe, where it is sayde,
As God hath dealt to euery one the measure
of faith, it is certaine, the purpose of the
holy Ghoste is, more playnely to declare
and expresse, the meaning of his Lawe
and generall commaundement. But first
of the Lawe it selfe, then of those which
serue for the farther declaration thereof.
The Greeke Uerb which is heere translated
vnderstand, doth properly signify to
bee indued with a reasonable minde or
Soule: wherein because Wisedome and
knowledge is, and because shee hath as
it were, her mansion house in it, it signifieth
also, to bee wise: in which signification
it is vsed in this place: and for
so much as Wisedome principally consisteth
in a discreet moderation and comelye
order of all actions and workes, I




take it heere to signify by a trope of the
cause, for the effect, the moderate and
sober exercise of Wisdome and true vnderstanding.
The worde translated
sobrietie, properlye signifieth to haue a
sounde minde, not troubled with anye
diseaze, in which signification it is here
vsed. So that the whole commaundement
expressed in these two wordes, appearethe
playnlye to bee this: I commaunde
euerye one which is amonge
you, truely to vnderstande, soberlye to
esteeme, soundlye to iudge, and modestlye
to vse the giftes hee hath receiued
of GOD, being fullye contented and
satisfied therewith. Wherefore let vs
consider, I beseech you, the excellencye,
the dignitye, the profite and vse of this
generall Law. For what can be more excellent,
then for euery member of the misticall
body of Christ, truely to knowe his
proper gifts, and wisely and soberly to esteeme
and vse them? What can bee of
greater dignity and worthinesse, then for
all the people of God scattered thorough
the Face of the Worlde, hauing so dyuerse
gyftes and offices, being so farre
distaunt in place, by an humble, sober and




discreet iudging of their giftes, abilitie
and callinges to serue and worship in the
vnitie of spirit and truth, and in the bond
of peace, one true and immortal King of
glory. Finally, what can be more profitable
for the Church of Christ our mother,
then that all her Children according to
their age, strength, giftes, place and callinges,
shoulde without hatred, enuie, or anie
neglect of dutie, loue, relieue & maintaine
euery one an other, as becommeth
the dearly beloued children of God? This
law wel learned, and diligently practized,
bringeth with it all these and many mow
commodities. Therefore it is not onelie
in this place, but in many other places of
the scripture most faithfully registred. In
the booke of Numbers chap. 3.Num. 3. 38. we maye
read and see plainely, how that the Lorde
did not onely by precept, distinguishe between
the calling of the Leuites and people,
but threatneth the transgressours and
inordinate walkers with death. For the
Leuites were either called Priestes, or by
the common name of Leuites. If Priests,
then either the high Priest, as Aaron and
Eleazar after him: or such as were vnder
him ouer the rest, as Eliazaph the ouerseer




of the Gershonites, or Elizaphan the
ouerseer of the Coathites,
               Num. 3. 32. 4. 16. and Zuriel of
the Merarites. Their office was publikely
to teach, to praye, to offer sacrifice, to
keepe the vessels of the sanctuary. The office
of the other Leuites was, to minister
and serue the Priestes in all thinges belonging
to the discharge of their necessarie
duties. And this is the distinction betweene
the office of Priest, and the office
of the Leuite. Hereby therefore it appeareth,
that the Lord allotted vnto euery one
his seueral office, to be as it were his standing
place, out of the which he should not
step one foote, either to the left hande, or to
the right, neither dislike his place: but fullye
content him selfe therewith, without
enuying of anye, that were in more excellent
roomes. And as the Lorde knew this
order of distinguishing offices, to be verie
expedient and good for his Church: so he
hath reuenged himselfe most seuerely vpon
the breakers hereof, of what calling soeuer
they were, or with what affection or
intent soeuer they did transgresse this established
order of gouernment. King Azaria,
as we reade in the seconde of the
Chronicles the 26. Chapiter, otherwise




called Vzzia, was striken with an vncurable
leprosie, because lifting vp his hart,
he vsurped the office of the Priest, & went
into the Temple to burne incense vppon
the Altar.1. Cron. 13. 9. 
               Vzza, for supporting the Arke,
which was the only office of the Leuites,
notwithstanding his good intent (for the
Oren did shake the Arke) was strikē with
sudden death.Num. 16. 2. 
               Corah, Dathan, & Abiram,
because they presumed aboue their vocation,
went down aliue into the pit: for the
earth opened her mouth, and swallowed
them vp with all that they had. All which
ought to teach vs; how acceptable this order
of seuerall callinges is to God, and to
breed in our hartes, both a care and conscience
to keep it, and a feare and terrour
to breake it. But least any should imagin
this distinction of vocations to serue onelie
for the law, hauing no vse or profit vnder
the Gospell: let vs search the new
Testament. Was there no difference (I
pray you) betweene Iohn Baptist, and his
Disciples, and the Disciples of Christ?
None betweene them and other Christians,
that were Baptized and followed
Christ? None betweene the Prophet and
Apostle, betweene the Pastour and the




Deacon? What were all Apostles?
Were all Prophetes? Had all the giftes
of healing? Were all Teachers? Or did
all interpret? What was the bodie one
member? No, no, the Lord hath ordained
in his church many members, yet but one
body. Whereby it is certaine, that as it
pleased God vnder the lawe to establishe
this distinction of callinges in Israel: So
hath he done now vnder the Gospell in
the new Ierusalem. For our Apostle in
the 12.1. Cor. 12. to the Corinth. the first Epistle,
straightly chargeth euery one to walke in
that calling, wherin he is. His words are
these: Let euery man abide in that same vocation
wherin he was called. Againe a little
after, Let euery man wherein he was called
therin abide with God▪
                In which words
he teacheth that the most excellent gifts
of a Christian, which we by faith receiue
of Christ, & the eternall feed of regeneration,
can not, neither ought to mooue vs,
to loath our former calling be it neuer so
lowe or base, neither to desire to step into
any other, till it please God to offer vnto
vs some iust & necessary cause of change, &
to ad vnto ye cōmon giftes of a Christian,
some speciall which are proper and peculier,




for that lawfull calling whereunto
our desires are wholly and onely carried,
and the Lorde effectually calleth vs. But
least any should obiect that this generall
law, is not so straightly to be kept of all:
besides that the wordes of this text will
confute him, he may read the 17. verse of
the 7. Chapiter to the Corinthians. Or if
he proceede and say, it is no ordinance established,
or not in all Churches, the very
wordes of the Text there will ouerthrowe
him. But as God hath distributed
to euery man, as the Lord hath called euery
one, so let him walke, and so ordaine I in all
Churches. Then wee see in effect, what
this generall Lawe is: Namely, that
as Souldiers in Warre haue and keepe
euery one his standing place in the sight
of their Captaine: so euerye Christian
shoulde haue and keepe his seuerall calling
in the presence of the Lorde of life,
who hath in wisedome and mercy called
them thereunto. For if they do not, as experience
teacheth in warre and in peace,
then they must needes tumble and indanger
them selues, vere and greeue others,
hurt and disquiet the church, whose peace
and felicity, all her Children oughte to




redeeme, euen with the losse of bloud and
life. O that this Lawe were deepely printed
and grauen in the hearts of all Christians,
and were as easely to bee learned &
seene in our liues, as it may be in this precept,
then we should see with no smal ioy,
the Church our mother with cheerefull
countenaunce to lift vp her heade, which
now, to the greefe of many, hangeth verie
low, and whose heart lamenteth the loosenesse,
securitie, the aspyring and vnquiet
mindes, and ye continuall disorder of her
children, which had rather do any thing,
then that which principally concerneth
them. For, if it be demanded from whence
commeth al this disorder, at home, abroad,
in publique and priuate persons, in common
wealth, and in the Church, in towns,
in Uniuersities, and in Cities: the cause
is euident no man can deny it: father and
childe, husband and wife, master and seruaunt,
rich and poore, magistrate and subiect,
Pastor and people, haue broken and
transgressed this generall Law and commandement
of God. They know not truely
their giftes and callings, they haue not
humbly and soberly esteemed of them, they
haue not wisely, discreetely, and with a




single eye iudged themselues; they haue
not with care and conscience discharged
their duetie to God. Finallie, they haue
broken out of their standing places, and
burst asunder the lists of their callings, &
cannot, neither will be bounde to order &
obedience, no not with the bondes of the
Lawe of their Creator. The causes of all
this disorder in all degrees shall appeare,
and bee declared in their proper places
next following, as also the remedies wherby
it may be remooued, and good order
(the health of both the bodies) restored and
brought again into the Church and common-wealth.
            It followeth in the text: That no man
presume to vnderstande aboue that which is
meete. Paul declareth this generall Law,
first as you see by the contrary, that wee
might the better vnderstand & see by this
negation, what he ment by the affirmation:
and also that we might wisely collect
the cause of the former disorder, whereof
I haue spoken. A wise and vsuall order in
exhorting, obserued of the Prophetes, hauing
regard not what ought to be first in
knowledge, but first in practize; not respecting
the perfection of order, but the corruption




of our nature. For we being ful of
pride, selfe-loue, vain-glorie, arrogancie &
ambition, it is necessary that this hard and
brasen wall, made and grounded vpon the
harde brasen pillers of originall concupiscence,
should first be cast downe and digged
vp, with the ground-work thereof, before
we can see and feele the sweet grace
of God, & the comfortable presence of his
Spirit, in humbling our proud hearts, and
working in our mindes a sound iudgemēt.
We must therefore, for the better keeping
of the general Law, cast off these two burdens
yt presse vs down; ouerweening of our
gifts, & ambitiō, which make the mind not
content with her own estate and calling.
For as darknes and light cannot dwell in
one place at one time: so pride and humilitie,
ambition and godly contentation, cannot
dwell in one man. So long as pride yt
blindeth our eies, and a disliking of our estate
possesse the heart, ther is no place for
an humble & sound iudgemēt, no roome for
an affection contented to rest in yt portion,
which God hath allotted vnto vs. The
blessed apostle seeing this, chargeth ye Romans
to put out & dispossesse their harts of
those two enimies: wherin, albeit they had




their abode since the fall of our first Parentes,
yet being vsurpers, they must bee
thrust out, that Christ whose we are, and
hee oures by the eternall couenaunt, may
dwell in vs, and we in him for euer. They
be strong men, and therefore will not bee
dispossessed by any weak power: only they
will giue place to the force and powerfull
hande of a stronger: that is to the spirit of
God, which filleth vp the low valleyes, &
casteth downe the high mountaines. As
they be strong to keepe possession, so they
be strong to strike, to wounde, to slay and
destroy, both the Ecclesiasticall and Politique
bodies of the Church and Common
wealth. For from these two pestilent fountains,
selfe-loue and ambition flow, enuiyng
of the good, bitter contention and striuing
with the equall, disdaine & contempt
of the inferiors. Hence it is, that the gouernors
of the Church thinke too well of
them selues, not humbly begging the direction
of Gods spirite, but expounde the
word according to their own fancies: that
they desire to rule as they list: deuise new
offices: confounde those which the Lorde
hath wisely distinguished: challenge vnto
thēselues new titles, new names, princely




prerogatiues, and vnlawfull iurisdiction
ouer their brethren. All which vices,
as they sprung vp first in the Churche of
Rome, (notwithstanding this admonition
of Paul, for the preuenting of them) so
hauing nowe deadlye wounded the body,
and wholy destroied and defaced that
Churche, they haue spread their bowes
and braunches into many places of the
Lordes Uineyarde, wherein they haue
taken such deepe roote, that it is to bee
feared, that as they now doe ouershadowe
the tender plants of the Orchard of God,
so they will in time consume and destroy
the whole growthe, with the poyson of
their corruption, except they be plucked
vp by the rootes. For my part, examining
the matter with an indifferent minde, I
can see no other roote whence these rotten
& vnnatural bowes should spring, then
this high and lofty minde, whereby men
doe presume to thinke of themselues, and
of the treasure of grace which they haue,
more then they ought to do. Why woulde
not Diotrephes receiue Iohn & the other
faithfull ministers of the word? Wherefore
did he prattle with malitious words
against them? Why would he neither him




selfe receiue, nor suffer others to intertain
the brethren? Was not this the onely
cause? because hee loued to haue the preeminence
in the Church?3. Iohn. 9. Read the third epistle
of Iohn. What caused the Scribes
and Pharisies to contemn and disdaine, ye
base estate & low degree of Christ and his
poore Disciples? they loued the cheef places
at feastes, & desired the cheefe seate in
the assemblies, and greeting in the markets,
and to be called of men Rabby, Rabby:
was not this because they were highminded?
Why did Iames & Iohn, & their
mother, mooued by them, desire to be cheefest
in the kingdom of Christ? Or why did
the other disciples disdain at this request?
Was it not only because their harts were
puffed vp with pride, vaine-glory, and ambition?
Why did some preach to adde affliction
vnto Paules bondes? Was it not
because they thought better of themselues
and their giftes, then of him and his gifts?
and by enuying him troubled the Church?
O therefore howe necessary is it for vs
that be of the Church, to beate down this
brazen wall of pride, presumption, and
ambition, which cause all these disorders
among vs, that God may reare vp in our




hartes the newe fortresse of a sounde, discreete,
humble and sober minde, and so
make vs sincere obseruers of this general
Law. All these thinges I haue spoken doe
sufficientlie teache, howe some Churches
haue beene, and are at this day sore wounded,
others destroied by these two horrible
monsters, of pride and ambition, which
wil not bee subiect to any, nay which wil,
if they be suffered, lift vp their heads into
the throne of the Lord. Now to the Comman
wealth, wherein if we shall aske the
wisest men of all ages that be past, either
religious or prophane, they wil tell you yt
which by long & certaine experience they
haue learned: namely, yt this proud & ambitious
surprising of gifts, disliking of mens
proper dealings, haue bene ye disturbers, I
might say, ye destroiers of families, tribes,
towns, cities, kingdoms and empires. So
Moses, Iehosua, Dauid and the prophets,
haue left in their writings this to be learned
of such as wil read thē. The prophane
writers both Gretians & Romans, which
haue registred ye diuersities, chāges, ouerthrows
& ruins of cōmō wealths, do teach
the same better then the time will suffer
me perticulerly to rehearse. But to omit




the auncient monuments and histories of
the old time, & to come to our owne country:
did euer any man harden his heart
heere in England against lawfull regiment,
which hath not beene full of pride &
ambition? Can the sober minded man, resting
and taking his felicity in his base
and lowe calling, lift vp his hand to pluck
the regal crown, from the head of the lawfull
gouernour? No, no, dearly beloued, no
more then a heauy stone, can ascende into
the highest region of the firmament. It is
the lighte heade and the aspiring minde,
which through pride and ambition, flieth
into the Princes pallace. Seeing then yt
these two vices of pride & ambition, doe
not only eternally cōdenm such as are infected
with them (which is most fearfull)
but also wound and destroy the society of
the saints, and the policie of kingdomes:
seeing that the Lord by his Apostle here,
doth so straighty forbid them, as the most
daungerous enemies vnto this generall
Lawe: I am to charge you in the name of
Christ, from the highest to the lowest, to
throw down your selues before the maiesty
of God, crauing earnestly ye grace of his
spirit to mortify these euill affections, so yt



               
they may haue in them neither poyson to
kill the soul, nor power to hurt ye Church
or common wealth. And for you that are
ye ministers of God, and our gouernors, if
you wil learne how to establishe this generall
lawe, and to remedy all the abuses
thereof, beholde this must be your wisedome.
First pluck vp by the rootes thorough
the ministery of the worde, and the
authoritie of the swoorde, all proude and
high lookes, arrogant and ambitious persons:
set before your eyes the Godly zeale
of Dauid. Him (saith Dauid) that hath a
proud looke and high heart, I can not suffer.
Againe, Betimes will I destroy all the wicked
in the lande, that I may cut off all the
workers of iniquitie from the Citie of the
Lord. O that all her maiestes counsel and
all other Magistrates in this lande, had
kindled in their brestes suche a zeale of
Gods glory, such a hatred of all sin, namely
of pride and ambition, and such a loue
of his sober and sound iudgement, which
breedeth humblenesse of hart, and a mind
fully contented with any estate, wherunto
the Lord calleth vs. Secondarily aboue
all thinges, it behooueth you that bee the
Lordes seruantes in magistracie, to establish




euery one within his charge & iurisdiction,
this general law; prouiding that
euery man haue wherin to occupy himself
and his giftes, according to the tenor of
this law, in his owne standing, place and
vocation: and that he do discharge it according
to the measure and proportion of
his giftes, which he hath receiued for that
purpose. For none in the Church & house
of God must want his office: none must
walke inordinately: none must be idle in
his calling, or vnprofitable. As therefore
you know your enemies, and how to vanquish
them, and also the law of the Lorde,
how to establish it: take heede vnto your
selues, and dallye not in the Lordes matters.
For if you shall not betimes by the
swoord of iustice, cut off all that deserue
death by the lawe, not suffering your eye
to take pittie vpon any, and also correct other
malefactors according to their desert,
without partiality: know for certaintie
that the iuste God will require their
bloud at your hands. Againe, if you shall
preferre your owne pollicies and deuises,
before the establishing of this generall
law of God, assure your selues, that your
Lorde and Maister, whose person you sustaine




will neuer suffer such contempt of
him vnpunished. Therefore as you hate
these vices, and all other sinnes, as you
loue this vndefiled law of the Lorde, let
your hatred be shewed in abolishing the
one, and your loue declared in establishing
the other. It followeth.
            
               As God hath dealt to euery one the measure
of faith. This sentence sheweth what it is
to be wise according to sobrietie, or to
haue such vnderstanding that a man may
soūdly iudge. It is as if he shold say, hereby
ye shall know what it is to be wise according
to sobriety, if you mark & consider
yt God hath giuen to euery one seuerally
a certaine proper & peculier measure of
faith, that is, of any heauenly gift diuers
frō ye gift of regeneratiō, which ought to
be employed to the increase of your mutuall
faith. For here the Apostle giueth no
preceptes how those Christians shoulde
best prouide for their owne safety (for that
he hath done, and doth hereafter more particularly)
but how they may best prouide
for the safety of the church & euery member
thereof: which is done by keeping our
selues, within the compasse of the gifte
which God hath giuen, neither esteeming




it of greater value then it is, neither
desiring to stretch it farther, and to a
more excellent high calling, then it is giuen
for: neither yet by not seeing, or too
abiectly thinking of that gift which we
haue, or else enuying others which haue
the same gift in greater measure. Then
the proper sence is this: looke what certaine
and proper gift of grace God hath
giuen to anye of you, not for your priuate
profite, but for the publique good and benefite
of the body, in humble iudgement,
discreet wisedome, and soundnes of mind,
consider and thinke vpon it, be thankfull
for it, let that be your sober wisedome, let
that content and satisfie your hartes, not
extending it further then it can reach, not
ouerpressing it, nor thinking too basely of
it: not enuying others which haue either
other greater giftes, or the same gift in
greater measure. For, seeing God in his
excellent and incomprehensible wisdom,
hath disposed both diuers gifts to diuers
men, and the same giftes in a diuers measure,
to the profit, peace, and preseruation
of his people: as the misliking of this heauenly
and wyse dispensation proceedeth
of great folly, insolencie, & want of iudgement;




so the disordering, confounding, and
corrupting these giftes, must needs tende
to the ruine and vtter ouerthrowe of the
Churche. For, consider I beseeche you
(deare brethren) if euerye member of our
body shoulde either stretch his giftes farther
then they can reach, as if the hande
would needes see and direct the body, if it
would speake, &c: or if the head would go:
againe if the hand should thinke it selfe of
greater excellencie then the heade, or if
through enuie of the greater giftes of the
eyes, which are more excellent, it woulde
denie to doe the office of the hand: or finallye,
if the left hande, hauing the same gift
which the right hath, woulde enuy it, because
it is more apt, quicke and ready in
the vse of the same: would we not cry out
of this confusion, as most vnnaturall and
monstrous, and such as without all doubt,
would vtterly destroye the whole bodye?
Neuerthelesse we see it in the Churches
of England, which professe them selues
partes of the whol, and are not astonished.
We haue seen it a long time, & yet we cā
               not
be vnfaynedly greeued: we cannot be
perswaded to feare & tremble, at the present
peril which hangeth ouer our heads.




For alasse, must we not looke for the heauy
hande of the Lorde, when we see many
ignorant men, not only voyd of all skil in
the Hebrue, Greeke, & Latin tongues, in
Logicke, Rhetorick, and other Artes: but
also (which I am ashamed to speake,) both
voyde of the knowledge of the doctrine of
repentance, and also wicked and lewde in
life; who are yet so bold, so impudent, of so
harde faces, that they dare present themselues
to the learned Bishops, and so extend
and stretch out, I will not saye their
gifts, which they haue not, nor the shadow
of a gift, to take vppon them the high embassage
of their God: to carry to his people
the glad tidinges of saluation, which
Christ hath purchased for them, with his
most pretious bloud. O shamelesse impudencie!
Shall he take vpon him to holde
the helme, that is scarce worthy to sit in
the sincke? O damnable boldnesse, O couetous
Patrons, that for gaine present
such vnworthy men to the Bishops! O
foolish men that will commend thē whom
they ought to dispraise! O miserable Bishops,
that by laying on of their handes,
lift vp those into Moses chaire, who ought
rather to bee thruste to the tayle of the




plow. What doth more dishonour God,
discredite the Gospell, confirme the aduersaries
of the truth, and incourage the
rebell in his treason, then this ignorance
and impietie of the Ministers? For I
beseech you tell me; can the honour and
praise of Gods wysdome, be commended
by the folly and ignoraunce of his Minister?
Can the inestimable treasure and
riches of the gratious Prince, be seene
in the beggerly nakednesse of an vngratious
and base Ambassador? Can the aduersaries
of the grace of Christe, by looking
vppon an idoll, which hath nothing
but a shew of that it is not, bee diswaded
from the worshippe of Idolles? Can hee
bring men from errour, which can teach
no truth? Can hee that is trayterously
affected to Magistracie, become a loyall
subiect, and neuer heare his Pastour
prooue by the word of God, that all must
be subiect, not onely for feare, but for conscience
sake? Finally, can the carnal minded
man, and the blasphemouse Atheist
be perswaded, that Christe is the redeemer
of the worlde, whose Ministers these
be? Therefore as all Christians, are
priuately to looke vnto them selues,




their giftes and callinges, that they tye
and bind their iudgement and affection to
the measure of that faithfull grace they
haue receiued: so all Magistrates are by
the swoord of their authoritie, which they
beare not in vaine, to keepe and hold their
Christian subiectes within the compasse
of their limittes.
            Now followeth the last reason of the
generall law. For as we haue many members
in one bodye, and all members haue not
one office: so we beeing many are but one body
in Christ, & euery one, one anothers members.
This last reason taken from the mutuall
disposition of the body, is by the Apostle
applyed, not onely to the Saintes
at Rome, but also generally to the whole
Church of CHRIST, which, as it
teacheth an vnitie of bodie, a multitude
of members vnder one heade, a variety
of duties, and a diuersitie of gifts: so it
sheweth manifestly, that this destinction
in the body, wherof ariseth the gouerment
of the whole, making for the safety
of the whole and euery part, is most necessary,
most profitable: and therefore perpetuall
and immutable. In consideration
whereof, I will laye out the partes more




plainly, least any shoulde take vppon him
through presumption, a greater charge
then he can sustaine, or the measure of his
gifts permit, and the rather, for that there
are in these two verses 4. similitudes, albeit
at the first vewe, there seemeth to bee
but one. The first is, as we haue in one naturall
body many mēbers: so wee haue in
one catholique Church many members.
The second, as all members of the naturall
body, haue not one office, so all the
members of the Church, haue not one office.
The thirde, as many members in the
natural body haue one head, wherein they
are: so many members in the Church haue
one head, wherin they are. The fourth and
last, as in a naturall body, euery member
is anothers: so in the Church, euery member
is anothers. Al which particuler similitudes
are necessarily collected out of the
Apostles words, in the 4. and 5. verses, as
you may plainly see. The same similitudes,
though not in the same wordes, yet
to the same purpose, our Apostle vseth in
the twelfth Chapiter of the first Epistle
to the Corinthians, saying: As the body is
one,
               1. Cor. 12. 12. 
               and hath many members, & all the members
of the body, which is one, though they be




many, yet are but one body, euen so is Christ,
that is, the church of Christ. Hee prosecuteth
it farther, as wee shall hereafter see.
But first, let vs somewhat more diligentlie
consider according to these foure similitudes,
of the state, condition and regiment
of the Churche of Christe heere in
earth: for hence arise foure most excellent
and worthie rules, touching the spirituall
gouernment of the misticall body of
Christ. The first is this: There must be,
and ought to be in the church of Christe,
manie members. The first similitude teacheth
this: the 12. to ye Corinthians doth
conclude and determine it: for the body is
not one member,
               1. Cor. 12. 14. 
               but many: againe: if they
were all one member, where were the body? but
now there are many members, yet but one body:
therefore there must be manie members
in the Church. By a member he meaneth,
such a part of the body, as hath receiued
from the heade, some particular and
necessarie gifte, fit to helpe and benefite
the whole body, and euery member thereof,
as it appeareth by the last similitude,
and by the enumeration of the parts immediatly
following.
            Now if you aske me, howe manie members




there be in the bodie: what they be:
and howe they bee named and called: and
what be their duties and callings: the Apostle
him selfe will aunswere plainly in
the next verses, and perfectlie and fully
determine all these questions, saying:
These members are either Doctors to
teach, Pastors to exhort, Elders to rule,
Deacons to distribute, Attenders vppon
the poore straungers and the sicke, or else
the people and Saints, which are taught,
exhorted, ruled, and receiue almes and releefe.
These are al: no mo, no fewer. So the
necessity of ye relation plainly prooueth, &
these are such as are able to execute & performe,
any duty belonging to the perfect
building vp, and adorning of the mystical
body of Christ, as shall hereafter appeare
more at large in the particular handling
of euery seuerall office.
            Now I beseech you, let vs iudge indifferently
of ye body of ye Church of England,
whether it be perfect or no, hauing no wāt
of any necessary mēber, nor any part vnnecessary.
For if nature lack any one, be it neuer
so base, if it be but one toe she is sory,
she is grieued, she lamēteth, she iugeth her
self maimed: yea, she wold redeem it wt the




perill of loosing the rest: such is her loue
and desire to appeare in her beautye and
perfection. The Church of God in England
(deare Christians) which is the beloued
spouse of Christ, which desireth to appeare
most beautifull and perfect in the
eyes of her louer, shee wanteth her Pastours,
Teachers, Elders, Deacons and
her Attenders vppon the poore, therefore
she hangeth downe her head for heauines,
her eyes bee bleared with teares, her
cheekes be defiled with the water of her
eyes, her heart is heauy with sorrow, her
bones are withered with drinesse, her
whole body is cloathed in sackcloth, she
lyeth in caues and dennes, beeing almost
ashamed to shew her face, hauing so deformed
and maymed a body:Cant. 5. & 6. 
               Which ought to
be as bright as the Sunne, and as fayre as the
Moone: yea, of ten thousand the chiefest. Againe
on the other side, if nature do espie
in the body anye superfluous member, as
if shee haue three handes, three feet, or six
fingers, by and by she mislyketh her selfe,
she hateth the superfluity, she laboreth to
cut it off, because she is contended with
her selfe, desiring no mo partes then shee
hath: nay, hating if it bee but a knob of




flesh, that is more then needs. She would
haue manye members, but not too many:
she would haue all her members, she wold
want none, least she should appeare either
monstrous, which is feareful, or maimed,
which is hatefull. Euen so is it with the
Church and spouse of Christ in England.
For, as she is grieued for the lack of those
partes which are wanting: so shee abhorreth
and loatheth such as are abounding:
as namely, the callinges of Archbishops,
Bishops, deanes, Archdeacons, Deacons,
Chauncellers, Commissaries, Officials, &
all such as be rather members and partes
of the whore and strumpet of Rome, then
of the pure virgin and Spouse of the immaculate
Lambe. Therefore she desireth
these (if they will needs be of her body) to
shew that they bee created of God, and vnited
to her by Christ her heade. If they
will needes be of the heauenly Hierusalem,
let them shew that they came down
from heauen, and who gaue them from
thence? For the Apostles neuer knewe
them, Sion hath not hearde of them: Hierusalem
which is aboue, wil not acknowledge
them: the watchmen, no doubt, beeing
a sleepe, they haue crept into the Citie




of the Lord. But now they are espied:
now the Church complayneth of them,
both because they haue no title, nor interest
in it, as publique members: and also
because by the length of their vnlawfull
swoordes, they keepe out lawfull members
of the body. We therefore that are
the Lordes remembrauncers, must neuer
let him rest, till he haue expelled them out
of Hierusalem, wherin they haue no right
to exercise such vnlawfull authoritie.
Therefore we humbly desire and beseech
all that are in higher places, and haue accesse
vnto her excellēt Maiesty, that they
woulde for the loue they beare to the
Church of Christ, in tender compassion
looke vpon our Church, which maketh so
iust a complaint: that they would send for
the Preachers of the word, enquire what
is lacking, and what is too much, and so
repayre and build vp the walles of Hierusalem,
the praise of the world.
            The second rule is, that the members
of the body must haue but one office: that
is, euery one his seueral & distinct office.
For God is not the author of confusion,
but of good order, and necessary distinction.
So sayth Paule: There are diuersity




of giftes and administrations, of operations:
yet but one spirite,1. Cor. 12. 4. 5 one Lorde, one God which
worketh all in all. And least any should obiect
that this maye be, and yet no let but
that one man hauing manye giftes maye
haue diuers offices; for though they bee
diuers one in respect of an other, yet they
maye agree in one man: we must consider
that the Apostle speaketh here, of diuers
mēbers of one body, & meaneth yt euery
one must haue his seueral gift, yt maketh
a seueral office for the cōmon profit
of others. This seuerall and speciall gift
bindeth to one seuerall and special office.
For the same Apostle teacheth, that those
gifts are not only distinguished in nature,
but also in person: saying, To one is giuen
the worde of wisedome,
               1. Cor. 12. 8. 
               vnto an other the
worde of knowledge. &c. Therefore euerye
personne or member of the Church,
muste haue his owne proper and seuerall
office, that he maye vse it to the common
commoditie of all his fellow-members.
If the naturall members of the
bodye doe perfectly performe their seuerall
dutyes, then it muste needes goe wel
with the body, and nature must needes
delight and take greate pleasure in it:




but if contrarily, one member do encroch
vpon the office of an other, it must needes
tend to the destruction of the body. So assuredly
the estate of the Church is best,
and most flourisheth, when there is neither
too many, nor too few members, according
to the first rule, neither confusion
of offices according to the second. Seeing
then (beloued) in our church the Deacon
encrocheth vpon the office of the Pastor,
(for he prateth openly and ministreth
the Sacraments) women vpon the office
of men (for they baptize) priuate men vppon
the office of publique persons, (for one
man doth suspend from the Sacramentes
and excommunicate): the Doctour vpon
the office of the Pastour, (for both indifferently
teach, exhort, and minister the sacraments)
the Ecclesiasticall person vpon
the office of the ciuill Magistrate: and
contrarily, the ciuill vppon the Ecclesiasticall
(for they interchangeablye handle
and discide ciuill and Ecclesiasticall
controuersies,) seeing I saye, here is no
distinction, but confusion: no contenting
with one duetye, but encroching vppon
many, no wyse order in gouernment,
but a foolishe and pernicious shuffeling




togeather of diuers dueties, which the
Lorde hath heere and else where, in sundry
places of his word distinguished: haue
we not iust and necessary cause to beseech
and pray such as be in authority, not to suffer
their eye-lids either to slūber or sleep,
til they haue remooued these superfluities,
supplied these wants, and refourmed this
intollerable confusion, that the body of the
Church may appeare in her perfect beauty
and health:
            The 3. rule is, these many members
must haue but one head, to whom they are
most nearely & surely vnited, and of whom
they must be onely and perpetually ruled.
All the parts of the naturall body, because
they are by many iointes and bandes fitly
and surely coupled to the head, they receiue
life, sense, power, motion and strength to
perfourme their duties, and mutually to
helpe one another, and all this is done by
the vertue of this naturall vnion. For if
that were not, no part were able to serue
either it selfe, or any other: so that beeing
in this vnion they liue, being seuered they
dye and perish. Euen so it fareth with the
members of ye Church: for they beeing by
spirituall ioints & handes, surely vnited &




knit to Christ their heade, he conuayeth
into euerye one by his spirite and faith,
life to quicken them, wisedom to lighten
them, sense for feeling, and all other graces,
and strength to defend them against
all aduersary power, and to bring them to
the perfect vnion and fellowship, which
is in himselfe. We are the tender braunches,
he is the vine: if we be in him, we
shall receiue spirituall nourishment to
life euerlasting, and al things that appertaine
to our health; if we be out of him,
we can not but die, and that eternally. He
onely is the vine whereinto we must be
graffed: he onely is the band that bindeth
vs vnto him: the braunches that are not
in the vine, must needes wither and die: if
he binde vs not vnto him selfe, we must
needes scatter abroade, and fall asunder
one from an other. He onely is the cause
of all vnion with him selfe, and among
the members, to make all the members
at one with him, and with them selues.
And also, to take away all difference and
discord, he hath gyuen not a Pope, not an
Archbishop or Bishop, (for there was perfect
vnion before they were, though they
falsely beare vs in hande, that these are




for the mayntenaunce of peace and vnitie:)
but Apostles, Euangelistes, Prophetes,Ephe. 4. 11.
Pastoures and Teachers, by
whose ministery we may be fully lead to
a perfect vnitie of faith in Christ, and to
the full age of the fulnesse of him. So
that he alone by his owne gyftes, must
keepe all the members of his Church in
perfect vnity, and by them also remooue
all iarring in iudgement, and all discorde
in affection. The which harmonie no
Pope, Archbishop, Aungell, or any other
creature can make. O that we might once
heare this plesant soūd & time of this harmony.
The primitiue church they heard
it, yea, they so delighted in it, that Saint
Luke often repeateth it, as though the
very bare repetition thereof had wonderfully
pleased: to wit, that the Apostles, disciples
and all continued togeather in one
place, with one accorde, with one iudgement,
with one minde, with one hart. O
heauenly harmonye & vnitye, before euer
ye Pope or Archbishop, or any such straūge
calling were hatcht. Therefore we are to
beseech ye honorable Coūsellers to labour
night & day, till it be graunted vnto vs, yt
we maye haue libertye, but once to make




triall and experience, whether we cannot
onely by the Lords gifts, and by those graces
which descended and came down from
the heade, set in time all the members of
the Churche, that wee may once againe
heare the first song of the first Churche,
planted by the Apostles: the which if we
can (as no doubt the Lorde will giue vs to
doe) I am perswaded, as he will preferre
it before all other harmonies that haue
beene, so we shall rest in it without wearinesse,
or desire of chaunge.
            Again, if all the members submit themselues
to the gouernment of the heade, and
onely follow it, then there can be neyther
desire of rule, nor breach of any good order.
But the admitting of two heads and
diuers lawes, as it maketh a monstrouse
body, so a contrary gouernmēt, both which
nature and good reason mislike and condemne.
Yea though not altogether, yet in
some part wee see these disorders in our
Church. For what else is the sole authoritie
of one priuate man, to rule ouer his fellow-brethren,
to chide them, to correct
them, to punish them, to suspende them
from their office, yea and that which nothing
appertaineth to him, to imprison




them. And I beseech you tell me, doe they
all this by the Lawes of Christ?
            Surely (deare Christians) we must and
will appeal vnto their honours, from these
vnlawfull iurisdictions: if we teach false
doctrine, let vs in the presence of her Maiesty,
and them all be confuted: if we haue
offended, we refuse no punishmēt. We are
called, nay we are slandered of the papists
and others, with the diuelish sect of Puritans:
we are thought to beare scarce good
will vnto her Maiestie. Well howsoeuer
men iudge of vs, we are that we are by ye
grace of God, and for my selfe I will aunswere
(& I am perswaded that al that be of
my iudgement are of the same minde) touching
my loue and affection towardes my
Soueraigne and gracious Prince: I protest
here before God, his Angells and you
all, that to saue her Maiesties life, I wold
giue my right hand: what sayd I? Nay assuredly
as the Lord liueth, to prolong her
life but one howre, I would powre out all
the bloud in my heart, though it should run
a thousand year. And I perswade my selfe
moreouer, that if her Maiestie should hear
and know the grounds of this doctrine, we
should not long pray in vain for the reformation




of the Church.
            The fourth and last rule is, euery member
must be one anothers member: that
is, hauing a peculier office, seruing to the
benefite of all the members, that, by diligence
and loue must be imployed for the
preseruation of the whole body, and not
for our owne profite. For euen the least,
and basest member is necessary, and therfore
not to bee neglected or to bee dispised.
This rule, as it requireth a diligent
and continuall seruice of euery member,
so it condemneth all idlenesse, and neglect
of duetye. If the members of the naturall
body shoulde fayle in their seuerall
duties, woulde we not by and by iudge,
that there were in them either want of
loue vnto others, or inability in nature,
and also that this defect woulde tende
in the ende to the destruction of the body?
I am sure you will graunt it. What
shall wee say then of the members of our
Churche, which are so idle in their callinges,
may we not moste iustly condenme
them for want of loue? for loue is the bond
of perfection, which bindeth together the
hartes of the saintes, by her labour & trauell
she taketh, in helping and releeuing




them: she seeketh not her owne, she refuseth
no paine,1. Cor. 13. 5. she feareth no perill, she disdaineth
no basenes, so yt the members and
saintes of Christ, may be bettered by her.
But alasse, where is she in our Churches?
verely she commeth not abroade into our
streetes, shee sheweth not her selfe in our
assemblies, she appeareth not in pulpit dailie,
she is faine to hide her selfe in certeine
corners of the Church. For seeing some
preache not at all, some seldome, some
haue mo charges then is possible for them
to discharge: some seeke dispensations,
some faculties, some sue for commendations,
some one thing, some for another:
can we think yt they perswade thēselues to
be mēbers of others, seruants to other mē
               bers,
& not to thēselues only? thei haue hāds
eies, & ears, but they reach to themselues,
not to others: they see for thēselues, not for
others: they heare also, but not for others.
            Moreouer, where it is saide, that we are
one anothers members: we must know that
in dispising others, wee dispise our selues
and hurt our selues: for we depriue our
owne soules of those benefites, which other
shoulde minister vnto vs for oure
health & peace. We ought then rather to




nourish and cherish them, because we may
reape great good of them. But such is the
blindnesse and senselesse dulnesse of many
in our Church, that they esteeme nothing
of the members, that the Lord hath giuen
and ordayned for their singular commodity.
God hath giuen vs in great mercie
Pastors and Doctours to be our eyes, to
lead and direct vs in the wayes of truth
and holinesse: Elders, and Deacons to be
our handes, to keepe vs and hold vs in the
way, & also to reach vnto vs those things
we want: Attenders vppon vs, to be our
feet when we are not able otherwise to
goe. And yet (O Lorde) we despise them,
we deride them: nay, that which is incredible,
though they be the Lordes owne
gifts, we will not be perswaded, that they
will, or can do vs any good, or bring anye
ornament to the body. The Lord for his
mercye sake open our eyes, that we maye
see, and mollifie our stony hartes, that we
may loue our fellow-members, and serue
them in tender compassion for euer. For
alasse, this is a miserie, and a great vexation
of spirite, that manye churches haue
neither eyes, nor handes, nor feete: some
haue blind eyes and maymed handes, and




yet no man lamenteth: no man weepeth
for the misery of Sion, no man goeth about
to restore her to her perfect proportion,
and comely beauty. Thus you see
this generall lawe what it is, the two declarations
thereof, the contrary and similitudes,
how excellent, how worthy, how
profitable, how certain, cōstant, & vnchangeable:
for as it is in ye bodi, so in ye church,
keep all, preserue all, keepe some, preserue
some, keepe none, preserue none: chaunge
one, some, or all, then you breake ye Lordes
decree and ordinaunces established in his
Church. Wherefore to make an ende of
this part, it appertaineth to their HH. (as
they will aunsweere before God at the
dreadfull day of iudgement) to root out all
proud, insolent and ambitious members
from the Church and common-wealth,
wysely and diligently to plant, wise, modest,
sober, and sound gouernours: in both
to prouide that euery one, according to the
grace receiued occupy his talent: that in
the Churche they shred of all such superfluous
members, and supply the wantes
out of the word: that they auoyde confusion,
and preserue it from destruction: that
they seeke for vnity in one onely head Iesus




Christ, and in the continuall practize
of his lawes: finally, that they banish all idle
persons from the Citie of God, & compell
euerye member by loue to serue the
whole body. If they do this, then they shal
see the Church of Christ to appeare to be
such a one as Christ describeth her to be
in the Song of songes, and as shee was in
her yong and tender age in the time of the
Apostles: if not, I am to conclude thus: O
England, England, yt thou knewest those
thinges which belong vnto thy peace, but
now they are hidden frō thine eyes. Thus
much of ye general law appertaining to al.
            Now followeth the speciall law appertayning
to some: Seeing then we haue gifts
that are diuers, according to the grace that is
giuen vnto vs, whether we haue prophesie let
vs prophesie, according to the proportion of
faith: or an office, let vs wait vpon the office.
This speciall law concerneth only such, as
be publique persons in ye church, whereas
the former touched all in generall. And as
by the former, all men were charged to
content them selues with their seuerall
callinges and giftes: so by this, publique
persons are charged to abide in their seuerall
callinges, as in their seuerall standing




places, without breaking vppon the
functiōs of others, or enuying their gifts:
and therefore he doth not mention any extraordinary,
but onely ordinarye gyftes,
wherein men must abide to the comming
of Christ, and which we must only desire.
            Where he sayth, Seeing then: &c: we
note that the Apostle taketh it for a certaine
and an infallible rule, that the lord
had established and already giuen these
diuers giftes vnto his Church. For he
saith, According to the grace which is giuen
vnto vs. And when he saith, That whether
we haue prophesie, or an office, let vs abide
therein: he giueth a plaine cōmandement,
and a perpetuall law vnto the Church, to
retaine and keepe them for euer: to publique
persons or officers, to serue ye church
in them: to priuate mē, to make their profit
of thē. That God gaue them, it is manifest
also in other places. Ephes. 4. chap.
the 11. & 12. verses. Christ ascending gaue
some to be Apostles, some Prophetes, some Euangelistes,
to plant the Church, some Pastours
and Doctours to keepe in for euer. Againe,
1. Cor. 12. 28. verse. God hath ordayned
in the Church, first Apostles, secondly
Prophetes, both for a time, thirdly Teachers,




Helpers, and Gouernours to rule
the Church vnto the end.
            Againe Paule witnesseth, that, for the
adding of that which was wanting, and
namely for ordaining of Elders in euery
Citie, he left Titus in Creta: as he also
desired Timothie to abyde at Ephesus,
that he might be a means to bring in Pastors,
Doctors, Elders, Deacons & Widowes:
for else to what purpose should he
wryte of their offices: Therefore the Apostle,
maye well take it for a receiued
ground, wherof no man then doubted, that
God had giuen diuers giftes, for the continuall
and perfect gouernement of his
Church (for here he sayth they had receiued
thē by grace): so that vpon this groūd
he buildeth his generall commandement,
which he applyeth seuerally to euery particular
calling here mencioned. Where
he saith, According to the grace giuen me:
obserue two things; first, that euery ecclesiasticall
calling, must haue ioyned with
it, some singular grace of God: secondarily,
that euery of these functions here named,
are the seuerall giftes of the mercye
of God (as the word signifieth) most bountifully
bestowed vpō the Church. Wherfore




if any abuse these, he abuseth the liberality
and bounty of God: if anye take
these offices vppon him, not adorned with
that grace, which God hath annexed to
them, he dishonoureth the giuer, and bringeth
the giuer into contempt. If any be
an enemie to these, is he not an enemye to
the grace of God?
            Behold then, I beseech you, what we
do when we speake of Pastors, Doctors,
Elders, Deacons and widowes. Uerily,
verily, we in the person of God in ye name
of Christ besech you, whereas we haue authoritie
to command you, to receiue these
giftes. If you consider the giftes, they be
very necessary and profitable for you; yea,
they be the sweet graces of God: if you
respect the giuer, he it is that hath gyuen
him selfe for you: it is therefore no wisedome
to refuse so good giftes of so louing
a friend: he giueth cheerefully, and plentifully
powreth his benefites vppon vs, if
we refuse them, that shall be such vnkindnesse,
as I am not able to expresse.
            It followeth, Whether we haue prophesie,
let vs prophesie, &c. First he reduceth al
the ordinary functions, which were ordained
in the Church, & which are perpetually




to be retayned, for the happy successe
and preseruation thereof, vnto two generall
heads: that is to saye, vnto Prophetes
and Officers, diuiding either of them into
their seuerall braunches, as shall appeare
more plainely in the particular discourse.
In that he saith, Whether we haue
prophesie, by it he meaneth not any singular
gift to foretell that which is to come:
but an ordinary gift of interpreting the
writinges of the Prophetes, and other
Scripture, to the edification of the hearer.
The Greeke, Preposition Pro, beeing
sometimes in the place of Vpo, the
worde doth well admit that signification,
wherin it is vsed diuers times in the new
Testament, I would that ye all spake strange
languages,
               1. Cor. 14. 5. 
               but rather that ye prophesied. And
againe, We know in part, and we prophesie in
part. Now, that here it is so to be taken in
that signification, it appeareth first, in yt
he retaineth it among the ordinary gifts:
secondly, in that he tyeth and lymitteth it,
to be moderated and ruled by the proportion
of faith: thirdly, in that he commaundeth
the Prophet to abyde in that calling:
fourthly, in that immediately after,
he diuideth it into the office of the Doctour




and Pastour: all which, can not agree
with the giftes of foretelling things
to come. For that is not ordinary, not alwayes
limitted, not alwayes to be retayned,
neither is it common to the Doctour
and the Pastour, therefore it must needes
be thus expounded in this place, as we
haue sayde: so that the meaning is: hee
whom God hath called sincerely to interpret
his worde, to the profit of his people,
let him abyde in that function. For albeit
that worde is wanting in the Greek
text, yet either that, or some other of the
like force must necessarily be vnderstood,
as the Greeke Scholiast and other writers
doe well note. But what is ment
here, by The proportion of faith? To omit
the opinions of men, I take it to be the
same which the Apostle before named,
The measure of faith: and the meaning
to be, as if he shoulde saye: he that is lawfully
called by the church, truly and purely
to expound the Scriptures to the edification
of the hearer: let him abide therein,
according to the proportiō or measure
of his gifts, which are giuen him to occupie
and exercise in faith: for God hath giuen
to some more, to some lesse: yea,




and somtimes blesseth him that hath lesse,
more than him that hath more. Therefore
euery man being called, must abide therin,
and occupy his proper talent and gift,
with all diligence and faith, to the edification
of his owne flock. Whereby we may
plainly see, what a Prophet is. A Prophet
is a member or minister of the Word of
God, which abideth in the true & sincere
interpretation thereof, to the edification
of his own peculier flock. So Paul chargeth
ye bishops at Ephesus, to do. Act. 20.
The word trāslated office, signifieth here
all other ordinary functions, besides the
Pastor and Doctor. In deede it is sometimes
taken in scripture generally for all
Ecclesiasticall functions, & sometime applyed
to the ciuill Magistrate: but that it
is not so taken here, it is manifest by the
disiunctiue proposition, either of whose
partes, cannot by any rule of reason comprehend
both. Wherefore as the Prophet
hath to handle the Word, so ye officer hath
to handle not it, but other necessary dueties,
wherein he must also continue with
diligence and fidelity.
            Let vs proceed to the seueral branches.
Or he that teacheth on teaching. These




wordes as they shewe the office of the
Doctor, wherein he must bee continually
occupied, not breaking in vpon any other
ciuill or Ecclesiasticall calling: so they
may teach vs together what a true Doctor
and Teacher is, howe to define and distinguish
him from all other ministers in
the Church. A Doctor or Teacher is a
Prophet, which truely, soundly, and reuetently
expounding the Canonicall Scriptures,
continueth in teaching true doctrin
to his own people, for the establishing of
their minds in the truth. If any doubt of ye
trueth hereof, he may as well doubt of the
Scriptures them selues, out of the which
euery part hereof is drawne. For the Apostle
here calleth the Doctor a Prophet:
& that he must interpret ye canonical scriptures
it appeareth: first by the fourth of
the 1. of Pet. Let him that speaketh, speake
as the words of God. Secondly, because who
knoweth not, that the Scriptures are giuen
of the holy ghost, and are sufficient to
teach all trueth, and that the Churche is
built vpon this doctrine: Lastly, Christe
sendeth vs to the Scriptures, which witnesse
of him, and teacheth by them the
trueth, and confuteth errors. Therfore the




Doctours must onely expounde the canonicall
Scriptures, not the Apocripha,
or any mans writinges. For the
Lord will haue nothing brought into his
holy assembly, but that which he hath appointed.
And therefore albeit there were
greate corruption in the Synagogues of
the Iewes, yet the histories of the Acts of
the Apostles declare, that nothing was
read and expounded in them, but the Law
and the Prophetes, not so much as the
Caldie paraphrast. For as the Prophetes
might not in calling the people together,
blow any trumpets, but those which were
made and set apart for that purpose, by the
commaundement of God. Numb. 10. 28:
so ought not the Ministers of God to expound
or read openly in the congregation
any writings, but onely the Canonicall
Scriptures, which the Lorde hath set apart
and sanctified for that vse. That he
must doe it properly, purely, and reuerently,
appeareth by Peter before cited, hee
must speak as the wordes of God. Paule
testifieth yt he spake as concerning Christ,
as of sincerity, as of God, as in the sight &
presēce of God. 2. Cor. 2. 17. That he must
be diligent & continue in teaching, the generall




law prooueth it. Last of al, yt he must
do it to his owne people, the word it selfe
prooueth: for there is a necessary relation
betweene ye Teacher and the learner, the
Doctor and the disciple. Howe can hee
teach except hee haue disciples? howe can
those be his Disciples, which doe neither
heare him, nor learne of him? The reason
why he must doe it diligently, to plant and
establish his disciples mindes in the truth,
is because we are very dull to conceiue
and learne: and although lecture be vpon
lecture, doctrine vpon doctrine, here a little
and there a little, yet we shal remaine
ignorant, and proceede slowly, if the truth
be not soundly beaten into our heades. Againe,
because by this meanes the Pastor
shall haue more time in exhorting and applying
his exhortation to the present necessity
of his people. But if any say, is this
al to teach ye truth to his people by expounding
ye scriptures? must he not also confute
errors, & stop the mouth of the aduersary?
No doubt he must. But we must acknowledge
here the wisedome of the holy ghost,
which meaneth heere, by teaching the
trueth, the confutation also of errour: for
the rule of trueth is also the rule of falshood.




For as light expesseth darknesse, so
truth falshoode, and who is better able to
confute errors, then hee that knoweth the
true meaning of the word. Thus you see
what a true Teacher is, and wherein his
whole function consisteth. There remaineth
nothing but to giue him his schollers,
and to set him on worke: for as the
Doctor must continue in true, sound, and
pure doctrine: so his schollers must search
diligently (according to the example of the
noble men in the Actes 17) whether his
doctrine be true or not: whether it bee
soundly and purely gathered oute of the
word or not. As he is reuerently to handle
the Word, so they must reuerently receiue
it, as from the mouth of God.
            The next braunche or speciall, which
Christe hath giuen to his Church, is the
gift of exhortation, else-where called the
Pastor: who as the Teacher is occupied
about the reasonable part of the minde,
therin to plant true knowledge and sound
doctrine: so he is occupied about that part,
wherein the affections haue their abode,
to bring the heart and will to continuall
obedience of the trueth: which is so much
more necessary then the other, by howe




much the Lord is more delighted with obedience,
then with naked and bare knowledge.
The discription of the Pastor and
his office, is this. A Pastor is a Prophet,
that vpon sound doctrine grounded vppon
the sincere interpretation of the Scripture,
continueth in exhortation wisely applied
to the present vse, necessitie, and edification
of his people, and in the administration
of the Sacraments: all the partes
wherof may appeare in this sort. Doctrin
is the ground, euery exhortation not builded
thereon, is fruitlesse and weake, and
vanisheth away as smoke in the winde,
though it be zealous yet it is blinde aad
without knowledge. As the Scriptures
are able to instruct the Doctor with all
knowledge in teaching, so the Pastor in
exhorting improouing and correcting. It
is certaine that obedience is the end of exhortation,
and that faith is the mother of
obedience, and that faith leaneth only vpon
the Worde. Rom. 10. Hebrues. 11. 4.
7. 8. 17. 27. 28. Moreouer the Stewarde
of the Lords house must be not only faithfull:
Luk. 12. 41. but also wise to giue his
seruaunts their portion in due time. The
Lords children are not all of one age and




strength, and therefore their spirituall father
must feede some with milk, and some
with stronger meate, according to their
seuerall necessitie. The diuider of the
word must cut it aright. 2. Timothy. 2. 15
The Pastor being a learned Scribe, is
like the wise housholder which hath filled
and furnished all his treasure houses with
all store new and old. Exhortation must
be applyed to all estates high and lowe,
rich and poore, bond and free, learned and
vnlearned. The Pastor must not onely
lead his sheepe into pleasant and holesom
pastures, but also to heal the sick, to bring
home the strayes, to strengthen the weak,
Ezechiel. 34. 4: that all these duties are to
be done continually in his proper place
whereunto the Lord hath called him, it is
manifest by the reason before vsed. Wher
shoulde the shephearde bee occupied, but
where his sheepe are? where shoulde the
watchman watch, but where his Citie
and Towne is? the spirituall enimies of
our soul are many, strong, mighty, malitious,
vigilāt, subtil, & ful of deceipt: ye sheep
of the great pasture, fewe, weake, feeble,
simple, dull, vnwise: therefore their keeper
and defender had neede alwayes to bee




among them, to knowe their wayes, to
see their going out, and their comming
in. That hee may the better, going before
them in all sounde Doctrine and
godlinesse, keepe them to Christe and
defende them from their enimies; hee
must hearken vnto the voyce of Christ,
Feede, feede, feede. Hee must bee instant
in season and out of season, and therefore
continually abide with his flocke:
which to doe, as it is a moste profitable
duty both for the Pastor and the flock, so
to leaue ye flock as many do, & feed & watch
where they haue no flock, is most hurtfull
to both: and therefore all such rouing Pastors,
are by cordes to be tied to their own
people. As before, teaching contained the
whol duty of ye Doctor: so here exhorting
(by a figure) signifieth al ye duties of a Pastor.
For hee exhorteth the weake ones to
take comfort by the sweete mercies and
promises of God: the good hee exhorteth
to proceede, partly by the feare of
Gods iudgementes, and partly by the
loue of his mercies. The wicked he exhorteth
to repentance by laying before
them, the eternall and seuere iudgements
and curses of GOD, and the multitude




and greatnesse of their sinnes. So that
those are but meanes to whet his exhortation,
that it may pearce and enter in, euen
to the diuiding of the soule and the spirite.
            Nowe I beseech you consider, first the
wisdome and mercy of God, in prouiding
for the people. Mans soul hath two parts,
reason or the minde, the hart or the affection.
By the fall of Adam, there is in the
minde darknesse and ignorance of the will
of God: in the hart there is nothing but
rebellion and enemity against him: so that
the Scripture hath iudged vs to be by nature
the Children of darknesse, and the
sonnes of rebellion. Nowe, the Lorde in
wisedome and mercy hath giuen to his
Church, remedies to cure these diseases.
First a Doctor, who by heauenly wisedom
in interpreting the Word, is able (the spirit
working by his ministery) to translate
vs from the kingdome of darknesse, to the
kingdom of light and knowledge: then the
Pastor whom he hath ordained to subdue
and tame the rebellious motions of our
harts, and make them obedient to the wil
and truth of God. O the vnspeakable wisdome
& mercyes of God, who to cast down
the strong holdes of ignorance and rebellion,




which by nature possessed our soules,
hath giuen the ministeries of the Pastor, &
Doctor, which being giuen of the king of
kings, & prince of princes, in the day of his
coronation, when he led his enimies in triumph,
to shew the glory of his kingdome, &
his princely power, can neither bee thoght
to be smal, neither lightly regarded, without
great dishonor vnto ye giuer, who hath
not left vs destitute, as we see, of any gift
necessary for our soules health.
            
               He that distributeth, in distributing with
simplicity. From the Ministers of ye Word,
he commeth to other officers, which haue
charge either of a part of the congregatiō,
as Deacons & Attenders vpon the sick: or
of the whol as Elders, shewing yt these as
they are diuers gifts from ye other, so they
are very necessary in their place & roome.
The first is the Deacon, called here ye distributer,
wherby appeareth his office and
function what it is. For a Deacon is an
officer which continueth in distributing ye
common liberality of ye Church, according
to the necessity of all the poore members
therof. The first part is plaine in this text,
yt he is a distributer of the Church goods,
appeareth in the 4. of the Arts & 6. where




many brought the price of their lands and
houses which they had sold, and layd the
mony at the Apostles feete, to be distributed
to euery man as he had neede. Nowe
the Apostles that they might the better
attend vnto preaching and praying, were
vpon necessary causes faine to giue ouer
this charge vnto other called Deacons,
whome the Church elected: as it is in Act.
6. Therefore this is the Deacons office,
herein he must be occupied, to marke the
necessity of the poore, and accordingly to
distribute. Whereupon yt followeth, yt hee
must knowe therefore their estate, their
wealth, their charges, their custome of
spending, whither it be much or little, or
moderate, their trade of life, whether they
be painfull or negligent therein: that hee
may distribute with knowledge, wisdom,
iustice, fidelity, simplicity, and without respect
of persons. All men can not do this, &
it is necessary yt some should do it: therfore
least the children of God should in bestowing
their liberalitie & almes behaue them
selues disorderedly, spilling where they
ought to spare, and holding backe their
handes where they ought to bestowe: it
pleased our merciful father, to ease a great




many, and to lay the burden vpon a fewe
faithfull wise men, full of the holy ghoste,
that all thinges in the Church might bee
done orderly and vprightly in the sight of
God. Thus we see the necessity of these
officers, by whose labour and godly care,
the sicke, the strangers or other saints, vnable
to earn their own liuings by ye sweat
of their browes, might bee honestly maintained
by the liberality and bountifulnes
of their brethren, vnto whome God hath
giuen aboundaunce for the supply of their
want, in such sort yt there shoulde be, as it
was foretold by ye Prophet, & to be seene in
the primitiue Church, no begger in Israel.
He that ruleth with deligence. By the ruler
hee meaneth all those that gouerned the
Church, wherof some labour both in word
and gouernment, as the Pastours & Doctors:
some onely in gouernement as the
Elders called by the common name, as
Paule in the 1. Tim. 5. 17. These Elders
are Churche-officers or censors of
manners, whoe by correcting, and admonishing
the vnruly, and incouraging the
good, preuented offences, and continued in
ruling, & gouerning ye church which depē
               ded
vpon thē. Their office was chiefly in




assisting the Pastors & Doctors in admonishing
ye vnruly seuerally, by comforting
the feeble minded, by preuenting of offences,
which otherwise might arise: in suspending
ye vnworthy from ye Sacraments,
in excommunicating of the obstinate, in
absoluing the repentant, in ordaining and
remouing church officers: finally, in handling
& deciding all such matters & controuersies
in doctrine or manners, as belong
& appertain to ecclesiasticall gouernment.
The proofe of al which particular duties,
I cannot (for lack of time) stand vpon, only
I wil quote the places of scripture. Math.
the 22. chapiter, the 24. & 25. verses. Mat.
18. chap. & the 17. verse. 1. Timoth. the 4.
chap. and the 14. verse. Act. the 15. chap. 6.
& 22. verses. Act. the 16. chap. & the 4. vers.
Act. the 21. 18. & 20. vers. 2. And therefore
these being set ouer vs in matters pertaining
to God, we must acknowledge & obey
them, with singular loue & reuerence,
because they watch for our souls. 1. Thes.
5. I haue much to say of the office & necessitie
of these offices, how needeful they are
for ye suppressing of errors, schismes, sects,
& heresies: for the brideling of the lust &
pride of life, for the correcting of the vnruly,




& the preferring of the worthy, & in all
wisdome, grauitie, & vprightnes, as lights
to shine vnto the Church, that they may ye
clearer see, how to walk in the waies of ye
iust. But a long treatise is scarcely sufficiēt
for this discourse, & my time is almost
spent. I cannot stande here to shew the difference
betweene all these offices, certain
it is, that they are diuerse giftes, & distinguished
one frō another. Let men beware
howe they confounde those thinges which
God hath distinguished. For the Elder &
Deacon (because yt will more shewe their
offices) they differ thus: the Deacon he is
occupied only about the pore, the Elder about
all: the Deacon distributeth, the Elder
admonisheth: the Deacon obserueth ye
pouertie of the saints in bodily things; the
Elder noteth manners, and conuersation:
the Deacon searcheth howe the Churche
goods receiued are spent: the Elder noteth
howe euery one laboreth in his owne calling.
Whereby it commeth to passe, yt as
the Deacons can make true report to the
Church of the state of the pore, so the Elders
of the state of all. By which wise gouernment,
it woulde in part come to passe,
which the Prophets foretell, yt the polluted




should haue no passage into the churche:
that no noisom beast shold be found there,
that the redeemer of the Lord may walk
in peace. Finally, the Deacons take heed
that no idle person be nourished in ye company
of the poore: the Elders care is, to
see that no vnclean person remaine in the
bosom of ye church, wherof redoundeth no
small commodity, both to the Church and
Common-wealth.
            The last gift is, the Shewing of mercie
with cheerfulnes. This was the proper office
of those, which beeing relieued by the
Church, were appointed to looke vnto the
poore which were weake & sicke, and the
poore stranger. So yt a Shewer of mercy
is he, or rather she (for the cōpanies of such
as executed this duty consisted especially
of widowes) which by the gouernors of ye
Church & consent of the people, was appointed
to help ye pore impotēt, & pore strā
               gers,
in those duties wherin they could not
wel help thēselues, hauing neither friends
nor kinsfolk to help them. A very necessary
functiō, especially in time of persecutiō
or greeuous sickenesse, when the Church
hath many impotent persons, in which
time such order is to be taken that none




of the members of Christe, for whome hee
hath shed his pretious bloud, perishe for
lacke of looking vnto, nor want any attending
which they may haue, and it is meet
they should. These ministers of the poore,
their age, qualities, office, and conditions,
are declared of Paul in the 1. Tim. 5. By
the deligent, continuall and cheerefull
performaunce of those offices, these whom
the Lord seemeth to haue a speciall and
singular care of (namely the widows & fatherlesse,
and all impotent persons) shoulde
be moste charitably and godly prouided
for. The want of these officers and mercifull
companies, is the cause of the death
and perishing of many a poore fatherlesse
childe, impotent persons, and sick ones;
who are ready often, euen to dye in the
streetes, as I my selfe haue seene and
heard credibly reported, and that, as to my
greefe, so to the great infamy of all Christian
professours of the Gospell: a matter
therefore of those that bee in authority
to bee looked vnto. I graunt there
bee many good lawes and statutes enacted
for the prouision of the poore, but wee
see by experience, that the Lord will not
blesse and giue good successe there vnto.




For (notwithstanding these statutes) wee
haue swarms of beggers pore & impotent,
till we haue by authority established in euery
congregation these eternall decrees
of Christ, touching the gouernment of his
Church. For the want of this gouernmēt,
as I take in hand to prooue, is the cheefe
& principall cause of all the euils that are
perpetually in our Church. For if it be demanded,
why ther is in the land such grose
ignorance of God? the answere is at hand,
we want Doctors & Teachers. Whence
come such swarms of Athiests, Idolaters,
Papistes, erronious & hereticall sectaries,
of the Family of loue & such like? ther are
no Doctours to teach, nor Pastors to exhort.
Nowe commeth it to passe, that in a
Christian Church, professing newnesse of
life, and the doctrine of regeneration, ther
should be such a huge masse of old and detestable
workes, of coniuring, witchcraft,
sorcery, charming, blaspheming the holy
name of God, swearing and forswearing,
prophaning of the Lords sabboths, disobedience
to superiors, contempt of inferiors:
murther, manslaughter, robberies, adultery,
fornication, couenaunt-breakers, false-witnesse
bearing, lyars wt all other kindes




of vnmercifull dealing one with another?
Is not the cause euident? we lack Elders
and Gouernors of euery congregation to
admonish, correct, suspende and excommunicate
such noisome, hurtfull, & monstrous
beastes, out of the house of God, without
respect of persons. Why haue we so many
poore, so many feeble, and weake ready to
die amongst vs? we want Deacons and
mercifull men, which should faithfully distribute
to the necessity of the Saints, and
willingly and cheerefully attend vpon the
impotent, which are vnable to helpe them
selues. O what fruite might be reaped by
these seuerall vocations, if they were set
vp and established in euery congregation!
Without all controuersies the benefites
that would redound to vs, and this
land hereby, are innumerable: no tongue
can expresse them. For hereby her gratious
Maiestie and her honourable Counsell,
might truely knowe within a short
time by name, who & howe many enimies
there are (a very few subtile hipocrites excepted)
to religion, & the common-wealth.
How many obstinate, malitious, and traiterous
Papists, how many Annabaptists,
Libertines, how many of the Family of




loue, how many Atheists, how many vnruly
& inordinate walkers, which thē might
bee punished according to their faultes:
wheras now Archbyshops, Bishops, Archdeacons,
Commissaries Officialls, hauing
contrarie to ye word of God, pulled ye rains
of gouernment from ye Elders, ruine & destruction
is feared, but not auoyded. Not
one enimy of an hundreth is known of ye
greater part, & yet there be moe secret enimies,
then ye wisest & most prouident can
thinck of. Hereby al the secrete & mischieuous
deuises against her Maiesties royall
person, against religion, & the whole state,
might easily be tried & searched out, by the
diligent & wise search of ye Elders in euery
Church: whereas now, did not ye Lord somtimes
most wonderfully, for the singular
care he hath ouer her Counsel bring thē to
light, we should haue bene often eare now,
swalowed vp by these secret vnderminings
of the common peace and state. Hereby we
should knowe certainly, who be those yt so
prodigally maintain suche as haue beene
blouddy butchers & murtherers of Gods
people, remaining as yet enemies to the
Gospell, and false harted to her Maiestie:
where as nowe some of them haue




securely boasted (as I am able to iustifie)
iudge you of the rest, that they haue
had greater reuenews, being Prisoners
in the Tower and other places, then
when they were Abbots and riche Prelates
in the lande: and yet no man knoweth
howe they come by them, nor of
whome they receyue them. Howe
muche then, thinke you, is all that is
bestowed this waye in one yeare, you
maye gesse by this annuall receypte of
some one man? Hereby might easily in
time be preuented all secret conspiracies.
For whatsoeuer conspiracie were begun
in any Towne or Citie, it would easily in
the beginning, long before the flame therof,
bee espied of such wise and graue men,
as now in some congregations may, and
after teaching and exhorting, might in
many moe bee appointed: and such attemptes
either by ecclesiasticall censure,
or ciuil correction of the Magistrate bee
altogether quenched: so that our gracious
Prince, her honorable Counsel, & the whol
land might liue in much more safety and
security, then now they do, and haue greater
assuraunce of the mercifull protection
of the almighty, then nowe they haue.




Hereby all godly lawes ecclesiastical and
ciuill, should either vniuersally be kept of
all, or else the breakers come vnder such
ciuill and Ecclesiasticall punishments as
they should deserue, which were a singuler
meane to breede in the harts of the Subiectes,
a pure feare & loue to their Prince
and other Magistrates. Whereas now
good lawes are transgressed and no man
accused: the Lorde is not truely worshipped,
the Prince of some not in vnfained
simplicie reuerenced, nor with good will
from the hart beloued of them. Finallye,
heereby the Pastours and Doctors
shoulde, hauing a true relation from
their Seniors, touching ye estate of their
flocke, be much more fruitfully occupied
in teaching and exhorting: for they might
with al knowledge and wisedome, deliuer
vnto euery one that which were fit most
to draw him to God, & his eternal saluation.
Seeing therfore, that the establishing
of this gratious gouernment of God, will
bannishe & chase a way all noysome beasts
out of the Lords vineyearde: seeing it wil
be such a singular meane to preserue and
maintaine the peace and securitie of the
Common-wealth, & all estates therin: finally,




seeing it maketh very much both
for religion and godly pollicie, & is a most
deare friend to both, for the loue of your
Common-wealth and the Church, I beseech
you all to enterteine this Christian
gouernment of ye church of Christ, wherof
he himselfe is the authour and no man.
Two things remaine which I purpose to
determine. First that this gouernement
is perpetuall: secondly, that it is only sufficient:
wherin I cannot, for lack of time
be long, and therfore wil briefly set down
the reasons of both.
            For the first, I proue thus. First this
speciall commaundement, touching the
practize & exercise of these giftes, besides
that it is the commaundement of God,
drawne out of the generall law: it chargeth
al these officers to abide in their offices,
therefore they are perpetuall.
            Secondly, all these officers are called
here the true members of the body of the
Church: therefore the Church beeing to
endure to the comming of Christ, these also
must be of the same continuance, except
you will say, yt Christe is pleased better
with a maimed body, then a perfect one.
            Thirdly, Paule commaundeth Timothie




to keepe this gouernment vnto the
comming of Christ. 1. Tim. 6.
            Fourthly, all the thinges where-about
they are occupied, as the ignorances, and
errours of the minde, the corruptions of
the heart, the vnrulinesse of men, the pouertie
of the saints, and impotency of the
poore, are alwayes to be looked vnto and
cared for. Therfore the offices of God appointed
and ordained for these purposes,
are perpetuall.
            Fiftly, Christe the King and gouernour
of his Church, must rule it till the comming
of him selfe by his owne offices and
lawes, therefore this is perpetuall.
            For the second. First we are commaunded
here to content our selues with these,
and to rest in them, therefore these are only
sufficient.
            Secondly, these doe make the man and
church of God perfect to euery good work,
as it is in ye 4. to ye Ephesians & else where,
therefore these onely are sufficient.
            Thirdly, if these bee insufficient, then
Christ can not be glorified, as perfect gouernour
of his Church, neither his worde
is such, but that something may be added,
both which are absurd: therefore they onely




are sufficient: if not, who dare adde a
member to that body, which hee neither
made, nor can make.
            Fourthly, these functions onely are sufficient,
which haue all the gifts needefull
for the ministery of the word and Sacramentes,
and for the gouernment of the
Church: but all these functions are sufficient
for these ends: therefore onely these
are sufficient.
            Fiftly, if any erect new ministeries, hee
must either giue new gifts, or assure men
that they shall haue newe giftes of God:
but none can do thus: therefore these only
are sufficient.
            Sixthly, if men may adde, they may detract:
but ye second is false, therfore ye first.
            Seeing then these things are so as hath
bin set forth, out of ye Word of God, yt this
is his order to which al ought to vow their
backs, euery one keeping his proper place,
& none intruding vpon the right & interest
of another: seing superfluous things ought
to be cut off, & such offices as are frō Antichrist,
ought to be abandoned: let vs euery
one in our places, pray to our good God,
that he wil pitty this his poore Church, yt
trueth and righteousnesse may kisse eche




other, that his scepter may flourish, that
the stiff-necks of the obstinate, and the Iron
siniews of the rebellious may be bowed
and broken: to the end these confusions
that appeare euery where: this pompous
pride and curssed ambition, enimy to all
sincerity, good order, & true religion may
cease, and onely the glory and victory of
Christe, our onely, King, Prophet and
Priest, may be established, to whom with
the Father and the holy ghost, three persons
and one eternall God, be all
prayse, glory and honor,
now and for euer.
            Amen.
            
         
      
   