
      
         
            
            
            A
Sermon preached at
Farington in Barkeſhire, the
ſeuenteene of Februarie,
1587.
            At the buriall of the right Honorable
the Ladie Anne Countes of Warwicke,
daughter to the Duke of Sommerſet his
grace, and widowe of the right worſhipfull
Sir Edward Vmpton
knight.
            By Bartholomew Chamberlaine, Doctor
of Diuinitie.
            
            
               LONDON
Printed by Iohn Wolfe, and are to be
ſold at his ſhop at the broad ſouth dore
of Paules. 1591.
         
         
            
            
            To the right Honorable and
moſt vertuous Ladie, the Ladie Doritie
Vmpton: Bartholomew Chamberlaine
wiſheth increaſe of health, wealth, worſhip,
and godlines with long life here
to gods glorie, and euerlaſting
life hereafter with Chriſt
Ieſus in heauen.
            
               WHether yee eate or
drinke, or whatſoeuer
ye doe, do all to the
glorie of God, as the
Apoſtle ſaith. Which
when I remembred,
to the glorie of my
creator, and benefite of his church, I
thought good to commit this little treatiſe
to writing, preached at the buriall of
your motherinlaw, a noble Ladie, a faithfull
wife, a vertuous woman, and a godly
widow. And becauſe your Ladiſhippe
(whoſe giftes of bodie and minde are
excellent) heard it with attention, as you
do alwaies the word of truth (to gods
praiſe and your owne commendation be
it ſpoken) I tooke it meete to dedicate it
to you for a New yeares gift, and declaration

of my thankfull mind, for your
manifold courteſies towardes me. And
foraſmuch, as the daies are euill, (ſinne abounding,
and charitie being cold) I haue
therefore ſet downe the iudgements of
God againſt the diſſolute people of this
age, which haue a ſhew of godlines, but
haue denied the power thereof. And ſeeing
they giue themſelues to commit all
ſinne, euen with greedines, being proude
without humilitie, malicious without
charity, cruell without compaſsion, coueteous
without meaſure, vaine without
vertue, vile without the feare of God, like
to the horſe and mule in whom is no vnderſtanding:
therefore they ſhall vndoubtedly
taſt the bitter cuppe of Gods
heauie diſpleaſure, except they ſpeedily
and truely repent. Which, if they ſhall do,
though their ſinnes were as crimſin, they
ſhall be made white as ſnowe: though
they were red as skarlet, they ſhall bee
as wooll, and that they may ſo do, I daiely
and deuoutly craue of God, in the gratious
name, and glorious face of Ieſus Chriſt
his ſonne: who gaue him ſelfe for vs, to
redeeme vs from all iniquitie, and to

purge vs to bee a peculiar people vnto
himſelfe zealous of good workes. To
him therefore with the Father and the
holy Ghoſt three in perſons, one God
in nature, be all glorie
for euer,
            
               Your Ladiſhips at commandement
Bartholomew Chamberlaine.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A Sermon preached at Farington
in Barkeſhire, the ſeuenteene
of Februarie
1587.
            
            
               
                  O Death, how bitter is the
remēmbrance of thée to
a man that liueth at reſt
in his poſſeſſions, vnto
the man that hath nothing
to vexe him, and
that hath proſperity in al
thinges: yea vnto him that is able to receiue
meate. O death how bitter is the remembrance
of thée to the Epicure, which beléeuing
no reſurrection of the bodie to life euerlaſting,
but counting it pleaſure to liue deliciouſly
for a ſeaſon, doth ſpue out euill words,
corrupting good manners, ſaying: Let vs eat
and drinke, for to morowe we ſhall die. O
death how bitter is ye remembrance of thée to
the coueteous, whoſe truſt is in vncertain riches,
not in the liuing God (which giueth vs
aboundantly all thinges to enioy:) to the
glutton, whoſe God is his belly, and glorie
to his ſhame: to the Atheiſt, which hath no
hope, and is without God in the world. O

death how ſwéete is the remembrance of thée
to him, which hath put on the breſtplate of
faith and loue, and the hope of ſaluation for an
Helmet, liuing ſoberly, iuſtly, and godly in
this preſent world, hauing his conuerſation
in heauen, from whence alſo ye looke for the
Sauiour, euen the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, deſiring
to be looſed and to be with him, which is
beſt of all. O death how ſwéete is the remembrance
of thée to the man which looketh not
on the thinges which are ſéene, for they are
temporall, but on the thinges which are not
ſéene, for they are eternall: becauſe to him
thou art the ende of all miſerie, and the beginning
of all felicitie: becauſe thou art a paſſage
to the thinges, which eye hath not ſeene, neither
eare hath heard, neither came into mans
hart, which God hath prepared for them that
loue him. Notwithſtanding, though the remembrance
of death to ſome be bitter, yea
bitterer then wormewood it ſelfe, yet it is appointed
for all men once to die. It is appointed
therefore it is certaine, for all men, therefore
none can eſcape once to die, therfore euery
houre death is to be expected. It is appointed
for rich Creſus, and poore Codrus, for
wiſe Salomon and fooliſh Eſau, for godly Abell,
                  
and wicked Caine: for proude Pharao
and méeke Moiſes: for vertuous Ioſua, for
mightie Dauid: for faire Abſolon, for ſtrong
Sampſon, for learned Tertullus, for prince
and people it is appointed for all once to die.
Noah liued nine hundreth and fiftie yeares,
and died. Adam liued nine hundred and thirty
yeares, and died. Methuſelah liued nine hundreth
ſixtie and nine yeares, and dyed. And of
all the fathers of the olde Teſtament, though
it be ſaide they liued long, yet it is added they
went the way of all the world, that is they
died. Now it is good to remember death, it is
better to learne to die: it is beſt of all in death
to hope for life, knowing that if one earthly
houſe of this tabernacle bée deſtroyed, wée
haue a building giuen of God, that is an houſe
not made with handes, but eternall in the
heauens. Some to remēber death do go euery
morning into the church yeard and behold the
graues. Some wil haue deathes head engrauen
in a ring. Some death painted on their
houſes. Philip king of the Macedonians, euery
morning before he came out of his chā
                  bre,
had one to cry thriſe at his dore, remember
thou art a man: Whereby he was put in
minde of his mortality, that albeit he was a

king, yet in time he muſt lay downe his tabernacle
as well as others. Which conſideration
might make him to rule diſcréetly,
and to liue orderly. For there can bee no
ſtronger bridle to hold vs backe from ſinne
neither ſharper prick to ſtirre vs forward to
goodnes, then to remember we muſt remoue
out of this body and appeare before the iudgement
ſeate of Chriſt, to receiue the thinges
which we haue done in this bodie according
to that we haue done, whether it be good or
euill. Saint Hierom was wont to ſay: whether
I eate or drinke, or whatſoeuer I do, me
thinkes that terrible Trumpet ſoundeth in
mine eare: Ariſe ye dead, and come vnto
iudgment. This made him to hope in Chriſt
ſtedfaſtly, to loue God ſincerely, to ouercome
his affections valiently, to repent his ſinne
vnfainedly, to beare the troubles of this life
patiently, knowing that the afflictiōs, of this
preſent times are not worthy of the glorie,
which ſhall be ſhewed vnto vs. O that wée
could remember thrée thinges paſt: What
good thinges wee haue omitted, what euill
things we haue committed: what time we
haue loſt. O that we could conſider thrée
thinges preſent. The breuity of our life: The

difficulty to be ſaued: The paucity of them
which ſhall be ſaued. O that we could foreſée
thrée thinges to come. The houre of death,
then which no thing more vncertaine: The
reſurrection to iudgement, then which nothing
more terrible: The paines of hell, then
which nothing more intollerable. Remember
the ende, and thou ſhalt neuer do amiſſe.
The end of ſinne is death. Here is a ſpectacle,
a Ladie by birth, a Countes by mariage, by
title right honorable, a widow of a vertuous
life, a woman of many yeares, a mother of
good children, whoſe bodie death hath killed,
whoſe ſoule Chriſt hath taken, whoſe bodie
muſt to the earth, whoſe ſoule is in the hands
of God. Beholde in her the ende of all fleſh:
for as we are, ſo was ſhe: and as ſhe is, ſo ſhal
we be: that her truſty Seruants, that her
faithfull frendes, that her worſhipfull, déere,
and louing children, ſeing God hath wrought
his will vpon her, as in time alſo he will vpon
you and vpon all fleſh, by calling her from
earth to heauen, from men to Saintes, to
Angels, to the fruition of his moſt glorious
preſence: praiſe God for her. Let your lamentations
be mixed with moderation, becauſe
ſhe is gone from a vale of miſerie, to a

hauen of all happines, and when Chriſt,
which is her life ſhall appéere, then ſhall ſhée
alſo appeare with him in glorie. For though
her bodie be ſowen in corruption, yet it ſhall
be raiſed in incorruption. Though it be ſowen
in diſhonor, yet it ſhall be raiſed in glorie.
Though it be ſowen in weakenes, yet it
ſhall be raiſed in power. Though it be ſowen
a naturall body, yet it ſhall be raiſed a ſpirituall
body, when this corruptible hath
put on incorruption, and this mortall
hath put on immortality.
            
            
               
               Who may ſtand in thy ſight, when thou
art angry.
               
                  THe earth which drinketh
in the raine that
cometh often vpon it, &
bringeth forth hearbes
meete for them by
whom it is dreſſed, receiueth
bleſſing of God.
But that which beareth
bryars and thornes is reproued, and is
neare vnto curſing, whoſe end is to be burned,
who ſo heareth Chriſtes wordes, and
doth the ſame, is likened to a wiſe man
which hath builded his houſe on a rocke, and
the raine fell, and the floudes came, and the
windes blewe, and beat vpon that houſe, and
it fell not: for it was grounded on a rocke.
But whoſoeuer heareth Chriſtes wordes
and doth them not, is compared to a fooliſh
man, which builded his houſe on the ſand:
and the raine fell, and the flouds came, and
the windes blew and beat vpon that houſe,
and it fell, and the fall thereof was great.
If any heare the word and doth it not, he is
like vnto a man, that beholdeth his naturall

face in a glaſſe: for when he hath conſidered
himſelfe he goeth his way, and forgetteth immediatly
what manner a one he was. But
who ſo looketh in the perfect law of libertie,
and continueth therein, he not being a forgetfull
hearer, but a doer of the worke, ſhall
be bleſſed in his déede. When a woman
with a lifted vp voice had ſaide to Chriſt:
Bleſſed is the wombe that bare thée, and the
pappes which gaue thée ſucke: he anſwered,
yea rather bleſſed are they, which heare the
word of God and kéepe it. He that hath my
commaundements (ſaith Chriſt) and kéepeth
them, he is he that loueth me. He that hath
them (ſaith Auguſtine) in his beliefe, and
kéepes them in his life: he that hath them in
his wordes, and kéepes them in his workes,
he that hath them by hearing, and kéepes
them by doing: He that hath them by doing
and kéepes them by continuing in doing, he,
and none but he loueth Chriſt. The fruitles
trée is good for nothing, but to be cut downe
and caſt into the fire. That ſaucy marchaunt
which intruded himſelfe into the marriage
of the kinges ſonne, without his wedding
garment, was not onely checked, but
alſo commaunded to be bound hand and foote:

to be taken away and caſt into vtter darkeneſſe,
where ſhall be wéeping and gnaſhing
of téeth. The figge trée which had leaues,
but no fruite, was by our Sauiour accurſed
for euer. The fooliſh virgins which had
lampes without oyle, though they cryed,
Lord, Lord open vnto vs: yet they receiued
a ſhort and ſharpe anſwere: verily I ſay vnto
you, I know you not. That euil, ſlouthfull,
and vnprofitable ſeruant, which hid his
maiſters talent in the earth, had it both taken
from him▪ and was caſt into vtter darkneſſe,
where ſhall be wéeping and gnaſhing
of téeth. That therefore we may be doers
of the word and not hearers onely, deceiuing
our owne ſalues: that the word may be vnto
vs, not the ſauour of death vnto death: but
the ſauour of life vnto life. That the worde
may be vnto vs liuely and mighty in operation,
and ſharper then any two edged ſword,
and enter through euen to the deuyding a
ſunder of the ſoule and the ſpirit, and of the
iointes and the marow, and may be a diſterner
of the thoughts and intents of our harts,
ſo that all thinges in vs may be new, let vs
by humble prayer looke vp to almightie God
in the glorious face of Ieſus Chriſt.
               
                  
When ſinners once begin to deſpiſe the
riches of Gods bountifulneſſe and patience,
and long ſufferance, not knowing that the
gooneſſe of God leadeth them to repentance:
when walking in the vanitie of their minde,
in darkeneſſe of their vnderſtanding, in
ſtraungeneſſe from the life of God, through
the ignorance in them, in hardneſſe of their
hart: and being paſt féeling ſhall giue them
ſelues vnto wantonneſſe, to worke all vncleanneſſe
euen with gréedineſſe: when they
ſhall turne the grace of our God into wantonneſſe,
and deny God the onely Lord, and
our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, ledde with ſenſualitie
as natural brute beaſtes, walking after
the fleſh in the luſts of wantonnes: when
they ſhall thinke it loſt labour to ſerue God,
and no profit to kéepe his commandements,
neither to walke humbly before the face of
the Lord of hoſtes: when they ſhall ſay to
them ſelues, our life is ſhort and tedious, our
breath is as a ſmoke in our noſtrels, our
wordes as a ſparke raiſed out of our harte,
our ſpirits vaniſh away as the ſoft ayre, our
bodies ſhall be turned into duſt, our life ſhall
paſſe away as the trace of a cloud, our time is
as a very ſhadow, our workes ſhall ſoone be

forgotten, our name no man ſhall haue in remembrance:
come on therefore let vs enioy
the pleaſures that are preſent, let vs be partakers
of our voluptuouſneſſe, let vs leaue
ſome token of our pleaſure in euery corner,
let the law of vnrighteouſnes be our ſtrēgth,
let vs eate and drinke, for to morrow wee
ſhall dye: when neither often warnings by
his preachers, nor faire promiſes of rewarde,
nor longe benefits of mercy, nor ſharpe
threatnings of puniſhment can doe any good:
then God (which in his wrath is a conſuming
fire) playing the part either of a good ſchoolemaiſter
towards his negligent ſcholer, or of
a naturail father towardes his diſſolute
childe, or of a wiſe magiſtrate towarde his
diſobedient ſubiect, taketh the rod in hand,
and executeth iudgement on thoſe whom
mercy could not allure nor draw to amendment.
Then his anger beginneth to kindle:
for as God is the father of mercies, and the
God of all comfort to them which drawe
neare vnto him with a true hart, in aſſurance
of faith, their harts being pure from an euil
conſcience, and waſhed in their bodies with
pure water, kéeping faſt the profeſſion of
their hope without wauering, conſidering

one another to prouoke vnto loue, and to
good workes: ſo is he the God of iuſtice to
them which beare euil and vnfaithful hartes,
to depart away from him, faſhioning them
ſelues like vnto this world, dead in treſpaſſes
and ſinnes, wherein they walke according to
the courſe of this world, and after the prince
that ruleth in the ayre, euen the ſpirite that
now worketh in the children of diſobedience,
hardened through the deceitfulneſſe of ſinne.
To the one he is louing as a father, being his
children elected of his grace, called by his
word, iuſtified by his ſonne, ſanctified by his
ſpirit, and reconciled to himſelfe. The other
he hateth as his enimy. For as the righteous
Lord loueth righteouſneſſe, whoſe countenance
might behold the thing that is iuſt:
ſo he hateth all thoſe that worke iniquitie,
not bearing in them his Image, which is
righteouſneſſe and true holineſſe, to beautify
them, but the image of the diuel, which is
vnrighteouſneſſe and vnholineſſe to deforme
them: not ſpeaking truth one to another,
conſidering they are members one of another,
but deceiuing one another, by flattery▪
lying and diſſembling: not ſpeaking that
which is good to the vſe of edifying, that it

might miniſter grace to the hearers: but
vſing euil wordes which corrupt good manners,
not being courteous and tender harted
one to another, fréely forgiuing one another
euen as God for Chriſt his ſake fréely forgiue
them: but full of bitterneſſe and anger,
and wrath, curſing and euil ſpeaking with all
maliciouſneſſe, not knowing the wiſedome
that is from aboue, which is pure, peaceable,
gentle, eaſie to be intreated, full of mercy, and
good fruite, without iudging, and without
hipocriſie: but following the wiſedom of this
world, which is fooliſhneſſe with God, The
wiſedom of the fleſh, which is enmity againſt
God, the wiſedom that is beneath, which is
earthly, ſenſuall and diueliſh, doe delight in
enuying, ſtrife, ſedition, and all maner of euil
workes, deſpiſing Gods preſence, abuſing
his patience, offending his Maieſtie, and prouoking
his anger. But when to aſcribe anger
to the moſt high, almightie & euerlaſting
God, which is to be loued for his mercy, & to
be feared for his iuſtice, they muſt not imagin
any ſuch cholericke paſſion to be in him,
as is in man, as if God were moued of an intemperate
heate, when iuſtly he ſtriketh the
contemners of his bountifulnes, and patiēce,

and long ſufferance, & raineth vpon the wicked
fire and brimſtone, ſtorme and tempeſt
which is the portion of their cup. As there is
in God no corporall member of longitude, latitude,
and profunditie: ſo is he voide of affections
and paſſions which procéede in vs from
infirmity. Si quis in Deo-humana membra
humano more cogitet procul dubio de
Deo in corde ſuo idola fabricat. For God
is a ſpirite, and they that worſhip him, muſt
worſhip him in ſpirite and truth. And as we
are not to think, that the Godhead is like vnto
gold or ſiluer, or ſtone grauen by arte, and
the inuention of man: ſo muſt we not aſcribe
to the deuine power corporall partes, bodily
members. And though the Scripture attributeth
to God ſometyme a heade, eyes ſometime,
ſometymes eares, & ſometymes hands:
yet groſly to imagine theſe thinges to bee in
him is not onely erronyous, but full of Idolatrie.
And albeit the Scripture ſaith that man
was made after the image of God, wherupō
certaine heretikes grounded their opinion of
corporall ſubſtance in God: yet true it is,
that God is a ſpiritual ſubſtance, moſt glorious,
moſt mighty, moſt wiſe, moſt good, and
hath no ſuch corporall partes. To be made

after the image of God, is, to haue dominion
as Adam and Eue had ouer all other liuing
creatures before their fall: alſo to be created
in righteouſnes & true holynes. Deus totus
oculus eſt, quia videt omnia. He that made
the eye, ſhall he not ſée, God ſéeth ſometime
with the eye of his mercy, ſometyme with the
eye of his iuſtice, with the eye of his mercy to
illuminate, with the eie of his iuſtice to blind,
with the eye of his mercy to mollify, with the
eye of his iuſtice to reiect, with the eye of his
mercy to pardon, with the eye of his iuſtice
to puniſh. Nathaniell (ſaide Chriſt) before
thou waſt vnder the figge trée, I ſaw thée.
Here is the eye of mercy. Nathaniell anſwered,
thou art the Sonne of God, thou art
the king of Iſrael: here is the eye of faith,
or here is faith the eye of the ſoule.
               The Lord turned backe & looked vpō 
                  Peter:
here is the eye of mercy: then Peter
went out and wept bitterly: here is the eie of
faith, or here is faith ye eye of the ſoule. With
the eye of iuſtice God ſaw Lucifer to throw
him out of heauen: Adam to caſt him out of
Paradyce: the olde worlde to drowne it for
ſinne: the cities of Sodom and Gomorra to
burne them for iniquitie. Pharao and his hoſt

to ouerwhelme them with water for rebellion.
Ananias and Saphira to ſtrike
them ſtarke deade for lying: Herod to conſume
him with wormes, for not giuing him
the glory: God hath looked downe manye
yeares vpon this realme with the eye of his
mercy, giuing vs peace, plenty, with ye preaching
of his gracious & glorious Goſpel: our
ſinnes doe deſerue why he ſhoulde turne the
eye of his mercy from vs, & looke down vpon
vs with the eye of iuſtice. God ſéeth them
which walke not honeſtly as in the day time:
but in gluttony and drunkenneſſe, in chambering
and wantonneſſe, in ſtrife & enuying:
not putting on the Lord Ieſus, but making
prouiſion for the fleſh to fulfill the luſts thereof.
Comfortable to the godly it is, that God
ſéeth all their doinges, and terrible to the godleſſe
it may be, that the Lorde beholdeth all
their actions. He that made the eare ſhall he
not heare? heare a parable. The ground of a
certaine rich man brought forth fruites plenteouſly.
Riches are common to the good with
the bad, and that of the bleſſing of God, which
maketh the ſunne to ariſe on the euil, and on
the good, and ſendeth raine on the iuſt and on
the vniuſt, and bleſſeth the ground of the gracious

and graceles. Therefore he thought
within him ſelfe, ſaying: what ſhal I doe becauſe
I haue not roome to receiue in my
fruites. This wil I do, I wil pul downe my
barnes, and ſet vp larger in their places, and
therein wil I gather my fruites & my goods.
No mention of a thankful mind, no conſideration
of God, no regarde of the poore neighbour,
but how to enlarge the barns to gather
in his fruites & horde them vp, then I wil ſay
to my ſoule, ſoule thou haſt goodes layde vp
in ſtore for many yeares, liue at eaſe, eate,
drinke, & take thy paſtime: He remembreth
not God, he forgetteth death, he truſteth in
māmon, he maketh account of many yeares,
he purpoſeth to line in ſenſualitie, in eaſe, in
eating, in drinking, & in paſtime: But God
heard him and anſwered him, O foole thou
makeſt account of many yeares, this night
wil they fetch away thy ſoule from thée, then
whoſe ſhall all theſe thinges be, which thou
haſt gathered together? euen ſo ſaith our Sauiour
by the way of applicatiō is it with him
which is rich in this world, and is not rich in
God. Some are rich in God but not in the
world, as Lazarus was: ſome rich in the
world but not in God, as this Diues was:

ſome both rich in the world and rich in God
as Abraham was: ſome neither rich in the
world nor in God, as thoſe poore beggers
which haue nothing, yet doe contemne the
word of God. Heare another parable. There
was a Iudge in a certaine Citie which feared
not God, nor reuerenced men. And there
was a widow in the Citie which came to
him, ſaying: Do me iuſtice againſt mine aduerſary:
and he would not for a time: but afterwarde
he ſaide within him ſelfe, though I
feare not God nor reuerēce men, yet becauſe
this widow troubleth me, I will doe her
right, leſt at the laſt ſhe come and make me
weary. He ſaide it within him ſelfe, but the
Lord heard him and anſwered, ſaying: Heare
what the vnrighteous Iudge ſaith: and ſhall
not the Lord auenge his people which crye
vnto him day and night? yes ſurely he wil do
it, though for a time he differ. Comfortable
to the godly it is, that God heareth all their
ſayings, and terrible to the wicked it may be
that the Lord heareth all their wordes. As
there is in God no corporall member: ſo is he
voide of paſſions which procéed from infirmity.
The gifts and calling of God are without
repentance. I am the Lord, I am not chaunged:

with God there is no variableneſſe nor
ſhadow of turning, God is not as man that
he ſhould lye, neither as the ſonne of man
that he ſhould repent: hath he ſaide and ſhall
he not do it? and hath he ſpoken and ſhall he
not accompliſh it? God in nature can not be
chaunged: but in quality he may: whatſoeuer
is in God is of his ſubſtance: Nullum accidens
cadit in Deum. In God is knowledge
without ignorance, wiſedom in perfection:
iuſtice without reſpect of perſons: mercy
without meaſure, and what els not that pertaineth
to excellency? and all theſe are of his
ſubſtāce. God is not ſometime forgetful, ſometime
mindeful, ſometime pleaſed, ſometime
diſpleaſed, as man is. Theſe things are
ſpoken for mans capacitie. He is ſaide to be
forgetful, when for a time he withdraweth
his ſupporting hand from his, for their tryall,
he is ſaide to be mindful. when he deliuereth
ſuch as call vpon him faithfully. He is ſaide to
be pleaſed, when he poureth his bleſſings vppon
his ſeruants. He is ſaide to be angry whē
he puniſheth the wicked, delighting in ſinne.
God ſpared not the Angels that had ſinned,
but caſt them downe into hell, and deliuered
them into the chaines of darkneſſe, to be kept

vnto condemnation, God ſpared not the olde
world that had ſinned, but ſaued Noe y• eight
perſon a Preacher of righteouſnes, & brought
in the floud vpon the worlde of the vngodly:
God ſpared not the cities of Sodome & Gomorrah
that had ſinned, but turned them into
aſhes, condemned them and ouerthrew them
and made them an example vnto them that
after ſhould liue vngodly. If God ſpared not
the Angels that had ſinned: if hee ſpared not
the old world that had ſinned: if he ſpared not
the Cities of Sodome and Gomorrah that
had ſinned, if he ſpared not the natural branches,
ſhal we thinke he will ſpare vs which
are as proude as Lucifer, as voluptuous as
Sardanapalus, as enuious as Cain that firſt
murtherer, as malicious as Eſau, as cruel as
Phalaris, as lecherous as Amon which defiled
his own fiſter, as miſtruſtful as Ananias,
as couetous as Iudas which for money
betrayed his Lorde and maiſter: as ſinfull
as the olde worlde, as filthie as Sodome,
as much giuen to lying as euer was Saphira.
Dearely beloued, let vs not deceiue our
ſelues: foraſmuch as we ſay Lord, Lord, yet
doe not the wil of our heauenly father, and do
acknowledge the way of righteouſneſſe, yet

do turne from the holy commandement giuē
vnto vs: and haue a ſhew of godlineſſe, yet
haue denyed the power thereof: foraſmuch as
our ſinnes are growne ripe, & crye to heauen
for vengeance, therefore we may feare deſtruction.
If ye refuſe the word of the Lorde
as ye do, and be rebellious againſt him, as ye
are, ye ſhal either be deuoured with yt ſword,
or killed with the peſtilence, or cōſumed with
fire, or ſtarued with hunger, for the mouth of
the Lord hath ſpoken it: But if ye wil take away
the euil of your workes, from before the
eyes of the Lord of hoſtes, & ceaſe to do euil,
and learne to do wel, ye ſhal both eat the good
thinges of the land as hetherto ye haue done:
and though your ſins were as crimſin, they
ſhall be made white as ſnow: though they
were red as ſcarlet, they ſhalbe as woll, otherwiſe
ye may feare ſuddaine deſtruction. For
when no other meanes may preuaile, then
the Lorde ſtriketh ſuddenly. Suddenly hee
threw the proude angels out of heauen: ſuddenly
he drowned the olde ſinful world: ſuddē
                  ly
he burned the cities of Sodom & Gomorrah
for iniquitie: ſuddenly he ſtroke dead Ananias
and Saphira for lying: ſuddenly hee
conſumed Herod with wormes for robbing

him of his glory. The day of the Lorde ſhall
come as a théefe in the night, that is ſuddenly
wherein the heauens ſhall paſſe away with
a noyce, the elements ſhal melt with heat, the
earth and the workes that are therein ſhalbe
burnt vp, ſéeing therefore that all theſe things
muſt be diſſolued, what maner perſons ought
ye to be in holy conuerſation & godlines. But
what manner of people are the greateſt part?
proude without humility, malicious without
charitie, cruel without compaſſion, couetous
without meaſure, vaine without vertue, vilde
without the feare of God, like to ye horſe and
mule in whom there is no vnderſtanding: and
therefore heare the iudgements of God. The
indignation of a prince is death, ſaith Salomon.
If the indignation of a mortal prince be
death to the ſubiect, the diſpleaſure of the king
euerlaſting, immortal, inuiſible, of God only,
wiſe, the king of kings and Lord of Lords is
euerlaſting death to them which are taken away
in his wrath without repentance. Behold
the day cometh (ſaith Malachie) that
ſhall burne as an ouen, and all the proude, yea
and all that do wickedly ſhalbe as ſtuble, and
the day that cometh ſhal burne them vp, ſaith
the Lord of hoſts, and ſhal leaue them neither

roote nor branch. The Lord (ſaith the Prophet
Dauid) is a righteous iudge, ſtrong & patiēt,
and God is prouoked euery day, if a man will
not turne, he hath whet his ſword, hée hath
bent his bow and made it readie, if the Lorde
be angry the earth ſhall tremble & quake, the
very foundation of the mountaine ſhall moue
and ſhake. When Adam perceiued the anger
of God kindled againſt him for his tranſgreſſion,
he could not abide his voice, but went about
to hide himſelfe in the middeſt of Paradice:
(ſinne maketh men fooliſh) for he coulde
not hide himſelfe from God which is preſent
euery where & beholdeth all things. When
Cain felt the wrath of God incenſed againſt
him, for embruing his guilty hands with the
guiltles bloud of his righteous brother Abel,
he fell into a deſperate minde: my puniſhmēt
is more then may be borne, my ſinne is greater
then it may be forgiuen, mentiris Cain
(ſaith Auguſtine) Maior eſt Dei miſericordia,
quam omnium peccatorum miſeria.
In the 21. of Nombers. The wrath of
God was kindled againſt certaine tempters,
and they were deſtroyed of ſerpents. The
wrath of God was enflamed againſt certain
murmurers and they were deſtroyed of the

deſtroyer. Num. 14. The wrath of God was
kindled againſt certaine that committed fornication,
and there fel in one day twenty and
thrée thouſand. All theſe thinges came vnto
them for examples, and are written to admoniſh
vs, vpon whom the ends of the world are
come. This anger of God againſt ſinne how
great it is, by this it may appeare, that when
man had ſinned, no creature in heauen or in
earth could appeaſe it, but only he, which is ye
loue of the father, the brightnes of his glory,
and the very ingraued fourme of his perſon,
euen Ieſus Chriſt our ſauiour, who appeared
to looſe the works of the diuell, and through
death deſtroyed him which had the power of
death, that is the diuel, and to redeem vs from
the curſe of the law, was made a curſe for vs,
and being conſecrate was made the author of
eternal ſaluatiō vnto al them yt obey him, and
is made more excellent then the Angels, in as
much as he hath obtained a more excellent
name then they: penitent ſinners confeſſing
with their mouthes the Lord Ieſus, & belieuing
in their harts, that God raiſed him from
the deade: to whom God hath not giuen the
ſpirit of feare, but of power, of loue and of a
ſound minde, néede not to ſtand in feare of

God his anger: for vnto them and for them
Sathan the author of ſinne is vanquiſhed, ſin
the worke of Sathan is deſtroyed, death the
effect of ſinne is ſubdued. The curſe of the law
is taken away, the wrath of God is pacified,
and man to God euerlaſtingly reconciled.
They which are ſubiect to God his anger, are
the wicked, men of corrupt mindes, reprobate
concerning the faith, louers of their owne
ſelues, no louers at al of them which are good,
louers of pleaſures more then louers of God?
hauing a ſhew of godlineſſe, but haue denyed
the power thereof. Notwithſtanding, if they
could forſake euil and doe good, if they coulde
caſt away all filthineſſe & ſuperftuity of maliciouſnes,
and receiue with meekenes ye word
which is able to ſaue their ſoules, if they could
put off that old man, which is corrupt though
the deceaueble luſts, & be renewed in the ſpirit
of theyr minde, & put on that new man, which
after God is created vnto righteouſnes, and
true holines, they ſhould not néed to fear God
his anger, for God is pleaſed in Chriſt for his
owne ſake. This is my beloued ſon in whom
I am well pleaſed, heare him. There are two
ſorts of ſinners, ſome penitent, ſome impenitent.
Impenitent ſinners are they which are

led with ſenſuality as naturall brute beaſtes,
walking after theyr owne luſtes, whoſe
mouths ſpeake proud things, and the ſwelling
words of vanity, whoſe eies are full of adultery,
and that cannot ceaſe to ſin, whoſe harts
are exerciſed with coueteouſnes, whoſe minds
are puffed vp with pride, hauing no ſenſe of
ſinne, no féeling of Gods mercy, no ſwéetenes
in Chriſt his merits, not ſeruing God, for hée
is a ſpirite, and they are carnall: for he is charity,
and they are malicious, for he is light, &
they walke in darkenes of ignorance and ſin.
which minde nothing but earthly things. Penitēt
ſinners, are they which rent their harts
and not their garments and turn to the Lord
their God, hauing in them that godly ſorrow
which cauſeth repentance vnto ſaluation, beléeuing
in true repentance, that when they
ſhall confeſſe their ſinnes, God is faithful and
iuſt to forgiue them their ſinnes, and to clenſe
them from all iniquity, denying all vngodlines
and worldly luſts, and ſtudying to liue
ſoberly, iuſtly, and godly in this preſent world
looking for that bleſſed hope, and appearing
of the glory of that mighty God, and of our
Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, who gaue himſelfe
for vs, that he might redeeme vs from al iniquity,

and purge vs to be a peculiar people
vnto him ſelfe, zealous of good works. To
him therefore, with the Father and the holy
Ghoſt, thrée in perſons, one in nature, bee
glory, and maieſty, and dominion,
and power, both now and
for euer. Amen.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   