
      
         
            
            
            A SHORTE Discourse of the most rare and excellent vertue of Nitre: Wherein is declared the sundrie and diuerse cures by the same effected, and how it may be aswell receiued in medicine inwardly as outwardly plaisterwise applied: seruing to the vse and commoditie aswell of the meaner people as of the delicater sorte. ❧
            
            
               Ecclesiast. 38.4.
               The Lord hath created medicines of the earth, and he that is wise will not abhorre them.
            
            IMPRINTED at London by Gerald Dewes, dwelling in Paules churchyearde at the signe of the Swanne. 1584.
            
         
         
            
            
            The Printer to the Reader.
            
               I Haue aduentured (gentle Reader) for thy behoofe, to print this small treatise touching the faculties and qualities of Nitre, whose vertue (being such as our authour auoucheth) may bring to all which stand in neede thereof no small ease, & commodity: the medicines are not verie harde to be made or compounded, nor ouer costlie to be procured, but how commodious and effectual, I leaue to the learned, and to such, as by proofe haue had, or may haue profit thereby. Thus omitting to commend that (which I hope will commende it selfe sufficientlie) I ende nothing doubting but that all those

which receiue commoditie and ease by others trauailes and labours, will not be vnthankefull for the same but vse them to Gods glorie.
            
               
                  Thine at his small power. A. D.
            
         
         
            
               
                  Fortuna
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A COPIE OF A DISCOVRSE VVRITTEN FROM THE ISLE OF LAMBY ON THE the East coaste of Ireland, by Thomas Chalonergent▪ vnto his cosen Iohn Napper Apothecarie dwelling at the signe of the Ewe and the golden Lambe ouer against Soper lane ende in cheepe side at London, touching the qualitie and facultie of Nitre. The example whereof he sent vnto him with that letter.
            
               WITH my hartie commendations beloued cosen: in performance of my promise (although not so sone as you looked for): I do send vnto you herewith by this bearer, some Nitre onwards. And as you shall like thereof, I shalbe willing to furnish you accordingly. Not doubting that you shall finde it a marchandize as auailleable & gainfull, as anie drugge of grosse quantitie that you shall haue to do with, so manie waies commodious is it, to the vse aswell of the meaner people, as of the delicater sort.
            THis Nitre is (as you may perciue) a iuice thickned by growing together, and hardned by congelation, in forme and apparance like vnto transparent Alome, Salgemme, or Borace. And (in deede) such sort of it as is growen together in the earth and hardned into a stonie substance by long abyding so, and at the last is digged vp and brought into Christian regions out of Egypt, Armenie, Turkie, Barbarie, and other far countries comming

to the hands of the Borace makers vnpure, and by them refyned, is the principall substance and matter, of which they doe make the Borace wherewith the Goldsmythes doe solder their workes of gold and of siluer: And the Battriesmythes their copper pannes. A drugge so rare and precious, as by the great price and small plentie thereof, is knowen vnto you. Neither commeth this Nitre (which I doe sende vnto you) otherwise to be had in quātitie for our countrie to haue the vse and commodie thereof, but by my fathers industrie and meanes. And yet his good minde vnto his natiue countrie is such, as to procure it so reasonably cheape, that the poorer sort be not barred the benefit of so necessary and so great a commoditie, for the excessiuenes of the price.
            What I haue heard him define and discourse of the complexion, nature, and excellent facultie, and manyfold vse, of this Nitre: (gathered partly of good authours, and partely of his owne experience and of reason) I will empart vnto you, cosen, so well as my memory hath serued me to note: To your selfe I meane. For if (by your shewing this my letter for commendation of the matter) the learned, or others (in proofe thereof) reprone my report, I must excuse me to haue not so perfectlie borne a waie his speaches thereof, as he deliuered them. Neither did he to other ende impart it vnto me, but for mine owne instruction: knowing how sufficiently the learned (vpon the sight and taste of this Nitre) can define and set downe what it is, and howe to vse it. And fittest for their censure and iudgement, charitablie to publish & recommend the fittest vse and fruition thereof, to the publicke commoditie.
            The smack thereof (being at the first tast vnto the tongue, sowre sharpe, then moderatelie bitter, and lastlie a little rancke in the swallowing) argueth therein a mixture of a watrie substance, altred and maistred by coldnes beyond the first degree (formallie rather then effectually) whereon an externe heate hath out breathed whatsoeuer natiue heate was therein: Leauing yet the pricking sharpnes that was in that watrie altered substance, which perceth the tongue, and therewith

also mixed an earthie drie substance, ouermaistred and subtiliated by a smoothering heate, (partely beyonde the first degree, causing the rankenes & leuened Nitrositie: and partelie adusted by a sterie heate vnto the middle of the seconde degree, causing bitternes:) which bitternes being of more force, effecteth the tast more strōgly thē the ranke Nitrositie. So as vntill the smacke of bitternes be passed, the ranknes is not perceiued. By mixture of which passiue substances, earth, and water, the action and leauening of putrefactiue heate, hath caused in that rancke Nitrositie, an oilie and gummie substance aiery. The fattenes and oyllienes whereof, together with the aforesaide watrie substance (out of the which the nature heate first hath bene euaporated by an externe heate, and then altred and maistred by coldnes, so surmounteth the drie, adust, earthy, subtile parte therof, as sufficeth it not to fluzze nor enflame, nor be set on fire, (as Saltpeter will) nor to sparke (as salt will) by reason the watrie substance is so maistred with the oylie airie substāce, neither is it salt as Saltpeter is. For, as for the the tast of saltnes (which was else also perceiued in that sort of Nitre that commeth from Armenie, aswell as also that fine meale or flower of Nitre called Aphrō Nitron) this Nitre hath thereof litle or nothing at all. Bycause (what saltnes it had of if selfe) is separated from it in the refyning. And for the oyllines or fattenes sti
                  •
               l abyding with it, vnles it be consumed by further burning artificiall, it hath not yet that purchased saltnes.
            The colour of this Nitre is (as you may see) onelie white, by reason of the refineing: And so not of colour blacke, or russet, as is the natiue or vnpurified Nitre mixed with the sotle of the earth or slimie pittes or slowghes out of the which it is digged or gathered.
            So in faculty this Nitre hath no astringēce (which, you wot, meaneth in our English tongue, shriueling, or shutting of the poores or swertholes of the skinne) as that other salter Nitre hath. But it hath faculties and vertues of entring, and percing, and sufficiently warming and heating, suppling, rarifying,

opening, enlarging, vnstopping, deuiding, resoluing, spredding, dispersing, extenuating, euaporing, emptying, discombring, and effectually wyping, clensing, and skowringe, without smarting, fretting, or excoriation as hath the other sharper or salter Nitre. To you cosen, that doe vnderstand these vsuall termes concerning these faculties and vertues, I recite them as of ordinarie they be termed. Neuertheles this refined Nitre (with artificiall burning) shall also purchase more subtility and aduste qualitie. Whereby it shall be the more percing, heating, resoluing, wasting, and drying. And with bay salt or alume added, or else with any other medicine astrictiue, hot or cold as shalbe requisite, it shall also be be accompanied with that facultie, wherewith the sinewes or other partes, which by loosenes or slacknes are weake, shalbe fastened & kept in their due tightenes and strength.
            
               The preparation of this Nitre vnto more subtilitie, sharpenes, drines and heat, is after three sortes ensuing.
               SPread this Nitre thinne in a platter of glased earth or of pewter. So set it in the hoat Sunne, and attend it vntill it be parched white and not molten, and so it will come into fine white poulder or floure as Aphron Nitrō. And hereby getteth it somewhat more subtilenes and lesse gummines, and may be named puryfied Alphron Nitron.
               
            
            
               The second waie.
               GEt a new earthen pot glased within, & fitted with a couer (to close it, that no ashes come therein) hauing such an handel as thereby with your tongues or pliers you may (when it is in your firie furnaice) take of the couer, to looke into your pot, and againe at your pleasure couer it.

Fill that pot halfe full with this Nitre. And set that pot with the Nitre therein and the couer thereon in a wide fornace for this purpose, raised with two walles on either side a foote high from the ground, left open through betweene those two sides before and behind. Grate that ouerthwarte with barres of iron, ech barre a finger widenes from other, and thereon aboue those barres aswell before as behinde, as also one eche side, wall it vppe square halfe a yarde more of height. And let the widenes of the furneys within, be such, as your pot being set in the middest of your fornace may haue roome on euerie side of your fornace halfe a foote: not forgetting to trauers your fornace within, with two sufficient barres whereon to place your pot halfe a foote aboue your foresaide yron grate: and that you haue to couer the vpper mouth of your fornace with tiles, bricke, or yron plates, to be couched vppon yron roddes or barres, loose and remoueable for the purpose. These thinges thus reddie, fill your fornace with deade charcoales, first halfe a foote heigth from the grate. Then place your pot vpon the two barres in the middest of your fornace: hauing your pot (as aforesaide) halfe full of Nitre, and couering your pot with the couer fitted for it, poure in more dead charcoales to fill the voide roome on euerie side about your pot, vp as high about your pot, as your Nitre filleth your pot within, and somewhat more. Then kindle your charcoales leisurely beneath and aboue: closing the foreparte and hinder part of the vent vnder the grate, with loose brickes or tyles, so as the winde vnder, come not vp to vehement at the first. But that your pot take heat by litle and litle encreasing. And it were not amisse that your pot were emptie (but yet couered) vntill the coales be all fiered, and your pot nealled red hot. And then to put in your Nitre vnto the halfe fulnes of your pot (as aforesaide) and so couer your pot, and also the vpper mouth of your fornace, with the couers thereto prepared. So yet, as there is vent-hoales left, one at euerie corner, and one in the middest. And then pul away the closure of your neather vents vnder the grate of your fornace, that the fire may

haue ful quickning by the grate: And as the experience of the worke wil teach you) suffer your Nitre to melt & dry vp & tost, so farforth as the colour become black & not yet white againe. Then take vp your pot, first aboue your coales, with plying tongues or hooks fit for you purpose: Then higher vpon the vpper barres of your furneys: And lastlie vpon hoat ashes, and scrape out your Nitre with a faire yron ladle fit thereto, and braie it into fine poulder, and reserue it. It hath then, lesser moysture and gummines, & more subtilitie, and more heating and drying facultie, then the first way aforesaide.
            
            
               The thirde way of more Calcination to make this Nitre, yet more sharpe and subtile, then the other two waies aforesaide.
               USing the selfe same way last afore prescribed: when this Nitre hath taken such heat, as the melting and heauing thereof hath ceased, and that your Nitre is dried and burned beyond blacke collour, and become againe perfit collour: vse it as is aforesaide in withdrawing it from the fire. And after that it is taken out of your pot, bray it lightlie, and reserue it to vse: Equiualent vnto Nitre called Bawrak of Armenie: howbeit not astrictiue without mixture of astrictiue medicines as aforesaide.
               
                  By the which aforesaide complexion, qualitie and faculties: this Nitre hath (aswell otherwise as in medicine) the manifolde and sundrie operations and vertues, particularly (for example) declared hereafter, besids a great many moe then I set forth,
               
            
            
               Outward reamedies to fordoe foulenes and diseases of the skinne: as tawnie steynings, Sunneburning,

freckles, dusknes, iaundises, yellow, greene, and blacke, wheales and white whelks, cholerick, melancholicke, & flegmatike euaporations, ill colour or complexion by sicknes called Atrophe, which commeth of ill conuertion and assimulation of the nourishment: and to restoore the skinne and complexion to the natiue bewtie. Also to remoue and fordoe, skurffe, dandruffe, skales, skalles, scabbes, pimples, pushes, maunge, ringewormes, tetters, byles, buttons, drie lepries, and such effectes.
               FIrst that (that for those purposes) of antiquitie, Nitre aswell as Aphron Nitre, and Bawrak, hath bene (of ordinarie vse in Baines and hot houses) dissolued in warmed water, or in warmed lie made of the ashes of vineshreddes or of rosyers, or of sweete bryers, or of brābles, or of willowes, or of rosemarie, or of sage, or of hysope, or of lauender, or of thyme, or of bayes, or of such like, or else in a yonge boy childes vrine vndistilled, or rather distilled: or else in vinegre, or rather in distilled vinegre, or in iuyces of verie sowre Orrēges, or rather in iuyces of lymmōs, or else dissolued with clarified white honie, and (after three dayes seasoning) laide on by night, or else in like sorte dissolued with hennes greace, or capons greace, or swannes greace: or oyles of sweete almondes & of bittre almondes, (three or foure dayes afore mixed and seasoned together) I say with anie of those liquours or iuycees, laid on at night, and washed of in the morning with rosewater, or with water of beaneflowers, or with the cleare broth of barlie meale, of wheate branne and mallowe rootes: (For to scoure and clense the heare, the face, the skinne, and the rest of the bodie, from rankenes of smell, and from fumosities,

sweate, soyle, steyning and dusknes of the skinne, and to fordoe freckles, spottings, tawnynes, Sunneburning, morphewes, iaundizes, discolorings, scurffe, dandruffe, scales, scalles, scabbes, maunge, pushes, pymples, ringewormes, tetters, roughnes, and all such deformities and affectes of the skinne) it is touched by manie auncient authours, insomuch as (amongest others) S. Ierome in an Epistle to a Gentlewoman, saith: Although thou wash thy skinne with Nitre, and rubbe it neuer somuch with the herbe called Bawrak or Bowrik, what auayleth it, if yet thou remaine filthie with sinne?
               
                  And to those purposes also, some doe dissolue Nitre in distilled whaye, or in distilled Goates milke: or else doe temper it with the brooth and fatnes of figges: or else with the fine meale of the knottes of the rootes of Aaron called cuckow pyutle or the knottes of rootes of serpentine called dragon or snakegrasse: nine times sooked in rosewater and eche time dryed by the Sunne or ouer a sooking fire: or with meale of lupynes: or or with oyle of bitter almondes, and lay it on all night, and on the morning wash it of, as aforesaide.
               
                  But if those affectes be deepe rooted, and doe require stronger scouring out: Then put oken ashes, and vnquenched lyme, in a meisshing tubbe, the one cowched by course vpon the other by seuerall layes or couches, beginning at the nethermost with the ashes and leauing vppermost with the ashes. Then poure therein hoat water, or rather the warmed vrine of yong boy children, in quantitie sufficient (to wit) so much licour, as the ashes and lime will receiue, to be but filled with the licour to the vpper ashes. And if you take yong boy childes vrine, it may be had at the schooles, setting vesselles for that purpose. Then (after sufficient steeping with the ashes and lime) boyle that mixture together, and lastelie braine and let runne the lie into a receiuing vessell, and let it settle to become cleare, and then (by a spyggot somewhat higher thē the groundes settled) draw the cleare lye from the troubled groundes, and boyle that cleare lye downe againe vnto such wasting and strength, that it can beare an egge. Then distill it into a limbeck (if you wil)

and put by, the weaker licour which droppeth first, & reserue for your purpose the strongest licour that distilleth the first weaker water: And vnto so much of that strong distilled water, or else vnto the strong Lye it selfe vndistilled (so much as will couer the bottom of an earthen boyling pipking, or skillet well glased within, and fitted with a couer of the same stuffe, and so set ouer a soft fire of wood coales) melt therein, for euerie pinte of that strong distilled water, or strong Lye, two pound weight of chosen Sope not ranke nor stinking. And thē cast thereto by little and little, twise so much weight of Nitre as your sope weyed) and as the Nitre is all dissolued therein, boile them altogether to the wasting of the said distilled water or lycour of Lie. Foreseeing that your boyllyng vessell be but a third part full of them all, least they fome ouer.
               This done, take it from the fire, and slurre it still with a sticke or splatter vntill it be come colde and stiffe. Then forme your stuffe into flat pellets or small round balles: and put thē on a fayre borde to drie and to harden in the winde and shadowe, and reserue them to wet (at sundrie times as you shall neede) with iuyce of lymondes or of soure Orenges, or with distilled vynegre, or with distilled vrine of yong boy children, or with the flewgme water of distilled wine. And with the slyme of one of those pellets or balles so moisted, rubbe the stayninges or spottes of the skinne, suffering it to lie on a reasonable space: And then wash it of with broath of barlie floure, or of wheate braune boylled with stamped rootes of mallowes, or with distilled water of the coddes and flowers of beanes, or of roses, or of whaye distilled.
               
                  And to the selfe same purpose is succinctlie taught by Galene. To take (as aforesaide) to partes of Nitre and one parte of Sope, tempred with sufficiēt quātity of strong Sope Lye cal-Capitellum, and to make them into tro
                     ••
                  skes or pelletes to be dryed and reserued to be vsed as aforesaide. And this outward medicine is for effectes of the skinne, of harde remouing.
               
            
            
               An other waie more delicate, and for tender skin,

which leysurely remoueth such affectes, and also doth smooth and bewtifie the skinne.
               STeepe chosen Gumme Tragacanthe of the purest and whittest a night and a daie in rosewater, then put thereto of this Nitre, and a curtesie of Camphere. And season and incorporate them together, and by night laye it on, and wash it of in the morning as aforesaide.
            
            
               An other for the same, of stronger effect.
               TAke chosen Gumme Tragacanth, of the whytest and purest, one portion, distilled rosewater, or rather strōg vinegre distilled with red roses either freshe or drie, thrise or foure times so much as the weight of the Gumme, & therein steepe your gumme vntill it soften and dissolue therein: Adde fine poulder of the knottes of Aaron rootes, or of Dragon rootes, seauen times sooked in rosewater, and euery time dryed againe by the Sunne: Also fine poulder of sweete preos roote: And fine flowre of Rice: of euerie of those three, asmuch as the weight of your Gumme. Then put so much Nitre as your gumme and rootes and riseflowre (altogether) weyed, and ouer a soft fire, mixe and temper them together: alwayes stirring them vntill the Nitre melte, and that the compound lastlie (after washing of the ouerplus of the rosewater) be apte to become stiffe (which shall be knowne by proofe of a droppe let fall on a marble stone to coole: if being colde it become stiffe) thē sprinckling into your mixture a curtesie of Camphere, and so mixing that with stirring, take it from the fire, and still stirre your mixture vntill it become colde and stiffe.
               So forme it into washing balles, and dry them in the winde and shadow, not forgetting (at the first) to dissolue a curtesie of muske, ciuet, and Ambergreyce, in your aforesaid rosewater, or distilled roseuinegre for the more pleasauntnes of the smell. Howbeit that the rosewater, and the yreos roote, of

themselues, are sufficient of pleasaunt odour. And whereas Gumme Tragacanth (either for deerenes or for scarcitie shalbe forborne) there, the slime of the harebell roote, otherwise called Ierubell or Hiacynthus, may serue in steede of that gumme.
               The vse of those balles, is to moist one of them at night in warmed rosewater, or in warmed water of the floures and coddes of beanes, or (for more effect) in distilled stronge vinegre rosate, or in iuyces of distilled lymondes, or of sowre orenges distilled and purified by the feltre: And at going to bedde, smeere the affected places of the skinne, yea, and ouer all the face, with the slime of your moysted ball, suffring it to lye one all night, or lesse space, as the medicine to the tendernesse of the skinne is tolerable. And then alwayes washe and skoure it of with some of the waters aforesaide. These balles in hotter water, may serue to wash & scoure the bearde, the face and the heares of the heade, in steede of sope-balles adorate.
            
            
               A lotion of washing to fordoe ringe-wormes, and tetters.
               TAke of Nitre 3. dragmes, of common salt one dragme, of distilled water of the rootes of soure-dockes foure ounces, of vinegre of squilla one ounce, dissolue and and mixt them togeather: And ech time of the vse of them (being warmed and well mixed) moisten a cloth or sponge therein and rub therewith the places affected.
            
            
               An oyntment or plaister to foredoe harde knobbes, buttons, or cornes wheresoeuer they be in the face, or other partes of the skinne.
               TAke Nitre, Salgemme, or digged salte, leaues and tender croppes of hysope, and penyrioll, of eche a like portion:

Braie them fine and soft, and ouer a moderate fire encorporate them in Gerate rosate. The receipte thereof I neede not to receiue vnto you (cosen) that are an Apothecarie, and apply it to the place affected.
            
            
               An other oyntment for the same.
               TAke Nitre, Alume du plume, seedes of Basill or Deyinum, leaues and tender toppes of greene penyroiall, and Costus Indiane, of eche a like portion: Bray them soft and fine, & ouer a soft fire mixe them with hennes greace, or capons greace, or swannes greace, or ducks greace, and anoynt the places affected.
            
            
               An other oyntment to fordoe the buttons of lepree faces.
               TAke burned Nitre, burned alume, & calcined Tartar, of ech one ounce & a halfe, browne yellow Litarge, and the ingredience of the vnguent citrine (which I neede not receite to you chosen being an Apothecarie) of ech foure ounces, of Ceruce washed, two ounces of iuyces of Lymonds, of rootes of Enula campana, of the rootes of Soure-docke, of rootes of Cyclamine, and rootes of Dragon or serpentine. And rootes of Aaron or cuccow pyntell, of euerie of them (as often infuzed in rosewater and dryed againe in the Sunne as afore described) fiue ounces, vinegre of squilla, water of plantine, water of purcelane, of eche three ounces, and of oyle of complete roses, a pinte, vse them according to your art, and encorporate them togeather, and therewith annoint the place affected.
            
            
               To mundifie and heale vlcers in the face.
               TAke Nitre, and ouer a soft fire (and in an emptie vessell set within an other vessell full of boyling water) dissolue it

with honie and cowes mylke, and annointe the vlcers of three with.
            
            
               An experte oyntment for cure of maunge, ringe-wormes, scabbes, and eating soores.
               TAke Nitre, brymestone, and Maiorane, otherwise called Margerome, of eche a dragme, beate and sifte the Nitre and brimestone into fine poulder, and braye the Maiorane fine and soft, mixe them, and temper them with oyle rosate, and therewith annoint the places affected.
            
            
               A linement or enoynting, effectuallie good against Itche, and breaking out of all the bodie.
               MElte Nitre and brimestone together which (being colde) commeth to be harde as a stone, braie that againe into fine poulder, and with greace make a salue, or smeering for the purpose aforesaide, or else bathe it on with yong boy childes vrine, or with the broath of meale of lypynes and wheate branne.
            
            
               A lotion or washing for the same.
               TAke the fine poulders of Nitre and of sulphure vine, or else of sulphur commune, bayled together, with brused sorell rootes in vinegre, and with a cloath or spunge, dipped in that licoure, rub the places affected, or else cut a Lymond or sowre Orenge by halfe ouerthwarte, and thereon bestowe of that lycoure with those poulders, and with the innerside of oke of those halfe Lymonds or Orenges, rubbe the places affected. Or ese take the foresaide poulders of Nitre and brymestone molten togeather, and with a yonge boy childes vrine, or with broath of meale of lupines and of wheaten branne, or with wine (mixed warme) dippe therein a sponge, and bathe and soke the places affected.
               
                  
                  In like manner, mixe Nitre with vinegre distilled or vndistilled, or with iuyce of lymondes or of sowre Orenges, or put the poulder of Nitre on the moyst inward part of lymons, or cyterone or sowre Oranges cut ouerthwart, and rubbe the places affected with the iuyce. In like manner, bruse and steepe Nitre and salt, in vertioyce of vynes or of crabbes, and laie one the places affected with Itche, or with Tetters or ringe-wormes or pushes or pimples new come out.
            
            
               An effectuall plaister and lotion or washing for the Affectes aforesaide.
               MIxe Nitre with a yonge boy childes vrine, and with a pestell of fine red copper bray and fret them long together in a morter of fine red copper, set & contynued ouer hoat ashes made hoat by fire or ouer hoat sande, or the hoat Sunne, vntill the mixture doe become thicke, and then so taken out, and put in an earthen glased platter and dryed in the Sunne or ouer hoat sande (still turning it ouer and ouer with a splatter) vntill it corne like to small wormes or at least vntill it be made into fine poulder, and when you will vse it, mixe it with Therebyntine, and applie it in plaister to the affectes aforesaide.
               
                  It cureth pushes called surferters, skuruie & scalie drie leprees, and filthie maungines, and all such breaking out: Applying it on by night, and one the morning wyping it of with a sponge dipped in warme barelie broath, or warmed broath of wheaten branne boyled with brused rootes of mallowes, and the place washed after with rosewater, or with water of flowres and coddes of beanes, or such like.
               
                  The same emplaister or washing. Applyed to the foreheade and swolne browes, doth remeadie the swolne browes. Take heede to winke while it is in laying on, and also while it is in washing of, least the sharpenes of the medicine it selfe (or mixed with the broath) doe smarte and fret the eyes.
            
            
               
               A lotion or lynement for bringing out, and for outwarde healing of the small pockes, measelles, whealkes, and pushes.
               MIxe Nitre with iuyces of Hysope, Marigoldes, & Camomell, and therewith temper oyle of bitter almondes, and with the lyniment enoint the skinne, or else burne Nitre white (as aforesaide) and quence it hoate in rough tasted wine, then temper it with oyle of bitter almondes, and anoint the bodie, after bayne.
            
            
               For healiing and sealing vp of rank lepree breaking out.
               TEmpre Nitre with vittrioll, and with viridae Aeris called verdegres or greene canker of copper or brasse, and laye it one the places affected, This (if it were with licour or greace, or oyle or gumme) aggreeth verie neere with that working of Nitre in a copper morter, as aforesaide. But either of them are to be washed of with decoction of wheate branne broilled with brused mallowe rootes and afterwardes with rosewater, or other waters of delaying and claryfying facultie.
            
            
               For opening, riping, drawing and mundifying of carbuncles sores, and for cure of suspecte fellon sores with hollow brimmes, deepe sores, and all vlcers in generall.
               TEmper Nitre with Therebyntine and apply it thereto for salue, &c.
            
            
               A lotion vnto the cankring, creeping and spredding of malitiouse vlcers and sores.
               
                  TAke vinegre drawne through quicke lime afore vnquenched and therewith mixe Nitre, and so wash the sores.
            
            
               An other lotion, and emplaister to fordoe deformities of scuruie & dry scalie eating lepres, maung, tetters, ringewormes, itches, and deformed neiles.
               DIssolue Nitre in stronge distilled vynegre, and therewith first rubbe the saide deformities, and then laie to them brused rootes of sorell, or of Sorell du boys, or of Sowre-dockes, boyled in vinegre, or steeped and tempered rawe in vinegre.
            
            
               An oyntment to heale the skinne broken out of putrified salt fleugme, be it one the face, or elsewhere on the rest of the bodie.
               TEmper Nitre with old barowes greace, or else rather with oyle of roses, and waxe in forme of a lynement or smering & therewith anoint the places affected.
            
            
               An other lotion for the Itche.
               DIssolue Nitre and alume with distilled vinegre, or with water of Scabious, and therewith rubbe and washe the places affected.
            
            
               A lotion or rubbing for Itche, Maunge and Scuruie leprees.
               RUbbe the places with poulder of Nitre, mixed with dogges vrine when it may be come by, and it helpeth those effectes,
            
            
               A liniment to fordoe freckells in the face, & other places of the skinne.
               DIssolue Nitre with Galbanum, in strōg distilled vinegre or in iuyce of lymondes or sowre Orenges, and rubbe & smeere

the places affected, and after it hath lyen on by night, washe it off euerie morning as is aforesaide.
            
            
               A drinke for the Iaundyze
               MIxe a sponefull of Nitre ech morning with a draught of wine, and drinke it fasting.
            
            
               A lyniment or lotion for the st
                     •
                  yning of the Iaundize (after right cure) vsed inwardes
               DIssolue Nitre in distilled vinegre, & with a sponge rub & scoure the skinne at night going to bedde, & eche morning wash it off▪ as aforesaide.
            
            
               A liniment or lotion delicate to fordoe Morphews, darke and white.
               DIssolue Nitre with white wine (if not with distilled vinegre, or with iuyces of Lymondes, or of sowre Orenges) and therewith rubbe the places deformed, at going to bedde, and one the morning wash it of as aforesaide.
            
            
               Likewise for the white morphewes.
               MIxe Nitre with the iuyce of the herbe and rootes of that wilde kinde of Ciquorie, called Condrilla or Caudarilla, or Seralia, but with vs called Dent de Lion, or else take honie with Trociske or paste of the same hearbe and rootes, and temper therewith distilled vinegree, or iuyce of Lymonds, or of sowre orenges, and rubbe the places so steyned, at going to bedde, and in the morning washe and skowre it of, as afore mentioned.
            
            
               An other lotiō or washing for the white Morphew.
               TAke Nitre with creta cimolea (a chalke so named which you knowe) dissolue them in distilled vinegre, and rubbe them in the Sunne vpon the places affected.
            
            
               
               For such as are discolered by the sicknes called Atrophia, in that their nourishment is not natuturally conuerted.
               DIssolue Nitre in warme water, and vse it to baine them therewith, it is good for them.
            
            
               To fordoe the rancke smell of the armeholes, and other the clensing partes of the body, and foldes of the skinne.
               DIssolue Nitre in warme water, and with a sponge or lynnen cloath dipped therein, bath and skowre awaie the swet and rank humours and fumosities expulsed by nature through those loose clensing partes.
            
            
               In generall.
               TO bayne with warme water, with onely Nitre therein dissolued, or adding what other sortes of medicines simple or compounde, acording the diuersitie of the cause: dath clense, and supple, and smoth, and bewtifie the skinne. And healeth, the Itche, and Maunge, and skuruie or drie skalie Lepree: Reformeth colde and moyst distemperances, Hydropisyes, benommings and other diseases of the synewes motiue and sensitiue, caused through coldenes, slymines, clammines, congelation, clynging, cluddering, stopping, stuffing, compression, distention, contraction, crampes or stitches, and slacknes or paralisie. Moreouer cureth streightnes of breath and weising in the wine pipes, catarres and distillations from the heade. Remedieth rawnes of the stomak pasted or sobbed with fleugme. Redresseth the cold and ouermoist distemperance of the Liuer, Spleene, Kydneyes, Matrice, and Genitories, deuideth, vnstoppeth, and skowreth away, the slymie clinging and pasted chokeings and stuffinges in them moderatlie heateth & comforteth them, & apteth the Matrice vnto conception.
            
            
               
               An oyntment for the face, to make the skinne smooth, egall, sticke, and suppell, fordoing the duskenes of the skinne, and yelding the complexion cleare transparent.
               TAke of seedes of psillium otherwise called Fleworte, a dragme, oyle of Tartar three ounces, steepe them together three dayes in a glased vessell, then put the seedes with the oyle in a little long lynnen bagge bounde strong at the necke, and wring it downwardes betweene two stickes, and gather so the slime or muscilage that commeth through the lynnen, and mixe that slime with an ounce of oyle rosate, and therein dissolue Nitre and Salgemme, of eche a dragme, so enoynt the face therewith at night going to bed, and washe it of in the morning with rosewater or beane flowres water or broath of wheate branne and barlye meale decoct with Mallow rootes, setled and drawne cleere from the groundes by an hole perced aboue the groundes, or with such like.
            
            
               An other oyntment to the same purpose & effecte.
               TAke oyle of the marrowe of Hartes bones two ounces, oyle of the marrow of a gelded calfe two ounces, oyle of Gourde seedes one ounce, Uenice Therbyntine washed well and often in rosewater halfe an ounce, Goattes suet halfe an ounce, new waxe three dragmes, melte first the waxe in a double vessell as afore specified, then adde and melte therewith the Goates suet then adde and melte therewith ye Therbyntine, then adde the saide oyles, and mixe and temper them well, then adde and temper therewith the poulders of Masticke and of burned Nitre, of eche two dragmes, and stirre and incorporate them well altogethrr, taking it from the fire, and still stirring them vntill they be colde, and with that oyntemente enoynte the face at night going to bedde, and in the morninge washe it of with water of wheate branne and Mallowes, as aforesaide.
            
            
               
               To cherish the growing of the heares, and to cause them to become fayre and yellow naturally
               TEmper Nitre and rawe stamped Lupynes with warme water, and therewith ordinarilie washe the heares and rootes of them.
            
            
               Likewise for the same.
               TAke the fleugme water of Aqua-vitae drawne of wine, and of it, with ashes of the woode and leaues of Iuie burned, make Lye, and with that Lye warmed, dissolue Nitre, and Labdanum, adding oyle of sweete Almondes, of the which mixture (daylie and often during lx. dayes, at eche time warmed) sponge and moysten the heares and the rootes of the heares, and it will yelde them faire and yellow naturally frō the rootes.
            
            
               Likewise for the same.
               TAke the barke or outwarde parte of cane rootes halfe an ounce, and Aphron Nitre, halfe an ounce, mixe them with pix Liquida (it is not Tarre: you cosen, doe know the right pix Llquida) and rubbe that lyniment on the place being often shauen.
            
            
               An other for the same.
               TAke Aphron Nitre, white pepper, Ginger, Muscaerda, or Mousduong, Alcionium (of which I can well furnishe you) ashes of Goates houes, iuyce of Thapsia, and Mirra of eche a like deale, braye them well, and mixe and incorporate them with Goates gall, and vse it as aforesaide, washing it off with Lye of dulce and tender woode or with Nitre sope, which is made of egall patres of sweete sope and of Nitre dissolued and encorporated together.
            
            
               For falling off, or pilling of the heares.
               DIssolue Nitre with wine Maluesie, or Bastarde, or Muskadell, or like sweete wine, and therewith rubbe the

places pilde of haire, or which by the heate or itching are like to pill, cisting first those places lightly ouer with the point of a penne-knife, or skratching Skalpell, and after, rubbe and applye thereon, the rawe leaues of beetes, and the vse hereof will bring againe the heare to growe.
            
            
               To fordoe vermine, Nittes, Skurffe, Dandruffe, Scales, mattring Skalles, and drie Skalles in the heade.
               DIssolue Nitre, and terra Samia in oyle of Raddish seedes, and therewith rubbe the places a affected.
            
            
               An other for the same
               TAke Nitre with meale of Lupynes, or with hennes galle, or Partriche gall, or with stronger galle, also poulder of Staphisagre, and distilled vrine of a boye childe, mixe them and let them all season together: And therewith rubbe the rootes of the heares and places affected, and after, washe it off as aforesaide, it doth fordoe those affectes, and clenseth the heares and the rootes of them, and yeldes them a cleere colour.
            
            
               A medicine to skoure and heale the moysture and mattering skalles of the head.
               DIssolue Nitre in white vinegre, or in a boy childes vrine distilled or vndistilled, or with iuyce of a Lymonde, & mixe therewith poulder of Olibanum (which is the masculine Frankencence (and rubbe it one the places affected.
            
            
               Another for the same.
               TAke tosted Nitre (which is the seconde way of preparinge afore spoken of) sprinckle it one the places affected, and and rubbe it with a red Onyon, or with Bulbus esculentus, cut ouerchwarte, &c.
            
            
               
               An oyntment for the same.
               TAke Aphoron Nitre, Frankencens, fine poulder of Leaddessage, vine buddinges, and Mirrhe, braie them well eche by themselues, and mixe them with vinegre and oyle of Mirtilles asmuch as sufficeth, so make an oyntment, and vse it to the places affected.
            
            
               Likewise for the same.
               TAke Nitre and Uitrioll of eche a dragme, dissolue them in oyle, and make an oyntment to be vsed for the like effect vppon the rootes of darke colored heares, but not vnto such as haue bright coloured heares.
            
            
               Likewise.
               TAke Aphron Nitre, Alume du plume, Staphisagre, Olibanum, Rocket seedes, Uittrioll, of eche a dragme, Sulphur viue vi. dragmes, Rue three croppes, braie them fine eche by themselues, and mixe them with vinegree and oyle of Bayeberies, or of Mirtilles, asmuch as sufficeth, and so make an oyntment, to vse vnto the rootes of darke coloured heares, but vnto bright coloured heares, leaue out the Uittrioll.
            
            
               An oyntment for skalles on the heade and for dandruffe.
               TAke Nitre meale of cicers, meale of Fenegreke, wheate branne, poulder of Mirtilles, and brused mustard seedes, of eche two ounces, oyle Oliue asmuch as sufficeth, vinegre and water, of eche a little, make an oyntement and enoynt the the heade, first shaued and washed and then rubbed drie with a roughe cloath.
            
            
               A washing medicine for the same.
               TAke Aphron Nitre, Uittrioll, of eche a like, dissolue them in warme wine, asmuch as sufficeth, and with a spong dipped

and wronge out, rubbe the rootes of the heares there with (at the least once euerie wecke) if the heares be blacke.
            
            
               But if the heares be yellow or bright, then vse this medicine.
               TAke Nitre, and whyte Arguill (which as you knowe, is the harde effectes of Lyes cleauing to the sides and heades of white wine vesselles, or Rheynish wine fattes) poulder of a Pumice, and meale of Lupynes, of eche a like deale, boile them in white wine, and vse it with a sponge vnto the rootes of the heares, as aforesaide,
            
            
               An other oyntment to fordoe Vermine and Nittes in the heade, and other hearie places.
               TAke poulders of Nitre, Staphisagre, and of rootes of white elleborus, of eche a like deale, boyle them in asmuch oyle of Radish seedes as sufficeth, and in a bayne (after sweating and cleansing of the head or hearie partes affected) rubbe one that oyntment.
            
            
               An other oyntment for the same.
               TAke Nitre, and the red orpyment called Sanderake of eche a like deale, and of Staphisagre, asmuch as of both the other, heate and sifte them fine, and temper them with oyle & vinegre asmuch as sufficeth, and enointe the rootes of the heares as aforesaide.
            
            
               To cleane the teath.
               TAke Nitre burned as aforesaid, vntill it become first black and lastlie white againe, and therewith rubbe the teeth. and it skowreth them and restoreth them their natiue coloure.
            
            
               For the tooth-ache.
               Boyle Nitre with wine and pepper, and holde that licour in the mouth.
            
            
               
               Likewise.
               Boyle Nitre and brused Leeke seede with vinegre or with wine, and holde that licoure in the mouth.
            
            
               Or else.
               Boyle Nitre & brused Leekes, with vinegre, or with wine and hold that licour in the mouth.
            
            
               For an olde ache in the head.
               TAk Nitre, with the iuyce of the leaues and beries of Iuie and snuffe that mixture into the nosethrilles, ann then shed vpon the head vinegre beaten with oyle Rosate or else Oxirhodinum.
               
            
            
               Or else rather.
               Temper Nitre with iuyce of Iuye leaues and beryes and with honie and with oyle of Camomill, and snuffe vp that mixture into the nosethrilles.
            
            
               And therewith also for the same.
               Enoint the heade with the saide mixture, tempered with vinegree Rosate, and with oyles of Camomell & of Uioletts, and oyle Rosate Omphacyne, which is (as you knowe) oyle of vnripe Oliues made with buddes of vnripe Roses.
            
            
               For the eares akeing, & mattering, or hauing noise or hissing or ringing in them. And also to clense the eares from stopping or stuffing, and to amende the hearing.
               PUt (warmed) into the eares, the saide mixture of Nitre, with the iuyce of the leaues and berries of Iuie, and with the oyles of bitter Almondes, of Cammomill, of Uiolettes & of complet Roses.
            
            
               Or else.
               Mixe and dissolue Nitre with warmed wine, or with Aquavitae, or with oyle of bitter Almondes, or with distilled vinegre,

or (onely) with warme water and iuyce of Onyons, and so droppe it warme into the eares.
            
            
               Or for the same.
               Blow the drie poulder of Nitre with a quill into the eares.
            
            
               For bleared eyes, pynne, webbe, and skarres in the eyes, or for white, growen betweene the circle and blacke of the eye, and to remoue dymnes of of the eyes, and to sharpen the eye sight.
               TEmper Nitre with honie of Roses, or else boyle Nitre in wine Maluesie vnto the halfe, and delaye it with Rosewater, or with Endiue water, or else boyle Nitre with figges, in barely water, and put any of those mixtures (colde) into the corners of the eyes.
            
            
               For bleeding at the nose.
               MIxe Nitre with Silphium or Assa fetida, and hold it to the nose to smell thereto.
            
            
               Or else.
               Receiue into the nose, the steme of vapour of Nitre boyled in water.
            
            
               To helpe the deformities of the neyles.
               DIssolue Nitre with wine Maluesie, in the cuppe or barke of pomegranate, set vpon hot ashes, and dip clowtes therein, and apply them vpon the deformed neyles.
            
            
               For cure of the Squinancie or strangles.
               BOyle Nitre with Uiolet flowers, and temper that broath with honie of Uiolets, and therewith mixe pix liquida or Cedria, and gargle that mixture, and by little and little, let downe some of it.
            
            
               Or else.
               Dissolue Nitre with broath of Hysope and figges, and gargle

it, and by little and little let it downe.
            
            
               Or else.
               Gargle the decoction of Nitre, Uiolet flowers, Lupynes, & poulder of yong Swallowes, and of their nests: myxed with honie of Uiolets.
            
            
               Also.
               Applie outwardes: honie of violets, and oyle of Uiolettes, tempered with Nitre, and with meale of Lupynes & poulder of yonge Swallowes, & of their nestes, and Album grecum, or rather excrementum pueri infantis.
               
            
            
               Or else.
               Mixe Nitre with decoction of wormewood, adding oyles of Uiolets, and of wormewood, with honie of Uiolettes: and meale of Lupynes, poulder of yong Swallowes, or of Swallowes nestes: Album graecum & excrementum pueri infantis, and emplaister this compounde outwardes.
            
            
               For paralisie of the tongue
               BOyle Nitre with Sage, and posca: or water, vinegre & salte, and put that mixture to leuen with doa, and so make that doa in bread, and let the patient vse to eate that breade.
               
                  For the which also of auncient time: Nitre, hath bene vsed aswell in the leauening and seasoning of breade: as also in the mosting or smering ouer of the breade, when they did put their breade into the Ouen, for to cause the breade baked, to haue a fayre shyning glosse.
            
            
               For other paralisies and slacknes of the Sinewes, and for priuation of the facultie of sense or mouing of the sinewes, and for stitches, crampes, conuulsions, distortiōs, wrying, shrinking, crowching or tying forwardes, backewardes, or sidewardes, of the sinewes, and for all such like

greefes or defaultes of the sinewes and faculties motiue and sensitiue.
               VSe bathes or fomentations, with sponges or clowtes dipped in the boyling of Nitre in salt water, or of Nitre boylled with water and salte, together with Sage, Lauander, Rosemarie, Thyme, Hysope, Organie, Penyriall, Sauerie, elder leaues, Danewort, myntes, Horehounde, deade nettels, enula campana rootes, Oken polipodie rootes, or such like, enointing the affected places (first and last) with the Oyle of castorie, or else with the Oyles of Spyke, and of Masticke tempered with the poulder of Castorie.
            
            
               Or (in causes requiring lesse vehemence) as wrenches of sinewes, or greefe and anguish of sinewes:
               Temper Nitre with barrowes greace, or with oile of roses, and waxe, and so enointe the places greued.
            
            
               A bathe to the feete, verie wholsome for the feete, the sinewes, the head, and all the bodie to be vsed once or twise weekelie, in the morning or euening, before meale, and at going to sleepe.
               TAke red Rose leaues, fresh or drie, Cammomell, Betonie, Organie, Sage, Rue and Asarum of eche an handefull, put them into a lynnen bagge, and knit the bagge, and so boile the same in water sufficientlie. Then cast thereto two pounde and an halfe of Nitre, and a fistfull of bay salt (while the bath is yet on the fire) and when they are dissolued in the bath: vse that bathe, sufficientlie warme or temperately hot, it may serue a long while (to be heate and bathed in) from time to time, vntill the licour be consumed.
            
            
               For stifenes of greefe of the Rompe, the hippe-ache, or Sciatica, or such like.
               GIue glisters of Nitre with broath of Daneworte, or of barke of the rootes of elder, and of rootes of enula cāpana
                  ▪
               
            
            
               
               To ease the hurte of other partes of the bodie.
               ENOyte the ioynctes or other partes grieued afore a fire or in the hoat Sunne, with flower of Nitre, and fine poulder of brymstone, boyled together in the water of the Smythes trough, which hath gotten qualitie and taste of quenching of fiered yron, and participation of the Seacoale nature.
            
            
               Or else for the same.
               Boyle Nitre with Rue rootes, or with Turnepes together with leaues and barke of Elder, or Daneworte, and therewith bath or vse fomentation vnto the grieued partes afore a fire, or in the hoat Sunne.
            
            
               For vncumbring and clensing of the Lunges, and breastbulke, and for remedie of hoarsenes, olde coughe, and toughe coughe, stright breath, weising in the windepipes, heauines of the breaste, and sighing.
               BOyle Nitre with Hysope and figges, and with that broathe, mixe the iuyce of rawe Colewortes, and licke downe that mixture with a spone, by little and little, holding open the mouth, and leaning backewardes, that the draweing in of the breath may let down the licour by little and little into the weasand pype and Lunges.
            
            
               Or else for the same.
               Take Nitre with iuyce of rawe Colewortes, and Hysope, and vse it as aforesaide.
            
            
               Or else for the same.
               Dissolue Nitre with posca, or with water and vinegre, wherein the hearbe Melissa (otherwise called Apiastrum, commonlie called balme) in good quantitie hath bene stamped, and boyled with figges, and with great raysings clensed from the kernelles, and the licour of that broath wrong out, to be vsed as aforesaide.
            
            
               
               Or else for the same.
               Dissolue Nitre with honie of Uiolets, and broath of balme leaues, and vse it as aforesaide.
            
            
               Or else for the same.
               Dissolue Nitre with iuyces of Hysope and horehound, and with broath of honie, or of figges, or of great raysons clensed from their kernelles, or of iuyce of Liquorice, and vse it as aforesaide.
            
            
               Or else for more effect to the same.
               Take Aphron Nitre (which is the fine meale or flowre of Nitre) and Galbanum, and Therbyntyne of eche a like deale, mixe and forme them in pilles, the muchenes of a beane, and hold one of those pilles longe vnder the tongue, to mixe thereof asmuch as may be with the moysture of the mouth to descende downe the weysande pype as the breath is drawne in the mouth being hold open and leaning backwarde as aforesaide, and lastlie swallow it, and so renewe the like at sundrie times or (if it be lothsome) lappe it in pappe of a rosted apple buttered with suger, and swallow it downe, and so continew that remeadie to fordoe the olde coughe, weising in the windpipes, streitnes of breath, and heauines of the breast, and sighing.
            
            
               Likewise for heauines of the Lunges and cause of sighing.
               DRinke downe (by little and little) &c. Nitre dissolued with ptizane.
            
            
               Also for the same.
               The vse of Nitre bayne as aforesaide is good for those affectes.
            
            
               To clēse the stomak of filth & encōbrāce of slyimy and clinging humours, & lothsomenes & to remedie suffocation, windynes, heauing, gnawing &

torment, of the stomake, vnderbulke, and bowells.
               
                  A Dragme of Nitre with honie of Roses, or with common honie, taken by the mouth, skowreth downe the fecces and filth of the stomake, and so riddeth the fulsomenes and lothsomenes, and restoreth appetite.
            
            
               For the same.
               Mixe Nitre with Oximel de radicibus, and brused pepper, and brused Anyseseedes, or Dilleseedes, and poulder of red meadowe Mintes, and poulder of Yreos roote, or of galanga roote, compound them in forme of an electuarie, and eate thereof.
            
            
               Also for the same.
               Make lyniment or fomentation of the region of the stomak with Nitre and iuyce, or decoction of Mintes, Rue, Dill, Cummine, complete Roses, bitter Almondes, and Rue.
            
            
               For suffocation or strangulation by such sliemy & clinging matter in the stomak or in the veynes or cōduittes betweene it, & the Liuer or Splene.
               DRinke Nitre with Lazer or Assa dulcis, or onely with posca, or warme water, vinegre and salt, or else in warmed wine.
            
            
               Or else for the same.
               Make Almond milke of sweete Almondes and bitter Almondes, brayed and drawne with the decoction of Nitre, Camomel Flowers, Uiolets, Borage, Buglosse, Balme-hearbe red Mintes of the meadow, Roseleaues, and Lazer or Assa dulcis, and drinke thereof.
            
            
               Also for the same.
               In the same Almonde milke and decoction warmed, dippe sponges and make warme bathing or fomentation on the region of the Stomake, Liuer, and Spleene, enointed first with the oyles of bitter Almondes, Camomell, Dill, Rue, and complete Roses.
            
            
               
               Likewise for the same.
               Drinke a dragme of Nitre, with broath of Rue, red Roses and Dill or Commin, or with the oyles aforesaide, receiue it downe.
            
            
               Likewise for the torment of the stomak and bowels.
               DRinke Nitre, and Balme-hearbe, with warmed wine, or with Ale warmed, or with warme water.
            
            
               To vnstoppe and discombre the Liuer, from the distentions, stuffinges and chokings of the conduites thereof.
               DRinke Nitre with broath of Cicorie, Endiue, Dent de Lion, adding in the broathe a few red Rose leaues, and on the region of the Liuer, emplaister or enoynt Nitre with oile of bitter Almonds, oyle Rosate, and vinegre of Roses wherein fiered steele is often quenched.
               Also giue glisters with the saide decoctions, and with the oyles of bitter Almondes, and of Cammomell, and with honie of Roses: dissoluing therein an ounce of Nitre at a time.
            
            
               To asswage and ease the swelling or stuffing and hardenes of the Spleene.
               TAke Nitre, and Caper rootes, and Fenegreke seedes brayed, with also a curtesie of red rose leaues, fresh or dry. Boyle them in water, adding Rose vinegre, or simple vinegre wherein fiered steele hath bene quenched, & with sponges or peeces of soft frise, make outward bathing and supyling on the region of the Spleene, enointed first with oyles of Cammomell, of Dill, of complete Roses, of vnripe Roses, of sweete Almondes, of bitter Almondes, & of Capers, or proceede by degrees & turnes of mollifying, rarifiying, and resoluing, alwayes mixing the comfortatiues.
            
            
               Also.
               Make an Oximell or syrupe of honie Rosate, or of common

honie well clarifyed, adding vinegre Rosate or simple vinegre wherein fiered steele is often quenched as aforesaide: boiling therin Nitre, Fenegreeke seedes brused, red Rose leaues, & Capers both fruit and barkes of the rootes, & receiue downe by the mouth a sponefull euerie morning fasting.
            
            
               Also.
               Eate downe Nitre with figges and Capers.
            
            
               Or else.
               Eate Nitre with figges and Hysope.
            
            
               And also for the same.
               Make emplayster to the region of the Splene of stamped figges mixed with Nitre, Hysope, and fruites and rootes of Capers, tempred with vinegre Rosate, and vinegre of Elders, or with symple vinegre, wherein fiered steele hath bene often quenched, and much the better if the place be first as aforesaide, softened by degrees with hennes greace, or capons greace, oyle of Cammomell, oyle Rosate complete, oyle of sweete Almondes, oyle of Dill, oyle of bitter Almondes, oyle of rootes of Capers, ech after other, alwayes mixing steeled vinegre, and some oyle of vnripe Roses, or else some decoction of Willowe barkes.
            
            
               Likewise.
               Enoynte the region of the Spleene with Nitre, meale of Fenugreke seedes, or of Lupynes, steeled vinegre, oyles Rosate Omphacine, and also complet, oyles of sweete Almonds and of bitter Almondes, oyles of Cammomell, of Dill, of Elders, and of rootes of Capers, or such of them, as (for the purpose) shalbe conuenient.
            
            
               For gurgling, heauing, and torment of the vnderbulke.
               MAke warme bathing or fomentation vnder the bulke of the chest and shorte ribbes, with sponges or with softe

fryze cloutes, dipped (one after an other) in white wine boyled with Nitre, Cammomell flowers, Marigolde flowers, Borage, Buglosse, Languedebeof, Hysope, Dill, Mugwort, Balme-hearbe, and a curtesie of saffron, annointing first the place with oyles of Uiolets, of Cāmomell, of sweet Almonds, of bitter Almondes, and of Roses complete.
            
            
               Also for the same.
               It auaileth to drinke that decoction, with Nitre, and poulder of Amber and Lazer, or Assa dulcis.
               
            
            
               Or else for the same.
               To drinke Nitre it selfe with sugar, or without sugar were it but with warme drinke, or warme whaye, or warme water.
            
            
               For the Illiacke passion, (to wit, the torment of the vpper bowels and gutts.)
               DRinke the like decoction of Nitre, Cammomell flowers, Marigolde flowers, Hysope, Basill minte, balme-hearbe, poulder of Yreos roote, and Galanga roote, and Lazer or Assa dulcis, adding brused seedes of Parslie, Fenill, Anyse, Dill, and Cummin, and that broath to be made in Almonde milke drawne of sweete Almondes and of bitter Almondes.
            
            
               Also for the same.
               Make outwardlie on the greeued place, a hoat bathing or fomentation with the same decoction: first enoynting on the place grieued the oyles of Cammomell, Dill, and of bitter Almondes.
            
            
               Likewise for the same.
               Drinke a dragme of Nitre in warmed wine, or in other warmed licour, conuenient, with Rue croppes, or with Dill, braunches and seedes, or with Cummin seedes, or Annyse seedes.
            
            
               For the Collicke passion.
               VSe the selfe same remedies inwardes by the mouth: and outwardes by hot bathing and fomentation and enointings

as afore described, for the Ilyake passion.
            
            
               Moreouer.
               Giue glisters of Nitre with the like decoctions and oyles.
            
            
               For the Hydropsie.
               Eate Nitre with figges and Hysope.
            
            
               Also.
               Stampe Nitre with figges and Hysope, and applie it playsterwise one the bellie and other partes affected.
            
            
               Or else.
               Temper Nitre, with garden Snayles stamped shelles and all, such as feede on hearbes hot and drie, as Rosmarie, Sage, Lauender, Thyme, Organie, Basill, Sauerie, Penirorall, Towne-cresses, Hysope, Parcelie, and such like. Adding fine poulders of Baye-salte, Cloues, Mace, Nuttemukes, Mastik & Frankencens, tempering them all with vinigre Rosate quenched with steele, and apply it plaisterwise, and so let it remaine on, vntill of it selfe it fall of, and then renewe it (from time to time) vntill the swelling be abated, & the distemperance be amended.
            
            
               Also for the same.
               Giue Nitre in glister with decoction of Daneworte (hearbe and rootes) or of the berries, leaues, and inner rinds of barkes of the bowes and rootes of Elder tree, and rootes of gladen Acorns, or Yreos, therewith boyled, or poulder of either of those rootes thereinto cast.
            
            
               Also for the same.
               Use Nitre baynes made either with the saide decoction, or else at least with salt-water.
               For Nitre bayne by qualitie and vertue doth (more effectually then salt baine) remedie all colde and moyste distemperances, and by the subtilitie and penetration vnto to the depth,

doth carrie therewith the vertue of heating, deuiding, vnstopping, euaporating, and drying, aswell as of dispersing, wasting, extenuating, mundification, abs
                     •
                  ersion, skowring, and auoyding. Wherefore, Nitre serueth properlie against Hydropsies, Gontes, dolowres of sinewes, Paralysies, Crā
                  pes, Stitches, shorte breath, Cough, thicknes of the eyesight, sounding & wattring of the eares, Scabbes, Maunge, &c.
            
            
               For to asswage and abate inflamation, swelling and anguish of the Coddes.
               STampe Nitre with great Raysons (be they vnkerneled, or not) brayed verie small and softe, and mixing therewith a competent portion of oyles of Uiolets and Roses, warme it, and applie it in cataplasme or pultes.
            
            
               To dispare or swage other swellings, inflammations and inflations, or heauings outward.
               TEmper Nitre with the pulpe of Casia fistularis, honie of Uiolets, honie of Roses, oyle of Uiolets, oyle of Roses complete, oyle of Cammomell, and iuyces of Cammomell, Marigoldes, and Elders.
            
            
               And if the euill be inwardes.
               Drinke Nitre with broathe of Cammomell flowers, Marigolde-flowers and Uiolet-flowers, adding also Roses, or Cicorie, or Dent de lion, &c.
            
            
               For Carnosities or knobbes growing in the conduit of the yearde, or in the purse of the coddes.
               TEmper Nitre with ashes of vine twigges, and steeled vinegre and apply it on the outside, and vsing that medicine, it shall disperse and consume those carnosities and knobbes.
            
            
               
               To breake the stone in the kidneyes and bladder, & and to vnstoppe and discharge the stuffing and chokeing there, and in the conduits of the vrine: And for mundifying of soores in the kydnyes and bladder.
               TAke by mouth Nitre with Oximell of Raddish, adding honie of Roses, or poulder of red Roses.
            
            
               Or else in like sort.
               Swallowe downe Nitre with pulpe of Cassia fistularis drawne with the broth of a Coney farced with Parsley and Cammomell.
            
            
               Or else in like sorte.
               Swallowe downe Nitre and poulder of Rhwebarbe, tempred with conserue of Roses, & with Cassia fistularis drawne as aforesaide.
            
            
               And moreouer also for the same.
               Enoynte the region of the Kidneyes and downe from the Reynes aloft by the Hippes and Flankes, as the conduits of the vrine doe descende, and betweene the coddes and the fundamente, with the fat of Conyes kydneyes, mixed with Nitre.
               
            
            
               And also.
               Put into the fundament a Suppositorie made with Nitre, fat of Coneyes kydneyes, and iuyces of Cammomell and of Parslye hardened with sufficient quantity of honie of Uiolets and of Roses and tallowe of a bucke Goate molten together.
            
            
               And also.
               Giue glisters in sufficient quantitie of Nitre, with Cassia fistularis and broathe of a Coney farced with Cammomell, Maidenhaire, Parsley, Raddish, Sampier, Saxifrage, and such like, adding honie of Roses and of Uiolets and oyle of Cammomell.
            
            
               
               For to supple and dissolue the Cake or hardenes growen in the substance of the Matrice, and for remedie of suffocatiō & tortures of the Matrice, and to open and clense and apte the Matrice vnto conception, and to procure it the benefit of the ordinarie and monthlie auoidance.
               GIue Nitre with iuyces of Cammomell, herbe Mercurial, Hysope, and Mugworte to drinke.
            
            
               Or else.
               Farce those hearbes with Nitre in the bodie of an old Cock weried with longe chasing, and vnfeathered while it is aliue: Then strangled with salte, and cast forthwith into colde water: and then to be farced with Nitre, and those hearbes: and boyled according to Arte, and giue the broath of that Cocke to drinke.
            
            
               Or else.
               Boyle Nitre with those hearbes, in wine and giue it to drinke.
            
            
               Or else.
               Dissolue Nitre, with Lazer or Assa dulcis, or Belzoynye, by steeping and warming them in wine, and giue it to drinke.
            
            
               Or else to the poorer sort.
               Giue drinke of Nitre it selfe with those hearbes, boylled in warme water, or with warme water mixed with a curtesie of vinegre, or with wine.
            
            
               Likewise.
               Use iniections, or pessaries, into the matrice, of Nitre mixed and dissolued with iuyces of Hysope, Marigoldes, Cammomell, Mugworte, Motherworte, herbe Mercuriall, and olye of bitter Almondes, and therein dissoluing Galbanum, Assa dulcis or Belzoynie, and a curtesie of Ambregrise, or Aliapta museata.
               
            
            
               
               And likewise outwardlie.
               Applie emplaisters, or vse enoyntmentes, or bathinges of Nitre with the like herbes, decoctions, gummes, and oyles.
            
            
               To smooth the wrinckles of womens bellies after childing.
               
                  
                     •
                  Ray Nitre with the leaues of Idianthose or black maidenhaire in a stone morter, with a boy childes brine, and therwith let them vse to bath their bellyes.
            
            
               To bring the blood, and plumnes and supplenes vnto anie member decated and wythered by not receiueing nutriment.
               TAke blacke pitche, waxe, and Colophonie of eche thrce ounces, melt them, and put thereunto an ounce of Tharre, an ounce & an halfe of Nitre, three dragmes of Sulphure vif, poulders of pepper, and of Aderge, of ech two dragmes, Belzoynie two dragmes, Euphorbium or Catharides halfe a dragme, Labdanum an ounce, oyle of sweete Almondes and oyle Ciprine, of eche an ounce, mixe them according to Arte, and make a liquide sticking plaister syreade on leather to put on, and to plucke of againe often times after it cleueth.
            
            
               To procure sweating.
               DRinke Nitre with iuyces of Cammomell and Marigoldes in warme posset-ale.
            
            
               Also.
               Enointe the skinne with Nitre, mixte with oyles of Cammomell and of bitter Almondes, and lye downe lapped warme with cloathes.
            
            
               To stay immoderate sweating.
               DIssolue and temper Nitre with poulder of drie Iris, in oyle Rosate Omphacine, adding vinegre Rosate, or other vinegree steeled, and anoynt the place to much sweating.
            
            
               
               To supple and nimble the stifenes and wearines of the lymmes.
               ENoynte the lymmes with Nitre dissolued with oyle, and a fourth part of vinegre.
            
            
               Or rather
               Enoynte the lymmes with Nitre onelie dissolued with oyle of Cammomell.
            
            
               Or else.
               With a sponge dipped in warme broathe of Cammomell, and Marigold-flowers, or Elder leaues, boyled in wine or Ale and Nitre therein dissolued: adding hennes greace, or capons greace, or oyle: supple and bath the lymmes afore a fire, or in the warmth of the Sunne.
            
            
               To preuent the grudg or cold shrugge or shakeing, inuading with the accesse of fits of Feuers.
               DIssolue and temper Nitre with oyle oliue, or rather with oyle of bitter Almondes, or of Dill, or of Raddish seedes, or of Nettleseedes, or of Castorie, or of Spyke, or of Nardus, and annointe the chine of the backe, from the nape of the necke downe beneath the shoulder blades, and also the wrestes of the handes and the feete.
            
            
               Or else.
               Afore the accesse of the fit, procure to sweate, according the instructions aforesaide.
            
            
               To laxe and scoure the bowells.
               DRinke Nitre with poulder of Yreos in iuyce of rawe colewortes.
            
            
               Or else.
               Drink Nitre onely with iuce of rawe colewortes.
            
            
               Or else.
               Drink Nitre with the first broath of colewortes not ouerboyled.
            
            
               
               Or else.
               Drinke downe a large sponefull of poulder of Nitre with warme water or with warme whey, or or with white wine, or with broath of great Raysons, or with warme water and honie.
            
            
               Moreouer.
               
                  Nitre also so taken clenseth the stomacke and bowels of the clinging slymie filth and dirte cleuing thereunto, and riddeth the choking of the conduites and veynes, and warmeth and restoreth them their natural operation, euaporing the sweltring heate and restoring naturall heate.
            
            
               For burning or scalding.
               TAke Nitre tosted (as aforesaid) vntill it become black, bray it then into fine poulder, and sprinckle it thick on the place burned or sckalded.
            
            
               For the byting of a madde dogge, and for other venemous byting or stinging.
               TEmper and melt Nitre with Roson, or with Therebyntine adding vinegre, and goosegreace, or swynes greace, and applye that treate for the beginning of the cure. And in the cō
                  tinuance of ye cure, driane vinegre through vnquenched lime, and temper that vinegre with Nitre, and with that lotion, soake and bath the wounde, and mixe also that lotion with the aforesarde treate to be still vsed to the cure.
            
            
               Likewise.
               Rube the wounde with Nitre tempered with dogges vrine, when it can be had.
            
            
               Against the venome of Henbane receiued into the bodie.
               DRinke Nitre dissolued with warme water, & with the singer, or with a feather procure to vomite it vp, and so do eftesones againe and againe.
            
            
               
               Against the estonyeng venome of Mandragora taken into the bodie.
               FIrst procure often vomite by the meanes aforesaide, with Nitre, and warme water, and honie. Then drinke largely of the bruage of stamped wormewood boylled in Muscadeli or Bastard or Maluesie, or other 
                     •
                  at sweete wine, and the iuyce or broth of the saide herbe well streyned and wronge into the wine: and therein a good portion of Nitre dissolued, and the patientes heade to be sponged with vinegre and oyle Rosate: adding smelles hot and sharpe and Ranke to the nose, and causing the patient to exercise the bodie mightelie, and then also procure sweating as aforesaide.
            
            
               Against the venome and strangling of vnkinde Mushrowmes eaten.
               STampe and strayne the leaues and stalkes of Melissa otherwise called Apiastrum or balme herbe, with Pusca, or with vinegre water and salte, and in strayned licour, dissolue Nitre, and drinke it warme in large quantitie, and procure as aforesaide to yeelde it vp by vomit, and so do often againe & againe.
            
            
               Against the venome, and vlceration, and strangulation and tormente caused by receieuing inwardes, of Buprestes, or of other Cantharides.
               DRinke Nitre with Lazer or Assa dulcis or Belzoynie, dissolued & tēpred with warme water & honie, or with sweete wine, or with other wine and honie, warmed, and (as aforesaide) yeelde it vp by vomite; and so renewe it often, and then take troeiskes of Alkakengie with Almonde milke, or else take Almonde milke drawen with broth of Lettice, Uiolettes, Borage, Petimorell, Purcelane, Plantaine, great Reysons, the colde seedes, and such like.
            
            
               
               Against the venome, and strangulation of Bulles bloode taken inwardes.
               DRinke Nitre with Pusca and salte, or with water and vinegre and salte, or with Aleger and salt warmed, and (after a while, by procurement as aforesaid, yelde it vp by vomite, and renewe that remedie againe and againe.
            
            
               And vniuersallie, for all strangulations, or suffocations, stuffinges, or obstructions, by anie of those causes, or cluddred blood, or, humors, grosse clā
                  mie, slimie, clinging, pasted, or cleuing.
               
                  NItre, is an effectuall remedie for all those, aswell by taking it inwardes, as also to be bathed, enointed, emplaistred outwardes. For (as aforesaid) it perceth, deuideth dissolueth, subtileth, looseth, suppleth, rarifieth, enlargeth, extenuateth, vnstoppeth, openeth, maketh waie, euaporeth, auoideth, skowreth, and clenseth, all such collections, congeallings, cludeeringes, suffocations, and encombrances, without anie extoriation or seltring, which Nitre of it selfe, doth rather heale, then empaire.
               
                  And yet moreouer besides the foresaide vses of Nitre in medicine, it is seruiceable vnto other vses. As.
               
            
            
               For soldring of golde, siluer, or copper, and to yeeld fayre colour vnto golde vnfine.
               BRaie or rather fret Nitre, and some Alume du plume, with boy childes vrine, in a morter of pure red copper, with a pestell also of pure red copper, setting the morter ouer hot ashes, or ouer hot sande, or in the hot Sunne, vntill the mixture (togethers with the limell or fretting of the copper) becomme (at the last) thicke & almost dry, then with a thinne chippe (or an other sit instrument) take it out of the morter, and also from the pestell, and drie it in the Sunne, on a glased

earthen dish, and so reserue it to be made into fine poulder, to the like vse as golde smythes and coppersmythes doe newe occupie Borace, and it yeeldes fayre colour vnto the mettall, by waie of cemtecing.
            
            
               For sponginge or skouring of greace, or of filthie spottes or soyle out of silke or lynnen or bombazine, or wollen or leather.
               SPonge with the foresaide Trociskes of Nitre and Sope dissolued, and vsed hot with a yong boye childes vrine distilled or vndistilled, or with vinegre distilled, or white vinegre vndistilled, (or more speciallye) with iuyce of Lymondes, or of verie soure Orenges, repeating the doing thereof sundr
                     •
                   times if it so needeth.
            
            
               For skowring and whytting of lynnen cloth, or lynnen yarne.
               DIssolue Nitre in sharpe Lie made reasonable hot, & therein steepe and washe the lynnen cloath or yearne, sundrie times, and lastlie rinse it out (as often as needeth in warme water, and spread and white it in the ayre and Sunne, according the ordinarie.
            
            
               For skowring of woll, or of wollen cloath, or of wollen yearne, from the soyle, greace and fatnes therein: whereby to make it apt to receiue and reteine Die: and moreouer to yeelde it soft and supple.
               VSe Nitre in the same maner, first with Lie (rosonably hot not verie hat) and lastlie vse onely Nitre with warme water, and it so effectually suppleth, & softeneth, and rariefieth the wolle, and skowreth out the greacestnes and oylynes of the wolle: As (in deede the helpe of winestone named Arguille to fret and drie out the greacesines or fatnes of the wolle) or

yet the helpe of Alume, or of copporas (to gumme the woolle, and to cause it to receiue, or to sooke in and receiue the die) shal be founde not onely superfluous, but also rather harmefulll, to the cloathes softnes and supplenes and fiuenes thereof, in that euerie of them, doe yeelde the woolle harde, stubborne, stiffe, rough, & brittle: So as of auncient time (while Nitre was to be had plenteouslie and of price not excessiue to much aaboue the others) Nitre was vsed to that purpose, especiallie, for the most precious cloathes and colours.
            
            
               For to skowre & supple Buffe-leather, Shamois lether, and such like skinnes, to make them to become cleane, drie, suplle and soft.
               
                  NItre (vsed first with warme Lie, dulce, and not ouer sharpe, and then Nitre eftesones with warme water) doth that busines so well, as none better.
            
            
               For to taw and make furres, supple and soft.
               WAshe them in warme water with Nitre sope (afore described) & they shall become so softe and perfectlie supple: As (drying them at the fire, or neuer so manie times after wet and dryed) they shall not be hard nor stiffe.
            
            
               THus haue I exceeded the measure of a letter, while I followe to recite vnto you the so manifolde and commodious vses of Nitre, which thing it selfe (being found againe, and nowe knowne to be had) will (I assure you) be gratefully accepted of: and more sufficientlie recommended to the publike vse and vtilitie, by the learned Phisitions and experimentors. Wherefore I thus commit you to God from Lambay, &c.
               
                  Your verie friende and louing Cosine. TH. CH.
                  
               
               
            
         
      
   