
      
         
            
            
            A MANVAL OF CONTROVERSIES. wherin the Catholique Romane faith in all the cheefe pointes of controuerſies of theſe daies is proued by holy Scripture.
            
            By A. C. S.
            
               Search the Scriptures, for you thinke in them to haue life euerlaſtinge: and the ſame are they that giue teſtimonie vnto me.
               
                  Ihon cap. 5. verſ. 39.
            
            Printed at Paris by Peter Buray. M. D. C. XIV.
         
         
            
            
            THE EPISTLE to the reader.
            
               
                  I Haue courteous reader taken ſome paynes to put together this litle manual of controuerſies, entending nor pretending anie other thing therby then thy profit: yf thou reape anie by it: my trauayle shalbe richly recompenced. Howſoeuer, in requitall of my good-will let me intreat this fauoure of the, that, if thou wilt dayne it the reading, thou wouldeſt doe yt with ſome attention, and ſuch intention, as the ſubiect requireth: which howſoeuer, or by whomſoeuer it be handled, is of that weyght and moment, that may duly demaūd thy beſt, moſt ſetled, & ſincereſt thaughtes.
               
               The inſuing preface wil acquaynt thee both with the drift and motiue of this treatiſe, and alſo with thoſe few pointes which I haue thaught worthie of remark concerning the ſame. Therfore haue I nothing more to trouble the with, but only to entreat thee to take ſome heede in decerning the Catholique Poſitiones, from thoſe of the Proteſtantes, becauſe they are not ſo euidently diſtinguished in character (especially before the page 76.) as they might haue beene: and alſo to pardon the faultes eſcaped in the print, but moſt of all thoſe in the margent as moſt important. In the latter end of the booke they are all corected and therfore may more eaſely be born with. Farewell.
            
            
               Thy freind as thou art a freind to truthe: howſoeuer thy well willer.
A. C.
            
         
         
            
            A TABLE OF THE CONTROuerſies.
            
               1. SCriptures pag. 15.
               2. Traditiones. pag. 20.
               3. Difficultie of ſcriptures. pag. 26
               4. Churches infallibilitie. pag. 31.
               5. Churches markes: vniuerſalitie. p. 43.
               6. Viſibilitie. pag. 39.
               7. Succeſsion. pag. 42.
               8. Conſecration and vocation of Paſtores. 45.
               9. Supremicie of S. Peter and Pope. 49.
               10. Honoure of ſainctes. 57.
               11. Prayer to ſainctes. 59.
               12. Reliques. 63.
               13. Images. 67.
               14. Purgatorie. 76.
               
                  15. Of the Sacraments. 81.
               16. Neceſsitie of Baptiſme. 84.
               17. Ceremonies of Baptiſme. 85.
               18. Euchariſt: reall preſence. 86.
               19. Tranſubſtantiation. 89.
               20. Adoration of Chriſt in the Euchariſt. 91.
               21. Communion vnder one kinde. 93.
               22. Sacrifice of the Maſs. 98.
               23. Confirmation. 102.
               24. Pennance with indulgences. 107.
               25. Holy orders. 118.
               26. Extreame vnctione. 120.
               27. Matrimonie. 122.
               28. Effect of the Sacraments. 125.
               29. Character. 127.
               30. Iuſtification and concupiſcence. 128.
               31. Iuſtice once had may be loſt. 141.
               32. Certayntye of Saluation. 142.
               33. Merit of workes. 145.
               34. Free will. 148.
               35. Commaundementes poſsible. 152.
               36. Euangelicall counſels. 155.
               37. Preiſtes ſingle life. 159.
               38. Seruicce in the vulgar tongue. 162.
            
         
         
            
            
               FAVLTES ESCAped in the margent.
               PAge. 23. for cap. 27.  Read cap. 23.
               24. ſert ſect.
               29. degeneſi ad literam lib. 2. lib. 7.
               30. 2. Petri cap. 2. v. 7. cap. 1. v. 20
               30. Malachie. v. 2. 3. v. 7.
               30. Math. v. 27. v. 2.
               32. Luc v. 16. 20 v. 16.
               33. Math. v. 28. cap. 20. cap. 28. v. 20.
               33. [Actes 15] is placed to high 
               36. Creſco: cap. 3. cap. 33.
               37 Pſal: 27. 71.
               37. Math. cap. 18. cap. 28.
               40. Math. 19. 18.
               41. corin. v. 18. v. 28.
               45. Act cap. 13. cap 14.
               46. Rom: cap. cap. 10
               55. epla 65. epla. 165.
               61. Apocalip. cap. 3. cap. 2.
               
                  64. Act. v. 18. 12.
               69. psal. 9. 98.
               86. after. 24. add. [Luc] 
               91 Pſal. 69. 96.
               95 Smaforward. forward
               100. Malachic v. 1. v. 10. 11.
               102. Act v. 20. v. 17
               109. Act. v. 6. v. 3.
               109. pag. 10. pag. 109.
               120. want theſe citations Iames cap. 5. v. 14. 15.
               Chriſoſt. De Sacerdotio. lib. 3. ad initium.
               122. 5. v. cap. 31. cap. 5. v. 31.
               126. Actes cap. 22. v. 17 v. 16.
               128. ſer. ſect.
               128. & oncu. & concu.
               132. contra Iuliam: c. 5. c. 15.
               136. is omited. De ſpiritu & litera cap. 27.
               137. Epheſios cap. 3. cap. 1.
               143. is omitted the citation of Eccleſiaſtes cap. 9. v. 1.
               146. 2. Timo. cap. 5. cap. 4. 1. Regum. v. 45. v. 4. 5.
            
            
               
               FAVLTES ESCAped in the text.
               Page. 7. for. hall. read shall.
               13. cotrouerted controuerted
               19. this. that
               21. nothinges nothing.
               42. word. world.
               44. then. them.
               46. In the ſecund line wanteth this word [inward].
               62. ſayed. ſaued
               62. ſod. ſo.
               68. placc. place
               68. the. he
               73. his. is
               78. eueire. euerie,
               96. ſam chapter. ſame chapter
               96. cheeſt. cheefeſt.
               135. whoſe prayſe is not of god. For whoſe prayſe is not of men, but of god.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A MANVALL OF CONTROuerſies. Wherin the Catholique Romane faith in all the cheefe pointes of controuerſies of theſe daies is proued by holy Scripture.
            
            The Preface to the Reader.
            
               THis brief treatiſe (courteous reader) being at the requeſt of à friend ſpeedely compiled, may ſerue to conuince them of

manifeſt calumnie, who no leſſe vntruly then boldly, doe affirme the Doctrine of the Catholique Roman Church, to be ether againſt holy ſcriptures, or at leaſt to haue no ground or proofe frō them: And it maie alſo giue ſatisfaction vnto ſuch, as more vpon the confident boldneſſ of them that affirme the Roman Religion to be deſtitute of ſcriptures, then vpon anie other reaſon, are drawne, ether to think this to be true, or at leaſt to doubt of the truth of the contrarie. But before thou proceede to vieue the thinge it ſelfe, I deſire thee to conſider well theſe fewe pointes followinge.
            Firſt that no proofe of anie one point of Chriſtiā beliefe, can be ſo direct and full out of holy ſcripture, that may not be deluded by falſe interpretation. For the damned Arrianes, and moſt other

heretiques, could interpret all places of holy ſcripture brought by the Catholiques againſt theire hereſie in ſuch ſenſe, as beinge ſo vnderſtood, they made nothinge againſt it: yea, that, as ſeely, as peruers heretique Legate (burned in ſmithfield not long ſince for Arrianiſme) could not be conuinced of hereſie by onelie ſcripture. Such proofes therfore of Catholique Doctrine, as cannot be deluded by anie interpretation, are not to be expected out of holy ſcripture.
            Secondly that though Proteſtātes maie alledg textes of holy ſcripture for the proofe of ſome pointes of theire Doctrine, yet that alone is not ſufficiēt to make it true. Both becauſe the ſame pointes are proued falſe by other places of ſcripture: and alſo for that all heretiques, haue euer brought ſcripture for their hereſies,

and none more apparant, or frequent then the blaſphemous Arrianes: to ſay nothinge of the Deuill his citinge of ſcripture euen againſt oure bleſſed ſauiour. By all which it is more then euident, that the ſenſe of holy ſcripture, beſides the wordes, is neceſſarely required to make ſufcient proofe of true doctrine. For which reaſon I oftē bringe the vncorrupt teſtimonie of ſome holy father for the ſenſe of the place alledged by me, who haueinge liued at leaſt on thowſand yeares before theſe controuerſies began, cannot be eſteemed partiall on our ſide.
            Thirdly, that I expect and exact of him, or them that shal goe about to anſwer this treatiſe, the ſame roūde ſincere, and direct dealinge, which I haue here vſed. Remembringe before all things that he firſt ſet doune his faith

in direct poſitions, and then proceed inlike methode as I haue done for the reſt. To whom I willingly graunt this large libertie aboue that which I haue vſed that he tye not himſelf vnto the firſt 500. yeares for the fathers interpretations, but that he take boldly 1500. yeares ſo that he bringe not condemned heretiques for his auctours, and with all obſerue the point followinge.
            Fourthly, that it ſhall not be to anie purpoſe in waye of anſwer, that anie aduerſarie bring another interpretation of ſome father upon the places of ſcripture alledged by me, beſides that which I haue brought. For it is not denied, that one & the ſame place of ſcripture maie be, and is often diuerſly underſtoode, not onely of diuers fathers, but of one and the ſame father. But

if he will ſaye anie thinge to the purpoſe in this kinde, he muſt bring an interpretation contradicting that which I haue brought: and withall labour rather to proue his owne Doctrine thē to impugne that of the Catoliques. For ſeeinge it is (as all men Knowe) à far more eaſie thīge to impugne anie doctrine, though neuer ſo true, then to proue the ſame: no truth (eſpetially of faith) being ſo euidentlie clere but that ſome thing with shew of probabillitie maie be obiected againſt it: it is not now expected, that anie aduerſarie should ſtand to anſwer thoſe auctorities of ſcripture and fathers wich I haue alledged for proofe of the Catholique Doctrine, or to impugne the ſame: but rather to bring others in proofe of his owne: that the iudicions reader maie compare our groundes in

ſcripture both together; and by the uieu of his owne eie, trie whether of them be more conformable to Gods ſacred worde. And when anie one shall haue produced his proofes for Protestantiſme, in the like maner as I haue done in the behalfe of the Catholique religion; (if he can ſo doe) yet ſhall he gaine no more therby, but an euident demonſtration againſt the cheefeſt ground of the Proteſtātes doctrine, that ether, to the true and full deciſion of controuerſies in matter of faith, is neceſſarily requiredNote. ſome other iudgment or triall, then the only wordes of holy Scripture, or ells that therere is no meanes at all to end cō
               trouerſies of faithe; which later neuertheleſſ to affirme, is no leſſ iniuriouſe to gods wiſdome, goodneſſ, or power, then to ſaye that he hath prouided noe

ſufficient meanes for men to know the way to ſaue their ſoules. For both parties bringing ſcripture for them ſelues whoe shall finallie determine whether of them, doth applie the ſaid Scriptures more ſincerlie and accordinge to their true meaninge?
            Fifthly that wheras, before I can proue anie point of Chriſtian beliefe by ſcripture I ſhould firſt by good order, proue that there is a holy Scripture, and ſecondly in what bookes of the Bible it is contained: yet becauſe nether of theſe two pointes can be proued by ſcripture, vnleſs wee firſt beleeue ſome ſcripture without proofe: therfore that, I may proue thoſe pointes of faith wherin the Catholique Romane church doth differ from the Proteſtantes by holy ſcripture (which our aduerſaries vrge me ūto) I muſt neceſſarilie to ſatisfie

their diſordered deſire, proceede diſorderlie, and ſuppoſe that for truth without proofe, which requireth moſt to be proued: I ſay without proofe, if no proofe be good, but that which is made out of ſcripture.
            And here occurr by the way two things worthie of note, Thone that the ſcripture cannot be an vniuerſall rule of our faith, ſeeinge ſome thinges are to be beleeued with out proofe of ſcripture, as are (for example) that there is a holy ſcripture contayninge gods word and reuelation, and that theſe and theſe bookes be ſuche: therfore muſt there of neceſſitie be ſome other rule of our faith more vniuerſall then the ſcriptures, and conſequently before the ſcriptures. And this cannot be but the aucthoritie of godes church: which is clerly S. Auguſtins Doctrine,

who was not afearde to ſaye. I would not beleeue the Goſpell,
               Contra epiſtolā fundamenti cap. 5. 
               but that the auctoritie of the church doth moue mee. Seeinge therfore the authoritie of the church is a ſufficient motiue for vs to beleeue what is ſcripture, why should it not haue the like aucthoritie with vs in other pointes of faith? which is alſo S. Auguſtins argument in the ſame place: but I will notwithſtanding ſatisfie our aduerſaries in their owne humoure.
            The Secund thing to be noted is, that they that beleeue nothing, but that which is proued by Scripture, are euidently conuinced to beleeue nothinge at all. For they that cannot beleeue that there is à holy Scripture, or what bookes be holy Scripture, cannot beleeue anie thinge, becauſe it is proued by ſcripture. For it is euident,

that before they beleeue anie thing becauſe it is proued by ſcripture, they muſt beleeue that there is a Scripture, and what bookes are ſcripture: but they that beleeue not anie thing but that which is proued by Scripture, cannot beleeue that there is a ſcripture, nor what bookes are holy ſcripture: for nether of theſe two, can be proued by Scripture. Thefore they that beleeue not anie thinge but that which is proued by ſcripture, cannot beleene anié thing at all. This Argument is a plaine demonſtration, and compelleth the Proteſtantes ether to confeſſ that they haue no faith at all: or to acknowledge this their poſitione, to witt [that nothinge ought or can rightly be beleeued, but that which may be proued by Scripture] to be falſe: which notwithſtandinge is the

maine ground of all their religion. But now haueing ſhewed the abſurditie of their Doctrine in this point, I will ioyne with them in the Scriptures, as they themſelues do deſire, obſeringe this method. Firſt I ſett downe the Catholique Roman belief in direct and playne poſitions: then I bringe in proofe of it, one, two, or moe places of holy Scripture, citing the auncient vulgar tranſlation, and often times I ad the teſtimonie of ſome auncient father of the friſt 500. yeares vnderſtandinge ſuch Scriptures as I cite, in the ſame ſenſe and meaninge that I cite them for: Furthermore thoſe fewe places of Scripture, which ſeeme to ſounde directly againſt the Catholique faith I shewe in brief how they are to be vnderſtood. And laſt of all I put downe the poſition contradictorie

to the Catholique doctrine, to the end that the indifferent reader (be he Catholique or otherwaies) may more eaſely iudge whether Doctrine hath better ground in holy Scriptures. And further that he that will impugne this treatiſe may ſee, what he hath to proue if he wil proue anie thinge to purpoſe.
            who is to vnderſtand, that though the Proteſtantes doe maintayn the negatiue part, in almoſt all the poſitions cotrouerted betwixte them and the Catholiques, yet is he not for all that, to be excuſed from the proofe of thoſe pointes, vnleſs he will withall confeſs, that in them the Proteſtantes haue no faith at all, but onely a mere deniall of faith. For, faith beinge not a ſimple denying or not beleeuing, but a poſſitiue aſſent and belief of ſuch articles as are

reueled vnto vs by God; it hath poſſitiue groundes, wherby it may and ought to be proued, euen in thoſe pointes which are negatiue. And therfore as Catholiques doe proue theire faith, in theſe negatiue pointes: that onely faith doth not iuſtifie: that we are not certayn of our iuſtification or ſaluation and the like: ſo likewiſe are the Proteſtantes to proue theyr faith in theſe: that there is no Purgatorie: no reall preſence: no ſacrifice of the Maſs, and the reſt. Vnleſs as is ſayd before, they will confeſs, that they haue no faith in theſe pointes, but onely a mere deniall of faith.
            Haueinge thus aduertiſed thee good Reader of theſe fewe things I leaue thee to peruſe the treatiſe it ſelf, deſiringe thee to expect onely the bare poſitiones proued with the ſelf text, of holy

Scripture, and ſome fewe fathers, without anie florishe of wordes at all: The worke being ſuch as doth rather reſemble the bare bones of a great bodye tied together with dried Sinewes, then a bodie throughly furnished with flesh, and orher habiliments of friendly narure. For which cauſe, though to ſuch as rather reſpect fashion then ſubſtance, it may happ to appeare hideous, yet to others of contrarie appetite (for whoſe contentment it is ſpeciallie intended) it will not paraduenture be iudged altogether without forme.
         
         
            THE FIRST CONTROuerſie Of Holy Scriptures.
            IT is Knowne that the Catholique Roman Church doth admitt more bookes and

percells of holy Bible for Scripture, then the Proteſtantes doe, and conſequently acknowledgeth a larger canon then they, and yet notwithſtanding shee teacheth.
            
               Chatolique Poſitiō 1.
               That all ſuch articles as by her, and the Proteſtantes themſelues are beleeued and holden for articles of faith, are not ſo expresſly contayned in holy Scriptures, as out of them onely, full proofe may be made therof.
            
            
               Proofe.
               The articles which the Proteſtantes doe beleeue to be of faith, as well as Catholiques, and yet are not contayned expreſly in holy ſcriptures, are many, but wee will giue inſtance onely in a fewe, 1 That there are three diſtincte perſonnes and one onely ſubſtance in god. 2. That the ſecūde and third perſonns are of the ſame ſubſtance,

                  
                     •
                  nd equall gloire with the firſt. 
                     •
                  . That the third perſonn proceedeth from the ſeconde and from the firſt. 4. That there are two diſtinct and compleat natures in our ſauiour Chriſt, and but one onely perſonn. 5. That there are in him two willes, and two operations, to witt, of god and man: about all which pointes haue been diuerſe hereſies as is well Knowne to the learned. And thoughe all theſe articles haue moſt true ground and proofe in holy Scriptures, yet are they not ſoe expreſsly contayned therin, as they may be fully prooued by them alone. One example ſhall ſerue for all. To proue the ſonn to be conſubſtantiall or of one ſubſtance with the father, the Catholiques doe alledg (and truly)Iohn. cap. 10. v. 30. this teſtimonie: I and the father are one: yet becauſe there are

moe meanes of beinge one then in ſubſtance, as namely to be of one will, deſire, and affection of which ſorte of vnitie, ſpecially the Arrianes did explicat this place: alledging for them ſelues that teſtimonie. I pray that they all may be one, as thou Father in me and
                  Iohn. cap. 17. v. 21. 
                  I in thee: that they alſo in vs may be one: which cannot be vnderſtood of vnitie in ſubſtance. Therfore this teſtimonie without the interpretatiō of the Church (which is the piller of truth) doth not fully proue the father and the ſonn to be one in ſubſtance. The like may be ſayd of the other articles here mentioned.
            
            
               Catho. poſi. 2.
               All ſuch articles as are of faith, and ſo holden by the Proteſtātes them ſelues, are not contayned ſo much as indirectly or implicitly in holy Scriptures: but onely ſo farr, as the Scriptures contayne and teſtifie the auctoritie

of the Church, and traditions.
            
            
               Proofe.
               That all the Bookes of the Bible, and euerie parte therof which are acknowledged for canonicall ſcripture ioynthy of Catholiques and Proteſtantes be ſuch indeed. That the moſt bleſſed mother of our Sauiour Chriſt continued perpetually a Virgin. That it is lawfull for Criſtians to eate ſtrangled things and blood (which were expreſly forbidden them. acts. cap. 15. verſ. 20) are not ſo much as indirectly contayned in holy Scriptures, otherwaies then is mentioned in our poſition. But this being more amply proued in that which followeth of traditions, this which wee haue ſayd already shall ſuffice for the preſent.
               The Poſitions which the Proteſtantes in this queſtion are to proue be theſe.
            
            
               
               Proteſtāt poſition.
               
                  1 All articles of faith are ſo expreſſy contayned in ſcripture as out of them onely full proofe may be made therof.
                  2. All articles of faith are at leaſt ſo contayned in holy ſcriptures as with out anie teſtimonie or auctoririe of the Church, or traditions they may thence be plainlie and diſtinctly deduced.
               
            
         
         
            TE SECOND CONtrouerſie of Traditiones.
            
               Catholique. Poſitions. 1.
               THe holy Apoſtles deliuered by worde of mouth moe thinges to be beleeued and obſerued by the Church, then ether they found written or wrot them ſelues. And theſe thinges are vſually called traditiones.
            
            
               Proofe. 1.
               
                  Haueing moe things to write vnto you
                  2ae. Iohn
                  
                  would not by paper and 
                        •••
                     e, for I hope
                  v. 12. 3ae. Iho: 13. 
                  ſhall be with you and ſpeake mouth to 
                        •
                     outhe.
               
            
            
               2.
               
                  And the reſt I will dispoſe when I
                  1. Cor. cap. 11. v. 34. 
                  
                     
                        •
                     ome: where the holy Apoſtle euidently ſheweth that he reſerued ſomething more to be ordayned by worde, then he wrote.
            
            
               3.
               The Apoſtles were commaundedMat. cap. 28. v. 20. to teache all nationes to obſerue all things which our ſauiour had commavnded: which doubtleſſ they fulfilled: but they were not commaunded in anie place to write all the ſame: nether doth it appeare by anie Scripture, that they did write all thinges which they taught men to beleeue and obſerue. This is à demōſtration that they taught more then they wrote, if nothing be to be beleeued but what is contayned in holy Scripture.
            
            
               
               4.
               They taught Baptiſme giuen to infants to be good and lawfull: or ells the Anabaptiſtes are not heretiques for rebaptiſing them.
            
            
               5.
               They taught the ſonday to be ſolemniſed. and the Iewes Sabbathe to be left without all ſolemnitie though moſt ſtrictlyExod. cap. 31. v. 16. commāded by god to be ſolemniſed as an euerlaſting couenāt.
            
            
               6.
               They deliuered and taught the creed by worde and not in writing, which from theyre tyme till now hath continued in the church by tradition onely.
            
            
               7.
               They taught Baptiſme miniſteredAuguſt. de Bapti. con: Donatiſtas. lib. 2. cap. 7. by heretiques to be good: and therfore S. Auguſtin ſpeakinge therof, ſaith: Manie things which are not founde▪ in the
                  
                  Apoſtles writinges: nor in latter councells
                  De baptis. cōa Donatis. lib. 5. cap. 27. 
                  yet becauſe they are obſerued by the whole church, are beleeued to be deliuered and recommended by none but by thē: Agayne he ſayth: There are many thinges which the whole church doth hold, and therfore are well beleeued to be commaunded by the Apoſtles, albeit they be not found written.
               
            
            
               Catholique poſiti.
               The Catholique church doth & ought to beleeue thoſe things which the Apoſtles deliuered onely by worde, without writinge: in the ſame degree of faith with thoſe, which are written. Note that the proofes of this poſition doth alſo proue thother going à fore.
            
            
               Proofe. 1.
               Therfore Brethren ſtand and hold2. Theſalo. cap. 2. v. 15. the traditions which you haue learned whether it be by worde or by our epiſtle. S. Baſile ſaith, I account it

Apoſtolique to continue firmly in vnwrittenBaſil de Spiritu. ſancto. cap. 29. cap. 27. Fulk. 2. Theſali. cap. 2 ſert. 17. traditions and alledgeth this place of S. Paule. S. Chriſoſtome cited by Fulke himſelf ſaith thus: Hereof it is manifeſt that they [the Apoſtles] deliuered not all by Epiſtles: but many things without letters, and the one is of as great credit as the other. Therfore we think the tradition of the church to be worthie of credit: It is à tradition inquire no more.
            
            
               2.1. to Timoth. cap. 6. vs. 20.
               
               
                  O Timothee keepe the depoſitū: That is that which is comitted to thy truſt: not certes by writinge. For litle or nothinge writren of the new teſtament was knowne to Timothee then. See à large diſcourſe herevpon in Vincentius lirenenſis.
            
            
               3.
               
                  But if anie man ſeeme to be contentious
                  
                     1a. Cor. cap. 11. vs. 16. 
                  wee haue no ſuch cuſtome: nor the church of god: where S. Paule alledgeth the cuſtome of the church as à ſufficient diſproofe

of anie practiſe: why not therfore for the proofe of anie?
               
                  The things which thou haſt hearde
                  2. ad Timo. cap. 2. vſ. 2. 
                  of me by many witneſses theſe commende to faithfull men which ſhall be fitt to teach others alſo: loe no word here of writing, but of hearing & teaching by worde of mouthe.
               Nowe haueinge proued by Scripture it ſelf, and euident inſtances, that many thinges are to be beleeued, that are not directly contayned in Scripture, it appeareth à ſenſleſſ thinge to demaunde direct proofe of euerie thinge we beleeue out of Scripture.
            
            
               Proteſtants. Poſiti.
               The holy Apoſtles deliuered not by word of mouth moethings to be beleeued and obſerued by the church, thē theyether founde written or wrote them ſelues: And therfore are there no traditions to be holden or beleeued.
               
                  2. The Catholique church ought not to beleeue thoſe thinge which the Apoſtles deliuered onely by worde of mouth without writinge, in the ſame degree of faithe with thoſe which are written.
            
         
         
            THE THIRD CON trouerſie of the difficultie to vnderſtand the Scriptures.
            
               Catho. poſitiones.
               1 All places of holy ſcripture conteyninge articles of fayth (the obſtinate misbeleife wherof is Damnable) are not eaſ
                     ••
                   to be vnderſtoode but requi
                     ••
                   ſome rule to be interpreted by.
            
            
               Proofe. 1.
               
                  Philipp ſayd to the Eunuc
                        •
                     
                     Act. 8. vſ. 30. 31. whom he founde readinge th
                        •
                      Prophet Eſay; Trow eſt thou th
                     ••
                   thou vnderſtandeſt the things which thou readeſt? who ſayde: how can vnleſs ſome man shewe me?
            
            
               
               2.
               Our Sauiour accordinglyLuc. 24. vſ. 45. 
                  
                     •
                  pened the vnderſtādinge of his Apoſtles that they might vnderſtand the Scriptures: ſee therfore what à ſpeciall grace it is to 
                     •
                  nderſtand the Scriptures in there true ſenſe and meaninge.
               
                  In the which [the Epiſtles of2. Petri. 3. vſ. 16. ſainct Paule] are certayne thinges hard to be vnderſtoode which the vnlearned and vnſtable depraue, as alſo the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of the Scriptures to theyr owne per
                     
                        ••
                     ione.
               
               Sainct Hierome explicatingeEpiſt. 103. ad Pauli num. 
                  
                     ••
                  e text now cited out of the actes concludeth thus. Theſe thinges haue I breifly touched as the limitts of an Epiſtle would permitt; that thou mayeſt vnderſtande, that with out a guide and teacher, thou canſt not enter the pathe of holy Scriptures.
               
               which is eaſie to conceaue, ſeeinge as he notethe in the ſame place no trade, nor mechanicall

art is learned with out à maiſter.
               Certes it is not onely an hereſie but à meere frenſie to ſaye, that all ſcriptures conteyninge poyntes of faythe neceſſary to be beleeued are eaſie to be vnderſtoode of priuat beleeuers, ſithence all hereſies whatſoeuer, haue bene begōn and maynteyned for want of true vnderſtandinge of holy ſcriptures: wherof Vincentius Lirenenſis ſayth thus Some man may peraduenture aſke, fo
                        •
                     
                  
                  His booke againſt the prophane 
                        •
                     oueltie of hereſie. 
                  aſmuch as the canon of the ſcriptures 
                        〈◊〉
                      perfect, and in all pointes very ſufficient in it ſelf, what neede is ther t
                        •
                      ioyne therunto, the authoritie of the eccleſiaſticall vnderſtandinge? For this cauſe ſurely, for that all take not the holy ſcriptures in one and the ſame ſenſe, becauſe of the deepneſſ therof: b
                        ••
                      the ſayinges therof ſome interpret one way, and ſome another way, ſoe tha
                        •
                      tbere may almoſt as manye ſenſes b
                        •
                      picked out of it, as there be men. Fo
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                  Nouatian doth expound it one waye, and Sabellius another waye. otherwiſe Arrius, Eunomius, Macedonius, other wayes Photinus, Apolinaris, Priſcillianus, otherwayes, Iouinian, Pelagius, Celeſtius, laſtly otherwayes Neſtorius; Thus far that aūciēt father: to whom we may ad: otherwais wicliffe, Luther, Caluin, Anabaptiſtes,Sanctes de Eucha: repet. 1. cap. vlto in fine. with the reſt: and this moſt truely, ſeing of theſe fewe wordes [This is my Bodye] there are found aboue 80. diuers ſenſes, beſides the Catholique 
                     •
                  enſe and meaninge.
               S. Auguſtine alſo auoucheth
                     De gen. ad literā. lib. 2. crp. 9▪
                   the ſameſayinge. For no other reaſon are hereſies made, but becauſe men not rightly vnderſtandinge the Scriptures, doe obstinatly affirme theyre owne opiniones against the truthe of them.
               
            
            
               Catho. pos. 2.
               Priuate perſonnes though true beieeuershaue not the ſpirit of interpretinge the holy Scripture in the true ſenſe and

meaninge of the ſame.
            
            
               Proofe. 1.
               
                  No prophecie of ſcripture is made by
                  
                     2a. Petri cap. 2. vſ.. 7. Malachi cap. 2. vſ. 2. 3. 
                  priuate interpretation.
               
            
            
               2.
               
                  The lippes of the Prieſt ſhall keepe knowledg and the lawe they shal require of his mouthe: be cauſe he is the Angell [that is the meſsēger] of the lord of hoſtes. loe here the office of interpretinge the lawes of god, giuen to prieſtes, and not aſſured to euerie faythfull perſon.
            
            
               3.
               
                  Vpon the Chaire▪ of Moyſes haue ſitten
                  Mathe. 
                        •
                     3. vſ. 27. 
                  ſcribes and Phariſies, all thinges therfore whatſoeuer they ſhall ſaye to you obſerue yee and doe yee. loe here à commaunde to heare the prelates & paſtoures of the church and no man lefte to followe his owne fantaſie in matters of faythe, and manners.
            
            
               Proteſtantes Poſitiō.
               1. All places of holy Scripture 
                     •
                  onteininge articles of faith, the

obſtinate miſbelief wherof is dānable, are eaſie to be vnd er ſtood, & therfore require not anie rule to be interpreted by.
               2. Priuat perſounes that are true beleeuers haue the Spirit and gift of interpretinge the holy Scripture in the true ſenſe and meainge therof.
            
         
         
            THE FOVRTH CONtrouerſie Of the infallibilitie of the churche.
            
               Catho. poſ.
               THe ſenſe and meaninge of holy Scriptures giuen or aproued by the holy Catholique church, is vnfallibly true, as are alſo the definitiones and declarationes of faithe, deliuered by the ſame, and euery one is bounde vpon his damnatiō not to reiect the iudgment therof.
            
            
               
               Proofe. 1.
               My spirit that is in thee, and my
                     
                        ••
                     ay cap. 59. 
                        •
                     ſ. 22. wordes that I haue put in thy mouthe, ſhall not departe out of thy mouthe and out of the mouthe of thy ſeede and out of the mouthe of thy ſeedes ſeede, ſayth our lord for this preſent and for euer. A manifeſt promiſe of the ſpirit of god to continue for euer in the church.
               
            
            
               2.
               All power is giuen to me in heauenMathe. 28. vſ. 18. 19. and in earthe: Goinge therfore teache yee all nations teachinge them to obſerue all thinges what ſoeuer I haue cōmaunded you. Loe here commiſſion to teache giuen to the Apoſtles and in them to all paſtores.
               
            
            
               3.
               
                  He that heareth you heareth me:
                  Luc. cap. 10. v. 16. 20 
                  and he that dispiſeth you dispiſeth me: Loe here obligation for others, to heare, and obaye that which they, who haue the former commiſsion ſhall teache.
            
            
               
               4.Mat. vſ. 28. cap 20.
               
               
                  Behould I am with you all daies euen to the consūmation of the worlde; Loe, here the aſſurance of Chriſts aſiſtance to his church, and the lawfull paſtores therof, till the ende of the worlde. who can now doubt of the infallibilitie of the doctrine of godes
                     Io. cap. 14. vſ. 16. 17. Act. 15 vſ. 28 church?
            
            
               5.
               
                  I will aſke the father, and he will giue you another Paraclet, [that is an aduocate or comforther] that he may abyde with you for euer. The spirit of truthe: loe here the ſpirite of truthe promiſed to abide with the church for euer. By warrant of which promiſed the firſt generall coūcell that euer was houlden (which was at Hieruſalem) ſayth thus. Yt▪ hath ſeemed good to the holy ghoſt and to vs, to laye no further burthen vpon you then theſe neceſsarye thinges.
               
            
            
               6.
               In reſpect of the ſinguler priuiledges

of the church and ſpetiallye of the infallibilitie it hath in doctrine, ſainct Paule callethe it: the howſe of god, the church oſ the liuinge god, the piller and grounde of truthe.
               
            
            
               7.
               
                  He that will not heare the church
                  Math 18. vſ. 17. 
                  let him be to thee as the Heathen and the publican.
               
               Touchinge which pointe ofAgaynſt Cr
                        •
                     ſconius. lib. 1. cap. 3. the infallibilitie of the church ſainct Auguſtine hath this excellent doctrine: Althoughe (Saith he) no example is brought out of canonicall Scripture of this thinge. (Speakinge sf the validitie oſ Baptiſme miniſtred by heretiques) yet doe we followe the truth of the ſame Scriptures in this pointe whilſt we do that which pleaſeth the whole church which the auctoritie of the Scriptures doth cōmēd: And becauſe the holy Scripture cannot deceaue, whoſoeuer feareth to be deceaued by the obſeurite
                  
                  of theſe queſtiones let him conſult ther vpō with the church, which without all doubt the Scripture doth ſhewe.
               
            
            
               Proteſ. Pos.
               The ſenſe and meaninge of the holy Scriptures giuen, or approued by the Catholique churche, is not alwaies true: nether are the definitiones and declarationes of faythe deliured by the ſame vnfallible truthes. Here the reader may marke à ſtrāge peruerſitie or blindneſſ in the Proteſtantes who graunt the gift of interpretinge the Scriptures to priuate beleeuers and yet deny it to the whole chuche;
            
         
         
            THE FIFTH CONtrouerſie of the marKes of the true Churche.
            THe true Churche of god is but one. This being not denyed by the Proteſtantes needethe

no proofe. The queſtion is which of all thoſe Churches which doe challenge vnto them ſelues the name of the Churche, is that one true churche; which doubt will eaſelie be cleared by the notes and markes fololwinge.
            
               Vniuerſalitie. Catho: Poſitions.
               The true Churche of Chriſt is Catholique or vniuerſall aſwell in reſpect of place, as of tyme, That is: the true church of Chriſt hath euer continued ſince his gloriouſe aſcention into heauen till this day, and shall doe till the end of the world: which is to be Catholique or vniuerſall in reſpect of time. And it hathe or shalbe ſpred throughe all kingdomes and countries, that are vnder heauen; which is to be vniuerſall or Catholique in reſpect of place.
            
            
               Proofe in reſpect of place.Pſal. 2. vſ. 8.
               
               
                  Aske of me and I will giue thee the
                  
                  gentiles for thin inheritance, & thy poſeſsione
                  In hunc Pſalme 
                  the endes of the earthe. By this promiſe of god to Chriſt S. Auguſtine conuīceth the Donatiſtes and in them the Proteſtātes, that they haue not the true Chruche, becauſe theyrs is not vniuerſall in ſuch ſorte as here is promiſed.
               
                  2.Pſa. 27. vſ. 8.
                  
                  
                     He shall rule from ſea, to ſea; and from the riuer euen to the endes of the rounde worlde; Theſe Propheſies are clearely vnderſtoode of the inheritance and kingdome, that is, the Churche of Chriſt as he is man: Accordinge to which propheſiesMath. cap. 18. vſ. 18. 19. our ſauiour ſaythe; All power is giuen me in heauen and in earthe. Goeinge therfore teache yee all nationes: baptiſinge them in the name of the father and of the ſonn and of the holy ghoſt.
                  
               
               
                  3.
                  You shall receiue the vertue of theActes cap. 1. vſ. 8. holy Ghoſt comminge vppon you, and you shall be witneſſes vnto me in Hierusalem,

and in all Ieury and Samaria,Con. Petilian lib. 2. cap. 38. and euen to the vtmoſt of the earthe. See Sainct Auguſtine Learned reader if thou pleas.
                  
               
            
            
               Proofe in reſpect of tyme.
               
                  1. In the dayes of thoſe Kingdomes,
                     Daniell. cap. 2. vſ. 44 
                     the god of heauen will rayſe vp a Kingdome that shale not be diſsipated for euer, and this Kingdome shall not be deliuered to another people.
                  
                  2. And he shall reigne in the howſe
                     Luc. cap. 1. vſ. 33. Mathe. 28. vſ. 20. Mathe cap. 16. vſ. 18. 
                     of Iacob for euer, of his Kingdome there shall be no ende.
                  
                  3. Behould I am with you all dayes, euen to the conſummation of the world.
                  
                  4. Vppon this Rock will I build my Churche, and the gates of hell shall not preuayle agaynſt it.
                  
               
               
                  A faithful ſayinge (Saith Sainct
                  Oratione qnod Chriſtus ſit vnus. 
                  Athanas.) and not à waueringe promiſe. and the Church is an inuincible thinge althoughe hell it ſelf should be moued.
               
               The vniuerſalitie of the church, all chriſtians profeſſ to beleeueī
                  
the creed of the Apoſtles and of the firſt councell of Conſtantinople, ſayinge, I beleeue the holy Catholique church.
               
            
            
               proteſ. pos.
               The ttue Churche of Chriſt is not neceſſarily Catholique or vniuerſall; nether in reſpect of place nor tyme. This poſitione moſt cleerely againſt holy Scripturs muſt the Proteſtantes defende, and proue, yf they will proue and defende theyre Churche to be the true Churche of god and conſequentlye theyr religione to be true. Viſibilitie.
            
            
               Catho. pos.
               The true Churche of god ys viſible and apparant, both to the faithfull beleeuers, that are in it, and to heretiques, and thoſeMathe. cap. 5. vſ. 15. Pſal. 13. that are out of it.
            
            
               Proof. 1.
               A Citie cannot be hid, ſituated vpon à mountayne.
               He put his tabernacle in the Sunn. S. Auguſtine proueth our poſitione by theſe textes: ſay inge, The true churche is hid to no

man: whence is that which he [ourContra literas petibani lib. 2. cap. 32. ſauiour] Sayth in the Gospell, A Citie ſett vppon à mountane cannot be hidd, And therfore is it ſayd in the Pſalme: hee hathe put his tabernacle in the ſunn, that is in manifeſt.
            
            
               2.
               
                  In the latter dayes the mountayne
                  Iſay. c. 2. vſ. 2. 
                  of the howſe of our lorde, shall be prepared, in the top pof mountaynes, and it shalbe eleuated aboue the little hilles, and all nationes shall flowe vnto it.
               
            
            
               3.
               Men doe not light à Candell and.Mathe. cap. 5. vſ. 16. put it vnder a bushell, but Vpon à Candleſticke. To theſe textes doth S. Auguſtine allude, when
                  Tract. 2. vppon the. Epiſt of S. Iohn. 
                  he ſaythe; what ells am I to ſaye then, that they are blinde that doe not ſee ſo great à mountayne that shutt theyre eyes againſt the lampe ſett vppon the candleſticke?
            
            
               4.
               
                  If thy brother offende againſt thee
                  Mathe. 19. vſ. 17. 
                  tell the churche; therfore muſt it of neceſſitie be apparent and visible.
            
            
               
               5.
               The Churche conſiſtethe of Paſtores and sheepe, Superiors, or rulers, and ſubiectes. And he
                  Ephes. cap. 4. vſ. 11. firſt to the co
                        ••
                     . cap. 12. vſ. 18. 
                  gaue ſome Apoſtles, and ſome Prophetes, and other ſome Euangeliſtes, & other ſome paſtores and Doctores▪
                  
               
               
                  Are all Appoſtles? are all Prophetes? are all Doctores? But ſuperiores and ſubiectes, muſt be Knowne to one another, as alſo Paſtores, and theyre sheepe. Therfore muſt the Churche of neceſſitie be viſible and apparent.
            
            
               Protestantes. poſit.
               The true Church of god is not neceſſarily viſible nor apparent, ether to the faithfull beleeuers that are in it, or to heretiques and thoſe that are out of it. This poſition muſt the Proteſtantes alſo proue and defend, though directly againſt the holy Scriptures, vnleſs they will confeſs their church not to be the

true Church as (if the Scriptures be true) it cannot be: ſeeinge that before Luther it ether was not at all, or was inuiſible, and therfore no true church of Chriſt.
            
            
               Catholique. Poſiti.
               The true church of Chriſt can neuer want à lawfull perſonall ſucceſſion of Paſtors from herSucceſſion. firſt inſtitution till the end of the world.
            
            
               Proofe. 1.
               And he gaue ſome Apoſtles andEpheſia. 4. vſ. 11. 12. 13. ſome Prophets, and otherſome Euangeliſtes, and otherſome paſtores, and Doctores. To the conſummation of the ſaintes vnto the worke of the miniſterie, vnto the edifyinge of the bodye of Chriſt. Vntill we meete all in the vnitie of faythe. Loe here Paſtores giuen for the Churche till all meete in vnite of faythe which is till the ende of the worde.
               
            
            
               2.Mathe. 28. 19. 20.
               
               
                  Goinge teache all nationes baptiſeinge them in the name of the Father
                  
                  &c. and behoulde I am with you all dayes, euen to the conſummation of the worlde. Loe here Chriſt promiſeth to be with the paſtores of the Churche, whom he ſendethe, all dayes till the ende: therfore there shall alwayes be paſtores.
            
            
               3Pſal 44▪ vſ.
               
               
                  For thy Fathers there are borne ſonnes to thee thou shalt make them princes ouer all the earthe: VnderſtoodeVpon this Pſalme tovvardes the ende. by S. Auguſtine, of the ſucceſſione of paſtores in the churche Sayinge.
               
                  The Apoſtles begott thee (ô Chriſtian Churche) they were ſent, they preached, they are thy fathers. But could they bee alwayes corporally with vs? could any of them tarye here till this tyme? could they tarie till the time yet to come? But was therfore the Churche left deſolate by theyr departure? God forbidd. For thy fathers ſonnsare borne to thee, what is this for thy
                  
                  fathers ſonnes are borne to thee? The Aposſtles were sēt fathers: inplace of the Aposſtles ſonnes are borne to the: Biſhoppes are appointed. For whence were the Biſhoppes borne that are att this daye in the worlde? the church her ſelfe callethe them fathers, ſhee begate them and appoynted them in the ſeates of the fathers. Doe not therfore think thyſelf deſolate (O Chriſtiā church) becauſe thou ſeeſt not Peter, ſeeſt not Paule; for thou ſeeſt not them by whome thou waſt borne, but of thyn iſſue, fatherhoode is ſpronge to thee. For thy fathers ſonnes are borne to thee, thou ſhalt make them princes ouer all the earthe This is the Catholique church. Her children are made princes ouer all the earthe: her ſonnes are conſtituted for fathers: lett them acknowledge this that are cut of: let them come to the vnitie: be they brought into the temple of the kinge Thus S. Auguſtin.
            
            
               prote. pos
               The true church of Chriſte may be without a lawfull personnall

ſucceſſion of Paſtores. This poſition they muſt alſoe proué or ells theyr church cannot be anie true churche.
               For they cannot shew any Paſtores of theyr religion before Luther to whom he ſucceeded.
            
            
               Catho. poſ.
               This lawfull ſucceſſion of Paſtores in gods churche is not withovt conſecration and authenticall miſſion or ſendinge by an ordinarye power reſiding in the churche.
            
            
               Proofe. 1.
               when they (S. S. Paule and Barnabas)
                  act. cap. 13. vſ. 22. had ordayned to them Prieſtes in eueri churche and had prayed with faſtinge they commended them to our lord in whom they beleeued.
            
            
               2.
               
                  Nether doth any man take the honoure
                  Hebru: cap. 5. vſ. 4. (of prieſthoode) to himſelf but he that is called of god as Aaron. Note that if Luther, Caluī, and Beza, with the reſt who ſay they are

called of god as Aaron: can ſhewe the like proofes of theyre calling that Aaron did: and beſides the externall conſecratiō which he alſo had notwithſtanding his internall callinge of god: they ſhalbe beleeued to haue godes caling. Tough Aaron being the firſt of his order, and therfore could not haue his callinge by ſucceſſion his caſe is farr vnlike to our newe mayſters; vnleſſ they will cōfeſſ a truthe and ſaye, that they are alſo the firſt of their order, wherin they ſhalbe beleeued, and therby conuinced, not to be preachers of Chriſt, but of themſelues, becauſe they haue no miſſion from him, but come of them ſelues beinge ſent by none.
            
            
               3.
               Howe ſhall they beliue himRo. cap. Vſ. 14. 15. whom they haue not hard? And howe ſhall they heare without a preacher? But howe ſhall they

preach vnleſſ they be ſent. Amen Amen I ſaye vnto you, he that
                  10. cap. 10. Vſ. 1. 2. 
                  entereth not by the dore, (that is by the ordinarie waye) into the fould of the ſheepe, but climethe vp another way he is a theefe and a robber. But hee that enterethe by the Dore is the Paſtore of the ſheepe.
               
               
                  The Prophets propheſie lyes in my
                  Hiere. cap. 14. vſ. 14. 
                  name, I haue not ſent them. I haue not ſent theſe Prophets, yet they rann. with many ſuch like wherbyHiere. 23 vſ. 21. it appeareth that we are not to beleeue euerie one that pretē
                  deth to come from god, vnleſſ they ſhew their miſſion, and cō
                  miſſiō. To which purpoſe heare this notable ſaying of the auncient Ireneus. It beho
                        •
                     uethe to obaie
                  lib. 4. cap. 43. att. the ende. 
                  thoſe prieſtes, that are in the churche, thoſe who haue the ſucceſsion from the Apoſtles, as we haue ſhewed who together with Epiſcopalitie, haue receiued accordinge to the will of the father, the aſſured certayne gift of truthe. But to
                  
                  ſuſpect the reſt that ſtande of from the originall ſucceſsion in what place ſoeuer the are aſſembled, ether as heretique
                        •
                      and of bad doctrine, as makeinge ſchiſme, and as highe mynded and pleaſinge themſelues: and of S. Cypriane▪
               
               
                  If the church was with Cornelius wh
                        •
                     
                  
                  Lib. 1. epla. 6. 
                  ſucceeded the Biſhope Fabiane, and whome beſide the honoure of Preiſtho
                        ••
                      our lord glorified with martyrdome
                        •
                      Nouatian is not in the church, nor ca
                        •
                      he be eſteemed à Biſhope, who dispiſing euangelicall and apoſtolicall tradition, ſucceeding to none is ſprong
                        •
                      out from himſelfe. For nether can 
                        〈◊〉
                      haue or houlde by any meanes the churche who is not ordered in the churche.
               
            
            
               Proteſtantes. Pos.
               The lawfull ſucceſſion of Paſtores in gods churche, may be with out conſecration, and authenticall miſſion or ſending by any ordinarie power reſiding in the churche.
            
         
         
            
            THE SIXTHE CONtrouerſie of the ſupremicie of S. Peter and of the Pope or Biſhope of Rome.
            
               Catho. Poſitions. 1
               SAint Peter was by our ſauiour Chriſt conſtituted ſupreme head and ſouraigne Biſhope or Paſtoure ouer his whole churche militant.
            
            
               Proofe. 1.
               Our ſauiour ſayd to S. Peter
                     Io: 21. v. 17. 1▪
                   
                  Symon of Ihon loueſt thou me? Feede my ſheepe: a ſpeeche directed to S. Peter and to no other of the Apoſtles: containing charge, to feede as a ſhepherde doth his sheepe all chriſtes flok whithout exceptiō: ſo vnderſtood by S. Cipriā ſayinge. To Peter our lord after his reſurrection
                  De vnitate Ec- 
                  ſayde, feede my ſheepe and builded
                  
                  his churche vpon him alone, and to him he gaue charge of feeding his ſehepe By S. Chriſoſtome: he gaue him
                  Hom. 1. depenit. [S. Peter] the primacie & gouernment of the churche thrughe the whol world & which is aboue all he sheweth him to haue loued our lord more thē All the Apoſtles ſayinge. Peter loueſt thou me more thē theſe. Our ſauiour ſayth to S Peter Thou art Peter & vpon this rock wil
                        •
                     
                  
                  Mathe 16. v. 18. 
                  I builde my churche. Note that accordinge to the Greke & Siriake text theſe wordes ſound thus, thou art a rocke and vpon this rocke I wil builde my churche, which is alſo the true sēſe of the vulgare latī. Here did our ſauiour chriſtmanifeſtly promiſe to S. Peter ſouerayntie ouer his churche. For the foundation is to à buildinge, the ſame that the heade or prince is in a kingdome or common wealth. Thus doth S.In Anccorato. Epiphanius vnderſtand theſe

wordes ſayinge. Our lord him ſelfe hath conſtituted him [S. Peter] the firſt of his Apoſtles, the firme rocke vpon which the churche of god is built. To theſe wordes alſo manifeſtly alludeth the holy generall councell of Calcedon, in the ſentence of cōdemnatione againſt Dioſcorus, ſayinge. Leo the moſt holy &
                  Coū
                     
                        •
                     ell. of Caledon. actiones. 3. 
                  bleſſed Archebiſhope of great and aū
                     cient Rome by vs and by this preſēt holi ſynode, together with the thriſe moſt bleſsed and all prayſe worthye S. Peter whoe ys the Rock and very topp of the Catholique Churche, & he which is the foundatione of true faithe hathe spoyled him [Dioſcorus] of all epiſcopall dignitie.
               
               Our ſauiour ſayth to S. PeterMath
                        •
                     . 16. 
                  I will giue to thee the keyes of the kingdome of heauen: wher is alſo moſt clerely ſignified S. Peter his preheminence in godes churche; For none hath the gouernement or commaundemēt of the Keyes of any towne or citie, but

the prince or gouernour of the ſame: & that ſoueraygne power is ſignified by the Keyes, it is proued by that of our ſauiour Chriſte. I haue the keyes of death and
                  Apoc. 1. v. 18. Apoc. 3. v. 7. 
                  hell. That is the rule and prower ouer deathe and hell. And agayn Hee that hath the Keye of Dauide he that ſhuteth and noe man openeth.
               
               S. Peter practiſed the authoritie of ſupreame paſtoure, in declaringe Iudas to haue fallenAct. cap 1. v. 15. vnto the 26. from his Apoſtleship, and propoſinge another to be choſen in his roome: Peter riſinge vp in the mideſt of the bretherē ſayd: & as foloweth. S. Chriſoſtome vnderſtā
                  dingeIn hunc locum. it ſo ſaythe; How feruent is he? how he acknowledgethe the flocke committed by chriſt? how he is prince of this company? and in euery place begineth the firſt to ſpeak. His ſupremicie was acknowledgedGala. 1 vſ. 18. by S. Paule goeinge to Hieruſalem to ſee him. Then after
                  
                  three yeares I came to Hieruſalem to ſee Peter. S. Chriſoſtome vnderſtandethHom: 87. in Ihoan. it ſo, ſayinge, Peter was the mouthe of the Apoſtles, prince and topp of that companye, therfore alſo Paule goethe vp to ſee him beſide the others.
               
            
            
               Catho. pos. 
                     •
                  .
               The Pope or Biſhope of Rome is the law full and lineall ſucceſſoure of S. Peter in that charge and office which our ſauioure gaue vnto S. Peter ouer his churche militant.
            
            
               Proofe.
               The power which our ſauioure gaue to S. Peter ouer his churche militante was giuen him, as likewiſe the power giuen to other Apoſtles: to the conſūmation
                  Epheſiās cap. 4. vſ. 12. 13. 
                  of the ſaintes, to the edif
                        •
                     nge of the bodye of Chriſt. vntill we all meete in the vnitie of ſaith & knowledge of the ſonn of god. as S. Paule teſtifiethe, and therfore to continue in the churche, ſoe longe as the churche is to continue.
               
                  which is alſo prooued by that: Vpon this Rocke will I build my churche, and by that: feed my sheepe: for ſo longe as the buildinge of the churche cōtinueth, or the flock of chriſte is to be fed which will be to the end of the world: ſo long muſt the rock wherupon the churche is built, and the paſtours who muſt feede the shepe continue: But this cannot be in S. Peters perſonn: therfore in his ſucceſſoures: ſee S. Auguſtin his wordes before in that poſitione, that the true churche can neuer want a lawfull perſonnall ſucceſſione, of paſtores, vpon theſe wordes of the pſalme 44. For thy fathers are borne ſonnes to thee.
               
               And S Chriſo. who. ſaith: whyLib. 2. de Sace. did oure lord shed his blood? ſurely to redeeme thoſe sheepe the cure wherof he commited to Peter, ād alſo to his ſucceſſoures
               
                  Now, that the Bishope of Rome is the lawfull and lineall ſucceſſoure of S. Peter is as authentically and euidently proued as that Lewis the 13. of France is lineall ſucceſſoure to Hughea. lib. 3. cap. 3. b. lib. 2. againſt parmea niane c. hereſie. 27. d. epla. 65. Capet or his maieſtié of Ingland to wiliam the cōquerour S. Ireneus, Optatus, S. Epiphanius, and S. Auguſtin, doe deriue the ſucceſſione of the bishopes of Rome from S. Peter vntill the biſhopes that liued 
                     •
                   theyr tymes. Beſides Euſebius,1 or S. Hieroſme, Prosper, and all ſuch as haue written the cronicles of eccleſiaſticall affayres, doe not omitt to continue the Bishopes of Rome vntill theyranſvver to a coū
                     terfaite cathopa. 27. owne dayes And ſoe wel is this ſucceſſione knowne that M. Fulke ſayethe, wee can coumpt it on our fingares.
               
               And S. Auguſtine doubteth not to ſaye, that the ſucceſsion of preiſtes
                  
                  from the ſeat of Peter, (to whom our
                  Contra epla
                        •
                     n. fundamenti. cap. 4. 
                  lorde after his reſurrection commended his sheepe to be fed) vntil that preſent Bishopp held him within the lapp of the churche.
               
            
            
               Protes. pos. 1.
               S. Peter was not by our ſauiour our Chriſt conſtituted ſupreme head and ſoureygne paſtoure or Bishop ouer his churche militant.
               2. The Pope or Bishope of Rome is not lawfull and lineall ſucceſſoure to S. Peter in that charge and office which our ſauiour gaue to S. Peter ouer his churche militante.
            
         
         
            
            THE SEAVENTH Controuerſie of the honoure due vnto the holy Angells and Saintes in heauen.
            
               Catho. pos. 1.
               TO the holy Angelles and ſaintes in heauen is due more then ciuil honoure and reuerence.
            
            
               Proofe. 1.
               To mee thy frendes (ô godPſalme. 138. vſ. 17. are exceedingly honorable: loe here Dauid beinge 
                     •
                  inge, auowethe that the frendes of god are greatly to be honoured, by him: Certes not with ciuill honoures for ſuche he ought not to them he beinge kinge, and the frendes of god, beinge allIo: cap. is v. 14. thoſe that doe the thinges he

cōmaūdeth (as our ſauiour teſtifiethe)
                     
                        •
                     ſ. 13. of what condition or degree ſoeuer.
            
            
               2.
               
                  where this Goſpell shalbe preached
                  Math. 26. vſ. 13. 
                  in the whole worlde, that alſo which ſhee hath done, shalbe toulde for a memorie of her.
               
               Loe here an exeeding honoure decreed by our ſauiour him ſelf to S. Marie Magdaleyne. whereLuc. cap 22. vſ. 19. is to be noted, that this is cōmaū
                  ded to be done in memorie of her in like manner of ſpeeche as our ſauiour commaunded the holy miſteries to be celebrated in memorie of him.
            
            
               3.
               
                  Ioſue beinge in the feild of the citie of hiericho,
                  Ioſue. cap. 5. vſ. 13. 
                  ſaw a man ſtādinge againſt him, how ldinge a drawne ſworde, and he went nere to him, and ſayde, art thou oures, or our aduerſaries? who anſwered noe: but I am a prince of the hoſt of our lorde. Ioſue fell flatt downe to the grounde, and adoreinge he ſayd, what ſpeaketh the lord to his ſeruant? looſe
                  
                  ſayth he thy shooe from thy foote for the place where in thou ſtandeſt is holy. And he did as he was commaunded Loe here the Angell not onely adored to the grounde but alſo the ground it ſelf nere where he ſtoode duely reuerenced for respect of him.
            
            
               Proteſt. pos.
               To the Angelles and Saintes in heauen is due no other honoure or reuerence then ciuil.
            
         
         
            THE EYGHTETH CONtrouerſie. Of prayer to the holy angells and ſaintes in heauen.
            
               Catho. pos.
               TO pray to the Angelles or ſaintes in heauen doth not derogate anie whitt at all from our ſauiour Chriſt his office of mediatoure.
            
            
               Proofe. 1.
               S. Paule prayeth to the RomāsRom. cap. 15. vſ. 30. in this ſorte. I beſeeche you brethren
                  
                  by our lord Ieſus Chriſt, and by the charitie of the holy ghoſt, that you helpe me in your prayres for me to god.
               
               The like he hath to the Epheſianes. cap. laſt v. 19. the firſt to the Theſalo: cap 5. and elles where often. But if the prayer to ſaintes on earthe do the not derogat from the mediatorſhipe of Chriſt: certes the prayers made to them in heauen cannot.
               Agayne Iacob prayed to hisGeneſis. cap. 48. vſ. 16. good Angell in this ſorte: The Angell that deliuereth me from all euilles: bieſs theſe children.
               
            
            
               Catho. pos.
               The ſaintes in heauen doe heare our prayers and vnderſtande our perticuler eſtates ther fore it is not idle or in vaine to pray to thē, as thoughe they did nether,
            
            
               Proofe.
               
                  They are as the Angelles of god in
                  Matth. 
                        •
                     . 22. v. 
                        •
                     0. Luc. c. 20. vſ. 
                  heauen. They are equall to the Angelles. but the Angelles Knowe our

particuler eſtates: ſee that you diſpiſe
                  36. c. Matt. cap. 18. vſ 10. d. Luc. cap. 15. vſ. 10. 
                  not one of theſe little ones (ſaith our ſauiour Chriſt) For I ſaye vnto you that theyre Angells in heauē doe alwayes ſee the face of my father which is in heauen. yea they knowe our ſecret thoughts: I ſaye to you, there ſhalbe ioye before the Angelles of god vpon one ſinner that doth pennance.
               
               The ſaintes haue power ouerApocal. cap. 3. vſ 26. 27. nationes to rule them, therfore doe they know theyre eſtates. He that ſhall ouercome and keepe my wordes vnto the ende I will giue him (ſayth our ſauioure) power ouer nationes, and he ſhall rule them with a rodd of Iron.
               
            
            
               Catho. pos. 3.
               God doth ſomtymes heare & accepte the prayers of his ſeruāds or ſaintes for a nother man, whē he will not heare that man prayinge for hymſelfe: therfore is it profitable to praye vnto them.
               
                  God ſayd to Eliphas the Themanite
                  Iob laſt. cap. vſ. 7 
                  my ſurye is wrothe againſt thee and thy
                  
                  two freindes. Take therfore vnto you
                  8. 9. 10. 
                  ſeauen oxen and ſeauē Rāmes, & goe to my ſeruande Iob and offer holocauſt for your ſelues, and my ſeruande Iob ſhall pray for you, his face I will receaue, that the folly be not imputed vnto you. They went and did as our lorde had spoken to them, and our lorde receaued the face of Iob. Our lord alſo was tourned at the penance of Iob whē he prayed for his freindes.
               
               
                  Againe, Pray one for a nother that
                  Iam. cap. 5. vſ. 16. 
                  you may be ſaved: for the cōtinuall prayer of a iuſt man auayleth much.
               
               I alledge not the fathers teſtimonie for prayer to ſaintes they beinge confeſſed by the learned proteſtantes to haue taught that Doctrine; namely Fulke ſaythe: In Naziāzen, Baſile and Chriſostome,
                  2. pet. cap. 1. ſec. 3. reminder to Briſto. 3. pa. 
                  there is ſome mentione of the inuocatione of ſaintes to help vs with theyr prayers The like he confeſſeth of Ambroſe Auſtine and Hierome. So that wee ſee the doctrine of the

Greke and latin churche in this pointe (by the cōfeſſione of one of our ſeuereſt aduerſaries) to haue bene 1200. yeares agoe the ſame with the doctrine of the preſent churche of Rome.
            
            
               Proteſt. pos.
               To praye to the ſaintes or Angelles in heauen doth derogate from the office of mediatour of our ſauiour Chriſt.
               2. The ſaintes in heauen doe not heare our prayers, nor know our particuler eſtates, or neceſſities, and therfore is it in vayne to pray to them.
               3. God doth neuer accepte of the prayers of his ſaintes offered for another man, when he doth not accept of the ſame mans prayers for him ſelfe.
            
         
         
            THE NINTH CONTROuerſie of holi Reliques.
            
               Catho. poſi. 1.
               God doth honor the Reliques of ſaintes by working miraculouſe thinges by them to his owne

glorye, the honoure of the ſaintes, the benefit of man, and the edification of his churche: and therfore are they to be honoured and reuerenced by faithfull Chriſtianes.
            
            
               Proofe. 1.Actes. cap. 19. vſ. 
                        •
                     18.
               
               There were brought from his [S. Paule] bodye napkins, and hand kercheeſes vpon the ſike and the diſeaſes departed from them; and the wicked ſpirites went out.
            
            
               2.
               
                  They did bringe forth the sicke into ſtreetes
                  Actes cap. 5. vſ. 15. 
                  and lead them in beddes and couches that whē Peter came, his ſhadowe at the leaſte might ouer ſhadowe anie of them, & they all might be deliuered from there infirmities.
               
            
            
               3.
               
                  Certayne perſones buryinge a man
                  4. of the 
                        •
                     imges. cap. 13. vſ. 21. 
                  ſawe the rouers; and threwe the bodie in the ſepulcher of Eliſeus, which when it had touched the bones of Eliſeus, the man reuiued and ſtoode vpon his feet.
               
               
                  For the teſtimonie of the fathersThe. 22. booke of the cit. e of god. cap. 8. in this pointe I wil onely alledg S. Auguſtine, whom vn
                  
                     •
                  eſſ our aduerſaries dare condemne both of erroure in Iudgment and falſitie in hiſtorie, they muſt needes confeſſ that holy reliques in his tyme, were had in great and publique honoure and reuerence. The reader that deſirethe to ſee or heare himſelf ſpeake, muſt be content to turne the booke himſelf, for this wordes, to this purpoſe, are ouer Pro
                  
                     •
                  ix to be inſerted in this briefe treatiſe.
               The Doctrine and practiſe ofExam. 4. partē. ſec haec gentilia. ancient churche is ſoe euident in this pointe, that Chemnitins a renowmed proteſtant is forced to, write in this ſort. Of tranſlation of riliques followed the caryinge them about in proceſſiones, as is mentioned by Hierome againſt Vigilantius: And by Auguſtine when in the tranſlatione of
                  
                  the reliques of Steuen, à blinde woman receaued her ſight, Lucilius the Biſhope ſtreyght ordayned the carieing abont of the Reliques of Steuen. And be cauſe ſometimes certayne miracles were done at the reliques: all per sōne
                        •
                      in any īfirmitie or neceſsite, what ſoeuer rann to them. Auguſtine mentioneth that flowers and otherthinges: Ambroſe that garmentes caſt vpon the ſepulchers, or cofines of martyres were caried by Chriſtianes, as defenſes and preſeruatiues frō euill; They did think that the martyres them ſelues were preſent with theyre aſhes. Nor did they call vpon god onely, but the very martyres did they inuccate at theyre reliques: and thinkinge grace and heauenly vertue, to reſide in theyre bones by prayer and other worſhippe did they ſeeke them at reliques: As Baſile diſcourſethe vpon the Pſalme. 115. Nor did they ſeeKe theyr onely corporall cures: but did imagine that spirituall graces, as holineſs and charitie was giuen and
                  
                  creaſed by tovching and Kiſsing of liques as Nyſſenus doth gloriouſlie 
                        •
                     eache of Theodore the martyr: with any other thinges to the ſame 
                     •
                  urpoſe.
            
            
               Protes. poſiti.
               God doth not honoure the re
                  
                     •
                  ques of ſaintes by worKeinge 
                     •
                  y miraculous thinges by them 
                     •
                  her to his owne glorie, the 
                     •
                  onoure of the ſaintes, the be
                  
                     •
                  efit of man, or the edification of his churche: or thoughe he 
                     •
                  oe, yet are not the reliques of 
                     ••
                  intes for all that to be honou
                  
                     •
                  ed or reuerenced. 2.
            
         
         
            THE TENTHE CONtrouerſie of holy images
            
               Catho. poſi. 1.
               THe images of holy perſonnes may with out feare of idolatrie or anie other inconuenience be placed in churches, and oratories.
            
            
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               Proofe. 1.
               Two Cherubins thou shalt makeExodus. cap. 25. vſ. 18. 19. 20. beaten golde on both ſides of the oracle. Lett one cherubin be on the one ſi
                     •
                   and the other on the other, lett them couer both ſides of the propitiatorie, ſpreadinge theire winges and coueringe the vaile, and lett them looke one towardes the other, theire faces turned vn
                     •
                   the propitiatorie wher with the Ark
                     •
                   is to be couered. Loe here the commaundement of god himſelfe for the placeinge of holy images, in the moſt holy place of the temple or tabernacle, not with ſtādinge that the jewes were moſt prone vnto idolatric.
               
            
            
               2.
               All the walles of the temple rounde3. of the kinge. cap. 6. vſ. 28. 29. aboute 
                     •
                  e graued with diuers engraueinge and caruinge and hee made in them Cherubins and Palme trees and diuers Pictures, as it were ſtanding
                     •
                   out of the wall, and cominge forthe:

                  
                     
                        •
                     e here holy images made in the 
                        •
                     mple with out anie expreſſ cō
                     
                     
                        •
                     aundinge of god.
               
            
            
               3.
               
                  Our lorde ſayde to Moyſes make a
                  Nübres cap. 21 vſ. 8. 
                  
                     
                        •
                     aſen ſerpent and ſet it for a ſigne: that beinge ſtriken looketh vpon it all liue.
               
            
            
               Catho. poſ. 2.
               The jmages of holy persōnes 
                     •
                  ay and ought to be honoured reuerenced and worſhiped.
            
            
               Proofe.
               The holy Scriptures approuue 
                     •
                  nd commaunde honoure and euerence to be done to diuers thinges, for the ſole reſpect and 
                     •
                  elatione which they haue to ho 
                     •
                  y perſonnes, thoughe nether ſoe euident, nor ſo naturall as the reſpecte which images haue to the perſonnes whome they represēt: therfore is it euident, that they approue and cōmaund the liKe to be done to them.
               
                  Adore you his footeſtoole becauſe it is
                  Pſulme.
                  
                  holi. The Rabins by the foo
                     •
                  
                  9. vſ. 5. ſtoole vnderſtand the Arke of the owld teſtament, which therfo
                     ••
                   according to this commaundement they adored.
               
                  I will adore towarde the holi temple,
                  Pſalme. 5 vſ. 9. 
                  thy feare. Loe here adoration o
                     •
                   the temple for reſpect of god whoſe how ſe it is.
               
                  God hath giuen him a name which
                  Philipē cap. 2. vſ. 10. 
                  aboue all names: that in the name IESVS euerie knee bowe of the celeſtialls tereſtr
                        •
                     alles and infernales. Lo
                     •
                   here reuerence commaunded to be done to the holy name of I
                     •
                  
                  SVS.
               
                  Loſe of thy shooe from thy foote, for
                  
                     Exodus. cap. 3. vſ. 5. Ioſue. cap. 5. vſ 13. 
                  the place wherein thou ſtandeſt is ho
                        •
                      grounde, Loe here reuerence cō
                  maūded to be done to the groū
                  de neere where the Angell ſtood onely in reſpect of his preſence there.
               
                  woe to you blinde guides that ſai
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     Matthe. cap. 23. vſ. 19. 17 
                  whoſoeuer shall sweare by the temple
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     t is nothinge, but he that shall ſweare by the gold in the temple is bownde 
                        •
                     ee blinde, for whether is greater the gold or the temple that ſanctificthe the gold. Loe here the gold in the temple ſanctified, for beinge in the temple, and therfore deſerueth reuerence, but much more the temple it ſelfe.
               Now e let the iuditions reader conſider, whether the image of anie perſonne hath not a more nee
                     •
                  e and euident relation and reſpect unto the perſonne repreſented by it; then theſe thinges which the holy Sripture auoweth & cōmaundeth to be honoured forthe reſpecte which they haue to ſome perſone worthye of honoure. And yf he finde that they haue ſo in deede, as doubtleſſ they haue: and further, if the persōnes repreſented by the images deſerue honoure and reuerence (as is proued before that

the ſaintes and Angelles doe then vnleſſ he be depriued of the light of naturall reaſon, he cannot denye but ſuch holy images may and ought to be honoured and reuerenced in regarde of the persōnes represēted by thē. whic
                     •
                   yet is made more playneby this reaſon. The iniurie or contumelie done to the image of any perſonne, is by all men eſteemed to redounde to the iniurie or cō
                  tunielie of the persōne repreſented by it, which (to omitt infinit other proofes) is euident by the wrathe and indignatione which Theodoſius a good & wiſe prince, conceaued againſt the citezensTheodo. 5. booke ofhis hiſtorie cap. 19. of Antioche for caſtinge downe his wifes ſtatua: which iniurie he had reuenged with the ruine of the whole citie, yf he had not been preuented by the prudent & piouſe endeuoures of others. The curious reade

may ſee Euſebius of MaximinEuſeb. lib 9. cap. 9. his ſtatua defaced in diſhonoure of the perſon and alſo Suetonius of the the like diſgrace shewed to Domitiane. The diſhonoure therfore done to the images, redownding to the perſonnes; the ſame muſt neceſſarily be ſayd of the honoure Vſed to them. And this is euidently true if all naturall reſon & diſcours be not falſe.Math. cap. 9.
               
               Of the woman cured of the bloodie flix wherof mention is made in the goſpell, it is recorded that returninge home, ſhee in memorie of that benefit, ſett vp an image of Chriſt, at theExſeb. lib. 7. cap. 14. foote whereof, grewe an herbe, which when it touched the hem of the image, cured all diſeaſes: which image Iuliane the Apoſtata threwe downe, and ſett vpp his owne in the place, which was īmediatly deſtroyed by fyre from heauen. But the Image of

Chriſt broken in peeces by the heathen: the Chriſtiannes after wardes gatheringe the peeces togeather, placed in the churche wher it was: as Sozomen writetheSozomē. lib. 5. cap. 20 vntill his tyme.
               Seeinge therfore god doth honoure holy images by doing miracles by them for our beuefit; why ſhould not wee alſo honoure them, with due reuerence and worſhipp, or rather the perſonnes repreſented by them?Exodus cap. 20. Therfore when god forbidethe the makeinge and adoreinge of any grauen thing, or any ſimilude; the meaning is only, that no ſuch thing ſhould be made o
                     •
                   adored as god; & not otherwiſe. For he himſelf hath commaunded both to make holy images and alſo to adore his footſtoole as is already ſhewed. In like manner therfore, as he torbideth to kill, not certes abſolutly, but by

priuate auctoritie, vpon reuenge, malice, or other vnlawfull cauſe. ſo doth he forbid to make and adore anie grauen thinge: not abſolutlye, but as a god. And for confirmation of this thou mayeſt note [prudent reader] that noe one Catholique father for theſe 1600. yeares hath euer vnder ſtoode this commaundement in that ſenſe which the proteſtantes would drawe it vnto: which is more then a probable argument that it is not the true ſenſe therof.Demoſt. of his proble
                        ••
                      title: ſi
                        •
                     num Crucis.
               
               For the teſtimonie of the fathers in this pointe: I will content my ſelfe with M. Parkins confeſſion: ſayinge that the croſſ begann to be adored about the 400. yeare of Chriſt. And thoughe fraudulently he ſay yt begann to be adored yet to the manifeſtation of his owne fraude doth hee bring diuers teſtimonies

of Prudētius, Hierome, Paulin, and others which manifeſtly ſhewe, that it was then in publique vſe, & not in begining only. Note, that what is ſay de of the honoure due to the cros may be ſayd of anie other holy image.
            
            
               Proteſtantes poſition.
               
                  1. The images of holy perſonnes may not without idolatrie or other inconuenience be made & placed in churches, oratories, or places of prayer.
                  2. The images of holy perſonnes may not, or ought not, to be honored, reuerenced, or worshiped.
               
            
         
         
            THE ELEVENTHE Controuerſie: Of Purgatorie.
            
               Catholique poſition.
               AFter this life there is a purgatorie, or place where the

ſoules of the faythfull, departinge out of this world Ī the ſtate of grace are detayned vntill they be wholly purged from all guilt and payne due vnto ſinn.
            
            
               Proofe. 1.
               
                  Hee that shall speake againſt the holy
                  Math. cap. 12. v. 32. 
                  ghoſt it shall not be forgiuen him nether in this world nor in the world to come. Hence it is manifeſt that ſome ſinnes are forgiuen in the world to come: not in heauen whither no ſinner entereth: nor in hell where there is no remiſſion, therfore in a third place which is Purgatorie, S. Auguſtin aludinge to this place expreſly ſayth that ſome ſinnes are remittedDeciuit lib. 21. cap. 13. in the next world.
            
            
               2.
               Bee att agrement with thy aduerſarie betymes whileſt thou art in the wayMa the. cap. 5. v. 25. 27 with him, lest perhappes thy aduerſarie deliuer thee to the iudg, and the

Iudge deliuer thee to the officers and thou be caſt into priſone. Amen I ſaye to thee thou shalt not goe from thence till thou repaye the laſt farthinge. To theſe wordes S. Cyprian
                  Epiſtle to Antonian. 
                  alludinge Sayth. Another thinge it is for him that is in priſon, not to goe out til he hath payde the laſt farthinge, another thinge preſently to receaue rewarde of faythe and Vertue: another thinge beinge by longe payne tormented: to be clenſed and purged by longe fire.
            
            
               3.
               The worke of eueire one ſhal be manifeſt for the day of our lorde will declare,1. Corin cap. 3. vſ. 13. becauſe it shal be reuealed in fire, and the worke of euerie one of what kinde it is the fire shall trye.
               Vf anie mans worke burae he shall ſuffer detriment: but hee himſelfe shalbevſ. 15. Vpon the Pſal. 37. ſaued, yet ſoe as by fire. S. Auguſtine Vnderſtandeth this place of Purgatorie, ſayinge yf they did build vpon the foundation gold, ſiluer, and pretions ſtones, they should be ſecure from

both fyres, not onely from that euerlaſting which shall torment the impiouſe eternally: but alſo from that which shall amende them that shalbe Saued by fire. For it is ſayd, hee shalbe ſafe yet ſoe as by fyer.
            
            
               Catholique Poſitions.2. Catho. poſ. 2.
               
               The ſoules in Purgatorie are holpen by the prayers, Sacrifices, and other workes of pietie done for them by the faithfull liuinge in this world: And therfore is it à good worke to praye for them.
            
            
               Proofe.
               
                  Otherwiſe what sh. il they doe that
                  1. Corin. cap. 15▪ vſ. 29. 30. 
                  are baptiſed for the dead, yf the dead riſe not agayne at all? why alſo are they baptiſed for them? By baptiſme here is vnderſtoode all corporall afflictione and chaſtiſement vndertaken for the departed; in like manner as it is vnderſtoodeMarc. cap. 10. vſ. 38 by our ſauiour when he ſay the, with the baptiſme wher with Iam

Baptiſed shall yee be baptiſed.
            
            
               2.
               
                  And (Iudas) makeinge a gatheringe
                  2. Machah. c. 12. vſ. 43. 44. 46. 
                  he ſent 12000. Drachmes of Siluer to Hieruſalem for ſacrifice to be offred for ſinne, well and religiouſlye thinking of the reſurrection (for vnleſs he hoped that they that were ſlayne, should riſe agayne, it should ſeeme ſuper ſtuouſe and vayne to pray for the dead) it is therfore a holy and healthfull cogitation to pray for the dead that they may be looſed from ſinnes.
               
               For the iudgment of the churche, in & before S. Auguſtines tyme, lett the induſtrius reader ſee the confeſſione of Chemnitius3. part. octaua. ſecte in his examen where he vndertaketh to diſpute againſt S. Auguſtine and S. Chriſoſtome of purgatoire & prayer for the dead.
            
            
               Proteſtant poſition.
               1. After his life there is no purgatorie or place where the ſoules of the faithfull, departed in

the ſtate of grace are purged ether from guilt or payn of ſinn.
               2. The ſowles in purgatorie are not holpen by the prayers, and other workes of pietie done for them, by the faithful liueinge in this worlde. And therfore it is att leaſt in vayne to pray for them.
            
         
         
            THE XII. CONTROuerſie of the Sacraments.
            
               Catholique poſition.
               THere are ſeauen Sacramēts of the newe lawe properly ſo called. That is ſeauen viſible or ſenſible ſignes, ordayned or inſtituted by our ſauiour Chriſt: wherby grace is giuen to thoſe that worthely receaue thē. The proteſtantes doe confeſſ that Baptiſme and the Euchariſt are properly ſacramentes, therfore are wee onely to proue the other fiue.
               
                  Note that as nether baptiſme nor the Euchariſt are in any place of holy ſcripture called or ſaid to be ſacramentes: and yet becauſe they are viſible or ſenſible ſignes, and ceremonies giueing grace (as the catholique churche beleeuethe: or ſignifyinge the ſame as the proteſtās teache) they haue euer in gods churche (euen by the confeſſion of our aduerſaries) beene truly called and eſteemed ſacramentes: ſoe likewiſe all other externall and ſenſible ſignes, or ceremonies proued by ſcriptures to haue the like effecte and haue beene called and eſteemed of the auncient churche ſacramentes: ought alſo of the proteſtātes to be acknowledged for ſuch: nether are they to require any other proofe for the other ſacraments, then they are able to produce for theſe two.
               
                  And albeyt the proteſtantes confeſſ with the Catholiques that Baptiſme and the holy Euchariſt are Properlie ſacramentes: yet doe they deny diuers thinges pertayninge to them which the Catholique churche tacheth: which are therefore to be ſpoken of before we proceede to the proofe of the other ſacramentes.
            
            
               
                  
                  OF THE NECESSItie of Baptiſme:
                  
                     Catholique poſition.
                     It is neceſſary for euerie mans ſaluation that he be baptiſed.Io. cap. 3. vſ. 5.
                     
                  
                  
                     Proofe.
                     A Men I ſay to thee, vnleſs a man be borne agayne of water and the ſpirit, the cannot enterinto the kingdome of god. S. Auguſtine numberethHereſe 88. amongeſt other hereſies of Pelagius this: that he promiſed eternall bliſſ though without the kingdome of god to infantes without Baptiſme.
                  
                  
                     Proteſtant poſition.
                     It is not neceſſarie for any mans ſaluation that he bee baptiſed.
                  
               
               
                  
                  OF THE CEREMOnies of Baptiſme.
                  
                     Catholique poſition.
                     THe exorciſmes and other ceremonies vſed by the Catholique churche in Baptiſme, haue example in the holy ſcripture and are agreable there vnto.
                  
                  
                     Proofe.
                     And takeinge him from the multitudeMarc. c. 7. vſ. 33. 34. apart, he put his fingers into his eares, and ſpitting, touched his tounge, And lookeinge vp to heauen, he groaned, and ſayd to him ephpheta whichFirſt booke of ſacrament. v. cap. 1. is, he thou opened. Sainct Ambros teſtifiethe theſe ceremonies to haue bine vſed in his tyme.
                     
                  
                  
                     Proteſtant poſition.
                     The exorciſmes and other ceremonies vſed by the churche in Baptiſme are diſagreable to holy ſcripture.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  OF THE HOLY EVchariſte, or moſt bleſſed Sacrament of the Aulter.
                  
                     Catholique Poſitions.
                     IN the holy Euchariſt, the true body and blood of our ſauiour Chriſt is truly, really and ſubſtantially, and not in figure only.
                  
                  
                     Proofe.
                     
                        Take yee and eate: This is my body.
                        Matth. cap. 26. vſ. 26. 27 28. Marc 14. v. 22 24. cap. 22. vſ. 19. 20. 
                        Drinke yee all of this. For this is my blood of the newe teſtamēt which shalbe shed for many vnto remiſsion of ſinnes Agayne.
                     
                        This is my body which is giuen for you. This is the chalice the newe teſtament in my blood which shall be shed for you. and yet agayne Our lord Ieſus in the night that he was betrayed
                        1. corint. cap. 11. vſ. 23. 24. 25. 
                        tooke breade: And giuinge thankes brake, & ſayd. Take yee, & eate: This is my body which shall be deliuered
                        
                        for you, this doe yee for commemoration of me. In like manner alſo the chalice after he had ſupped, ſayinge this chalice is the newe teſtament in my blood this doe yee as often as ye shall drinke, for the commemoration of me.
                     
                     Note that theſe wordes (this is my body) beinge vnderſtoode as they ſounde there can be no more controuerſie about this poynt: And that they are to be vnderſtoode as they ſounde, and without all figure, may be conuinced in this ſorte. There can nether reaſon nor aucthoritie be alledged why anie other wordes of holy ſcripture are to be vnderſtoode as they ſounde, and namely theſe wordes which areMatth. cap. 17. vſ. 5. moſt like them (This is my welbeloued ſonne) which doth not proue the ſame of theſe wherof we now ſpeake. Therfore without all ſenſe & reaſon, & merely of hereticall wilfulneſſ, is

a figure ſought in theſe Wordes, more then in any other, and namely in theſe I haue mentioned. But here I intēd not any further diſpute.
                  
               
               
                  OF TRANSVBST ANtiation.
                  
                     Catholique poſition.
                     THe worde Tranſubſtātiation is not founde expreſſly in holy ſcripture, as likewiſe is not cōſubſtantiall: but as the Catholique churche did euer beleeue the equalitie of power, & vnitie of ſubſtance in the Father, and the ſonne, and by the aſſiſtance of the holy ghoſt theIohn ca. 16. vſ. 13. ſpirit of truthe, which teacheth her all truthe did expreſſ her beleefe in that point, by the worde conſubſtantiall in the holy councell of Nice: ſo like wiſe

haueinge euer beleeued the true & reall preſence of Chriſtes body in the moſt holy euchariſt, by the change of the bread into the ſame body: did, (beinge aſſiſted by the ſame neuer fay linge ſpirit of truthe in the holy councel of Lateran firſt, and ſince in diuerſe others) expreſſ her beleif in that poynt, by the worde tranſubſtantiation, as moſt fitly declaringe the veritie of that moſt holy myſtery. Nether can the proteſtantes produce anie thing againſt tranſubſtantiation, which they themſelues are not bounde to ſolue and anſwere: the Arriannes obiectinge the very like againſt that of conſubſtantiall. That the doctrin of trā
                        ſubſtātion is not newe Adamus Franciſci a learned proteſtantMarga. theologi. pag. 256. (with others) confeſſeth in theſe words. The fiction of tranſubſtantiation crep into the churche betimes:
                        
And this shall ſuffice for this pointe till occaſion be giuen of a larger diſcours.
                  
               
               
                  OF ADORING THE holy Euchariſt.
                  
                     Catholique Poſitions.
                     OVr Sauioure Chriſt beinge noe leſſ truly preſent in the holy Euchariſt thē he was in the ſtable. in Bethelem, or vpon the croſſ, he is noe leſſ to be adored of all faithful chriſtians in the ſacrament, then he was there: or then beinge in the forme of a gardiner he was of S. Marie Magdalein.
                  
                  
                     Proofe.
                     Adore yee him all his Angells:Pſal 69 vſ. 8. which wordes S. Paule hebrwes cap. 1. vnderſtādeth of the ado
                        
                           •
                        ation

of Chriſt in his humanitié.
                     Adore yee the footſtoole ofPſalm. 98. v. 5. S. Auguſt. vpon that pla
                              •
                           
                         his feete. By which footſtoole S. Auguſtine vnderſtandeth the fleshe or bodie of our ſauiour Chriſt and ſaith, Becauſe he walked here in fleshe, and gaue the same fleshe to vs to be eaten for our Saluation: and no man eateth that fleshe vnleſſ he firſt adore it, it is foūde howe the footſtoole of our lord is adored.
                     
                     Certes he that acknowledgeth our ſauiour Chriſt truly preſent in the B. Sacrament and yet thinketh him not worthie of Adoration is more ſensleſſ and vnthankfull then that vngratfull kaytiff that ſeeinge his grations ſoueraigne cōming to viſit him in his vile cottage, should thinke him leſſ honorable for ſuche exceeding grace and fauoure.
                  
                  
                     Proteſtantes poſitions.
                     In the holy Euchariſt the true

body and blood of our ſauiou
                           •
                         Chriſt is not, truly, really an
                           •
                         ſubſtantially, but in figure only 2 The body of Chriſt is not i
                           •
                         the Euchariſt by tranſubſtantiatione.
                     3 He ys not to be adored in the Euchariſt.
                  
               
               
                  OF COMMVNION vnder one kinde.
                  
                     Catholique poſitions. 1.
                     IT is no where forbidden i
                           •
                         holy ſcripture to miniſter the holy communion to lay perſonnes vnder one Kinde onely. This Poſitione is clear no ſuch prohibitione appearing in the ſcripture. And yf the Proteſtātes growndes of beleeuinge nothinge but what is proued by ſcripture were true; would ſufficiently warrant the practiſe of the Roman

churche in this poynt. But 
                           •
                        urther.
                     It is no where commaunded 
                           •
                         holy ſcripture to giue the holy 
                           •
                        ommunion vnder both kindes 
                           •
                        o the laye people. This Poſiſion ys alſo cleare no ſuch commaundement anie where appearinge. For that which is ſayd: doe
                        Luc ca. 22. v. 19. 
                        
                           
                              •
                           his for remembrance of me: is ſpokē onely of the kinde of bread: and therfore doth well prouue the contraire: S. Paule in deed1 Corin. cap. 11. 
                        
                           •
                        ddeth it to both kindes: therby alſo declaringe this holy myſterie taken ether under both or one kinde, to be a memoriall of Chriſt, and his paſſione: and therfore doth rather proue the Catholique Roman practice, then anie waye diſproue yt. Thoughe theſe wordes, doe rather giue power and auctoritie to the Apoſtles & prieſtes, to conſecrate and offer the vnbloody ſacrifice here inſtituted

and offered by our ſauiou
                           •
                         Chriſt: then import anie commaundement of miniſtringe th
                           •
                         ſame to the laye people vnde
                           •
                         both kindes. And this ſhal appeare more euidently by tha
                           •
                         which followeth.
                  
                  
                     Catholique poſition.
                     The Catholique Roman churche doth not anie wronge or iniurie to the lay people, miniſtringe vnto them the holy Euchariſt vnder one kinde onely, They receauinge the ſame benefit by one that they should do by bothe: chriſts bodie & bloodIo: cap. 6. from the 53. ſmaſorvvard. beinge whole in eache.
                  
                  
                     Proofe.
                     He that ſaythe vnleſs you eate the fleſhe of the ſonn of man and drinke his bloode you ſhall not haue life in you ſaithe alſo. He that eatethe me the ſame alſo ſhall liue by me. And agayne: he that eateth of this bread ſhall liue foreuer. And he that ſayth; he that eateeth
                        
                        my flesh and drinketh my blood, abideth in me and I in him: The ſame alſo ſayth, the bread that I wil giue is my fleſhe forthe life of the wolrde. And he that ſayth, he that eateth my fleshe and drinketh my blood hath life euerlaſtinge. The ſame ſayth, he that eateth this bread ſhall liue for euer. All theſe are the ſayinges of our ſauiour Chriſt in on & the ſame hapter of S. Ihon, where if we say with moſt Catholique Docteurs that he ſpeaketh of the holy Sacrament Sacramentally receaued it is manifeſt, that he aſcribeth the ſame effect and vertu to one kinde that he doth to both. And therfore can they haue noe wrō
                        ge done them, that for moſt iuſt cauſes haue it miniſtered vnder one kinde onely. But yf we ſaye with the Proteſtantes that here is no ſpeache of ſacramētall eatinge of Chriſt his body: thē is there noe difficultie in theyr cheest

argument, which is grounde vpon the firſt wordes alleadge in this proof.
                  
                  
                     2.
                     
                        The were perſeueringe in the doctrin
                              •
                           
                        
                        Actes cap. 2. vſ. 42. 
                        of the Apoſtles, and in the communication of the breakeing of bread & prai
                              •
                           
                         Loe here communion vnder on
                           •
                         kinde. For this breakinge o
                           •
                         bread was the miniſtringe of th
                           •
                         holy ſacrament. Agayne.
                     
                        And the firſt of the Sabothe wh
                              •
                           
                        
                        Actes cap 20. v. 7. Epiſtlo. 86. to Caſſ
                              •
                           la. 
                        we were aſsembled to break
                              •
                            bread
                              •
                           
                         This S. Auguſtine vnderſtand et
                           •
                         of breakinge bread, as in the Sacramēt of Chriſt his body. so that it appearethe the practice of the Apoſtles to miniſter the Sacrament to the people in one kinde onely.
                  
                  
                     Proteſtant Poſition.
                     
                        1 It is forbidden in holy Scripture to giue the holy communion to the lay people vnder one kinde onely.
                        2 It is commaunded in holy Scripture

to giue the holy cōmunion to the lay people vnder both Kindes.
                     
                     The lay people haue wronge done them, in that they are a bridged of the Sacrament vnder both Kindes: therby receauinge leſſ benefit then yf they receaued it vnder bothe.
                  
               
               
                  OF THE SACRIFICE of the Maſs
                  
                     Catholique Poſition.
                     THere is in the newe lawe a Sacrifice; truly and properly ſo called to wit the holy maſſ wherin is offered the body and blood of Chriſt.
                  
                  
                     Proofe 1.
                     Our Sauiour Chriſt gaue Power and commaundement to his Apoſtles and all Preiſtes to doe that which he did in his laſt ſupper:

                        Sayinge doe this for commemoration
                        Lue. cap. 22. v. 19. 1 cor in: cap. 11. v. 23. 
                        of me. But our ſauiour Chriſt in his laſt ſupper ſacrificed his body and blood vnder the formes of bread and wine: therfore the Apoſtles and all preiſtes haue now power and commaundement to offer the ſame ſacrifice, which is not done but in the holy Maſſ. That our ſauiour Chriſt ſacrificed in his laſt ſupper is proued thus. Chriſt was, and is, for euer to the ende of the world a preiſt accordinge to the order of Melchiſedeche, whoſe prieſthoodPſal 109 cōſiſted in offering bread & wine Melchiſedech kinge of Salem bringing
                        Geneſis. cap. 14. v. 18. 
                        forth bread and wine for he was the Preiſt of god most highe: therfore it is euident tha tour Sauiour was to offer ſome tyme in the ſame forme, which he neuer did but in his laſt ſupper where though he offered his body and blood, ſayinge, this is my body wich ſhalbe giuen for you
                        
                        this is my blood which ſhalbe ſhed for you, yet did he performe this vnder the forme of bread and wine, accordinge to the rite or vſe of Melchiſedeche his ſacrifice.
                  
                  
                     2.
                     
                        I haue no will in you ſayth the lorde
                        Mala. chie. cap. 1. v. 1. 
                        of hoſtes: and gift I will not receaue of your hand. For from the riſeinge of the ſunne euen to the goeinge downe, great is my name amonge the gentiles, and in euerie place there is ſacrificinge, & there is offered to my name a cleane oblation. This prophecie is not fulfilled but by the ſacrifice of the maſſ. This is the ſacrifice (ſayth S. Auguſtine)Deciuie. dei lib. 18. câp. 35. 
                        by the Preiſthoode of Chriſt accordinge to the order of Melchiſedech: ſeeinge we now ſee it to be offered to god in all places from the riſeinge of the ſunn vnto the ſettinge therof. And many other fathers in like ſorte. whoſe wordes we canot here rehearſe ſtudyinge to be breif.
                     But for the Doctrine of the

moſt auncient fathers in this point I will taKe the confeſſioneTrue reformatiō of the▪ churche. of Caluin. Saiynge thus; It is an vſuall thinge with theſe knaues [ſoe modeſt is this newe Apoſtles.] to rake together whatſoeuer ys vitiouſe in the fathers. Therfore when they obiect the place of malachi to be expoūded by Ireneus of the ſacrifice of the Maſſe The offeringe of Melchiſedech to be ſee handled of Athanaſius, Ambros, Auguſtin, Arnobius, it is breifly anſwered, the ſame writers elſe where to interpret alſo bread the body of Chriſt, but ſo ridiculuſly that reaſon, and truth cauſeth vs to diſſent. Thus M. Caluin, but whether he, be not ridiculus rather then theſe fathers lett the indiffrent reader iudge.
                  
                  
                     Protestantes Poſition.
                     In the newe lawe is there not anie ſacrifice truly and properly: nether is the maſſ à ſacrifice of the body and bloode of our ſauiour Chriſt.
                  
               
            
            
               
               OF CONFIRMAtion.
               
                  Catholique poſition.
                  COnfirmatiō as it is practiſed in the Catholique Roman churche is truly and properly a Sacrament of the newe lawe.
               
               
                  Proofe.
                  
                     It is a ſenſible ſigne giueinge grace: therfore a Sacrament.
                     Actes cap. 8. v. 20.
                  
                  Then did they impoſe theyr handes vpon them, and they receaued the holy ghoſt wherof ſayth S. Cyprian: They that in Samaria were baptiſed of PhilipEpiſtle. 73. to Iubai. becauſe they had lawfull and Eccleſiaſticall baptiſme, ought not to be baptiſedanie more: But onely that which wā
                     ted, was done by Peter and Iohn; to witt, that by prayers made for them, & impoſitione of handes the holy ghoſt might be powred vpon them; which now alſo is done with vs. that they which

in the churche are baptiſed, by the rulers of the churche offered, and by our prayers and impoſition of handes receaue the holy ghost, and be ſigned with our lordes ſeale. Agayne.
                  
                  It is to little purpoſe to impoſe handesEpiſtle. 72 vpon thē to receaue the holy ghost, vnleſs they receaue the churches baptiſme. For then may they be fully ſanctified, and be the Children of God, if they be born by bothe Sacramentes.
                  
                     And S. Auguſtine: the SacramentAgaynſt the letters of Petilian lib. 2. cap 104. of Chriſme in the kinde of viſible ſeales is ſacred and holy, euen as Baptiſme it ſelf.
               
               
                  Proteſtant Poſition.
                  Confirmation as it is practiſed in the Romā churche, is not truly & properly a Sacrament of the newe lawe.
               
            
            
               
                  Of Pennance. 
               
               
                  Catholique Poſitions. 1.
                  Pennance conſiſting of contrition, confeſſion, and ſatisfaction of the penitent, and abſolution of

the preiſt is truly and properly a Sacrament of the newe lawe.
               
               
                  Proofe.
                  
                     It is a viſible ſigne or ceremonie as appearthe by the confeſſion of the penitent and abſolution of the preiſt: it remitte the ſynnes & therfore giueth grace.
                  
                  Receaue you the holy ghoſt; whoſe ſinnesIohn. cap 20. v. 23. you ſhall forgiue they are forgiuen them: And whoſe ſinnes you shall retaine thei are retained. Of this power of remittinge ſynnes S. Chriſoſtome ſaythe thus. For they that dwellLib. 3. de Sacer. dotio: one the earthe that conuers in it, to them is cōmiſsion giuen to diſpenſe thoſe thinges that are in heauen, to them is it giuen to haue the power which god would not to be giuen nether to Angells nor Archangells. For nether to them was it ſayd, what ſoeuer you shall bynde in earthe shall be bound in heauen and whatſoeuer you shale loſe in earth shall beloſed in heauē. The earthly Princes in deede haue alſo powre to binde but, the

bodies onely: but that bonde of preiſtes which I ſpeake of, toucheth the ve
                        ••
                      ſ
                        •
                     ule it ſelf, & reacheth euen to the heauenes: in ſo much that whatſoeuer t
                        ••
                      preiſtes shall doe be neathe; the ſelf ſa
                        ••
                      god doth ratifie aboue, and the ſentence 
                        〈◊〉
                      the ſeruantes▪ the lord doth confirme. F
                        ••
                      in deed what ells is this, thē that the power of all heauenly thinges is graunted them of god? whoſe ſinnes ſoeuer (ſaith he) you shall retaine, thei are retaine
                        •
                      what power I beſeeche you can be greater then this?
                  
                     Haueinge thus proued the power of preiſtes to remit ſynnes▪ And the proteſtantes confeſſing
                           •
                         contrition, which they call repentance: it remaynethe, that I proue the other two partes of Pennance to wit confeſſion and ſatisfaction.
                  
               
               
                  
                  OF CONFESſione.
                  
                     Catholique poſition.
                     OF the power of retayning (that is not remittinge) of ſynnes giuen to preiſtes followeth the neceſſitie of confeſſion of all ſynnes. For if on the one ſide, the ſynnes retayned and not remitted by Preiſtes vpon earthe be retayned and not remitted in heauen, as is manifeſt by our Sauioures owne wordes; and yf on the other ſide, the prieſt cannot remitt the ſynne vnleſſ he knowe it, as is manifeſt he cannot: nor cā he know it vnleſſ it be towlde him: it followeth neceſſarilie, that he that will haue his ſynnes remited, muſt by his owne confeſſione make them knowne vnto

him, to whome god hath giuen power to remitt them.
                     Confeſſion was practiſed in the Apoſtles tymes as appear theActes cap. 19 v. 18. 
                        for manie of them that beleeued came confeſsinge and declaringe their deedes. It is alſo probable that S. Iames ſpeaketh of this Sacramētall confeſſion when he ſayth: Confeſs your ſinnes one to another. for ſoe dothIames. cap. 5. v. 16 Origen homilie 2. vpon. leuiticus. Origen vnderſtand it ſaying. There is a ſeauen the kinde of remiſsione of ſinnes, though verie hard and labourſome when the ſinner washeth his bedd with teares & they are made his bread both daie and night: and when he is not aſhamed to declare his ſinne to the Prieſt of our lorde, and to ſeeke remedie accordinge to him which ſaithe: I haue ſaide I will pronounce my iniuſtice againſt my ſelfe to our lord, and thou hast remitted the impietie of mine hart. In whom alſo that is fullfilled which the Apoſtle ſaith: yf anie be ſick lett him bring in the preiſtes of the churche
                        
                        and yf he be in ſinne they shall bere mitted to him.
                     
                     The iudgement of the auncient churche is ſoe clere in this point of confeſſion, that Mr. Fulke (a moſt piuishe enimie to all Catholique Doctrine) is compelled, by the multitude of moſt clere teſtimonies of the auncient fathers to cōfeſſ, that it is expedient ſome tymes: in theſe wordes. That it is
                        Vpon th 20. cap. of s. Iohn Sect S. 
                              •
                           ovvardes the ende. 
                        expedient in ſome caſes for men to confeſs theyr ſinnes to theyre paſtoure, we deny not.
                     
                  
               
               
                  OF SATISFACction.
                  
                     Catholique poſition. 3.
                     THe guilt of the ſinne beinge remytted, the payne due therfore is not alwayes ſo pardoned, but that often tymes, ther remayneth a temporall payne to

be ſuffered for it, ether here in this life, or els in purgatorie.
                  
                  
                     Proofe. 1.
                     Forgiue I beſeche thee the ſinne of thisNūb cap 14. v. 20. 21. thy people, accordinge to the greatneſs of thy mercie, as thou haſt beene propitiouſe to them ſince their goeinge out from Egipt vnto this place. And our lord ſaid I haue forgiuen it accordinge to thy worde: liue I and the whole earth shal be replenished with the glorie of our lord. But yet all the men that haue ſeene my maieſtie, and the ſignes that I haue done in Egipt and in the wilderneſs, and haue tempted me nowe tenn tymes nether haue obeied my voice they shall not ſee the lande for which I ſwore to their fathers: nether shall anie of them that haue detracted me behould it.
                     
                        The like is recorded of Moyſes Deuter: cap. 32. v. 49▪ and of Aaron. Nūbers cap. 20. v. 23. yet noe man doubteth but the ſinn for which they were punished was forgiuuen them before
                        
                        theyre deathe,
                     
                     Dauid ſayd to Nathā I haue ſynned2. of kinges cap. 12. v. 13. 14. to our lord: And Nathan ſayd to Dauid our lord alſo hath taken away thy Syn thou shalt not dye: Neuertheleſs becauſe thou haſt made the ennimies of our lord to blaſpheme, for this thing the ſonn that is borne to thee dyinge shall die.
                  
                  
                     Catholique poſition.
                     This temporall payne remayning after the guilt of the ſinne is remitted, may be redeemed by good workes; as by faſtinge prayer, Almes and the like, which therfore are truly called ſatisfactorie.
                  
                  
                     Proofe. 1.
                     
                        If I shall shut heauen, and reane fall
                        2. of Paralip. cap. 7. v. 13. 14. 
                        not, & shall bid & cōmaunde locuſtes to deuoure the lande and shall ſend Peſtilence into my People: And my poeple beinge conuerted vpon whom my name is inuocated shall doe pennance from theire moſt wicked wayes: I alſo will heare from heauen & will be propitious
                        
                        to theyr ſinnes, and will ſaue their land.
                     
                  
                  
                     2.
                     
                        O kinge lett me counſell thee and redeeme
                        Daniell. cap. 4. v. 24. 
                        thy ſinnes with almes & thy iniquities with the mercies of the poore.
                     
                  
                  
                     3.
                     
                        Therfore are there amonge you manie
                        1. Corī. cap. 11. v. 30. 31. 
                        weake and feeble and manie ſleepe. But yf we did iudge ourſelues we ſhould not be iudged: that is yf we puniſhe or chaſtice our ſelues, we should not be chastiſed of god, for our ſynnes remitted, for of ſuch the Apoſtle ſpeaketh as is manifeſt by the vers followinge But whiles we are indged of our lord we are chaſtiſed, that with this world we be not damned.
                     
                  
                  
                     Catholique Poſitions. 5.
                     workes done for the ſatisfactiō of the temporall payne remayning after the ſinne be pardoned, do no way derogate from the ſatisfaction of chriſt his paſſion.
                  
                  
                     
                     Proofe. 1.
                     
                        I Paule, whoe nowe reioyce in ſufferinge
                        Collosē. cap. 1. v. 24. 
                        for you and doe accompliſhe thoſe things that want of the paſsiones of Chriſt in my fleshe, for his body which is the churche.
                     
                  
                  
                     2.
                     we are heires truly of god, and coheyresRoman. cap. 8. v. 17. of Chriſt yet yf we ſuffer with him that we may be gloriffied which him. Loe here our ſufferinge at leaſt a condition neceſſarie for our glorification.
                     
                  
                  
                     3.
                     
                        To him that is ſuch an one this rebuke
                        2. Cor. cap. 2. v. 6. 
                        ſufficeth that is geuen of many: where S. Paule ſpeaketh of the Pēnance enioyned vpon the inceſtious Corinthiane.
                     
                        Doe Pennance ſayth S. Iohn Baptiſt
                        Mathe. cap. 3. v. 2. and by his life and example shewed what pennance he ſpake of: And agayne: yeeld therfore fruit worthy of Pennance.
                     
                     
                        
                        But Zacheus ſtandinge ſayd to our lord
                        Luc. 19. vſ. 8. 
                        Behould the half of my goodes I giue to the poore: and yf I haue defrauded anie man of anie thing, I reſtore fowre fould.
                     
                     The doctrine and practiſe of the auncient churche thouchingCenturie. 3. coll. 127 Satisfaction, is confeſſed by the Centuriſtes in theſe wordes: The life of thoſe that confeſſed leſſer ſinnes was conſidered, & iudged whether they had done iuſt pennance, as appreareth by Ciprian lib. 3. epiſtle 16. and that ſatisfaction was accuſtomed to be impoſed vpon them according to the quantitie of the fault appearethe by his S. ſermone de lapſis. Tertuliane alſo mentioneth the ſame in his booke of Pennance.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  OF INDVL. gences.
                  
                     Catholique poſition.
                     THere is in the churche of God power to giue Indulgences, or graunte pardonnes: that is to remitt and pardonne parte or all the temporall payne, pennance, or punishment which (for the moſt parte) remayneth to be performed, or ſuffered, for the ſatis-faction af the ſinne after the guilte of the ſynn be taken awaye.
                  
                  
                     Proofe.
                     
                        To the will I giue the keis of the kingdome
                        Matth. cap. 16. v. 19. 6. Mat. ca. 18. v 18 2. Cori. cap. 2. v. 10. 
                        of heauen and what ſoeuer thou shalt loſe in earthe shalbe alſo loſed in the heauens. And the ſame repeated agayne to all the Apoſtles, in another place. This power is practiſed by S. Paule, whom you haue
                        
                        pardonned anie 
                              ••
                           ing. I alſo. Formy ſelf alſo that which I pardoned yf I pardoned anithing for you in the perſonne of Chriſt. Loe here S. Paule at the prayer of others, pardoned and aſſoyled of mere mercie and grace, the inceſtu ouſe corinthiane, of the reſt of his Pennance, which with out the ſame pardone, he was boūde to haue performed, though his ſinn was already forgiuen him,
                  
                  
                     Proteſtant Poſitions. 1.
                     Pennance, conſiſtinge of contrition confeſſion, and ſatisfaction of the penitent, and abſolution of the preiſt, is not truly & properly, à Sacrament of the newe lawe.
                     2. It is not neceſſarie for the penitent to confeſſ all his ſynnes: or that cōfeſſion is not neceſſarie for obtaynīg remiſſiō of our ſynnes.
                     3. The guilt of the ſynn being pardonned there remainethe no temporall payne to be ſuffered, or other ſatisfaction to be made,

ther in this life or in the next.
                     
                        
                           •
                        , The temporall payne re
                        
                           •
                        ayning cannot be redeemed 
                           •
                        y anie workes: nor are there 
                           •
                        nie ſatisfactorie workes.
                     
                        
                           •
                        
                        ▪ workes done for Satisfaction 
                           •
                        or ſynn, or for the payne due to 
                           •
                        t, doe derogate from the ſatifaction of our Sauiours paſſion.
                     
                        
                           •
                        . There is not in the churche of Chriſt anie power to giue indulgence, or graunte pardon of anie parte of the the temporall payne, or pennance to be performed after the guilt of the ſynn be pardoned, and remitted.
                  
               
            
            
               
               OF HOLY ORders.
               
                  Catholique poſition.
                  HOly orders wherby power is giuen both to conſecrate the true body of Chriſt as the catholique church doth beliue: & alſo to miniſter other Sacraments in the churche (which is the myſticall body of Chriſt) & to exercise other eccleſiaſticall functiones is truly and properly a Sacrament of the newe lawe.
               
               
                  Proofe.
                  Holy order is giuen by a viſible or ſenſible ſigne with the effect of grace: therfore properly a Sacrament.
               
               
                  Proofe. 1.
                  Neglect not the grace that is in thee:1. Tim. cap. 4. v. 14. which is giuen thee by prophecie with impoſition of the handes of preiſthoode.

                     
                        
                           •
                        gayne.
                  
               
               
                  2.
                  I admoniſhe thee that thou reſuſeitate2. Tim. 1. v. 6. he grace of god which is in thee by the 
                        •
                     mpoſition of my handes. Further.
                  
               
               
                  3.
                  
                     Then they faſting and praying and impoſing
                     Act. ca. 13. v. 6. 
                     handes vpon them diſmiſsed them S. Ambroſe vpon the wordes before cited out of the firſt to Timothee 4. ſayth thus. The impoſition of handes is myſticall wordes where with the elect is confirmed to this worke receauing auctoritie (his conſcience bearing witnes) that he may be bould in our lorde ſteede to offer ſacrifice to god.
                  
                  M. Bilſon proueth by the auctoritiePerpetuall gournment pag. 10. of Caluin, holy orders, or creating miniſters (as he tearmeth it) to be a Sacrament: which Caluin doth not only affirme, but proue (if the other cite him truly) by theſe reaſones: becauſe it is a viſible ſigne, with grace.
               
               
                  
                  Proteſtans poſitions.
                  Holy orders wherby power i
                        •
                      giuē to miniſter other Sacramēt
                        •
                      and exerciſe other eccleſiaſticall functiones is not properly & truly a Sacrament of the newe lawe.
               
            
            
               OF EXTREAME vnctione.
               THe anoylinge of the ſicke with the forme of wordes ioyned ther with, vſed in the Catholique Roman churche, is truly and properly a Sacrament of the newe lawe.
               
                  Proofe.
                  It is a ſenſible ſigne with the effect of inuiſible grace, therfore properly a Sacrament.
               
               
                  Proofe 1.
                  Is anie man ſicke amonge you let him bring in the prieſtes of the churche and let them praye ouer him anoyleing

                     
                        •
                     im with oyle in the name of our lord: Loe here the externall signe, And 
                        •
                     he prayers of fayth shall ſaue the ſick: 
                        •
                     nd our lord shall lift him vp: and if hee 
                        •
                     e in ſinnes thei shall be remitted to him: Loe here the internall grace of which S. Chriſoſtome ſaythe 
                           •
                        hus: They [to witt preiſtes] haue auctoritie to forgiue ſinnes; not only when they regenerate vs but after wardes alſo. For, is anie ſick amonge you, 
                        •
                     aith the Apoſtle let him bringe in the Preiſtes &c.
               
               
                  Proteſtantes poſition.
                  The anoyleinge of the ſick with the forme of wordes adioyned, vſed in the Romane churche, is not properly a Sacrament of the newe lawe.
               
            
            
               
               OF MATRImonie.
               MAtrimonie contracted betwixte chriſtianes is not a bare ciuill contract, but truly & properly a Sacramēt of the newe lawe.
               
                  Proofe.
                  It is a Symbole or ſigne of a holy thing with the effect of grace therfore a Sacrament.
                  
                     For this cauſe shall man leaue his father
                     Ephe. 5. v. cap. 31. 
                     & mother & shall cleaue to his wife, & they shal be two in one fleshe. This is a great Sacrament, I ſpeake in Chriſt & in the churche. Note that Catholique auctores vrge not this worde Sacrament to proue that matrimonie is properly a Sacramēt: but to proue it a holy ſigne, or a ſigne of a holy thing; and therfore not a mere ciuill contract, and this doth the text euidently importe:

declareing that the ioining together of mā & woman, as it is vſed in Chriſt his church is a Symbole or ſigne, of the inſeparable vnione, & āmitie of Chriſt & his churche. The effect of grace in this Sacrament, is alſo shewed by the ſame wordes. For matrimonie is not onely a ſigne of the vnione of Chriſte, and the churche, in conformitie of nature, but alſo by ſpirituall charitie wher with Chriſt loued his churche, & gouerneth it holily, & the church doth inſeperably adhere vnto Chriſt by faythe, hope, & charitie, and is ſubiect to him by obediēce: which ſpirituall vnione mariage cannot ſignifie, vnles there be betwixt man and wife a ſpirituall vnione of mindes beſide the ciuil contract: and therfore the Apoſtle doth warne, that
                     In the ſam
                           •
                         cap v. 24. 25. 
                     huſbandes should loue theyre wiues as Chriſt doth his churche, and that wiues
                     
                     should obaye theyre huſbandes as 
                           〈◊〉
                         churche doth Chriſt.
                  
                  S. Auguſtine to omit other fathersDe bono coniugali cop. 18 ſaythe thus of this Sacrament. In the mariage of our people [meaninge Chriſtianes] the holineſs of the Sacrament is of more worth
                           •
                         thē the fertilitie of the wombe Agayne.
                  
                     The good of mariage in all natione
                           •
                        
                     
                     The ſame booke cap. p. 4. 
                     and men is in the cauſe of procreation and fayth of chastitie: but for as mu
                           ••
                         as pertaynethe the people of god, it is 
                           〈◊〉
                         in the holines of the Sacrament. which places beſides others manifeſtly shewe that he ſpeakethe of a Sacrament properly, for els theſe ſayinges were not true.
               
               
                  Proteſtant Poſition.
                  Matrimonie contracted betwixt Chriſtianes, is but a bare ciuill contract: and not anie Sacrament properlye.
               
            
            
               
               OF THE EFFECT OF the Sacraments.
               
                  Catholique Poſition. 1.
                  THe Sacrament of Baptiſme as it is a Sacrament of the 
                        •
                     ewe lawe (& therfore all the Sacramēts of the newe lawe) giueth grace ex opere operato, or of the worke it ſelf, or is the true cauſe of grace in thoſe that receaue it worthilie, which is to giue grace ex opere operato: or of the worke wrought, and is not onely a ſigne, or a ſeale of godes good will to vs, or a bare meanes to ſtir fayth vp in vs, as the preaching of the Goſpell is.
               
               
                  Proofe. 1.
                  Vnleſs man be borne agayne of waterIohn cap 3. v. 5 and the ſpirit he cannot enter▪ into the kingdome of god. Loe here our regeneration
                     
                     aſcribed to Baptiſm as to a true cauſe.
                  
               
               
                  2.
                  
                     Doe pennance and be euerie one of 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                     Actes cap. 2. v. 32. 
                     baptiſed in the n
                           •
                        me of Ieſus, Chriſt. 
                           〈◊〉
                         remiſsiō of your ſinnes: Loehere remiſſion of ſinnes atributed to baptiſme as to a true cauſe: as yf one should ſaye, take medecin for your health. The like or moreActes cap. 22. v. 17. playne is that Riſe vp and be baptiſed, and washe away thy ſinnes inuocating his name.
                  
               
               
                  3.
                  Not by the workes of iuſtice which wee did but according to his mercie h
                        •
                     
                     Titus cap. 3. v. 
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                      hath ſaued vs by the lauer of regeneration and renouation of the holy ghoſt. Loe here wee are ſaued by baptiſme.
                  
               
               
                  4.
                  wherunto Baptiſme being of the like1. Petri: cap. 3. v. 21. forme now ſaueth you alſo As Noë (ſaythe S. Auguſtine) with his, was deliuered by the w
                        •
                     t
                        •
                     r 
                        •
                     nd the woode. So the family of Chriſt by baptiſme ſigned

w
                        •
                     th the p
                        •
                     ſsion on the Croſse.Lib. 12 againſt fauſius cap. 14.
                  
               
               
                  Proteſtantes poſition.
                  Nether baptiſme, nor the other Sacramentes of the newe lawe giue grace as cauſe therof, but are onely ſignes of gods good will towardes vs, or meanes to ſtire vp faythe in vs.
               
            
            
               CHARACTER.
               
                  Catholique poſition.
                  THe Sacrament of Baptiſme Confirmation and orders; (beſides the grace which they giue) doe make and leaue a ſigne or ſeale in the soule of the receauer which after S. Auguſtine is ordinarily called a Character.
               
               
                  Proofe.2. Cor. cap. 1. v. 21. 22.
                  
                  And he that confirmethe vs with you in Chriſt, and that hath anoynted

vs, god, whoe alſo hath ſealed vs. of S. Auguſtines Doctrine cōcerninge this matter M. Fulke ſayth thus S. Auguſtin doth righely conuince theVpon the 2. to Cor. cap. 1. Scr. 7. Douatiſtes, that the Sacrament of Baptiſme ought not to be reiterated, becauſe it is the Scale or character of regeneration, which beinge once giuen, by godes ordinance is not to be repeated; the like he ſayth of ordination.
               
               
                  Proteſtans poſitions.
                  Nether Baptiſme nor anie other Sacrament of the new lawe doe leaue anie ſigne, mark or character in the ſoule of the receauer.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE 13. CONTROVERſie; Of Iuſtification.
            
               Catholique poſitions.
               IVſtification is the tranſlation of ſinners from the ſtate of ſinne vnto the ſtate of grace, and adoptione of the Childrē of God: and therfore conſiſteth not in the bare remiſsion of ſynnes, but in true ſanctification and renouation of ſpirit.
            
            
               Proofe.Colloſſ: cap. 1. v. 12. 13.
               
               Giuing thankes to god and the father whoe hath made vs worthye vnto the parte of the lott of the ſaintes in the ligtht whoe hath deliuered vs frō the power of darkeneſſ, and hath tranſlated vs, into the kingdome of the ſonn of his loue.De N
                        ••
                     . & oncu. lib. 1. cap. 20.
               
               
                  The diligent reader may ſee S. Auguſtine, alleadging this place in the ſame ſence.
               
            
            
               
               2.Gallatas cap. 4. v. 4. 5.
               
               God ſent his ſonn made of a woman, made vnder the lawe. That he might redeeme thē that were vnder the lawe, that wee might receaue the adoption of ſonnes.
            
            
               3.
               
                  He hath ſaued vs by the lauer of regeneration
                  Tit cap. 3. v. 5. 6. 
                  & renouatiō of the holy ghoſt, whome he hath powred vpon vs abundantly by Chriſt Ieſus our sauioure.
               
            
            
               4.
               Nor theeues, nor couetouſe, nor drunkards nor raylers, nor extortioners shall1. Cor. cap. 6. v. 10. 11. poſſeſs the kingdome of god.
               And theſe thinges certes you were, but nowe you are washed but now you are ſanctified, but now you are iuſtified, in the name of our lord Ieſus Chriſt, and in the ſpirit of our god.
            
            
               5.
               Lay you away accordinge to the ould conuerſation the owld man, which isEpheſios cap. 4. v. 22. 23. 24. corrupted according to the deſires of erroure: And be renewed in the ſpirit of

your mynde: and put on the new man which according to god is created in iuſtice and helines of truthe.
               Behould (ſayth S. Auguſtine)
                  Degene. ad l
                        •
                     t. lib 6. cap. 26 & 27. what Adam loſt by ſin
                     •
                  e, in that therfore we are renewed, according to that which Adam loſt that is according to the ſpirit of our minde.
               Spoyling our ſelues of the owld manColoſſ. cap. 3. v. 9. 10. with his actes: And doeing on the newe, him that is renewed vnto knowledge according to the image of him that created hym.
               This image (ſayth S. Auguſtine)
                  In the place laſt cited. imprinted in the ſpirit of our minde Adā loſt by ſinn which we receaue by the grace of iuſtice.
            
            
               Catholique poſition. 2.
               Synn is not onely couered, or not imputed by iuſtification, but it is washed, purged, and quite taken away.
            
            
               
                  Ezechiel cap. 36. v. 2
                        •
                     .Proofe. 1.
               
                  I will power out vpon you cleane water
                  
                  and you shalbe clenſed from all your contaminationes.
               
            
            
               2.Pſalme 50. v. 9.
               
               Thou shalt ſprincle me with hyſope and I shalbe clenſed, thou shalt waſhe me, and I shalbe made whiter then ſnowe.
            
            
               3.Pſalme. 102. v.
               
               As farr as the caſt is diſtant from the weſt: hath he made our iniquities farr from vs.
            
            
               4.Iohn. cap. 1. v. 29.
               
               Behould the lambe of god, behould him that take the awaye the ſinn of the world.
            
            
               5.Actes. cap. 3. v. 19. 1. Iohn cap. 1. v. 7.
               
               Be penitent therfore and conuert, that your ſinnes may be put out.
               But yf we walk in the light as he alſo is in the light: we haue ſocietie one toward another, and the blo
                     •
                  de of Ieſus Chriſt his ſonn clenſethe vs from all ſinn.
            
            
               
               OF CONCVPIScence.
               
                  Caetholique poſition.
                  THat rebellion or concupiſcence of the fleshe which remay nethe in man after Baptiſme, is not properly ſinne of it ſelf, or with out the free conſent of the will.
               
               
                  Proofe.Iames. cap. 1. v. 15.
                  
                  
                     Concupiſcence when it hath conceaued bringe the forth ſinn: therfore of it ſelf is it not ſinn. As S. Auguſtine playnly prooueth by theſe wordesAgainſt Iuliane. lib 6. cap. 5. ſayinge: when concupiſcence hath conceaued it bringeth forth ſinn: verely in theſe wordes, that which is brought forth, is diſtinguished from that which bringeth forth: that which bringethe forth is cōcupiſcēce that which is brought forth is ſinn: but concupiſence doth not bring forth vnleſs it haue conceaued, it conceaueth not vnleſs it hath allured,
                     
                     that is vnleſs it hath obtayned the aſſent of the will to doe euill.
                  
                  
                     There is nowe therfore noe damnation to thē that are in Chriſt Ieſus, that walke
                     Romanes cap 8. v. 1. Roma. cap. 7. 
                     not according to the fleshe.
                  
                  S. Paule calleth it ſinn becauſe it his the roote, cauſe, matter, and also the effect of ſinn.
                  As likewiſe the golden calfe made by the people of Iſraell isDeutrono. cap. 9. v. 21. called ſinn, becauſe, it was the cauſe, and effect of ſinn.
                  Our ſauiour alſo is called ſinn, becauſe he was the Hoſt & oblation2. Cor. cap. 5. v. 21 for ſinn.
               
               
                  Catholique poſition.
                  Aſynner is not iuſtified, that is, clenſed from ſinn, made iuſt, holy, and the child of god▪ all which are effected by iuſtification) by the externall iuſtice of Chriſt imputed vnto him: but by internall grace truely receaued and inherent with in him.
               
               
                  Proofe.
                  
                  1.
                  
                     The holy ſcripture playnly teſtifiethe that there is a grace which
                     Romanes cap. 8. v. 11. 
                     is the ſpirit of god dwelling with in vs: yf the ſpirit of him that rayſed vp Ieſus from the dead dwell in you, he that rayſed vp Ieſus Chriſt, from the dead, shall quicken alſo your mortall bodyes, becauſe of his ſpirit dwellinge in you.
               
               
                  2.
                  
                     which is the life of our ſpirit:
                     Romanes cap. 8. v. 9. 10. you are not in the fleshe but in the ſpirit, yet yf the ſpirit of god dwell in you. But if anie man haue not the ſpirit of Chriſt, the ſame is not his. But if chriſt be in you the bodie in deed is dead becauſe of ſinn, but the ſpirit liueth becauſe of iuſtification.
               
               
                  3.
                  which is the circumciſion ofRoman
                           ••
                         cap. 2. v. 29. the hart in ſpirit. Not that which is in open shew, in the fleshe, is circumciſion, but the circumciſione of the barte in ſpirit, not in the letter who
                        •
                     e prayſe is not of

god. The circumciſion of the hart ſayth▪
                     
                     De Spi
                           
                              •
                           it
                              •
                            & litera cap. 8. S. Auguſtine, is the will, pure from all vnlawfull cōcupiſcence, which is not made by the teaching & threating letter, but by the helping and healing ſpirit.
                  
               
               
                  4.
                  which is a ſcripture or writing2. Cor. cap. 3. v. 3. made in our hartes. Being manifeſted that you are the epiſtle of Chriſt miniſtred by vs, and written not with inke, but with the ſpirit of the liuing god: not in tables of ſtone but in the hart, where vnto S. Auguſtine alluding ſaythe. By the grace wherby we are freely iuſtified, iuſtice which was blotted out by ſinn, is written in the interriour man renued.
               
               
                  5.
                  
                     which is powered out abundantly
                     Titus. c. 3. v. 5. 6. 
                     vpon vs: he hath ſaued vs by the lauer of regeneration, and renouation of the holy ghoſt whom he hath powered vpon vs abundantly by Ieſus Chriſt, our

ſauiour.
               
               
                  6.
                  which is powered forthe in ourRomaues cap. 5. v. 5. hartes: And hope confoundeth not becauſe the charitie of god is powered forthe in our hartes, by the holy ghoſt which is giuen to vs. wherupon S. Auguſtin ſaythe, the charitie of god is ſayd to be powered forth in our hartes not that by which he loueth vs: but that by which he makethDeſpiritu & litera cap. 32. vs louers of hī as the iuſtice of god is ſayd that wherby we are made iuſt by his gift.
                  And not to be ouer prolix in this point. which maketh vs the. 
                     1. Cor. cap. 3. v. 16. 
                     temple of god. 
                     Gala. c. 6. v. 15 
                     A newe creature. 
                     2. 
                           •
                         Petri. c. 1. v. 4. 
                     makethe vs pertakers of his diuine nature. 
                     Gala. 3. v. 27. 
                     wherby wee put vpon vs Christ. 
                     Ephe. cap. 3. v. 14. 
                     which is a pleadg of our inheritance, and the. 
                     
                        
                           •
                         Iohn cap. 3. v. 9. 
                     ſeede of god a
                           •
                        yd
                           •
                        ge in vs, with other ſuch like: lett now the indifferent reader iudge, whether this grace wherof all theſe things are sayd is not truly with

in vs: but being in our ſauiou
                        •
                      Chriſt, is but onely imputed to vs.
               
               
                  Catholique poſition.
                  It is not onely faythe that worketh in vs remiſſion of ſinnes, & the adoption of the children of god, or to ſaye the ſame in other wordes, it is not onely faythe that doth iuſtifie vs.
               
               
                  Proofe. 1.1. Cor. cap. 13. v. 2. Tom: 7. concio de geſt
                           ••
                         
                        
                           •
                        ū Emerito ante medium.
                  
                  If I should haue all faythe, ſo that I could remoue mount
                        •
                     ynes, and haue not charitie I am nothinge: wher vpon S▪ Auguſtine excellently ſaythe, what 
                        〈◊〉
                      man would ſay, Prophecie is nothing? Theſe thinges are not nothing: but wh
                        •
                     lſt I haue theſe greate thinges, yf I haue not charitie I ā nothing, theſe are great thinges, and I haue great thinges, and I am nothinge, yf I haue not charitie, by which theſe greate thinges doe profitt me. If I haue not char
                        •
                     t
                        •
                     e theſe thinges may be in me (note theſe wordes) but they can not

                     
                        •
                     rofitt me.
               
               
                  2.The ſame. cap. v. 13.
                  
                  Now there remayne faythe, hope, charitie theſe three, but the greateſt of theſe is charitie. Therfore doubtleſſ doth it ſaue & iuſtifi rather then fayth.
               
               
                  3.
                        Iames. 
                        
                           •
                        . 2. v. 20.
                  
                  wilt thou knowe O Vayne man, that faythe with out workes is idle? yf idle, therfore it alone doth not iuſtifie.
               
               
                  4.
                        Same. 
                        
                           •
                        . v. 24.
                  
                  Doe you ſee that by workes a man is iuſtified and not by faythe onely?
               
               
                  5.
                  For euen as the body without
                        Same ca. v. 26. the Spirit is dead, ſoe alſo faythe with out wotkes is dead.
               
               
                  6.
                  In Chriſt Ieſus nether circonciſion
                        Galatas. cap. 5. v. 6. auaylethe ought, nor prepuce: but fayth working by charitie.
               
               
                  
                  7.
                  
                     The ende of the precept is charitie
                     1. Timo. cap. 1. v. 5. 
                     from a pure hart, and a good conſcience & a fayth not fayned. The ende, that is the accomplishment and perfection of the lawe or commaundement being charitie, certes with out it we cannot be iuſt nor iuſtified.
                  
                  Goe yee away from me you curſed into eternall fier &c. for. I was hungryeMathe. cap. 25. v. 41. de fide et operi
                           
                              
                           
                           bus
                        . cap. 15 and you gaue me not to eate. Hee doth not blame them ſayth S. Auguſtine that they did not beliue in him, but becauſe they did not good workes.
                  If thou wilt enter into life keepe the commandements. I ſee not ſayth S. Auguſtine
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         De fide & operi. cap. 15 why Chriſt should ſay yf thou wilt haue life euerlaſtinge, keepe the commandements: yf whith out obſeruinge them, by onely fayth one might be ſaved.
               
               
                  Proteſtantes poſitions
                  
                     1. Iuſtification is onely the remiſſion of ſynn with out renouation

of ſpirit, or interioure ſanctification.
                     2. By iuſtification ſinn is onely couered, or not imputed, and not whashed or quite taken away.
                     3. Concupiſcence of it ſelf. and with out the conſent of the will is properly a ſynn:
                     4. Synners are inſtified by the onely imbutation of Chriſt his iuſtice and not by anie internall grace or iuſtice receaued, or inherent with in them.
                     5. It is onely fayth that iuſtifiethe.
                  
               
               
                  Catholique poſition.
                  True faythe, or iuſtice once had may be loſt.
               
               
                  Proofe. 1.
                  
                     For they vpon the rocke: ſuch as
                     Luk. 8. cap. 13. 
                     when they heare, whith ioye receaue the word: and theſe haue noe rootes becauſe for a tyme the beleeue and in time of temptation they reuoult.
                  
               
               
                  
                  2.
                  
                     Haueing faythe, and good conſcience,
                     1. Timo. cap. 1. v. 19. 
                     which certayne repelling, haue made shipwrake about the faythe.
                  
               
               
                  3.
                  
                     The roote of all euills is conetouſneſs:
                     1. Timo cap. 6 v. 10. & vc 21. 
                     which certayne deſiering haue erred frō the faythe.
                  
               
               
                  4.
                  They went out from vs: but1. Iohn: cap. 2. v. 19 they were not of vs: not becauſe they diſſembled iuſtice but becauſe they perſeuered not in iuſtice, ſayth S. Auguſtine, de correp: & gratia cap. 9.
               
               
                  Protestantes Poſition.
                  True faythe, or iuſtice, once had can neuer be loſt.
               
               
                  Catholique Poſition.
                  whith out particuler reuelation no man in particuler is ſo certayne of his iuſtification or ſaluation, that he may not iuſtly feare▪ the contrarie.
               
               
                  
                  Proofe. 1.
                  Thou by faythe doeſt ſtand be
                        Romanes ca
                              •
                           . 11. v 20. 1. Cor. cap. 4. v. 4. not to hihgly wiſe but feare.
               
               
                  2.
                  I am not guiltie in conſcience of anie thing: but I am not iuſtified herein, but he that iudgethe me is our lord.
               
               
                  3.
                  I chaſtiſe my body, and bring it1. Cor. cap. 9. g. v. 27. into ſeruitude leſt perhappes when I haue preached to others, my ſelf become reprobate.
               
               
                  4.
                  He that thinketh himſelf to1 Cor. cap. 10. v. 12. ſtād, lett him take heed leſt he fall.
                  Man knoweth not whether he be worthie of loue or hatred but all things are reſerued vncertayn for the tyme to come.
                  wherefore S. Auguſtine ſaytheDe correptione & 
                           •
                        rat. cap. 13. thus what one amonge the faythfull, ſoe longe as he liueth in this mortallitie can preſume that

he is of the number of the predeſtinate? For it is needfull that this should be hidden here: where hautineſſ is ſoe to be taken heede of, that euen ſoe great an Apoſtle2. Cor. cap. 12 was to be buffited by the Angell of ſatan, leſt he should be puffed vpp.
               
               
                  Proteſtantes poſition.
                  Euerie faithfull beliuer ought to be ſoe aſſured of his iuſtification or ſaluation, that he should be with out feare of the contrarie.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE 14. CONTROuerſie Of good workes.
            
               Catholique poſition.
               GOod workes done in the ſtate of grace are meritorious of life euerlaſting.
            
            
               Proofe. 1.
               Come yee bleſſed of my fatherMatthe. cap. 25 v. 34. poſſeſſ the kingdōe prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For I was an hungred and you gaue me to eate, I was a thirſt and you gaue me to drinke. &c.
               
                  Come yee bleſſed of mi father ſaythe
                  Vpon the Pſalme 49. S. Auguſtine, receaue, receaue what? a kindome: For what? I was hungrye and you gaue me to eate: what is ſo cheape, what ſoe earthly, as to giue bread to the hungrye? ſo much is the kingdome
                  
                  of heauen, worthe.
               
            
            
               2.
               I haue fought a good fight I2. Timo. cap. v. 7. haue kept the faythe, concerning the reſt, there is laid vp for me 
                     •
                   crowne of iuſtice, which our lord will render to me in that daye a iuſt iudge. Vpon which wordes moſt excellently ſayth S. Auguſtine, explicating both the neceſſitie of grace that wee may merit, and the iuſtice of reward due to merit. To whom ſayth he should the
                  De gratia & libero arbitrio cap. 6. 
                  iuſt iudge render a crowne, yf the mercifull father had not giuen grace? & howe should there be a crowne of iuſtices, vnleſs grace which doth iuſtifie the wicked had gone before?
               
            
            
               3.
               God is not vniuſt that he should
                     Heb. cap 6. v. 10 forgett your workes and loue which you haue shewed in his name which haue miniſtred to the ſainctes and doe miniſter.Against Ioui. lib. 2. cap. 2.
               
               In deede great were gods iniuſtice,

if he would onely punish ſynnes, and would not receaue good workes. Sayth S. Hierome vpon theſe wordes.
               The ſonn of man shall come inMath. cap. 16. v. 27. the glorie of his father with his Angels: and then will he render to euerie man according to his workes. He ſayth not accordingSerm: 35. de verbis Apoſt. to his mercie: ſayth S. Auguſtin: and I alſo add, not according to fayth onely.
            
            
               Proteſtantes poſition.
               Good workes done in the ſtate of grace are not meritorious of life euerlaſting.
            
         
         
            
            THE 15. CONTROuerſie of freewill.
            NOte that I speake here of freewill onli ī such things: as appartayne to our ſaluation, and not in naturall, morall, or indifferent actions as in eating walking, or ſaluting, others.
            
               Catholique poſition.
               Man through the help of gods grace which is neuer denyed him hath free will and power both to fly ſuch euill, and to doe ſuch good, as is neceſſarie for his ſaluation: nor is he forced or conſtrayned to ether.
            
            
               Proofe. 1.
               He that hath determined in his harte1. Cor. c. 7. v. 37. being ſetled not hauing neceſsitie, but hauing power of his owne will, and

iudgeth this in his hart to keepe his virgin doth well: This place is cited by S. Auguſtin for this ſame purpoſe, de gratia, & libero arbitrio cap. 2.
               
            
            
               2.
               Come yee bleſſed: gett yeeMathe. cap. 25. v. 34 41. De actis cum Felice maniche
                        •
                      cap. 8. away from me you curſed. It is no incōgruitie (ſaith S. Auguſtin) that god should ſaye, goe īto euer laſting fire, to them that by theyr will haue repelled his mercie: And to the other, come yee bleſſed of my father, that by theyr free will haue receaued fayth, confeſſed theyr ſynn and done pennance.
               He hath ſett before thee waterEccleſi. cap. 15. v. 17. 18. and fier: to which thou wilt ſtretch out thy hand: before man is life and death, good and euill, what pleaſeth him shalbe giuen him. Behould (ſayth S. AuguſtineDe gract lib. arbitirio cap. 2. hauing cited theſe wordes) we ſee the freedome of mans will

moſt playnly expreſſed, which in the begining of that chapter he promiſed to shewe out of holy ſcriptures, and therfore is it manifeſt that he tooke this booke to be holy ſcripture but this by the way only. He that is not ſatiſfied with theſe teſtimonies, lett him take the paynes to read S, Auguſtin his 2. cap. of his booke of grace and free will in the. 7. tome of his workes, where haueing cited aboue 20. teſtimonies out of the oulde and newe teſtament to proue mans free will, he concludethe thus: whith others of like ſorte to witt, where it is ſaid, doe not this, or doe not that, and where, to the doeing or not doeing of anie thing the act of the will is required, by gods admonition free will is ſufficiently declared.
               
               Of the iudgment of the moſtCentur. 2. cap. 4 collum: de libero auncient church, (to witt of the ſecunde hundretho yeares after Chriſt heare the confeſſion of the

cēturiſtes, theſe are theyr wordes.arbitrio. 
                  There is almoſt no poynt of doctrine which begann ſo ſoone to be obſcured as this of free will. And after. In like māner Clemēs doth euerie where teach free will: that it may appeare, not onely all the doctors of this age (meaninge age after Chriſt) to haue beene in the ſame darkneſſ, but alſo in the ages following theyr darkneſſ did much encreaſe.
               
            
            
               Proteſtant Poſition.
               Man thoughe holpen by gods grace hath not freewill ether to flye anie euill, or to doe anie good auayling to his ſaluation, but in both is forced to doe that, which god hath ordayned he should doe.
            
         
         
            
            THE 16. CONTROVERſie of the poſsibilitie of obſeruing godes commaū
               dements.
            
               Catholique Poſition
                     •
                   1.
               IT is not vnpoſſible for a man aſſiſted whith gods grace to obſerue and keepe all gods cō
                  maundements.
            
            
               Proofe. 1.
               
                  The iudgments of our lorde be true
                  
                     Pſal. 18. vs. 10. 11. 12. 
                  iuſtified in them ſelues: to be deſired aboue gold and much pretious ſtone & more ſweet then the honie and the honie combe. For thy ſeruand keepeth them, in keeping them is much rewarde.
               
            
            
               2.
               
                  They were both iuſt before god, walking
                  Luke. c. 1. vs. 6. 
                  in all the commaundements and iuſtificationes of our lord whith out blame.
               
            
            
               
               3.
               Take vp my yock vpon you and learneMathe. cap. 11. v. laſt. 1. Iohn ca. 5. v. 3. Denatura & gratia. c. 69. of me &c. for my yocke is ſweet & my burthen light. And in another place. His commaundements are not heauie. S. Auguſtine ſayth, it being moſt conſtantly beleeued, that the iuſt and good god, could not commaunde impoſsible thinges, we are admonished what we ought to doe in eaſie thinges, and what to aske in hard thinges. For all thinges to charitie are eaſie, according to which it is ſayd: that his cōmaundementes are not heauie.
               
                  The diligent reader may pleaſe to ſee what S. Auguſtine writeth of this pointe, in his booke de perfectione iuſtitiae cap 10. to. 7. where for the proofe of this Catholique doctrin, beſides other teſtimonies he alledgeth that.
               
               This commaundement that I commaūde the this daye is not aboue the nor ſo farr of &c. Deutronomie. cap. 30. v. 11. and. after.
               
            
            
               
               4.
               
                  Romanes. c. 8. v. 4.
               That the iuſtificatiō of the lawe might be fulfilled in vs. who walke not according to the fleshe but according to the ſpirit. Loe here the lawe fulfilled by thoſe that walke not according to the flesh.
               
            
            
               Proteſtants poſition.
               It is not poſsible for a man though aſſiſted whith godes grace to obſerue all godes cōmaundements.
            
         
         
            
            THE 17. CONTROuerſie Of workes of ſupererogation.
            
               Catholique poſition.
               A Man by the help of godes grace may doe many things not commaunded▪ but onely counſelled or (which is the ſame) may doe workes of ſupererogatiō, which are of more perfection then the commaundements.
            
            
               Proofe. 1.
               If thou wilt be perfect, goe ſell theMath. c. 19. v. 21. vpō the 1. to the corinth. cap. 
                        •
                     . things thou haſt, and giue to the poore, & thou shalt haue treaſure in heauen: and come & followe me. Some things (ſayth S. Chryſoſtome) he commaundeth, ſome things he leaueth to our owne fre
                     •
                  
                  
wil. For he ſayd not, ſell that thou haſt
                     •
                   but yf thou wilt be prefect ſell that thou haſt. & much more to the ſame purpoſe hath that holy father in that place.
               
               As concerning virgins a commaundement1. cor. c. 7. v. 25. of our lord, I haue not but counſell I giue, as haueing obtayned mercie of our lord to be faythfull.
               Becauſe (ſayth S. Auguſtine) byDe S. Virginitate cap. 14. auoyding ſynn or obtayning remiſsion therof, life euerlaſting is to he got, in which there is a certayne excellēt glorie, not to be giuē to all the bleſſed but to ſome certayne, for the obteyning wherof it doth little auayle to be free from ſynn, vnleſs ſomthing be vowed to our deliuerer, which to haue not willed is no ſinn, but to haue vowed and performed is prays worthy: therfore he ſayth I giue counſell as haueing obtayned mercie of god to be faythfull.
            
            
               3.
               There are euneuches which haueMath. c. 19. v. 12 guelded themſelues, for the Kingdome

of heauen, he that can take, lett him take.
               Haue care of him, and whatſoeuerLuke. c. 10. v. 35. De S. Virginitate. cap. 30. thou shalt ſupererogate, I will at my returne repaye thee S. Auguſtine alluding to theſe two places ſayth, you that yet haue not vowed: who can take, take, runn, whith perſeuerance that you may obayne, take euerie one his ſacrifices, and enter into our lordes court not of neceſsitie, but hauing power of yor owne will, For as it is ſaid thou shalt not kill, it cannot ſo be ſayd thou shalt not marrie. For theſe things are exacted, they are profered, yf they be done they are commended yf thother be not done they are condemned: in theſe thinges god cōmaundeth a debt, in thoſe what you shall ſupererogate (or beſtowe more) he will render at is returne. with much more to the ſame purpoſe in the whole booke where he proueth virginitie to be onely a counſell, to be more perfect then wedlok, and to haue
                  
                  a greater glorie in the next life.
               
               
                  But for the Doctrine of the aūcient churche in this poynt I neede no other witneſſe then Mr. Caluins owne confeſſion ſet downe in theſe wordes. This (ſay
                  lib. 4 inſtitu. c. 13. ſect. 27. 
                  they) hath from furthest memorie beene obſerued, that they which would dedicate them ſelues wholy to our lord, should bynde them ſelues with the vowe of continencie. I graunt indeed that this maner hath alſo beene of ancient tyme receaued but I doe not graunt, that that age was ſo free from all fault, that what ſoeuer was done, might bee taken for a rule.
            
            
               Protestantes Poſition.
               No man though aſſiſted with gods grace can doe anie workes of ſupererogation or of counſell nether are there anie councelles of more perfection then the cō
                  maundementes.
            
         
         
            
            THE 18. CONTROVERſie Of Preiſtes not Marrying.
            
               Catholique Poſition.
               IT is moſt conformable to the Doctrine of holy ſcriptures and practiſe of the auncient churche that all Preiſtes and other church men should vowe perpetuall chaſtitie. And leade a ſingle life.
            
            
               Proofe. 1.
               
                  I woulde haue you without carefulneſs
                  1. corint. cap. 7. v. 32. 
                  he that is with out a wife is carefull for the things that pertaine to our lorde how he may pleaſe god. But he that is with a wife, is carefull for the things that pertayne to the world, howe be may pleaſe his wife, and he is deuided.
               
            
            
               2.
               
                  
                  No man being a ſouldier to god intāgl
                        ••
                     
                  
                  2. Timo. cap. 2. v. 4. 
                  ethe himſelf with ſecular buſineſſes that he may pleaſe him to whome he hath approoued him ſelf.
               
               
                  After the dayes of is office were expired he departed into his owne howſe. It isLuke. c. 1. v. 23. playne hereby & ells where, that the Preiſtes of the ould lawe did abſtayne from theyr wiues during the tyme of theyr ofice which they exerciſed by turnes.
               Yf thou haue aniething at hand1. Regum. c. 21. v. 45. yea yf but fiue loaues giue me, or what ſoeuer thou shalt fynde, & the preiſt anſwered Dauid ſaying, I haue no laye breades at hand but onely holy bread yf the ſeruantes be cleane eſpecially from weomen? And Dauid anſwered the preiſt, and ſay de to him. And truly yf the matter be concernīg weomen we haue refrayned our ſelues from yeſterdaye and the day before.
               Now yf ſuch cleaneſſe, euen

                  
                     ••
                  om the law full vſe of weomen was required in laye men, to eate the hallowed bread of the owld lawe which was but a bare figure of that which is offered in the newe lawe, what cleaneſſ may we think is required in Preiſtes them ſelues of the newe lawe?
               For the practice of the auncient church in this poynt I will onely alledge the 2. Councell of Carthage where S. Auguſtine was preſēt which ſayth thus. It pleaſeth
                  concelli, cartagiū 2. can. 2. 
                  all, that Bishopes, preiſtes, and Deacones abſtayne from wyues. that we may alſo obſerue that which the Apoſtles taught and antiquitie obſerued.
               
            
            
               Proteſtantes poſitions
               It is contrarie to the doctrine of holy Scripture & practice of the auncient primitiue church, that preiſtes and other church men should vowe chaſtitie and leade a ſingle life.
            
         
         
            
            THE 19. CONTROVERſie Of the churche ſeruice in the learned tongues.
            
               Catholique poſition.
               IT is no where forbidden in holy Scripture that the publique Seruice of godes churche should be in a tounge not vnderderſtood to all the aſſiſtantes.
            
            
               Proofe.
               No ſuch prohibition appeareth in all the Scripture.
               Yea the practiſe of the contrarie is euidently gathered out of theſe wordes According to the cuſtōe
                  Luke. c. .1. v. 9. 10. 
                  of the preiſtlye function, he went forth by lott to offer incenſe entering into the temple of the lord. And all the multitude of the people was praying with out at the hower of the incenſe Loe here

the people did not vnderſtand nether the prayers nor the actions of the preiſt; yet neuer the leſſ did they participate of both. The ſame
                     Leuie cap. 10. v. 17. is more expreſly cōmaunded in theſe wordes. Let no man be in the tabernacle when the highe preiſt goeth in to the ſanctuarie to pray for him ſelf and for his howſe and for the whole aſſembly of Iſraël vntil he come forthe. nether doth that of S. Paule yf thou bleſs in the spirit: he that ſupplieth the
                  1. Cor. cap. 14. v. 16. 
                  place of the Vulgar howe shall he ſay Amen vpon thy bleſsing bycauſe he knowethe not what thou ſayeſt? nor anie thing ī all that chapter make anie more againſt the practis of the romā churche in this point, then it doth againſt that of the Iewiſhe churche now menrioned S. Paul ſpeaking not of the ordinarie, publique, receaued and eſtabliſhed churche ſeruice, (werof all the aſſiſtantes are parttakers becauſe it is performed by the preiſt a publique

officer in all theyr behalfes, thaugh they vnderſtande not the wordes, nor ſee the actions done by the preiſt) but of certaīe perticuler exhortationes, hymes; Pſalmes, and other holy & good things vttered by particuler perſonnes, haueing the gifte of tongues: which being not vnderſtood of others, ha
                     •
                   no other fruit then the edification of the ſpeaker, and that nether to his inſtruction, for often tymes he vnderſtood not him ſelf: but to an eleuation of his mynde, or ſpirit to god, as appeareth by that: For yf I pray with tongue, my ſpirit prayeth, but my vnderſting is with out fruite. Therfore S. paule would that theſev. 14. exerciſes showld be vſed with much moderation, and in good order, but forbiddeth them not. Therfore that which he ſayth of that matter toucheth nothing,

                  
                     •
                  he publique ſeruice of the church which the perpetuall practice of the ſame church (a ſure rule to all thoſe that deſire to be gods children) doth shew to be moſt cōueniētly celebrated in the learned tounges. Agaynſt which yf anie will wrangle or be contentiouſe we aunſwere thē as S. Paule1. cor. c. 11. v. 16. doth theyr like in another occatione: we haue no ſuch cuſtome, nor the church of god.
            
            
               Proteſtantes poſition.
               It is forbidden in holy ſcrypture that the publique ſeruice of the church should be in a tongue not vnderſtoode by all the aſſiſtants.
               Haueing as thou ſeeſt (iudicious reader) gone throughe al or at leaſt all the cheef poynts of controuerſie of theſe tymes, and proued thē by expreſſ ſcripture: thou mayſt vnderſtād that I haue not laboured to bring all the pla
                  
                     •••
                  
                  
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   holy Sripture for euer
                     •
                   poynte, which maketh for th
                     •
                   proofe therof: for, I profeſſ not to compile here an index, or concordance of all ſuch paſſages which prou
                     •
                   the poyntes of the Catholique religion, but haue brought thoſe that I eſteeme ſufficient to ſatiſfie anie indifferēt vnderſtanding, thoughe I haue not peraduenture brought alwayes the moſt pregnant according to thy iùdgment: wherein ſo, far as I haue fayled, I humbly requeſt the defect to be ſupplied by thy diligence, and zeale, in defence of the Catholique truthe; yf thou be Catholique.
               Finis.
               
            
         
      
   