
      
         
            
            The Counſell of a Father to his Sonne, in ten ſeuerall Precepts.
            Left as a Legacy at his death.
            
               The Induction or Preface.
               
                  SONNE, The vertuous inclination of thy matchleſſe Mother, by whoſe tender and godly care thy Infancy was gouerned, together with thy education vnder ſo godly and zealous a Tutor, puts me rather in aſſurance then hope, that thou art not ignorant of that ſummary bond, which is onely able to make thee happy, aſwell in thy life as death. I meane the true knowledge of thy Creator and redeemer, without which all things are vaine and miſerable. So that thy youth being guided by ſo al-ſufficient a teacher, I make no doubt but he will furniſh thy life both with Diuine and morall documents; yet that I may not caſt of the care beſeeming a parent towards his child, or that thou ſhouldeſt haue cauſe, to deriue thy whole felicity and welfare rather from others, then from whom thou receiuedſt thy birth and being, I thinke it fit and agreable to the affection I beare, to giue thee ſuch aduertiſements and rules for the ſquaring of thylife, as are gayned rather by long experience, then much reading, to the end, that thou entring into this exorbitant age maiſt be the better prepared to ſhun thoſe cautelous courſes, whereinto this world, and thy lacke of experience may eaſily draw thee. And becauſe I will not confound thy memory, I haue reduced them into ten precepts, if thou imprint them in thy mind, thou ſhalt reape the benefite, and I the contentment. And theſe are they.
            
            
               The firſt Pecept.
               FIrſt, when it ſhall pleaſe God, to bring thee to mans eſtate, vſe great prouidence and circumſpection in the choice of thy wife: for from thence may ſpring all thy future good or ill. And it is an action like to a Stratagem in warre, where man can erre but once. If thy eſtate bee good, match neere home and at leaſure: if weak, then farre off and quickly, enquire diligently of her diſpoſition, and how her parents haue bene inclined in their youth. Let her not be poore, how generous ſoeuer: for a man can buy nothing in the market with gentility. Neither chooſe a baſe or vncomely creature: for that will breed contempt in others, and loathing in thee. Make not choice of a dwarfe or a foole: for from the one thou maiſt beget a race of Pigmies, the other may be thy daily diſgrace. For it will yrke thée to heare her talke, and thou ſhalt finde (to thy great griefe) that there is nothing ſo fulſome as is a ſhee foole.
               Touching the gouernment of thy houſe, let thy hoſpytality bee moderate, according to the meaſure of thine owne eſtate, rather plentifull then ſparing, (but not too coſtly) For I neuer heard nor yet knew any man grow poore by keeping an orderly Table, But ſome conſume themſelues with ſecret vices, and their hoſpitality muſt beare the blame. Baniſh ſwyniſh drunkards out of thy houſe, which is a vice that impaires health, conſumes much, and makes no ſhew, beſides I neuer heard any commendations aſcribed to a drunkard more then the well bearing of his drinke which is a commendation fitter for a brewers horſe or a drayman▪ then for either a Gentleman or Seruingman.
               Beware that thou ſpend not aboue three of the foure parts of thy Reuenewes, nor aboue one third part thereof in thy houſe, for the other two parts will but defray thy extraordinaries, which will alwaies ſurmount thy ordinaries by much, for otherwiſe thou ſhalt liue like a rich beggar in a continuall want, and the needy man can neuer liue happily nor contented, for then euery leaſt diſaſter makes him ready to morgage or ſell. And that Gentleman that then ſels an aker of land, looſeth an ounce of credit, for Gentility is nothing but auncient riches, ſo that if the foundations do ſinke, the buildings muſt needs conſequently faile.
            
            
               The ſecond Precept.
               BRing thy children vp in obedience and learning yet without auſterity, praiſe them openly, reprehend them ſecretly, giue them good countenance, and conuenient maintenance according to thy ability, for otherwiſe thy life will ſeeme their bondage, & then what portion thou ſhalt leaue them, they may thanke death and not thee for it. Marry thy daughters betimes leaſt they marry themſelues. Suffer not thy ſonnes to paſſe the Alpes, for they ſhall learne nothing but pride, blaſphemy, and Atheiſme. And if by chance they attaine to any broken languages, they will profite them no more, then to haue one meate ſerued in diuers diſhes, Neither by my aduiſe ſhalt thou traine them vp to warres, for he that ſets vp his reſt to liue by that profeſſion, can hardly be an honeſt man, or a good Chriſtian, for euery warre is of it ſelfe vniuſt, the good cauſe may make it iuſt, beſides it is a ſcience no longer in requeſt then vſe, for ſouldiers in peace, are like to chimnies in ſommer,
            
            
               The third Precept.
               LIue not in the country without corne and cattell about thee, for hee that muſt preſent his hand to his purſe, for euery expence of houſhold, may be likened to him that keepes water in a ſiue, And for thy prouiſion, lay for to buy it at the beſt hand, for there may bee a peny ſaued betweene buying at thy neede, or when the market, or the ſeaſons do ſerue fitteſt for it.
               Be not willingly attended or ſerued by kinſmen or friends, or men intreated to ſtay, for they will expect much, and do little, neither by ſuch as are amorous, for their heads are commonly intoxicated, keepe rather two too few, then one too many, feede them well and pay them with the moſt. So maiſt thou demand ſeruice at their hands, and boldly require it.
            
            
               The fourth Precept.
               LEt thy kindred and allies be welcome to thy Table, grace them with thy countenance, and euer further them in all their honeſt actions for by that meanes thou ſhalt double the bond of nature, ſo as thou ſhalt find them ſo many aduocates to plead an Apology for thee behind thy backe But ſhake of thoſe glowormes, I meane paraſites and ſycophants, who will feed and faune on thee in the ſommer of thy proſperity, but in any aduerſe ſtorme, they will ſhelter thée no more, then an Arbour in Winter.
            
            
               The fift Precept.
               BE ſure thou alwaies keepe ſome great man to thy friend, but trouble him not for trifies, complement him often, preſent him with many, yet ſmall gifts and of little charge, And if thou haſt cauſe to beſtow any great gratuity, then let it be ſome ſuch, as may bee daily in ſight, for otherwiſe thou ſhalt liue like a hop without a pole, liue in obſcurity, and be made a footeball for euery inſulting companion to ſpurne at.
            
            
               The ſixt Precept.
               VNdertake no ſuite againſt a poore man without receiuing of great wrong, for therein making him thy competitor, beſides that it is held a baſe conqueſt to triumph where there is ſmall reſiſtance, neither vndertake law againſt any man, before thou be fully reſolued that thou haſt the right on thy ſide, and then ſpare not for money nor paines, for a cauſe or two beeing well followed and obtained, may after frée thée from ſuits a great part of thy life.
            
            
               The ſeuenth Precept.
               BEware of ſuertiſhip for thy beſt friend, for he yt payeth an other mans debts, ſeekes his owne decay, but if thou canſt not otherwiſe chooſe rather then to lend that money from thy ſelfe vpon good bonds, (though thou borrow it) So maiſt thou pleaſure thy friend and happely ſecure thy ſelfe.
               In borrowing of mony bee euermore pretious of thy word, for he that cares to keepe day of payment, is Lord commander many times of another mans goods.
            
            
               The eighth Precept.
               TOwards thy ſuperiours be humble yet generous, with thy equals familiar, yet reſpectiue, towards inferiours ſhew much humility and ſome familiarity, as to bow thy body, ſtretch forth thy hand, vncouer thy head, and ſuch like popular complements. The firſt prepares a way to aduancement, the ſecond makes thée knowne for a man well bred, the third gaines a good report, which once gained may eaſily be kept, for high humilities take ſuch roote in the mindes of the multitude, as they are eaſilier wonn by vnprofitable curteſies, then by churliſh benefits, yet doe I aduiſe thee not to affect nor to neglect popularity.
            
            
               The ninth Precept.
               TRuſt no man with thy credit or eſtate, for it is a méere folly for a man to enthrall himſelfe to his friend further then if iuſt cauſe be offered, he ſhould not dare to become otherwiſe thy enemie.
            
            
               The tenth Precept.
               BE not ſcurrilous in conuerſation nor ſtoicall in thy ieſts, the one makes thee vnwelcome to all companies, the other puls on quarrels, and makes thee hated of thy beſt friend, Jeſts when they doe ſauour too much of truth, leaue a bitterneſſe in ye minds of thoſe yt are touched. And although I haue already pointed al theſe incluſiue, yet I think it neceſſary to leaue it thee as a caution, becauſe I haue ſeene ſo many proue to quip and gyrd, as they had rather looſe their friend, then their ieſts. And if by chance their boyling braine yeld a quaint ſcoffe, they will trauell to be deliuered of it as a woman with child, thoſe nimble apprehenſions, are but the froth of wit.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               LONDON.
            
            Printed for IOSEPTH HVNT, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in Bedlem, neere Moore-field gate.
            FINIS.
         
      
   