
      
         
            
            
            CERTAINE
PRECEPTES,
OR
DIRECTIONS,
For the well ordering and carriage
of a mans life:
As alſo oeconomicall Diſcipline for the gouernment
of his houſe: with a platforme
to a good foundation thereof, in
the aduiſed choiſe of a Wife:
            Left by a Father to his Sonne at his death, who was
ſometimes of eminent Note and Place
in this Kingdome.
            And publiſhed from a more perfect Copie; than
ordinarily thoſe pocket Manuſcripts
goe warranted by.
            EDINBVRGH,
Printed by ANDRO HART, 1618.
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            AGainst good Counſell who will ſhutte his
Eare,
            At eaſie Rate maye buye Repentance
deare.
         
         
            
            THE INDVCTION.
            
               BEloued Sonne, the manie
religious and morall
vertues inherent
in your matchleſſe
Mother, vnder the
winges of whoſe prudent
and godly gouernment
your infancie
hath beene trayned
and guided vp, together
with your education,
vnder ſo zealous and learned a Tutor, put
me rather in aſſurance than hope (as Tullie ſome
time exacted from his Sonne, from the onelie
hearing of Cratippus his Maſter) that you are not
ignorant of that ſummary bond, wherein you
ſtand oblieged to your Creator and Redeemer;
which is onely able to make you happy, both
here and hereafter, in life and death: In mentioning
whereof, I meane not only a bare and Hyſtoricall
knowledge, but with a reall and practicall

vſe adjoyned, without which, though with
a ſeemely aſſumption, you could expreſſe to the
World in a former habite and liuing portrayture,
all Aristotles Morall Vertues, and walke
that whole Booke in Life and Action, yet are you
but a vaine and wretched Creature, the fayreſt
out-ſide of the miſerableſt in ſide, that euer
was concealed by Tombe, or ſhadowing. And
although I nothing doubt, your youth beeing
guided, and your greene veſſell ſeaſoned by ſuch
wholſome documents and inſtructions, deriued
from ſo all-ſufficient Teachers, that you are not
vnfurniſhed of ſuch needefull helpes, as may bee
furtherers to your life and conuerſation: Yet
that I may the better retaine and expreſſe the
zealous affection, beſeeming a Father to his
Sonne, or that you ſhould bee forced to deriue
your ſtay and aduiſe, rather from the rule of
Strangers, than from him from whom you are
produced, and brought foorth.
            Out of theſe fore-going Conſiderations
therefore, thinking it not vnmeete, I haue eſſayed,
from the affection of a Father, to giue
you ſuch good aduertiſements and rules for the
fitting and ſquaring of your life, as are gayned
rather by my lōg experience & obſeruatiō, than
by much reading or Study: beeing ſuch (in my
hope) with that good aſsiſtance, as ſhall Seaſon
your Youth like the draw of Age: to the end, that you
entering into this exorbitant and intangling

Worlde, may be the better furniſhed to auoyde
thoſe harmefull courſes, whereinto theſe daungerous
times, and your inexperience may eaſily
inſnare you. And becauſe I woulde not confound
your memory, I haue reduced them into
tenne Preceptes: which, if next to MOSES
Tables, you imprint in your minde, you ſhall
reape the benefite, and I the ende of my expectation
and content. And thus they follow.
         
         
            
            The Contents of this Booke.
            
               Precept I.  FOr choyſe of your Wiues.
               
                  II. The education of Children.
               
                  III. For Houſe-holde Prouiſion, and the choyſe of Seruantes.
               
                  IV. How to intreat your Kindred and Allies.
               
                  V. Aduiſeth to keepe ſome great man to your Friende:
and how to complement him.
               
                  VI. How and when to vndertake ſuites.
               
                  VII. Aduertiſeth for Suretieſhip.
               
                  VIII. How to behaue a mans ſelfe.
               
                  IX. How farre to diſcloſe a mans ſecretes.
               
                  X. Be not ſcurrilous in conuerſation.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            PRECEPT I,
            For the choyſe of your Wiues.
            
               FIrſt, when it ſhall pleaſe God to
bring you vnto Mans eſtate, making
you capable of that Calling,
vſe great prouidence and
circumſpection, in choyſe of
your Wiues, as the roote from
whence may ſpring moſt of your future good or
euill: For it is in the choyſe of a Wife, as in a project of
Warre, wherein to erre but once, is to be vndone for euer.
And therefore bee well aduiſed before you conclude
ought therein: For though your Errour
may teach you wit, it is vncertaine whether you
ſhall euer find time to practiſe it: Therefore the
more ſecurely to enter herein, Firſt, well conſider
your eſtate, which, if in a true ſuruay, you
finde firme and ſetteled, Match neare home, and
with deliberation: But if otherwiſe, crazie and
rented, then farre off, and with quicke expedition:
Bee informed truely of their inclination,

which, that there may be a more equall Sympathie,
cōpare it with your own, how they agree:
for you muſt know, that euery good womā maketh
not for euery man a good wife: no otherwiſe
than ſome one good Diſh diſgeſteth with
euery ſtomacke. After that, inquire diligently of
her ſtocke & race, from whence ſhe ſprung, and
howe her parentes haue beene affected in their
youth. Let her not be poore, how generous ſoeuer:
For Generoſity without her ſupport, is but
a faire ſhell, without her kernell, Becauſe a man
can buy nothing in the Market without Money.
            
            And as it is the ſafeſt walking euer betweene
two extreames, ſo chooſe not a Wife of ſuch abſolute
perfection and Beauty, that euery carnall
eye ſhall beſpeake you injury: Neither ſo baſe
and deformed, that may breede contempt in
others, and bring you to a loathed Bedde.
            Make not choyſe of a Dwarfe or a Foole: for
from the one you may beget a race of Pigmeyes,
as they other will be your daily griefe and vexation:
for it will irke you ſo oft as you ſhall
heare her talke: and you ſhall continually finde,
to your ſorrowe that feele that Croſſe, There is
nothing ſo fullſome as a ſhee-Foole.
            
            Touching the gouernment of your Houſe, let
your Hoſpitalitie bee moderate, equalled to the
meaſure of your eſtate, rather bountifull than
niggardly, yet not prodigall, nor ouer-coſtly:
for though ſome, who hauing otherwiſe conſumed

themſelues with ſecret vices, haue endeuored
to colour their riots vpō their vertue, yet
in my obſeruation, I haue not heard nor known
any man growe poore, by keeping an ordinary,
decent, and thrifty Table.
            Baniſh Drunkenneſſe out of your Houſes, and
affect him not that is affected therevnto: for it
is a vice that impaires health, conſumes wealth,
and transformes a man into a beaſt: a ſinne of no
ſingle rank, no ordinary ſtatiō, that neuer walks
vnattended with a traine of miſdemeanors at
the heeles: beſides, for the credite thereof, to induce
a man, I neuer heard other commendation
aſcribed to a Drunkard, more than the wellbearing
of his drink: which is a cōmendation fitter
for a Bruers horſe, or a Dray-mans backe, than
either for Gentlemen or ſeruingmen: for eſpecially
the latter being taken tardy herin, is thereby
doubly diuorced from himſelfe: for, beeing
firſt ſober, hee is not his own man: and beeing
drunke, hee falles ſhort by two degrees.
            Beware thou ſpend not aboue three of the 4.
parts of thy reuenue, nor aboue one third parte
thereof in your houſe: for the other two partes
wil but defray extraordinaries, which wil alway
ſurmoūt your ordinaries by much: for otherwiſe
you ſhall liue like Beggars in cōtinual wants: &
the needy man can neuer liue happilie, nor contented,
being broken & diſtracted with worldly
cares: for the euery leaſt diſaſter maks him ready

to morgage or ſell: and that Gentleman that
ſelleth an acre of lande, looſeth anounce of credite:
for Gentilitie is nothing but auncient Riches: So
that if the foundation doe ſinke, the building
muſt needes conſequently fall.
         
         
            PRECEPT II,
            Teacheth the Education of Children.
            BRing your Children vp in obedience and
Learning, yet without too much auſteritie,
praiſe them openly, reprehende them ſecretly:
giue them good countenance, and conuenient
maintenance, according to your abilitie: For
otherwiſe your liues will ſeeme their bondage,
and then as thoſe are cenſured, that deferre all
good to their ende; ſo that portion you ſhall
leaue them, they may thanke death for, and not
you. Marry your daughters betimes, leſt they
marry themſelues.
            Suffer not your Sonnes to paſſe the Alpes: for
they ſhall exchaunge for their forraine trauell
(vnleſſe they goe better fortified) but others
Vices for their owne Vertues, Pride, Blaſphemie,
and Atheiſme, for Humility, Reuerence, and Religion:
And if by chaunce, out of a more wary induſtry,
they attain to any broken Languages, they will
profite them no more, than to haue one Meate
ſerued in diuers Diſhes.
            Neither by mine aduiſe ſhall you traine them

vp to Warres: For he that ſets vp his reſt to liue
by that profeſſion, in mine opinion, can hardly
be an honeſt man, or a good Chriſtian: For Euerie
Warre of it ſelfe is vnjuſt, the good cauſe may make
it lawfull: Beſides, it is a Science no longer in requeſt
than vſe: for Souldiours in Peace, are like
Chimneyes in Summur, like Dogges paſt hunting,
or Women when their beauty is done. As
a perſon of quality once noted to the like effect,
in theſe Verſes following:

                  Friendes, Souldiours, Women in their prime,
                  Are like to Dogges in Hunting time:
                  Occaſion, Warres, and Beautie gone,
                  Friendes, Souldiours, Women heere are none.
               
            
         
         
            PRECEPT III,
            For Houſe-holde Prouiſion, and of the
choyſe of Seruantes.
            LIue not in the Countrey without Corne and
Cattle about you: For he that muſt preſent
his Hande to his Purſe for euery Expence of
Houſe-hold, ſhall as hardly keepe Money therein,
as it is for one to hold Water in a Siue.
            And for your Prouiſion, Lay to buy it at the
beſt hand, for there may be ſometimes a pennie
ſaued, betweene buying at your neede or when
the ſeaſon moſt fitly may furniſh you.
            Be not willingly attended, or ſerued by Kinſmen

or Friendes, which will ſeeme to bee men,
as it were intreated to ſtay: for ſuch will expect
much, and ſtead little: neither by ſuch as are
amorous; for their heads are commonly intoxicated.
Keepe rather too few, than one too manie:
feede them well, and paye them with the
moſt, ſo maye you lawfully demaund ſeruice at
their handes, and boldly exact it.
         
         
            PRECEPT IV,
            How to intreat your Kindred and Allies.
            LEt your Kindred and Allies bee welcome to
your Table: Grace them with your countenance,
and euer further them in all their honeſt
actions, by worde, liberalitie, or induſtrie:
For by that meanes you ſhall double the bonde
of Nature: Bee a Neighbour to their good, as
well as to their blood: By which reaſonable
deſeruinges, you ſhall finde them ſo manie Aduocates,
to pleade an Apologie for you behind
your backe, ſo manie Witneſſes of your Vertues,
whenſoeuer others ſhall ſeeke to depraue
you: But ſhake off the Glow-wormes, I meane
Paraſites and Sycophantes, who will feede and
fawne on you, in the Summer of your Proſperitie;
but in anie aduerſe Storme, will ſhelter
you no more than a Cloake of Taffatie, or an
Arbour in Winter.
         
         
            
            PRECEPT V,
            Aduiſeth to keepe ſome great Man to your Friend,
and how to complement him.
            BE ſure you keep ſome great Man alwayes to
your Friend: yet trouble him not for trifles:
Complement him often: preſent him with manie,
yet ſmall gifts, and of little charge. And if
you haue cauſe to beſtow any great gratuitie on
him, then let it be no Cheſt commodity, or obſcure
thing: but ſuch a one as may bee dayly in
ſight, the better to be remembred: for otherwiſe
you ſhall liue but like a Hop without Pole, or a
Vine without her Elme, ſubject to injury & oppreſsion,
ready to be made a Football for euery
ſuperior inſulting companion to ſpurne at.
         
         
            PRECEPT VI,
            How and when to vndertake ſuites.
            VNdertake no Suit againſt a poore man, without
receiuing of great wrong, for therin
you make him your Compeditor: Beſides that,
it is helde a baſe Conqueſt, to triumph vpon a
weak Aduerſary. Neither vndertake law againſt
any man, before you be fully reſolued you haue
the Right on your ſide: which being once ſo aſcertained,
then ſpare neither coſt nor paines to
accompliſh it: For a Cauſe or two being ſo cloſe
followed, and well accompliſhed, may after free
you from Suits a great part of your life.
         
         
            
            PRECEPT VII,
            Aduertiſeth for Suretieſhippe.
            BEware of Suretieſhippe, yea for your beſt
Friend: For hee that payeth another mans
debts, goeth the way to leaue other men to pay
his, and ſeeketh his owne ouer-throwe. Therefore
if hee bee ſuch a one, as you cannot well ſay
nay, chooſe rather then, to lend that mony from
your ſelues, vpon good bonds, though you borrowe
it: ſo may you pleaſure your Friende, and
happily ſecure your ſelues.
            In borrowing of Money, bee euermore precious
of your word: For hee that hath a care to
keepe daye of payment, is lord-commaunder
many times of another mans Purſe.
         
         
            PRECEPT VIII,
            How to carrie a Mans ſelfe towardes his
Superiours, and Inferiours.
            TOwards your Superiours bee humble, yet
generous: with your Equalles familiare,
yet reſpectiue: towardes your Inferiours ſhewe
much humilitie, with ſome familiaritie; as to
bow your body, ſtretch foorth your hand, vncouer
your head, and ſuch like populare complements:
the firſt prepareth way to aduancement:
the ſecond will make you knowne for men well
bred: the thirde gaineth a good report, which
once gained, may eaſily bee kept; for high humilities

are of ſuch reſpect in the opinion of
the multitude, that they are eaſilier won by vnprofitable
Courteſies, than by churliſh benefits:
Yet doe I not aduiſe you, ouermuch to affect or
neglect popularitie.
         
         
            PRECEPT IX,
            How farre to diſcloſe a Mans Secrets.
            TRuſt no man with your Credite, or Eſtate:
For it is a meere follie for a man to inthrall
himſelfe further to his Friende, than that
hee needeth not feare him beeing his Enemie.
         
         
            PRECEPT X.
            BE not ſcurrilous in conuerſation, nor Stoicall
in your wittes; for the one maketh you
vnwelcome to all companies, as the other pulleth
quarrels on your heads, and maketh you
hated of your beſt Friends.
            Ieſtes, when they doe ſauour of too much
trueth, leaue a bitterneſſe in the minds of thoſe
that are touched.
            And, although I haue alreadie pointed at
theſe incluſiue, yet I thinke it neceſſarie to leaue
it to you as a Cantion, becauſe I haue ſeene
manie ſo prone to quippe and girde, that they
had rather loſe their Friende than their Ieſt:

And if by chaunce their boyling Brayne yeeld
a quaint Scoffe, they will trauell to bee deliuered
of it, as a Woman with Childe: But I
thinke thoſe nimble Apprehenſions, are but the
Froth of the Wittes.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   