
      
         
            
               
               
               Bretnor. 1615.
               and Prognoſtication, for 1615.
               
                  Being the thirde after Leap yeare.
               
               ding to Art for the latitude and ty of London, and may well ſerue all the South parts of Great-Britaine.
               By Thomas Bretnor profeſſour of the Mathematicks & Student in Phyſicke in Cowlane, London.
               Fata mouere Deus, tollere fata poteſt.
               Cum priuilegio.
            
            
               as the partes thereof are gouer
                  
                     ••••
                  
               
               
                  
                     Signes.
                     Head and face.
                     Necke and throate.
                     Armes and ſhoulders.
                     Breaſt, ſtomacke, longes.
                  
               
            
            
               An Alminacke and prodigious premonſtration, made for the yeare of grace. 1566. By Mi. Noſtrodamus, § ⋆ §
               
                  The God which eche mans viſage well doth ſee,
                  His temple gates to come for to vnbarre:
                  And Pandores boxe vncouered ſhall bee,
                  A great thicke cloude for to diſsolue frō farre
               
               
                  AMERICA
                  AFRICA
                  ASIA
                  Admirandus Alri
                        ••
                     imas.
               
               ¶ Imprinted at London by Henry Denham.
               
            
            
               A Prognosticatitiō made for the yere of our Lorde God 1579.
               Wherein the chaunge of the weather is briefely ſet foorth, and the ryſyng of certayne notable Starres, &c. referred to the meridian of the Citie of Cheſter.
               By Alexander Mounſlowe.
               
                  1. Cor. 15. Alia gloria Solis, alia gloria Luna, & alia gloria Stellarum.
               Imprinted at London by Richarde Watkins, and Iames Robertes.
            
            
               ¶ A PROGNOStication made for the yeare of our Lord God, 1573.
               ¶ Practiſed in Saliſburie, by Iohn Securis Maiſter of Art and Phiſicke.
               
               Anno Mundi. 5535.
               
               ¶ Imprinted at London, by Richard VVatkins, & Iames Robarts.
               
                  Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
               
            
         
      
   